Place of or igin 114.C4i,4.0. I 11 IP k.;' tit% Date VI bAS 9

Project worker. AI* Aiirou

Project editor

lbp

Remarks

Forms to be Filled out for Each Interview

FOLKLORE

=LOGO FOLISTOIT

FORM A

Circumstances of Interview

CHICAGO

We. Words

y

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

Abe Aaron

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

5471 Ellis Ave., Chicago

May 18, 1939

Newsboys

JfIN J 4 Inni

1. Date and time of in terview May 12 through. May 17, fraa 8:30 A. M.

2. Place of in terview

Informant's ham, taverns, handbooks, oaths job
(the in fonaut, it will be reealled - soo fors A of May 4th - , is a signpainter).

3. Name and address of in formant

Philip Marcus
4523 S. Cottage, Crowe Aye., Chicago

4. Name and address of person, if any, who put you in

touch with in formant.

5. Name and address of person, if any, accompanying you

6. Description of room, house, surroundings, etc.

(Use as many additional sheets as necessary, for any of the forms, each

bearing the proper heading and the number 'bb which the material refers.)

W3612

FORM B

FOLKLORE

Personal History of Informant

CHICAGO

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

Ni. Words

STATE

NAME OF WORKER

Illisois

Abs Aare'

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

NAME OF INFORMANT

5471 Ellis keo. Mow

May 18, 1939

Newsboys

Pkilip Nereus

1. Ancestry

See ltma B of May 4, 1959

2. Place and date of birth a a a

3. Family

a

a

4. Places lived in, with dates

a

5. Education, with dates

a

6. Occupations and accomplishments, with dates

7. Special skills and interests

a

8. Community and religious activities

9. Description of in formant

a

10. Other Points gained in in terview

FORM C

Text of Interview (Unedited)

CHICAGO FOLKS1141

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

No. Words

STATE

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

Illinois

Abe Aaron

5471 Ellis Avenue

May 18, 1939

Newsboys

NAME OF INFORMANT

Philip Marcus

When papers was a penny a piece was the days when I was selling

them. I was a little lad then, and I lived on the streets practically all day,

days and nights both. We used to sneak in the burlesque houses or the a llnight places on West Madison Street and sleep there. The only trouble with

that was the ushers would come around every hour or so and throw the flashlight

it your face to see was you a wake. You wasn't supposed to go to sleep. Sometimes

v."
they timed us out.

We had a let of dodges. A, penny was a lot of money to us, and a

nickel was a hell of a lot. A dime or a quarter was a fortune.

I practically grew up on a pool table.

Here's one of the dodges us newskids used to have in those days

for making money.

You know haw a guy is when he buys a newspaper. He's a fez

of something or other, baseball nine time out of ten, and he's got the boxscare habit. You hand him a paper, and right away he's looking at the boxscore; he's holding the paper in one hand, reading the scores, and the other

hand's stuck out for the change; he takes his change by ear, see, by ear and

touch if you get it; he's reading. So me, I lay a penny in his hand, if it's a

nickel, say, that he game me. Than I click the second penny on the first

and count two.

F011u C TEXT 2-

CHICA--0 FOLKSTUFF

And the same with the third penny. Each time the penny drops on the other

pennies in his hand. But the last penny I hold onto; I click it on the other

pennies, but I don't let go on it, and he thinks he's got all of his change.

Nine times out o' ten he sticks the pennies in his pocket without even lookin'

at them, an' that's the dodge.

Here's another petty larceny trick we had. We'd pull it at

car stops where they had stop lights.

When the streetcar was waiting for a red light to turn, we

used to run up alongside the car and the people in the cur would stick their

hands through the windows for a paper. He'd stick his hand outside the

window and maybe he'd have a nickel or a dime in it instead of the change, the

penny, and later, when the war started, two pennies.

If he gave us a nickel or a dime, it was just too bad. We'd

fumble,

try and we'd fumble-- boy, we sure had to dig deep for that

change -- and we'd run along beside the car when it started, but-- it never

failed--we just couldn't reach him, the car would be picking up speed and

we just couldn't reach his hand A.th that change. It never failed to happen.

But I've had guys get off the car at the next stop and come back and mice

me give them their change. They were wised up, I guess, or maybe they'd sold

papers once themselves. Anyway, I've had that happen to me.

The big guys thought this one up. We pulled it every Christmas.

They'd have cards printed up, and they'd sell them to us little

fellows for a nickel a piece. Let's see if I remember just what was on those

FORk C

TEXT 3

CHICAGO FOIESTUFF

CARDS. Somethin' like this:

"Christmas comes but once a year,

"And when it comes it brings good cheer;

"So open your purse without a tear,

Well, we paid a nickel a piece for those cards, and whenever

we sold a paper we'd hand the card to the customer. Sometimes it was good

for as much as a quarter. But this was the payoff. We always asked for the

card back. They'd give us something, and they'd expect to keep the card, but

we'd ask for it back; we'd use the same card over and over again-- it would

cost us a nickel to zet another one. We called the big guys the "midnight

cuckoos" -- I don't remember why.

It's funny what crazy things a guy will do when money's so

important to him. I remember once Manuel ( the narrator's brother --A.A.)

found a dollar bill on the floor of a saloon. I spent the rest of the night

going in !ill of the saloons. I couldn't find a damn cent.

The newsboy WAS always a good source of in formation in those

days. Like the cops are today. Since the automobile came in, you'd be

surprised to know how many kinds o' questions are asked of the cops. But the

newsboy was the original. You could find out from us almost enything you

wanted to know, where the saloons were-- only you didn't have to esk much

about them--, the location of the gambling joints, the whorehouses, almost

anything, from the location of the First National Bank to the best place

to get a piece of tail cheap.

FeFi C

ral 4

CHICC FOILSTUFF

Did I tell you the one about the time we tried to vet the

bathing suits, and didn't?

You know what an island showcase is? This was twentytwenty- five years ago. You've seen these stores with two big show windows

outsid- the door and the door set way back, maybe fifteen- twenty feet or so.

'Jell, in thet entrance, between the windows up to the door, the stores used

to have high glass showcases - they were always locked, with a padlock--

they were called island showcases.

They were permanent showesses that stood in the lobby. You

still see some of them.

Well, this was in the summer. There was three of us that always

palled around together. There wes Ha Ty and Benny an' me. Harry wasn't

around this time thoh. There was a place about a mile away, in the Italian

neiahborhood, where we used to go swimming. It used to cost us a penny a-

piece. It was hot as hell that day I renumber, and we wanted to go swimming

like all hell. Only we couldn't, because we didn't have no bathing suits.

In this here island showcase I'm telling you about, Benny an' me, we saw

something that :lust fit the bill, bathing suits, lots of them, all kinds,

and we went over an' looked them over an' picked out the ones we wanted--

one for Harry too; Harry wasn't with us, T think I told you.

The payoff was the padlock on the showcase wasn't locked; so

Benny an' me, we made out plans, which ones to get an' everything.

Well, it was along vigil. All evening end till about four

o'clock in the morning. 71:e knew enough not to tske any chnces. Every

time we were ready to raid the cese someone would come stragglin' along,

FOiJ

C TEXT 5

CHIC.V2,0 FOIZSTUFF

sometimes the cop on the beat, sometimes some pslooka out welkin' the

streets -- it wasn't till about four before we got the chance we was lookin'

for.

So we rushes over. The padlock tint locked, an' we take it

off an' go to open the case. An' I'll be a son of a bitch! - the goddamn

thing had sn inside lock, an' it was locked:

We was so mad we st - fted

to cry, both of us. We stood there blubberin like a coupla babies. Jesus.

Believe me, us kids used to be on the lookout; we was ready

for anything. An' there wasn'tvery much got by us either.

I remember once I was in a one-armed restsurent--the place

did a thriving business, an' along about midnight, ' specially when it was

cold, we used to go in to soak up some heat. They used to kick us out,

but sometimes we'd buy some coffee-- and, an' then they'd have to let us

stay a while anyway.

Well, PS I was sayin', I was in there one night-- it was maybe

twelve- one o'clock--when a guy comes in with what looks like 'it. laundry

package under ' is arm, an' I'm on the make as usual, alert. It looked

like a leundry packnEe, but it we all wrapped up nice en' I figured it

wasn't no laundry. Be got him something to eat; and ' ewalked over

to a seat; ant this package, he sat on it.

Le, I go buy myself a cup of coffee, an' I sit down in the

seat right next to him. I keep dawdlin' an' dawdlin' over my coffee, an'

I almost don'tmake it last. I figured maybe ' ed forget that package.

I kept busy readint one of my papers. It must've been along about one

o'clock in the morning.

FONd, C 1I-T 6

CHICAGO

FOLESTUFF

Sure enough, when ' e ts up, ' eforets to take the package,

an' calick as a flash I grab it an' put it in between my papers, an' then I

weak out. Mien I open it up a few blocks away, there's a classy silk shirt.

I figure it must-'ve cost seven- eight dollars, maybe ten. I couldn't do

much ith a thing like that.

But I set a bright idea. It won't do me no harm, I figure,

to be on the good side o' one o' the circuletion men, an' I offer ft to

eim. Ile likes it an , he says, ".;:het do you went for it?"

I wasn't figurin' to sell it; I'd meant to give it to ' im,

fieurin' it wouldn't do no harm to be on the good side of lim that's all.

But when he said thet, me, I say, "we'll call it a hundred an' fifty sheets."

That'd be about ninety cents. NO! - in those days the wRr we: on an' the

price was raised to epenny, to us kids. A dollar en' a half was all I got for

it, in papers.

There WPS certin code a mong us kids, an' the guy who didn't

live up to it, that was just too bed for him. You observed it, or else:

One of the things was, you couldn't sell on the corners where

the

fellows was. Thee wasn't stands in those days, they just piled

the papers on the curb an' put stones on top of ' em, an' every busy corner

WkFi held down b_ some big guy. Us little kids, we ran nround the streets,

an' we wasn't allowed to sell on any o' those corners. If we did, we had to

buy the paper beck from the guy whose corner it was; an' besides thRt,

he'd boot Us a good one.

ie were little kids. The women, especially, would buy from us

in preference to the big guys, not realizing, o' course, what they were

F C . XT 7

CHICAGO

FOLESTUFF

lettin' us in for. I remember one time. I sold a raper sn' I had to buy

it back. But I got a kick thet time that hit the bull's eye. It was so

terrific I felt it for days. 79ut not only that.

Every time I saw that

guy, I wouTr9 feel that kick.

This is about that code P-ain. The corners, the good spots,

told you about -- the big guys who we en them, they'd make le.2 with one

of the younger fellows in the naesreeer ealesroom before going out on the

street to buy them out at 9bout midnight or one a. r- when the finpl lull

begins. One of the big guys wouldd say to one of the little guys, "Hey,

punk, wantta buy me out tonight?" An' the little guy, if he said yes, it was

his ass if he didn't, no metter how many papers the bi-z guy had left over.

Cnly this time, it lees the wholesble pro,

likl! Then ya ',rot cPuht

.,11in . on ncorner wn' d ta pay whet

t-kv s-..ift 7?-4_7..1( besi.

metter hm often ya sold on the corner, there'd be the big guy stendin'

rilet behind ya, 9n' ys got :,JhAt was coin' to

thee or maybe leter--

y? 21 - ys sot it.

:ell, if ye didn't keep your promise to 1-Juy the 711y. out, it w.

too

had. That was the code.

I'd made c deFil with

guy;

said I'd buy

out. Along

"bout twelve o'cloc k, when I loedced t el7 the DRPP7S he had left, there

was more than I thought I could sell.

IJ.t the ' esn't two weys about it,

I hadda buy them, on' I did. dud I sterted to bawl.

While I was stkndin' there cryin', I sold cll the

e:s. The2F2

FORM C ThMT 8

CHICAGO

FOLESTUFF

I was, bawlin' like hell, an' I ended up a skiat all the other kids when

they straggled by if they wanted to sell we any 01 their sheets, sayiat

"If you're stuck I'll buy some," and cryia' like all hell all 0' the time.

When I was sellin' papers, if there wasn'tanything startling

we could yell about to help sell the papers, we always got around it this

may:

we'd look all over the sheet lookix' for a story from Washington,

anything at all, no matter what it was, ant then we'd yell like hell, we'd

yell:

"Read all about the White House Scandal:

All about the White

House Scandal:

The White House Scandals Read all about its"

Did I tell you about the time the three of us were looked up

the same night, Miguel an' me an' Izzy? ( Brothers of the narrator - A.A.)

I was the oldest an' Izzy was the youngest. Izzy's dead now.

Bow he happened to be with me that night I don'tknow, because he was a real

little guy. This happened about - well, about two o'clock in the morning

I guess.

Well, when one-two O'clock in the morning rolls around

a copy happens to see Izzy--he's standia' off by himself to one side--

an' bec -nuse he's so little, picks him up. Manuel says to me, "You'll

get hell, Phil, if you don't ge -,. him." Axe that was right, because I MAI

the oldest one an' I was responsible. So I goes to the station.

I say to the desk sergeant, " I'll take him home, I'm his brother,"

but the desk sergeant picks we up toe. While I'm standint therT:, the sergeant

FORM C TEXT 9

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

sip 14 NW of the cops, "There's a kid lookie in the window. Go out ' round

the back an' bring ' in in." So there was the three of us; it was the big

roundup; and away we went to the cooler.

They called up tho old folks, an* my mother cams down to get us.

She talked to the sergeant to lecture us so we'd come in off the streets at

night, an' he made his lecture so good, especially to me, my mother got

sore at ms an' wouldn'ttake me out, only Izzy ant Memel. She refused to take

me out ea' I was left there for two-three days.

The prize one is the one about the time the two cops searched

me for the money ea' couldn't fled it en mo. I was eight years old then.

I' run away from home.

I was Austlia' papers; it was on a Sunday, an' mm ea' another

kid, we was workie a roomia'-house neighborhood. Two guys call ma up. One

of ' em's got a Sunday hard- one, ea' he wags it at mo. MA, I'm on the make,

but mot that way, ea' I take a look around. I spy a purse that belongs to

one of these lads ea' I take it. When I get downstairs I show it to the

kid who's workia' with me, al' he wants a out. I wouldn'tgive it to him.

There was about twelve dollars.

I took the money an' the purse an' the rest of the stuff that's in

it I throw in an alley. There's a wind blowie, an' all the papers that was

in the purse blow away.

Pretty soon, along come these two lads runnin' after me, an'

there's a couple ot cops with them. "He's the one, he's the one," one of

the lads aim pointin' to ms, an' ono ol the cops, be grabs me, an' the other

cop grabs the kid's that with mo. I play dumb rummy, ant I don'tknow what the

FORK C TEXT 10

CHICAGO

FOLESTU117

hell they're taikin' about. But the other kid, he owns up he saw the purse

an' the money on me, an' they start searchin' me.

Well, they go through every inch ot my clothes an' they don't

find nothin'. The two lads, they don'tcare so much about the money, they

say I can keep that, only they want the papers that was in the purse, papers

that was important, and railroad tickets. I just played Ib. But the kid

who was with me, he'd seen the money, an' I called him a liar an' told the

cops, "All right, I took the money, huh? Then I oughtta have it on ms?

Why don't you find it then? If I a ilit got it, then I couldalta taken the

purse, could I? An' they couldn't find the money. So after a while they let

us a lone, an' we go about our business selling these papers.

NI, I'm faille pretty smart ant laughint to myself at this

kid. Ant I was plenty sore at him because he'd snitched. So I get back at

him. I roll down the sleeves of my shirt an' pull the money out. I'd

flattened the bills out an' rolled ' am up in my sleeves. Seeia' I was only

about eight years old then, I don't know how the hell I got the idea to do

that. "See smarty, " I said, " if you hadn'tbeen so smart an' gone an' snitched,

I'd give you a out outta this. But you know what you can do, dJn't ya?"

AR' I put the bills back in my sleeves again an' rolled them up.

While I went in a house to sell a paper, this kid, he runs back

an' gets the cops an' they pinch me. I was seat to the detention home, the

reform school for a while for that.

This swimmia' pool I was Ulna' you about. We used to go there

in a crowd. It was about a mile away, in an Italian a eighborhoed, an' it *lost

a penny to swim there. One day I missed the gang ant I thought they'd went

down to the swimmin' pool, and so I goes on down by myself, figurie that I'd

70161 C TEXT 11

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

be MOW them there. Well, they wasn't there when I got there, ant they

didn'tcome; but I figured they would, so I hung around along while. Pretty

soon the other kids, they notice I'm there all by myself, an' they start gettie

tough. I get my clothes on in a hurry.

Pretty soon I start welkin' away, real bold, not notioial

how these here Italian lads are gangie up on me, pretendin' not to see.

Then they start stoppie me, an' they shove ma an' bradigh pocket knives

that they all seem to've got. Na, I look around for a way out.

Near to the swimmie pool, there's a candy store, ant I slip in

there. I hang around along time tryie to figure out how to get out 0' this

mess

ia. When the guy starts lookie at me too hard I buy a penny's worth

of candy an' go on Imagist around in there until I figure he's ready to throw

ma out even if I did spend a penny. The Italian lads are 'tangle around outside -- they know I've gotta come out sometime-- an' I still don'tknow what to

do.

When I get out on the street a gate, they're all standie in a

crowd not far off. Well, I don'thave time to think, ea' I don'tknow what

to do, so I do so metkie without tikie time to think. I step right pp to

them an' say, real tough, "So yuh wantta fight, huh?*

They say, "Yoh. Sure.* They manta fight.

"All right," I say, " I'm willia' to fight yuh.* Al' I will out,

*Hey, gang, These guys wantta fight." Ant I start to collie' them by name.

There's lots o' people on the street pp a head ant these Italian kids don't

know but what maybe my gang is up there the way I'm lookie.

So I keep sayin" Ya wantta fight?" an' I keep eallie to my

gang that I pretend's up a head, an' all the time I keep edgie around them

FORM C MC 12

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

till there's Rose of gem in front of me, all behind. Then I call out

real loud to one of the fellows I pretend's up a head of me an' start to

run like hell. They're as puzzled that for a minute there they don'tknow

what to do, ea' by the time they decide to chase after me I'm ruaniag

with a good head start. I didn't stop runniag till I'd got all the way

home.

One of our favorite stunts, if a guy didn'thave anything smaller

than a nickel or a dime or a quarter or something like that was to plead we

had no change. Then we'd go to some convenient saloon: - there wasalways

a salooa handy-- and these saloons, they all had two entrances. They guy

would watch us go in one entrance an' stand outside it waiting for us to

come out with his change. But we'd slip out the other entrance an' go looking

for another guy who needed chEnge for a nickel or a dime or a quarter or

something like that.

There was another way us kids used to raise money. We'd

go to the market an' gat these big empty barrels--not the casks, but barrels.

Us kids could roll them easy, an' they were light enough so the bigger guys,

they carried them. They rolled nice an' easy, an' the meat-packers, they

paid us a nickel a piece for them, five coats a barrel.

Naturally, we couldn'tfind enough of them, so we started stealia'

them. We'd steal them from one meat-packer an' sell them to another.

We was always en the make. We had to be.

I made friends once with a kid who had a swell home. I can still

FORA C TEXT 13

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

remeriber it, the home I meal, ant the mother; I don'tremember the kid

at all. Ant I don'tremember how I come to make friends with him. All

I remember's his home an' his mother.

Well, I remember one day I was playia' with him, up in

his home. Gee, it was a swell layout. It was up on the third floor, a flat

on the third floor, an* we had a little puppy that we was playia' with.

That's the first memory I have of bean' happy. I guess we was =akin' a lot

of noise.

says:

Anyway, after a while, the lad's mother comes by, an' she

"Why don't you children throw that dog out ol the window?*

She didn'tmean nothial by that: she was only jokint, Ulna'

us to be more quiet. But me, I'd never been in a house like that, or seen

a woman like that, an* I'm so happy ea' so 811XiOUB to please, I pick up

that goddess' little pup an' walk over to the window an' throw it out.

Holy Jesus: I en laugh about it now; but you can tell the sort 40 kid

I was. I can still see that pup fallia° down to the street. It wee a

pretty cuss. Jesus.