5. Name and address of person, if any, accompanying ycu

6. Description of room,house, surroundings, etc.

None

Union Headquarters

(Use as many additional sheets as neoessary, for any of the forms, each bearing

the proper heading and the number to which the material refers.)

W3622

FORM B

Personal History of Informant

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF ViORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

1339 S. Troy

June 20, 1939

Packinghouse workers job

NAME OF INFORMANT

Jean Bolter

1. Ancestry

Irish parents
Amerioan born

2. Place and date of birth

Chicago, 23 years old

3. Family

Married, no children

4. Places lived in, with dates

Chicago only

5. Education, with dates

Grammar school, 1 year high

6. Occupations and accomplishments, with dates

7. Special skills and interests Active in her union, and the auxiliary

8. Community and religious activities Attends church, Irish Catholic one, admires

the priest because he calls on the members to stick to the union and not to be afraid to be called ' red'. This priest was once against the CIO, now he preaches that the only menace to America is the spreading of fascistic ideas. So she goes

9. Description of in formant

to church without fail, to hear the priest

10. Other Points gained in in terview

stand up for ' them', meaning yards workers, and it makes her feel good the rest of the week.

FORIC

Text of Interview (Unedited)

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

1339 S. Troy St.

June 20, 1939

Packinghouse worker's job

NAME OF INFORMANT

Jean Bolter

I carry away finished pork hooks. That is, when my table

finishes the trimming of them, they box the hocks and I take it

away to another table farther up. These boxes are heavy, they

weigh a good thirty pounds a piece. The floor is greasy and

that makes it easy to slip and fall all over the plaoe. I

almost broke my neck from one of the flops I took there. My

arm was sore for three weeks after that. I remember I went

over to the ' butcher shop' a couple hours after I fell that

time, and I wanted the doctor to take a look at my arm. It was

swelled up like a ham, and hurt so I mould hardly work. Well,

the way he fixed me upl Like they always do in the ' butcher

shop'. Feinted merouroohrome on my arm, gave me a pill and

said I could go back to work.

The doctors are lousy in that place. They don'tgive a

hang about you. The girls always joke about the ' treatments'

they give you. Got a headache? Here you are. Mite pill.

Dizzy spell? Take a pink pill. Cold? Take an aspirin. Sore

throat? Take an aspirin. Infection? Paint it with =moll. or

iodine, and let it go at that. Cut deep? Tape it. Katie

Sullivan out herselv across the first joints of her three middle

FORM D

FOLKLORE

Extra Comment

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF WOREER

ADDRESS

1539 S. Troy St.

DATE

June 20, 1939

SUBJECT

Packinghouse worker's job

NAME OF INFORMANT

Jean Solter

fingers. Doctor said it wasn't bad, just needed taping. Her

fingers are deformed now. All crooked up. She ain'tunbend

them. Those dirty company doctoral

A lot of women keep at work until their fifth or sixth

month of pregaanoy. Couple of months after they came right

back. Pregaant woman gets sick at work she won't go see the

doctor. He'll just tell her to go home or shut up, she isn't

supposed to be working there according to oompany rules and

if she does, why, let her take the consequences. If she gets

sore, he sends in a report and she gets laid off right away.

Once there was a committee got up of people who were

willing to pay a doctor to set up a clinioh8; yards

workers. You know, to find out just how many had t.b. and

heart diseases and all that. Armour's wouldn't let him do it.

All he asked for was a little space for the clinic in the yards.

He was going to furnish it with hospital equipment through the

committee that was backing him. But they wouldn'tgive him a

chance. They said that ' unfortunately' there was no available

spave in the yards for a clinic. We were all for it, got

signatures from the girls and all, but they wouldn'tbudge. That

Jean bolter

Text of Interview

was before the union's tine. If we had this contract signed and

off our minds, we could start the ball really rolling for a

yards clinic, sure.