5. Name and address of person, if any, accompanying you

None

6. Description of room,house, surroundings, etc.

Two roans in a nicely kept flat, 3rd floor, kitchen and bathroom shared by three families, including the Thomases. Comfortably furnished, definitely middle class, crowded. Dining rocs: set and three piece parlor set in one roam, besides occasional tables, radio, etc. Very caftgested district, 20 and more people living in flat apts. built to house no more than 6 persons. This neighborhood not the poorest nor the most crowded of the South Side Black Belt, either.

(Use as many additional sheets as necessary, for any of the forms, each bearing

the proper heading and the number to which the material refers.)

W3621

FORM B

FOLKLORE

Personal History of Informant

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF INORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

NAME OF INFORMANT

Betty Burks

1339 S. Troy St.

May 10, 1939

Packinghouse worker

Elmer Thames

1. Ancestry

Negro

2. Place and date of birth

3. Family

Eastern Illinois
Around 32 years ef age

life, stepson

4. Places lived in, with dates

Marion, Ill., Chicago, Ill.

5. Education, with dates

Finished 4 yrs. high school in
Marion

6. Occupations and accomplishments, with dates Butcher in sheep kill for 12 years

.7. Special skills and interests

Is secretary of his union local and steward in his dept. at work

8. Community and religious activities

Belongs to the Metropolitan Nondenominational Church at 41st and South Parkway. Proud of the fact that his church bars no one from its doors, and makes no issue of color, or eed or sect.
9. Description of in formant

Very clean and neat, dresses rather

expensively for wkr. 1411 built 6 footer, dark brown skinned, quietly intelligent, plain speaking. Likes to discuss problems and solutions to

his raoels problems. Very race conscious. Thinks his people ought to

10. Other Points gained in in terview

concentrate more on businessedministration courses in their education, rather than the more speolalised proressions or lawyer, doctor, or any or . arts4

Form B

Thinks this would build the initiative neoessary for them to create their own centers of in dustrial and economic activity, and do away with the extreme exploitation of the Negro in his own conmiunity, at least. Says
Jewish merchants and absentee landlords are worst and most resented.

FORM C

Text of Interview (Unedited)

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF WORKER

Betty Burke

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

1339 S. Troy St.

May 10, 1939

Paokinghouse worker

NAME OF INFORMANT

Elmer Thames

Time ah went to the yards they put me on as a laborer on the Killing

floor. That was in Beef Kill but they soon had me transferred to Sheep

Kill. Ah used to try handling a knife, try to do some of the butoher jobs,

you know, when the foreman wasn'taround. Well, that's a trade and ah

wanted to learn it so ah'd have a better chance to keep a job there. Time

ah started there was lots of Negro workers there, you know, had been in

the yards since they were brought from the South to help break the big

strike, well, they'd let me pick up the trade, helping them on the job.

Foreman, he came over once and see ah know how to handle a knife so ah got

a butchering job as soon as there was call for that. What ah do is out

off sheep's head after it's been dressed. Ah been doing that particular

job more than 12 years now. Ah Know fellows, told me when they started in

the yards, and tried to learn to butcher, white men on the floor didn't

like to see it. They'd do almost anything to keep them from learning,

throw anything they could lay hands on at them, knives, sheep fat oups,

punches, ( that's tools we work with) anything. The white butchers, they

hated the Negroes because they figured they would scab on them when trouble

came and then („et good paying, skilled jobs besides. Well, that was a

long time back, with the • CIO in, all that's like a bad dream gone. Oh,

we still have a hard wow but this time the white men a rewith us and we're

with them.

FORM D

Extra Comment

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF livORKER

Betty Burke

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

1339 S. Troy St.

May 10, 1939

Packing house worker

NAME OF INFORMANT

You take pork packing. Jobs like that, they're clean, easy, light.

You won'tfind Negroes working there. They won'tgive them such jobs.

When they ' raise a gang', ( that's a term they use in the yards when there's

new men being hired,) you can bet you won't see any Negroes coming in.

Like in ' 33, they were hiring young white boys, 16 and 18 years old, raw

kids, didn'tknow a thing, but there were plenty of colored boys waiting for

the same chance who never got it. Hank Johnson, just the other night said

he'd bet there hadn'tbeen a Negto hired in Armour's in 7 years. He knows

what he's talking about. Of course, they lay off Negroes who later are rehired. But if they haven'tworked there before they don't stand a chance.

Ah remember one time ah was fired. Ah was doinl my job and the work was

coming too fast so ah had to let some of it go on by. Well, ah know the

boss was drunk and he oame by, asked me why ah didn itkeep up and ah told

him. He was too drunk to listen, just got mad and said ' get to hell out 0"

here.' Ah see there was no use arguing with him like he was. Just picked

up my mat and hat and walkhd out. Three days later they called me back to

work. Ah thought they'd take away my vacation time for that, but they didn't

Never will know why they didn't break my seniority on account of it. guys

would tell about when they ' worked for the church'. A man would finish his

work and go punch time clock. Than he'd have to came back and work without

tbe

Elmer lhomas

Form D

being paid for the time he was putting in. Never had to do

that myself, but sometimes the foremen would make us work

five, ten minutes overtime, and finally we stopped that. At

that time they had those big sheep fat cups hanging on the

ohains. We'd see they were working us past supper hour.

Man fatthest away from the foreman would whistle and all the

guys at work would start hollering ' s-o-u-pl and whistling

and banging the cups around, working all the time, you know.

So they couldn'tfire us all and we made so much racket they

quit that particular chiseling after the first few times.

There's an old man, he pulls hog fat. Pulls hog fat off

the carcass and stows it in the fat cups. He's been oaths

killing floor for thirty years, and been stone blind for

twenty years. Be can get around on that floor as well as

anyone of us with eyesight. Knows every man on the floor by

the sound of his voice. He does his full share of work, and

better than most, at that. Ah was workinl with him 6 months

before ah found out he was blind, he gets around that good.

Don'tknow how he lost his sight. He don'tneed but a man to

take him home at night and bring him to work mornings. Guess

after you been working thirty years at one job you don'tneed

much else except habit to keep going. Some guys come to work

drunk, so drunk that they can hardly walk, but they can do

their work. They've been doing the same thing for so many

years, they can do it sleeping.

Form D

They have a./or edit union/ in Armour's, keepea lot of

people out of the CIO. If you want a loan from them yom

have to have a / good/ reoord. Well, some fellow, colored

fellow, he tried to get a loan. They knew he was a Union

man, so they made it hard for him. Told him to get some

worker with a bank account in the credit union to vouch for

him. Fellow went and got Charlie. Oharlield been in the

yards along time and he happened to have some money there.

He walked into the office and signed them papers, and them

in charge of the loans with their eyes popping like a fish/

out of water. Manager asked Uharlie to step into his private

office, he was so upset. He said to him, / You really mean

you want to sign for that man, and he a colored maul I hate

to think of a white man would want to take on that responsibility./ Charlie, he's Irish, and he looked at this manager

and grinned. He said, iNell, sure now, I do appreciate that

bit of a dvioe, min/ you a init oharginl nuthinl for it. But

that black boy's my friend. He works with me. He's a union

brother and I guess maybe you're surprised to hear thet I'm

with the union, tool So just save that advice of yours for

somebody don't know no better./ Walked out of there and

slammed the door. You think that colored fellow didn't get

his loan? He got it. Manager couldn't do a thing. He

really spoke his piece out of turn that time. Got a union

man mad, that time, and got himself told.