maroh I,  1939. 
A1exan4er Mitehell  III 
9014 Department 
Barnett  National  Bank 
Jacksonville,  fleritas 
Hese  Shopherd,Writer. 

Araxionyli  Knomaz, nxacial. 

Mr.  Mitohell was oontaoted after banking Miura in his  offloo 

in the  bend departiemil  at the Barnett National  Bank.  Re is  a small 

man,  about five  foot  four inohes  tall,  rather stookily built,  with 

blend hair and quiok-moviag gray  eyes,  and is  thirty-five years of 

alf•• 

Re was energetioally  busy with a list  of  statistics,  his  desk' 

arrayed with numerous referenoe sheets,  and evidently  in the midst 

of compiling a monthly report of the &at/vitt** of his department. 

A warm afternoon had induced  him  to  remove his oeat,  whioh was  oars-

fully  arranged  over the  tuck  of a nearby  office  chair.  ,Re  quiakly 

transferred his coat  to  tho top of the  railing which fenced off his 

department from the  lobby  of  the  elierssestien of the  bank,  at in-

vited  the  writer to (some  in and  be  seated. 

'I..  have been in this position five years,  and before that was 

oonneoted with the  office  of smith-Hioharisen and Conroy,  caterers 

to  the  hotel supply  trade. 

"I  an sorry to  say  I know  very little of my groat-gramitather, 

my namesake, who was a financial  power in the late 1860's in his 

him. state  of  Wisconsin,"  said young Alexanaer Mitohell  III. *Re 

and  she my great-grandmother were of Anglish desoent ani Apiscepal-

tans.  All  family  papers  have  been lost by ono means or another  and 

I have nothing to authenticate  their arrival and  settlement  in 

Milwaukee.  However,  his  financial  aotivities are a matter of  resort." 

Producing a small  paper-beund  volume  from the  top loft-hand drawer 

26053 

Alexanaer Mitchell  III 

2. 

of his desk ** an alPhahotical list  of aarly national  organisations - 

he turmoil  quickly to  the Ate  and  road.: 

"Alexander Mitoholl,  organism*  an& first  president  of  the 

American Bankers'  Association;  organiser and  stockholder  of the 

Chicago,  Milwaakee and  St.  Nail Railroad;  and organiser and  first 

prosillim* ( 1069)  of the Narthoostern National  Ineurunoe  Company. 

"I  can siva no first hand information regarding Willa 

Alexandsta.  Jar a long time I kept a newspaper clipping of a 

writeup of the  Villa by Harriet Butcher Stowe,  but  that,  too,  has 

been misplaced  and  I do  not  knew whirr.  I could  new  lay hands on it. 

"Naturally,  I feel  reluctant  in maw; into any personal 

history of my immildiate  family.  My father  and mother separated 

many yours  ago;  I have always mad' my home with my mother  and her 

pimple,  and know  practically nothing of the Mitchell family history. 

David Mitchell 

"My  father/I have not  seen for  considerably  over a year. 

I- de  net know  it he  is  at present  in  Jacksonvills.  However,  Mr. 

Bainbridge Richardson,  MV.  Francis P.  iflesizig,  lit.  J.  Y.  Wilson, 

may  be  able  to  give  some  clue as to his whereabouts. " 

Ris hands  played nervously with a pewit,  and he was 

ovidently anxious  to  ot baok to  the compilation of his  report. 

"No,  4 do  not know  if I will  over attain to  any  such 

reputation as my  famous ancestor  enjoyed in the finanoisl 

but  I an glad,  to have impasse  assooiatea with the eldest  banking in-

stitution in Jacksonville,  and  I um  ournestly trying to make  good - 

just as  if  I were  the  first Mitohall in the  country, with no an-

cestral  background or achievenahts  to live up to. 

"A  banker's lifi is  net  a bed  of roses -  it  means long 

hours aid hard work,  just  the  emus  as  may other vocation, with the, 

aids&  burden of responsibility  for other peoples finances. 

Whoa 

Alexander Mitchell III 

S. 

the  slides  go down at  the  tellers'  windows at  2 v.  m.  and neon oin 

baturiay,  and  tho doors are  clessd, working hours aro mot evil* 

for the  employoos;  sometime.  it  means  ill afternoon like today,  with 

me,  and ofteu far  into  the  night during sputa rushes or buoy  sous-

Om. 

"I  Gould net  discuss my work,  that would have to  came 

from  the  head  of my department,"  he  said,  clipping his  sentonaes 

with the  finality  of  dismissal. 

"Always work?  Well,  I have, a little  reoreatioa.  Ima 

very  fond  of  swimming and  I have  just  taken up golf - but  I isn't 

think I'll  over bacon.  a ' bug'  about that.  Not  so  mUoh time to 

lost. 

"My  surly  teachers were  in a private  sohool,  thou  I at-

tended the Duval  Couuty public mamas, later graduating from the 

University  of Plorida.  Now,  I am studying a apeoial  maws* in 

finance  by  the American Institute of Nanking,  and other  things in 

relation to mg work,  that  takoo up a great  rawly  of my off hours. 

"Veto?  Yes I vets,  as a matter  of uouree„  but  I an 

afraid I would never make  a ward  politician,"  he laughed -" tee 

many snooks  and turns.  Nationally,  I lilts  President Roosevelt's 

got 

ideals,  and  beliovo  in time  he  will/fillioncos„  labor,  and living 

conditions  of the American people on the up-and-up." 

Mardh  7,  1919. 

Bainbridge Richurtisen 

Realtor 

lb Blum Bldg., 
daeksonvillealorida. 
Rose  4hephert,Writer 

ALUANDitR MITOMiLL,  YINANOISR. 

Mr,  Buinbridee Aishardson wtl.e  interviewee in his  office,  Roes 

lb Blum Building,  214 West  Forpyth-st. 

"1  can oonfirm  the  t6ot  that  Mr.  Alexander Mitshell  of mil-

wioconein,  was the organizer and  first  presidmat  of the 

American Bankers'  Association. 

"As  to David Mitobell,  his grandson and  the  father  of  laszaalor 

Mitoholl III,  of  Jacksonville,  I have not  seen his for three  or 

four months.  I do  Dot  know  just where  he  ,lay .be,  but when he returns, 

be  31A,  to  let  you knew, 

"You have hoard about  under-privileged Children?  Well,  David 

Mitobell was ever-privileged.  Re was  the"apple of his  grandmother's 

eye,"  so  to  speak,  and  had  everything under the  sun lavished upon 

him that  money could  buy  or  influence scour. -  education,  travel, 

and  all  possible  advantages. 

"It  is  reported that  iD  his early manbooli he hod  a fall  from 

a pole powyou the  grounds of  Villa Alexandria,  suffering severe 

injuries,  indluding a fractured  skull.  At  any rate,  he developed 

into an uareliable terrethe  individual.,  sometimes unaoosuntable, 

and  at  other times  rational. " 

