5. Name and address of person, if any, accompanying you

. None

6. Description of room,house, surroundings, etc.

Ordinary 2 flat apt. building, in so mewhat well-to-do neighborhood, scanty, nondescript furnishings in hams, keeps a boarder to help pay the rent. Couple of streets sway to the north are the ' yard' slums.

(Use as many additional sheets as neoessary, for any of the forms, each bearing

the proper heading and the number to which the material refers.)

W3623

FORM B

FOLKLORE

Personal History of Informant

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF 1NCRKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

1339 S. Troy

May 12, 1939

Packinghouse worker

NAME OF INFORMANT

1. Ancestry

Irish, American born

2. Place and date of birth

New York City,
About 25 years old

3. Family

Husband, 5 month old baby

4. Places lived in, with dates

New York, Chicago

5. Education, with dates

Finished Grammar school

6. Occupations and accomplishments, with dates

7. Special skills and interests

PackingOcuse union, progressive community groups, and political pressure groups to supply aid to the workingman are her main interests.

8. Community and religious activities

No religious affiliations

9. Description of in formant

A hundred and seventy-five

pounds of husky Irish, fresh, cocky mariner, pretty face, hard worker, keeps busy in various groups above mentioned practically every
10. Other Points gained in in terview

FORM C

FOLKLORE

Text of Interview (Unedited)

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

NAME OF INFORMANT

1339 S. Troy

May 12, 1939

Packinghouse worker

start with my first job in the yards, pork trimning in Swift's.

That job is in a cooler where there are no windows. It's always wet and

the girls had to wear boots, or wooden shoes, and woolen socks, and long

aprons. It's a messy job and the girls would get all bloody and wet and

greasy right away.

We had to change aprons at least twice a week and the

company doesn'tfurnish them nor launder them for us.

Pork trimming consists of trimming fat pork from the lean. All that's

done with a knife, which you have to keep sharpening all the time because

of the wetness and then the work naturally dulls your knife soon. It's

very cold, and your hands get frozen and numbed and since it's piece work

you have to work like mad to make anything. Hundreds of girls have their

fingers all out up on account of the rush. They're always sticking each

other or themselves, accidentally, of oourse, knives slip out of their

fingers, they get so cold, or greasy and bloody, or else beoause they're

trying to make the above B rate. That's base rate. You had to earn bonus,

and go over base rate. If you don't, they fire you.

The pork, before it's trimmed, oomes in barrels of 60 pounds or more,

and we'd have to carry our barrels of meat up to the tables ourselves. The

barrel itself weighs about twenty pounds. That'd be some work, and don't

fbrget we didn't get paid for lugging them, either, we only got paid for

the meat we trimmed and had weighed. Another thing, we used

FORM D

FOLKLORE

Extra Comment

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF MREER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

1339 S. Troy

May 12, 1939

Packinghouse worker

NAME OF INFORMANT

to have to come to work extra early in order to get any pails to work with.

There weren'tenough pan* to go around and those who didn'thave any couldn't

do their work, they'd have to wait till somebody was finished with theirs, which

usually never happened, because the girls hung on to their pails, being all

piece workers they couldn'tafford to sit around and wait, none of them. That

made an awful lot of trouble. Everybody was always mad at everybody else, but

it wasn'tanybody's fault except the company's.

To go to lunch we had to climb two flights of stairs, the steep kind, like

fire excapes. Many times there wculd be serious accidents, women would slip

on them because they had an their rubber boots, or those wooden shoes, and break

their ankles or their legs, just all kinds of accidents.

I got laid off there. The whole gangIwas with, about 12 girls, got laid off.

We couldn'tmake the rate, try as we would.