1. Date and time of in terview May 1, May 3, evenings

2. Place of in terview

3658 South Boyne Avenue

3. Name and address of in formant

Estelle Zabrittfici"-

4. Name and address of person, if any, who put you in

touch with in formant.

None

3658 South Moyne Street

•Ei..

Name and address of person, if any, accompanying you

6, Description of room, house, surroundings, etc.

None

Four Roam house, 2nd floor back, stove heat, very neat and homey. Being married about two years and both working steady, they have all new and good furniture. They live in a cleaner, fairly well-to-do workers! residentidt section. By ! well-to-do! workers is meant the kind who have skilled jobs in the yards, foremen, small time office executives ( from the yards).
Three large Catholic churches dominate the social and community life of this small section. Plenty of saloons but all situated on the business streets, not, as in the real yards slums, eight blocks south, scattered thickly on every street, business or ' residential!.

(Use as many additional sheets as necessary, for any of the forms, each bearing the proper heading and the number tb which the material refers.)

W3613

FORM B

FOLKLORE

Personal History of Informant

CHICAGO

mum Fousiukk

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

Betty Burke

ADDRESS

1339 South Troy Street

DATE

May 4, 1939

SUBJECT

Packinghouse worker

NAME OF INFORMANT Estelle ZabritaKi

1. Ancestry

Lithuanian, American born

2. Place and date of birth Chicago, 23 years old

3. Family

Married, Husband Lithuanian, American born
6 months old baby girl

4. Places lived in, with dates

South side of Chicago and back of yards

5. Education, with dates

Grammar school, two years of High at Englewood High

6. Occupations and accomplishments, with dates

Never did anything but work in the yards

7. Special skills and interests

Her baby and her husband and her home are the most important things in her

life. Union work comes next, but since the baby came she hasn'tdone much

except attend its social affairs.

8. Community and religious activities

Attends a YWCA center recently established in the yards area. Lauds it

for its progressive ideas and stimulus to stockyard women workers. Raised a
Catholic but not very religious. Seldom goes to church.

9. Descript ion of in formant

A beauty, mild, smiling ways. Says she gets along very well at the yards because they think she's beautiful and dudb. The foremen would come and cry on her shoulders all the time about the union and she would have to be so so licitous
10. Other Points gained in in terview and sympathetic and indignant about it all, sti

with a CIO button stowed away in her purse sinoe the first day the union came to the plant

FORM C

Text of Interview (Unedited)

CHICAGO FOLKSUYV

FQLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

Betty Burks

ADDRESS

1339 South Troy Street

DATE

May 4, 1939

SUBJECT

Packinghouse worker

NAME OF INFORMANT

Estelle Zabrits

I'll tell you how I got to working in the yards. I wanted to

finish high school but we had a lot of sickness and irouble in my

family just then; my father got t.b. and they couldn'tafford to send

me any more. Oh, I guess if I had begged and coaxed for moony to go

they would have managed but I was too proud to do that. I thought Ltd

get q job downtown in an office or department store and then maybe make

enough to go back to school. Me and my girl friend used to look for

work downtown every day. We lived right near the yards but we wouldn't

thiik of working in that smelly place for anything. But we never got

a nring in office work and a year went by that way so one time we took

a walk and just for fun we walked into Armour's where they hire the girls,

you know. We were laughing and hoping they wouldn'tgive us applications,

lots of times they send new girls away because there's so many laid off

girls waiting to get back, and we really thought working in the yards was

awful. Lots of girls do even now, and even some of them will have the

nerve to tell people they don'twork in the yards. They'll meet other

girls who work there, at a dance or some wedding and they'll say they don't.

FORM D

Extra Comment

CHICAGO FOLKSTUtT

FOLKLORE

CHI CAGO

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

Betty Burke

ADDRESS

1339 South Troy Street

DATE

May 4, 1939

SUBJECT

Packinghouse worker

NAME OF INFORMANT Estelle Zabrits

But you can always know they're lying, because mostly their finger nails

are cracked and broken from always being in that pickle water; it has some

kind of acid in it and it eats away the nails.

Well, in walks Miss MoCamn and she looks over everybody and what did

she do but point at me and call me over to her desk. I guess she just

liked my looks or something. She put no to work in Dry Casings, you might

think it's dry there but it isn't, they just call it that to distinguish it

from Wet Casings dept., which is where they do the first cleaning out of

pig guts. The workers callit the ' Gut Shanty' and the smell of that place

could knock you off your feet. Dry Casings isn'tthat bad but they don'ttake

visitors through, unless it's some real important person who makes a point

of it and wants to see. Lots of those ritzy Lilies can'ttake it, they tighten

up their faces at the entrance and think they're ready for anything, but before

they're halfway through the place they're green as grass and vfmiting like they

A

never did before. The pickle water on the floors gets them all slopped up,

just ruins their shoes and silk hose. And are they glad to get outi They

bump into each other and fall all over themselves, just like cockroaches,

FORM C page - 3 -
CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

they're so anxious to get away and get ° leaned up. We feel sorry for

them, they look so uncomfortable.

I operated a power machine in Dry Casings. It's bitter where I

am because the casings are clean and almost dry by the time they oome

to the machine and I sew them at one end. Mine is a semi-skilled job

and / get good pay, piece work, of course. On an average of from $ 23

to $ 27/a week . In my dept. there aren't so many layoffs like in the

other places. 114 work about eight months a year, but I was lucky, I

only got it three times in the five years I was there. I think they

sort of like me, Miss McCann and some of them.

But the first meek I was there, you should have seen my hands,

all puffed and swollen. I wasn't on sewing then, I was on a stretching

machine. That's to see if the casing isn'tdamaged after the cleaning

processes it goes through.

You know that pickle water causes salt ulcers and they're very hard

to cure, nearly impossible if you have to keep working in the wet. The

acids and salt just rot away a person's skin and bone if he just gets the

smallest scratch or cut at work. Most of the girls in casings have to

wear wooden shoes and rubber aprons. The company doesn't furnish them.

They pay three dollars for the shoes and about one fifty for the aprons.

My husband got the hog's itch from working there. He can't go near

the yards now but what he gets it back again. He used to have his hands

and arms wrapped up in bandages clear up to his elbows, it was so bad.

The company paid his doctor bills for a while till it got a little better

but they broke up his seniority. They transferred him to another dept.

FORM C - page - 4 -

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

after he had worked 3irywars in one plaoe, and then after a couple

months they laid him off because they said he was ' newt in that

department. They just wanted to get rid of him now that he was

sick and they had to keep paying doctors to ours him. Finally

he got a job outside the yards to he Said Ito hell with them'.