5. Name and address of person, if any, accompanying you

None

6. Description of room,house, surroundings, etc.

WM Center, West Side. Family awns home on North Sid., in good condition. Good, quiet neighborhood.

(Use as many additional sheets as necessary, for any of the forms, each bearing

the proper heading and the number to which the material refers.)

W3624

FORM B

FOLKLORE

Personal History of Informant

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF IhORRER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

1339 S. Troy

May 15, ' 39

Packinghouse worker

NAME OF INFORMANT

Gertrude Daubs

1. Ancestry

German, American Born -

2. Plaoe and date of birth

Chicago, 22 years about

3. Family

Both parents, one younger sister

4. Places lived in, with dates

Chicago

5. Education, with dates

Grammar School

6. Occupations and accomplishments, with dates

Worked a short time onoe in a radio factory, last 6 years in yards

7. Special skills and interests

Excels in athletic sports of all kinds, has

son sweaters, oups, etc:, in volleyball, softball, basket ball, swimming.
Enjoys horseback riding. Amateur, of course. Used to play on factory teams.

8. Community and religious activities Member of the Industrial Girls dept. of

the TM, West Side. Joined club for its athletic program, swimming, etc.
Likes and shares social activity of club. Reluctantly goes along with club's social action program, but obviously and apparently because of shop

9. Description of in formant

influences, disinterested in discussion of unions, etc.

Pretty, strong, and stubborn. Well liked by the girls. Lots of pep and always venting to be engaging in physical activity.

10. Other Points gained in in terview

Goes to German Lutheran church. Father a

skilled, steadily employed craftsman. AFL union member.

FORM C

Text of Interview (Unedited)

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

NAME OF INFORMANT

1339 S. Troy St.

May 15, ' 39.

American Lives
Paokinghouse worker
Gertrude D.

I've worked in Reliable Packing Co. for the last 6 years, mostly in Sliced

Baoon. I just wrap up the bacon as it comes out of the slicing machine, ih those

cellophane wrappers, and staok them. I have lots of fun at work, we kid around

with the guys all the time. Sometimes we fry bacon on a little electric plats

that we plug up to one of the machines. A bunch of us always eat together. We

even make ooffee. It's against rules to cook anything, really. You're supposed

to use the cafeteria. But the boss don't care, he comes around lunch time and

we make him eat with sts. He likes our gang. Some of the old Polish women get

sore as heck because he treats us better than them. They don't like to see young

girls and fellows have a good time, but we don't do anything. We just monkey

around a little bit, that's all. They're just jealous ' cause th...2a can't.

I get paid by the hour. It's pretty nice where I work. It gets cold, but

I don'tmind. I got two weeks vacation with pay this winter, I took another

week off without pay, the boss let me off, and I went to Florida. Did I have

fun! I was flat broke when I came back.

We have a union in our place. It's the Employees Mutual Benefit Association. We have dances and socials, bunco parties, things like that. We have our

Grievance oommittee, all that. Of course, the CIO had to came butting in where

they weren'twanted and lots of people joined but my gang didn't and I'm glad.

I'm satisfied with my job and I got no kick with the company. Why should I worry

FORM D

Extra Comment

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF lORhER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

1339 S. Troy

May 15, 1939

Packinghouse Worker

NAME OF INFORMANT

Gertrude D.

about somebody else's troubles on the job? I pay my dues to the Employees

Association and always will. They're just jealous of anybody with a good

job, and they join the CIO and try to get the company to give them all the

easy work. Some of them in the CIO union won'teven talk to us anymore, can

you imagine thatl We get a lone at work better than any of them, so we don't

pay any attention to them.