t/t( 

July 1V,  1104V. 
Kra.  Charles ( Valli. 
q(bsolt)  LoNoir,  
Iloorotary,Womune  Club of 
Jaoicsonville, 

Riverside- eve., 
Juckeonville,  Floriaa. 
Rose  lAlepherd,  writer. 

VI 74., , A141 

If ' TOY . ZI4 

SOUTH 

1:::L•014 VI IL • 

Yrs.  Charles Leheir,  or " Vise itollio"  us ohs  is  4, 3T00-

tionutely  knowL  to the  embmrs  of  the'omen's  Club  of  Jack-

sonville,  of which  she  has  Loon  the  efficient  aeoret.,ry  for 

seven yours,  velunteere4  informutiou on Villa 

re. .doxan,or  itohull , whA  inoi,ionta  of  Bouth  Jucksouville 

history,  un  wuz interviewed  us  she  sat  ut  hor  leek ih the 

businose  office  of  the  ,,t4an'a  Club. 

r.ee.  LeNoir is  a_small  woman of  6cotoh-.inglish descent, 

itn koon brown eyes,  reioish brown huir, . ruddy  com-

plexion. .Jho  speuke  rupidly,  hor  hih pitohed  voiood  having 

oc:Asidorublo  nasal  oiality, &mu  interepi)rsee liar  convorou-

tion vith  quiok,  exTveeeive hand  qestareo, 

fumily  came  to  Jacksonville  from  Flint,  Miohigan, 

in.1870,  when  i v‘s  u vory smull  ohild,"  euid rre. 

"ry  faLhar, 

L.  Gibson,  huA  1,0en  ordered  to 

lorid  by  hie  pnyeician,  beiw:  viutiri  of oonsumption,  or 

tubJrculosie,  49  it  is  now  called.  The  libsons were early 

settlers  of  ichifrun,  my  f4ther  t)ein  of  tho  fourth 4eneru-

tion  of  that  faL.ily  in thut  tat*. 

"Iihen  we  first  Qua:a  to  this  section,  wo  bo.rded * fth 

tha  fu,ily  of  ox- Governor Hurrlson Hoed,  livin,<  in  tis  old 

Aeod  house en Pluglor  Jtroet  in  outh  Jaokeonville.  The 

26054 

house  is  still  etun4.;inz  in its  original leeatien,  but  *us  that 

Mrs.  Charles 34eboir 

2. 

in the  mentor  oi 

small  estate  of  toelve  acres,  en which . 

.was  planted  a splend  t bearing orange grove,  41d  other trop-

Leal  fruits  and  shrubs. 

This WiliS  in 1879. 

W. were  considered Yankees,  and were not  vqry  popela..r 

at  thdt  oariod  of Florida's history. 

"H...rison iteed  was  the  first  Territorial  GoVernor of 

Florida,  Ulso  u Yankee,  from Milwaukee,  Wisconsin,  se  it  was 

natural  that  ee  should  seek congenial  friends. 

"The Reeds had  u shall  son, Harrison Reed,  Jr.,  and  he 

4.Lai  I b(iini;  tout  theapia age,  wore  oordial  playmates of 

preschool  age,  aril  had ..rood  Li ; es  romping .4.round  the  big house 

and  exploiling  the  estate.  We  were  -ery  fond  a oats,  and  I 

remembcr at  one  time we possessed in  joint  ownership a magnifi-

cent  colony  of  sixteen.  They  Ayer°  all  kinds,  mostly scrubs 

or  the  common alley variety,  but we loved  them dearly,  dressed 

the up,  put  paper boots on them,  and  fed  them  until  they  were 

as  fat  as butter. 

was  not  lug until  my  father  secured  44  position 

bookkaepar with the  Larnett bank..  He was  toe  third man em-

ployed.  The  firm oonoisted of 

b.  Barnett.  14r.  3141 

Cooper,  arid  then my  father w...ts  added,  the staif  of  thr)o  car-

ried  on  the  ral)idly  growing business of  the  institution.  The 

tiiktik.  was leao.ted  it  . small  building  on  the  same  corner where 

eurchgett's  Department -'?. tore  now  stands,  southwest  oorner of 

loorsyth  and  2ina ( or Iluipititreet,  as  it  is  known today).  vthen 

I look baok now,  I  slams  impoasible almost  to  realise  that 

the  Barnett Bank of ,Taoksonville  now  employees  around  three 

hundred  people.  It  was not  it  National  ban-,  but  vv..°  known 

then .As  he bank of  Jaci.sonvillo. 

Ure.  Oharlee Lenoir 

4. 

'then ma  father died  in 1V1e,,  he was  assisant  oashier 

ihe Barnett batik. 

"We  livad vith  the  Roods  for  m yoar or  so,  theh  my 

fathor purchased  an adjoinihg plot,  whioll  also ° contained  an 

orahge  grove,  buil,  a he,se,  atid  yhah  the  street wake  out 

through  pant  he  house in 1866,1t was Galled ' Gibson  ocreet , 

aiter  my  family. 

The  big old red house is still  sting. 

"Ix gaovarnor Harrison Red was  A  broth ,a°  of  Mrs.  ails-

andar : Atehall,  also  fro 0 ;ha owned  the ' Villa 

Alexandria'  as  to  on  he  A,  Johns  Aver,  farther  out  on 

the  month  side,  where  tha . wisher  roporty  no' w is.  In Pwicimg. 

she  UAMO  frequen ly  to  visit  the ,: ooas,  and we go ,  to knew  her 

wiry  well. 

"Mrs.  Mitohell was  a tall,  well-built we  411,  and  very  dig-

nified  in h r c.mnhor  and  spoeoh. : he was middle-aged,  ae  I 

first  reLauber has",  i-h h4r  ,uito  gray.  Her eyes were blue. 

.;he  was  a woman * f mueh oulu:e,  a world  raveler,  and  quite 

artistic). 

"Jhe  took a fanoy  to  me,  40.nci  as 'Jilt) 

along 

rzweeit 

deal  iu her big house,  sha often  took ma  to  Villa _lexandria 

to  alai  with har overnight  or  ov4r  1414  week end. 

"The  house was  4  big rambling three  story strueture,  all 

frame,  and no',  yawl,  pretentious from  he oulside,  but  tho  in-

side was most  beautiful. 

"Mrs.  Mitchell  used  to  humor me when  I would  be  her 

guest  by  giving me  mw  cholas  of  the room I was •  4000194Y. 

i'  

There via. , a French room,  with dainty blue  and gold  finiehed 

.white  antique  furniture,  with  heavy  brocade . draperies,  and 

lots  wind  lets  of  mirrors -  Yrenoh beveled  in gold  frames - 

everything v(iry  dipiisity  and ' Frenehe.  ThiL43 mi  favorite. 

Then there was the  Japanese  bedroom,  viLli  ho‘vy  dark lacquers& 

furniture,  with rugs and  other  furnishings  from  Japan;  and 

the  ilitique  room,  furnished  in early ,umerioun.  On the  other 

aide  of  the  house * AS  a rath'sr  largo bedroom,  all  greq  and 

straw  eolor, 

"Mrs.  Mitchell's  own bedroom vial  vei4  beautiful.  It  had 

a big bay  window whioh faued  Ole  river.  The windows  in the 

room were hung with  white silk curtains with over-drapes 

of heavy  blue brocade. 

On one  side  of  hr bad ehe  had  a 

tal screen wi  h throe  doors  that  folded.  Those doors were 

all  full-length heavy mirrors,  and  the other  side  was  of 

yellow  plush.  Three  steps led  ap  to  her bedroom  from  the 

hall,  whioh eaused  some  people to  remark -' The  steps  led up 

to  her throne.'  The woodwork  in  the room was  all  decorated 

with hand-oarvings.  it wae reported  oho  had  seoured  these 

carvings in France,  had  them  carefull4  taken  down  read,  brought 

ovor  here  and  installed  in  her  room. " ll  the litAle  uabinete e 

the  paintings on  the taA.s  ore French,  and  there were many 

round  and oval  mirrors of ?renoh  style. 

"The dining room Wo‘13,4  masterpiece  of magnifieenoe.  It 

Mrs.  Charles LoNoir 

4. 

was  quite large.  The dining table  ououpied  the  center of the 

roes,  thigh  could a000mmodate  esventy-fivo guests.  Cabinets 

were  built  in on two  sides pf  the  room,  11th  glat.fs  doors,  wud 

in  these were  stored her m 4 nifioont  imported  china.  In one 

was a marvelous  collection of teapots  from all  ovor the world, 

pathently ° ciliated on hoz*  many  trips abroad"  Ordinarily 

the  table wascin the  middle of the  room,  but then only  4 Low 

guests  were  nresent,  it was  shoved  up into  the expansive by 

indew  looking eut upon  the  it.  Johns liver. 

rise  paintings 

by  3urepean maetors adernod  the  walls  of  this  room. 

'Mrs.  Mitghell's son,  John,  was married to in aotross. 

The  son was rich  wad  spoiled,  the  asiviss-wifs was  high-

tempered and  avarioieue,  and when  they  separated,  hrs.  Mitoholl,sr 

took the small  sen t Weid e whom the  court  proceedings in 

divorce  suit  had awarded  to the  father.  He was then  about. 

seven years of age. 

"The  first  time  I saw David Mitohall was when  his  grand-

mother,  Hrs.  Alexander  71tohell,  brought  him back to  6outh 

Jacksonville  early  one  fall.  Thil=  was  in 1893.  He was  a 

small,  fair-haired youngster,  dressed in a blue  serge  soldier 

suit,  ornamented with  toll  gold  braid. 

"I  rev:ember  he  had  4 couple  of ferocious  bulldogs,  which 

he trained to  catch  and  kill  oats.  This,  to  Harrison Aeed and 

me,  was  the  height  of cruelty,  and we were not  vory  fond  of 

the ' little  heathen'.  He  used  to  hire  the  negroes to  bring 

Mrs.  Maslen LoNoir 

b. 

oats  to  villa . 1exandria,  which he  would tux')  loess  and ittnk 

sio  thaws  forooious bulldogs  on them.  If  the  dogs ° aught 

the  uats,  they would  tear  them apart.  It * as terriblol 

"Thom was no  doubt  of David's  being a legitimate  son, 

g s I remember all  the  talk about  the  soparation and  divoroo 

of  the  father and mothor in Milwaukoo. 

"Davie was the  Apple  of his  -rrandmother's  eye,  and  she 

lavished  evorything upon him.  He was  also  vory fond  of  his 

granamother and was  always loyal  to  her. 

"I  romomber  his oourtship with Kittie Parrott,  who * us 

Kittio  Sutton,  whom,Mr.  Parrett  adopted  uftor he  married  hr 

mother,  Mrs.  Lillie iJuttoa.  She  had vowed  she would marry 

the  riohest man  in  Jaoksonville,  aud  so  she  set  herillar  for 

David  Mitohell.  He was  a sport,  riding tild peal's,  drinking, 

gambling,  and  idling away  his time.  But they were marriot, 

and  I remember when  the  little  boy,  ,-,lexander Pitohell,  named 

for his  great-grandfuthor,  was born.  He w...e  a outs little 

baby  and I have lots  of  snapshots  of him,  as my mother used 

to  take  oar()  of  him A -'rot  deal, when Kittie (lama  ovor  to 

visit  in  Jaaksoil  ills. 

"i?he would  acme  as  far as  our  house,  and to  would walk 

down  to the  river  wid  put  out  a litle white  flag,  when * 

rowboat would  bo  sent  ovor  tk:  bring the  passenger  to  this  eido 

of  the  rivor.  They were  landed  at  the  foot  of Newnan ;Areet. 

My  father hud  his  own  rowboat,  and made  the  trip auross the 

rivir each day,  storing the  boat  at  the  Florida Yacht  Club 

basis  on  lho  rivor.f 

tti  ,- Ak etA-7:7n )  

"When  David ritoholl met with a terrible  aooldent  - 4  bad 

Mrs.  Oharles LeNoir 

6 

spill  from a fast  polo  posy,  he  suffered a conouselon of the 

brain und  oth-Jr  injuries,  being unooneeloue for  a period  of 

six weeks or  so,  Kittle Zuritett-Mitohell, & welded  she did  net 

ish to  be  ties  to u broken man,  so  she talked  of divorcing 

&avid,  who was praotioally  an  invalid ,and not  aAmtutable  for 

his  speaoh or actions  for a'ling  time.  Her father, who was  un 

ivortant  offioial  of  the Plorita . ast  Coast  Railroad,  wus 

rather stern with  her,  telling her  she  had  married David for 

better or for worse,  and  it  was  up to  her  to  remember her 

vows. 

he  refused  to live with  him,  however,  and immediately 

apen  the  death of  war  f ther  she  inetit  tod  preeeedings  for 

divoroo.  In tha  meantime,  she  had  b000me  involved in u moo-

ealieuloo  with  dm AOlmes, . loual  married  mein,  canning a lot 

of soandal,  and  it  was  reported "she  lived with him for  severl 

yeara  befolio  his  if  died and  he  we  ble  to make her his 

legal ', ifs. 

fter  he died,  she married  for  the third time, 

now , living in tieat  41m Beaoh,  having attained u modicum of 

ruspeotability  after  her wild uotions. 

The son,  aexander 

Ultehell,  is now  employed  in  the bond  department  of thJ  B.ruott 

hieuk.  He we's  quite  smell whs.',  his  father  and mother 

separated,  and  nrobably knows  •orry  little about  the Mitohelle. 

His  vrindmothor,  Mrs.  Lint. Parrett,  was  very  ion of him,  how-

ovIr, 

fleit  she  died,  in him Till  she  loft  him h,4r  beautiful 

reeidenoe  on  A.  Johns  4iArGIA10  in the  ZAhhionuble „oroudeelo  moo-

tion. 

Y.oung  lexandar  Mitohell was  born in 1V00. 

"The  first  ierryboat  op)ruted  on the  t.  Johne was  in 

1896 or 11194.  It  was  (sailed  the armington, and  I need to 

come  over  on it  to  Jacksonville  to  attend the  Bradford  Institute, 

mrs.  OhArles  1t4oir 

7. 

prive  sdhool  operated  by  Mrs.. Drow,Williems,  under the 

auspices of  the  Spiscepal  Church. 

"The next ferry  was  called  the  Ueohaniu.  It  belonged 

to  the flaglor wystem and  would  eot  the  trains at  the  foot 

of Hogan  Areet  and (Awry freight  and  passengers over  to  the 

south side  station of  the  Florida Auet  Coast  Railway. 

The  bridge was started about that  time,  and my mother 

who  died  in  1914.  said  Hhe wished  she might live  to  see  the 

bridge uomploted  and  the  two  eities,  Jaoksonville  and  ovith 

Jaoksonville,  joined  together. 

"During  the fire of Vay  3.  1901.  we ohildren were  Awed 

by the spectacle from the  south  aide of  the river.  It  must 

have  been  either on  a  Featurday  or  some holiday, 

we were 

home from school.  It  started about  noon. 

v,e  had  1;aen 

forbidden  to  go  down  through  the  orange  grove  which  run  to 

the  water' s edge. , Ixr  place was  all fenced  in,  And  there 

was  a.  gate  on  the  river  side,  but we  never went beyond the 

gate.  The  flames  kept 'booting up wad  the  black smoke 

rolling in,  so  we decided to go up to  the roof  of  the 

house.  he mounted  the  stairs to  the attic,  and  through 

window  climbed  out  Oil  the rocf,  from which we had  a magnifi-

cent view.  I remember  the  smoke  And  flame which (same  from 

the roof  of  the  Catholic  Church  after  a blazing  Lrand was 

wafted  thoro  by  the  Agh wind,  and we  watched  as  the  church 

Was  rapidly oensumed. 

"Along  in  the  evening the  forr5  began  to  tring 'people 

over  to  the  south side -  their  homes and  belougiugs  destroyed 

!'rs.  Charles LeNeir 

S. 

in  the fire,  their olothing in shreds and tbo  Owes burned. 

from their  feet  as they walked  tbroLth the  het  ashes.  That 

night we  had  nineteen  guests. 

"The  burning brands  fell  in every  direetion during  the 

height  of  the  fire -  the  fire department  simply  could not 

keep up with  them -  and even the next  pluming buildings were 

still  napkin& 

"Father  stayed at  his  post  in  the  Barnett Hank until 

5 e'elook on the  morvin;  after  take  fire.  The  bunk dict  net 

burn,  as  the fire lifted and burned Ihe next  Wawa.  Avery-

thing  in  the  other  direetion,  up in the  block where  the 

AAus  Club new  is,  was destroyed,  also. 

"Harris** Reed,  or rarry  Heed,  as we °ailed  him,whou he 

finiehed  edhool,  went  to work for  Lite  Hubbard Hardware  lo. 

Later ha was offered  a position with the t:tandard  Oil  Os., 

havin  charge  of  their warehouse  in Jaeksonville. 

Th 

11 

when we  parted  oompany,  as mother  thought ' warehouteeman° 

was not  good  enonghOter her daughter  to  keep  company with. 

when the  tandard Oil  Oompuni beeame more  prosperous  and  in-

fluential,  Harrison .toed was  promoted,  until  he  iinally  be-

came  the  Florid* manager.  He  is  retired now,  having  a beau-

tiful  Ame in ';an  Jose.  He must be  a multi-millionaire,  s 

he  sold hundreds  of auras  to  the  real  estate company develop-

ing * an Jose ; states,  one  of Jaoksouvilles most  beautiful 

residential  suburbs.  He  has  quite  a eolleation of vUuable 

historioal  relies  portaininit  to 

flu  has  treasured 

from  his  father's time,  when  he w4w,  Territorial  qoverner. 

Getting baak to Mre.  Mitehell,  ehe was always  a devout 

Apisoopaliaa,  and  when  outh  Jauksonville was building up,  she 

Mrs.  ChArles  Lagoir 

9. 

oenceived the ideu  of  building  4  ohupel  on the  south  site. 

The  spot  being selooted,  Rho  got  people  intorested,  and  ne 

one wav mere enthusiastio  that,  my  own  dear mother.  lou see, 

being Yankoes,  e .4, few  aloes  friends,  so  mothor  hud little 

soolul  setivity and  was glad to  Kiva her  time to helping Vre. 

Mitchell  in establishiwr the little ‘,11  Saints  Chapel,  us  it 

was  known. 

"I  remember that  my futhor used  to  go hunting with 

Mr.  d Holmes and  through  this assooiution  they  beclume  fast 

friends.  One clay  Tir.  114:e  said: " Gibson,  I am going to 

hAva my wifi  cull  on Yrs.  Gibson,  ho  , e can  bo  family friends." 

M/  father was  so *slighted whei,  he  brought  this message  home, 

but  my  mother said - " No,  she'll  not cull - v  ire  toe much 

Yankee  for  her" - and 'sure  enough  she  didn't. 

"If you will  lomo  k-aok  tomofrow,  I will  tell  you  more 

about  the Atohells und _ 11  Sainte  shurcb,  also  the yellow 

fever epidemic  of  1988." 

?}Lev 

1,41(.4i 

July  41,  1949. 
Kre.  OhArlse  0.  looleir, 
oeoretAry, 

J °knowing, t *swam 

eaub, 

861  Rivorside  Ave., 
e'mkeenville,  PleridA. 

AOse  Atepherd,  titer. 

SOUTH (^ dditIonA1). 

MITOE 

meet 

leyAl  At  ull  times  to )1,e , rrAtidmether.  1- remember  one 

!:va.  Lefloir  mAids "DAvid  itakell 

evening After he ...nd  ittie 

fratt were ...cried,  she hAd 

dressed- to  go  out  to  dinner ut  one  of  the  JAcli_eouville 

hetele.  Duvid  refused.  to AuoompAny ier. , ered,  she Ask 

why. " I hAve  Another  engArement,""  he  uAid.- "  What is 

more  importAnt  thun AoloompAnying me .to  this  dinner.  You know 

I oAn't  go  Alone,''  eAid  Yittie. "" I hAve  Au  engAgement with 

my -,:rAndmother."" " How loiw hAve  you hAd  this  engAgeresut?" 

asked Eittke. " Twanty-two yore,""  replied  David. 

grAndmother  And  I i7LAd  An  Agreement wholl  ahe first .4.0umed my 

oAre  that  whenever  She , oeted me  I would :A:,me, ° tell  she were 

'lonesome  And  wished  o to  sty with  .or,  I would  spend  As  long 

As  she  Liked  in clespanahmehip — just  she  And  I. 

This  is  one 

of'those times  she  hAe  Asked me  to  tqAy  vl.th  1-,or for  the even-

inp:,  And  I um  oulA to  go on my  honor." ;:;c,  Urn.  Kittle hAd 

to  atAy  quietly  At  hor:'e  14  herself. 

"Darin: % he ,. 

WAr,  who  the  troops were 

enuAmped in  JA,4c.son  ill,,  Anothor  grwasione--  John Mituhell, 

DAvid's half-brother,  son  of his  fAthor by  the  eeoonu wife - 

Mrs.  Ohsrles 

Lesoir 

go 

wss  s Lieutonsnt  in  ono  of  the Wiioo  din regiments,  and  VI's. 

Mitohell  give a Rrsnd  nsrty  st  Vills , 1exundris for  the young 

peoDle  of  Jaoksonville,  And  I wss invited.  This  John Mitehill 

seemed  to  be  s very  fine ' iou  g run,  serious,  and  businesslike. 

"Mrs.  Alexander Mitohell  vise *  lifeisleng Spisoopal‘am, 

and  slimIt  through  the  e:fortu  of ,ome  of  th , rouicionts  of the 

south  side,  a eh pel  wise  established  ss  an udjunat  to  staohns 

Ohiirah  of  Jacksonville.  My mother wss one  of:the  first  ones 

to  projeat this venture;  others were Mr.  au& Mrs.  Si Holmes, 

Judge  Cs11  and  his wile,  sad Mr,  and  ,Aes.  DeLsoy.  Later  Mrs. 

Mit,shell  beesme  interested  and worked hesrt  and.  soul : for  the 

little ohuroh,  oerated first  4.s  s Vission - All  sints - snd 

it wus hard work for  the  1.Nurithionars  to  keep Mrs. Mitehoill  from 

feelin-  that  she  orsAicully owned  it,  s.  she  gave  the  argot'', 

the  furniture,  the vestmeuts,  and wunted to  do  everything thst 

wus  needed without  question smd without  pries. 

"Ph:  firot  services were held in MAW in  the  little wsit-

ing  room +At  the  Ferry  station,  where  psweengers  ohsnged trsins, 

ar went serotle  to  JaCksonville from tha  Florid. 

st  Coast  Rail-

wsy  aosehes.  1 still  have  The . litle Biblethst wss given me 

ss  a souvenir  of  the  first meeting st . 11  3iiinte. 

. "Urn.  Mitchell would luxe  the ludies of  the  Guild meet 

st  her  home,  And  defter  t h+wines* mooting wss over  she would 

entertain them  by resdin,!  from s disry  she  nsd kept  of  4,  trip 

to *ypt  and  up  th4  Ale.  Just  s few  paragrsphs  st  a time, 

but  the  resdinR wus -Jontimued  with  the  entire  trip  from start 

to  finish ha&  been  covered. 

Mrs.  Oherles 0.  LeNo  r 

a. 

"Mr. 

Orawford was  the  * irst ' retwid ,nt of 00 

Florida ;alet  Coast.  He  built  a fine  home  in  south  Jaaksonville, 

and Vire.  Crawford nee as muoh interested s my. mother was  in 

the little Mission of _ 11 

ints,  and it  w e th  se  two  Who 

etarted  the  building.  The Florida -:'! ast , oast  g.ive 

crkO mon• $ 

and  the  roes memorial  vindow to Yr.  Croon,  un  ol -iicaul. of  the 

iloriL. 'ilk at  Octuat,  was also ; ivon by  the railroad  seople. 

"The first  rector of ,,11  6s.ilitaw440  the Rev.  Mr.  Yiellor, 

from  .16‘4,111.1.1.14),  while  it _ was  till  a ilesion of et.  Johns. 

"The first  regular  rector afloOr  it  attained  the  status 

of a church was Rev.  Mk.  Lee.  After ha left,  v  had.  a splendid 

little man  by  the  eame of Grubb.  Ho was only  there  for  a short 

tima  thee we  4 M. Brooke q.  White.  Then we  hed  a Pr.  Hilm-

tower.  I had by  this  time  become  interested in Christian ;'.oi-

t 
once,  Mnd Mr ° fightawor, - beinga  strict adherent  of the letter 

of  the  law,  tail my mother  she  should  take my Science .books 

away. 

Mother  replied that  as  long  as  I read  the bible, ' Jesuit 

worship  46  I pleased. ;, s I quit  ll  Sainte  and  started ' attend-

ing  he  Amietian .iuiencto  rhurch,  in  JaAsonville.  I did not 

know  kuo h about  its .a tai rs  ft er  that. 

"Mrs.  Mitobill wee very  ueleAppy  about  David's marriage, 

and  thi  4..y  it  tumed out. 

ftar  there w.‘,,!  so  much eoundel 

about  Kittie's  oarryingson,  tho. divoree,  and  al, Pre  Mitoholl 

withdrew  mere  aed  wore  from civic:  end  church affairs,. 4-1d  lived 

alone  in her  big mansion.  Her  friends vore very  grateful  that 

she  died before  the  vast  fortune luau  dissipated  and 'i-eut  into 

unAseerving hands,  ri1  thee 

uhemors and  tricksters. 

"Mrs.  Mitchell  is buried  in  the little  ,ld :!_ t,  Nicholas 

Cemetery  on  the  south  Ade ,-  14r ,,vo  le  i about  the  center 

Mrs.  Charles 0.  Lencir 

4. 

of the  Li.rge  Plot  in the  southeast:rn , eution,  4  hiiAl mound,  with 

flat,marbie  slab - on  top.  1 had memorised  the  ineiription  cam-

posed by  David  and  hieh hl  had  carved  on the  slab 

aomthing 

about ' good deeds live afterwards,  etc.' .... but  it  esoapes mit 

now.  Haver, it  is  v)ry  prott4-  and  1-ory  a'ppropriate,  desurbing 

Mrs.  Mitchell's aCts and charitable  in/inflations, 

By  the way,  the  was most  helpful  in carrying  on  the work 

and  establishin :it.  Luke's  Hospital  in  Jacksonville.  There was 

a v xv ,elabor4te room whieb  Ale  furnished  and  endowed in 

t. .Luke's,  as  the " Martha Heed Mitchell  Memorial  HoOm."  The 

firot 

g 1 did  -4n  4  child  was  suml  littio dies of linen 

which  I hemAitehed by  hr  Lot  1711.,il  room. 

."Ais  I said  before,  my  first exp rience at  school  was with 

the litle Children  of  415.  L.  Drew Williams'  Bradford  institute " 

4  privato  school ,,,ndor  th..t  auepioes of St,  Johns  3pieeopal  Churoh. 

fter  re.  tilliams beeame  too  feablo  to  teaoh,  the work was' 

taken  ov)r hy  1.1.ss - lice  -row.  There wore eight  girls,  among 

them  Kittle  Parrott,  lAer -re.  David  Vitohoil,  and  Hollis 

v.tewart,  of  Tt.  Goor,7o  Island,  liktor ? Ars.  Victor  Plus. 

"When tho  school  dwindled,  down  and wad  Laosed,  Iuttondod 

Olivia  High  Ashool,  of which  rof.  Paseo was  nrinciP01, 

91,  ter  I graduated,  1-ent to ,! aimbridge  Institute,  at 

12ambridge,  Vassachusetts. 

Thor'  I 1144w  snow  for  tho  first 

tim ,),  114  sat  tip  all  night watching  thI  feathory flakes fall 

into  drifts and  pil*  up  on  tho  pavements  to a depth of  twelve 

inches or  ore. 

Mrs.  Charles  O.  Lenoir 

b. 

"My  father,  who,  as  I oaid 

oma  to  Florida for  his 

hoalth in 1879,  now  bectams - arw  ill 

This wae in 1914. 

had  to  return  home,  and  did  not  got.lv  Animh my  college 4on e 

as  father diad,  a.nd  my mothor had  bOUOM4  80 .W0111  out in taking 

oars  of him Turing  his  lonK ilness  that  oho,  toopassed otay 

two  years 1,Aer .•  in 1914. 

"One  inoliont 

romember at  tisabri3ge  was  the  ries  of 

the  famous  UWIegro,• Booker T.  Washington,  who wag traveling 

ana  leuturiuT  in tha  o atarn  states,  rails  ug funds for the 

Tuskaageo  Institute. 

young 'Lady  from New Orleans, 

uam o  have  now  forgotten,  anA  I refused  to attend him  loc-

tux's,  and  he.  other girls were discussing  mita,  VA  v,01,1d  get 

up end  leave  the  mom. ".17hey  oalled  us  Ilk° ' two hot-hoaded 

little  outherners. 1 

4 fter fathor died,  1 tartod  the ' Booklevarst  Library' 

whioh was • somothing now  at  that  time  in thowel of  4  oirettlatint 

library.  I ran it until  the laeltsonviile  Publio Library was 

opened  in  its  present looution  in  tho  building which was con-

sidered very  oranta  and  up-to-date  at  that  time - 1904,  when 

Miss  Klisabeth Long and  I who  had  boon working  for  tumora& 

months  tetting the  books ready and mapo mounted  to  hang,  went 

to work  there.  I  tayed  thorn until  1909.  Mr.  George B.  Utley 

waS the  librarian. 

"My two  brothers,  who were born  in bouth Jackeonville, 

one ill  1880  and  tha  other in 1$64,  hud  startod a kodak  store, 

handling piJturesadoveloping photographic  films,  gifts, 

bundling and 

pluture  frames,  etc.,  in the building at  24 West Foreyth-st., 

Mrs.  Oheaell O.  LeNoir 

6. 

later oaeupied by  Nuanally's  Cz4y  tore,  and now  the home 

of the  Lugg.ge  6hop. 

"They  ad  built  ur .  Line  business,  is  it wus a new  line 

t,ild  they  had no oppoHition,  but  they  gave  sueh  srlendid  servioe 

Then my oldest  brother developed  tnberonloeie. 

they aould not help but *wooed./  I took him to  the beet  lootore 

and  fin4,14 to . Vanitarium  in New York State,  where he died. 

aume  buuk und  it w‘s not  lonig before my youngest  brother,  too, 

beeume  ill  from  the dread  disease.  No  seamed  stronger, *got  we 

sent  him to , risona.  The  old  red house  on  the  south  oide whieh 

h.d  been  our  dhildhood  hLme 'us  oold, . wt .11  tho  money  W48 de-

voted  to  trying  to  hell')  him mo  r000very.  Re vorete to Xh e 

brought  la.,%ok  to  Juokeonvile,  4.o  he  ouid ,. risona was  mei* ei 

dusty,  dry,  hot,  disagreeable  piaci*,  10,nd  it  we so lonesome  for 

him.  Lefler  he returned,  he  filmed cheered up und We  aotually 

bltt!r ;or a few w eke,  thil,  one night  us  I eat  ne.r hi  he 

oatl - '  I am  going  to  die.' 

In . few  hours hi  11..,.d 

sed 

"4t  one time,  Dr.  Morris,  of  J‘okson tile,  suid  I,  too, 

would develop tub.reulosis - it  oould  not  be  helped - 

I 

-hud  inherited  it  the : 2ame  s my  two  broths:116. • But,  touch 

wood/ " here  she  smiled,  as  Wu touched her desk lAth her 

right - hand  three  times a 41 took up Chritian  science,  and  I 

hve  iv  r h),),d 

eymetoms 

"Aft ,r my  seem'  brother died,  I rn the  store very 

suaeessfully  for  oevirul 

taki)Ig  out  enouAi monei  to 

build  the  litle aputtment  house at  41i)  east .dame-ot.  I sold 

the  oto_e  for 0 very  hunesomi  warn,  and went  into  the  Chrietian 

Mrs.  Oharims 0.  LbNoir 

6. 

*Cli (MUG Reading Room,  who I stayed w ti1 'ems  Mo.rried  in 

191b. 

"During the World War  my hi.mband *us Aftwillwimaktart 

lattaubuducibtauunlivikusabgtax in the  U.  S.  Naval  dorvioe 1+4 

3..V44,102:.h,  Georgia.,  I v•eut  U  theta to  bo : tux  hint,  e‘rid  for 

two  years workod  in the  Auditoes office  of  the 441Antie  Coast 

Line Railroad. 

• 

"1t it  the wax we  returned to  Jaaksonville  and  I went  to 

work  in  the"genaral  officio  of the staniard Oil  Co.,  being in 

Mt.  ZAohArias°  offieo  for  ten years. 

"In 1W, I oamo  ovor and  had  a talk with  i. ve •. 

Cummlr,  wh, * As  at  that  1,ime  president of  ilhe  cisnins  Club 

of Jaoksonville,  Ant  plied  for  tho  position of secretary. 

We.  talkod at  length.  The olub memberehip had  goal down,  they 

*are  doauly  in  debt, , 

Urn.  CuMmer  told  me  tho  sala4  would 

be  small  to  otikrt  wi th,  and  I would  have  to  he . . alert  of  house-

kleper,  looking  ftlr the  phpsioal  proporty  af  tho  olub t as well 

as  handling tho  soeial  det/Ails,  tho  office work,  aecsow ting, 

and  other incidental  duties.  I toll  her  I was used  to  hartA  work, 

eA was  willing  to  tne:tortake  it,  and  nor°  I AM. 

"This work I enjoy  most  thorauAlly.  I am on  Auty,  yo1?. 

might  sow,  tent- four  hours. a day,  as  I havo my  residenoe 

her..  ,This morning 

as  up At  b:JC  And  o,:m-o  down  And  opened 

up the lower windows 

tho  view  fray  tho  eolurium  through  the 

rose  beds,  the  wan rising over  th 

lma - it *as intworessibly 

beautiful.  The vorkk 10  vo.riod.  I enjoy  planning the  lun.Jhoons 

and  banquets  mkW  hvi  irvod  savaral  o.  the latter when there 

were  five  humired  pr,) wont •  Of  J aurae,  during  the)  eummor months 

we do not is muoh,  

I 4M only on half  pay,  big on uotive 

mrs.  Churles 0.  LeNoir 

7. 

duty only  on Wednesdays  and  Fridays', * lob  are  open days  both 

to olub members  and  he  publia. 

hueband travels,  and  I am  aleme a ;treat  deal,  but 

these  is  nev)r u dull moment. 

"We  have  two  colored  regular employees,  Lizzie  aLd 

Japer, who have  ben with  the  caub  so long  their duties ore 

automatic),  and  they  are  as  muoh *apart  of  the  TiLuoe  oe  the 

walls  and woodwork 'then  nutting on large  affairs, we  have 

to  1:,..vo  additional  maids  and  waiters,  and then,  too,  Airing 

the winter months we have  a regular hostess  on full. time,  who 

Plans  all  the  meals  and  does  the parohasing  of  food. 

In the 

elummer I have  to  take  are  of  this. 

natitomexiick 

'Then  I first  uamo with  the  Jlub  in 

they  had.  te 

'borrow moi,e4 to,  ,. cry  on  their expenses,  and  it  is  gratifying 

now  to  know we  are  rapidly  ealling ou: bonds,  and  that  the 

funds  taken  in  from  dues  and tha  different  departm 

are 

more  than suifiA.ent ." or all  expeneos and we ,„.re rapidly laying 

un  A  bonus.  The  Olub now has  u roster of sight  hundred members - 

and not  a dal one  in  the lot!"  she  finished  enthusiastioally. 

"Besides belonging  to  the Womans  Club and  the  Christian 

Ouience (Muriel,  I also  hold membership in looal  chapters of  the 

Daughters  of  the  Anerican Revolution,  the  Colonial  Dames,  and 

the Order  of  the  lastorn 6tar,  amerioa Chapter. 

o,you see, 

"I  am a very  busy. womaniw 

