DeSoto is a Spanish-Irish *boomer" sign painter who

says he is a direct lineal descendant of his explorer namesake. His story

is unedited, even as to punctuation.

This story is an experiment with the

method used by Jack Commons in editing his Seven Shifts CS.,-P. Dutton A Co.,

1930. Commons found it more satsifactory to ask his informants to write

their stories in their own words. After considerable editing he evolved what

he believes to me typical stories of seven typical workers in seven industries.

-2-

The in delsnoe of those two men was notorious. Either could sleep at a

moment's notice. They had been known to sleep three times on a three " stretch'

wall. At the end of each wowing" they would to use Dippy's wenwordo 'take a

rest" and be down on the ' stage and go to sleep. Subconscious had been known to

go to the "tee to 'tie off* and go to sleep on the roof, leaving Dippy down

below holding the 'pull ropes* unable to do anything about it until Sub chose to

wake up. It was oommon to see Dip a sleep in the warm sun perched precariously on

a box behind some stores* plate glass window. Mouth open, completely relaxed.

Doubtless many a nervous person, passing has wished for that ability of complete

relaxation.

This ability to relax had saved Dippy from serious in juries from falls. He

had fallen quite a number of times,with slight in juries, for it is said that to

relax or to keep one's joints loose while falling saves in juries. Go tense and

break a leg. Dippy had fallen 16 feet on to a oonoretestdowalk, bet up went back

on the stage and finished the job. Re had fallen from a 40-feet stack, thrust

one leg through a roof and was up and around the next day. Ome time one of the

'woks parted the loose bricks of a fire wall and let the stage drop a foot. Dippy

didn'teven lose his balance, but a brick hit him in the only place he couldn't

relax ( his head all bone) and he was in the hospital two weeks with neubonia, which

later developed into fallen arches.

Hippy Flinn and Subconscious Connors slouched to a spot along the tracks, best

suited to the catching of the train and where the grade slowed said train to a

minimum of speed. Where the least a mount of energy should be expended by these

two components of commodious comfort. Coe a board and in a luxurious box oar of

ancient vintage they proceeded to in spect with a view to creature comforts their

prison of the next few hours. Dippy of oourse, had first choice and chose the

South by south east eerner for the southern exposure and the pile of straw

attached thereto. Subconscious had the ohoise of three lovely corners it & add

have been easy but with his usual care flbt took his time and stood pondering as to

the direoticn his rmainations may have gene something like this: *Let's see new,

let's see, Dip says he's in the south by south east corner, if the train was going

south the engine would be 'store the " caboose is now but it ain't it's on the ether

end so we must be goigg north if we're goinl north how can Dip be in the south se...

so corner they ain't no south in the north or is they I never heard so anyway..

Dippy says se and 14.ppy's always right, but I *ain't see, / think I'll .it down

here and see if I ken figger it out. If this end of the car is south then the

other end must be north but they ought to be shade on one side or tlether and they

ain't so what*. wHeyl Dip which way we goin. mZZZ. N He's mieep maybe, bettor not

wake ' in.* *Oh Pippyi e Nhatcha want? . a llhioh way we goine "East, y'd urn fecal"

Puzzled, Suboonscious slowly took off his coat and balled it up for a WIlow,

squirmed into as comfortable a position as the hard near allowed and was himself

soon fast a sleep. The freight rattled along at a pretty good diveating up the

miles and it was not long before buboonsoious was rudely a wakened, literally with

a bang, for with his usual lack of foresight he had fallen a sleep with his head

too close to the wed of the car and the bump caused by the engineer's sudden re--

lease of the throttle jerked his head against the end.

His howl a woke his majesty the journeyman, who with many grunts and groans,

got up to see where they were. *Looks like tfair sized burg, seems tome I've

been here beer., but they all look a like from the railroad track, dirty and gingy.

Looks like these small towns would have a little civic pride and clean up what the

cities can't, seem' as the railroads the only thing that keeps them on the map. *

With this renain. the train having come to a stop, the two climbed from their

journeying juggernaut and ambled towards the depot and perhaps the main street.

One of Sub's many accomplishments was his habit of being hungry,bebeing the

salesman of the partnership was always apt to so licit bakers and grocers first

with his offers of good signs cheap. Here often then not the remuneration was

taken out in trade and the numerous packages carried to the ' jungles' there to be

concooted into a "Mulligan.* Zippy and Subconscious were always noisome in the

jungles by the over present, ' buzzards' who were always ready to help gather fuel

and cooking utensils, in order to share in the feast. The Halligan, made by the

pair was a bonafide hobo stow - everything in it but the railroad track. Potatoes,

on ions, turnips, cabbage, sweet potatoes, corn, peas etc. were put in in discriminately with the meat.

There had been times when the stew was not so perfect like the time in Hutohinson Kans., which town had been "bummed out" and the hobos in the jungles were

hungry and in a qaendary when Hippy had hit upon the idea of assigning each man

to a oertain kind of shop, one to the butcher, one to the baker, etc. Each was

to bum a specific item, but to take what he could get. When after a time, they

gathered again in the jungle and looked over the spoils it was found that butchers had donated one link of liver sausage, the grocers a quantity of lettuce,

potatoes, parsnips and some slightly damaged tomatoes, the bakers, stale bread

and buns. A mulligan was made, the akin of the sausage burst and was never again

recognized as such, the other ingredients were cooked into a mash. Hanger is not

discriminating, so all thought the stew was good which was all that was necessary.

They filled up and were satisfied, until the sheriff came down from the village

and ordered them ti get out on the next train. The concerted onslaught on the .

stores of the good citizens had caused a protest against knights of the road and

their a bsenoe was urgently requested.

As the tee neared the depot. The -place seemed more familiar to friend Dippy

and soon he caught sight of a tall grain elevator and recognized a sign. He

had complete several years before high up on the side of it. He remembered the

layout now. Remembered the picture of a clown head, the biggest picture he had

ever painted the pupils of the eyes being et ft. in diameter. He had cause to

member that particular sign, esitad lost a good helper while working on it. The

job was almost completed, they had swung ever for the last stretch and had pulled

the stage about half way up, when, suddenly the rope slipped through the helper's

hands ( In some way part of the pull rope had come in contact with grease - same

some had adhered to it and mused it to slip.) he had caught it before it came

down very far but the damage was done the *color° all slid to that end over him

and the wall, and the pots cane down on his head. To give him credit he held on

to the rope through the rain of paint and pots but he refused to go up en the

stage and Dippy had to finish the stretch by himself. The helper had lost his

nerve and was of a consequence useless to a journeyman. Dippy had to break in

another helper - was as small job.

Every workman has his idiosyncrasies and it is sometime before a helper be.

cones accustomed to them. For instant*, one journeyman may be a (p.15) about his

brushes and have the helper go through a series of usebse lessons on the handling

and care of brushes, another may expect his color to be just right, another may

expect every crack in the wall fitted with paint. There are many things a helper

is supposed to knew or to conjure out of thin air at a memento settee. As they

passed the depot they lingered long enough to get in formation as to the freight

schedules in case they found no work, and then sauntered down the main

The town seemed dead no one on the street. Dippy paused to get his bearings he

remembered the sign shop but couldn'tremember just where it's** located he finally

decided to send his partner down one street and he (mistimed down main metalling

the side streets as he went al.mg. Subconscious found the shop and came back for

Dippy who followed him a short distanoe off main street. There it was with the

word signs 3 foot high painted en a beard over the front which by the way, had it

been painted since Moses had his shoes half- so led. The average small shop advocates the painting of Biggs but seldom paint their own. He peered into the dim

interior.

What little light filtered through the dusty window was not adequate to good

sight. He stopped inside and gradually his eyes became accustomed to the din light

and things began to take shape. E4 made out the paint bench with its litter of

empty cans, paint paddles and what not, a block and falls ( 17 ) carelessly on the

floor, a half empty keg of white lead and other apparatus oommon to the trade. He

ventured farther into the paint laden atmosphere and let out a tentative "Hello."

He netioed now farther baoka long the wall something that looked human. It was

folded into a chair tipped back against what appeared to be a desk in the last

stages of decay. On closer examination it proved to be the prop, an old timer

whom Hippy had known long ago in another and better entironment. He had worked

with him at one of the best shops in the middle west. He had had a bad fall and

one leg had remained stiff and as his stage career was ended he had hid himself

to a small teen and built up a little business of his own. As the years went by

be had became more and more careless. His ambition was limited new to "getting

by" until he was called to the big shop where all signpainters are sketch artists

and the angels are their helpers. Hippy stepped back and yelled, "Hill.Happyl"

Web came the chair with a bang spilling its contents in a heap *althea floor ( 19

language unfit for the ears of polite society. The heap jerked itself into an

upright position the eyes assuming their natural feous and after a time recognized

the disturbing element and greeted him with enthusiasm. "Hippy Flinn& just the

boy I wanted to see. I been thinkinl about you the last few days. I got a job

for you. Remember the big elevator down by the tracks? You did it ones befere.

Remember?" "Yes, I remember. That's the last time I saw Pats! lbat ever

happened to him?" "Patsy? Oh yes, I remember him new that was the helper you had

then. He staid around here a while, then got himself a job with a farmer out of

town a ways. Stops in every onoe in a while to say hello. He'll be in one of

these days."

"I like to see old Patsy he was a pretty good man while he lasted.

Dippy looked around for "Sub" and saw him fast a sleep in the chair that had

just erupted with Happy. It was back in the original position ( 20 ) against the

desk but with an added feature. Sub had found a box plaoed it in front of the

chair and placed his heels thereon. The sight of "Sub" in this comfortable position

reminded nippy that he had been on his feet all gicdtwo hours and he also must need

rest. He spied a dilapidated overstuffed armchair edged ever to it and sank down

with a sigh of oontent. "Happy" found himself a box and placed himself in front

of Dippy and continued to keep him a wake with reminiscences of the good old days.

Dippy in the meantime bethought himself of the desire to eat and mentioned that

desire to Happy. At the mention of food Subconscious* nose began to twitch but he

kept his eyes tightly closed in the hope that he would not be required to get out

of his comfortable position and repair to the store for it. But 4appy had other

ideas, his eyes searched the rear of the shop for his " shop punk" and shouted

"Doeskin" and tor the first time since he case in Dippy noticed the shapeless

bundle ensconced on a box in the shadows of the shop. The shape entangled himself

from the darkness and came forward his eyes wide in admiration of the boomer of

whom he had heard so much. In his eyes Dippy was a here, a God. The one whom

Happy always used to express perfection in signpainters. Dippy could do this,

Dippy coud do that, Dippy would de it this way and so forth had been drummed in his

ears until his imagination was imbued with the magic of Dippy, the super sign

painter. Happy introduced him as "Dumbfounded Doeskin and then instructed him

what to get and where to get it and that on the way be could deliver that show-card

to Devine the dry-good merchant and not to forget to ask the grocer for a little

salt. The talk lapsed into the goild old days. Of the time Patsy was elected door

man at the union hall and made his boss stand outside because he couldn'tgive the

password and Patsy wouldn'tapprise the chair of his presence and how the boss had

ranted and raved about it so much that Patsy had to quit and get another job, he

wasiNt forced to but be did and the boss tried to get him back ' cause he was a

good man. HOW Charlie Obst and "Dash" Fogarty when painting a big Maxwell sign

on a building high up on the bluff facing the drive the wind oame up blew the

planks off one of the stages they were using and hew they scrambled to get off

and hew "Dash" brought a quart of his grandma's balsam and whiskey one morning

and they weren't any good the rest of the day. How Maxie G 25 had flirted with

a girl in a window of the house they were working on and married her two weeks

later, that he had three kids now and that one was apprentice in the Outdoor shop,

and so-throughout the afternoon.

tUmbfounded Doeskin had been listening with eyes open and ears wide for he

had made recterd time in his trip to get groceries not willing to miss a word of

conversation. Talk filially ( 24 ) around to the job an the elevator, Happy had

been unable to got any one to do it on account of the height. "The signpainters

they put out nowadays are afraid to go high", says he "You tell 'me what you need

Dippy and I'll get it for you."

"What about falls. I'll need 200 footers on that wall if / remember rightl

and here with hidden wink at Happy he said "What about sky hooks you stillket that

pair I brought you the last time I came through here?"

Happy maintained a straight face and solemnly pondered his answer.

"New let me see who did I land them tot "Oh yes& I lent them to the housepainter at the other end of town. Doeskin, "Come here!" You go down there and

find out if he's through with them and while your at it get that left handed

yardstick he promised me."

Doeskin got to his feet and started his chunky body rolling toward the door

he wondered at the roar of laughter that went up as he started down the street

towards his objective.

He had never heard of the stmange implements he was sent for so he could not

be expected to know that he was eff in search of the golden fleece, as it were,

and that many a step would be take before it came to him via surreptitious smiles

-9-

and ill-hidden grins that the sky hooks and left handed yardsticks were a myth.

Doeskin was a good natured boy and he laughed with the rest over his misadventures and thereby set himself in solid with his out of town friends. If he

had shown ire in any respect he would have been further bedeviled, as the apprentice

is fair prey. His good nature spiked their grins and henceforth be was able to

pick up many valuable hints spoken for his edification by the lazy Dippy who was

'ever ready to help a ycungster on his way and they were many who could say that

Dippy taught them what they know.

Dippy was the bezt kind of a teacher being too lazy to show them, he told them

what to do and then let them practice it themselves on some of his jobs. If they

did it right he let it go, if not he did it over himself thereby showing them by

experience where their mistakes were. Dippy was a natural philosopher; he made

his Utopia as he went along. His motto was ' Do unto ethers as you wish to be done

but keep your hand on your pocket book pocket* ,

Dippy had net his helper in " jungles * of an eastern city. Subconscious

was uneducated but was smart enough to keep his mouth shut in the presence of

strangers. It was net until after be had roamed around for several months with

Hippy that he thawed enough to confide some of his adventures. He was born in the

'Ghetto' of a great metropolitan city. He had gone to school as little as possible

and then only when a truant of fioer caught him and threatened reform school. His

mother had died when he was very young and left him as the sole charge of a worthless father who left him to his own devices. He had made his esoape when the other

members of his gang had been caught stealing the brass plumbing from a railroad

passenger car. The officers had hidden in the cars and disappear. He had swung

on a passing freight and thus started on his travels. He became acquainted with

2 men on the train who turned out to be burglars; they persuaded him to join them

and for a while be was their lookout and sometimes was boosted over transoms and

through small windows. After several months of this, receiving no money, be

he decided to leave these men and go on his wen. He had waited until they were

a sleep cue night, and stele away. It was shortly after this be had attached himself to Dippy.

Sub was quick to learn and attentive to any words of in struction. He won the

good graces of the journeymen by his ability to sell signs thus keeping them

supplied with funds. He had learned the use of the falls, hew to tie off and was

not afraid to go high. He was as much at home on the stage up high as be was near

the ground.

Dippy and Sub slept in the shop that night and were a wakened next morn, when

Happy opened up. After ' coffee and' - they gathered together the tools and

materials for the big job. Dippy inspected the falls for " dry rot, * repaired a

block of which the pin was loose. Sub took the stage ladder out beak of the shop

and burnt off the accumulated paint with gasoline in order to lighten it. He went

to a lumber yard and brought back new planks, and burnt out rase paint pots and

cleaned out "fillers" * cutters * and *Makes * that had not been used lately and

were a sunial * louse? from standing in gas se long. Everything was then carted

to the elevator and while Subconscious faound his way to the roof through the

inside of the building, Dippy arranged the falls. Arriving at the roof, Sub threw

down one end of a

line on whioh the hook and one end of the fall was a ttmhed.

He then pulled it up, hooked it over the edge of the building and !lied it back so

that it could not slip off. He went through the same procedure with the other

and came down and helped Dippy assemble the stage and mix color.

The stage oensisted of two slings, two bumpers, a twenty-two ft. wire

ladder and VS in. planks on which to stand. The slings, also waled stirrups,

are made of rope ( in some states ether than Missouri it is required by law that

they be made of iron) - and has a loop in the middle which fits over the hook at

the lower end of the fall. The two free ends also have loops and are fitted an

each end of the bumper. The bumper is a two by four with a wheel on one end which

runs against the wall holding the stage out. The stage rests on the bumper between

e

-11•

the stirrups and is pulled upwards by means of a free rope or pull rope. When

the stage is pulled up to the reqpired bight, the operator takes a half-hitch

through the sling and over the hook of the lower block one rope crossing over,

the other binding it tight into the V-shaped crotch formed under the middle

loop of the sling.

nippy mixed colors by guess. Looking at the wall, be measured in his mind

how much it would take and mixed accordingly; but working on the theory that it

is better to mix too much than not enough. With his sketch before him on the

ground he matched colors which Sub mixed black and white lead. There was a

picture of a negro mammy to be painted this time and Sub scouted about for a box

and empty tin OKUS• The cans to be used for the various shades and colors. The

box to hold them on the stage so that they would not be in advertently kicked off

while working. A large price of tin for a pallets, they were ready to start. The

wall not coated as is the ease now-a-days; but as it was a black background it

mattered little.

Some journeymen start at the bottom of the sign and layout and ' spot on'

going up. This procedure, always seemed to Dippy to be doing twice what could

be done over. Be started at the top and came down completing each stretch on the

way. They pulled up to the top and Sub went up, climbed over unto the stage and

tied off; then 'hippy followed.

Unless it is impossible to So so the job is always started from left to tight

where there is more than one swing. As the picture was on that end, Slippy had

previouslysoaled off his sketch and had to do the same on the wall. Each was

marked off in squared and what was in each square on the sketch was put in each

square on the wall. In this manner the picture was drawn and painted from the

sketch. But experience enters into the scheme of things for the workman is painting only a segment of the whole as he lowers himself and must constantly keep in

mind bow it is going to look at a distance. The picture on the sketch may be weak

-12in color and the journeyman must strengthen the highlights and shadows

accordingly. Be must watch his drawing, as it is very easy to lose perspective on a big picture. In the big towns where there is more than one

sign to be painted a "perferated pounce", is used in order that the drawing

be the same on each sign. Also in the larger cities when a number of signs

have the same picture and that picture is to be executed in "poster style"

the various colors are sometimes mixed in quantity before-hand and each

journey man is required to Rae these roady mixed colors. ythus confining

the workman he is precluded the use of his own ideas as no two signpainters

work a like even to the lettering.

As the picture began to take an shape spectators gathered to watch aid

guess what it was going to be. Their loudspoken comments were audible to

the two on the stage who grinned at each other over some of the wisecracks.

Some were of the opinion that sign painting was easy witness the fact that

they even had a sketch to go by. ftho couldn'tpaint a sign? . said they.

*Why, there's nothing to it." Others thought it hard. In the first place

they said, wIt takes courage to work so high in the air."

The average signpainter thinks nothing of working high. Danger never

enters his mind. Balancing himself on the comparatively narrow stage becomes

second nature. The greatest danger lies, not as would be supposed on falling

outward, but in ward. The possibility of one's pressing too hard or suddenly

against the wall thereby throwing the stage out from it and causing one to

fall between the stage and wall in all too easy. A building that has a cornice

extending out, say one foot from the wall is dangerous beeause the wheel of

the bumper touches very lightly and the least push will send the stage swinging outward leaving a gap through, which there would be no returning.

There are otherdingers. Arriving at the job too late one evening to swing

up, Dippy had left the falls on the roof of the 14 story hotel. The next day

being Saturday there was no weak. The falls lay on the roof until Monday.

Monday morning Dippy started work as usual; nothing appeared wrong with the

falls when let down over the edge of the roof. The owner of the building next

door regused to let him swing from his roof so Dippy had to make what is

called a roof swing. When making a roof swing, the fall is shortened block

to block, the big hook is put on and wired or tied, the stirrups and bumpers

are assembled in place and hooked on to the lower block and with a man on each

end the entire outfit is lifted carefully over the wall and let down until the

big hooks come in contact with the fire wall after which one man climbs down

and takes the planks which are handed to him from the roof. All this is

difficult, necessitating a stmong back and a weak mind. After the stage was

swung the sign was started. When half way down Dippy was surprised to see ane

of the stands of the rope part and unwind itself to the block. Just as he

called it to the attention of the helper another parted and he felt a slight

give to the stage; even then he did not get excited or so ared. As did his

helper. There was a window a few feet below and he had the courage to let the

stage down to the window on that one remaining strand of the rope. He did it

very carefully knowing that a sudden jerk would part the rope and precipitate

him to the concrete side walk eight stories below. The window being now within

reach the helper opened it and climbed inside. He found a phone and called

the shop telling them what had happened and what was needed. Meanwhile Dippy

had remained on the stage. He had gone to the other end, tied the guy line

around his middle and waited. As he waited he began thinking of what had

happened and what could still happen. He could visualise himself down there

on that sidewalk. He could see the ladder sticking out of the top of some

automobiles' roof. All sorts of dire calamities flashed through his brain.

The arrival of the shop truk with an extra fall found him soared sick. He

forced himself to fasten the new fall and bumper on the stage pulled it up 03

that the broken fall could be disengaged. The sign was soon finished and earth

felt unusually solid to his feat. He examined the broken fall and found that

an acid had eaten through the parted strands. 'Where the acid had acme from

was problematical. Dippy opined that it had in some way come from the smoke

stack a few feet from where the ropes were lying.

Dippy was progressing with the picture and a huge grin was begmning to

appear on the mammy's face. Sub was sitting on one end of the stage a sleep,

for while nippy was painting the picture there was nothing for him to do

except let the stage down and paint the border and in set. The shrill blast of

a factory whistle woke him up, at the same time letting him know that it was

noon. Each put an extra half hitch over the small hook and slid down the rope

to the ground. Happy was there waiting for them and led them to a lunch roan.

The best in town * so he said.

After eating, the saloon next door was their mecca for the rest of the

afternoon; they sat and talked and talked signs. Eventually Sub thought of

the brushes lying on the stage and went to the job to retrieve them. He

climbed to the roof, slid down the falls, collected the brushes, let them down

to the ground, slid down after them. He hunted up some old newspapers and wrapped them, put some gas on them and wandered back to his companions. Happy and

his friend had mellowed considerably and had reached the stage of barroom

harmony. *Sweet Adeline* floated out through the bat wing doors in varying

degree of disoord. Workers hurrying home with their dinner buckets on their

arms stopped in to jeer and remained to join them. Their voices added to the

general din as the evening grow older. The bartender had to get help and the

good brew flowed freely. The crowd thinned out as the hour grow late and the

two briends left the bartender sorrowing over their departure.

.15.

Sub had disappeared long before.. Dippy took Happy to his home then Happy

said he'd go with Dippy to keep him company. Arriving at the shop Dippy deaided that Happy must have companionship on his way home and so on. Morning

found Dippy sitting on Happy's front steps where he had fallen a sleep waiting for

Happy when he had last track of in their wanderings. He later found Happy

a sleep at the shop him having had the same idea in his head that he must wait

for Dippy to see that he got home all right.

EXPLANATIONS OF TERMS

The pounce pattern is a piece of paper four feet wide and as long as is

necessary, on which the subject is drawn some tines by hand some times projected onto the paper by means of a projeotor s a lantern with a series of mirrors and lenses. It is drawn from the reflection on the paper and then

pricked with a tailors pricking wheel.

The pounce bag is filled with charcoal for walls and bulletins with whiting

for glass. It is usually *de with oboese cloth and rubbed over the perforations

leaving the impression on the wall on glass as the ease may be.

*Jungles* is a hobo camping mound usually outside the towns limits so that

the town mershall has no jurisdiction over them as has 6 sheriff. Sometimes

there is a jungle on each side of town. In the large cities as a rule there is

no jungles as the hobos congregate in some certain part of town as suits their

purpose which of course is bogging for money, cheap saloons and eating houses.

This district, as you know is market street in our own fair city.

I *Workman* of course is a *Joumneyman or journeyman signpainter and as

suoh is defined in our International Union. Commercial man, one who works only

on glass and smaller glasses of signs. Sketch man makes the sketch from which

the signpainter works. A lay-out man is used in the studios of big shops and

does nothing but laying out lettering. The completed signs are apt in this

way to have the same characteristics and so look a like.

"The all around man" can do anything glass, walls, bulletins etc. A

combination man is one who paints the picture and lettering. A picture paint er

is so metimes unable to do lettering.

"Native son" is self explanatory.

A "Stretch" is the distance that can be reached in one swing.

A " Swing" desoribes the stage as it hangs on the well.

The " tie off" is the half hitch make under the crotch of the sling and

over the hook on the lower block; this is very important and is the first thing

learned in stage work.

"Pull rope" is the free end by which the stage is raised and lowered.

A "Buzzard" ia hobo language, is one who is too lazy or too timid to beg

on the street at book doors or other establishments where food is a oommodity

or necessity and are content to hover around the jungles and piok up the left

overs or in gratiate themselves into the good graces of the more callus beggars

who have a ocumulated the wherewithall of a mulligan by carrying wood, make a

fire eto.

"Bummedout", describes the state of a town where begging has beoome pro-,

miscuous and the to wnspeaople are hardened by the too frequent please f8r alms.

Most division points and sub-divisions of railroads are in this condition or were.

"Color", paint.

"Shop Punk", apprentice.

"Fillers", so called bemuse they are used to fill in the big spaces of the

sign are never larger than four inches seldom that much usually 3i."

"Cutters", so willed because they are used for cutting in the bigger letter

also used to fill in where the filler is too large.

A "Fitch", also called by the housepainter Rigger, is used for a uffaoing

dark letters on a light background also cutting in smaller letters&

A brush is called "Lougee when some of the paint has dried in the

-17bristles, as happens in hot weather and when the brush has not been in use for

a oonsiderable length of time.

A * Guy line" is used to pull the falls to the roof and also is hung dawn

the middle of the stage in order to balanoe oneself when working on extra high

walls.

*Spot on is the prooess of painting the light oolored letters that are

to be out in with a darker color or black.

In "Poster style" pictures the oolors are not blended. The juxtaposition

of the colors and shades light and dark in proper order form the picture.

FORM C

Text of Interview (Unedited)

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

Illinois

NAME OE WORKER

Jack Conroy

* ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

3569 Cottage Grove Ave.

Ilay 11, 1939

Industrial Folk Lore

NAME OF INFORMANT

Frank DeSoto

DeSoto is a Spanish- Irish " boomer" sign painter who says he is a direct

lineal descendant of his explorer namesake. His story is unedited, even to

punctuation. This story is an experiment with the method used by Jack Commcns

in editing his Seven Shifts ( E. P. Dutton & Co., 1938). Commons found it more

satisfactory to ask his informants to write their stories in their own words.

After considerable editing he evolved what he believes to

typical stories of

seven typical workeirs in seven industries.