92p; For related dccuuents, see BC 013 0 47-058 and
BC 013 071-08U, Best copy available*

IDlNtlPIEBS

MF01/PC0U Plus Pos
Acculturation; *Am
Indians: Cos munity
Cultural Backgroun
♦Educational Histo
♦One Teacher Schoo
♦Sural Schools; sc
Relationship; ♦saa
Bole

♦Country school Le
(Tribes) ; ♦South Da

tage.

erican Indian Education; American

Centers; coaaunity Schools; d; cultural Influences; Curriculua:
ry; Elementary Secondary Education;
Is; oral History; Jural Education:
hool Buildings; school Coaaunity
11 Schools; State Bistory; Teacher

gacy Project: Historic Sites: Sioux kota

ABSTRACT

As part of an eight-state research effort to locate and preserve in formation related to country schools, this report examines western South Dakota's country schools as historic sites, country schools as community centers, teachers (their rcles, rules, '
and restrictions), school curriculua, education for Sioux Indians, and country schools today* School records, periodicals, manuscripts, and oral histories provide facts and anecdotes such as; in 1935 there were ,029 frame school buildings, 77 of stucco, 59 of trick, 18 of hollow tile, 13 of logs, 3 each of stone and concrete, and 2 of sod:
11:00 P-H- was the hour when both men and woaen teachers were expected to be home; state law reguired that there r jst be at least 7
_p_npils to constitute a school, but this rule was broken or chanced because some schools had only 2 or 3 pupils; in 1694, 61,71 of the children in south Dakota were enrolled in school, while during the depression year of 1934, only 42.8* of the children were enrolled; because of the lack of pencils, paper, and books, a eaorization was an important part of education: today, 108 small rural schools are still operating in western south Dakota. (NEC)

********************************** ************;*************************

♦ Be prod actions supplied by EDBS are the best that can be made ♦

♦ from the original document. *
***********************************************************************

sO

BEST eo?*i .VVAa3il

COUNTRY SCHOOL LEGACY:

Humanities on the Frontier

WESTERN SOUTH DAKOTA'S COUNTRY SCHOOLS

by

!

Carol ine Hatton

School Librarian
Edgemont Public Schools
Edgemont, South Dakota

1981

o

o

CO

©

ERIC

Funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities
Sponsored by the Mountain Plains Library Association

UA DfFAftTMEttT Of EDUCATION

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF EDUCATION

EOUCATlONAl RESOURCES INFORMATION

CENTER (ERIC)
! Th document hm tmn ropoducd at
*e#rvdfrom tht pf*on or or wnatxkw
.ong*rxitf>g ^
w Minor choriQM h#vt bw mod* to trnprovt
^•production qualify

• Polrmof v^of opin*on ftttodtoth*docu mm do not nocomrtry nprt - nt offlcW NIE pomtton or pofccy

m1™1!? ion to rew wce this

MATERIAL HA8 BEEN GRANTED BY

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES
INFORMATION CENTER (Em©."

3

COIANTRY SCHOOL LEGACY ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF

Project Director:
Andrew Gulltford

Colorado Mountain College/Silt Elementary School
Silt. Colorado

Media Director:
Randall Teeuwen
Photo America
Fort Collins. Colorado

Exhibits Director:
Berkeley Lobanov
Denver. Colorado

Fiscal Agent-
Joseph Bdelen
I. D. Weeks Library
University of South Dakota
Vermillion, South Dakota

COUNTRY SCHOOL U2GACY: HUMANITIES ON THE FRONTIER

The Mountain Plains Library Association is pleased to be involved in this project documenting the country school experience. Funding of this project from the National Endowment for the Humanities, cost sharing and other contributions enabled us 011 to work with the several statebased Humanities
Committees as well as a tony other state and local libraries, agencies and
Interested citizens. We are deeply Impressed not only by the enthusiasm for this work by all concerned but by the wealth of experience brought to bear in focusing attention on - and recapturing - this important part of history, and how we go* here. This project seems to Identify many of the toots and "character formation" of our social political and economic institutions in the west.

Already the main Project objective seems to be met stimulating library usage and in creasing circulation of historical and humanities materials In this region
Public interest is rising in regional, state and local history. Oral history programs are Increasing with greater public participation. The studv of genealogy-and the search for this in formation - is causing much interest in consuiting-and preserving-historical materials. What has been started here will not end with this project. The immeoiate results will tour the entire region and be available for any who wish the program, film, and exhibit. There will be more discussion of - and action on - the issues Involving the humanities and public policies past and present. The Mountain Plains Library Association is proud to be a partner In this wort-, the Country School Legacy, and its contribution to under standing humanities on the frontier.

Joseph J. Anderson
Nevada State Librarian
Post President x
Mountain Plains Library Association

COUUTHT SCHOOLS AS HISTORIC SITES

White men did not enter western South Dakota in any great numbers until 1876 so the 1880'e, l890's and 1900' swere frontier times in this area* The land west of the Missouri was opened up to homesteaders in 190^ and people came seeking free land and jfave no thought

<*

to how impossible it would be to make a living by farming on the Great
Plains* ¥he early days were tough times for the fir si: pioneers in western South Dakota and the hardships they endured are reflected in the schools of that era* Over and over one hears or reads about how hard everyone struggled to have a school and ^to get their children there to attend it*

When enough families had come into a locality to warrant the opening of a school , the district was organized and the 3choolhouse built , or more likely, for the first years y an abandoned dugout, claim shack, or sod or log house was appropriated for a school until a regular school could be built* A board of directors was elected and education began
Often times, a community would establish a school by providing a building and a supply of fuel and the county furnished the teacher*

Esther Darling told of her first school, "A young lady of eighteen '
years walked across the prairie for two miles with two of her pupils to a new frame school building supplied by two of the three patrons so they could keep their children home instead of boarding them out, ♦••This was

in Carlin District No. 92 in Haakon County... Desks, books and supplies had been gathered fforn other schools in the large district and fitted into the little unpainted building.. . 1,1

Often the building they provided was not in very good condition. No sod building used then still exists although there are people who "remember when one still stood in Lawrence county. Few old log buildix^sstill stand unless they .have been covered and look like a frame building now.

Some which did exist wore the 3ower school which was a log building with a dirt roof and the 3akersville school in what is now Custer
State Park. John Colman spoke of the first school he attended, r
*at tended school in what was jokingly called Mud College, a log buil ding with a plank roof covered with dirt, it was very warm au comfortable. f|2
The first Harrison Flat 3choolhouse was built by men of the community.
They hauled logs from the Black Hills* "It was built with notches and holes for guns and during an Indian scare Elvira QtohlerJ and the children went with other families to the schoolhouse for protection."^

The Cold Spring school in Custer county is one log school building which has been saved and has been put on the National Register. It was built in 1887 by the Bowman brothers and Johnny Haver, all of whom lived in the valley where it sits. It has been restored and lovingly preserved by the old people who went to school there. Most of them are too old now to cope with the problems of its upkeep but because of one man's devotion to his neighbors it is preserved. Den Heed and his wife, Gladys, spend

several days a year building fence, organizing picnics and dinners, making.

1. Esther Anderson Darling, Memoirs of South Dakota Be tired Teachers , p. 31.
2* John Coleman, Our Yesterdays , p. 120.
3. Joye Sherman, Our Yesterdays , p. 279.^

/

sure the grass is cut and that the building is safe. It was falling down and the Forest Service whose land it is on wanted to pull it down, when the Reeds and their neighbors intervened and saved it*

Another historical log school in the Black ^.lls built at about the same time which has not been saved is the Glen Erin school on Hazelrodt road east of Custer. It is tumbling down. The Cold Spring schoolhouse has the typical nigh ceiling, windows on both sides and sits on quite a high foundation. The Glen Srin school waa a typical early day log cabin with low roof, eaves probably not six fe*tfrom the ground, and a few small windows. It did not look much like a schoolhouse but must have been cozy and warmer in winter than the high-ceil in ged Cold Spring school*

The Mountain school in Red Canyon school district was a log building wnich was taken down log by log and set up again on the Killer ranch nearby to be used as a macnine shop. One of the teachers there, in his end-of- the -year report, answered the question, ,f Eow was the school ventilated? 99 by replying, ,f Windows and cracks. " Not all log buildings were cozy and warm*

Sod buildings -were warm but by necessity had small windows. Some

dugouts were comfortable but some were not. Mr. Seppala, in talking

about his boyhood north of Buffalo in Harding county, mentioned going to

school in a dugout wi.ich was Ik* x l6 f . There was a Christmas program

that winter and everybody came but he wonders now how they managed to

accommodate everyone. Pearle Rietmann taught in a dugout in Meade county

and remembered how uncomfortably cold it w^s. The children and she had

to go to a nearby creek and pick up branches and twigs to burn. She said,

,f I don'tthink we were comfortable at anytime. 91 *'

n Pearle Rietmann, Central Meade County Prairie Schools, p. 322.

if

"On lower French Creek, the community was somewhat isolated.
The schoolhouse was located quit* a distance from the homes of the students so several vacant houses took their turn as a schoolhouse*
The old Bower log house was used for several terms, then the Art
Hedlun house served its turn."*

Alta Currier said, "Vfe moved to the homestead six miles southeast of
Fair burn. Our school days were really an effort. My first school was in the George T. Wagner home on South Fork... The second year we had school in Lillian Kimball* shomestead house." 2

Many schools were started in claim shacks, little tar-paper-covered buildings with one window and a door* sometimes as >n as 10 1 x 12* •
They were not built to be permanent dwellings but were built for shelter for the year it took to prove up on one's homestead. Once the year was up and the land in possession, the homesteader often sold it to a nearby neighbor and left. His claim shack stood unattended. JLs families moved into the area or moved away, the population shifted frequently. Some schools moved from little claim shack to claim shack following the center of population. This went on in some places until the early 1920* s.^ It is not surprising that not many really old schoolhouses exist in the West
River area.

Almost all of these buildings are gone now. As the country became
<aore thickly settled and there was more money, they were replaced with

frame buildings, uninsulated ?* high ceilinged, and hard to heat. Many \

1. Our Yesterdays, p. kkQ.

2. Alta Currier, Our Yesterdays t p. ^07.
3 Personal interview, Grace Libby

ERLC

of tnem were unpainted to keep taxes down. Some were stuccoed to make them warmer and to a void having to paint. The Burdock school in Fail River county was stuccoed and never painted. With the years it has turned exactly the color of the gumbo it sits on.

There was trouble sometimes about where to put more permanent schoolhouses. There was a pbroblem in 1917 about the location of the
Soper school. The schoolhouse was about three miles from Watsons and less than two miles from Mann's ranch. The Watsons complained. In order to settle the matter fairly, Mr. Blaine, school board president, and Mr. Mann measured the distance from Mann's house to Watson's house.
They tied a rag onto the rear wheel of a spring wagon and counted the revolutions. There were 2508 revolutions of the wheel uhiph had a circumference of U feet, 10 inches. That made the distance 1798 rods when they had computed revolutions times circumference. 1798 rods equaled 5.6 miles. Halfway wouli be 2.8 miles from each. Mann and
Blaine, members of the board, and other interested patrons met at the halfway point and chose a new location for the school on the S.W. corner, SWfc of SWJt of sec. 2 Tn 5t SB 1 E. B. H. M., 2.96 miles from
Wats ens and 2.65 miles from Manns. 1 There it still sits today where the road makes a sharp turn past it. Its name was changed from the
Soper school to the Lauzon school which it is still called.

The names of the schools shifted in early days almost as often

as the buildings themselves. It was a community joke north of Buffalo

in Harding county; they moved the schoolhouse so often they kept

runners under it. /

1. Elk Mountain, School District, Clerk's Record Book.

South Dakota had state laws and regulations about all manner of things concerning schoolhouses. One State Board of Health regulation said that "the glass arsa of windows shall equal 1/5 of the floor area of the school room." Building plans for new school houses were to be submitted to the State Department of Public Instruction' before construction began. In a report by the State Planning Board in 1937, it was reported that half of the common school districts had failed to comply with this regulation.

Another important ruling was about the a mount of airspace per child.
That was the reason for the high ceilings. A school was to hatfe 6nly a

certain number of children living the closest to some the one nearest their home

and after that number was reached , the children

other school had to be taken there instead of

u This did not happen very often in sparsely

settled ranch country. One wonders if they really needed to worry, with

the way the wind must have blown in around the windows.

In 1937, 19.5 par cent of the ^222 districts which reported, needed

new buildings or additions. That was 824 buildings which were needed.

At the^same time, 38 per cent or l6l of the schools reported that they

needed additions*

In a 193^-35 survey, the ages of the schoolhcuses were as follows:

600 schoolhouses less than 5 years old

l800 efehoolfrouees were 6-20 years old

4*00 schoolhouses were 21*25 y*ars old

300 schoolhouses were 46 years or older

20 schoolhouses were 66*70 years old and still in service

As the report says, ,f Even assuming that frame school buildings erected fifty years ago have been repaired and reconditioned in supposed keeping with the needs of school children, one may well raise the question whether or not the best of such structures are doing justice to the

physical well-being of the pupils"

In 1935 there were still in use two schools made of sod. There

were thirteen made of logs, seventy seven made of stucco, three of stone, fifty nine of brick, three of concrete, eighteen of hollow tile.
The greatest majority of all the schoolhouses were frame buildings -
of them*

The lighting of the school buildins was still primitive in 193^35 s

72.58 per cent had no artificial lighting
27*77 per cent had kerosene or gasoline lamps
1.64 per cent had electric lights

tfater and plumbing were always problems for country schoolhouses

and still are in western South Dakota. In 193^-35,

per cent hud wells and cisterns
60 per cent hauled their water .
31.8 per cent had drinking water in a watfcr pail
7*5 per cent had a drinking fountain
90 per cent had water basins to wash in
80 per cent had outside toilets
18 per cent had inside chemical toilets
2 per cent had flush toilets

The author of the survey report stated emphatically, "that the outside toilet is always a potential danger to the health and morals of school children. ff ^

Ventilation was achieved by using windows or transoms in 95.1
percent of the buildings (and by cracks and windows in the Mountain school.)

Almost every country school had the same arrangement. There was an entry of some sort, either built onto the main building or partitioned off from the main room inside. There the children hung their

coats and left their overshoes and their lunch pails. It was generally

1* South Dakota State Planning Board. Elementary and Secondary Education in South Dakota , 1937t PP* 132-152.

unheated. In some larger, more elaborate schools there were separate cloakrooms.

All the country schools had outside^ toilet buildings, one for the girls and one for boys. Many schools hac^ a stable in which to keep the horses while the pupils tfere in school and sometimes a coal shed. Many schools had a fence around the yard but just as many did not have a fen,ce. There was playground equipment in most yards in later years but sin ear^ydays children had to make their own games. The equipment consisted usually of swings and teeter-totters. Every school had a flag pole in later day*, sometimes a wooden one, later a metal one. None of the pictures of really early schools show a flagpole.

xf a school had a teacherage it was either built onto the back of the school building or was a separate building next to the schoolhouse.
It was usually one room, heated by the same kind of heat as the schoolhouse *

Inside every school building was the big pot bellied or jacketed cast iron 3tove in the middle of the room, double desks for the pupils, or single desks fastened together in ro**, a* desk and chair for the teacher. One person told of going to a school in an old log house where the desks were made from orange crates by bis fathe^. Some old schools like the Cold Spring school had an eight inch raised platform in the end of the schoolhouse where the teacher's desk sat. There was a water pail and dipper and a wash basin on a narrow table somewhere in the back of the room. A modern improvement was the purchase of a crockery water cooler with a lid, and sometimes a spigot. There was a blackboard^
either boards painted black, or a certain kind of black treated cloth

stretched over boards, or real slate. Up in front near tfre teacher's desk was along recitation bench where a class vent when it was the.tr turn to raad or recite. Generally t&ere were some maps* A really well-equipped school would have a wooden case mounted on the wall above the blackboard which contained a wnole set of maps which the teacher could pull down one by one as needed. Lighting was a kerosene lamp in most schoolhouses if there was any lighting. Some better equipped for evening use had two or three brackets for lamps along each side of th* room*
A well furnished school house always had a large picture of Washington and one of Lincoln*

Amy Jacobsen found that when she went to the schoolhouae where she was to teach near Newell in Butte county, "I found the door open and some cattle had visited there. Only six books were on the library shelf.
Many improvements were needed. I asked the school board for the improvements I felt were necessary; paint the schoolhouie red with white trim f repair the door with lock and key, scrub and clean schoolroom, as well as the windows. They did all this "and also brought a crock with a cover for the water and a dipper. I bought flowered cloth and made sash curtains for the windows. Roll curtains were . also provided.

The pupils each brc*;ht~his own cup and towel* These were ming on a hook on the wall near the water fountain. The papils pasted their names under their own cup and towel. The pupils were to use the dipper to fill their cups. They brought fresh towels each week.

The school provided coal from tne 3lim Buttes; it was peat coal;

logs were also provided for the year 9 ssupply 1 ! 1

Amy J. Jacobaon, Memories of South Dakota Retired Teachers , p. 68.

!

/

The abandoned schoolhouses which are still standing today

are generally in bad condition. Windows are broken, they need paint.

\

Those which were sold and moved to nearby ranches are generally in pretty good shape structurally. They are used as granaries, shops or cattle sheds. Some have been preserved and kept up to serve as a community hall and a meeting place for *f-H meetings and community parties of various kinds. One serves as a fire hall for a rural volunteer fire department. At least three have been' preserved in the
West River area; one at Cold Spring, one at Buffalo and one at Old

Town south of Midland. The furnishings of an old schoolhouse have

/

been collected by the Cuater County Historical Society and one room of their museum: has been set up to look like an old country school*

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Elk Mountain School District, Clark's 3c cord 3ook .

Memoirs of South Dakota Retired Teachers . South Dakota Retired Teachers
Association, 1977.

Our Yesterdays. Herraosa, S. D.: Eastern Custer County Historical
Society, 1970*

School Stories in Central and Eastern Meads County, South Dakota,

to Reo rganization. Stonevlllo. S. stonavlll* ktm*h*m
Extension Club, 1969.

South Dakota State Planning Board ^ Elementary and Secondary Educ a tion in South Dakota. Pierre, S: D.: State of South Dakota, I9J7V

f.

COUNTRY SCHOOLS AS COMMUNITY CUfTSRS

Country School Legacy

Caroline Batten

IS

mm*

COUNTRY SCHOOLS AS COMMUNITY CUTTERS

Most communities used their 3choolhouse as a center for all the activities going on in the area. There were several reasons. First, it was in the center of the camaunity and more easily accessible for all the people than a ranch house might be. Even though few of them were over 20 9 x 30% the schoolhouse was the largest building available.
There seemed to be the feeling that the school belonged to all the people so they felt welcome there. It was a symbol of culture in a frontier community where there were few symbols of culture.

One of the most important community uses was that of serving as a meeting place for Sunday school and church. Mainly such services were non-denominational * Sometimes church services were held every other
Sunday when a minister could come, sometimes once a month* Sunday school classes taught by local women and men were held every Sunday.
Sometimes if the school was close enough to a little town fchurch services were held on Sunday afternoon or evening so a minister who had to preach at his own church at the regular time could come to services in the country later in the day.

"Sunday School at Lame Johnny gathered together Roman Catholics ]\
Episcopalians, Christian Scientists, Methodists, Baptists, and folks of any denomination who happened to be a mong us. vie sang hymns, Hazel
Howe played the or gan, and had classes learning Bible verses and Bible s

\

stories and getting our lessons from them.-* 1 /

Often in the summer there were Sunday school picnics after church , at the schoolhouse if there was no shade close by; in a grove of trees along a creek or river if there was one.

The Cold Spring school has an old cemetery next to it, and was used as a church for many years.

"Mr. Young built a building for school on his ranch [in 183£). \.
^A Mr. Williams drove from Deadwood to Fair burn ^seventy miles] every y two weeks to hold Sunday church services oh the Young ranch. '

The Christmas program was one of the most important events that t^ok place at the school. Not only were the children involved but in some places the adults of the community took part every year. The same ftflc performed the same part annually in the acting out of the Christmas story. Young men were shepherds end others the Wise Hen for four #r five years or as long as they stayti in the community. There were poems and little playlets memorized, songs sung. In some places everyone
In the community eke^a nged gifts at the schoolhouse at the Christmas program. Besides the. gifts, there were oranges, candy and nuts for the children. There was a tr*e£_o£/course. If they had candles on it, they were lit for just a moment or two with a man with a pail of water close by in case of fire. After the program there was coffee, and sandwiches, cakes, and pies brought by the families.

Mrs. Carrie Fey remembers when she first had electric Christmas

tree lights on the school tree. They uged direct current so the night

1. Verda Arnold, Our Yesterdays ♦ p. 13?.

2. Our Yesterdays , p. 361.

er|c\

of the Christmas program her husband, Philip fbrought the battery fro* their radio and connected it to the tree and for a few brief minutes they had klighted tree. It was a most beautiful sight to children who had never seen Christmas lights before • It was lighted very briefly so it would not run down the radio battery. 1

Mrs. Beryl Heckert remembers how the holidays were celebrated in
Meade county at the Crowell school. "The Christmas party was the big event of the winter. Plans ware started on Thanksgiving Day. For ten years a community Thanksgiving Day carry-in feast was held at bur place.
All the neighbors came... During the afternoon the people above and below school age exchanged names to exchange Christmas gifts. The school age pupils drew at school* Then the Saturday night after Thanks*
giving there was a dance and box-social at school. The money was to buy candy, popcorn and apples so everyone had a gift and a treat at the big Christmas program the school put on. The program lasted as much as one and one half to two hours. Then came Santa In the same fur coat, with gifts and candy. The program was a headache to the teacher but a joy for the students and the parents. It was definitely a time of Peace and Good Will. 2

In some schools having a Halloween party was a tradition. The

school children would have a program of Halloween poems and pieces or

a Halloween play. Then they would bob \or a pplts and play games. Lunch

would be served; everyone brought something. The whole community came

to the program and took part in the fun..
II Personal interview, Carrie Fey

2. Boryl Crowell Heckert, Central Meade County Prairie Schodls, p. 370-

ERIC

k

Spelling bees were a part of the winter entertainment in the days
^ when there were no radios, no television and no way to get to town.

This w as adult recreatio n and if the children came they were strictly in the audience unless some older one was an extra good speller who could hold his own with the competition. The teacher pronounced the words and they got tougher and tougher as the evening progressed.

In l88l when Rapid City was just a village, an article appeared in the Stack Journal tha t tchallenged the people of the town„
'Relieving that an entertaining as well as a musing evening might be spent by the people of our town in an orthographical contest, I, S. Pitts
Wells, the schoolmaster hereby in behalf of the Rapid City school, challenge the people of this town or as many as wish to participate to meet said school in a spelling match...." 1 *

In the words of the Journal , "The result of the spelling bee was
Veni, Vidi but we didn't Vici worth a cent! In other words the Rapid
4 City school got away with the town... The ease, grace, and rapidity

^ with which the school thinned the ranks arrayed in opposition was

beautiful and wonderful to behold.... Miss Tressler stumbled on the word, 'mortise* and victory was declared for the school. •• McGuffey's spelling book was used."^
■ Earlier yet, in 1878 the Journal wrote that library societies,

\ debating and dramatic clubs should be or ganized for the passage of the long winter nifi?hts...2arly in 1879 a lyceum Was heJLd where the

people of the town met in order to entertain themselves. •• It held

1. Black Hills Journal , Jan 1, 1881,

2. foii, Jan. 8, _

ERIC

regular meetings during the winter and on one occasion, a debate was held on the question: "Resolved; that mankind would be benefited by making it unlawful to charge and collect interest". The affirmative won. At another time the question for debate was: "Is a man morally bound to obey a law which he believes to be wrong?"

Scaetimes poetry was read; original poems by the people present, or classics from books of poetry* S. Pitts Wells, the schoolmaster, took part in these programs and in the debates

Nr. Seppmla remembered the lively debates he attended a* a boy on the prairie north of Buffalo in Harding county* Some of the homesteaders

had been college men and the whole community would gather at the school

to hear good debates about all kinds of current to pics *

Some times school programs, except for the Christmas program, were

put on to raise money ^ to buy things for the school; encyclopedias,

a crockery water container, playground equipment, a clock* After the

program there rfould be a box social or a pie social* Everyone in the

♦

community took part* Verda Arnold told it best*

"Oh what thrilling fun! All women and girls?<feven little pi-each ^lers,

decorated boxes or baskets with crepe paper. Some turned out creatic of

real artistic beauty. But the foodl Packed in those boxes on the big

night was enough food for six people and only two were supposed to eat

it. Now the fun (?) came when a certain young man or boy was known to

b# courting - or just snowing interest in - a special girl* The m*n

and boys were not supposed tc know to whom any ore box belonged. But
1* Black Hills Journal, Nov. 2, l8?8.

ERIC

/'

/

of course, there were ways and way* of finding out* Especially when toe young lady was willing. The fun part came when a young man (sometimes not so young) began to bid. The rest of the males took great "
dalight in bidding against him to run the price as high as thpy thought he could afford and would go. More than once a box sold for $25. or
130. So that a big boy wouldn'thave to eat with a too little girl

the boxes were stacked in three different groups. Adults, girls, and

in J little girls. x

Adults enjoyed them as much as the young folks did. Sometimes it was a pie social. There the pies were auctioned off* Coffee was served and the buyer ate the pie with the lady who had baked it. It was unknown for anyone there to go without pie. The buyers generously shared with anyone who didn't. get a pie.

Sometimes a dance was held at the school. Desks were pushed back against the wall and piled up in the entry, out of the way. All of the family came and babies and sleepy little children were bedded down on the benches while the older folks danced. Music was played by anyone who

knew how on whatever instrument they played - piano, violin, guitar,

a ccordian* Usually there were two people playing, sometimes three,

seldom more than three. Sometimes one person provided the music.

Every community had one citizen who could tfcall" square dances,

usually an older man who had danced them in his youth and took on the

chore as he got older. No pay was involved for either the muscians or

the caller. Lunch was served at midnight. No charge for that either;
T. Verda Arnold, Our yesterdays , p. 137.

7 '

everyone had contributed and there was always more than enough for everyone* Heavy drinking was no problem, even though the men might step out for a little nip. The dancing was the main thing and everyone participated, sometimes all night long. If young people, heard of a dance fifteen or twenty miles away, four or five of them, girls and men, might come on horseback. After the dance they would ride home, getting there veil after sun-up ♦ Cold weather was no deterrent, either.
They could go by team and wagon but that was slower. Sometimes they did, with hg£ rocks or hot sad irons at their feet under buffalo robes for waj-mth. And we criticize kids today for the crazy things they dot

Once in a while a wedding dance was held at the schoolhouse.
Venn Schick said, "Our wedding dance was held at the Ayrea School House.
Fred had to furnish the music and he never got to dance with his bride all night. "*Fred played the violin.

Beryl Heckert remembered the dances at the Crowell school when she was a child, "The school room was about 2 V x 26 9 but it was large enough to have neighborhood dances. As soon as we were old enough to stay a wake aft pr 8:00 p.m. *estarted to learn to dance. The music was

usually* a violin, banjo, and guitar. Lunch was served at midnight.

\ 2
Usually it was pake, sandwiches, pickles and coffee. 19 ^

\

\

More staled affairs at the a choolhoust included Farmers 9 Union

meetings, j^-H meetings, the annual school board meeting, township meet-
1. Vena Schick, Our Yesterdays , p. *f25#

2 Beryl Heckert, Central Meade County Prairie Schools, p. 370.

ERLC

ings. The school was often the polling place at election time.
One* school was a place of shelter during Indian scares which didn't happen often. Harrison Flat was near the Fine Ridge reservation and the log -school there had been built with notches like a fort. When there was an Indian scare the neighbors gathered there until they got over their fright and went home, do Indians ever appeared*

The last big affair of the school year was the school picnic.
Everyone came whether they had children in school or not. It was a
* potluck affair with lots of food and usually a ball game in the a fteraoon and more coffee and food late in the afternoon before everyoue went home. There was talking and visiting and games for the little kids* Sometimes it was held at school but generally it was held where there were some trees along a creek somewhere. It came to be a tradition to go back to the same place year after year. The only thing that would cancel it would be rain for then the gumbo would be so sticky that wagon wheels couldn'tturn*

Esther Darling found when she went to teach at the Stamford school that it was the center of community activity. She had not experienced that before and, as the teacher, found it took some adjusting to*

"Here, school or the schoolhouse was the center for all community activities including school, Sunday school, chWch, farmers 1 union, and community dances. School programs for the whole community were a must for Halloween and Christmas . * Because the school was used for so
Ban? community activities, a special effort was needed to have things in order for other 1 s use. This putting things feacK in order was quite

well respected by others using the building."*

Many people grew up with the a choolhouse the center of their lives. Everything important took place there. As children they attended school, as young people it was the place f->rsocial events , as married folks it ,was a place for cultural activities, church and
Sunday school, and the best school they could afford for their children.
In the days when twenty miles was along day's drive, most homesteaders in western South Dakota were isolated from the rest of the world. The more isolated the community, the more important the schoolhouse was.

ERIC

1. Ssther Darling, Memoirs of South Dakota Retired Teachers , p. 31.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Black HilXa Journal . November, 1878.
Black Hllla Journal . January, l88l.

Meaoira of South Dakota Retired Teachera. South Dakota Retired Teachera
Aaaoclation,

Our Yeatordaya. Kereoaa, S. O.J Eaatern Cuater County Hlatorical

School Stor laa In Central and Eaatern Meade Cohaty. South Dakota.

to Re or ganisation , StoneviMK S. D.t's to nevilie &ta*A±a
Extenaioa Club, 1969.

r

5C

TEACHERS: THEIR aGLES, HOLES AND RESTRICTIONS

Country School Logmoy

Caroline Hatton

* ERIC

\

a use

z

\

TEACHERS i TH2IR 3QL25, RULES AND 3EST2ICTICNS

Who wara tha taachara in tht country schools? From tht a arliaat days and into the prasant tima thay war a and at ill art ranchara 1
wiraa and ranchara* daughtara. In a arly tiaaa thara wara tastarn girla from Iowa and Minnas otA, and mora taatarn a tataa, too 9 who cama out wast to ba taachara. Thay wara hirad bafora thay laft homa, sight

unsatn, and suraly most of thtm did not know what thay wara gat ting into. Som wantad a dvantura, which thay had. Soma wantad a man, which thay auTaly found. Ttacharo raraly las tad mora than a ytar or two bafora baing propoaad to by soma cowboy or two or thraa.

"In 1918 Mima Maria Sawyar cama to ba taachar at Lama Johnny school. Sha a tartad school with us again tha naxt yaar but during tha Christmas vacation aha and Hanry Siagar wara marriad.

In 1920 Olaann* Laraan waa taaohar at Lama Jctonay. Ona day during
Miss Laraan 1 a tarm, Carty Ash of Oral cama to visit - school? Wall, ht cama to visit anyway. Thara was a alightly fluatarad taachar and a room full of vary wiat pupils with a f aw huahad giggles a cattarad around. Safora tha naxt school yaar, Olaanua Laraan and Carty Ash wara marriad. That maant a naw taachar for 1923 t -22* f,l >-

Johnaon Downan waa a young man whosa family ballad oay for a living* Hauda Matcalf f a young a chool taachar, cama to llva with his parants and taught a chool nsarby. It waa during this yaar that a laating roaanoa davalopad. Mauda 9 a naxt yaar was spant with tha

l* Varna Arnold, Our yaatardaya , p# l 1 ^)-^!.

(Jregerson family and she taught school at the Summit school* During her third ytar of teaching aha and Johnson ware married at Christ*
mas time."*

Tha role of tha tsachar in tha community was an important one.
People a ttachad much importanca to education and wanted it for their children* So the parson to whom they entrusted their children to gat education was an Important one. She was a cultural leader in the community. There was an i*£erect in everything she did or said or wore iespecially if aha were a stranger, those that lived in the community cams to become a kind of community fixture. She was important to the whole community , not just to tha children in school*

At school she was janitor, superintendent, principal, playground supervisor, office girl, producer and director of programs, and organizer of community picnics and social events. I

*

A few men taught in country schools. In the Custer County Superintendents Register of Scnool Officers (school board members) for the years from 1891 to 1919 % there were about four women for every one hundred male officers listed. At least 90 per cent of the teachers which were supervir.jd and managed by these men were women.

As the tiiues worsened during the depression more young men taught because other jobs were so scarce but never were they more^V
*han a small minority.

School board members, during the early days and in the depression, out of desperation to find a teachor for their kids, did not worry

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. Our yesterdays , p.

ERIC 29

too much about qualifications. "At Lama Johnny the teacher quit at Christmas. One day a Mr. Harry McDonald came to Buffalo Qap loofcUs for work. Sow did he get in touch with Father? And why
<^Ld Father ask if Ue could teach school? There is no one now who

can answer these questions. Lame Johnny needed a teacher; Mr. McDonald made a pplic&tior and was accepted, probably without any questions asked. He was a good teacher in one way. He was able to explain and make us want to learn. He was a good disciplinarian and we all adored him. But this was too good to last. Mr. McDonald was wanted by the law. The details are vague and how he found out the 'law 1
wan so close is anyone's guess. He just disappeared and school was over for tho rest of that year. No picnic, no program - just nothing.
No one ever heard if he paid for his folly. ^

There were restrictions in some small communities that must have made a teacher* spersonal life difficult. Helen Greenfield wrote

In her memoirs, "Tou have heard of curfew for students. Have you ever heard of curfew for teachers? Eleven o'clock was the hour when teachers were expected to be home in the small South Dakota town where I started my teaching career. This wes known as 'teachers 1
curfew 1 ^ and it applied to men as well as women. It was a rule to be observe^^jvearyone wno planned events where teachers were expected to attend. No teacher tried to sneak in after curfew* If an in dividual tncught of such a thing, he gave up the idea as impoasible because his landlady surely would know of his misdemeanor.

In those days a teacher lived in a rented room, usually an up -
3talrs bedroom, in a private home. Only the superintendent, the

1. Verda Arnold, Oar yesterdays, p.HK).

/

coach and possibly out or two other married faculty members had apartments or homes ^of their own. jtoen single men or women came to town to teach feach rented a room in a private home. It was unthinkable for a couple of young women to live in an apartment where they could entertain as they pleased.

Living in a single bedroom was not one of the specified rules; it was an economic necessity.... Such restrictions left little room for freedom. One did not take the liberty of entertaining friends nor undertaking any noisy activity in someone else's private home.
The room was simply a place to retire after a day's work at school." 1

* More important than any social restrictions were the living conditions which a teacher in the country had to endure when she boarded with some families* One teacher wrote 9 "My bedzjoom; was an unfinished attic room with an outside stairway which at times was slick with ice and snow. Before going to bed t the room was heated with a small wood and coal stove; we used a kerosene lamp.
I kept my clothes under the covers sc they would be warm in the morning; sometimes my bed was covered£th snow. I would go downstairs to wash, eat breakfast ftake my school bag and lunch pail to start walking 134 miles to school." 2 For this she probably paid ten, twelve or fifteen dollars a month.

A surprising number of teachers have said that they preferred to stay at the a choolhouse rather than with some patron. It was in convenient in many ways f but it in sured a certain a mount of privacy and peace and quiet. During the winter f if one boarded with a

II Helen Greenfield* Memoirs of South Dakota retired teachers , p. 51
2. Julia Hall, Memoirs of South Dakota retired teachers , p. 70

ERLC 31

\

family with children, it meant eating all meals with the children, teacning them all day, spending the evening with them, and probably sharing a room with one or more of them. In the winter the bedrooms wore cold so one could not retreat there but must spend the evening near the stove w*th the whole family.

To live comfortably in the schoolhouse the teacher wxld have a kerosene stove in a cloakroom and s. fold-up cot to put down in the schoolroom* She would live out of a suitcase* There was no plumbing so the toilets were outside but so it was at her home, too*
She r*% at her desk and used a kerosene lamp for correcting papers or sewing in the evening. No telephone, no radio, and the nearest neighbor a mile or more over the hill. Her husband took her the fifteen miles to school on Monday morning, or Sunday evening if the roads or weather were bad, and came after her on Friday afternoon* His life on the ranch by himself was even lonelier than hers; at least she had the school children every day.

Some even kept a child with them at the schoolhouse if the child's ranch home was too far from school for the trip to be made every day*
One lady wrote, "Another year I stayed in a one room teacherage. 1
kept a little boy *ith me during the five days; we curtained off a comer of the classroom for his little bedroom.'* 1

There were a few teacherages. Sometimes it was a room built directly onto the side or back of the schoolhouse* Sometimes it was

separate building. Teacherages usually had the same facilities as the schoolhouse. If the schoolhouse had a wood or coal stove,

1* Julia Eall t Meroirs of -South Dakota retired teachers , p. 70.

ERIC 32

so did the teacherage. If th<> school had no water, neither did the teacherage. If gas or kerosene lamps were used in the schoolhouse the4*a cher had a gas or kerosene lamp at the teacherage.

Why did teachers stay at the teacherage or at the schoolhouse when they, lived only fifteen miles away? Probably they had only one vehicle and her husband needed it. Brin ging her in the morn-uig and coming after her at night interfered with chores and milkixy, things tUnt needed to bs done before dark tespecially in winter in those *
days befo^e^ural electrification. Besides it was too expensive in the depression to travel that thirty miles every day. The country raod which was the closest route was only a trail across the prairie, little traveled t and in winter  before the days of four-wheelj^vehicles, likely to be impassable. To go around on better and more traveled roads was twice as long a trip*

Quite often traveling to school meant along walk* One lady remembered. •• "I would take my school bag and lunch pail to start across the prairie walking the 1)4 miles on a cold winter day through deep snow with no fence nor guide to follow. This was dangerous when road tracks were covered with new snow and blizzard conditions were beginning to a rise. The two little boys from tnis home walked with me, which made it a difficult problem in the cold. To get the fire started, the room warm and try to wipe away the frozen tears with the cold fingers*" 1

Lucille Hartshorn recallled her school days when her aunt, Jennie
3uen, was her teacher. "In the early fall they gucille and Jennie}
traveled the seven miles with a horse and buggy* Ray's homestead

!• Julia Hall, jtemoira of Soutn nakota retired t*eh*** t P . 70.

m

shack was refinished, inside and out, and moved down just east of the school yard, for Jennie and Lucille to live In from Monday through
Friday. In the spring of 1927 a blizzard and extremely heavy snowfall created travel problems for several weeks - -first the snow drifts and then the flood waters* They rode horseback and carried the week's supply of food, clothing, etc* with them." 1

The building where a teacher worked was cold in winter and extremely hot in the fall and late spring. The store had to be coaxed along. The fire had to be started each morning and on very cold mornings, the schoolroom would not warm up until noon. One elderly lady told how one winter one of the mothers came to school with her child and spent most school days at school, sewing or doing needlework. Sometimes she helped students or listened to them read. She was a well educated lady who was having hard times nd the teacher made her welcome for she suspected there was no money to buy coal fur the stove at home.

Supplies and books were adequate but limited. There was a blackboard, a recitation desk, double desks for the children, and later, single desks fastened together in a row, a teacher's desk and chair, maps, sometimes a globe % sometimes a piano or an or gan, always a water pail and dipper. Later, a new in novation was a crockery water cooler with a lid* Some schools had wells, s- te had cisterns,

at some the children and the teacher carried their water to school In

covered syrup *pails.

1. Lucille Hartshorn, Our vented™ T p. jik.

ERIC

In the late l880's and early 1900* ssalaries were low* After

the First World War they in creased and were their best in the 1920 f s*

When the depression came, they went down. Examples are: Floyd

Cocking: First grade certificate from Aberdeen Normal School; $110

per month; highest paid graduate out that year; the job to aching

fifth to eighth grades at Pr ingle in the Black Hilla. 1 Zelma

Sweeney : M I taught one year at the Bender school on Squaw Creek,

1903-O 2 *.* .My salary was 530. a month and I paid $10. a month tor room
"2

and board. Sylvia Warren: " (Jtaing the depression] finally a contract came from a school east of Hermosa at $75* a month. I paid
$20. for room and board. The next two years I taught at the Lame
Johnny school and received $50* a month {and lived at home}."-*

from the record book of the Directors of the Harrison school township cooes the following: "August 13, 1889. At a meeting held this day the scale of teacher's salaries shall be as follows:

First grade certificate $ i K).-45 per month
Second grade certificate $35 per month
Third grade certificate $30 per month

In the 1930* a the pinch of the depression manif ested^itself by the ^

petition presented to the Harrison School Board asking them not to

hire married teachers. "It warn then moved, seconded and carried not

to hire any married woman who has an able bodied husband." This rule

presisted in many places until World War II and the shortage of teachers

then.

1. Lloyd Cocking, Memoirs of South Dakota retired teachers , p* 2$.

2. Zelma Sweeney, Cur yesterdays, p^ ^SSTt
3* Sylvia Wvrat, Our yesterdays , p. ^75.

3* Sylvia jfltrratt Our yesterdays , p. 2
k. John Barta, Our yesterdays , p. 33^*

erIc 35

Vena Schick wrote, "I boarded schoolteachers through the years .
Cora Havens got $60. a month and I charged her $15 a month for her boards 1

A teacher was supposed ta liave a certificate before she could teach. The first certification law was written in 186&. It stated that the county superintendent 'was to examine all teachers who offered themselves for service f in moral character, learning, and ability to teach* Certificates were limited to one year*

In 1879 provision* were made for the Superintendent of Public

Instruction to prescribe the requirements for first, second, and

* 2

third grade certificates. To become certified, anyone could take the

tests given a nnu a ll y by the County Superintendent. One's grades on

.he various parts determined the kiad of certificate one received.

Tests were given in reading, writing, geography, grammar, spelling,

arithmetic, United States history, civics, physiology, bookkeeping,

current events, art, and theory and practice. Low scores meant one

could be rejected. The accord Book for the Superintendent of Schools

for Custer County from 1892 to 1919 contained a section labeled

Rejected and it was along list of people who had taken the teats and failed.

Eventually by studying one could pass the tests with high enough scores to get a first grade certificate and not have to. take the testa again* In the middle 1920* s as more and more teachers began to attend normal schools, their attendance there gave them a third, second or first grade certificate without having to take the tests.

ERLC

1. Vena Schick, Our yesterdays , p. ^25.

2. CI. Justin Bales, "Development of territorial education of the
Slack Hills of South Dakota, 1876-1890" (unpublished thesis), p. 39.

> 36

By then, renewals were possible without taking the tests again.
3y the early 1930' a few war* taking the teeta. 1934 w a the date

of the l&at recorded teat a coree in Cuater county. All certificatea were iaaued for attendance at normal a chool or college after that.

In the early 1900' a many high a choola offered "normaP'couraee wnich prepared their student* to teach. One part of thoae couraea conaiatad of Senior reviews, in which they went over or reviewed all area* of knowledge! math, spelling, history, geography; all the area* they were likely to encounter when they took the teacher examination* • Young - - and women aa young aa 16 etarted to teaoh with a third grade certificate. If they studied diligently, or learned aa they taught various subjects, when they took the teat the next year, they might advance to a second grade certificate. A first grade certificate wa* difficult to attain and u*ually requt/ed some teaching experience and one or two year* at a normal a chool.

It wa* difficult to find the money to attend a chool, especially

ft

during the depression* Many went to a tunmer school and taught la the winter*

Qualification standards remained low for elementary teachers in South Dakota into the 1950' a. In a Report of the Committee ca
Education of the South Dakota Legislative Reaearch Council in 1954, the committee was concerned with the problem of teacher certification.
In the 1953-5^ a chool year there *ere 212 •♦unqualified" teachera and
1215 permit teachera employed. To have a permit meant that one had lea* than on* year of normal training; it could be a* little as six

u

weeks of summer school* At that time no other state ranked lower than South Dakota In the percentage of teachers who are college graduates. In South Dakota only ten per cent of the elementary teachers were college graduates* The highest at that time was Arizona where 97*5 per cent of elementary teach*** had degrees* 1

To overcome the lack of good education and teacher training a mong elementary teachers county institutes were held every year at the county seat In every South Dakota county* Recorded in the
Record Book of the Superintendent of Schools for Custer County was the first institute held there from July 20, to August 1, 1$91*
It lasted for ten days and was conducted by Mr* R* M* Jester* In l89*fr fifty-five teachers attended and in 1902, Professor Q. V* Nash conducted classes for 96 teachers* There were lessons on how to teach, classes to provide in formation about various subjects such as geography and travel, demonstrations in art and handicraft* It was a time for all these young women who led such quiet, hard working lives In the rural schools to get together in town for a Tew
\ys* In the evenings t one lady remembers, they would go back to the meeting place and spend the evening copying new patterns to use during the school year* Mr* Leo Seppala, who lived in Buffalo as a young man, remembered institute as a time when all the young ladies of the county would be in town and special programs would be held and would be open to the public as well as to the teachers.
But the young ladies were the main attraction*

1. south Dakota Legislative Research Council , Report of the Committee on Education, 195^t ?* 6*

These young ladles kxxtw they had much to learn. Mrs* Carrie
Conger said she was so in experienced it was a wonder the pupils learned anything. But looking back, it seemed to one of her fonfier pupils she did well in spite of her in experience, and taught eighteen or twenty pupils in all eight grades. 1

The teacher was the key factor. Inexperienced, untra^ .ut conscientious and hard-working, the girls of sixteen and seventeen and older who were the oarly rural teachers did mere than they ever knew to bring culture to the frontier that was western South Dakota*

1* Verda Arnold, Our yesterdays  p. 136.

Bibliography

Bales, a. Justin. "Development of territorial education of the

Black Hill* of South Dakota, 1676-1890" (unpublished thesis),!^.

Custer County Superintendent of School*. Record Book , 1891-1973.

Meaoira of South Dakota retired teachers * South Dakota Retired
Teachers Association, 1977.

Our Yesterdays* Hermosa, S* D.: Sastern Cuater County Historical
Society, 1970.

South Dakota Legislative Research Council. Report of the Committee on Education, 1954.

BEADING, WBZXXNQ, 'RXTHMETXC AND RECITATION

Country School Ltgasy

Caroliat Hatton

■r

ERLC

HEADPG, VHZTIN9, 'RITHMETIC AND 2BC1TATICW

As settlera oaas to South Dakota from tht l880's until World War I, oso of the first things thsy did was to organize a school. The first hooastsadsrs sast of Oslrichs built thsir own school, furnished it and hirsd a tsachsr several ytsrs bsfors an of ficial school district was formed, whan it was, thsy turned thsir school over to the proper authorities. 1
These honest sadars knew all about how to set up and run a school. Many of the* were middle-aged family men who had been board members in the states they had oe*efrom so thsy knew how to get schools started, even though the building might be crude and, at first, lack tha kind of equipment thsy had known back east.

This same development took place everywhere am districts came into existence. The state law said there imVst be at least seven pupils to constitute a school. Cnce the district^ were f orn^dthis rule was broken or changed because some schools had only twer or three pupils sometimes. - \

In 1862 the first territorial legislature had" made a legal provision for the district unit of school control. At the beginning the district officers ware director, clerk, W treasurer, each elected for one year. There wai an annual meeting 6f electors in these early days, where the whole community considered the levy of a school tax, the location of the school bunding and the length of the school year which was not

to be leas than three months.^

1. Personal interview, Carrie Fey

2. 0. Justin Bale, "Development of territorial education of the Slack
Hills of South Dakota (unpublished thesis), 1943.

Marie Patterson says of her first school in Meade County, "Cur building was my fourteen by sixteen shack and the class was eleven children who came in asserted sizes. We d±4 not have desks in rigid rows bolted to the floor. In fact, we did not have desks, just a few tables and chairs. The McCoy, the Wilcox, the Ham, and the Hertz children attended this learning center for three months in the fall and three months in the spring when they were not otherwise occupied."*

Pearl e Rietmann said of her teaching career in Meade comity, "When
I first started teaching about 1918 there were no or ganized schools as such, therefozBl had to get out and hustle up the seven pupils required by law before a school could be started. There were few children at that time but I managed to get enough signed to start school.

The school house was an abandoned claim shack, no equipment whatsoever, but we managed by supplying our own, a few chairs, a couple '
small tables, ,a board painted black answered for a blackboard. We had no books or writing material except what we brought from home. Fortunately these children were all small 50 it wasn'thard to teach them to^
read, write, spell and do simple problems. However the school was only a short term as two families moved away leaving only two children.

The next school was also a short three month term. The owner had pr^red up on his claim and left. It was in a dugout, the house partly built into the side of a hill about seven miles from home. Mrs. John
Magnus on cleaned the place up as best she could the day before school

started. T wo of her children, Amelia and Herbert, were my pupils... It
!• 1 Central Meade County prairie schools , p. 313.

was a cold winter, there was no fuel supplied, the children and I had to pick up twigs and branches from a nearby creek %/' burn in the tiny

;

stove. I dent tLink we were comfortable at eoiy/tiaie."

Irene Griffin said, ,ft the one room unpainted schoolhouse was too hot

if your desk was x^oefc to the stove, but you were cold if your seat was

near the vail. During cold weather your feet were always cold. I don't

believe children were is in telligent as they are now. Perhaps, some had

plenty of potential but they had little guidance and not much to stimulate

interest."* /

" Evelyn Hove said, "On chilly winter mornings we huddled around the

wood stove to warm ourselves, then attended to thawing out the water pail and ink bottles J$

In 1893-9^ the average term of South Dakota schools was 113 days or about Jk months. This was twenty-two days less than the national average had been in 1889* 3y the 1913-1** term the average school term for South
Dakot* was 15^to nly f our kdays less than the average for the nation. In
1929-30 the average was 172.7 day/ but in 1933-3 [ Sdue to the hard times of the Japression it had gone doJL to 171 days. 2 * ,

Around 3389 the school term jt or the Harrison Flat school ran usually for four- months beginning a bpatf October 1. By 1910 th$ term was divided into two sessions of threp months in the fall and three in the spring.^

The clerk 1 srecord for the Elk Mountain 3chool district for July l*f,

191^ shows that the board decided to have eight months of school at the

Dewey schoo l  six months school at 31k Mountain school and three months
C Central Meade County prairie schools , p. 322.
2* Irene Or iff in, Our yesterdays  p.
*U iVelyn Howe, Cur Yesterdays , p. 253*

if. South Dakota State Planning Board 9 Elementary and secondary education in South Dakota , p # 2#

5 # John Barta, Our yesterdays , p. 332.

school at the Soper school. In 1915 they chose to have eight months school at Both the Dewey school and th<* Soper school and to have school at Elk Mountain for three to six months. In July of 1917 they allowed nine months school at Dewey, eight months school at Sopors and seven months school at Elk Mountain. There was no mention of the reason for the difference in lengths of term.^

Many older boys went to school only when the ranch work was done.
Sometimes they were older than the teacher * almost always they were bigger then she. If they respected the teacher they helped keep the younger ones in line; otherwise they were a discipline problem. 2

Ruth Elliott wrote about her father, Ben Miller. lf When work was slow he went to school, as was frequently the custom then, work came a head of school.... When he was seventeen years old he went back to school. He had left home when he was thirteen or fourteen years old and struck out for

In 189^, 81.7 per cent of the children in South Dakota were enrolled in school. Most of the population of South Dakota at that time was east of the river in small towns or on thickly populated farm land. Twenty years later, by 191^ the population had spread over the thinly settled western half. Times were tough for the settlers and it was difficult to have school when families lived so far from one another. Only 67.9 per cent of the children were enrolled. Times were better in the twenties but by
19^f t the depression was felt everywhere and only k£.Q per cent of the children in South Dakota were enrolled in scnool. Children had to go to

work to hel psupport the family.

1. Elk Mountain School District, Clerk's record book .

2. Personal interview, Carrie Fey

3. 3uth Elliott, Our yesterdays, p. 222.

South Dkkota State Planning Board, Elementary and secondary educatio n in South Dakota , p. 18. M ' * " ~

; 45

Over and over, the fact is mentioned that school books were fur-

*

nished by thm pupils. "They used whatever books they had. There was

no uniformly in textbooks. Reading , writing and arithmetic was the

curriculum. ffl #
Julia Hall wrote, "In my e£rly school days parents furnished textbooks. As a consequence there was often a lack. The only supplies furnished by the school board were chalk and erasers. Up till my last

years in the grades I never saw a sheet of construction paper and I am

quite sure all the other schools in my county were as unsupplied* 11 ^

The series of reading 4 books called Blodgett's reader were popular.
Other reading series were School read Jig by grades by Baldwin, the
Swinton readers , the series called Progressive course in reading by
Aldrich and Forbes, and the Heath readers by grades * Geographies included
Natural school geography, edited especially for the Dakotas and Minnesota, by Hedway and Hinman, First steps in geography by Frye, and Barnes complete geography by Montieth. One history book was A primary history of the United States for intermediate classes by Donnelly. Golden song books were used for singing.

The noon meal was a* break in the day's hard work. Cnce lunch was eaten, the children played games with the teacher usually playing with them. For these cnildren so isolated on their ranches, this play time must have been very good for them and filled a real social need. Sometimes recess would be skipped so the whole school could take a longer noon hour and go to a nearby pond to skate or sfh ij^to slide down^ /*

There were no hot lunch programs in those days. Most lunches Cottle Ruth Elliott t Our yesterdays , *p# 222.

2* Julia Hall, Memoirs of South Dakota retired teachers, p. 52.

sisted of a jelly sandwich with an apple or a plain piece of cake or a cookie; no waxed paper wrappings in those days. Fried egg sandwiches ware big fwith homemade bread. Sometimes biscuits or cornbread were "
all some, children had fwith lard instead of butter. Times were tough and fruit was not available * except in season.

In one community the five or six mothers took turns sending the ingredients for a hot dish which the teacher heated on a kerosene stove and all the children shared it. Often it wqs only plain potato soup; milk and potatoes were two things most people had plenty of, but sometimes it was dishes like vegetable soup or macaroni and cheese *>r hot cocoa.
Another teacher said that such a plan did not work at all where she taught because the mothers kept trying to out-do one another in the hot dishes they sept and it caused so much friction and hard feeling they had to stop it. Somehow it's comforting to know that people haven't changed much and that our intrepid pioneer ancestors were human also.

Dorothy Harmon said, "...often our bread was frozen at noon, as we had to leave it /^ur lunches} in the ante-room. But there was a huge stove in the center of the room... We would toast our bread on top of the stove*, and at least we had hot toast. The butter would melt and smoke. .. but Mrs. Van Pelt never said anything about it." 1

School was very important and the children came to thes* often

uncomfortable schoolhouses by whatever means they could get there. They

walked, rode horseback, drove a horse and cart or horse and buggy, were

brought in a wagon, or on a bobsled behind a team. Faul Schnose said,

"We travele d the seven miles to school each day ija a buckboard pulled
II Dorothy Harmon, Our yesterdays t p. 2.k6.

by two horses. The next year... Arthur rode a saddle horse and I rode a ;,into Shetland pony, bareback." 1

Marian C*3rien said, f, We had* to walk 2)6 miles to school over country that was rough. We also had to cross two creeks, that in the spring of the year always overflowed. These and the draws were hard to cross and many times we would have to rely on the railroad bridge to cross Lame
Johnny Creek}*" 2

Dorothy Harmon remembered experiences with Lame Johnny Creek.
"One time when I was about six years old Mr. John Hackel, who lived on the east side of the creek, hitched his team to the wagon to come to the schoolhouse to get all the children wao lived on the east side of the creek as it was terribly high this time. When we got to the creek and started to cross, we didn'tunderstand Mr* Hackel 1 sseriousness but the wagon started going downstream and the horses were having a difficult time trying to keep going, The wagon was full of children but after

what must have seemed fvery long time to Mr. Hackel we finally got- to the other side...'^

Zelma and Joe Norman drove tyi miles to the Harrison Flat school in a one horse cart pulled by a faithful old horse called Inger which their dad had purchased from an Indian for a dead cow.^

Tom Norman, from the time he was seven until he was twelve, rode seven miles on horseback to the Grieves school. During in clsment weather he stayed with a family who lived closer to school.^ Horses were * big

part of peo ple's lives in those days. Mrs. Rietmann said that in 1925

1. Paul Schnose, Our yesterdays , p. 30.

2. Marian Q , BrianT"bur yesterdays , p. 169.
3* Dorothy Harmon, Our yesterdays, p* 2**6.

*f. Josephine Hazzelstrom, Our yesterdays , p. 260.
5* Audrey Norman; Our yesterdays , p. "255*

.8

when she taught at the Chaffee school In Mead* county, most of the pupils rod* to school, usually two to a horse. "In the spring there was a pond not too far from the scnoolhouse and those youngsters would ride their horses out in the middle of it, turn them around end t 9 end and make them kick at one another, what kids won't dol" 1

In the northwestern part of South Dakota wild horses a problem even to some^one on horseback. Jennings Ploden said that his father would not allow him to ride in one area even when he was seventeen because of the danger of meeting a wild stallion whose territory that
,was. S. C. Pellegrin told of wild horses coming up out of the breaks between his ranch home and the scnoolhouse. .£hey were mean and would chase anything, so my dog usually went to school with me. One day when they were giving me a worse time than usual Sherm Strait came out and shot at them to keep them from me."^

The teachors at most of the schools were mostly young, in experienced, and poorly trained. Put most of them made up for their youth and in experience and lack of training by hard work, ingenuity and conscientiousness. All were helped to get the practical in formation and teaching methods they needed by attending annual county institute which lasted a week or two at the county seat sometime during the summer.

And they had the South Dakota course of study to follow. If they followed it conscientiously, and had had a good enough education themselves, so'they knew the content of the subjects they were expected to

teac h^t he ywere successful teachers. The Course of study was the teacher's

Central Meade County prairie schools , p. 5S5.

2. Central Meade County prairie schools, p. 373.

Bibl. Sht mw prp*rd a lwtoa without consulting it. It listed

\

every fact ud every concept to be learned in every subject for tvtry grade and gave ideas of what could be done to accomplish thw learning of all of it It was printed and published* by the State of South Dakota and cam fro© the office of the State Superintendent of Public Xnstructic

Orace Lobdell Hammerquist, retired teacher, described her first te^ohing experience at the Dawkins school: "Tne dozen children and I religiously covered the work for each month as it was outlined in the big yellow State Course of study ,"*

Floyd Cooking taught his first year at the Pringle school in Custer county * "One of *yseventh grade girls was pretty sharp and I had to hustle to keep her busy and challenged* And then I found the solution*
Two of my fifth grade seemed to need acre personal help ^hen I had tinie to give so I had Anne start helping them* Within a week f she was my full-fledged teacher aids during p^rts of the day* She loved it* So did I* And everyone profited from it. Of course f she did not get paid*
But she got a better education*

It seems we were to teaoh about six or eight subjects to each

grade level. • • That would sake twenty-five or thirty classes a day during

a period from eight till t&ree* Could you believe our shortest class

was only five minutes? That was spelling* And our longest was twenty

minutes* That was because I believe in a good oath background* Some

other doubling up had to be done so I put the fifth and sixth grades

together in the same claws for history the first 3emester and covered

the fifth grade work* The second semester we did the sixth grade work*
1* Orace Lobdell Hammerquiat f Memoirs of South Dakota fcetired teachers

p# 3k. :

ERiC 5f )

It wm not too bad but did keep the teacher jumping without bono*
fit of coffee breaks, froo periods, relaxation or neighborly chat*
with othtr teachers.

Wo know tho subject notorial had to bo covered from the Course of study . But ths teacher was not the final, authority. He had to do his job well enough so that everyone in the eighth grade was qualified to graduate. The county superintendent prepared the final exams, mailed thorn to the president of the school board who delivs-ed them to the te&eher the day of tho final exam. After the student had written tho examination, the papers were returned to tho county office for narking. And if tho grades wore too low, the student flunked cut and had to repeat another year. If a teacher had that happen, you can imagine how popular he was in the community. But the system .seemed to encourage both tho student and teacher to do a good job." 1 f

Questions like this tented whether or not the Course of study had'been followed:

Grade HI arithmetic: A am bought at a sale* a team of horaea for 137?* The term* of tha aala ware, 1 year'a time at 6# iataraat, or 2* of f f or caah* Tha man a ccdpted tha lattar condition and want to a bank and
■* borrowed juat enough money to pay tha cash a mount paying 80 in tartat. Sid hagain or loaa by chcoaing tha second condition , and how ouch?

Grade VIZ a palling: \ Spall tan worda to ba pronounced by tha taachar from V liat mada up by har from taoae wordav quita generally miaaad whan tha regular lessons wara given, but which hava siact baan studied.

Grade VI reading: You will write from a emory one stanza from either* 11 Barefoot Boy, ,f "The Children 1 a Hour", "Ode to a Waterfowl* 1 f or "jjtar Spangled banner".

1. Floyd Cocking o Memoirs of South Dakota retired teachers, p. 27.

I u

I Grade V drawings Each pupil will bring two potatoes.
/ They will be placed on the desk in front so that .

il the end of one overlaps the other. Draw them just \

as they seem* \

Grade IV geography: Draw an outline map of South Amer- \
ica and write the names of the oceans on the east \
and on the west of it*

Grade III geography: Write how you could make a little

pool of water from water running in the street or '

road after a rain. If you have ever seen a lake on

a stream of water, tell how you think it came there* /

Grade II language: The teacher will have on the board /
a liberal list of ords already studied having the long and short sounds of a, e, i, and o. She will have each come to the board and mark the vowels of four of them.

Grade I reading: Write on the board a few sentences such as the following and have each pupil read for fluency and expression: "Mamma, I see you., % Do you see met
I love you Mamma* Do you love me? 91

Verda Arnold reaembered taking the final eighth grade examination*

,f In the spring of 1922 a decree went out from somewhere that all

seventh and eighth grade pupils must go to the county seat to write

their final examinations* There were four of us from Lame Johnny.

Mason Peterson, Peter Sieger, Evelyn Maxon and me. Poor little country

kids. We were all afraid x>t the big city. The idea of a FINAL test

was bad enough. But to have to write such a test in a strange big

building - oh noi Miss Carter assured us we all knew enough to pass.

Then gave us added relief by of fering to go along and just be there.

We all passed.

Programs, especially the Christmas program were an important part of the school year. There was no television, or radio, the slow mode

of travel made it impossible to go to town for entertainment , so the

x. Quarterly uniform test and review Questions , December, 1910.
2. Verda Arnold, Our yesterdays, p. 136. "

people in the community made their own* Some school* had pro*
grama to raise money to buy needed equipment. Children gained much from the experience of getting up in front of people to act out a playlet, speak a piece 0r perform in some other way* Because of the lack of pencils, and paper and books , memorization was an'
important part of education. Some people in their eighties can still quote dozens of poems which they learned while in elementary school*

Verda Arnold wrote of her school days, "Much of the fun and joy of a country school was program time* It was probably looked forward to with as ouch trepidation as joy* For some there was always a little stage fright, for others there was none* Edna Haaser was a master hand when it came to programs* These consisted of group singing, solos a^ddialogs (little plays)* Edna played the or gan and the older pupils stood close enough to read the words* \h 'little kids'
stood back and learned the words from them. A few days after being given our parts to learn, we used the 'opening exercise' period for practice sessions. For those who would be taking part in more than one rendition there was no warning until the first 'piece 1 was pretty much under control-** then we received the lines we must learn for the dialogue or extra 'piece'* During program time there was usually a feeling of to getherness - a comradeliness that was missing on just regular days. Now the big boys didn'ttease the younger children so much and the whole school seemed interested in how well you spoke

your piece. ^

1. Veroa Arnold, Our yesterdays , p. 136.

' 13

Throughout each county the schools prepared for county spelling bees and declamation contests* Everyone, from first graders through eighth grade took part* Winners from eaoh county went on to a state contest.
But everyone was a winner because the practice involved to compete at the county level raised the ability of all to spell and to speak in front of a group.

Sach school district within a county, while controlled by the

local board, was directed and guided^ by the woman or man who was County

\

Superintendent • The office was at thfe County Courthouse and the Superintendent's job was not an easy one in the large counties of western
South Dakota. In the first place, it was an elective position so every two years he had to run for office during the election, had to go out and ask people in the county to vote for him, an expensive time-consuming, tiring cnore in the days of travel by horseback-e*-buggy, in the large counties in the West River area*

"The county superintendents office was always a busy, busy place.
There was always a rush on to get things done and meet the deadlines

set for school reports and activities on the school calendar

Summer began with the census reports from the clerks. Then came the ordering of textbooks and supplies. Next came the completing and filing of the annual reports from the school officers, which, was followed by the stocking of textbooks and supplies. Then came th£ planning of the school calendar and the preparation of the annual school teachers 9
bulletin, which was the basic guide to be followed for the school term a head, and mixed in with these regular duties, was always the problem

\

\

' of placing good teachers in tke schools, who meet the certification regulations adopted by the State Department of Public Instruction.

The beginning of school brought teachers 1 meetings, institutes, etc., with the accompanying rush by teachers, for slibrary books, textbooks , and supplies***. Each term brought its rally days with spelling contests, sreect contests, track meets, art exhibits, music festival?, and the Co'inty YCL Convention, at which time State Spelling Contestants

and State YCL Delegates were selected. Sighth Grade Graduation

was always a special day, a culminating activity for pupils, parents,

teachers, and the County Superintendent.^

The Young Citizens League was an or ganization for children ir

school which promoted good citizenship, practice in the democratic pro*

cess by teaching them to conduct business msetings, 3hare th chores

of the school and raise money to improve the school. Besid? ae YCL

annual convention and the county convention, there was an annual YCL

chorus day in each county.

Some schools far from a high school added the Jirst years of high school subjects if they could find a qualified teacher. The Sorum common school district, in Sorum, a little community in Perkins county, had a rural four year high school and employed one or two teachers for the few students who otherwise would have had to leave home to bo^d in some town where there was a high school.

3eatha Spring remembered that the ninth grade classes at a school
'-Li Custer county started at 8:30 and the other grades started at the regular time. Wages for. the teachers who were able to teach the ninth

1* Central Meade County prairie schools, pp. 12-13-

ERIC 55

grade wsj $80. per month while those who could teach only the regular eight grades was $55. If a district couldafford.it, it was better to keep the kids at >ome as long as they could*^

•

1. Beatha Spring, Our yesterdays ,

BIBLIOGRAPHY

* Aldrich, George I. and Forbes , Alexander. Progressive Course in

\ Reading; First Book . American Book, 15557

Baldwin, James. School Heading by Grades . American Book, 1897.

Bale, G. Justin, "Development of Territorial Education of the Black
Hills of South Dakota, I876-189O" (unpublished thesis, 19^3).

Blodgett, Frances and Blodgett, Andrew B. The Blodgett Second
3ea<ler  GJnn, 1905* ^

Donnelly, F. F. A Primary History of the United States for Inter -
mediate Classes. American Book. 1BS5.

Elk Mountain School District. Clerk's Record Book .

Frye, Alexis Everett. Frye's First Steps in Geography .. Ginn, 1906.

The Golden Book of Favorite Songs . Hall & McCreary, 1915.

The Heath Readers by Grades; Book Seven . Heath, 1907 .

Memoirs of South Dakota Retired Teachers . South Dakota Retired Teachers
^ ~ Association, 1977.

Monteith, James. Barnes's Complete geography . American Book, 1896.

Our Yesterdays . Hermosa, S. D.: ' Eastern Custer County Historical
Society, 1970.

Quarterly Uniform Test and Review Questions . Lincoln, Nebraska:
University Publishing Company, 1910.

Redway, Jacques W. and Hinman, Russell. Natural School Geography .
American Book, 1907*

School Stories in Central and Eastern Meade County, South Dakota ,

1009 to Reorganisation . Stonev^lle, D.; Stoneville Steadies
Extension Club, 1969c

South Dakota St^te Planning Board. Elementary and Secondary Education in South Dakota. Pierre, S. D.r State of South Dakota, 1937.

Svri nton f s Fourth Reader . American Book, 1883*

ERLC

COUNTRY 3CHC0IS AND THE AMERICANIZATION
OF ETHNIC GROUPS

COUNTRY SCHOOL LEGACY

Caroline Hatton

COUNTRY SCHOOLS AND TEE AMERICANIZATION
OP ETHNIC GflOUPS

The Sioux, the greatest of the Plains Indiana who haughtily dominated the northern plains for nearly a century, resisted tne white can's nays more vigorously than other tribes. Of the Sioux living only a nundred years ago, Haserick wrote, "To characterize the Sioux as anything less than vainglorious would be in accurate. Their arrogance was born of successful conquest.. ..They could hardly help being a ware or their great power. The Sioux were far more than a ware; they were overbearing in their vanity." The Sioux were forced by sheer weight of numbers to submit to the white man's ways. Still conscious of their superior past it is no wonder they most bitterly resisted. 1

When the economic basis of the Sioux culture, the buffalo, was destroyed, the Indians 9 manner of making a living was taken away, their relationship between themselves and their environment changed and tl&F whites, an a lien conquering culture, tried to force a new way of life upon them. Unlike the agrarian Pueblos, for example, traditional values of the Sioux bow no relation to this new way of life.
The nomadic and warlike Sioux with their high values of physical bravery, generosity, individual autonomy, good advice and leisure could not follow their traditionalways when the white American culture was thrust

upon them. When they tried to behave according to their heritage and

1. Hassrick, The Sioux; life and Customs of a Warrior Society, p. S7. *

tradition they were constantly frustrated and their normal behavior

was considered wrong and ignorant by the white men. For example,

the refusal of the Sioux to accept the white man's value of working \ Qo^ aC

from eight to five in exchange for something led to being called / 3

lazy. The Sioux value of in dividual autonomy and appreciation of

leisure led to them be;^ regarded as irresponsible.

Hie management of Indian affairs was a federal responsibility.
Various plans for land hblding and tallotments for the Indians .failed to make them self -supporting ranchers. Over the next century their management failed to bring about hoped-for educational progress, although some federal boarding schools for Indian people were established very early *

Any noteworthy progress made^ during this period was contributed by the missionaries of several denominations. The four men who did the most in. this respect in South Dakota were John P. Williamson, Presbyterian, 1360-1917} Hey. Thbmas^H. Higgs, Congregational, who worked with the Indians from l872-19 / K)R Bishop William ftobart Hare, Episcopalian, from 1873-1909; and Bishop Martin Marty, Catholic, 1873-1896.
These four denominations conducted most of the ministry to the reservation Indians in South Dakota.,. In 1900 the government discontinued all help to the Indian mission schools and gradually large numbers of them closed. 3ut the Catholics, especially, continued in spite of difficulties. 3y 1961, there were still three left: St. Francis on the
Hosebud, Immaculate Conception at Stephan, and Holy Rosary at Fine
Sidge. 1

1. South Dakota Historical Colleetions? XXXVI, pp. 205-444.

o SO

ERLC

Because the United States government held the Indians as wards
*nd supervised all* internal and external relationships with them, missionaries, traders ani all others were obliged to approach the
Indians by negotiating with government a gents, which had been sent to each reservation.

T^efirst government schools were boarding schools, the idea

being that the best way to te ch the Indians the white culture was

to ^et the children away from their parents and the old customs,

ways, and values. White men sought cut the Indian bands and. told

them they had to send their children to the white school. Their

parents, honorable people fthought that if the Great White Chief in

*

ttfasnington sai to theyiiould uo ic. Sometimes their chidren were never allowed to cooe home until they had finished high school. The

problem then was what was a student, having graduated from high school and knowing a trade, to do once he came back to the reservation?
Over ninety five per cent of the young Sioux people did return from school to live with their home folks.^ Very few opportunities were available for employment. The major occupation was raising livestock but most of the reservation land was sub •marginal ranch land.

There was no relationship between the government Indian schools and the public schools of South Dakota. In 1916 1 State Superintendent of 3c*~ w is, Lugg, said in his biennial report, 1 'While our schools are not yet what we wish them to be, we may congratulate ourselves on the fact that illiteracy a mong the whites is but seventy two hundreths

1. South Dakota Historical Collections, XVIII #

ERIC

of one per cent. The non-white population of the state is almost wholly Indian, and the illiterates a mong the Indians are still wards of the federal government, for whom cur schools are not responsible . ,r

A 1913 law had required that Indian children be in cluded in the census which put them under the compulsory attendance law. But in
1915 > chapter 195 of the session laws of 1913 was repealed. This served to excuse Indian children from compulsory attendance in white schools. 2 Thus Indian parents living off the reservation did not have to send their children to school and teachers, school board members and administrators could discourage Indian children from coming to school and not be breaking mj laws*

As the Indians sold their land on the reservation to white ranchers, and whites moved onto the reservation, some public school districts were established there. They had very meager tax support but there were some small one-room schools started. Indian children living in the vicinity attended also, sometimes. In Kyle, a small, small community on the Pine Ridge reservation there was a one-room day school run by the federal government for Indian children on the east side of the village and a poor, run-down one-room school run by
5,the local school district for white cnildren on the west side of the village. The retired 3.I.A* teacher who told this, wnen asked if they ever had contact with each otb^r and how many white children went to school there, shrugged and s?id, "Oh, we had nothing to do

1. Biennial Report of State Superintendent of Schools , 1916, p. 8.

2. South Dakota Educator, April, 1915, p. 6.

with them. I don'treally know anything Jbout the number of students. 19

The duat bowl and depression of the thirties intensified the

problems of Indian life and Indian education. In 1936 it was sug-

- gested in Washington that boarding schools be eliminated and da;*
schools be started* It was obvious that the boarding school concept was not working. In 1935, Kraushaar wrote that the Indian schools would have a hard time meeting stace accreditation standards.
At that time about twenty per cent of the children in Pine Ridge and eighteen per cent on Rosebud were not in school

The boarding schools continued to be used but day schools were started. Eventually there were three typos of federal schools on the Indian reservations; day schools, reservation boarding schools and non-reservation boarding schools.

The day schools tried to prepare their students for the kind of life they would live on the reservation. They carried on the raising of cattle, horses, goats, and poultry; gardening; farming; and haying. They had summer projects something like today's k-R projects for the boys. They had a shop at the school where they taught them simple carpentry, and repair of farm machinery.

The Bureau of Indian Affairs hired a teacher and a cook for each day school. Most of the teachers were men and if they were married their wife- served as cook. If the teacher were a woman, another woman would be hired to help as cook. The cook's job was more than
1. South Dakota Historical Collection , XVIII.

to get the noon meals. It was up to her to teach the girls how to prepare food, how to wash the dishes, how to clein the kitchen, how to keep themselves clean, how to behave at table, how to sew simple articles of clothing, while the teacher had to be a graduate of a teachers college and qualified to teach, the cook did not, although she was certainly teaching also.

Teachers came from all over the United States tu teach in the
.'Indian schools. It was depression times and the pay was pretty good.
None of them had any training about the Indian culture, or any knowledge about the problems people faced vixen they were made to change from one culture to another. Host of them had no understanding of the people they came to teach, and I suspect, some of them did not care. I talked with one man and his wife who had spent thirty years teaching on reservations and they had nothing to tell me. As the

*

man said, "It was a job. 11

Sach day school consisted of a schoolhouse in a small, loosely knit community of houses usually built of logs, up to one-fourth to one-half mile from each other. Besides the school there was a house for the teacher and his family, a building vriiich served as kitchen, dining room and washroom, and sometimes a shop for the boys to work in.
There was usually a garden somewhere in the vicinity, but not close to the schoolhouse because it would be in a valley or good garden spot.' The teacher worked all year round with a short vacation some time during the summer. He was teacher, janitor, carpenter, projects leader, gardener* His wife was cook, teacher, and c ann er of all harvested produce for use during the winter as well as mother and wife to her family and husband.

ERIC 84

I \

Moat Indian children started school speaking only. Lakota.
Harold Shunk said that when he started teaching at Cherry Creek day school, Cheyenne Jliver reservation, in 1936, only two children of the 2>rty or fifty in that community 3poke English, those two had

f

moved back to the ommunity and were part white. He said he taught hie first graders Eaglish and reading by using pictures of the things they kne*, printing the tome of the tfcing under the picture and teaching them to read those nords. He used things they understood:
deer, chipmunk, skunk, crow, raccoon, tree, at first and then led them to other words. To his great surprise it worked and they learned.
Lakot* children had no understandings or experiences which helped them in their lessons. The contents of the textbooks too often were a lien and unrelated to anything in their lives.

Main t a inin gregular school a ttead&aee was~ a definite problem.
Mr. Shunk said that when he first came to that school, only twenty one children showed up for 3cfcool but there were over forty on the school census. He talked to a father of children wfco were always in school and asked his help. He was to go around and ^alk to the families who were not sending their children and tell them that they were supposed to xsend them. The man was successful and eventually there were fifty- two children coming to school. There were some disgruntled parents wno said, ,f Who does he think he is, coming around telling us that our kids 3hould be in school as if he were the teacher. He is no better than the rest of us." But the children came to school.

There were several cultural reasons for the lack of attendance.
The nomadic spirit was slow in dying out. Families frequently went to visit relatives, or if the wtliia took them, went to some other locality to take part in some kind of traditional ceremony or celebration. The Dakota value of in dividual autonomy affected how they raised their children. They believed that the self is one with the universe, yet completely autonomous. As $nexample, children were assigned tasks but never supervised in order to develop their autonomy
Coercion and persuasion were unacceptable to them since no person could decide for another. It is evident that the exercise of this traditional value would cause much frustration for an Indian child in a school run by white values. Indian parents had the tendency because of their heritage to support the child in his desire to stay away from school if he wished, because he wasn'tgetting along with the teacher or he mi having trouble with nis schoolvork.* Poor

roads caused poor attendance also during the winter because of drifting snow and in the spring because of impassable mud.

The Indian parents thought that the white ways of raising children rag abnormal. The whites let their babies cry and spanked their children. School discipline is successful if it is an extension of the parents 1 control. The white-run day schools were by no means an extension of the Indian parents 1 beliefs. This conflict between cultures tends to* make children withdrawn, confused and defensive, 3e-

1. D. Lee, Freedom and culture

ERLC

sides, they bad not been taught to be competitive, but to be cooperative, because in their culture, cooperation on the hunt, and in tbeir daily lives was totally necessary.

In the beginning the government furnished the Indian children attending boarding school *Lth clothing. When day schools were started all pupils in day 4 echool were also provided with clothing during the school year. Teachers began to see that such dependency was not good, and breaking a forty year tradition, they began to provide clothing on an only-for-service-rendered basis* Some schools had the children do so many hours of chores to earn jackets, overshoes and other clothes. Others had the parents work to earn clot hing for their children. They did such work as repairing fence, filling the ice house or working in the school garden.

The Indians found the transition from the old way of life to the white man's way confusing and difficult. Breaking up kinship groups and bonds and the established way of nomadic life to which the Indian had been accustomed caused uncertainty and confusion*
It was many years before the B. I. A. finally gave up the idea of trying to completely eliminate the oative culture of the Indian people and attempting to replace it with a veneer of hhite man's culture.

One Indian Commissioner who had an anthropologist's respect for the Indian culture was Colyer. He strove to let the Indians keep the customs and ways of their heritage, Harold Shunk told about receiving Word from the lady who was the head of e4ucation on

Cheyenne River reservation at that time that he was to let the children "dance Indian" at school* Be was part Indian himself , but he felt that doing that waft neither practical nor desirable. One of the problems at the school was that some children were kept u$ late too many nights dancing and would either not show up for school the next day or would be too tired to do well when they did come. He did not take the lady's recommendation, but a voided saying no because she was, after all, his superior, and it was during the depression and he had a family and did need his job. Finally there was a showdown, and the lady told him to let the kids dance Indian or else.

One morning he had them jiush the desks back and dance Indian.
By the next day three Indian mothers came to see him, and he told them why he had let the children dance. ' One of them, mdre assertive than the others, said she would like tc talk with that lady next time she came to visit school* When the supervisor came on her next visit, he told her the Indian mother wanted to see her and he pointed out her house, quite a way from the scnool. There she t jls told iiL quite definite terms that Indian children in that community were to go to scnool to learn from books and she would please leave the dancing up zo their parents. /

There were twenty one of these day schools on Fine 3idge reservation. Officially they were designated by number* but a mong the local people ^ome of them vcalled by the following names: Red
Shirt Table d&yschool, Wakpamini day school, Wounded Knee day school,

t

\

i 11

Oglalla day school f Lone Man day school. Porcupine day school,
Manderson 4ay school, Wamblee day school, Allen day school, Potato
Creek day school, Kyle day school, and Slim Buttes day school. Cn
Cheyenne River reservation there were ten one-room schools: Cherry
Creek, Red Scaffold, Bridger, Iron Lightning. Thunder 3utte, Four
3ear, Green Grass, Bear Creek, Moreau River, White Horse. Cn Rosebud there were nine day schools: Oakcreek, He Dog, Hrrse Creek,
Norris, Little Crow, Corn Creek, Spring Creek* Mllka Camp, and
Soldier Creek*

Up to World War II, horses and wa^ins were the common family transportation. During the war the picture began to change. Young
Indian men went to the armed forces and when these veterans returned many left the reservations. Those that stayed were unhappy and trap ped there by circumstance. Many of the young people bad been influenced by their war time experiences to adopt more of the white culture. Second hand cars began to appear which made getting to nearby towns possible, but sadly, made liquor more available.

In 1957 t the Spindle rs distinguished four main classes of
Indiana recognized by their level of acculturation. The first level includes those who have changed very little from the time of tneir ancestors and who exercise all the old time virtues. At the other extreme is that of the completely acculturated Indian who will not be found on the reserv-Ation because when a person reaches that stage he is assimilated into the white culture. Between these two groups are young people /ho have doubts about the traditional culture but

continue to aff LrH it because they feel unhappy an4 thwarted by the white culture* The transitional type is a gressive and unpredictable, Shifting from one stance to another or becoming passively withdrawn* Because of this, the Sioux communities were and still are places of apathy and poverty. The modern Sioux Inaxan is characterized as passive, a pathetic and hostilely dependent, f P^

It has been the observation of educators of Sioux Indians, that, a part from an in itial native sh/ness, Sioux youngsters are perfectly normal in their emotional responded when they fir~tcome to school.
It takes about three years for them to become acclimated to this new situation, so that with dramatic suddeness, at about che fourth grade ; Indian students achieve and exceed standarized norms* This lasts until the seventh grade. Then begins a decline in a cnievement which continues to the twelfth grade and is accompanied by a sixty per cent dropout rate. 3y the twelfifc grade their are as far as two years behind in achievement. It is theorized that the impact of the Sioux-white value conflict occurring primarily during the period of adolescence creates in . the Sioux student (personality disturbances which hinder full performance.*

3y 1970 most of the one-room schools on the seservaticn were gone* a eorgani^a tion took place there too, big new buildings were built, and pupils are bussed to them.

Svery six weeks, and at the end of the school year, the teachers at the day scnools ant reports to the 3. I. A. agency on the r*s-

1#3* Swindler It L. Spindler  "American Indian Personality Types and their Sociocuxtural roots," The Annals of the African Academ y of Political and Social Science , May, 195/*. pp

2. joha-a apyde, The Indian "Studert , p. 31#

\

ervation. So far these old reports ha i not been located* Each school had a kind of school board set up to advise the teacher.
The records for z .ese meetings have not been found*

The other ethnic groups in western South Dakota were the immigrants who came late in the l600*s* One group consisted of people from a lnost every European country foo came to \ork in the
Homes take gold mine at Lead* They included Finns, Belgians, Trench,
Bohemians t Irish, Greeks, Chinese t Italian, and Polish ♦ Once the land was opened to homesteaders in the early 1900*3 mny of them moved dowt from the Black Kills onto the prairie to take a homestead and own land of their own, probably something they never dreamed back in their homeland that they would ever be able to do*

The F inn ish people congregated in one area north of Buffalo*
They, had the tradition of the sauna and were sociable with one another and it meant a great deal to be together* Other nationalities from Lead did not ssem to stay together, but one family or two would move into an area a mong English speaking people*

The country schools were the places whe~etney sent their children to be Americanized, and from their children, they learned the
American ways # t$rf Leo Seppala, who is Finnish, told how his parents wanted t^eir thirteen children to speak Finnish at home „o as not to forget their heritage but sent them to scnool to learn English*
School was very important to them, he said, because it meant a better life for their children ♦ He thought that was true of all the Finnish

ERLC

Ik

families in the area where he grew up. Others have said that the nev^imd&graats they knew felt the same way*

The other jroup of immigrants were the Russian-Germans* Some

of them settled north of Wall where the land is very f?at, and raised wheat. They tended to keep their own "language; the schools were taught in German , their church services were conducted in
German. Even in the 1930* smany of them still 3poke German at home.
Family was very important to them and they had big families. Their children went to one-room schools but quit when they finishe^the^^
eighth grade and did not come to town to beard and to attend high

school as ranchers 1 children did. World War II changed all tb*t
They, like the young Sioux Indiana, had to go out in the big world, and it changed everything when they came back.

ERLC

3I3LICG3APHY

Bryde, John p. Tht Indian Student; A Study of Scholastic Failure and Personality Conflict . Vermillion, S. D.: DaKota Pr*ss f 1570*

Hassrick, 3. B. The Sioux; Life and Customs of a Warrior Society .
Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press f 196^.

Krauahaar, R. W., et al. "Studies in South Dakota Education/'
South Dakota Historical Collection , Volume XVIII.

Lee, D. Freedom and Culture . Sew York: Prentice-Hall, 1962.

Shunk, Harold. Personal interview.

Spindler, G. and Spindler, L. "American Indian Personality Types and Their, Sociocultural Roots." The Annals of the American
Academy of Political and, Social Science , Volume CII f May, 1957.

South Dakota Sducator . South Dakota Education Association, April, 1915.

South Dakota State Superintendent of Schools. Biennial Report , 1916.

Thorpe, Cleata 3. "Education in South Dakota? Its First Hundred
Jears, l36l-196l," South Dakota Historical Collection , Volume
XXXVI, pp. 205-Wf.

CCUNTRT- SCHOOLS TODAY
Country School Legacy

Caroline Hattoa.

pg USt " T|

COUNTRY SCHOOLS TODAY

In .western South Dakota there are one hundred eight small rural schools still in business. Most are one-room schools but twenty eight have two teachers, ten have three teachers and one has four teachers. The: schools with more than one teacher are in tiny communities of less than one hundred people, usually twenty five to fifty miles from the nearest larger town.

Distance is still a big problem in much of western South
Dakota* The children Who attend rural schools travel long distances to get to that one-room building where they spend the day with other children whose homes are just as remote from community life as their own. Many travel from ten to 'twenty to twenty five miles one way to get to the ofce-teacher^ one-room school where they attend. Imagine the nearest school being twenty five miles away and when you get there, there are six other kids. In one such school there are two kindergartners , two lirst-graders, one sec end-grader, one third-grader and one fourth-grader.

There will likely be school in that buildihg. for at least eight more years. Then perhaps, it will be closed, or moved because all the children of the ranchers in that vicinity will be gone. But by that time a younger age group wno live in the area will have

grown up, married, and 3tarted families, but probably not on the same ranches, so the center of population will shift. The school house might be moved, an old, empty one revived, or the school left in the same place and some families travel farther than others.

There are no small common school districts left since reorganization took place in the sixties. Every small rural school is part of a school district which often covers hundreds of square miles f and includes the schools in a town from twenty-five to fifty imiles away. There is so metimes the feeling a mong rural teachers

in far outlying scnools that they are forgotten ana neglectedr^by their administrators. The'xproblems are probably not appreciated by some harried elementary principal who has lots of discipline and teccher problems. He probably thinks that the rural teacher in that rural school has a pretty peaceful time.

And she does, generally. Several teachers commented that their school children are like a family. The teacher knows each one personally and knows the weaknesses of each. There are few behavior problems and discipline is a very simple and unimportant issue.
•^Education ia, in fact, tutoring, with them (the children] getting individual attention." So 3ays Mary Lighthill, who teaches thirteen children at Littleburg Elementary School.

Students can work on their own, get help from the teacher in a one-to-on* situation and have the opportunity to participate in all activities.

ERLC

Cheryl Carstensen, the teacher at Alfalfa Valley School, \
said, "I feel that younger and older students learn from each other, not only subject natter but bow to five and take. They learn how /
to work with and cooperate with others, despite vast differences." /

Ranch famlies live and tfork together and few of the fathers go off to a daily job of wnich their family has no part. The ranch is the family job, not just the father's responsibility, and that makes for a closeness of family ties. Because of thi3, perhaps, there is a more personal contact between teachers and parents.
As Cheryl Carstensen ssid, ,f There Ls closer contact with both the parents of students in a rural school."

Once a child is ^through the eighth grade the problem of high school looms large. The parents have several choices* If they can afford it they rent or buy a house in the nearest town which has a high school and for a few years the mother and children spend the week-days in town and the weekends on the ranch with Dad. As the children grow older and more responsible they might be left in town by themselves during the week.

The problem is so lved easier if there is an aunt or a grandmother with whom the high school student can stay. Many travel farther away from home than the nearest high school in order to stay with a relative.

No matter where a student stays, during the winter months, there will be weeks at a time when he will either riot be able to get heme, or does not dare go because the ror,ds might blow shut and h£

won't gtt back to school for a month.

Sending a child forty-five or fifty a lias away for months at a time to take on the demanding business of adjusting to high school with no close support frcm his family must be a traumatic experience for both parents and children* One lady spoke of how hard it as to send her only son forty-five miles to Newell. She sa? 1 "I thought I'd die of lonesomeness at first, but I didn't."

A rural teacher is basically her own boss. She is free to run her daily program to suit the ages and temperments of her pupils and to suit herself. II a May Croff said the parents of her pupils were the nicest, most-cooperative people she had ever worked with. She has an old fashioned Christmas program every year wnich involves the people in the community , and she teaches plenty of "basics" in her daily work.

Paula SisenbrWiwho teaches at Big Foot School in the Badlands, said an advantage to teaching in such a place was that
"nature is at your front door wnich is most inspiring and excellent for experiments."

As one teacher expressed it, "It is a very peaceful atmosphere

with very few noisy distractions and plenty of fresh, clean air.

There is lots of vrde open space for <juite a variety of activities

at recess and in classroom work. Mostly the advantage comes from

the people. Jfreryone is so friendly and parents are always willing

to help. ^

1. Elaine Williams, Fairpoint School.

There are lots of wide open spaces around the Fairpoint
School* It is thirty miles west to Newell* The nearest town to the north is Bison, fifty-five miles away. To the east the Missouri
River is one hundred miles away with no to wns in between. To the south New Underwood is forty *#ive miles aw*y. No wonder the parents of the fjive children in thayi school aire friendly and willing to help. Certainly in such on isolated place, people a revery important to ^ach other, and the school becomes very important to the

people j^n the area*

Th^tteacher liVed at that school. But many rural teachers opt to /drive long (distances to work. Most of them live at home and dirve /to work, some four or five miles, ten, fifteen, twenty, others twenty-five or thirty miles. None expressed the belief that having to dtfive so far every day was a disadvantage of teaching a rural school *

There were disadvantages mentioned. Some teachers who lived in the . snail communities where they teach mentioned the long distance, fifty miles for example, to town as a disadvantage. That makes it difficult to get materials and, more personally, difficult to find entertainment such as theaters, restaurants, and nightclubs.

Most-mentioned disadvantages that teachers feel affect their

students are lack of team 3ports, skilled music and art teachers,

the lack of science resources and equipment and the lack of libraries.

Cne lady feels her students suffer from not getting a chance to mix

and adjust to larger groups. 1 Then when they go to town to high
1. Reva Maas, Maitland Scnool.

ERIC

school it la a little harder to adjust.

Many teachers of rural schools have had experience teaching in town schools. One thing they miss is the interaction with other teachers which they had in town.

School houses now are all wired for electricity, thanks to the Sural Electrification Associations. Many still have outdoor toilets though; even if they have inside bathrooms they have kept the outside ones and^as one teacher told me, use them in nice weather to conserve water. Some who still use outside toilets have cistern water in the scnoolhouse for drinking and washing. Few teachers spoke of the primitive plumbing or lack of plumbing as a disadvantage.

I found no more coal or wood stoves , but plenty of gas furnaces and space heaters, some oil. A few schoolhouses are heated by electricity.

Many of the teachers say they could think of nothing their school lacked. Two wished the entry was bigger. Other wishful thinking conjured up a music room, more playground equipment, a television $et, more plug-ins, a movie camera. About one third of the teachers wished they had a library at scnool or access to a library on a regular basis.

Gayla Fredrickson who teaches at Twilight school in Meade
County, said "South Dakota still has need of rural schools and will continue to need them as long as we remain an agricultural rural state.

I began 4 rural school in Butte County in 1957. I attended the
S tetter school itoich was closed in 1971 • In the twenty-three years since I started I feel like the rural schools should have tsade more progress- That school was almost exactly like this one twenty-three years later. 11

/
/

/

/

/

/
/

>3±

COUNThY SCHOOL I.TOACY

DEC 1981

WESTERN SOUTH DAKOTA CKK ~ffFS$

BIBLIOGRAPHY ft£C£/^£n

Aill^^thjtak^ So,th Dakota i^ffl^f

DakoSrwr SCCOndary EdUCati0n ' Pierre ' S.D.: State, of South

% C A < S , i 1 ! % S e r!° Pment ° f T ^ritorial Education or the Black Hills of South Dakota with Special Reference to
Pennington County, 1876-1890." Unpublished M. A. thesis^ 1 %3 .

vol. in, p^rre, S. D.: South Dakota FistolTcTl Society," 19lT.

Biennial Re p ort of the SuDerint.PnH.nt_of_P ublic instruction of the State '
Lawrence K. Fox, Superintendent. Pierre, 3. D. : State of ^outh Dakota,

Blekted In £ a Theodora "Territorial Schools in Pennington County,
1876-1390." Unpublished M. A. thesis, n.d. v

Br ™i£™ ^P'jSK ''Pi 11 " 16 Ch ^ d n M ^h_D^ta Historical C J±

° 1 01 * miX * Pierre ' S  D - : South Dakota Historicay Society,

Bruner, Charles W "A Study of the History of the Elementary S Jols of

Iryd., John F ;| The Indian Student.., „ Studj, -.,..„) Fail ure *nd

ith Dakc

Colborr. Joseph E., "A History of School Finance in South Dakota  South
Dakota Historic al Collection. Vol mi P 1erril c n
HistolT cal Society, 1923. * " e ' S * 2* South Dakota

^i^0^dv__for Elementary Grades. South Dakota Department of Public
Instruction, Harold S. Freeman, Superintendent. Pierre! S D •
State of South Dakota, 1954. ' ' u "

£sa£Pg.£?.j 3tudy_ for the Seventh anH E^hfh r-rades of the Kiementarv fg£22|_ofSo^t^^

Comnyr d 92 2 . ' Su P er ^ en ^t- Pierre, S.D.: J. Fred Slander

f

Course j, 0. W. A Complete Biographical Sketc h of Gener al William HTiry

Herri son Beedle . Mitchell, S. D.: The Educator Supply Company, 191 3 .

Cowboys and Sodbusters; History of ButM County , Vale, S. D.: Old
Friends of Vale, n.d.

Dick, Everett. The Sod-House Frontier . Lincoln, N*br.: Johnson Publishing Company, 1954.

Dimmette, Celia Puhr. Take We Home . Francistown, H. H.: Marshall Jones
Company, 1979.

Dystra, H*nry; Jerde, Walter; and Wollman, Harris; editors. Permanent
Scht 1 Fund in Souffi Da ko ta and the Beadle Club . Aberdeen, S. D.:
Nort- Plains Press, i<>737

Early History of South Dakota Counties * Statewide Education Service,
Report F69. VermillionT^S. D.: University of South Dakota, 1969.

Eastern P>pnin£ton County Memories . Wall, S. D.. American Le£ion Auxilliary, 1965T

Eastman, Elaine Good* :. Sister to the Sioux* Lincoln, Nebr.: University Press, 1978.

-Echoes Throu£h the Valleys . Elk Creek Pioneer Association, 1968.

"Education." Doane Robinson's Encyclopedia of South Dakota . Pierre,
S. D.: By the Author, 1925.

"Eductirn in South Dakota. M South Dakota Historical Collecti on, Vol.
XVIII. Pierre, S. P.: South Dakota Historical Society, 193*

"Educational Drive." South Dakota historical Collection , Vol. X.
Pierre, S. D.: South Dakota Historical Society, 1920.

Fall River County Pioneer Histories . Hot Springs, S. D.: Fall River County
Historical Society, 197£

Fielder, Margaret, editor. McInt o sh-Watauj?a-Morri3town t South Dakota,
1909-1956 . 1958.

Fifth Census of the State of South Dakota, Taken in the Year, 1935 *
Table XVI, Extent of Education of All Persons Eithieen Years and
Over, by Counties, pp. 337-138. South Dakota Department of Public
Instruction, Lawrence K. Fox, Superintendent. Pierre, S. D.:
State of South Dakota, 1935.

*^Hall, Bert S. Roundu p Years, J?I_d_Mud dy teethe Black Hill s. Pierre,
S. D.: Reminder/ 195 A.

o S3

ERIC

~ a I

t

Ha '' Se ?Ao?T ie Geor * " A History of Hardly C*> n ty, South . aKnta to
1925." South Dakota Hi stories) Co] jac jM _on . Vol. XXI. Pierre,
S. D. : South Dakota Historic*! Society", 1%2.

Helium, Ethel L. Blizzards of South Dakota . Pierre, S. D.: State
Publishine Colmpany, 1970.

Hellman, Ethel L. Winter of Disaster, 19^ 3. Pierre, S. D.- State
Publishin£ Company, 1953.

The Heritage of Societ y's Elders . South Dakota Retired Citizens, 1976.

Funkins, Ralph V. S. D. E. A., the First Seventy-Five Years, 1894-1959 .
Pierre, S. D.: South Dakota Education Association, 1959.

Hunkina, Ralnh V., and Lindsey,John C. Soutu Dakota. It s Past, Pr esent and Future . New York: Macmillan, 1932.

Jennewein, Leonard, and Boorman, Jan, editors. Dakota ranorama .
Pierre, S^D.: Dakota Territory Centennial Commission, I96I.

Johnson, Clifton. Old Tire Schools a nd Schoolbooks. New York- p
Smith, 1935. *

Johnson, Willis E. South Dakota, A Republic of Frien ds. Pierre, S V >
The "a pitol Supply Co., 1912.

Karolevitz, Robert F. Challenge; The South DakoU St ory. Sioux Falls
S. j.\ Brevet Press, 1975.

K0ll "v' it°*' ' mnnesela ^ys-" South Dakota Historical Collection, Vol.
XXIV. Pierre, I . D. : South Dakota historical Society7"l9Z ( 9.

Kors £ aard, Ross P., "A History of Rapid City, South Dakota durine Territorial Days." South Dakota His to rical^ Collection , Vol. XXXVII.
Pierre, S. D.: South Dakota Historical Societv, 1976.

Lane, Mrs. Wayne F. , editor. Faith Country, 1910-1960 . Faith, S D •
Executive Committee of the 50th Anniversary Golden Jubilee of
Faith, I960.

Lenski, Lois, Little Sioux Gir l. New York: Lippincott, 1959.

Lerski, lois, Prairie School. New York: Lippincott, 1951.

Lon £ , f'in nle, euitor. Golden_ Jubilee , 1910-1^60. Timber Lake. lin-.ber
S. D. : Timber Lake Community Club, - 19(50^

Lowe, Barred,. Twenty Million A cres. Mitchell, S. D.: Education
Supply Co. , 1937.

Si

\

Ludeman, W. W., "History of Public Education." South Dakota Historical
Collection, Vol. XIII. Pierre, S. D. : South Dakota Historical
Society, 1931.

Mato Pah a, Land of the Pioneers . Meade County, S. D.: Alkali Community
Club, 19o9.

Memoirs of South Dako t a Retired Teachers . South Dakota Retired Teachers
Association, 197o.

Miller, Farrel R. One Hundred Years in Dakota . T.R.M. Enterprises, 1978.

Ourjrgsterdays. Hermosa, S. D. : Eastern Custer County Historical Society,
1967-1970. "

Pioneer Fo otprints. Butte County History, n.d.

Powers, W. H., "k History of the Development of Education in Dakota Territory, 1862-1S89." Unpublished M.A. +h PS is , state College of Agricultur and Mechanical Arts, 1890.

Prairie Schools, 1899-1969. Stoneville, S. D.: Stoneville Steadies Exten-
-lon Club, 1974.

Pr ovin|_U£; Jones County Histoqr . Murdo, S. D. : Book and Thimble Club,

Ransom, Frank L. Civil Government of the Un ite d States and South Dakota.
Mitchell, S. D.: Educator Supply Co., 19l)~ '

Reese, M. Lisle. South Dakota: a Guid e to the Stat e. New York: Hastings
House, 1952. "

R.binson, Doane. Brief History of South D a kota. New York: American.
1912. "

Schell, Herbert. Dakota Territory dur i ng the 1660's . Vermillion, S. D.-
University of South Dakota Press, 1954.

Schell, Herbert. History of South Dako ta. Lincoln, Nebr.: University of Nebraska Press, 1961.

Schell, Herbert. South Dakota: Its Eerinninrs and Growth. New York:
American, 1942.

School La ws of the St„te of South Da kota _1953. Sioux Falls, S. D.:
Midwest Beach, 1953. " '

School Stories in Ce ntral ar.J Eastern_Meade County, South Da kota, 1889 to geor£ajnjzajUon. StonevilU, S.~D.: Stoneville Steadies Extension
Club, 1969,

ERIC

Sloane, Eric. The_ Lit tle R ed Schoolhouae. Doubleday, 1972,

omith, Geor£e B. , and Youn£, Clark K. Histor y of G overnment, of South
Dakota. New York: American, 1913. " -

South Dakota Legislative Research Council. Report of the Committee on
Education Pierre, S. D. : State of South Dakota, 1937.

South Dakota Planning Board. Ele mentary and Secondary E duca tion ln_
South Dakota. Pierre, S. D.: State of South Dakota, 1937\T~

Spindler, Will H. Centennial Prai rie. Gordon, Nebr.: Gordon Journal
Publishin£ Co., 1965.

Sundstrom, Jessie Y. , editor. C uster Coun t y History to 1976. Custer,
S. D.: Custer County Historical Society, 1977.

Suns hine a nd Sa gebru 3h; a Com pre hensive History cn the 0 ra 1-Sm lthwick ,
South Dakota Communities . Oral, S. £)71 Northeast Fall River
County Historical Society, 1976.

The__Su nshine State, Sou th Dakota Sone Book; Let's Sin£ „ Mitchell, S. D. :
Educator Supply Co*, n.d.

Tal lent, Annie D TheJSlack HiUs_ prj oat Jjfuntin g Ground of the Dakota*
, 1874-1876 . Centennial Edition. Freeman, S.~D m Y P i^~Hlll7 p7e S3~,

Taylor, Gilbert 8. Glimpses into Edp emn nt'a Past . Lusk, Wyo- Lusk
Printing, 1961.

Taylor, Katherine Sprague. A Shat tered Dream . Lusk, Wyo: Lusk Herald,
1967. '

Tidball, Rose, editor. Taming the Plains . Keldron, S. D.: By the
Author, 1976. ~ 3

Tri£E_gountj. Fiftieth Anniversary Winner, S. D. : Sodak Printers and
Winner Chamber of Commerce, 1959.

Van Orman, Hattie, ,nd Johnson, Pearl Bieber, compilers. Hardi ng
School, 1931-1953. Cors on County . Timber Lake, S. D. : Ey the
Authors, 1981. 3

Westerhoff, John K. McGuffey and His Reader . Nashville: Abingdor., 1973.

Whitley, Fred, "History of Custer City." South D a kota Histori cal Collections. Vol. XXXVI 1, Pierre, S. 0.1 South Dakou!?!^!^!™"
Society, 1974.

ERIC 0

Williamson, William. William Will jarr son. Rapid City, S D • By the
Author, I96Z4. '

Woodward Harry R -Public Hi £ h School Dormitories in We 3 tern States."
Unpublished M.A. thesis, Stanford University, 1929. '

Mm . Old newspapers are excellent sources for school news, fresh at the

^ ?*i 4 his > or ical now  The followin £ old newspapers from western oeutb DakoU have been microfl lined by the South Dakota Historical Society

1911-1912
1953-present
1942-1944
1922-1952

1915-1917
1911-present

1915- 1939
1900-pre5ent
1903-1935
1936-present
1396- 1399
1917-1928

1913-1917
1907-1911

1903-1929

1939-present

1936-present

1916- 1918
1915-present

1890-1907

1390-1939, 1904-present

1960-1974

1925-1927

1833-1391

1 939-present

1954-prc.irnt

1911-19^9

1911-1912

1911-1912

1 915-present

Bennett Pouirtv

LaCreek

Dennett u oun wy oooster

Martin

Bering t^ rnnntv Rn r\<%+ or*

Martin

Martin

1  w O w J J I

Butte County

Newell

n tr t jl t mti j, x on news

Newell

" " *a,t X * i X£a tor

Ms land -

owwic wounty rress

Bee

Belle Fourehe

fftrri'hurf* if' Pnf

Da^ilv B^lle Frmrrh** Pnf

X J. JIIC O

Castle Rock

Press & Moreau News

Vale

Call to Action

Vale

Valley Irrigator

Corson County

Grand Valley

Herald

Mcintosh

Corson County News

McLaughlin

Messenger

McLaughlin

Mirror

Morristown

World

Cutter County

Euff^h* Gap

Republican

Custer

Custer County Chronicle

Custer

Weekly News

Fairburn

Custer County Press

Hermosa

Pilot

Dewey County

Eagle Butte

Isabel

kotan

Isabel

News

Lcntry

Leadt r

lantry

l>d£* v

Timber Lake

Topic

ERIC

>

Fall Fiver County

Ardnore

American

bdgemont

Express

i on i i oom iyuii - iy^o

T?j1 X

Edgemont

Herald-Tribune

1952-present

Edgenont

Tribune

1 GOT T

Daily Star

isycj*io9/

Times

i no/ t O

lyzo-iy^o

Times herald

lyoo-iyuy

Weekly Star

1337-prerent

Oelricns

Advocate

1915-19^9

Haakon County

Leslie

Pioneer

iyut|-ivu5

rarietta

bagie

1 /-lyl^

Midland

Mail

1912-195A

III Jln.J

Midland

Western Star

lyu/i - lyn

rniilp

oaa niver News

lyuo - iyi<&

Philip

Pioneer

iyi /-ly^jL

rnl lip

Pioneer Review

lyci - present

rnlllp

weeKiy heview

i or\*7 1 COT

r owe 11

VJakoma Leader

lyuz-iyiK:

we ii so urg

r*agie

i on*7 i oi n lyv f" xyiu

Hardirg County

Buffo .iO

Times -He raid

19^3-present

Buifai

Harding County fcra

19H-1910

tamp trooK

Kange oazette

iyu/-iyz**c

Gcvert

Advance

lViiO'-iyA^

Jackson County

Belviuere

Jackson County Times

19a7-1>5J

Interior

Index

lyZO-1928

Kadoka

Press

lyuo - present

Jones County

Murdo

Coyote

190A -pre sent

Murdo

Pioneer

I9OZ4- 1911

Oka ton

unite niver jouvnai

1 yuo - iyi 7

Westover

Wave

trtni t (vie
I9VJZ4-I9O5

Lawrence County

Deadwood

Black rills Daily Times

10/ /-lyy/

Deadwood

Black Hills Mining Review

1703-1907

Deadwood

Black Hills Pioneer

1376-lovl

Deadwood

Daily Champion

1B77-I89i

Deadwood

Dai]y Pioneer-Times

1997- present

Deadwood

Evening Independent

1997- 1B98

Deadwood

Equality

1899-1900

Tnrl"prndent

1 rt rt'** ^ *on'">

1Bm^-Jm97

Deadwood

Lantern

1 y05- J /v'V

icit i. icijn

Lead

Black Hills Weekly

1927-1974

Sead

Daily Call

pre sent

Lp^d

Register

1904-1 yio

Spearf i sh

Daily Bulletin

1399-199-

Spear fish

Dakota Register

19S1-1906

Spe^rfish

Enterprise

1910-1916

ERIC

Spearf ish

Queen City toil

Spearfish

Weekly Re£ister

Terry

News-Record

Keade County

fid * on

Press ,

Faith

The Faith

Faith

Independent

Sturgis

Advertiser

Sturcis

Black Kills Press

Sturgis

Record

Sturgis

Tribune

White Owl

Oracle

Fenninfton County

Harney Peak Mining News

News

Prevailer

Keystone

Recorder

New Underwood

Times

New Underwood

Press

Bee

Quiiin

Courant

Qui nn

Courier

Cuinn

Record

Cu5nn

Times

Advocate

Black Hills Journal

Gate City Guide

Guide

Journal

Black Hills Union

The Commoner

Rochford

Miner

Wall

Fennin£ton County Courant

V/asU

Commoner

Waata

Ga setta

Vlasta

World

Perkins Counly

Ada

Advocate

Bison

Courier

Grand River

Press

Lemrrjon

Leader

Lemmon

Tribune

Meadow

£rani Valley Herald

Shannon County

Fine Rid£

0£la'Ja Ll£ht

Pine Ridge

Shannon County News

Stanley County

Da v^^j <>ri

Cheyenne Valley News

Fort ; ierre

fairplay

Pert fierre

ciignal

fort Pierre

7xtr,e s

1899-pre- ert
] 897-1 393

1903- 1910

1911-1912

1911-1912

1936-pre3Pnt

1897-1891

1596-present

1S83-19A6

1946-present

1915-1930

1904- 1926
1926-1951
1970-present

1904- 1909
1923-1943
1953-1955

1908- 1926
1922-1925
1952- 1954
1951-1967
1936-1943
1939-1943
1878-3952
1906-1968
1968-present
1993-present
1895-1911

1936-1937
1890-1881
1915-preaent

1934- 1938
1911-1934

1935- 1939

1909- 1912
1915-present

1908- 1910
1929-present
1921-1970

1909- 1929

1905- 1920

1903-1931, 1964-1967

1911-1912
1903-1913
1880-1983
1915 - present

ERIC

Hayes
Todd County

Mission

Rosebud
Ziebach County

Dupree

Dupree

Dupree

Red Elm

Booster

Todd County Tribune
Sioux Herald (Eyapaha)

Leader

We;st River Frogress
Ziebach County News
Record

1929-1931

1921-present
1963-1971

1910-1924
1936-1971

1916- 1951

1917- 1927

This biblio£raphy compiled by Caroline Fatton for Country School Le£acy,

ERIC

SCHOOL RECORDS AVAILABLE AT COUNTY AUDITORS 1 OFFICES IN WESTERN SOUTH iJAKOTA

County

School census

Bennett

Butte

Corsofr

Custer

Dewey

1937-
1974

End of
I year reports

1921-

1970

191S-

1971

199/.-
reorg.

19U-
1966

Six weeks teacher's reports

1921-
1970

Fall RiverlSS6- 1903-
| 1970 1970

Haakon t (Did not answer)

Harding ](Did not answer)

f

Jackson (Did not search)
Jones J

Lav/rence (Did not answer)
Meade (Files in active; did
Mellette ! !Have

19H-
1968

1903-

1970

Pennington
Perkins

! iesi-

1970

1914-
1969

Stanley j(All records are at l,he Stanley County H

Ziebach ! 1920- 1920-

1970 1970

not search)

Have

1981-
1970

Countj
Supt, record book

Teacher application

and standing

(All records are at

1920-
1971

1891-
1970

1918-
1968

1916-
1970

1919-

1970

1909-
1962

1916-
1971

Have
Have

Financial [Board
!Of

Education minutes

records the Benne

some

gh School

1910-
1945

Fort Pie

Record of 7th and 9th graduation

School district boundarie

t Co. high scnool)

1965-
1971

1930-

1962

Have

re, S. Dj

Officers 1 , reports

Have
Have

1921-

1968

1882*

1970

1911- *

195A