How did I happen to become a peddler? When I came to

Chicago in 1870, there was nothing else to do. I was eighteen

years old; I had learned no trade in Russia. The easiest thing

to do was to peddle.

(Here was a promising start to a tale of frontier commerce

by a true old timer. His story grew out of a conversation

about the present day refugee problem.)

People coming to Ametioa today have a much harder time.

There are better houses to live in and nearly everybody has

a bath- tub, but there are no jobs. It is not easy to make a

living. In the old days, if you had a few dollars, you could

buy some dry- goods and peddle. But today you must know a trade

or have a profession, otherwise you have no chance.

I went to live with an aunt and uncle when I first came

to Chicago. They lived in a small four room house on Fourth

Avenue. ( Federal Street today) They had four children but they

managed to rent one room to two roomers. I shared the bed with

these two men.

The day after I got to Chicago my uncle asked me if I had

any money. I told him I had ten dollars. He told me to in vest

it in dry goods and start peddling. I peddled in Chicago till

after the fire og 1871. There were not many stores, so I had

no trouble selling my goods. I used to make from six to ten

dollars a week. I paid my aunt three dollrs a week for my

food and lodging and the rest

saved. I had the responsi-

W 3687

Hilda Polacheek,

Peek on my Back.

bility of bringing my father, two sisters and two brothers

to Amerioa.

It was the great fire of 1871 that made me a country

peddler. Oh, yest I remember the fire very well. It was

in October. We used to go to bed early, because the two

roomers had to go to work very early. We were getting ready

to go to bed, when we heard the fire bells ringing. I asked

the two men if they wanted to see where the fire was.

"Why should I care where the fire is," one of the men said.

"As long as our house is not on fire, I don't care what house

is burning. There is a fire every Monday and Thursday in Chicart

go."

But I wanted to see the fire. So I went out into the street.

I. saw the flames a crods the river. But I thought that since

the river was between the fire and our house, there was nothing

to worry about. I went into the house and went to bed.

The next thing I knew my two bed- fellows were shaking me.

"Get up," they cried. " The whole city is on firel Save your

things! We are going to Lincoln Park."

I jumped out of bed and pulled on my pants. Everybody in

the house was trying to save as much as possible. I tied my

clothes in a sheet. With my clothes under my arm and my pack

on my back, I left the house with the rest of the family.

Everybody was running north. People were carrying all kinds

of crazy things. A woman was carrying a pet of soup, which was

-3-

Hilda Polaoheok,

Pack on my Back.

spilling all over her dress. People were carrying oats, dogs

and goats. In the great excitement people saved worthless

things and left behind good things. I saw a woman carrying

a big frame in which was framed her wedding veil and wreath.

She said it would have been bad luck to leave it behind.

When we came to Lake Street I saw all the wagons of

Marshall Field and Company lined up in front of their place of

business. ( The firm was then called Field, Leiter and Company)

Men and boys were carrying the goods out of the building and

loading everything into the wagons. The merchandise was taken

to the street- oar barns on State near Twentieth Street. I am

sure that Marshall Field must have been one of the rowners of

the street- car company. Otherwise why would the street- car

people have allowed him to bring his goods there. A couple

of weeks later, Marshall Field started doing business in the

ear-barns. I remember buying some goods there.

No one slept that night. People gathered on the streets

and all kinds of reasons were given for the fire. I stood

near a minister. He was talking to a group of men. He said

the fire was sent by God as a warning that the people were

wicked. He said there were too many saloons in Chicago. There

were too many houses of prostitution. A woman who heard this

said that since the fire started in a barn it was a direct

warning from God. She said Jesus was also born in a barn.

I talked to a man who lived next door to Frs. O'Leary, and he

-4-

Pack on my Back.

told me that the fire started in Mrs. O'Leary's barn. She

went out to milk the cow when it was begining to get dark.

She took a lamp with her and the cow kicked the lamp over and

that's how the fire started. There were all kinds of so ngs

made up about the fire. Years after the fire, people were

still singing songs about it. You remember the song " Hot Time

in the Old Town," well there was a song made up to .that tune.

These are the words:

"One moonlight night while the families were in bed,
Mrs. O'Leary took a lantern to the shed,
The caw kicked it over winked her eye and said:
There'll be a hot time in the old town tonight, my baby."

As may of the homes were burned, many people left the city.

Some went to live with relatives in other cities. A great many

men became country peddlers. There were thousands of men walking from farm to farm with heavy packs on their backs. These

peddlers earreid all kinds of merchandise. Things that they

thought the farmers and their families could use.

There was no rural mail delivery in those days. The farmers very seldom saw a newspaper. They were hungry for news.

They werevery glad to see a peddler from any large city. They

wanted to hear all about the great fire. When I told a farmer

that I was from Chicago, he was very glad to see me. You see,

I was a newspaper and a department store.

The farms were ten,fifteen, twenty, and even thirty miles

a part. It would take a day sometime to walk from one farm to

the next one. T used to meet peddlers from all over. It was

-5-

Pack on my Back.

not an easy life. But we made pretty good money. Most of the

men had came from Europe and had left their families behind.

We were all trying to save enough money to bring relatives to

America.

The living expenses of the peddlers were very little. The

farmers' wives always gave us plenty of food. I did not eat

anything that was not kosher. But I could eat eggs and there

were plenty of them. There was fresh milk and bread and butter.

The farmers always gave us a place to sleep. In the summer

we slept in the hayloft. In the winter, if there was no

spare bed, we would sleep on the floor. When the farmer had

no extra blankets, we slept with our clothes on to keep warm.

I had a customer in Iowa. I used to get to his farm once

a year. He had a nice six room house, and it was one of the

few places where I could have a bed to sleep in. When I got

to the place after a year's absence, there was no house. The

ground was covered with snow, and I could not even see the

plaoe where the house had been. As I was looking around,

thinking that I was lost, my good friend the farmer came out

of a dug- out. I asked him what had happened to his house.

"Oh, we had a terrible storm about four months ago, and

the house blew away," said the farmer. "We are living in this

dug- out now, it isn't as nice as the house was, but it's safe

and warm. Come on in."

I had never been in a dug- out and I was surprised to see

-6-

Pack on my Back.

how nice the farmer and his wife had fixed up this hole in

the ground. There were seven people living in this dug- out,

but they made room for me.

The farmers were very lonely during the long winters, and

they were glad to have anybody come to their homes. Very often

they were cheated by crooks that travelled about the country.

The farmers called them city slickers.

I remember the story of one of those slickers. You see,

I never worked on Saturday, WhiCh was my Sabbath, and I never

worked on Sunday which was the farmer's Sabbath. You see, I

had a five day week long before the unions started asking for

it. I was spending Saturday with a farmer, and I was pitting

on the back porch in the afternoon, when a horse and buggy •

drove into the yard. Two men got out of the buggy and walked

into the kitchen. No one knocked on doors those days. Theta

were no door- bells. One man was well dressed and the other one

looked like a hired man. The man with the good clothes, said

that he was " Doctor O'Brien", and the other one was his driver.

The " doctor" wanted to know if he and his driver could get some

dinner. He said be could pay any price. The " doctor" wanted

fried spring chicken.

Well, we had finished our dinner. But the farmer's wife

said she would fix dinner for them. She went out to the yard

and caught two fine ; spring chickens. She dressed them and

soon they were frying. Thile the good woman was fixing some

potatoes, the " doctor" went out into the yard. As soon as

-7-

Amerioan Folk Stuff.

Pack on my Back.

he was out of the kitchen, the driver told the woman that she

should be careful when the " doctor" paid for the dinner, because he had a lot of counterfeit money.

Well, the woman put the dinner on the table. The driver

the -called the " doctor" and those twO men sat down and ate

everything on the table. I never saw anybody eat so much.

After they each had. three cups of coffee, the " doctor" took

out a big wallet and gave the woman ti„Aen-dollar bill and

asked for the change.

The woman thought the money was counterfeit, so she said

she had no change. The " doctor" was very sorry, but he said

he was driving to town and he would leave the money in the

post office. The men left. Of course there was no money

left at the post office.

For months after that, every farm I 'came to, I heard the

story of"Doctor O'Brein,- and his driver. A farmer who had

heard the story had the " doctor" arrested for carrying counterfeit money. But all his money was good. That was just a X

trick to get free meals.

After carrying the pack on my back for two years, I decided to buy a horse and wagon. many other peddlers got the

same idea. I used to meet the small covered wagons as they

drove about the country.

I had now been peddling for five years and had saved

enough money to bring my father, brothers and sisters to

America. They came to Chicago. By that time a great many

Pack on my Beek.

new houses had been built and we rented a four room house

on Maxwell Street. My,oldest brother started peddling. One

of my sisters started working in a clothing factory, while

the other one kept house.

After my father had been in Chicago a few mtniths, he

wanted to go to Burlington, Iowa to see a friend who had been

his neighbor in Russia. When he got there, he met this

friend's daughter and decided that I ought to marry her. So

I went to Burlington, met the girl, and I a greed with my father.

The young lady and I were married in 1875. I rented a small

house near my father's homeand we furnished it. I beliete we

had the first rug in the neighborhood. We were very proud of

our first American home. It was the begining of a good life.

I stayed home for a week with my young wife. It was my first

vacation since I had come to America. Then I started off again

in my wagon.

Several years after we were married the house next door to

ours burned down. My wife, who was a very good housekeeper,

took the family into our home. The husband was peddling in the

country and he did not know about it. So when he came home,

he could not find his family. Finally some of the neighbors

told him where his wife and children were. He came to our

house and made himself at home. But he told my wife later

that he did not like it at our house because it was too clean.

He could not spit on the floor.

-9-

Pack On my Back.

Many of the men who carried packs on their backs and in

covered wagons, became very rich. They learned American

business ways. Some of them opened mall stores which their

wives looked after while the men were on the road. When the

stores showed a good profit, they would quit peddling. Some

of the largest department stores in the country were started

by men who peddled with packs on their backs.

I never got rich. My wife and I raised six phildren.

When my sisters and brothers got married, my father came to

live with us. Then one of my sisters died and her children

came to live with us. 'then my wife brought her parents to

America and they lived with us. Then we wanted our children

to have an education, so we sent them to college. There never

was enough money left to start any kind of business. But I

feel that we made a good in vestment.

During the fifty years that I peddled, I always went home

f7r all the Jewish holidays and when a baby was born. I would

stay home a week and then was off again inl.my wagon.

Yes, the peddlers with their packs did their share to

make life more comfortable for the farmers, while they were

ploughing the Around and raising food for America.