Place of origin_chi94.119, Illinois Date.11/11/3 9

Project worker Grace Outlaw

Amount

Project editor

8p

Remarks

Forms to be Filled out for Each Interview

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO FOLKS10V

FORM A

Circumstances of Interview

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

507 Oakwood Boulevard

April 14, 1939

Religion

1. Date and. time of in terview

- April 14, 1939, evening ,

2. Place of in terview

- Holiness Church, 335 East 37th Street

CHICAGO hi" .24-4.....1-06,

41k

49,20

3. Name and address of in formant - Maurita jokers, 4733 Champlain Avenue

4. Name and address of person, if any, who put you in

touch with in formant. .

Maurita jokers, 4733 Champlain Avenue,
Chicago, Illinois

5. Name and address of person, if any, accompanying you

Sane

6. Description of room, house, surroundings, etc. -

Store front church. The services of the wHoliness*Shurch are held in an old building which has been long vaoant and in poor repair. It is only one story high. The neighborhood is run dawn and the people for the most part are on relief. There is electricity in service, a general utility room which serves as a waiting roam and toilet roam for both men and women.
Odd chairs are used by the audience, there are numerous pictures of Christ on the dirty walls; on the rostrum is a lighted cross, suspended by a wire from the ceiling, just pver the pulpit.

(Use as many additional sheets as necessary, for any of the forms, each bearing the proper heading and the number tb which the material refers.)

VV 364U

FORM B

FOLKLORE

Personal History of Informant

CHICAGO

STATE

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

CHICAGO FOLKSTurk

Illinois

507 Oakwood Boulevard

April 14, 1939

Religion

NAME OF INFORMANT

Material secured by observation during service.

1. Ancestry

III•

Negro ( Preacher)

2. Place and date of birth - Not given

3. Family - Not given

4. Places lived in, with dates

5. Education, with dates

6. Occupations and accomplishments, with dates

7. Special skills and interests

8. Community and religious activities .

Makes an effort to assist folk in oommunity to get relief; not ordained

by any church group, just preaches, because he as called ' by the holy spirit%

9. Description of in formant

10. Other Points gained in in terview

FORM C

Text of Interview (Unedited)

CHICAGO FOLKSlutV

PQLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORK.

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

NAME OF INFORMANT

507 Oakwood Boulevard

April 14, 1939

Dry Bones In The Valley

There is a certain religious group who boast of being sanctified

and unafraid, thus making the following in oident which actually happened,

a real joke.

At the beginning of the services there were testimonials as to their

fitness for the "kingdom" because they were sanctified, thus free from harm.

The store-front church was crowded. At the completion of the testimonials the preacher announced, " I'm gonna talk shortly on ,' Dry bones in the

valley'.

He thrilled them with vivid word pictures of death on a white horse

riding through the valley 4,

the grim reaper at harvest time.

Under the spell of his appeal, the fury of his shouting and the magnetism

of the songs with which he in terspersed the sermon, they broke forth in a

spasm of religious fervor that gratified his efforts.

He hissed through his teeth with fiery vehemenoe, moaned, sobbed and

grunted; ending with a chant that struck them with such poignancy, they were

fairly lifted out of their seats.

The conglomerate response of a mens, halleluahs, stamping of feet,

clapping of hands and the rhythmic danoing of those who pranced up and down

FORM D

Extra Comment

CHICAGO FOLESTUPP

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

NAME OF INFORMANT

507 Oakwood Boulevard

April 14, 1939

the a isles charged the air.

The preacher gulped dawn glasses of water as sweat poured dawn

his face. " You see the silent rider on his white horse but you aint

afraid cause you're God's awn children, sanctified and saved by graoe, 11

he moaned.

At this point the lights went out leaving the place pitch dark.

There appeared a figure clad in white. Eyes bulged as they beheld the

speotable in white, a small light focused on it.

.There was a brief, tense silence followed by the noise of chairs

being overturned, women screaming and the general commotion of everyone

trying to get out of one door at the sane time.

The preacher proved himself adept at tackling and was the first out

of the building.

Three people knew what had actually happened. Three mischievous boys

planned the thing. One turned out the light sanother held the small flashlight and the third one clad in a sheet. The latter oame near getting the

worst of the deal for he was pretty well trampled before he could get out

of the sheet.

FORM C page -MP

CHICAGO FOLKS TUFF

The story of the passage of scripture, "Moreover the dog licked

Lazarus sores," is an example of the strange interpretations put upon

the bible. It is also something of a revelation as to the spontaneity

and ease with which some of the folk can create verse.

It is no unoommon thing for those Negroes who make up verses to old

familiar tunes, to hear a sermon and sing three to ten now verses which they

make up as they sing. There is always that repetition, of one or more lines

suoh as "Oh my Lord . • • yes my Lord

vilior as in the case of the song

mentioned in the story, the line, " I got a home in that rock, dont you

see," is repeated three times when the entire verso is sung.

This spontaneous origin is true of the Negroes religious songs, work

songs and social songs. The tune may be one common to every one byt the

words are changed to express the singer's thought or idea. Plagiarism has

no place in their conscience.

Moreover, the dog licked Lazarus sores

Preacher: ( chanting) And Lazarus laid on Divas1 steps, a sick man,

a beggar man, covered with sores from head to foot. . . sick umto death. • . 1

(repeating) *sick unto death . • . .*

Audiences "Amen* • ."Balleluah" • • •"Praise his name • • • *

Preachers And the scriptures tells you that it was, moreover, the dog

licked Lazarus sores . . . didja hear me? The bible say moreover the dog

lioked Lazarus sores.* Then with strong emotion and weird in to nations he

FORM C page -4..

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

asked, "Now what was the dog's name I ask you what was the nano of the

dog that licked Lazarus' sores?"'

Amdienoe: "Preach the word brother t

Tell the truth.'

ea

Preacher: All the years you been hearing about the dog what licked

Lazarus' sores and you aint never thought about what his nano was.

Moreover,' he shouted, "Moreover, the dog licked Lazarus' sores • • •

the dog's nano was Moreover • •

dont it say "Moreover, the dog licked

Lizaruel sores • . • Mays it plain as anything."

Audienoet(singing) Poor man Lazarus poor as I when he died he

found a hone on high,

I got a hone in that rook dont you see.

Now we know for thevery first time

The name, Moreover is divine,

I got a home in that rock dont you see.