February 2,  1939 

Life History 
Montgomery Gorse, 
(Wood & nal Dealer) 
1801  Goodwin  it., 
Jacksonville,  Florida 
1.-ritten by  iose Shepherd 

MAR= CROSS,  WOOD AND FUEL DEALER 

Mr.  Gross,  retired wood and fuel merchant,  lives  in  a splendidly 

substantial brick home  near the  foot  of  Goodwin Street in Jacksonville 

Where he can hear the lapping of  the  waves of the  incoming and  outgo-

ing  tide  in St.  Johns  River which hse  figured  so ?rominently in his 

life history. 

Hose,  a happy-faoad colored maid,  with  the assuivnee  and  proprietary 

manner of  a well  trained  family servant  of an old-time  Southern family, 

ushered me  into  the  spaeious  living room,  with *Mr.  Cross  hash's the 

lsdy you's expectin.* 

There he  sat,  a kindly man,  with his  eighty years  resting  lightly 

upon him,  with  the  exception of  partial deafness  and a 'Light stoop  in 

his  shoulders,  his  hair snow-white,  his  skin  clear,  a faint pink  in his 

cheeks,  and  the  twinkly blue eyes not  covered with glasses. 

He rises,  shakes hands  in a cavalier fashion,  and ? laces a rocking 

chair - which from its  size  and  oonfortable  cushions must  be  the  favor-

ite  chair of Mrs.  Cross - end  says: 

"My memory is failing and  I'm not  sure I can give you  the  informa-

tion you wish,  hut  I'll do my best,  and  perhaps when we get further 

along in  the  interview,  more will' cone  to me. 

"I  came to Florida  from Virginia  in the  early 1880's and  settled 

with my family on nn orange grove near Picolata,  a prosperous river 

town on the  honks of  the  St.  Johns,  about  18 miles from St.  Augustine. 

26024 

Martin Cross -2-

was  thee  twenty-two  years of  age. 

"At  that  time,  the  St.  Johns  River valley was the  center of  the 

citrus growl rr  ineustry of floria.  Our ° ranee grove  had been well 

established,  and  we  lived  in  e frame house - aot  log - built by  the 

former owner.  The  house was  Larts  sod  roomy  and most  ownfortable for 

th ,?.t  period,  t fire-place  in  the  sitting  room,  but  the kitehen had a 

fine wood-burnine  range,  whieh furnished most of  the  heat when noses-

sari  snd  on  which  sll 

the  cooking wws  lone.  There wore no  sereens, 

hlthough  the  beds were  fitted with  a canopy overhead on 'thigh netting 

was hung  to keep  out the mosquitoes which were numerous in  the  were 

months  and  most  troublesome. 

"The  orani:e  trees,  for the  most part,  were budded fro* the  native 

sour-orange  trees,  although there were nurseries from which specially 

grafted stock could  be  obtained.  However,  grower.  supervised  their 

groves carefully,  attending to  their own planting,  budding,  etc.  The 

trees were  not  sprayed.  ge did  not  know much about fightiag scale, 

pests,  etc.,  in  the  early days.  Later a popular emulsion composed of 

whale-oil  and  soap,  thinned with  kerosene,  was used  with  considerable 

success in combatting  scale.  No,  there were not  any Yediterranean fruit 

flies  to  worry ut -  nothing  but  quantities of  the  ever-present mosquitoes. 

"when  the trees were young,  we  planted crops  of  cow pets,  corn, 

sugercane,  beans,  etc.,  between the rows.  But,  of  course,  *hen the 

groves of  trees  grew  larger,  there was too mush  shads,  and  this  crop  ro.., 

tatioa had  to  be abandons!. 

"The oreages,  when matured,  were pecked  in erste* - Birchwood 

Martin Cross 

shipped from Maine,  curiously enough,  like the materiel used  now by 

cabinet makers and  builders for venserine. 

"The  fruit was  shipped  to  Charleston,  Baltimore,  New York and 

other Atlentle  ports.  There was daily shippine  aerate*,  as water traf-

fic on the  St.  Johns  was  then at the helpht of  its popularity.  There 

were no  railroads  south of  Jacksonville. 

"The meet  prominent passenger. boats  in  that period were the  Jelin 

8/tweeter, and  the  Sylvan Glen.  They ran from Jasksonville  to  Palatka 

every day.  These boats  carried no  freirht. 

7Freight boats were the  ?later Lily which ran from Jacksonville  to 

Crescent  City,  and  tha  City of  Jacksonville, a freight  and passenger 

boat which went  et,  far  as  Sanford,  the farthest  point of river shipping. 

"Captain  Tillie= Hallowes of Croon Cove Springs, *emended the 

Sylvan Cleu, and  perhaps  could  easily give  the  muse of  tither  boats on 

the  Zt.  Johns  in  the  carl:i  days. 

"Freight  was billed at  so  much a box  to  the growers,  tecording  to 

the  quantity of  the  shipment  and  its destination. 

"In addition to (minas,  sugarcane  and  corn,  we  raised quantities' 

of  sweet  potatoes.  Strange to  say,  the  idea  was prevalent  that vege-

tables could  not  be ;,7rovn  in Florida,  hence we were eompello0  to  sup-

plement our  other fool requirements by Grit:. on  Jacksonville,  which 

were promptly exeeutee and  1.ippe.4 to  us  at  the  boat  landing at Pleolata 

by  daily boat. 

"Bach family made  its own syrup  from the  sugarcane,  and  brown 

sugar was also manufactured locally from the  same  source.  This was the 

usual Camily commodity.  We had  no  means of  refining  the  sugar,  although 

Martin Cross 

at any time we wished we could obtain the granulated sugar from Jackson-

ville.  Also powdered  sugar,  in large irregular ained  lumpa,  was popu-

lar with the ladies when serving tea. 

"we  enjoyed rather good health,  with  exceptions of occasional  fe-

vers,  especially malarial fever in  the  summer months and  early fall.  I 

suffered with malaria  for  a period  of  two  years,  ask  finally overcame  it 

with  quantities of  quinine.  This drug some  in bottles about  the  sine of 

'beeline  bottles familiar to  us now,  containing two  or two  and  one-half 

ounces.  I carried  a bottle in my pocket,  and took  it  throughout  the  day--

placing a queatity in a cigarette paper and  dropping  it dolma my throat 

as  far back an  possible,  washing  it  down with ester  - taking sometimes 

as much as forty or  fifty grains a day.  It made me deaf as a post at 

the  time,  and  turned my hair white. 

One experienee  I'll  never forget wait  the  ease of  a laborer,  work-

ing for  a neighbor of  mine 

neighbors  then were on adjoining orange 

groves,  four and  five milee away.  This young MAU jumped over 8 fence 

and  ran a garden-rake  through his  foot.  It made a bad wound,  and noth-

ing was  thought of  it  at the  time,  home  remedies being applied;  but 

later in  the week he  became violent  and we sent  for  the  dostor at  Green 

Cove 4rings nine miles away.  Mien the  doctor  cams,  he  said at ogee it 

was  a ease of  tetanus,  or  look- jaw,  and  there was no hops.  The man had 

to  nave constant care  and  was kept  under Aba influence of  ohlorn1  to 

allay his  pain and keep him quiet.  In  order to relieve my neighbor,  I 

sat  up with the  natient  at night,  long nitOts  they  seemed.  The dostor 

gave me the  bottle of  chloral,  which was really mit  according to  medical 

ethics,  but he said  it  did not  make any difference who  administered  it 

to  the -patient,  as he was bound  to die  anyway,  and  to (live  it  to  him 

whenever he  became restless. 

"A wick poem* like  this,  and ono  night %mooning worn out with 

my vigil,  I dosed off.  I was rudely awaked by tho  grip of  the patient's 

hands on my throat,  and he began touting - ' You are trying to  kill mel 

You've been giving me  poisoW 

" I shook him off,  as  he was weak  from having nothing  to eat for 

seven days,  and  gave  him another does of ehloralt 

The young non's parents earns  from Palatka about  this  time.  They 

were  ignorant  people,  and  thought  we were not doing  all  that  should  be 

done for  their  son, * specially in keeping his under the  influence of an 

anaesthetic,  or rather opiate.  They took him home,  and the doctor at 

Palatka advised giving him morphine.  The  parents seid  they did not  wish 

their  ODA to  acquire  the morphine  habit,  and  refused  to  give him the 

drug.  The young man  again bosoms violent,  and  the  authorities took pos-

session of him and  carried him off  to  the county jail declaring  him 

insane. 

"The  authorities at Tallahassee and  Chattahoochee wore notified, 

but  mails  traveled  slowly and  transportation,  Wooten limit**,  so  that 

before  the  proper authorities arrived  a seek  later,  the  young men,  from 

his  close  aonfinement  in  jail and *ming kept  quiet and unannoyod,  had 

entirely recovered. 

"This  la an illustration of how  country people lacd  to  look  after 

thamsolves  in those  days. 

-It  took  throe hours to  drive from Picolata  to  6t.  Augustine.  The 

sand  and  the  corduroy roads made  transportation tedious,  cad often in 

Martin Cross 

cold weather,  I would  get out  of the  buggy and  walk  to keep  warn,  and 

in preferenee to the  jolting  over the rough roads. 

*There were no  sawmills  is 'Isolate.  The  nearest  was at Green 

Cove Springs.  There was  wonderful timber in that  seetion.  Nobody paid 

any attention to  land ownership -  if one wanted timber and  saw a see-

tlon of  likely trees,  he  Just moved in and  started  cutting. 

'The out  timber was healed away in  log wagons - strongly built 

and with high wheels,  six or  eight  feet  in diameter, - and taken to 

Jaeksonville which was  a sawmill  town  in  those days,  with many large 

mills in constant  operation. 

"Sad  to say,  the  ruthless  Gutting  of timber has depleted Florida's 

splendid  forests,  the  sawmill business  is  dying out,  and  the  pulp mills 

moving in to  take advantage of the  scrub  pines,  as  it  will be  years be-

fore the  present  reforestation plan  will  enable  the  lumber business to 

recuperate and  attain its former magnitude. 

rI  came to  Jacksonville  in 1893.  It was then a sprawling  little 

town,  confined mostly between  abet is  now Hogan Street and  Hogan's Creel. 

It  consisted of  five  separate municipalities - Jacksonville,  East :sok-

Danville,  Fairfield,  Lavilla  and Nrooklyn - the  letter extending from 

what  is  now Myrtle &venue  to  the St.  Johns  River,  and bounded on the 

south  by the present Forest Street. 

"I  established by business on East Duval Street,  and right across 

was  the early St.  Luke's Hospital,  started,  financed and  run by the 

women of Jacksonville,  including Mrs.  Alexander Mitchell,  a wealthy rail-

road executive's wife,  end other prominent ladies of  the town. 

"My help were the  ordinary Negro laborers,  who  bombe familiar 

figures on the  streets of  Zasksonvills,  with  the sule-dran arts de-

liveries wood  ad other tail  to the salsas of Zaskehaville.  There 

was sone owl used in  fLre pleas is  those days,  but soot of  the  tool 

was antive mod.  I obtained my supplies trma the Kea Crook amities 

and other nearby wake end  streams *ilia are heavily wooded.  A great 

deal as 

from seer cliddleburg. 

There were so  farrag o of  sours.,  or  ther methods of  artifioial 

heating  then. 

"People  in the eountry built a fire is the  yard,  and stood around 

it  to keep warm. 

"Awn I first sea to ieskevaville,  the  streets are deep sand. 

The  streets-or tasks stood up a toot or  as,  and  all vehieles had  to  gross 

the  tracks at  the street sprays on raised board crossing. 

*But  it  was a delightful  pinee to  live.  Iverybody Mew everybody 

else,  and  all are friendly and  neighborly.  I miss  the old °estate,  so 

any have passed atty.  Rat every moraine,  I go bask to sy old of file for 

as hear or  se,  as  that my old  friends was some  to vialt while we talk 

over the old balsas days in Iasksormllle. 

lAwn  the  tees  has beano so  assopoliten,  it  iamb almost  tilled 

with stress/ars,  end  if  I walk along the  streets there are tee teas whieh 

ors familiar.  claimer,  the other day I stagged the  tumoral at a proni-

seat /gear, • shariable,  well liked mom,  and  I knew nearly everyone 

there.  bo  the  Old-timeil  are  81111 here,  theeth they way au , always he 

in *videos'. 

"lhe  old lending at I- isolate  is  a ghost  of  the past.  where our home 

stood  is a turpeatimo still.  The orange grove* era all gone,  as citrus 

Martin Oross 

culture has oonsentrated farther south in Tlerida.  There are oaly two 

houses stealing,  and  they are in bad repair. 

"Two brothers,  Boaters Sollaoe and Meal Mitchell,  were the promi-

nent  physicians  in Jacksonville when I same  here in the early 1890'0 

They were well educated,  and had had the advantages of the  best  train-

ing  in the United States and abroad.  Both were kept tremendously , busy, 

and  were  the  first physicians  I knew of  that had the modern method of 

keeping  in constant  touch with  their offices by telephone.  They could 

always be located promptly.  Eash had imams practices and  both  died 

from the  strain of overwork when they  had barely reashed middle  life. 

In early  times,  it  took hours to reach or  locate a physician,  death or 

anything might  happen ill  the  meantime. 

"One would  hardly believe  the  immense  quantities of  fish  and other 

seafood.  that were taken out  of  the  St.  Johns  River in  those days.  The 

fishermen  would  go  out with seines and rowboats  and  come  in loaded  to 

the  water's edge with  their catches. 

"Ducks - well,  ducks in  season  settled on the  bosom of  the  St.7ohns 

by the  aere. 

"No,  there were no  hyacinths in the  river,  but  there were  quantities 

of water lettuee,  an aquatic growth  a pale  yellow in  solar and  coarser 

than the garden  lettuce.  The  sowing  of  the hyacinths crowded and killed 

out  the water lettuce,  so  it  is  not  seen now.  Cattle will *et  hyacinths, 

but  they would not  eat water lettuse,  which is  tough  and  rather hard 

and  stishery 

"The  Seaboard Railway ran from Ternendina  to  Lake City,  Tallahassee, 

Cedar Keys;  and  a bransh sane into Jacksonville.  The old  tracks may now 

Ntirtia Cross 

be  seen at the foot of Hogan Street,  where the  Logan Coal Company 

yards are now loeated.  The  passeager station was there when I came 

to  Jacksonville. 

"In the old days we used berosens  leaps fbr  lighting.  They made 

a aise  soft  light,  but were lots of  trouble  to  keep  filled  and  in 

order.  They used to  smoke,  and  the  ehimneys had  to  be washed sad  pol-

ished every day.  The housekeepers had  to eontend with  a lot of dis-

advantages in the  early days. 

"The good old days?  well  probably as good  as any of  their kind, 

but  I like  the  present,  with its modernity ami  improvements. 

"To  I regret  the  passing of my business?  No,  we are living  in a 

different age,  and must keep abreast of  the  times.  Tuel oil,  gas and 

electricity have  suppinoted  the  old methods,  and to  most  all are a 

weleome change." 

