9 a. 16 to 1 p. R4 (or later) April 25, 26, 27

28; May 1, 2, 3. Since the time was spent with the same man every day, it may be regarded as one interview.

2. Place of in terview

On the job, wherever he happened to be working

at the time; a saloon, a sign shop, a well board ( bulletin), a store

front.

3. Name and address of in formant

P. M.

Cottage Grove Ave. He will not permit

more definite in formation on this point

4. Name and address of person, if any, who put you in

touch with in formant.

5. Name and address of person, if any, accompanying you

6. Description of room, house, surroundings, etc.

(Use as many additional sheets as necessary, for any of the forms, each

bearing the proper heading and the number tb which the material refers.)

W36 W

FORM B

Personal History- of Informant

CHICAGO YOLESTUFF

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

No. Words

STATE

Illinois

NAME OF WORKER

Abe Aaron

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

5471 Ellis Ave. Chicago,

May 4, 1939

Sigapainters

NAME OF INFORMANT

P. M.

1. Ancestry

ROUMAW AR Amish. Son of a restaurateur

2. Place and date of birth

St. Louis, Missouri, about 1900.

3. Family

Wife ( German, not Jewish), two adopted children.

4. Places lived in, with dates

St. Louis till about ten years of age; Detroit, Mich. till about eighteen;

Chicago.

5. Education, with dates Through the sixth grade, beginning in St. Louis about

1908, ending in Detroit about 1915. Apprenticeship in Chicago, 1919 to 1923

inclusive.

6. Occupations and accomplishments, with dates Lived on the streets as a child,

selling papers, sleeping in burlesque houses and pool roams. Then odd jobs.
Then laboring till about seventeenth year. Then two years as migratory laborer

in the wheat fields.

7. Special skills and interests A good craftsmAn. Calls himself a "made" painter,

not a "natural". A liking for and a good knowledge of Shakespeare. Quotes at length. Self-acquired. Collects books. "Plays the ponies," a good

!handicapper."

8. uommunity and religious activities Interested is and sympathetic toward refora

and radical movements; is active in none. Atheistic. -Cynical in respect to

group activities of any sort. Younger child named in honor of Clarence Darrow.

9. Description of in formant Tall, Lean. Strong, rougb-cut features. Laughing

constantly. Rabelaisian, in speech.

10. Other Points gained in in terview It is not true that every signpainter is a disappointed artist. Himself, be would like to become a careoonist. " I wish to hell

I'd gone to school. I wish to bell I could go right now." *Tall tales, folklore, we don'thave any. If anyone asks you, sigapainting's just an occupational disease.

But e get around, that's something."

FORM C

Text of Interview (Unedited)

FOLKIORE

CHICAGO

No. Words

STATE

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

NAME OF INFORMANT

Illinois

Abe Aaron

5471 Ellis Ave. Chicago

May 4, 1959

Signpainters

Philip Marcus

Well, I'll tell you. There aren'tvery many of us. Maybe seven- eight hundred altogether in the city. About seven-hundred- fifty in the union, I guess.

No, everybody aint in the union. But we got things pretty well tied up. The others

snap a job on the sly once in a while, but it don'tamount to much. Shops don'thire

them and we pull them off the jobs they get themselves when we catch them.

The good ones? Yoh, practically all of than are signed up. What the others get don't

a mount to much.

I'll tell you one thing about Chicago though. Detroit's tops when it cages to bulletins,

and sols Los Angeles, I guess-- that's what they tell no anyway--but for all around

sign work you won'tfind any town that beats Chicago. 14 got good men here. Sure, we

have palookas too, who aint worth a a - , but not vary many.

The scale?

Fifteen a mackeroos. But if we get ten we're lucky. Sure, the book calls

for fifteen, and if anyone asks, we're getting fifteen, see; only damn few get it. I get

it so metime. Depends on who I work for.

14 lose too goddam much time. I figure, the year / round we average maybe eight-hundred

to a thousand bucks a year. The sign game's just about done. Too much neon work for

one thing. But that's about reached its limit too. What keeps us going now are these

FO1 C TErr 2

CHICAGO FOLESTUFF

beer joints. They fold up so goddamn fast, you wonder why anyone else starts up.

The breweries pay for the sign work, so the saloon keepers want a lot of it. They

think they're getting something for nothing. There ain't no one harder to work for.

And I'll tell you something funny, while I'm thinking of it. I don'tgive a goddamn

where you go in these damn saloons-- and these fellows that run the joints are just one

step removed from hoodlums, as rotten a tribe as you want to meet, don't let anybody

tell you different--but there we'll be, working away, never stoppie except to look

over some swell job passing in front of the window - say, I was working at Division

and State last week, and the girls up there beat anything I've seen, Jesus: But

around these joints. Well, there's always at least one drunk who comes along with

a story of a signpainter he knew once, and Christ Jesus was he a good maid - paint

like nobody's business! But, you know what? Be had to be drunk. Yep, couldn't

lay out a word unless he was drunk as a lord. Never knew it to fail, you always get

that story. But I've got to in set that signpainter yet. These jags! - you wonder

where the hell they come from!

You're right, there's something for you, the way the people look at us. Now take the

average, I'd say it's with admiration.

How do we react?

Well, Jesus! We're normal, aren't we? We feed it to 'ea.

Like the time I was &An' a bulletin out south on Halsted. Some guys are standie

a nound watchint us. Ever notice how a guy's mouth comes open sometime when he forgets

himself watchin' something? Well, there're these jags gapin' like a bunch of kids when

the old lady's about through =akin* the candy, and one of them pipes up with, *Say,

that's a pretty big sign you guys are painting, aint it?*

FORM O

TE-i2T 3

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

So we get to jibber- jabberin', an* you know me, old Anmaniaa himself, I say,

"You guys aint seen nothin*. You remember that big one we did outside the New York

airport for the airplane passengers to read, don't you, Lou?" Lou was the helper

on that job. He's a pretty good man. But he's too mechanical, his work doesn'thave

any swing. ( The word is not taken from the current musical craze. It refers to style

and individuality in work. A signpainter can walk about the streets, look at signs,

tell who did the work, what shop and what man. This applies particularly to gold

leaf jobs.-A. A.) So most of the time he's a helper. He says, "You mean the one

where we used a washtub of black for the eyelashes?" "Hell, no," I said. "That

was a small one. Don't you remember that job-where we used ten tons of lead just for

the period?" I couldn'tkeep from laughing, the way they ate it up.

But these saloon-keepers, they're the ones that are the real phonies. No one likes

to work for them. Of course, we work for the breweries, not for them, but they're gettin'

something for nix, so they want a lot. When we give extras to a saloon keeper, like

putting his name on or something like that, we say, "Okay, here's the egg in your beer."

When one guy sees a saloonkeeper coming, he does this ( gestures, spreads arms wide,

brings right hand to front, bring tips of thumb and index finger to in dicate a mace

of about * inch). That means, "big sign, small letters." Then we stop shooting

the s--- and keep quiet till he's out of earshot. We don'tlike to talk to them unless

we can help it. MO do that, by the way, whenever anyone we don'tlike comes along. It

means freeze him out, ignore him, don'tgive the bastard any encouragement."

TaIkin' about this "egg in the beer" gag, reminds me of something I pulled last year about

this time. A saloonkeeper kept botherin , and thinkin' and I couldn'tthink how to

get out of it. Then I get a bright idea. I said, "Look, I'm aixin0 the two coats

in this pail, I'm givie you your extra coat; what're ya gripin° about." He didn't

FORM 0 XT 4

micAGo FOLESTUFE

catch on till about six months later. The Jerk.... But at the same time you have to

keep them in good humor, because you don'tfind jobs hangin* on trees these days. Anyway, after about six months or so, he comes bellyachin* for that extra coat of paint.

Did I give it to hiss?

Hell, not I told ' in to go s----- up a straight stick.

They don'tpull that kinds crap on me.

The signpainters are always grousing. No work, some guys are too good and too hungry

at the same time, like S

who works for A..

That bastard will work till maybe

two o'clock and finish a job and then call up all the shops in to

trying to get in

an extra two hours so's he'll get a full day. But you can'ttake anything away from

him, he's tops, and not only that, he's fast: me,

better than average, if I do

say so myself, but compared to S.

I'm just another punk trying to get along. Aren't

we all?

The HSU*? Sure it's against the rules. No, he's not supposed to do it, and if anyone

reported it he wouldn't get away with it. Every trade has someone who's known as tops,

I guess. And every trade has someone who's got a rep for being hungry for do-re-me,

We've got both in one man.

And ;ems is he dumb when it comes to anything else but painting signs. He's as dumb

as the guy who was looking over my shoulder one day when I VOA working in Ws shops,

last winter. You know how we lay out with chalk without measurin* or anything, and I

guess it looks pretty good to someone who doesn't do it himself. Well, this guy's

lookin' over my Shoulder, I'm paintin* away, an* pretty soon I come to the end of the

sign an' I've got everything worked in, good as if I'd laid every letter out with a rule

before starting. That jerk looks and says, "Gee, you're lucky." "Yoh?" I says. I

notice his mouth is open and he's a dmirin* as hell. He nods his head. "You sure was

FORK C TEXT 5

CHICAGO

FOLESTUFF

lucky," he says, " that sign was just long enough."

It was a pretty big sign.

I had to lay it on the floor to work on it. I just about busted a gut. R. says,

"Some folks sure do things funny." Jesus.

Now this guy, R. Is he a screwball?

He's taking singing lessons. One day we're all

standing around. It's a Saturday. We don'twork Saturdays, but we came down to get

our money.

R., he's always screwing around trying to pay off 8.8 late as possible,

always singing the blues. But this time is the payoff, he's singing songs for us---

that jerk. So in comes a collector with a summons for R. He didn't pay a bill, and

they were suing him. I say, "Why don't you sing for him, R. 4- he's the guy you ought

to be singing for." R. didn'tfeel so good.

But you take R., now, just as an example. He's got him a shop, a few guys workin'

for him when he's got the work, and for all he knows he'll be out on his a--tomorrow

or the day after. I lost my shop in 1932. That wir3 my own fault though. The nice

thing about havin• a shop, though, is that you're your own boss. That's why I

contract most of my work; I get along about as good as average. Signpainting? -

well, today, it aint an occupation, it's an occupational disease. That's what I call

it.

No, I don'twant to be tied up to any one shop. Because I've got contacts and accounts

from the time I had my own shop. Snapping like this, I nakm more than If I only workad for someone else. Of course, a job like one with the Daily News, say, would be

regular and you'd make more out of it, day in and day out. But then you do the sane

sign over and over again, all day, every day, and you lose your touch and can't do

anything else. Workin' with General Outdoor has it's gripe too; first sign of slack

and out you go. Ka, one day

be working on a bulletin, the next on a wall, the

FORK C TEXT 6

CHICAGO

FOLESTUFF

the next on a window, the next on a truck, or on showoarde, or what the hell. Did I

ever tell you the story of the signpainter who sold two-three kits a day, be cause

he couldn'tfind work?

You know what a kit is. CA signpainter's kit is a high, rather wide, relatively

narrow box, about about 19 6" to 2' x 1, to 1'6" x 6" to 9", A.th a sliding rollaway front, containing small compartments of various sizes and shapes in which are

stored the essential items for every possible type of job the signpainter may be

called upon to do. With good materials, gold leaf, and silver, paint, brushes,

etc., eto., it may easily be worth as much as two-hundred dollars, seldom less than

seventy-five.-A. A..) Well, this guy - I don'tknow how old this story is; I heard it

when I first started as an apprentice, and I still hear it every onoe in a while - this

guy, he can'tfind no job. So he gets him some boxes. You know the kind that beer

comes in, the bottles. And he cuts them down and fixes them up and paints them black,

so they look just like a kit. Then he goes around to the saloons. He's broke, he

ain't got a pot to spit in, his wife is in rags and starvin and so desperate she's

even threatenint to go out Benin' it, and the kids, Jesus the kids l So he spreads

it on, thick. He even cries when it comes time. So this kit he's carryin , around.

It's all he has left in the world. It's his bread, if he ever should maYbe get him a

job. And it's worth dough. EA doesn'twant very much, only a couple ol bucks, that's

all. An' he sells the kit, if he can'tborrow on it, two- three of them a day. To no

it don't sound so damn funny, but you want to hear what kind of stories we tell, and

we tell that one--as long back as I can remember.

And there's the one about the guy who's out of work an' thinks he'll maybe do better

for himself if he starts beatin' around the country. So he goes down to the union and

gets him a traveling card, throws his kit in the old jallopy and away he goes. Well

FORM C MIT 7

CHICAGO

FOLKSTUFF

he goes plenty far and what he finds is pretty damn small pickin's. Finally he gets

him a job, a good one. It's a big job, and he wants it like right now I'd like to

lay that dame across the street. Look at that! Boy, she's good enough to eat. Aint

that so methin° I Well, the jobs for a big garage man. This here garage man, he sees

how things are, gets the lay of the land quick, and jaws down the price to practically

nothing at all. So, all right, the guy goes to work on it. He gets enough dough

to buy him paint and such, and doesn'teven have enough left over to eat on. Pretty

soon he gets hungry. The sun's hot as a bitch in heat. It's close, the guy can

hardly breathe; he's been on bread and water for days. Naturally, he's a little

nervous an' forgetful an' liable to make mistakes. The big spot in the sign is for

the word "vulcanizing." And damn if he doesn'tleave- the z out of vuloaniziag. He's

got to think fast. He wants to let the garage man look at the sign, got his dough,

and blow. So he gets an idea. He takes cardboard, prints "paint" on it in big red

letters and hangs it over where the zwould be. Then he gets the garage man to come

look at the job. He gets his money and he blows. Only one thing I forgot to tell you.

This sign was a bulletin out on a country road at the city limits, that's what makes

the story good--no call to put "wet paint" on that.

We don'thave any stories about guys from other towns, not that I can think of right

now anyway, except maybe about the guy from Los Angeles. You know, those fellows

out an the coast get big ideas, because maybe they think they come from Hollywood

or something like that; they like to plan crazy layouts and think we don'tknow what

the score is.

We have fellows in this town that have more and better ideas than

they ever heard of, at least when it comes to signpainting. except on bulletins maybe,

that's all. Well, this guy, he comes in from Los Angeles ant talks himself into a jobo

Not with a shop; he snapped one. But he forgot to get a transfer; Jr maybe he wasn't

70141 C TEXT 8

CHICAGO

FOLICSirarr

even in the union out there, I don'tknow. So the business a gent pulls him off

the job. Then he tries to get half the guys in town to finish the job for him.

It'd moan a fine for any union man who touched it. We wont out to look at it. It

wasn't a bad layout, nothing extra though; but it was the lousiest goddamn work you

ever saw. That was about the size of his big ideas.

Fbr quality, the Chicago work

is good; yes, I'd say it's a lot better than average. And I've been around.