2,400  Words 

NEDIRAL WRITSHOs  PROM? 
Kiami„  Florida 

• 

• 

Fetruart 20,  1939 
Albert J.  Kershan(ftro) 
1429 349•93141  AVe. 
Wiami,  acrid& - 
Monet 
Weirs I.  Burnell, 
triter 

mann J.  maw, Jr.  N.D. 
(NOMP) 

In the **nested business  district of Miami's "Ootored Town* 

there  dwells  Dr.  Albert J.  Kershaw,  an outstanding physician who 

is  seeking neither riches nor publioitn but who devotes his  tins 

and  energy to  the welfare and uplift of his race.  His main inter. 

set  is  in the nation's  fight against tuberculosis.  He is  in charge 

of the anti.tuberoulosis work in the schools for Negroes and does 

a great  deal of charity work oonnected with his  interest in the 

battle against T.  N. 

Dr.  Kershaw's office is  at 1429 Nor.  3rd Avenue.  Between two 

stores  occupied by Jewish people,  a wooden stairway leads  to  the 

second floor of the building.  At  the head of the stairway,  to ths 

left,  I observe an open door leading to aroma stitch appears  to 

be a waiting room.  A tall bleak Negro is  busy dusting about the 

waiting room. 

'Is  this  Dr.  Kershaw's  office' I.aok. 

"Yastn,  have a seat,  please,* the man replies, politely. 

dootah just  went out rot  breakfast  a few minutes  ago g but. he's sm. 

• 

26041 

pestle rah."  I sit down in the waiting roes. 

After a few minutes  the man carofully looks  a door of grilled 

iron work which leads  to the dootoris private afloat and leaves 

the roomy  walking down a long eerrider which leads  to the rear of 

the building. 

As  I wait I observe my sumundings..  Directly morose  the hall 

. is  an open door of what appears  to be another apartment.  A Novo ' 

is  standing in front of a mirror shaving. 

The furnishings of the room in otioh I am *Min consist of 

a small  dark oak table ( which stands  against a wall)  with rooker 

and arm chair to matoh.  The seats  of the chairs are severed dark 

brown leather.  An empty hat reek stands in a (tomer.  Four plain 

wooden chairs  are plasm' against a wall.  Them is worn blue and 

white cheek linoleum on the floor that shows  signs  of recent swab.. 

bing.  On the table are Hemlines and a thick memo pad with plum 

oil tied to  a pleoe of bleak string.  Althe not  ilaboratelY tar-

nished,  the room is  very Glean.  Hanging on the well Jest shove 

the  table,  are two framed  diplomas  belonging to Albert Julio Ker. 

@haw,  Jr,  The diploma on the left reads  sUniversitis  Waldensise 

and is  printed in Latin.  The one on  the right reads 'Faculty and 

Graduates 1.907  Maury Medical Dental and Pharmaeoutioal Dollops 

of Walden University.  Picture; of  tho oleos  are also on this  do. 

oument. 

A door of solid wood leads  to another roost.  The door is  open 

and I observe the furnishings of this room its about the same as 

the average dootorts  examining soom**oxamination table,  cabinet 

with glass  doors contains  instruments,  as  elan bottle* of medi 

eine,  and doctor's equipment;  a scale stands in.s corner;  an oleo* 

trio drop*light is  mar table.  The floor is bare. 

Between the waiting room and the doctor's  office is  a divided 

partition;  the lower half is  finished wlth solid wood;  the upper 

half is  made of diagonal  iron grill work;  a door leading to the 

*Mos is made entirely of iron grill work.  A hanging look  is  on 

this  door. 

The office has  two large windows, *Loh have shades but as 

curtains.  The shafts are not drawn.  The furnishings consist of 

a roll-top Nook and swivel chair.  The desk,  whisk stands  against 

a will to the right,  is  littered with papers and letters.  On the 

top of it are some books  and also several photographs.  Two of 

these are of fine looking young Nsgroes in their.  apts.  In the 

center is  a photograph of an elderly Negro woman in a gold frame. 

On the other side of the room is  a book ease lined with books; • 

small table contains  an electric fan.  A medicine table is well 

filled with bottles.  Near the desk is  a telephone table contain* 

tag a phone and book.  An arm ohair somewhat like the one in the 

waiting room stands near to  the  desk and tacos the window.. 

Adjoining the office,  to the right,  an open door loads  to a 

bid-zoos.  A neatly made mahogany bed with clean white spread is 

visible, mahogany dresser and *hair to =tab,  and a window with 

a freshly starched white curtain can be seen. 

Alidiin  a short  time  I hear the sound of foot- steps coming 

up the stairs  and Vs.  Kershaw enters  the waiting room,.  Having 

made an appointment by phone the previous  day,  he is  expeeting me. 

'Good morning,' he says pleasantly. 'Sorry to keep you wait-

ing,  come right in my office.'  He unlocks the door betsimen  the 

two rooms and motions  to an arm chair saying, 'Have a chair.' He 

sits  down in the ssivel chair at his  desk,  facing is as  we talk. 

Dr.  Kershaw is  a fins locking Negro,  well mannered and very 

pleasant;  tall and stout,  a picture of good health.  His bats is 

partly gray;  his  features  are not'negrold in type.  His fee* is 

stout and the color of a mulatto.  He is  in his  504, but looks 

younger.  Immaculately dressed in a whits pals boaoh suit,  colored 

handkerchief  in coat pocket,  tan silk shirt with small embroidered 

figures  in red and stilt*  silk;  red tie with diamond stick pin; 

white shoes  and grey and white soaks.  He is wearing a hem gold 

signet ring on the  third finger of his left hand. 

'My paramount interest lies  in the fight against tuberculosis. 

have wawa physicians who work with me and I supervise the 

tuberculin tests,  which are administered Vy the nurses.  Zash (Mild 

in  the schools  is  tested,  and whOSO there is  an infection,  treat. 

mint is  given,  parents are advised,  and instruatod.  All oases 

are followed closely.  I also do a great deal of charity' work so.. 

song my T.  11,  patients.  The lack of food among the colored people 

is  appalling.  I also conduct an ambulatory clinic.  09% of wf 

patients are not ablo to pay the fees  but none of them are re. 

fused treatment.  Altho I am late in getting into the field,  I 

can see a maskod dooms* in the disease.' 

Dr.  Kershaw., anti...tuberoulosis  walk is  well organised.  Al-

tho  it has  never been given mmeh publidity„  thcwork is  being 

steadily (tarried on by him and his professional helpers,  who are 

using their influence as  well as  their knowledge to overcome the 

conditions  that have weakened the physical constitutions of the 

residents of colored town.  There is  a co-operative work going on 

among fifteen medical men,  both physiolans  and  dentists,  and they 

have • small hospital of their own in addition to the colored 

ward at the City Hospital.  Ho speaks  with much appreeiation of 

the co-operation of the Dade County Medical Association,  in its 

organised work for Negro physicians,  and says  that  every modioal 

.man in colored town is making the most of the opportunity to take 

the modern 'mums offered by the medical association. 

'Negro  doctors and  dentists  should be allowed to poetise 

regardless  of race,  and  I see no reason why any white woman should 

hesitate to oall a colored doctor or patronise a colored dentist. 

'I  believe  that eventually- there will be no colored ram,.  for 

.e. 

the  worli'm  history shows :that all  submerged or minority races 

have finally been absorbed by their stronger surrounding neigh. 

bors,  and I_ believe  that the white and colored rains in the United 

States will merge into one " American"  rase,"  Asked about the 

Indians,  he  thinks  they,  too,  will be absorbed. *Dut it won't be 

for hundreds  of years,  and none of us will live to see it,' he 

ays • 

He is  particularly interested in obildren,  and from the day 

of his  arrival in Miami has been a:  devoted friend of the oolored 

schools. *Athletic work interests as isitanselys  At  the Booker 

T.  Washington school,  I organised the athlttio work,  acted as 

ooaoh of the ball  teams  and generally supervised all *thistles. 

At  the present times I am medical adviser and part time financier. 

I just received a letter from a high official commending WI work , 

along lama lines,' points  to an opened letter lying on his  desk. 

oonsider  that &thistles  wakes a student self-reliant,  teaches 

him to give and take,  to  develop self.sontrol and temps:anal.' 

He ,has  a kindly mkt with the girls and boys and  they show plainly 

that  they oonsidir his their friend. 

The sanitary sonditions of colored to 

have engaged mush of 

Dr.  Kershaw's attention.  He is  a right hand helper of the  faculty 

of the  schools  and takes a keen interest in the °lasses Where girls 

are learning  the home arts and domestio science.  That  the mothers 

of  the future become good home makers  is  most essential to  the 

welfare of the rase. 

• 

nou would like to hear a little about or family historY14 

he asks  as  he  took a cigar out of his pocket and smoked leisurely. 

*Well,  my ancestors were slaves of the Xershaw family for whom 

the county of Kershaw,  South Carolina was  named.  *1 father used 

to speak of our ancestors  and how moat of their time was spent 

picking ootton.  At the  time of emaniiipation,  my parents lived in 

west  florid*.  They were  born in Jefferson 'County and ,also were 

married  there.  They had three sons  and two  daughters all of whom 

are graduates of the A & X University. 

#1183, father was  the first student of the A & X in Tallahassee 

and was  a member of  the  first football and base  bell ,teams.  That 

was  in the  80*s.  He was  very proud of the fact that his  brothers 

and sisters,  sons  and daughters  and grandchildren 'ere graduates 

of his  Alma Ulster.  He always  was  a good student,  did a great . 

deal of writing,  especially artinles  for magazines;  he also  did 

some farming.  He  became a Methodist preacher and travelled in 

many parts of Carolina,  Georgia and .Florida.  He died in 1917. 

*My mother is still living.  This  is  a,  pietnye of hays he 

says  as he tab's  the gold framed picture from the top of his (task 

and hands it  to me. *the is  77 years old and lives  in Tallahassee‘ 

*Those pictures are of Wf sons,* he proudly points  to two 

blow photographs. 

have two sons  and a daughter ..  all grad-

uates  of the A a K.  WI sons were not interested in the medical 

profession . 

they studied the liberal arts. 

114.  wife wets  born in Florida also;  we wars married in JO— 

ferson nounty.  The  teaches  at the A & M at  Tallahassee now;  she 

50  years  old. 

.s. 

"ION, I chose the medical profession?  While a 'WM boy I 

oame under the influence of an elderly physician and  I greatly ad-

mired this man.  He encouraged me in my desire  to study modtolnO. 

My father also was pleased,  Weans* he felt that it would be an 

avenue of helpfulness to our race.  Me helped me with my expenses 

in college to a certain extent,  then too,  I worked at  different 

jots  during the summer.  In those  dikvo  it  use muoll easier for a 

medical student to waft his  way through college than it  is  today 

.  and oost much less  too.  Roughly speaking,  a college course 

cost about 11,500  tuition in those  days  it  it .00uldn't be  done 

for that amount today. 

first practiced medicine in West Florida;  Suwon** °county. 

I cams to Miami  15 years  ago,  because there was  a more fertile 

field for service among my  people;  also the financial inducement, 

there being better prospects  in Miami  for a man in the medical 

profession. 

"• Regarding the sohnols,  ay frank opinion is  that the schools 

of the south cannot compare with the schools of the north and the 

same  applies  to  the colleges.  I believe in calling a spade a 

spade," he continues emphatically as  he puts  down his cigar and 

goes  into great length on the sutdect„  motioning with his handis. 

'The reason for  this *Gantt= is  the lack of funds here in the 

south and I believe that Stole San should appropriate tundi  for 

education.  Farts of the west,  also,  should have assistance with 

their schools.  It is  a well knownlact that the endowment funds 

.of Yale, Harvard and Cornell equal or expel the total funds of all 

the colleges  in the south put together.  Among the list of names 

of the 15 oolleges given the highest rating in the United States, 

not one of these is  a college of the south;  it  lust can't be  done 

with  the funds  they have bore.  I believe the ohlldron of the 

South should  be  given the same opportunity to obtain a high 'dumb., 

tion as  the children of  the north. 

mx course s' he continues, 

as of the opinion Miami High 

is  a fine school,  but  it cannot compare with the High Sehools  of 

the North and  I say the same for the grade schools. 

'Polities?  Yes,  they interest  me  a great  deal  and I always 

vote.  I keep up with politios  thru reading  and  other  sources,  Re— 

garding the mess we have at City Hall,  I think  the  mayor  and  two 

of his  city commissioners  should be  ousted. 

I 

'Methodist is  If riation._  I contribute  towards  the  support 

of the Methodist church  which  I attend.  I should go  more  regular 

the.  I believe overyotie  should go  td  some  church because  religion 

has  a good influenee  on  the  morals  of  the  people.  It  helps  them 

to  lead the right kind of  life. 

II  spend most of my spare time tooling.  I enjoy hall games 

of all kinds,  also borlog.  OseasitelattY I de to  the movies.  I 

never tire of my work,  but I am a firm believer that we all mod 

a oortain amount of relaxation. 

The question of  list  is,  of °ours',  a very important matter. 

The lag* of money for the proper food is  the root of the trouble 

among my people.  They are instrueted as  to proper feed, but it 

is  diffioult for them to live up to those instruotions 'bon their 

funds  are so limited.  t do not bolievo 'maple should own a oar 

when they haven't proper food and ghettos.  In ly opinion shelter 

oomes  first,  food next,  and oar last. 

'Sons  day,  when I am of no further use to NI people hero,  I 

an looking forward to having a posy home in the ocuntry 

haps a farm too.  ails I can be of service to my sae., 

ro. 

main right hero with thou.  At prosont„  due to my activity in my 

profusion,  I find it wastleal to live right here in tte city, 

altho  it would be more to my taste  to have  a little home  in the 

suburbs  to go to after my days  work is  ever,  However,  I have  had 

these room@  renovated to suit as for office and  living quarters 

oolbinOd and  it  daft;  very well for the  present.  I have  some  pro-

perty hero in this 'motion,  which / rent  out.  The  income  from 

this 'nobles  as  to  do muoh charity work  and helps  with my  T.  B. 

interest.' 

I thank  Dr.  Kershaw for his  co-operation  and prepare  to  take 

111111ffe. 

at any tine you eare'to visit the schools and see our 

anti.lubereulin work in aotion 

sill be glad to have you do so,' 

he sore ora  wo walk to the  door. 

01 nay take advantage of the opportunity within the near future, 

Dootor Kershaw,  and thanks  so ouches I sopty-amormilAtilmay, 

