1. Date and time of in terview May 5th ( the morning)

May 10th ( the day)

2. Place of in terview

May 5th- sign shops- 47th & Cottage Grove

May 10thp-a saloon-South Halsted St. ( a window job)

and the Marcus home

3. Name and address of in formant Philip Marcus, 4523 S. Cottage Grove Ave. Chicago,

4. Name and address of person, if any, who put you in

touch with in formant.

5. Name and address of person, if any, accompanying you

6. Description of room, house, surroundings, etc.

The Marcus home is well-appointed, newly decorated, pleasant. With four large rooms, excluding kitchen and bath. Three flights up. On the "White" side of Cottage Grove.
In the building are Italian ( 1), Mexican ( 1), Russian ( 1), families. The remaining families are American stock ( so-called) and Irish.

(Use as many additional sheets as necessary, for any of the forms, each

bearing the proper heading and the number ft which the material refers.)

\AI 361

FORM B

FOLKLORE

Personal History of Informant

CHICAGO

CHICAGO YOLKSTUFF

Illinois

Abe Aaron

5471 Ellis Ave. Chicago

May 11, 1939

Taverns

Philip Marcus

(See copy of 5/4/39)

•

STATE

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

NAME OF INFORMANT

1. Ancestry

2. Place and date of birth

•

3. Family

4. Places lived in, with dates

5. Education, with dates

6. Occupations and accomplishments, with dates

7. Special skills and interests

8. Community and religious activities

9. Description of in formant

10. Other Points gained in in terview

a

FOLKLORE

CHICAGO

FORM C

Text of Interview (Unedited)

CHICAGO POLESTUFF

Illinois

Abe Aaron

5471 Ellis Ave. Chicago

May 11, 1939

Taverns

STATE

NAME OF WORKER

ADDRESS

DATE

SUBJECT

NAME OF INFORia.NT

Philip Marcus ( to be added to the material submitted May 4, 1939, gathered from the sans individual.)

1.

The Saloon Keeper Who got Vicarious Revenge On his EORloyees

I could tell you more stories about the taverns than anything else,

I guess. They're a crummy bunch of places and a crummy lot of people, them tavern

keepers I mean. Take all in all, though, the taverns that cater to the Irish are the

dirtiest of the lot and the ones that cater to the Salves are the cleanest. Not casting

reflections on the Irish, understand, and not throwing bouquets at the Slays. I get

around, that's all, and that's the way I've found it. Maw line, a guy sees more than

the average, and if he keeps his eyes and ears open he sees and hears a lot the average

man don'tever get a chance to see.

All that aint nothing to do with this story.

But about this guy I was going to tell you about. I was workin'

on a saloon window one iny and listenin' to the help jibber jabberinl. One bartender

he's saYin ° to another, "The way to treat this guy"-- they're talkinl about the boss--

"is to sass right back at ' in when he starts shootin' off." The other gay says,

Well, I work two days on that job. While these two guys are

talkie and 21m painters, another bartender is servie the boss who's satin' at a

table with a customer. They're drinkine different brands, but each guy's stickin'

to his own brand, and pretty soon, it's along toward noon, the place gets pretty

FORM C TEXT 3

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

After a while I say to the tavern keeper, "Say, how do you expiate

this?

These dames got class. Jesus!" An' they got clothes. An' you can see they

don'twork. How the hell's a guy gonna work? How do you do it? How do you keep

your mind on your business?"

The tavern keeper ant barkeep, they both laugh. An' the bar-keep

cracks:

"What d' y3u mean?" I says.

The Tavern Keeper says, "Hell, Phil, these are the kind ohigh

class whores business men will call long distance, spendie ten, fifteen, twenty, twentyfive dollars just to tell ' en when they'll be in town, just to phone tem.

3. What She Used to Give Away

This one happened in a saloon on Clark street, near north. You

know these victrola's, the automatic nickel one's I mean. Well a guy's puttin' one

in. I'm pushin away at the brush, an' you know me, the open ear kid, always listenin'.

I'm workin° and listenie and the wife of the owner ant the victrola man, th y're

talkint. The dame, she says:

The guy, he reads off the list ot records ' i's put in, an' this

dame she pipes up with:

"Did you put in the one called Now She sells What She Used to

Give Away?"

Did ya ever hear anything like it?

These jerks/

4. There's Always Some Way To Beet The Rep

I was workie in a saloon out south. A big moving van pulls up,

ant the driver ant helper lugs a big case into the joint. It's a beautiful case,

FOE& C TEXT 4

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

Mahogany finish, like a piece of furniture. It was a brand new slot machine, with a

sliding front like's on my kit there. lessir, it had a sliding drawer that pulled

down an' looked when the heat was on. That's the feature of it, that's the latest.

And tailing the van was the slugger, the syndicate man, in a Lincoln Zephyr, who cams

in and tended to the formalities, how the split was going to be, an' if there was

any trouble to contact him, an' all that. I tell you, Abe, there's always some way to

to beat the rap. It's the goddamnedsst thine

5.

They're Hard-Boiled

So ya wantta know what the saloon keepers are like, in general?

Well, now, I'd say it's like everything else, there ' re all kinds, only the range's sort

of narrow, good ant bad inside of certain limits. I told ya before they're next door

to hoodlums. But one thing, most of * ea are hard boiled. Anyway, on the surface.

Like the guy in this place.

Yesterday after you left he was outhere talkin' to

ms. I'd noticed he wouldn't let no one buy him no drinks an' I remarked on it. Well,

Jesus, the guy had a regular cods. He said:

"Buy no a drink? No, by Tagus: Let them buy their drinks an'

get their money an' kick them out, that's the way I do business. I don't stand for

that buying no a drink stuff. I won't let the bartenders do it either. They buy

you a drink an' than you gotta set ' am up for them, an , they hang around then an'

clutter up the place so pain' customers don'thave roam. As long as they havJ money

an' set lent up a mong themselves that's all right. But I let lea buy no a drink, then

I'm one of ° sat too t get it, an' if I kick them out, I lose their business altogether.

Ya eta always kick a man in the ass if you're a business man, but ya can't do it if

you're a member of his club. An' I kick * en out, by Jesus yes, just as so ones I

see they don'tmean to spend no more dough. Ye gotta be hard boiled in this business

or it's your ass, that's all."

FORM C TEXT 5

CHICAGO 7CLESTuzY

They're hard boiled.

6. I'll Drink It Up.

It's mostly when there's no customers around that the

stories came out. Now in this saloon near 79th. The bartenders were talking

about the way they connive on change; you know, when somebody gives ' am a big

bill and maybe walks away, forgetting to pick up his change. Well, one of the

guys is telling about it.

Be says he always puts the dough on the back bar, so

if the customer should happen to come for it, he couldn't say he was stealing it.

After a few hours, of course, they guy pockets it. The customer comes in, an he

says, "You see my chance? an' the barkeep says, "Yoh, here it is," an , that proves

he's honest. If the customer doesn'tcome back, it's gravy. One time, though, a

couple of bucks are on the back bar, are the boss comes in an' sees it. "What's

this? he says. The barkeeper tells him. The boss wants to know what time it was

left, an' the barkeeper, like a fool, tells him. So the boss puts it in his pocket.

But that's not the best one. The best one's about the dame that called up from

the elevated station. Did I tell you that one?

A big heavy woman comes in an' guzzles some beers. She lays

a dollar on the bar ant she's thootie a line an' when she walks out she forgets to

pick up her change. It was thirty cents out of a buck, so there was seventy cents

layin' there. Well, the barkeep lays it on the back bar, like I said. After a while,

there's a call for the boss, who aint in; so the barkeep takes it. It's from the dams

who forgot her change. She's callin' from the El station on 63rd. wreh, I got it,"

the barkeep says, "seventy cents." The dame says, "That's right." And then she

pulls this gag. Listen, It'll knock you off your pins. She says:

Mell ojust hold it for me. I'll be in one of these days

and trade it off."

So the barkeeps tellin' me about it and swearin, ant he says:

F0161 G TEXT 6

CHICAGO FOLKSTUFF

"There's the goddamn seventy cents, gatherin' dust, no good to

me or her or anyone else. If that goddamn--don'tcome in pretty goddamn soon an'

drink it up, I'll drink it up."

I says, " I'll drink it up, don'tworry, if you want to get

rid of it."

The barkeep says, flAint that a bitch?"

Y. Anti Sanitiam

A lot of fellows, ice non and guys like that, have to spend

a certain a mount of time and money in the saloons, just to hold their trade. Well,

I'm workin' in a place, and in comes a guy, a German or a Swede or something like that.

We were talking about it afterward, and we sort of a greed he must 0 been a Swede.

The saloon being one of his stops, he tries to be sociable. He's an ice man, sort of

big an' hulking an' dumb as hell. He tries to make talk an' blunders at it so methin'

awful. But that aint the point. The point is, when he goes out, the tavern keeper

turns to me an' says:

"He acts like

Jew."

I don'tlook Jewish, an' no one ever takes me for a Jew, so

I hear lots of thing's like that. You'll find a lot of that kind o' stuff around

these taverns.

S. Anti Semitian

I was workle in another place. This wasn't no window job

this time, but on a wall outside. The guy comes out every once in a while to watch

us work we see how thingere gots.**

We get to jibber jabberie around---you know me, always a skint

questions ant tryin' to find things out, an' pretty soon we're talkie about Hitler

FOLIC TEXT 11

CHICAGO FOLESTUFF

an' so on. This bastard, he busts out with:

trade.

"I don'twant no Goddamn shooflies in here*" - talkin' about his

Maybe I didn'ttalk right, forgot myself for a minute or samethie,

because he looks at me sort of queer an' says, "You aint Jewish, are you?"

The lad I'm workin° with, he says, "Aint we all God's peoplo,"

tryint to a mooth things over.

But the guy must've had his suspicions all the time after that,

anyway, because he kept comln° out an' talkinl to me, tryin' to justify himself. He'd

Bay:

"Look, Phil, you wouldn'tthink that a guy who governs millions

of people for years an' them letting him get away with it, you wouldn't think he could

be all wrong, would you?"

I aint nobody's dummy exactly, an' I know what he's leading up to,

an' I say, "No, no, I guess not."

"Yeh," I say.

" he says, " if he kicks out the yaws, an' all the Germans

let him do it, them damn Jews must've done some pretty goddamn bad things in their

time, aint that so? You can't say the guy don'thave so methie on the bail."

That's the sort o' thing ya gotta contend with.

FORM C TEXT 8

CHICAGO FOLESTUTF

9. Now Don't Work Too Hard Boys

I was workin' at one place where the twenty-six girl was as

nice a piece as you'd want to see. I worked three days on that job; it was windows

ant a mall outside, both. We were always kiddin' back an' forth.

Well, one day, the second morning it was, she gets off the bus.

It's in the summer. Jesus, you could see everything she had. An' Pm tellin° you, she

had plenty.

She goes uwaggerin' by us, Red an' ms. We're lookin: au' not =akin'

no bones about it either.

That dame knew what the score was, all right. She steps when

she gets up to us an' just looks at us an' laughs. Then off she goes, swingie that

rump of hers--Oh :ems!" An' when she gets to the door, she looks around an' yells,

sort of soft an' just loud enough for us to hear:

It was good enough to eat.

We swaggered around like that for weeks, Bain':

Oh, Iesusl

10. Two Tough Broads

Did I ever tell you about the two tough broads?

It aint much of a story.

It's like this.

I was workin in a saloon au S. State, ant the bartender tells it

to ms. It's about a snippy little waitress. I didn't see her; the wasn'tworkin' there

no more when I was letterin' the joint.

FORM C TE1T 9

CHICAGO

FOLIMTUFF

Two broads come in an' order some sandwiches an , beer. The

waitress is kind o's low gettin' them their orders an' they start givin' her the works,

ramarkint on the way she looks, the clothes she wears, ant pretty much everything else

in general, including the fact that she puts it out. Whether she did or not I don't

know. I don'tknow anything about her but this that I'm tellint you.

Well, the waitress goes over an' tells them where to get off.

Kind elow. The barkeep didn'thear what she said.

drinkin' beer an' eyein' the waitress.

The broads sit around, maybe one and a half-two hours, just

After a while the waitress has to go to the can. An' damn

if the broads don't follow her in. Pretty soon there's oarsman' ant bumpin an' hell

to pay in general. By the time the barkeep ' d got help an' got them out otthere, than

two tough broads had just about killed that kid, I guess.

The bartender was sort oesorry about it. She was a good kid,

he said, a good kid, but not tough enough. 1M gotta be tough yourself to talk back

to a tough broad, he said. But you want them pretty, in the saloons, too, and they

don'talways go together. The barkeep said he was sorry as hell. Be shook his

head over it for a hell of a while.

U. Anti Semitiam

a Jewish neighborhood, feature that.

This one happened out south. And the hell of it is, it's in

The guy was sayin° how much he hated "kikes." "Take, for

example," he said, "the two couples that was in here the other night."

Me, I always say, "Yeh," - you know as, get- the story Phil.

So it's like this.

FOB( C TUT 10

CHICAGO FOLKSTETIT

These two couples - they're all dressed up to kill, fur coats

an' evening gowns on the dames, and the lads in tuxes, or evening suits, or whatever

the hell, an' they're drinkin° and eatint an' having fun.

The waitress-- I don'tknow how she come to do it, but she did--

she spilled two cocktails. Well, the guy says, the tavern keeper I mean, a little

of the stuff got on the clothes.

So one of the guys calls the tavern keeper over. They want him

to look at what's happened and to pay the cleaning bill.

But the tavern keeper says that ' 11 cone to too mach, it aint

worth it. Besides, most of the stuff was on the table cloth not the kikes• " clothes,

an' how mach syrup was there in two cocktails, anyway? "Leave it to them to make a good

thing out of something like that," he says.

So they get sore all around and the tavern keeper calls for

the bill. It comes to something like two- sixty, if I remember right, an' he sass

"All right, now this is on the house; that's as much as I'll pay and I won't pay

no more."

Then one of the guys, or maybe it was one of the dames,

I don'tremember now, says, "Well, we won'to ome in here no more."

The tavernkeeper laughs. He says to me, "A hell of a lot I

Oars. That's the way I treat these goddamn hikes."

12. The City That Knocked Himself Out

This one happened on State near Congress. I had a good view,

because I was on a ladder looking down, and I laughed so hard I almost fell off. Look,

it's a pippin', an' if it doesn't get you, why, you ought to be doing some other kind

of work.

FORM C TEXT 11

CHICAGO FOLKSTUIT

It was outside of a saloon as usual, of course.

There was two guys. One was mall, a shrimp maybe five foot four

or something like that, and the other was a big gay. I mean bat

It's classic. You might put this one in the movies. You

couldn'tmake up a better one than this. By the way, I can substantiate everything

I'm telling you. I don't --what's the word?

Fictionize, that's right; I don'tfictionize anything. It's

all true, every word of it.

Well, these two guys were fighting. I mean, it was as if

they was going to fight. One guy, the little fellow, he was walking (lirass

around the big guy, posturing, gesturing, like a prize fighter, like a professional.

The big guy just looked sort of puzzled and sick.

The guy with all the class, the one that was doing all the

posturing and gesturing, dancing around like Pavlowa, all of a sudden he stumbled.

Guess how. Well, I'll tell you. He caught the toe of one foot behind the heel of

the other and he stumbled and fell. When he fell he hit his head on the curbstone

and rolled off of the sidewalk into the gutter. Belt knocked himself out. I was

up there on that ladder and I almost split my guts laughing. But that •isn't-

the end. The next part's funnier.

The big one, the muselehead that was all the time skull

draggin' around looking puzzled and sick, he suddenly comes out of it. He's lost

his straw hat, it's laying on the sidewalk, and he stoops and picks it up. Than he

looks at the little guy that's Win' unconscious in the street, and then he looks

at the crowd.

By the way, I forgot to tell you, there was a hell of a crowd

standing around gawking. He looks around, and it's as if he was saying, "Any of you

guys want to get tough with me?" Be didn't say a word, but that was what his face

FORM C TEXT 12

CHICAGO FOLESTUFF

said, and the crowd just melted away. There wasn't a blow struck.

15. The Best IS Got In ma House.

I was workin' in a saloon a couple of weeks ago, an' a guy

walks in an' says, "Gime the best ya got in tha house."

The barkeep gives it to him, an' he puts it down en' starts

to walk away.

payday."

The barkeep yells, "Hey! - how about the dough?"

This guy, he just turns around and laughs and says, " I'll see you

There wasn't anyone in the saloon but the barkeep an me an' the

lad helpint me to letter up the place, an' this guy.

The barkeep comes out from behind the bar.

This guy, he just turns an' looks at the barkeep an' laughs

an' walks out.

guy?"

The lad with me, he says to the barkeep, "Don't you know the

The barkeep, he scratches his head an' says, "Bever saw him

before in my life. I'll be a son of a bitch!"

I never saw anything like that before. Did you?

14. Two Irishmen

This one happened in a saloon on 51st street.

Two Irishmen had been bullcrappint each other for hours. These

Irish. They'll be standin' around drinkin', and' someone'll know a Mahoney, say, an'

someone else'll know a Mahoney, an' so he'll hear the first guy speak of Mahoney

an' want to know, " Is that the Mahoney that lives down on Racine and 50th," or

wherever the hell, abd that's the way they break the ice, and pretty soon they're

all thick as jelly and talkin' hell for leath, each one tryin' to out-bullerap the

FOAL C TEXT 13

CHICAGO FOLEBTUFF

other. The Irish saloons are the filthiest of 'em all. And the toughest. Did

you see the Informer? Well, remember the saloon? They got it there, all right.

I've seen it over and over again. It's the same way righthere in Chicago.

These two. They had plenty under their belt. It was all

beer, though, because I was watching them. Well, after a While, they stop talking

so much, and then one of them starts to argue, en' the bartender says something to

him, an' he goes outside. I see him standing there for maybe half an hour.

Pretty soon I've got to go outside s too, to judge the layout,

and while

standin' there, this guy comes up to as. Be says:

"That's the bull, that's the bull. I spent a dollar and a

half and he only spent a half dollar, he's got to come across with a few. Be can't

got away with that bull with me. That's the bull, that

the bull, I spent

Over and over again. I went baok inside and he followed as in.

Pretty soon there Wa8 talking again, plenty of it - the same

two Irishmen.

Well, they three the guy who'd been talking to ma out on his

ear. I mean on his ear, Abe.

They picked him up and three him through the air

and he landed with a plop on his side and his head bumped on the sidewalk so I thought

he'd crack his skull, at least. I never saw anything like that before.

Was he hurt? Now. He got up cursing and walled away. Now

there's something for you, maybe you can use that one, I don'tknow.

15. MY America

I was workie in a saloon just west of Western on ? 1st. It's

Lithuanian or Polish, something like thE,t, I don'tknow. The owner's wife let me

in every morning.

Because she'd be busy cleaning the joint while I worked, and

the old man, he had to be up late at night so he didn't get up till maybe elevenr.

FORM O TEXT 14

CHICAGO

FOLESTUFF

twelve o'clock. She'd come out with pail and mop, but before she started to work

she'd park her fanny behind the bar.

There's a little radio there. She'd turn it on and listen,

with her head almost on top of it. By God, I thought her ears were glued to that

loudspeaker. But always the same programs, two of them, always the same ones.

They were "Dan's Other Wife" and "Road TO Life." Or maybe it's "Road of Life."

Aint that a bitch, though?

And as soon as those two programa were over, always

the sane two, she'd turn off the radio and begin to work like hell, noppin. up that

floor.

There's Amerioa: what are you going to do with it?