University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program 


Gaming  Regulation  in  Nevada 


UNOHP  Catalog  #236 


Interviewees: 


Interviewed: 

Published: 


Patricia  Becker,  Paul  Bible,  William  (Bill)  Bible, 
Shannon  Bybee,  Gerald  Cunningham,  William  (Bill) 
Curran,  Steve  DuChanne,  Bert  Goldwater,  Dennis 
Gomes,  Phillip  (Phil)  Hannifin,  S.  Barton  (Bart) 

Jacka,  Bob  Lewis,  Arthur  Marshall,  Wayne  Pearson, 
Harry  Reid,  Michael  Rumbolz,  Brian  Sandoval,  Frank 
Schreck,  Jack  Stratton,  Roger  Trounday,  Sue  Wagner 

2001-2004 

2016 


Interviewer:  Dwayne  Kling 

Volume  Editor:  Alicia  Barber,  Ph.D. 


Description 

Through  interviews  with  2 1  individuals  with  a  wide  range  of  firsthand  experiences,  this  oral  history 
project  illuminates  the  evolution  of  gaming  regulation  in  Nevada.  The  elimination  of  organized  crime 
from  the  state’s  casinos  might  have  happened  without  the  increased  vigilance  of  state  gaming  regulators, 
but  these  events  undoubtedly  would  have  unfolded  more  slowly  and  perhaps  even  more  controversially  if 
left  only  to  federal  prosecutors  and  investigators.  With  the  assignment  of  casino  licensing  responsibilities 
and  levying  of  gaming  taxes  to  the  Nevada  Tax  Commission  and,  later,  the  creation  of  the  Gaming 
Control  Board  and  the  Gaming  Commission,  the  state  of  Nevada  established  a  groundbreaking  and  highly 
effective  regulatory  structure  for  the  casino  industry,  setting  the  standard  for  others  to  follow.  From  the 
origins  of  the  state’s  regulatory  policies  to  investigations  of  prominent  mob  figures,  from  the  advent  of 
corporate  licensing  to  the  challenges  posed  by  changing  technologies,  these  stories  provide  a  fascinating 
inside  glimpse  of  an  industry  and  its  regulatory  apparatus  from  the  1950s  to  the  early  2000s. 


This  oral  history  collection  may  be  downloaded  and/or  printed  for  personal  reference  and 
educational  use,  but  not  republished  or  sold.  Requests  for  permission  to  use  transcripts  or 
recordings  for  commercial  purposes  should  be  directed  to  the  Special  Collections  Department, 
University  of  Nevada,  Reno  Libraries,  (775)  682-5665,  specoll@unr.edu. 


Gaming  Regulation  in  Nevada 


University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program 

All  rights  reserved.  Published  2016. 

Special  Collections  Department,  University  of  Nevada,  Reno  Libraries 


Contents 

Foreword . iv 

Introduction . vii 

Chapter  1:  Patricia  Becker . 1 

Chapter  2:  Paul  Bible .  19 

Chapter  3:  William  (Bill)  Bible . 35 

Chapter  4:  Shannon  Bybee . 46 

Chapter  5:  Gerald  Cunningham . 103 

Chapter  6:  William  (Bill)  Curran . 147 

Chapter  7:  Steve  DuCharme . 171 

Chapter  8:  Bert  Goldwater . 193 

Chapter  9:  Dennis  Gomes . 207 

Chapter  10:  Phil  Hannifin . 239 

Chapter  1 1:  S.  Barton  (Bart)  Jacka . 287 

Chapter  12:  Bob  Lewis . 309 

Chapter  13:  Arthur  Marshall . 332 

Chapter  14:  Wayne  Pearson . 357 

Chapter  15:  Harry  Reid . 384 

Chapter  16:  Michael  Rumbolz . 401 

Chapter  17:  Brian  Sandoval . 425 

Chapter  18:  Frank  Schreck . 449 

Chapter  19:  Jack  Stratton . 479 

Chapter  20:  Roger  Trounday . 493 

Chapter  21:  Sue  Wagner . 523 


IV 


Foreword 


As  might  be  expected  for  an  oral  history  program  founded  in  the  state  of  Nevada,  the  University  of 
Nevada  Oral  History  Program  (UNOHP)  sought  out  firsthand  recollections  of  the  gaming  industry  from 
an  early  date.  Oral  histories  contained  in  its  collection  include  those  of  major  casino  owners  and  operators 
including  Bill  Harrah,  “Benny”  Binion,  Dick  Graves,  Warren  Nelson,  Silvio  Petricciani,  Morton  Saiger, 
Jack  Douglass,  and  Pete  Cladianos,  Jr.  The  chronicles  of  dedicated  casino  employees  ranging  from 
dealers  to  advertising  executives  also  appear  throughout  the  archive. 

The  topic  of  gaming  regulation  forms  a  critical  piece  of  several  of  the  program’s  early  volumes, 
as  well.  Robbins  Cahill,  interviewed  by  Mary  Ellen  Glass  in  1971-72,  chaired  the  Gaming  Control  Board 
from  1955  to  1958.  His  oral  history  is  an  indispensable  source  on  Nevada  gaming  since  1945.  Another 
early  chronicler,  Edward  A.  Olsen,  was  a  successful  journalist  who  began  covering  gambling  in  the  mid- 
1940s  and  later  became  the  assistant  secretary  of  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission.  Appointed  by 
Governor  Grant  Sawyer  to  chair  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  he  served  from  1961  to  1966  and  was 
interviewed  by  Mary  Ellen  Glass  in  1967-1969. 

Gary  E.  Elliot  interviewed  Nevada  Governor  Grant  Sawyer  for  the  program  in  1991  and  1993, 
producing  an  oral  history  that  forms  the  basis  for  the  UNOHP -published  book,  Hang  Tough!  Grant 
Sawyer:  An  Activist  in  the  Governor’s  Mansion.  Sawyer  began  his  administration  in  1959,  when  gaming 
control  was  largely  ignored  outside  of  Nevada.  He  was  acutely  aware  that  after  the  Kefauver  crime 
hearings  in  1950,  Nevada  would  be  judged  by  how  it  controlled  casino  gaming  and  the  people  involved  in 
Nevada’s  “peculiar  institution.”  Consequently,  he  moved  early  in  his  administration  to  claim  the  high 
ground  in  gaming  control  through  the  creation  of  Nevada’s  first  Gaming  Control  Board. 

Under  the  directorship  of  Tom  King,  the  UNOHP  created  a  Gaming  Advisory  Board  to  provide 
input  on  possible  gaming-related  topics  and  to  suggest  possible  chroniclers.  In  2001,  after  receiving 
training  from  the  Oral  History  Program,  advisory  board  member  Dwayne  Kling  began  to  interview 
individuals  with  firsthand  experiences  in  gaming  regulation. 

In  addition  to  the  transcripts  contained  in  this  volume,  Kling  conducted  interviews  with  two  other 
prominent  figures:  Guy  W.  Farmer  and  Robert  (Bob)  Faiss.  Their  interviews  appear  in  separate  volumes 
professionally  published  by  the  UNOHP:  Farmer,  interviewed  by  Kling  in  2001,  served  as  Public 
Information  Officer  for  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  and  Gaming  Control  Board  from  August  1963 
through  1966.  There,  his  principal  responsibilities  were  to  serve  as  press  spokesman  for  the  gaming 
control  agencies  and  as  liaison  officer  with  state  and  national  media.  His  recollections  of  the  early 
members  of  the  Commission  and  Control  Board  are  vital  memories  of  Nevada’s  once  unique  gaming 


GAMING  REGULATION  IN  NEVADA 


v 


control  system.  In  2006,  the  UNOHP  published  the  book  based  on  his  interviews,  titled  Guy  W.  Farmer: 
Gaming  Regulation  in  Nevada — The  First  Sawyer  Administration. 

Bob  Faiss,  interviewed  by  Kling  in  2002,  became  assistant  executive  secretary  of  the  Nevada 
Gaming  Commission  in  1961.  In  that  role,  he  created  the  first  state  publication  on  the  history,  economics, 
and  control  of  the  gaming  industry.  A  protege  of  Grant  Sawyer,  Faiss  went  on  to  become  the  head  of  the 
gaming  division  of  the  state’s  largest  law  firm,  Lionel  Sawyer  &  Collins.  With  Faiss  at  the  helm,  the 
gaming  law  division  of  LSC  became  arguably  the  most  powerful  and  influential  in  its  field,  anywhere  in 
the  world.  Fie  was  responsible  for  many  important  parts  of  the  Nevada  Revised  Statutes  and  the 
regulations  that  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  and  the  Nevada  Gaming  Control  Board  use  today. 
Published  by  the  UNOHP  in  2006,  Faiss’  memoir,  Gaming  Regulation  and  Gaming  Law  in  Nevada,  is  an 
eloquent,  eyewitness  account  of  crucial  events  and  moments  in  the  history  of  legalized  gaming  in  the 
state. 

The  remaining  21  interviews  Kling  conducted  for  the  gaming  regulation  project  are  compiled  in 
this  volume.  The  participants  span  a  wide  range  of  experiences  and  eras.  The  majority  served  either  on  the 
Gaming  Control  Board  or  Gaming  Commission,  many  as  chair.  The  earliest  was  Bert  Goldwater, 
appointed  by  Governor  Grant  Sawyer  to  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  in  1959.  Some  served  only  a 
year,  while  others,  like  Jack  Stratton,  served  for  more  than  a  decade.  Figures  like  Harry  Reid  and  Brian 
Sandoval  moved  on  from  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  to  extensive,  high-profile  careers  in  public 
service.  The  wide  range  of  topics  covered  include  the  licensing  of  mob-related  properties,  investigations 
of  skimming  allegations,  the  List  of  Excluded  Persons,  changes  in  regulatory  legislation,  the  relationship 
between  the  Board  and  the  Commission,  the  impact  of  coiporate  licensing,  and  much  more. 

Transcripts  of  the  oral  histories  contained  in  this  collection  were  sent  back  to  the  participants, 
who  had  the  opportunity  to  provide  edits  and  corrections.  The  project  then  lay  dormant  for  several  years 
until  it  could  be  professionally  edited  and  added  to  the  UNOHP  archive.  While  taking  great  pains  not  to 
alter  meaning  in  any  way,  we  have  removed  false  starts,  redundancies,  and  the  “uhs,”  “ahs,”  and  other 
noises  with  which  speech  is  often  liberally  sprinkled;  compressed  some  passages  which,  in  unaltered 
form,  misrepresent  the  chronicler’s  meaning;  and  relocated  some  material  to  place  information  in  its 
intended  context. 

While  these  interviews  are  without  question  authentic,  it  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  these  are 
remembered  pasts,  and  the  recollections  contained  here  are  not  presented  as  entirely  free  of  error.  It  can 
be  stated,  however,  that  the  transcripts  accurately  reflect  the  oral  history  recordings  on  which  they  were 
based.  Accordingly,  each  transcript  should  be  approached  with  the  same  prudence  exercised  when 
consulting  government  records,  newspaper  accounts,  diaries,  and  other  primary  sources  of  historical 
information.  All  statements  made  here  constitute  the  remembrance  or  opinions  of  the  individuals  who 
were  interviewed,  and  not  the  opinions  of  the  project’s  planners,  sponsors,  or  the  University  of  Nevada, 
Reno. 

This  project  received  generous  support  from  the  Charles  Mathewson  Foundation,  Lionel  Sawyer 
&  Collins,  Ken  Adams,  Bill  Douglass,  and  the  Melton-Gannett  Endowment. 

Alicia  Barber 
September  2016 


VI 


About  the  Interviewer 

Dwayne  Kling  began  his  professional  association  with  Nevada  gaming  in  1954,  the  year  he  returned  to 
Reno  after  playing  professional  baseball  in  the  Yankee  farm  system.  He  began  at  Harolds  Club,  carrying 
change  on  the  graveyard  shift.  From  there  he  learned  to  deal  craps,  became  a  pit  supervisor,  and  finally 
rose  to  the  position  of  a  casino  manager  and  later  a  general  manager.  Over  the  course  of  his  career,  he 
held  various  executive  positions  at  the  Peppermill  Hotel  Casino,  Harrah’s  Club,  Harolds  Club,  the 
Virginian  Hotel-Casino,  Ponderosa  Hotel,  the  Horseshoe  Club,  and  the  Silver  Spur  Casino.  Kling  retired 
in  1995.  His  book,  The  Rise  of  the  Biggest  Little  City:  An  Encyclopedic  History  of  Reno  Gaming,  1931- 
1981,  was  published  by  the  University  of  Nevada  Press  in  2000.  Kling  himself  was  interviewed  by  Ken 
Adams  for  the  University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program  in  1998,  and  his  transcript  was  published  in 
2000  with  the  title,  Dwayne  Kling:  Luck  is  the  Residue  of  Design. 


GAMING  REGULATION  IN  NEVADA 


vii 


Introduction 


For  nearly  half  a  century,  Nevada  stood  alone  as  the  only  state  in  the  United  States  with  legal 
gambling.  Today,  all  but  two  states  have  some  form  of  it,  Native  American  groups  own  casinos,  and 
riverboats  boast  everything  from  crap  tables  to  slot  machines.  With  this  growth  has  come  a  need  to 
regulate  the  industry,  and  Nevada’s  approach  has  attracted  attention  from  throughout  the  world.  Nevada’s 
gaming  regulatory  system  has  evolved  into  the  world’s  finest,  and  these  oral  histories  suggest  how  and 
why — and  that  none  of  it  happened  overnight. 

Nevadans  enjoyed  legal  gambling  from  1869  to  1910,  when  an  anti-gambling  law  passed  by  the 
1 909  legislature  took  effect.  The  state  played  no  role  in  regulating  its  legal  casinos  or  combatting  illegal 
casinos,  leaving  everything  to  the  cities  and  counties.  By  1919,  Governor  Emmet  Boyle,  a  committed 
Progressive  and  thus  a  believer  in  expanded  government  regulation  and  in  moral  reform,  deemed  the  anti¬ 
gambling  law  a  failure  and  suggested  a  “rigid  enforceable  law  designed  to  prohibit  gambling  in  all 
forms,”  but  to  no  avail. 

During  the  1920s,  Nevada  turned  increasingly  to  catering  to  tourists  in  pursuit  of  what  others 
considered  vice  and  immorality.  In  1 927,  the  legislature  cut  the  residency  requirement  for  divorce  in  half 
to  three  months,  appalling  opponents  of  “easy  divorce”  but  appealing  to  those  seeking  to  end  their 
marriages.  The  activities  available  to  those  seeking  divorce  included  gambling  in  Reno  casinos  whose 
investors  included  George  Wingfield,  the  state’s  political  and  economic  boss.  Many  throughout  the  state 
also  flouted  Prohibition.  Those  disembarking  from  the  Union  Pacific  depot  in  downtown  Las  Vegas  had  a 
short  walk  to  Block  1 6  and  its  gambling,  prostitution,  and  illegal  alcohol. 

In  1931,  Nevada  went  much  further.  The  1931  legislative  session,  meeting  as  construction  began 
on  Hoover  Dam,  turned  out  to  be  the  most  important  in  Nevada’s  history.  On  March  19,  two  laws  passed 
and  signed  by  Governor  Fred  Balzar  would  have  a  profound  impact  on  the  state’s  future.  Legislators 
voted  to  cut  the  residency  requirement  for  divorce  from  three  months  to  six  weeks,  effective  May  1 ,  and 
legalized  gambling  immediately.  The  assemblyman  who  introduced  the  gambling  bill,  Humboldt  County 
rancher  Phil  Tobin,  claimed  a  desire  to  increase  state  revenues  and  legalize  what  had  been  going  on 
anyway.  Las  Vegas  casino  operator  Harold  Stocker  said  that  he  sent  at  least  one  suitcase  of  money  to  the 
legislature.  Others  point  to  organized  crime  interests,  especially  Chicago,  and  Johnny  Rosselli,  later  a 
mob  overseer  on  the  Las  Vegas  Strip. 

But  Nevada  had  other  motivations.  Businessmen  hoped  that  those  who  came  to  Nevada  for  a 
divorce  would  find  their  six  weeks  so  pleasant  that  they  would  choose  to  live  in  the  state  and  become 
taxpayers  and  investors.  Gambling  would  be  another  way  to  attract  those  visitors.  The  state’s  leading 


businessman,  Wingfield,  would  reap  benefits  from  legal  gambling  at  his  banks  and  hotels,  and  such  a  law 
fit  neatly  with  his  libertarian  inclinations. 

Those  inclinations  affected  how  the  state  regulated  its  new  industry — it  chose  not  to  do  so.  The 
legislature  left  licensing  decisions  up  to  cities  and  counties.  In  turn,  the  local  government  sent  one-quarter 
of  the  fees  they  received  to  the  state.  Each  county  would  set  up  a  five-member  board  that  would  include 
its  three  county  commissioners  (today,  county  commissions  range  from  three  to  seven  members),  the 
sheriff,  and  the  district  attorney. 

The  signs  proved  to  be  ominous.  Addressing  concerns  about  organized  crime,  Reno’s  sheriff  said, 
“A1  Capone  is  welcome  in  Reno  as  long  as  he  behaves  himself.”  Making  this  comment  worrisome,  at 
least  in  hindsight,  Reno  had  a  long  history  of  illegal  casinos,  Capone’s  friend  Frank  Detra’s  Pair-O-Dice 
debuted  on  Highway  91  (across  from  today’s  Wynn  Las  Vegas)  outside  Las  Vegas  in  1930,  Detra 
allegedly  put  in  money  to  support  legal  gambling  that  may  have  come  from  Capone  himself,  and  Capone 
rarely  behaved  himself.  The  Las  Vegas  Evening  Review-Journal  said,  “People  should  not  get  overly 
excited  over  the  effects  of  the  new  gambling  bill — conditions  will  be  little  different  than  they  are  at  the 
present  time,  except  that  some  things  will  be  done  openly  that  have  previously  been  done  in  secret.”  If 
Nevadans  seemed  unexcited  over  legal  gambling,  the  national  reaction  provided  a  stark  contrast:  the 
Chicago  Tribune  spoke  for  many  with  the  headline,  “CANCEL  NEVADA’S  STATEHOOD!” 

Nevada  survived  as  a  state,  and  gambling  proved  to  be  important,  but  not  dominant.  As  it 
expanded  in  Reno,  Las  Vegas,  and  other  Nevada  cities,  and  in  particular  as  organized  crime  interests 
began  to  flex  their  muscles,  the  state  saw  an  opportunity  for  additional  revenue  and  a  need  to  step  in.  In 
1945,  the  legislature  approved  bills  to  have  the  Nevada  Tax  Commission  investigate  and  decide  upon  all 
gaming  license  applicants,  and  to  tax  gross  revenues  from  gaming  at  one  percent.  Unhappy  with  the  bill 
but  realizing  it  enjoyed  broad  support,  Governor  E.P.  Carville  let  it  become  law  without  his  signature  and 
warned  that  “the  wiser  course  would  have  been  to  avoid  this  type  of  taxation,  and  obtain  a  just 
contribution  from  the  gambling  business  by  imposing  a  higher  license  fee.”  He  apparently  feared  that 
taxation  without  representation  would  indeed  be  tyranny,  and  therefore  casino  operators  would  see  it  as 
necessary  and  proper  to  become  involved  in  state  politics — and  they  did. 

But  these  constituted  baby  steps.  The  Tax  Commission  hired  a  secretary,  Robbins  Cahill,  who,  in 
his  early  years,  functioned  as  a  one-man  regulatory  system,  doing  almost  everything  himself.  State 
employees  had  little  or  no  training  or  background  in  the  industry.  And  the  extent  of  its  powers  remained 
in  flux,  although  a  1949  opinion  by  state  attorney  general  Alan  Bible  clarified  that  the  Tax  Commission 
had  power  over  local  licensure  and  could  reject  an  applicant  for  “just  cause,  unsavory  reputation,  or  other 
reasons  of  public  interest.”  When  Estes  Kefauver  brought  his  Senate  Committee  on  Organized  Crime  to 
Las  Vegas  in  1950,  he  found  Nevada’s  regulatory  structure  appalling:  casino  owners  and  politicians  had 
power  over  and  in  the  Tax  Commission.  He  criticized  Nevada  in  his  final  report  and  the  book  based  on  it, 
but  had  little  impact  on  how  the  state  went  about  regulating  its  business. 

That  the  state  needed  to  do  much  more  became  painfully  evident  in  1954,  during  the  reelection 
campaign  of  Governor  Charles  Russell,  and  it  all  started  with  prostitution.  After  an  FBI  raid  on  a  brothel, 
Hank  Greenspun,  the  publisher  of  the  Las  Vegas  Sun,  accused  Clark  County  Sheriff  Glen  Jones  of  taking 
bribes  to  allow  the  business  to  stay  open,  prompting  Jones  to  sue  Greenspun  for  libel.  In  turn,  Greenspun 
and  his  staff  put  together  a  sting  operation,  hiring  a  private  detective  who  posed  as  an  East  Coast 
hoodlum.  They  recorded  his  discussions  with  local  officials  about  his  plans,  his  criminal  record,  and  how 
he  could  obtain  a  license.  According  to  the  transcripts,  the  lieutenant  governor  and  Democratic  national 
committeeman,  Cliff  Jones  (no  relation  to  the  sheriff),  claimed  that  after  Russell’s  defeat,  he  would  have 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


IX 


power,  force  out  Cahill,  and  gut  the  Tax  Commission’s  power — and  that  Meyer  and  Jake  Lansky  held 
hidden  interests  in  the  Thunderbird,  a  Strip  hotel  that  Jones  co-owned.  The  publication  of  this  news 
affected  the  outcome:  Russell  won  reelection  (and  the  sheriff,  caught  accepting  money  from  the  ersatz 
gangster,  dropped  his  lawsuit). 

In  1955,  Russell  and  the  legislature  responded.  They  set  up  a  Gaming  Control  Board  of  three 
members  appointed  by  the  governor  and  with  backgrounds  in  such  areas  as  accounting  and  law 
enforcement;  they  would  make  recommendations  to  the  Tax  Commission,  which  still  would  have  final 
approval.  The  Tax  Commission  also  revoked  the  Thunderbird’ s  gaming  license.  When  Jones  and  the 
other  owners,  led  by  Marion  Hicks,  filed  suit,  the  case  worked  its  way  to  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court. 

In  retrospect,  Nevadans  may  realize  how  valuable  gaming  regulation  would  turn  out  to  be,  but  the 
casino  owners  at  the  time  resented  it.  In  1957,  they  led  an  effort  to  pass  legislation  to  dilute  the  state’s 
power  to  revoke  licenses.  Russell  vetoed  the  bill,  which  passed  overwhelmingly.  With  a  two-thirds  vote 
required  to  override,  one  lawmaker,  Republican  State  Senator  Ralph  Lattin,  switched  to  Russell’s  side. 
Historian  James  Hulse,  then  a  reporter  covering  these  events,  described  Lattin’ s  vote  as  “a  singular  act  of 
courage  without  parallel  in  the  history  of  the  legislature.” 

The  Nevada  Supreme  Court  also  came  down  on  the  side  of  regulation.  Just  after  S.B.  92’s  defeat 
in  1957,  Nevada’s  three  high  court  justices  ruled  in  Tax  Commission  v.  Hicks  that  the  Tax  Commission 
had  acted  wrongly  when  it  pulled  the  Thunderbird’s  license  “without  substantial  evidentiary  support.”  But 
Justice  Charles  Merrill’s  majority  opinion  favored  the  state:  “Nevada  gambling,  if  it  is  to  succeed  as  a 
lawful  enterprise,  must  be  free  from  the  criminal  and  corruptive  taint  acquired  by  gambling  beyond  our 
borders,”  he  wrote.  “If  this  is  to  be  accomplished  not  only  must  the  operation  of  gambling  be  carefully 
controlled,  but  the  character  and  background  of  those  who  would  engage  in  gambling  in  this  state  must  be 
carefully  scrutinized.”  The  state  kept  the  power  to  regulate  its  casinos,  and  gained  more  of  it  from 
Merrill’s  opinion. 

After  defeating  Russell  for  a  third  term  in  1958,  new  Governor  Grant  Sawyer  created  the  modem 
gaming  regulatory  system  as  we  have  come  to  know  it.  Sawyer  saw  that  with  the  governor  serving  on  the 
Tax  Commission,  politics  could  too  easily  enter  into  decisions  on  licensing  and  rules.  Thus,  in  1959,  the 
state  legislature  approved  a  bill  creating  a  Gaming  Commission  that  would  consist  of  five  gubernatorial 
appointees,  freeing  the  governor  from  any  involvement  in  its  decisions — not  to  mention  that  if  the 
commissioners  made  somebody  angry,  Sawyer  or  any  other  governor  would  be  able  to  say  that  he  had 
nothing  to  do  with  it.  Two  years  later,  at  Sawyer’s  urging,  the  legislature  created  an  appointed  Gaming 
Policy  Board  that  could  meet  and  propose  regulations  and  changes.  Sawyer  told  his  regulators,  “Hang 
tough  and  you  will  be  doing  a  great  service  to  me,  to  the  industry,  and  to  the  state,”  and  the  governor  felt 
strongly  enough  about  his  statement  that  it  became  the  title  of  his  oral  history. 

These  and  other  steps  proved  controversial.  State  Attorney  General  Roger  D.  Foley  felt  that 
Sawyer  and  his  regulators  overstepped  their  powers.  Gaming  officials  proposed  a  “List  of  Excluded 
Persons,”  or  the  “Black  Book,”  as  it  became  known  for  the  binder  containing  the  names;  it  would  bar 
some  criminals  or  suspected  criminals  from  entering  a  casino,  starting  with  a  group  of  twelve  reputed 
mobsters,  all  with  Italian  backgrounds.  Sharing  Foley’s  concerns  about  civil  liberties,  Sawyer  said,  “I 
didn’t  see  how  we  could  put  somebody’s  name  on  a  list  and  say,  ‘You  can’t  go  into  a  public 
accommodation,”’  but,  he  said,  “I  was  in  favor  of  doing  anything  within  the  law  to  keep  those  people  out 
of  Nevada.”  One  of  them,  Marshall  Caifano,  also  known  as  Johnny  Marshall,  sued  in  a  federal  court, 
which  upheld  Nevada’s  actions. 


X 


But  the  Black  Book  also  caused  a  different  kind  of  black  mark.  Chicago  mobster  Sam  Giancana, 
an  original  member  of  the  list,  visited  Lake  Tahoe’s  Cal-Neva  Lodge  anyway  as  a  guest  of  the  resort’s 
licensed  owner:  Frank  Sinatra.  The  “Chairman  of  the  Board”  and  leader  of  the  Rat  Pack,  known  for  his 
loyalty  to  his  friends  and  a  temper,  and  rumored  to  be  Giancana’s  front  man,  resented  it  when  news  of 
Giancana’s  visit  appeared  in  the  press.  Sinatra’s  attorney  spoke  with  Ed  Olsen,  a  former  journalist  who 
chaired  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  but  then  the  singer  called  Olsen.  Although  Olsen  never  publicized  the 
discussion,  it  ended  Sinatra’s  ownership:  he  swore  at  Olsen  and  appeared  to  threaten  him,  and  then 
Sinatra  gave  up  his  license.  Shortly  thereafter,  Sawyer  saw  President  John  F.  Kennedy,  who  spoke  in  Las 
Vegas  in  the  early  days  of  a  reelection  campaign  that  he  would  never  have  the  chance  to  run.  After 
exchanging  greetings,  Kennedy  asked,  “What  are  you  guys  doing  to  my  friend,  Frank  Sinatra?”  Sawyer 
replied,  “Mr.  President,  I’ll  try  to  take  care  of  things  here  in  Nevada,  and  I  wish  you  luck  on  the  national 
level.” 

Sawyer — and  Nevada’s  gaming  regulators — also  needed  luck  at  the  national  level.  In  1960, 
Sawyer  had  been  Kennedy’s  leading  supporter  in  Nevada  and  his  closest  political  ally  had  chaired  the 
presidential  campaign  in  the  state.  But  Kennedy’s  younger  brother  Robert  had  been  counsel  to  a  Senate 
committee  investigating  labor  racketeering,  and  targeted  the  Teamsters,  their  pension  fund,  and  their 
powerful  leader,  Jimmy  Hoffa.  As  his  brother’s  attorney  general,  Bobby  Kennedy  continued  to  target  the 
mob.  The  Justice  Department  asked  Foley,  who  also  had  backed  JFK  in  1960,  to  deputize  65  federal 
agents  to  be  part  of  Nevada’s  Gaming  Control  Board  so  that  they  could  raid  the  state’s  casinos.  Sawyer 
and  Foley  went  to  Washington,  where  Sawyer  found  Bobby  Kennedy  contemptuous  of  him — a  far  cry,  he 
noted,  from  Kennedy’s  view  of  him  when  he  was  seeking  votes  at  the  1960  Democratic  National 
Convention.  The  governor  and  attorney  general  then  went  to  the  White  House  and,  whatever  they  told 
John  Kennedy,  the  raid  never  took  place. 

Sawyer  managed  to  criticize  both  organized  crime  and  the  federal  leaders  supposedly  targeting  it. 
He  attacked  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  the  legendary  director  of  the  FBI,  for  dishonesty  and  hoarding  information, 
and  for  violating  the  civil  rights  of  Nevadans  by  illegally  wiretapping  them.  Sawyer’s  appointees  also 
continued  to  add  members  to  the  Black  Book  and  to  raid  casinos  without  Bobby  Kennedy’s 
involvement — and  antagonized  casino  operators  who,  in  turn,  opposed  Sawyer’s  quest  for  a  third  term  in 
1966. 

The  winner  that  year,  Republican  Paul  Laxalt,  sought  a  different  approach  to  ferreting  out 
organized  crime  and  regulating  gaming.  He  encouraged  the  shopping  spree  by  Howard  Hughes  that  led  to 
the  reclusive  billionaire’s  purchase  of  half  a  dozen  Las  Vegas  casino  properties,  including  excusing  him 
from  the  requisite  personal  appearance  before  the  regulatory  boards.  He  pushed  for  passage  of  the 
Corporate  Gaming  Act  of  1969,  which  changed  the  state’s  rules,  which  required  every  stockholder  to  be 
licensed,  to  enable  publicly  traded  corporations  and  their  millions  of  investors  to  buy  casinos. 

Sawyer  had  feared  that  mobsters  would  simply  find  a  way  around  the  corporate  gaming  law,  and 
they  did:  they  formed  corporations  of  their  own.  The  classic  example,  Allen  R.  Glick’s  Argent 
Enteiprises,  bought  the  Stardust,  Fremont,  Hacienda,  and  Marina  Hotels  in  Las  Vegas,  thanks  to  a  $62.7 
million  loan  from  the  Teamsters  Central  States  Pension  Fund.  While  Glick  professed  naivete,  the 
Chicago,  Kansas  City,  and  Milwaukee  crime  families  exerted  actual  control  through  onetime  sports  fixer 
Frank  “Lefty”  Rosenthal,  who  oversaw  the  skimming  operation  at  Argent  properties.  The  Kansas  City 
mob  ran  the  Tropicana  Hotel  behind  a  frontwoman,  Mitzi  Stauffer  Briggs,  a  chemical  heiress.  Hoffa’s 
longtime  attorney  Morris  Shenker  ostensibly  owned  the  Dunes,  Detroit  and  St.  Louis  operators 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


xi 


represented  their  cities’  mobs  at  the  Aladdin,  and  organized  crime  continued  to  predominate  in  Nevada 
gaming,  especially  in  Las  Vegas. 

Both  federal  and  state  officials  responded.  Congress  passed  the  Racketeer  Influenced  and  Corrupt 
Organizations  Act  (RICO)  as  part  of  the  Organized  Crime  Control  Act  of  1970.  In  addition  to 
strengthening  penalties,  the  legislation  made  it  possible  to  prosecute  a  boss  or  “capo”  for  crimes 
committed  on  his  orders.  The  Justice  Department  stepped  up  its  Organized  Crime  Strike  Force,  eventually 
prosecuting  skimming  classes  involving  mobsters  throughout  the  Midwest,  and  the  Teamsters  union 
leaders  allied  with  them. 

In  Nevada,  what  Rosenthal  called  “the  O’ Callaghan  Gang,”  appointees  of  Governor  Mike 
O’Callaghan  and  the  agents  who  worked  for  them,  increasingly  targeted  suspicious  characters.  In  1976, 
state  gaming  agents  raided  the  Stardust  in  search  of  evidence  of  skimming.  Rosenthal  kept  taking 
different  job  titles  to  try  to  mask  his  actual  role  running  the  casino  until  finally  the  Gaming  Commission 
called  him  in  for  licensing  and  rejected  him.  Rosenthal  proceeded  to  challenge  the  ethics  of  the 
commission’s  chair,  Harry  Reid,  prompting  his  fellow  mobsters  to  add  a  nickname  to  “Lefty”:  “Crazy.” 
Reid  stood  his  ground,  Rosenthal  had  to  leave  the  Stardust,  and  in  the  wake  of  reports  and  investigations 
related  to  the  skim,  Glick  sold  his  hotels — but  his  successors  either  failed  or  proved  unwilling  to  make 
enough  changes,  and  lost  their  licenses  for  the  Stardust  and  Fremont  Hotels  in  1983. 

By  then,  Reid  and  the  Gaming  Commission  also  had  tackled  the  Tropicana.  On  FBI  wiretaps,  the 
hotel’s  show  producer,  a  Sicilian  mobster  who  had  taken  the  name  of  a  more  reputable  Italian  citizen 
named  Joe  Agosto,  claimed  to  control  a  regulator  he  called  “Cleanface,”  clearly  referring  to  the  boyish- 
looking  Reid.  In  a  highly  unusual  move,  FBI  officials  came  forward  and  made  clear  that  no  evidence 
existed  to  support  Agosto’s  claims.  The  same  wiretaps,  involving  Kansas  City  mobsters,  revealed  Carl 
Thomas,  a  respected  young  gaming  executive,  as  the  architect  of  the  Tropicana’s  skimming  operation, 
and  he  surrendered  his  license. 

Nevada’s  regulators  had  stood  up  to  the  challenge,  but  they  had  help — not  just  from  the  federal 
government,  but  also  from  the  media.  The  Valley  Times,  a  daily  Las  Vegas-area  newspaper,  reported 
extensively  on  gaming,  and  obtained  wiretap  transcripts  and  other  confidential  material.  Reporter  Ned 
Day  and  columnist  Dick  Odessky,  in  between  jobs  as  a  casino  publicist,  obtained  most  of  the  material — 
but  a  great  deal  of  the  information  came  to  them  through  another  reporter  by  way  of  Dennis  Gomes,  the 
head  of  the  Control  Board’s  audit  division,  who  had  feared  that  political  connections  might  enable 
mobsters  like  Rosenthal  to  escape  proper  scrutiny.  Ultimately,  the  state  did  its  duty,  but  so  did  the  press. 

To  say  that  everyone  lived  happily  ever  after  might  overstate  matters.  Rosenthal  survived  a  car 
bombing  and  lived  into  his  late  seventies  in  Florida.  Reid  found  a  bomb  attached  to  a  family  car,  and 
emerged  unscathed  from  that  to  go  on  to  serve  as  Senate  majority  leader.  Agosto  died  of  a  heart  attack  not 
long  after  testifying  in  court  against  other  mobsters.  After  a  car  bombing  attempt,  Day  died  while  on 
vacation  in  Hawaii. 

One  of  the  subjects  of  regulators’  attention,  Anthony  Spilotro,  joined  Rosenthal  in  achieving  the 
status  of  legend.  Spilotro  had  come  to  Las  Vegas  in  1971  through  the  intervention  of  the  Teamsters 
pension  fund  boss,  Allen  Dorfman,  and  soon  took  over  street  crime.  Suspected  of  numerous  murders  in 
Chicago  and  Las  Vegas,  as  well  as  robberies,  Spilotro  managed  to  avoid  jail  time  until,  in  1986,  he 
returned  to  Chicago  for  a  meeting  apparently  intended  to  decide  who  would  take  over  that  city’s 
organized  crime  family.  Spilotro  lost,  in  more  ways  than  one.  He  and  his  brother  disappeared,  their  bodies 
found  a  few  days  later  in  an  Indiana  cornfield,  where  they  had  been  buried  after  being  beaten  to  death. 

The  story  of  Rosenthal  and  Spilotro  became  the  center  of  Casino,  a  1 995  film  directed  by  Martin 


Scorcese  and  starring  Robert  DeNiro  as  a  far  handsomer  version  of  Rosenthal  and  Joe  Pesci  as  Spilotro, 
with  Sharon  Stone  as  Geri  Rosenthal,  the  former’s  wife  and  the  latter’s  mistress.  Although  the  film  made 
the  mob  look  more  competent  than  it  seems  to  have  been,  given  its  ultimate  demise,  it  provides  the 
texture  and  context  of  the  times. 

The  mob’s  time  had  run  out.  By  1985,  federal  and  state  prosecutions  and  regulations,  as  well  as 
media  scrutiny,  had  driven  organized  crime  management  and  ownership  out  of  Nevada’s  casinos.  Since 
then,  multinational  corporations  have  taken  over  ownership  of  most  of  the  Las  Vegas  Strip  and  some  of 
Reno’s  resorts,  with  smaller  companies  involved  in  neighborhood  casinos  in  Las  Vegas  and  other 
properties  in  Reno.  Gaming  regulators  tend  to  concentrate  more  now  on  national  and  international  issues, 
technological  crimes  and  problems,  and  issues  of  security  and  securities. 

The  mob’s  elimination  from  casinos  might  have  happened  without  the  increased  vigilance  of  state 
gaming  regulators,  but  these  events  undoubtedly  would  have  unfolded  more  slowly  and  perhaps  even 
more  controversially  if  left  only  to  federal  prosecutors  and  investigators.  Today,  the  Nevada  Gaming 
Commission  and  Control  Board  continue  to  regulate  the  industry,  but  the  industry  has  changed 
significantly.  This  project  illuminates  the  evolution  of  gaming  regulation,  and  gaming  itself — complicated 
subjects,  involving  complicated  people  with  knowledge  to  share,  stories  to  tell,  and  warnings  to  impart. 
What  they  have  done,  and  continue  to  do,  never  has  been  simple  or  easy;  otherwise,  this  story  would  be 
far  different. 


Michael  S.  Green 
September  2016 


Dr.  Michael  S.  Green  is  an  associate  professor  of  history  at  UNLV.  He  is  the  author  of  Nevada: 
A  History  of  the  Silver  State  and  co-author  of  Las  Vegas:  A  Centennial  History,  among  other 
books  and  articles  about  Nevada.  He  has  published  three  books  on  the  Civil  War  era,  including 
Lincoln  and  the  Election  of 1860  and  Politics  and  America  in  Crisis:  The  Coming  of  the  Civil 
War.  He  writes  "Nevada  Yesterdays,"  read  by  former  U.S.  Senator  Richard  Bryan,  for  KNPR 
and  Nevada  Humanities.  A  columnist  for  Nevada's  Washington  Watch  and  Vegas  Seven,  Dr. 
Green  is  a  member  of  the  board  of  directors  for  The  Mob  Museum,  for  which  he  was  one  of  the 
researchers. 


GAMING  REGULATION  IN  NEVADA 


1 


1 

Patricia  Becker 


Born  in  1951,  Patricia  Becker  grew  up  in  Las  Vegas.  After 
earning  her  law  degree  at  California  Western  School  of  Law 
in  San  Diego,  she  returned  to  Nevada  and  clerked  for  Nevada 
Supreme  Court  Chief  Justice  Cameron  Batjer.  In  1979  she 
became  a  lawyer  with  the  state  attorney  general ’s  office, 
assigned  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board  and  Nevada  Gaming 
Commission.  In  1983,  Becker  was  appointed  to  the  Gaming 
Control  Board  by  Governor  Richard  Bryan  and  served  until 
fall  of  1984.  She  later  became  the  senior  vice  president  and 
general  counsel  for  Harrah ’s  and  senior  vice  president  of 
corporate  affairs  and  legal  for  Aladdin  Gaming.  In  1996  she 
established  her  consulting  firm,  Patricia  Becker  & 

Associates.  She  has  served  as  a  compliance  officer  for 
companies  including  Bally  Technologies  and  was  the 
Executive  Director  of  the  International  Gaming  Institute  at 
UNL  V from  2005  to  2011. 

Patricia  Becker.  Photo  courtesy  of  Patricia  Becker. 


Dwayne  Kling:  This  is  Dwayne  Kling.  It ’s  July  29,  2002.  I’m  with  Patty  Becker  in  her  office  in  the 
Aladdin  Hotel  in  Las  Vegas,  Nevada.  Patty,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada 
have  the  right  to  record  this  interview  that  we  are  about  to  begin  today? 

Patricia  Becker:  Yes. 

I  will  start  out  by  asking  when  and  where  were  you  born  and  when  you  came  to  Nevada. 


2 


I  was  bom  December  29,  1951  in  Los  Angeles,  California,  and  1  moved  to  Las  Vegas  in  1954. 1 
graduated  from  Clark  High  School  in  Las  Vegas,  and  then  1  went  to  undergraduate  school  both  in  Las 
Vegas  and  UNR.  1  graduated  from  UNR  in  1972  with  a  degree  in  elementary  education.  1  actually  taught 
second  grade  here  in  Las  Vegas  for  a  year,  and  then  went  off  to  law  school.  1  graduated  from  California 
Western  School  of  Law  in  San  Diego  in  December  1975. 

When  did  you  first  go  to  work  for  the  State  of  Nevada? 

Almost  immediately  after  graduation.  1  worked  part  time  for  the  state,  and  then  1  was  named  the 
law  clerk  for  Chief  Justice  Cameron  Batjer  of  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court.  1  started  that  job  after  1  took  the 
Nevada  bar  exam  in  September  of  1976. 

What  other  positions  did  you  hold  with  the  state  prior  to  being  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board? 

In  1977  Governor  O’Callaghan  appointed  me  to  a  position  that  had  just  been  created  by  the 
Nevada  legislature  called  “State  Industrial  Attorney.”  1  did  that  from  1977  to  1979.  And  then  in  the 
summer  of  1979  1  went  to  work  as  a  deputy  attorney  general  for  Richard  Bryan.  1  worked  part  time  for  the 
Gaming  Control  Board  and  part  time  for  the  civil  division. 

Did  the  Gaming  Board  have  a  full-time  deputy  attorney  general  at  that  time? 

Y es,  1  think  they  had  three  frill-time  positions,  and  1  was  brought  on  to  be  an  additional  part-time 
deputy  because  they  were  so  busy  in  the  attorney  general’s  office.  And  even  though  1  was  supposed  to  be 
part  time  in  the  civil  division — that’s  the  way  the  job  was  created — in  truth,  1  was  full  time  almost  from 
day  one  at  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  My  office  was  there,  and  they  had  so  much  work  that  they  made 
me  full  time  within  a  few  months. 

In  1978  Anthony  “Tony  the  Ant’’  Spilotro  was  entered  in  the  List  of  Excluded  Persons,  commonly  called 
the  “Black  Book.  ”  Did  he  appeal  the  legality  of  that  action? 

Yes.  He  took  that  case  to  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court  stating  that  the  List  of  Excluded  Persons,  or 
the  “Black  Book,”  was  unconstitutional,  and  that  the  constitutionality  of  that  statute  had  not  been  decided 
in  the  state  of  Nevada.  The  case  was  heard  at  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court  level.  Oscar  Goodman 
represented  Tony  Spilotro,  and  I  represented  the  State  of  Nevada.  At  that  time  1  was  chief  counsel  for  the 
Gaming  Control  Board  and  Gaming  Commission.  1  had  been  named  chief  in  December  1980. 

That  was  quite  a  responsible  assignment  that  you  were  given,  wasn ’t  it? 

Yes.  What  happened  was  [laughter]  Dick  Bryan  had  made  me  chief  in  December  of  1980.  It  had 
really  been  a  quantum  leap  when  1  was  named  deputy  A.G.  [attorney  general],  as  there  had  never  been  a 
woman  deputy  A.G.  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  Clearly,  there  had  never  been  a  chief  deputy  that  had 
been  female,  either,  so  it  was  an  honor  in  every  respect.  1  give  both  Governor  O’Callaghan  in  1977  and 
then- Attorney  General  Richard  Bryan  in  1979  a  lot  of  credit  for  having  the  foresight  and  the  openness  to 
appoint  women  to  positions  that  hadn’t  been  previously  held  by  women.  In  this  day  and  age  it’s  nothing, 


GAMING  REGULATION  IN  NEVADA 


3 


but  at  that  time,  when  I  took  the  Nevada  bar,  there  just  were  not  that  many  women  lawyers.  When  1  went 
to  law  school  there  were  only  a  handful  of  us  in  law  school.  So  it  was  very  unusual.  We  were  not  the 
norm  as  we  are  today. 

And  not  only  were  you  the  first  female,  but  you  were  quite  young  when  you  represented  the  state,  weren ’t 
you? 


Yes.  [laughter]  1  was  twenty-seven  when  1  went  to  work  as  a  deputy  A.G.,  and  it  was  a  week  or 
two  before  my  twenty-ninth  birthday  when  1  was  made  chief  counsel  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  So 
you’re  correct,  1  was  not  very  old. 

What  was  the  result  of  the  Spilotro  hearing? 

It  was  pretty  interesting  because  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court  had  just  ruled  that  cameras  could  be 
allowed  in  the  courtroom.  And  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court,  for  the  first  time  in  its  history,  allowed 
cameras  in  the  courtroom  for  that  hearing.  So  the  entire  hearing  was  taped,  and  although  it  wasn’t  shown 
in  its  entirety  on  television,  excerpts  were  on  all  of  the  evening  news  shows.  It  was  high  visibility. 

Richard  Bryan  sat  next  to  me  as  1  argued  the  case,  but  he  actually  allowed  me  to  argue  the  case.  He’s 
incredibly  competent,  and  he  was  an  incredibly  competent  lawyer.  He  could  easily  have  said,  “Oh,  I’m 
going  to  argue  that  case  as  attorney  general.”  I  worked  very  hard  to  prepare  for  that  case — very  hard.  I 
was  nervous.  I  actually  had  one  of  the  other  attorneys  in  the  office  come  over  to  my  home  and  pretend 
that  he  was  a  Supreme  Court  justice  and  ask  me  questions  to  help  me  prepare. 

Was  Mr.  Spilotro  present  at  the  hearing? 

No,  he  was  not.  1  never  saw  Mr.  Spilotro. 

Was  he  eventually  included  in  the  “Black  Book?  ” 

Yes.  It  was  a  lengthy  hearing.  I  think  they  gave  us  extended  time  for  oral  arguments.  I  remember 
the  courtroom  being  packed.  And  they  did  not  rule  from  the  bench.  They  just  asked  a  lot  of  questions. 

And  my  recollection  is  that  they  asked  more  questions  of  the  state — or  of  me — to  respond  to  than  they  did 
of  Mr.  Goodman.  But  eventually,  when  the  ruling  came  down,  the  state  was  victorious.  So  Mr.  Spilotro 
was  included  in  the  “Black  Book”  or  the  List  of  Excluded  Persons. 

Were  you  or  your  family  ever  threatened  during  this  appeal  or  at  any  other  time  during  the  years  you 
worked  for  the  state? 

No,  I  was  never  really  threatened.  But  in  a  slot-cheating  case  that  we  later  worked  on  in 
conjunction  with  the  FBI,  I  know  the  FBI  monitored  my  home.  I  was  a  single  woman  living  alone  at  that 
time,  and  I  know  that  they  kept  close  tabs  on  me.  The  slot-cheating  individual  was  in  the  protected 
witness  program,  and  the  FBI  agents  were  concerned  about  me  during  that  time  period.  They  told  me  after 
the  fact,  [laughter] 


4 


You  also  represented  the  state  in  the  case  in  which  the  Summa  Corporation  challenged  the  state ’s 
computation  of  gross  gaming  revenues.  Would  you  tell  us  about  that ,  please? 

That  case  related  to  whether  or  not  gaming  markers  were  going  to  be  taxed.  The  industry  was 
adamant  that  uncollected  gaming  markers  should  not  be  part  of  gross  revenue.  They  used  to  discount  the 
markers  as  a  business  decision,  and  the  state  audit  division  had  said  no,  the  revenue  should  be  included  in 
gross  revenue.  The  Summa  case  was  really  just  one  of  many.  The  entire  industry  was  doing  it,  and  that 
just  happened  to  be  the  case  that  was  taken  up  to  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court.  Bob  Faiss  represented 
Summa,  and  I  argued  the  case  for  the  state  before  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court,  and,  again,  the  state  was 
the  winner.  Subsequent  to  that,  legislation  was  enacted  so  that  there  were  standards  set  on  when  gaming 
markers  could  be  deducted  from  gross  gaming  revenue.  And  that  standard  is  still  being  utilized  today. 

So  that  was  a  landmark  ruling? 

Yes.  And  there’s  a  third  case  that  1  argued  before  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court.  The  issue  was  the 
constitutionality  of  the  board’s  ability  to  call  forward  somebody  for  licensing  who  was  doing  business  on 
the  premises  of  a  gaming  establishment.  That  had  never  been  challenged.  The  Gaming  Control  Board  had 
never  called  anyone  forward  under  that  statute.  The  Board  made  the  decision  to  call  the  individual 
forward  for  licensing,  and  he  challenged  the  constitutionality  of  that.  That  was  the  third  gaming  case  1 
argued  before  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court,  and  it  was  interesting  because  all  three  cases  occurred  within  a 
period  of  four  weeks.  So  it  was  a  very  hectic  time  period  for  me,  but  the  state  also  won  that  case.  Also,  it 
was  during  a  time  period  when  the  then-attorney  general,  Richard  Bryan,  was  running  against  the  then- 
governor,  Robert  List.  So  there  was  a  lot  of  pressure,  a  lot  of  publicity,  a  lot  of  focus.  And  those  three 
cases,  probably  to  this  day,  are  three  of  the  most  important  cases  that  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court  has 
decided  in  regard  to  gaming  law  in  the  state. 

You  were  appointed  as  chief  deputy  attorney  general  by  Richard  Bryan.  Were  other  people  considered  for 
the  position? 

Yes.  1  know  that  he  interviewed  several  people  before  1  was  made  chief  deputy.  It  was  a  quantum 
leap  for  someone  to  make  at  the  time.  1  have  always  respected  him,  and  I  was  also  very  thankful  to  him 
during  this  time  period,  because  he  made  the  decision  on  a  Thursday  or  a  Friday,  and  he  scheduled  a  press 
conference  for  the  following  week.  At  that  time  my  mother  was  terminally  ill  and  in  the  hospital,  so  he 
gave  me  permission  to  tell  her.  1  couldn’t  tell  anyone  else  that  1  was  going  to  be  made  chief  deputy,  but  1 
was  able  to  have  that  conversation  with  her.  Between  the  time  that  he  had  told  me  and  the  time  he  made  it 
public  she  passed  away.  So  I’ve  always  been  very  grateful  that  1  was  able  to  share  that  with  her  during 
that  time.  Richard  was  very  honorable  to  work  for,  and  very  bright.  When  tough  decisions  came  along, 
you  could  almost  speed  feed  him  the  facts  and  the  law  and  he  was  right  there  in  sync  with  you  to  assist  in 
making  a  tough  decision.  And  he  was  very  supportive.  You  never  had  to  wonder  if  he  would  change  his 
mind  on  a  decision.  If  he  was  there  during  the  time  you  made  a  joint  decision,  he’d  be  there  for  you  after 
the  fact. 

1  had  not  known  him,  1  had  not  met  him,  and  1  had  not  worked  for  him  before  he  appointed  me  as 
a  deputy  A.G.,  and  the  same  with  Governor  O’Callaghan.  Governor  O’Callaghan,  when  1  was  made  state 
industrial  attorney,  had  just  made  a  decision  that  he  was  going  to  look  for  some  prominent  women  to 


GAMING  REGULATION  IN  NEVADA 


5 


appoint  to  important  positions.  He  appointed  four  of  us  to  different  positions  and  at  that  point  in  time  he 
was  looking  for  a  woman  lawyer  to  fill  this  position,  and  there  just  weren’t  that  many  women  lawyers, 
[laughter] 

When  were  you  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board? 

1  became  a  board  member  in  January  1983.  Two  days  after  Richard  Bryan  had  been  elected 
governor — so  that  would  have  been  in  November  of  1982 — he  called  me  up  and  told  me  that  he  was 
going  to  make  me  a  member  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  That  was  the  first  time  that  we’d  ever 
discussed  it  or  that  he’d  ever  mentioned  it.  He  just  called  and  said,  “Look,  I’m  going  to  do  this.”  And  he 
said  to  me,  after  it  was  made  public,  that  he  wanted  me  to  go  around  and  meet  as  many  people  in  the 
industry  as  I  could — as  many  of  the  owners — because  he  knew  that  they  were  going  to  be  very  uneasy 
about  having  a  female  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board. 

How  old  were  you  when  you  were  appointed  to  the  board? 

1  had  just  turned  thirty-one  when  I  became  a  member  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board. 

You  were,  of  course,  as  we  mentioned,  the  first  female  to  be  appointed  to  the  Board.  Did  you  ever  feel  that 
you  were  being  patronized  by  other  board  members  or  members  of  the  gaming  community? 

I  don’t  know  if  “patronize”  would  be  the  right  word.  At  that  point  1  had  been  the  lawyer  for  the 
Board  and  Commission  for  three  and  a  half  years,  and  I  think  I  had  paid  dues  to  the  extent  that  I  had 
earned  a  reputation.  I  don’t  know  if  I  felt  patronized  by  the  other  members.  I  don’t  think  that  that  would 
be  correct,  or  by  the  industry,  really.  I  did  feel  like  I  was  an  anomaly.  The  press  that  I  received  when  I 
was  named  a  member  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  was  unexpected  to  me.  I  had  not  run  for  office.  I  had 
stayed  out  of  politics.  I  just  had  worked  hard  as  a  lawyer.  And  to  be  on  the  front  page  of  the  newspaper,  to 
have  people  recognize  you  when  you  went  to  the  grocery  store,  or  if  you  went  out  clothes  shopping  was  a 
huge  surprise  to  me.  And  I  think,  if  anything,  during  that  time  period,  I  remember  retreating  and 
becoming  shyer  and  shyer,  only  because  people  all  of  a  sudden  knew  who  I  was,  and  I  was  not 
accustomed  to  that. 

Who  did  you  replace  on  the  Board? 

I  replaced  Jack  Stratton. 

Do  you  have  an  opinion  on  why  there’s  never  been  another  female  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Control 
Board?  You  ’re  the  first,  last,  and  only. 

[laughter]  That  saddens  me  because  it’s  a  very  prestigious  job  and  it  opens  up  a  lot  of  doors.  I’m 
sure  that  in  the  future  there  will  be  other  female  members  of  the  board. 

When  you  were  appointed  to  the  board  in  1983  the  Stardust  Hotel-Casino  was  owned  by  Al  Sachs  and 
Herb  Tobman.  Would  you  tell  us  the  problems  that  came  to  light  at  the  Stardust  during  your  term  on  the 


6 


Board? 


I  don’t  recall  if  the  FBI  approached  the  Gaming  Control  Board  or  if  it  was  through  discussions, 
but  the  FBI  had  an  ongoing  investigation,  and  they  believed  that  there  was  skimming  ongoing  at  the 
Stardust.  And  they  requested  the  Gaming  Control  Board  to  join  them  in  the  investigation.  Then  one  of  the 
agents  at  the  Board — 1  believe  it  was  a  Board  agent,  it  might  have  been  one  of  the  FBI  agents — actually 
saw  infractions  occurring  when  we  were  doing  this  joint  investigation.  And  since  one  of  the  underlying 
premises  of  gaming  is  that  everything  be  honest  and  aboveboard,  the  Gaming  Control  Board  filed  a 
complaint  and  sought  an  emergency  revocation  of  the  gaming  license — an  emergency  order — so  that  Mr. 
Sachs  and  Mr.  Tobman,  even  pending  review  of  the  case,  would  not  be  allowed  to  be  in  the  operations.  1 
think  the  ability  to  have  that  kind  of  an  emergency  order  came  about  in  the  legislature,  and  had  only 
recently  been  enacted.  1  think  it  was  the  first  time  where  the  state  tried  to  take  over  and  operate  an 
establishment  under  an  emergency  order. 

Who  did  the  state  put  in  to  run  the  operation? 

That’s  an  interesting  question,  because  the  law  stated  that  you  had  to  go  to  the  court  and  name  a 
supervisor  to  put  in  charge  and  you  had  to  at  least  give  the  judge  two  names.  When  we  made  this  decision 
to  go  forward  with  the  Stardust,  and  the  chairman  of  the  Commission  signed  the  emergency  complaint 
and  order,  we  did  not  have  two  individuals  or  companies  that  would  agree  to  be  utilized  as  a  supervisor. 

So  1  think  it  was  a  day  or  two  after  the  emergency  order  was  signed — or  it  might  have  been  right  before 
the  emergency  order  was  signed — we  started  interviewing  every  major  gaming  company  in  the  state.  We 
asked  every  major  executive  of  companies  that  were  large  enough  that  we  thought  could  have  enough 
personnel  to  operate  the  Stardust  and  their  own  casino. 

The  last  person  in  the  afternoon  that  we  interviewed  was  Bill  Boyd.  Up  to  that  time  everyone  had 
said,  “We  want  to  support  the  Board.  We  understand  what  the  Board  has  done.  We  will  loan  you 
executives,  we  will  loan  employees,  but  we’re  not  going  to  take  the  primary  responsibility  for  running  it.” 
So  we  were  getting  very  discouraged.  Then  Bill  Boyd  came  in,  and  in  a  matter  of  minutes  said,  “Not  a 
problem.  I’ll  be  happy  to  have  my  company  act  as  the  supervisor” — a  very  aboveboard  decision  on  his 
part,  because  the  state  could  have  been  in  serious  trouble  otherwise.  And  he  had  no  idea  that  he  was  the 
last  on  our  list  to  be  interviewed.  He  wasn’t  last  on  our  list  of  choices.  It  was  just  that  every  hour  on  the 
hour  somebody  else  was  coming  in,  and  for  whatever  reason,  probably  for  his  convenience,  he  was  the 
last  person  scheduled  for  that  afternoon. 

His  decision  not  only  kept  the  revenue  coming  for  the  state  but  it  kept  hundreds,  or  thousands,  of people 
working. 

That’s  correct,  and  that’s  what  was  very  important.  When  the  state  had  tried  to  close  the  Aladdin, 
the  federal  judge  said  Aladdin  could  not  close.  After  that,  the  Gaming  Control  Board  went  to  the 
legislature  and  got  the  supervisor  statute  enacted,  so  that  in  the  future  if  they  wanted  to  close  an 
establishment  down  on  an  emergency  order,  the  state  could  go  to  a  state  court,  get  a  supervisor  appointed, 
the  establishment  would  not  close,  and  the  three  thousand,  or  thirty-five  hundred,  employees  would  not  be 
out  of  work.  They’re  the  ones  that  would  truly  be  harmed  if  the  establishment  was  closed,  and  the  state 
did  not  want  that  to  occur. 


GAMING  REGULATION  IN  NEVADA 


7 


Was  the  federal  judge  that  had  ruled  on  the  Aladdin  Harry  Claiborne? 

Yes,  sir.  [laughter]  And  it  went  up  to  the  Ninth  Circuit  and  the  Aladdin  remained  open  during  that 
time  period.  Eventually  the  Ninth  Circuit  ruled  in  the  state’s  favor,  but  it  took  a  long  time. 

The  management  team  that  was  put  in  was  headed  by  Bill  Boyd.  Who  were  some  of  the  executives  that 
helped  Mr.  Boyd  operate  the  Stardust? 

1  believe  he  had  Perry  Whitt  and  Chuck  Ruthe  on  his  team,  and  they  went  into  the  operation  side 
of  the  business. 

Were  Sachs  and  Tobman  eventually  forced  out  of  gambling? 

Y es,  a  complaint  against  them  was  filed  at  the  time  of  the  emergency  order.  There  was  a 
stipulated  settlement  on  the  complaint  requiring  them  to  turn  in  their  gaming  licenses.  But  then  after  the 
settlement  they  appealed  through  the  federal  court  system,  trying  to  have  the  revocation  reversed.  It  went 
up  to  the  Ninth  Circuit,  1  believe,  and  the  court  held  in  favor  of  the  state. 

Were  they  also  fined? 

Yes.  1  don’t  remember  the  amount  of  the  fine,  but  1  do  remember  that  it  was  the  largest  fine  in  the 
history  of  gaming  at  that  time. 

Let ’s  talk  a  little  bit  more  about  the  taking  over  of  the  Stardust  by  a  new  management  team  and  the 
gaming  control.  How  did  that  come  about? 

We  got  the  emergency  order  signed  by  the  chairman  of  the  commission  sometime  in  the  late 
afternoon,  and  we  went  in  around  midnight  because  we  thought  it  would  be  the  least  disruptive  time  and 
basically  took  over  the  casino.  The  operations  continued,  but  we  had  agents  on  the  premises  non-stop. 
They  were  there  twenty-four  hours  a  day. 

Were  all  three  board  members  there? 

Yes,  all  three  of  us  were  in  the  casino  plus  numerous  agents,  both  enforcement  and  audit  agents. 
The  board  members  just  observed.  The  agents  observed  in  the  count  room  and  at  the  tables  as  they  were 
counting  down  the  tables.  We  had  every  available  agent  with  us  at  the  time. 

How  long  did  the  board  members  actually  stay  there? 

We  were  there  until  about  two  o’clock,  two  thirty  in  the  morning,  and  the  agents  stayed  there 
until  the  Boyd  group  came  in  as  the  supervisor.  We  were  able  to  get  the  Boyd  group  in  there  within  a 
week.  In  fact,  they  might  have  been  in  there  within  days.  It  was  quick,  very  quick. 


Mr.  Sachs  and  Mr.  Tobman  also  owned  other  properties  in  Las  Vegas.  What  action  was  taken  at  those 
properties? 

They  owned  the  Fremont  and  they  were  the  lessee  and  the  operator  of  the  Sundance.  When  the 
Stardust  case  was  settled,  because  they  agreed  to  the  revocation  of  their  license  as  part  of  that  settlement, 
they  were  given  a  time  period  in  which  to  sell  the  Fremont  and  have  somebody  else  take  over  as  the  lessee 
for  the  Sundance.  So  the  stipulated  agreement  set  forth  the  time  period,  that  they  had  to  be  out  of  gaming 
in  total. 

Were  all  the  requirements  met  in  that  stipulated  agreement? 

1  believe  that  the  finalization  on  the  Fremont  did  not  occur  within  the  time  period,  and  that  the 
Fremont  was  actually  closed  down  for  a  very  short  period  of  time  pending  a  sale  to  the  Del  Webb 
Corporation.  That  happened  maybe  six  months  after  we  filed  the  complaint,  and  it  was  probably  a  few 
months  after  the  stipulated  agreement  had  been  entered  into.  The  stipulated  agreement  was  still  on  appeal 
at  that  time  because  they  sued  the  board  and  the  commission  shortly  after  agreeing  to  the  revocation  of  the 
licenses. 

Did  they  lose  the  lawsuit? 

Yes.  Eventually,  the  courts  upheld  the  revocation  of  the  license.  And  Paul  Bible,  who  was 
chairman  of  the  commission  at  the  time  that  the  stipulated  agreement  was  entered  into,  really  queried  Mr. 
Sachs  and  Mr.  Tobman  on  the  underlying  facts  of  what  they  were  agreeing  to — similar  to  the  way  a  judge 
takes  a  plea  in  a  criminal  court  case.  Fie  made  them,  and  their  counsel,  state  on  the  record  that  they 
understood  what  they  were  agreeing  to.  And  that  became  very  important  to  the  court  on  appeal,  because  it 
really  set  forth  the  fact  that  they  were  informed  and  had  knowledge  as  to  the  underlying  facts  and  that 
they  were  agreeing  to  the  revocation  of  their  license. 

So  Paul  Bible  did  a  very  good  job? 

Yes,  he  did  an  excellent  job,  and  it  really  protected  the  state  years  later  when  it  finally  went  to 

court. 

When  you  first  came  on  the  board,  Patty,  what  was  the  first  major  problem  or  major  incident  that  you 
confronted? 

My  second  month  as  a  board  member,  in  February  of  1983,  the  Perlman  brothers  were  seeking 
approval  to  operate  the  Dunes.  Morris  Shenker  was  selling  the  Dunes,  and  the  Perlmans  were  going  to 
buy  it.  They  wanted  an  emergency  participation,  which  meant  that  they  would  be  able  to  go  in  before  the 
transfer  and  operate  pending  the  transfer.  They  had  been  long-established  operators  at  Caesar’s  in  Las 
Vegas,  and  when  New  Jersey  approved  gaming,  Caesar’s  went  to  New  Jersey  and  applied  for  a  gaming 
license,  but  New  Jersey  denied  the  Perlmans  their  license.  The  Perlmans  had  to  get  out  of  Caesar’s,  and 
now  they  were  coming  back  in  on  their  own  and  wanted  to  operate  the  Dunes. 

This  put  the  state  in  a  situation  where  they  had  to  conduct  a  hearing  on  persons  who  had 


GAMING  REGULATION  IN  NEVADA 


9 


previously  been  licensed  and  acted  honorably  in  the  state  of  Nevada,  but  subsequently  had  been  turned 
down  in  the  state  of  New  Jersey.  Dick  Hyte  was  the  accounting  member  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board, 
but  he  had,  in  his  private  practice,  done  work  for  the  Perlmans,  so  he  recused  himself  and  did  not  sit  on 
the  case.  So  only  two  board  members,  Jim  Avance  and  1,  heard  the  case.  And  1  believe  it  went  on  for  four 
or  five  days.  It  would  start  about  nine  o’clock  in  the  morning,  and  we  would  have  testimony  from  them — 
because  the  burden  was  on  them  to  show  that  they  were  suitable — until  about  nine  o’clock  at  night. 
Former  Governor  Grant  Sawyer  represented  the  Perlmans,  and  it  was  a  lengthy  hearing,  especially  when 
there  were  only  two  board  members. 

At  the  end  of  the  Perlman  hearing  there  were  a  lot  of  noteworthy  individuals  that  came  and 
testified  on  their  behalf:  a  number  of  former  Gaming  Control  Board  members,  Gaming  Commission 
members,  chairmen — former  Gaming  Control  Board  chairmen — all  of  them  talked  about  how  honorably 
the  Perlmans  had  acted  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  My  recollection  is  that  they  were  found  suitable,  but  then 
the  board  recommended  that  they  not  be  allowed  to  participate  in  emergency  participation  because  of  the 
financial  insolvency  of  the  Dunes.  The  fact  was  that  the  Perlmans  then  would  be  operating  the  Dunes,  but 
they  couldn’t  put  any  money  into  the  operation,  so  the  Dunes  could  continue  to  lose  money,  and  that,  in 
fact,  that  is  what  occurred. 

The  Board  said  yes,  they  found  the  Perlmans  suitable,  and  then  the  Board  recommended  that  they 
not  be  allowed  to  participate  because  of  the  finances;  however,  the  Board  was  reversed  on  that  at  the 
commission  level.  That  second  vote  may  have  been  a  one -one  vote.  And  at  the  time  there  was  a 
determination  that  a  one -one  vote  would  only  require  a  majority,  not  a  unanimous  decision  by  the 
commission  to  overturn.  The  Perlmans,  then,  did  not  go  through  with  the  deal,  so  they  never  became  the 
owners  of  the  Dunes.  And  the  money  that  they  lost  during  that  six-month  period — it  was  approximately 
six  months  that  they  were  in  for  emergency  participation — got  the  Dunes  to  a  point  where  it  had  to  file  for 
bankruptcy. 

Whatever  happened  to  the  Perlmans?  Were  they  ever  licensed  anywhere  in  Nevada? 

No,  they  did  not  come  back  to  the  state  of  Nevada.  An  interesting  aside  is  they  did  make  a  made- 
for-TV  movie  about  the  hearing,  and  1  think  Rock  Hudson  played  Cliff  Perlman. 


You  were  known  as  being  outspoken  on  many  subjects,  and  also  known  for  your  toughness  and  tenacity. 
Did  these  traits  cause  some  members  of  the  gaming  community  to  feel  uncomfortable? 

Oh,  probably  so,  but  1  don’t  know  if  they’d  ever  be  honest  in  answering  that,  [laughter]  But  I’m 
sure  that  they  did  feel  uncomfortable  at  times.  Being  young  and  being  the  first  female,  1  took  the  job  very 
seriously.  1  thought  1  was  there  to  be  a  regulator  and  that  regulators  were  supposed  to  be  somewhat  tough, 
and  that  there  was  an  appellate  body  within  the  commission.  So  1  think  that,  although  1  might  have  been 
known  as  tough  or  tenacious,  1  don’t  have  regrets  in  that  area.  And  if  anything,  1  think  that  1  probably  was 
predictable.  And  when  you’re  a  regulator  1  think  the  industry  wants  you  to  have  some  predictability. 
When  1  was  appointed  to  the  Board  1  had  been  at  the  agency  for  three  and  a  half  years  as  the  Board  and 
Commission’s  lawyer,  and  the  other  two  members  had  come  from  the  outside.  So  1  knew  the  players,  1 


10 


knew  the  staff.  And  because  1  had  been  the  lawyer  1  knew  gaming  law  at  that  point  probably  better  than 
any  other  time  in  my  life.  1  really  understood  it  inside  and  out. 

In  August  of  1983  a  1.7  million-dollar  jackpot  was  hit  at  Harrah ’s  Tahoe.  Would  you  tell  us  about  that 
jackpot? 

1  remember  that  the  enforcement  agents  called  me  at  home  and  said  that  the  jackpot  had  been  hit 
and  everything  was  fine.  A  few  hours  later  they  called  and  said  it  was  really  strange,  because  they 
couldn’t  find  the  individual  who  had  hit  the  jackpot,  Mr.  Econopoulos.  So  they  started  looking  for  Mr. 
Econopoulos,  and  it  turned  out  that  they  eventually  found  him  in  Texas.  He  had  gone  to  his  sister’s  home 
in  Texas. 

Had  he  been  paid  the  jackpot  by  this  time? 

Yes.  He  had  been  given  a  certain  amount  in  cash,  maybe  a  hundred  thousand.  1  can’t  recall,  but  it 
was  enough  for  him  to  buy  a  car.  He  either  bought  a  car  or  rented  a  car,  but  1  think  he  bought  a  car  and 
drove  to  his  sister’s  in  Texas.  When  the  enforcement  agents  found  him  in  Texas,  he  told  them  that  he  had 
this  black  box,  and  when  he  held  the  black  box  next  to  the  machine,  it  rigged  the  machine  and  the  jackpot 
he  hit  was  not  a  valid  jackpot.  He  also  said  that  he  had  been  given  this  black  box  to  use  by  a  group  out  of 
San  Francisco  and  he  wasn’t  the  person  who  knew  how  the  tampering  occurred;  he  didn’t  know  how  to  do 
the  cheating.  He  had  just  been  solicited  to  go  into  the  casino  and  to  be  the  person  who  won  the  jackpot. 

He  was  then  to  give  the  money  to  the  people  who  had  produced  the  black  box.  When  the  agents  called  me 
from  Texas  a  day  or  two  later  and  told  me  this  story  we  got  the  FBI  involved,  because  we  needed  to  get 
Mr.  Econopoulos  in  some  kind  of  a  witness  protection  program.  He  was  in  fear  of  his  life,  and  the  agents 
thought  his  fear  was  legitimate.  So  we  worked  with  the  FBI,  got  him  in  a  witness  protection  program,  and 
then  worked  jointly  with  them  to  prosecute  the  case.  It  was  very  interesting  because  the  slot  manufacturer 
[1GT]  at  the  time  was  adamant  that  it  could  not  have  occurred — that  the  machine  could  not  have  been 
cheated.  Even  when  we  gave  them  the  information  that  Econopoulos  told  us,  they  said  it  just  could  not 
happen.  Eventually  they  made  some  changes  with  their  new  machines,  because,  clearly,  it  did  happen. 

There  was  no  doubt  that  it  was  a  rigged  jackpot? 

No  doubt. 

Was  this  a  MegaBucks  jackpot? 

Yes,  it  was  a  MegaBucks  jackpot. 

Is  Mr.  Econopoulos  still  in  the  witness  protection  plan? 

You  know,  he  was  for  a  long  time.  He  was  not  young  at  that  time,  so  1  don’t  know  if  he’s  still 
around.  When  he  was  in  the  program  he  would  call  me  every  now  and  then,  [laughter]  They  had  put  him 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


11 


in  a  safe  house  at  Lake  Tahoe  and  he  was  monitored  and  watched  both  by  the  FBI  and  by  the  enforcement 
division  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  He  befriended  some  of  the  agents,  and  he  would  contact  them  after 
the  fact,  after  we  went  through  trial.  Every  now  and  then  he  would  call  one  of  them  and  they’d  let  me 
know  he  had  called.  He  was  quite  charming.  One  night  the  FBI  agents  picked  me  up  and  drove  me  up  to 
the  safe  house.  He  was  a  Greek  cook,  and  he  cooked  dinner  for  the  agents  and  me.  He  got  very  worried  in 
the  midst  of  the  proceedings,  and  if  he  didn’t  think  he  was  being  treated  appropriately,  or  with  enough 
respect,  he  would  say,  “Hey,  I  don’t  know  if  1  really  want  to  do  this.  1  might  want  to  get  out  of  here.” 

It  was  really  the  first  time  that  the  state  had  taken  on  the  issue  of  slot  cheating,  and  after  that  it 
just  exploded.  1  think  there  hadn’t  been  any  focus  on  the  amount  of  money  that  the  industry  was  being 
cheated  out  of  up  until  that  time.  After  that  the  enforcement  division  took  a  much  more  proactive  view  on 
slot  cheating,  and  they  even  began  putting  slot  cheats  in  the  “Black  Book.” 

*  *  *  * 

In  your  time  on  the  Board  a  better  working  relationship  was  established  between  Nevada  gaming 
regulators  and  the  FBI.  Did  that  come  about  due  to  a  conscious  effort  by  Nevada  gaming  regulators? 

Absolutely.  The  FBI  had  stopped  sharing  information  with  the  previous  Gaming  Control  Board. 
Almost  immediately  after  our  Board  was  appointed,  we  met  with  the  chief  of  the  FBI  in  Las  Vegas  and 
worked  out  an  agreement  for  the  sharing  of  information.  We  worked  hard  to  maintain  that  relationship, 
because  it  was  important  to  our  background  investigators  that  they  have  access  to  the  FBI  information. 

So  you  had  a  good  working  relationship  with  the  FBI  all  your  time  on  the  Board? 

Yes,  we  had  a  good  working  relationship  and  they  did  share  information  with  us.  And,  in  fact, 
when  the  incident  with  Mr.  Econopoulos  came  about,  it  was  the  U.S.  Attorney’s  office  that  prosecuted;  it 
wasn’t  a  state  prosecution.  The  FBI  got  him  in  the  federal  witness  protection  program,  they  charged  a 
federal  crime,  and  the  U.S.  Attorney’s  office  did  the  prosecution.  It  was  very  unusual  in  that  time  frame. 
But  it  does  show  you  how  we  were  cooperating  and  working  with  the  FBI. 

The  Gaming  Control  Board  consists  of  seven  divisions.  During  your  tenure,  the  corporate  securities 
division  was  created.  Would  you  tell  us  your  role  in  the  creation  of  that  division? 

More  and  more  companies  were  incorporating,  more  and  more  coiporate  issues  were  coming 
about,  more  and  more  corporations  were  applying  for  gaming  licenses,  so  we  decided  we  needed  to 
elevate  the  coiporate  position  so  that  it  became  a  chief  position  within  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  By 
doing  that  we  could  hire  people  that  were  either,  by  background,  lawyers  or  accountants,  who  understood 
corporations  and  knew  how  to  do  a  proper  investigation  into  a  corporate  background  that  was  separate 
from  an  individual’s  background.  The  creation  of  the  coiporate  division  has  greatly  benefitted  both  the 
Board  and  the  state. 


12 


Would  you  relate  to  us  some  interesting  things  that  happened  to  you  while  you  were  with  the  Board  or 
when  you  were  a  deputy  attorney  general? 

There  were  a  lot  of  interesting  things.  One  happened  when  1  was  just  a  deputy  attorney  general, 
so  it  must  have  been  my  first  year  assigned  to  the  Board.  Frank  Sinatra  was  applying  to  be  a  key 
employee  at  Caesar’s  Palace,  and  the  investigators  asked  that  a  lawyer  be  assigned  to  the  investigation  so 
that  they  could  deal  with  one  lawyer  throughout  the  investigation,  and  1  was  given  the  assignment.  The 
Board  wanted  to  have  a  lawyer  present  when  they  interviewed  Mr.  Sinatra  in  Palm  Springs,  because  they 
knew  he  was  bringing  counsel.  1  went  to  Palm  Springs  with  the  agents  but  then  they  excluded  the  lawyers 
from  the  interview,  so  1  spent  eight  hours  sitting  in  a  room  with  Mickey  Rudin,  who  was  Frank  Sinatra’s 
lawyer.  Fie  told  me  about  his  entire  legal  career,  which  was  fascinating,  because  he  had  actually  argued 
cases  before  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court. 

Later  the  agents  took  me  with  them  when  they  went  for  a  personal  view  of  Mr.  Sinatra’s 
mountain  home  outside  of  Palm  Springs.  The  agents  usually  visit  the  homes  of  applicants  to  make  sure 
that  the  value  stated  on  their  application  is  consistent  with  what  they  see  in  the  actual  home.  And  at  the 
time,  the  head  of  the  investigation — this  shows  you  how  long  ago  it  was — when  1  was  traveling  with  the 
three  male  agents,  and  we  were  staying  in  Palm  Springs,  he  made  it  very  clear  that  throughout  the 
interview,  if  the  agents  were  in  my  hotel  room,  that  the  door  had  to  be  open,  or  if  I  was  in  their  room  the 
door  had  to  be  open.  I  was  probably  twenty -eight  at  the  time,  or  twenty-seven  and  I’d  never  even  heard  of 
such  a  thing.  I  thought  it  was  very  funny. 

When  1  was  first  appointed  to  the  Board,  Steve  Wynn  contacted  me  because  he  was  considering 
doing  business  in  London  so  1  went  over  to  London  for  a  week  to  meet  with  their  regulators  and  to  review 
their  regulatory  process.  And  that  was  interesting.  When  Hilton  wanted  to  do  business  in  Queensland, 
Australia,  I  went  to  Queensland,  Australia  and  met  with  the  regulators  there  to  determine  whether  or  not 
Nevada  would  approve  their  regulatory  system.  And  that  was  very  interesting. 

1  was  counsel  when  the  Commission  issued  the  order  to  close  the  Aladdin,  and  I  was  there  when 
the  agents  started  to  count  it  down  and  close  it,  then  we  were  served  with  a  federal  court  order — an 
injunction — ordering  that  the  facility  not  be  closed.  It  was  just  an  incredible  time,  both  as  lawyer  and  as  a 
board  member,  just  because  so  much  was  happening.  The  gaming  industry  was  changing  so  rapidly. 

You  were  involved  as  an  attorney  and  a  board  member  during,  possibly,  one  of  the  most  exciting  times  in 
gaming  history.  Things  were  in  such  a  transitory  situation. 

Very  much  so.  It  was  at  a  time  when  the  state  was  working  diligently  to  get  the  allegations  of 
organized  crime  and  mob  activity  out  of  the  state  and  try  to  clean  up  its  image.  And  it  was  just  a 
fascinating  time  period.  Also,  being  the  first  woman  deputy  A.G.  was  very  unusual.  And  then  to  be 
named  a  board  member  and  to  have  that  kind  of  visibility  there  was  just  constant  pressure.  There  was 
never  a  letdown.  Being  a  Gaming  Control  Board  member  is  an  enormous  job.  There’s  a  lot  of  reading. 
You  have  monthly  [she  taps  once  on  something  for  emphasis]  meetings,  and  there’s  an  enormous  amount 
of  reading  in  between  the  meetings.  There  are  phone  calls  from  the  industry  all  the  time.  I  always  felt  that 
the  industry  set  the  agenda  more  than  the  Board  because  there  was  always  a  problem  or  an  issue  that 
would  be  raised  that  would  need  an  answer.  And  at  the  same  time  we  were  trying  to  keep  operations 
within  the  Gaming  Control  Board  working.  I  would  think  that  any  of  the  board  members  that  you 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


13 


interview  would  tell  you  it’s  just  a  lot  of  work;  it’s  an  enormous  job. 

Could  you  estimate  how  many  hours  a  week  you  worked? 

Oh,  this  is  a  terrible  thing  to  say,  but  it  was  my  whole  life.  1  wasn’t  married  at  the  time.  1  didn’t 
have  children  at  the  time,  and  I  worked,  lived,  and  breathed  the  job.  And  then  because  everyone  was 
watching  me  so  closely — or  1  perceived  they  were,  because  1  was  female — I  decided  that  1  needed  to 
practice  something  that  I’d  learned  in  law  school  and  it  was,  “Prior  preparation  prevents  poor 
performance.”  I  made  sure  I  was  always  prepared — always.  I  read  everything  that  came  across  my  desk,  I 
read  all  of  the  summaries,  I  involved  the  staff,  1  asked  hard  questions  during  the  rump  session,  which  is 
the  day  before  a  Gaming  Control  Board  meeting  when  the  agents  meet  with  the  Gaming  Control  Board 
members  and  you  can  ask  any  follow-up  questions  that  you  might  have  found  confusing  from  the 
summaries.  And  the  agents,  I  think,  hated  the  process  because — first  of  all,  you  have  to  remember  that  the 
agents,  when  they’re  doing  a  background  check,  by  the  time  they  finish  they  know  everything  about  this 
person,  and  they’ve  got  to  summarize  it  for  the  Board.  So  the  Board  doesn’t  get  the  application;  they 
don’t  get  all  of  the  background  work.  What  they  get  is  a  written  summary  of  what  the  agents  have  done. 
Then  the  Board  reads  the  summary  and  then  they  meet  with  the  agents  who  did  the  investigation  for 
follow-up  questions.  Clearly,  everyone  who  reads  a  document  comes  away  with  different  questions.  And 
then  the  agents  have  to  quickly  go  back  and  try  to  answer  all  the  Board’s  questions.  It  was  a  tough  time 
for  them,  and  we  had  a  lot  of  difficult  applicants  during  the  period  that  I  was  on  the  Board. 

Were  there  a  lot  of  two-to-one  votes  when  you  were  on  the  board? 

Yes.  I  had  forgotten  that,  but  yes,  there  were.  I  think  that  I  was  consistent.  I  think  that  if  you 
appeared  before  me  I  was  the  predictable  vote,  and  the  issue  would  be  whether  you  could  convince  either 
Mr.  Hyte  or  Mr.  Avance  or  whether  I  could  convince  them  to  go  with  me. 

Were  the  two-to-one  votes  usually  you  and  Mr.  Hyte  against  Mr.  Avance? 

Y es,  actually,  I  think  that  most  of  the  votes  were  that  way. 

Was  that  because  the  three  of  you  had  different  philosophies? 

No,  I  think  it  was  because  we  were  all  very  independent.  We  truly  would  not  know  how  the  other 
board  members  were  going  to  vote  when  we  went  into  a  meeting.  We  would  listen  to  what  the  applicant 
had  to  say  and  then  make  our  decision. 

Perhaps  we  should  touch  on  the  fact  that  on  a  two-to-one  vote  by  the  Board  the  Commission  can  approve 
an  applicant  with  only  a  majority  vote. 

Yes.  The  reason  the  vote  is  important  is  that  if  you  get  two  board  members  in  your  favor,  then 
you  only  have  to  get  three  commissioners — three  out  of  the  five,  the  majority  of  the  Commission — to  get 
licensed.  But  if  the  Gaming  Control  Board  unanimously  votes  a  recommendation  of  denial,  then  the 
applicant  must  get  a  unanimous  vote  of  the  Commission  to  get  licensed,  which  is  not  easy  to  do.  They 


14 


basically  have  to  reverse  the  Gaming  Control  Board’s  recommendation.  Although  that  did  occur  when  1 
was  on  the  Board,  [laughter] 

So  some  of  your  board  recommendations  were  overturned? 

Yes. 

Did  that  cause  any  hard  feelings? 

No,  1  don’t  think  so.  Looking  back  twenty  years,  it’s  hard  to  remember  what  you  felt  at  the  time. 
But  1  think  what  it  means  is  the  system  works.  The  system’s  supposed  to  be  a  check  and  balance.  The 
system’s  not  supposed  to  be  just  a  stamp  of  approval  of  whatever  the  Gaming  Control  Board  does.  The 
commission  members  aren’t  full  time.  They  come  with  different  backgrounds,  and  they  should  view  the 
board’s  actions  in  a  different  light.  And  the  Board  has  a  tendency  to  be  closer  to  staff,  because  the  staffs 
working  on  a  day-to-day  basis  with  the  Board,  and  you’ve  got  to  support  your  staff.  But  then  the 
Commission  can  look  at  it  a  little  bit  differently. 

Let’s  talk  for  a  little  bit  about  the  politics  of  the  Board  and  the  Commission.  Do  you  have  any  comments 
on  that? 


Yes.  When  1  was  the  chief  counsel  for  the  board,  my  boss  (Richard  Bryan)  was  running  against 
my  client’s  boss  (Robert  List)  for  governor  of  the  state.  And  it  was  a  very  difficult  time.  The  Board  made 
accusations  that  the  attorney  general’s  staff  had  leaked  information  and  declined  to  give  them  the 
summaries  of  the  background  investigations.  This  meant  that  the  attorneys  would  have  to  go  to  the  Board 
and  Commission  meetings  basically  unprepared,  because  you  wouldn’t  have  read  the  summaries,  you 
wouldn’t  know  what  the  issues  were  in  regard  to  an  individual,  and  you  couldn’t  anticipate  what  the  legal 
questions  might  be.  The  Board  or  the  Commission  would  ask  legal  questions  that  you’d  have  to  answer  at 
a  public  hearing,  so  it  was  difficult.  At  that  time  Carl  Dodge  was  chair  of  the  Commission,  and  if  you’ve 
ever  worked  for  him  or  known  him,  you  know  he  has  incredible  integrity  and  incredible  ethics  and  that 
assisted  the  situation.  But  it  was  difficult  to  find  yourself  in  that  kind  of  a  press  battle,  because  it  became 
public  information.  1  don’t  think  it  was  really  a  pretty  time  or  a  good  time  for  gaming  control,  or  the 
history  of  gaming  control,  in  the  state  of  Nevada. 

Were  you  affected  personally  by  it,  other  than  when  you  were  questioned  at  the  hearings? 

It  was  hard.  There  was  a  debate  between  Governor  List  and  Attorney  General  Richard  Bryan 
when  the  issue  came  up.  The  press  asked  why  weren’t  the  attorneys  being  given  the  summaries  and  it  was 
hard  not  to  take  it  personally,  because  1  was  chief  deputy  at  the  time.  And  it  was  also  about  that  same  time 
that  the  Spilotro  case,  the  constitutionality  of  doing  business  on  the  premises  case,  and  the  gaming  marker 
case  were  before  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court.  So  you  worked  hard,  you  tried  to  stay  above  it,  you  tried  to 
be  prepared  for  anything,  and  you  just  tried  to  move  forward.  Mr.  Dodge  was  a  big  help.  1  remember  that 
he  had  a  lot  of  integrity,  and  that  oftentimes  he  would  ask  for  lengthy  opinions.  There  was  one  opinion  he 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


15 


asked  for  on  a  speculative  offering  of  stock,  because  the  statute  at  the  time  said  that  a  gaming  company 
could  not  go  public  with  a  public  offering  if  it  was  speculative  in  nature.  That  statute  had  been  passed  for 
the  protection  of  the  industry,  because  the  public  companies  wanted  to  make  sure  that  people  weren’t 
speculating  in  gaming  stocks.  It’s  funny  in  this  era  to  think  about  something  like  that. 

So  1  issued  an  opinion  for  Carl  Dodge  on  the  statute.  He  wanted  a  written  opinion  that  looked  at 
the  legislative  history  and  background,  before  a  vote  was  taken.  1  remember  it  was  a  twelve  or  fifteen- 
page  opinion,  and  then  he  shared  it  with  outside  counsel,  with  the  company’s  counsel,  so  that  they 
understood  at  least  what  the  advice  of  counsel  for  the  Board  was  to  the  Commission.  He  would  do  things 
like  that  a  lot.  He  was  very  much  a  dot-the-i’s,  cross-the-t’s  sort  of  person.  He  would  call  the  attorney 
general’s  office  on  a  regular  basis  and  ask  questions,  but  he  would  ask  questions  before  the  hearings  so 
that  you  had  some  time  to  think  about  it,  or  you  had  time  to  do  research  if  it  was  necessary. 

You  worked  less  than  two  years  as  a  board  member.  Why  did  you  leave  the  Board  after  such  a  short 
period  of  time? 

Well,  even  though  I’d  only  been  a  board  member  for  just  about  two  years,  I’d  been  with  the 
Board  for  five  and  a  half  years.  And  then  I  got  a  phone  call  from  Bob  Maxey  telling  me  that  he  was 
looking  for  a  general  counsel  for  the  Elsinore  Hotel  in  Atlantic  City  and  would  I  have  any  interest  in  the 
position.  It  came  out  of  the  blue.  I  was  totally  surprised.  When  I  got  off  the  phone  I  called  the  person  that 
I  usually  called  for  advice  and  told  him  what  was  happening,  that  I’d  gotten  this  phone  call.  And  he  said, 
“Well,  when  you  leave  the  Board  what  would  you  like  to  do?” 

And  I  said,  “I  probably  would  like  to  be  in-house  counsel  for  a  gaming  company.” 

And  he  said,  “It  looks  to  me  like  you’ve  met  your  goal.  Why  are  you  staying?” 

And  I  thought  about  it  and  I  said,  “Y ou  know,  this  is  probably  true.  If  there  are  people  out  there 
that  want  my  services,  maybe  it’s  time  for  me  to  leave.” 

Then  the  other  thing  that  had  happened  was  that  there  had  been  quite  a  scandal  with  the  chairman 
of  the  Board,  Jim  Avance,  in  regard  to  his  having  a  female  agent  drive  him  home  when  he  had  been 
drinking,  and  the  working  situation  was  not  pleasant.  When  I  got  the  phone  call  it  was  like  an  awakening 
telling  me  that  it  was  time  to  go.  The  third  thing  that  was  happening  at  the  time  was  that  I  was  about  to 
get  married  to  somebody  who  was  going  to  be  licensed  in  the  gaming  industry,  and  that  was  going  to 
present  problems.  So  everything  combined,  it  just  seemed  it  was  time  for  me  to  go.  I  went  over  and  met 
with  Richard  Bryan,  and  my  recollection  is  I  gave  him  four  or  five  weeks  notice  and  said  I’d  help  out  in 
any  way  that  I  could,  but  that  it  was  time  for  me  to  go.  I  was  ready  to  leave.  It  was  probably  in  August  of 
1984  that  I  gave  him  notice,  and  I  think  I  left  in  September. 

After  the  phone  call  from  Mr.  Maxey,  I  was  contacted  by  Harrah’s  and  after  talking  with  them, 
when  I  left  the  Gaming  Control  Board  I  took  the  position  as  general  counsel  for  Harrah’s  West.  I  think  it 
was  about  a  year  or  eighteen  months  after  that  that  I  became  general  counsel  for  all  of  Harrah’s,  and  was 
later  promoted  to  the  position  of  senior  vice-president.  I  spent  nine  years  at  Harrah’s. 

Who  was  your  immediate  boss  at  Harrah  ’s? 

Phil  Satre. 


Was  he  the  person  who  hired  you? 


16 


He  and  Richard  Goeglein  jointly  hired  me.  Richard  was  just  about  to  go  back  to  Memphis,  and 
Phil  was  in  Atlantic  City  prior  to  moving  back  to  Nevada.  They  both  interviewed  me  and  both  hired  me, 
and  then  1  went  to  work  for  Phil.  Richard  had  left  by  the  time  1  started  the  job,  and  had  gone  back  to 
corporate  headquarters  in  Memphis. 

I’ve  heard  rumors  that  there  is  a  law  called  the  “Patty  Becker  Law.  ” 

[laughter] 

Could  you  tell  me  about  the  “Patty  Becker  Law?  ” 

Yes,  it’s  kind  of  interesting  to  me  because  you  don’t  want  to  say  that  you’re  treated  differently 
because  you  are  female,  but  truthfully,  that  was  an  era  when  you  were  treated  differently.  When  1  went  to 
work  for  the  gaming  industry  there  was  an  outcry:  “How  could  this  happen?  How  could  a  regulator  leave 
and  go  to  work  for  the  industry?”  even  though  all  my  predecessors  had  done  the  same  thing.  They  had  all 
left  the  Gaming  Control  Board  and  gone  to  work  in  the  industry,  but  they  were  all  men. 

[laughter] 

And  when  1  did  it,  it  was  either  the  catalyst  or  the  final  straw.  1  don’t  know.  But  the  legislature 
decided  that  they  were  going  to  enact  a  one -year  restriction  that  would  apply  prospectively  after  the 
enactment  to  anyone  that  took  a  new  appointment  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  That  meant  you’d  have 
to  wait  out  a  year  after  leaving  the  Board  before  you  could  go  to  work  for  the  industry.  The  law  was 
passed  the  January  after  1  left — 1  left  in  September — and  the  press  picked  it  up  and  talked  about  it  as  the 
“Patty  Becker  Law.”  It’s  a  good  example  of  how  a  woman  was  treated  differently  than  all  the  previous 
men. 

Who  replaced  you  when  you  left  the  board? 

Bart  Jacka,  who  then  went  on  to  be  chairman  after  Jim  Avance  left. 

What  do  you  feel  were  your  major  accomplishments  while  you  were  on  the  Board? 

1  think  generally  being  true  to  my  ethics  and  integrity,  and  getting  a  reputation  for  that.  That’s 
something  in  my  career  that  I’m  proud  of.  I  think  1  worked  very  hard.  I  think  taking  on  the  Stardust,  and 
the  implementation  of  the  supervisor’s  law  for  the  first  time  was  important.  I  am  proud  of  my  work  in  the 
legislature  that  resulted  in  changes  in  the  gaming  laws.  For  a  period  of  five  years  whenever  they  needed 
testimony  from  the  state  on  a  gaming  law,  I  would  be  the  one  that  would  testify  and  try  to  explain  the  pros 
and  the  cons  of  the  bill  and  recommend  whether  or  not  a  change  should  occur  or  an  amendment  should 
occur.  Arguing  and  winning  three  Nevada  Supreme  Court  cases  is  also  something  I  am  very  proud  of.  I’m 
also  proud  of  creating  a  corporate  securities  division  within  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  and  that  I 
appointed  a  woman,  Gerri  Kowitt,  to  head  that  division.  She  did  an  excellent  job. 

I  also  think  I  just  have  a  sense  of  pride  in  the  way  I  handled  the  job.  It’s  nice  to  look  back  twenty 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


17 


years  later — twenty-five  years  later — and  know  that  you  did  your  best.  It’s  not  that  1  didn’t  make 
mistakes.  1  did  make  mistakes,  and  1  made  mistakes  both  on  the  political  front  and  probably  on  the 
regulatory  front,  but  they  were  made  in  good  faith.  They  were  made  because  1  had  a  belief  in  what  1  was 
doing.  1  think  all  regulators  make  mistakes,  but  1  really  do  believe  that  1  was  true  to  what  needed  to  be 
done  at  that  time. 


As  counsel  for  Harrah ’s  were  there  any  interesting  cases  that  you  were  involved  with  that  [you]  might 
want  to  talk  about? 

Well,  there  is  one  that  was  interesting  on  the  regulatory  front,  which  is  kind  of  consistent  with 
what  we’re  discussing,  and  I  think  it  occurred  in  around  1990. 1  actually  represented  Harrah’ s  and  argued 
with  the  Gaming  Control  Board  about  whether  or  not  a  licensee  could  do  business  in  other  states.  This 
was  after  New  Jersey,  and  it  was  about  the  foreign  gaming  law  that  was  being  used  to  prohibit  Nevada 
companies  from  doing  business  elsewhere.  And  1  lost  at  the  Board  level.  1  had  a  two-to  one  vote,  so  1  had 
to  have  a  unanimous  vote  of  the  Commission  to  get  it  overturned,  and  1  was  able  to  obtain  the  unanimous 
vote  of  the  Commission.  That  basically  opened  up  gaming  in  the  sense  that  it  allowed  Nevada  licensees  to 
participate  throughout  the  United  States.  And,  as  we  all  know  from  that  point  on  gaming  just  exploded. 

You  mentioned  earlier  that  you  had  worked  for  Harrah ’s  for  nine  years.  What  did  you  do  after  you  left 
Harrah  ’s? 

It’s  kind  of  interesting,  because  at  that  point  Harrah’s  moved  their  corporate  offices  to  Memphis, 
Tennessee.  1  had  a  three-year-old  son  whose  father  lived  in  Reno,  Nevada,  and  all  of  my  support  systems 
were  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  My  family  is  here,  so  1  made  the  decision  that  I  did  not  want  to  move  to 
Memphis,  Tennessee,  and  1  left  Harrah’s. 

Within  a  short  period  of  time  1  was  contacted  by  Governor  Bob  Miller  who  asked  me  if  1  would 
be  interested  in  being  his  chief  of  staff.  1  immediately  committed  to  being  his  chief  of  staff  and  said  I’d 
get  him  through  the  next  election,  which  was  two  years  away.  It  was  another  fast-paced,  high-profile  job 
and  it  got  me  back  into  the  state  system. 

When  I  left  Governor  Miller  my  son  was  just  starting  first  grade  and  I  wanted  to  be  home  more. 
So  I  worked  for  myself  for  three  or  four  years,  and  I  only  took  two  or  three  clients  at  a  time  so  I  could  be 
home  more.  One  of  my  clients  turned  out  to  be  the  Aladdin,  and  I  was  doing  more  and  more  work  for 
them.  And  then  through  a  process  of  negotiation  they  asked  that  I  work  for  them  full  time,  but  full  time 
would  only  be  three  days  a  week  contractually.  So  I  agreed  to  come  back  to  the  Aladdin  as  a  senior  vice- 
president,  only  working  three  days  a  week,  because  it’s  hard  to  be  a  mom  and  working  full  time.  It’s  just 
hard!  I  really  enjoy  my  son  and  my  time  at  home,  so  it  worked  out. 

Are  you  married  now? 

Yes,  I’m  married  to  Steve  DuCharme,  former  board  member  and  chairman. 


Where  did  you  meet  Mr.  DuCharme? 


18 


A  friend  introduced  us,  but  Steve  had  first  seen  me  when  1  made  the  presentation  for  Harrah’s  on 
foreign  gaming  when  he  voted  against  me.  He  later  asked  my  friend  for  an  introduction,  but  it  took  him 
about  eight  months  before  he  got  the  introduction.  But  that’s  actually  how  we  met — it  was  at  a  Board 
meeting. 

So  you,  a  fanner  board  member,  married  a  board  member. 

Yes.  [laughter] 

Is  there  a  final  comment  you ’d  like  to  make? 

Yes.  I’ve  been  lucky  in  my  career  in  that  1  have  had  wonderful  bosses  that  are  truly  people  of 
integrity.  And  1  learned  from  all  these  bosses.  Cameron  Batjer,  who  was  the  chief  justice  of  the  Nevada 
Supreme  Court,  is  just  a  wonderful  individual.  Governor  O’Callaghan,  Dick  Bryan,  Phil  Satre,  Richard 
Goeglein,  and  Bob  Miller,  they’re  just  people  of  integrity  and  oftentimes  when  1  had  difficult  decisions  to 
make,  1  made  the  decisions  much  easier,  because  1  had  the  support  of  the  bosses  and  people  that  1  was 
learning  from. 

Thank  you. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


19 


2 

Paul  Bible 


Paul  Bible  was  born  in  Reno  in  1940  and  grew  up  in  Reno  and 
the  Washington,  D.C.  area.  Son  of  Alan  Bible,  Nevada’s 
Attorney  General  and  U.S.  Senator,  he  graduated  from  the 
University  of  Nevada,  Reno  in  1962  and  completed  law  school  at 
Georgetown  University.  After  sendee  in  the  U.S.  Army ’s  Judge 
Advocate  General ’s  Corps,  he  came  back  to  Nevada  to  practice 
law,  first  with  McDonald,  Carano,  Wilson,  Bergin,  Bible, 
Frankovich,  and  Hicks,  and  later  with  Bible  Hoy  &  Trachok.  In 
1983,  Governor  Richard  Bryan  appointed  Bible  chairman  of  the 
Nevada  Gaming  Commission,  a  position  he  held  until  1987. 
Under  Bible ’s  leadership,  the  Commission  was  renowned  for 
revoking  the  license  of  the  Stardust  in  Las  Vegas.  Bible  later 
became  a  senior  partner  at  Lewis  Roca  &  Rothgerber, 
specializing  in  Nevada  gaming  law.  He  also  taught  as  an  adjunct 
law  professor  at  the  Nevada  School  of  Law. 


Paul  Bible.  Photo  courtesy  of  Paul  Bible. 


Dwayne  Kling:  It’s  December  17,  2003.  My  name  is  Dwayne  Kling.  I’m  with  Paul  Bible  in  his  law  offices 
here  in  Reno,  Nevada.  I’d  like  to  start  out  by  asking  you  when  and  where  you  were  born. 

Paul  Bible:  1  was  born  in  Reno,  Nevada,  on  October  3,  1940,  and  my  father,  Alan  Bible,  a  former 
attorney  general,  was  a  long-time  politician  on  both  the  state  and  national  level.  When  my  father  was  in 
Washington,  D.C.,  1  spent  a  portion  of  the  year  there.  He  was  elected  to  the  senate  when  1  was  a  freshman 
in  high  school.  At  that  time  the  Senate  and  the  House  would  only  be  in  session  from  January  until  Labor 
Day  at  the  latest,  so  when  the  family  would  move  back  to  Reno,  1  would  go  to  the  fall  semester  at  Reno 


20 


High  School  and  the  spring  semester  in  Silver  Spring,  Maryland.  1  went  back  and  forth  the  first  three 
years  of  high  school,  and  then  the  fourth  year  of  high  school  1  spent  the  entire  year  near  Washington, 

D.C.,  in  Silver  Spring,  Maryland. 

1  returned  to  Washington,  D.C.  a  second  time  when  1  was  in  Georgetown  Law  School,  and  1  lived 
there  for  three  years.  Then  when  I  was  in  the  service  1  was  stationed  at  Baileys  Crossroads,  Virginia, 
which  is  a  suburb  of  Washington,  D.C.  So  1  have  had  three  separate  occasions  in  my  life  when  I’ve  lived 
in  the  Washington,  D.C.,  area. 

You  mentioned  you  went  to  Georgetown  Law  School.  Prior  to  that  did  you  go  to  the  University  of 
Nevada? 

1  sure  did.  Yes. 

So  you  received  your  first  degree  there  at  UNR? 

1  did.  Yes. 

What  was  your  first  job  after  receiving  your  law  degree? 

The  U.S.  Army,  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

When  1  was  at  the  University  of  Nevada,  there  was  a  compulsory  ROTC  program.  After  the  first 
two  years,  which  were  required,  we  had  the  option  of  going  into  advanced  ROTC  and  getting  a 
commission.  If  you  did  that  you  were  compensated  on  a  monthly  basis  by  the  military,  but  you  then  owed 
them  an  obligation.  So  1  was  a  commissioned  officer  when  1  graduated  from  the  University  of  Nevada.  I 
was  deferred  during  my  law  school  time,  but  when  1  completed  law  school,  1  had  a  military  obligation  so  1 
became  a  part  of  the  Judge  Advocate  General  Coips.  It  was  a  three-year  obligation,  which  1  fulfilled.  1 
went  on  active  duty  in  January  of  1966,  and  I  was  discharged  in  December  of  1968.  Then  1  came  back  and 
practiced  law  here  in  Reno,  so  my  first  job  after  law  school  was  the  army. 

When  were  you  appointed  to  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission? 

April  the  first,  1983 — a  little  over  twenty  years  ago.  I’ll  never  forget,  it  was  April  Fools’  Day. 
[laughter]  Dick  Bryan  appointed  me;  he  was  the  recently-elected  governor.  He  had  run  the  previous 
November  and  had  defeated  incumbent  governor  Robert  List  in  the  general  election. 

Did  you  know  Governor  Bryan  prior  to  being  appointed  to  the  commission? 

Yes.  Governor  Bryan  had  been  active  in  politics  his  entire  life,  and  I  had  known  him  very  briefly 
at  the  university.  We  were  both  members  of  the  ATO  Fraternity.  Then  after  I  returned  from  the  military,  1 
reacquainted  myself  with  him  and  I  helped  him  in  his  first  statewide  election  when  he  ran  for  attorney 
general  and  was  elected.  But  the  first  time  he  ran  for  attorney  general,  it  was  against  Bob  List,  and  Bob 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


21 


List  won  that  election.  Then  he  ran  a  second  time  when  Bob  List  ran  for  governor,  and  then  he  ran  again 
against  Bob  List  for  governor.  Actually,  Dick  Bryan  and  Bob  List  ran  against  each  other  twice  and  they 
had  a  draw. 

We  know  that  being  a  gaming  commissioner  is  quote  “a  part-time  job.  ”  How  many  hours  a  month  did  you 
devote  to  your  so-called  part-time  job? 

Well,  1  don’t  know  that  1  could  tell  you  on  a  four-year  annualized  basis.  There  were  periods  when 
I  devoted  virtually  all  my  time  to  the  job.  Those  were  periods,  for  example,  when  we  had  the  Stardust 
seizure.  And  then  there  were  other  periods  when  1  wouldn’t  spend  that  much  time.  1  would  always  give  up 
the  weekend  before  the  meeting  for  the  reading,  and  1  would,  of  course,  give  up  the  meeting  day.  But  it 
seemed  to  me  that  as  the  job  went  on,  some  of  the  issues  became  more  routine.  But  1  would  say  out  of  a 
month  that  1  would  have  spent  in  the  neighborhood  of  eighty  to  a  hundred  hours.  1  was  chairman,  so  that 
required  much  more  time.  There  are  a  lot  of  things  that  the  chairman  has  to  do  that  take  more  time. 

Did  you  meet  with  the  chairman  of  the  Board  on  occasion? 

Yes,  but  we  usually  didn’t  talk  about  meeting  items  when  they  were  before  us.  The  Board  meets 
the  first  week  of  the  month,  and  the  Commission  meets  the  third  week  of  the  month.  So,  between  the 
board  meeting  and  the  commission  meeting,  it  would  be  unusual  if  the  board  chairman  and  1  would  have 
discussions  about  matters  that  might  have  been  decided  by  the  Board.  We  tried  not  to  do  that.  But  1  would 
have  a  lot  of  contact  with  the  board  chairman  on  policy  matters  and  administrative  matters,  but  that  would 
occur  primarily  by  telephone. 

In  the  case  of  the  first  board  chairman  1  worked  with,  Jim  Avance,  his  office  was  in  Clark 
County,  and  then  Bart  Jacka’s  office  was  in  Carson,  and  my  office  was  always  in  Reno,  so  we  seldom 
would  be  together  in  meetings.  We  talked  a  lot  by  telephone. 

At  your  first  Commission  meeting  you  presided  over  the  application  of  the  Perlman  brothers,  Cliff  and 
Stuart,  to  purchase  the  Dunes  Hotel-Casino.  Would  you  tell  us  something  about  the  Perlman  brothers  and 
the  result  of  their  attempt  to  purchase  the  Dunes? 

That’s  a  long  story.  The  Perlmans  were  two  brothers,  originally  from  Florida,  who  came  to  the 
state  of  Nevada  probably  in  the  late  1960s,  the  early  1970s.  They  had  a  small  publicly -traded  company 
named  Lums  that  they  used  to  buy  Caesar’s  Palace.  They  took  Caesar’s  Palace  public,  and  they  were  very 
successful.  And  they  seemed  to  be  doing  just  fine  until  some  intelligence  reports  surfaced  that  involved 
them  with  some  unsavory  contacts,  and  it  was  Clifford  Perlman  rather  than  his  brother.  Clifford  was  kind 
of  the  front  guy.  His  brother,  Stuart,  was  in  the  background  and  it  was  Clifford  who  was  the  public  face 
and  the  one  that  made  the  appearances  and  would  meet  the  Board  and  the  Commission  and  so  forth. 

Anyway,  Clifford  had  some  dealings  with  an  attorney  by  the  name  of  Alvin  Malnick,  and  Alvin 
Malnick  was  thought  to  be  a  front  for  Meyer  Lansky.  Alvin  Malnick  was  observed  in  a  series  of  meetings 
over  the  years  in  a  restaurant  in  Miami  called  The  Old  Forge  Restaurant  that  was  a  notorious  hangout  for 
mob  guys  and  was  constantly  under  surveillance  by  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation.  And  because  of 
these  reports,  Phil  Hannifin  and  Pete  Echeverria,  the  board  and  commission  chairman  respectively,  called 
them  in  for  an  investigative  hearing  and  read  them  the  riot  act.  They  said  to  the  Perlmans,  “You  should 


22 


not  be  dealing  with  this  person.  He  is  an  unsavory  person.  It’s  a  discredit  to  the  gaming  industry  to  deal 
with  people  like  that,  and  we  don’t  want  it  to  happen  again.” 

I  may  be  a  few  years  off,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  it  was  within  about  a  year  of  that  meeting  that 
Caesar’s  entered  into  a  transaction  in  the  Pocono  Mountains.  There  was  a  very  famous  honeymoon  resort 
up  there  in  the  Poconos,  and  Caesar’s,  the  company,  entered  into  a  transaction  to  buy  it.  Alvin  Malnick 
and  the  pension  fund  were  involved  in  that  transaction.  The  question  was  whether  or  not  Hannifin  and 
Echeverria  had  said  to  the  Perlmans,  “You  individually  cannot  deal  with  Malnick,”  or  whether  they  said 
to  Clifford,  “Either  individually  or  through  your  company  you  can’t  deal  with  him.”  So  Perlman  took  the 
position  that  he  understood  it  to  be  only  him  personally  and  not  his  company.  And  when  the  Caesar’s 
company  decided  they  were  going  to  do  an  expansion  and  go  into  Atlantic  City,  New  Jersey,  the  New 
Jersey  Casino  Control  Commission  denied  them  their  gaming  license  application  based  on  the  fact  that 
they  did  business  with  Malnick  after  they  had  been  warned  by  the  State  of  Nevada  not  to  do  so. 

So  when  the  Perlmans  came  back  out  to  purchase  the  Dunes — this  was  my  first  meeting — I  had 
all  that  history  before  me  and  a  denial  from  a  sister  state  of  their  gaming  application.  The  Board  was  the 
Board  that  had  been  appointed  by  Dick  Bryan,  so  it  was  a  new  governor’s  Board,  but  the  Commission 
was  the  old  governor’s  Commission  plus  me,  because  the  former  commission  chairman,  Senator  Carl 
Dodge,  tendered  his  resignation  as  a  courtesy  to  the  governor.  That  was  my  first  meeting.  And  I 
remember  [laughter]  someone  asked  me,  “Why  did  you  take  that  one  for  your  first  meeting?”  As  I  think 
back  on  it,  it  probably  wasn’t  very  smart,  but  I  figured  the  governor  wanted  to  get  his  Board  and  his 
Commission  in  place  right  away,  and  that  was  part  of  the  process. 

Anyway,  what  happened  with  the  Perlmans  is  I  voted  against  Clifford,  because  I  thought  it  was 
pretty  darn  clear  that  if  you  were  warned  you  couldn’t  deal  with  them  personally,  you  couldn’t  take  a 
company  that  you  controlled  and  use  that  as  a  subterfuge  to  get  around  the  warning.  And  I  felt  the  brother, 
Stuart,  wasn’t  in  the  meeting  where  he  was  threatened,  and  while  he  was  a  major  investor,  there  was  no 
evidence  that  he  was  the  one  who  was  making  decisions  or  actively  involved,  so  I  did  not  vote  against 
him.  Eventually,  the  Commission  recommended  approval  with  a  four-to-one  vote  for  Clifford  Perlman 
and  a  unanimous  vote  for  the  brother.  Ironically,  the  Dunes  transaction  didn’t  close  and  the  Perlmans 
never  got  back  into  the  gaming  business. 

And  I’ll  tell  you,  it’s  interesting  how  a  gaming  license  denial  can  ripple  through  other 
jurisdictions.  After  they  were  forced  by  New  Jersey  to  sell  their  interest  in  Caesar’s,  the  two  of  them 
bought  a  company  in  Philadelphia  that  manufactured  regulator  railroad  cars  and  specialty  railroad  cars. 
They  got  a  huge  order  from  the  New  York  subway  system  to  manufacture  and  build  new  replacement 
subway  cars  for  the  entire  system.  However,  there  was  a  governmental  agency  that  had  to  approve  that 
contract,  and  based  on  the  action  in  New  Jersey,  they  denied  them  that  and  they  lost  an  awful  lot  of 
money  in  that  company. 

The  next  thing  they  did  was  go  into  a  company  called  Regent  Air,  and  Regent  Air  was  an 
airline — for  really  wealthy  people — that  only  flew  between  Los  Angeles  and  New  York.  You  would 
basically  charter  it  one  way,  or  both  ways.  You  would  call  up  and  say,  "I  want  a  certain  kind  of 
champagne  on  board,  and  I  want  a  certain  meal  from  a  certain  restaurant."  Then  they  would  make  all 
these  arrangements,  put  it  all  together  and  you  would  have  this  wonderful  first-class,  private  plane  ride 
between  Los  Angeles  and  New  York.  Well,  to  operate  they  had  to  have  a  certificate  of  authority  from  the 
Federal  Aviation  Administration,  and  they  had  one  but  they  had  to  renew  it,  and  they  lost  it  because  of  the 
denial  in  New  Jersey.  I  tell  that  story  to  clients  who  are  looking  at  getting  into  the  system,  because  who 
would  think  that  a  denial  of  a  gaming  license  in  the  State  of  New  Jersey  would  have  those  kinds  of 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


23 


ramifications.  But  anyway,  the  long  story  is,  I’m  told,  that  both  of  them  died  broke.  So  anyway,  that’s  the 
story  of  the  Perlmans. 


I’ve  been  really  lucky  in  the  people  that  I’ve  worked  with,  especially  the  executive  secretary  of 
the  Gaming  Commission,  who  at  the  time  was  a  lady  named  Irene  Morros;  she  was  a  great  secretary.  She 
was  a  lot  of  the  institutional  memory  of  the  Commission,  because  she’d  served  there  for  more  than  twenty 
years  when  I  came  on  board.  So  when  we’d  get  to  a  tough  question,  or  a  tough  issue,  where  you  had  to 
scratch  your  head  and  figure  out  the  right  answer,  I  would  always  call  Irene  and  say,  “Has  this  ever 
happened  before?”  There  were  a  lot  of  times  it  had,  and  someone  before  me  had  struggled  and  worked  out 
a  good  solution  and  I  so  borrowed  it.  I  figured  if  they  had  thought  it  all  through  and  it  worked  out  well, 
then  that  probably  was  a  good  solution.  And  a  lot  of  times  it  was  due  to  Irene’s  homework  and  memory. 
She’d  give  me  a  call  and  say,  “Hey,  this  guy  was  before  us  fifteen  years  ago.  You  ought  to  go  back  and 
look  at  that  old  transcript.” 

And  I’d  say,  “OK,  send  it  over,”  and  she’d  send  it  over.  She  had  actually  grown  up  there.  She  was 
from  Ely,  and  was  married  to  Pete  Morros,  who  later  became  the  state  engineer.  While  working  at  the 
Gaming  Control  Board  as  a  teenager — they  were  married  very  young — she  put  Pete  through  the 
University  of  Nevada,  where  he  got  his  engineering  degree.  She  was  like  a  twenty-eight  or  thirty-year 
employee,  and  retired  quite  young.  Having  started  there  at  eighteen,  she  didn’t  have  to  be  very  old  by  the 
time  she  retired.  She  was  not  even  fifty.  A  group  of  tremendous  people  have  worked  in  that  agency  as 
staff  people.  They’re  the  ones  that  do  all  the  leg  work.  They’re  the  ones  that  go  dig  all  this  stuff  up,  and 
they’re  on  the  road  a  lot,  they  often  travel  under  adverse  conditions,  and  they  work  in  places  sometimes 
where  it’s  hostile,  but  they  still  do  a  marvelous  job. 

My  view  is  you’re  only  as  strong  as  your  people.  And  if  people  perceive  the  Board  and  the 
Commission  as  doing  a  good  job,  it’s  because  they  have  a  great  staff  that’s  turning  out  that  work.  Even 
today,  I  still,  as  an  attorney,  do  a  lot  of  work  with  the  Gaming  Board  and  their  staff,  and  it’s  still  a  fine 
staff.  And  the  other  thing  that  you  see  is  the  longevity  in  the  staff.  You  have  people  like  Jack  Stratton  who 
spent  thirty  years  with  gaming.  Jack  was  the  greatest  guy  in  the  world  to  work  with.  When  I  was  a  young 
attorney  and  I’d  get  a  problem,  I’d  go  over  and  I’d  sit  down  with  Jack,  and  we’d  close  the  door  and  off  the 
record  we’d  talk  about  it.  I  don’t  know  if  that  happens  anymore,  but  he  gave  a  lot  of  good  guidance  to  a 
lot  of  young  attorneys  and  also  to  licensees.  Another  thing  is,  when  you  think  of  an  agency  that’s  been 
around  so  much  cash  and  so  much  money,  there’s  been  no  major  scandal  in  that  agency,  except  we  had 
the  one  guy  in  the  gaming  laboratory  who  went  “south,”  Ron  Harris.  But  when  you  think  about  the 
hundreds  of  people  who’ve  worked  there  that  didn’t  dishonor  the  agency,  it’s  pretty  good.  I  just  want  to 
say  that  the  current  executive  secretary,  Marilyn  Eppling,  is  right  out  of  the  same  mold  as  Irene  Morros. 
She  went  to  work  there  as  a  young  woman,  and  she’s  virtually  spent  here  entire  career  there.  She  was 
Irene’s  replacement. 

In  January  of 1984,  the  Gaming  Control  Board  presented  to  the  Commission  a  revised  reporting 
requirement ,  known  as  “Exhibit  A,  ”  and  the  Commission  rejected  the  proposal.  Would  you  give  us  some 
background  on  Exhibit  A  ? 


Well,  again,  this  is  not  a  short  answer.  Exhibit  A  was  a  proposed  set  of  conditions  that  the 


24 


Gaming  Control  Board  wanted  to  put  on  the  public  companies  that  were  involved  in  gaming  outside  of 
Nevada.  One  of  the  aspects  of  Exhibit  A  that  the  board  wanted  to  make  mandatory  was  that  each 
company  would  be  required  to  create  a  compliance  committee.  A  compliance  committee  is  something  that 
originally  developed  in  Nevada  when  Bally’s  was  first  licensed.  The  Bally  gaming  license  application 
process  was  very  contested  and  very  close.  It  was  a  two-to-one  vote  at  the  Board  and  a  three-to-two  vote 
at  the  Commission,  which  is  really  unusual.  And  probably  the  reason  that  Bally  got  licensed  was  because 
they  suggested  and  were  willing  to  implement  a  compliance  committee,  which  was  a  committee  made  up 
of  outside  people  who  were  not  part  of  management,  but  who  would  be  able  to  overlook  to  see  if  Bally 
was  following  all  of  the  rules  and  laws  in  places  where  they  were  doing  business.  There’d  never  been  a 
compliance  committee,  to  my  knowledge,  on  any  Nevada  company  prior  to  them. 

After  that,  there  was  a  lot  of  discussion  about  what  companies  needed  to  have  compliance 
committees.  The  Board  was  of  the  view  that  every  public  company  that  was  going  to  be  doing  business 
outside  Nevada  needed  to  have  a  compliance  committee.  Now,  a  compliance  committee  was  an  additional 
level  of  bureaucracy,  as  far  as  the  industry  was  concerned,  and  it  was  an  additional  expense.  The 
compliance  committee  would  report  directly  to  the  board  of  directors  of  the  company,  and  they  were 
basically  a  watchdog.  When  the  Board  proposed  Exhibit  A,  they  had  a  requirement  in  there  that  the  five 
public  companies  that  were  doing  business  outside  the  state  had  to  create  and  form  compliance 
committees. 

The  companies  were  the  Golden  Nugget,  Bally’s,  Elsinore — which  was  the  Four  Queens — 
Holiday  Inn,  and  the  Hilton  Coiporation.  But  there  were  a  couple  of  objections.  From  the  industry 
standpoint,  companies — for  example,  like  the  Golden  Nugget,  who  already  were  doing  business  in  New 
Jersey  and  didn’t  have  a  compliance  committee — felt  that  by  adopting  this  Exhibit  A,  you  had  to  bring 
them  back  in  and  run  them  through  a  hearing,  and  they  were  opposed  to  that.  But  1  think  there  was  a 
philosophical  concern  by  the  members  of  the  Commission  about  whether  or  not  you  needed  to  have  a 
compliance  committee  if  you  had  a  company  that  was  a  good  coiporate  citizen  and  that  had  not  had  any 
trouble.  Bally’s  had  had  a  lot  of  troubles.  They  had  a  background  that  was  problematic,  and  the  Elsinore, 
for  example,  and  the  Golden  Nugget  didn’t  have  any  of  those  kinds  of  background  problems.  Plus,  at  the 
time  there  was  only  one  other  jurisdiction  that  the  companies  were  going  into,  and  that  was  in  the  state  of 
New  Jersey,  which  was  generally  considered  to  be  a  legitimate  regulatory  environment. 

So  the  Commission  felt  that  rather  than  make  a  blanket  requirement  and  say,  "Everybody  has  to 
do  it,"  you’d  look  at  these  companies  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  And  if  you  had  someone  who  had  a 
problematic  background  like  Bally,  you  would  impose  a  compliance  committee.  We  also  felt  that  the 
Board  was  maybe  not  being  consistent,  because  earlier  in  the  year  we’d  had  a  manufacturing  company 
called  Sigma,  a  manufacturer  of  gaming  devices,  which  had  been  approved  by  the  Board  and  the 
Commission.  They  were  a  very  clean  company  and  there  was  no  requirement  for  a  compliance  committee 
on  that  company.  It  was  our  view  that  if  the  Board  wasn’t  going  to  require  a  compliance  committee  for 
somebody  like  Sigma,  who  was  a  manufacturer  and  had  machines  in  many  jurisdictions  throughout  the 
world,  why  would  you  want  to  put  them  on  our  Nevada  licensees  who  were  in  New  Jersey?  So  that  was 
the  first  objection. 

The  second  objection  was  that  the  information  they  were  required  to  report,  we  felt,  was 
something  that  the  Board  and  the  Commission  already  had  the  power  to  ask  them  to  report  under  the 
existing  statute  and  regulations.  They’re  the  same  statutes  and  regulations  that  you  have  even  now,  which 
basically  say  that  the  Board  and  the  Commission  have  the  power  to  ask  licensees  to  furnish  whatever 
information  the  Board  and  Commission  ask  for.  So  that’s  why  we  took  the  action  that  we  did.  And  it 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


25 


was  .  .  .  [laughter]  unfortunate,  1  suppose,  as  you  look  back  on  things,  maybe  had  we  had  more  of  a 
dialogue  at  the  meeting  where  that  was  discussed,  the  Board  wouldn’t  have  been  so  upset.  And  actually 
the  Board  wasn’t  so  upset;  Patty  Becker  was  upset,  [laughter]  She  called  up  the  local  reporter,  and  the 
reporter  started  calling  me,  and  then  the  next  thing  you  know  the  press  was  reporting  a  brouhaha  between 
the  Board  and  the  Commission  and  1  think  it  all  got  blown  out  of  perspective.  In  terms  of  the  big  scheme 
of  matters  that  1  looked  at  when  1  was  on  the  Commission,  it  really  wasn’t  of  that  magnitude,  but  it 
became  a  news  story  and  that  gave  it  its  own  life.  So  that’s  basically  the  reason  that  the  Commission  and 
the  Board  disagreed.  If  you  look  at  today  with  Enron  and  all  the  bad  stuff  that  we  had,  compliance 
committees  are  now  becoming  kind  of  the  norm.  All  the  companies  now  have  to  have  what  is  called  a 
“corporate  governance  committee.”  It’s  now  mandatory  with  all  companies  on  the  New  York  Stock 
Exchange. 

So  as  you  look  back,  [laughter]  maybe  the  Board  was  twenty  years  ahead  of  everybody  else.  But 
anyway,  that’s  what  the  Exhibit  A  issue  was  about. 

So  it  really  wasn ’t  that  much  of  a  problem  for  the  entire  Board.  It  was  mainly  just  Patty  Becker? 

Correct. 

Were  there  any  long-term  effects  on  the  relationship  between  the  Board  and  your  Commission? 

1  don’t  think  so.  The  next  thing  that  happened  was  the  Stardust  issue,  and  that  was  the  biggest 
deal  we  had  the  entire  time  1  was  on  the  Commission.  The  Board  had  been  conducting  a  covert 
intelligence  operation  and  surveillance  of  the  Stardust  along  with  federal  agents — the  Federal  Bureau  of 
Investigation,  ATF  agents,  and  IRS  agents — because  they  suspected  that  there  was  a  skim  operation  going 
on.  They  had  conducted  this  covert  operation  probably  starting  in  March  or  April  of  1983,  and  no  one  on 
the  Commission  was  even  aware  of  it. 

Then  in  December  1  was  told  by  Jim  Avance  (chairman  of  the  Nevada  Gaming  Control  Board) 
that  the  Commission  should  be  prepared  to  accept  material  from  the  Board  on  a  disciplinary  action,  and 
an  action  that  we  were  going  to  be  asked  to  approve.  Early  in  the  month,  1  was  given  this  huge 
investigative  report  that  had  been  put  together,  and  twenty  years  later  1  can’t  remember  the  complete 
details,  but  1  can  tell  you  that  the  gist  of  the  skim  operation  was  that  a  chip  runner  would  leave  the  cage 
with  a  cartload  full  of  cash.  He  would  make  his  run  through  the  pit  and  make  a  series  of  bogus  drops  at  a 
series  of  twenty-one  tables  on  the  swing  shift  on  Friday  night.  Then  he  would  exit  a  side  door  with  the 
cart  still  fully  loaded  and  would  be  met  by  a  confederate,  who  would  take  the  cash  and  leave.  The 
confederate  was  then  tailed  so  they  had  a  clear  track  of  the  money  being  skimmed  out  of  the  casino.  It 
was  always  on  a  Friday  night  on  swing  shift.  And  there  were  always  certain  key  figures  who  always 
worked  that  swing  shift.  They  were  the  shift  manager,  the  pit  manager,  the  casino  manager,  the  chip 
runner,  and  fourteen  or  fifteen  blackjack  dealers  that  always  worked  that  same  shift.  So  it  was  a  fairly 
good-sized  conspiracy.  What  astounded  me  when  the  information  was  presented  to  me  was  the  fact  that 
the  board  agents,  and  1  believe  one  of  the  board  members,  met  with  the  owners  of  the  casino  (A1  Sachs 
and  Herb  Tobman)  about  a  month  and  a  half  before  this — maybe  it  was  in  the  month  of  October — and 
basically  laid  this  out  for  them.  Told  them  what  was  going  to  happen,  how  it  was  happening,  told  them 
basically  what  I’ve  just  told  you  and  it  didn’t  stop. 

What  the  Board  wanted  to  do — and  the  Commission  had  the  authority  to  do  it — was  without  a 


26 


hearing,  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  go  in  after  the  Commission  signed  an  emergency  order  suspending 
their  license,  and  take  over  the  casino.  They  wanted  to  do  this  all  like  on  the  twelfth,  thirteenth,  fourteenth 
of  December.  And  I  said,  “You  mean  you’re  going  to  close  the  casino  two  weeks  before  Christmas  and 
you’re  going  to  put  two  thousand  people  out  of  work,  and  you  want  the  Commission  to  approve  that 
without  a  hearing?” 

And  the  Board  said,  “Yes.” 

1  said,  “Well,  we’ve  got  to  talk  about  that.”  There  was  a  statute  that  had  been  recently  passed  that 
had  never  been  used.  It  was  called  “The  Supervisor  Statute.”  And  The  Supervisor  Statute  allowed  the 
Commission  to  petition  the  district  court  to  get  someone  who  was  qualified  to  come  in  and  run  the 
gaming  operation  if  a  license  was  lost.  So  1  said  to  the  Board,  “1  won’t  support  closing  this  thing  two 
weeks  before  Christmas  with  no  hearing  and  throwing  all  these  people  out  of  work  unless  we  can  get  a 
supervisor  in  there  to  keep  the  place  open.”  So  they  went  back  to  the  drawing  boards,  did  their  research 
and  figured  out  how  that  would  work  and  what  needed  to  be  done  and  came  back  to  me,  after  they  had  it 
all  worked  out  with  the  attorney  general’s  office.  They  had  prepared  a  detailed  affidavit  that  was  pages 
long — I  don’t  know  how  long  it  was — that  laid  out  the  entire  procedure.  It  required  the  signature  of  three 
members  of  the  Commission  in  order  to  take  over  the  casino.  It  was  all  going  to  be  done  on  a  Sunday 
evening  without  any  hearing  and  without  any  notice.  After  I’d  looked  at  all  the  evidence,  I  called 
Governor  Bryan.  It  was  a  Saturday  night  and  I  was  going  to  fly  down  to  Las  Vegas  the  next  night, 

Sunday,  because  they  wanted  to  close  this  thing  on  Sunday  night.  I  said,  “I  need  to  talk  to  you.” 

He  said,  “Well,  I’m  coming  over  here  (to  Reno).  I’m  going  to  the  Prospectors’  annual  Christmas 

party.” 

I  said,  “Well,  why  don’t  you  just  come  by  my  office?”  My  office  at  the  time  was  on  Center  Street, 
which  was  right  down  from  Harrah’s.  So  when  he  came  in  he  was  dressed  up  in  his  tuxedo.  Bonnie  (his 
wife)  was  all  dressed  up,  also.  She  stayed  out  in  the  outer  room,  while  basically  I  took  the  governor 
through  this  whole  story,  [laughter]  And  I  said,  “Governor,  what  do  you  think?” 

He  said,  “I  think  you’re  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission.  I’ve  got  a  party  to  go  to.”  He 
threw  it  right  back  at  me,  and  the  reason  he  did  is  that  when  I  took  the  job,  there  was  a  feeling  that  politics 
was  involved  in  some  of  the  decision-making  at  the  Commission  and  the  board,  and  that  there  was 
political  cronyism.  So  I  had  an  understanding  with  Dick  Bryan.  I  said,  “If  you  ever  call  me  up  and  tell  me 
how  I’m  supposed  to  vote,  I’m  going  to  resign  after  I  vote  the  way  I  think  is  right.”  And  what  he  was 
saying  to  me  was,  “That’s  the  way  you  wanted  to  have  the  job.  Now  you  got  it.”  I’ve  always  respected 
him  for  that,  [laughter]  But  I  really  did  want  some  help,  because  nobody  had  ever  done  this  before. 
Nobody  had  ever  used  The  Supervisor  Statute.  Felix  Turillas  in  Lovelock  had  his  place  seized,  but  that’s  a 
lot  different  than  closing  down  the  Stardust  right  before  Christmas.  I  had  asked  the  Board  to  get  some 
candidates  to  be  the  supervisor,  because  the  Commission  had  to  recommend  some  people  to  the  district 
court  if  we  were  going  to  ask  for  a  supervisor  to  be  appointed.  I  interviewed  two  guys  who  used  to  be 
with  Caesar’s,  in  the  board  office  in  Las  Vegas,  and  after  they  both  left  the  office  I  met  individually  with 
three  other  commissioners.  Skip  Avansino,  who  was  a  commissioner,  was  not  available,  so  I  met  with  the 
three  other  commissioners  and  I  got  their  signatures  on  this  order  with  the  understanding  that  we  would 
soon  get  a  supervisor.  There  would  not  be  a  closure  until  a  supervisor  was  appointed  to  run  the  place. 
After  they  put  their  signature  on  it,  I  put  my  signature  on  it,  so  we  had  the  order  signed,  and  I  had  two 
guys  who  had  said,  “OK,  I’ll  do  it.”  I  had  told  them  where  I  was  staying,  and  when  I  got  back  to  the  motel 
I  got  a  call  from  each  of  them  separately  about  fifteen  minutes  apart,  and  they  both  said,  “We’ve  been  told 
that  the  mob  is  involved  there,  we  have  young  families,  and  we  don’t  want  to  be  supervisor.”  And  I  don’t 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


27 


know  how  Jim  Avance  did  it,  but  he  got  ahold  of  Bill  Boyd.  And  we  talked  to  him,  and  the  Boyd 
organization  agreed  to  do  it. 

So  that  night — it  was  probably  by  then  two,  three  o’clock  Monday  morning — the  Gaming  Control 
Board  went  in  and  took  over  the  place.  The  next  morning  the  attorneys  for  the  Commission  went  to  the 
district  court  and  we  got  the  Boyd  Group  appointed  as  supervisor.  Within  twenty-four  hours,  Trans- 
Sterling  had  retained  a  very  good  attorney  named  Mort  Galane.  He  filed  suit  against  our  action,  and  the 
first  thing  he  asked  for  was  a  hearing  before  the  Commission.  The  statute  was  silent.  The  statute  didn’t 
say  anything:  didn’t  say  we  had  to  give  it,  didn’t  say  we  didn’t  have  to  give  it.  So  1  met  with  our  attorneys 
and  they  all  advised  me  that  since  the  statute  didn’t  say  we  had  to  do  it,  we  didn’t  have  to  do  it.  But  as  a 
lawyer  1  just  couldn’t  buy  that.  1  mean,  you  take  away  a  multi-million-dollar  business  like  that  and  you 
don’t  even  give  a  guy  a  hearing,  1  couldn’t  imagine  the  courts  would  ever  let  that  stand  up.  So  we  ordered 
a  hearing  starting  around  the  fifteenth  of  December  in  Carson  City.  The  Board  started  putting  on 
evidence,  and  I  don’t  know  how  many  days  we  went.  Five  days,  six  days,  seven  days,  I  don’t  remember. 
We’d  start  at  eight  in  the  morning  and  go  till  eight  at  night.  The  court  reporters  were  dying,  because  in 
court  you  have  a  lot  of  breaks,  but  here  we  were  all  just  private  citizens  with  real  jobs  somewhere  and  we 
were  forced  into  this  emergency  hearing.  In  the  meantime,  they  got  a  special  writ  before  the  Nevada 
Supreme  Court,  and  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court  said  that  since  we  had  given  them  a  hearing,  they  were 
going  to  wait  until  the  hearing  was  over.  1  can’t  remember  what  day  it  was,  but  1  was  in  the  hallway  when 
A1  Sachs  came  up  to  me  and  said,  “1  have  to  talk  to  you.”  So  1  went  into  one  of  the  offices  in  the  attorney 
general’s  part  of  the  office  building,  and  when  1  closed  the  door  he  said,  “1  want  to  settle  this.” 

1  said,  “Stop.  1  can’t  talk  to  you.  You’re  going  to  have  to  negotiate  a  settlement  with  the  Gaming 
Control  Board.”  So  1  went  and  found  Jim  Avance  and  they  started  talking.  We  then  recessed  the  hearing, 
and  seems  to  me  it  took  three  or  four  days  after  that  to  get  a  negotiated  settlement  worked  out  where 
basically  they  surrendered  their  license  and  they  paid  a  very  large  fine.  This  fine  has  now  been  exceeded, 
but  for  years  it  was  the  largest  fine  ever  imposed  in  the  state. 

Did  Mr.  Tobman  go  along  with  Mr.  Sachs? 

Sachs  was  the  principal  owner  and  Tobman  had  a  smaller  interest,  and  Sachs  was  the  guy  doing 
the  talking.  The  hearing  room  was  just  loaded  with  press  and  people.  I  mean,  it  was  a  big  story,  because 
here  were  all  the  details  of  this  big  skim  going  on!  The  Board  worked  out  a  settlement  and  it  was  a  long, 
long  stipulation.  So  then  I  went  to  my  attorney  general  and  said,  “Well,  now  what  do  I  do?  I  think  I  need 
to  hold  a  hearing.”  When  you’re  in  a  criminal  court,  if  a  person’s  entering  a  guilty  plea,  they  come  in 
before  the  judge  and  the  judge  makes  them  be  sworn  in  and  say,  “I’m  guilty,  and  I  plead  guilty,  and  this  is 
my  signature.”  So  I  did  that,  and  I’m  certainly  glad  I  did,  because  they  then  sued  us  for  a  civil  rights 
violation  in  the  United  States  District  Court.  You  asked  about  whether  Tobman  went  along,  [laughter]  It’s 
funny  how  certain  things  stick  in  your  mind.  I  made  a  mistake  when  I  had  that  hearing;  I  did  it  by 
telephone.  I  was  up  here  in  Reno  and  they  were  down  in  Las  Vegas,  and  I  couldn’t  look  them  in  the  eye. 
So  I  really  didn’t  get  anything  except  what  was  coming  across  on  the  phone.  But  I  asked  Tobman,  “Do 
you  agree  with  this  stipulation,  and  is  it  voluntary?” 

And  he  said,  “Under  the  circumstances.” 

And  I  thought  to  myself,  “Do  I  ask  under  what  circumstances  and  get  into  that?  And  maybe  he 
starts  saying,  ‘there’s  coercion  and  there’s  duress’  and  I  blow  the  whole  settlement.”  So  I  didn’t  ask  the 
question.  Well,  it  almost  came  back  to  haunt  me,  because  when  it  was  all  done,  within  a  month  they  had 


28 


sued  us  in  federal  district  court  for  violating  their  civil  rights  and  all  sorts  of  constitutional  violations, 
again  filed  by  Mort  Galane.  And  the  thing  that  saved  that  case  was  the  fact  that  1  had  taken  the  time  to  ask 
those  questions,  because  it  was  all  right  there  on  the  record.  And  the  court  quoted,  “Under  the 
circumstances,”  but  didn’t  say  1  should  have  asked  more.  It  just  said  that  he  said,  “Yes,  under  the 
circumstances,”  and  that  was  a  voluntary  relinquishment  of  their  known  rights.  That  was  the  end  of  the 
case. 

Judge  Roger  Foley  wrote  the  decision — a  long,  long  decision.  It  went  to  the  Ninth  Circuit,  was 
affirmed,  and  twenty  years  later  1  look  back  at  that  as  being  a  watershed  event  in  Nevada,  because  what  it 
really  said  to  the  financial  world  was  that  Nevada  is  serious  about  regulating  gaming  and  we’re  willing  to 
do  tough  things.  After  that,  the  coffers  of  Wall  Street  started  opening  up  to  fund  publicly -traded  gaming 
companies  and  gaming  ventures  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  As  you  look  at  what’s  been  built  in  Las  Vegas 
today,  you  think  twenty  years  ago  none  of  that  was  there,  it  all  kind  of  started  with  the  Stardust  thing.  I’ve 
had  people  from  Wall  Street  tell  me,  “After  the  Stardust  incident  we  knew  that  this  was  a  legitimate, 
regulated  business.” 

Something  that  first  appeared  bad  for  the  industry,  the  skimming  exposure,  wound  up  being  a  plus 
because  of  the  way  it  was  handled. 

I  think  so.  And  as  I  look  back  and  I  think  of  all  the  things  I  did  in  the  four  years  I  was  on  the 
Commission,  that  was  the  single  most  important  thing.  I  have  to  say  that  I  followed  my  instincts  and  my 
instincts  were  good  getting  a  supervisor  in  there  rather  than  closing  it  down.  It  would  have  put  two 
thousand  people  out  of  work  in  Las  Vegas  two  weeks  before  Christmas  and  the  Commission  would  have 
been  vilified!  Anyway,  that  is  the  story  of  the  Stardust,  and  it  had  some  great  fall-out.  I  will  tell  you  what 
it  was  like  for  the  troops  in  the  agency,  for  the  guys  in  the  field:  it  was  like  those  guys  nabbing  Saddam 
the  other  night.  It  really  gave  them  a  boost.  It  was  like,  “We  got  him,”  because  they  had  been  working  this 
case  for  months.  They  had  surveillance  there,  they  had  ATF,  they  had  IRS,  they  had  FBI,  they  had  all 
those  agencies.  And  not  a  word  ever  got  on  the  street.  They  did  a  great  job!  And  I  give  the  Board  and  the 
staff  an  enormous  amount  of  credit.  If  the  staff  hadn’t  done  such  a  tremendously  thorough  job  and  put 
together  such  a  tight  case,  A1  Sachs  wouldn’t  have  come  to  me  and  said,  “Let’s  settle.” 

You  talked  earlier  about  the  amount  of  fines  that  were  levied  against  Sachs  and  Tobman.  How  large  were 
the  fines? 

Well,  the  total  fine  for  the  individuals  and  the  Trans-Sterling  Corporation  was  three  million 
dollars,  and  Tobman  was  fined  one  hundred  thousand,  while  Sachs  was  fined  two  hundred  thousand. 

Also,  their  license  was  taken  away  and  they  were  divested  of  their  interests,  but  I’ll  tell  you,  there 
was  an  interesting  sidelight  that  developed  that  caused  me  to  go  to  the  legislature  and  get  the  law 
changed.  And  that  is  after  the  Boyd  group  started  running  the  Stardust,  they  started  making  a  lot  of 
money.  The  Supervisor  Statute  provided  that  the  supervisor  was  then  to  ask  the  court  to  sell  the  property. 
So  there  was  a  period  of  time — and  I  can’t  remember  how  long  it  was — that  the  Boyd  group  ran  this 
property  basically  for  the  benefit  of  the  state  before  it  was  sold.  But  during  the  period  of  time  from  the 
order  when  they  took  over  and  were  appointed  supervisor  until  they  bought  the  property,  they  generated 
several  million  dollars  worth  of  profit.  And  under  the  statute  as  it  was  written  at  the  time,  the  profit  went 
to  Sachs  and  Tobman.  I  talked  to  Governor  Bryan  and  we  both  agreed  that  wasn’t  right.  So  we  went  back 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


29 


and  we  corrected  that  so  that  after  they’d  lost  the  license  they  couldn’t  get  any  profits.  And  1  used  to  think 
to  myself,  “If  they  were  skimming  and  weren’t  making  any  money,  then  if  they  stopped  skimming,  it’s 
only  logical  they’d  start  making  money.” 

Under  the  revised  statute,  who  gets  the  profit  now,  if  something  like  that  would  happen? 

1  looked  up  the  statute.  It’s  NRS  463b200:  [and  I’m  reading]  and  all  earnings,  except  the 
amount  representing  the  reasonable  rental  value  of  the  premises.”  In  other  words,  Sachs  and  Tobman 
would  get  reasonable  rental  value  for  the  time  when  the  Boyd  group  was  running  it,  but  then  the  profit 
would  be  forfeited  and  deposited  in  the  state  general  fund.  So  it  goes  to  the  people  of  the  state. 

Did  the  Commission  close  any  other  gaming  properties  during  your  tenure? 

[long  pause]  Yes.  It  was  one  in  which  1  didn’t  participate,  because  it  was  the  Cal-Neva  at  Lake 
Tahoe  and  it  involved  a  licensee  named  Ron  Cloud.  1  did  not  participate  because  just  before  1  became 
commission  chairman,  1  was  involved  in  a  lawsuit  against  Mr.  Cloud  and  I  formed  an  opinion  about  him 
that  was  such  that  I  could  not  be  a  fair  judge,  and  I  excused  myself.  That  case  involved  the  filing  of  the 
star  reels  on  the  old  electromechanical  slot  machines.  The  board  staff  had  gone  in  and  did  an  inspection  of 
the  slot  machines,  and  they  discovered  that  the  star  reels  had  been  filed  so  that  certain  winning 
combinations  were  impossible.  There  was  a  hearing  and  Mr.  Cloud  lost  his  license  because  of  that.  But 
that  was  the  only  other  closure. 

During  your  tenure,  of  course,  the  Stardust  Hotel  with  Mr.  Sachs  and  Mr.  Tobman  was  one  of  your 
biggest  problems.  Were  there  any  other  applications  or  events  that  caused  you  a  lot  of  concern? 

Well,  right  at  the  end — it’s  kind  of  interesting,  this  was  my  last  meeting — we  had  a  hearing  in 
which  we  put  Carl  Wesley  Thomas  in  the  List  of  Excluded  Persons,  otherwise  known  as  the  “Black 
Book.”  That  hearing  caused  me  a  lot  of  concern  as  a  lawyer,  because  Carl  Wesley  Thomas’s  attorney, 
Richard  Wright,  who  had  been  a  U.S.  attorney  for  the  state  of  Nevada,  raised  some  very,  very  compelling 
legal  arguments  that  I  had  to  wrestle  with  because  of  their  novelty.  Basically  what  he  said  was,  “How  can 
you  put  my  client  in  the  ‘Black  Book’  when  you  have  issued  work  cards  and  let  people  work  who  have 
felony  convictions  and  have  all  sorts  of  other  problems?  Y ou  are  singling  him  out  and  you  are  selectively 
prosecuting  him.”  Richard  Wright  asked  to  have  the  Board  produce  a  list  of  people  who  had  work  cards 
who  also  had  felony  convictions.  The  Board  resisted  that  fiercely  and  said,  “We  don’t  have  to  produce 
that.” 

And  I  thought  to  myself,  “Well,  how  do  you  know  if  there  is  selective  prosecution  if  you  don’t 
know  what  you’ve  done  with  the  others?” 

I  thought  it  was  important,  and  I  ruled  that  they  had  to  produce  it.  [laughter]  I  think  we  were  all 
astounded  at  the  magnitude  of  the  people  who  had  been  allowed  to  get  into  the  industry  and  to  have  a 
work  card  that  had  really  serious  felony  problems.  When  this  argument  was  raised,  he  cited  a  case  that 
every  one  of  us  who  grew  up  in  the  Vietnam  era  knew  all  about,  and  that  was  the  prosecution  of 
Mohammed  Ali.  Because  remember,  he  refused  to  step  forward  and  be  drafted,  and  they  stuck  him  in  a 
federal  penitentiary,  and  the  best  prime  years  of  his  career  were  spent  behind  bars  because  he  refused,  as  a 
conscientious  objector,  to  go  to  Vietnam.  The  courts  later  overturned  that  and  concluded  that  it  was 


30 


selective  prosecution. 

1  was  very  concerned  that  we  wouldn’t  do  the  same  thing  to  Carl  Wesley  Thomas  that  the  U.S. 
Government  did  to  Mohammed  Ali,  but  the  deputy  attorney  general,  who  was  handling  the  matter  for  the 
board,  just  didn’t  get  it.  He  just  didn’t  see  the  issues  as  serious  and  as  significant  as  1  did,  and  1  had  to  step 
in.  For  example,  1  took  judicial  notice  of  all  sorts  of  facts  and  information  that  properly  the  board  attorney 
should  have  been  presenting,  but  didn’t.  1  almost  mucked  up  the  whole  thing,  because  1  became  so 
involved  that  the  attorney,  Richard  Wright,  in  addition  to  saying  selective  prosecution,  said  the  chairman 
took  over  the  job  of  the  board  attorney  in  handling  the  Carl  Wesley  Thomas  matter. 

After  the  hearing  we  put  him  in  the  “Black  Book,”  and  1  was  convinced  that  this  guy  was  a  lot 
different  from  some  guy  who  maybe  had  a  felony  DU1,  because  Carl  Wesley  Thomas  was  a  ringleader  for 
the  mob  in  showing  them  and  explaining  to  them  how  to  skim  Nevada  casinos.  He  was  recorded  on  FBI 
wiretaps  giving  instructions  to  the  mobsters  on  how  to  skim  casinos  in  Las  Vegas.  To  me  that  was 
significantly  different  than  somebody  who  got  violent  and  hurt  somebody  or  somebody  with  a  youthful 
crime  or  whatever.  I  mean,  this  went  to  the  heart  and  soul  and  the  integrity  of  the  industry.  After  the 
commission  voted  to  put  him  in  the  “Black  Book,”  it  went  to  a  federal  court  where  the  judge  agreed  with 
us  and  fortunately  didn’t  think  I’d  gone  too  far  as  when  1  stepped  in  to  make  sure  that  the  evidence  all  got 
in  the  record.  But  I  thought  Richard  Wright  did  a  fantastic  job  of  raising  an  issue  in  a  way  that  you  just 
wouldn’t  expect  it — selective  prosecution  in  the  Mohammed  Ali  case  applicable  to  the  “Black  Book.” 
[laughter]  And  really  the  lawyer  part  of  me  just  found  that  whole  thing  very,  very  challenging,  because 
this  guy’s  presentation  and  the  way  that  he  handled  it  was  just  top-notch.  The  stakes  were  not  anywhere 
near  like  they  were  in  the  Stardust,  and  the  human  consequences  were  much  different,  but  from  an 
intellectual  standpoint  it  was  very  stimulating. 

Were  there  any  individuals  or  corporations  licensed  during  your  tenure  that  had  historical  significance? 

Well,  the  first  one  that  comes  to  mind  is  the  licensing  of  CARMA,  which  was  a  publicly-traded 
corporation  headquartered  in  Canada.  They  wanted  to  acquire  a  property  called  Bourbon  Street,  and  the 
issue  was  that  the  law  at  the  time  did  not  allow  publicly-traded  companies  that  were  not  registered  with 
the  American  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  to  be  able  to  qualify  to  get  a  license  in  Nevada.  So 
what  we  had  to  do  was  fashion  a  licensing  mechanism  that  would  allow  us  to  register  CARMA  with  the 
Gaming  Commission  in  such  a  way  that  we  could  treat  it  essentially  the  same  way  that  we  treated  a 
publicly-traded  company  that  was  registered  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission.  We  did  that 
in  1984  through  a  series  of  waivers,  which  required  CARMA  to  act  and  be  treated  as  if  they  were  an 
American  publicly-traded  company.  That  was  the  first  time  that  a  foreign  publicly-traded  company  was 
registered.  1  believe  the  legislature  in  the  next  session  of  the  legislature  amended  the  statute,  and  now  it’s 
clear  that  you  can  do  that. 

The  other  situation  which  was  of  historical  significance  was  that  we  approved  for  the  first  time  a 
Nevada  licensee’s  ability  to  conduct  gaming  outside  the  United  States.  And  that  was  with  respect  to 
Hilton  Coiporation,  which  was  going  to  manage  the  Conrad  Hilton  property  on  the  Gold  Coast  in 
Queensland,  Australia.  At  the  time  the  law  required  that  the  Queensland  regulatory  scheme  be  reviewed 
by  the  Board,  which  was  done,  and  we  concluded  that  they  had  a  comprehensive  regulatory  scheme  in 
place  in  Queensland  and  that  the  Hilton  Corporation  could  satisfy  all  of  the  requirements  of  Nevada  law. 
No  Nevada  licensee  prior  to  that  had  ever  been  approved  to  do  business  outside  the  territorial  limits  of  the 
United  States.  As  you  look  at  it  now,  twenty  years  later,  companies  are  doing  business  all  over  the  world. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


31 


it’s  not  a  big  deal  anymore,  but  it  certainly  was  at  the  time. 

We  also  had  a  licensing  situation  that  involved  a  property  in  Laughlin  called  The  Gold  River. 

That  was  a  limited  partnership,  and  we  had  a  large  number  of  limited  partners  who  in  the  normal  course 
of  events  would  have  been  required  to  have  been  fully  investigated  and  approved.  And  what  we  did, 
because  the  limited  partners  had  no  voting  power,  no  control,  had  no  say  over  the  operation  of  the  casino 
itself,  is  we  developed  a  concept  called  “delayed  licensing.”  What  we  approved  was  that  each  one  of  these 
limited  partners  had  to  fill  out  all  of  the  necessary  gaming  application  forms,  including  the  personal 
history  record  and  the  personal  financial  questionnaire,  and  then  the  Board  did  what  was  called  a  “cursory 
investigation.”  They  did  an  FBI  scope  background  check,  they  looked  into  these  people,  and  it  turned  out 
that  none  of  them  had  any  red  flags.  So  we  then  accepted  their  applications  but  delayed  their  licensing 
until  a  future  time.  The  reason  we  did  that  is  because  we  then  had  jurisdiction  over  them  because  we  had  a 
license  on  file  that  had  not  been  acted  on,  so  if  any  one  of  these  people  ever  got  in  trouble,  the  Board 
could  call  them  forward  and  say,  “OK,  we’re  going  to  activate  your  license  investigation,”  and  we  would 
be  able  to  go  through  and  process  the  application.  So  they  hadn’t  been  approved,  and  they  hadn’t  been 
turned  down,  but  they  were  in  the  system  and  subject  to  the  jurisdiction.  Again,  based  on  that,  the 
legislature  has  approved  the  concept  of  delayed  licensing  in  the  statute  as  it  relates  to  limited  partnerships 
and  also  as  it  relates  to  limited  liability  companies.  But  that  was  a  new  concept  and  a  new  method  of 
licensing  that  had  not  been  contemplated  before. 

During  your  time  on  the  Commission,  what  were  your  main  problems? 

We  had  one  problem  that  every  commissioner  before  me  and  every  board  member  before  me 
inherited,  and  that  was  the  fact  that  Moe  Dalitz  owned  the  land  under  a  number  of  the  casinos  in 
downtown  Las  Vegas.  Everybody  knew  that  Moe  Dalitz  was  affiliated  with  organized  crime,  with  the 
mob;  it  was  a  situation  that  existed  for  years  and  years  and  years.  The  Board  and  the  Commission  have 
the  authority  to  call  any  landlord  forward  for  licensing,  but  no  one  had  ever  done  that  to  Dalitz.  As  part  of 
the  Stardust  purchase,  the  Boyd  Group  bought  other  properties  as  well.  They  bought  the  Sundance,  and 
they  bought  the  Fremont  Flotel,  because  they  were  the  three  properties  in  Trans-Sterling,  and  Dalitz  was 
the  landlord.  As  part  of  that  transaction,  one  of  the  things  that  1  really  wanted  to  see  accomplished  was  to 
get  Dalitz  out  as  landlord.  And  that  was  accomplished  when  the  Boyd  Group  purchased  the  property  from 
Trans-Sterling.  I  don’t  remember  the  exact  details,  but  1  do  remember  having  discussions  with  Dalitz’s 
attorney,  David  Goldwater,  who  is  Bert  Goldwater’s  brother.  Dalitz,  you  know,  had  a  table  in  the  Las 
Vegas  country  club  and  people  went  over  and  kissed  his  ring  every  day.  It  wasn’t  any  secret.  He  gave  a 
ton  of  money  to  charity,  and  everybody  loved  him,  but  he  was  the  last  reputational  problem  that  we  had, 
and  when  the  Trans-Sterling  sale  occurred  to  the  Boyd  group,  we  took  care  of  him  as  well.  That  was 
something  that  had  always  bothered  me,  that  he  had  always  been  there  and  everybody  kind  of  blinked  or 
looked  the  other  way  or  whatever.  But  he’s  gone  now  and  the  problems  are  solved.  It  was  just  one  of  the 
historical  situations  that  existed,  and  that  was  the  way  it  was  in  Vegas  in  those  days. 

Well,  in  that  particular  circumstance,  was  he  called  up  for  licensing  or  did  he  sell  the  property? 

He  sold  the  land  outright  when  the  Boyd  group  bought  the  property.  Instead  of  just  buying  the 
lease  interest,  the  Boyds  bought  the  whole  thing. 


32 


Did  the  governor  or  anyone  else  in  state  government  ever  ask  for  any  favors  when  it  came  time  to  vote  on 
an  applicant? 

Never.  No.  No. 

Did  anyone  ever  threaten  you  or  your  family? 

I  was  never  threatened,  but  I  was  worried  about  it.  And  you  have  to  remember  Harry  Reid  had  the 
same  job  and  the  bomb  squad  removed  a  bomb  from  underneath  his  car.  And  yes,  you  got  to  think  about 
that,  and  I  did.  [laughter]  1  used  to  kid  my  wife.  1  said,  “1  went  to  the  FBI  and  I  said,  ‘Do  1  have  anything 
to  worry  about?’  and  they  said,  ‘No,  no,  don’t  worry  about  a  thing,  but,  Mr.  Bible,  when  you  start  your 
car,  we  recommend  that  you  have  the  door  open.’”  She  didn’t  think  that  was  funny,  [laughter] 

[laughter]  Did  they  actually  tell  you  that? 

One  of  them  actually  told  me  that,  but  1  think  he  was  pulling  my  leg. 

[laughter]  Are  there  any  decisions,  votes,  or  actions  that  you  would  change  if  you  had  the  opportunity  to 
do  so? 


Hmm.  [long  pause]  1  can’t  think  of  any  specific  names,  but  one  of  the  areas  that  always  bothered 
me,  and  I’ll  bet  you  every  commissioner  and  every  board  member  will  always  say  that  it’s  when  you  have 
to  deny  work  permits.  The  rules  on  work  permits  and  sustaining  the  Board  changed  during  the  time  1  was 
on  the  Commission.  It  used  to  be  that  if  it  had  been  denied  at  the  board,  one  vote  from  one  commissioner 
could  sustain  that  denial  of  the  work  permit.  That  was  later  changed,  I  think,  to  a  majority  vote.  But  I  can 
recall  some  times  when  I  was  the  one  vote.  I  had  four  commissioners  who  wanted  to  give  the  work  permit 
back,  and  these  are  people  that  have  jobs  in  the  industry  that  are  their  only  livelihood.  As  I’ve  mellowed, 
maybe  I  wouldn’t  have  been  so  hard  on  some  of  those  people.  Maybe  I  would  have  been  willing  to  give 
them  another  chance.  Gee,  one  time  a  lady  showed  up  and  she  had  her  three  little  kids  with  her,  tugging  at 
her  and  fussing  around  and  here  she’s  standing  up  at  the  podium  and  they’re  pulling  on  her  skirt  and 
everything.  I  don’t  remember  what  she’d  done,  but  it  was  pretty  darn  bad.  And  she  wanted  her  card 
back — her  work  card  back — and  I  voted  against  her.  I  didn’t  give  it  back  to  her!  Today  I  probably  would 
have  done  it.  I  will  never  know  what  happened  to  those  little  kids. 

How  would  you  describe  the  job  performance  of  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission,  Paul  Bible? 
How  would  you  evaluate  yourself? 

I  feel  like  I  was  fair,  I  feel  like  I  was  consistent,  and  I  believe  that  my  approach  was  always  to  try 
and  find  a  way  to  make  it  work  if  it  could.  It’s  kind  of  like  looking  at  a  glass  as  being  half  full  or  half 
empty.  Y ou  can  look  at  that  book  of  gaming  statutes  and  regulations,  and  you  can  either  look  at  it  as  a 
whole  bunch  of  no’s  or  a  bunch  of  opportunities.  I  used  to  talk  to  the  deputy  attorney  generals  who  were 
assigned  to  gaming,  and  I  would  say,  “Well,  you  guys  need  to  look  at  that  statute  as  a  bunch  of 
opportunities.  That  statute  is  expansive  so  don’t  just  look  at  it  narrowly  and  say,  ‘You  can’t  do  it!’ — look 
at  different  places  and  find  a  way  to  try  and  make  it  work.”  And  that  was  my  philosophy.  For  example, 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


33 


what  we  did  with  CARMA  was  an  example,  what  we  did  with  the  Gold  River  with  delayed  licensing  was 
an  example.  Those  were  ideas  that  nobody  had  ever  tried  before.  The  idea  of  using  The  Supervisor 
Statute,  nobody  had  ever  done  that  before.  So  1  think  that  if  1  evaluate  my  performance,  1  have  to  say  that 
that  was  kind  of  my  touchstone.  1  think  that’s  the  right  way  to  look  at  governmental  regulation.  If  you 
look  at  it  that  way,  where  you  have  a  highly-regulated  business  like  this,  you  can  accommodate  the  needs 
of  the  industry  and  you  can  protect  the  public  at  the  same  time.  1  think  that  we  certainly  had  some 
interesting  and  challenging  experiences  in  four  years.  You  don’t  even  see  that  anymore.  1  don’t  know  how 
long  it’s  been  since  there’s  been  a  contested  hearing  before  the  Nevada  Commission  in  a  licensing 
revocation  hearing.  I’ll  bet  it’s  been  twelve,  fifteen  years.  It’s  been  a  long  time!  And  every  era  of 
commissioners  has  a  little  different  task.  The  challenges  today  are  far  different  than  they  were  when  I  was 
there.  It’s  an  evolving  task,  and  that’s  what’s  so  interesting  about  it.  It’s  always  changing.  There’s  always 
a  new  challenge,  there’s  always  some  new  way  to  figure  out  a  way  to  solve  a  problem.  I  think  that  during 
the  four  years  I  was  there,  we  solved  problems.  We  got  it  done. 

Did  serving  on  the  Commission  have  any  effect  on  your  life  or  your  career  after  you  left  the  Commission? 

Oh,  yes.  I  still  do  some  gaming  work,  and  it  gave  me  a  perspective  from  the  regulator’s  viewpoint 
that  I’d  have  never  had  otherwise.  I  can  now  understand  when  I  see  a  problem  what’s  going  to  bug  the 
regulator.  So  by  seeing  that  right  away,  I’m  able  to  start  working  on  figuring  out  how  to  solve  it.  So  yes, 
that’s  been  very  important.  If  I  had  moved  to  Las  Vegas,  where  most  of  the  gaming  activity  is 
concentrated,  I  probably  could  have  had  a  much  larger  gaming  practice,  but  I  prefer  to  live  in  Reno.  Yes, 
my  time  on  the  Commission  had  a  great  impact.  I  was  in  my  early  forties,  and  I  think  that  those  four  years 
were  the  best  period  of  maturation  in  my  life. 

Did  you  work  in  the  gaming  industry  after  you  left  the  Commission? 

No.  When  I  left  the  Commission,  there  were  no  rules  about  moving  from  employment  in 
regulating  the  industry  into  the  industry  itself.  There  were  no  cooling-off  periods.  I  followed  Harry  Reid’s 
example.  I  did  a  voluntary  one -year  cooling-off  period,  and  then  I  went  to  the  legislature  and  I  advocated 
it  becoming  a  law,  which  it  is  today.  The  revolving  door  between  the  regulator  and  the  industry  is  at  all 
levels  of  government.  And  frankly,  somebody  who  has  been  a  regulator  is  of  real  value  to  someone  in  the 
industry  and  can  really  help  them. 

When  did  you  leave  the  Commission? 

I  left  the  Commission  January  31,  1987.  I’ve  got  a  plaque  around  here  somewhere  that  says  that, 
[laughter] 

Why  did  you  leave  the  Commission? 

Actually,  my  term  was  not  up  until  the  first  of  April,  but  I  felt  that  the  new  commission  chairman 
should  have  the  opportunity  of  being  on  board  during  the  legislative  session.  If  I  had  waited  until  April,  it 
would  have  been  right  in  the  middle  of  the  legislative  session,  which  might  not  have  been  the  best  thing. 


34 


Who  took  your  place  on  the  Commission  as  chairman? 

John  O’Reilly. 

Anything  you ’d  like  to  add ,  Paul,  any  specific  observations? 

There’s  one  observation  I’d  like  to  make,  and  I  don’t  know  whether  it’s  correct  or  not,  but  right  at 
the  end  of  my  term,  Donald  Trump,  who  was  a  licensee  in  New  Jersey,  but  not  a  licensee  in  Nevada,  was 
involved  in  buying  shares  of  the  Holiday  Hotels  and  Bally’s.  That  was  at  a  time  when  the  takeovers  in  the 
business  were  fairly  commonplace,  and  there  was  real  concern  that  Donald  Trump  was  going  to  take  over 
one  of  those  two  companies.  I  got  involved  as  an  outgoing  chairman  and  I  expressed  some  concern  about 
that,  because  we  didn’t,  at  the  time,  have  any  regulations  or  statutes  addressing  someone  who  comes  in 
and  tries  to  take  over  a  company  and  then  forcing  the  company  to  buy  him  out  at  a  premium.  And  as  a 
result  of  my  concern,  there  has  now  been  legislation  passed  in  Nevada  concerning  the  extraordinary 
repurchase  of  shares. 

But  as  I  look  at  what  Trump  started,  here’s  something  that  I’ve  thought  about  a  lot,  and  I  don’t 
know  whether  other  people  have  or  not.  Bally’s  thought  Trump  was  going  to  try  and  take  them  over,  and 
Bally  management  decided  they  had  to  do  something  to  stop  him.  There  was  a  statute  in  New  Jersey  that 
said  that  a  licensee  could  only  own  two  establishments.  Bally’s  owned  one,  Trump  owned  one.  So  Bally’s 
went  and  knocked  on  Steve  Wynn’s  door  at  the  Golden  Nugget,  and  they  bought  the  Golden  Nugget  in 
Atlantic  City,  New  Jersey,  and  gave  him  a  very,  very  favorable  price.  The  reason  they  did  that  is  they  then 
had  two  properties  so  that  if  Trump  attempted  to  take  them  over  he  would  violate  the  law  because  the 
combination  of  Trump  and  Bally’s  would  be  three  properties,  so  that  was  the  way  they  checkmated  him. 
I’ve  often  thought  that  Donald  Trump  is  in  a  way  responsible  for  starting  what  Steve  Wynn  started  on  the 
Strip  when  he  took  the  money  he  got  from  Atlantic  City  and  built  the  Mirage.  Maybe  people  would  say 
that’s  farfetched,  but  I  see  what  Trump  did  was  the  triggering  event,  because  had  he  not  gone  after 
Bally’s,  Bally’s  wouldn’t  have  bought  Wynn’s  Golden  Nugget,  and  Wynn  wouldn’t  have  had  the  money 
to  go  and  do  what  he  did  with  the  Mirage.  Then  all  of  that  burst  into  those  incredible  properties  that 
developed  in  the  1990s.  Anyway,  that’s  all  I  wanted  to  add. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


35 


3 

William  (Bill)  Bible 


William  Bible  was  born  in  Reno  in  1944,  graduated 
from  Stanford  University  in  1967,  and  earned  a 
master’s  degree  in  Business  Administration  from  the 
University  of  Nevada,  Reno.  His  father,  Alan  Bible, 
served  as  Attorney  General  of  the  state  of  Nevada  and 
later  as  U.S.  Senator.  Bill  Bible  spent  his  early  career 
working  for  the  state  of  Nevada  in  various  aspects  of 
financial  management.  He  worked  with  the 
Legislative  Counsel  Bureau  as  the  assembly  fiscal 
analyst  prior  to  being  named  state  budget  director  by 
governor-elect  Richard  Bryan  in  1983.  When  Bob 
Miller  replaced  Richard  Bryan  as  governor,  he 
named  Bible  the  chairman  of  the  Nevada  Gaming 
Control  Board,  a  position  he  held  for  nearly  ten  years 
beginning  in  January  1989.  Bible  headed  the  Nevada 
Resort  Association  beginning  in  1999  and  left  in  2010 
to  serve  on  the  board  of  MGM  Mirage. 

William  Bible,  1991.  Photo  courtesy  of  Nevada  Gaming  Control  Board. 


Dwayne  Kling:  1  ’m  with  Mr.  Bill  Bible.  Mr.  Bible,  does  the  University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program 
have  your  permission  to  make  available  to  the  public  the  tapes  and  transcripts  of  the  oral  history 
interviews  that  we  are  about  to  begin  today? 

Bill  Bible:  They  do. 


Thank  you.  Could  you  tell  us  when  and  where  you  were  born? 


36 


I  was  bom  in  Reno,  Nevada,  on  May  24,  1944. 

Your  father,  former  Attorney  General  Alan  Bible,  was  a  long-time  politician  on  both  the  state  and 
national  level.  When  your  father  was  in  Washington,  D.C.,  did  you  spend  your  younger  days  there? 

1  did.  My  father  was  elected  in  1 954.  That  would  have  made  me  ten  years  old.  1  stayed  in 
Washington,  D.C.,  until  approximately  1963,  when  1  graduated  from  high  school.  During  that  time  period. 
Congress  would  meet,  not  on  a  full-time  basis  like  they  do  now,  but  they  would  take  a  recess  for  a  portion 
of  the  summer,  and  normally  would  wrap  up  their  work  in  August  and  then  would  reconvene  in  January 
of  the  next  year.  So  during  the  fall  period  1  would  normally  come  out  to  Nevada  and  attend  school,  and 
then  would  transfer  back  East  until  1  entered  St.  Albans,  which  was  probably  in  1959  or  1960,  in  which 
case  then  1  lived  back  East  on  a  full-time  basis. 

So  when  you  graduated  from  high  school  then,  what  did  you  do? 

Went  to  college,  like  most  people  of  my  generation.  1  headed  off  to  college,  and  1  attended 
Stanford  and  started  in  the  fall  of  1963. 

And  you  graduated  from  there? 

1  did.  1  graduated  in  the  spring  or  early  summer  of  1967. 

And  then  did  you  go  on  to  further  your  education? 

1  did.  There  was  a  short  intervening  period  where  1  attended  basic  training  for  the  United  States 
Amiy  Reserves.  1  spent  two  years  at  University  of  Nevada,  Reno  as  a  student  enrolled  in  the  master’s 
business  program. 

Well,  after  you  completed  your  education,  I  know  you  had  a  long  and  illustrious  career  working  for  the 
State  of  Nevada.  Would  you  tell  us  the  positions  that  you  held  in  state  government  prior  to  being  named  to 
the  Gaming  Control  Board? 

Yes.  Most  of  my  experience  prior  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board  was  in  state  financial 
management.  1  started  in  January  of  1971. 1  had  the  great  good  fortune  of  being  appointed  chief  assistant 
budget  director  by  Governor  Mike  O’Callaghan,  and  1  served  in  the  budget  office  first  as  chief  assistant 
and  then  as  deputy  budget  administrator  until  1978  or  1979.  At  that  point  1  accepted  a  job  with  the 
Legislative  Counsel  Bureau  as  the  assembly  fiscal  analyst.  1  served  as  the  assembly  fiscal  analyst  until 
1983  when  1  was  approached  by  Governor-Elect  Richard  Bryan  to  serve  as  his  budget  director.  And  1 
served  in  that  capacity  until  1988. 

1  took  a  leave  of  absence  for  one  year  and  ran  Dick  Bryan’s  campaign  for  the  United  States 
Senate.  At  that  time  he  was  an  incumbent  governor  and  he  was  mid-way  through  his  term  of  office.  That 
election  was  successful.  Richard  was  elected  to  the  United  States  Senate.  Governor  Miller,  upon 
becoming  governor,  since  he  was  Richard  Bryan’s  lieutenant  governor,  asked  if  1  would  be  interested  in 
accepting  an  appointment  as  chairman  of  the  state  Gaming  Control  Board,  and  1  did.  1  would  have  started 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


37 


at  the  Gaming  Control  Board  in  January  of  1989. 

Did  you  know  Governor  Miller  before  he  appointed  you  to  the  Board? 

1  did.  I’d  worked  with  Bob  Miller  on  a  couple  of  occasions  in  the  legislature.  He  was  district 
attorney  of  Clark  County.  He  had  been  a  very  strong  proponent  of  some  sentencing  reform  measures  and 
some  measures  that  compensate  or  provided  compensation  for  victims  of  crime.  And  so  I’d  known  him  in 
that  capacity.  And  1  worked  with  him  also  as  Dick  Bryan’s  lieutenant  governor.  So  1  knew  him  both  as  the 
district  attorney  of  Clark  County  and  as  lieutenant  governor  during  Dick  Bryan’s  second  term. 

Did  you  have  any  experience  in  the  gaming  business  per  se  prior  to  being  named  to  the  Board? 

I  really  did  not.  My  brother  had  been  involved  in  gaming  regulation,  serving  as  chairman  of  the 
Nevada  Gaming  Commission  when  Dick  Bryan  was  governor,  but  I  had  not  had  any  direct  experience. 
Just  like  anybody  growing  up  in  Nevada,  I’m  certainly  aware  of  gaming  and  how  gaming  is  regulated  and 
operated.  And  I  gained  some  of  that  experience  from  my  review  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  and 
Gaming  Commission’s  budgets  as  budget  director,  or  as  a  fiscal  analyst,  or  as  a  deputy  budget  director. 

So  I  was  pretty  conversant  with  the  administrative  functionings  of  the  board.  I  had  not  obviously  delved 
into  licensing  matters  and  things  of  that  nature. 

As  chairman  of  the  Board,  did  you  pattern  yourself  after  any  previous  chairman?  Had  you  read  back  into 
the  records  and  see  how  different  people  operated? 

No,  I  really  did  not.  I  knew  a  number  of  the  previous  chairmen.  I  knew  Phil  Hannifin  because 
Phil  had  been  the  chief  parole  officer  under  Mike  O’ Callaghan  and  was  part  of  the  O’ Callaghan 
administration.  Mike  had  then  appointed  him  to  the  state  Gaming  Control  Board  as  chairman.  Roger 
Trounday  I’d  dealt  with  as  director  of  human  resources,  and  he  subsequently  was  appointed  as  chairman 
of  the  state  Gaming  Control  Board.  So  I’d  known  these  individuals.  And,  as  I  indicated  earlier,  I  had  dealt 
with  a  number  of  the  chairmen,  mostly  on  budget-related  issues.  I’d  dealt  with  Richard  Bunker,  when  he 
was  chairman  under  Bob  List,  on  budget -related  issues  and  those  sorts  of  things.  So  I  was  pretty 
conversant  with  both  how  the  agency  operated  and  some  of  the  personnel  involved  in  the  agency. 

Shortly  after  you  joined  the  Board,  gaming  was  first  starting  to  spread  throughout  the  United  States.  Of 
course,  it  had  already  been  opened  in  New  Jersey  for  a  few  years.  But  you  were  opposed  to  the  spread  of 
gambling  in  the  United  States.  Why  did  you  take  that  position? 

Well,  the  statutory  scheme  that  existed  at  that  time  indicated  that  Nevada  licensees  had  to  have 
the  prior  approval  of  the  Nevada  State  Gaming  Control  Board.  Well,  through  the  application  process,  the 
Nevada  Gaming  Commission  and  the  Nevada  regulatory  authorities  essentially  prohibited  Nevada 
licensees  to  engage  in  gaming — as  we  describe  it,  foreign  gaming,  because  it’s  conducted  outside  of  the 
state  of  Nevada — and  I  was  concerned  about  the  proliferation  of  gaming,  that  it  may  not  be  properly 
regulated  in  a  number  of  jurisdictions.  And  I  felt  that  a  go-slow  approach  was  appropriate,  that  licensees 
should  go  thorough  due  diligence  before  they  expanded  their  operations  into  other  jurisdictions,  and  they 
should  be  fully  aware  of  the  regulatory  structures  and  the  political  structures  of  those  jurisdictions  before 


38 


they  entered  those  markets. 

Do  you  still  feel  that  way  or  do  you  feel  there  are  good  regulations  in  the  majority  of  the  states? 

I  think  there’s  regulation  that  one  would  characterize  as  good  in  most  of  the  states.  It  clearly 
varies  from  state  to  state.  There  are  really  two  ways  of  judging  gaming  regulation:  one  is  you  can  open  the 
statute  book  and  look  at  the  way  the  organizational  structure  is  created,  and  then  you  can  actually  look 
and  see  how  it’s  operated.  And  there  can  be  a  difference  between  the  two.  Some  systems  can  have  all  the 
attributes  described  in  statute  and  may  not  be  particularly  efficient  or  effective  in  terms  of  how  they  carry 
out  their  mandate.  And  1  felt  that  Nevada  needed  to  have  a  go-slow  approach  so  that  it  was  certain  that  in 
the  jurisdictions  where  its  licensees  were  operating,  that  there  was  proper  regulation  and  proper  control, 
and  that  the  governmental  apparatus  was  of  ethics  so  that  gaming  would  not  encounter  difficulties 
throughout  the  United  States,  because  I  felt — and  1  continue  to  feel  to  this  day — that  a  black  eye  for 
gaming  in  any  one  jurisdiction  becomes  a  black  eye  for  gaming  in  all  jurisdictions. 

Yes.  I  believe  that,  too.  In  the  early  years,  gaming  regulators  had  to  focus  on  eradicating  the  influence  of 
organized  crime  from  the  gaming  industry.  During  your  tenure  on  the  Board,  do  you  feel  that  there  was 
any  mob  activity  or  unsavory  persons  owning,  operating,  or  controlling  any  casinos  in  the  state? 

1  don’t  believe  that  the  degree  of  control  was  as  present  as  it  had  been  earlier.  The  state  and  the 
federal  government,  and  a  number  of  pretty  well-attended  funerals,  were  fairly  helpful  at  eradicating  that 
influence  in  Nevada  gaming.  When  1  came  on  the  Board,  we  obviously  had  some  issues  that  dealt  with  the 
individuals’  backgrounds,  where  there  may  be  some  suggestion  that  there  was  an  organized  crime 
influence,  that  there  was  a  variety  of  background  problems.  But  to  a  large  extent,  a  lot  of  the  issues  that 
we  dealt  with  were  financially  related  that  dealt  with  SEC  issues,  with  corporate  filings,  with 
restructurings,  with  acquisitions  and  mergers,  and  those  kinds  of  issues.  And  1  felt  1  was  particularly 
suited  for  those  types  of  transactions  because  of  my  financial  training  and  my  financial  background.  If 
you  would  attend  a  meeting  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  or  the  Gaming  Commission  today,  1  think 
you’d  find  that  a  majority  of  their  time  is  spent  discussing — instead  of  individual  suitability,  is 
transactionally  oriented  where  we  were  discussing  the  aspects  of  the  transaction  and  trying  to  assure 
ourselves  that  it’s  a  proper  transaction  within  the  meaning  of  Nevada  statutes  and  regulations. 

So  it  was  really  quite  a  difference  from  the  early  days. 

Again,  1  think  the  emphasis  has  changed.  Now,  occasionally  you  would  have  an  application,  as  1 
indicated,  that  would  crop  up  that  would  have  some  suggestion  of  organized  crime  influence.  And  in 
some  cases,  it  would  be  a  suggestion  of  organized  crime  influence,  perhaps  not  in  this  country,  but  in 
some  other  country,  as  applicants  from  other  countries  applied  for  licenses  in  the  state  of  Nevada. 

So  financing  is  really  one  of  the  major  issues  you  were  concerned  with. 

Yes,  that  would  be  true.  And  during  my  tenure  as  chairman  of  the  Control  Board,  we  made  some 
substantial  changes  in  regulation  1 6,  which  is  the  regulation  that  deals  with  publicly -traded  companies,  to 
facilitate  the  flow  of  capital  and  capital  investment  into  Nevada.  We  modified  the  institutional  investor 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


39 


regulations.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  created  them;  we  didn’t  modify  them.  The  regulations  were  created  to 
facilitate  the  flow  of  capital  into  Nevada  so  that  the  industry  could  build.  Clearly,  the  1990s  were  a  period 
of  great  growth.  Institutions  such  as  mutual  funds  and  insurance  companies  were  interested  in  investing  in 
Nevada,  either  on  the  debt  or  the  equity  side,  but  were  not  particularly  interested  in  being  involved  in 
management  or  control  of  the  property,  and  because  of  the  size  and  complexity  of  their  operations  did  not 
want  to  subject  themselves  to  licensure.  So  we  created  a  set  of  regulations  to  allow  financial  institutions 
that  were  so  situated  to  make  investments  in  Nevada,  and  in  exchange  for  not  going  through  a  mandatory 
licensing,  they  pledged — and  the  pledge  was  verifiable — that  they  would  not  be  involved  in  the 
operations  or  management  of  the  gaming  property.  That  was  helpful  in  attracting  new  capital. 

It’s  interesting  how  the  industry  and  the  regulations  have  changed  over  a  period  of  time.  It’s  a  situation 
where  you  can  ’t  stay  the  same;  you  have  to  keep  changing  to  keep  up  with  things.  And  it  appears  that  the 
regulators  have  done  that. 

That’s  true.  And  what  is  also  interesting  is  the  basic  statutory  structure  that  has  been  enacted  by 
the  legislature  has  not  been  substantially  changed,  or  was  not  substantially  changed,  by  the  legislature 
during  my  tenure.  Instead,  much  of  the  work  that  was  done  was  done  under  the  regulatory  grants  of 
authority  that  were  provided  by  the  legislature  so  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  could  adopt 
regulations  where  they  felt  there  was  a  need  to  adopt  regulations,  and  had  a  lot  more  flexibility. 

Have  you  ever  appeared  before  the  Board  as  an  attorney  representing  a  client? 

1  could  not.  I’m  not  an  attorney. 

Oh,  you  ’re  not  an  attorney. 

No,  I’m  not  an  attorney.  And  I  have  now  appeared  before  the  Board  on  a  couple  of  occasions  in 
my  current  capacity  as  president  of  Nevada  Resort  Association  to  discuss  regulations. 

If  you  were  going  to  give  advice  to  an  attorney  appearing  before  the  Board  for  the  first  time,  what  would 
be  your  words  of  wisdom? 

Well,  my  advice  has  always  been  pretty  consistent  to  attorneys.  I  have  articulated  on  a  number  of 
occasions  that  I  think  the  first  thing  is  be  prepared.  I  think  that  applies  to  whether  you’re  appearing  before 
the  Gaming  Control  Board,  the  Gaming  Commission,  any  other  administrative  agency,  or  a  court  of  law.  I 
think  you  need  to  be  fully  prepared.  At  the  point  you  make  your  appearance  before  the  Board  or  the 
Commission,  you  are  aware  because  of  staff  briefings  as  to  what  any  potential  issues  have  at  least  been 
identified  by  the  staff.  Now,  the  Board  may  have  recognized  or  developed  some  other  issues  that  you  may 
not  be  aware  of,  but  it’s  important  for  an  attorney  to  have  addressed  those  issues  and  dealt  with  them,  to 
the  greatest  extent  that  they  could,  and  provided,  for  instance,  supplemental  information  to  the  Board  in  a 
number  of  areas  where  the  staff  perhaps  had  provided  what  we  refer  to  as  an  “area  of  concern”  within  an 
application  summary.  I  think  it’s  important  he  recognizes  that  the  Board  is  a  very  busy  board,  that  there’s 
a  lot  of  work  involved  in  being  a  board  member,  and  a  board  member’s  time  is  fairly  precious,  and  that  if 
you  seek  to  have  time,  that  you  use  it  sparingly  just  because  of  the  amount  of  work  that’s  done. 


40 


Well,  I  realize  that  different  weeks,  or  different  months,  you  might  spend  more  time  as  chairman  of  the 
board  preparing  for  the  hearings,  but  how  about  a  rough  idea  of  how  many  hours  a  week  this  job 
entailed? 

Well,  everybody  that’s  on  the  Board  or  the  Commission  always  complains  about  the  amount  of 
reading  you  do,  and  1  think  that’ll  be  a  common  thread  throughout  your  interviews  of  board  and 
commission  members  But  you’re  presented  normally  with  a  massive  set  of  investigative  summaries  and 
material  the  week  prior  to  a  board  meeting.  Y ou  may  have  some  knowledge  of  the  content  of  that  material 
as  you’ve  dealt  with  on  a  day-to-day  basis  the  staff  operations  of  the  board,  but  you  need  to  review  and 
digest  that  material.  And  it  is  pretty  tough  to  budget  your  time,  because  sometimes  a  summary,  as  we  call 
them,  or  an  investigative  summary  that  may  number  hundreds  of  pages  can  be  reviewed  fairly  quickly, 
but  in  other  times  you  may  have  one  that’s  five  or  six  pages  that  details  some  complex  financing 
transaction  that  is  a  case  of  first  impression.  It  may  take  you  better  part  of  the  day,  or  maybe  almost  a 
weekend  to  review  that  and  to  understand  all  the  nuances  and  complexities  of  it.  I  would  typically  work 
probably  ten  hours  on  a  normal  workday.  I’m  an  early  riser,  so  I’d  usually  make  it  a  habit  of  being  in  the 
office  by  six  thirty,  or  at  least  by  seven  o’clock  in  the  morning.  We  would  work  one  Saturday  every 
month,  or  every  week,  and  then  before  a  board  meeting  work  both  the  Saturday  and  the  Sunday  before  the 
week.  So  I’d  take  Sundays  off  just  as  a  normal  matter  of  course,  and  sometimes  Saturday  afternoons. 

You  spent  several  hours  a  week  every  week,  week  in  and  week  out? 

Y es,  it  can  be  a  grind.  And  as  soon  as  you  get  done  with  one  meeting,  you  have  another  one 
coming  up.  And  the  chairman  has  responsibilities  that  are  not  shared  by  other  board  members.  He  has  a 
lot  of  administrative  responsibilities  in  terms  of  directing  the  affairs  and  staff  of  the  agency,  and  in  terms 
of  preparing,  for  instance,  budgets,  legislative  proposals,  and  things  like  that.  A  lot  of  that’s  done 
cooperatively  with  the  other  board  members,  but  each  chairman  has  managed  that  workload  probably  a 
little  bit  differently. 

Yes.  In  February  of  1989,  Sheldon  Adelson  came  before  the  board  requesting  a  non-restricted  gaming 
license  for  the  Sands  Hotel  in  Las  Vegas.  Also  requesting  licensing  at  the  Sands  was  the  Aristocrat  Hotels 
of  Nevada,  Incorporated,  headed  by  Henry  Lewin.  What  problems  did  the  Board  have  with  these 
applications? 

Well,  this  would  have  been  my  second  board  meeting. 


Yes. 


I  had  just  gotten  on  the  Board.  We’d  had  a  couple  of  major  applications  that  had  a  number  of 
problems  in  them,  and  this  was  one  of  them.  I  can  remember  this  meeting  particularly  well.  We  met  up  in 
northern  Nevada  in  the  Board’s  offices  over  on  Williams  Street.  The  application  was  probably  early  in  the 
order  of  applications,  and  we  spent  four  or  five  hours  asking  questions  and  listening  to  testimony  and  it 
looked  to  me  that  we  were  not  going  to  complete  that  particular  application  prior  to  five  o’clock.  And  so 
we  kind  of  took  it  off  the  calendar  and  diverted  it  for  a  period  of  time,  handled  the  other  applications.  We 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


41 


came  back  that  evening,  and  my  recollection  is  we  picked  up  the  application  about  six  o’clock  and  we 
went  through  it  till  about  two  or  three  o’clock  in  the  morning  with  the  application. 

There  were  a  number  of  areas  of  concern  that  related  particularly  to  Mr.  Lewin  and  some  personal 
conduct  issues.  There  was  a  rather  hotly-contested  matter.  The  Board  recommended  the  denial  on  a 
unanimous  vote,  recommended  that  Mr.  Lewin  not  be  approved  for  a  gaming  license.  I  believe  there  was 
a  split  vote  on  Mr.  Adelson  and  the  members  of  his  group.  There  was  one  other  individual  on  the 
application  who  1  think  had  some  difficulties  and  may  have  withdrawn  at  that  point.  But  the  long  and 
short  of  it  is  that  the  application  as  it  was  recommended  by  the  Board  went  up  to  the  Commission  with  a 
split  vote  on  portions  of  it  and  a  unanimous  vote  recommending  denial  of  Mr.  Lewin. 

Do  you  remember  any  specific  problems  with  Mr.  Lewin? 

They  were  personal  issues  that  involved  allegations  of  misconduct,  sexual  harassment,  some 
items  like  that,  if  my  memory  is  correct.  I  don’t  think  I’d  want  to  talk  about  those  in  any  depth  unless  1 
had  the  transcripts  in  front  of  me  and  reviewed  my  memory.  Y ou  have  to  appreciate  that  over  the  course 
of  my  ten-year’s  tenure,  I  saw  thousands  of  these  things,  and  sometimes  when  you  look  back  your 
memory  gets  a  little  fuzzy.  But  1  knew  there  were  some  issues  that  related  to  personal  conduct -type  issues 
that  the  transcripts  fully  air. 

Do  you  recall  that  Mr.  Adelson  stated  that  it  was  essential  that  Mr.  Lewin  be  licensed,  and  stated  that  he 
wouldn ’t  go  forward  with  the  deal  unless  Mr.  Lewin  was  approved? 

1  do  recollect  that.  1  believe  he  made  that  statement  at  the  board  level  and  perhaps  in  summation. 
And  1  know  he  clearly  made  that  statement  at  the  commission  level  when  they  considered  the  application. 

What  was  your  reaction,  or  the  Board’s  reaction?  Didn  ’tyou  feel  that  he  was — not  threatening  you,  but 
giving  an  ultimatum  of  him  being  licensed? 

Well,  he’d  had  a  substantial  project  in  mind  and  a  substantial  project  in  vision.  He  had  artist 
renderings  of  what  now  would  appear  to  be  the  Venetian,  and  indicated  that  he  would  not  go  forward  with 
that  project  without  Mr.  Lewin.  The  Commission  ultimately  granted  him  a  license,  and  then  did  what  1 
thought  was  a  fairly  peculiar  thing:  they  gave  Mr.  Lewin  a  gaming  license,  and  then  conditioned  it  that  he 
not  be  involved  in  the  gaming  end  of  the  operation,  which  was  probably  a  first. 

Do  you  recall  a  gentleman  named  Paul  Clapper? 

1  do,  but  just  peripherally.  He  may  have  been  one  of  the  individuals  that  withdrew.  1  don’t 
recollect. 

Do  you  recall,  after  the  Commission  OK’d  everyone,  how  long  that  Mr.  Lewin  and  Mr.  Adelson  worked 
together? 

My  recollection  is  they  worked  together  for  at  least  a  couple  of  years,  and  then  there  was  a 
parting  of  the  ways,  as  1  understood  it,  for  a  variety  of  reasons. 


42 


When  the  Commission  overruled  the  Board  on  a  couple  of  those  instances,  what  was  your  reaction  to 
that,  or  what  was  the  Board’s  reaction?  Did  you  feel  here  you  just  got  this  job  and  you  made  a 
recommendation  and  already  you ’d  been  overturned? 

I  can’t  recollect  exactly  what  went  through  my  mind  at  the  time.  And,  as  you  indicated,  1  was  new 
to  the  job.  I  felt  personally  that  the  Commission  had  made  an  error  and  should  have  acted  on  the 
application  as  it  had  been  recommended  by  the  Board.  1  felt  the  issues  with  Mr.  Lewin  were  important.  I 
was  obviously  concerned,  and  1  was  disappointed  that  the  Commission  had  not  adopted  the  Board’s 
recommendation.  1  think  that  was  the  general  consensus  of  my  colleagues  on  the  Board. 

We ’d  talked  about  this  a  little  bit  a  little  earlier,  and  in  1989  the  first  of  the  mega-resorts,  the  Mirage, 
opened.  And  during  your  term  in  the  Board  several  more  mega-resorts  came  on  line.  Did  the  evolution  of 
these  mega-resorts  and  multi-million-dollar  financing  costs  change  the  focus  of  gaming  regulations? 

They  did.  As  1  indicated  earlier,  because  of  the  complexity  of  the  financial  structures  and  the 
arrangements  that  had  been  made,  they  presented  a  much  different  level  of  a  review  than  was  done  on  a 
simpler  application  that  may  have  been  owned  by  a  sole  proprietor.  They  also  had  had  a  variety  of  other 
features  that  invited  additional  board  scrutiny.  For  instance,  a  number  of  the  mega-resorts  catered  to 
families.  1  provided  guidance  to  the  industry  at  one  point  about  making  sure  to  police  the  premises 
properly  to  keep  children  out  of  gaming  areas  and  things  of  that  nature,  and  to  watch  for  underage  people. 
There’s  a  wide  variety  of  different  types  of  issues,  but,  again,  they  were  probably  more  financially  related 
than  anything  else  as  these  mega-resorts  were  constructed. 

During  the  course  of  my  tenure — and  1  may  not  have  them  in  the  correct  order;  in  fact,  I’m  sure  1 
don ’t  have  them  in  the  correct  order — we  saw  the  Mirage;  we  saw  the  Bellagio;  we  saw  Treasure  Island; 
we  saw  the  Excalibur;  Luxor;  Mandalay  Bay;  Paris,  as  I  was  leaving  the  board;  Stratosphere  Tower  all 
come  forward  for  licensure.  In  Laughlin  we  saw  a  couple  of  properties.  And  up  here  in  northern  Nevada, 
we  saw  the  Silver  Legacy  as  a  new  property.  The  Monte  Carlo,  also,  in  southern  Nevada.  So  we  saw  a  lot 
of  growth  in  the  industry.  And  one  of  the  main  challenges,  really,  for  the  Board  during  this  time  period 
was  keeping  up  with  this  growth,  and  the  workload  that  was  associated  with  it,  because  it  not  only  creates 
a  lot  of  strain  on  the  investigatory  processes  for  application,  but  a  lot  of  strain  on  the  audit  and 
enforcement  divisions  because  they  have  to  supervise  these  properties. 

1  was  going  to  mention  that  a  few  years  after  you  went  on  the  Board,  or  after  becoming  chairman,  the 
state  was  falling  behind  in  the  goal  of  auditing  casinos  every  two  and  a  half  years.  The  length  of  time  in 
1996 for  audits  was  three  years  and  two  months,  and  would  increase  to  four  years  unless  more  staff  was 
added.  Was  the  legislature  receptive  to  assisting  the  Board  fulfill  its  needs,  not  only  in  the  audit  division 
but  in  all  the  Board’s  divisions? 

Well,  the  governor  obviously  reviews  the  Board’s  budget  prior  to  its  presentation  to  the 
legislature,  and  then  the  legislature  reviews  the  recommendations  of  the  governor  and  either  accepts  or 
rejects  those  recommendations — or  modifies  them;  I  won’t  say  reject.  But  both  the  administration  and  the 
legislature  were  responsive  to  the  needs  of  the  Board  and  the  Commission  and  a  growing  industry.  They 
recognized  that  there  was  a  lot  of  growth  going  on,  that  they  needed  to  provide  additional  resources  to  the 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


43 


board.  And  I’m  sure  that  there  were  various  staff  members  or  people  associated  with  gaming  regulation 
that  may  have  felt  that  there  were  not  enough  resources  allocated.  But  I  think  we  did  a  very  effective  job 
at  arguing  and  making  the  case  for  additional  resources  where  they  were  needed,  and  the  Board  and  the 
governor  and  the  legislature,  1  think,  responded  appropriately. 

That ’s  nice  that  they  did  that  as  it  certainly  makes  it  a  lot  easier  to  regulate  and  control  things. 

Well,  and  the  audit  issue  is  a  revenue  issue.  If  you  don’t  do  audits  within  a  certain  time  period, 
you  potentially  risk  falling  out  of  the  statute  of  limitations  for  audit  recoveries.  And  not  only  is  it  a 
revenue  measure,  but  to  a  large  extent,  the  audit’s  functions  are  regulatory  in  nature  where  you’re 
monitoring  the  internal-control  environment  to  ensure  yourself  that’s  it’s  effective  and  that  it’s  efficient 
and  it’s  accomplishing  the  goals  it  is  intended  to  accomplish. 

Do  you  recall  what  time  period  you  got  it  back  down  to  approximately  two  and  a  half  years  again? 

Not  specifically  as  to  time  period,  but  as  chairman  1  would  have  dealt  with  the  1989  legislature, 
the  1991  legislature,  the  1993  legislature,  the  1995  legislature,  and  the  1997  legislature.  And  all  of  those 
sessions  were  responsive  to  the  needs  of  the  Board,  and  in  some  instances  they  would  augment  staff  levels 
over  those  recommended  by  the  administration.  And  in  the  competition  for  state  resources  1  think  that  we 
did  very  well,  as  1  indicated  earlier,  and  that  both  the  governor  and  the  legislature  were  responsive  to  the 
regulatory  apparatus’s  needs. 

Well,  how  long  was  it  between  audits  then  when  you  left?  Was  it  two  and  half  years? 

1  believe  we  were  operating  on  a  schedule  of  about  two  and  half  years.  1  don’t  have  the  figures  in 
front  of  me  so  I  couldn’t  completely  verify  that.  That’s  sort  of  a  technical  question.  But  we  had  brought 
the  audit  time  frame  down.  Since  1  left,  I  understand  there’s  been  some  further  changes,  and  certain 
classes  of  licensees  are  audited  less  frequently.  So  there  have  been  some  further  improvements  made  on 
the  audit  system.  But  I  always  felt  that  the  audit  division  was  staffed  with,  in  my  viewpoint, 
knowledgeable  and  dedicated  individuals,  in  our  struggle  to  keep  up  to  date. 

In  August  of  1991,  even  though  the  Board  recommended  denial,  the  Gaming  Commission  voted  to  allow 
Caesar’s  Palace  and  Hilton  to  operate  casinos  in  other  states  and  countries  without  prior  review  by 
Nevada  gaming  regulators.  What  was  the  significance  of  that  action?  Or  why  did  the  Board  deny  them? 

Well,  this  resulted  in  a  series  of  differences  between  the  Board  and  the  Commission  on  licensing 
matters.  At  that  time  the  Board  felt  concerned,  as  1  had  indicated  earlier,  and  I  personally  felt  concerned 
about  allowing  licensees  to  open  casinos  in  other  jurisdictions  until  the  state  had  had  an  opportunity  to 
satisfy  itself  that  the  level  of  regulation  and  governmental  structure  was  adequate,  so  that  if  any  instance 
occurred,  that  there  would  not  be  any  disrepute  or  black  eye  brought  to  the  gaming  industry,  or 
specifically  to  Nevada.  The  Commission  has  the  final  say  on  those  particular  matters,  and  they  overturned 
the  Board’s  recommendation  and  allowed  those  companies  to  seek  opportunities  throughout  not  only  the 
United  States,  but  throughout  the  globe,  without  having  the  Board  and  the  Commission  involved  in  the 
decision,  and  they  were  hotly  contested  matters.  The  Commission  is  the  final  arbiter  of  these  matters,  and 


44 


they  chose  to  make  a  change  that  was  not  really  general  application.  It  later  became  general  application, 
but  on  these  specific  applications  to  make  a  policy  change,  in  the  manner  in  which  these  matters  had  been 
handled. 

So  they  could  operate  differently  in  one  state  or  one  country ,  differently  than  they ’d  had  to  operate  in 
Nevada? 

No,  what  it  really  meant  is  that  instead  of  having  a  prior  approval  where  the  state  would  look  at 
the  application  or  look  at  the  request  for  a  company,  say  company  X,  to  operate  in  jurisdiction  Y,  the  state 
would  go  into  jurisdiction  Y  and  would  make  an  evaluation  of  the  regulatory  structure  and  the  political 
climate,  the  nature  of  the  business  that  was  going  to  be  operated,  and  ascertain  that  the  associations  that 
the  company  was  going  to  be  involved  with — if  there  were  partners  in  the  business — if  the  financing 
arrangements  were  adequate,  that  the  regulatory  structures  were  sophisticated  and  well  staffed,  and  in  the 
whole  variety  of  areas,  before  granting  approval  to  operate  in  those  jurisdictions.  The  Commission  felt 
that  that  was — and  1  would  not  want  to  put  words  in  their  mouth,  but  they  seemingly  indicated  that  that 
was — overly  burdensome  to  Nevada  licensees,  and  that  they  felt  that  licensees  should  not  be  restricted  in 
that  manner. 

That ’s  the  way  it  is  now,  currently? 

That’s  the  current  situation.  The  legislature  ultimately  modified  the  statutes  to  some  extent  to 
accommodate  that  policy  decision. 

Do  you  think  that  eventually  proved  to  be  a  benefit  to  the  state  of  Nevada? 

Well,  as  you  know,  some  of  Nevada’s  licensees  have  gotten  involved  in  other  jurisdictions  in 
some  controversy.  Perhaps  some  of  those  controversies  could  have  been  avoided  if  the  state  had  had 
greater  oversight  and  as  licensees  got  involved  in  these  opportunities. 

In  February  of 1995  the  Avi  Casino  near  Laughlin  was  licensed.  Would  you  tell  us  about  the  significance 
of  that  licensing? 

Well,  there  are  a  couple  of  significances  of  the  licensing.  The  state  had  entered  into  an 
agreement — and  I’ll  call  it  an  agreement  at  this  point,  although  subsequently  it  would  have  been  renamed 
a  compact — with  the  Mohave  band  of  Paiutes,  and  they  wanted  to  become  involved  in  gambling  and 
gambling  activities.  And,  of  course,  that  presented,  at  that  time,  a  number  of  difficulties  because  the  tribe 
felt  that  they  were  solvent,  that  they  should  not  be  subject  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  state  on  these  matters. 
But  it  was  ultimately  accommodated  through  an  agreement  between  the  state  and  the  tribe,  where  the  state 
agreed  to  regulate  the  gambling  activities,  should  they  occur,  down  along  the  Colorado  River  in  the  event 
the  tribe  agreed  to  full  state  jurisdiction  so  that  they  would  have  the  same  regulatory  and  licensing 
structure  as  any  other  casino  throughout  the  rest  of  the  state.  The  agreement  actually  became  the  model 
for  the  Indian  Gaming  Regulatory  Act,  which  was  adopted  in  1987  and  was  largely  patterned  after  the  Avi 
agreement  as  an  example  of  tribal-state  cooperation  to  achieve  the  purpose  of  allowing  a  tribe  to 
participate  in  gambling.  The  actual  application  came  a  number  of  years  later. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


45 


And  the  significance  is  that  it  was  really  the  first  tribal  casino  that  was  licensed  in  the  state  of 
Nevada.  It  was  subject  to  full  state  licensing  review  and  regulatory  oversight.  There  were  some  moderate 
payments  that  were  made  to  the  state  to  offset  regulatory  and  licensing  costs.  They  were  not  subjected  to 
the  gross  revenue  provisions  of  Chapter  463,  and  served,  as  1  indicated  earlier,  as  a  model  of  the 
arrangements  that  could  be  made  between  a  state  and  a  tribal  government  that  wished  to  operate 
gambling. 

Now,  as  we  discuss  this,  your  readers  or  observers  of  this  transcript  will  recognize  that  this  is  a 
different  pattern  than  exists  in  other  places  in  the  United  States.  And  the  prime  reason  for  that  is  because 
of  the  large  number  of  gaming  licensees  that  are  involved  in  Nevada.  And  the  tribe,  in  my  opinion,  felt 
that  in  order  for  them  to  successfully  compete  against  other  commercial  gaming  operations  within 
Nevada,  they  had  to  be  subject  to  the  same  regulatory  apparatus,  or  else  the  tourist  may  somehow  feel  that 
there  was  a  lesser  standard  in  effect  and  that  they  were  not  appropriately  regulated,  that  maybe  questions 
of  a  player  dispute  would  arise  or  whole  wide  variety  of  other  things. 

Now  the  state,  after  that  first  agreement,  entered  into  a  number  of  other  compacts  with  a  variety 
of  tribes  throughout  the  state.  And  there  are  a  couple  of  tribes  now  that  are  operating  gambling,  but  none 
as  extensively  as  the  Mohave  band  of  Paiutes.  And  that  project  has  had,  quite  frankly,  mixed  success. 
They’ve  struggled;  they’ve  had  some  difficulties.  Some  of  them  may  be  locational  in  nature,  and  some 
may  just  reflect  some  of  the  changing  marketplaces.  As  you  know,  it’s  very  close  to  the  Arizona  border, 
and  Arizona  has  substantial  tribal  gaming,  which  has  affected  not  only  the  Avi  market  but  also  the  more 
general  Laughlin  market. 

How  many  Indian  casinos  do  you  think  there  are  in  the  state  of  Nevada  now? 

Well,  if  1  can  name  them,  we  have  Avi.  The  Moapa  band  of  Paiutes  operates  a  small  casino.  I’m 
also  referring  to  slot  operations.  They  may  not  necessarily  have  tables,  but  they  have  150  or  so  slot 
machines,  I  believe,  in  their  smoke  shop  along  1-15.  The  Washoe  band  of  Paiutes,  I  believe,  operates 
either  one  or  two  locations  with  slot  machines  in  them.  There  are  a  number  of  other  compacts  that  are 
currently  enforced  that  do  not  have  gambling.  And  additionally,  the  Snow  Mountain  band  of  Paiutes — 
boy,  you’re  taking  me  down  memory  lane — in  the  northern  part  of  the  Las  Vegas  Valley  operates  a  golf 
course,  and  they  do  have  some  gaming  in  their  smoke  shops.  So  there  are  probably  four  or  five,  maybe  six 
locations  that  have  some  form  of  gaming.  And  there  is  Sutcliffe’s  out  at  Pyramid  Lake  that  also  has 
gaming,  and  that’s  operated  by  a  route  operator  who’s  in  there  by  virtue  of  a  compact.  And  I  believe  he’s 
on  location  or  premises  that  are  non-tribal  operated,  if  my  memory’s  right. 

[laughter] 

That’s  a  long  answer.  1  think  that’s  about  what  you’ve  got  now. 

And  they  all  operated  the  same  way;  they  ’re  all  under  the  Nevada  regulations? 

They  are.  They’re  generally  smaller  operations,  and  the  gambling  is  associated  with  the  sales  of 
cigarettes  and  tribal-type  items. 


46 


4 

Shannon  Bybee 


Shannon  Bybee  was  born  in  Tropic,  Utah,  in  1938,  and 
grew  up  in  Ely,  Nevada.  After  working  as  a  military 
policeman  and  deputy  sheriff  he  received  a  law  degree 
from  the  University  of  Utah  College  of  Law.  Bybee  was 
appointed  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board  by  Governor 
Mike  O’Callaghan  in  1971.  Upon  his  departure  in 
1975,  he  worked  in  private  practice  for  several  years. 
In  197 8  he  joined  Steve  Wynn's  Golden  Nugget  Inc.  as 
a  vice  president  and  later  ran  Wynn's  Golden  Nugget 
in  Atlantic  City.  He  then  sen’ed  as  chief  executive  of 
the  city's  Claridge  hotel  and  as  president  of  a  slot 
maker  that  would  eventually  become  Alliance  Gaming 
Corp.  In  1994,  Bybee  joined  the  faculty  of  the  William 
F.  Harrah  College  of  Hotel  Administration  and  the 
William  S.  Boyd  School  of  Law.  In  1996,  Bybee  was 
appointed  executive  director  ofUNLV's  International 
Gaming  Institute.  He  died  in  2003. 


Shannon  Bybee.  Photo  courtesy  of  Shannon  Bybee. 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  morning.  This  is  Dwayne  Kling.  It 's  December  third  in  the  year  2001.  I’m  with 
Shannon  Bybee  in  his  office  in  the  Fulton  building  on  the  UNLV campus  in  Las  Vegas,  Nevada. 

Shannon,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have  your  permission  to 
make  available  to  the  public  the  tapes  and  transcripts  of  the  Oral  History  inter-views  that  we  are  about  to 
begin  today? 

Shannon  Bybee:  Yes. 


Shannon,  when  and  where  you  were  born? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


41 


I  was  bom  in  1938  in  Tropic,  Utah,  which  is  near  Bryce  Canyon  National  Park. 

How  long  did  you  live  there? 

1  lived  there  for  less  than  a  year,  then  moved  to  the  Ely,  Nevada,  area  where  1  did  all  my 
schooling  through  high  school.  Actually,  even  some  off-campus  courses  after  1  got  out  of  the  Army. 

Are  you  married  now,  Shannon? 

Yes.  I’m  still  married  to  the  same  woman.  We  have  five  children  and  eleven  grandchildren. 

What  is  your  wife ’s  name  and  where  did  you  meet  her? 

Her  name  is  Norma  Reid,  and  she  is  from  Lund,  which  is  thirty  miles  from  Ely.  1  was  the  deputy 
sheriff  in  Ely  after  1  got  out  of  the  Army,  and  she  was  working  across  the  hall  from  me  in  the  assessor’s 
office. 

When  did  you  get  out  of  the  Army? 

In  1961. 

Did  you  enlist  in  the  Army?  Was  that  going  to  be  your  career? 

No,  no.  1  enlisted  because  I  wasn’t  sure  what  I  wanted  to  do,  and  I  figured  that  gave  me  three 
years  with  no  pressure  about  deciding  a  career.  I  had  two  uncles  who  were  police  officers  in  Cedar  City 
[Utah],  where  1  went  to  junior  college  before  going  in  the  Army,  and  my  dad  had  been  a  company  cop  for 
Kennecott.  He  was  a  security  guard  deputized  by  the  county  for  McGill,  Nevada,  where  the  Kennecott 
smelter  was.  I  knew  her  older  brothers.  1  knew  her  dad,  but  did  not  know  her  until  I  met  her  in  the  county 
building. 

Where  were  you  stationed  in  the  Army? 

1  spent  my  entire  enlistment,  after  1  got  out  of  the  military  police  school,  at  the  U.S.  Military 
Academy  at  West  Point. 

What  did  you  do  after  you  got  out  of  the  sendee? 

1  went  back  to  Ely.  1  worked  for  a  brief  time  for  Kennecott  and  then  became  a  deputy  sheriff,  ran 
the  office  and  the  jail.  We  had  other  people  who  could  write  tickets,  but  not  all  could,  or  wanted  to, 
handle  the  paperwork,  and  I  could  handle  the  paperwork  pretty  good. 


How  did  you  get  from  the  Ely  area  to  Reno? 


48 


Well,  my  sheriff  got  beat  in  an  election,  and  1  realized  that  this  was  an  uncertain  vocation.  Even 
though  the  new  sheriff  wanted  me  to  stay,  1  decided  it  was  time  I’d  better  go  on  and  get  a  college  degree. 
So  1  went  to  Reno  and  enrolled  at  the  University  of  Nevada,  Reno,  and  studied  political  science  in 
preparation  for  law  school. 

Did  you  have  to  work  to  finance  your  education? 

1  sure  did.  The  first  job  I  found  was  at  Harrah’s  and  for  six  weeks  or  so  1  worked  as  a  change 
person,  and  then  an  opening  came  up  on  the  sheriffs  department.  1  had  letters  of  recommendation  from 
the  sheriff,  the  district  attorney,  and  the  district  judge,  and  so  1  was  hired  when  a  job  opened  up  in  the 
sheriffs  department,  working  in  the  jail.  That  worked  out  good  for  me  going  to  school  as  1  could  study  at 
night.  1  worked  two  swing  shifts,  two  graveyard  shifts,  and  one  day  shift,  and  that  one  day  shift  was  on 
Sunday. 

Were  you  working  forty  hours  a  week? 

Oh,  yes,  at  least.  Occasionally  1  worked  extra  duty,  such  as  at  the  Harolds  Club  gun  club.  1 
worked  security  on  that,  which  we  got  paid  extra  for. 

They  had  gambling  at  the  gun  club  on  various  shoots? 

Yes.  And  they  set  up  tables  and  a  few  slot  machines. 

Were  the  Washoe  County  sheriffs  hired  on  off-duty  time?  Was  it  like  a  moonlight  job  for  them? 

Right,  and  it  was  good  extra  money.  It  was  periodic;  1  worked  just  when  they’d  have  a  big 
tournament  or  something,  and  1  worked  there  from  1963  to  1966. 

You  said  when  you  went  to  the  university  you  majored  in  political  science  working  towards  a  law  degree. 
Did  you  have  some  motivation  or  some  specific  reason  for  deciding  to  get  a  law  degree? 

Yes,  while  1  was  working  in  the  sheriffs  department  1  got  to  know  the  district  judge  in  Ely,  Jon 
Collins,  and  acted  as  his  bailiff  often,  or  when  he  needed  one,  and  1  took  a  business  law  class  he  taught  in 
Ely  for  UNR.  He  gave  me  an  “A”  and  told  me  1  could  be  a  lawyer,  and  Ed  never  even  considered  that  1 
had  that  capability.  But  that  got  me  thinking  about  it,  and  I  decided  1  wanted  to  do  it. 

So  one  man  turned  your  life  around? 

Yes.  Yes.  And  by  the  time  1  finished  law  school,  he  was  chief  justice,  and  1  became  his  law  clerk. 
He  later  became  a  partner  in  the  law  firm  of  Lionel  Sawyer  &  Collins. 

Where  did  you  attend  law  school? 


The  University  of  Utah  from  1966  to  1969. 1  finished  second  in  my  class. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


49 


Did  you  have  to  work  while  you  were  going  to  law  school? 

No,  fortunately  they  had  passed  the  G.I.  bill  just  before  1  went  to  law  school.  1  had  some  good 
timing,  [laughter]  So  between  that  and  government  loans  that  1  didn’t  have  to  make  the  payments  on  until 
after  1  graduated,  1  was  OK. 

Did  you  have  any  children  at  that  time? 

Oh,  yes.  1  had  two  when  1  started  law  school  and  one  more  while  we  were  there. 

When  you  completed  law  school,  did  you  go  to  work  for  Jon  Collins? 

That  clerkship  didn’t  start  till  the  fall,  so  that  summer  I  clerked  with  the  Woodbum  firm  and 
worked  mostly  with  Procter  Hug.  That  was  a  great  experience,  and,  of  course,  he  later  became  a  very 
important  man  in  legal  circles  as  chief  judge  of  the  Ninth  Circuit. 

So  you  worked  for  Mr.  Hug  in  the  summer  and  then  you  clerked  for  Mr.  Collins? 

Right.  And  when  the  clerkship  ended  the  next  August,  1  came  to  Vegas. 

What  precipitated  your  move  to  Las  Vegas? 

The  judge  was  going  to  retire  at  the  end  of  his  term,  the  end  of  the  year,  to  go  in  with  Lionel 
Sawyer,  and  he  wanted  me  to  come  with  him.  But  1  never  did  practice  with  him,  because  Mike 
O’Callaghan  called  me  in  December  after  he  won  the  election,  and  asked  me  to  go  on  the  Gaming  Control 
Board. 

So  you  went  on  the  Board  a  year  and  a  half  out  of  law  school. 

Yes. 

How  did  you  know  Mike  O'Callaghan?  What  caused  him  to  call  you? 

Harry  Reid,  who  was  elected  the  lieutenant  governor  in  the  same  election,  and  1  were  students 
together  at  College  of  Southern  Utah,  a  junior  college  in  Cedar  City,  Utah.  And  Mike  was  good  friends 
with  an  uncle  of  mine.  They  both  trained  fighters  and  had  matches  between  their  two  teams.  So  he  knew 
of  me,  and  when  he  was  chief  juvenile  probation  officer  he  came  to  Ely  once  when  1  was  on  the  sheriffs 
department,  and  that  was  the  first  time  1  had  met  him,  but  he  was  well  aware  of  me  because  of  my  uncle. 
However,  1  think  it  was  Harry  [Reid]  who  recommended  me  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board. 

You  mentioned  you  went  to  College  of  Southern  Utah.  Was  that  prior  to  going  to  UNR? 


Yes.  That  was  before  1  went  in  the  Army. 


50 


Had  you  applied  for  the  Control  Board? 

No,  I  never  did  even  think  about  it.  After  the  governor  asked  me  to  do  it  and  I  agreed,  I  had  to  go 
grab  the  statutes  and  see  what  it  was  I’d  agreed  to  do.  [laughter]  I’d  heard  “board”  and  I’d  heard 
“commission,”  but  I  thought  there  was  just  one  entity.  So  I  knew  nothing  about  it,  or  about  regulation  or 
about  the  activities  of  the  Board  and  Commission. 

You ’d  already  moved  to  Las  Vegas,  so  did  you  stay  in  Las  Vegas? 

Yes.  I  was  really  in  charge  of  the  Las  Vegas  office  for  the  Board. 

You  were  perhaps  the  first  member  of  the  Church  of  Latter-Day  Saints  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Control 
Board,  and  of  course,  a  large  segment  of  the  Nevada  population  are  of  the  same  religious  belief.  Do  you 
think  your  religion  had  any  bearing  on  the  appointment? 

I  don’t  think  so.  When  I  went  to  junior  college  Harry  [Reid]  wasn’t  a  Mormon;  he  joined  the 
church  later.  There  was  an  LDS  stake  president  who  was  on  the  Commission  before  me,  but  I  was  the  first 
one  on  the  Board.  I  think  I  was  appointed  because  of  two  things:  one,  I  qualified  as  an  attorney;  and  two, 
my  background  in  law  enforcement. 

What  are  the  qualifications  of  the  three  people  who  are  on  the  board? 

One  has  to  be  an  accountant  and  an  expert  in  gaming.  We  decided  that  was  Jack  Stratton.  One  has 
to  have  a  law  enforcement  or  a  legal  background.  Then  the  chairman  has  to  have  five  years  of 
administrative  experience,  and  that  was  Phil  Hannifin. 

Who  did  you  replace  on  the  board? 

Keith  Campbell. 

Did  you  know  Phil  Hannifin  or  Jack  Stratton  prior  to  your  appointment? 

I  did  not  know  Jack.  When  I  was  a  junior  in  high  school  I  went  to  Boys  State,  and  Phil  Hannifin 
was  one  of  the  counselors  there.  So  I  knew  him.  I  had  met  him,  but  had  little  contact  with  him  after  Boys 
State  until  I  went  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  When  I  was  working  my  way  through  college  he  was 
chief  probation  officer  in  Washoe  County.  And  when  we  took  in  juveniles,  he  would  come  there  to  talk 
with  them,  so  I  did  have  some  contact  with  him  in  that  capacity. 

Jack  Stratton  was  from  Ely  originally,  wasn ’t  he? 

Yes.  Well,  from  Cherry  Creek.  That’s  about  sixty  miles  north  of  Ely.  It’s  a  small  mining  and 
ranching  town. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


51 


During  your  four  years  on  the  Board,  did  the  makeup  of  the  Board  remain  the  same? 

Yes. 

During  your  time  on  the  Board  Jack  Diehl  and  Peter  Echeverria  were  chairmen  of  the  gaming 
Commission.  What  kind  of  relationship  did  you  have  with  those  two  gentlemen? 

1  think  I  had  a  good  relationship  with  both  of  them.  Being  an  attorney  helped  some,  1  think,  but 
what  helped  even  more  with  Echeverria  was  that  Pete  was  from  Ely.  [laughter]  So  we  had  a  natural 
affinity  and  got  along,  and  even  though  we  had  opposition  on  some  issues,  1  always  respected  him  very 
much  and  liked  him.  But  Ed  attack  him  as  much  as  he’d  attack  me. 

Are  you  of  the  opinion  that  during  your  tenure  on  the  Board  the  Commission  controlled  the  power  in  the 
gaming  industry  but  that  the  Board  was  influential  in  determining  the  direction  of  that  power? 

Oh,  technically  that’s  the  way  it’s  supposed  to  operate.  The  Board  has  a  lot  of  power  by  virtue  of 
the  fact  that  we  have  the  staff.  We  do  the  investigations  on  the  Board.  The  Commission  gets  what  we  give 
them,  in  a  sense.  A  lot  of  things  never  get  to  the  Commission.  So  the  only  things  the  Commission  is 
dealing  with  are  the  actual  granting  of  licenses  and  disciplinary  hearings.  Everything  else  is  handled  by 
the  Board.  So  the  real  power,  1  think,  is  in  the  Board.  The  Commission,  [in]  terms  of  setting  policy, 
adopts  the  regulation,  but  it  was  usually  the  Board  that  wrote  the  regulations.  The  Commission  certainly 
didn’t  have  any  more  power  than  the  legislature  gave  it. 

The  Board  had  the  practical  power  and  the  power  of  information  because  we  were  the  source  of 
information.  1  think  the  greatest  source  of  power  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board  is  the  control  of  the 
information  and  the  control  of — for  the  most  part — who  is  disciplined,  and  bringing  actions  in  front  of  the 
Commission  to  discipline  people.  The  Commission  didn’t  have  a  lot  of  time,  and  it  was  a  pretty  heavy 
reading  load.  The  materials  that  they  were  furnished  every  month  were  probably  a  couple  of  inches  thick, 
and  1  think  today  it’s  probably  in  two  or  three  volumes.  But  there’s  always  been  a  real  burden,  1  think,  on 
a  part-time  body  like  the  Commission  to  get  the  truth  out  of  the  material. 

And  all  the  Commission  members  don ’t  live  in  Las  Vegas  or  Carson  City. 

Right,  they  were  spread  around  the  state,  while  the  Board  was  talking  and  working  together  every 

day. 

Would  you  explain  the  regulation  determining  the  necessary  action  of  the  Commission  if  the  Board  voted 
for  or  against  the  approval  of  an  applicant  or  an  application? 

If  the  Board  recommends  approval  of  an  application,  the  Commission  can  either  grant  it  or  deny 
it.  If  the  Board  recommends  denial,  then  the  Commission  has  to  license  them  by  a  unanimous  vote.  So  the 
Board  can  require  the  Commission  to  have  a  unanimous  vote  by  recommending  denial. 

During  your  time  on  the  Board  was  there  generally  an  agreement  between  the  three  members  on  the  final 
vote,  or  were  there  a  lot  of  two-to-one  votes? 


52 


There  were  a  lot  of  times  when  we  didn’t  know  sometimes  how  we  were  going  to  vote  till  it  came 
down  to  when  it  was  time  to  cast  the  vote.  At  least  that  was  true  for  me,  and  we  did  not  discuss  the 
outcome.  Jack  Stratton  was  more  conservative  than  Phil  or  1. 1  made  probably  99  percent  of  the 
recommendations,  particularly  for  denial,  because  when  I’d  been  a  law  clerk,  the  Supreme  Court  had  a 
case  in  front  of  them  where  they  were  concerned  about  the  fact  that  there  was  no  information  given  to  the 
applicant,  so  he  didn’t  know  what  it  was  that  they  had  denied  him  for,  and  that  bothered  them.  So  when  1 
was  on  there  1  would  make  sure  that  in  the  public  record  there  was  sufficient  information  to  justify  and  to 
support  a  judicial  review  if  that  were  obtained.  Before  1  would  make  the  motion  for  denial  1  would  ask 
questions  and  get  the  applicant  to  admit  to  things  so  1  didn’t  have  to  go  in  to  our  report,  other  than  to  say, 
“Did  you  do  this  or  do  that?”  And  then  1  would  make  my  motion  with  those  grounds  as  the  grounds  for 
denial. 

Sometimes  was  it  difficult  to  get  the  applicant  to  actually  state  these  things  that  you  already  knew? 

Not  really.  No.  They  want  the  license,  and  they  know  if  they  lie  they  will  be  denied.  And  most  of 
them  had  counselors,  so  counsel  would  advise  them  that  if  they  didn’t  answer  the  question  they’d  get 
denied,  [laughter]  So  we  had  them  between  a  rock  and  a  hard  place. 

Was  there  usually  an  agreement  between  the  three  of  you  when  the  final  vote  was  made? 

More  often  than  not,  yes.  However,  1  think  we  had  Jack  nervous  all  the  time  with  our  votes  and  he 
thought  were  going  to  end  up  getting  challenged  and  have  the  courts  take  away  some  of  the  powers  that 
we  were  exercising. 

Did  it  ever  happen  during  your  tenure  that  the  Board  was  challenged  or  the  Commission  was  challenged? 

Not  on  the  licensing.  1  jerked  some  work  cards  and  got  set  back  on  those.  Court  ruled  there  was 
no  provision  for  review  of  the  work  cards  or  revoking  a  work  card,  so  1  had  to  get  legislation  to  change 
that. 

Would  you  explain  the  difference  between  a  work  card  and  a  gaming  license? 

Well,  a  work  card  involves  going  down  to  the  local  police,  for  the  most  part,  and  if  local  police 
doesn’t  do  it,  then  you  get  it  from  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  Basically,  it  involves  getting  fingerprinted 
and  getting  a  report  back  on  the  fingerprints.  And  then  if  the  Board  didn’t  want  the  person  to  have  one 
then  they  could  object  to  the  issuance  of  the  work  permit  by  the  local  police,  which  we  did  a  number  of 
times. 

Who  has  to  have  a  work  permit  or  a  work  card? 

Anybody  in  a  gaming  position,  and  a  statute  lists  them.  Basically  it  is  anybody  on  the  casino  floor 
who  handles  money  or  cards,  dice,  the  cage,  finance  positions,  that  sort  of  thing.  Clark  County  had 
expanded  it  to  include  maids  and  other  people.  But  under  the  state  statute,  the  only  ones  mandated  were 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


53 


people  who  worked  in  the  casino. 

So  Clark  County  is  the  only  one  that  required  work  cards  in  a  non-gaming  department? 

Clark  County  and  City  of  Las  Vegas.  But  that’s  changed  recently  as  a  result  of  [a]  lot  of 
opposition  to  it.  People  felt  that  maids  and  those  kinds  of  jobs  shouldn’t  have  to  be  submitted  to  the  same 
requirement  as  people  in  the  casino. 

So  the  work  card  is  for  anyone  that  works  in  the  gaming  business,  to  a  degree.  What  is  a  key  license? 

Well,  there  are  licensed  owners  and  directors,  officers,  and  key  employees.  Key  employees  are 
basically  people  who  are  not  officers  or  shareholders,  and  so  they’re  not  licensed  in  those  capacities. 
They’re  licensed  because  of  their  position  as  a  key  employee.  They  are  people  who  make  credit  decisions, 
who  are  in  charge  of  things  like  the  cage,  casino  operations.  It’s  fairly  broad,  but  those  are  the  positions 
that  normally  are  required  to  be  licensed  as  a  key  employee. 

Is  it  up  to  the  Board  to  call  these  people  forth  to  be  licensed? 

Basically,  the  Board  goes  to  the  Commission  and  recommends  they  be  called  forward,  and  then 
the  Commission  makes  the  decision  whether  to  have  them  apply. 

So  the  casino  doesn ’t present  someone  to  be  licensed  as  a  key  employee? 

No.  But  the  Board  doesn’t  investigate  a  lot  of  key  people.  So  sometimes  if  you’ve  got  a  casino 
host,  or  somebody  like  that,  and  you  get  a  request  to  submit  him  for  licensing  as  a  key  employee,  you 
know  that  they  must  have  something  or  they  wouldn’t  be  asking  you  to  submit  him  for  licensing  and  pay 
for  the  investigation. 

Was  there  ever  any  political  pressure,  or  pressure  of  any  kind,  put  on  you  by  anyone  to  vote  for  or  against 
an  applicant? 

No,  there  wasn’t.  Mike  O’Callaghan  was  very  good  about  that.  1  can  remember,  though,  when  we 
had  the  Dunes  case  with  Morris  Shenker,  we  got  a  call  from  the  governor,  and  he  said  we  had  this  big 
matter  coming  up  and  he’d  gotten  lots  of  phone  calls  from  both  sides  and  he  wanted  us  to  make  a  decision 
based  on  the  evidence.  That  was  it.  That  was  the  only  time  he  ever  contacted  us  about  a  pending  matter. 
The  governor  was  very  good  about  that.  1  mean,  he  didn’t  try  to  meddle.  And  if  anybody  complained 
about  us  and  wanted  to  meet  with  him,  he’d  always  have  one  of  us  present. 

During  your  tenure  on  the  Board,  how  would  you  describe  the  relationship  between  the  Gaming  Board 
and  the  Gaming  Commission? 

Overall,  1  think  it  was  good,  a  good  relationship.  We  socialized  after  meetings,  and  sometimes  a 
commissioner  who  was  a  successful  businessman  would  buy  dinner,  but  never  with  the  state’s  money.  So 
it  was  a  good  relationship,  but  it  didn’t  mean  we  agreed  with  them  all  the  time.  1  used  to  tell  them  that  we 


54 


granted  justice  and  they  granted  mercy. 

There  were  times  when  we  knew  that  they  would  overrule  us,  and  we  told  them  we  didn’t  care 
but  we  wanted  to  deliver  a  message  so  other  people  wouldn’t  think  that  getting  licensed  was  an  easy  thing 
to  do.  So  if  we  did  get  a  unanimous  recommendation  for  denial,  we  might  tell  them  we  were  not  too 
concerned  about  it.  We  just  wanted  to  make  sure  that  people  know  that  this  isn’t  automatic,  that  they’re 
going  to  have  to  convince  not  only  the  Board  but  also  the  Commission. 

So  you  had  no  problem  in  most  cases  if  the  Commission  did  overturn  your  decision? 

No.  And  in  the  first  place,  1  don’t  remember  any  real  disagreements.  That  doesn’t  mean  we  didn’t 
have  any,  but  1  don’t  recall  any.  But  1  believed,  and  1  think  the  Board  believed,  that  we  had  our  role  and 
they  had  their  role.  And  if  you  were  supposed  to  vote  the  same,  you  wouldn’t  have  to  have  two  bodies. 

That ’s  right,  [laughter]  When  you  sent  a  two-to-one  approval  or  a  two-to-one  denial  to  the  Commission, 
was  that  vote  meant  to  imply  anything  to  the  Commission? 

No.  We  might  individually  mention  to  them  we  didn’t  care  if  we  got  overturned.  If  it  was  a  close 
one,  we  wanted  to  make  sure  the  applicant  got  the  message  that  they  were  going  to  have  a  similar  problem 
with  the  Commission. 

Did  all  three  of  the  board  members  attend  the  Commission  meetings? 

Yes.  But  1  was  usually  the  most  vocal,  [laughter] 

Was  that  true  in  the  board  meetings  or  just  the  commission  meetings? 

Probably  both,  although  sometimes  Hannifin  and  I  would  trade  off  asking  questions.  While  1  was 
looking  something  up,  he’d  be  asking  questions,  and  when  he  got  his  questions  answered,  then  I’d  start 
asking  questions,  as  he  was  looking  for  something  else  to  ask  them  about. 

As  I  mentioned  earlier,  I  read  several  transcripts  of  the  board  meetings  when  you  were  with  Mr.  Hannifin 
and  Mr.  Stratton,  and  you  seemed  to  always  work  well  together. 

Yes.  And  under  the  statutes  the  one  board  member  who  handles  the  investigations  has  a  police  or 
law  background  and  the  person  with  the  financial  background  usually  does  the  audit,  and  then  there’s  the 
chairman.  But  with  ours,  it  was  more  of  a  north-south  thing.  I  had  all  of  the  divisions,  and  anything  that 
was  occurring  down  here  1  was  usually  involved  with,  and  if  they  had  a  question  or  an  issue  they  would 
come  to  me.  We  didn’t  have  a  full  staff  of  attorneys.  We  only  had  one  part-time  deputy  attorney  general 
for  several  years,  and  so  they  would  come  to  me  if  they  had  problems,  personnel  problems,  et  cetera,  even 
though  their  division  chief  would  be  in  Carson  City.  Audit,  on  the  other  hand,  was  down  here.  Dennis 
Gomes  was  our  chief  of  audit.  He  was  stationed  here.  So  we  had  myself  and  one  division  chief  who  were 
stationed  here. 


Where  were  the  gaming  board  offices? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


55 


Originally  they  were  in  what  was  then  the  First  National  Rank  building,  right  across  from  the 
courthouse.  I  think  it’s  the  Wells  Fargo  Rank  now. 

In  1967  the  Corporate  Gaming  Act  was  passed  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  How  would  you  rate  the 
importance  of  this  act? 

1  think  it  was  extremely  important  to  the  growth  and  success  of  gaming  in  Nevada,  because  it 
gave  the  industry  access  to  clean  money,  and  that  was  very  important  particularly  for  long-term  growth. 
There  was  a  lot  more  money  on  Wall  Street  than  there  was  anyplace  else.  The  teamsters’  pension  fund 
financed  a  number  of  places  in  the  early  1970s,  but  even  then,  they  were  limited  to  what  they  could  do.  So 
the  growth  of  public  companies  really  helped  to  improve  the  industry  in  financing.  It  also  created  further 
separation  of  management  and  ownership;  therefore,  the  interests  of  the  state  and  the  shareholder  were 
parallel.  It  gave  those  two  segments,  the  government — us — and  the  shareholders  a  good  oversight  of  the 
gaming  operations. 

Did  it  eventually  do  away  with  the  need  for  teamster  money  as  far  as  loans  were  concerned? 

Yes.  That  was  a  culmination  of  things,  but  it  also  went  through  a  federal  imposition  of  control 
over  the  Teamster  Union,  that  had  had  their  problems  with  the  feds.  So  1  think  they  would  have  been  out 
of  those  Teamster  loans  anyway. 

What  were  some  of  the  problems  that  the  Corporate  Gaming  Act  created? 

I  don’t  think  it  created  any  problems  that  weren’t  there  already.  Some  people  said,  “Well,  you’ve 
got  all  these  shareholders  that  you  don’t  license,”  whereas  under  the  old  law,  every  shareholder  had  to  be 
licensed,  which  obviously  limits  the  number  of  shareholders  you  can  reasonably  have.  Rut  there  were 
enough  instances  of  hidden  ownership  to  make  it  clear  that  the  fact  that  you  were  doing  an  investigation 
didn’t  mean  that  they’re  not  going  to  try  to  do  something.  Some  of  those  hidden  ownership  cases  didn’t 
come  to  the  surface  until  after  they  were  licensed.  The  public  company  issue  focused  on  who  controlled 
the  company,  and  I  think  that’s  the  real  issue  anyway. 

Eventually,  were  regulations  or  statutes  passed  that  determined  who  had  to  be  licensed  in  the 
corporation? 

Yes,  we  adopted  regulations  fifteen  and  sixteen  after  a  number  of  hearings  and  discussions  with 
the  industry,  and  people  from  Wall  Street.  New  York  attorneys  for  Caesar’s  spent  quite  a  bit  of  time  on  it. 
I  think  the  quality  of  what  we  did  is  evident  by  the  few  changes  that  have  been  made,  and  those  changes 
have  usually  dealt  with  new  issues,  not  correcting  past  problems. 


Were  regulations  fifteen  and  sixteen  adopted  during  your  time  on  the  Board? 


56 


Yes,  in  the  early  1970s. 

What  were  some  of  the  fine  points  of  regulations  fifteen  and  sixteen?  Did  they  cover  who  had  to  be 
licensed  in  the  corporation? 

Yes,  they  actually  dealt  with  both  public  and  non-public  corporations.  Regulation  fifteen  was  for 
privately-held  companies,  the  old  standards  or  the  old  types  of  most  licenses,  and  regulation  sixteen 
addressed  public  companies.  In  public  companies  officers  and  directors  were  required  to  be  licensed,  and 
controlling  shareholders  if  they  owned  5  percent  or  more.  They  could  investigate  anybody  they  wanted, 
but  normally  they  wouldn’t  call  anyone  up  for  licensing  unless  they  had  five  or  more  percent,  or  unless 
there  was  some  problem  with  them.  The  5  percent  related  to  the  regulation  13-D  report  where  the  SEC 
requires  anybody  who  is  accumulating  stock  ownership  and  reaches  that  level  to  file  with  the  SEC  and 
indicate  whether  they’re  trying  to  seek  control  or  if  they  are  simply  investing.  1  think  that  was  one  of  the 
main  reasons  for  that  5  percent.  In  one  sense,  5  percent  was,  and  is,  sort  of  a  presumption,  but  a  rebuttable 
presumption  of  control.  If  somebody  has  50,  60  percent,  somebody  with  either  7  or  8  percent  is  not  in  a 
position  to  control  anyway.  But  it  was  automatic  at  1 0  percent.  That  was  the  maximum  allowed,  1 0 
percent.  At  1 0  percent  you  automatically  had  to  submit  for  licensing. 

Do  those  same  figures  still  remain  today? 

Yes.  They  did  make  one  change  in  the  1980s  when  they  had  some  bankruptcies  here,  and  as  a 
result  of  the  bankruptcies,  lenders  ended  up  with  equity.  They  thought  they  were  loaning  money;  instead, 
they  were  buying  equity,  and  so  they  went  to  the  legislature  and  got  it  changed  to  1 5  percent.  That 
happened  to  be  what  was  necessary  to  take  care  of  the  largest  lender,  which  was  Fidelity  Investments, 
who  had  bought  a  lot  of  the  bonds  and  that  sort  of  thing.  That  change  was  done,  1  think,  in  the  1980s. 

Did  the  Corporate  Gaming  Act  make  major  corporations  move  immediately  into  the  gaming  industry? 

No.  And  one  thing  that’s  interesting  is  that  we  had,  for  example,  the  Sahara,  and  the  Del  Webb 
Corporation  owned  the  Sahara,  so  what  they  did  was  they  leased  the  Sahara  to  three  of  their  top  officers 
who  were  licensed  and  then  they  wouldn’t  have  to  license  the  company.  By  having  the  Public  Gaming 
Act  and  regulations  fifteen  and  sixteen  you  could  require  them  to  submit  and  get  all  of  the  SEC  filings 
and  make  them  subject  to  the  SEC  and  federal  violations  if  they  didn’t  comply,  which  1  think  was  very 
beneficial.  It  was  much  better  than  having  this  other  method  where  you  never  got  any  information, 
particularly  on  a  regular  basis,  about  the  public  company. 

How  long  was  it  after  these  acts  were  passed  that  many  major  corporations  started  coming  in? 

In  reality,  1  think  it  was  after  New  Jersey  opened,  because  all  of  a  sudden  Wall  Street  discovered, 
right  under  their  nose,  gaming  operations  that  were  producing  a  lot  of  cash  flow.  That  got  their  attention, 
and  then  they  started  looking  out  here  as  well.  You  already  had  Caesar’s,  which  was  public,  and  Del 
Webb,  and  Flarrah’s  were  public.  So  you  had  three  major  companies  in  the  north  and  the  south  that  were 
public  companies  and  they  were  the  early  beneficiaries  of  this.  There  might  have  been  some  others,  but 
those  are  the  ones  that  come  to  mind. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


57 


There  were  several  new  statutes  and  regulations  put  into  effect  during  your  tenure  on  the  Board.  Did  you 
or  other  members  of  the  Board  frequently  appear  in  the  state  legislature  to  testify  for  or  against  pending 
legislation? 

Yes,  we  did. 

Who  was  the  major  player  from  your  Board?  Did  all  three  of  you  go,  or  did  it  depend  on  what  the  statute 
was? 


Depended  on  what  it  was.  Hannifin  was  always  there,  and  sometimes  I  would  be  if  it  was 
something  that  we  felt  it  would  be  helpful  for  me  to  be  there.  Add  my  perspective. 

Would  you  explain  the  difference  between  a  statute  and  a  regulation? 

A  statute  is  enacted  by  the  legislature,  and  a  regulation  is  adopted  by  the  Gaming  Commission. 

On  the  recommendation  of  the  Board? 

Well,  it  doesn’t  have  to  be,  but  normally  that’s  the  way  it  is.  Usually  the  Board  is  the  one  that  has 
the  concern  and  prepares  a  regulation  and  submits  it  to  the  Commission.  It’s  because  they’re  the  ones  that 
are  usually  looking  to  plug  holes  or  deal  with  problems. 

So  the  process  is  similar  to  an  application.  The  regulation  goes  to  the  Board,  and  they  recommend  or  get 
it  on  the  agenda. 

Yes,  but  not  formally  in  a  public  meeting,  unlike  the  licensing  process. 

So  it ’s  done  at  a  private  meeting  or  a  closed  meeting? 

Yes.  They  have  to  have  public  hearings  on  the  regulation,  but  in  terms  of  the  Board  drafting  and 
then  giving  it  to  the  Commission  and  explaining  it  to  them,  that  may  be  done  privately,  because  that’s  not 
part  of  the  public  hearing.  The  public  hearing  is  when  they  propose  and  publish.  They  have  to  publish  it, 
and  then  the  Commission  has  to  set  it  for  a  hearing  before  they  can  adopt  a  new  regulation. 

What  precipitates  a  statute?  Is  it  started  by  the  Board?  Does  the  Board  see  a  weakness  or  does  the 
Commission  see  a  weakness  or  a  problem  they  want  to  get  resolved? 

When  1  was  there,  it  was  most  often  the  Board.  If  we  felt  there  was  a  need  to  change  a  statute,  we 
didn’t  have  to  go  to  the  Commission,  because  that  wasn’t  a  commission  function.  The  Commission 
doesn’t  have  any  authority  over  the  Board.  It  just  has  its  area  where  it,  by  regulation  of  a  statute,  spells 
out  what  things  have  to  go  in  front  of  the  Commission,  and  it’s  basically  licensing,  disciplinary  actions, 
and  adoption  of  regulations. 


58 


What  regulations  put  into  effect  during  your  tenure  in  the  Board  do  you  feel  were  the  most  important? 

I  think  the  most  important  one — and  it’s  as  important  or  maybe  more  important  than  the  public 
corporation  issues — has  been  the  improved  accounting  regulation  that  we  adopted  and  put  into  effect  in,  I 
think,  1973  or  1974.  We  held  hearings,  we  dealt  with  people  from  the  industry,  we  spent  a  lot  of  time  and 
effort  on  it.  And  the  fellow  who  really  came  up  with  the  concept  that  worked  was  Clyde  Turner,  who  was 
a  commissioner  and  a  C.P.A.  He  had  the  concept  that  everybody  write  their  own  regulation,  submit  it, 
write  their  internal  controls,  submit  that  to  the  Board,  and  when  it’s  approved,  then  that’s  what  they’re 
measured  by. 

Was  that  Regulation  6? 

That’s  Regulation  6.  And  the  real  long-term  benefit  of  it  is  that  now  you  have  a  financial 
statement  that  Wall  Street  had  some  confidence  in.  They  understood  the  controls  that  were  in  place,  as 
well  as  the  regulations  for  the  licensing  statutes  to  keep  out  the  bad  people,  but  it  was  the  internal  controls 
and  those  accounting  regulations  that  really  gave  them  the  confidence  that  they  could  rely  on  the  financial 
statements  coming  out,  that  all  the  money  was  getting  counted  and  credited  to  the  owners  and  the 
shareholders  and  it  wasn’t  disappearing  out  the  back  door. 

So  each  individual  company  could  put  in  rules  and  regulations  that  would  fit  that  particular  company, 
and  then  it  was  up  to  the  Board  to  OK  their  proposal? 

Yes.  That’s  still  the  case,  although  they  have  now  adopted  what  they  call  “minimum  internal 
control  standards,”  and  everybody  has  to  adhere  at  least  to  those  standards.  But  one  of  the  things  that 
really  helped  was  the  bigger  companies  had  major  accounting  firms  doing  their  audits,  and  those  people 
kept  refining  this  law.  So  unlike  the  corporate  regulations,  the  accounting  regulations  and  accounting 
knowledge  or  ability  to  control  and  oversee  the  money  in  the  casino  has  had  the  benefit  of  many  experts 
in  accounting,  and  that  has  been,  1  think,  an  important  part  of  the  development  of  those  regulations.  We 
started  it,  but  it  has  continued  to  evolve  and  improve,  and  a  good  part  of  the  reason  for  that  is  having  all 
the  input  from  these  major  accounting  firms  that  do  the  accounting  for  the  large  public  companies. 

Prior  to  regulation  six,  did  each  company  have  to  have  an  external  auditor? 

Yes.  Well,  let  me  back  up.  In  1969  when  they  adopted  the  corporate  regulations,  they  also 
adopted  a  policy  that  said  you  had  to  submit  an  audited  financial  statement  annually.  1  remember  one 
place  on  the  Strip  showed  a  90-percent  increase  in  revenue  from  the  year  before  they  had  audited 
statements  and  the  year  of  the  audited  statements.  They  fortunately  had  changed  ownership  just  before  we 
came  on.  A  couple  of  years  later  the  feds  indicted  a  number  of  people  from  that  casino  for  skimming 
during  that  period  of  time. 

What  company  was  that? 

I’d  rather  not  say,  because  it  didn’t  reflect  on  the  people  who  have  operated  it  since  that  time.  It 
turned  out  that  what  they  were  doing  is  all  the  money  they  collected  outside  of  the  state  for  markers,  they 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


59 


never  sent  them  back  to  the  state. 

Oh.  [laughter] 

[laughter]  They  distributed  them  directly  to  other  places. 

You  mentioned  earlier  that  Clyde  Turner,  when  he  was  on  the  Commission,  got  the  ball  rolling  on 
regulation  six.  Did  he  have  help  later  on  from  a  gentleman  named  Gary  Royer? 

No.  What  happened  was  we  received  word  from  a  federal  source  that  there  was  a  draft  of 
accounting  regulations  circulating  amongst  federal  agencies  such  as  the  FBI,  treasury,  and  the  IRS,  and 
that  if  we  didn’t  adopt  something  and  straighten  out  the  problem,  then  they  would.  So  we  brought  in 
people  from  the  industry  and  talked  to  them  about  the  accounting  regulations.  At  that  time  there  were 
some  accounting  regulations,  but  they  were  the  same  for  everybody.  And  we  had  a  location — 1  think  it 
was  The  International — where  we  found  a  violation  of  the  regulation.  Only  problem  was,  what  they  were 
doing  was  better  than  what  the  regulation  required,  and  so  that  added  to  the  need  to  do  something. 

When  we  started  working  on  drafting  it,  it  was  Clyde  Turner  who  came  up  with  that  overall 
concept,  just  before  he  left  to  go  into  private  practice.  But  that  concept  is  still  there;  he  modified  it  with 
the  minimum  internal  control  standards.  But  beyond  those,  the  implementation  of  other  information,  and 
the  way  they’re  utilized  is  up  to  each  property,  and  it  has  to  be  signed  off  by  their  C.P.A.  and  has  to 
annually  be  reported  on  by  their  C.P.A.  So  that  gives  a  constant  review  to  make  sure  that  their  procedures 
are  working  and  that  they  are  good  procedures. 

Did  Dennis  Gomes  become  quite  involved  in  the  writing  of  the  regulation? 

Yes.  Dennis  was  the  head  of  our  audit  division.  He  was  a  C.P.A.,  with  a  master’s  in  finance.  I 
think  Gary  Royer  came  along  about  the  time  that  the  information  was  starting  to  be  filed — which  was 
around  1975 — and  he  became  involved  in  reviewing  for  Dennis  some  of  the  submitted  applications  or 
submitted  internal  control  systems. 

Did  Gary  Royer  work  for  the  Board? 

Yes.  He  was  a  Gaming  Control  Board  auditor  rather  than  an  agent. 

How  often  did  the  auditors  go  in  a  casino  and  check  their  regulation  six?  Did  they  do  that  more  than 
once? 


We  did  that,  and  1  think  they  still  do  it  today.  They’ll  go  in  and  check  for  regulatory  compliance 
and  spot  check,  but  they  don’t  do  a  full  audit,  except  periodically — sometimes  annually,  sometimes  not 
for  two  or  three  years  because  of  the  work  load.  The  Board  does  its  own  checks  on  maybe  the  count  room 
or  the  handling  of  markers  or  something  like  that.  They  will  go  in  and  just  examine  one  phase. 


Because  a  full-blown  investigation  could  take  weeks? 


60 


Oh,  yes.  An  audit  is  a  nasty  task.  It  takes  months,  [laughter] 

If  there  were  a  problem,  would  the  Board  then  act  on  it? 

We  would  get  a  recommendation  from  the  audit  division  only  if  there  was  a  problem.  We  didn’t 
review  every  audit.  We  didn’t  get  a  report  on  everything  they  did.  When  they  ran  across  a  problem,  then 
they  reported  it  and  we  figured  out  what  to  do  about  it. 

As  the  only  member  of  the  Board  with  legal  experience,  did  you  focus  more  on  new  regulations  and  their 
interpretation,  while  Mr.  Hannifin  and  Mr.  Stratton  concentrated  more  on  investigations  and 
enforcement? 

No.  As  I  indicated  earlier,  it  was  more  of  a  north-south  thing.  Even  though  they  had  division 
chiefs  for  enforcement  and  investigation  up  north,  there  were  still  questions,  and  a  lot  of  things  that  I 
handled  down  here  still  went  up  there  for  review.  But  if  they  had  questions  or  complained  about  who  sat 
next  to  the  window  and  who  got  next  to  the  wall  and  stuff  like  that,  I  handled  that.  Hannifin  was  back  and 
forth  between  the  north  and  the  south.  Jack  would  handle  more  of  the  day-to-day  kind  of  things  there. 
Today  they’re  pretty  well  divided  with  responsibilities  for  those  various  divisions  that  fit  their 
background.  We  didn’t  do  as  much  of  that  because,  like  I  say,  Jack  Stratton  was  up  there,  and  the  chief  of 
the  audit  division  was  down  here.  1  was  down  here,  of  course,  and  the  chief  of  investigations  and 
enforcement  was  in  Carson  City,  so  it  just  kind  of  evolved  that  we  divided  things  more  by  north  and  south 
than  by  department. 

It  seems  to  be  another  example  of  how  well  you  three  gentlemen  on  the  Board  got  along.  I  don ’t  know  if 
all  boards  were  as  compatible  as  your  board,  but  you  seemed  to  work  together  on  just  about  everything. 

We  did,  and  1  think  a  good  part  of  it  was  because  of  our  respect  for  each  other  and  for  each 
other’s  abilities.  I  think  the  other  two  often  looked  to  me  for  legal  advice,  especially  since  we  only  had 
one  part-time  deputy  attorney  general  who  was  not  an  expert.  We  later  got  one  full  time,  and  that  was  Bud 
Hicks.  Hicks  was  the  first  full-time  deputy  attorney  general  assigned  to  gaming. 

Did  you  act  as  a  liaison  between  Mr.  Hicks  and  the  Gaming  Board  and  the  Gaming  Commission,  or  did 
he  discuss  things  with  all  three  of  you? 

Well,  he  was  in  Carson  City,  and  besides  that,  we  still  had  the  part-time  deputy  A.G.  [attorney 
general]  who  lived  here  in  Las  Vegas.  He  was  the  senior  A.G.,  and  Bud  was  the  staff  attorney  who  was 
assigned  full  time  to  gaming.  So  there  really  wasn’t  any  liaison.  And  if  Hannifin  had  a  concern  he  might 
call  and  get  my  advice,  but  it  wasn’t  that  much  of  a  liaison  function. 

As  more  and  more  regulations  were  created,  was  your  workload  increased,  or  did  the  increase  of 
regulations  make  your  job  easier? 

Well,  I  think  the  increased  regulations  made  our  job  easier  because  it  gave  us  something  to  point 
to  rather  than  having  to  try  and  figure  out  how  do  we  accomplish  this  under  the  existing  regulation  that 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


61 


doesn’t  quite  say  what  we  want  it  to  say. 

As  we  discovered  problems,  that’s  when  we  would  usually  ask  for  regulation.  So  it  was  generally 
us  seeking  them,  and  it  helped  clarify  issues  as  well  as  now  you  have  something  to  show  the  applicant  and 
show  a  court  if  they  challenge  you. 

Were  the  problems  you  found  found  by  people  in  the  field? 

Y es,  and  most  of  them  came  through  the  audit  division.  Again,  it  wasn’t  changed  much  once  we 
got  the  basic  outline  because  of  the  nature  of  the  approval  process.  They  could  all  be  different  as  long  as 
they  had  minimum  standards.  The  audit  people  would  generally  fight  back  and  forth  with  the  applicant’s 
auditors  if  there  was  any  difference  of  opinion  on  things. 

Approximately  how  many  hours  a  week  did  you  work  when  you  were  on  the  Board? 

Oh,  probably  fifty,  sixty  hours.  1  tried  to  get  out  and  around  to  all  the  places  in  addition  to  my 
duties  in  the  office.  1  liked  to  get  out  to  see  and  be  seen,  to  keep  on  top  of  what  was  going  on. 

So  you  would  cruise  through  the  casinos  to  see  who  was  working  or  see  what  was  happening? 

Yes.  1  would  go  in  at  any  hour  of  the  day  or  night.  I  wanted  them  to  know  that  1  might  be  in  there 
at  any  time. 


Many  new  regulations  have  been  created  since  you  left  the  Board.  Do  you  think  there ’s  any  danger  of  the 
industry  being  overregulated? 

I  don’t  think  so.  If  you’ve  got  a  standard  when  you  charge  somebody,  other  than  just  your 
opinion,  this  can  be  very  helpful — being  able  to  point  to  a  regulation  and  say,  “Here’s  why  you  can’t  do 
this,”  instead  of  having  to  explain  your  philosophy  and  your  view.  It  gave  you  authority  and  you  didn’t 
have  to  convince  them  that  you’re  drawing  your  power  from  some  ill-defined  terminology. 

In  the  early  1970s,  a  gentleman  named  Jerome  Skolnik  spent  three  years  studying  the  Nevada  gaming 
industry.  His  study  resulted  in  the  book  House  of  Cards.  He  received  full  cooperation  of  gaming  control 
authorities  as  well  as  police  authorities  and  casino  owners  and  managers,  and  he  also  gained  a  lot  of 
cooperation  from  you.  Was  there  any  particular  reason  that  Mr.  Skolnik  was  given  so  much  access  to  the 
inner  workings  of  the  Board  and  the  Commission? 

1  had  read  one  of  his  books  in  law  school  called  Justice  Without  Trial,  which  was  the  study  of  a 
police  department.  His  method  of  study  was  to  go  with  and  be  with  the  people  and  become  close  enough 
to  them  so  that  he’s  not  treated  like  an  outsider.  In  that  way  he  gets  more  cooperation  and  more  insight. 
When  he  contacted  the  police  here,  they  told  him  that  he  should  go  across  the  street  to  the  Gaming 


62 


Control  Board.  So  he  came  in  and  when  he  started  to  introduce  himself,  I  said,  “I  know  who  you  are  .  .  . 
[laughter] 

“  .  .  .  I  had  to  read  your  book  in  law  school.”  And  when  he  told  me  he  wanted  to  do  a  study  of 
gaming  1  thought  it  was  a  great  idea,  because  up  to  that  point,  all  we  had  was  the  Green  Felt  Jungle  kind 
of  negative  book.  That  was  the  kind  of  thing  that  was  being  written  about  gaming  regulations  and  gaming 
operations  in  Nevada.  There  was  very  little  that  was  done  on  a  factual  basis,  and  none  on  a  real  academic 
study  of  it.  1  figured  that  we  should  be  able  to  withstand  the  glare  of  a  study  by  a  qualified,  unbiased 
academic,  that  whatever  he  said  would  probably  be  helpful  and  good  for  us  and  certainly  wouldn’t  be  the 
yellow  journalism  type  thing  that  we’d  been  used  to  with  Green  Felt  Jungle.  1  then  introduced  him  to  Phil 
[Hannifin]  and  talked  with  Phil  and  Jack  about  him,  and  he  eventually  spent  a  lot  of  time  with  us.  He 
never  did  get  quite  as  close  with  the  Commission. 

You  said  he  was  an  academic.  Did  he  have  a  degree  in  law? 

He  had  a  degree,  a  Ph.D.,  in  sociology,  and  he  was  the  director  of  the  Center  for  the  Study  of  Law 
and  Society  at  Berkeley  and  had  a  national  reputation.  He  had  been  the  reporter  for  a  presidential 
commission,  the  Walker  Commission,  to  study  violence.  It  was  done  after  the  1978  Democratic 
Convention,  and  he  was  the  one  who  actually  wrote  the  report  for  that  committee.  And  he  had  published  a 
number  of  books  on  police  operations  and  procedure. 

So  he  was  well-established  and  nationally  known? 

Oh,  he  was.  Yes.  He  had  an  excellent  national  reputation,  and  still  does  today.  He  retired  from 
Berkeley  and  now  teaches  law  at  NYU  [New  York  University],  1  think  they  eventually  made  him  a  law 
professor  as  well,  but  it  was  basically  in  the  area  of  law  and  impact  on  public  policy  and  that  sort  of  thing. 

So  to  get  back  to  what  you  were  saying,  you  took  him  in  and  introduced  him  to  Phil,  and  Phil  was  all  for 
it? 


Yes.  And  we  told  our  people,  “You  can  let  him  in  on  anything  you’re  doing.  But  if  you  don’t  feel 
comfortable  about  it,  you  don’t  have  to.”  Our  chief  of  investigations  never  liked  him  around  and  he  didn’t 
spend  much  time  with  him. 

Who  was  your  chief  investigator? 

Tom  Carrigan.  Tom  was  an  old  cop  and  didn’t  like  an  outsider  looking  in  on  it.  Dennis  Gomes 
adapted  to  it  very  quickly  and  very  easily.  Most  of  the  time  he  was  down  here,  so  he  got  to  know  the 
people  here  and  he’d  ride  with  the  agents  at  night.  We  actually  called  him  our  unofficial  consultant  on 
constitutional  matters,  [laughter]  He  was  very  helpful  in  that  regard;  he  would  tell  us  if  he  thought  we 
were  off  the  wall  on  some  things  and  he’d  get  us  to  thinking.  While  he  was  here  he  made  the 
acquaintances  of  Steve  Wynn  and  Billy  Weinberger,  and  they  opened  a  lot  of  doors  for  him. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


63 


An d  his  book  was  called  The  House  of  Cards? 

Yes.  It  was  published  about  1977  or  1978,  after  I  left  the  Board. 

What  general  overall  picture  did  he  give  of  the  gaming  industry? 

I  think  basically  it  was  an  objective,  positive  view  of  gaming.  He  went  into  things  like  the  history 
of  gaming  and  the  public  policy  aspects  of  it,  the  way  the  public  views  it,  and  the  way  different  writers 
had  viewed  gaming.  He  went  in  a  casino — I  can’t  remember  which  one — and  he  actually  spent  time  in  the 
pit  observing,  and  because  of  that  he  was  able  to  talk  about  contemporary  casino  operations  at  that  time.  I 
think  Frank  Schreck  was  also  cooperative  with  him  because  Frank  had  graduated  from  law  school  in 
Berkeley.  While  Skolnik  was  head  of  the  Center  for  Study  of  Law  and  Society,  he  also  taught  a  course  at 
the  law  school. 

Was  Frank  Schreck  on  the  Commission  at  that  time? 

Yes. 

So  all  in  all,  was  it  a  positive  look  at  Nevada  gaming? 

I  think  it  was.  I  think  it  was  beneficial  and  pointed  out  some  things  that  were  helpful.  It  was  a 
view  by  somebody  from  the  outside  without  a  negative  slant  on  everything  that  was  done  here  and 
without  a  presumption  of  some  sort  of  wrongdoing. 

Some  of  the  people  that  are  mentioned  in  the  book ,  including  you,  are  given  a  fictitious  name.  Do  you 
know  why  he  did  that? 

Yes.  That  was  his  style  of  doing  things.  He  said  it  was  to  keep  people  focused  on  the  content,  not 
on  who  the  people  were.  But  he  told  me  year  or  two  ago  that  if  he  had  to  do  it  over  again,  he  doesn’t 
know  that  he’d  do  that  same  thing.  I  spent  time  with  him  a  year  ago. 

The  period  from  the  late  1960s  to  the  late  1970s  was  replete  with  many  notable  and  sometimes 
spectacular  hearings  and  investigations  that  gained  nationwide  attention.  One  occurred  the  first  year  you 
were  on  the  Board  and  involved  the  Aladdin  hotel-casino.  In  December  of  1971,  a  group  of  investors  from 
Detroit  applied  to  purchase  the  Aladdin  from  Recrion  Corporation.  Would  you  relate  to  us  your 
memories  of  this  application  and  tell  us  about  the  principals  involved? 

In  the  initial  licensing  we  denied  a  number  of  the  people,  and  some  of  them  we  didn’t  feel  we  had 
a  case  for  denial  that  the  courts  would  uphold.  The  interesting  thing  is  that  we  believed  that  there  was 
judicial  review  of  our  decisions.  In  1978  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court  ruled  that  there  is  no  judicial  review 
of  a  denial  on  a  gaming  license — and  if  we’d  have  known  that  then,  there’ d  been  some  different  things 
happen. 


64 


[laughter] 

So  we  were  careful.  What  we  didn’t  want  to  do  was  lose  what  we  had  by  getting  a  bad  decision. 
There  is  a  saying  that  hard  cases  make  bad  laws.  So  that’s  why  sometimes  some  people  were  licensed  that 
might  have  not  otherwise  have  been — people  that  were  borderline. 

Did  you  have  any  other  comments  you ’d  like  to  make  on  that  Aladdin  case? 

1  remember  that  when  they  applied  there  was  a  question  raised  about  some  of  the  forms  that  we 
made  them  sign  waiving  any  liability  and  saying  they  agreed  to  furnish  everything.  They  didn’t  like  that; 
they  said  we  were  asking  them  in  effect  to  waive  their  constitutional  rights.  We  told  them  they  could 
decide  whether  they  wanted  to  be  a  licensee  or  not.  But  if  they  were  going  to  be  a  licensee,  they  were 
going  to  have  to  sign  the  forms  or  the  application  wouldn’t  be  complete  and  we  wouldn’t  start  it. 

So  that  was  kind  of  a  motivator. 

Yes.  And,  of  course,  a  number  of  them  were  denied.  The  ones  that  were  denied  were  people  that 
we  had  seen  meeting  with  bad  people,  where  it  was  pretty  clear  that  they  had  some  connection. 

What  was  the  final  decision  of  the  Board  and  the  Commission? 

Well,  we  denied  a  number  of  people  from  Detroit:  Charles  Goldfarb,  George  George,  and  Irwin 
Goldfarb.  The  people  who  were  approved  were  Don  Aiken,  who  had  been  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board 
and  had  been  an  auditor  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board;  Peter  Webbe,  who  was  an  attorney  out  of  Kansas 
City;  Richard  Daley;  and  Sam  Diamond. 

So  eventually  Sam  Diamond ,  Webbe,  Daley,  and  Aiken  were  licensed  at  the  Aladdin? 

Yes. 

Did  other  considerations  such  as  the  economic  welfare  of  the  hundreds  of  employees  there  and  the  loss  of 
gaming  revenue  enter  into  the  decision? 

Not  officially.  And  1  can  tell  you  it  didn’t  affect  my  decision,  but  I  don’t  know  about  Phil  or  Jack 
or  the  commission  members.  Commission  members  were  generally  more  sensitive  than  we  were,  and 
sometimes  Phil  might  have  been,  because  he  was  more  on  the  front  line  as  the  chairman;  he  was  the  one 
people  focused  on.  If  there  was  somebody  who  was  licensed,  then  we  would  give  them  delays  and  do 
something  to  help  them  get  rid  of  the  people  who  weren’t  licensable  so  that  the  place  could  go  ahead,  but 
we  didn’t  tell  them  who  could  or  couldn’t  have  it.  I  think  in  this  situation  there  were  people  who  were 
licensed,  so  they  simply  had  to  alter  the  ownership  percentages. 


Were  there  any  other  similar  cases  where  you  had  to  weigh  keeping  the  club  open  against  other  factors? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


65 


The  only  other  one  1  can  recall  was  one  where  we  allowed  a  potential  owner  to  put  money  into 
the  King’s  Castle  before  they  were  licensed.  That  required  special  approval  of  the  Board  and 
Commission.  They  put  money  in  several  times,  and  eventually  ran  out  of  money  and  never  completed  the 
purchase.  Our  concern  was  to  try  and  get  it  through  the  holiday  season.  We  didn’t  want  the  place  shutting 
down  while  we  were  getting  these  people  licensed,  especially  since  the  place  needed  money.  It  couldn’t 
last,  and  they  would  have  had  to  shut  it  down  if  there  wasn’t  money  from  the  potential  buyers.  Eventually 
when  they  didn’t  get  licensed,  when  the  deal  fell  through,  they  lost  the  money.  They  lost  it  all.  And  I 
recall  one  of  the  newspapers  here  criticizing  us,  saying  we  did  it  because  the  attorney  for  one  of  the 
parties  was  some  influential  person.  We  did  it  to  keep  the  place  open,  and  we  weren’t  letting  anybody 
who  was  unlicensed  run  it.  We  didn’t  let  them  participate  in  the  operation,  they  just  put  their  money  in, 
and  then  we  were  criticized  for  it.  1  recall  years  later  at  the  Aladdin  a  federal  judge,  Harry  Claiborne, 
stopped  its  closing,  but  then  it  was  ruled  that  he  couldn’t  do  that.  1  think,  primarily  the  judge  was  trying  to 
keep  it  open  to  keep  people  employed.  Now,  what  we  would  do  sometimes  would  be  to  suggest  to  people 
that  they  could  lease  it  to  someone  who  was  licensable.  That’s  why  Dennis  Gomes  came  to  work  at  the 
Aladdin.  They  needed  somebody  who  was  licensable,  and  then  they  did  the  same  thing  over  at  the  Dunes. 
Gomes  went  in  as  a  manager  and  actually  had  a  lease.  1  don’t  know  for  sure  if  he  did  that  at  the  Aladdin, 
but  at  the  Dunes  he  had  a  lease. 


Did  you  ever  feel  any  personal  fear  when  you  were  denying  these  people  that  were  notorious  gangsters 
and  hoodlums?  Didn  ’tyou  feel  that  you  were  out  there  in  the  open  when  you  were  making  judgements 
and  decisions  on  these  people? 

Not  really.  1  believe  the  last  thing  they  would  do  would  be  to  harm  somebody  in  law  enforcement, 
as  it  would  bring  more  heat  on  them  than  they  would  want  from  other  law  enforcement  people.  I  never 
even  had  my  phone  unlisted  the  whole  time  1  was  on  the  Board  and  never  got  any  kind  of  a  call  at  home.  1 
was  never  threatened.  Never  had  any  problem. 

Was  anyone  on  either  the  Board  or  the  Commission  threatened? 

Two  commissioners,  Harry  Reid  and  George  Swarts,  had  bombs  in  their  gas  tanks,  but  they  were 
never  sure  whether  it  was  because  of  gaming  or  something  else  that  they  were  involved  with.  They  had  no 
threats  from  anybody.  And  usually  they  wouldn’t  go  after  commissioners;  they’d  go  after  a  board  person. 
But  whoever  did  it  did  a  bad  job;  the  water  or  the  gasoline  snuffed  out  the  flame. 

In  1972  the  Argent  Corporation,  an  acronym  for  the  Allen  R.  Click  Enterprises  headed  by  Allen  Click, 
purchased  the  Hacienda  Hotel.  Mr.  Click  and  his  associate,  Frank  “Lefty”  Rosenthal,  were  soon  to 
become  two  of  the  most  well-known  figures  in  the  history  of  Las  Vegas  gaming.  Would  you  tell  us  how 
Mr.  Click  got  his  start  in  Las  Vegas? 


It  was  at  the  Hacienda,  but  Rosenthal  was  not  involved.  His  associate  was  Paul  Lowden.  He  put 


66 


together  a  group  of  people,  and  Glick  was  one  of  them.  There  were  about  three  or  four  investors,  and 
Glick  wasn’t  even  the  one  who  was  running  it.  He  was  just  an  investor  at  that  point.  But  he  later  moved  to 
get  control  of  the  Stardust.  Then  we  sent  another  team  out  to  do  another  background  investigation  so  that 
we  would  have  a  double  check.  Hannifin  and  I  even  went  on  part  of  it.  He  had  some  property  in  Mexico 
and  we  talked  with  the  people  that  ran  it. 

A  gaming  property? 

No,  it  was  a  resort  hotel,  and  it  all  checked  out.  1  was  really  puzzled,  because  1  figured  something 
was  wrong.  As  you  know,  the  quote  I  made  when  1  licensed  them  was  that,  “It  bothers  my  stomach,  but  1 
am  just  going  to  have  to  take  something  for  my  stomach  because  1  don’t  have  any  facts  to  base  a  denial 
on.”  And  that  was  the  truth,  but  we  suspected  that  he  had  grown  up  with  somebody  bad,  or  had  some  bad 
connection.  But  we  could  find  absolutely  no  connection  with  any  organized  crime  people  or  anybody  else 
with  a  bad  reputation. 

When  1  was  a  witness  in  the  federal  trials  in  Kansas  City  on  the  Tropicana  and  Stardust,  1  found 
out  that  the  government’s  position  was  that  when  he  [Glick]  went  to  get  the  loan,  they  told  him  he  had  to 
contact  a  guy  up  in  Wisconsin,  who  happened  to  be  a  family  don.  He  went  to  see  him,  because  they’d  told 
him  he  had  to  see  this  guy  and  get  this  guy  to  run  interference  for  him. 

Did  Glick  go  to  Wisconsin  and  meet  “the  Don?” 

He  did  and  he  had  to  sign  an  agreement  that  the  family  would  have  an  interest  in  the  Stardust.  He 
said  he’d  have  to  report  the  loan  because  they  put  in  an  option,  and  he  said  options  were  licensable,  and  so 
theoretically  they  canceled  the  option.  But  later,  according  to  the  feds,  they  threatened  his  wife  and 
children.  He  was  supposed  to  ignore  things  and  leave  them  alone.  So  basically,  he  made  a  good  living  and 
got  some  good  money  for  staying  out  of  the  way.  1  don’t  think  Glick  was  ever  really  connected  with 
Rosenthal  or  anybody  like  that.  It  was  just  that  in  order  to  get  a  teamsters’  pension  fund  loan,  he  had  to  go 
through  a  mobster  to  get  the  loan. 

Was  that  the  loan  for  the  Hacienda ,  or  for  the  Stardust? 

For  the  Stardust.  The  Hacienda  didn’t  take  that  much,  and  I  think  Lowden  may  have  arranged  for 
that  loan.  I  don’t  know,  but  1  think  Lowden  really  had  most  of  the  money  in  that  deal,  or  he  at  least 
obtained  the  financing. 

How  did  Glick  and  Lowden  hook  up? 

I  don’t  recall,  but  he  [Glick]  was  a  real  estate  developer  in  southern  California,  and  from  what 
I’ve  been  able  to  find  out,  I  don’t  think  he  had  any  connections  with  anybody  until  he  went  for  that 
pension  fund  loan. 

So  the  Gaming  Control  Board  had  investigated  Glick  at  least  twice,  first  at  the  Hacienda  and  later  on  at 
the  Stardust  and  the  Fremont? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


67 


Y es,  first  the  Hacienda  and  then  we  investigated  the  Stardust  and  the  Fremont  together. 

Wasn  ’t  it  strange  or  didn  ’t  it  appear  strange  that  Click  was  able  to  get  such  a  huge  loan  from  the 
teamsters  ’  union? 

Absolutely.  But  we  had  no  contrary  evidence. 

Who  did  Click  buy  the  Stardust  from? 

From  the  Recrion  Coiporation. 

Did  Allen  Click  ever  take  a  polygraph  test? 

Yes,  1  asked  him  to  take  it.  It  was  the  only  one  1  ever  did.  But  according  to  Nick  Pileggi,  who 
wrote  the  book  Casino,  Allen  told  him  that  he  was  the  only  one,  or  the  first  one,  that  was  required  to 
submit  for  a  polygraph.  That  could  have  been  a  disaster  for  him  because  the  day  after  he  took  the 
polygraph  he  went  [to]  Wisconsin  to  meet  with  “the  Don.”  [laughter] 

We  figured  he  was  so  cold  that  a  polygraph  wouldn’t  reveal  his  lie,  but  then  1  got  this  other 
information  from  Pileggi  that  gives  a  rational  explanation  for  why  he  didn’t  have  anything  to  hide.  Up  to 
that  point  1  don’t  think  there  was  anything  to  hide.  But  he  said  if  he’d  taken  the  test  after  he  had  that 
conversation  and  talked  with  the  mobster,  we  would  have  probably  gotten  a  different  result,  [laughter] 

Funny  what  time  can  do,  isn ’t  it? 

Yes.  Yes.  Timing  is  everything. 

So  actually,  there  was  never  any  evidence  discovered  that  indicated  Allen  Glick  was  unsuitable  for 
licensing. 

Right.  We  just  found  no  evidence.  Nobody  had  any  information  of  him  being  associated  with 
anybody. 

Do  you  now  feel  that  Mr.  Glick  was  a  front  for  the  mob  and  that  he  was  cognizant  of  the  skimming  that 
took  place  at  the  Stardust? 

1  think  he  was  a  front,  but  1  think  it  was  a  situation  where  he  was  told,  “If  you  don’t  do  it,  we’ll 
get  your  wife  and  kids.  If  you  do  it,  stay  out  of  our  way  and  you’ll  make  some  good  money  on  this.”  And 
he  did.  So  in  that  sense  he  was  a  front  man.  There  were  a  lot  of  things  1  don’t  think  he  had  to  know.  1 
don’t  think  they  would  involve  him  in  any  more  than  they  absolutely  had  to,  because  he  wasn’t  one  of 
them.  So  1  don’t  think  that  he  was  involved  in  the  skimming,  but  certainly  he  was  involved  with  covering 
up  who  was  really  running  the  place. 


Was  Glick  eventually  forced  out  of  the  gaming  industry? 


68 


Yes.  That  happened  a  number  of  years  later  when  Herb  Tobman  and  Alan  Sachs  took  over  his 
position.  It  might  have  been  in  the  1980s  after  the  federal  conviction  of  all  those  people  involved  with  the 
loan. 

Frank  “Lefty  ”  Rosenthal  was  an  individual  who  created  many  problems  for  Nevada ’s  gaming  regulators 
during  the  period  Click  controlled  the  Argent  Corporation.  Rosenthal  became  the  top  executive  with 
Argent.  Could  you  give  us  some  background  on  Mr.  Rosenthal  and  your  experiences  with  him? 

Rosenthal  was  a  Chicago  bookmaker,  and,  like  most  bookmakers,  in  places  where  it’s  illegal, 
they  usually  end  up  either  under  the  protection  of  or  connected  in  some  way  with  the  mob.  1  think  he 
knew  Tony  Spilotro  when  they  were  growing  up,  although  he  is  considerably  older  than  Spilotro. 
Rosenthal  came  out  here  and  worked  in  the  racebooks  and  sportsbooks.  Spilotro  came  out  when 
“Milwaukee  Phil”  Alderisio  died.  We  got  a  call  from  the  FBI  and  they  said,  “You  got  a  new  guy  out 
there — Spilotro,  Tony  Spilotro.”  So  we  were  aware  of  that  within  at  least  a  week — no  longer  than  a  week 
or  two  after  he  hit  town — and  had  an  FBI  rap  sheet  on  him.  Rosenthal  was  pretty  good  about  keeping 
Spilotro  out  of  the  places  where  he  was  working.  He  didn’t  go  on  the  premises  much. 

Was  Spilotro  here  to  keep  an  eye  on  Rosenthal? 

Not  on  Rosenthal — on  all  of  the  investments  the  Chicago  group  had.  And  certainly  this  was  one 
of  their  biggest  ones.  Rosenthal  was  a  highly  qualified  and  experienced  bookmaker  in  the  Chicago  area. 
And  he  also  worked  Florida.  1  know,  because  he  got  kicked  out  of  a  racetrack  down  there.  That  was  one 
of  the  grounds  they  used  for  his  license  denial  and  for  his  “Black  Book”  inclusion. 

Was  he  eventually  given  the  top  job  at  the  Stardust? 

He  was  given  the  top  job  fairly  soon  after  Glick  came  there.  I  wanted  him  brought  up  for 
licensing,  but  I  think  Phil  and  Jack  were  concerned  that  we’d  go  to  court  and  lose.  I’d  already  tried  to  jerk 
his  work  card,  and  he  went  to  court  and  got  that  back.  And  then  somebody  told  me  that  Phil  got  a  lot  of 
information  on  the  industry  from  Rosenthal,  and  that’s  possible  because  I  know  he  was  very  helpful  to  me 
in  explaining  how  bookmaking  works,  and  as  far  as  thieves  that  were  around  town  and  that  sort  of  thing. 
And  he  kept  the  thieves  away.  I  figured  he  was  a  guy  that  was  smart  enough  to  make  it  straight,  and  that’s 
how  I  rationalized  it.  I  wanted  him  brought  up,  but  because  Phil  and  Jack  voted  no  we  didn’t  do  it. 

But  he  continued  to  work  in  the  Stardust? 

Yes,  because  they  didn’t  agree  with  me  that  he  should  be  brought  up  for  licensing.  Later  on  in  the 
next  administration  he  was  told  to  submit  for  licensing,  and  when  he  was  denied  he  created  a  big  scene  at 
the  hearings.  He  argued  with  the  commissioners  and  with  the  audience.  Had  a  huge  ego.  Still  does. 

When  he  would  come  and  tell  you  things  about  bookmaking,  did  he  come  to  the  office,  or  did  you  contact 
him? 


No,  I  would  contact  him  when  I  had  any  questions.  He’d  tell  me  about  some  thieves  that  might  be 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


69 


working  in  the  area  and  things  like  that. 

What  was  he  doing  at  the  Stardust  at  that  time? 

I  don’t  remember  what  his  title  was,  but  he  was  running  the  casino,  even  though  he  wasn’t 
licensed  to  do  so.  I  mean,  it  was  fairly  obvious.  All  1  had  to  do  was  watch  for  a  bit  and  1  could  tell  he  was 
key  guy  in  there.  People  come  to  him  for  permission  to  do  things  and  he  was  critical  or  he  would  correct 
people  and  that  sort  of  thing.  It  was  obvious  he  was  in  a  power  position. 

Was  that  another  situation  where  Click  was  aware  of  it  and  didn ’t  care  to  do  anything,  or  was  not 
allowed  to  do  anything? 

Well,  1  think  they  told  him  to  stay  out  of  Frank’s  way,  that  Frank  would  run  the  place.  And  1  think 
that  was  part  of  the  deal. 

Is  there  any  evidence  of  mob  people  meeting  with  Rosenthal  here  in  Vegas? 

Not  that  1  was  ever  aware  of.  One  of  the  fascinating  things  in  the  book,  Casino,  is  that  it  states 
that  somebody  came  out  from  Chicago  and  met  in  Mayor  Oscar  Goodman’s  office  with  Spilotro  and  I 
can’t  remember  whether  Rosenthal  was  involved  or  not,  but  1  think  he  was. 

Did  Mayor  Oscar  Goodman  eventually  become  Spilotro ’s  attorney  and  Rosenthal’s  attorney? 

He  represented  all  the  mob. 

So  you  might  call  him  a  mob  attorney? 

Absolutely.  And,  yes,  he  did  represent  Spilotro.  In  fact,  he  said  in  a  newspaper  article  that 
Spilotro  was  not  in  the  mob,  there  was  no  mafia,  and  that  he’d  rather  have  his  daughter  marry  a  mobster 
than  an  FBI  agent.  How  times  have  changed. 

Of  course,  he  wasn ’t  mayor  then. 

Right. 

Did  he  appear  in  front  of  the  Board  frequently? 

Not  frequently.  Couple  of  times.  He  always  lost,  [laughter]  He  was  in  front  of  us  on  a  couple  of 
occasions  when  he  accused  me  of  majoring  in  arbitrary  and  capricious  in  law  school. 

[laughter] 


He  once  called  me  a  brown-booted  storm  trooper,  and  that  was  on  a  good  day.  [laughter] 
Rosenthal  was  pretty  smart  and  pretty  smooth,  at  least  during  the  time  1  was  there,  in  that  1  believe  he  told 


70 


Spilotro  to  stay  out.  In  fact,  I  think  he  told  us  that  he  told  Spilotro  to  stay  out  his  place,  and  he  did.  So  he 
would  go  to  other  places. 

Where  did  Spilotro  hang  out? 

As  far  as  I  know,  all  over.  I  saw  him  in  a  little  casino  across  from  the  Stardust  once,  and  he 
played  lot  of  poker.  He  was  usually  in  a  poker  game  when  I  saw  him.  He  seemed  to  hang  out  wherever 
poker  was  being  played. 

Did  he  ever  work  in  any  casinos  or  have  any  businesses  in  any  of  the  casinos? 

Just  the  gift  shop  in  Circus  Circus. 

Did  he  have  to  be  licensed  for  that? 

No,  but  I  tried  to  get  his  lease  terminated.  I  sent  a  letter  telling  Circus  Circus  to  terminate  the 
relationship,  and  the  response  was  that  they  did  not  know  it  was  Spilotro  when  they  signed  the  contract 
and  it  was  a  ten-year  agreement. 

Oh.  So  he  signed  it  under  a  different  name? 

Yes.  He  used  the  last  name  of  Stuart — John  Stuart,  or  something  like  that.  I  was  still  trying  to 
figure  out  what  to  do  next,  [laughter]  because  we  didn’t  have  any  authority,  when  the  Circus  was  sold. 
They  showed  up  with  new  buyers  to  buy  his  gift  shop,  because  the  people  who  underwrote  the  public 
money  for  Circus  Circus  took  Circus  Circus  public,  and  investment  bankers  wouldn’t  do  it  with  Spilotro 
on  the  premises.  And  that  caused  him  to  sell.  They  had  this  list  of  owners,  and  when  I  looked  at  it  one  of 
them  was  a  name  I  recognized.  It  was  the  administratrix  of  “Milwaukee  Phil”  Felix  Alderisio’s  estate, 
[laughter] 

[laughter] 

So  we  sent  them  back  and  they  came  back  with  a  list  of  local  doctors  and  dentists.  They  were 
clients  of  Oscar  Goodman’s  law  firm  that  bought  it.  So  that’s  how  eventually  Spilotro  got  out  of  Circus 
Circus. 

Who  did  he  sign  the  original  lease  with? 

The  creative  guy  that  designed  it,  and  also  was  the  guy  who  designed  Caesars — Jay  Samo. 

He  sold  out  to  Bill  Bennett  and  William  Pennington,  but  Bennett  was  the  controlling  person. 

You  mentioned  earlier  that  you  tried  to  pull  Rosenthal ’s  work  permit  and  he  took  it  to  court.  Did  he  get  it 
back? 


He  went  to  court  along  with  a  couple  of  other  people  who  I  objected  to  the  issuance  of  their  work 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


71 


permits,  and  the  court  said  there  was  no  authority  for  pulling  it,  and  we  had  to  let  them  have  their  work 
permits.  So  the  next  legislative  session  we  got  in  a  provision  stating  we  could  require  the  finding  of 
suitability  for  anybody  doing  business  on  the  premises  of  a  casino. 

After  Rosenthal  got  his  work  permit  back  again  was  he  ordered  to  apply  for  licensing  as  a  key  employee? 

As  1  said,  that’s  where  Jack  and  Phil  voted  me  down  on  bringing  him  in  for  key  employee 
licensing.  So  that  did  not  take  place  until  after  1  was  out  of  office.  And  I  think  that  may  even  have  been 
initiated  by  the  Commission  on  their  own.  I’m  not  certain  about  that. 

I  realize  this  may  have  happened  after  you  left,  but  was  he  eventually  called  up  to  be  licensed  as  a  key 
employee? 

Yes,  and  was  denied  a  license. 

Did  he  appeal  that  decision  in  court? 

Yes,  he  went  to  the  district  court,  and  the  district  court  ruled  against  the  Commission.  It  turned 
out  later  that  Rosenthal  had  hosted  the  judge’s  daughter’s  wedding  at  the  Stardust. 

Was  that  Judge  Pavlikowski? 

Yes.  And  when  the  decision  made  by  Pavlikowski  was  appealed  to  the  state  supreme  court,  that’s 
where  we  got  a  decision  that  spelled  out  the  state’s  powers  for  the  first  time,  really,  and  said  several 
things.  The  court  didn’t  need  to  do  that,  but  it  did  anyway.  It  said  that  there  was  no  right  to  an  appeal, 
there  was  no  right  to  due  process  in  the  application  process,  and  they  also  upheld  the  grounds  on  which 
the  license  was  denied.  Even  though  they  didn’t  need  to  reach  that  question,  they  did,  and  so  you  had  for 
the  first  time,  really,  a  final  denial  based  on  such  things  as  being  excluded  from  a  racetrack  in  Florida, 
having  a  couple  of  police  officers  testify  that  he  tried  to  bribe  them  to  leave  his  business  alone  and  some 
of  his  other  associations.  There  was  also  testimony  before  some  hearing  body  that  he  tried  to  fix  couple  of 
college  basketball  games.  And  the  court  upheld  all  of  those  grounds  as  being  valid  grounds  for  denial  of  a 
license.  So  again,  those  were  issues  they  didn’t  need  to  reach.  Once  they  decided  there  was  no  right  to 
appeal,  they  didn’t  have  to  do  anything  else,  but  they  did.  They  went  on  and  gave  these  guidelines.  They 
were  very  helpful  for  the  future  and  helped  to  lay  out  what  the  authority  is  of  the  gaming  regulators. 

Actually,  by  him  appealing  the  decision  and  going  to  the  state  supreme  court,  it  was  actually  a  big  benefit 
to  the  gaming  industry  in  the  state  of  Nevada. 

Yes,  then  he  appealed  that  decision.  He  went  to  the  Ninth  Circuit  Court  to  try  and  get  it 
overturned.  When  he  tried  to  bring  it  in  to  federal  court,  they  said  it  was  a  matter  for  the  state.  He  took  it 
to  the  Ninth  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals,  and  they  affirmed  the  decision.  And  then  he  appealed  to  the  United 
States  Supreme  Court,  and  they  wouldn’t  hear  it. 


And  that  really  established  the  fact  that  a  gaming  license  is  a  privilege,  not  a  right. 


72 


Yes,  in  a  sense  that’s  what  it  does  that  mean,  and,  in  effect,  the  court  gave  it  meaning  by  saying 
that  there  was  no  right  to  a  license  and  no  right  to  due  process  or  a  judicial  review,  because  the  legislature 
had  never  provided  for  it.  Since  they  had  provided  judicial  review  for  disciplinary  actions,  we’d  always 
assumed  that  that  applied  as  well  to  applications.  But  because  they  didn’t  mention  applications,  it  was 
intentional  that  they  left  out  applications  and  not  an  oversight. 

Do  you  feel  that  that  was  one  of  the  most  important  gaming  decisions  ever  made? 

Absolutely,  and  at  a  very  important  time.  It  really  solidified  the  basis  of  the  kind  of  evidence  you 
need  on  organized  crime  connections  and  associations  with  bad  people  for  denial  of  a  gaming  license. 

And  so  we  no  longer  had  the  problem  that  Phil  and  Jack  had  with  me  pushing  things  saying  we  were 
going  to  lose  power,  because  a  lot  of  things  we  did  people  weren’t  sure  we  had  the  power  to  do,  and  they 
didn’t  want  to  test  it. 

Some  people  like  Rosenthal  and  Morrie  Shenker  you  knew  were  going  to  test  you.  They  were 
going  to  push  it,  so  you  had  to  make  sure  you  were  covered. 

Long  after  you  left  the  Gaming  Control  Board ,  Rosenthal  continued  to  operate  in  Nevada.  Did  you  follow 
his  activities?  What  ever  happened  to  Mr.  Rosenthal? 

He  eventually  was  forced  out  of  gaming  when  Glick  was.  He  was  forced  out,  because  he’d  lost 
his  gaming  license,  and  then  they  changed  the  law  and  they  moved  against  his  work  permit.  So  then  he 
was  out  of  business. 

Do  you  know  what  he ’s  doing  now ? 

Yes.  He  has  a  home  in  Florida,  and  he  is  quoted  occasionally  as  an  oddsmaker.  Nick  Pileggi  told 
me  that  when  DeNiro,  who  played  Rosenthal  in  the  movie,  went  down  to  visit  him  for  the  first  time  he’d 
been  there  only  a  couple  of  minutes  when  the  doorbell  rang  and  it  was  Spilotro’s  daughter.  A  few  minutes 
later,  the  doorbell  rings.  It’s  the  guy  who  mows  the  grass.  Rings  again,  it  was  another  neighbor, 
eventually  he  had  the  whole  neighborhood,  and  all  kinds  of  people  drop  by  and  meet  DeNiro. 

In  the  movie  Casino  Robert  DeNiro,  you  mentioned ,  played  Rosenthal,  Joe  Pesci  played  Tony  Spilotro, 
and  Sharon  Stone  played  Geri  Rosenthal,  Mr.  Rosenthal ’s  wife.  Have  you  read  the  book  or  seen  the 
movie? 


1  have  not  seen  the  movie.  One  of  my  students  asked  me  why  1  hadn’t  seen  the  movie.  1  told  him  1 
lived  it.  [laughter] 

Yes.  [laughter]  That ’s  right,  you  did. 

Nick  Pileggi  sent  me  an  autographed  copy  of  the  book,  and  he  interviewed  me  for  about  eight 
hours  before  he  wrote  the  book.  But  the  book  was  written  after  the  movie  was  done,  [laughter]  And  he 
told  me  that  the  movie  was  fiction.  The  book  was  a  reportorial  approach,  so  the  book  was  trying  to  give 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


73 


an  accurate  picture,  whereas  the  movie  wasn’t.  That’s  why  he  didn’t  interview  me  until  afterwards.  He 
has  an  excellent  reputation  in  that  area.  Very  knowledgeable  in  writing  books  about  the  mob,  because 
before  he  was  a  writer  he  was  a  reporter  who  covered  the  mob. 

Did  you  like  the  book?  Do  you  think  it  was  pretty  factual? 

Yes,  because  most  of  the  stuff  was  quotations  from  other  people.  And  again,  you  may  not  agree 
with  him;  different  people  may  have  different  recollections,  but  at  least  it  wasn’t  the  author  drawing  a 
conclusion  and  presenting  it  as  fact,  which  is  often  the  problem  with  things  like  the  Green  Felt  Jungle. 

Were  you  quoted  quite  a  bit  in  the  book? 

A  few  times.  Few  times.  I  think  they  used  my  quote  in  the  board  meeting  on  Glick,  and  my  gut 
feeling  about  him.  1  think  that  might  have  been  in  there. 

You  didn ’t  say  gut  feeling;  you  said  stomach  feeling. 

Yes.  [laughter] 

[laughter]  Sounds  more  dignified. 


In  1973,  Steve  Wynn  became  the  first  person  to  be  licensed  for  gaming  in  Nevada  while  being  licensed  in 
another  state. 

That’s  not  exactly  accurate;  he  may  not  have  been  the  first  one.  The  way  that  developed  was  we 
were  working  on  an  application  from  the  Hyatt  Corporation  to  buy  the  King’s  Castle  at  Lake  Tahoe,  and 
as  part  of  the  investigation,  we  found  that  they  had  interests  in  casinos,  in  other  jurisdictions  outside  the 
United  States  in  their  hotels.  We  told  them  we  would  try  to  get  the  regulation  changed,  because  they  were 
the  kind  of  licensee  that  we  wanted.  The  regulation  had  been  put  in  there  originally  because  of  Havana, 
Cuba,  and  because  of  people  going  from  here  to  Havana  and  opening  casinos.  So  we  started  the 
regulatory  process,  to  amend  the  regulation  and  knock  out  the  ban  on  someone  who  had  a  foreign  license. 
At  the  same  time,  or  actually,  after  we  had  started  that  process  is  when  Steve  Wynn  applied,  and  so  did 
Ernie  Primm. 

Where  did  Mr.  Primm  have  gambling? 

He  had  poker  rooms  in  California.  And  the  way  it  turned  out,  they  were  both  on  the  same  agenda. 
So  Hyatt  was  not  on  the  agenda;  the  two  on  the  agenda  were  Primm  and  Wynn? 


Right.  The  interesting  thing  is  that  while  we  were  in  the  process  Hyatt  said,  “We  don’t  want  to 
wait  for  that.  We’ll  remove  all  the  people  who  were  involved  in  foreign  operations  so  we  can  go  ahead.” 


74 


And  they  did.  But  we  wanted  it  anyway  because  we  wanted  it  for  other  hotel  chains.  We  were  looking  to 
get  more  public  companies,  especially  big  companies,  with  hotel  chains  all  over  the  world  that  might  have 
casinos.  And  so  that  was  the  full  motivation  for  it.  Wynn  and  Primm  were  the  timing  beneficiaries.  As  1 
said,  1  think  Primm  might  have  been  first  on  the  agenda  before  Wynn,  but  they  were  both  on  the  same 
agenda. 

Well,  Wynn  may  have  got  more  publicity  on  it  because  he  became  such  a  well-known  name  in  the  gaming 
industry. 

Eventually.  Y es,  everybody  forgot  about  Ernie  Primm  because  Steve  attracts  attention. 

What  is  the  significance  of  someone  being  licensed  in  two  states?  What  did  it  lead  to?  Was  it  good  and 
bad  for  the  gaming  industry? 

Well,  after  changing  it,  it  wasn’t  too  many  years  until  you  had  gaming  in  New  Jersey.  And  there 
were  licensees  from  here  who  wanted  to  operate  there.  If  we  hadn’t  changed  the  regulation,  it  would  have 
prevented  them  from  having  licenses  in  both  states.  So  changing  that  was  beneficial  and  helped  to  some 
extent  to  accomplish  what  we  wanted,  getting  some  of  the  bigger  chains  in  Nevada. 

Some  people  said  that  by  changing  it  you  created  competition  in  New  Jersey  that  was  harmful  to 
Nevada ’s  economy.  Do  you  feel  that  way  at  all? 

No.  New  Jersey’s  was  primarily  a  drive-in  business.  At  the  same  time  that  was  occurring,  what 
was  also  occurring  was  the  airlines  went  to  the  hub-and-spoke  system.  So  we  had  these  hubs,  like  at 
Chicago,  so  you  had  to  fly  to  Chicago  and  then  you  had  to  change  planes  to  get  to  Vegas.  There  were  very 
few,  if  any,  coast -to-coast  or  New  York-Nevada  planes,  and  they  didn’t  stop  to  think  that  that  had  more  of 
an  effect  on  the  Nevada  economy  than  New  Jersey  did.  The  other  aspect  was  the  high  cost  of  gasoline, 
and  that  affected  the  high  cost  of  fuel  and  it  drove  up  the  prices,  and  that,  again,  reduced  the  number  of 
people  flying  to  Nevada.  I  think  it  was  primarily  the  hub-and-spoke  system,  which  eliminated  the  direct 
flights  between  New  York  and  Las  Vegas.  It  was  easier  to  go  to  Atlantic  City  than  to  Nevada.  You  can 
make  the  same  argument  for  all  of  the  places  that  have  opened  since  then  with  the  expansion  of  gaming. 

But  it’s  interesting  that  Nevada  has  had  its  greatest  periods  of  growth  during  the  greatest  growth 
in  gaming  in  the  country.  And  although  that  slowed  it  down  for  a  bit,  it  never  did  dip;  it  just  didn’t 
increase  as  fast  after  Atlantic  City  opened.  But  1  don’t  think  that  it  was  as  much  due  to  New  Jersey  as  it 
was  to  the  way  the  airlines  were  organized.  Now  the  beneficial  side  was  being  right  under  the  nose  of 
Wall  Street.  You  got  more  people  involved,  and  Wall  Street  started  loaning  money  here,  and  places  here 
were  built  because  of  having  access  to  Wall  Street  money.  1  think  that’s  the  real  benefit  from  the  New 
Jersey  operation  that  outweighs  any  negatives  that  occurred  at  the  time,  because  it  didn’t  drive  anybody 
out  of  business. 

Are  there  any  more  benefits,  Shannon? 

A  number  of  people  in  Nevada  were  upset  because  Nevada  coiporations  ended  up  going  to  New 
Jersey.  But  in  the  long  run  if  you’re  a  public  company,  you’ve  got  to  go  where  the  business  is  or  buy 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


75 


somebody  else’s  stock  or  your  stock  will  languish  and  you  won’t  be  able  to  raise  money  when  you  need  it 
to  expand.  And  so  the  fact  that  Nevada  companies  went  back  there  and  went  into  business  helped  their 
stock  prices,  helped  their  ability  to  gain  financing  for  Nevada  operations,  and  Steve  Wynn  is  a  good 
example.  He  was  able  to  raise  big  chunks  of  money  here  because  of  his  success  in  Atlantic  City. 

1  think  another  benefit  from  gaming  in  New  Jersey — and  the  same  thing  happened  later  with  the 
Riverboat  gaming — is  you  had  a  congressional  delegation  that  had  an  interest  in  gaming,  so  Nevada’s 
wasn’t  the  only  delegation.  It  still  carried  the  load  and  it  still  led  the  fight,  but  at  least  it  gave  them 
somebody  else  they  could  call  upon  to  help  in  some  cases.  And  that’s  been  more  true  as  the  years  have 
gone  on.  So  1  think  that  was  helpful.  There  are  a  lot  more  voices  on  Capitol  Hill  than  there  used  to  be  on 
behalf  of  gaming. 

That ’s  right.  For  many  years  the  Nevada  people  stood  there  by  themselves. 

Another  interesting  case  that  had  a  lot  of  publicity  started  in  November  of  1974.  A  gentleman  named 
Morris  Shenker,  who  was  the  sole  owner  of  the  IJK  Corporation ,  applied  for  licensing  as  owner  of  the 
Dunes  hotel  casino.  Could  you  tell  us  his  background? 

Morris  Shenker  was  a  well-known,  very  capable  criminal  attorney.  In  fact,  a  number  of  people 
who  owned  the  Dunes  had  been  his  clients  in  the  Midwest  before  he  came  out  here.  He  never  moved  out 
here  before  he  became  an  operator  here,  but  the  people  that  he  ended  up  buying  from  were  people  that 
he’d  represented  years  before  they  came  to  Nevada,  when  they  got  in  trouble  with  the  law  over  illegal 
gambling  in  other  states.  One  of  Morris’s  better  known  clients  was  James  Hoffa,  and  Morris  was 
considered  the  outstanding  criminal  attorney  in  the  St.  Louis  area. 

What  made  him  decide  he  wanted  to  be  a  casino  owner? 

I  do  not  have  a  clue  other  than  the  fact  that  apparently  the  people  who  were  running  it  were 
running  it  into  the  ground,  and  1  suspect  they  couldn’t  get  capital,  and  he  had  more  access  to  capital.  And 
for  whatever  reason,  he  decided  he  wanted  to  be  a  casino  owner. 

Then,  as  you  said,  he  was  buying  out  former  clients  who  were  perhaps  friends  of  his,  or  definitely 
acquaintances  of  his. 

Yes,  I’d  say  acquaintances.  I  gained  respect  for  him  after  the  trial  process — unlike  Oscar 
Goodman  -because  Shenker  dealt  with  their  criminal  cases  and  that  was  it.  He  didn’t  socialize  with  them, 
didn’t  do  other  things  with  them.  We  were  never  able  to  find  anything  of  that  nature;  whereas,  Oscar’s 
office  kept  all  the  books  of  Spilotro’s  business,  for  example,  which  means  before  you  can  subpoena  them 
you  had  to  go  through  Oscar’s  law  firm,  because  they  were  maintained  at  the  law  firm.  That’s  going 
beyond  representing  somebody  in  a  criminal  case;  that’s  being  a  business  attorney  as  well.  But  Morris,  the 
best  we  could  find  out,  through  this  investigative  process  and  hearings,  was  that  he  represented  them 
criminally  and  then  he  went  home  and  didn’t  associate  with  them  socially,  didn’t  get  into  other  businesses 
with  them,  and  didn’t  get  involved  in  their  business. 


76 


Do  you  recall  any  specifics  of  the  investigation,  such  as  who  headed  the  investigation  and  how  many 
agents  were  assigned  to  his  case? 

I  don’t  recall  how  many  agents  were  assigned;  it  depended  on  workload  and  what  else  we  had  to 
do.  I  know  1  got  a  call  from  one  of  our  agents  in  Shenker’s  office  who  was  going  over  his  things  in  St. 
Louis  who  said  that  Shenker  had  a  safe  in  his  office  that  they  wanted  to  get  into.  Shenker  said  it  had  client 
materials  in  there  that  were  an  attorney-client  privilege.  1  said,  “Put  him  on  the  phone.”  And  1  said, 
“Morris,  you’re  going  to  have  to  decide  whether  you  want  to  be  a  casino  owner  or  an  attorney.”  And  he 
opened  the  safe  and  let  them  in.  And  that’s  where  they  found  some  old  promissory  notes  where  he  had 
loaned  money  to  some  of  his  clients.  1  think  they’d  been  paid  back,  but  he  still  had  them  in  his  safe.  It 
actually  wasn’t  his  client’s;  1  think  it  was  a  U.S.  attorney  that  had  paid  back  the  money.  Shenker  had  also 
sold  a  car  at  a  pretty  good  deal,  when  cars  were  very  shorthanded  during  the  war,  to  an  I.R.S.  agent  who 
“happened”  to  be  also  working  on  a  case  involving  some  of  his  clients. 

However,  when  we  held  the  hearing  we  had  an  attorney — 1  can’t  remember  his  name  now,  but  he 
had  been  counsel  for  the  Watergate  committee — and  he  said  that  the  ethical  standards  before  Watergate 
were  different  than  they  were  after.  We  also  had  the  I.R.S.  agent  who  said  the  agent  who  Shenker  sold  the 
car  to  was  not  involved  in  the  investigation  of  Shenker’s  client.  And  he  also  said,  “7  was  the  one  who 
made  the  determination  that  there  was  no  criminal  case.”  And  then  the  I.R.S.  agent  who  got  the  car  said 
he  had  no  authority  to  do  anything  related  to  that  case  other  than  if  they  prosecuted  and  recovered  the 
money,  then  he  would  apply  it  against  the  taxes. 

That’s  the  kind  of  thing  we  ran  into  on  almost  every  issue  with  Morris.  The  attorney  for  the  I.R.S. 
who  said  he  made  the  decisions,  when  he  testified  for  us,  was  head  of  the  criminal  defense  section  of  the 
Illinois  bar,  another  person  who  was  unimpeachable.  Every  time  we  turned  around,  that’s  the  kind  of 
witnesses  he  had,  the  guy  on  ethics,  he  was  the  key  person  in  dealing  with  ethics  at  that  level.  There  was 
another  person  that  testified  and  he  was  head  of  the  bar  association  in  Massachusetts,  so  every  one  of  his 
witnesses  were  quality  witnesses.  We  thought  he  had  juggled  some  accounts,  and  made  some  improper 
loan  situations,  so  he  brought  in  to  testify  in  his  behalf  a  person  who  wrote  the  California  law  on  the 
subject  and  the  practice  manual  for  attorneys  on  that  subject,  and  he  testified  that  what  they  did  was  not 
wrong,  [laughter] 

Also,  as  part  of  Shenker’s  investigation,  one  of  the  issues  the  investigators  found  was  that  every 
year  Shenker  had  loans  from  the  California  pension  fund  that  he  would  pay  back  at  the  end  of  the  year, 
and  right  after  the  first  of  the  year  he  would  take  out  a  new  loan.  He  would  put  it  back  in  for  a  short 
period  of  time  so  that  at  the  end  of  the  year  his  books  and  the  union’s  books  would  show  no  loans 
outstanding  to  him,  and  then  he’d  borrow  on  a  new  one.  The  investigators  finally  thought  they  had  him 
because  they  talked  with  everybody  at  the  hank  and  found  there  would  be  no  money  in  the  account  if  a 
check  hit  the  bank;  therefore,  he  was  writing  a  non-sufficient  funds  check.  And  so  we  figured  he  was 
going  to  have  a  tough  time  getting  out  of  that  one.  Shenker’s  attorney  brought  in  Parry  Thomas  to  testify 
that  Morris  had  called  him  up  in  Sun  Valley  where  he  was  on  holiday,  and  asked  him  if  a  check  came  in 
would  Parry  cover  the  check,  and  Parry  said  yes,  that  it  would  be  covered.  If  a  check  had  come  in,  they 
would  have  called  me,  and  1  would  have  covered  it.  He  just  hit  every  issue  head  on  and  brought  in  the 
best  people. 

Another  person  who  had  had  an  important  role  in  Watergate  testified  about  a  senate  hearing.  He 
was  now  a  top  official  in  the  criminal  defense  bar,  but  then  he  had  been  a  legislative  assistant  on  a  hearing 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


77 


that  involved  James  Hoffa.  The  senator  who  was  in  charge  of  the  committee  was  from  Missouri  and 
everybody  assumed  that  Shenker  had  got  to  him.  This  attorney  gets  up  and  says,  “No,  this  was  a  staff 
decision.  I  know  because  1  was  the  top  staff  man  for  the  committee,  and  I’d  been  there  before  that  Senator 
and  I  was  there  after  the  senator  and  we  made  the  call  on  that,  not  the  senator.” 

[laughter] 

And  this  was  the  person  who  is  now  the  reporter  for  the  ABA  committee  for  defense  counsel.  So 
his  standards  are  an  authority  in  that  area. 

Was  Shenker ’s  association  with  Hoffa  brought  up  quite  a  bit  during  the  investigation? 

It  was  a  well-known  fact,  but  the  only  association  was  always  as  attorney-client.  We  found  no 
evidence  of  anything  other  than  an  attorney-client  relationship.  And  I  don’t  think  anybody  thought  you 
could  deny  an  attorney  a  license  because  he  represented  criminals. 

Who  was  Shenker ’s  lead  attorney? 

I  think  that  Herb  Jones  was  the  lead  attorney,  and  during  the  hearings  he  brought  in  Grant 
Sawyer.  I  don’t  remember  who  Grant  was  representing,  but  my  recollection  is  that  it  was  not  Morris 
himself.  But,  again,  he  had  strong  people  at  every  position,  every  witness  and  two  of  the  top  gaming 
attorneys  in  the  state  working  for  him.  It  was  an  impressive  display  of  not  avoiding  the  issue,  but  taking 
each  issue  and  bringing  on  some  of  the  best  people  in  the  country  to  address  each  one  of  those  points 
favorably  for  him. 

Shannon,  you ’ve  been  saying  how  each  specific  point  was  brought  up  and  he  had  good  testimony  for 
every  point.  Was  it  board  policy  at  that  time  to  tell  the  applicant  what  his  problems  were? 

No.  Our  investigators  often  would  sit  down  with  somebody  before  they  finished  their  report  and 
tell  him  what  they  thought  would  be  issues  of  concern,  but  there  was  no  formal  list  of  causes  or  grounds 
or  whatever  that  was  given  to  the  applicant.  The  first  time  we  did  that  and  the  only  time  that  I  was  aware 
of  was  with  Morris  Shenker.  That  was  because  we  knew  that  he  would  be  the  one  most  likely  to  sue  and 
take  it  as  high  as  he  could  go  and  he  was  a  very  capable  attorney,  and  so  therefore,  we  wanted  to  be  on  a 
safe  ground  and  not  have  it  thrown  out  because  we  didn’t  tell  him  what  the  issues  were. 

So  it  was  rather  a  unique  situation  then,  almost  a  full-blown  disclosure  to  him? 

Right.  I  had  previously  asked  questions  of  applicants,  getting  on  the  record  information  that 
would  sustain  a  denial  if  I  felt  I  was  going  to  vote  for  denial.  But  this  went  beyond  that:  this  was  giving  it 
to  him  up  front  before  the  hearing  and  telling  him  what  each  one  of  the  issues  was.  And  then  that’s  when 
he  took  each  one  of  those  issues  and  just  tore  us  apart  with  them  with  the  quality  of  the  people  testifying 
and  the  substance  of  their  testimony. 


Was  that  an  extremely  long  hearing? 


78 


Y es,  it  was  the  longest  one  1  was  ever  involved  with.  1  think  it  was  thirty -some  hours  over  three 
days.  We  went  from  eight  o’clock  in  the  morning  until  midnight,  one  o’clock  in  the  morning,  and  would 
start  again  at  eight  or  nine  and  go  all  day  and  into  the  evening. 

Were  all  other  items  on  the  agenda  put  aside ,  or  was  this  a  special  hearing? 

This  was  scheduled  at  the  end  of  the  agenda  after  we  got  everything  else  out  of  the  way. 

Was  the  hearing  held  in  Carson  City  or  Las  Vegas? 

Carson  City.  And  my  understanding  is  that  either  Shenker  said  or  somebody  in  the  group  said  that 
he  rented  a  full  floor  of  rooms  at  the  Ormsby  House  for  all  the  witnesses  he  was  bringing  in  from  around 
the  country.  And  these  people  were  coming  at  no  cost.  Some  of  them,  1  think,  even  paid  their  own 
expenses,  but  they  were  not  paid  to  testify. 

Did  he  have  an  extremely  complex  financial  situation? 

Yes,  in  the  sense  that  most  of  it  was  in  pension  fund  loans  and  variety  of  different  businesses.  But 
1  don’t  know  that  it  was  the  most  complex.  There  was  certainly  a  lot  of  information  there  to  sort  through, 
and  that’s  where  the  agents  got  concerned  with  how  he  was  handling  the  loans  from  the  pension  fund. 

So  he  was  recommended  and  licensed,  I’m  sure. 

Yes.  Again,  this  was  one  of  those  investigations  that  when  1  went  into  it,  my  feeling  was,  “I’m 
going  to  vote  against  this.  If  he  gets  a  license,  he’s  going  to  have  to  go  to  court  to  get  it.”  By  the  time  it 
was  through,  I  felt  it  would  be  bad  public  policy  to  deny  someone  a  license  who  had  put  on  as  strong  a 
case  as  he  did,  that  we  weren’t  serving  the  state  by  doing  that;  we  would  be  misusing  our  power  to  do 
that.  He  put  on  such  a  solid  case.  There  were  no  weaknesses.  He  had  such  solid  witnesses  that  I  felt  very 
comfortable  recommending  him.  I  didn’t  like  to  have  to  do  it,  but  I  was  comfortable  in  the  fact  that  I  felt 
there  was  just  no  other  way  to  go,  even  though  I’d  started  out  with  the  thought  that  he  was  going  to  have 
to  go  to  court  to  get  that  license.  That  I  realized  that  would  be,  in  light  of  the  case  that  he  put  on,  the 
wrong  thing  to  do,  both  as  a  lawyer  and  as  a  government  official. 

Well,  he  certainly  wanted  the  license  badly,  didn ’t  he? 

Yes,  he  did.  He  spent  a  lot  of  money. 

After  he  was  licensed,  did  he  move  his  operation?  Did  he  have  an  office  in  Las  Vegas  at  the  hotel? 

Oh,  he  probably  had  a  place  at  the  hotel  that  he  worked  out  of,  but  he  didn’t  spend  much  time 

there. 

It  wasn  ’t  a  hands-on  operation? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


79 


No,  I  don’t  think  so.  That  wasn’t  his  nature.  I  don’t  even  know  if  he  would  know  what  to  do. 
[laughter] 

How  long  did  he  keep  the  operation? 

1  think  he  ended  up  selling  it  to  Masao  Nangaku,  a  Japanese  man,  in  1987. 

Why  did  Mr.  Shenker  sell  it? 

1  have  no  idea.  Probably  made  a  good  deal.  Probably  made  money  and  got  tired  of  keeping  an  eye 
on  the  operation  here. 

How  old  a  man  was  he  when  he  was  going  through  this  lengthy  process  of  being  licensed? 

I’d  say  in  his  sixties. 


In  1975  Bally  Manufacturing  Company  applied  to  be  licensed  to  take  control  of  Bally  Distributing 
Company.  What  problems  did  the  Board  have  with  that  application? 

Bally’s  problems  primarily  related  to  its  history  and  development  and  some  of  the  people  who 
worked  for  it  and  were  part  owners  of  it  originally.  It  started  out  being  owned  and  operated  by  a  number 
of  people  who  were  in  illegal  operations.  One  of  them  sold  pool  tables.  Their  distributor  in  Europe,  Dino 
Cellini,  had  been  a  gaming  expert  for  Meyer  Lansky.  And  in  Louisiana  a  mafia  family  was  their 
distributor,  and  I  think  they  were  a  company  that  was  charged  once  with  violating  the  gaming  laws  in 
Louisiana.  But  it  was  primarily  their  people  and  their  history  that  caused  problems.  And  that’s  one  reason 
why  we  created  a  regulatory  compliance  committee.  We  got  rid  of  the  people — the  object  was  to  get  rid 
of  the  people  who  couldn’t  be  licensed,  clean  up  the  company,  and  then  to  allow  them  to  operate  here  but 
have  a  regulatory  compliance  committee,  which  at  that  time  was  headed  by  a  former  high-ranking 
Chicago  police  officer.  So  that  was  the  first  regulatory  compliance  committee  in  the  industry.  They’ve 
had  one  ever  since,  and  I’m  currently  the  chairman  of  the  compliance  committee  for  Alliance  Gaming, 
which  is  now  the  parent  of  Bally. 

Was  Bally  Distributing  Company  already  licensed? 

Si  Redd  had  Bally  Distributing  Company.  There  was  also  a  distributing  company  in  Las  Vegas 
for  the  southern  part  of  the  state,  and  Bally  bought  them  both  out,  but  they  kept  Si  Redd  running  their 
subsidiary  statewide. 

Did  Si  Redd  want  to  sell  out  to  Bally  Manufacturing,  or  what  precipitated  the  sale? 


I  think  it  was  Bally’s  decision  to  come  in  here  and  get  licensed  and  be  their  own  distributor,  keep 


80 


better  control  over  the  distribution  of  their  machines. 

So,  in  other  words,  if  Si  Redd  hadn ’t  have  sold  to  them,  they  would  have  stopped  giving  him  machines  to 
sell. 


1  think  so.  The  interesting  thing  is  they  couldn’t  agree  on  the  value  of  the  poker  machine  that  he 
had  developed,  and  so  he  finally  said,  “If  you  don’t  think  it’s  worth  what  1  think  it  is,  why  don’t  you  just 
give  it  to  me?”  And  they  did.  And  that,  of  course,  today  is  1GT  [International  Game  Technology]. 

So  that  was  a  major  mistake  on  their  part? 

Yes,  they  definitely  undervalued  that  asset,  and  Si  Redd  became  famous  with  that  machine  and 
his  distribution  system  around  the  state. 

Didn ’t  Bally  fall  far  behind  in  the  video  poker  game  for  many  years? 

Y es,  as  part  of  the  deal,  they  agreed  not  to  have  a  poker  machine  for  x-number  of  years,  and  so 
they  fell  far  behind  1GT. 

So  the  main  problem  with  Bally  Manufacturing  when  they  came  to  get  licensed  was  their  history  of 
association  with  unsavory  characters? 

Yes.  In  the  eastern  states  where  it  started,  they  ran  pinball  machines  and  other  amusements 
machines  which  were  really  used  for  gambling,  and  that  was  how  they  got  started.  And  it  was  those 
people  who  brought  those  elements  in  and  who  had  those  elements  in  their  business  that  were  the  most 
important  ones  to  get  out  of  there.  1  wasn’t  happy  with  Sam  Klein  staying  on.  1  thought  he  ought  to  go, 
but  the  Commission  didn’t,  and  actually,  neither  did  the  other  two  members  of  the  Board.  And  so  1  voted 
against  recommending  approval  on  it,  and  that  was  the  same  reason,  1  think,  that  Frank  Schreck  voted 
against  it  at  the  commission  level — he  and  Clare  Haycock.  1  think  it  was  because  of  some  of  the  people 
who  were  not  forced  out  at  the  beginning. 

Sam  Klein  was  an  owner  and  director  of  Bally  Manufacturing.  Who  were  some  of  the  other  officers  of  the 
company  and  major  investors? 

Well,  originally,  there  was  Irving  Kaye,  and  some  other  people  who  they  got  out  before  they 
came  in  for  licensing.  1  can’t  remember  who  those  people  were,  but  there  were  two  or  three  at  least  that 
they  eliminated  from  the  company  before  they  applied  for  licensing. 

Who  was  the  president  of  the  company? 

Bill  O’Donnell.  He  had  started  out  as  a  low-level  employee  and  worked  his  way  up  in  the 
organization.  There  were  concerns  about  him,  but  they  were  all  concerns  relating  to  people  he  associated 
with  while  he  was  running  Bally.  Most  of  the  other  applicants  had  problems  they  brought  into  the 
company  in  terms  of  the  nature  of  their  business  and  the  kind  of  activities  they’d  engaged  in  before 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


81 


folding  their  business  into  Bally. 

Was  there  quite  a  bit  of  discussion  between  you  and  Phil  Hannifin  and  Jack  Stratton  as  to  whether  they 
should  be  recommended  for  licensing? 

1  don’t  recall  a  lot  of  discussion,  but  1  felt  that  Sam  Klein  should  be  out  and  they  didn’t.  So  it 
went  up  two-to-one  in  favor  of  licensing.  We  were  in  agreement  on  a  number  of  those  that  were 
recommended  for  denial.  But  I  felt  that  Sam  Klein  should  have  been  one  of  those  who  were  eliminated.  1 
wasn’t  as  concerned  about  Bill  O’Donnell  because  he  had  been  more  of  a  business  functionary.  He  didn’t 
operate  the  illegal  operations.  He  ran  the  manufacturing  and  distribution  of  the  machines  to  these  other 
people,  and  it  was  the  other  people  who  had  the  problems.  I  also  felt  the  company  needed  somebody  to 
run  it,  and  he  had  no  unsavory  associations.  I  don’t  recall  any  connection  between  O’Donnell  and  Gerardo 
Catena.  If  there  was  any,  it  would  have  been  very  tangential.  Sam  Klein,  on  the  other  hand,  a  year  later 
got  caught  playing  golf  with  Gerardo  Catena. 

Who  was  Mr.  Catena? 

Catena  was  the  head  of  a  major  organized  crime  family,  a  mafia  family,  in  New  Jersey. 

What  was  the  final  decision  of  the  Commission?  When  you  voted  two-to-one,  did  they  have  to  approve  it 
unanimously? 

No,  because  it  was  a  recommendation  for  approval.  If  we’d  have  recommended  denial  by  two-to- 
one,  then  they  would  have  had  to  have  a  unanimous  vote.  There  were  a  number  of  people  who  were 
recommended  for  denial  in  the  process.  Irving  Kaye,  for  example,  was  denied,  and  with  that  then  the 
other  people  were  satisfied.  As  I  said,  I  think  he  had  started  out  with  a  pinball  or  a  pool  table  company, 
and  he  had  some  routes  where  he  distributed  machines  and  tables  for  money  on  the  East  Coast,  I  think 
around  the  Boston  area. 

So  there  was  a  slight  adjustment  as  far  as  the  owners  and  the  percentages  of  the  company  that  they 
owned. 


Yes.  Alex  Wilms  was  approved,  and  he  was  in  charge  of  the  European  operation.  And  when  I  say 
in  charge,  he  had  the  distributorship  for  Europe,  so  when  they  folded  all  this  into  the  one  company,  I  think 
he  may  have  still  been  a  distributor,  or  he  might  have  come  in-house  with  some  of  the  stock  and  operated 
it  as  an  in-house  subsidiary.  And  Dino  Cellini  was  in  charge  of  Africa  and  southern  Europe — Italy  and  the 
area  around  the  Mediterranean. 

They  certainly  had  a  worldwide  operation ,  didn ’t  they?  No  wonder  they  wanted  to  take  over  Nevada. 

Y es,  and,  again,  I  think  they  wanted  more  of  the  profits,  and  more  control  over  their  distributors 
after  they  got  nailed  a  couple  of  times. 


Did  Dino  Cellini  have  some  unsavory  associates  also? 


82 


Dino  Cellini  was  the  gaming  expert  for  Meyer  Lansky.  On  the  other  hand,  his  brother  worked 
here  in  Vegas  for  years,  working  the  table  games  in  various  casinos.  He  had  a  good  reputation,  [laughter] 

Samuel  Klein  was  approved  for  a  license,  but  on  a  one-year  probationary  basis.  Was  Mr.  Klein  ever 
given  a  permanent  license? 

I  don’t  think  so,  and  I’m  not  sure  that  it  was  one  year;  it  might  have  been  longer.  I  think  within 
the  year,  though,  he  was  caught  and  pictures  were  taken  of  him  playing  golf  in  Florida  with  Gerardo 
Catena,  and  that  did  him  in.  They  eventually  held  hearings  and  got  him  excluded  from  the  company — 
revoked  whatever  license  he  had  at  that  time. 

Did  Bally  Manufacturing  become  the  corporation  that  operated  hotel-casinos,  such  as  Bally ’s  Hotel 
Casino? 


Yes.  That’s  how  it  started.  It  was  later  split  into  two  entities,  and  it  was  probably  in  the  1980s  that 
they  spun  off  the  casinos — one  here,  one  in  Reno — that  had  been  acquired,  and  one  in  Atlantic  City  that 
they  had  built  from  scratch  and  owned  from  the  outset.  And  the  man  who  headed  it  up,  Arthur  Goldberg, 
died  a  couple  of  years  ago.  He  was  the  one  who  folded  it  into  Hilton.  Before  that,  my  understanding  is 
that  he  had  a  battle  with  one  of  the  directors  or  the  president  of  Bally — not  O’Donnell;  I  think  New  Jersey 
made  O’Donnell  get  out.  But  there  was  a  disagreement  between  the  fellow  who’d  invested  in  the 
company  after  New  Jersey  opened,  several  years  after  or  a  couple  of  years  after  at  least — went  on  the 
Board  and  then  eventually  took  over — but  there  was  a  battle  between  him  and  the  president  and  a  guy 
who  had  been  the  director  and  helped  do  the  public  offering  for  Bally.  And  the  way  they  divided  it  up  was 
to  give  the  president  the  manufacturing  and  Goldberg  took  the  casinos  and  then  he  formed  a  company 
called  Park  Place  Entertainment. 

So  there  is  no  more  Bally ’s? 

Not  as  an  operator.  They  still  have  the  name.  In  fact,  Bally  Manufacturing  had  to  pay  a  fee  to 
Goldberg  for  using  the  Bally  name,  because  he  controlled  it  when  they  split  it,  and  he  kept  the  rights  to 
the  name  in  his  company. 

So  these  Bally  hotel  casinos  that  you  see  now  are  owned  by  Park  Place? 

Right.  Right. 

Is  there  anything  else  about  Bally  Manufacturing  Company  you  care  to  add? 

An  interesting  thing  is  that  Frank  Schreck,  Clare  Haycock,  and  myself,  a  few  years  ago,  ended  up 
on  the  compliance  committee  when  Alliance  Gaming,  in  a  hostile  takeover,  took  control  of  Bally 
Manufacturing,  and  all  three  of  us  were  “no”  votes  in  the  original  licensing  application. 


During  your  time  on  the  Board  you  must  have  come  in  contact  with  many  interesting  personalities.  Are 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


83 


there  any  unforgettable  characters  you ’d  like  to  talk  about? 

Billy  Weinberger  was  a  restaurant  owner  from  Cleveland  that  came  out  here  and  ended  up  as 
president  of  Caesar’s.  One  of  the  major  shareholders  of  Caesar’s  told  Phil  Hannifin  and  I  at  lunch  one  day 
that  titles  meant  nothing  in  the  gaming  industry,  because  the  guy  there  with  Billy  Weinberger  had  the  title 
of  vice  president,  but  he  really  ran  the  business  on  a  day-to-day  basis.  His  name  was  Harry  Wald. 

So  Weinberger  was  a  figurehead? 

Yes,  but  Billy  was  one  of  the  best  hosts  in  the  business.  1  mean,  he  was  a  super  host,  and 
everybody  loved  Billy.  He  was  just  a  very  nice  man,  but,  again,  that’s  not  what  you  normally  expect  from 
your  president.  It’s  usually  an  operating  position. 

How  does  a  fellow  that  ran  a  restaurant  in  Cleveland  become  the  major  operator-owner  of  a  major  hotel? 

I  don’t  know  how  he  got  into  it,  but  he  was  sure  successful  with  it. 

What  was  interesting  about  him? 

So  many  people  liked  him.  Wherever  you  saw  him  or  whenever  I  stopped  by  to  see  him,  he  was 
just  a  very  gracious  and  warm  human  being  and  made  the  customers  feel  good.  He  had  this  following 
from  the  Midwest  that  came  out  here,  and  they  were  good  customers,  and  it  didn’t  hurt  to  have  those 
kinds  of  people  talking  to  the  president  rather  than  the  vice  president,  Harry  Wald,  who  was  the  guy  really 
running  the  place. 

Were  they  licensed  during  your  term? 

They  were  both  already  licensed  at  Caesar’s  when  I  came  on. 

Didn ’t  Jay  Sarno  start  Caesar’s  Palace? 

He  was  part  of  the  group  that  started  Caesar’s,  and  he’s  the  one  who  created  the  design  of 
Caesar’s  and  of  Circus  Circus.  Circus  Circus  was  originally  designed  to  be  a  slot  arcade  or  part  of  the  slot 
department  area  for  Caesar’s,  but  they  didn’t  build  it,  so  he  used  the  same  plans  and  built  Circus  Circus. 

So  Sarno  went  from  Caesar’s  to  the  Circus? 

Yes.  He  built  it  and  organized  the  people  who  funded  it. 

Weren ’t  they  two  of  the  earlier  themed  casinos? 

Yes.  One  year  after  Sarno  died,  he  was  recognized  at  one  of  the  gaming  conferences  as  one  of  the 
most  creative  casino  designers. 


84 


Was  Sarno  the  leader  in  Las  Vegas  as  far  as  designing  themed  casinos? 

Well,  the  Dunes  had  an  Arabian  Nights  theme,  and  the  Aladdin  had  a  theme  but  they  didn’t  carry 
it  throughout  the  casino.  With  Caesar’s  the  theme  carried  down  to  the  uniforms  on  the  cocktail  waitresses 
and  everybody  else.  They  carried  the  theme  throughout  the  location. 

Would  you  tell  us  of  your  association  with  Donald  Trump? 

1  had  a  good  friend,  Steve  Hyde,  who  died  in  a  helicopter  crash,  who  worked  for  him,  and  Trump 
asked  me  to  go  to  work  for  him  after  Steve  died.  Steve  had  started  out  as  an  accountant  when  his 
accounting  firm  did  the  books  at  Caesar’s.  They  moved  him  in-house  and  he  handled  the  fills  to  the 
baccarat  pit  when  it  was  all  cash  and  there  were  some  questions  about  whether  the  fills  were  going  all  the 
way  from  the  cage  to  the  table.  He  worked  his  way  up  to  become  the  casino  administrator,  and  then  when 
Caesar’s  opened  in  Atlantic  City,  he  went  back  there  to  run  Caesar’s.  Eventually  Steve  Wynn  hired  him  at 
the  Golden  Nugget,  and  then  Trump  hired  him  away  from  the  Golden  Nugget. 

So  after  the  helicopter  went  down  Mr.  Trump  contacted  you? 

Yes.  He  put  my  wife  and  1  in  the  Plaza  Hotel,  in  a  very  nice  suite.  When  we  met  he  made  a 
proposal  to  me,  and  I  told  him  I’d  think  it  over.  When  I  got  home  I  called  back  and  told  him  that  I  didn’t 
want  to  move  again.  1  had  just  moved  back  to  Las  Vegas  not  too  long  before,  and  1  didn’t  want  to  move 
back  there  again  after  just  moving  back  here.  1  knew  that  he  was  not  an  easy  man  to  deal  with,  but  it  was 
mainly  the  moving.  And  so  that’s  what  I  told  him,  that  I  didn’t  want  to  move.  This  would  have  been  in  the 
early  1990s,  because  I  was  with  Golden  Nugget  until  1988.  Then  I  came  out  here  when  Steve  sold  Golden 
Nugget  in  Atlantic  City  to  Bally,  because  they  were  battling  with  Trump  and  they  could  only  have  two 
licenses.  And  by  Bally  buying  the  Golden  Nugget,  that  gave  them  two  locations  which  with  the  two  that 
Trump  had  would  be  four,  one  more  than  the  law  allowed.  But  he  ended  up  striking  a  deal  with  them 
eventually  and  then  he  got  the  law  changed  and  ended  up  with  a  lot  of  money  when  they  bought  him  out. 
They  had  bought  the  place  from  Steve  to  use  as  a  defensive  tool  in  their  battle  with  Trump.  And  so  I 
moved  back  to  Las  Vegas  when  it  was  sold,  which  was  the  summer  of  1987. 

Had  you  met  Mr.  Trump  before  he  invited  you  and  your  wife  to  the  Plaza  Hotel? 

Oh,  yes,  1  had  met  him  at  various  functions  in  Atlantic  City,  and  1  had  his  top  man  co-host  a 
fundraiser,  a  golf  tournament. 

Who  was  that? 

Nick  Ribis.  He  was  a  New  Jersey  attorney.  We  worked  together  on  the  fundraiser,  and  Trump 
played  in  it  and  made  a  substantial  contribution. 


What  impressed  you  about  him — his  personality? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


85 


Well,  he  thought  he  was  an  expert  in  everything.  Not  arrogant,  at  least  not  from  my  viewpoint;  he 
just  thought  of  himself  as  an  expert  on  anything  to  do  with  casinos  and  he  had  an  instant  rivalry  with 
Steve  Wynn.  He  was  just  an  interesting  character  who  made  millions  in  real  estate  and  owned  places  like 
the  Plaza  Hotel  in  New  York  City  next  to  Central  Park.  My  understanding  was  he  would  call  his  top 
people  at  any  hour  of  the  day  or  night.  Steve  Wynn  was  almost  like  that,  but  he  would  usually  call  people 
who  were  working  on  the  night  shift.  Trump  would  call  his  top  guy  at  home  and  wake  him  up.  [laughter] 

Is  there  anyone  else  you  care  to  discuss? 

Well,  Lefty  Rosenthal  certainly  was  a  character — loud  mouth  and,  again,  very  self-assured,  very 
authoritative.  We  battled  each  other  when  1  tried  to  take  his  work  card  away,  but  we  got  along  fine  when 
the  court  gave  it  back.  Had  no  problems  with  him. 

Did  you  have  much  personal  contact  with  Allen  Click? 

Yes,  but  Allen  Glick  is  not  a  very  personable  person.  There’s  nothing  striking  about  him.  He’s 
not  a  demanding  person.  He  was  pretty  quiet  and  low-key.  Not  too  exciting. 

What ’s  he  doing  now? 

As  far  as  1  know,  he’s  doing  the  same  thing  he  was  before  he  came  here,  and  that’s  real  estate 
development  in  southern  California. 

Another  interesting  character  was  Big  Julie  Weintraub  who  was  well  known  for  creating  the  real 
high-roller  junkets  out  of  New  York  to  Las  Vegas  at  the  Dunes.  1  met  him  and  got  to  know  him  because 
he  used  to  come  to  the  Golden  Nugget  in  Atlantic  City.  His  son  worked  for  Golden  Nugget  in  Las  Vegas 
in  the  baccarat  pit.  Julie  was  certainly  one  of  the  key  people  in  the  marketing  of  Las  Vegas,  and  part  of 
the  history  of  Las  Vegas  was  Julie  Weintraub. 

What  casinos  was  he  associated  with  over  the  years? 

In  Las  Vegas  it  was  the  Dunes. 

The  Dunes  only? 

Y es,  as  far  as  1  know,  and  that  was  where  he  developed  his  reputation  and  the  concept  of  the 
high-roller  junket.  I  don’t  know  that  he  brought  them  into  anyplace  else.  But  he  did  come  to  Atlantic  City 
frequently. 

1  also  met  Joe  DiMaggio  and  had  breakfast  with  him  there,  and  it  was  interesting  to  get  to  meet 

him. 

Was  he  associated  with  any  of  the  casinos? 


No.  His  attorney  was  a  high-roller  and  a  player,  and,  of  course,  Joe  was  good  to  have  around  a 


86 


casino  at  a  party  function.  That’s  how  I  met  him.  I  had  actually  met  him  out  here  at  a  party  one  other  time, 
but  1  got  to  visit  with  him  and  have  a  meal  with  him  at  the  Golden  Nugget  in  Atlantic  City  at  a  high-roller 
party. 

I  recall  Willie  Mays  and  Mickey  Mantle  were  representatives  for  one  of  the  casinos  and  it  caused  a 
problem. 

1  met  both  of  them,  and  have  autographed  balls  from  them.  1  was  chairman  of  the  Atlantic  City 
Convention  &  Visitors  Authority  for  four  and  a  half  years  from  about  1982  to  1986,  1987. 1  remember  we 
went  someplace  to  try  to  convince  a  group  of  meeting  planners  to  bring  their  meetings  to  Atlantic  City,  so 
we  had  Mays  and  Mantle  in  our  booth  signing  autographs  and  signing  baseballs,  and  1  got  to  be  with  them 
all  day. 

Were  they  working  for  a  particular  casino  or  for  Atlantic  City? 

Mays  was  working  for  Bally  Park  Place  in  my  recollection,  and  Mantle  was  working  for  the 
Claridge. 

I  know  they  were  almost  outlawed  from  baseball  because  of  that  association. 

Right!  They  couldn’t  participate  in  anything  in  the  baseball  industry  while  they  were  working  for 
a  casino.  I  think  Mays  later  quit  so  he  could  fill  some  function  in  baseball.  Mantle  he  got  very  ill.  He  was 
a  heavy  drinker,  and  1  don’t  know  how  much  that  had  to  do  with  his  problem,  but  he  had  quite  a 
reputation  for  being  a  heavy  drinker. 

Are  there  any  other  characters  you ’d  like  to  talk  about,  Shannon? 

Yes,  Shelby  Williams.  He  had  at  one  time  run  the  Silver  Slipper,  and  then  he  built  and  operated 
the  casino  which  is  now  Harrah’s  on  the  Ship.  When  he  died  his  wife,  Claudine,  took  over  the  company. 
When  they  were  acquired  by  Harrah’s,  she  went  on  the  board  of  Harrah’s,  and  she  is  a  terrific  lady.  But 
Shelby  was  one  of  those  original  gamblers.  1  mean,  he  was  not  a  mobster;  he  was  a  gambler  and  an 
interesting,  interesting  fellow  and  good  marketing  person. 

Did  he  grow  up  in  Nevada? 

No,  he  didn’t  grow  up  in  Nevada.  Most  of  the  gamblers  didn’t  in  those  days.  I’m  not  sure  where 
he  came  from.  Once  we  were  asking  about  where  some  of  the  money  had  gone  when  there  was  a  sale  of 
the  Silver  Slipper,  and  he  said  he  left  his  son  a  big  chunk  of  money  under  his  pillow,  [laughter]  Just 
interesting  things  like  that.  But,  again,  he  was  an  excellent  operator;  he  was  one  of  the  old  school.  I’m 
sure  he  learned  his  trade  elsewhere  and  came  here  to  run  the  Silver  Slipper,  and  when  it  was  sold,  he  built 
the  Holiday  casino,  which  is  now  part  of  Harrah’s. 


Did  Claudine  help  Shelby  in  the  operation  of  the  Holiday  and  the  Silver  Slipper? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


87 


Yes.  And  she  did  a  good  job  running  the  place  after  he  died. 

Is  she  still  on  Harrah ’s  board  of  directors? 

That’s  my  recollection,  if  it’s  not  the  full  board,  it’s  the  board  of  the  Nevada  operations,  but  1 
know  she’s  on  their  board.  And  I  think  she  has  served  them  well  with  her  ability  and  her  knowledge  of  the 
community.  She’s  just  one  of  the  sharper  lady  executives  around. 


When  did  you  leave  the  Gaming  Control  Board? 

In  the  summer  of  1975. 1  had  an  unusual  four-year  term.  1  was  appointed  for  four  years  in  January 
of  1 97 1 ,  and  during  the  legislative  session  that  year  they  decided  that  all  the  board  members  should  end 
their  term  on  the  same  date  as  the  governor,  so  they  changed  the  expiration  date  to  July.  So  they  changed 
my  term,  and  1  got  a  new  four-year  appointment  in  July  of  1971.  Then  in  the  1975  legislature  they 
changed  it  back  to  what  it  was  before,  so  I  served  a  full  four-and-a-half-year  term,  and  Jeff  Silver  served  a 
full  three-and-a-half-year  term,  and  then  they  got  back  on  track. 

Why  did  you  decide  to  leave  the  Control  Board? 

I  had  never  decided  to  take  it  as  a  career.  1  was  an  attorney,  and  I  didn’t  believe  that  the  Board 
was  something  I  wanted  to  do  for  the  rest  of  my  professional  life,  so  I  had  agreed  to  take  it  for  one  term. 

When  you  were  on  the  Board  did  you  have  any  clients? 

No,  1  couldn’t  have.  And  I  wanted  to  practice  law,  so  1  got  off  when  my  term  ended. 

Did  the  financial  situation  affect  your  decision  at  all? 

Somewhat,  yes. 

The  job  isn  ’t  or  wasn ’t  that  high  a  paying  job,  I  would  imagine,  compared  to  having  a  law  practice. 

No,  it  wasn’t.  I  think  1  was  making  something  like  twenty-four  thousand  a  year  when  I  left  that 
position,  and  I  made  over  thirty  the  first  year  in  practice  and  then  it  went  up  from  there.  And,  of  course,  1 
was  only  in  practice  a  couple  of  years  before  1  went  in-house  with  the  Golden  Nugget.  It  had  become  one 
of  my  clients. 

And  you,  of  course,  had  a  growing  family  at  the  time  you  left  the  Board. 

Oh,  yes. 


Who  was  named  to  replace  you  on  the  Board? 


Jeff  Silver. 


Was  there  a  controversy  in  the  media  or  in  the  gaming  industry  when  you  left  the  Board  to  enter  the 
private  sector? 

I  don’t  recall  any.  1  served  my  full  term,  1  wasn’t  there  for  number  of  years,  and  1  didn’t  go 
directly  out  and  join  a  casino.  And  it  was  before  anybody  working  for  the  state  was  required  to  have  a 
cooling-off  period. 

What  law  firm  did  you  join?  Did  you  have  offers  from  different  law  firms? 

Yes.  1  could  have  gone  back  to  the  firm  that  1  left  to  join  the  Board,  which  was  Lionel  Sawyer  & 
Collins,  but  1  wanted  to  have  my  name  in  the  title.  1  ended  up  having  a  conversation  with  Frank  Schreck, 
and  he  was  in  a  very  small  firm.  There  were  three  of  them  in  the  firm:  Ty  Hilbrecht,  Frank  Schreck,  and 
Terry  Jones.  Terry  was  a  quiet  guy  who  didn’t  get  a  lot  of  attention  in  public,  but  he  did  the  quality  work 
that  they  were  able  to  bring  in.  When  they  asked  me  to  join  them,  1  thought  it  would  be  a  good  firm  to 
join.  1  wanted  to  be  in  a  quality  firm,  and  these  were  all  people  with  Ivy  League  backgrounds  and  they 
were  top-quality  people. 

So  did  you  become  a  partner?  Did  it  become  Hilbrecht,  Jones,  Schreck,  and  Bybee? 

Y es,  it  did.  [laughter]  And  one  of  the  interesting  things  is  that  the  first  associate  we  hired  after 
that  was  a  guy  named  Peter  Bernhardt,  who  was  recently  made  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission.  He 
was  a  brand  new  attorney  when  he  came  to  work  for  us. 

While  you  were  with  Hilbrecht,  Jones,  Schreck,  and  Bybee,  did  you  represent  a  lot  of  gaming  clients? 

Not  a  lot,  but  a  number,  and  it  was  growing.  Schreck  brought  in  some.  1  brought  in  most  of  the 
gaming  business.  1  was  better  known  from  having  served  on  the  Board  and  working  with  them  so  much  of 
the  time.  By  the  time  1  left  to  go  in-house  with  Golden  Nugget  1  was  bringing  in  most  of  the  gaming 
business.  When  1  went  to  work  for  the  Golden  Nugget  they  were  already  licensed,  and  Steve  [Wynn]  had 
asked  me  if  1  could  handle  their  SEC  work,  that  sort  of  thing.  They  were  a  public  company,  so  they  had  to 
comply  with  the  SEC.  Steve’s  attorney,  who  was  in  California,  had  taken  a  leave  of  absence  from  practice 
of  law  and  spent  a  year  traveling  the  country  with  his  family,  and  so  Steve  needed  counsel  and  called  and 
asked  me  if  I  would  take  it.  This  would  have  been  in  late  1976,  something  like  that.  So  it  was  over  a  year 
after  1  left  the  Board  that  1  started  representing  him.  Then  when  New  Jersey  started  gaming  and  he 
decided  to  go  back  there,  he  asked  me  to  come  in-house  full  time  to  handle  regulatory  matters,  and  that 
was  in  October  of  1978. 

Did  you  first  meet  Steve  Wynn  when  he  was  called  to  be  licensed  in  1973? 


Yes. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


89 


Did  you  maintain  any  association  with  him  before  you  became  his  attorney? 

No.  We  had  contact,  because  from  1973  on  he  was  running  the  Golden  Nugget.  I  can’t  remember 
anything  specific,  but  I  probably  had  some  contact  with  him  in  that  role.  Then  it  was  in  the  fall  of  1976 
that  he  asked  me  to  be  his  outside  counsel,  and  start  handling  all  the  legal  matters  for  him.  They  didn’t 
have  the  official  title  of  outside  counsel  or  general  counsel.  It  was  just  we  were  in  a  law  firm  that  did  his 
legal  work  for  him  here  in  Nevada. 

So  you  didn  ’t  leave  the  law  firm? 

Not  at  that  time.  I  went  to  work  October  first  of  1978  full  time  for  Steve,  and  I  left  the  firm  to  do 

that. 

Did  he  hire  you  for  a  specific  assignment? 

Yes,  to  handle  all  regulatory  matters.  And  there  were  quite  a  few,  both  with  New  Jersey  and  with 
raising  money  for  New  Jersey,  so  I  got  a  variety  of  experiences  doing  that.  And  while  Steve  was  out 
raising  money  for  New  Jersey,  I  was  running  the  casino  in  his  absence — the  whole  place,  actually.  I 
oversaw  the  whole  place.  I  didn’t  have  any  title  other  than  vice  president  for  gaming,  but  I  ended  up 
managing  the  operation  while  Steve  was  on  the  road  raising  money  for  Atlantic  City. 

It  sounds  like  Steve  Wynn  wasn ’t  a  hands-on  owner? 

No,  Steve  was  very  much  the  hands-on  guy  all  the  time.  But  when  he  couldn’t  be  there,  or  at  the 
Nugget  here,  I  was  in  charge.  I  had  to  move  back  to  New  Jersey,  and  really  got  involved  with  that,  but  it 
turned  out  that  they  didn’t  need  me  full  time  in  New  Jersey.  Then  I  made  some  of  the  trips  on  the 
fundraising  circuit  with  the  public  companies  selling  the  bonds  and  that  sort  of  thing  and  I  got  to  see  the 
Windows  on  the  World.  We  held  a  presentation  there  at  the  top  of  the  World  Trade  tower  and  there  was  a 
group  of  New  York  investors  and  fund  operators  that  we  made  our  pitch  to  about  what  we  were  going  to 
do  in  Atlantic  City  and  how  that  was  going  to  work. 

Were  you  involved  a  lot  with  the  gaming  regulations  in  New  Jersey? 

Not  all  that  much.  They  were  pretty  well  in  place  by  then.  They  didn’t  look  for  outside  help  from 
me.  I  initially  did  consulting  for  a  major  accounting  firm  that  was  trying  to  get  the  contract  to  write  the 
internal  controls,  but  they  wanted  to  charge  more  than  what  had  been  budgeted  and  another  firm  got  the 
contract.  But  I  helped  put  their  proposal  together  because  they  didn’t  have  anybody  with  any  gaming 
experience,  but  they  didn’t  get  the  deal.  That  was  my  one  chance  to  work  on  the  regulations,  and  I  didn’t 
get  it.  By  the  time  I  went  back  there  with  Steve,  the  regulations  were  pretty  well  done  and  they  already 
had  a  couple  of  places  open.  I  think  we  were  the  third  or  fourth  casino  to  open  there.  We  didn’t  open  till 
November  or  December  of  1980,  and  I  moved  back  to  run  the  place  in  the  summer  of  1981. 


What  year  did  the  first  casino  open  in  Atlantic  City? 


90 


Nineteen  seventy-eight.  It  was  shortly  after  that  that  Steve  decided  to  have  me  come  in-house.  He 
had  decided  he  was  going  to  New  Jersey  in  1976  when  the  people  approved  a  referendum  legalizing 
gaming.  The  Resorts  International  was  the  first  casino  to  open  and  it  opened  on  Memorial  Day  1978. 

Steve  went  in  and  looked  at  the  crowd  in  the  casino  and  turned  to  Bob  Maxey  and  said,  “Let’s  go  get 
some  property.”  [laughter] 

[laughter]  So  he  went  out  the  door  and  down  the  street  and  bought  some  property? 

Yes.  He  bought  some  property  right  next  to  Resorts.  It  was  too  small  a  piece,  but  we  operated  our 
offices  out  of  there  for  a  while.  In  the  meantime,  he  also  had  this  other  deal  further  down  the  boardwalk, 
the  one  on  the  opposite  end  of  the  boardwalk  that  is  still  the  last  one  on  the  boardwalk.  We  got  that  built 
and  were  able  to  buy  enough  land  there  to  do  what  he  wanted  to  do.  That’s  why  we  put  it  down  there  and 
then  sold  the  other  property. 

Were  the  New  Jersey  gaming  regulations  patterned  after  Nevada ’s  regulations? 

Somewhat — although  they  felt  Nevada  didn’t  have  a  good  reputation,  so  to  succeed  there  they  felt 
they  needed  to  be  different  and  be  tougher  than  Nevada.  So  they  had  very  detailed  rules  for  every  game; 
the  rules  of  the  game  were  spelled  out  in  the  regulations. 

Did  they  go  so  far  as  to  state  things  such  as  how  many  times  twenty-one  dealers  could  shuffle  the  deck? 

They  may  not  have  gone  that  far,  but  they  covered  the  way  they  had  to  shuffle  and  they  had  to 
deal  the  cards  to  the  player  face  up.  The  player  couldn’t  touch  the  cards.  Things  that  they  had  felt  that  we 
weren’t  tough  enough  on  in  Nevada.  So  they  went  beyond  what  we  did  in  Nevada. 

Did  they  establish  a  percentage  of  return  on  slot  machines? 

Yes.  I  think  they  had  to  pay  back  at  least  between  eighty  and  eighty-five  percent.  And  now 
Nevada  does  the  same  thing.  They  never  did  take  that  full  amount.  Strict  competition  kept  the  percentages 
lower  than  the  state  mandated. 

Did  they  stay  open  twenty-four  hours  a  day? 

Not  initially,  they  didn’t.  I  think  they  were  open  twenty  hours  on  weekdays  and  twenty-two  hours 
on  weekends  or  something  like  that.  But  they  did  have  to  close  down  for  a  period  of  time.  They  thought  it 
was  right  that  the  players  should  have  to  go  home.  They  didn’t  tell  you  when  you  had  to  open  or  when 
you  had  to  close,  but  basically  competition  dictated  everybody  open  and  close  at  the  same  time. 

Otherwise,  you’re  going  to  lose  your  business  to  somebody  else.  Eventually  they  saw  the  error  of  that  and 
went  to  the  twenty-four  hours. 

Were  they  always  open  seven  days  a  week ? 


Y es,  it  was  just  the  number  of  hours  per  day  that  was  changed. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


91 


Have  some  of  those  regulations  eased  off  a  little? 

1  think  there’s  no  question  they  have  backed  off  somewhat  in  areas  where  they  have  gained 
confidence  and  learned  more  about  the  industry.  Nevada,  on  the  other  hand,  has  gotten  tougher  and  gotten 
more  like  New  Jersey  in  a  number  of  ways.  One  deal  that  was  interesting  to  me  is  we  had  imposed  the 
requirement  here  that  if  you  had  a  car  or  some  other  big  prize  for  a  jackpot,  you  couldn’t  remove  it 
anytime  you  wanted;  you  had  to  leave  it  there  until  it  was  won.  They  had  the  same  rule,  and  then  finally 
somebody  talked  to  them  and  they  decided  that  when  a  person  put  their  coin  in  and  pulled  the  handle, 
that’s  all  they  were  entitled  to,  and  that  the  house  could  replace  that  machine  with  other  machines  without 
having  to  keep  the  large  jackpot  prize  available  on  the  casino  floor. 

Would  you  say  that  Nevada  gaming  regulations  have  been  used  as  a  model  in  the  Indian  gaming  casinos 
and  in  gaming  locations  throughout  the  world? 

Well,  yes.  But  there  are  also  a  lot  of  locations  who  base  their  regulations  on  New  Jersey  law. 
Foreign  countries,  like  Australia  and  South  Africa,  are  based  more  on  New  Jersey  laws  than  on  Nevada 
laws,  because  they  wanted  stringent  control.  Trying  to  identify  any  particular  set  of  regulations,  where 
they  came  from,  is  very  difficult,  except  in  Mississippi.  They  really  adopted  Nevada  laws.  They  took  the 
whole  thing  and  passed  it  and  changed  a  few  words  here  and  there  to  fit,  except  one  place.  They  forgot — 
or  missed  the  fact — that  they  mentioned  the  chairman  of  the  board  and  they  didn’t  have  a  chairman  of  the 
board.  They  had  a  chairman  of  the  commission,  and  what  they  meant  was  the  executive  director  of  the 
commission. 

Even  though  they  used  the  statutes  and  regulations  from  Nevada — and  they  still  do  for  the  most 
part — they  operated  with  only  one  agency  for  everything  instead  of  having  two  agencies.  New  Jersey  had 
two  agencies:  one  of  them  reported  to  the  attorney  general  and  the  other  one  reported  to  the  treasurer. 

The  commission  there  had  a  staff  of  their  own  and  we  had  to  file  information  initially  with  both 
agencies.  Then  finally,  a  few  years  ago,  they  sat  down  and  worked  out  a  deal  where  you  could  cut  out  the 
overlap,  and  that  helped  make  it  a  lot  less  expensive  to  comply  with  the  regulatory  process. 

How  about  the  Indian  casinos?  Are  their  regulations  pretty  much  the  same  all  over  the  United  States? 

No,  they  vary  from  state  to  state,  tribe  to  tribe.  Some  of  them  are  different  for  every  tribe  because 
they’re  all  sovereign  nations.  Some  of  them  developed  their  own  regulations  by  getting  somebody  from 
either  New  Jersey  or  Nevada  to  come  and  help  draft  them.  And,  of  course,  depending  on  who  they  hired, 
that’s  what  they  were  based  on.  There  were  people  from  both  states  who  were  hired  by  tribes  to  write 
regulations,  but  there  were  no  regulations  that  came  down  from  Washington  until  a  couple  of  years  ago 
when  they  developed  a  standard  internal  control  system  that  everybody  was  supposed  to  comply  with. 

You ’ve  touched  on  this  quite  a  bit  already,  but  could  you  give  me  your  job  history  with  Mr.  Wynn  again? 


Yes.  1  started  doing  legal  work  for  him  out  of  my  law  firm  in  the  fall  of  1976.  And  then  in  the  fall 


92 


of  1978,  two  years  later,  when  New  Jersey  had  the  successful  opening  they  did  and  he  decided  to  go  to 
New  Jersey,  he  asked  me  to  come  in-house  to  handle  regulatory  matters.  Then  after  they  opened  in  the 
summer  of  1981,  they  asked  me  to  move  back  and  run  the  place.  1  became  president  of  Golden  Nugget, 
Atlantic  City.  1  did  that  for  two  years  and  then  he  moved  me  up  to  a  corporate  level,  and  1  became  senior 
vice-president  for  community  relations.  He  had  run  into  some  problems  when  he  tried  to  get  some  zoning 
changed,  so  1  began  to  work  with  the  community  and  1  also  handled  all  of  the  political  donations  in  both 
Nevada  and  New  Jersey. 

Did  he  donate  quite  a  bit? 

No.  He  wasn’t  nearly  as  shrewd  then  as  he  is  now  in  that  area.  He  hated  to  spend  any  money.  1 
was  the  company’s  face  in  New  Jersey.  Because  1  had  been  president,  more  people  knew  me  and  1  got 
more  attention  than  some  of  the  other  people  who  did  government-community  relations,  and  so  1  ended 
up  being  sort  of  the  official  joiner.  This  was  one  of  my  most  interesting  things:  I  was  on  the  board  of 
directors  in  the  Miss  America  pageant,  and  1  got  to  introduce  the  new  contestants,  to  the  press  at  the  first 
official  event  of  the  Miss  America  pageant.  And  1  was  on  hospital  boards.  1  was  chairman  of  the 
convention  and  visitors  bureau,  president  of  the  Boy  Scouts.  1  was  involved  very  heavily  in  the 
community.  I  didn’t  have  to  say  1  was  representing  Steve  Wynn,  because,  there  again,  1  was  known  as 
being  his  top  guy  in  New  Jersey.  We  ended  up  sponsoring  a  lot  of  the  dinners  and  fundraisers  and  things 
like  that.  1  was  also  in  the  NAACP,  and  got  a  citizenship  award  from  them.  So  1  was  involved  a  lot  in  the 
community  and  1  enjoyed  that. 

Was  that  your  last  job  with  Steve  Wynn? 

Yes.  He  eliminated  my  position  when  he  sold  the  Golden  Nugget  in  Atlantic  City  in  the  summer 
of  1987.  When  1  came  back  here  1  had  a  contract  for  a  year  as  a  consultant.  About  the  time  that  year  was 
up,  1  was  asked  to  go  on  the  board  of  directors  of  the  Claridge  by  Del  Webb,  and  1  agreed  to  do  it.  When  1 
went  to  my  first  meeting  1  discovered  that  Del  Webb  was  trying  to  pull  out  of  New  Jersey.  Then  the 
banker  who  was  chairman  of  the  board  resigned  because  of  a  conflict,  and  1  ended  up  being  chairman  of 
the  board  and  involved  with  the  heavy  negotiations  as  Del  Webb  negotiated  with  bankers,  and  other 
people,  in  order  to  leave  New  Jersey  and  basically  turn  the  company  over  to  the  other  shareholders.  There 
were  about  four  hundred  shareholders.  Claridge  was  a  public  company,  so  they  didn’t  have  to  license 
everybody;  it  was  publicly  owned  but  not  publicly  traded.  There  was  no  market,  because  it  was  too  small 
a  stock,  plus  the  company  was  not  in  good  financial  situation.  After  Del  Webb  left  1  became  the  chief 
executive  officer,  and  1  served  in  that  capacity  until  1983  when  1  received  an  offer  to  become  president  of 
United  Coin,  here  in  Las  Vegas.  So  1  left  Claridge  but  1  stayed  on  the  board.  1  was  still  a  director  and  after 
a  year  chairman  of  the  audit  committee  until  the  Claridge  was  sold  last  May — May  of  2001 — to  Bally 
Park  Place. 

Is  that  what  it’s  called  now,  Bally  Park  Place? 

No,  it’s  still  called  the  Claridge.  It’s  right  next  door  to  them,  but  they  didn’t  change  the  name,  or 
at  least  haven’t  so  far. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


93 


Would  you  compare  operating  a  casino  in  Atlantic  City  to  operating  a  casino  in  Nevada?  Do  they  have 
the  same  problems? 

Some  of  them.  The  Claridge  was  the  smallest  one  there,  and  we  did  over  a  hundred  million  in 
revenue.  At  the  time  1  came  back  here,  1  remember  seeing  a  report  showing  that  there  were  only  two  or 
three  casinos  in  the  state  doing  a  hundred  million  a  year  in  revenue.  The  smallest  casino  in  Atlantic  City 
did  that,  and  so  you  had  much  more  consistency  in  the  type  of  operation  there  than  you  did  here.  But  it 
was  expensive  to  operate  there.  Everything  was  more  expensive:  labor,  regulatory  costs,  anything  you  did 
cost  more  there. 

Why  do  you  suppose  that  the  lowest  casino  could  make  a  hundred  million  dollars?  Was  it  because  there 
were  less  casinos  or  because  of  the  large  nearby  drawing  area? 

A  little  bit  of  both.  They  were  all  good-sized  casinos.  We  had  twelve  hundred  slot  machines  and 
sixty  table  games  at  the  Claridge,  so  that  was  a  big  factor.  The  other  factor  was  they  had  more  win  per 
machine  than  here.  There  the  average  win  per  machine  was  probably  in  the  two-hundred-dollars-a-day 
range,  and  in  Nevada  it  was  less  than  a  hundred.  So  that  made  quite  a  bit  of  difference  in  the  revenue.  And 
there  were  over  a  thousand  buses  a  day  coming  into  Atlantic  City  that  would  come  down  for  a  few  hours 
and  then  go  back  home.  And  then  we  had  a  lot  of  good  high-roller  action  from  New  York,  Philadelphia, 
and  northern  New  Jersey.  And  we  had  the  only  casinos  that  were  there  until  Foxwood  opened  in 
Connecticut.  There  were  basically  a  dozen  casinos  in  Atlantic  City  and  nothing  else  in  the  neighborhood. 
That’s  changing  today  because  Delaware  has  slot  machines  at  their  racetracks.  There  are  two  tribal 
casinos  in  Connecticut.  Now,  they’re  talking  about  doing  an  Indian  casino  in  the  Catskills,  so  it’s  going  to 
be  tougher  and  tougher  to  do  business  back  there.  They  were  less  affected  by  the  events  of  September  1 1 
this  year  than  Las  Vegas.  They  didn’t  drop  as  far  and  they  recovered  quicker  because  most  of  the  people 
were  drive-ins  rather  than  fly-ins. 

And  still  a  lot  of  bus  people,  I  imagine? 

Yes.  Yes,  I’m  sure. 

Was  there  competition  between  casinos  as  to  what  they  would  offer  these  buses  to  come  to  their  casino? 

Absolutely.  It  frequently  got  out  of  hand,  when  you  were  giving  back  to  these  people  on  average 
fifteen  to  eighteen  dollars  per  person.  It’s  tough  to  make  money  when  you  do  that.  You  generate  a  lot  of 
revenue,  but  a  lot  of  it’s  your  own  money.  In  some  respects  it  was  like  a  local  casino  because  a  lot  of  the 
people  are  close  by.  Philadelphia  is  just  over  an  hour,  north  Jersey  was  two  hours  and  New  York  City  was 
two,  two  and  a  half  hours.  So  you’re  talking  about  people  who’d  come  down  several  days  a  week  so  you 
did  get  a  lot  of  shots  at  them. 

Did  a  lot  of  people  drive  up,  or  would  they  mostly  come  on  a  bus? 

There  was  some  drive-in  business.  It  was  just  that  the  bulk  of  numbers  was  on  the  bus  because 
you  figure  a  thousand  buses  a  day  and  they  all  hold  forty  people.  They  probably  averaged  at  least  thirty  to 


94 


thirty-five  people  per  bus.  That’s  a  lot  of  people.  A  couple  of  places  had  parking  garages,  but  a  lot  of 
people  didn’t  like  to  drive  down  near  the  boardwalk.  Traffic  was  bad,  with  narrow  streets.  It’s  an  old  city 
with  narrow  streets  and  no  parking.  Unfortunately,  in  some  places  they  had  parking  and  they  couldn’t  get 
them  to  take  the  parking  lanes  out  because  the  local  store  owners  were  losing  business  and  they  didn’t 
want  to  lose  any  potential  business  from  people  who  wouldn’t  come  to  their  store  because  they  couldn’t 
park  nearby. 

Did  they  have  good  room  occupancy? 

Not  as  good  as  Las  Vegas.  And  there  weren’t  many  rooms;  most  of  them  didn’t  have  more  than 
the  five  hundred.  1  think  they  might  have  one  that  has  fifteen  hundred  or  two  thousand  rooms  now.  The 
Tropicana  built  another  tower,  but  they  were  usually  five  to  eight  hundred  rooms  because  the  minimum 
you  had  to  have  was  five  hundred.  And,  again,  they  were  catering  to  people  who  were  driving  down  and 
going  home.  They  weren’t  coming  there  on  holiday;  they  were  coming  to  gamble.  Y ou  get  a  lot  of  people 
coming  to  Vegas  on  holiday,  but  in  Atlantic  City  they’re  not  coming  for  a  holiday  where  they’re  going  to 
be  there  for  three  or  four  days  and  do  a  variety  of  things.  You’re  talking  about  people  who  drive  down 
and  gamble  and  go  home  or  take  the  bus  down  and  gamble  and  go  home,  so  you  don’t  get  the  hotel  room 
usage  that  you  do  in  Las  Vegas. 

Would  you  tell  us  a  little  about  Steve  Wynn? 

One  of  the  reasons  I  enjoyed  working  for  him  was  if  we  were  walking  through  the  casino  he 
would  point  out  why  he  had  designed  certain  things  the  way  he  did.  If  he  noticed  an  area  that  to  him  did 
not  stimulate  the  eye,  he  wanted  something  on  the  walls,  he  wanted  something  to  attract  the  eye  and  to  get 
people  excited.  That’s  what  he’s  done  with  everything  he’s  built,  and  walking  through  the  place  with  him 
as  he  looked  for  problems  of  that  sort  and  design  problems  was  an  education  in  and  of  itself. 

Steve  was  the  guy  who  rebuilt  a  bird  cage.  It  was  supposed  to  have  had  parakeets  and  other  live 
birds  in  it,  but  they  kept  pretending  they  were  stuck  and  screaming  and  so  we  ended  up  giving  them  to  a 
zoo  and  putting  in  mechanized  birds,  designed  by  people  who  worked  for  Disney.  But  this  big  cage  had  to 
be  two  stories  high  hanging  in  the  lobby.  They  designed  it  with  brass  plating,  but  he  did  not  want  brass 
plating.  It  had  to  be  solid  brass,  which  cost  about  forty,  fifty  thousand  dollars  more.  But  that’s  the  kind  of 
attention  to  detail  that  Steve  has  always  had. 

Where  was  that  bird  cage? 

That  was  in  Atlantic  City  at  Golden  Nugget.  I  can  remember  when  he  added  the  hotel  downtown 
at  Golden  Nugget  here  before  we  went  to  New  Jersey.  In  fact,  it  might  even  have  been  while  I  was  outside 
counsel.  One  day  he  was  sitting  in  the  lobby  looking  at  things  and  he  started  moving  potted  trees  around 
to  get  the  look  he  wanted,  [laughter]  When  it  comes  to  understanding  the  customer  and  making  a  place 
exciting,  there’s  nobody  like  Steve  Wynn  who  understands  what  motivates  people  and  has  the  sense  to 
work  with  the  designers.  In  fact,  sometimes  he  can  be  very  frustrating  for  the  creative  people,  because 
Steve  doesn’t  always  choose  his  words  carefully.  He  never  worried  about  people’s  sensitivities,  and  he 
could  be  very  tough  on  the  creative  people’s  egos — the  architects  and  the  interior  designers.  He  was  a  guy 
who  could  make  you  feel  like  nobody  else.  His  choice  of  words  and  the  way  he  would  describe  you,  it 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


95 


was  just  excellent.  But  if  he  got  mad  at  you,  he  could  also  make  you  feel  pretty  lousy;  he  didn’t  hold  back 
there  either.  Other  than  being  impatient,  he  was  just  one  of  the  most  creative  people  in  the  industry.  1 
think  that’s  why  everybody  has  been  waiting  to  see  what  he  is  going  to  do  at  the  Desert  Inn  here  and  then 
they’ll  follow.  They  did  the  same  thing  at  the  Bellagio.  They  waited  till  the  Bellagio  opened,  and  then  you 
got  a  whole  string  of  new  ones.  You  got  Mandalay  Bay,  you  got  Paris,  you  got  the  Venetian.  Those  were 
all  after  he  broke  the  ground  with  Bellagio. 

Does  he  remind  you  in  any  way  of  Bill  Harrah  as  far  as  striving  for  perfection? 

Well,  1  didn’t  know  Bill  Harrah  that  personally,  but  Steve  clearly  tries  to  get  perfection,  and 
particularly  in  things  that  appeal  to  the  sensitivities  of  people.  He  knows  what  draws  them  in  and  he 
makes  them  feel  a  part  of  something  and  makes  them  want  to  stay  there  for  a  long  period  of  time.  Some 
places  will  offer  you  a  lot  on  the  outside,  but  when  you  get  inside  they  fail  to  deliver  on  their  promise.  It’s 
just  another  cheap  design  job.  With  Steve,  he  enticed  you  inside  and  then  he  delivered  on  that.  The  inside 
was  spectacular  and  the  inside  did  have  the  quality  that  the  people  expected  from  looking  at  the  outside.  It 
was  always  interesting  to  me  that  some  of  these  places  could  not  draw  people  in,  or  they’d  draw  them  in 
for  a  show  or  something  like  that  and  then  they’d  leave.  Steve  would  have  free  shows  like  the  volcano  in 
front  of  the  Mirage,  and  then  the  people  would  go  inside  and  lose  their  money,  [laughter]  He  was  able  to 
do  that  much  better  than  anybody  else  in  the  industry. 

Bill  Harrah  used  to  say,  “Treat  people  like  you ’d  like  to  be  treated  yourself.  ”  It  seems  Wynn  follows  that 
concept,  also,  to  give  people  their  money ’s  worth. 

Yes.  Although  he  wants  people  at  the  top  level  to  be  treated  like  that,  the  people  down  at  the 
bottom  level  he  relates  to  less. 

Did  he  treat  the  customer  like  he  would  like  to  be  treated? 

No,  because  I  think  he  had  higher  demands  than  most  customers,  [laughter]  He  wanted  to  take 
care  of  the  customers’  concerns,  and  he  understood  the  customer.  He  understood  what  the  customer 
wanted,  1  think,  better  than  just  about  anybody.  And  so  it  wasn’t  a  matter  of,  “Y ou  treat  the  customer  like 
you’d  like  to  be  treated.”  It  was,  “You  treat  the  customer  the  way  I  want  you  to  treat  him.”  That  is 
probably  a  better  way  of  describing  it.  1  think  he  didn’t  have  total  faith  that  his  people  would  treat  all  the 
customers  right  if  they  just  treated  them  the  way  they’d  like  to  be  treated.  He  wanted  something  more 
than  that. 

Were  you  surprised  he  didn ’t  create  another  position  for  you  after  they  eliminated  the  position  that  you 
had? 


Well,  Steve  goes  through  people.  He’s  only  had  a  couple  of  people  that  have  stayed  with  him  for 
extended  periods  of  time.  I’m  not  sure  why  he  eliminated  the  position,  but  he  did.  When  he  got  out  here 
he  hired  a  PR  guy  who  was  very  good  at  working  within  the  community  and  doing  public  relations — 
Allen  Feldman.  I  think  sometimes  he  liked  changes,  to  try  different  things,  to  try  different  people. 


96 


Did  you  leave  on  good  terms? 

I  think  so.  My  position  was  being  eliminated,  but  he’d  given  me  a  contract  for  a  year  as  a 
consultant.  So  1  worked  the  legislature  and  worked  out  of  my  old  law  firm  so  if  I  brought  in  business  1 
had  somebody  to  help  take  care  of  that.  1  also  did  a  lot  of  public  affairs  consulting  with  companies, 
including  United  Gaming,  around  1987  to  1988,  and  I  did  work  for  United  Gaming  at  that  time  as  a 
consultant.  We  never  had  words.  I  never  heard  any  disparaging  remarks  or  anything  like  that,  and  I 
certainly  learned  an  awful  lot  working  for  him. 

Do  you  see  him  on  occasion? 

Only  if  we  happen  to  be  at  the  same  functions.  I  haven’t  seen  him  for  a  while. 

Is  he  losing  his  vision?  What  is  the  name  of  the  eye  disease  that  he  has? 

Retinitis  pigmentosa.  It’s  a  gradual  deterioration,  and  everybody  progresses  at  a  different  rate.  His 
has  been  pretty  slow  over  the  years.  The  last  time  I  saw  him,  Elaine  [Mrs.  Wynn]  told  him  who  I  was  as  I 
walked  up,  and  it  was  like  old  home  week.  We  visited  and  got  along  well.  But  it  was  obvious  he  has 
problems  recognizing  somebody  more  than  two,  three  feet  away. 

In  1994  you  joined  the  faculty  of  the  William  F.  Harrah  College  of  Hotel  Administration  and  the 
University  of  Las  Vegas  International  Gaming  Institute.  What  prompted  you  to  leave  the  gaming 
industry? 

I  had  taken  the  job  as  president  of  United  Gaming  because  I  was  tired  of  traveling  back  and  forth 
from  Las  Vegas  to  Atlantic  City.  I  had  commuted  from  1988  to  1993,  so  I  was  looking  forward  to  less 
travel.  But  when  I  got  that  new  job,  that  year  I  traveled  more  than  I  did  before.  I  was  in  Montreal,  Canada, 
at  a  gaming  conference  and  I  happened  to  see  a  flyer  for  the  teaching  position  here  and  I  responded  to  it 
and  got  the  appointment,  but  I  couldn’t  take  it  until  the  next  year.  That  was  in  fall  of  1993.  And  so  in  the 
summer  of  that  year  I  left  United  Gaming  and  came  to  teach  here. 

How  long  has  the  University  of  Nevada,  Las  Vegas  had  a  college  of  hotel  administration? 

The  hotel  college  graduated  its  first  graduates  in  1969,  and  I  understand  it  was  about  1966  when 
they  started  it  with  a  grant  from  the  Nevada  Resort  Association  and  actually  hired  some  of  the  Nevada 
Resort  Association  people  as  teachers.  One  of  them,  Leo  Lewis,  taught  here  for  many  years.  He  died  a 
year  ago  or  so,  and  up  until  a  year  or  two  before  that  he  taught  a  course  here  every  year. 

So  it  wasn ’t  originally  called  the  William  Harrah  College? 

Right.  I’m  not  sure  when  the  name  change  occurred,  but  I  think  it  happened  in  the  late  1980s,  or 
early  1990s.  But  anyway,  it  was  renamed  the  William  F.  Harrah  College  of  Hotel  Administration.  And  in 
1993  they  created  the  gaming  institute,  so  we’re  now  an  institute  within  the  hotel  college.  You  can  get  a 
bachelor  of  science  in  hotel  administration,  and  you  can  specialize  in  gaming,  hotel  operations,  food  and 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


97 


beverage,  tour  and  travel,  conventions  and  meetings,  and  in  recreation  and  golf  course  management.  We 
have  about  two  thousand  students.  We’re  the  biggest  contributor  to  the  international  student  body  on 
campus.  About  20  percent  of  the  student  body  in  the  hotel  college  are  international  students.  And  now  our 
graduates  are  recruited  throughout  the  world.  The  major  hotel  chains,  like  Marriott,  recruit  here  very 
actively. 

The  gaming  institute  was  designed  for  teaching  or  training  people  in  the  industry.  It  was  created 
when  gaming  started  to  expand  throughout  the  country  and  everybody  was  calling  trying  to  get  some 
training.  They  did  their  first  gaming  regulator  training  in  early  1 994. 

The  people  that  just  go  to  the  institute  are  not  in  the  college? 

Right.  The  institute  is  not  an  academic  program.  It’s  a  training  program  like  continuing  education 
is  at  UNR.  1  got  involved  with  about  the  second  or  third  one  of  those  seminars  when  1  came  on  in  the  fall 
of  1994.  We  continued  it  and  we  revised  it  and  now  we  do  about  six  seminars  a  year — at  least  six 
seminars  a  year  relating  to  gaming  regulation  or  surveillance.  We  also  do  training  away  from  here  for 
gaming  regulators  and  for  management  training. 

Do  you  mean  away  from  this  building,  or  away  from  Las  Vegas? 

Away  from  Las  Vegas.  I’ve  been  to  Atlantic  City,  to  Mississippi,  and  we’ve  been  talking  lately 
with  Michigan  about  coming  there  and  doing  something. 

So  the  gaming  institute  has  functioned  very  well.  We’re  developing  more  and  more  management 
courses.  We’ve  done  a  lot  of  management  training  for  the  Indians.  We  have  had  two  tribes  where  we  did  a 
major  training  program  for  them.  One  of  the  programs  is  still  going  for  a  tribe  out  of  California. 

Stan  Fulton  contributed  six  million  dollars  when  this  place  was  built,  so  it’s  called  the  Stan  Fulton 
Building,  and  it’s  designed  for  continuing  education.  We  do  all  kinds  of  seminars  here. 

Would  you  give  us  some  background  on  Mr.  Fulton? 

Fie  was  one  of  the  first  developers  of  the  poker  machine.  CEI  was  the  name  of  the  company  that 
he  developed  it  under.  Later  he  was  a  major  shareholder  in  United  Gaming.  Then  he  left  and  took  some  of 
the  business  that  United  had  in  route  operations  with  some  grocery  store  chains,  started  his  own  company 
and  hired  some  people  who  were  very  good  at  gaming  design.  They  designed  some  machines  that  were 
very  popular  and  they  leased  them  and  developed  the  concept  of  leasing  the  machine  so  that  you  had  a 
stream  of  income  rather  than  selling  it  outright. 

Were  they  only  poker  machines,  or  did  they  lease  all  types  of  slot  machines? 

They  didn’t  lease  the  poker  machine.  By  this  time  the  poker  machines  were  in  United  Gaming 
and  other  people  had  developed  machines  that  did  more.  These  were  new  gaming  devices — the  wheel  of 
fortune,  and  that  type  of  game.  They  developed  the  games,  and  then  they  would  contract  with  Bally  and 
1GT  to  build  the  machines  and  then  they  put  on  their  add-ons  to  create  different  games,  bonuses,  and  that 
sort  of  thing. 


98 


Is  Mr.  Fulton  still  alive? 

Yes.  He  sold  out  last  year  for  something  like  five  hundred  million.  The  company  by  then  had 
acquired  racetracks,  and  he  took  the  racetracks  from  them  and  now  runs  slot  machines  at  some  of  the 
racetracks.  So  he’s  made  a  lot  of  money,  and  he’ll  probably  make  another  pile  of  money  with  his 
racetrack  operations. 

Is  the  International  Gaming  Institute  self-sufficient?  Does  it  pay  for  itself  through  charges  to  the 
students? 

Yes.  We  get  no  state  budgeted  money.  1  think  other  institutes  on  campus  have  the  same  situation, 
but  we  have  to  earn  all  the  money  we  use  to  pay  for  our  staff  and  those  kinds  of  things,  so  it’s  imperative 
that  we  make  money  in  order  to  have  a  program  here. 

So  Mr.  Fulton  doesn  7  contribute  any  more  on  a  yearly  basis? 

No.  He  gave  Anchor  Gaming  stock,  and  the  stock  was  originally  supposed  to  be  about  five 
million,  but  by  the  time  it  was  sold  it  was  worth  six  million. 

At  the  college,  apart  from  the  institute  here,  you  can  earn  a  master’s  and  a  Ph.D.  in  hotel 
administration,  but  you  can  do  your  dissertation  or  your  thesis  on  a  gaming  topic.  We  have  over  a  dozen 
gaming  courses,  and  three  or  four  of  those  are  at  the  graduate  level.  So  you  can  truly  get  a  Ph.D.  in 
gaming  here  in  that  sense.  You  can  get  a  broader  background,  which  is  good,  because  you  are  going  to 
have  to  do  other  things,  like  general  marketing,  statistical  analysis  and  things  like  that.  We  have  two 
instructors  who  teach  some  gaming.  One  worked  in  the  industry,  the  other  one  did  not.  We  have,  actually, 
three  people  on  staff  who  got  their  doctorates  through  the  hotel  college,  and  one  of  them  was  experienced 
in  the  industry  and  he  teaches  gaming  courses,  undergraduate  and  graduate  level. 

Does  he  still  work  in  the  gaming  industry,  also? 

No,  he’s  a  full-time  instructor. 

How  many  classes  do  you  teach ,  or  what  have  you  taught  over  a  period  of  years? 

Most  of  my  courses  have  been  in  casino  management  or  gaming  regulation,  and  1  teach  one  class 
at  the  law  school.  1  have  the  last  few  years.  1  usually  taught  one  class  in  the  law  school  each  semester  and 
one  class  in  the  hotel  college,  and  for  the  last  couple  of  years  I’ve  been  teaching  hotel  law  because  we  lost 
our  graduate  instructor  in  hotel  law.  But  I’m  finishing  up.  This  will  be  my  last  semester  doing  that.  We 
have  a  new  professor  who  came  on  last  spring  who  will  teach  it  from  here  on.  So  mostly  what  I’ve  taught 
was  gaming  regulation  and  casino  management  at  the  graduate  level.  I  also  taught  gaming  law  and 
gaming  regulation  at  the  law  school  when  I  was  on  loan  to  the  law  school.  And  so  I  taught  one  course  in 
each  place  and  the  rest  of  my  time  was  spent  as  executive  director  of  the  gaming  institute. 


Have  you  given  courses  at  the  gaming  institute,  also? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


99 


Yes,  but  those  are  training  courses,  not  academic. 

How  many  seminars  a  year  do  you  conduct? 

In  gaming  regulation  we  do  at  least  a  half  dozen  a  year  just  for  regulators.  Next  week  the 
American  College  of  District  Attorneys  is  going  to  be  here  in  Las  Vegas  for  three  days,  and  one  of  these 
days  they’re  going  to  spend  in  the  gaming  institute.  And  I’ll  be  helping  instruct  that.  This  past  summer  we 
put  on  a  training  program  with  the  National  Judicial  College  out  of  Reno  for  tribal  gaming 
commissioners.  We  co-sponsored  it  with  them  and  helped  to  put  it  on. 

Do  you  have  to  advertise  a  lot  to  get  people  to  come  here? 

Oh,  yes.  But  the  first  group  in  here  on  our  training  program  was  a  training  program  for  gaming 
regulators  from  South  Africa  the  day  after  we  moved  in.  That  really  made  us  an  international 
organization.  People  from  South  Africa  and  Canada,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Japan,  and  a  couple  of 
countries  in  Africa  have  come  here.  We’ve  put  on  some  of  the  programs  with  Japanese  where  they  used 
translators,  but  most  of  the  regulators  that  have  been  here  speak  English.  In  our  first  graduating  class  from 
the  hotel  college  in  1969,  there  were  six  graduates.  Two  of  those  have  gone  on  to  high  positions  in  the 
gaming  industry.  One  of  them,  Bill  Poulos,  has  probably  opened  more  casinos  in  more  locations  than 
anybody.  He  worked  for  Circus  Circus  and  went  to  Australia  and  opened  a  casino  there  and  came  back 
and  ran  the  Primm  casinos  in  Stateline,  then  went  to  Michigan  and  he  opened  a  casino  there,  and  now  it 
looks  like  he’s  going  to  run  the  Regent  casino,  which  is  in  bankruptcy.  The  other  one  is  Roger  Wagner. 
Roger  ran  the  Claridge  in  Atlantic  City  and  he  once  ran  an  operation  in  Atlantic  City  for  Trump.  Now  he 
is  president  of  the  Horseshoe  Gaming  Riverboat  casinos  for  Jack  Binion,  so  the  two  of  them  have  had 
very  successful  careers. 

Do  the  state  regulators  from  the  Board  or  the  Commission  attend  any  of  the  seminars? 

We  invite  them  all  to  attend  the  seminars.  Sometimes  they  do  and  sometimes  they  don’t 
depending  on  their  work  load.  They  started  out  teaching  at  the  seminars  for  regulators,  but  it  got  to  be  too 
much  of  a  burden  on  them  and  so  we  took  it  over  completely.  We’re  still  listed  as  sponsored  by  them,  but 
now  when  we  put  on  seminars  we  invite  them  to  send  people  and  we’ll  have  commissioners,  as  well  as 
the  staff  people,  that  will  occasionally  attend  our  regulator  seminars. 

About  how  many  people  are  on  your  staff  here  at  the  institute? 

Well,  lull  time  we  probably  have  half  a  dozen,  and  we  use  student  help  for  various  things.  We 
have  one  lady  who  books  the  facility  and  books  the  rooms.  Ed  Polivka  organizes  the  seminars  and  the 
training  programs  and  prices  them.  Nakia  Jackson  is  the  young  lady  that  since  June  has  been  our  facilities 
coordinator,  and  she  does  an  excellent  job  of  doing  that.  She  worked  for  Circus  Circus  before  she  came  to 
work  here. 


1  see  you  also  have  a  library  here.  Is  that  part  of  the  gaming  institute? 


100 


Yes.  That  was  a  grant  from  1GT.  Originally  there  was  only  enough  money  for  a  part-time  person, 
but  now  we  have  a  full-time  librarian,  Betty  McNeil,  and  we’ve  done  enough  business  to  pay  for  her.  We 
also  have  a  chef  who  prepares  the  meals.  Normally  when  we  do  seminars  that  go  over  to  the  lunch  hour, 
we’ll  feed  them  here  rather  than  just  give  them  a  break  and  let  them  go  wherever  they  want  and  we  build 
the  price  of  the  meal  into  the  price  of  the  course. 

Would  you  tell  us  about  an  organization  called  the  International  Association  of  Gaming  Attorneys  and 
your  involvement  with  that  organization? 

1  was  one  of  the  founding  group  that  got  it  started,  as  were  Bob  Faiss,  Bud  Hicks,  Frank 
Fahrenkopf,  and  a  couple  of  other  people.  We  started  it  in  1979.  When  we  first  started  it,  it  was  the 
National  Association  of  Attorneys  and  we  had  our  first  meeting  in  New  York.  Then  we  had  one  here.  And 
then  somebody  came  up  with  the  idea  of  going  to  Europe.  Mike  Sloan  from  the  Mandalay  Bay  group  was 
also  one  of  the  founders,  and  1  think  he  was  the  one  who  had  the  idea  of  holding  it  in  London  in 
conjunction  with  the  American  Bar  Association.  So  we  went  to  London  for  a  couple  of  days  and  held 
meetings,  then  we  went  to  the  Riviera  and  to  Monte  Carlo  and  held  more  meetings  there  and  we  had  good 
turnouts.  We  weren’t  sure  we  were  going  to  have  enough  people  involved  so  we  ended  up  deciding  to 
make  it  an  international  association  and  added  one  or  two  board  members  from  England,  so  we  had  an 
international  board  and  went  from  there.  We  meet  usually  once  a  year  and  do  a  seminar  someplace. 

We’ve  met  in  Australia  and  in  Vienna,  in  the  Netherlands,  in  London  twice,  and  the  Riviera  twice. 

Do  you  ever  meet  in  the  United  States? 

Yes,  but  not  since  we  became  international.  But  next  year  we’re  scheduled  to  be  at  San  Diego, 
and  then  Canada.  Wherever  they  have  had  gaming  we’ve  had  meetings.  We’ve  also  held  meetings  in 
Puerto  Rico  and  the  Bahamas. 

How  many  people  are  in  this  group? 

Well,  now  it’s  up  to  about  three  or  four  hundred  and  it  truly  is  international. 

Do  you  have  a  monthly  newsletter  or  some  method  of  communication? 

There  is  a  magazine  that  comes  out  twice  a  year  that  has  articles  in  it  on  what’s  going  on  in 
different  jurisdictions. 

In  your  yearly  meeting  do  you  discuss  things  that  have  happened  in  the  previous  year? 

No,  we  put  on  programs  of  various  kinds,  bring  in  other  speakers.  It’s  become  a  very  popular 
place  for  regulators  because  they  come  and  they  get  together,  and  they  have  even  started  their  own 
International  Association  of  Gaming  Regulators.  They’re  part  of  the  gaming  attorneys  group.  But  they’ll 
hold  one  day  of  their  own  meetings,  and  then  we’ll  participate  jointly.  It  has  become  a  popular  place  for 
CEOs  and  other  top  casino  officials  to  come  and  mingle  with  regulators  and  get  acquainted  on  a  personal 
basis  with  regulators  where  they  weren’t  in  front  of  them  on  an  issue,  and  it  has  promoted  communication 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


101 


between  top  casino  people  and  the  top  regulators  around  the  world.  That  has  become  a  very  popular  part 
of  it.  Every  time  they  hold  one,  one  of  the  things  they  try  to  do  is  to  involve  as  many  CEOs  and  other  top 
people  from  the  industry  as  well  as  involving  the  regulators,  so  that  there’s  an  opportunity  for  interaction, 
on  an  informal,  friendly  basis  between  regulators  and  the  industry,  instead  of  always  meeting  only  when 
there’s  a  confrontation  of  some  kind. 

Shannon,  you ’ve  been  in  or  associated  with  the  gaming  industry  in  one  form  or  another  for  over  thirty 
years.  What  are  some  of  the  changes  you ’ve  seen  happen  in  the  gaming  industry? 

One  of  them  is  the  recognition  that  there  is  a  problem  with  the  compulsive  problem  gamblers. 

The  industry  has  done  a  lot  in  that  regard  in  the  last  ten,  twelve  years  making  quite  a  bit  of  progress, 
especially  over  the  last  five  or  six  years.  That  was  difficult  to  get  started,  but  it’s  become  a  very 
prominent  issue,  and  the  industry  has  really  gotten  involved  with  dealing  with  it. 

You  ’re  getting  a  lot  of  support,  aren ’t  you,  from  some  of  the  major  casinos? 

Oh,  yes.  1  was  appointed  to  the  National  Council  on  Problem  Gambling,  a  board  position,  in 
1991,  and  then  I  was  named  president  of  Nevada’s  council  on  problem  gambling  in  1995,  and  served  in 
that  position  until  last  year.  So  anyway,  that’s  a  big,  big  step  forward.  Beyond  that,  the  biggest  change  has 
been  the  expansion  of  gaming.  Part  of  the  reason  for  the  expansion  has  been  the  good  gaming  regulation, 
both  in  Nevada  and  New  Jersey.  The  governments  discovered  it  was  possible  to  operate  gaming  without 
people  with  criminal  backgrounds  who  learned  their  trade  in  an  illegal  operation  and  that  if  the  accounting 
systems  were  sufficiently  reliable,  they  could  keep  track  of  the  money  and  make  sure  that  taxes  were  paid. 
When  Nevada  got  into  this,  the  only  people  with  experience  were  those  in  illegal  operations,  and  it  took  a 
number  of  years  for  those  people  to  work  their  way  out  of  the  industry;  however,  time  got  rid  of  a  lot  of 
them.  And  buying  them  out  when  the  major  companies  came  in  and  started  buying  up  places,  that  also 
helped. 

But  the  expansion  of  gaming  as  a  result  of  good  regulation  has  led  to  a  different  attitude. 
Previously,  gaming  was  presumed  to  be  involved  only  with  organized  crime.  For  example,  that  was  one 
of  the  top  issues  in  the  president’s  commission  to  study  the  national  policy  towards  gaming  in  the  1970s. 
Their  report  came  out,  1  think,  around  1976,  and  that  was  a  major  issue.  They  found  there  was  no 
problem,  even  though  that  earlier  had  been  one  of  the  major  concerns  of  the  Commission.  With  the  last 
commission,  the  National  Gambling  Impact  Study  Commission,  organized  crime  wasn’t  even  on  the  list. 

It  wasn’t  in  the  top  ten  or  fifteen;  it  was  no  longer  an  issue.  It  was  not  an  item  of  concern  because,  again, 
with  the  good  regulation  you  had  more  people  then  who  were  willing  to  come  and  be  a  part  of  it  who  had 
a  good  background.  And  so  one  kind  of  breeds  the  other:  as  you  get  more  of  those,  people  have  more 
confidence  in  it.  Groups  like  Wisconsin  Teachers  Association  funded  their  pensions  by  becoming  a  major 
shareholder  in  some  of  the  casinos.  Many  people’s  mutual  funds  had  casino  stocks  and  bonds  and  the 
casinos’  public  companies  were  widely  held.  You  now  had  a  lot  of  people  who  had  an  interest  in  gaming 
and  who  saw  it  in  a  different  light  than  they  did  in  the  past.  And  so  it  wasn’t  so  much  of  them  against  us 
or  society  against  this  group  of  law  breakers;  it  was  looked  upon  as  a  valid  means  to  revive  economic 
development,  jobs,  and  taxes  for  government.  And,  again,  1  don’t  think  you  can  overemphasize  the 
importance  that  good  gaming  regulation  contributed  to  that  change  in  attitude  and  the  ability  to  attract 
qualified  people  who  did  not  have  a  background  in  illegal  gaming.  Now  you  have  the  same  kind  of 


102 


quality  people  who  run  major  companies  running  gaming  companies. 

Didn ’t  the  real  start  of  gaming  regulations  come  during  your  term  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board  in  the 
late  1960s,  early  1970s? 

Well,  we  accomplished  a  lot,  but,  you  know,  it’s  like  most  people’s  accomplishments;  they’re 
standing  on  somebody  else’s  shoulders.  In  1947  Attorney  General  Bible  gave  an  opinion  that  the  state 
could  deny  an  applicant,  and  the  first  meeting  after  they  got  that  ruling,  they  denied  some  applicants. 

Then  in  1955  the  state  created  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  and  you  had  to  be  found  suitable  by  the 
Gaming  Control  Board  before  you  could  go  before  the  tax  commission  to  get  a  license.  Then  in  1959  they 
restructured  it  by  creating  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  and  giving  them  the  final  say  on  the  licensing 
and  left  the  Board  in  this  recommendation  posture  where  all  they  could  do  is  require  a  unanimous  vote  by 
the  Commission  if  they  recommended  denial.  Now,  before  that  time,  if  the  Board  found  them  unsuitable, 
they  never  got  to  the  tax  commission.  Those  were  all  things  that  were  preparation  for,  1  think,  the  work 
that  we  did. 

We  took  it  further  and  faster  from  that  point,  and  I’d  like  to  think  that  I’m  partly  responsible  for 
that  because  I  had  the  legal  training  and  I  had  a  desire  to  have  things  in  regulations  and  to  have  more 
certainty  and  more  consistency  in  the  way  these  things  were  handled.  We  adopted  regs  for  the  public 
companies,  which  hadn’t  been  there  before.  So  we  had  the  corporate  regs,  we  revised  the  accounting  regs, 
and  we  even  developed  new  regs  for  the  game  of  jai  alai,  because  MGM  when  it  opened  had  a  jai  alai 
fronton.  And  so  we  accomplished  a  lot,  I  believe,  but  it  was  because  of  what  had  occurred  before,  and  we 
didn’t  yet  have  the  benefit  of  the  Rosenthal  decision,  which  really  put  the  Board  and  Commission  in  a 
solid  position  to  deny  people  for  things  that  a  lot  of  us  wondered  would  be  upheld  if  we  did  it  on  those 
kind  of  terms. 

That  was  an  important  ruling. 


Yes.  Very  important. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


103 


5 

Gerald  Cunningham 


Gerald  Cunningham  was  born  in  Canton ,  Ohio  in  1934  and 
moved  to  Las  Vegas  in  1962,  after  several  years  of  military 
sendee,  He  was  a  member  of  the  Las  Vegas  Metropolitan 
Police  Force  for  twenty-five  years  prior  to  being  named  to 
the  Nevada  Gaming  Control  Board  by  Governor  Richard 
Bryan  in  1987,  a  role  he  filled  until  1991.  Noted  for  his 
tenacity  and  his  determination  to  fully  investigate  applicants 
who  came  before  him,  his  persona  is  perhaps  best  described 
by  the  following  statement  made  by  Mr.  Cunningham  during 
his  interview:  “I  took  on  whoever  it  was.  I  didn  ’t  know  how 
to  back  down.  I’ve  caused  the  loss  of  indictments  in 
Washington,  D.C.  and  I’ve  even  gone  to  jail  for  contempt  in 
support  of  what  I  believed  in.  ”  Mr.  Cunningham ’s  reputation 
for  having  a  tough  exterior  is  sometimes  tempered  by  his 
recollections  of  actions  he  took  to  ensure  that  slot  machine 
locations,  or  gambling  of  any  kind,  be  kept  far  away  from 
school  and  residential  areas. 


Gerald  Cunningham,  ca.  1988.  Photo  courtesy  of  Gerald  Cunningham. 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  morning.  My  name  is  Dwayne  Kling.  I’m  with  the  University  of  Nevada  Oral 
History  Program.  I’m  in  the  city  of  Las  Vegas,  Nevada.  It ’s  July  31,  2002,  and  I’m  with  Gerald 
Cunningham  in  his  home.  Gerry,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have 
permission  to  record  the  inten’iew  that  we  are  about  to  begin  today? 


Gerald  Cunningham:  Good  morning,  Dwayne.  Yes,  you  certainly  do. 


104 


Thank  you.  Gerry,  when  and  where  were  you  born? 

1  was  bom  in  Canton,  Ohio,  on  September  7,  1934. 

When  did  you  move  to  Las  Vegas? 

In  1962  after  1  got  out  of  the  military  for  the  second  time.  1  had  been  recalled  in  1960  during  the 
Berlin  crisis,  and  prior  to  that  I’d  been  drafted  in  1958. 

When  you  came  to  Las  Vegas  what  profession  did  you  pursue? 

Well,  really,  I  was  running  away  from  home  .  .  . 

[laughter] 

.  .  .  because  the  military  had  taken  quite  a  chunk  out  of  my  life.  When  1  came  to  Las  Vegas,  they 
were  advertising  for  a  police  officer,  so  1  made  an  application.  I  and  a  friend  who  had  been  in  the  Army 
with  me  went  on  to  visit  the  World’s  Fair  in  Mexico  and  things  like  that,  and  then  came  back  through  at 
about  the  time  they  wanted  to  complete  the  process  of  the  background  investigation.  And  although  they 
hadn’t  completed  it,  1  told  them  1  had  to  have  a  job,  1  was  starving  to  death,  so  they  put  me  in  touch  with  a 
man  by  the  name  of  Earl  Black,  who  had  Globe  Investigations  at  that  time.  Mr.  Black  was  interested  in  a 
full-time  person,  but  1  convinced  him  to  hire  me  for  the  interim,  and  that  1  would  work  hard,  so  he 
ultimately  did  that. 

1  finally  got  hired  by  the  police  department  in  October  of  1 962,  and  1  resigned  to  accept  the 
appointment  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  given  to  me  by  Governor  Richard  Bryan  in  June  of  1987.  So  1 
was  with  the  police  department  for  almost  twenty-five  years. 

Had  you  known  Governor  Bryan  prior  to  your  appointment? 

1  had  known  him  throughout  my  whole  career.  When  1  was  a  young  detective,  he  was  in  the 
district  attorney’s  office.  Later  he  went  to  the  public  defender’s  office.  He  offered  me  a  job  there  which  1 
declined  because  1  had  just  had  a  promotion.  1  think  1  was  a  sergeant.  Then  he  went  to  the  attorney 
general’s  office  and  he  offered  me  a  position  there,  which  1  declined  because  I’d  made  additional 
promotions.  And  1  think  ultimately  the  head  of  the  Department  of  Motor  Vehicles  was  a  possibility, 
although  1  wasn’t  interested,  because  by  this  time  1  was  deputy  chief.  Ultimately,  he  offered  me  the 
position  on  the  Nevada  Gaming  Control  Board.  And  it  was  really  Bart  Jacka  who  told  me  to  get  out  of  the 
Metro;  it  would  be  good  for  me.  1  subsequently  accepted  the  appointment  and  went  to  the  Control  Board. 

Who  did  you  replace  on  the  Board? 

Bart  Jacka,  who  was  the  chairman,  was  leaving  and  that  left  a  vacancy.  Mike  Rumbolz  took  over 
the  chairmanship,  and  then  1  took  the  position  that  was  available. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


105 


Who  was  the  other  board  member? 

Dennis  Amerine  was  the  other  board  member. 

Did  you  work  with  them  the  entire  time  you  were  on  the  Board? 

Well,  ultimately  Dennis  and  Chairman  Rumbolz  both  left.  Mike  was  replaced  by  Bill  Bible,  who 
became  the  chairman,  and  Dennis  Amerine  was  replaced  by  Tom  Roche.  At  the  conclusion,  it  was  Bill 
Bible,  Tom  Roche,  and  myself  on  the  Board. 


One  of  the  applicants  that  came  before  you  when  you  were  on  the  Board  in  July  of 1987  was  Caesar’s 
Palace.  They  were  requesting  a  1.1  billion-dollar  recapitalization ,  and  you  were  very  adamant  in  your 
position  of  denying  the  request;  however,  you  had  little  support  from  the  other  board  members. 

Well,  that’s  basically  true.  The  application  was  considered  shortly  after  1  joined  the  Board.  It  was 
very  voluminous,  with  a  lot  of  financial  things  to  go  through.  But  in  essence,  what  they  wanted  to  do  was 
to  deregister  the  company  in  Nevada,  and  then  subsequently  merge  it  with  a  Delaware  corporation.  In  the 
process  they  were  going  to  give  away  $26.25  per  share.  The  underlying  idea  behind  all  this  was  to  defeat 
a  fellow  by  the  name  of  Martin  T.  Sosnoff  who  had  acquired  a  substantial  position  in  the  stock  of 
Caesar’s  Palace.  He  wanted  the  position,  as  1  recall,  of  a  director.  They  declined  to  give  him  that,  and  so 
he  then  commenced  an  attempt  to  take  over  the  company.  1  think  someone  figured  that  the  company  was 
probably  worth  about  $35.00  a  share,  and  at  the  time  Sosnoff  was  involved,  it  was  very  undervalued, 
probably  anywhere  from  twelve  to  sixteen  dollars.  It  moved  up  as  more  people  became  aware  of  what  was 
going  on.  And,  of  course,  it  subsequently  moved  up  very  high. 

But  at  any  rate — this  is  very  general — 1  felt  that  giving  away  $26.25  a  share  was  extremely 
detrimental  to  the  company  just  to  attempt  to  defeat  a  takeover.  As  1  saw  it,  only  the  officers  and  directors 
were  going  to  benefit  highly  by  selling  their  shares  in  the  existing  company.  And  1  think  at  that  time  1 
asked  most  of  them,  including  Mr.  [Henry]  Gluck,  how  many  shares  they  had,  and  then  with  the 
calculator  we  calculated  how  much  they  stood  to  earn.  Then,  as  1  recall,  they  were  going  to  each  receive 
10  percent  of  the  new  company.  So  they  were  going  to  gain  when  they  left  and  gain  when  they  moved 
their  corporation  to  Delaware.  Whether  the  gaming  company  survived  was  immaterial  to  them  because 
they  would  have  become  quite  wealthy.  1  felt  that  the  financial  viability  of  the  company  was  at  stake.  I 
felt  that  there  was  the  possibility  of  the  company  going  bankrupt  because  they  were  initially  only  going  to 
pay  interest  only  on  the  new  loans  which  was  a  serious  issue.  Ultimately,  1  think,  some  of  what  1  feared 
came  true,  because  later  Caesar’s  laid  off  several  hundred  people  during  a  business  downturn.  1  recall 
asking — 1  think  his  name  is  Mr.  Rogers,  who  had  shown  projections  for  the  1980s,  and  each  year,  of 
course,  Caesar’s  Palace  revenues  seemed  to  go  up  according  to  his  projections.  When  1  delved  into  what 
he  used  to  calculate  those  projections,  I  asked  him,  “Did  the  national  debt  have  anything  to  do  with  the 
projections?” 

“Oh,  of  course  not.” 

1  said,  “Did  oil  prices  or  any  crisis  have  anything  to  do  with  the  projections?” 


106 


“No,  of  course,  it  didn’t.” 

“Did  labor  strife  enter  into  any  of  the  calculation?” 

“No,  it  did  not.” 

And  so  it  went.  1  ultimately  asked  him  if  there  were  any  real  world  things  that  they  really  used  to 
make  this  calculation?  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

It  became  somewhat  adversarial  from  that  point  on.  My  fellow  board  members  realized  where  1 
was  going  with  this,  and  they  pretty  much  abandoned  me  and  any  further  efforts  that  1  made.  So  1 
undertook  to  give  those  people  a  very  difficult  time,  because  it  was  not,  in  my  mind,  provable  that  giving 
away  that  much  money  could  possibly  be  good  or  how  creating  it  as  a  debt  could  possibly  help  the 
company.  1  recall  one  incident  where  they  argued  about  a  possible  condition  on  the  new  license  after  1  had 
more  or  less  been  left  out  of  the  discussion.  They  wanted  to  argue  the  condition.  1  believe  it  was  around 
eight  million  dollars  for  maintenance  and  so  forth,  and  they  asked  for  a  recess.  Then  subsequently  they 
came  back  in  after  the  recess  and  they  assured  Chairman  Rumbolz  that  they  would  be  happy  to  spend  the 
eight  million  dollars  a  year  to  maintain  Caesar’s  Palace,  but  they  pleaded,  “Don’t  apply  it  in  the  form  of  a 
condition.” 

1,  in  my  inimitable  fashion,  told  them  that  was  the  most  pathetic  argument  I’d  ever  heard, 
[laughter]  and  that  Caesar’s  Palace  was  famous  for  its  brass,  marble,  and  lushness,  and  I  hardly  thought 
they  could  maintain  it  for  eight  million  dollars.  After  everything  that  was  talked  about,  of  course,  1  did  my 
little  injection  of  my  thoughts.  There  were  a  lot  of  interesting  aspects  of  that  discussion.  And  if  1  may  tell 
you,  this  is  sort  of  interesting:  I’d  asked  one  of  the  attorneys,  of  which  there  were  many,  to  give  me  an 
example  of  any  other  company  that  had  given  away  that  kind  of  money  in  some  kind  of  a  restructuring 
transaction,  and  the  first  one  that  the  attorney  offered  was  Kraft  Foods.  In  reality,  I  must  explain  that  I’m 
an  options  trader,  and  so  I  had  done  options  in  Kraft  Foods,  and  in  that  particular  instance  it  wasn’t  an 
option,  but  it  was  an  arbitrage.  Kraft  Foods,  I  think,  was  $103.  A  cash  offer  was  pending  at  $106  per 
share.  They’d  held  it  up  for  anti-trust  reasons.  That  was  under  the  Reagan  administration.  They  weren’t 
big  on  anti-trust.  I  spent  $103,000  to  make  $3,000,  and  after  commissions  made  about  $1600  on  the 
whole  thing.  The  anti-trust  delay  only  went  on  for  about  two  weeks,  and  so  that  was  it. 

So  when  he  gave  this  in  the  example,  I  interrupted  him  by  saying,  "This  has  no  comparison  at 
all."  Kraft  Foods  was  a  straight,  $106  cash  offer.  The  proposed  buyout  was  held  up  at  $103.00  for  about 
two  weeks,  as  I  explained,  and  I  went  on  to  give  the  rest  of  the  description  of  the  Kraft  transaction.  So 
then  he  went  to  the  RJR  Nabisco  buyout.  There  they  had  a  more  complex  situation  where  they  had  offered 
so  much  cash  and  so  much  new  stock.  Some  other  forms  of  payment  were  in  debentures,  and  a  variety  of 
things  occurred.  He  tried  to  use  that  as  an  example.  And,  ironically  again,  I  had  done  an  option  on  that 
transaction  also,  [laughter]  I  explained  to  him  in  detail  what  the  transaction  was  about,  and  at  that  point  he 
gave  up  and  apologized  and  said  he  was  afraid  he  couldn’t  give  me  an  example,  [laughter]  The  irony  of  it 
was  that  I  had  been  familiar  with  both  of  those  transactions,  and  no  one  in  the  audience,  of  course,  knew 
that,  and  they  thought  I  was  brilliant.  The  fact  was  I  was  very,  very  fortunate. 

Did  he  call  some  of  the  other  officers  who  stood  to  benefit  besides  Henry  Gluck? 


Oh,  all  of  them.  I  don’t  remember  all  their  names,  but  he  called  up  anyone  who  was  an  officer  or 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


107 


director  holding  shares  in  the  existing  company.  1  made  them  publicly  declare  how  many  shares  they  held 
and  how  many  millions  they  would  make  as  a  result  of  this  giveaway  program  that  they  were  conducting. 

Was  a  motion  ever  made  to  recommend  or  deny  this  action? 

Y es,  it  was  a  long,  drawn-out  hearing — probably  all  day,  as  1  recall.  Maybe  even  late  into  the 
evening.  Drexel  Burnham,  of  course,  was  there  in  force.  The  attorneys  were  there  in  force.  All  the 
officers,  directors  were  there.  But  subsequently,  board  member  Amerine  and  Chairman  Rumbolz  voted  in 
favor  of  the  recap.  1  was  the  dissenting  voter,  and  it  went  on  then  to  the  Commission  for  ultimate 
consideration.  As  you  know,  the  Board  recommends,  the  Commission  approves  or  denies,  or  does 
whatever  they  will  with  the  license.  The  interesting  part  of  that  is  that  the  Commission  held  several 
meetings,  and  I’ve  always  felt  that  they  believed,  or  they  knew  that  I  was  right,  that  it  was  financially  a 
debacle  that  Caesar’s  couldn’t  come  through  on.  After  several  meetings,  I  guess  to  the  delight  of  the 
Nevada  Gaming  Commission,  the  New  Jersey  Gaming  Commission,  because  Caesar’s  was  multi- 
jurisdictional  involved,  denied  the  application,  and  that  made  the  Nevada  part  of  it  moot.  I  always  felt 
very  good,  because  the  New  Jersey  Gaming  Commission  in  their  concluding  statements  indicated  that 
they  gave  great  weight  to  the  dissenting  member  of  the  Nevada  Gaming  Control  Board. 

In  1988  you  began  an  investigation  into  the  American  Coin  Company,  which  was  owned  by  the 
LaVecchia  family  and  Frank  Romano.  What  precipitated  your  investigation  into  that  company? 

Well,  as  I’ve  indicated,  my  background  is  that  of  a  police  officer,  and  on  a  particular  occasion 
prior  to  that,  the  Las  Vegas  Metropolitan  Police  Department  was  having  a  retirement  party  at  the  Gold 
Coast  for  about  six  metro  police  officers,  and  I  was  in  attendance.  It  was  at  that  party  that  a  former  police 
officer  approached  me  and  wanted  to  talk  to  me  about  American  Coin.  He  told  me  that  he  was  of  the 
opinion  that  American  Coin  had  taken  face  cards  out  of  the  decks  of  their  video  poker  machines,  and  he 
made  this  conclusion  because  he  felt  that  with  the  contracts  they  were  letting  .  .  .  that  if  it  was  legitimate, 
and  there  wasn’t  something  wrong,  they  couldn’t  survive  financially. 

Please  explain  what  American  Coin  Company  was.  Were  they  a  distributor  or  a  manufacturer? 

American  Coin  Company  was  a  slot  route  operator.  They  are  people  who  are  licensed  to  put  slot 
machines  on  the  property  of  another.  They  can  do  it  one  of  two  ways:  they  can  put  it  on  the  property  of  a 
person  who’s  not  licensed,  and  that  person  would  be  a  landlord  and  the  route  operator  would  be  the 
licensee.  Or  they  can  place  machines  on  the  property  of  a  person  who  holds  the  gaming  license  or  the 
person  who  owns  the  premises  could  apply  for  license,  and  then  they  would  put  machines  on  that  property 
and  share  revenue  with  the  route  operator.  That  would  be  called  a  participation.  The  reason  for  that  is,  that 
in  Nevada  you  cannot  share  in  the  revenues  of  gaming  unless  you’re  a  licensed  individual.  But  if  you  got 
licensed  you  could  participate  in  the  revenues — to  wit,  get  a  percentage.  If  you  weren’t  licensed  you 
would  then  be  paid  a  flat  fee  each  month  for  the  permission  to  put  machines  on  a  property.  American 
Coin,  the  route  operator,  was  involved  in  both  kinds:  landlord  situations  and  participation. 


108 


To  get  back  to  where  you  were,  you  were  saying  that  you  were  informed  that  some  of  the  video  poker  slot 
machines  had  the  face  cards  removed. 

That  is  what  my  friend  was  indicating  to  me.  1  will  tell  you  that  in  reality  1  had  no  clue.  But  1  had 
played  Mario  Brothers  with  my  kids  enough  to  know  that  they  could  bump  their  head  on  a  block  and  it 
could  turn  into  a  mushroom  or  a  grapevine  or  whatever.  So  it  was  clearly  conceivable  to  me  that  if 
someone  desired,  they  could  rig  a  slot  machine  to  work  any  way  they  wanted  it  to,  possibly  by  several  hits 
on  the  hold  buttons  in  some  sequence,  or  in  a  variety  of  ways.  But  to  me  it  was  conceivable.  What  I’d  told 
my  friend  was  that  1  would  appreciate  it  if  he’d  call  my  secretary  and  make  an  appointment  to  come  in  to 
my  office  and  see  me,  and  let’s  go  ahead  and  enjoy  the  party,  which  we  did.  He  did  make  that 
appointment,  and  he  did  come  in,  and  we  then  talked  about  his  allegation  in  more  detail.  1  tried  to 
understand  why  he  felt  so  strongly  about  this.  Like  1  said,  it  related  to  the  amounts  of  money  that 
American  Coin  would  be  deriving  in  the  participation  basis  that  1  was  talking  about,  and  how  much  it 
might  cost  them  to  do  what  they  were  going  to  do,  like  pay  all  royal  flushes  and  service  the  machines  and 
have  technicians  do  the  pay-outs  and  so  forth,  as  route  operators  do. 

At  the  conclusion  of  our  discussion,  he  told  me  of  seven  locations  where  he  thought  they  may 
have  taken  face  cards  out  of  the  deck  of  video  poker  machines.  Some  other  things  that  occurred  at  our 
meeting  that  were  interesting,  but,  at  any  rate,  it  was  subsequently  requested  that  the  Gaming  Control 
Board’s  electronic  laboratory  compare  the  EPROMS1  that  existed  in  the  machines  at  the  seven  locations 
provided  to  me  by  the  informant,  with  the  state-approved  master  EPROMS  maintained  by  the  Gaming 
Control  Board.  If  there  were  any  variations  between  the  machine  EPROMS  and  the  master  EPROM,  it 
would  immediately  show,  even  down  to  one  byte  of  information,  if  something  had  been  altered. 

After  some  period  of  time  the  gaming  agents  reported  back  to  me  that  there  were  at  least  70  to  80 
percent  of  the  EPROMS  which  were  checked  that  didn’t  compare  on  the  Kobitron  or  the  other  device  that 
was  used  to  test  the  EPROMS.  The  Kobitron  is  an  electronic  device  which  is  used  to  compare  the 
software  program  loaded  into  an  EPROM  with  the  actual  electronic  signature  of  the  master  EPROM.  That 
is  how  we  discovered  that  70  to  80  percent  of  the  tested  EPROMS  exhibited  an  incorrect  signature.  This 
finding,  of  course,  was  extremely  disturbing  and  an  electronic  lab  technician,  Ron  Harris,  pursued  the 
investigation  by  first  analyzing  the  source  code  for  the  games  software  program  which  had  been 
submitted  to  the  Board  by  the  American  Coin  Company  at  the  time  they  were  seeking  to  obtain  the 
Board’s  approval. 

Harris  was  a  very  bright  young  man,  whose  intelligence  had  not  been  documented  because  he  didn’t  have 
any  degrees  that  1  know  about.  He  was  just  a  very  smart  young  man  and  at  the  time  no  one  really  knew 
how  smart  he  was.  [laughter]  We  appreciated  his  skills  when  he  applied  them  on  our  behalf;  however,  we 
didn’t  appreciate  them  later  on,  and  I’ll  talk  about  that  later. 

Source  codes  are  usually  very  voluminous  and  somewhat  difficult  to  comprehend.  At  some  point 
in  the  analysis,  Harris  found  an  unusual  looking  area  which  was  described  as  pay  tables,  but  it  didn’t  seem 
to  correspond  with  the  submitted  source  code.  At  this  point  Harris  called  Larry  Volk,  the  programmer 
who  worked  for  American  Coin  and  who  was  involved  in  writing  the  software  program.  Harris  asked 
Larry  what  this  particular  area  was,  because  even  though  it  said  pay  tables,  it  didn’t  look  like  pay  tables. 
As  I  understand  Volk’s  response,  there  was  a  momentary  hesitation  on  the  phone  and  then  he  said,  “I 
better  come  down  and  talk  with  you  about  that.” 


1  EPROM:  Erasable,  programmable,  read-only  memory  computer  chips. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


109 


After  this  we  had  a  board  meeting,  and  as  luck  would  have  it,  Chairman  Bible  immediately  went 
back  to  Reno,  and  board  member  Dennis  Amerine  also  left  almost  immediately  in  order  to  help  his 
parents  who  were  in  the  process  of  moving.  I  had  returned  to  my  office  and  as  usual  was  looking  through 
a  stack  of  paperwork  when  an  entourage  of  people  came  into  my  office — from  Gaming  Board 
investigators  to  Deputies  Lisa  Miller  and  Mike  Wilson  of  the  attorney  general’s  staff.  During  the 
discussions  that  followed  they  explained  to  me  what  Harris  had  found  out  from  his  discussion  with 
American  Coin  programmer,  Larry  Volk.  Volk  had  admitted  to  inserting  a  gaff  into  the  slot  machine 
computer  programs  which  enabled  American  Coin  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of  royal  flushes  on  their 
video  poker  machines. 

The  board  investigators  had  identified  thirty-seven  locations  where  American  Coin  had  placed 
machines  on  property  locations  on  a  monthly  lease  arrangement.  The  investigators  could  not  identify  any 
of  the  locations  where  American  Coin  participated  with  a  licensee  because  the  Board’s  records  only 
reflected  the  name  of  the  licensee  and  not  the  name  of  any  route  operator,  if  one  existed.  The  investigators 
had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  majority  of  the  American  Coin  machines  were  rigged  as  cheating 
devices.  A  positive  that  came  out  of  this  investigation  was  that  it  did  lead  to  the  creation  of  regulation 
5.050  which  mandates  that  you  have  to  identify  anyone  that  you  pay  a  portion  of  your  revenues  to,  so  in 
that  way  the  participation  locations  can  be  identified. 

We  attempted  to  get  in  touch  with  Ellen  Whittemore,  another  deputy  attorney  general  lawyer,  and 
when  we  couldn’t  contact  her,  1  asked  Deputy  Attorney  General  Mike  Wilson  if  1  had  the  authority  to 
close  down  the  locations.  Mike,  bless  his  heart,  told  me  1  did  not.  1  subsequently  asked  Mr.  Wilson  if 
there  was  anything  in  the  law  that  said  1  had  to  abide  by  his  opinion  and  he  told  me  no.  [laughter]  1  said, 
“Good,  I’m  going  to  close  them  down.”  Before  we  actually  closed  the  locations  down,  Ellen  Whittemore 
was  contacted  on  the  telephone.  After  listening  to  the  facts  of  the  situation,  she  agreed  that  the  machines 
should  be  shut  down  and  sealed.  So  that  night  we  proceeded  to  close  down  the  slot  machines  at  the  thirty- 
seven  locations. 

The  following  day,  Frank  Romano,  who  was  licensed  with  American  Coin,  and  his  attorney,  Jeff  Clontz, 
came  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board  offices.  The  situation  was  discussed  at  length  and  Mr.  Romano 
subsequently  supplied  a  list  of  other  gaming  locations  where  American  Coin  participated  and  machines 
were  located  on  the  premises  of  a  licensed  location.  Those  machines  were  taken  out  of  service  and 
ultimately  seized  by  the  Board. 

By  this  time  a  lot  of  furor  had  gone  on,  but  I  think  very  justifiably  we  did  what  we  had  to  do. 
There  were  a  lot  of  procedural  problems  associated  with  the  sealing  and  seizure  of  the  slot  machines. 
Investigations  had  to  be  done.  People  wanted  their  money  from  the  coin  drop.  Like  the  participation 
people  would  say,  “We  want  our  percentage.”  And,  of  course,  we’d  seized  like  a  thousand  machines,  and, 
you  know,  doing  the  accounting  on  the  money  and  then  dividing  it  up,  paying  it  to  the  people  who 
deserved  it  and  so  forth  was  a  lot  of  work.  The  gaming  agents  had  other  things  to  do  besides  just  that, 
because  we  were  in  the  middle  of  a  very  serious  investigation.  One  time,  up  in  Carson  City,  I  think  they 
recessed  a  board  meeting  so  I  could  talk  to  Senator  Harry  Reid  about  some  lady  whom  I  had  talked  to  in 
my  office.  She  said  that  her  children  were  starving  within  one  week  [laughter]  out  of  this  dire  need  for 
their  participation  funds.  I  tried  to  be  tolerant  of  such  requests,  but  wasn’t  very  sympathetic  because  they 
weren’t  realistic.  That’s  just  a  silly  little  sideline,  but  Senator  Reid  had  called  me  on  that. 

Subsequently,  the  Board  got  a  search  warrant  for  the  American  Coin  offices,  which  were  on 
Industrial  Way,  I  believe,  at  the  time,  and  in  the  American  Coin  office  safe  they  found  a  tape.  Quite 
interestingly,  it  was  a  tape  recording  of  the  person  whom  I  shall  call  my  informant  originally,  who  had 


110 


come  to  see  me  in  my  office.  After  he  left  my  office  he  called  his  boss  and  was  describing  to  him  the 
meeting  that  we  had  just  completed.  Interestingly  enough,  best  1  can  figure  out,  someone  must  have 
placed  a  phone  tap  on  the  phone  of  my  informant’s  boss.  Maybe  American  Coin,  or  a  private  investigator, 
1  don’t  know  who,  but  obviously  they  were  associated  with  American  Coin  in  some  fashion  because  tape 
of  that  conversation  was  found  in  the  American  Coin  safe.  They  must  have  had  a  tap  on  the  boss’s 
telephone  because  the  cell  phone  and  the  hard  line  were  both  very  clear  and  audible.  As  1  understand  it, 
cell  phones’  signals  fluctuate  and  you  can’t  continuously  record  without  an  unbroken  conversation.  This 
recording  was  very  clear  and  it  dealt  with  the  discussion  with  me  and  some  other  matters  that  we  had 
discussed  about  a  sting  operation  that  one  of  my  fellow  police  friends  wanted  to  establish.  My  policeman 
friend  wanted  to  have  a  bar  with  slots.  He  said  they  could  get  building  inspectors,  drug  addicts,  route 
operators  .  .  .  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

...  thieves,  and  he  would  have  done  anything,  you  know,  if  he  could  have  set  up  that  kind  of  a 
sting  operation.  Of  course,  what  1  had  repeatedly  told  him  that  it  was  inconceivable  because  1  would  have 
had  to  somehow  done  something  improper  to  get  him  a  slot  license.  Couldn’t  do  that,  and  therefore  it 
never  came  to  completion  in  any  way,  but  we  had  talked  about  that  as  policemen  will  do.  The  informant 
was  a  former  policeman. 

As  American  Coin  progressed,  of  course,  we  ultimately  issued  complaints  against  the 
LaVecchias,  the  father  and  the  son,  and  also  Mr.  Romano.  We  also  filed  criminal  charges  in  the  hopes  of 
getting  a  criminal  complaint  against  all  of  them  with  the  district  attorney’s  office.  Tragically,  Larry  Volk, 
who  was  the  key  witness  in  this  situation,  was  shot  in  the  head  in  his  carport  and  killed.  The  police  later 
arrested  two  people  in  connection  with  that  murder,  and  there  were  some  links  to  the  LaVecchias,  not  Mr. 
Romano.  We  always  felt  that  the  murder  obviously  had  to  do  directly  with  Larry’s  cooperation  with  us  in 
identifying  what  he  had  done  for  American  Coin  in  creating  the  gaff.  1  understand  ultimately  Volk 
acknowledged  that,  in  fact,  they  had  submitted  an  illegal  EPROM,  which  passed  the  approval  process  and 
was  out  and  in  use,  so  that  EPROM  would  no  longer  compare  differently  from  the  approved  master, 
because  it  was  the  approved  master.  1  think  you  can  attribute  that  situation  to  the  fact  that  in  years  gone  by 
Nevada  basically  placed  their  trust  in  the  licensee  to  tell  them  precisely  what  the  machines  would  do.  The 
electronic  laboratory,  of  course,  would  set  up  tests  and  they  would  try  to  see  if  it  did  what  the 
manufacturer  said  it  did,  but  they  had  no  way  of  identifying  aberrations  that  might  occur  on  command,  or 
demand,  or  something  of  that  nature.  1  don’t  believe  up  to  that  time  that  we  ever  went  out  in  the  field  and 
checked  EPROMS.  Now  it’s  a  matter  of  mandatory  sampling  every  year  to  check  to  see  that  EPROMS 
are  as  they  were  approved  and  things  of  that  nature.  Then  they  changed  a  lot  of  things  in  terms  of  how 
you  submit  programs,  and,  hopefully,  they’ve  made  it  better.  The  criminal  complaint  never  came  to 
fruition  because  of  Mr.  Volk’s  murder.  The  Board’s  administrative  portion  ended  up  causing  the 
LaVecchias  and  Frank  Romano  to  surrender  their  license,  or  they  were  revoked.  1  believe  that  they  were 
ordered  to  pay  fines  of  some  amount  that  1  don’t  recall.  I  don’t  know  if  those  fines  have  ever  been 
completely  paid  to  this  date. 

Did  the  LaVecchias  leave  town  then  after  that? 


Yes,  1  understand  they  hurriedly  left  town,  and  the  last  1  had  heard  they  were  in  Hawaii,  but  1 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


111 


don’t  know  that  for  sure. 

Was  Mr.  Romano  their  general  manager  or  chief  executive  officer? 

I  don’t  recall.  I  think  he  was  the  manager.  He  always  contended  that  he  had  no  knowledge  of  the 
cheating.  1  found  that  hard  to  believe,  but  that  was  always  his  contention,  and  we  could  never  prove 
unequivocally  that  he  did,  in  fact,  know. 

They  were  lucky >  to  get  off  as  they  did. 

Oh,  yes,  very  much  so.  They  should  have  all  gone  to  jail,  to  be  honest  about  it.  Mr.  Romano  later 
sued  me  and  probably  every  other  member  of  the  Commission  and  Board,  and  that  case  was  dismissed,  1 
think,  around  1999  or  2000. 

In  his  lawsuit  did  he  allege  that  you  had  colluded  with  United  Gaming  to  investigate  American  Coin? 

Yes,  he  did.  Part  of  that  was  what  was  discussed  about  that  sting  operation  that  1  told  you  about. 


Yes. 


That  1  had  a  friend  on  the  police  department  who  is  the  master  of  sting  operations.  His  name  is 
Lieutenant  Loren  Stevens.  Lieutenant  Stevens  had  conducted  a  wide  variety  of  sting  operations  with 
various  representations  to  entice  criminals  to  come  in  and  more  or  less  confess,  or  sell  their  stolen  goods, 
and  things  of  that  nature.  Lieutenant  Stevens  was  the  one  who  would  have  liked  to  have  had  that  bar  1 
talked  about. 

Yes. 


It  was  impossible  to  do,  because  without  a  gaming  license  it  would  have  been  some  kind  of  an 
illegal  operation,  therefore  we  could  never  establish  it,  and  it  never  was.  It  was  in  discussion  with  my 
informant  friend  that  day  that  I  had  sort  of  reminisced,  because  he,  too,  was  a  police  officer.  And  I  told 
him  Loren  has  always  wanted  a  bar,  and  I’d  love  to  have  given  him  a  bar,  but  I  couldn’t  do  it.  I  said  it  was 
a  conflict  of  interest.  And  I  said  not  only  that,  it  would  have  cost  a  lot  of  money.  My  informant  friend, 
who  was  with  another  company,  offered  to  give  me  money  to  establish  that  bar,  and  1  again  reiterated  that 
it  was  a  conflict  and  the  money  was  immaterial  because  we  couldn’t  do  it.  It  was  in  this  conversation  with 
his  boss  after  he  left  my  office  that  the  informant  had  mentioned  that  he  had  offered  me  that  money  and 
that  I  had  declined,  saying  that  it  was  a  conflict  of  interest.  I  am  so  thankful  that  he  did  have  that  on  the 
tape.  It  was  out  of  that,  that  Romano,  evidently,  or  somebody  in  association  with  American  Coin,  gave  it 
to  the  press  that  I  had  taken  money.  Of  course,  they  put  a  different  slant  on  it  then;  there  was  no  mention 
of  the  possibility  of  opening  a  bar  to  operate  a  police  sting.  None  of  that  ever  occurred;  it  was  a  matter  of 
discussion.  It  was  a  matter  of  what  the  police  wanted  to  do  and  I  couldn’t  assist  them  with.  It  was  out  of 
that,  that  I  was  later  accused  of  taking  money — not  very  seriously,  of  course.  There  was  no  probe,  and  I 
begged  them  to  produce  anyone  who  would  say  I  took  money,  because  I  would  sue  them  instantaneously. 
It  was  a  fabricated  falsehood. 


112 


[laughter] 

It  was  a  crazy  time.  But  desperate  people  do  desperate  things,  and  criminals  will  lie.  [laughter] 
Yes.  [laughter]  They  do  lie,  yes. 

1  always  found  it  interesting — my  whole  career,  1  took  on  whoever  it  was.  1  didn’t  know  how  to 
back  down.  I’ve  caused  mistrials  in  federal  court;  I’ve  caused  the  loss  of  indictments  in  Washington, 

D.C.,  by  arresting  a  guy  that  was  a  burglar;  I’ve  gone  to  jail  for  contempt  in  support  of  what  1  believed  in; 
I’ve  done  just  a  whole  variety  of  things.  In  my  whole  life,  I’ve  even  accused  a  former  district  attorney  of 
collusion.  He  goes  back  some  time.  I’m  not  going  to  get  into  his  name,  but  I’ve  done  a  lot  of  things  like 
that.  And  people  would  say,  "Gee,  that’s  great,  Gerry."  And  they’d  say,  “There’s  a  guy  who  stands  up  for 
what  he  believes,  his  whole  life.” 

[laughter] 

And  then  the  first  time  some  would-be  crook  suggests  I  did  something  wrong,  the  world  comes 
down  on  you  saying,  “Did  you  do  that?” 

[laughter] 

No.  [laughter] 

[laughter]  You  previously  stated  that  you  never  reveal  the  identity  of  an  informant.  Did  that  policy  ever 
cause  you  any  legal  problems? 

Oh,  sure.  People  tried  to  have  me  arrested  for  that  in  the  Matis  Marcus  case.  I  had  an  informant 
there,  too.  And  during  deposition  I  was  asked  to  reveal  the  name  of  that  informant,  which  I  refused  to  do. 
They  called  the  evidence  commissioner,  or  whatever  his  title  was,  in  order  to  get  a  ruling  on  it.  But  I’d 
informed  the  attorney  in  that  case  that  I  wasn’t  going  to  tell  them,  and  if  they  wanted  to  have  me  arrested 
they  ought  to  spend  more  time  doing  that,  because  I  wasn’t  going  to  talk  to  them  under  any  circumstances 
about  the  name  of  my  informant.  Y ou  don’t  get  informants  if  you  expose  them.  People  tell  you  things, 
and  if  they  ask  for  confidential  retention  of  their  name,  then  that’s  what  you  must  do.  Informants  are  very 
valuable  in  any  type  of  police  work.  In  the  Matis  Marcus  case — I  think  I’m  getting  off  a  little  bit — but  I 
had  met  with  some  informants  through  another  informant.  I  exposed  the  ones  that  I  met  with,  but  I  never 
exposed  the  one  who  led  me  to  them,  because  there  was  no  confidentiality  agreement  given  to  the  ones  I 
met  with.  There  was  a  confidentiality  agreement  with  the  one  that  took  me  to  them.  So  people  try  to  make 
you  tell  them  who  your  informants  are,  and  really,  that’s  a  privilege  that’s  protected  under  the  law,  but  I 
wouldn’t  do  it  whether  there  was  a  law  or  not. 

Were  you  ever  arrested  for  it? 


Oh,  no.  No,  not  for  that.  I  was  arrested  for  a  different  situation,  [laughter] 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


113 


What  were  you  arrested  for? 

Well,  that’s  sort  of  an  interesting  story.  Somewhat  lengthy.  And  if  you  want  it  I’ll  be  happy  to  go 
into  it.  There  was  a  fellow  by  the  name  of  Dr.  Hal  Joe  Harms.  He  was  from  Aachen,  West  Germany.  He 
came  to  Las  Vegas  and  he  hired  a  minister,  a  pilot,  and  a  video  person  to  take  videos,  and  then  he  went  up 
in  an  airplane  with  them  and  headed  out  toward  Searchlight  and  told  the  pilot  to  go  to  ninety-five  hundred 
feet.  When  the  pilot  said  they  were  at  ninety-five  hundred  feet  after  a  short  period  of  time  Mr.  Harms 
instructed  his  video  person  to  turn  his  camera  on.  He  then  was  sitting  in  the  back  seat  of  the  small  airplane 
and  he  reached  over  the  minister  lady  seated  in  the  right  front  seat,  cranked  the  door  open  and  sort  of 
bailed  out.  They,  of  course,  turned  the  tape  over  to  us  when  they  returned  and  landed  at  the  airport.  We 
looked  at  the  videotape,  and  what  it  showed  was  Dr.  Harms  dressed  in  a  dinner  jacket,  cummerbund,  with 
a  microphone,  and  he  was  standing  by  an  airplane,  obviously,  at  an  airport  with  the  minister  lady,  the 
pilot,  and  he  had  his  video  man  recording.  After  he  had  introduced  everybody,  he  kind  of  looked  skyward 
and  pronounced  that  it’s  about  time  to  go  up  and  see  what  we  shall  see.  After  they  were  in  the  air,  he  told 
the  pilot  to  go  down  Boulder  Highway,  head  out  towards  Searchlight,  climb  to  the  ninety-five-hundred- 
foot  altitude,  and  at  some  point,  after  they’d  reached  that  height,  he  told  his  cameraman  to  turn  the  camera 
on  and  then  they  videotaped  him  falling  out  of  the  door  of  the  airplane.  The  minister  lady  immediately 
starts  screaming,  “See  if  he’s  hanging  on  the  wheel!  See  if  he’s  hanging  on  the  wheel!”  1  would  tell  you 
he  was  not  hanging  on  the  wheel,  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

So  after  we  had  learned  what  happened,  the  next  day  we  went  out  and  we  tried  to  search  for  this 
individual  in  the  desert  and  we  couldn’t  find  him.  We  then  had  the  pilot  that  night  take  the  plane  back  up 
and  go  to  where  he  thought  he  was  when  the  man  jumped  out,  and  we  had  McCarran  Airport  triangulate 
the  position.  The  following  day  we  went  out  and  searched  again,  and  this  time  we  did  find  the  gentleman 
that  was  depicted  on  the  tape.  His  dinner  jacket  was  pulled  up,  and  shirt  was  up,  and  his  pants  were  pulled 
down.  What  he  had,  which  wasn’t  visible  on  the  tape,  was  a  compact  parachute  which  he  had  bound  to  his 
body  with  ace  bandages.  He  did  get  the  parachute  to  unfurl,  but  unfortunately  it  tore,  and  he  bounced 
rather  roughly  off  of  the  desert  floor.  We  also  found  about  a  mile  from  there  a  vehicle,  which  we  were 
able  later  to  identify  as  his  vehicle.  1  believe  it  was  a  rental  to  Dr.  Harms.  It  had  two  flashlights  propped 
up  on  books  in  the  windshield  pointed  skyward.  The  batteries  were  by  now  dead. 

What  we  surmised  or  concluded  was  that  when  he  had  told  the  pilot  to  go  out  toward  Searchlight, 
which  is  a  very  darkened  area,  and  climb  to  the  ninety-five  hundred  feet,  he  saw  the  twinkle  of  the  light, 
which  must  have  been  shining  through  the  windshield;  he  then  bailed  out.  1  think  his  intent  was  probably 
to  survive.  The  purpose  for  the  stunt,  we’re  not  sure.  We  thought  at  the  time  it  might  be  the  fact  that  he 
was  a  fugitive  trying  to  feign  his  death,  possibly  to  beat  a  fugitive  charge.  It  could  have  been  an  insurance 
scam.  In  that  situation  there’ d  have  to  be  a  beneficiary.  If  there  was  a  beneficiary  in  something  that 
resulted  in  the  death  of  another  individual — to  wit,  a  illegal  act  resulting  in  the  death  of  another 
individual,  we  would  deem  that  felony  murder.  So  we  considered  it  a  criminal  death  investigation.  News 
reporter  Mark  Fierro  of  Channel  8  called  me  later  on  and  wanted  a  copy  of  that  videotape.  1  told  him  he 
couldn’t  have  it  because  it  was  evidence  in  a  death  investigation.  We  talked  for  some  time.  He  told  me 
that  they  had  an  attorney  over  at  the  courthouse  trying  to  get  a  writ  from  District  Court  Judge  Paul 


114 


Goldman.  1  told  him  I  really  didn’t  care  whether  he  got  a  writ  or  not,  they  weren’t  getting  the  videotape.  1 
had  heard  various  stories  about  Judge  Goldman  and  wasn’t  real  anxious  to  challenge  him.  Fierro  said  to 
me,  “Where  will  you  be  after  we  conclude  this  phone  call?” 

1  looked  at  my  watch  and  it  was  four  twenty-five  p.m.,  and  I  said,  “You  know  what,  I’m  going  to 
be  out  of  here  the  minute  we  hang  up,”  because  I  didn’t  want  to  talk  to  Judge  Goldman.  We  concluded 
our  conversation.  I  then  got  immediately  up  from  my  desk.  I  told  my  secretary  that  I  would  be  gone  for 
the  day.  I  went  down  the  hall  to  the  homicide  section  to  talk  to  my  homicide  lieutenant,  Paul  Conner,  to 
see  what  was  going  on  and  what  were  the  latest  developments  in  the  Hal  Joe  Harms  situation.  While 
talking  to  him,  a  page  came  over  the  detective  bureau  paging  system.  It  was  my  secretary  checking  if  I 
was  still  in  the  building  and  she  sounded  frantic.  I  went  back  down  to  the  office.  She  looked  upset.  I  said 
to  her,  “What’s  wrong  with  you?”  And  I  was  concerned,  of  course,  because  my  wife  Gail  rode  with  me  to 
work,  and  I  thought  maybe  something  had  happened  to  her. 

My  secretary  said,  “A  man  called.  It  was  either  Judge  Goldman  or  George  Goldman” — quite  a 
distinction  to  be  made  .  .  . 

[laughter] 

.  .  .  and  he  wanted  to  talk  to  me.  When  she  told  him  that  I  had  left  for  the  day,  he  immediately 
became  extremely  irate,  used  profanity,  and  if  I  may  quote,  said,  “Tell  him  to  get  his  ass  in  my  office  in 
ten  minutes  or  I’ll  throw  him  in  jail!”  and  hung  up. 

I  told  her,  I  said,  “Well,  he’s  nuts.” 

[laughter] 

“Write  me  a  memo  describing  the  phone  call.”  And  so  she  did  that. 

[laughter] 

I  left  for  the  day.  The  next  day  I  was  served  with  an  order  to  show  cause,  and  there  was  a  court 
date.  I  don’t  remember  what  the  date  was,  but  October  10,  at  9:00  a.m.  is  the  date  and  time  that  comes  to 
mind.  I  was  required  to  appear  before  Judge  Goldman.  I  had  informed  the  sheriff,  of  course,  of  the  earlier 
incident  and  the  fact  that  I  now  was  served  with  an  order  to  show  cause.  The  sheriff  was  John  Moran,  and 
he  said  he  would  go  to  court  with  me.  That  morning  at  about  nine  a.m.  we  went  over  to  the  district  court.  I 
met  with  deputy  district  attorney  Chuck  Hauser.  Mr.  Hauser  told  me  that  District  Attorney  Rex  Bell  had 
talked  to  the  judge,  and  he  felt  that  if  I  would  simply  tell  the  judge  I  was  sorry  that  everything  would  be 
OK.  I  recall  sort  of  patting  Chuck  on  the  shoulder,  saying,  “I’m  not  made  that  way,  and  I  didn’t  do 
anything  wrong,  and  I’m  not  apologizing  to  the  judge.” 

I  don’t  think  that  conversation  had  anything  to  do  with  it,  but  later,  as  we  waited  in  the  hallway,  I 
was  told  that  the  hearing  would  be  held  in  open  court.  I’d  originally  thought  it  would  be  in  the  judge’s 
office,  and  I  had  taken  a  tape  recorder  with  me  for  that  eventuality.  When  I  was  told  it  was  going  to  be 
held  in  open  court,  I  went  to  the  courtroom  door  and  opened  it  up,  and  I  saw  a  court  reporter.  I  felt 
somewhat  reassured  by  the  fact  that  there  was  a  reporter  there.  Ultimately,  my  case  was  called.  The 
sheriff  went  in  with  me.  It  was,  “Good  morning,  Sheriff.  Good  morning,  Your  Honor.  Morning, 

Detective.  Good  morning,  Your  Honor.”  I  was  commander  at  the  time,  a  little  more  than  a  detective,  but 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


115 


that  was  OK. 

He  said  words  and  substance  to  the  effect  of,  “Do  you  know  why  you’re  here?” 

And  I  said,  “1  assume  it’s  because  1  didn’t  return  your  phone  call.” 

He  said  to  me,  “Why  didn’t  you  return  my  phone  call?” 

And  I  said,  “1  will  respond  in  this  fashion.”  1  said,  “1  decline  to  return  a  phone  call  to  someone 
who  was  described  to  me  by  my  secretary  as  rude  and  irrational” — and  really,  she  had  said,  “Crazy,”  but  1 
toned  it  down  for  the  judge’s  benefit .  .  . 

[laughter] 

“  .  .  .  And  who  would  not  stay  on  the  line  long  enough  to  leave  his  phone  number."  At  about  that 
point  he  slammed  the  gavel  down  and  told  me  1  was  in  contempt,  and  that  1  was  to  be  placed  under  arrest. 
The  bailiff  was  Dell  LaFontaine.  Dell  came  over  and  he  stood  in  front  of  me.  I  knew  Dell  and  he  said, 
“Commander,  1  don’t  know  what  to  do.” 

1  said,  “Dell,  he’s  a  crazy  son  of  a  bitch.” 

[laughter] 

“Take  my  weapon,  put  me  under  arrest  just  like  he  told  you.”  With  some  hesitancy  Dell  did  that. 
They  put  me  in  handcuffs  and  then  placed  me  in  the  jury  box  where  1  could  be  a  spectacle  for  everyone  to 
see.  During  that  waiting  period,  there  was  a  recess,  and  it  was,  “All  rise,”  and  1  wouldn’t  get  up. 

[laughter] 

[laughter] 

And  when  he  came  back  in  it  was,  “All  rise,”  and  I  wouldn’t  get  up.  Probably  it’s  because  1 
thought  it  was  an  act  of  respect  to  stand,  and,  of  course,  I  had  no  respect  for  this  judge  after  what  I’d  just 
been  exposed  to.  During  his  following  cases,  I  think  there  were  three  people  that  were  there  for  parole 
violation.  The  third  person  1  remember  rather  well,  because  the  judge  gave  a  number  of  stipulations  and 
said,  “Do  you  have  any  questions?” 

The  man  responded,  “Oh,  yes,  I  do,”  and  his  attorney  nudged  him  so  hard  that  it  was  obvious. 
[laughter] 

The  idea  was,  “Don’t  you  see  who’s  sitting  there?  It’s  a  police  commander”  [laughter]  “under 
arrest  and  you  want  to  ask  this  guy  a  question?” 

[laughter] 

But  it  was  actually  humorous,  and  even  the  judge  laughed.  I  had  to  laugh  a  little  bit  about  that. 
The  judge  went  ahead  and  responded  to  his  questions,  and  then  it  was  concluded.  With  that  I  was  then 
marched  off  to  the  jail  with  my  fellow  inmates,  [laughter] 


[laughter] 


116 


The  situation  was  that  1  had  to  be  confined  to  the  Clark  County  jail.  What  Judge  Goldman 
couldn’t  do  is  he  couldn’t  determine  where  in  the  county  jail  that  1  would  be  confined.  So  after  1  was 
photographed  and  fingerprinted,  1  directed  the  jailors  to  take  me  to  the  jail  director’s  office.  He  had  a  very 
nice  office  up  on  the  tenth  floor  or  so.  I,  with  all  apologies,  told  him  that  I  was  going  to  take  over  his 
office.  1  had  the  kitchen  bring  in  some  cookies  and  milk  and  some  sliced  apples  and  place  them  on  the 
table.  I  then  prepared  a  statement  wherein  1  was  absolutely  ridiculing  and  criticizing  the  judge  for  his 
tyrannical  actions,  and  then  1  allowed  each  TV  station  to  come  in  one  at  a  time,  with  the  exception  of 
Channel  8,  which  1  refused  to  allow  in.  1  told  the  other  news  people  the  rules  for  the  interview,  that,  “You 
can  videotape  me  while  1  read  my  condemnation  statement  of  Judge  Goldman.  Then  the  cameras  go  out, 
and  the  camera  people  go  out,  and  you  can  ask  me  any  question  you  want.”  The  idea  was  that  1  wasn’t 
going  to  have  excerpts  of  some  stupid  statement  1  might  have  mumbled  about  shown  on  TV;  1  wanted 
them  to  show  me,  [laughter]  you  know,  being  very  critical  of  the  judge.  There  was  an  interesting  situation 
that  occurred:  Harold  Hyman,  who  is  a  reporter  with  the  Las  Vegas  Sun,  also  came  up  to  visit  me  while  1 
was  in  jail.  I  should  say  that  in  the  meantime  my  personal  attorney,  Gary  Lang,  was  working  on  a  writ  to 
get  me  out.  It  took  a  supreme  court  writ  because  of  the  way  the  judge  made  his  ruling.  No  other  district 
court  judge  could  get  me  out.  It  took  a  supreme  court  writ.  Attorney  Gary  Lang  worked  on  that.  In  the 
meantime,  Harold  Hyman  came  into  the  jail  and  he  read  to  me  what  sounded  like  exactly  like  what 
happened  in  the  courtroom  that  day.  1  said,  “Harold,  where  did  you  get  that?” 

He  said,  “Well,  when  1  heard  you  were  arrested,  1  went  down  and  saw  Mary  Duffin,  the  court 
reporter.”  He  said,  “She  read  directly  from  her  tape,  and  I  typed  exactly  what  she  told  me  on  the 
typewriter  in  her  office.”  This  later  became  very  important.  So  Harold  then  published  the  story,  which  had 
the  transcript  as  he  described  it  in  the  article.  By  the  time  1  got  ahold  of  the  legal  transcript,  a  week  or  ten 
days  had  passed.  1  don’t  recall.  But  the  transcript  had  additions  to  it,  and  it  had  been  altered  somewhat.  A 
startling  revelation  when  you  consider  the  seriousness  of  changing  what  was  said  in  the  court  hearing. 

Yes. 


So  1  ultimately  was  sprung  on  a  supreme  court  writ.  Upon  returning  to  my  office,  Gary  Waddell 
with  Channel  8  called  my  office. 

Although  it  wasn’t  exactly  true,  1  told  my  secretary  to  tell  Mr.  Waddell  that  on  the  advice  of 
counsel,  and  as  a  party  to  a  future  lawsuit,  1  couldn’t  talk  to  him. 

[laughter] 

1  subsequently  obtained  a  copy  of  the  court  transcript  and  read  it.  It  had  information  in  there  on  a 
future  court  date,  which  1  was  unaware  of,  and  it  was  slightly  modified  to  temper  the  tone  of  what  was 
said.  Unfortunately,  the  tape  recorder  that  1  had  with  me  was  not  turned  on  because  1  was,  1  guess,  misled 
into  believing  that  the  court  reporter  would  accurately  report  the  situation.  At  any  rate,  1  didn’t  turn  the 
recorder  on.  1  later  called  the  court  reporter  and  asked  her  to  come  in  to  the  Detective  Bureau.  Her  name 
was  Mary  Duffin.  She  came  in  with  an  attorney  by  the  name  of  Frank  Kremin.  Mr.  Kremin  declined  to  let 
her  speak  to  me.  And  I  more  or  less  told  her  that  this  man  doesn’t  represent  you,  he  represents  Judge 
Goldman.  1  said,  “Unless  1  misunderstand,  part  of  your  duties,  it  is  to  attest  to  the  truth  and  accuracy  of 
the  things  that  you  do,  like  transcripts.  In  my  opinion,  this  transcript  has  been  altered,”  and  I  wanted  to 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


117 


talk  to  her  about  that.  The  attorney  would  never  let  her  speak  to  me  and  told  me  that  the  transcript  was  the 
best  evidence.  1  told  him,  “Well,  that’s  a  term  of  art.”  In  the  legal  profession  it  is  the  best  evidence.  But  1 
told  him  that  reasonable  people  will  listen  to  reasonable  evidence  and  I  had  a  tape  recorder  with  me  that 
day. 

[laughter] 

He  sort  of  got  excited  and  asked  me  what  1  expected,  and  1  said,  “Just  about  what  happened.  1 
went  to  jail.”  Well,  ultimately,  they  left — unhappy,  of  course.  During  that  discussion,  1  had  with  me  a 
detective  by  the  name  of  A1  Levitt.  Right  after  they  left  1  said,  “Al,  did  you  hear  precisely  what  1  told 
them?” 

He  said,  “Yes.” 

1  said,  “Tell  me  what  it  was  you  heard.” 

He  says,  “You  told  them  you  had  a  recorder.” 

1  said,  “That’s  true.  What  else,  Al?” 

He  said,  “You  didn’t  tell  them  that  you  didn’t  have  it  on.” 

1  said,  “That’s  true  also,  Al.” 

[laughter] 

We  got  a  search  warrant  after  that  and  we  seized  the  tape  out  of  Duffm’s  transcribing  machine. 

We  seized  the  ribbon  out  of  the  typewriter  in  her  office,  and  subsequently  we  had  them  both  translated. 
From  the  typewriter  ribbon  we  got  the  transcript  as  Harold  Hyman  had  typed  it.  And  when  we  looked  at 
the  stenograph  machine  tape  and  had  it  transcribed,  we  saw  that  the  court  case  involving  me  ended,  then 
we  had  the  three  people  on  probation  violation.  The  one  asking  if  he  could  question  the  judge  about 
several  stipulations.  Immediately  following  that  discussion  was  an  insert  which  was  my  court  case 
number  and  time  set  for  hearing  on  civil  contempt,  October  24,  nine  a.m.  That  came  out  of  the  blue.  There 
was  no  direction  to  notify  my  attorney  or  me,  and  that  ultimately  appeared  in  the  transcript.  A  clear  case 
of  an  addition  to  the  transcript.  This  was  clear  proof  that  it  was  done  outside  my  presence  and  outside  the 
presence  of  my  attorney.  Although,  yes,  1  was  sitting  in  court,  1  didn’t  know  what  the  case  number  was;  I 
didn’t  know  that  it  referred  to  me  since  my  case  had  been  concluded.  1  think  the  ploy  was  that  on  October 
24  at  9:05  a.m.  1  would  be  dragged  out  of  my  office  and  arrested  again. 

1  should  go  back  and  say  that  once  1  was  freed  from  jail,  1  met  with  a  member  of  the  Nevada 
Supreme  Court  and  I  begged  his  indulgence  before  he  told  me  anything,  because  1  didn’t  want  to  be  in 
opposition,  or  contrary,  to  what  he  may  have  to  say.  So  what  I  did  was  1  told  him  how  extremely  angered 
1  was,  how  abusive  1  thought  the  judge  was  in  his  tyrannical  conduct,  and  that  1  would  accept  nothing  less 
than  something  being  done  to  him  in  a  legitimate,  legal  fashion,  that  1  didn’t  want  to  compromise,  1  didn’t 
want  the  supreme  court  or  the  judge  to  tell  me  that  they  could  smooth  it  over.  1  wanted  something  done 
with  this  man  and  I  didn’t  want  them  [the  supreme  court]  to  tell  me  that  they  would  smooth  it  over  and 
then  1  would  stand  in  opposition  to  their  position.  So  that’s  why  1  told  him  everything  1  had  to  say  before  1 
even  gave  him  the  opportunity  to  talk. 

He  was  very  considerate,  and  surprisingly,  they  commissioned  me  to  investigate  the  judge,  and  a 
variety  of  things  that  he  had  done,  and  respond  back  to  them  within  about  seven  days.  1  took  that 
assignment  very  seriously.  1  put  quite  a  number  of  my  best  detectives  on  the  investigation  of  the  judge. 


118 


And  ultimately,  we  submitted  twenty-six  incidents  that  had  occurred  which  reflected  poorly  on  the 
judge’s  judgment  and  conduct.  One  was  that  he  had  an  elderly  lady  by  the  name  of  Mrs.  Cockrell 
arrested.  She  was  eighty -seven  years  old  and  refused  to  testify.  Goldman  was  conducting  a  murder  trial  at 
the  time.  Mrs.  Cockrell’s  son  was  the  suspect.  I’m  assuming  that  as  one  of  the  last  living  things  she  did, 
she  didn’t  want  to  testify  against  her  son,  and  so  she  refused  to  cooperate,  although  she  had  earlier 
cooperated  with  the  grand  jury.  He  put  her  in  jail,  and  he  told  the  jury  to  not  worry,  that  he  had  the  jail 
call  him  every  hour  on  the  hour,  and  that  she  got  more  sleep  than  he  did.  The  truth  of  that  situation  is  that 
at  seven  o’clock  he  called  the  jail  and  told  them,  “Don’t  bother  me  anymore.” 

[laughter] 

And  so  he  lied.  It  just  shows  his  character.  He  put  a  gentleman  by  the  name  of  Mr.  Kinard  in  jail 
during  that  same  trial.  He  had  Gary  Kinard  called  into  the  courtroom.  There  were  some  construction 
people  on  the  roof,  and  there  was  a  muffled  bumping  or  a  pounding  sound.  He  said  to  Mr.  Kinard,  “Do 
you  hear  that  noise?” 

Mr.  Kinard,  trying  to  be  helpful  to  the  judge,  said,  “Yes  Sir,  I  do.”  And  at  that  point  Mr.  Kinard 
was  put  under  arrest. 

[laughter] 

Later  Goldman’s  bailiff  told  him,  “Judge,  he’s  the  maintenance  man,  and  that’s  the  construction 
company  on  the  roof.  He  doesn’t  have  anything  to  do  with  it.”  He  had  also  threatened  the  county  recorder 
with  jail  time  as  a  result  of  a  mistake  in  some  type  of  a  document  and  things  of  that  nature.  So  anyway,  all 
of  these  things  were  submitted  in  a  report  to  the  supreme  court.  They  ultimately  held  a  judicial 
disciplinary  hearing.  Judge  Goldman  was  represented  by  attorney  by  the  name  of  Cobeaga.  During  the 
conversation  of  that  hearing,  Mr.  Cobeaga  said  to  me  that  he  understood  I  had  a  recorder  with  me  at  the 
time  I  was  in  court,  and  I  acknowledged  that  I  did.  He  said  to  me,  “Did  you  know  that’s  a  felony?” 

I  said,  “No,  I  did  not.” 

He  said,  “Well,  what  is  your  response  to  that?” 

I  said,  “Let  me  respond  like  this:  I  had  a  recorder  with  me  that  day,  just  as  I  do  now,  sir,”  at  which 
time  he  concluded  that  line  of  questioning,  and  so  the  hearing  went.  Frank  Kremin  was  the  only  person 
outside  of  the  investigation  who  knew  about  the  recorder. 

[laughter] 

In  trying  to  conclude  it,  the  judge  was  permanently  removed  from  the  bench.  The  supreme  court 
found  everybody  wrong,  except  me,  which  is  documented  in  Nevada  Jurisprudence  under  “Cunningham 
versus  District  Court,”  and  it’s  one  of  the  better  dissertations  on  what  contempt  is. 

[laughter]  That’s  a  great  story,  [laughter]  Thank  you  very  much. 

You’re  welcome. 


To  get  back  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  later  on  in  September  of  1988  it  was  discovered  that  Ralph 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


119 


Engelstad,  owner  of  the  Imperial  Palace,  had  what  they  called  a  “war  room  ”  where  he  had  a  collection 
of  Nazi  memorabilia  and  Nazi  vehicles.  In  this  room  he  would  hold  parties  celebrating  Hitler’s  birthday. 
This,  of  course,  gained  wide  publicity  all  over  the  United  States,  especially  in  Nevada.  What  was  the 
Control  Board’s  reaction  to  what  appeared  to  be  a  shrine  to  Nazi  Germany  and  to  Adolf  Hitler? 

Well,  of  course,  we  were  extremely  concerned,  because  we  thought  it  was  totally  improper.  When 
it  came  to  our  attention,  of  course,  the  investigative  enforcement  people  did  follow  up  and  verify  that  such 
a  room  existed,  that  murals  were  painted  on  the  walls,  and  subsequently  they  identified  witnesses  who 
verified  that,  in  fact,  two  such  parties,  that  we  knew  of,  had  been  held.  The  allegation  was,  of  course,  that 
it  honored  Hitler  because  they  were  held  on  his  birthday,  and  they  had  cakes  with  swastikas  and  things  of 
that  nature.  So  we,  of  course,  commenced  an  investigation  and  subsequently  filed  the  complaint  with  the 
Commission  against  Mr.  Engelstad  for  what  I  think  we  felt  were  things  that  were  inimical  to  the  policy  of 
State  of  Nevada  and  unsuitable  conduct  and  method  of  operation. 

Was  he  really  a  Nazi  lover,  or  was  it  just  a  hobby,  or  why  did  he  do  this? 

Well,  he  obviously  was  extremely  fascinated  with  Hitler  and  World  War  II  far  beyond  what  you 
would  call  normal.  He  concentrated  on  all  types  of  Nazi  vehicles  and  paraphernalia.  Not  just  one,  but  he 
had  many  of  them,  as  many  as  he  could  buy.  He  proclaimed  that,  of  course,  it  was  simply  an  interest  in 
auto  collecting,  that  he  didn’t  in  any  way  have  an  unusual  admiration  for  Hitler,  that  he  didn’t  do  the 
parties  to  honor  Hitler.  He  denied  all  those  things.  I  personally  felt  that  he  was  not  truthful.  He  had  a  bust 
of  Hitler  in  his  office.  These  parties  were  ridiculous  in  my  mind.  They  were  outrageous,  they  were 
inconsiderate,  they  were  insensitive,  and  to  do  that  sort  of  thing,  to  me,  defied  the  explanation  that  it  was 
just  done  to  have  a  party.  I  don’t  know  what  his  excuse  was.  1  think  it  was  to  show  off  his  vehicle 
collection,  to  show  his  employees  and  guests  what  he  had  accumulated.  1  don’t  know.  You’d  have  to  go 
back  and  determine  what  he  said  about  that. 

Well,  there  must  have  been  a  tremendous  public  outcry. 

Oh,  there  was.  I  mean,  it  was  actually  nationwide.  It  might  have  gone  international.  Almost 
everybody  found  his  conduct  in  holding  those  parties  just  absolutely  outrageous.  The  Jewish  community 
was  very  upset  and  they  were  totally  inflamed.  They  wanted  him  closed  down,  license  revoked.  Nothing 
would  have  been  too  harsh  for  him. 

Yes. 


And  although  I  could  agree  with  their  sentiment,  there  were  a  lot  of  things  at  stake  here.  First,  Mr. 
Engelstad  had  been  a  good  licensee  in  terms  of  following  regulations  and  paying  his  taxes.  That’s  what 
we  want  him  to  do.  As  I  recall,  there  were  no  earlier  disciplinary  actions  against  him,  and  there  were  some 
two  thousand  employees  who  had  jobs  at  the  Imperial  Palace.  So  it  was  a  bigger  issue  than  whether  Mr. 
Engelstad  should  leave,  be  thrown  out  of  the  gaming  business,  or  have  his  license  revoked.  But,  yes,  there 
was  a  lot  of  hue  and  cry.  I  think  the  neo-Nazis  paraded  on  his  behalf. 


[laughter] 


120 


There  was  all  kinds  of  civil  unrest  as  a  result  of  this  sort  of  thing.  It  went  on  for  some  period  of 
time,  but  it  did  ultimately  end  in  two  counts  being  filed  against  Mr.  Engelstad.  Those  counts  carried  with 
them,  as  1  recall,  a  hundred-thousand-dollar  maximum  fine  on  each  count.  Subsequently,  1  think  they 
decided  they  didn’t  want  this  complaint  to  go  public.  I’m  talking  about  the  Engelstads.  I’m  sure  the 
Commission  didn’t  want  it  to  go  public  either,  because  none  of  this  was  going  to  do  the  state  of  Nevada, 
or  its  gaming  industry,  any  real  good.  But  I  think  it  would  have  done  a  lot  more  to  injure  Mr.  Engelstad, 
because  there  was  a  potential  consequence  of  license  revocation  and  all  the  things  that  go  with  it.  So  a 
stipulation  was  hammered  out  where  he  would  pay  a  fine  of  1.5  million  dollars,  which  was  1.3  million 
above  the  statutory  allowance.  I  believe  they  paid  that  in  order  to  avoid  the  ultimate  consequence  of  a 
public  hearing,  which  in  my  mind  was  probably  OK  because,  as  I  said,  the  idea  of  any  disciplinary  action 
is  to  correct  the  errant  behavior.  We  also  had  to  take  into  account  the  welfare  of  the  many  employees  who 
were  innocent  in  this  matter  being  injured  by  being  put  out  of  work  if,  in  fact,  we  revoked  the  license. 
There  were  a  number  of  conditions  applied  by  the  Board,  and  then  several,  I  think,  subsequently  applied 
by  the  Commission  before  it  was  concluded.  It  was  generally  agreed  by  the  attorneys  for  the  attorney 
general’s  office  and  Mr.  Engelstad  that  it  was  in  the  best  interests  of  the  state  and  Mr.  Engelstad  to  accept 
the  stipulation  and  pay  the  fines.  He  wasn’t  happy  about  it,  but  there  were  a  lot  of  people  who  weren’t 
happy  with  him  either,  including  myself. 

That  had  to  be  possibly  the  largest  fine  up  to  that  time. 

I  think  it  was  the  second  largest.  I  believe  the  largest  came  out  of  the  Stardust  situation,  Tobman 
and  Sachs,  as  a  result  of  their  improper  conduct.  I  don’t  know  who  all  was  fined.  I  think  it  was  about  3.5 
million.  This  was  1.5  [million  dollars]  and  probably  the  second  largest  fine  imposed. 

In  1988,  Masao  Nangaku  was  licensed  as  owner  of  the  Dunes,  and  Dennis  Gomes  was  licensed  as  the 
CEO.  Would  you  tell  us  your  recollections  of  that  investigation? 

Well,  the  Nangaku  investigation  was  very  lengthy.  Mr.  Nangaku  was  a  very  wealthy  man.  And 
my  memory  won’t  serve  me  exactly,  but  I  think  he  had  something  like  fifty-two  companies  worldwide. 
Some  of  them  were  in  Hawaii  and  elsewhere.  Many  were  worldwide.  I  believe  he  came  into  his  fortunes 
after  World  War  II  when  Japan  was  rebuilding. 

So  he  was  a  resident  of  Japan? 

Yes.  And  so  it  took  a  long  time  to  investigate  the  Nangaku  companies.  Some  of  the  difficulties 
with  it  were  the  language  barriers,  and  also  the  obtaining  of  various  records  was  difficult  because  in  Japan 
they  don’t  give  out  those  records  too  easily  for  legal  reasons.  I  know  that  at  the  licensing  hearings  it  was 
extremely  difficult.  We  tried  to  talk  to  Mr.  Nangaku,  who  didn’t  speak  a  word  of  English.  We  went 
through  translators.  And  the  truth  of  it  was  he  didn’t  get  the  lull  essence  of  what  we  asked  him,  and  we 
didn’t  get  the  full  essence  of  what  he  said. 

I  remember  at  a  break  a  young  British-speaking  gentleman  came  up  to  me  and  was  saying  that 
Mr.  Nangaku  said  such  and  such.  And  I  said,  “No,  what  he  said  was  blah,  blah,  blah.” 

And  he  said,  “No,  he  said  such  and  such.” 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


121 


And  I  said,  “Are  you  asking  me  or  telling  you?” 

He  says,  “I'm  telling  you.” 

[laughter] 

He  said,  “1  speak  Japanese,”  and  what  the  interpreter  said  wasn’t  what  Mr.  Nangaku  had  relayed. 

And  I  said,  "Whoa!" 

That  was  just  another  point.  People  in  the  audience  were  even  recognizing  the  difficulty  of  it. 
Well,  at  any  rate,  that  sort  of  gives  you  an  idea  of  the  difficulty  we  have  with  non-English-speaking 
people.  And  then  some  of  the  persons  that  Mr.  Nangaku  had  surrounding  him  really  were  of  questionable 
character.  You  couldn’t  prove  anything,  but  you  really  wondered.  Ultimately,  when  they  got  into  a 
licensed  position  would  they  be  loyal,  honest,  that  sort  of  thing?  Y ou  didn’t  really  know,  but  you  had  no 
proof  against  it.  1  know  that  I  proclaimed  that,  as  far  as  1  was  concerned,  1  would  never  again  vote  to 
license  anybody  who  was  not  an  English-speaking  person — the  reason  being  we  find  so  many  English- 
speaking  people  that  do  not  understand  or  follow  the  regulations.  And  when  there’s  such  a  tremendous 
language  barrier,  you  know  very  well  that  the  licensee  has  no  ability  to  follow  the  regulations,  and  he’s  at 
the  mercy  of  those  that  surround  him.  If  those  that  surround  him  are  not  absolutely  conscientious  and 
sincere  about  understanding  the  regulation,  it  isn’t  even  going  to  be  close.  So  that  was  my  reaction  to  it.  I 
think  Mr.  Nangaku  was  an  honest  person.  1  have  no  reason  to  think  otherwise.  But  1  do  believe  that  some 
of  the  people  he  had  working  around  him  were  only  interested  in  their  personal  welfare  and  not  Mr. 
Nangaku’ s. 

The  Japanese  people  working  around  him? 

Yes,  maybe  they  took  shortcuts.  Maybe  that’s  the  nicest  way  to  say  it.  Maybe  they  took  shortcuts 
because  they  were  used  to  doing  business  to  make  money,  not  doing  business  to  make  money  and  follow 
regulation.  Regulation  is  not  the  easiest  way  to  do  things,  and  I’m  sure  that  throughout  his  business 
empire  they  did  things  in  the  most  efficient  way  that  they  knew  how.  I’ve  always  told  people  regulation  is 
not  an  efficient  way  to  do  things;  what  it  does  is  it  protects  the  bottom  line  so  that  we  can  gain  and  collect 
the  proper  revenues,  and  that’s  what  we’re  interested  in.  It  also  protects  the  licensee  so  that  he  doesn’t 
gain  a  lot  of  partners  throughout  the  operation  of  his  business.  It  was  an  extremely  difficult  investigation, 
as  I  recall.  Dennis  Gomes  was  brought  in  at  some  point  prior  to  the  completion  of  the  investigation,  or 
possibly  as  a  continuation  thereof.  I  don’t  recall  how  that  worked,  but  I  believe  Mr.  Gomes  was  licensed 
as  Clark  Management,  and  Mr.  Nangaku  in  that  arrangement  would  be  paid  a  fee  like  he  was  a  landlord. 
He  did  own  the  premises,  but  not  being  licensed  at  that  point  in  time  was  not  able  to  share  in  a  percent  of 
revenue.  That  goes  back  to  kind  of  like  the  participation  thing  that  I  talked  about  in  American  Coin. 

Yes. 


So  they  tried  to  establish  a  flat  fee  that  he  would  be  paid,  and  that’s  the  way  Mr.  Gomes 
ultimately  was  licensed  to  operate  the  Dunes  during  that  interim  period.  I  don’t  know  that  it  was  at  all 
fair,  but  that’s  the  way  it  works.  I  think  subsequently,  Mr.  Nangaku  probably  lost  large  sums  of  money. 
As  I  recall,  he  was  routinely  supplementing  that  operation  with  literally  millions  of  dollars.  And  so  I’m 
sure  it  was  not  a  good  experience  for  him. 


122 


Do  you  recall  how  long  that  situation  lasted? 

You  know,  1  want  to  say  six  months.  And  I  don’t  know  how  accurate  that  is,  but  that’s  the  figure 
that  comes  to  mind. 

So  that  was  kind  of  a  unique  situation,  wasn ’t  it,  to  license  the  Clark  Company?  The  Clark  Company  was 
the  name  of  the  company  that  Dennis  Gomes  headed? 

Yes,  Clark  Management,  or  something  like  that. 

Clark  Management.  So  Clark  Management  was  actually  licensed  to  operate  the  property? 

Right,  they  were.  I  think  all  of  the  revenues  that  were  collectible  such  as  markers,  Gomes  took 
with  him.  In  other  words,  any  receivables  that  existed  were  his.  He  took  those  with  him.  1  think  probably 
whatever  percentage  of  the  markers  he  collected,  I’m  reasonably  certain  he  didn’t  pay  gaming  tax  on.  So 
he  had  quite  a  windfall,  but  all  legitimate,  as  far  as  I  know. 

Did  the  Gaming  Control  Board  unanimously  recommend  that  Nangaku  got  licensed  eventually? 

My  recollection  is  that  it  was  a  unanimous  thing.  He  had  been  put  through  such  a  difficult 
situation  that  without  something  more  than  maybe  his  inability  to  speak  the  language,  which  I  think  was 
an  extremely  valid  consideration,  even  myself,  having  made  that  decision  that  I’d  never  do  it  again,  didn’t 
want  to  see  him  not  get  licensed.  I  felt  he  was  entitled  to  be  allowed  to  make  the  effort.  I  think  probably  if 
he  could  have  read  the  future,  he’d  have  wished  I  would  have  denied  him.  [laughter] 

Yes.  [laughter] 

Being  fair,  we  licensed  him,  and  unfortunately,  I  think  he  lost  great  sums  of  money. 

So  then  when  he  was  licensed,  Clark  Management  and  Dennis  Gomes  went  out  the  window,  or  did  they 
still  operate  as  managers? 

Y ou  know,  I  don’t  recall  that  point  exactly.  They  may  have  worked  in  the  managerial  position  for 
a  while,  subsequently  changing  to  someone  else.  I’m  not  clear  on  that  at  all. 

How  was  his  success,  then,  would  you  say?  If  he  could  have  read  into  the  future,  he  wouldn ’t  have  wanted 
the  license.  Did  he  eventually  lose  the  property,  go  bankrupt,  or  have  to  sell  it,  or  what  was  the  outcome? 

I  wish  I  could  remember  that  exactly.  I  do  remember  the  monthly  monetary  input  by  Mr. 

Nangaku  was  very  large,  as  we  kept  a  very  close  financial  track  of  that.  He  was  supplementing  operating 
money  to  a  great  extent.  I  think  what  he  did  is  he  ultimately  sold  the  property  to  Steve  Wynn  and  got  out 
of  there  as  fast  as  he  knew  how.  That’s  my  recollection,  that  he  was  not  a  successful  gaming  person,  that 
he  sold  the  property,  and  that  was  the  end  of  him. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


123 


He  sold  it  to  Steve  Wynn? 

Yes,  1  think  so. 

And  that  is  where  the  Bellagio  is  now? 

Yes.  Right. 

In  February  of  1989,  Sheldon  Adelson  came  before  the  Board  requesting  a  nonrestricted  gaming  license 
for  the  Sands  Hotel  in  Las  Vegas.  Also  requesting  licensing  at  the  Sands  was  the  Aristocrat  Hotels  of 
Nevada ,  Incorporated ,  headed  by  Henry  Lewin.  What  problems  did  the  Board  have  with  these 
applications? 

Well,  1  recall  the  biggest  problem  1  had  was  with  Mr.  Lewin  and  the  suitability  factor.  There  was 
quite  a  bit  of  information  to  indicate  that  Mr.  Lewin  was  a  womanizer  and  had  done  some  totally 
inappropriate  things  with  employees  when  he  was  at  the  hotel  they  worked  before.  1  think  he  was  with  the 
Hilton.  And  it  was  those  incidents  that  he  had  been  involved  with  at  the  Hilton  that  led  to  the  major 
portion  of  the  evidence  to  go  against  his  suitability. 

1  believe  that  it  was  sometime  back  in  1988  that  Sheldon  Adelson  agreed  to  buy  the  Sands  Hotel 
from  Kirk  Kerkorian.  He  would  accomplish  the  purchase  through  a  partnership  called  the  Interface 
Group.  The  partnership  consisted  of  Sheldon  Adelson,  Irwin  Chafetz,  Theodore  Cutler,  one  or  two  others, 
and  a  brother-in-law  whose  names  I  cannot  recall.  Not  being  remembered  is  a  good  thing  in  this 
application.  Although  being  remembered  does  not  mean  that  the  applicants  had  suitability  problems,  if  an 
applicant  had  concerns  regarding  suitability,  I  remember.  Included  in  the  application  for  the  purpose  of 
operating  the  Sands  Hotel  and  Casino  was  the  Aristocrat  Hotels  of  Nevada.  Persons  with  Aristocrat 
Hotels  seeking  a  license  were  Henri  Lewin,  Larry  Lewin,  his  son,  and  Paul  Klapper  and  possibly  one 
other  individual  with  no  suitability  concerns.  The  Sands  Hotel  and  Casino  gaming  license  application  had 
a  little  bit  of  everything  that  the  Gaming  Control  Board  and  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  should  take 
into  account  when  approving  or  denying  a  license. 

In  the  Nevada  Gaming  Control  Act,  the  qualifications  to  be  considered  for  suitability  or  approval 
of  a  gaming  license  are  clearly  set  out.  If  the  issue  arises  at  the  hearing  or  is  discovered  through 
investigation,  the  statute  states  that  the  burden  of  proving  the  qualification  to  receive  a  license  or  to  be 
found  suitable  is  on  the  applicant. 

If  I  may,  I  would  like  to  paraphrase  some  of  the  pertinent  sections  of  the  relevant  statute.  For  an 
applicant  or  person  to  receive  a  gaming  license,  they  must  be  of  good  character,  [meaning]  honesty  and 
integrity.  Their  prior  activities,  criminal  record,  if  any,  reputation,  habits  and  associations  must  not  pose  a 
threat  to  the  public  interest  or  to  effective  regulation  and  control  of  gaming.  The  applicant  must  in  all 
other  respects  be  qualified  to  be  licensed  or  found  suitable  consistent  with  the  declared  policy  of  the  state. 
A  license  to  operate  a  gaming  establishment  must  not  be  issued  unless  the  Commission  is  satisfied  that 
the  applicant  has  adequate  business  probity,  competence  and  experience  in  gaming  or  generally,  and  the 
finances  are  adequate  for  the  proposed  operation,  and  the  money  is  from  a  suitable  source. 

Several  of  the  applicants  had  issues  which  became  areas  of  concern  and  could  be  grounds  for  the 
denial  of  a  license.  Such  a  denial  could  be  based  on  one  or  more  of  the  above  factors  or  under  the  power 


124 


granted  by  statute  to  the  Board  and  Commission,  “for  any  cause  deemed  reasonable.”  1  would  ultimately 
disagree  with  my  fellow  board  members  regarding  some  aspects  of  suitability  for  the  licensing  of  specific 
applicants  in  this  matter  and  the  Commission  would  totally  disagree  with  the  Board  on  certain  aspects  of 
the  application.  These  differences  subsequently  became  a  serious  focus  of  disagreement  between  the 
Commission  and  myself.  1  will  discuss  this  dispute  later. 

The  two-tiered  system  of  Nevada  gaming  control  provides  that  the  Gaming  Control  Board  is  a 
full-time  agency  and  the  Commission  is  part  time.  The  Board  has  all  of  the  power  and  authority  to 
recommend  the  approval,  denial,  limiting  or  conditioning  of  a  license  applicant,  as  does  the  Commission. 
The  difference  is  that  the  Board  can  only  recommend  and  the  Commission  has  the  final  authority  to 
accept  or  reject  the  Board’s  recommendation.  1  often  felt  that  the  Commission  was  too  permissive  and  did 
not  follow  the  state’s  declared  policy  of  strict  regulation  of  all  persons,  locations,  practices,  associations 
and  activities  related  to  the  operation  of  licensed  gaming  establishments.  The  fact  that  the  Board  could 
only  recommend  was  difficult  for  me  to  accept  when  the  Commission  exhibited  a  permissive  attitude.  I 
expressed  disagreement  with  the  Commission’s  decisions  so  often  that  Commission  Chairman  John 
O’Reilly  placed  that  portion  of  the  statute  in  a  picture  frame  and  sent  it  to  me. 

The  Sands  Hotel  and  Casino  gaming  application  submitted  by  the  Interface  Group  and  Aristocrat 
Hotels  took  a  considerable  time  to  investigate.  After  the  investigation  was  nearly  complete,  1  remember 
attending  at  least  one  investigative  hearing  which  dealt  with  Henri  Lewin’s  situations  where  he  was 
questioned  about  the  details  of  those  events  and  evidence  in  support  of  the  accusations  was  examined. 
There  were  legal  documents  relating  to  some  of  the  allegations  and  a  check  written  by  Mr.  Lewin  to  one 
of  the  ladies  who  complained  of  his  misconduct  in  a  lawsuit.  In  addition  to  the  investigative  hearing,  there 
was  a  large  summary  of  the  entire  investigation  prepared  by  members  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board’s 
staff  which  detailed  the  issues  concerning  the  applications  and  the  involved  individuals,  if  any  existed. 

The  summaries  also,  just  as  the  term  implies,  provided  an  explanation  of  the  entire  proposed  gaming 
operation,  future  plans,  sources  and  types  of  financing. 

After  the  investigation  was  completed,  the  board  members  were  permitted  to  meet  with  the 
investigators  in  what  is  called  a  “Rump  Session.”  The  purpose  of  such  a  session  is  to  clarify  with  the 
investigators  any  details  which  may  not  be  clearly  understood  and  to  view  any  documentation  referred  to 
in  the  summary  which  a  board  member  may  wish  to  examine.  A  deputy  attorney  general  was  always 
present  during  rump  to  insure  that  the  Nevada  Open  Meeting  Law  was  not  violated.  Board  members  were 
only  allowed  to  ask  questions  and  never  permitted  to  express  opinions.  Deliberation  between  the  members 
is  strictly  forbidden.  If  you  even  said  something  as  seemingly  innocent  as,  “That’s  odd,”  you  would  be 
reprimanded  by  legal  counsel  for  expressing  an  opinion.  Y ou  soon  learned  to  just  ask  questions  and  keep 
your  thoughts  to  yourself  until  the  public  hearing. 

As  the  hearing  date  grew  very  near,  I  stopped  by  the  billiards  hall  to  see  some  of  my  pool  hall 
friends  and  shoot  some  billiards  to  relax.  One  of  the  guys,  Russell  Swanky,  was  an  ex-police  officer  and  I 
asked  him  if  he  had  ever  heard  of  a  guy  by  the  name  of  Henry  Vara.  He  said,  “Hell,  I  used  to  work  in  one 
of  his  gay  bars  in  Atlanta,  Georgia.”  Since  Henry  Vara  was  either  a  friend  of  acquaintance  of  several  of 
the  applicants  in  the  Interface  Group,  and  in  some  instances  a  business  partner,  I  pursued  the  conversation 
with  great  interest.  Originally,  I  treated  Russell  as  an  informant,  but  since  he  is  now  deceased,  1  want  to 
give  him  credit  for  helping  me.  Russell  was  a  valued  friend.  During  my  conversation  with  Russell 
regarding  what  he  knew  about  Vara’s  Atlanta  operation,  he  claimed  they  would  cancel  out  [not  count  the 
funds  in  reported  revenue]  certain  cash  registers  and  told  me  about  the  types  of  immoral  conduct  that  was 
permitted  to  go  on  in  the  club.  I  asked  Russell  to  go  with  me  that  night  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


125 


office  where  late  at  night  we  recorded  his  statement.  He  described  a  cruise  ship,  which  1  believe  was 
owned  by  Vara,  that  went  through  the  Panama  Canal  and  fees  were  paid  out  of  a  suitcase  filled  with  what 
Russell  thought  was  approximately  a  million  dollars.  He  also  described  a  shooting  incident  committed 
somewhere  in  North  Carolina  involving  Vara-associated  people.  No  one  was  killed  or  injured  in  the 
incident,  but  you  got  the  idea  that  you  would  not  want  to  make  those  people  angry  with  you.  Vara  was  not 
an  applicant  in  the  Sands  Hotel  application,  but  along  with  other  information  developed  by  the  Board’s 
investigators,  Henry  Vara’s  character  went  to  the  issue  of  the  association  and  the  character  and  integrity 
of  several  of  the  applicants.  1  felt  that  such  associations  not  only  reflected  on  the  attributes  of  some  of  the 
applicants,  but  also  their  judgements  which  could  carry  over  into  gaming. 

Mr.  Adelson  could  be  expected  to  be  aware  of  most  of  the  areas  of  concern  in  the  joint 
applications  of  Interface  and  Aristocrat  because  at  the  end  of  the  Board’s  investigation,  the  applicants  and 
their  attorneys  are  invited  to  attend  a  closing  conference.  At  that  conference,  the  areas  of  concern  which 
were  developed  during  the  investigation  are  discussed.  This  gives  the  applicant  a  heads-up  as  to  what  may 
be  asked  at  the  licensing  hearing  and  provides  the  opportunity  to  prepare  a  response  if  it  becomes 
necessary.  With  the  abundance  of  concerns  in  the  Sands  application  and  the  last-minute  revelations  from 
my  friend  Russell,  there  was  a  fair  amount  of  anticipation  leading  up  to  the  hearing.  Not  only  was  this 
going  to  be  a  difficult  hearing,  but  the  purchase  of  a  hotel  could  possibly  be  negated,  people’s  jobs  could 
be  jeopardized,  improvement  investments  in  the  Sands  Hotel  could  be  cancelled  and  the  state’s  welfare 
could  be  at  stake. 

In  the  early  part  of  1989,  the  day  of  the  hearing  arrived.  The  hearing  was  held  in  Carson  City.  1 
don’t  think  the  concerns  in  the  application  had  much  of  anything  to  do  with  the  location  where  the  hearing 
was  held  because  the  Board  and  Commission  hearings  are  alternated  between  Las  Vegas  and  Carson  City 
each  month.  The  room  was  filled  with  participants  and  spectators.  Although  the  hearing  room  was  full,  it 
probably  would  have  been  packed  if  held  in  Las  Vegas  because  of  the  local  interest.  In  the  beginning  of 
the  hearing,  the  Sands  attorney  was  given  the  opportunity  to  describe  the  application  and  the  proposed 
improvement  to  the  Sands  Hotel.  They  were  going  to  build  a  large  convention  center  and  add  additional 
rooms  to  the  hotel.  The  financing  for  the  project  was  a  combination  of  monetary  contributions  and  loans 
from  the  Interface  Group  and  Drexel  Burnham  was  hired  to  raise  a  large  portion  of  the  funding.  Michael 
Milken’s  affiliation  with  Drexel  Burnham  and  his  stock  fraud  conviction  dealing  with  junk  bonds  sales 
raised  concerns  about  the  suitability  of  Drexel  Burnham  to  raise  monies  as  a  portion  of  the  funds 
proposed  for  the  Sands  improvements,  but  that  concern  never  materialized  to  the  point  of  disqualifying 
the  firm  or  the  money. 

Mr.  Adelson  made  his  presentation  regarding  his  other  businesses  which  would  be  beneficial  to 
the  overall  marketing  plan  of  the  Sands.  I  think  he  owned  an  airline  and  a  travel  agency  which  could  be 
useful  as  marketing  tools.  He  also  owned  COMDEX  which  very  successfully  produced  computer-related 
trade  shows  nationally  and  some  internationally.  These  trade  shows  generated  large  sums  of  money  which 
put  Interface  in  a  good  financial  position.  He  also  spoke  highly  of  Mr.  Henri  Lewin  and  after  his 
accolades  in  support  of  Mr.  Lewin’ s  talents  and  value  to  the  proposed  operation,  said  something  to  the 
effect  that  without  him,  he  might  not  go  through  with  the  deal.  I  do  not  remember  the  exact  verbal 
exchange,  but  I  am  sure  that  I  suggested  that  may  be  a  problem,  but  that  would  be  his  decision.  It  would 
not  make  any  difference  to  me  and  1  told  him  that  there  were  problems  contained  in  Mr.  Lewin’ s 
background  investigation  which  would  become  apparent  during  the  hearing. 

Some  of  the  more  prominent  issues  in  the  application  dealt  with  Sheldon  Adelson,  Henry  Lewin, 
Irwin  Chafetz,  Paul  Klapper,  and  to  a  lesser  extent,  Cutler.  In  earlier  years,  Mr.  Adelson  had,  in  my 


126 


opinion,  an  excessive  number  of  civil  litigations  ranging  from  ordinary  bills  involving  utilities  to  matters 
involving  several  hundreds  of  thousands  of  dollars.  Excessive  litigation  may  reflect  on  his  business 
probity  so  these  civil  actions  were  considered  potentially  serious  matters  and  discussed  at  some  length. 
The  Board  ultimately  accepted  the  explanation  that  the  lawsuits  were  probably  the  result  of  business 
difficulties  during  those  years  and  not  a  matter  of  integrity.  Regarding  Henry  Vara,  Adelson  claimed  to 
know  who  he  was  to  say  hello,  but  never  had  any  business  relationship  with  him.  Any  time  Adelson  was 
asked  for  his  opinion  as  it  related  to  the  other  applicants,  especially  Irwin  Chafetz’s  involvement  with 
Henry  Vara  or  questionable  actions  on  his  part  of  issues  relating  to  Henry  Lewin,  he  consistently 
defended  their  character  and  never  gave  any  credence  or  was  unable  to  understand  the  Board’s  suitability 
or  regulatory  concerns. 

Chafetz  had  extensive  involvement  with  Henry  Vara.  The  Board’s  investigation  indicated  that 
Henry  Vara  had  licensing  problems  in  the  Boston  area,  he  was  accused  of  tax  evasion,  had  a  number  of 
his  bars  seized  in  the  process,  was  involved  in  misleading  bar  investment  scams  where  the  investor  took 
all  the  risk,  allegedly  skimmed  revenue  from  his  bars  where  drugs  were  sold  and  other  immoral  acts  took 
place.  Generally  had  a  very  bad  reputation.  Chafetz  socialized  with  Vara  on  a  regular  basis,  helped  bail 
Vara  out  of  jail,  refused  to  testify  at  one  of  Vara’ s  trials  by  claiming  his  Fifth  Amendment  privilege,  took 
loans  from  Vara,  loaned  Vara  money,  invested  in  his  cruise  ship,  invested  in  two  radio  stations  with  him, 
invested  in  one  of  his  gay  bars  in  San  Francisco,  and  a  variety  of  other  unusual  transactions.  Chafetz  had 
another  good  friend  who  was  convicted  of  income  tax  evasion,  another  accused  of  arson,  another  accused 
of  possessing  illegal  gambling  paraphernalia,  another  accused  of  wire  fraud  and  possession  of  a  ton  and 
one-half  of  marijuana. 

To  the  best  of  my  recollection,  Henri  Lewin  did  not  know  Henry  Vara,  but  had  his  own  problems. 
He  was  accused  of  giving  complimentaries  to  a  labor  leader  in  violation  of  federal  law.  Lewin  was  also 
accused  of  allegedly  providing  complimentaries  for  hotel  rooms  in  Hawaii  for  Federal  Judge  Harry 
Claiborne,  who  was  involved  in  the  labor  leader’s  case.  Lewin  was  accused  of  making  unapproved 
payments  to  a  fellow  in  Hawaii  who  made  gaming  debt  collections  and  other  unauthorized  chores  for  the 
Hilton  Hotel.  Lewin  was  also  accused  of  assaulting  a  Hilton  Hotel  cocktail  waitress  in  Barron  Hilton’s 
office.  The  Board’s  investigation  supported  the  accusation  that  the  cocktail  waitress  was  ordered  to 
contact  Mr.  Lewin  in  his  office.  After  she  arrived,  another  Hilton  employee  who  was  in  the  office  area  left 
the  area  or  was  asked  to  leave.  The  cocktail  waitress  and  Lewin  then  went  into  what  we  believed  was 
Barron  Hilton’s  office  where  the  inappropriate  advances  were  allegedly  committed.  Our  information 
indicated  that  he  gave  her  a  strand  of  pearls  as  a  gift  before  she  departed.  She  subsequently  sued  him  in 
federal  court.  The  case  was  settled  without  a  trial  and  the  agreement  was  confidential,  but  during  our 
investigation,  a  Lewin  personal  check  for  a  large  amount  of  money  made  out  to  the  former  cocktail 
waitress  was  discovered.  In  his  application,  Lewin  did  not  even  acknowledge  that  she  had  sued  him  and 
subsequently  when  confronted  with  the  details,  never  admitted  that  he  did  anything  inappropriate  to  her. 
The  Board  had  information  of  a  similar  assault  on  another  lady  who  never  sued  him,  but  she  too  received 
a  strand  of  pearls.  In  police  jargon,  that  is  called  modus  operandi  or  method  of  operation.  I  have 
deliberately  not  described  these  situations  in  detail,  but  the  board  members  took  a  very  dim  view  of  his 
actions. 

The  next  applicant  the  Board  had  serious  problems  with  was  Paul  Klapper.  Henry  Vara  was  a 
good  friend,  although  to  our  knowledge,  Klapper  had  never  entered  into  a  business  relationship  with  him, 
but  their  association  extended  back  for  many  years.  Klapper  had  an  extensive  number  of  civil  cases 
including  non-payment  of  taxes,  a  long-time  association  and  business  involvement  with  illegal 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


127 


bookmakers,  he  was  involved  in  illegal  gambling  and  a  variety  of  pending  business  problems. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing,  Member  Dennis  Amerine  supported  by  Chairman  Bill  Bible 
recommended  a  limited  license  for  Irwin  Chafetz  conditioned  that  he  divest  all  investments  with  Henry 
Vara  and  that  he  disassociate  with  Vara  and  five  of  the  other  people  discussed  earlier.  I  thought  this  was 
ridiculous.  If  Chafetz  was  not  unsuitable  as  a  result  of  his  associations,  I  never  saw  anyone  who  was.  I 
also  thought  there  were  concerns  dealing  with  his  judgement,  honesty,  and  integrity,  but  he  was  approved 
by  the  Board  on  a  split  vote  of  two  to  one.  I  guess  that  I  was  still  clinging  to  that  silly  idea  of  strict 
regulation.  One  of  my  favorite  sayings  was,  “If  you  don’t  get  rid  of  a  flawed  applicant,  you  end  up  with  a 
flawed  licensee.”  Gaming  is  a  privileged  industry  and  it  is  important  to  reject  unsuitable  persons  and 
discipline  those  who  do  wrong.  I  had  a  consimilar  saying,  “It  is  important  to  punish  wrongdoers  so  that 
the  good  people  can  appreciate  the  benefits  of  being  good.”  The  board  members  did  agree  unanimously  to 
deny  Lewin  and  Klapper. 

After  the  hearing,  Mr.  Adelson  was  not  pleased  and  his  attitude  could  not  be  described  as 
congenial.  Mr.  Lewin,  on  the  other  hand,  underwent  some  very  difficult  questioning,  and  although  I  am 
sure  he  would  say  he  was  very  uncomfortable,  he  was  a  gentleman  from  start  to  finish.  After  the  hearing, 
he  walked  out  into  the  lobby  with  me  and  as  we  walked,  said,  “Mr.  Cunningham,  there  is  something  that  I 
want  you  to  know.  If  I  had  the  information  in  front  of  me  that  you  had  in  front  of  you,  I  would  have  voted 
to  deny  me  also,  but  I  want  you  to  know  the  truth.  I  didn’t  do  it.”  I  told  him  that  I  did  not  enjoy  doing 
hurtful  things,  but  I  did  what  I  believed  was  the  correct  thing  to  do.  If  I  said  anything  that  was  not  correct 
or  if  I  had  wrongly  accused  him  of  anything  that  was  untrue,  it  was  not  intentional. 

Do  you  recall  how  long  the  hearings  lasted?  Were  they  very  lengthy? 

The  Adelson  hearings? 


Yes. 


Y es,  they  were  fairly  lengthy.  I  believe  the  entire  day  was  set  aside  for  that  hearing.  When  the 
meeting  was  concluded,  it  was  dark  outside  and  very  late. 

Well,  was  Mr.  Lewin  licensed  to  be  in  the  gambling  part  of  it,  or  was  he  more  in  the  hotel  management? 

I  think  he  was  more  in  the  hotel  and  entertainment  area,  but  unsuitability  is  unsuitability.  The 
thing  that  I  relate  to  is  if  you  have  to  come  before  the  Board  and  Commission  for  licensing,  then  you  have 
to  be  suitable  to  obtain  a  license.  It  is  not  particularly  important  what  jobs  you  do  or  do  not  perform  or  the 
title  that  you  hold. 

At  the  commission  meeting,  former  governor  Robert  List  led  the  presentation  of  the  Sands 
application.  The  crux  of  the  presentation  centered  on  the  physical  plans  and  improvements  which  the 
applicants  would  bring  to  the  aging  Sands  Hotel.  Paul  Klapper  requested  to  withdraw  his  application, 
which  was  granted.  He  may  have  gotten  some  bad  advice  because  the  Commission  gave  very  little  serious 
attention  to  applicant  suitability  issues,  so  he  could  probably  have  been  approved.  How  could  they  have 
justified  denying  him  when  they  licensed  everyone  else?  Nevertheless,  Chafetz  was  given  a  limited 
license  with  the  condition  requiring  him  to  disassociate  with  five  or  six  people  and  to  divest  his 
investments  with  Vara. 


128 


Lewin  was  approved  in  spite  of  all  of  his  problems  which  several  years  earlier  contributed  to 
Hilton’s  inability  to  obtain  their  initial  licensing  in  New  Jersey.  As  a  result  of  their  problems  in  New 
Jersey,  Lewin  was  terminated  with  the  Hilton  organization.  The  Commission  overturned  the  Board’s 
unanimous  three-to-zero  denial  of  Lewin  with  a  unanimous  five-to-zero  approval.  How  did  they  do  that? 
Every  commissioner  had  to  believe  that  Lewin  had  met  his  burden  of  proving  that  he  had  done  nothing 
wrong  and  was  suitable.  Surely  they  would  not  go  against  that  requirement,  would  they?  I  have  said  that 
the  commission  members  had  a  “gelding”  philosophy.  They  were  all  very  personally  likable,  but 
something  was  missing. 

After  that  meeting,  1  publicly  denounced  the  Commission  for  their  permissive  conduct  and 
announced  that  1  would  never  waste  another  minute  of  my  time  by  attending  another  commission 
meeting. 

So  did  you  fulfill  the  promise? 

1  may  have  gone  back  once  or  twice  on  an  issue  that  may  have  highly  concerned  me;  however, 
generally  speaking,  1  never  went  back.  1  felt  it  was  a  waste  of  my  time. 

Well,  Henri  Lewin  had  a  son  who  was  getting  licensed  at  the  same  time,  wasn ’t  he? 

Yes,  Larry  Lewin.  To  my  knowledge,  Larry  was  a  very  suitable  person.  1  don’t  remember  asking 
him  any  questions  at  the  hearing.  After  Larry  left  the  Sands,  he  worked  at  the  Riviera  where  1  serve  on  the 
compliance  committee.  1  think  initially  he  had  some  difficulty  with  me  because  of  the  action  taken  against 
his  father,  however,  before  he  left  the  Riviera,  1  believe  that  Larry  took  a  different  view  of  what  1  did.  1 
think  his  attitude  ultimately  changed,  but  1  would  attribute  his  initial  attitude  as  the  resentment  any  son 
would  have  toward  a  person  who  voted  to  deny  their  father. 

After  Lewin  and  Adelson  and  the  remainder  of  the  group  were  licensed  and  went  into  operation,  how 
successful  were  they? 

Well,  the  relationship  wasn’t  real  successful.  Within  months  after  the  approval  was  granted, 
Lewin  and  Adelson  parted  company  over  differences  they  were  experiencing.  Some  years  later,  1  ran  into 
Mr.  Adelson  at  the  Sands  Convention  Center  where  1  was  attending  a  seminar.  A  model  suite  identical  to 
the  suites  being  built  at  the  Venetian  Resort  Hotel  and  Casino,  which  was  under  construction,  was  on 
display  in  the  convention  center.  1  approached  him  and  said,  “Hello,  Mr.  Adelson.  How  are  you?”  He 
looked  at  me  with  some  degree  of  uncertainty,  and  1  said,  “Gerry  Cunningham,  Gaming  Control  Board.” 
Somewhat  to  my  surprise,  he  was  totally  congenial  and  very  gentlemanly.  He  proceeded  to  personally 
show  me  and  two  of  my  friends  the  model  suite  and  explain  the  amenities  it  contained.  1  guess  time  and 
success  gave  him  the  ability  to  control  old  emotions.  1  am  sure  he  didn’t  forget.  1  recall  saying  to  him 
about  Lewin  words  and  substance  to  the  effect  that  1  guess  now  we  both  agreed  about  Henri  Lewin,  it  just 
took  you  a  little  longer  to  realize  what  1  knew  at  the  time  we  had  the  hearing.  He  laughed  it  off,  but  1  am 
sure  that  he  wasn’t  real  pleased  with  my  reflection  on  his  judgement. 


Have  you  ever  been  told  that  you  were  exceeding  your  authority? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


129 


Y es,  sometimes  directly  and  other  times  by  inference,  but  it  has  always  been  said  that  the  Board 
and  Commission  have  draconian  powers.  It  is  appropriate  that  such  authority  exists  in  order  that 
unsuitable  persons  are  kept  out  of  the  gaming  industry  because  of  the  importance  to  the  financial  health 
and  well-being  of  the  state  and  need  to  maintain  public  confidence. 

1  have  been  told  by  attorneys  for  applicants  that  we,  the  Board,  didn’t  have  the  right  to  do  certain 
things.  For  example,  in  the  Caesar’s  Palace  Hotel  and  Casino  recapitalization  where  they  wanted  to  go 
into  debt  by  1.1  billion  dollars  so  they  could  give  the  shareholders  a  dividend  of  $26.25  per  share.  They 
also  wanted  to  do  a  number  of  other  things  which  1  believed  were  detrimental  to  the  company’s  overall 
viability.  1  was  told  that  those  decisions  should  be  up  to  the  shareholders  and  it  was  not  within  my 
purview  as  a  gaming  Board  member.  My  response  was  that  if  the  Board  didn’t  have  the  authority  to 
decide  such  issues,  why  don’t  you  just  walk  out?  In  reality,  it  is  silly  to  suggest  that  the  Board  and 
Commission  did  not  have  the  authority  to  stop  a  gaming  company  from  financially  destroying  itself,  from 
jeopardizing  thousands  of  jobs  and  costing  the  state  its  portion  of  the  revenues. 

In  another  incident,  Paul  Bible,  a  former  commission  chairman  and  Board  Chairman  Bible’s 
brother,  called  me  “smug”  during  a  foreign  gaming  debate.  Because  Chairman  Bible’s  brother  was 
appearing  on  behalf  of  a  client,  Chairman  Bible  recused  himself  for  that  portion  of  the  hearing  and  1  was 
acting  chairman.  1  was  concerned  about  Nevada  licensees  exporting  company  funds  to  build  casinos  in 
other  jurisdictions  and  reassigning  Nevada  personnel,  experience  and  brainpower  to  operate  those  casinos 
in  direct  competition  with  Nevada.  1  suggested  that  if  a  Nevada  licensee  wanted  to  operate  a  casino  in 
another  jurisdiction,  they  should  surrender  their  Nevada  license  before  they  could  be  involved  in  foreign 
gaming.  Now  that  Nevada-trained  people  are  working  in  casinos  practically  all  over  the  world,  1  guess 
you  know  who  won  that  debate. 

And  also  there  have  been,  of  course,  many  instances  where  people  have  been  licensed  to  do  one  job  and 
wind  up  doing  another  job,  like  Lefty  Rosenthal. 

Yes,  that’s  true.  He  had  some  kind  of  a  title  like  Director  of  Entertainment  but  was  actually  the 
guy  in  charge  of  running  the  Stardust.  1  was  on  the  Board  when  he  was  recommended  and  subsequently 
placed  on  Nevada’s  excluded  persons  list,  the  so-called  "Black  Book."  Key  employees  are  now  looked  at 
more  in  terms  of  what  they  do,  what  type  of  authority  they  possess  to  issue  complimentaries  or  to  hire  and 
fire  employees,  how  large  is  their  salary  and  things  of  that  nature.  I  have  colleagues  from  New  Jersey  who 
often  make  remarks  about  Nevada’s  early  history,  and  that  we  are  not  as  clean  and  pure  as  New  Jersey 
thinks  they  are.  Y ou  have  to  remember  that  Nevada  was  a  transitional  gaming  society.  In  1931,  gambling 
was  legalized  in  Nevada.  If  the  applicant  could  pay  the  license  fee,  a  license  would  be  provided  and  they 
were  in  the  gaming  business.  Many  people  involved  in  illegal  gambling  throughout  the  United  States 
came  to  Nevada  to  practice  their  trade  where  it  was  legal.  Some  came  with  unsavory  backgrounds  and 
even  notorious  reputations.  By  the  early  1960s,  Howard  Hughes  brought  corporate  structure  to  the 
industry  and  mostly  thanks  to  Governor  Grant  Sawyer  and  the  legislature,  a  strict  licensing  and  regulatory 
mechanism  has  been  put  in  place  where  suitability  issues  become  a  prerequisite.  In  the  beginning,  there 
were  people  who  could  probably  never  be  licensed  in  a  contemporary  time  period  because  of  background 
issues,  but  there  was  no  regulation  in  the  beginning.  Many  of  those  people  obeyed  those  regulations  as 
they  were  created  and  therefore  were  accepted  as  good  members  of  the  gaming  community.  Others  did 
not  obey.  We  remember  the  Stardust,  the  Aladdin,  the  problems  at  the  Tropicana  to  name  a  few. 


130 


Are  there  any  other  license  applications  that  were  interesting  or  that  you  would  like  to  talk  about,  or 
interesting  characters  that  came  before  you?  Did  you  ever  come  into  any  association  or  were  you  ever 
involved  with  Carl  Thomas  in  any  way? 

Well,  not  directly.  1  remember  when  Carl  Thomas  was  thought  to  be  a  respected  gaming 
executive.  My  first  recollection  was  when  1  was  on  the  police  department.  He  donated  a  plate  of  meat  to 
the  political  campaign  of  John  McCarthy  when  he  was  running  for  sheriff. 

He  supplied  what? 

A  plate  of  meats. 


Oh. 


1  may  have  eaten  some  of  that  food,  1  am  not  sure.  In  the  early  1980s,  Carl  Thomas  was  a  fairly 
well-respected  person  in  the  gaming  industry.  1  think  it  was  in  the  early  1980s  he  went  to  Kansas  City  on 
other  business,  which  ended  his  gaming  career.  In  an  FBI  undercover  operation,  they  bugged  the 
residence  of  a  person  named  Mario.  1  believe  that  is  the  name  of  the  person  whose  house  was  rigged  for 
sound  recording  and  thus  the  “Mario  tapes.”  Carl  Thomas  was  recorded  talking  to  the  Civella  brothers, 
who  were  considered  to  be  organized  crime  members,  about  his  skimming  operations  in  Las  Vegas,  and 
was  describing  how  he  skimmed  money  from  the  casinos.  He  said  that  he  just  loved  it.  He  also  talked 
about  his  man  in  Las  Vegas  and  he  named  Frank  Fertitta,  who  is  no  longer  involved  in  Nevada  gaming. 
They  went  on  and  talked  about  a  variety  of  things.  In  total  there  were  many  recordings  dealing  with 
different  people  and  situations  in  Nevada.  The  basic  thrust  of  the  federal  investigation  was  the  Kansas 
City  organized  crime  activities.  As  1  understand  it,  the  federal  prosecutors  signed  a  proffer  with  Thomas’s 
attorney  agreeing  not  to  discuss  the  Nevada  operation  or  the  people  involved  in  return  for  Thomas’s 
cooperation  and  testimony  in  the  Kansas  City  Case.  This  eventually  placed  the  Nevada  Gaming  Control 
Board  investigation  at  a  great  disadvantage.  The  Civellas  were  subsequently  convicted  and  went  to  jail  for 
those  crimes,  with  the  assistance  of  testimony  by  Carl  Thomas.  For  his  cooperation,  Thomas  spent  about 
two  years  in  prison  and  was  released.  After  the  Kansas  City  trial,  the  Mario  tapes  and  transcripts  of  that 
trial  were  made  available  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  The  investigation  took  quite  a  while  because  the 
tapes  we  are  talking  about  had  not  been  available  and  all  of  the  tapes  had  to  be  reviewed  and  1  assume 
transcribed  before  the  follow-up  investigation  could  take  place.  1  think  the  Board  became  involved  in  the 
investigation  sometime  in  1985.  Then  there  was  a  several-year  investigation  by  the  Gaming  Control 
Board  Intelligence  Bureau,  primarily  by  agent  Richard  Carr. 

At  the  completion  of  the  investigation,  the  information  and  pertinent  portions  of  the  tapes  were 
supplied  to  the  board  members  for  review  and  the  ultimate  decision  to  decide  whether  to  issue  a 
complaint  against  the  Palace  Station  Casino  and  Frank  Fertitta  began.  To  try  to  capsulize  what  was  done, 

1  believed  the  allegations  in  support  of  a  complaint  were  substantial  and  in  my  opinion,  a  complaint 
should  be  issued  by  the  Board.  1  told  Member  Dennis  Amerine  and  Chairman  Bill  Bible,  that  if  they 
decided  to  not  issue  a  complaint,  that  1  wished  to  not  be  associated  with  that  decision.  Subsequently, 
Amerine  and  Bible  believed  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  go  forward  with  a  complaint.  You  would  have 
to  ask  them  why  they  didn’t  want  to  do  it,  but  in  my  opinion,  anyone  who  read  the  materials  provided  in 
the  investigation  and  listened  to  the  tapes  would  come  to  the  conclusion  that  an  unsuitable  method  of 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


131 


operation  was  involved.  Now,  it  may  be  understandable  why  Mr.  Amerine  and  Chairman  Bible  may  not 
have  wanted  to  issue  a  complaint.  First  of  all,  it  referred  to  situations  which  by  that  time  raised  the  issue 
of  laches  which  affected  witnesses  and  the  possible  claim  of  unreasonable  delay.  The  complaint  would  be 
accusing  a  major  licensee  of  a  most  serious  gaming  offense  which  if  taken  to  a  commission  hearing  could 
have  caused  damage,  not  only  to  the  licensee,  but  also  to  the  state’s  reputation  and  the  public  trust  during 
an  extended  public  hearing.  This  possibility  generates  great  political  pressure  to  avoid  such  exposure  on 
the  basis  of  an  uncertain  outcome.  The  case,  although  very  convincing,  was  circumstantial  and  there  was 
no  so-called  “smoking  gun.” 

Additionally,  there  was  always  the  possibility  that  the  Commission  could  declare  critical  portions 
of  the  evidence  as  inadmissible,  rendering  the  prosecution  of  the  complaint  very  difficult,  if  not 
impossible,  and  witnesses  had  been  deteriorated.  There  was  a  security  guard  by  the  name  of  Harry 
McBride  who,  at  the  time  certain  events  took  place,  was  so  well  trusted  by  Carl  Thomas  that  he  gave 
McBride  his  phone  or  notebook  containing  coded  phone  numbers  of  the  Civellas  and  other  damaging 
evidence.  If  everything  in  the  book  had  been  known  at  an  earlier  time,  it  would  have  been  sufficient  to 
lead  to  Mr.  Thomas’s  license  revocation  probably  without  the  tapes.  McBride  was  trusted  by  Thomas 
with  that  book  and  he  was  supposed  to  destroy  it.  Apparently  that  trust  was  misplaced,  because  McBride 
did  not  destroy  the  book,  which  fell  into  the  hands  of  law  enforcement.  By  the  time  the  Board  got  around 
to  considering  the  issuance  of  a  complaint,  McBride  was  described  by  attorneys  for  the  potential  plaintiffs 
as  a  drunk  and  ne’er-do-well  and  someone  who  was  not  believable.  In  later  years,  he  may  have  become 
the  person  that  they  described.  1  never  met  Mr.  McBride,  but  1  knew  the  position  of  trust  he  once  held 
with  Thomas.  He  was  so  well  trusted  that  they  placed  the  very  thing  that  could  have  led  to  their  downfall 
in  his  hands.  So  it  was  that  type  of  world  we  were  in.  Witnesses  were  discredited,  much  time  had  passed, 
it  was  a  lengthy  investigation,  and  a  lot  of  what  we  are  talking  about  goes  back  to  the  1970s.  One 
situation  Thomas  talked  about  in  court  testimony  from  the  Kansas  City  trial  in  1985  was  skimming  at  the 
Circus  Circus.  An  excerpt  from  the  testimony  went  something  like  this: 

The  prosecutor  asked  Thomas,  “When  you  were  at  the  Circus  Circus,  did  you  start  skimming 
immediately?” 

His  reply  was  something  to  the  effect  that,  “No,  they  had  to  get  it  (Circus  Circus)  in  the  black 

first.” 

The  prosecutor  asked,  “Did  you  get  it  in  the  black?” 

He  said,  “Yes.” 

The  prosecutor  asked,  “Then  did  you  start  skimming?” 

He  said,  “Yes.” 

The  prosecutor  then  asked,  “Who  did  you  give  the  money  to?” 

He  said,  “Jay  Samo.” 

What  is  interesting  about  that,  if  1  may  depart  from  where  I’m  going  on  the  other  portion  of  this 
story,  is  that  years  later,  former  Commission  Chairman  John  O’Reillywas  asked  to  nominate  Jay  Samo  to, 
1  believe,  the  World  Gaming  and  Wagering  Conference  &  Expo  Hall  of  Fame.  I  called  him  on  the  phone 
and  said,  “John,  you  cannot  do  this.” 

He  asked,  “Why?” 

I  said,  “Well,  you  were  the  commission  chairman  when  Carl  Thomas  was  placed  into  the  ‘Black 
Book’.”  I  then  recited  for  him  the  testimony  about  Thomas  giving  money  to  Jay  Samo  that  he  had 
skimmed.  I  said,  “It  would  be  kind  of  contradictory  that  you  would  put  one  member  of  a  skimming  team 
in  the  ‘Black  Book’  and  the  other  in  the  Hall  of  Fame.”  I  think  Mr.  O’Reilly’s  comment  was  that  he 


132 


would  be  careful  what  he  said  and  1  believe  he  went  on  to  make  the  nomination. 

Back  to  the  Fertitta  investigation,  1  was  explaining  there  were  a  variety  of  reasons  why  Mr. 
Amerine  and  Mr.  Bible  might  not  want  to  agree  to  a  complaint  because  of  the  impact  it  would  have  on  the 
gaming  industry  and  the  difficulty  it  might  cause.  My  position  was  firmly  on  the  side  of  issuing  a 
complaint  because  of  my  belief  that  unsuitable  methods  were  involved.  I  believed  that  would  be  the  basis 
for  our  complaint  and  the  issue  should  be  pursued.  If  the  “what  ifs”  are  allowed  to  dictate  board 
enforcement  action  regarding  serious  regulatory  infractions,  then  disciplinary  proceedings  would  never 
occur,  as  they  did  not  in  this  case,  and  never  will.  If  there  are  reasonable  grounds  to  believe  a  licensee  has 
engaged  in  unsuitable  conduct,  then  they  should  be  dealt  with  accordingly. 

At  any  rate,  1  had  told  Chairman  Bible  that  if  he  and  Mr.  Amerine  did  not  agree  with  me  to  issue 
a  complaint,  that  he  should  separate  me  from  that  decision.  The  next  thing  1  knew,  there  was  a  letter  sent 
to  the  licensee  and  a  press  release  which  said  words  and  substance  to  the  effect  that  the  Board  concluded 
that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  go  forward  with  a  complaint  at  this  time;  therefore,  no  complaint 
would  be  issued.  The  substantive  word  to  me  was  it  said,  “Board.”  1  later  confronted  Chairman  Bible  on 
that  aspect,  and  1  said,  “Why  did  you  do  that?  1  had  asked  to  be  separated  from  that  decision.”  He  told  me 
that  he  had  asked  the  attorney  general  about  it,  and  the  attorney  general  said  two  members  of  the  Board  is 
a  quorum;  therefore,  they  could  speak  as  “the  Board.”  1  said,  “Well,  that’s  regrettable.”  1  then  called  a  TV 
station  and  gave  a  press  release  saying  1  thought  a  complaint  should  have  been  issued  and  criticized  both 
of  my  colleagues  for  apparently  including  me  in  the  decision  to  not  issue  a  complaint. 

How  did  that  go  over  with  Mr.  Amerine  and  Mr.  Bible? 

Well,  probably  not  very  well  at  all,  but  to  their  credit,  they  knew  how  1  was  and  1  think  we 
remained  friends. 

You  were  remembered  as  being  a  very  outspoken  member.  Do  you  ever  have  any  regrets  about  your 
sometimes  controversial  comments? 

No,  not  really,  but  when  you  do  some  things  like  I  did,  there  is  a  certain  price  that  you  have  to 
pay.  Those  that  you  speak  out  about  don’t  like  you  very  well  sometimes,  but  other  people  who  like  to  hear 
a  person  stand  up  for  what  he  believes  do  like  you.  In  the  final  analysis,  1  believe  the  people  who  allow  or 
want  you  to  speak  your  mind  are  the  decent  folks  and  the  only  ones  that  1  want  as  friends  anyway. 

Although  1  totally  support  the  gaming  industry,  1  believe  there  should  be  limitations.  1  believe  a 
person  should  have  to  make  a  conscious  decision  to  go  gamble.  Gaming  devices  should  not  be  placed 
everywhere  people  need  to  go  for  necessities  and  compulsively  lose  their  money.  1  didn’t  like  slot 
machines  in  grocery  stores  to  entice  mothers  and  fathers  going  into  the  store  to  buy  bread  and  milk  to  end 
up  losing  the  money  to  buy  what  they  came  in  for.  Most  grocery  store  owners  are  not  investigated  or 
licensed  for  gaming  and  yet  are  paid,  in  some  instances,  that  1  saw,  millions  of  dollars  by  route  operators 
for  a  space  lease  to  place  fifteen  or  more  slot  machines  in  their  locations,  like  a  grocery  chain.  On  top  of 
the  signing  bonus,  the  route  operator  pays  a  monthly  rental  for  the  space  that  the  machines  occupy.  That 
represents  a  lot  of  bread  and  milk  and  at  least  some  hungry  kids. 

1  used  to  routinely  challenge  people  who  wanted  to  put  slot  machines  in  bars  that  were  too  close 
to  schools,  too  close  to  churches,  or  make  a  fifteen  slot  machine  arcade  out  of  every  convenience  store. 

For  schools  and  churches,  there  were  ordinances  that  usually  prohibited  such  establishments  within  1500 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


133 


feet  of  such  locations.  1  believe  there  are  issues  of  respect,  decency,  and  maybe  morality  issues  in  the  case 
of  bars  near  schools.  Don’t  the  statutes  prohibit  persons  under  twenty-one  years  of  age  from  gambling  or 
holding  a  gaming  license?  Doesn’t  the  Board  insist  that  licensees  police  their  casinos  to  insure  that 
children  are  not  permitted  to  loiter  in  the  casino?  It  seemed  reasonable  to  me  that  we  not  jam  such 
establishments  up  against  the  schools  and  churches. 

There  are  also  safety  issues.  For  example,  an  individual  wanted  to  build  a  bar  on  the  north  side  of 
Flamingo  Road  just  east  of  Kenny  Guinn  Junior  Fligh  and  slightly  within  the  1500-foot  restricted  zone. 
Alcoholic  beverages  are  consumed  in  bars,  sometimes  paid  for  and  sometimes  given  as  complimentaries 
to  slot  players.  Either  way,  people  can  become  impaired  and  should  not  drive.  Flamingo  Road  has  a 
median  divider  which  means  that  a  person  leaving  the  proposed  bar  must  turn  west  toward  Kenny  Guinn. 

1  thought  it  made  sense  to  not  license  a  bar  where  potentially  impaired  drivers  could  only  leave  by  driving 
immediately  toward  a  school  intersection.  The  application  was  continued  for  several  months.  A  concerned 
parent  and  resident  who  lived  in  the  area  by  the  name  of  Dana  Mathews  appeared  at  several  meetings  and 
was  a  leading  citizen  opponent  of  this  bar  for  child  safety  reasons.  As  a  result  of  her  opposition,  it  is 
believed  that  she  became  the  victim  of  dirty  tricks.  As  many  as  thirty  unwanted  magazines  were  ordered 
in  her  name,  order  blanks  were  filled  out  in  her  name  for  dolls  she  did  not  want  from  the  Franklin  Mint, 
and  dry  cement  and  sand  was  thrown  on  her  car.  A  flyer  she  had  prepared  and  distributed  around  the 
neighborhood  to  make  the  residents  aware  of  her  concerns  was  mailed  back  to  her  home  with  a 
threatening  message  written  on  the  bottom.  Through  it  all,  she  was  persistent  and  undeterred.  That 
application  was  ultimately  denied  or  withdrawn,  but  never  approved. 

A  bar  cannot  survive  financially  without  slot  machines,  so  sometimes  they  try  really  hard  to 
obtain  approval  or  discourage  their  detractors.  During  the  hearings,  the  applicant  wanting  to  place  slot 
machines  at  the  proposed  bar  location  would  say  things  like,  “1  assure  you,  Mr.  Cunningham,  that  the 
children  will  absolutely  not  be  permitted  into  the  bar  for  any  reason.”  1  would  respond  with  something 
like,  “If  keeping  the  little  rascals  out  of  the  bar  was  my  only  concern,  I  would  make  the  bar  owner  place 
the  doorknobs  five  feet  off  the  ground.”  The  applicant  told  me  that  there  was  a  fence  completely  around 
the  school  and  the  children  were  contained  within  the  school  grounds.  My  response  to  that  was,  if 
someone  built  a  burlesque  place  across  the  street  from  your  house  and  then  built  a  fence  down  the  middle 
of  the  street,  you  would  still  have  a  burlesque  place  across  from  your  house.  1  tried  to  make  the  point  that 
there  were  larger  issues  other  than  the  physical  facts,  but  money  seemed  to  make  all  other  issues  moot. 

Business  operations  of  fifteen  or  fewer  slot  machines  are  restricted  by  statute  to  the  number  of 
slot  machines  that  are  incidental  to  the  primary.  No  one  could  agree  what  “incidental”  means.  1  would 
require  that  convenience  stores  and  the  like  that  wanted  to  increase  the  number  of  machines  from  four  or 
five  to  seven,  or  ten,  and  up  to  fifteen,  to  bring  in  their  financials  to  the  hearing  so  the  Board  could 
attempt  to  determine  if  the  machine  revenue  was  incidental  to  the  primary  business.  Five  or  six  machines, 
in  the  right  location,  can  produce  very  large  monthly  revenues.  This  prompted  extensive  discussions  about 
what  “incidental”  means.  The  Board  would  concede  up  to  50  percent  as  incidental  and  applicants  would 
still  argue  the  point.  My  favorite  question  was,  “If  your  boss  would  cut  your  salary  by  some  incidental 
amount,  say  by  50  percent,  would  that  upset  you  and  would  you  say  that  was  more  than  an  incidental 
amount?”  They  might  stutter  and  beat  around  the  bush,  but  1  never  recall  anyone  ever  agreeing  that  more 
than  50  percent  of  their  revenues  from  slot  machines  would  violate  the  incidental  restriction  in  the  statute 
even  though  many  businesses  would  go  out  of  business  without  the  slot  machines.  Some  applicants  tried 
to  factor  in  the  phone  bills,  light  bills,  property  taxes  and  all  kinds  of  things  to  the  cost  of  the  slot 
machines  in  an  attempt  to  show  that  they  were  not  as  profitable  as  we  thought  they  were  just  because  the 


134 


machines  pulled  in  a  lot  of  money. 

Several  of  the  commission  members  complained  that  they  didn’t  think  it  was  right  that  the  Board 
forced  these  licensees  to  bring  in  that  sort  of  information  and  financials.  One  commissioner,  who  1  like 
very  much,  would  complain  in  private  that  he  didn’t  think  the  Board  should  be  setting  policy  in  that 
matter.  1  questioned  why  we  would  worry  about  who  sets  the  policy;  why  don’t  we  discuss  the  merits  of 
the  issue.  The  end  result  was  that  they  generally  ignored  my  concerns  about  this  issue  just  as  they  did 
about  many  of  my  other  concerns.  1  had  a  former  policeman  and  friend,  Tommy  Park,  who  was  applying 
for  a  restricted  gaming  license  for  a  bar  which  was  slightly  inside  the  1500-foot  restricted  zone.  I  told  him 
before  the  meeting  that  1  opposed  that  type  of  application  1 00  percent  of  the  time,  but  as  a  friend,  1  would 
give  him  the  option  at  the  hearing  of  listening  to  the  long  version  of  my  spiel  or  the  short  version.  He  said, 
"Hell  Gerry,  1  know  how  you  are.  Give  me  the  long  version."  1  gave  him  the  long  version  and  voted 
against  the  application,  but  the  Board  on  a  split  vote  and  Commission  unanimously  gave  him  his  license 
anyway.  He  doesn’t  have  the  bar  anymore,  so  only  he  can  say  if  1  was  right  or  wrong. 

Y es,  there  were  those  who  didn’t  like  what  1  had  to  say,  but  there  were  those  who  did. 

Were  you  or  any  of  the  members  of  your  family  ever  threatened  with  physical  violence? 

Yes,  during  the  American  Coin  investigation  there  was  one  telephonic  threat  on  my  life,  and  on 
one  or  two  occasions  1  was  notified  by  Metropolitan  Police  Intelligence  Bureau  personnel  that  they  had 
picked  up  on  vague  information  that  someone  wanted  to  hurt  me  or  might  try  to  set  me  up.  They  did  not 
know  the  methodology  that  would  be  employed.  They  said  it  could  even  be  a  retired  police  officer,  which 
was  very  hurtful  to  even  think  that  somebody  I  probably  knew  would  do  anything  like  that.  In  reality,  to 
my  knowledge,  nothing  like  that  ever  happened,  but  it  made  for  very  uneasy  and  difficult  times.  1  wasn’t 
sure  what  to  expect,  but  as  an  example,  conceivably,  someone  with  a  hidden  recorder  could  approach  me 
concocting  veiled  overtures  about  making  it  worth  my  while  if  I  could  help  them  with  an  application  that 
had  problems.  Since  I  am  retired  from  the  Metropolitan  Police,  with  twelve  years  as  the  Chief  of 
Detectives,  the  natural  instinct  would  be  to  go  along  with  the  proposition  and  set  that  person  up  for 
possible  arrest  on  attempted  bribery.  Unfortunately,  in  that  scenario,  I  would  never  have  seen  them  again. 

1  would  be  the  pigeon  and  would  read  about  it  in  the  newspaper. 

In  another  situation,  one  evening  my  wife  Gail  was  taking  out  some  trash  around  midnight.  A 
black  or  dark-colored  Corvette  was  parked  across  the  street  from  my  house.  She  could  only  describe  the 
driver  as  male  having  what  looked  like  bushy  hair.  When  he  saw  her  coming  out  the  front  gate,  he  backed 
the  car  through  the  intersection  and  backed  down  the  street  turning  into  a  condominium  complex  at  a 
fairly  high  rate  of  speed  considering  he  was  driving  backwards.  She  came  and  alerted  me  to  what  had  just 
happened.  We  went  outside  and  were  standing  behind  the  archway  entrance  to  our  home,  looking  in  the 
direction  of  the  condominiums  when  we  saw  a  bushy-haired  male  walk  out  from  the  side  of  one  of  the 
buildings,  look  in  our  direction  for  a  short  time,  then  retraced  his  path  out  of  sight.  Within  seconds,  we 
observed  the  same  Corvette  reappear  and  speed  off  in  a  direction  away  from  our  house.  Since  I  was  not 
fully  clothed  and  did  not  have  my  car  keys  on  my  person,  I  could  not  pursue  the  vehicle. 

One  other  time,  after  I  left  the  billiards  hall  which  was  my  means  of  getting  away  from  the  rigors 
of  the  job,  an  attractive  female  very  overtly  tried  to  get  my  attention  by  pulling  alongside  my  vehicle, 
blowing  her  hom,  smiling,  and  waving.  She  then  passed  my  vehicle  and  shortly  thereafter,  pulled  into  a 
gas  station  providing  the  opportunity  to  contact.  I  couldn’t  read  her  license  plate  and  was  too  concerned 
about  ending  up  on  video  tape  even  if  I  only  pulled  into  the  station  to  obtain  the  plate  number.  Y ou  never 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


135 


know  what  she  might  have  done,  if  it  was  a  set-up.  I  would  like  to  think  the  incident  happened  because  1 
am  so  good  looking,  but  it  was  more  probably  was  another  attempt  to  compromise  my  integrity. 

Those  were  difficult  times  and  routinely  upsetting  somebody  at  licensing  hearings  on  a  monthly 
basis,  anything  was  possible.  As  an  honorably  retired  police  officer  1  am  permitted  to  carry  a  concealed 
weapon  and  I  often  did.  There  were  many  places  where  a  weapon  could  not  be  used,  but  there  were  many 
nights  when  1  left  the  office  late  at  night  and  there  were  many  darkened  parking  lots.  I  was  never  afraid  or 
paranoid,  but  if  a  miscreant  attempted  a  felonious  transgression  against  me,  1  wanted  the  ability  to  cause 
him  remorse. 

Well,  why  did  you  leave  the  Board? 

There  were  several  reasons,  1  suppose.  It  was  certainly  an  interesting  job  and  1  shall  always  be 
grateful  to  then-Governor  Richard  Bryan  for  the  appointment,  but  it  was  an  extremely  arduous  job.  My 
ideas  on  slot  machines  in  grocery  stores,  convenience  stores,  pawn  shops,  and  laundromats  were  not  in 
sync  with  the  commission  members  and  often  not  even  with  my  colleagues  on  the  Board.  1  was  opposed 
to  residential  casinos  because  of  the  effect  on  the  downtown  casinos  which  historically  were  supported  by 
local  residents.  1  was  opposed  to  the  approved  foreign  gaming  regulations.  That  should  be  sufficient  to 
make  a  pretty  good  case  of  frustration  and  it  is  not  at  all  certain  that  the  new  Governor,  Robert  Miller, 
would  have  even  offered  me  a  reappointment. 

Would  you  have  taken  the  appointment  if  he  had  offered  it? 

Respectfully,  1  would  not  have  accepted. 

Who  replaced  you  on  the  Board? 

Steve  DuCharme.  Steve  is  a  friend  and  was  a  colleague  on  the  Metropolitan  Police  Department.  1 
believe  he  was  an  excellent  choice. 

Did  you  have  any  association  with  the  gaming  industry  after  you  left  the  Gaming  Control  Board? 

Not  initially.  During  my  tenure  on  the  Board,  1  appropriately  made  no  effort  to  establish  any 
relationship  with  any  licensee.  1  worked  right  up  until  quitting  time  on  December  31,  1990.  When  1 
walked  out  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  offices  that  day,  1  had  no  job  and  no  prospects  for  getting  one.  1 
was  retired  with  twenty-five  years  at  Metro  and  four  years  with  the  Board.  Subsequently,  I  was  contacted 
by  various  establishments  which  need  an  outside  independent  member  to  serve  on  their  Nevada  Gaming 
Commission  mandated  regulatory  compliance  committees.  Most  compliance  operational  plans  call  an 
independent  member  who  is  familiar  with  gaming  law  and  regulation.  1  fulfilled  that  requirement.  1  have 
never  sought  any  compliance  committee  membership  position,  but  was  asked  to  serve  on  the  compliance 
committee  by  someone  in  the  particular  casino  organization  or  recommended  by  someone  who  liked  my 
reputation.  1  am  proud  of  that  fact  and  grateful  to  those  friends. 

1  have  worked  for  a  number  of  prominent  Las  Vegas  casinos  and  conglomerate  casino 
organizations.  1  still  serve  on  three  compliance  committees  in  Las  Vegas  and  1  am  one  of  three 
commissioners  on  the  Oneida  Nation  of  New  York  Gaming  Commission  which  regulates  the  Turning 


136 


Stone  Hotel  Casino  and  Resort  in  Verona,  New  York.  The  Turning  Stone  Casino  is  recognized  as  one  of 
the  foremost  properly  regulated  Indian  casinos  in  the  United  States.  In  recent  years,  the  Oneida  model  of 
regulation  has  been  adopted  by  several  other  casinos. 

Did  you  pattern  some  of  those  regulations,  or  a  lot  of  them,  after  Nevada  regulation? 

The  regulation  is  an  amalgam  of  Nevada  and  New  Jersey  regulation  and  some  that  we  put 
together  ourselves  from  other  sources.  For  example,  we  have  a  problem  or  compulsive  gambling 
regulation  that  is  superior  to  either  Nevada  or  New  Jersey  jurisdictions.  Our  surveillance  and  internal 
audit  departments  are  controlled  by  and  report  directly  to  the  Commission.  These  departments  are  totally 
independent  of  the  gaming  operation.  Our  executive  director  is  an  attorney  with  an  accounting  degree.  We 
have  approximately  twenty  gaming  inspectors  who  actually  work  the  gaming  floor,  three  or  four 
inspectors  per  shift.  One  of  the  other  commissioners  is  an  attorney,  formerly  with  the  New  Jersey 
Division  of  Gaming  Enforcement  for  fifteen  years.  1  think  we  have  a  pretty  good  handle  on  the  situation. 

Gerry,  in  1990  it  was  discovered  that  Matis  Marcus,  a  government  informant,  was  running  an  illegal 
bookmaking  operation.  When  the  Gaming  Control  Board  heard  of  the  operation,  who  was  directed  to 
head  up  an  investigation  of  that  operation? 

Well,  initially,  of  course,  1  was  involved,  and  there  were  no  select  individuals  who  were 
appointed  at  that  time.  Later,  Gary  Atkins  and  Ken  Alkire  were  assigned  to  do  the  investigation,  but  1  was 
involved  initially  to  a  great  extent. 

Was  there  a  raid  held  on  the  operation? 

Well,  yes,  there  was.  But  prior  to  that,  I’d  like  to  say  that  apparently  this  Matis  Marcus  had  served 
as  a  paid  informant  for  the  IRS.  They  had,  back  in  the  mid-1980s,  created  and  operated  a  similar  illegal 
sportsbook,  and  it  was  called  Project  Layoff.  Project  Layoff,  as  I  understand  from  newspaper  accounts, 
probably  handled  millions,  maybe  up  to  twenty-two  million  dollars  in  total  handle.  But  the  end  result  was 
that  the  federal  government  had  put  into  that  operation  about  six  hundred  thousand  dollars  and  got  very 
little  in  return.  Marcus  was  paid  as  an  informant  to  perform  those  services.  And  it’s  my  belief  that  either 
Dennis  Cooper,  Ron  Hollis  and  John  Taylor — one  or  all  of  them — became  aware  of  that  operation  and 
had  contact  with  Mat  Marcus.  Apparently,  they  decided  that  they  would  conduct  their  own  illegal 
sportsbook.  Later,  of  course,  the  identified  purpose  for  establishing  that  sportsbook,  as  I  understood  it, 
was  in  order  to  get  information  about  other  illegal  bookmakers,  and  Matis  Marcus  was  rewarded  for  that 
information  by  being  allowed  to  operate  an  unlicensed  sportsbook. 

I  became  aware  of  this  situation  on  about  June  3,  1990.  Agents  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board 
Intelligence  Bureau  executed  a  search  warrant  at  1111  Las  Vegas  Boulevard  South,  Suite  317,  which 
were  the  offices  of  Marcus  Sports  Service.  I  was  first  apprised  of  this  event  on  a  Sunday  evening,  June  3, 
1990,  by  a  telephone  call  from  Acting  Chief  of  Enforcement  Ron  Hollis.  This  phone  call  was  initially 
answered  by  my  wife,  who  identified  the  caller  as  Ron  Hollis  by  asking  his  name  prior  to  transferring  the 
call  to  me.  Acting  Chief  Ron  Hollis  briefly  explained  that  they  had  executed  a  search  warrant  at  the  above 
location,  which  was  the  1111  Las  Vegas  Boulevard  South,  and  they  had  arrested  six  people.  I  asked  if 
everything  went  OK,  which  he  said  it  did.  I  complimented  him  on  a  job  well  done  and  terminated  the 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


137 


brief  call  with  a  comment  of,  “Keep  me  informed.”  Since  this  was  a  reading  weekend  prior  to  a  Board’s 
public  meeting,  1  was  extremely  preoccupied  with  the  preparation  for  that  meeting  and  simply  perceived 
Acting  Chief  Hollis’s  call  as  a  courtesy  call. 

Many  of  the  dates  and  facts  I’m  going  to  give  you  are  taken  from  my  personal  notes,  and  so  it’s 
with  some  degree  of  precision  that  I’m  able  to  give  you  the  dates  and  times.  On  June  4,  1990  a  press 
release  was  issued  on  Control  Board  stationery  which  described  the  execution  of  the  search  warrant  at 
1 1 1 1  Las  Vegas  Boulevard  South,  listed  the  items  seized  during  the  process,  and  also  included 
information  that  six  people  had  been  arrested  in  the  operation.  I  still  have  a  copy  of  that  press  release,  and 
I’ll  read  it  if  I  may.  It’s  dated  as  I  had  indicated,  June  4,  1990.  It  states  as  follows:  “The  Gaming  Control 
Board  announced  the  arrest  Sunday  of  six  men  in  connection  with  a  large-scale,  illegal  bookmaking 
operation  centered  in  Las  Vegas.  According  to  Ron  Hollis,  Acting  Chief  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board’s 
enforcement  division,  the  arrests  followed  a  month-long  investigation  by  agents  assigned  to  the  Gaming 
Control  Board’s  Intelligence  Bureau.  Acting  under  a  search  warrant,  agents  seized  telephone  and  office 
equipment,  computer  equipment,  and  a  large  quantity  of  illegal  betting  records  from  the  Marcus  Sports 
Service  at  1 1 1 1  Las  Vegas  Boulevard  South  in  Las  Vegas.  The  operation  was  accepting  wagers  on  both 
horse  races  and  sporting  events,  estimated  to  total  approximately  one  million  per  week.  The  following 
individuals  were  taken  into  custody:  Matis  Marcus,  forty-five;  Las  Vegas  Dennis  Cook,  forty-two, 
Birmingham,  Alabama;  John  O’Herlihy,  forty-one,  Denver,  Colorado;  Arthur  Goldberg,  forty-two,  New 
York  City;  Michael  Rossi,  thirty-six.  Las  Vegas;  and  John  Strong,  thirty-two,  of  Oklahoma  City. 

According  to  Hollis,  the  operation,  which  involved  approximately  twenty  employees,  accepted 
wagers  from  bettors  living  in  various  parts  of  the  United  States  and  Canada.  Hollis  said  that  preliminary 
analysis  of  the  records  seized  indicated  that  a  majority  of  bettors  were  from  Chicago,  New  York,  and 
Florida.  A  search  revealed  that  the  office  had  eleven  telephone  lines,  plus  three  toll-free  lines  for  the 
acceptance  of  wagers  by  telephone.  Hollis  said  that  the  arrests  were  part  of  an  ongoing  crackdown  by  the 
Gaming  Control  Board  against  illegal  bookmaking  operations  in  Nevada.  Hollis  added,  ‘Illegal 
bookmaking  operations  pose  a  significant  threat  to  gaming  industry  because  they  divert  thousands  of 
dollars  from  licensed  sportsbooks  and  from  potential  state  revenue.  Additionally,  the  individual  bettors 
have  no  guarantee  that  their  winnings  will  be  paid.’  According  to  Hollis,  the  investigation  is  continuing." 
And  that’s  the  end  of  the  press  release.  On  June  4  an  internal  intelligence  daily  report  was  issued  basically 
describing  the  same  information  and  indicating  that  six  people  were  arrested,  and  that  two  individuals, 
Dennis  Cook  and  John  O’Herlihy,  were  undercover  operatives — Agent  Cooper  and  Taylor,  respectively.  I 
had  not  seen  either  of  these  documents  until  Thursday,  June  7th,  1 990,  since  Monday,  June  4th,  I  did  not 
come  in  to  work  as  I  stayed  home  to  read.  June  5th  was  rump.  That’s  what  we  called  the  meeting  with  the 
investigators.  June  6th  and  7th  were  board  public  meetings. 

On  the  evening  of  June  7th,  after  the  board  meeting,  Chairman  Bill  Bible  advised  Mr.  Tom  Roche 
and  I  that  he  had  learned  that  the  search  warrant  executed  at  1 1 1 1  Las  Vegas  Boulevard  South  location 
was  not  a  legitimate  operation,  and  that  no  one  had,  in  fact,  been  arrested  since  the  entire  situation  was 
concocted  by  members  of  the  intelligence  detail.  I  don’t  recall  precisely  Chairman  Bible’s  words,  but  this 
is  my  perception  of  what  I  was  told,  and  Ron  Hollis  was  the  individual  that  the  chairman  indicated  had 
disclosed  this  information  to  him.  I  recall  reviewing  at  that  point  the  Intelligence  Bureau  daily  report  and 
expressed  extreme  dismay  and  disgust  with  Chief  Hollis  for  having  published  or  written  an  intelligence 
daily  report  that  was  intended  for  board  members’  eyes  only,  which  was  false.  I  remember  talking  about 
the  fact  that  if  he  had  written  the  document  knowing  the  contents  were  false  that  I  personally  could  have 
no  further  use  for  Mr.  Hollis.  I  also  reviewed  the  Intelligence  Bureau’s  daily  report  dated  on  May  24th, 


138 


1990.  On  the  second  page  there  is  a  reference  to  the  Marcus  Sports  Service,  where  agent  Cooper  had  been 
acting  in  an  undercover  capacity,  and  their  intent  to  execute  a  search  warrant  at  that  location.  1  later 
learned  that  Agent  Cooper  was  well  known  to  Matis  Marcus  and  the  individuals  working  in  the  Marcus 
Sports  Service.  Therefore,  it  is  impossible  that  he  could  have  been  working  in  an  undercover  capacity  at 
that  location.  It  was  also  learned  that  the  illegal  bookmaking  operation  was  known  to  the  agents  of  the 
Intelligence  Bureau  for  an  extended  period  of  time  and  condoned  by  them.  Thus,  the  report  was,  at  least 
in  part,  is  insincere,  dishonest,  and  clear-cut  evidence  of  Acting  Chief  of  Enforcement  Hollis’s  attempt  to 
deceive  the  Board. 

During  the  intervening  period  from  June  7th  until  June  15th  1  spoke  to  Chairman  Bible  several 
times  about  his  continuing  inquiry  into  the  Marcus  matter.  The  only  outstanding  aspect  of  these 
discussions  dealt  with  the  chairman’s  intention  to  have  Acting  Chief  Hollis  travel  to  Carson  City  for  the 
puipose  of  a  complete  discussion  of  the  Marcus  matter  and  the  subsequent  results  of  that  discussion.  On 
June  15th,  1990  1  talked  to  Chairman  Bible  about  his  interview  with  Ron  Hollis  and  learned  that  Matis 
Marcus  had  apparently  been  allowed  to  operate  his  illegal  bookmaking  operation  since  the  latter  part  of 
1987. 1  was  further  told  that  no  board  member  had  ever  been  advised  of  this  activity  and  that  Ron  Hollis 
had  resigned  effective  5:00  p.m.  on  this  date.  We  also  talked  about  making  Deputy  Chief  Walt  Ramey 
aware  of  the  circumstances  of  this  situation,  and  possibly  putting  him  temporarily  in  charge  of  the 
Intelligence  Bureau. 

After  concluding  that  phone  call,  1  contacted  Deputy  Chief  Walt  Ramey,  and  in  my  office  briefed 
him  on  the  Matis  Marcus  situation.  Upon  completing  the  briefing,  1  again  talked  to  Chairman  Bible  on  the 
telephone.  It  was  agreed  that  1,  along  with  Deputy  Chief  Ramey,  should  go  to  the  Intelligence  Bureau  and 
secure  the  files  that  related  to  the  Marcus  Sports  Service,  and/or  Matis  Marcus.  At  approximately  1 1 :00 
p.m.  on  that  date,  Deputy  Chief  Ramey  and  I  made  contact  with  Acting  Chief  Hollis  in  his  office.  1 
explained  the  purpose  of  my  visit  and  asked  for  the  Matis  Marcus  file.  Hollis  told  me  there  was  none.  I 
expressed  surprise  that  no  such  file  existed,  and  it  was  at  that  time  that  Hollis  turned  over  to  me  a  legal¬ 
sized  file  labeled  Marcus  Sports  Service,  which  contained  nothing  more  than  newspaper  clippings 
commencing  in  June  of  1990  referring  to  the  Marcus  Sports  Service  and  Matis  Marcus.  In  other  words, 
just  newspaper  articles  about  those  things.  I  persisted  in  my  request,  and  Hollis  led  me  into  the 
Intelligence  Bureau  records  room,  where  he  opened  a  top  drawer  of  a  security-file  cabinet,  and  stated  that 
if  such  a  file  existed  that  this  is  where  it  should  be  located.  He  again  stated,  “There  are  no  files  on  Matis 
Marcus  here.”  Adjacent  to  the  cabinet  were  some  three-by-five  file  drawers  containing  typed  index  cards, 
which  I  searched  looking  for  the  name  of  Matis  Marcus,  but  to  no  avail. 

1  asked  the  question,  “Do  you  mean  to  tell  me  that  if  1  ran  the  name  of  Matis  Marcus  1  cannot  find 
anything  in  the  intelligence  records?” 

He  said,  "It  may  be  in  the  computer,"  but  the  index  cards  that  1  was  looking  for  were  for  older 

files. 

1  then  called  to  the  Intelligence  Bureau  secretary,  Diane  Glassford,  who  came  into  the  records 
room  and  checked  the  computer  index  for  records  on  Matis  Marcus  or  Marcus  Sports  Service.  Two 
records  were  reflected  in  the  computer:  one  for  Marcus  Sports  Service  and  the  other  for  a  Paul  Citelli.  The 
first  file  listed  was  located  and  contained  an  assignment  sheet,  newspaper  clippings,  as  in  the  previous  file 
given  to  me  by  Hollis,  an  affidavit  for  search  warrant  for  the  location  of  1 1 1 1  Las  Vegas  Boulevard 
South,  Suite  317,  and  a  search  warrant  signed  by  Judge  Earl  White  for  that  location.  The  second  file  on 
Paul  Citelli  had  been  signed  out  by  Agent  Dennis  Cooper,  and  was  later  located  and  taken  by  me.  1 
restated  my  request  for  other  files  on  Matis  Marcus  and  was  told  there  was  a  LE1U — that  stands  for  Law 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


139 


Enforcement  Intelligence  Unit  file — on  him,  but  nothing  more.  We  then  proceeded  into  the  Intelligence 
Bureau  reception  area.  And  in  front  of  Deputy  Chief  Ramey,  Ron  Hollis,  and  Diane  Glassford,  1  asked 
Agent  Dennis  Cooper,  who  was  in  that  area  at  the  time  also,  if  he  had  any  files  on  Matis  Marcus,  and  1 
recall  his  reply  was  essentially  that  no,  there  were  no  files  on  Matis  Marcus.  Agent  Cooper  stated  that 
they  had  made  a  deliberate  effort  to  never  mention  him  in  any  report,  and  that  the  only  place  that  he  could 
be  found  would  be  in  individual  cases  wherein  he  was  listed  as  a  confidential  informant. 

1  asked  Dennis  Cooper  if  we  could  speak  to  him  in  his  office,  and  Deputy  Chief  Ramey  and  1 
proceeded  to  follow  him  into  his  office.  The  office  was  heavily  laden  with  reports  and  paperwork  on  his 
desk,  on  the  file  cabinets  adjacent  to  his  desk,  on  a  table  in  front  of  his  desk,  on  the  floor,  and  in  boxes  in 
front  of  his  desk.  He  explained  that  the  majority  of  the  paperwork  related  to  the  Paul  Citelli  file,  and  he 
identified  a  large  file  on  his  desk  as  being  the  original  Paul  Citelli  file  from  the  Intelligence  Bureau 
records  section.  I  asked  Agent  Cooper  if  he  had  any  objection  to  my  looking  through  the  files  to  see  what 
may  exist,  and  he  gave  me  his  permission.  A  cursory  review  of  those  documents  on  the  surface  of  the 
pieces  of  furniture  and  floor  substantiated  Agent  Cooper’s  statement  that  most  of  the  documentation 
related  to  Paul  Citelli  file,  except  for  a  group  of  files  on  his  file  cabinet  adjacent  to  the  desk,  which  were 
related  to  a  variety  of  things  other  than  Matis  Marcus  or  Paul  Citelli.  1  then  asked  to  look  through  the  file 
cabinets  in  his  office  and  he  agreed  that  1  could  do  so;  however,  for  the  most  part,  they  were  empty.  When 
1  inquired  as  to  why  nothing  was  in  the  file  cabinets,  he  explained  to  me  that  he  was  moving  from  his  old 
office  to  this,  his  new  office. 

1  then  opened  the  top  right-hand  drawer  of  his  desk  and  he  immediately  complained  that  he  would 
have  to  object  at  that  point.  1  stopped  what  1  was  doing  in  order  to  inquire  as  to  why  he  would  complain, 
and  he  stated  that  he  thought  at  this  point  1  was  going  too  far.  1  told  him,  “Very  well,”  that  1  would 
suspend  him  and  secure  the  office  until  such  time  as  it  was  decided  by  legal  counsel  what  was  the  proper 
approach  to  look  through  the  desk.  We  then  proceeded  to  the  hallway  where  1  observed  Deputy  Attorney 
General  Scott  Scherer  talking  to  Diane  Glassford  and  asked  him  to  join  me.  1  explained  the  situation  to 
Mr.  Scherer,  and  after  1  had  completed  the  explanation,  Agent  Cooper  indicated  that  1  could  go  ahead  and 
look,  that  he  was  just  objecting  out  of  principle.  1  told  him  that  1  did  not  wish  for  him  to  do  anything  that 
he  was  uncomfortable  with,  but  if  it  was  truly  voluntary,  1  would  proceed  to  look  through  the  desk. 

He,  at  that  time,  of  his  own  accord,  opened  the  drawers  and  said,  “Look,  I  have  nothing  to  hide.” 

1  leafed  through  several  annual  diaries  which  contained  short  notations,  most  of  which  were  not 
meaningful  to  me,  and  therefore  1  did  not  take  them.  In  the  upper  left  hand  drawer  of  his  desk  were  four 
documents  paperclipped  together  relating  to  payments  from  the  chairman’s  revolving  fund.  The  first 
document  seemed  to  log  a  series  of  informant  payments.  The  only  name  listed  was  the  name  of  an 
informant.  The  second  two  documents  were  expense  sheets  made  out  by  Agent  Cooper  to  the  name  of  the 
informant,  and  the  fourth  item  was  a  memorandum  dated  June  4th,  1 990  from  Harlan  Elges,  Chief  of  the 
Administration  Division,  to  Ron  Hollis,  who  was  the  acting  chief  of  the  enforcement  division,  regarding  a 
reimbursement  expense,  wherein  Mr.  Elges  authorized  the  expenditure  of  $1286.36  to  a  confidential 
source.  All  of  these  items  were  initialed  by  me  and  dated  6-15-1990.  These  items  were  also  seized  by  me, 
and  Agent  Cooper  was  given  a  Xerox  copy  for  his  records. 

All  the  items  that  I  seized  that  day  were  later  put  in  a  safe  belonging  to  Deputy  Chief  Walt  Ramey 
and  were  not  removed  again  until  about  June  26,  1990,  which  was  when  the  Gaming  Control  Board 
investigators  Ken  Alkire  and  Gary  Atkins  were  provided  with  these  items  for  review.  The  contents  of 
Chief  Elges ’s  memo  were  very  specifically  referred  to  in  a  Las  Vegas  Review- Journal  article  by  Howard 
Stutz  and  Allen  Tobman,  dated  June  24,  1990.  It  can  reasonably  be  concluded  that  a  copy  of  Chief  Elges’ 


140 


memo  in  possession  of  the  Review- Journal  reporters  was  supplied  by  Agent  Dennis  Cooper. 

1  want  to  read  to  you  just  a  portion  of  the  article  that  was  in  the  Review- Journal  dated  June  24, 
1990,  which  substantiates  what  1  just  said  about  Cooper  giving  the  articles  to  the  paper.  It  states,  “Gaming 
Control  Board  officials  approved  a  $1286.3 6-reimbursement  payment  to  confidential  informant  Matis 
Marcus  earlier  this  year  for  expenses  he  incurred  while  helping  agents  in  an  undercover  operation  in 
Carson  City.  The  disclosure  comes  at  a  time  when  the  Control  Board  is  denying  it  had  any  knowledge  that 
Marcus  was  working  as  an  informant  for  the  agency.  Regulators  also  said  they  would  not  have  approved 
of  ex-gaming  agent  Ron  Hollis’s  decision  to  allow  Marcus  to  operate  an  unlicensed  sportsbook  in 
exchange  for  information  or  other  illegal  activities.  The  $1286.36  payment  to  Marcus  was  approved  by 
Harlen  Elges,  the  Control  Board’s  Chief  of  Administration.  Elges  confirmed  the  reimbursement  in  a 
memorandum  to  Hollis  dated  June  4.  Control  Board  Chairman  Bill  Bible,  in  an  internal  memorandum 
from  Hollis  dated  March  30,  was  notified  of  the  reimbursement  request,  which  covered  airline  tickets, 
hotel  rooms,  and  a  rental  car  Marcus  paid  for  while  helping  two  gaming  agents  pose  as  potential  buyers 
for  the  Carson  Victory  Club  in  March.  This  memorandum  does  not  name  Marcus  specifically.”  As  you 
can  see,  the  newspaper  article  does  go  on,  but  it’s  so  specific  with  regard  to  certain  factors  that  it  clearly 
indicates  someone  from  the  Gaming  Control  Board  gave  the  reporters  that  story,  and  it  certainly  would 
not  have  been  anybody  from  the  administrative  portion.  I  assumed  it  was  Agent  Cooper. 

Going  back  to  the  review  of  the  things  found  in  Agent  Cooper’s  desk.  In  the  right-hand,  bottom 
drawer  of  his  desk,  I  found  numerous  letters  written  to  a  Wayne  Marcus  in  Las  Vegas,  Nevada,  from  a 
lady  by  the  first  name  of  Gloria,  who  lived  in  Milpitas,  California.  I  asked  Agent  Cooper  what  these 
letters  represented  and  what  he  was  doing  with  them.  Agent  Cooper  said  that  they  were  letters  from  a 
friend  of  Marcus  and  that  he,  Cooper,  was  merely  retaining  them  for  Mr.  Marcus.  I  seized  the  letters  and 
ultimately  put  them  in  a  large  manila  envelope,  sealed  the  envelope,  and  allowed  Dennis  Cooper  to  also 
initial  the  sealing  area.  Additional  items  seized  on  that  same  day  was  a  draft  of  an  investigative  report 
dated  June  14,  1990  regarding  the  Paul  Citelli  investigation,  which  was  being  typed  in  the  Intelligence 
Bureau  secretarial  area.  After  the  typing  was  finished,  I  required  that  a  copy  be  made  for  me  in  unedited 
form,  after  which  I  initialed  each  page  with  my  initials  and  returned  the  computer  disk  to  the  secretary. 
The  document  along  with  Dennis  Cooper’s  original  notes  were  also  taken. 

The  last  document  acquired  on  this  date  was  voluntarily  turned  over  to  me  by  Agent  Cooper  and 
is  described  as  follows:  it  was  in  a  letter-size  manila  envelope,  which  had  been  mailed  from  R.  B.  Marcus 
in  Philadelphia  to  Mr.  Matis  Marcus  in  Las  Vegas,  postmarked  2-25-1985.  The  envelope  contained  multi¬ 
page  documents  from  the  District  Director  of  the  IRS  in  Reno  describing  an  outline  of  the  proposed  plan 
for  their  case  project,  which  was  called  Project  Layoff,  which  bore  the  notarized  signatures  of  Matis 
Marcus  and  dated  June  18,  1984;  two  receipts  for  consideration  received,  dated  21  August,  1985  and  9 
September,  1985  respectively,  bearing  notarized  signatures  of  Matis  Marcus,  and  three  hand-written 
pages  of  what  appeared  to  be  operational  agreements  bearing  the  notarized  signature  of  Matis  Marcus 
during  the  1984-1985  time  period,  one  of  which  bears  the  signature  of  an  IRS  agent,  Leo  Halper. 

During  my  discussions  with  Cooper  he  made  a  voluntary  statement  regarding  the  Matis  Marcus 
matter  to  the  effect  that  he  had  been  in  law  enforcement  as  long  as  I  had,  and  that  he  had  been  involved  in 
fifty  of  these  operations  when  he  was  with  the  ATF  and  there  was  nothing  wrong  with  them.  I  replied  that 
he  could  probably  speak  better  to  the  federal  aspect  than  I  could  since  he  had  been  employed  with  a 
federal  agency,  but  condoning  any  type  of  unsupervised,  illegal  conduct  did  not  reconcile  with  my 
understanding  of  proper  police  procedure.  At  approximately  twelve  noon,  Ron  Hollis  had  asked  for  and 
was  given  permission  to  keep  a  doctor’s  appointment,  and  upon  his  return  he  had  packed  a  half  a  dozen  or 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


141 


so  boxes  of  his  personal  belongings  from  his  office.  A  cursory  check  of  the  contents  of  these  boxes 
revealed  that  nothing  of  an  improper  nature  was  being  removed.  I  was  told  that  two  boxes  had  been  taken 
out  to  his  vehicle  without  my  consent  or  knowledge,  and  those  boxes  were  not  checked. 

Prior  to  my  leaving  Hollis’s  office,  I  asked  him  who  the  people  were  that  were  listed  as  arrested 
in  his  June  4th  daily  report,  such  as  Arthur  Goldberg.  He  replied  that  those  were  just  people  who  were 
selected  to  be  arrested.  He  made  the  voluntary  statement  that  Chairman  Bible  told  him  that  I  went  ballistic 
when  I  heard  about  the  situation,  and  f  replied  that  “ballistic”  might  have  been  a  little  strong,  but  there 
was  no  doubt  that  I  was  extremely  upset  that  such  activities  could  occur  without  my  knowledge,  and  I  was 
totally  offended  that  he,  Ron  Hollis,  would  write  daily  reports  to  the  Board  which  contained  untrue 
statements.  I  further  explained  that  I  could  not  understand  why  he  had  not  discussed  the  situation  with  me, 
and  his  only  response  was,  “I’m  sorry.”  Between  the  June  3rd,  a  Sunday-evening  telephone  call  described 
earlier,  and  the  contact  and  conversations  on  June  15th,  1990, 1  had  no  further  conversations  with  Ron 
Hollis.  Throughout  the  course  of  conversations  with  Chairman  Bill  Bible  during  June  15th,  it  was  decided 
that  senior  agent  Dennis  Cooper  should  be  placed  on  administrative  leave  with  pay  until  the  investigation 
of  this  matter  had  been  concluded.  At  approximately  5:00  p.m.  on  that  date  I  went  to  Agent  Cooper’s 
office  and  advised  him  he  was  being  placed  on  administrative  leave  with  pay  until  the  conclusion  of  the 
investigation  in  this  matter  and  presented  him  with  a  memorandum  to  that  effect.  Agent  Cooper  made  a 
remark,  “I  may  as  well  tell  you  there  are  two  others  just  like  this.”  I  replied  that  his  remark  certainly 
concerned  me  and  that  I  would  talk  to  him  as  to  what  he  meant  by  that  statement  on  either  Monday  or 
Tuesday  and  asked  him  if  he  would  be  available.  He  replied  he  would  and  I  left  his  office. 

On  Tuesday,  June  19th,  1990,  at  approximately  2:00  p.m.,  I  had  Chief  of  Enforcement  Ron  Asher 
join  me  and  we  talked  to  Dennis  Cooper  in  my  office.  I  related  to  his  Friday,  June  15th,  remark  and  asked 
him  to  fully  explain.  Cooper  told  me  that  an  informant  was  apparently  conducting  an  international,  illegal 
bookmaking  operation  out  of  the  Dominican  Republic  and  there  were  numerous  pay  and  collection 
locations  throughout  the  United  States,  including  Las  Vegas.  He  told  me  that  because  of  the  cooperation 
of  the  Clark  County  district  attorney’s  office  an  informant  was  introduced  into  the  operation  and  was 
presently  working  in  the  Dominican  Republic.  The  informant  was  described  as  a  defendant  in  an  eighty- 
four-thousand-dollar  ticket  scam  at  the  Hilton,  and  f  was  later  told  his  name,  but  I  choose  again  not  to  use 
it  in  this  report.  Agent  Cooper  also  indicated  that  the  informant  is  scheduled  to  appear  for  sentencing  as  a 
result  of  an  earlier  conviction,  and  it’s  my  understanding  that  that  informant  that  I  had  originally 
mentioned  here  was  sentenced  to  eighteen  months  in  prison,  although  I’m  not  positive  about  that. 

I  asked  Agent  Cooper  about  the  second  situation  that  he  referred  to,  and  he  stated  there  was  no 
second  situation.  In  pursuing  this  area  of  questioning,  Agent  Cooper  stated  that  the  second  situation  was 
in  the  planning  stages  only.  I  asked  him  what  the  plan  was  and  he  replied  that  they  had  thought  about 
setting  up  a  sting  operation  using  a  madam,  and  had  thought  about  using  the  Metropolitan  Police 
Department,  but  no  contact  had  been  made.  Agent  Cooper  clearly  gave  me  the  impression  that  the  intent 
was  to  set  up  an  illegal  prostitution  operation  in  order  to  gain  information.  I  did  not  ask  him  how  the 
information  would  be  obtained,  but  did  tell  him  that  it  would  be  totally  improper  for  the  metropolitan 
police  department,  or  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  to  be  involved  in  any  such  operation. 

On  Wednesday,  June  27th,  1990, 1  learned  from  Deputy  Chief  Walt  Ramey  that  an  Intelligence 
Bureau  clerk  had  located  a  file  on  Matis  Marcus.  I  subsequently  viewed  this  file,  and  although  it  did  not 
contain  extensive  amount  of  material,  several  items  of  particular  interest  to  me  were  found  as  follows:  a 
letter  postmarked  July  1987,  written  to  Sports  Service  by  an  anonymous  writer  indicating  that  the  FBI 
was  aware  of  their  operation.  This  particular  item  dated  the  illegal  sportsbook  that  the  Gaming  Control 


142 


Board  was  conducting,  which  led  it  back  to  that  early  1987  date.  There  were  also  two  memos  from  agents 
of  the  enforcement  division  dated  February  2,  1988  regarding  Sports  Service  at  1111  Las  Vegas 
Boulevard  South  written  by  two  agents  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  and  also  a  Ron  Hollis  1990  memo 
discussing  Sherry  Compton  of  Consumer  Affairs  regarding  a  cease-and-desist  order  and  license  fees 
regarding  the  Marcus  Sports  Service. 

Several  other  documents  were  contained  in  this  file;  however,  those  that  1  have  listed  have 
significant  meaning  to  me  as  follows:  the  postmark  on  the  anonymous  writer’s  letter  suggested  a  close 
relationship  between  Marcus  and  the  Intelligence  Bureau  personnel  as  early  as  July  1987,  rather  than  in 
the  latter  part  of  1987  as  was  told  to  Chairman  Bible  by  Ron  Hollis.  The  two  enforcement  memos  and  the 
Elges  memo  ended  up  in  the  hands  of  the  press  at  or  about  the  time  Agent  Cooper  was  relieved  from  duty 
and  Hollis  resigned.  The  Sherry  Compton  memo  clearly  indicates  that  Ron  Hollis  had  current  awareness 
and  recollection  of  a  Matis  Marcus  file,  since  this  memo  was  filed  therein.  However,  on  June  15,  when  1 
asked  both  Cooper  and  Hollis  about  a  Matis  Marcus  file,  both  denied  that  such  a  file  existed. 

On  June  27,  1 990  1  received  information  from  a  confidential  source  that  an  individual  by  the 
name  of  Arthur,  whose  phone  number  was  provided,  was  speaking  rather  candidly  about  the  Marcus 
Sports  Service,  Matis  Marcus,  and  individuals  connected  with  the  illegal  bookmaking  operation. 
According  to  the  confidential  source,  Arthur  was  of  the  opinion  that  Matis  Marcus  would  be  back  in 
business  in  a  couple  of  months.  He  alluded  to  the  fact  that  he  knew  the  whereabouts  of  the  computer  used 
to  operate  the  illegal  sportsbook.  He  talked  about  the  total  write  being  approximately  seven  hundred  and 
fifty  thousand  per  week.  He  also  talked  about  payments  that  were  made  by  check,  that  all  customers  were 
from  out  of  state,  and  also  about  the  difficulties  of  collecting  from  some  of  the  bettors.  In  the  computer 
files,  he  said  there  were  index  files  of  code  numbers  under  which  the  name  of  the  bettor  and  his  phone 
number  could  be  found.  Most  of  the  people  who  worked  at  the  sports  service  he  indicated  were  retired 
people.  New  bettors  were  taken  only  from  referrals  and  someone  else  who  was  known  to  the  operation. 

He  indicated  that  he  knew  Dennis  Cooper,  and  that  Dennis  Cooper  came  to  the  location  frequently  and 
would  routinely  ask  who  to  bet  on  and  then  would  place  calls  to  unknown  persons;  that  Dennis  Cooper 
also  gave  advice  to  them  on  how  to  deal  with  customers  who  would  not  pay;  that  Cooper  enjoyed  the 
atmosphere  in  the  sports  service. 

According  to  the  informant,  Arthur  stated  that  Cooper  had  attended  a  barbeque  at  Dan  Murphy’s 
residence,  which  1  believe  occurred  on  or  about  June  4,  1990.  Dan  Murphy  was  originally  Marcus’s 
partner.  1  believe  he  was  a  maitre  d’.  According  to  newspaper  accounts,  Mr.  Murphy  had  contributed  up 
to  thirty  thousand  dollars  to  get  the  sportsbook  at  1111  Las  Vegas  Boulevard  South  started.  Arthur 
additionally  told  my  informant  that  he  did  not  know  Ron  Hollis,  that  a  Donna  Brooks  worked  at  the  sports 
service  in  a  secretarial  capacity.  Daniel  Murphy  had  resigned  as  chairman  of  the  Alcoholics  Anonymous 
on  June  27,  1990.  Apparently  Chairman  Bible  received  a  telephone  call  from  an  individual  identifying 
himself  as  Kramer,  who  supplied  Arthur’s  first  name  and  telephone  number.  The  telephone  number 
provided  the  ability  to  identify  Arthur  as  Arthur  Elliott,  who  lived  at  2500  Karen,  #24.  After  1  received 
the  information  1  relayed  it  to  Chief  Gaming  Deputy  Attorney  General  Brook  Neilsen. 

Did  you  ever  have  any  further  involvement  in  this  problem  area,  Gerry? 

Well,  actually  1  did.  Ultimately,  you  know,  the  Gaming  Control  Board  assigned  a  couple  of 
investigators  by  the  name  of  Ken  Alkire  and  Gary  Atkins.  But  prior  to  that  time,  1  had  an  informant  that 
told  me  about  a  lady  who  had  quite  a  bit  of  information  about  the  sportsbook  operation  because  she 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


143 


worked  there,  and  it  might  be  very  beneficial,  but  she  was  extremely  frightened  at  that  time.  Ultimately 
through  the  informant  that  1  had,  1  set  up  an  arrangement  whereby  I  rented  a  room  at  the  Circus  Circus, 
and  there  along  with  the  informant  met  with  the  lady  that  1  came  to  know  as  Donna  Brooks.  Ms.  Brooks 
had  a  male  companion  with  her  at  the  time,  and  she  explained  that  she  had  worked  at  the  sportsbook. 
Thereafter,  she  provided  a  great  deal  of  detail  about  the  numbers  of  people  who  worked  there,  Dennis 
Cooper’s  activities,  Matis  Marcus’s  activities.  She  also  had  with  her  a  large  briefcase  which  contained 
large  numbers  of  three-by-five  cards  on  which  were  written  the  information  about  bettors  that  were  used 
by  the  sports  service  during  their  illegal  operation.  She  also  had  line  sheets  and  various  other  bookmaking 
materials  which  were  used  in  the  operation.  She  also  told  me  about  a  storage  area  where,  again,  additional 
quantities  of  sportsbook  materials  were  stored.  I  looked  through  the  material  that  she  had.  We  talked  at 
some  length  and  we  ultimately  agreed  that  she  would  cooperate  with  the  Attorney  General’s  office  if  she 
were  provided  with  some  form  of  immunity  from  prosecution.  1  advised  her  that  there  would  not  be  any 
prosecution  against  her  if  she  were  willing  to  cooperate  with  us,  and  would  provide  all  the  details  that  she 
had  given  me,  to  the  attorney  general’s  office,  and  would  help  with  a  search  warrant  to  recover  the 
properties  in  the  storage  area.  Although  my  assurance  that  she  would  not  be  prosecuted  didn’t  carry  the 
legal  effect  that  it  would  if  it  had  come  from  the  attorneys  general’s  office,  it,  in  fact,  would  be  upheld,  1 
believe,  by  any  court  if  1  were  willing  to  testify  that  1  had  given  her  such  immunity,  and  1  was  willing  to 
do  so. 

Based  on  those  conditions,  1  told  her  that  1  couldn’t  allow  her  to  take  the  briefcase  containing  the 
betting  materials  with  her,  and  1  took  that  from  her  because  1  didn’t  want  to  lose  the  materials  that  she 
had.  1  believe  that  date  was  July  4th,  and  it  was  on  July  5th  that  I  had  contacted  Mr.  John  Redlein  of  the 
Attorney  General’s  Office,  told  him  about  the  briefcase  full  of  materials  that  1  had  taken  from  Donna 
Brooks  and  about  her  willingness  to  cooperate  and  asked  him  when  they  wanted  to  meet  with  her.  He 
wanted  me  to  bring  her  down  almost  immediately,  which  1  did,  taking  along  with  me  the  betting  materials 
in  the  briefcase  that  I  had  described  earlier.  When  we  originally  met  with  Mr.  Redlein  it  was  important  to 
me  that  he  understand  that  1  had  told  Donna  that  she  would  not  be  prosecuted.  Although  Mr.  Redlein  was 
not  comfortable  with  the  fact  that  1  had  given  her  this  type  of  assurance,  he  ultimately  agreed,  since  1 
insisted  that  1  would  not  allow  her  to  cooperate  without  that  immunity,  that  he  would  honor  my  request. 
After  that  was  established,  I  left  Ms.  Brooks  with  Attorney  General  John  Redlein,  who  thereafter  did  a 
variety  of  things,  including  obtain  a  search  warrant  for  the  storage  area  that  1  talked  about.  It  was 
approximately  after  this  point  in  time  that  1  was  told  that  the  investigators  from  the  administrative 
division  would  be  taking  over  the  investigation.  On  approximately  June  the  25th  1  met  with  Agent  Gary 
Atkins  and  told  him  what  1  knew  about  the  Matis  Marcus  investigation  and  provided  him  with  a  report.  1 
also  turned  over  the  information  that  had  been  taken  from  Agent  Cooper’s  office. 

After  you  turned  the  investigation  over  to  Atkins  and  Alkire,  what  did  they  do  with  it?  How  did  they 
proceed? 

Well,  of  course,  you  know,  there  were  other  people  in  the  intelligence  unit,  some  from  Reno  that 
were  brought  down  for  the  false  raid,  which  was  one  of  the  reasons  that  1  thought  Bill  Bible  was  certainly 
not  involved.  He  was  a  good  administrator  and  he  was  extremely  conservative.  He  would  not  have  wasted 
the  state’s  money  to  fly  agents  down  here  to  pose  a  phony  raid.  At  any  rate,  they  brought  the  agents  down 
from  Reno,  and,  of  course,  there  were  other  Las  Vegas  agents  that  were  involved  in  the  execution  of  the 
phony  search  warrant.  It  was  Atkins’s  and  Alkire’s  responsibility  to  go  ahead  and  interview  all  of  those 


144 


people  and  anybody  else  associated  with  the  investigation,  like  Arthur  and  people  of  that  nature.  They 
subsequently  turned  the  information  over  to  the  attorney  general’s  office,  who  ultimately  presented  the 
case  to  the  grand  jury.  I  later  testified  before  the  grand  jury  along  with  many  other  people. 

The  results  of  the  grand  jury  probe  were  disappointing  to  me  because  1  felt  there  was  more  than 
adequate  proof  to  show  that  Gaming  Control  Board  agents  had  peimitted  an  unlicensed  sportsbook  to 
operate,  which  is  strictly  prohibited  by  a  law,  that  the  sportsbook  had  not  paid  taxes,  which  is  absolutely 
prohibited  by  law,  and  that  there  were  recordings  of  bets  being  taken  over  the  phone,  probably  in  the 
hundreds,  if  not  thousands.  1  think  each  one  of  those  would  have  been  a  federal  wire  transmission 
violation  because  of  the  taking  of  illegal  wagers  over  the  phone  lines.  For  some  reason,  which  1  was  never 
provided,  no  indictments  were  ever  returned  against  the  three  individuals  that  1  thought  were  primarily 
involved,  that  being  Ron  Hollis,  Dennis  Cooper,  and  John  Taylor.  1  guess  Matis  Marcus  was  ultimately 
charged  with  some  type  of  a  tax  evasion,  or  failure  to  pay  a  tax  violation,  which  was  a  misdemeanor,  so 
not  much  happened  to  him  either.  There  were  no  indictments  and  only  Marcus  paid  a  very  small  price  for 
having  violated  what  1  thought  were  very  serious  aspects  of  the  gaming  and  criminal  law. 

And  Hollis,  Cooper,  and  Taylor  then  had  resigned  from  their  jobs? 

Y es,  1  believe  that  they  all  actually  resigned  in  fact,  but  they  all,  of  course,  later  contended  that 
they  did  so  under  pressure.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  being  accused  of  doing  some  of  the  things  that  they 
had  been  accused,  would  create  a  great  deal  of  pressure,  because  one  can  reasonably  conclude  that  if  they 
were  guilty,  as  1  believe  they  were,  of  violating  the  law,  that  they  could  no  longer  work  for  the  Gaming 
Control  Board.  There  would  have  been  a  great  deal  of  intense  pressure  for  them  to  leave,  which  they  all 
did.  They  did  subsequently  recant  that  they  had  resigned  by  filing  a  lawsuit,  claiming  that  they  were 
involuntarily  terminated,  and  any  other  claim  that  they  could  put  in  the  complaint,  which  was  probably 
twelve  items  long.  It  alleged  not  only  involuntary  termination  but  lack  of  due  process,  humiliation, 
whatever  they  could  think  of. 

Did  they  sue  the  Board  as  individuals  as  well? 

Yes.  They  sued  the  Nevada  State  Gaming  Control  Board,  and  they  sued  the  chairman,  William 
Bible,  Thomas  Roche,  who  was  a  former  member,  Steve  DuCharme,  myself,  Ron  Asher,  Gary  Horton, 
who  was  involved  in  gaming  enforcement,  Walt  Ramey,  whom  I’ve  discussed.  They  sued  Gary  Atkins, 
the  attorney  general’s  office,  State  of  Nevada,  Frankie  Sue  Del  Papa,  and  that  goes  1  through  L  of  the 
complaint.  That  case  was  filed  under  district  court  case  A308505. 

So  what  was  the  outcome  of  that  lawsuit  against  the  Gaming  Board  and  the  individuals?  Did  it  cost  you 
any  money  individually? 

Well,  1  had  asked,  as  Fm  entitled  to  do,  for  the  state  to  provide  for  my  legal  defense,  and  1  was 
provided  with  that  service  since  1  was  a  member  of  the  Board.  They  undertook  depositions,  which  1 
participated  in  as  did  many  other  people.  Probably  most  everybody  involved  would  have  given 
depositions.  On  numerous  occasions  the  plaintiffs  made  requests  for  an  out-of-court  settlement,  and  each 
time  1  objected  strenuously  to  the  point  that  it  almost  became  a  joke  with  Attorney  Walt  Cannon. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


145 


Walt  Cannon  was  their  attorney? 

No,  he  was  our  attorney,  and  he  provided  our  defense.  Because  I  so  immediately  rejected  the  idea 
of  settling  with  these  people,  whom  1  felt  were  so  wrong,  that  it  was  almost  a  joke,  he  would  always  say, 
“Now,  Gerry,  1  know  that  you  object” — he  put  it  really  in  harsher  terms  than  that,  explaining —  “but  I’m 
obligated  to  present  these  settlement  offers  as  a  legal  situation,  so  I  have  to  tell  you  about  it.”  Each  time, 
of  course,  1  objected  to  it.  1  believe  on  an  occasion  when  1  was  out  of  town  in  New  York,  Mr.  Bible  and 
Walt  Cannon  entered  into  a  settlement  agreement  and  ultimately  agreed  to  pay  the  plaintiffs  a  hundred 
and  ten  thousand  dollars. 

That  was  a  hundred  and  ten  thousand  each  or  a  hundred  and  ten  thousand  dollars? 

1  believe  that  was  a  hundred  and  ten  thousand  dollars  in  total,  but  even  that  1  thought  was  too 
much  money  to  pay  these  people.  They  deserved  nothing,  in  my  estimation.  Mr.  Cannon  had  talked  about 
the  cost  of  our  defense,  and  I  questioned  how  we  should  be  so  concerned  about  the  cost  of  the  defense 
when  the  state  was  paying  his  salary  and  expenses  and  the  three  plaintiffs  were  basically  paying  on  their 
own.  1  felt  their  charges  in  the  complaint  were  totally  improper,  and  I  wanted  it  to  go  to  a  jury  trial,  but 
nonetheless  they  settled  it  without  my  consent  on  the  matter  while  1  was  present. 

When  1  did  discover  that  they  had  settled  the  case  I  was  extremely  upset  about  it,  and  1  told  Mr. 
Cannon  that  1  was  very  upset  about  it.  He  said,  “Well,  they  know  that  you  didn’t  participate  in  the 
settlement  and  that  they  stand  the  possibility  of  you  coming  back  on  them.”  1  told  Mr.  Cannon  that  1 
wanted  to  sue  them.  Mr.  Cannon  graciously  agreed  that  he  would  sue  them  for  me  on  a  contingency  basis, 
and  then  we  discussed  what  benefit  would  come  from  that.  They  had  no  money.  It  would  cost  me  a  lot  of 
money  for  depositions  et  cetera,  and  so  it  would  be  like  adding  insult  to  injury.  After  our  discussion,  1 
decided  to  conclude  it,  but  1  was  extremely  disappointed  at  the  way  it  was  handled. 

When  they  were  awarded  that  hundred  and  ten  thousand  dollars,  was  that  anything  out  of  your  pocket,  or 
it  was  all  the  state ’s  money? 

No,  it  didn’t  cost  me  anything.  And  it  probably  never  would  have,  because  1  think  1  was  covered 
by  the  state.  The  position  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board  is  what  they  call  a  quasi-judicial  position.  In 
essence,  unless  it  can  be  shown  that  you  did  not  act  in  good  faith,  as  a  board  member  you  are  immune 
from  any  type  of  prosecution,  as  a  judge  would  be.  Of  course,  I  don’t  believe  1  did  anything  wrong.  1 
reacted  to  a  situation  that  was  abhorrent,  was  improper,  it  was  illegal,  and  it  involved  people  that  worked 
for  me  and  with  me.  I  could  have  done  nothing  more  than  1  did  or  any  less. 

We  only  briefly  mentioned  Mr.  Bible.  Weren ’t  there  a  lot  of  rumors  or  conjecture  going  around  that  the 
fanner  board  members,  such  as  Michael  Rumbolz  and  current  board  members,  like  Bill  Bible,  were 
aware  of  this  situation? 

Yes.  Ron  Hollis  pretty  much  advocated  all  along  that  Mr.  Bible  knew,  and  1  believe  that  that’s  a 
distortion  of  the  facts.  Mr.  Bible  knew  probably  after  the  illegal  raid,  and  it  wasn’t  until  several  days  later, 
like  on  June  the  7th,  that  myself  and  member  Roche  were  told  about  it.  Hollis  and  Cooper,  in  their  minds, 
1  believe,  projected  it  all  the  way  back  to  1987,  which  would  be  rather  ludicrous,  because  in  1987  the 


146 


board  chairman  was  Bart  Jacka.  Jacka  didn’t  know,  and  Hollis  never  claimed  that  he  knew.  After  him  it 
was  Mike  Rumbolz.  Although  Hollis  contended  at  one  time  that  there  may  have  been  a  memo  authorizing 
the  operation  issued  by  Mike  Rumbolz,  that  was  never  produced.  Mike  Rumbolz  denied  that  he  knew,  and 
1  believe  it  to  be  true  that  he  had  no  knowledge  of  the  sports  book  operation.  After  that  Bill  Bible  came  on 
as  the  chairman  of  the  Board.  Between  the  time  he  came  on  the  Board  and  June  of  1990,  there  was  never 
any  mention  of  it.  1  believe  that  they  lied  about  Mr.  Bible’s  awareness  and  knowledge  of  the  illegal  sports 
book  if  they  inferred  that  he  knew  about  it  prior  to  the  false  raid  which  occurred  on  June  3,  1 990. 

They  were  possibly,  or  probably,  just  trying  to  throw  some  dirt  on  someone  else  to  take  some  of  the  sting 
off  of  them. 

Well,  1  think  they  were  trying  to  find  some  way  to  legitimize  what  could  not  be  legitimized  and 
maybe  that  is  that  they  had  persisted  in  the  condoning  of  the  illegal  sportsbook  over  a  number  of  years.  1 
believe  it  was  said  that  they  did  not  do  it  for  monetary  gain  but  for  information  on  other  illegal 
bookmakers  that  were  operating  in  the  Las  Vegas  area.  1  also  understand  that  there  was  a  Buffalo  LCN 
group  that  had  been  identified  through  the  efforts  of  Matt  Marcus.  I  don’t  know  if  that’s  true  or  not.  But 
anyway,  they  were  illegal  bookmakers,  and  supposedly  Marcus  provided  the  information  which  led  to 
their  undoing.  The  reason  they  allowed  him  to  operate  his  illegal  sportsbook  was  to  get  information. 

I  didn  7  quite  understand  the  Buffalo  LCN.  What  is  that? 

1  believe  it  was  a  Buffalo,  New  York,  La  Cosa  Nostra  group  that  was  operating  an  illegal 
bookmaking  operation  in  the  Las  Vegas  area.  1  believe  they  arrested  some  of  the  individuals  from  that 
organization  in  an  illegal  bookmaking  arrest.  Unfortunately,  the  end  did  not  justify  the  means. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


147 


6 

William  (Bill)  Curran 


Born  in  Minneapolis  in  1946,  Bill  Curran  earned  an  undergraduate 
degree  from  the  University  of  Minnesota  followed  by  a  law  degree 
from  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley  School  of  Law  in  1972. 
His  Nevada  career  began  with  a  clerkship  for  Chief  Justice  E.M. 
Gunderson  at  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court  in  1973.  He  then  worked 
as  a  Deputy  District  Attorney  from  1975  to  1979,  and  as  County 
Counsel  for  Clark  County  from  1979  to  1989.  Curran  was 
appointed  to  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  by  then-Acting 
Governor  Bob  Miller  in  1989  and  served  on  the  Board  for  ten 
years,  acting  as  its  chair  from  1991  to  1999.  In  the  meantime,  he 
started  his  own  private  law  practice,  ultimately  becoming  a  partner 
at  Ballard  Spahr  LLP.  A  founder  of  the  International  Gaming 
Institute  at  the  University  of  Nevada,  Las  Vegas,  Curran  was  the 
chairman  of  the  International  Association  of  Gaming  Regulators 
from  1993  to  1994. 

Bill  Curran,  1999.  Photo  courtesy  of  Bill  Curran. 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  morning.  This  is  Dwayne  Kling.  It ’s  March  30,  2004.  I’m  with  Bill  Curran  in  his 
office  in  Las  Vegas,  Nevada. 

Mr.  Curran,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have  your  permission  to 
make  available  to  the  public  the  tapes  and  transcripts  of  the  oral  history  interviews  that  we  are  about  to 
begin  today? 

William  Curran:  Yes. 


I  will  start  out  by  asking  you  when  and  where  you  were  born. 


148 


Well,  1  was  bom  in  1946  in  Minneapolis,  Minnesota. 

When  and  where  did  you  come  to  Nevada? 

After  1  got  out  of  law  school  at  Boalt  Hall,  down  at  U.C.  Berkeley  in  1972, 1  had  a  clerkship 
arranged  at  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court.  Ultimately,  1  got  here  in  early  1973. 1  started  with  the  idea  that  1 
was  going  to  be  a  law  clerk  and  soon  found  myself  filling  a  vacancy  as  state  court  administrator.  And 
thereafter,  1  held  that  position  as  well  as  being  a  regular  law  clerk  to  one  of  the  justices  until  about  June  of 
1974. 

Did  you  do  your  undergraduate  work  at  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  also? 

No,  I  went  to  University  of  Minnesota  in  Minneapolis. 

So  that  was  a  long  move  for  you  to  get  from  the  University  of  Minneapolis  to  Cal,  wasn  ’t  it? 

It  seemed  worth  it  one  June  day  when  we  had  a  blizzard  in  Minneapolis,  and  1  thought,  “I’ve  got 
to  get  out  of  here.”  [laughter] 

[laughter]  Makes  good  sense.  When  were  you  appointed  to  the  Commission? 

Let’s  see,  1  was  appointed  in  April  of  1989. 

Who  did  you  replace  on  the  Board? 

Bob  Peccole. 

You  had  a  little  different  circumstance  than  most  of  the  commissioners.  You  served  as  a  commission 
member  for  a  while,  and  then  you  later  served  as  a  chairman.  Is  that  right? 

That’s  right.  1  was  a  member  for  two  years.  Then  1  was  chairman  for  eight  years  after  that.  And 
then  1  even  served  a  few  more  months  back  as  a  regular  member  again  at  the  very  end,  until  my  successor 
was  appointed.  For  whatever  it’s  worth,  before  I  got  appointed  to  the  Commission,  in  addition  to  serving 
as  a  prosecutor  in  the  Clark  County  district  attorney’s  office,  1  have  also  been  county  counsel,  which  is 
the  chief  legal  advisor  for  the  county  commission  and  for  the  county  and  liquor  and  gaming  licensing 
board.  I’d  been  involved  in  gaming  regulation  for  eleven  years  at  that  level. 

As  you  know,  cities  and  counties  have  concurrent  jurisdiction  with  the  state.  And  during  much  of 
that  time,  it  approached  being  equal  level  of  jurisdiction.  With  the  county,  I  was  the  attorney  to  the 
licensing  board  that  regulated  the  Strip,  so  1  guess  I  had  a  little  more  in  the  way  of  background  than 
people  who  normally  come  to  this  with  no  background  in  either  gaming  or  gaming  regulation. 

It’s  very  true.  Yes,  you  ’re  almost  an  exception  with  the  background  that  you  had.  Who  appointed  you  to 
the  Commission  originally? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


149 


That  was  Bob  Miller,  whose  title  at  that  point,  1  think,  was  “Acting  Governor,”  because  he  had 
filled  the  vacancy  of  Richard  Bryan,  who’d  been  elected  to  the  Senate.  He  served  as  acting  governor  for 
two  years  before  he  was  then  elected  to  his  own  term  and  became  just  plain  “Governor.” 

Was  he  the  governor  that  appointed  you  to  be  chairman ,  also? 

Yes. 

And  then  you  were,  of  course,  reappointed  as  a  chairman.  Was  that  Governor  Miller  again? 

Yes.  He  also  appointed  me  to  chair  the  Gaming  Policy  Committee,  which,  as  you  know,  is 
another  regulatory  body  that  has  members  from  the  Board,  Commission,  and  the  Legislature. 

Had  you  known  Governor  Miller  prior  to  his  appointing  you? 

Yes,  I’d  worked  in  the  Clark  County  DA’s  office  with  him,  and  he  had  appointed  me  as  county 
counsel  when  he  was  district  attorney. 

During  your  time  on  the  Commission,  there  were  more  than  a  dozen  individuals  entered  in  the  “Black 
Book,  ”  or  the  List  of  Excluded  Persons.  Would  you  tell  us  why  you  feel  that  the  “Black  Book’’  is  such  an 
important  tool  for  gaming  regulators?  Or  do  you  feel  it  is  a  necessary  tool? 

Well,  1  never  gave  it  the  same  level  of  significance,  perhaps,  that  some  others  did.  That  isn’t  to 
say  that  1  didn’t  think  it  was  a  useful  and  valuable  tool.  Certainly  it  played  an  important  role  in  keeping 
the  undesirable  elements  out  of  the  gaming  industry  and  in  reassuring  the  public  that  there  was,  in  fact,  an 
effective  regulatory  system  that  did  try  to  keep  the  gaming  industry  clean  and  disallow  unsavory  types 
from  even  entering  the  casino,  much  less  being  involved  in  forming  or  operating  a  casino.  I  thought  an 
important  function,  though,  was  that  gaming  licensees  are  required  to  be  careful  in  their  associations,  and 
that  includes  who  they’ll  even  allow  in  their  casinos.  And  having  a  clearly-identified  list  of  name  that 
said,  at  the  minimum,  these  people  must  be  excluded,  I  thought  was  helpful  to  gaming  licensees  who 
don’t  have  the  same  access  to  information  or  investigative  material  that  regulators  have.  Then  sometimes 
with  the  enormous  number  of  people  who  come  to  casinos,  it’s  hard  to  know  who’s  there,  but  if  there  is  a 
small  list  of  names,  you  can  be  careful  when  people  register  in  the  hotel.  Y ou  could  be  alert  to  who  these 
people  were,  at  least,  and  see  to  it  that  you  kept  them  out  of  the  premises.  Now,  I  also  felt  that  it  had 
really  a  public  relations  function,  which  1  don’t  entirely  discount  the  value  of,  but  I  certainly  never 
believed  that  the  “Black  Book”  was  at  the  core  of  gaming  regulators’  efforts  to  keep  the  gaming  industry 
on  the  straight  and  narrow. 

Shortly  after  you  were  appointed  to  the  Commission,  a  hearing  was  held  to  determine  if  Joey  Cusurnano 
should  be  entered  in  the  “Black  Book.  ’’  He  was  the  first  of  the  many  individuals  entered  in  the  “Black 
Book’’  during  your  time  on  the  Commission.  Was  there  anything  special  about  that  hearing  that  stands 
out  in  your  mind? 


150 


Well,  it  was  one  of  the  more  contested  hearings.  Oscar  Goodman  was  the  attorney  who 
represented  Mr.  Cusumano.  He  raised  a  number  of  points  that  presented  issues  that  were  somewhat 
unique.  One  of  the  issues  that  he  submitted  was  that  this  was  a  selective  persecution  of  Mr.  Cusumano 
because  of  his  Italian- American  heritage.  He  presented  testimony  from  a  professor  who  said  that  he  had 
studied  the  percentage  of  Italians  who  lived  in  Nevada  and  the  percentage  of  Italians  nationwide,  and  that 
those  numbers  were  eight  percent  in  Nevada  and  five  percent  nationally,  and  that  60  to  70  percent  out  of 
the  members  of  the  "Black  Book"  were  Italian-Americans.  He  took  that  as  statistical  evidence  that  there 
was  an  invidious  discrimination  against  Italian-Americans.  [long  pause] 

He  presented  another  issue  that  had  to  be  dealt  with  that  1  thought  had  some  credibility,  and  that 
was  there  was  a  large  number  of  people  working  in  the  industry  who  did,  in  fact,  have  work  cards,  who 
had  been  given  work  cards  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  they  had  prior  felony  convictions  themselves,  as 
had  Mr.  Cusumano.  He  subpoenaed  an  intelligence  officer  from  the  metropolitan  police  department,  who 
had,  in  fact,  given  a  work  card  to  somebody  who  had  been  convicted  in  the  same  crime  with  Mr. 
Cusumano,  who  had  been  released  from  prison  and  came  back  and  was  issued  a  work  card,  and  said  it 
was  unfair  to  give  it  to  this  person  who  was  not  Italian  and  to  deny  it  to  Mr.  Cusumano  who  was  Italian 
when  they  had  essentially  been  convicted  of  the  same  thing. 

The  Gaming  Control  Board,  1  think,  aptly  pointed  out,  however,  that,  in  the  first  place,  the  work 
card  that  the  other  individual  had  received  was  a  non-gaming  work  card.  It  was  not  for  him  to  work  in  the 
casino  per  se;  rather,  it  was  for  him  to  be  a  valet  parker  at  a  casino.  Secondly,  that  person  did  not  have  the 
previous  criminal  history  that  Mr.  Cusumano  did,  had  not  been  listed  in  the  Chicago  Crime  Commission’s 
list  of  organized-crime  associates.  And  telling  to  me,  I  think,  was  that  the  crime  that  Mr.  Cusumano  had 
been  convicted  of  involved  kickbacks  to  executives  in  the  culinary  union,  having  to  do  with  life  insurance 
for  union  members,  which  essentially  was  a  defrauding  of  the  union  and  corruption  of  the  employees 
working  in  hotels.  Under  those  circumstances,  1  at  least  felt  that  Mr.  Cusumano  was  a  worthy  candidate, 
and  I  supported  putting  him  into  the  “Black  Book.” 

There  were  certainly  interesting  issues,  but  we  didn’t  find  any  merit  to  the  claim  that  there  was 
selective  persecution  or  that  there  was  any  kind  of  pernicious  discrimination  against  Italians  or  anybody 
else.  We  had  the  testimony  of  the  sentencing  judge,  who  stated  at  the  sentencing  hearing  that  Mr. 
Cusumano  and  his  colleagues  and  the  confederates  in  that  offense  had  allowed  organized  crime  then  to 
infiltrate  the  union  that  represented  a  huge  number  of  casino  employees,  and  they  thought  that  somebody 
like  that  did  pose  a  threat  to  the  industry  and  to  its  reputation.  Interestingly,  Mr.  Cusumano  didn’t  fit  a  lot 
of  the  images  of  a  criminal.  He  didn’t  look  like  a  criminal.  He  was  very  handsome,  well-dressed,  well- 
spoken,  moved  affably  in  polite  circles,  was  to  a  degree  involved  in  the  Las  Vegas  society  scene. 
Nonetheless,  the  Commission  unanimously  believed  that  he  did  pose  a  threat  to  the  industry,  and  1 
supported  that  conclusion. 

Was  it  quite  a  lengthy  hearing? 

It  went  a  whole  day,  until  after  midnight.  It  was  a  pretty  lengthy  hearing,  yes.  Lots  of  witnesses, 
lots  of  exhibits. 

Did  you  have  any  personal  confrontation  with  Mr.  Goodman? 


No,  while  he  was  a  zealous  advocate,  Mr  .Goodman  was  professional,  and  1  think  the  hearing  was 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


151 


conducted  professionally.  At  one  point  in  the  hearing — 1  believe  it  was  somewhere  around  six  o’clock — 
we  we  were  trying  to  do  our  scheduling  for  the  completion  of  the  hearing  and  when  we  should  break  for 
dinner,  because  we’d  basically  been  in  session  all  day  long.  And  I  indicated  that  my  son  was  playing  in  a 
t-ball  little  league  championship  game  that  night  at  seven  o’clock,  and  I  had  hoped  that  we  could  take  our 
dinner  break  so  that  it  coincided  with  the  time  of  the  game  and  I  could  go  see  my  son  play.  And  I  think 
everybody  thought  that  that  made  sense,  and  that’s  what  we  did. 

Yes.  [laughter] 

So  1  got  to  go  see  my  boy  play  his  championship  game,  and  we  came  back  sometime  later  in  the 
evening  and  resumed,  and  we  went  until  midnight  or  so  when  we  finally  completed  it. 

That  was  a  long  day.  [laughter] 

Yes. 

You  had  a  few  of  them,  I  guess. 

Well,  we  used  to  have  a  lot  of  long  days.  While  perhaps  not  the  norm,  it  certainly  wasn’t  unheard 
of  that  our  meetings  would  go  until  two  in  the  morning  or  later.  We’d  start  at  nine  in  the  morning  and 
basically  run  through  the  day,  sometimes  two  days  in  duration.  I’ve  had  occasion  since  then  to  look  at 
some  of  the  transcripts  of  our  hearings,  and  I  can  see  that  they  regularly  ran  in  the  neighborhood  of  five 
hundred  pages  of  testimony  per  meeting.  So  we  had  a  lot  of  issues  and  a  lot  of  work,  and  we  worked 
pretty  hard. 

Did  you  notice  that  the  longer  you  stayed  on  the  Board  the  longer  the  hearings  got?  Were  there  more 
things  that  come  up? 

Yes  and  no.  As  my  time  on  the  Commission  came  towards  its  conclusion,  1  think  our  hearings 
became  shorter,  reflecting  the  fact  that  there  was  less  activity  in  the  industry.  A  lot  of  the  difficult  issues 
had  been  resolved.  The  whole  thing  with  the  expansion  of  gaming  in  the  country  had  pretty  much  shaken 
out.  Our  regulations  had  been  revised  to  better  reflect  current  realities  and  current  technology,  and  1  think 
in  general  you  see  that  trend  has  continued.  There’s  been  a  consolidation  in  the  industry.  There  are  more 
companies  with  big,  multi-location  kinds  of  operations  and  fewer  of  the  “mom  and  pop”  companies  with 
a  single  operation,  with  a  single  operator,  fewer  of  the  colorful  characters.  So,  in  general,  while  for  a  time 
the  meetings  and  the  workload  were  pretty  staggering,  in  my  last  couple  of  years  on  the  Commission,  1 
think  the  workload  diminished,  and  1  think  that’s  carried  on  to  the  present. 

Are  there  any  other  individuals  or  incidents  that  transpired  at  “Black  Book”  hearings  that  you  would  like 
to  comment  on? 


Well,  the  one  1  got  the  biggest  kick  out  of  was  a  guy  named  Frank  Citro.  Not  that  anything 
particularly  unique  happened  in  the  hearing  itself,  but  Mr.  Citro  did  come  to  the  hearing  wearing  a  tuxedo. 


152 


[laughter] 

And  when  asked  about  it  by  the  press  after  the  meeting — they  asked  why  he  had  worn  the  tuxedo 
to  the  hearing — he  said,  “Well,  I’ve  never  been  nominated  for  anything  before,  and  1  thought  1  should 
dress  up  for  the  occasion.” 

[laughter]  That  is  funny. 

[laughter] 

So  he  got  nominated  and  put  in,  right? 

Yes.  Probably  one  that  was  most  painful  involved  the  former  Gaming  Control  Board  agent,  Ron 
Harris,  who  had  gone  to  Atlantic  City,  used  some  of  the  information  that  he’d  received  as  an  employee  in 
the  Control  Board,  and  gone  there  and  improperly  taken  advantage  of  it,  which  led  to  his  conviction  and 
his  entry  into  the  “Black  Book.”  That  was  a  tremendous  black  eye  for  the  state  and  for  the  regulatory 
effort  and  a  real  disappointment  to  see  somebody  who  had  a  lot  of  advantages  in  life  going  for  him  who 
had  misused  his  position  and  brought  disrepute  to  the  whole  regulatory  effort. 

Would  you  expand  a  little  bit  on  how  he  cheated  the  state  and  the  casinos?  Was  it  slot  machines  or 
twenty-one  tables  or .  .  .  ? 

He  was  able  to  utilize  the  confidential  information  about  source  codes  to  predict  sequencing  of 
numbers  on  games  like  keno,  and  went  with  his  computer  to  Atlantic  City  and  with  that  source  code 
information  was  able  to  make  predictions.  Had  he  won  only  small  jackpots  he  may  never  have  been 
caught.  He  had  the  misfortune,  however,  of  winning  a  large  jackpot,  which  put  him  in  the  position  where 
there  would  have  been  suspicion  if  he  had  not  claimed  the  large  jackpot,  and  suspicion  when  he  did  claim 
the  large  jackpot,  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

It  really  revealed  not  only  a  betrayal  by  a  regulatory  insider,  but  it  also  revealed  some  deficiencies 
in  the  idea  of  random  number  generators  that  presumably  had  made  the  games  random,  when  in  fact, 
there  was  some  pattern  of  predictability.  Not  a  huge  one-for-one  kind  of  predictability,  but  nonetheless 
still  a  measure  of  predictability  that  gave  him  a  tremendous  advantage  in  playing  the  game.  So  it  required 
the  Board  not  only  to  increase  its  own  internal  controls  to  better  protect  the  industry  from  Control  Board 
employees  who  are  willing  to  compromise  their  positions,  but  also  required  some  technological  changes 
so  that  you  could  deal  with  this  predictability  issue. 

So  there ’s  this  little  bit  of  good  news  there  that  it  did  cause  the  industry  to  perfect  their  machines,  their 
slot  machines,  even  a  little  bit  more? 

Well,  1  guess  you  can  find  that  silver  lining  in  what  was  otherwise  a  pretty  unfortunate  situation, 


but .  .  . 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


153 


It  was  a  dark  day  for  the  situation. 

It  was  a  terribly  dark  day. 

And  it  got  such  nationwide  publicity  besides. 

Well,  and  it  did  have  the  consequence,  however,  of  getting  everybody  to  redouble  their  vigilance 
and  to  reconsider  their  systems  so  that  there  were  internal  controls  that  would  reduce  the  possibility  that 
the  employees  could  compromise  the  system.  And  it  so  happened  in  that  case  it  was  an  employee  in  the 
Control  Board.  It  could  also  have  been  an  employee  of  the  operator  of  the  machines  who  had  gotten  the 
source  codes,  either  who  had  written  the  source  codes  or  for  some  reason  had  gotten  access  to  them  in  the 
course  of  his  employment.  And  so  there  was  that  positive,  but  it  was  a  very  painful  motivator  to  those 
changes. 

So  he  was  entered  on  the  List  of  Excluded  Persons.  Did  he  serve  jail  time  besides? 

Yes,  1  believe  he  did. 

Were  you  or  your  family  ever  threatened  by  anyone  while  you  were  on  the  Commission? 

No,  not  really.  There  were  times  when  there  were  threats  to  people  at  the  Control  Board.  There 
were  times  when  we  were  concerned  that  our  telephones  were  bugged,  and  I  believe  there  was  solid  belief 
that  some  of  the  Control  Board  members’  phones  were  bugged  by  criminal  elements.  1  do  know  the  Board 
came  out  with  their  electronics  team  and  swept  my  office  on  a  couple  of  occasions  for  bugs.  And  I  do 
know  that  members  of  the  Control  Board  did  live  with  some  threats,  and  1  know  that  there  were  some  bad 
people.  1  know  there  was  one  instance  when  an  informant  to  the  Control  Board  on  a  slot  machine  gaffing 
investigation  survived  one  assassination  attempt,  but  not  the  second. 

Do  you  recall  his  name? 

His  name  was  Larry  Volk  and  it  was  quite  celebrated  in  the  press.  It  had  to  do  with  the  American 
Coin  investigation.  It  resulted  in  a  prosecution,  but  not  a  conviction.  I  think  they  had  insufficient  evidence 
of  the  peipetrators. 

In  1991,  a  property  called  The  Sport  of  Kings  applied  for  licensing.  They  were  offering  a  method  of 
betting  on  sporting  events  unique  to  the  state  of  Nevada.  Would  you  tell  us  what  was  unique  about  their 
operation? 

Well,  I’m  not  sure  anything  was  really  unique  about  their  operation.  It  was  purported  to  be 
unique.  It  was  purported  to  be  a  better  mousetrap  that  would  allow  customers  to  bet  on  either  fixed  odds 
relating  to  a  particular  event  or  track  odds,  and  was  going  to  be  heavily  focused  on  a  lot  of  exotic  bets,  not 
just  quinellas  or  exactas,  but  combinations  of  things  like  combinations  of  quinellas  and  exactas  and  other 
kinds  of  proposition  bets  that  would  have  a  lot  of  moving  parts,  but  would  allow  the  payment  of  very  big 


154 


jackpots  to  successful  bettors.  It  was  proposed  that  an  English  mathematician,  who  was  described  as  an 
actuary,  was  going  to  be  the  central  brain  of  this  whole  operation.  It  was  represented  that  his  work  in 
London  had  yielded  about  a  23  percent  hold  on  the  bets  placed  there  where,  according  to  the  most  recent 
Nevada  Gaming  abstract,  it  was  less  than  15  percent  hold  on  the  betting  in  Nevada. 

Another  thing  that  was  represented  as  being  unique  was  that  while  most  casinos,  it  was  said,  treat 
sports  and  race  betting  as  auxiliaries  rather  than  the  main  business,  at  The  Sport  of  Kings  race  and  sports 
betting  was  going  to  be  the  main  business.  They  were  going  to  have  a  number  of  amenities  to  appeal  to 
customers.  They  were  going  to  have  a  video  library  of  past  races.  It  could  be  pulled  out  and  reviewed  by 
players.  They  were  going  to  have  a  complete  library  on  the  breeding  histories  of  all  horses.  They  were 
going  to  conduct  seminars  and  so  forth.  They  said  they  were  going  to  have  a  convenient  location  where 
you  could  pull  your  car  in  and  park  with  the  valet,  place  your  bet,  be  in  and  out  in  just  a  matter  of  minutes 
rather  than  the  more  cumbersome  process  of  going  into  a  major  hotel  and  working  your  way  to  the  sports 
betting.  And  they  thought  that  because  they  had  a  grandfathered  situation  where  they  can  have  a  non- 
restricted  license  and  be  exempt  from  the  two  hundred-room  requirement  that  was  imposed  on  any  new 
casinos  in  Clark  County,  that  they  would  have  a  great  advantage  that  they  could  be  very  focused  and  they 
predicted  they  were  going  to  have  performance  that  was  way  ahead  of  the  traditional  Nevada  figures. 

The  Gaming  Control  Board  didn’t  accept  those  projections,  and  they,  in  fact,  thought  that  they 
were  going  to  be  less  profitable  rather  than  more  profitable  than  the  industry  average,  and  that  led  the 
Commission  to  impose  some  cash  reserve  requirement  for  the  protection  of  players,  vendors,  and 
employees,  so  that  in  case  the  thinly-capitalized  and  somewhat  speculative  venture  did  not  succeed,  it 
would  be  the  investors  who’d  bear  the  loss,  not  the  vendors  or  employees  or  customers.  There  had  been  a 
separate  issue  with  some  of  the  original  organizers  of  the  proposal  and  some  of  their  activities  in  these 
off-shore  trusts.  And  1  believe  Malta  and  Gibraltar  trusts  where  financial  records  were  not  accessible. 
Under  the  laws  of  those  jurisdictions,  financial  records  could  not  be  disclosed.  It  was  made  a  crime  even 
for  the  owner  of  it  to  disclose  it,  and  that  was  offered  as  a  reason  why  those  records  did  not  have  to  be 
provided  for  review  by  our  regulators.  And  that  didn’t  go  too  far  with  us,  and  the  original  investors  had  to 
step  aside  before  it  was  finally  approved. 

Who  were  the  majority  owners? 

Well,  originally,  it  was  the  Forsyth  brothers  from  London. 

James  and  Stephen  Forsyth? 

Yes.  So  they  did  have  a  number  of  experienced  Nevada  operators  and  a  former  regulator  [Dennis 
Amerine].  But  in  the  end,  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  it  proved  not  to  be  successful.  They  had  a  beautiful 
facility.  They  had  an  interesting  and  novel  business  plan,  and  1  think  the  Commission’s  feeling  was  that 
we  weren’t  there  to  impede  development  of  novel  approaches — in  fact,  we  should  welcome  and 
encourage  innovation,  even  if  our  own  projections  were  not  as  rosy  as  the  applicant’s  projections — but 
that  we  did  have  a  statutory  duty  to  protect  customers,  employees,  and  vendors  and  that  we  had  to  place 
this  cash  reserve  for  the  benefit  of  those  people,  and  we  did  that.  It  was  a  good  idea.  It  was  an  innovation. 
It  had  some  potential,  but  at  the  end  of  the  day  it  did  not  really  succeed.  It  did  not  meet  its  rosy 
expectations,  and  ultimately  it  closed. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


155 


And  the  Forsyth  brothers  themselves  never  got  licensed? 

They  never  got  licensed.  Another  part  of  their  proposal  was  that  they  were  going  to  greatly  grow 
the  market,  because  sports  betting  in  Nevada — even  in  Nevada — is  still  a  small  percentage  per  capita  as 
compared  with  London  and  some  other  jurisdictions.  And  they  thought  that  with  their  innovations  they 
were  going  to  greatly  grow  the  market,  and  that  even  if  they  only  captured  a  small  percentage  of  the 
growth,  they  were  going  to  be  successful.  But  1  think  in  this  case,  at  least,  the  better  mousetrap  didn’t 
succeed,  and  there  was  some  vindication  for  the  old  timers  who  never  did  quite  believe  that  some 
mathematician  from  London  was  going  to  come  in  and  revolutionize  their  whole  industry,  [laughter] 

Well,  during  those  hearings — they  lasted  for  several  months  off  and  on — there  were  a  few  differences 
between  the  Board  and  the  Commission.  How  important  do  you  feel  it  is  that  the  Commission  and  the 
Board  work  together  and  do  not  disagree,  at  least  in  public? 

1  don’t  think  that’s  terribly  important.  1  think  it  is  important  that  they  respect  each  other’s  efforts 
and  try  to  be  considerate  of  each  other’s  somewhat  different  roles  and  perspectives.  But  1  think  there  are 
different  kinds  of  people  who  are  typically  appointed  to  the  Board  than  those  who  are  typically  appointed 
to  the  Commission.  The  members  of  the  two  bodies  have  different  kinds  of  roles,  different  perspectives, 
different  experiences  and  personal  histories,  and  1  think  that  the  system  is  set  up  to  reflect  that.  Gaming 
regulators  are  given  just  about  as  absolute  and  unchecked  a  power  as  you  would  ever  find  in  government, 
and  it’s  important  that  there  be  checks  and  balances  in  the  system,  because,  as  they  say,  absolute  power 
corrupts  absolutely.  1  always  felt  that  while  we  did  owe  a  duty  to  each  other  and  to  the  system,  that  we 
treat  each  other  respectfully  and  discretely,  that  simple  blind  agreement  was  not  in  the  interest  of  the 
system — it  was  not  in  the  interest  of  the  industry  or  the  state — and  that  it  was  a  strength  of  the  system  that 
we  had  different  kinds  of  people  who  would  come  at  the  same  problems  from  different  angles  and  have 
better  decision-making  as  a  result.  Control  Board  members  are  typically  people  who  have  had  public 
employment  histories,  particularly  law  enforcement,  but  not  people  who  have  ever  had  to  meet  a  payroll, 
people  who  have  ever  had  to  make  business  decisions  in  the  quick  of  the  moment  with  less-than-perfect 
information.  People  who  are  on  the  Commission  were  people  who  didn’t  come  from  the  gaming  industry, 
but  had  been  involved  in  business  and  did  understand  how  business  operates,  what  business  needs  to 
operate,  and  the  importance  of  predictability,  and  understand  that  decision-making  sometimes  has  to  be 
made  on  less-than-perfect  information. 

1  think  the  Control  Board  has  always  been  the  cops  of  the  regulatory  system.  Their  duty  and  role 
and  performance  has  been  to  see  to  it  that  every  “i”  has  been  dotted  and  every  “t”  has  been  crossed,  and 
that  people  have  followed  the  rules  down  to  the  last  degree.  The  Commission’s  function,  1  think,  has 
historically  been  to  give  that  perspective  full  recognition,  but  to  bring  a  little  more  in  terms  of  focusing  on 
the  big  picture,  on  the  real  things  that  have  to  be  focused  on:  what’s  the  wheat,  what’s  the  chaff?  Is  the 
fact  that  somebody’s  decisions  don’t  look  good  under  Monday  morning  quarter-backing  kind  of 
perspective,  is  that  reflective  of  the  fact  that  they  are  unsuitable,  or  is  it  reflective  of  the  simple  business 
realities? 

Some  have  said  the  Board’s  role  is  to  administer  justice,  and  the  Commission’s  role  is  to 
administer  mercy.  1  have  never  seen  it  in  quite  as  simple  of  terms  as  that,  but  1  do  think  that  there  is  some 
insight  from  that  statement  that  the  Commission  really  wants  to  focus  on  the  big  issues,  on  the  things  that 
are  important,  whether  it’s  assessing  an  individual’s  suitability  or  character  or  business  probity,  or 


156 


whether  it’s  the  big,  long-term  needs  of  the  industry.  Sometimes  the  Commission  works  on  very  big 
policy  issues,  adopting  regulations,  deciding  what  the  rules  should  be  to  allow  Nevada  licensees  to 
expand  into  new  jurisdictions  and  how  they  can  finance  their  operations  and  so  forth.  But  sometimes  they 
really  focus  on  the  bottom  end  of  issues  in  the  industry  as  well,  and  1  always  took  that  as  being  one  of  our 
most  important  duties,  such  as  simple  work  card  appeals.  For  somebody  who  has  to  support  themselves 
and  their  family  in  the  best  way  they  can  in  a  state  where  they  may  have  grown  up  and  where  they  hit 
some  kind  of  a  problem  in  their  life,  can  you  entrust  them  to  hold  a  low-level  job  in  the  gaming  industry? 
Whatever  their  mistake  was  that  caused  the  Board  to  question  their  ability  to  even  work  as  a  bartender  or 
a  change  person  or  a  slot  mechanic,  is  the  interest  of  the  state  and  the  integrity  of  the  industry  jeopardized 
if  in  these  low-level  positions  people  who  aren’t  perfect  are  allowed  to  hold  jobs? 

We  spent  an  enormous  amount  of  time  trying  to  do  what  we  thought  was  the  right  thing  by  way 
of  individuals.  We  didn’t  see  our  job  as  imposing  more  punishment  on  people  who  had  done  something 
wrong.  That  punishment  came  in  a  different  venue — it  came  in  the  courts.  Our  job  was  to  determine  could 
those  people  function  in  a  trustworthy  and  reliable  and  responsible  way  in  their  limited  positions.  And  if 
they  could,  we  tried  to  give  them  the  ability  to  do  so.  If  they’d  done  things  that  just  couldn’t  be 
overlooked,  we  simply  had  to  take  a  hard  line  and  say,  “If  you’ve  ever  cheated  a  customer,  if  you’ve  ever 
cheated  the  house,  if  you’ve  ever  done  something  that  compromised  the  integrity  of  the  games  or  of  the 
gaming  industry,  then  it’s  one  strike  and  you’re  out.  If  what  you’ve  done,  on  the  other  hand,  are  things  in 
other  contexts,  even  things  that  we  thought  of  as  really  bad  things  .  ...”  You  know,  the  fact  that 
somebody  had  been  in  a  bar  fight,  the  fact  that  somebody  had  done  various  anti-social  things,  if  it  didn’t 
relate  to  their  performance  in  the  workplace,  at  least  my  personal  philosophical  reason  was  there  has  to  be 
a  reason  why  they  can’t  be  given  that  trust.  And  if  we  couldn’t  find  that,  let’s  give  them  the  shot.  Let’s  let 
them  at  least  have  a  job.  If  you  take  away  somebody’s  ability  to  work,  you’ve  taken  away  an  awful  lot  of 
their  dignity  and  an  awful  lot  of  their  ability  to  be  a  productive  citizen. 

That ’s  right. 

So  that’s  one  of  the  things  that  made  the  Commission  so  interesting,  was  sometimes  we’d  deal 
with  these  mega-issues  where  we’d  have  fifty  or  a  hundred  gray-suited  attorneys  and  accountants  and 
industry  moguls  helping  us  analyze  these  big  issues,  and  sometimes  we  dealt  with  things  where  really 
nobody  much  cared  except  the  individual  involved,  and  we  had  to  try  to  do  the  right  thing  in  all  those 
different  kinds  of  settings.  So  it  was  really  a  very  interesting  job.  [laughter] 

[laughter]  Yes.  Did  you  feel  that  the  Commission  and  Board  worked  together?  You  had  a  good  rapport 
when  you  were  on  the  Commission? 

Yes,  I  think  we  had  a  good  rapport.  There  were  always  issues.  We  didn’t  always  see  things  eye- 
to-eye.  [long  pause]  I  remember  a  case  where  there  was  a  tax  dispute  about  whether  the  gaming 
entertainment  tax  should  be  imposed  on  a  small  casino  in  Beatty,  because  on  a  Saturday  night  some 
gaming  agents  had  come  in  and  discovered  that  some  of  the  patrons  had  pushed  some  of  the  tables  and 
chairs  aside  and  they  were  dancing  to  the  jukebox.  And  as  a  result,  the  Board  felt  that  the  casino 
entertainment  tax  should  be  imposed  on  everything  that  was  done  in  that  room  and  it  turned  out  to  be  a 
very  large  amount  of  money  in  relation  to  the  size  of  the  casino.  And  the  Commission  felt  that  that  was 
not  what  the  legislature  had  in  mind,  and  that  trying  to  impose  a  tax  because  some  customers  had 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


157 


spontaneously  broken  out  in  dance  on  a  Saturday  night  in  a  small  town  casino  coffee  shop  [laughter] 
didn’t  really  make  sense.  And  a  number  of  years  later,  1  can  remember  1  met  somebody  at  a  cocktail  party 
who  introduced  herself  to  me  and  told  me  that  she  worked  in  the  audit  division  of  the  Gaming  Control 
Board  and  said,  “Do  you  mind  if  1  speak  very  bluntly  to  you?” 

And  1  said,  “No.  Sure.  How  are  we  doing?  Tell  me;  I’m  interested.  What  do  you  think?  How’s 
everything  going?” 

And  she  said,  “Well,  everybody  has  respect  for  the  Commission,  and  we  think  that  you’re  a  good 
guy,  but  1  want  you  to  know  how  deeply  that  hurt  us  that  we  had  done  all  the  work  to  work  up  that  tax 
assessment  to  raise  the  revenue  for  the  state,  and  that  you  didn’t  uphold  our  position.  That  really 
undermined  our  authority,  and  it  really  was  like  a  personal  blow  to  a  lot  of  us  who  had  worked  on  this. 
And  I’ve  never  said  anything,  but  you  asked  how  things  were  and  so  I’m  telling  you.” 

[laughter] 

[laughter]  And,  you  know,  I  took  from  that  that  the  Commission  has  its  job  to  do,  and  it  can’t 
worry  about  whether  it  disappoints  the  expectations  of  people  in  private  industry  or  people  who  work  in 
government.  But  there  is  importance  to  always  trying  to  respect  people’s  dignity  and  the  legitimacy  of 
their  efforts  and  simply  recognizing  that  people  who  work  in  good  faith  can  disagree.  And  there  was 
never  any  insinuation  that  the  people  at  the  Board  had  tried  to  do  something  that  was  wrong  or  punitive  or 
anything  else.  They  had  simply  tried  to  do  their  job,  and  the  Commission  didn’t  see  eye-to-eye  with  their 
perspective.  I  didn’t  think  at  the  time  that  we  were  in  any  way  disrespecting  the  Board’s  efforts  [laughter], 
but  clearly,  it  had  been  taken  that  way. 

Now,  these  were  fairly  low-level  employees  there  in  the  Control  Board.  But  when  you  have  this 
very  unchecked  power,  seeing  to  it  that  you  exercise  it  with  restraint  and  respect  for  the  people  whose 
lives  are  going  to  be  touched  by  your  decision  is  really  a  colossal  responsibility.  And  one  of  the  things 
that  I  felt  best  about  during  my  time  on  the  Commission  was  I  got  to  serve  with  the  really  extraordinary 
people  who  understood  that  and  who  did  try  to  act  with  restraint  and  good  judgment  and  respect  for  the 
process  of  the  system  and  respect  for  the  people  who  became  involved  in  the  system.  And  during  the  time 
1  was  there,  the  culture  of  the  Commission  was  one  that  I  felt  good  about.  I  continue  to  feel  proud  that  we 
functioned  well. 

It  goes  without  saying  we  often  disagreed  with  the  Board’s  take  on  things,  but  we  did  always  try 
to  be  respectful  of  their  opinion  and  recommendations.  We  also  tried  to  not  let  personal  affection  or 
respect  for  our  colleagues  at  the  board  level  interfere  with  our  ability  to  do  what  we  thought  was  the  right 
thing  to  do  under  the  circumstances.  Sometimes  there  would  be  raw  spots,  I  suppose,  but  they  generally 
healed  pretty  quickly,  because  the  press  of  business  did  require  us  to  work  together,  [laughter]  I  think 
everybody  had  mutual  respect,  even  when  you  had  strongly-held  feelings  about  a  certain  subject,  that  you 
should  respect  that  others  may  not  agree  with  you.  That  was  an  important  system  value  and  one  that  we 
tried  to  maintain.  So  I  guess  I’d  say  that  if  there  was  tension  within  the  Board,  between  the  Board  and  the 
Commission,  it  generally  was  not  personal  in  nature.  It  generally  did  not  impede  our  ability  to  work 
together,  but  it  did  strengthen  the  system,  improve  the  decision-making,  and  provide  some  checks  and 
balances  that  helped  negate  the  possibility  of  abuse. 

You  served  as  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission  for  a  record  eight  years.  Would  you  tell  us  your 
reasons  for  remaining  in  that  position  for  so  many  years? 


158 


Well,  1  guess  because  1  loved  the  job.  1  thought  it  was  important  work,  1  thought  it  was 
interesting,  1  thought  it  was  a  great  privilege  that  1  got  to  serve  during  the  most  dynamic  period  in  the 
history  of  gaming  in  Nevada.  If  you  look  at  the  Las  Vegas  Strip  before  I  started  and  how  it  evolved  during 
the  time  of  my  service,  we  became  a  different  city.  The  state  became  a  different  state,  between  the 
technological  changes  in  gaming  devices  and  the  expansion  of  gaming.  When  I  started,  there  was  legal 
casino  gaming  in  only  Nevada  and  Atlantic  City.  When  I  left,  I  believe  twenty-six  or  twenty-seven  or 
twenty-eight  states  had  legalized  casino  gaming.  I  had  the  privilege  of  serving  during  a  very  interesting, 
dynamic,  and  important  time.  And  it  was  a  thrill  a  minute.  It  was  a  very  time-consuming,  very  difficult, 
very  intellectually-challenging  job,  but  still  a  great  job. 

During  your  time  as  chairman,  four  of  your  fellow  commissioners:  Bob  Lewis,  Debbie  Griffin,  Bill  Urga, 
and  Augie  Gurrola  worked  together  for  almost  seven  years.  Did  it  make  everyone ’s  job  easier  to  know 
each  other  so  well? 

Yes,  I  think  it  did.  We  all  had  great  respect  for  each  other  individually,  and  we  all,  I  believe,  felt 
that  disagreement  was  healthy  and  added  to  the  quality  of  our  decision-making,  and  we  could  fight  out 
our  positions  and  express  our  views  and  try  to  persuade  each  other  on  issues.  And  while  most  matters  are 
somewhat  routine,  on  the  issues  that  weren’t  routine  we  didn’t  always  agree,  but  I  do  think  we  always 
reached  good  decisions  from  our  group  decision-making  skills  that  developed  during  that  time.  Now,  I 
balance  that  with  the  fact  that  I  do  think  new  blood  strengthens  a  body,  also.  Ultimately,  when  I  decided 
to  leave  the  Commission,  the  job  was  still  interesting  and  exciting  to  me,  but  I  really  did  feel  for  the  sake 
of  the  Commission  that  new  blood  and  new  leadership  would  be  important,  and  that  for  me  personally  it 
was  really  time  to  move  on  to  other  things  as  well.  At  some  point  in  government,  you  can  get  into  a  rut  of 
doing  things  the  same  way. 

Even  though  we  were  together  for  that  long,  I  don’t  think  we  fell  into  that  rut,  I  think  in  part 
because  it  was  such  a  period  [laughter]  of  dynamic  change  that  we  had  something  new  every  month.  We 
had  something  challenging.  We  had  something  that  we  had  to  work  on  together.  We  couldn’t  just  do  it  in 
the  public  meetings.  We  had  to  try  to  educate  ourselves.  We  had  to  try  to  keep  abreast  of  changes  in 
technology,  changes  in  the  financial  markets,  changes  in  the  forms  of  doing  business.  I  think  the  fact  that 
there  was  that  stability  in  membership  did  make  it  easier  to  try  to  meet  a  lot  of  those  challenges.  I  think  it 
takes  commissioners  some  period  of  time  before  they  really  get  everything  and  become  fully  productive. 
But  new  blood  does  strengthen  the  Commission.  I  know  that  Governor  Miller’s  orientation  was  that  there 
should  be  change  on  important  bodies  like  this,  but  I  think  he  recognized  that  with  the  dynamic 
environment  in  the  gaming  industry,  at  least  for  a  while  it  was  important  to  have  some  stability  and  some 
experience  in  trying  to  deal  with  all  these  new  issues. 

Yes,  because  it  was  such  an  important  time  that  it  was  good  to  have  that  experience  altogether.  Did  you 
maintain  a  private  law  practice  while  you  were  on  the  Commission? 

Yes.  I  had  been  in  the  district  attorney’s  office.  I’d  been  county  counsel  before  I  was  appointed.  I 
had  to  leave  that.  I  then  started  my  own  practice.  Certainly  here  in  southern  Nevada  where  gaming  is  so 
widespread,  it  meant  I  had  a  tremendous  [laughter]  potential  conflict  and  had  to  be  very  circumspect,  not 
only  what  kind  of  clients  I  could  have,  but  even  what  kinds  of  industries  I  could  be  involved  in 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


159 


representing.  Realistically  1  had  to  start  out  as  a  sole  practitioner,  because  any  firm  1  would  try  to  join 
would  have  lost  a  significant  amount  of  business  with  the  conflicts  1  came  with.  And  1  always  had  the 
anxiety  that  if  somebody  was  going  to  try  to  make  me  look  bad,  they  might  do  it  by  coming  to  me  as  a 
client,  trying  to  get  me  to  represent  them  in  something  and  making  it  look  like  1  was  representing 
somebody  who  was  a  unsuitable  kind  of  person.  And  1  had  to  be  really  very  circumspect  when  clients 
came  to  me  to  try  to  find  out  as  much  as  1  could  to  be  sure  that  1  didn’t  get  into  something  unknowingly. 
The  days  of  threatening  people  weren’t  really  relevant  during  my  time,  but  I  did  have  anxiety  that 
somebody  could  try  to  compromise  me  by  involving  me  through  my  law  practice  somehow  in  something 
that  ultimately  would  look  bad,  so  1  had  to  be  very  conservative  in  what  1  could  get  into  and  who  1  could 
represent.  But  in  the  end  it  seems  to  have  worked  out.  So,  yes,  1  had  a  private  law  practice.  1  certainly 
couldn’t  support  myself  or  my  family  on  my  Gaming  Commission  salary. 

Well,  it’s  considered  a  part-time  job,  theoretically,  isn ’t  the  Gaming  Commission? 

Yes,  it  is,  and  1  think  it  should  be  a  part-time  job.  1  think  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  make  it  a  full¬ 
time  job.  1  think  that  it’s  the  strength  of  the  system  that  you  have  private  citizens  who  make  the  final 
decisions,  who  are  not  bought  into  any  one  position  and  who  can  really  weigh  things  in  the  long-term 
interest  of  the  state.  So,  yes,  having  a  “day  job”  is  tough  when  you’ve  got  a  “night  job”  that  not  only  is 
very  demanding  in  terms  of  its  time  requirements,  but  also  demanding  in  the  sense  that  you  have  to  be 
like  Caesar’s  wife  if  you’re  going  to  be  somebody  who  judges  others. 

Yes.  Well  we  touched  briefly  on  this  a  few  minutes  ago,  but  during  your  time  on  the  Commission,  several 
major  hotel-casinos  were  licensed  to  operate  in  Las  Vegas.  How  big  a  role  did  the  opening  of  these  mega¬ 
resorts  play  in  the  history  of  Las  Vegas? 

The  first  big,  new  casino  that  opened  after  1  was  appointed  to  the  Commission  was  the  Mirage, 
and  you  could  almost  draw  a  line  at  that  point  and  say  that  that  was  the  beginning  of  the  new  era  in 
gaming  in  Nevada.  The  size,  the  scope,  the  luxury,  the  sophistication,  the  growth  in  the  industry,  the  new 
financial  sources  and  business  structures  .  .  .  the  physical  environment  and  the  business  environment 
changed  rapidly  at  that  point,  and  I  just  had  the  great  fortune  to  have  been  there  during  that  time.  I  don’t 
claim  any  credit  for  what  happened,  although  1  do  think  it  was  beneficial  that  we  had  a  predictable 
business  environment  that  was  stable  and  that  was  attractive  to  investment  and  to  investors.  1  think  it  was 
a  time  of  strong  economy  nationally,  and  a  lot  of  things  just  came  together,  and  1  just  happened  to  be  there 
at  that  time. 

Under  your  leadership  the  Commission  was  oftentimes  concerned  with  multi-million-dollar  financial 
transactions:  public  offerings,  mergers,  bond  issues,  et  cetera.  Did  the  Commission  sometimes  become 
more  concerned  with  the  financing  of  the  mega-resorts  than  with  the  individuals  involved  in  the 
operation? 

Yes.  As  the  industry  became  more  corporate  and  as  people  with  accounting  and  MBA  kinds  of 
backgrounds  tended  to  become  the  heads  of  the  new  gaming  enterprises,  there  were  a  lot  less  colorful 
characters  who  had  storied  pasts  that  may  have  been  great  legends  for  storytelling  [laughter]  but  were 
maybe  not  too  suitable  as  leaders  in  an  industry  that  was  trying  to  establish  and  maintain  its  credibility 


160 


and  integrity. 

In  a  way,  I  guess  it  was  easier  to  check  the  finances  of  these  public  corporations. 

Well,  to  me,  the  move  was  not  to  the  backgrounds  of  the  individuals,  because  more  and  more  of 
the  individuals  were  people  who  had  gone  to  Ivy  League  schools  and  had  professional  degrees  and  highly 
successful  careers.  Instead,  it  came  to  structural  concerns  and  financing  concerns.  Although  legally 
trained,  I  wasn’t  really  a  tax  lawyer  or  a  coiporate  attorney,  nor  were  my  colleagues,  and  we  really  were 
put  through  our  paces  every  month,  because  we  had  to  understand  each  month  as  well  as  the  people  who 
would  work  sometimes  months,  if  not  years,  on  putting  together  these  transactions.  If  it  took  twenty  gray- 
suited  lawyers  and  accountants  to  present  what  the  transaction  was  in  our  hearing,  we  knew  right  away  we 
were  in  trouble,  [laughter] 

And  we  didn’t  have  any  budget  for  training,  we  didn’t  have  any  budget  for  travel,  we  didn’t  have 
any  staff  resources  that  could  educate  us  or  train  us.  We  knew  that  we  had  to  get  educational  help  from 
experts  and  that  we  had  to  do  it  both  at  low  cost  to  the  state  because  we  didn’t  have  a  budget,  but  we  also 
had  to  do  it  without  the  conflict.  It  would  have  been  easy  to  go  to  IGT  or  somebody  like  that  and  say, 
“Explain  to  us  your  new  technology  and  why  this  is  good.”  But  if  we  were  going  to  make  independent 
judgments,  we  had  to  be  able  to  understand  what  their  technological  changes  were.  We  had  to  be  able  to 
make  our  own  judgments  on  that,  and  these  were  very  difficult  challenges.  We’ve  prevailed  on  lots  of 
faculty  members  at  UNLV  and  UNR  to  help  us.  We  had  a  lot  of  sessions  where  we  went  in  and  took  apart 
computers  and  we  tried  to  learn  what  each  piece  was,  how  each  piece  worked,  what  the  issues  were  with 
regard  to  both  hardware  and  software  and  how  they  meshed  with  one  another,  and  then  try  to  understand 
what  all  these  engineers  had  been  working  on  [laughter]  with  all  these  new  intellectual  property  issues. 

We  had  to  meet  with  investment  bankers  and  conventional  bankers  and  lenders  to  try  to 
understand  and  be  educated  on  new  forms  of  financing.  As  the  role  of  pension  funds  and  mutual  funds 
became  more  and  more  important  in  the  economy,  we  had  to  rethink  our  rules  on  at  what  point  what 
percentage  of  ownership  licensees  or  people  were  required  to  come  in  for  licensure.  Did  it  make  any 
difference  if  people  were  entirely  passive  investors?  If  a  mutual  fund  agreed  not  to  exercise  any  votes  on 
leadership  or  to  exercise  any  influence  over  the  control  and  management  of  a  company  and  to  remain 
entirely  passive,  did  that  mean  we  could  allow  them  to  have  greater  ownership  without  having  to  come  in 
for  licensure?  What  do  we  do  about  junk  bonds?  These  were  tough  things,  and  we  were  all  generalists; 
none  of  us  were  specialists  in  this. 

Yes. 


And  you  couldn’t  pick  up  your  reading  the  night  before  the  hearing  and  think  you  were  going  to 
get  prepared.  We  had  to  work  pretty  extensively  between  meetings,  trying  to  identify  what  are  the  issues 
we  need  to  be  educated  on  and  find  a  respectable  way  to  get  that  education  so  that  we  could  at  least  be  in 
the  ball  game  and  be  in  the  discussion  on  all  these  important  issues.  And  whether  we  succeeded  ...  I 
suppose  we  could  have  done  better,  but  we  at  least  made  the  effort,  and  I  think  we  did  do  the  best  we 
could. 

Let’s  talk  for  a  while  about  how  in  the  mid-1990s  the  focus  of  gaming  regulators  seemed  to  be  changing 
toward  social  issues,  such  as  problem  gambling,  slot  machine  themes,  and  neighborhood  casinos.  In  June 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


161 


of 1996,  the  Twin  City  Surplus  store  in  Reno  applied  for  a  license  to  operate  machines  in  the  business. 

Yes. 

The  Gaming  Control  Board  recommended  approval,  but  the  Commission  voted  for  denial.  Would  you  tell 
us  why  the  Commission  voted  to  deny? 

Well,  1  think  we  defined  the  issue  as  involving  how  far  into  the  everyday  lives  of  our  citizens 
gaming  should  extend,  and  should  there  be  any  limits.  The  Twin  City  Surplus  was  not  really  the  first  time 
we  had  grappled  with  that  issue;  it  was  part  of  a  series  of  discussions.  We  had  had  inquiries  from 
everything  from  psychic  arts  studios  to  physicians  who  had  been  interested  in  putting  slot  machines  in 
their  waiting  rooms  to  occupy  their  patients  who  tended  to  be  unhappy  while  they  were  waiting  to  get  in. 
[laughter] 

[laughter] 

And  we  thought  that  certainly  gaming  has  been  good  for  the  state.  Certainly  the  benefits  of  it 
should  be  not  just  lodged  with  the  big  corporations,  and  that  “Ma  and  Pop”  Nevada  should  have  a  chance 
to  share  in  the  benefit  of  it  as  well,  but  that  that  should  be  balanced  somehow  with  not  just  having  a  free- 
for-all  where  you  could  have  slot  machines  absolutely  everyplace.  And  had  we  been  starting  from  scratch, 
we  may  have  come  up  with  much  different  kinds  of  solutions.  But  we  had  history,  we  had  certain 
traditional  kinds  of  locations — taverns,  for  example,  had  always  had  slot  machines,  as  did  grocery  stores, 
drugstores,  convenience  stores.  At  one  point,  donut  shops  were  included,  car  washes.  There  was  even  one 
car  dealership  that  had  a  slot  machine  on  its  sales  floor.  And  we  could  also  see  that  a  lot  of  businesses 
were  sort  of  morphing  in  that  we  were  distorting  the  whole  economy.  As  an  example,  a  gas  station,  if  it 
had  a  garage  and  provided  mechanical  services,  that  did  not  qualify  for  slot  machines,  but  if  they  took  out 
the  garage,  stopped  changing  oil  and  fixing  flat  tires,  and  put  in  beer  and  pop  and  cigarettes  and  bread, 
then  it  was  a  convenience  store  and  it  could  get  slot  machines. 

And  we  really  grappled  with  how  do  you  draw  a  line  that  has  some  principal  basis  that  gives 
some  respect  to  history  and  the  existing  business  environment  that  sees  to  it  the  machines  are  only  in 
places  that  are  susceptible  to  appropriate  supervision?  And  ultimately,  just  as  we  had  turned  down  the 
psychic  arts  store,  just  as  we  had  turned  down  the  idea  of  putting  slot  machine  arcades  in  the  public  space 
of  shopping  malls,  which  was  another  application  that  we  had  denied,  we  decided  it  was  inappropriate  to 
put  slot  machines  in  the  Twin  City  Surplus,  even  though  everybody  loved  the  store,  and  loved  the 
operators.  It  was  an  old-time  Nevada  family  that  was  very  hands-on  in  the  operation,  it  was  very  unique 
and  had  an  awful  lot  of  positives.  Although  one  commissioner  said,  “1  go  in  there  all  the  time,  and  I’m  not 
sure  I  could  ever  find  the  slot  machines,  the  way  things  get  stacked  on  top  of  each  other.”  [laughter] 

Yes.  Well,  was  one  of  the  problems  that  there  weren ’t  any  specific  guidelines  for  where  a  machine  could 
go? 


That  was  one  of  the  problems:  we  didn’t  have  proper  guidelines.  We  really  grappled  with  that 
issue.  It  took  years,  and  we  finally  came  up  with  what  I  think  was  a  principled  way  to  deal  with  it.  We 
primarily  recognized  the  existing  historical  categories — taverns,  convenience  stores,  drugstores, 


162 


supermarkets — and  allowed  for  a  case-by-case  consideration  of  unique  kinds  of  places  that  hadn’t  been 
considered,  but  for  reasons  that  could  be  brought  forward  would  justify  it  in  those  circumstances.  But  1 
think  since  that  regulation  was  adopted,  it’s  pretty  much  checked  the  expansion  into  new  business  forms 
and  hit  a  reasonable  balance. 

Was  the  establishing  of  the  guidelines  and  regulations  regarding  licensing  locations  one  of  the  proudest 
moments  of  your  commission  tenure? 

Well,  1  don’t  know  if  I’d  go  quite  that  far,  but  I  am  proud  of  the  fact  that  we  finally  came  up  with 
what  I  thought  was  principled.  Y ou  know,  we  had  a  lot  of  testimony  from  people  who  were  involved  with 
problem  gambling.  They  told  us  that  a  tremendous  number  of  problem  gamblers  frequented  these 
restricted  locations  and  that  problem  gamblers  were  as  often  found  in  the  grocery  stores  as  in  major 
casinos,  and  that  it  was  one  thing  to  keep  yourself  from  going  into  a  casino;  it  was  something  else  when 
even >  place  you  went,  everything  you  did  was  a  gambling  opportunity. 

And  we  didn’t  feel  we  could,  or  should,  undo  history,  but  we  did  think  that  whether  it  was 
because  of  existing  problem  gamblers,  or  whether  it  was  because  of  the  vulnerability  of  children  and 
others  who  go  to  supermarkets  and  convenience  stores  and  are  there  watching  people  gamble  all  the  time, 
we  just  thought  that  for  a  variety  of  reasons  it  was  best  to  impose  standards  that  were  written  and  that 
people  could  read  and  understand  and  plan  around,  so  that  they  didn’t  come  to  the  end  of  a  process  where 
they’d  built  the  new  store  and  done  everything  and  their  business  plan  was  all  predicated  on  getting  the 
gaming  revenue,  only  to  find  out  that  somebody  pulled  the  rug  out  from  under  them  at  the  last  minute.  We 
thought  far  better  that  we  try  to  have  a  written  standard  that  people  can  read  and  understand  and  plan 
around.  And  it  was  very  difficult  because  there  were  a  lot  of  competing  interests.  We  had  hundreds  of 
people  come  to  our  hearings.  A  lot  of  people  had  very  strong  financial  interests.  Others  had  very  strong 
personal  interests,  and  we  had  to  try  to  sort  it  all  out.  And  I  think  we  finally  succeeded,  but  it  was  tough. 

There  were  a  lot  of problem  gamblers  during  your  tenure.  What  did  the  Commission  do  to  help  fight  this 
problem  besides  all  these  things  you ’ve  listed?  By  keeping  slots  out  of  a  lot  of  these  locations  you  helped 
the  problem  gamblers.  Were  there  any  regulations  or  anything? 

Well,  how  meaningful  they  really  were  I  suppose  you  can  argue  about,  but  nonetheless,  you  have 
to  start  somewhere,  and  where  we  started  was  with  the  rules  that  required  casinos  to  post  800  numbers  for 
help  lines  where  people  could  go  for  help  if  they  felt  they  had  a  gaming  problem,  or  if  somebody  in  their 
family  or  somebody  they  were  close  with  had  a  compulsive  gaming  problem,  they  could  be  put  in  touch 
with  people  who  could  help  address  that  problem.  We  worked  with  the  casinos  in  encouraging  them  to 
have  compulsive  gaming  training  for  their  employees  so  that  they  could  identify  and  address  the  problem. 
I  think  we  made  it  clear  that  we  would  consider  it  an  unsuitable  method  of  operation  that  could  jeopardize 
somebody’s  license  if  they  tried  to  exploit  somebody’s  vulnerabilities. 

Were  these  guidelines  or  strict  regulations? 

Well,  it  was  a  combination.  Some  of  these  things — indicating  what  is  an  unsuitable  method  of 
operation  in  terms  of  not  intervening  in  the  case  of  a  compulsive  gambler  or  a  person  who  is  involved  in 
self-destructive  behavior — are  very  hard  to  quantify  and  to  state  in  words.  1  think  it  was  more  in  the  way 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


163 


of  focusing  public  discussion.  1  think  the  point  was  made  to  everybody  in  the  industry — and  1  think  the 
industry  really  took  some  of  the  leadership  itself  in  doing  research  into  the  nature  of  the  problem,  the 
extent  of  the  problem,  the  sensible  methods  for  dealing  with  the  problem — and  I  guess  you  could  say 
there  was  a  bit  of  a  public-private  partnership  in  trying  to  address  this,  but  it’s  a  very  difficult  issue  to  get 
your  arms  around  about  how  do  you  deal  with  a  problem  like  this.  It’s  one  thing  in  a  jurisdiction  that  only 
has  one  casino  where  somebody  can  exclude  themselves  and  you  can  say,  “Don’t  let  old  So-and-So  even 
come  in  the  door.”  Here,  where  you’ve  got  thousands,  if  not  tens  of  thousands,  of  customers  a  day  in  a 
single  property,  and  dozens  of  different  properties,  it’s  very  difficult  to  try  to  deal  with  it  in  a  systematic 
way  that  hits  individuals.  You  have  to  try  to  hit  the  problem  at  a  bigger  level,  and  1  see  that  as  a  challenge 
that  a  lot  has  been  accomplished  on,  but  probably  one  that  will  continue  to  require  research  and  attention 
from  the  industry  and  regulators  alike  to  try  to  see  to  it  that  people  can  enjoy  the  entertainment  value  and 
all  the  other  positives  that  come  from  gaming  while  minimizing  those  who  lose,  because  people  who 
become  compulsive  gamblers  really  can  lose  everything — not  just  their  fortunes,  but  their  self-respect  and 
their  dignity.  So  it’s  a  tough  problem  and  one  everybody  that  has  to  remain  alert  to  and  continue  to  try  to 
deal  with. 

Another  thing  that  came  up  during  your  time  on  the  Commission  was  the  question  of  slot  machine  themes 
that  were  attractive  to  minors.  How  did  the  Commission  handle  that  situation? 

Well,  actually,  that  came  up  just  as  1  was  leaving.  How  they  actually  dealt  with  it  was  by  trying  to 
require  that  themes  not  be  attractive  to  underage  gamblers.  If  it  was  a  Dagwood  and  Blondie  theme,  that 
appealed  to  people  who  were  twenty-one  and  well  above  that,  but  if  it  was  something  much  more 
contemporary  that  had  an  appeal  to  young  people,  then  that  should  be  taken  into  account  and  those 
machines  should  not  be  approved.  Most  of  that  was  resolved  after  1  left,  though. 

During  your  time  on  the  Commission  gambling  greatly  expanded  throughout  the  United  States  and  the 
world.  We  touched  on  that  briefly  before.  Were  the  Nevada  regulations  respected  and  oftentimes 
duplicated  in  other  gaming  venues? 

Well,  actually,  Nevada’s  regulatory  system  became  the  model,  both  nationally  and 
internationally.  Even  New  Jersey’s  system,  which  became  sort  of  the  alternative  model,  still  was  in  large 
measure  itself  based  on  the  Nevada  model.  But  a  very  big  part  of  my  job  consisted  of  meeting  with 
elected  officials,  law  enforcement  officials,  tourism  officials,  and  regulatory  officials  from  other 
jurisdictions  who  came  to  Nevada  to  try  to  determine  how  they  were  going  to  structure  the  gaming 
industry  that  they  had  decided  they  were  going  to  introduce  into  their  jurisdictions.  Now,  1  took  the 
position  that  1  was  not  going  to  be  a  cheerleader  for  expansion  into  other  jurisdictions.  1  wouldn’t  go 
testify  before  legislatures  on  what  great  economic  benefits  gaming  had  provided  to  Nevada  and  could 
provide  to  other  states  as  well.  But  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  decision  had  already  been  made  that  they 
were  going  to  introduce  gaming,  and  that  now  they  were  just  talking  about  how  they  were  going  to  do  it, 
then  1  thought  it  was  very  much  in  Nevada’s  interest  that  if  we’re  going  to  have  competition  out  of  state, 
it  should  be  from  competitors  who  themselves  have  effective  regulatory  systems,  because  we  could  all 
lose  and  Nevada  would  have  the  most  to  lose  if  gaming  got  a  black  eye  anywhere  because  it  wasn’t 
regulated  in  an  effective  way. 

So  1  would  see  an  enormous  number  of  people  here,  delegations  from  big  and  small  countries  all 


164 


around  the  world,  from  jurisdictions  all  over  the  U.S.,  and  periodically  I  would  even  go  and  either  speak 
at  seminars  that  a  lot  of  other  jurisdictions  would  attend,  or  sometimes  go  and  work  directly  with 
government  officials.  Just  to  give  an  example,  when  Michigan  approved  gaming  in  Detroit,  1  went  back 
and  spent  several  days  working  with  their  new  commission  trying  to  identify  issues  and  work  through 
how  we  deal  with  issues  and  sensitizing  them  to  things  we  thought  were  important.  1  did  that  kind  of 
thing  a  lot.  1  also  lectured  quite  a  bit  at  gaming  industry  conferences.  1  ultimately  became  an  organizer 
and  the  first  chairman  of  the  International  Association  of  Gaming  Regulators,  which  was  a  group  of 
people  like  myself  who  regulated  gaming  in  various  jurisdictions,  and  we  thought  it  was  important  that 
just  as  the  businesses  who  did  business  in  different  jurisdictions  were  in  touch  with  each  other  about  what 
they  were  doing  in  the  different  jurisdictions,  that  we  needed  to  be  in  touch  with  each  other,  and  that  we 
needed  to  learn  from  their  experiences,  good  and  bad,  and  be  sensitive  to  issues  that  arose  in  other 
jurisdictions,  because  we  could  foresee  that  they  might  arise  in  ours  sometime  thereafter,  [laughter]  So  I’d 
say  I  was  pretty  much  out  there. 

In  January  of 1997  the  Commission  passed  a  revised  regulation  6a.  That  revised  regulation  is  said  to  be 
of  utmost  importance  to  the  state  of  Nevada.  First,  would  you  tell  us  what  area  regulation  6  addresses 
and  tell  us  the  importance  of  the  revised  regulation  6a? 

Well,  regulation  6a  actually  came  about  in  1985  after  the  secretary  of  the  treasury  granted  an 
exemption  to  Nevada  from  treasury  rules  under  Title  3 1  and  allowed  Nevada  to  set  up  its  own  currency 
transaction  reporting  law.  Industry  leaders  and  our  elected  officials,  I  think,  correctly  foresaw  that  at  a 
time  when  there  were  only  two  states  with  gaming,  that  having  this  important  function  run  out  of 
Washington,  D.C.,  by  people  who  didn’t  understand  gaming  and  perhaps  didn’t  approve  of  it,  it  could 
really  be  used  as  a  weapon  to  harm  the  industry,  and  that  it  would  be  far  better  that  a  system  be  set  up 
under  state  law  that  would  track  the  requirements  of  Title  3 1  and  report  on  currency  transactions,  but  that 
it  would  be  done  at  the  state  level.  And  I  think  after  1985  the  Nevada  experience  was  very  successful.  A 
primary  purpose  of  this  from  the  Treasury  was  to  prevent  money  laundering,  I  suppose  primarily  from 
drugs,  but  potentially  other  sources.  And  from  1985  in  its  inception  through  1997,  there  had  been  some 
technical  violations  that  had  led  to  imposition  of  substantial  fines,  but  they  were  paperwork  kind  of 
violations,  and  there  had  never  been  any  evidence  of  actual  money  laundering. 

So  I  think  the  regulation  worked  quite  well  and  was  very  much  in  the  interest  of  the  state,  but  as 
time  went  on,  the  Department  of  Treasury’s  interest  in  currency  transactions  expanded  beyond  money 
laundering  to  other  suspicious  kinds  of  activities,  and  what  we  tried  to  do  was  to  revise  regulation  6a  to 
match  the  changes  in  the  federal  regulations  and  to  provide  suspicious-activity  reporting  to  deal  with 
some  difficult  issues,  like  multiple  transactions  or  the  aggregation  of  dissimilar  transactions,  to  eliminate 
some  ways  that  people  could  conceivably  get  around  the  existing  regulations.  But  in  my  eyes,  it  was 
simply  trying  to  stay  current  with  federal  regulations  so  that  we  could  continue  to  regulate  ourselves 
rather  than  run  the  risk  of  Washington,  D.C.  thinking  they  could  do  a  better  job.  And  I  think  we  were 
successful  in  convincing  the  federal  government  that  we  had  done  a  good  job,  and  that  we  would  continue 
to  do  a  good  job.  I  think  the  regulation  has  been  successful.  There  have  continued  to  be  some  technical 
problems — paperwork  problems,  human  failure  kinds  of  problems,  and  problems  relating  to  proper 
reporting — but  I  think  that  there  hasn’t  been  the  money  laundering  or  other  nefarious  activities  that  the 
regulation  was  aimed  at  reducing.  So  I  think  it’s  been  successful. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


165 


Are  there  some  states  or  some  areas  that  are  controlled  by  the  federal  government? 

Everywhere  else.  Nevada’s  unique. 

Nevada ’s  the  only  one  that  is  not? 

Nevada’s  the  only  one. 

As  an  individual  who  has  had  hundreds  of  attorneys  appeared  before  him  over  the  years,  what  would  be 
your  advice  to  an  attorney  appearing  before  either  the  Board  or  the  Commission  for  the  first  time? 

I’d  say  be  realistic,  be  well-informed,  know  what  the  issues  are  that  have  to  be  addressed  and 
what  it  is  you’re  trying  to  accomplish.  At  all  costs  don’t  misrepresent  or  exaggerate  or  try  to  put  things 
into  a  false  light.  Recognize  that  gaming  is  different  from  anything  else.  It’s  a  privileged  activity.  A 
gaming  license  is  a  privileged  license.  Nobody  has  a  right  to  do  it.  This  is  going  to  be  an  area  of  very 
strict  regulation,  and  you  should  come  to  the  process  with  an  understanding  of  that.  Now  all  that  being 
said,  that  doesn’t  mean  that  nobody  has  any  rights,  that  nobody  [laughter]  has  any  entitlement  to  argue  for 
their  position.  People  should  feel  free  to  argue  for  their  position,  but  they  should  do  it  in  a  way  that’s 
realistic  and  responsible  and  informed,  and  lastly,  I’d  say  don’t  be  intimidated.  Good  lawyers  show  their 
skills  in  lots  of  different  environments,  and  this  is  just  one  more  different  kind  of  environment  where  you 
can  show  your  good  training  and  capability. 

What  are  your  thoughts  on  the  legalization  of  internet  gambling? 

I’m  still  sort  of  a  skeptic.  First,  I  suppose,  I  don’t  see  any  great  benefit  to  the  state  of  Nevada 
from  internet  gaming.  Second,  I  see  Nevada  as  being  the  state  that  has  maybe  the  most  to  lose  if 
something  unfortunate  happens  in  the  realm  of  gaming  and  if  gaming  should  fall  into  disrespect  and 
become  subject  to  federal  or  other  type  of  intervention  to  limit  it.  So  I  think  Nevada  has  the  greatest 
interest  in  seeing  to  it  that  effective  regulation  is  made  a  part  of  any  system  of  gaming  anywhere.  I 
suppose  that  time  marches  on  and  innovations  continue,  and  it’s  possible  that  technological  and  other 
innovations  can  come  forward  that  will  address  the  regulatory  concerns  and  internet  gaming  may  grow 
and  become  accepted  in  the  future,  but  I  think  there’s  a  lot  of  hurdles  that  would  have  to  be  overcome. 
And  then  I  think  that  for  most  people  the  fun  of  gaming  is  the  social  aspect  of  it.  Sitting  at  a  computer 
terminal  by  yourself,  to  me,  doesn’t  really  hold  the  promise  of  the  fun  that  you  get  in  the  casino 
environment,  but  that’s  a  business  challenge,  not  a  regulatory  challenge,  I  guess. 

How  healthy  do  you  feel  the  Nevada  gaming  industry  is  currently? 

I  think  Nevada’s  gaming  industry  is  very  healthy.  I  don’t  think  it’s  ever  been  healthier  than  it  is 
right  now.  It  certainly  has  challenges  with  the  competition  from  Indian  casinos  and  other  forms  of 
gaming,  lotteries  and  other  things,  but  that’s  life.  Life  is  competition,  life  is  change,  life  is  reacting  to  new 
environments,  and  I  think  Nevada’s  gaming  industry  has  risen  to  these  challenges  before,  and  I  guess  I’m 
bullish.  I  think  things  are  moving  forward  for  the  industry  as  a  whole.  I  think  there  are  some  segments 
that  are  very  challenged.  And  there  probably  will  be  some  shake-out  in  the  industry,  but  as  a  whole,  I 


166 


think  that  it’ll  continue  to  grow  and  continue  to  become  more  sophisticated  and  more  professional. 

Well,  historically  there  have  always  been  shake-outs,  I  guess,  in  any  industry  and  in  gaming.  I  can 
remember  years  ago  people  said,  “Las  Vegas  is  overbuilt  with  hotel  rooms,  ’’  [laughter]  and  they ’ve  built 
tens  of  thousands  since  then. 

Yes. 

Bill,  there’s  an  organization  called  the  Nevada  Gaming  Institute  that  you  were  quite  involved  with  and 
still  are  involved  with.  Could  you  give  us  a  little  background  on  that,  when  it  was  formed  and  who  were 
some  of  the  charter  members,  things  of  that  nature? 

About  the  time  1  became  chairman  of  the  Commission  in  1991,  some  of  my  colleagues  from  the 
United  Kingdom  and  the  Netherlands  and  other  places  and  1  felt  that  one  thing  that  the  gaming  industry 
was  lacking  was  an  academic  resource,  a  center  of  learning  and  a  center  called  a  “think  tank”  for  people 
in  the  gaming  industry,  both  operators  and  regulators,  and  that  it  would  be  very  much  to  the  benefit  of  all 
if  something  like  that  could  be  established.  We  also  felt  that  the  most  fitting  and  probably  most  doable 
place  for  that  to  happen  would  be  in  Las  Vegas,  since  this  was  really  the  center  of  gaming  in  the  world.  1 
thought  that  as  the  world  of  gaming  changed,  and  it  was  clear  that  there  was  going  to  be  an  enormous 
expansion  of  gaming,  1  thought  it  was  very  much  in  the  interest  of  Nevada  to  have  an  academic  anchor 
here  in  the  state  that  people  in  the  gaming  industry  could  look  to  for  training  and  research,  the 
development  of  issues,  and  a  forum  for  discussion  for  people  at  all  different  levels  in  the  industry.  So  1 
began  working  with  the  people  here  in  Las  Vegas  to  see  if  we  could  create  something  like  that  here.  We 
looked  at  models,  everything  from  high-tech  industry  kinds  of  think  tanks  that  were  being  created  at 
Stanford  and  other  places.  That  became  one  of  our  models.  The  Petroleum  Institute  was  a  different  kind 
of  a  model  and  a  different  kind  of  a  context,  but  we  eventually  began  working  with  the  then-president  of 
UNLV  to  see  if  there  would  be  interest  and  how  we  would  go  about  forming  such  an  institute.  The 
president  then  was  very  concerned  that  he  didn’t  want  to  have  a  dealer’s  school  on  campus,  but  that  if  we 
were  talking  about  something  at  a  higher  level,  that  could  be  attractive. 

1  began  working  with  a  number  of  attorneys — Bob  Faiss,  Frank  Schreck,  Tony  Cabot,  Grant 
Sawyer — in  trying  to  work  on  the  proposal,  and  polish  exactly  what  it  was  that  we  needed.  Frankly,  a  big 
boost  came  to  our  efforts  when  it  was  uncovered  that  some  people  in  New  Jersey  had  become  aware  of 
our  efforts  and  that  they  were  trying  to  steal  our  idea  and  get  the  institute  set  up  in  a  New  Jersey 
university.  But  really,  when  we  got  Grant  Sawyer  involved,  he  was  able  to  utilize  his  credibility  not  only 
with  the  gaming  industry  leaders,  but  with  the  community  leaders  and  the  president  of  the  university  and 
the  Board  of  Regents,  to  convince  them  that  this  was  something  that  could  have  value  and  that  really 
could  happen.  Well,  to  cut  to  the  end  of  the  story,  1  think  it  was  1995  when  we  went  from  talking  about  it 
to  groundbreaking  for  the  large  building  on  the  UNLV  campus  that  now  houses  the  International  Gaming 
Institute. 

What ’s  the  name  of  that  building? 

1  believe  it’s  the  Stanley  Fulton  building.  He’s  the  one  who  donated  roughly  five  million  dollars 
to  build  the  building.  And  now,  the  institute,  under  the  leadership  of  a  couple  of  deans  of  the  hotel  school, 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


167 


a  couple  of  presidents  of  the  university,  and  some  outstanding  leaders  in  the  gaming  industry,  such  as 
Shannon  Bybee,  has  been  established  as  a  worldwide  leader  in  research,  training,  and  scholarship.  It  has  a 
huge  library  of  gaming  materials.  It  has  a  casino  floor  that  has  all  the  table  games  and  the  latest  slot 
machines  where  students  can  study  operational  issues.  It  has  a  large  kitchen  and  banquet  facilities  where 
people  can  learn  about  back-of-the -house  kinds  of  operations.  It  has  facilities  for  meetings  for  top-level 
people  in  the  industry  to  get  together  and  address  important  current  issues  on  neutral  ground.  And  while  1 
am  not  sure  that  the  institute  has  reached  its  full  potential  yet,  1  think  it  has  trained  literally  thousands  of 
regulators  from  all  over  the  world.  It  has  outreach,  it  does  research  for  industry,  it  does  training  for 
industry,  and  I’m  proud  of  my  role.  1  think  it  has  a  great  potential  to  continue  to  benefit  the  gaming 
industry  and  the  state. 

And  it  sounds  like  it  will  have  a  long-time  lasting  impact  on  the  industry. 

Well,  1  think  that  this  will  help  anchor  Nevada  as  the  capital  of  gaming  worldwide. 

And  you  say  that  you  ’re  having  a  luncheon  in  a  short  time  with  some  institute  people? 

Yes,  I’m  actually  having  a  meeting  with  Dean  Stewart  Mann  here  in  the  next  few  days  to 
continue  to  talk  about  new  leadership  for  the  institute  after  the  unfortunate  passing  of  Shannon  Bybee  and 
to  reinvigorate  its  growth  for  what  it  can  continue  to  do  for  the  university,  for  the  industry,  and  for  the 
state. 

Is  there  actually  anyone  that ’s  a  head  of  it  now? 

Well,  Stewart  Mann,  the  dean  of  the  hotel  school,  is  still  the  man  in  charge,  but  they’re  currently 
advertising  for  a  new  director  of  the  institute  itself. 

There  were  a  lot  of  important  things  that  happened  during  your  tenure,  and  1  was  wondering  if  you  could 
narrow  it  down  to  maybe  one  thing  that  happened  while  you  were  there,  or  one  thing  that  you  instituted. 

I  have  a  hard  time  saying  what  one  thing  I’m  most  proud  of,  but  one  thing  that  does  come  to  mind 
is  the  fact  that  we  eventually  succeeded  in  creating  a  written  index  to  our  gaming  statutes  and  regulations 
that  was  cross-referenced.  I  think  that  became  a  tremendous  research  tool  for  people  who  wanted  to  know 
what  exactly  the  rules  and  regulations  of  gaming  were  in  Nevada,  short  of  reading  the  hundreds  of  pages. 
It  may  sound  like  something  that  should  have  been  done  fifty  years  ago,  and  maybe  it  should  have  been. 
Working  with  the  attorney  general’s  office  and  with  Mark  Lemer,  a  private  attorney,  who  devoted  a 
tremendous  amount  of  time  to  the  project,  along  with  Mike  Wilson  in  the  attorney  general’s  office,  they 
came  up  with  something  that  I  think  is  of  tremendous  value  to  operators,  attorneys,  academicians — 
something  that  simply  helps  people  find  what’s  in  those  regulations  and  demystifies  what’s  there  so  that 
real  people  who  haven’t  devoted  their  career  to  the  gaming  industry  still  have  a  chance  of  figuring  out 
what  the  rules  and  regulations  are.  [laughter] 

So  while  it’s  a  small  thing,  that’s  the  kind  of  thing  that  I  think  made  a  big  difference  to 
everybody.  And  1  didn’t  do  the  heavy  lifting.  Mark  Lemer  and  Mike  Wilson  really  did  that,  but  I  do  think 
I  played  a  role  in  identifying  the  need  and  seeing  to  it  that  the  project  got  launched  and  got  pursued  and 


168 


got  completed.  So  that’s  small  thing,  but  small  things  are  important. 

How  would  you  describe  Bill  Curran ,  chairman  of  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission?  How  would  you 
describe  yourself? 

Well,  1  don’t  know  that  1  was  ever  any  smarter  than  anybody  else  or  any  wiser  than  anybody  else, 
but  1  did  try  to  see  to  it  that  anybody  who  had  an  interest  in  the  business  of  the  Commission  came  away 
from  it  with  the  feeling  that  there  had  been  a  fair  hearing,  that  they’d  been  treated  respectfully  regardless 
of  what  their  situation  was,  that  the  people  on  the  Commission  had  worked  hard  in  preparing  for  the 
meeting  and  in  trying  to  reach  a  decision  that  was  wise  and  was  well-founded.  And  1  always  felt  that 
process  was  very  important.  While  the  final  outcome  was  perhaps  of  paramount  importance,  if  people 
came  away  from  the  encounter  feeling  that  they’d  at  least  had  their  day  in  court,  that  they’d  been  given 
dignity  and  that  their  position  had  been  heard  and  listened  to  and  considered,  that  we  had  done  our  job 
and  done  it  well.  1  don’t  think  we  ever  lost  track  of  that  sort  of  system  value,  and  having  had  such  great 
colleagues  the  time  1  was  there  made  it  a  value  that  was  paramount  and  was  observed.  And  not  only  did  1 
have  the  good  fortune  to  serve  during  the  exciting  time  in  the  industry,  but  1  had  the  good  fortune  to  serve 
with  a  group  of  extraordinarily  gifted  and  committed  people  who  enrichened  the  experienced  for  me  and, 
hopefully,  accomplished  something  good  for  the  state  and  for  the  industry. 

During  your  time  in  office,  as  we  mentioned  earlier,  the  gambling  industry  moved  into  many  states  and 
many  countries.  You  often  hear  the  expression  “foreign  ”  gaming,  foreign  to  Nevada.  Would  you  explain 
if  that  means  foreign  outside  of  the  United  States,  or  does  that  mean  any  gambling  outside  of  the  state  of 
Nevada? 

Well,  we  use  the  term  here  to  mean  any  gaming  outside  of  Nevada  conducted  by  people  who  are 
licensed  in  Nevada.  This  became  a  very  controversial  and  important  issue  that  the  Commission  had  to 
address.  It  had  first  been  considered  when  Nevada’s  licensees  wanted  to  go  into  New  Jersey  when 
Atlantic  City  came  on  line,  but  in  the  early  1990s  the  pressure  really  began  to  mount  in  other 
jurisdictions,  and  Nevada  licensees  became  very  concerned  that  they  were  at  a  great  competitive 
disadvantage  as  far  as  taking  part  in  the  expansion  in  these  new  jurisdictions  because  our  rules  were  so 
restrictive. 

Under  the  old  regulations,  there  was  an  elaborate  procedure  where  before  you  could  go  into 
operation  in  a  new  jurisdiction  you  had  to  come  forward  in  Nevada  and  submit  an  application  to  do  so. 
One  part  of  that  application  required  a  licensee  to  show  that  there  was  an  effective  and  operating 
regulatory  system  that  would  ensure  gaming  was  regulated  at  the  same  high  level  as  it  was  in  Nevada. 
That  became  a  very  important  emotional  and  patriotic  issue  in  jurisdictions  particularly  overseas  who 
were  going  to  award  franchises  to  operate  one  casino  in  their  jurisdiction,  and  they  could  entertain  offers 
from  operators  from  all  over  the  world  who  could  come  in  and  negotiate  their  deal  on  the  spot,  or  with  a 
Nevada  operator  who  perhaps  came  with  some  greater  operational  credibility,  but  who  had  to  come 
forward  with  the  understanding  that  they  could  only  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity  even  if  it  was 
presented  to  them,  if  it  was  approved  in  Nevada,  and  further,  that  Nevada  regulators  were  going  to  make 
an  assessment  publicly  of  the  regulatory  system  in  this  other  country.  And  that  was  considered  very  off- 
putting  by  leaders  of  foreign  countries  to  think  that  little  old  Nevada  was  going  to  evaluate  their 
credibility  and  their  fitness  to  oversee  gaming,  and  that  additionally  required  months  of  application- 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


169 


making  and  evaluation  and  greatly  extended  the  time  from  initial  proposal  until  a  deal  could  be  inked  by  a 
Nevada  operator. 

So  they  came  forward  and  asked  for  revisions  that  could  eliminate  some  of  these  problems  and  it 
became  a  very  contentious  issue.  The  local  press  could  only  see  negativity  to  Nevada  as  it  would  shift 
investment  out  of  state  or  overseas,  it  would  undermine,  perhaps,  our  employment  base,  and  it  would 
perhaps  lead  to  our  corporations  moving  their  coiporate  headquarters  out  of  Nevada  to  someplace  else, 
and  they  thought  it  was  very  threatening  to  the  state.  And  that  was  more  or  less  the  Gaming  Control 
Board’s  take  on  the  issue,  that  there  should  continue  to  be  very  tight  restraints  on  expansion  into  new 
jurisdictions  by  Nevada  licensees. 

This  was  a  complex  issue  that  was  discussed  over  a  period  of  months  and  involved  numerous 
meetings  of  the  Gaming  Policy  Committee,  so  it’s  not  fair  to  characterize  any  one  person  or  group  of 
having  just  one  position  because  it  was  very  much  an  evolutionary  kind  of  a  process.  But  ultimately  what 
the  Commission  determined  was  that  Nevada  could  not  simply  say  that  gaming  was  not  going  to  expand 
anywhere  else,  that  we  were  not  going  to  face  new  competition,  and  that  having  the  restrictive  rules  that 
we  had  only  put  Nevada  licensees  in  the  tremendous  competitive  disadvantage  and  even  jeopardized  their 
willingness  to  continue  in  Nevada  because  they  might  be  in  a  position  where  they’d  have  to  choose  to 
either  operate  in  Nevada  or  operate  in  the  whole  rest  of  the  world.  We  didn’t  want  our  operators  to  have 
to  make  those  kinds  of  choices.  And  having  eventually  reached  that  kind  of  policy  choice,  then  there  was 
a  tremendous  amount  of  discussion  of,  OK,  if  you  don’t  have  to  get  approval  in  Nevada  first,  what  do  you 
have  to  do?  What  are  the  new  rules  going  to  be,  how  are  they  going  to  be  enforced,  how  do  you  do  the 
most  you  can  to  maintain  the  benefit  to  Nevadans  of  the  gaming  industry  that  grew  and  blossomed  here? 
But  how  do  you  also  allow  our  coiporate  citizens  to  fulfill  their  duties  to  their  stockholders  by  pursuing 
the  new  opportunities?  It  was  a  long  process,  it  was  a  difficult  one  that  was  marked  by  heated  debate,  but 
in  the  end,  1  think  we  did  make  the  right  decision.  1  don’t  think  that  we  would  have  benefited  at  all  by 
trying  to  restrict  competition.  1  think  we  would  have  only  hurt  our  corporate  citizens  and  our  actual 
human  citizens.  It  was  a  tough  decision.  1  think  it  was  the  right  one,  though. 

Approximately  how  many  hours  a  week  or  a  month  did  you  spend  preparing  for  your  monthly  meetings  or 
working  on  commission  business? 

It  really  varied,  because  not  every  month’s  meeting  was  the  same.  Occasionally,  we’d  have  fairly 
routine  meetings.  Those  weeks  or  those  months  1  could  probably  even  prepare  for  the  meeting  and  attend 
the  meeting  all  in  a  course  of,  say,  five  days.  Some  months,  though,  required  a  lot  more  time  than  that. 
Some  months  we’d  had  multiple  meetings  and  really  exhaustive  reading  and  preparation  for  the  meetings. 
And  then  particularly  as  chair,  1  have  all  these  other  responsibilities  meeting  with  people,  both  in  the 
industry,  people  from  other  jurisdictions,  working  with  the  press.  On  an  overall  basis,  when  1  think  of  the 
time  1  devoted  to  the  Commission,  it  was  almost  invariably  half  of  my  business  time  or  more  on  a 
monthly  basis.  It  was  a  substantial  amount  of  work,  and  you  were  never  quite  fully  off  duty  because 
things  kept  happening,  and  you  had  to  be  available  to  deal  with  it.  If  you  were  on  vacation,  you  were  still 
on  duty.  While  1  didn’t  get  an  enormous  number  of  calls  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  1  did  sometimes.  It 
took  a  lot  of  time,  but  it  was  worth  it. 

Bill,  since  you  left  the  Gaming  Commission,  are  you  currently  involved  in  any  way  in  the  gaming 
industry? 


170 


Yes,  I’m  still  involved  to  a  degree.  I  still  lecture  from  time  to  time.  I’m  at  conferences  or 
symposiums  of  some  kind  dealing  with  gaming  issues.  I  currently  serve  on  the  compliance  committee  for 
four  licensees.  I  occasionally  represent  people  in  licensing  or  regulatory  matters  of  one  kind  or  another, 
and  I’m  still  interested  and  involved  with  the  International  Gaming  Institute.  And  I’m  sure  I’ll  continue  to 
have  a  level  of  involvement  in  the  gaming  industry,  but  I  don’t  see  myself  as  becoming  a  full-time 
participant  in  it,  either  as  an  operator  or  licensee  or  anything  like  that. 

Thank  you  very  much  for  your  time ,  Bill. 

Well,  thank  you.  I  sure  appreciate  it. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


171 


7 

Steve  DuCharme 


Steve  DuCharme.  Photo  courtesy  of  Steve  DuCharme 


Steve  DuCharme  was  horn  in  Lowell, 
Massachusetts ,  in  1947,  moving  with  his  family  to 
Las  Vegas  at  age  twelve.  He  then  attended  Nevada 
Southern  University,  now  the  University  of  Nevada, 
Las  Vegas.  His  first  job  in  local  government  was 
with  the  Clark  County  Sheriff’s  Department,  which 
he  joined  in  1970  and  where  he  remained  until 
being  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board  by 
Governor  Bob  Miller  in  1991.  After  approximately 
seven  years  as  a  board  member  supervising  the 
enforcement  division,  he  replaced  William  Bible  as 
chairman  of  the  Board  in  September  of  1998  and 
remained  as  chairman  until  retiring  in  January  of 
2001.  Upon  his  departure  from  the  Control  Board, 
DuCharme  had  spent  more  than  thirty  years 
working  for  state  or  local  government.  After  the 
required  one-year  “cooling-off  period,  ”  he  began 
to  work  as  a  compliance  consultant  for  several 
gaming-related  entities,  as  a  consultant  for  gaming 
attorneys,  and  as  an  occasional  expert  witness. 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  morning.  My  name  is  Dwayne  Kling.  It ’s  July  30  in  the  year  2002.  I’m  with  Steve 
DuCharme  in  his  home  in  Las  Vegas,  Nevada.  Mr.  DuCharme,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the 
University  of  Nevada  have  your  permission  to  record  these  tapes  that  we  are  about  to  begin  today? 


Steve  DuCharme:  Yes. 


172 


Where  were  you  born  and  when  were  you  born? 

1  was  bom  in  Lowell,  Massachusetts  on  April  6,  Easter  Sunday,  1947,  and  we  moved  to  Nevada,  1 
believe,  in  February  or  March  of  1960. 1  was  twelve  years  old,  and  1  think  1  was  in  seventh  or  eighth 
grade  at  the  time. 

Did  you  attend  a  college  or  a  university  after  you  graduated  from  high  school? 

1  did.  1  went  to  Nevada  Southern  University,  which  is  now  University  of  Nevada  at  Las  Vegas.  1 
started  right  from  high  school,  and  then  1  got  involved  with  the  reserve  program  with  the  Clark  County 
Sheriffs  Department.  1  was  immediately  smitten  with  police  work  and  left  school  at  that  time  to  pursue  a 
career  in  law  enforcement.  In  the  mid-1980s,  when  1  thought  that  fd  had  enough  fun  on  the  streets  and 
wanted  to  start  taking  promotions  at  the  police  department,  1  went  back  to  school  again  and  started 
working  on  my  master’s. 

Was  there  any  particular  reason  you  liked  the  police  work ,  or  was  there  some  individual  that  steered  you 
that  way? 

Lloyd  Bell,  who  was  the  undersheriff  with  the  sheriffs  department,  was  a  family  friend  who  1 
looked  up  to,  and  when  1  became  aware  of  a  reserve  program  where  an  individual  would  receive  a  little 
bit  of  training  and  then  ride  as  a  second  deputy  in  the  car  about  two  nights  per  month.  I  prevailed  upon 
Lloyd  Bell  to  get  me  in  the  reserve  program.  Right  from  the  very  first  it  was  an  exciting  occupation  and  1 
immediately  applied  to  be  a  full-time  deputy  with  the  Clark  County  Sheriffs  Department.  1  joined  the 
sheriffs  department  in  August  of  1970,  and  actually,  Bart  Jacka  hired  me. 

1  went  back  to  school  in  1986,  and  over  the  course  of  the  next  couple  of  years,  1  received  my 
associate’s  degree  in  law  enforcement  and  then  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  criminal  justice.  1  was  pursuing  a 
master’s  degree  in  public  administration  when  1  was  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board. 

What  year  were  you  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board? 

1  was  appointed  in  1990  and  1  took  office  January  2,  1991. 

Who  did  you  replace  on  the  Board? 

Gerry  Cunningham.  As  you  know,  the  makeup  of  the  Board  typically  has  one  law  enforcement 
person,  or  a  lawyer  that  oversees  the  enforcement  division.  For  a  number  of  years,  a  retired  person  from 
metro  had  the  law  enforcement  position:  first,  Bart  Jacka,  then  Jerry  Cunningham,  and  then  me.  And  now 
Bobby  Siller,  the  former  special  agent  in  charge  of  the  FBI  has  the  position. 

Who  appointed  you  to  the  Board? 

Governor  Bob  Miller. 


Had  you  known  Governor  Miller  prior  to  your  appointment? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


173 


Y es,  1  had  known  Governor  Miller  since  high  school,  and  he  and  1  were  friends.  Also,  Governor 
Miller  had  worked  for  the  sheriffs  department  when  he  was  in  law  school,  then  worked  at  the  district 
attorney’s  office,  and  as  a  justice  of  the  peace.  And  so  while  we  were  social  friends,  our  careers  were 
tracking  for  a  number  of  years. 

As  the  law  enforcement  member  of  the  Board,  did  you  oversee  any  specific  division  such  as 
investigations? 

No,  actually,  investigations,  which  does  background  investigations,  typically  is  supervised  by  the 
chairman.  Normally,  the  law  enforcement  person  would  supervise  what  they  call  the  enforcement 
division,  and  that  division  has  about  eighty-five  agents  that  are  sworn  police  officers.  They’re  the  gun¬ 
carrying,  badge-toting,  law  enforcement  types.  The  other  division,  while  they  are  peace  officers,  they’re 
not  category  three  peace  officers. 

Did  you  oversee  other  divisions? 

No.  Just  the  enforcement  division  when  1  was  a  board  member.  Obviously,  when  1  became 
chairman  then  it  was  different.  The  chairman  would  oversee  administration,  corporate  securities,  and 
investigations. 

When  you  were  first  appointed  to  the  Board ,  what  did  you  feel  was  your  main  responsibility? 

1  felt  my  main  responsibilities  were  first  to  protect  the  integrity  of  the  state  and  to  protect  the 
integrity  of  the  gaming  industry.  The  public  policy  is  pretty  specific  about  maintaining  the  public’s 
confidence  through  strict  regulation  of  gaming,  which  ensures,  first,  that  people  have  confidence  that 
gaming  is  conducted  honestly;  and  second,  that  the  state  gets  its  proper  share  of  the  taxes.  The  two  main 
functions,  the  way  1  see  it,  are  to  make  sure  that  the  games  are  honest  and  make  sure  that  the  state  collects 
its  taxes. 

In  early  1990s,  shortly  after  you  were  named  to  the  Board,  the  casino  gaming  industry  in  Nevada  wanted 
to  spread  into  states  other  than  Nevada.  What  position  did  you  take  on  that? 

1  was  not  in  favor  of  it.  It  was  my  position  that  because  the  state  had  allowed  gaming  since  1931 
its  reputation  had  suffered,  that  a  number  of  people  thought  that  the  state  of  Nevada  was,  as  they  say,  “Sin 
City,”  and  that  it  was  not  a  place  where  you  wanted  to  raise  a  family  and  bring  up  your  kids.  Therefore,  a 
number  of  industries  would  not  locate  to  Nevada  because  of  the  taint  of  the  gaming  industry.  However, 
it’s  true  that  the  gaming  industry  was  good  to  the  state  in  the  form  of  taxes,  that  the  quality  of  life  here 
was  pretty  good,  that  the  tax  rate  was  low,  and  that  for  many,  many  years  there  was  a  state  surplus.  When 
it  looked  like  there  was  going  to  be  expansion  of  gaming  into  these  other  jurisdictions — a  number  of 
people  said,  “Well,  it’s  inevitable.  You  might  as  well  let  these  guys  go” — I  believe  that  with  the  cachet  of 
the  gaming  regulation  here,  with  the  name  of  some  of  our  quality  companies  like  Hilton  and  Caesar’s,  that 
if  they  were  in  the  forefront  of  promoting  legalized  gaming  in  the  other  jurisdiction,  that  that  would  speed 
up  the  process.  1  believed  that  if  people  in  Missouri  or  people  in  Florida  or  Mississippi  had  to  do  it  on 


174 


their  own,  it  would  take  a  lot  longer.  And  if  we  didn’t  have  the  ability  to  regulate  these  properties  they 
could  speed  up  their  process  to  the  detriment  of  the  state  of  Nevada,  and  instead  of  investing  their  money 
in  Nevada  they  would  put  it  in  some  other  state. 

Was  there  gambling  in  New  Jersey  at  this  time? 

Well,  yes,  there  was  and  I  didn’t  have  any  control  over  that.  That  occurred  in  1978,  before  1  was 
in  office.  But  there  was  a  statute  and  a  regulation  that  required  gaming  companies  to  get  prior  approval 
before  they  engaged  in  these  foreign2  gaming  operations.  There  was  also  a  provision  there  for  what  was 
called  “shelf’  approval,  which  means  that  a  company  would  come  to  the  Board  and  the  Commission  and 
say,  “We  don’t  have  a  particular  location  or  operation  that  we’re  looking  at,  but  we  want  approval  to  go 
out  and  beat  the  bushes  for  something  that  looks  good  to  us,  and  we’d  like  this  approval.”  As  it  turned 
out,  with  myself  and  Bill  Bible,  we  had  a  two-to-one  majority  on  the  board,  with  board  member  Tom 
Roche  thinking  it  was  OK  for  these  companies  to  go  outside  the  state.  So  the  initial  request  for  approvals 
was  denied.  And  actually,  that’s  how  1  met  my  wife,  Patty.  She  represented  Harrah’s  on  one  of  these  shelf 
approvals  and  received  a  denial.  However,  when  Harrah’s  went  to  the  Commission  she  was  able  to 
convince  the  commission  to  OK  them. 

Was  Harrah ’s  the  only  one  that  the  Commission  OK’d? 

No,  but  they  were  the  first  one,  and  then  it  was  like  opening  up  the  floodgates.  1  remember  one 
meeting  where  probably  all  of  the  NRA  [Nevada  Resort  Association]  was  there,  and  in  one  fell  swoop 
they  all  got  shelf  approvals.  Then  the  next  year  they  went  to  the  legislature  and  had  the  law  changed 
[laughter]  so  that  they  wouldn’t  have  to  jump  through  that  hoop  any  longer. 

So  actually,  Harrah ’s,  when  it  was  represented  by  Patty  Becker,  set  a  precedent. 

Correct.  You  know,  gaming  companies  are  reluctant  to  have  any  kind  of  denial.  Normally,  they 
test  the  water,  and  if  it  doesn’t  look  like  it  would  fly  they  would  withdraw  it  as  an  application  whose  time 
hadn’t  come.  But  for  some  reason  they  chose  to  push  this  to  the  fullest  and  were  successful.  And,  like  1 
say,  once  one  of  them  got  it,  then  they  all  jumped  on  the  bandwagon. 

You  were  a  member  of  the  Board  and/or  chairman  of  the  Board  for  approximately  ten  years,  and  the 
situation  you  just  mentioned  was  a  definite  change  in  the  gaming  industry  that  took  place  during  that 
period.  What  were  some  of  the  other  major  changes  that  took  place  during  your  tenure  on  the  Board? 

Well,  during  the  mid-1990s  there  was  this  big  rush  to  go  public.  All  of  the  gaming  companies  that 
had  previously  been  private  did  initial  public  offerings  and  sold  stock  to  make  themselves  more  liquid  and 
to  be  able  to  raise  additional  capital.  I  think  Palace  Station,  which  is  now  Station  Casinos,  was  the  leader 
of  the  pack.  They  were  very  successful  in  doing  their  IPO  [Initial  Public  Offering],  and  after  that  a  whole 
litany  of  companies  went  public.  It  took  a  while  for  the  Control  Board  and  the  Commission  to  get 
comfortable  with  some  of  the  SEC  filings  and  the  debt  offerings.  So  the  first  couple  of  years  the  Board 


2  Foreign  gaming  is  anything  outside  of  Nevada,  not  necessarily  outside  the  United  States. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


175 


and  the  Commission  were  fairly  conservative  and  wanted  to  really  scrutinize  each  one  of  these  debt  or 
equity  offerings  individually,  but  after  a  couple  of  years  they  became  fairly  routine  and  the  Board  and 
Commission  became  more  liberal  in  giving  companies  blanket  approvals  to  go  make  these  types  of 
offerings. 

Later  in  my  career  the  Board  and  the  Commission  got  even  more  liberal  with  some  of  the 
structures  of  companies  that  were  licensed.  The  first  one  would  be  Colony  Capital,  which  was  not  a  true 
publicly-traded  company  in  the  SEC  sense  of  the  word,  but  its  shareholders  were  all  institutional 
investors,  meaning  they  were  large  state  retirement  funds,  and  some  university  endowment  funds.  These 
large  institutional  investors  clearly  were  passive  investors  and  had  no  influence  over  the  operation  of  the 
gaming  concern.  And  when  we  initially  looked  at  them,  it  didn’t  neatly  fit  into  any  category  that  we  had 
previously  licensed.  But  with  certain  conditions  and  waivers,  we  were  able  to  allow  this  type  of  structure, 
which  then  brought  more  capital  to  the  state  of  Nevada  and  benefited  the  state.  Now  the  Board  and  the 
Commission  are  more  comfortable  with  it.  We  labored  over  these  things  for  months  and  months  and 
months,  and  agonized  over  them — you  know,  for  every  action  there’s  a  reaction:  if  we  do  this,  is  this 
going  to  open  the  door  for  something  sinister — so  we  were  very,  very  cautious.  But  in  the  long  run  it’s 
proved  very  beneficial  to  the  state,  and  the  integrity  hasn’t  been  jeopardized. 

Throughout  the  history  of  licensing  a  property,  the  main  question  has  always  been,  “ Where  is  the  money 
coming  from?  ”  In  this  day  of  multi-million-dollar  or  billion-dollar  financing,  has  the  “ Where  does  the 
money  come  from?  ”  taken  on  more  importance,  or  is  it  easier  to  track  the  money  when  people  such  as 
Steve  Wynn  are  the  ones  requesting  licensing? 

Well,  that  cuts  both  ways.  When  Steve  Wynn  comes  in  and  he  has  the  Bank  of  Nova  Scotia  and 
the  Deutsche  Bank  lending  him  big  chunks  of  money — hundreds  of  millions — that’s  fairly  easy  to  track. 
But  when  you  get  a  guy  like  Carl  fchan,  his  corporate  structure  looks  like  the  schematic  on  how  to  build 
an  atomic  bomb.  1  mean,  this  guy  has  two  or  three  hundred  companies.  And  so  while  some  are  relatively 
straightforward,  others  are  so  convoluted  they  give  you  a  migraine  right  off  the  bat.  So  we  do  still  track 
that  money.  As  you  pointed  out,  that’s  where  the  devil  is;  you  have  to  know,  “Where  is  this  money 
coming  from?”  Some  people  think  if  they  run  it  through  forty-two  corporations  and  an  off-shore  trust 
account,  that  we’ll  lose  interest,  but  we  don’t.  One  of  the  biggest  sticking  points  to  the  Forsyth  brothers 
on  the  Sport  of  Kings  investigation  was  they  had  a  Lichtenstein  trust  that  reported  to  a  Gibraltar  company, 
and  they  claimed  that  they  were  unable  to  pierce  the  trust  because  that’s  the  way  it  was  set  up  by  the 
father.  And  after  many,  many  go-rounds,  we  just  said,  “Well,  we’re  sorry  you  can’t  pierce  it.  But  we  don’t 
know  where  this  money  came  from,  and  so  we’re  not  going  to  approve  this.” 

Let ’s  talk  about  the  Sport  of  Kings  for  a  little  bit.  Would  you  give  us  a  little  background  on  the  operation? 

Well,  it  was  early  on  in  my  career  when  the  Sport  of  Kings  came  forward  with  this  proposal  that 
was  pretty  unique.  They  wanted  to  have  a  racebook  that  gave  true  odds,  but  they  were  also  going  to  have 
a  few  gaming  tables  and  some  slot  machines  as  an  amenity  to  this  racebook.  They  were  going  to  run  it  the 
United  Kingdom  way  and  they  were  going  to  be  street-comer  touts,  only  in  a  big,  big  way. 


No  pari-mutuel  system? 


176 


1  believe  they  were  going  to  have  a  small  pari-mutuel  system,  but  their  main  focus  was  this:  true 
odds,  a  real  gambling  type  of  a  venture. 

Kind  of  booking  it  out  of  their  back  pockets. 

Exactly.  There  was  a  primary  individual  who  had  come  up  with  the  idea  and  who  was  the  general 
bookmaker.  He  had  gone  out  and  found  these  two  brothers,  Stephen  and  James  Forsyth.  They  were  from 
London,  and  they  had  a  colorful  past.  Their  father  had  been  in  the  amusement,  slot-machine  business 
forever,  and  they  were  linked  to  an  unsavory  person,  and  that  unsavory  person  had  quite  a  colorful 
history.  But  we  were  willing  to  look  at  any  individual  and  try  to  separate  gossip  from  fact  and  if  we  found 
they  were  suitable,  we’d  move  forward. 

However,  there  were  a  lot  of  problems  in  this  suitability  investigation.  And  in  the  interim,  they 
went  out  and  hired  a  former  board  member,  Dennis  Amerine,  to  be  their  chief  executive  officer  and 
president.  Dennis  had  been  very  closely  associated  with  the  Forsyths.  They  were  close  friends.  Their  CFO 
was  an  individual  who  had  worked  at  Arthur  Andersen  with  Tom  Roche,  another  board  member,  and  their 
chief  of  security  was  a  gentleman  by  the  name  of  Tom  Park,  who  1  had  worked  with  at  the  Las  Vegas 
Police  Department  for  a  number  of  years.  We  had  worked  together  in  narcotics,  and  he  had  been  my  boss 
on  a  number  of  occasions.  So  we  had  a  little  bit  for  everybody  there,  [laughter]  And  their  lead  lawyer 
originally  was  Ellen  Whittemore,  who  had  been  a  deputy  A.G.  assigned  to  gaming  and  knew  everybody  at 
the  Gaming  Control  Board. 

As  we  started  moving  forward,  there  were  some  hiccups  in  the  investigation.  Suitability  issues 
aside,  their  particular  operation  and  their  business  plan  accentuated  every  loss  leader  that  all  the  other 
gaming  companies  tried  to  hide  from,  or  run  away  from.  All  the  things  the  Sport  of  Kings  wanted  to  do 
were  things  that  other  gaming  companies  were  losing  money  on.  When  we  looked  at  it  we  said,  “Y ou 
know,  guys,  we  don’t  know  if  you  can  be  successful.”  But,  of  course,  they  were  very  enthusiastic  about 
their  business  plan:  “No,  no,  no,  no.  We  are  going  to  revolutionize  race  and  sports  betting  .  .  .  .”  Actually, 
they  weren’t  even  going  to  do  any  sports  betting.  They  were  going  to  revolutionize  race  betting  in  the 
state  of  Nevada.  And  while  the  statute  requires  that  the  Board  and  Commission  make  a  finding  that  the 
business  plan  is  feasible  and  that  the  financing  is  suitable  and  that  there’s  adequate  financing  and 
adequate  business  acumen,  the  Board  and  the  Commission  are  reluctant  to  not  give  individuals  an 
opportunity  to  fail.  1  mean,  if  you  have  at  least  a  halfway  chance  of  succeeding,  the  Board  and 
Commission  typically  say,  “OK,”  [laughter]  “we  don’t  think  this  is  going  to  work,  but  it’s  your  money 
and  if  you  want  to  lose  it  go  ahead.”  Also,  in  cases  like  that,  we  would  typically  do  a  post-licensing  watch 
on  them,  and  we’d  clearly  make  sure  that  there’s  money  to  pay  the  gaming  patrons  and  try  to  ensure  that 
the  vendors  and  the  creditors  are  paid.  Now,  we’re  not  always  successful,  and  companies  do  go  bankrupt. 
And  typically,  it’s  companies  where  we  had  said,  “You  know,  this  is  an  interesting  plan  you’ve  got  here, 
but  it  hasn’t  worked  before,  and  we’re  not  sure  it’ll  work  now.”  And  1  can  think  of  three  or  four  instances 
in  my  ten  years  where  we  questioned  their  ability,  and  sure  enough,  they  ended  up  in  bankruptcy. 

I  didn  ’t  realize  you  kept  a  closer  watch  on  companies  like  that.  Do  you  send  in  your  audit  people  to  check 
things  out? 

Correct.  We  definitely  do  cage  countdowns  to  make  sure  that  they  have  adequate  money  to  fund 
their  outstanding  gambling  liabilities.  Their  trade  creditors  are  a  little  bit  different,  but  we  have  an 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


111 


obligation  to  protect  them  also.  Sometimes  we  would  require  these  companies  to  either  post  bond  or  to  set 
aside  certain  funding  ratios  for  their  current  liabilities  versus  their  long-term  liabilities  versus  their  cash 
on  hand. 

What  happened  at  the  investigations? 

Well,  initially  they  were  not  going  to  be  successful.  So  they  brought  in — and  not  to  say  Ellen 
Whittemore  wasn’t  a  big  gun,  because  she  was — but  they  brought  in  Governor  Grant  Sawyer  as  their 
attorney. 

This  is  when  they  ’re  appearing  before  the  Board? 

Correct.  The  first  time  they  were  not  successful  and  it  was  referred  back.  The  second  time  they 
were  able  to  get  a  recommendation  on  a  two-to-one  vote.  When  it  went  to  the  Commission,  the 
Commission  didn’t  buy  off  on  it,  so  it  got  sent  back  to  the  Board  again.  Then  they  brought  in  Grant 
Sawyer  and  Paul  Hejmanowski,  who  was  their  managing  partner,  and  they  went  through  another  round  of 
hearings  trying  to  develop  a  checklist  of  conditions  and  special  circumstances  that  would  allow  them  to 
move  forward  and  still  give  the  state  some  comfort  that  the  state’s  reputation  was  going  to  be  protected. 
They  backed  out  the  Forsyth  brothers  saying  that  they  could  not  be  involved  in  the  operation.  Now,  these 
people,  the  Forsyths,  were  the  biggest  lenders — 60,  70  percent  of  the  funding  came  from  them — and  they 
were  going  to  have  an  ongoing  involvement  as  a  lender  and  creditor,  but  were  not  to  be  involved  in  the 
gaming  operation.  This  didn’t  sit  well  with  the  Forsyths,  especially  Stephen,  but  that  was  the  only  way 
they  were  going  to  be  able  to  get  an  approval.  Eventually  they  did  get  their  approval,  but  with  several 
conditions  and  restrictions,  and  immediately  ran  into  trouble  and  started  to  have  regulatory  problems. 

There  were  some  attempts  to  disguise  their  lack  of  adequate  bankroll  and  that  resulted  in  a 
disciplinary  complaint.  The  end  of  the  story  is  they  went  into  bankruptcy,  and  almost  everybody  involved 
lost  money  on  the  deal.  They  closed  the  doors  and  it’s  now  a  nightclub.  1  suppose  if  you  talked  to  the 
Forsyths  they  would  say,  and  maybe  everybody  involved  in  an  operation  would  say,  that  the  Board  and 
the  Commission  handcuffed  them  so  much  that  they  couldn’t  be  successful,  that  had  the  Commission  not 
restricted  the  Forsyths  from  putting  in  more  money,  they  would  have  saved  the  place.  I’m  sure  that  the 
people  on  that  side  of  the  table  think  that  all  the  conditions  and  restrictions  are  what  forced  them  into 
failure,  while  the  other  side  thinks  that  it  was  just  poor  management. 

Was  there  any  application  or  applicant  that  proved  to  be  extremely  difficult  for  you  during  your  time  on 
the  Board ,  either  as  a  member  or  as  a  chairman? 

There  was  one  application  that  started  in  1992,  and  came  to  the  Board  in  1993,  and  that  was 
Leonard  Ainsworth’s  application  for  Aristocrat  Gaming.  Leonard  Ainsworth,  was  a  slot  machine 
manufacturer  out  of  Australia.  He  had  attempted  to  get  licensed  in  the  late  1980s,  was  unsuccessful,  and 
took  a  withdrawal.  His  Nevada  attorney  was  Paul  Bible — Bill  Bible’s  brother — and  for  obvious  reasons, 
Bill  had  to  recuse  himself  from  this  issue.  So  Bill  assigned  me  to  fill  in  as  chair  on  this  particular 
application,  even  though  I  was  relatively  new  to  the  Board.  Paul  Bible  came  to  me  and  said,  “Look,  we 
had  some  problems  in  1988,  1989  and  ended  up  withdrawing  this  application  but  we  want  to  refile  it. 
Would  you  hear  it?” 


178 


And  my  response,  obviously,  is,  “Well,  sure.  If  you’ve  either  rehabilitated  your  applicant,  or  you 
can  more  fully  explain  the  areas  of  concern,  we’ll  obviously  take  another  look  at  it,”  not  knowing  this  was 
going  to  be  one  of  the  biggest  headaches  of  my  career. 

Did  Bill  Bible  attend  the  meetings,  and  just  not  act  as  chairman? 

No,  he  would  not  attend  the  meetings.  He  had  no  involvement  in  the  application.  When  the 
investigators  wanted  to  talk  about  it,  or  when  the  chief  of  investigations  needed  authorization  to  go 
somewhere,  Bill  had  no  involvement.  That  would  go  through  me.  That  happened  many  times  to  me  when 
I  was  the  chairman,  and  a  company  that  my  wife  was  involved  with  had  an  application.  I  would  always 
turn  it  over  to  Dennis  Neilander,  and  put  out  memos  stating  that  anything  concerning  this  company  or  that 
company  has  to  go  through  Dennis.  Bill  did  the  same  thing  on  any  application  that  involved  his  brother. 
Now,  he  would  switch  off  sometimes  between  me  and  Tom  Roche — or  Brian  Harris  later  on — as  to  who 
would  act  as  chair.  But  on  any  of  those  applications  he  wouldn’t  read  any  correspondence.  When  there 
was  testimony  or  when  we  were  hearing  the  application  he’d  get  up  and  leave  the  room.  He  would  try  to 
stay  as  much  at  arm’s  length  as  he  could. 

But  in  any  event,  we  ended  up  sending  team  of  agents  down  to  Australia.  I  think  the  first  time 
they  stayed  down  there  for  six  weeks  and  ended  up  having  probably  twenty-four  or  thirty  hours  worth  of 
hearings  on  the  Aristocrat  application  on  a  number  of  issues  that  involved  Mr.  Ainsworth  personally.  The 
way  that  they  do  business  in  Australia  is  a  little  bit  different  than  the  way  they  do  business  in  the  United 
States.  A  large  portion  of  the  gaming  is  conducted  through  what  they  call  “private  clubs.”  It  would  be 
similar  to  your  local  country  club  getting  a  gaming  license  and  ploughing  all  the  profits  back  into  running 
the  club.  But  there  was  kind  of  a  little  clique  between  the  manufacturers  and  the  club  managers  on  what  or 
whose  machines  they  would  purchase.  And  so  some  type — I  don’t  want  to  refer  to  it  as  kickbacks — but 
some  type  of  an  incentive  [laughter]  was  given  to  the  club  managers  to  pick  a  certain  manufacturer’s 
product.  That  was  just  the  way  business  was  done  there,  and  one  of  the  reasons  that  Mr.  Ainsworth  had 
problems  in  his  1980s  hearings,  was  because  of  that.  And  when  we  looked  at  it  again  in  the  early  1990s, 
there  were  other  instances  of  that  that  were  recent.  So  there  was  a  concern  that  this  type  of  activity  might 
be  brought  to  the  United  States,  and  we  didn’t  think  that  that  was  the  way  a  licensee  should  go. 

At  the  board  level  there  were  only  two  board  members,  me  and  Tom  Roche,  and  it  ended  up  with 
a  split  vote  the  first  time,  so  it  went  to  the  Commission  with  actually  no  recommendation.  But  at  the 
commission  level  there  were  some  concerns  about  the  application,  and  it  was  referred  back  to  the  Board. 

In  the  interim  some  new  evidence  came  to  light  that  apparently  the  applicant  and  his  attorney  didn’t  think 
they  would  be  able  to  overcome,  so  they  requested  a  withdrawal.  And  it  was  withdrawn  again.  Later  the 
company  reorganized  and  Mr.  Ainsworth  liquidated  all  of  his  holdings  and  gave  it  to  his  children.  They 
put  all  the  children’s  holdings  into  what  we’d  call  in  the  United  States  a  trust  fund,  trust  account — there  is 
a  different  term  for  it  in  Australia — and  then  they  brought  in  professional  managers  and  they  were  able  to 
get  licensed  here,  probably  around  1992.  But  that  application  was  particularly  difficult  because  I  was  new 
on  the  Board  and  trying  to  do  a  board  member’s  job  plus  doing  the  chairman’s  job  was  rather  difficult. 
There  were  thousands  of  pages  of  documents,  and  there  were  probably,  I’m  guessing,  over  a  hundred 
exhibits  connected  with  the  thousands  of  pages  worth  of  what  we  call  “summaries.”  We  euphemistically 
call  the  write-up  of  the  investigations  the  “summary,”  but  they’re  typically  very,  very  long  and  involved 
and  detailed  and  complex,  especially  this  particular  application. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


179 


Did  you  find  that  every  year  or  so  there  would  be  one  or  two  cases  that  came  up  that  would  last,  not 
forever,  but  much  longer  than  usual? 

Right.  Y ou  know,  at  least  once  a  year,  sometimes  maybe  twice  a  year,  there  would  be  a  very 
contentious  application.  Typically,  the  toughest  ones  are  the  “tweeners.”  I  mean,  you’ve  got  a  number  of 
applications  where  the  guy  just  had  no  business  even  filing.  He  even  would  lie  on  his  application;  he 
wouldn’t  put  down  half  a  dozen  arrests;  he  hadn’t  filed  income  taxes;  or  the  income  tax  that  he  did  file 
was  phony.  And  so  those  are  fairly  clear.  This  guy  goes  away.  Sometimes  a  guy  doesn’t  know  any  better, 
or  doesn’t  have  the  proper  legal  advice,  and  so  he’ll  show  up  at  the  board  meeting  and  get  a  denial,  and 
there’s  a  stigma  to  being  a  denied  applicant.  It’s  one  thing  to  be  able  to  withdraw  so  that  you’re  not 
successful  getting  a  license,  but  if  you’re  a  denied  applicant,  you  cannot  do  business  with  any  gaming 
licensee  in  the  state  of  Nevada  without  prior  permission.  You  couldn’t  be  employed  by  a  casino,  and  you 
couldn’t  be  a  vendor  to  a  casino.  So  the  position  nobody  wants  to  get  into,  is  being  a  denied  applicant. 

You  may  not  be  successful,  but  it’s  ten  times  worse  to  be  a  denied  applicant.  Occasionally  these  guys 
would  not  understand  the  process  or  not  be  willing  to  take  the  advice  of  their  attorney,  and  they’d  just 
come  up  there  and  get  their  hat  handed  to  them. 

But,  as  you  point  out,  occasionally  there  are  these  “tweeners”  where  the  underlying  feel  is  that 
this  guy  doesn’t  have  the  business  probity  or  the  integrity  that’s  required  of  a  gaming  licensee,  yet  there’s 
no  silver  bullet  or  smoking  gun.  Some  of  his  past  business  practices,  while  they  might  not  be  illegal, 
there’s  just  a  whole  string  of  shady  deals  or  gray-area  shenanigans.  The  only  thing  the  Board  and 
Commission  have  to  go  on  is  past  practices  or  past  behavior  and  they  are  typically  indicative  of  your 
future  behavior.  If  a  guy  takes  too  many  shortcuts,  or  is  sailing  too  close  to  the  wind  all  the  time,  you 
probably  don’t  want  to  take  a  chance  on  him  because  the  reputation  of  the  state  and  the  whole  industry  is 
at  stake. 

I  have  heard  that  in  years  past  the  toughest  applicant  would  be  on  the  agenda  first.  Is  that  still  in  effect  to 
this  day? 

Correct.  It’s  either  the  one  that  has  the  most  problems  or  the  one  that’s  the  most  complex.  And  so 
generally,  the  lawyers  that  practice  in  the  gaming  field — the  gaming  lawyers — don’t  like  to  be  number 
one  or  two  or  three  on  the  agenda.  But  we  generally,  or  always,  explain  to  them  the  area  of  concerns. 
There’s  always  a  closing  conference  with  the  lawyer  and  the  applicant  and  the  investigators  to  say,  “Look, 
these  are  areas  of  concern  that  we  haven’t  fully  resolved,  so  these  are  issues  that  you’re  probably  going  to 
have  to  discuss  more  fully  at  the  Gaming  Control  Board  and  at  the  Commission.”  So  we  try  not  to 
blindside  these  guys  and  get  them  up  there  in  a  public  meeting  and  embarrass  them.  But  if  they’ve  had 
whatever  the  length  of  the  investigation  was — typically  if  it’s  a  big  investigation  it  will  last  a  year  or  so — 
they’ve  had  all  that  time  to  explain  any  area  of  concern  or  provide  any  exculpable  material  that  they  have. 
And  if  there  are  still  dangling  issues,  then  we  would  talk  about  it  at  a  public  meeting. 

Were  there  any  long-term  or  questionable  applications  you ’d  care  to  talk  about? 

We  had  an  application  where  a  partner  had  the  piece  of  property  where  Players  in  Mesquite  was 
built.  It’s  now  the  Casa  Blanca.  And  then  he  had  the  property  where  a  casino  in  Henderson  had  been  built. 
He  had  been  a  licensee  on  a  bar  several  years  before  he  got  heavily  involved  in  these  non-restricted 


180 


locations,  and  there  were  some  issues  with  the  Department  of  Labor  regarding  the  hiring  of  illegal  aliens 
and  then  not  paying  them  properly.  When  we  got  into  the  larger  investigation  for  the  non-restricted 
license,  we  came  across  a  very  large  kickback  scheme  involving  his  housing  development  company.  Then 
we  uncovered  what  appeared  to  be  about  six  hundred  thousand  dollars  that  he  had  stolen  from  his  partners 
and  not  reported  on  his  income  tax.  Also,  the  tax  return  for  one  of  his  corporations  had  been  prepared  by 
Arthur  Andersen  and  when  it  was  sent  over  for  his  signature,  he  and  his  attorney  had  used  white-out  on 
the  tax  return  and  changed  some  of  the  amounts  and  then  sent  it  in  as  if  it  were  prepared  and  approved  by 
Arthur  Andersen. 

Actually,  his  attorney  during  this  investigation,  Frank  Schreck,  who  is  one  of  the  better  gaming 
attorneys  in  the  state  of  Nevada,  had  been  doing  what  good  gaming  attorneys  will  do,  arguing  for  his 
client.  But  at  some  point,  Mr.  Schreck  became  convinced  that  his  client  hadn’t  been  forthcoming  with 
either  the  gaming  agents  or  with  him  and  resigned  his  representation,  which  is  pretty  unusual,  but  fairly 
stand-up  for  Mr.  Schreck.  So  now  this  individual  wanted  to  withdraw,  but  the  Board  would  not  grant  the 
withdrawal  request.  We  processed  the  application  and  denied  him.  He  did  not  appear  at  the  meeting,  but 
his  attorney  did,  his  in-house  counsel,  the  one  that  was  responsible  for  the  changing  of  the  tax  documents. 
And  we  denied  them  both,  and  reported  the  attorney  to  the  Bar  Association.  We  also  reported  this 
applicant  to  the  Internal  Revenue  Service.  They  went  over  there  with  search  warrants  and  seized  all  of  his 
documents,  so  that  was  an  interesting  little  turn  of  events. 

Another  difficult  applicant  was  Judah  Herz,  an  individual  involved  in  the  jewelry  business  out  of 
Los  Angeles.  Judah  Herz  was  the  CEO  of  Sapphire  Gaming  and  he  applied  to  purchase  the  Sands  in 
Reno,  the  Comstock  Hotel-Casino,  and  he  also  had  a  deal  with  the  Hilton  for  the  downtown  Flamingo 
Hilton.  He  did  all  the  right  things,  plus  he  hired  Frank  Schreck.  The  initial  review  of  his  books  would 
indicate  that  his  bookkeeping,  at  the  very  least,  was  sloppy,  and  at  the  worst  was  criminal,  [laughter]  So 
Frank  Schreck  did  what  he  could  to  rehabilitate  his  client  and  he  got  Arthur  Andersen  in  there  to  try  to 
reconstruct  the  books.  As  it  turned  out,  that  just  was  not  possible.  The  records  didn’t  exist,  they  couldn’t 
be  reconstructed,  and  Mr.  Herz  had  a  number  of  associations  that  probably  wouldn’t  have  passed  muster. 
It  became  obvious  that  he  was  not  going  to  be  successful,  and  he  opted  to  withdraw  his  application,  and 
when  the  Board  processed  that  up  it  resulted  in  him  being  denied. 

Would  you  explain  the  difference  between  a  person  being  denied  with  prejudice  or  without  prejudice? 

The  only  difference  is  that  “with  prejudice”  means  that  you  can’t  refile  for  one  year.  That’s  really 
the  only  distinction.  The  same  thing  with  a  withdrawal  with  prejudice  or  without  prejudice.  If  somebody 
is  granted  a  withdrawal  with  prejudice  it  means  that  they  have  to  wait  one  year  before  they  refile.  That’s 
the  same  with  a  denial.  You’re  still  denied. 

Did  Mr.  Herz ’s  investigation  last  for  at  least  a  year? 

Probably  longer;  it  was  a  pretty  extensive  investigation.  And  when  you  don’t  have  the  records,  it 
makes  it  much  more  difficult.  The  agents  have  to  go  to  the  banks  and  try  to  reconstruct  the  records,  but  if 
they’re  not  there  then  it’s  an  impossible  task. 

Would  you  give  me  a  ballpark  figure  of  how  much  it  costs  an  applicant  to  have  such  a  lengthy 
investigation? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


181 


The  Gaming  Control  Board  charges  the  same  hourly  rate  that  we  pay  our  agents,  and  we  have  just 
raised  that  rate.  We’re  still  not  the  highest  in  the  country,  but  we  have  raised  it.  For  a  number  of  years  we 
were  one  of  the  lowest.  We  were  billing  at  fifty  dollars  an  hour,  or  something  around  that  neighborhood, 
and  I  think  they’re  up  to  seventy  dollars  an  hour  now.  And  we  bill  them  dollar-for-dollar  for  travel 
expenses  and  per  diem  and  things  like  that.  While  some  of  these  investigations  can  run  into  the  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  dollars  that  the  applicant  has  to  pay  to  the  state,  the  bigger  expense  would  be  to  their 
professional  advisors:  their  lawyers  and  their  accountants  developing  documents  on  their  own.  If  we  tell 
the  applicant,  “Send  me  five  years  worth  of  your  income  tax,  or  send  me  five  years  worth  of  your  check 
stubs,”  if  they  can  just  go  make  copies  and  send  it  off,  then  that  reduces  the  cost.  If  they  say,  “1  don’t 
have  it,  1  can’t  find  it,”  and  if  our  agents  have  to  go  to  the  hank  and  have  the  hank  make  copies,  then 
obviously  that  is  an  extra  added  expense.  So  the  better  the  applicant’s  records  are,  and  the  quicker  he  can 
provide  that  information,  the  cheaper  it  is  to  him.  However,  generally,  on  some  of  these  more  drawn-out 
investigations,  their  professional  expenses  will  outrun  our  expenses  by  two-to-one,  sometimes  three-to- 
one.  So  if  we  end  up  billing  somebody  three  hundred  thousand  dollars,  he’s  probably  in  it  another  million 
in  professional  expenses.  1  know  probably  one  of  the  more  expensive  ones  was  the  Dunes.  At  the  Dunes, 
Mr.  Nangaku’s  investigation  ran  close  to  a  million  dollars.  He  had  over  a  thousand  corporations  in  Japan, 
and  our  agents  had  to  go  track  down  all  of  these  various  coiporations  and  so  it  got  to  be  pretty 
complicated. 

Did  some  of  those  agents  have  to  spend  weeks  in  Japan? 

Yes,  they  did.  They  actually  spent  months.  The  Japanese  government,  actually  the  entire  Japanese 
culture,  is  very  private  and  they  don’t  like  to  share  this  kind  of  financial  information.  To  ask  your 
business  associates  to  open  up  their  books  goes  against  the  grain  of  their  culture.  And  actually,  Japanese 
law  enforcement  was  reluctant  to  share  a  lot  of  information  with  us.  So  we  really  had  to  work  hard  to 
develop  these  liaisons  and  to  try  to  coax  out  this  information. 

What  was  the  result  of  his  purchase  of  the  Dunes?  Was  it  a  good  situation? 

No,  it  was  losing  money,  and  he  brought  in  a  number  of  operators  to  try  to  salvage  it,  but  it  ended 
up  when  his  health  started  to  fail.  He  then  brought  in  Richard  Goeglein’s  company  to  wind  it  down,  and 
then  they  sold  it  to  Steve  [Wynn], 

You  were  still  on  the  Board  during  what  was  possibly  the  most  embarrassing  happening  in  gaming 
regulation  history,  the  defection  of  gaming  agent  Ron  Harris.  Would  you  tell  us  about  Ron  Harris  and 
how  he  attempted  to  beat  the  system? 

Well,  part  of  the  function  of  the  gaming  lab  is  to  try  to  reverse  engineer  gaming  devices  to  see  if 
they’re  susceptible  to  being  cheated. 

Was  that  where  Ron  Harris  worked? 


Yes,  he  worked  in  the  lab,  and  he  was  an  engineer.  He  was  pretty  good  at  detecting  the  security  of 


182 


gaming  devices.  Cheaters  sometimes  develop  methods  to  cheat  gaming  devices,  and  there  was  one 
gentleman  by  the  name  of  [Leo]  Weeks  who  had  an  electronic  instrument  that  would  anticipate  the 
number  generator  and  predict  outcome  of  video  poker  devices.  Mr.  Weeks  was  fairly  successful  in 
cheating  slot  machines,  but  he  was  an  engineer,  not  a  career  criminal.  So  while  he  was  pretty  adept  at 
developing  this  device,  he  was  not  a  very  good  crook  and  we  were  able  to  catch  him  early  in  his  criminal 
career.  Now,  Ron  Harris  was  able  to  reverse  engineer  this  device  and  determine  just  exactly  how  Weeks 
had  done  it.  What  Ron  Harris  had  done  for  a  large  portion  of  his  career,  was  to  figure  out  how  to  cheat 
machines  and  figure  out  how  the  cheaters  were  cheating  machines.  And  so  apparently  at  some  point, 
Harris  determined  a  weakness  in  a  keno  device — the  random-number  generator — and  was  able  to  cheat 
the  system.  But,  again,  he  was  a  very  poor  criminal  and  got  caught  on  what  we  think  was  his  first  outing 
on  this  particular  device  located  in  Atlantic  City. 

Then  our  lab  and  our  enforcement  agents  were  able  to  uncover  another  cheating  program  that  he 
had,  a  pretty  ingenious  cheating  scheme  where  he  introduced  some  gaffs,  or  cheating  programs,  in  a 
number  of  slot  machines  throughout  the  state.  He  had  these  gaffs  inserted  on  the  machines  by  some 
unknowing  agent  and  Ron,  or  one  of  his  accomplices,  later  on  would  come  around  and  cheat  that 
particular  machine.  If  anyone  were  to  be  suspicious  that  this  machine  wasn’t  holding  what  it  should  be, 
they  sent  gaming  agents  out  to  retest  it,  and  upon  hooking  up  the  computer  again,  it  would  erase  the  gaff. 
So  it  was  a  pretty  ingenious  little  program.  But,  again,  there  was  a  paper  trail.  His  relatives  and  friends 
would  collect  these  jackpots,  and  so  there  would  be  these  W-2  G  payouts  on  these  slot  machines,  so  we 
were  able  to  track  them. 

Now,  the  embarrassment  got  exacerbated  because  the  investigation  dragged  on.  The  Gaming 
Control  Board  had  done  a  pretty  thorough  investigation  with  the  lab  and  the  enforcement  division,  and 
had  sent  the  case  report  to  the  office  of  the  attorney  general,  who  was  going  to  prosecute  the  case,  and 
then  the  case  kind  of  languished  there  for  quite  some  time.  There  were  a  number  of  letters  back  and  forth 
between  Chairman  Bible  and  the  attorney  general,  Frankie  Sue  Del  Papa,  with  Mr.  Bible  requesting  some 
kind  of  resolution  to  the  case.  Then  at  some  point,  Mr.  Harris  decided  that  he  would  cop  a  plea  and 
provide  testimony  or  evidence  to  the  attorney  general’s  office  on  other  wrongdoing.  So  there  were  a  series 
of  video  tapes  made  where  one  or  more  deputy  attorney  generals  debriefed  Mr.  Harris,  and  1  believe  the 
lead  attorney  general  was  a  gentleman  by  the  name  of  David  Thompson.  Over  the  course  of  the  eight  to 
twelve  hours  of  these  interviews  that  were  videotaped,  Harris  alleged  all  kinds  of  criminality  afoot, 
skullduggery,  and  sinister  activity  on  the  part  of  board  members  and  board  agents  and  people  in  the 
gaming  lab.  He  alleged  suitcases  full  of  money  were  being  given  to  the  gaming  board  chairman  from 
gaming  attorneys,  that  other  people  in  the  lab  were  rigging  slot  machines,  and  just  a  whole  litany  of 
wrongdoing.  Well,  at  some  point,  a  reporter  for  a  national  TV  news  magazine — 1  believe  it  was  the  ABC- 
TV  news  show  Prime  Time  Live — had  requested  an  interview  with  Chairman  Bible,  allegedly  to  discuss 
some  segment  of  the  gaming  industry  at  an  interview  in  the  control  board  offices. 

Without  any  notice  this  investigative  reporter  pulls  out  a  small  television  and  shows  Chairman 
Bible  a  portion  of  the  Ron  Harris  tape,  where  Ron  Harris  is  alleging  criminal  activity  on  part  of  the  Board. 

And  Chairman  Bible  was  not  aware  of  those  tapes? 

No.  We  later  discovered  the  existence  of  these  tapes,  and  we  called  the  attorney  general  and  said, 
“We’d  like  to  see  these  tapes.” 

She  said,  “No,  I’m  not  going  to  show  them  to  you.”  She  said,  “It’s  an  ongoing  investigation.” 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


183 


Well,  it  was  later  determined  that  Bill  Bible  had  said,  “If  we  can’t  see  them,  how  come  Prime 
Time  can  see  them?” 

She  then  disavowed  any  knowledge  of  how  ABC-TV  got  the  tapes,  but  later  the  explanation  was 
that  they  shared  those  tapes  with  the  division  of  gaming  enforcement  in  New  Jersey,  who  had  initiated  the 
case  on  Ron  Harris,  and  that  they  believed  that  those  tapes  had  been  leaked  by  the  New  Jersey  people  to 
Prime  Time.  But  in  any  event,  the  investigation  drags  on  and  on  and  on,  and  there  are  these  allegations 
that  board  members  are  corrupt,  and  that  members  of  the  lab  are  corrupt. 

Now,  during  this  period  of  time,  the  chief  of  the  lab  division,  Ed  Allen,  had  retired  and  we’re 
trying  to  appoint  a  new  lab  chief,  but  there’s  this  cloud  of  suspicion  hanging  over  everybody  in  the  lab 
because  the  attorney  general’s  office  won’t  share  their  information  with  us.  It  caused  a  lot  of  ill  feelings 
between  the  two  agencies,  and  we  said,  “Close  these  cases  or  exonerate  these  people,  or  do  whatever  you 
want  to  do,  but  we’ve  got  to  move  forward.”  Most  of  the  allegations  were  just  hearsay  and  rumor  and 
gossip,  and  a  number  of  them  had  already  been  investigated  and  put  to  bed,  but  this  was  just  festering 
there.  Finally,  Mr.  Thompson  issued  a  letter  saying  that  the  investigation  is  closed:  “1  can’t  prove  or 
disprove  these  allegations,  but  we’re  closing  it  out.”  So  it  was  not  a  pleasant  time.  Now  you’ve  got  the 
guys  that  are  supposed  to  be  watching  the  gaming  industry  under  suspicion  as  well  as  the  industry,  and  so 
it  was  not  helpful  to  the  state.  One  of  the  allegations  was  that  there  was  a  secret  room  in  IGT’s  main 
office  that  could  control  how  MegaBucks  is  paid  out,  and  that’s  why  every  time  Steve  Wynn  opened  a 
new  property  the  MegaBucks  was  hit  there  first.  But  they  didn’t  take  into  consideration  that  the  Wynn 
properties  had  the  largest  percentage  of  MegaBucks  machines  in  the  state.  However,  when  he  did  open 
the  Bellagio  we  were  all  keeping  our  fingers  crossed  that  the  damn  thing  didn’t  hit  at  the  Bellagio  the  first 
day.  [laughter] 

[laughter]  I  guess  it  didn ’t,  right? 

It  did  not. 

Do  you  feel  that  most  of  the  bad  publicity  resulting  from  that  problem  has  been  overcome,  and  that  the 
public  now  has  confidence  in  the  Nevada  regulatory  system  ? 

1  would  hope  so.  1  mean,  we  did  what  we  had  to  do.  Any  company  is  very  vulnerable  to  employee 
theft  or  employee  misconduct.  And  we  do  pretty  extensive  background  checks,  but  anybody’s  most 
vulnerable  to  the  people  that  they  trust  the  most.  However,  we  did  implement  some  changes  after  that.  We 
had  Sandia  Labs  come  up  and  do  an  audit  of  our  lab  and  make  recommendations  on  how  to  segregate  the 
work.  The  problem  with  the  gaming  devices  at  the  time  was  when  you  wrote  a  program,  your  program 
might  take  up  30,  40,  50,  80  percent  of  the  available  space,  but  there  was  blank  space  in  that  EPROM,  and 
so  somebody  could  come  in  there  and  stick  a  gaff  in  the  unused  space.  Now,  we  require  that  they  use  up 
all  that  space  with  just  nonsense  or  whatever,  so  that  no  one  can  add  anything  to  the  program. 

That's  a  good  example  of  how  gaming  regulators  have  the  capability  to  change. 

1  think  gaming  regulators — the  Board  and  the  Commission — are  open  to  change,  but  they’re 
conservative  by  nature,  and  they  want  to  make  sure  that  this  particular  approval  is  not  going  to  lead  to 
something  else  that’s  going  to  be  catastrophic  to  the  industry.  Gaming  regulators  are  taught  to  think  in  the 


184 


box.  They  think  inside  the  Gaming  Control  Act  and  inside  the  regulations:  this  is  what’s  allowed,  this  is 
what’s  not  allowed,  this  is  what  we  can  do.  You’ve  got  over  three  thousand  licensees,  and  some  of  these 
guys  are  the  best  and  brightest  on  Wall  Street  and  the  best  and  brightest  in  Nevada,  and  they’re  thinking 
outside  the  box:  “How  can  we  do  something  different?”  And  so  they  bring  these  new  ideas  to  these 
regulators  and  say,  “We’ve  got  a  great  idea.” 

“OK,  let  me  hear  about  it,  but  what’s  the  down  side?  If  1  allow  this,  what  will  that  open  the  door 
for  over  on  the  other  side?  And  while  1  trust  this  guy,  there  are  maybe  some  guys  sailing  close  to  the  wind 
that  1  don’t  know  about  and  they  might  take  advantage  of  this  to  the  detriment  of  the  state  or  the 
industry.”  So  1  think  regulators  want  to  consider  change,  but  they’re  conservative  by  nature  and  they  don’t 
want  to  open  up  Pandora’s  box. 

Have  the  differences  between  the  attorney  general ’s  office  and  the  Control  Board  been  settled? 

Yes.  And,  as  you  know,  there  are  eight  deputies  that  are  assigned  to  the  Gaming  Board  and  the 
Commission  from  the  attorney  general’s  office  that  are  actually  their  legal  counsel,  and  there  never  was  a 
problem  there.  Those  deputy  A.G.s  we  worked  with  on  a  daily  basis;  they  were  all  very  good,  very 
hardworking.  Our  bust-up  was  with  Frankie  Sue  Del  Papa  and  Mr.  Thompson,  and  1  don’t  know  whether 
they  have  ever  resolved  their  differences.  I  think  they  have.  But  actually,  Frankie  Sue  and  1  have  been 
friends  for  many,  many  years,  and,  you  know,  she’s  entitled  to  her  opinion,  [laughter] 

Did  you  experience  any  difficulty,  or  was  there  a  great  deal  of  change  when  you  moved  from  being  a 
board  member  to  becoming  a  chairman? 

Well,  yes.  It’s  hard  to  be  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  because  you  have  so  many 
balls  in  the  air.  Y ou  have  a  hundred  and  thirty -four  employees,  a  twenty-five-to-thirty-million-dollar 
budget,  plus  all  the  licensing  issues.  But  it  was  doubly  tough  for  me  because  1  was  following  Bill  Bible, 
who  was  probably  one  of  the  best  chairmen  the  Gaming  Control  Board  ever  had.  This  man  has  an 
incredible  intellect,  an  incredible  memory,  an  incredible  work  ethic.  He  is  the  epitome  of  a  government 
service  worker.  And  to  follow  an  act  like  that  was  very,  very  difficult.  But  on  the  flip  side,  he  had  a  pretty 
good  organization  in  place  and  the  momentum  was  going  forward.  We  had  a  few  little  minor  problems 
that  every  agency  that  size  has:  personnel  issues  and  things  of  that  nature,  budget  issues.  But  it  wasn’t  like 
1  had  to  come  in  and  clean  house.  It  was  a  pretty  good  organization.  He  and  1  had  worked  together  for 
eight  years.  We  had  an  excellent  working  relationship,  and  I  knew  the  process  going  in.  And  while  1  did 
have  some  reservations  about  taking  on  the  responsibility,  it’s  like  anything  else:  once  you’re  in  there  and 
you  get  to  doing  it,  it  becomes  easier. 

Do  you  recall  the  budget  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  when  you  retired? 

The  budget  for  the  last  year  1  was  there  was  approximately  twenty-seven  million  dollars.  That  had 
increased  over  the  ten  years  from  when  1  started  at  approximately  eighteen  million  to  the  twenty-seven- 
million-dollar  figure.  The  following  year  it  was  going  to  increase  another  four  million  because  we  had 
received  approval  from  the  governor  to  increase  the  investigative  fees  and  some  of  the  other  pass-through 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


185 


fees  to  the  gaming  industry  in  order  to  give  the  agents  a  raise.  The  agents  had  been  losing  ground  to  other 
state  agencies  and  other  state  law  enforcement  agencies  over  the  ten  years  to  the  point  where  we  were 
losing  a  considerable  amount  of  institutional  knowledge  to  other  law  enforcement  agencies,  other  state 
agencies,  and  to  the  industry,  just  because  we  couldn’t  match  their  benefits  and  salaries. 

What  was  your  salary  when  you  left  the  Board? 

1  believe  my  last  salary  was  a  hundred  and  seven  thousand.  The  pay  raise  that  we  got  the 
governor  to  approve,  which  was  a  pretty  good  kicker  for  the  agents,  1  believe  in  the  range  of  14  percent, 
did  not  include  the  board  members.  1  think  the  board  members  themselves  got  whatever  the  state  increase 
was,  which  was  four  percent,  or  something  of  that  nature.  But  the  governor  had  allowed  us  to  build  into 
our  budget  these  pass-throughs  in  order  to  give  the  agents  an  extra  boost  to  at  least  get  close  to  some  of 
the  other  agencies. 

I’ve  heard  that  oftentimes  the  chairman  of  the  board  will  work  eighty  to  a  hundred  and  twenty  hours  a 
week. 


Now,  you’re  talking  about  Bill  Bible  there. 

Oh.  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

How  many  hours  a  week  did  you  work? 

Well,  all  board  members  have  to  do  their  reading  once  a  month  for  the  monthly  meeting.  On  the 
week  before  the  board  meeting,  you  start  getting  what  we  discussed  earlier,  these  summaries.  The 
secretaries  put  them  in  these  big,  huge  eight-inch  binders  that  have  handles  on  them,  and  you  have 
literally  thousands  of  pages  of  documents  to  read.  Board  members  will  generally  try  to  get  out  of  the 
office  Thursday  afternoon  and  Friday  afternoon  to  start  their  reading,  and  then  they  read  all  through  the 
weekend,  and  typically  will  stay  home  on  Monday  to  read.  Then  on  Tuesday  morning  they  meet  with  the 
agents  for  what  they  call  the  “rump  session,”  where  they  ask  any  follow-up  questions  there  may  be  on 
each  one  of  the  items.  So  it  is  literally  like  cramming  for  finals  once  a  month. 

[laughter] 

1  know  when  1  first  started  on  the  Board  1  didn’t  have  any  institutional  knowledge  or  any 
institutional  memory,  and  so  an  application  that  came  up  may  have  been  heard  a  couple  of  times,  so  it 
would  have  the  application,  plus  maybe  two  hundred  pages  of  old  transcripts  from  previous  meetings.  So 
1  would  have  to  read  all  of  those  old  transcripts  to  get  up  to  speed  on  that  particular  application.  But  after  1 
had  been  there  ten  years,  those  old  transcripts  were  things  that  involved  me.  And  so  while  1  may  have  had 
to  go  back  and  refresh  my  memory,  most  of  that  stuff  1  already  knew. 

And  when  you’re  first  on  the  Board,  all  of  it  is  first  impression.  Now,  you’re  looking  at  it  and 
maybe  the  agents  will  isolate  some  kind  of  an  issue,  and  you  run  to  the  Gaming  Control  Act  and  say, 


186 


“How  does  this  comport  with  463.0129,  or  how  does  this  comport  with  the  multiple-licensing  criteria?” 

So  you’re  in  there  doing  legal  research.  My  first  year  on  the  Board  1  was  totally  swamped.  1  mean,  1  could 
not  believe  how  much  work  there  was.  1  figured  if  I  penciled  it  out  at  an  hourly  rate,  they  were  probably 
paying  me  less  than  minimum  wage. 

But  it  gets  easier  over  time.  You  get  more  familiar  with  the  issues,  and  you  build  on  your  past 
knowledge  and  your  past  experience.  And  so  it  did  get  easier.  Now,  when  1  made  the  switch-over  from 
board  member  to  chairman,  I’m  not  only  worrying  about  one  division,  I’ve  got  all  seven  divisions;  I’ve 
got  the  budget;  I’ve  got  personnel  issues.  It  does  present  a  lot  more  problems.  Plus,  everybody  in  the 
industry,  all  the  licensees  and  all  the  attorneys,  they  want  to  come  and  do  these  face-to-face  meetings, 
here’s  what  we’re  planning  to  do,  or  they  want  to  call  you  and  tell  you  we’re  going  to  make  this 
announcement  next  week,  don’t  want  to  catch  you  short.  So  you  spend  a  lot  of  time  in  face-to-face 
meetings,  or  with  telephone  calls  from  people  in  the  industry.  So  being  the  chairman  is  probably  twice  as 
tough  as  being  a  board  member,  and  being  a  board  member  is  hard  enough. 

[laughter]  And  you  also  had  the  press  to  contend  with. 

Y es,  we  were  pretty  lucky,  we  had  a  good  relationship  with  the  press.  I  think  all  of  the  board 
members  were  accessible  to  the  press.  We  knew  the  reporters  that  covered  the  gaming  industry,  and  just 
like  anything  else,  if  you’re  candid  with  these  guys  and  they  trust  you,  then  they’re  not  trying  to  take  your 
legs  out  from  under  you.  If  you  get  crossways  with  them  then  you’re  dead.  And  so  we  were  pretty  lucky, 
but  occasionally  they’d  write  a  story  that  portrayed  you  in  an  unfavorable  light.  I  remember  one  year  all 
three  of  us  went  to  Montreal  to  go  to  a  gaming  conference  with  the  International  Association  of  Gaming 
Attorneys,  but  it  also  has  a  brother  organization,  the  International  Association  of  Gaming  Regulators.  And 
even  though  the  three  of  us  took  vacation  time  and  paid  for  our  own  way — didn’t  charge  the  state  for  it — 
John  Smith,  one  of  the  local  columnists,  wrote  an  article  on  what  the  hell  we  were  doing  off  on  this 
boondoggle. 

And  it  kind  of  grated  on  you  a  little  bit.  And  so  I  still  tease  John  about  that  one,  and  [laughter] 
he’s  still  sticking  to  his  guns.  But  generally,  the  press  was  pretty  good  to  us. 

Have  you  ever  talked  to  board  members  or  chairmen  that  worked  for  the  Board  in  the  1960s  or  1970s  and 
1980s  and  compared  your  workload,  or  compared  job  similarities  or  dissimilarities? 

No.  You  know,  I  have  been  in  social  settings  with  Phil  Hannifin,  Bart  Jacka,  and,  obviously, 

Mike  Rumbolz,  but  those  were  not  substantive  meetings. 

You  didn ’t  discuss  work? 

Well,  you’d  discuss  old  war  stories  or  this  catastrophe  or  this  potential  nightmare,  or  this,  that, 
and  the  other,  but  generally,  you  tend  to  rag  on  somebody  that  voted  affirmatively  for  somebody  that 
turned  out  to  be  a  thug,  [laughter]  Y ou  try  to  rub  his  nose  in  that  one,  and  not  let  him  forget  it. 

1  would  assume  that  the  workload  has  increased.  There  are  so  many  different  fields  to  look  into  than  there 
used  to  be. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


187 


You  would  think  that,  but  actually,  at  least  for  me,  it  had  fallen  off.  And  I’ll  tell  you  why.  Starting 
with  Bill  Bible  in  1989,  you  began  to  get  a  little  more  longevity  from  the  board  members.  And  it  probably 
had  to  do  with  the  passing  of  the  Patty  Becker  bill,  which  said  that  you  couldn’t  go  straight  from  the 
Board  into  the  industry;  you  had  to  have  a  cooling-off  period  of  one  year.  So  1  think  that  started  probably 
with  Bill  Bible  and  anybody  after  him.  There  was  more  turnover  beforehand;  more  of  the  board  members 
left  before  their  term  was  up  or  only  did  one  term.  And  Bill,  he  ended  up  doing  just  short  of  ten  years; 

Tom  Roche  did  four;  1  think  Brian  Harris  probably  did  five  or  six;  1  did  ten.  And  so  you’re  seeing  more 
longevity  in  the  board  members,  and  they  have  more  institutional  knowledge  and  memory.  The  first  day  1 
walked  in  1  didn’t  know  a  progressive  from  a  roulette  wheel  practically.  And  towards  the  end  you’re 
familiar  with  issues.  Something  you  might  spend  two  or  three  hours  worrying  about  early  in  your  career, 
now  you  already  know  the  answer  because  you’ve  done  it  already,  or  you’ve  looked  at  it  already,  or  a 
certain  kind  of  a  financing  arrangement  you’ve  seen  before,  you’re  comfortable  with  it,  and  you  don’t 
have  to  dissect  it  like  you  did  originally.  The  first  part  of  the  1990s  it  seemed  like  our  meetings  would  last 
into  the  night — eight,  nine  o’clock  at  night  two  days  in  a  row.  But  when  1  left  we  were  getting  most  of  our 
meetings  done  in  the  afternoon  or  around  lunchtime,  because  we  were  looking  at  things  that  we  were 
familiar  with  and  were  comfortable  with. 

Does  the  number  of  corporations  currently  applying  make  a  difference  also? 

Yes.  You’ve  got  these  billion-dollar,  publicly-traded  corporations  that  have  literally  billions 
invested  in  the  state  of  Nevada  and  they’re  not  going  to  take  a  nickel-and-dime  chance  on  their  license. 
Actually,  they  bend  the  other  away.  They’d  rather  spend  money  being  on  the  safe  side  than  risk  it. 

During  your  tenure,  some  billion-dollar  properties,  such  as  the  Bellagio,  the  Paris,  and  the  Venetian  were 
licensed.  Do  you  feel  eventually  these  immense  hotel-casinos  will  force  many  smaller  properties  out  of 
business,  or  have  they  already  done  that? 

Well,  they’re  definitely  making  it  more  difficult  for  the  marginal  properties.  And  1  think  a 
downturn  in  the  economy  would  probably  be  catastrophic  to  some  of  the  lower-end,  third-tier  properties 
just  because  there’s  so  much  volume  now.  All  of  the  major  properties  are  twenty-five  hundred,  three 
thousand  rooms.  They’ve  got  huge  amounts  of  tables  and  slot  machines.  You’ve  got  to  run  a  lot  of  people 
through  there  in  order  to  make  your  overhead.  And  if  you  hit  a  slump  to  where  Joe  Six-Pack  is  not 
traveling,  then  the  lower-end  properties  are  going  to  suffer  most.  Probably  the  high-end  properties  that 
cater  to  the  more  affluent  people,  their  customers  may  be  tightening  up  a  notch,  but  they’re  still  going  to 
have  disposable  income  to  travel  and  they’re  obviously  going  to  want  to  go  to  the  shiniest,  newest,  most 
glamorous  property. 

What  do  you  feel  are  the  major  challenges  currently  facing  the  gaming  industry  in  the  state  of  Nevada? 

Well,  1  think  the  expansion  of  tribal  gaming  in  California  is  eventually  going  to  have  an  impact 
on  Nevada — specifically  Reno,  but  to  a  certain  extent,  southern  Nevada,  too.  Gary  Primm  made  a  nice 
living  for  a  number  of  years  being  fifty  miles  closer  to  California  than  Las  Vegas.  Those  properties  down 
at  Stateline  or  Primm  did  fairly  well.  So  if  you  get  properties  in  California  that  have  the  amenities  that 
some  Las  Vegas  properties  have,  people  are  going  to  forego  one  or  two  trips  a  year  to  Las  Vegas  and  go 


188 


to  their  neighborhood  casino.  Michael  Gaughan  and  the  Station’s  people  have  made  a  nice  living  because 
they’re  closer  to  the  neighborhoods  and  they  get  the  locals  market.  People  don’t  have  to  get  in  their  car 
and  drive  down  to  the  Strip  to  gamble.  The  expansion  of  California  tribal  gaming  is  going  to  be  a  big 
issue  as  soon  as  they  get  up  and  running  full-bore. 

Do  you  feel  that  internet  gambling  will  be  a  threat  to  Nevada  casinos? 

Well,  that  depends,  [laughter]  It  depends  on  whether  it’s  legal  or  not.  1  believe  there’s  a  huge 
market  for  internet  gaming,  but  1  don’t  think  it’s  good  public  policy.  All  of  the  negative  sides  of  gaming 
are  exacerbated  by  internet  gaming.  People  that  are  compulsive  gamblers  would  obviously  avail 
themselves  of  this  type  of  gaming.  And  while  our  gaming  companies  like  to  tout  gaming  as  another  form 
of  entertainment,  the  fact  is  that  somebody  who  sits  around  in  their  housecoat  and  their  bunny  slippers 
and  loses  their  money  via  their  credit  card  on  their  computer  doesn’t  seem  to  me  to  be  embracing  the 
entertainment  spirit  that  some  of  these  companies  espouse.  Now,  1  would  think  that  there  would  be  a 
place  for  sports  wagering  or  horse  wagering  on  the  internet,  not  dissimilar  to  how  Nevada  has  allowed 
telephone  accounts.  However,  just  like  anything  else,  if  one  legitimate  company  does  it,  and  it’s  legal,  1 
think  the  other  companies  would  have  to  do  it  just  because  they  have  a  duty  to  their  shareholders  to 
maximize  shareholder  value.  And  so  these  operators  may  think  like  1  do,  that  it’s  not  particularly  a  good 
idea  but  they’re  going  to  have  to  go  for  it  just  like  everybody  else.  So  it  all  depends  on  what  the  state  of 
the  law  is.  We  had  a  number  of  companies  look  into  this  when  Australia  legalized  internet  gaming.  And 
they  came  to  the  Board  and  said,  “Look,  we’re  thinking  about  doing  it.” 

The  Board  told  them,  “Well,  if  you’re  licensed  in  a  jurisdiction  where  it’s  legal  and  you’re 
conducting  business  legally,  1  guess  there’s  no  way  we  can  stop  you.”  But  there  are  so  many  unknowns. 
How  do  you  prevent  somebody  from  a  jurisdiction  where  it’s  not  permitted  to  access  your  site?  How  do 
you  prevent  minors  from  accessing  your  site?  How  do  you  know  if  some  compulsive  gambler  is  losing 
their  life  savings?  And  some  of  them  said,  “Well,  we  have  safeguards.”  Some  of  them  said,  “We  don’t 
care.” 

And  our  response  was,  “Do  it  at  your  own  peril.  We’re  going  to  test  you,  and  you’d  better  be  on 
the  up  and  up.”  Generally  we  were  able  to  defeat  their  systems  and  get  in  and  gamble  from  jurisdictions 
where  it  was  not  legal.  And  so  most  all  of  them  had  to  back  out  of  it.  The  technology  is  just  not  there  to 
protect  the  citizens  and  the  industry  from  illegal  activity. 

So  internet  gambling  isn ’t  legal  in  the  United  States  anywhere? 

Well,  1  don’t  know  that  you’ll  get  anybody  to  say  that.  It’s  believed  that  it’s  not  legal.  The  justice 
department  believes  that  the  current  Wire  Act  prevents  it;  however,  they  won’t  give  you  a  letter  saying 
that.  And  so  legitimate  companies  are  reluctant  to  spend  money  to  get  up  and  running,  because  they  don’t 
whether  the  federal  government  will  come  down  on  them  like  a  ton  of  bricks,  or  whether  some  attorney 
general  out  of  one  of  these  states  will  indict  them  for  exposing  gaming  to  their  citizens.  So  there’s  such  a 
cloud  over  the  whole  issue  that  no  legitimate  company  can  risk  their  license  doing  it.  That’s  why  you 
have  all  these  off-shore  or  these  fly-by-night  companies.  1  mean,  you  can  get  on  the  computer  right  now 
and  make  a  bet  on  probably  twenty,  thirty,  forty  sites,  but  they’re  all  off-shore. 


And,  of  course,  there ’s  no  way  of  knowing  how  many  people  from  Nevada  or  New  Jersey  or  Mississippi 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


189 


or  anywhere  are  playing  on  the  internet. 

Right.  A  number  of  states  have  enacted  legislation  to  prohibit  the  use  of  credit  cards  at  these 
internet  sites.  But  you  can  wire  transfer  money,  or  FedEx  money,  or  do  whatever  you  have  to  do. 

Within  the  last  year  there  were  concerted  efforts  to  eliminate  wagering  on  college  sporting  events.  Do  you 
think  that  will  ever  happen? 

Well,  you  never  know.  They  had  a  pretty  good  following,  and  it  looked  like  that  bill  was  going  to 
get  passed.  1  think  there  was  some  arm  twisting  by  Harry  Reid,  Dick  Bryan,  our  congressional  delegation, 
and  Frank  Fahrenkopf  that  got  that  thing  killed.  But  it  had  some  momentum  for  a  while,  and  it  looked  like 
they  might  get  that  on,  which  1  thought  was  very  hypocritical.  Almost  every  newspaper  in  the  country 
carries  the  sports  scores,  and  there’s  a  hundred  billion  dollars,  or  whatever  number  you  want  to  pick  out 
of  the  air,  being  wagered  illegally  every  week  on  these  college  games.  Local  law  enforcement  and  the  FBI 
would  treat  it  with  a  wink  and  a  nod.  It  is  not  a  high-priority  crime  for  them.  All  they  wanted  to  do  was 
pull  the  plug  on  Nevada. 

Did  it  ever  come  to  a  vote? 

No,  it  didn’t.  It  disappeared.  They  had  a  lot  of  support.  1  think  if  it  would  have  come  to  vote  we 
would  have  lost.  So,  again,  I  don’t  know  what  they  did,  but  they  deserve  credit  for  it. 

Do  you  believe  that  it  would  have  posed  a  serious  problem  for  Nevada  gaming  if  it  would  have  passed? 

Not  really.  It’s  only  a  small  portion  of  the  revenue;  however,  it  generates  a  lot  of  interest  and 
excitement.  But  while  the  revenues  are  not  big,  the  people,  just  going  to  the  casinos,  while  they’re  there 
making  their  sports  bet,  may  do  something  else.  It’s  just  part  of  the  whole  entertainment  package, 
[laughter]  It’s  not  a  big  deal  to  the  bottom  line  itself;  it’s  just  what  it’s  attached  to. 

Do  you  feel  that  it  is  important  for  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Board  and  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming 
Commission  to  have  a  good  working  relationship? 

[laughter]  Well,  there’s  always  the  good-natured  rivalry  between  the  Board  and  the  Commission. 
And  1  think  you  know,  Shannon  Bybee  had  a  saying  that  he  may  have  shared  with  you:  “The  Board 
dispenses  justice  and  the  Commission  dispenses  mercy.”  So  generally  a  couple  of  times  a  year  the 
Commission  will  overturn  the  Board’s  recommendation.  A  lot  of  times  it  happens  in  the  area  of  work 
cards,  where  they’ll  be  more  generous  than  the  Board  thinks  is  necessary,  but  over  the  years,  it  all  has  to 
do  with  the  personality  of  the  individual  chairman.  1  mean,  you’ll  have  a  commission  chairman  who  just 
loves  to  tweak  things  and  give  it  his  own  little  personal  touch.  And  sometimes  if  the  board  chairman  is  a 
strong  personality,  that’ll  just  irk  him  no  end,  and  so  there  will  be,  hopefully,  good-natured  ribbing  back 
and  forth.  But  generally  I  know  in  my  tenure,  the  commission  chairmen  were  very  easy  to  get  along  with. 

1  had  worked  with  Bill  Curran  for  years  when  he  was  with  the  district  attorney’s  office.  1  didn’t  know 
Brian  Sandoval  before  he  came  on  the  Commission,  but  he’s  a  very  bright,  hard-working  young  man,  and 
we  got  along  fine.  But  1  do  know  over  the  years  there  have  been  little  rivalries  between  the  Board  and  the 


190 


Commission.  And  as  a  matter  of  fact,  Jerry  Cunningham  was  so  mad  at  the  Commission  he  refused  to  go 
to  a  commission  meeting  for  three  years.  But  on  the  flip  side,  when  Jerry  retired,  John  O’Reilly,  the 
chairman  of  the  Commission,  threw  a  big  going -away  party  for  Jerry  at  his  house.  So  I  don’t  think  was 
any  kind  of  long-lasting  ill  feelings. 

Well,  basically,  isn't  everybody  working  for  the  betterment  of  the  state  and  the  industry? 

That’s  true.  But  out  of  the  eight  individuals  that  are  on  the  Board  and  the  Commission  they 
generally  wouldn’t  be  in  that  position  unless  they  had  some  kind  of  strong  personalities  or  a  little  ego 
working  for  them. 


During  your  term  on  the  Board  you  had  hundreds  of  applicants  and  their  attorneys  who  appeared  before 
you.  If  you  were  asked  to  give  advice  to  an  applicant  or  his  attorney  prior  to  their  appearance  in  front  of 
the  Board  or  the  Commission,  what  would  you  tell  them? 

Well,  clearly  you  have  to  fully  disclose  everything  that’s  requested,  ft  became  more  complicated 
over  the  ten  years  that  1  was  with  the  Board,  because  with  the  expansion  of  gaming,  a  gaming  license — 
while  it  was  still  a  privileged  license  and  still  only  a  select  few  were  given  a  license — started  to  get  more 
like  a  property  right,  and  more  people  thought  that  it  was  just  like  any  other  license.  When  1  first  came  on 
the  Board,  the  experienced  gaming  attorneys  were  experienced  enough  to  be  able  to  weed  out  clients  that 
they  could  tell  were  not  going  to  be  successful  in  the  process,  and  say  to  them,  “You’re  going  to  be 
wasting  your  money  if  you  pursue  this.  Why  don’t  we  just  try  to  fold  our  cards  now  and  look  for  another 
type  of  business.”  So  they  really  didn’t  bring  too  many  unworthy  applicants  to  the  meetings.  But  through 
the  1 990s  and  into  the  late  1 990s,  more  attorneys  started  treating  this  more  like  a  criminal  attorney  would, 
where,  “Maybe  my  client’s  not  the  most  stellar  guy,  but  he  deserves  representation,  and  therefore,  I’m 
going  to  take  this  to  the  mat,  and  maybe  we’ll  sneak  this  by  these  guys.”  And  so  occasionally  an  attorney 
would  bring  in  an  applicant  that  1  felt  he  knew  dam  good  and  well  that  this  guy  didn’t  have  a  snowball’s 
chance  in  hell  of  being  successful,  but  it  was  like,  “Hey,  pal,  this  is  your  nickel,  let’s  see  where  it  gets  us.” 
That  did  happen  upon  occasion.  1  guess  my  advice  to  the  applicants  would  be:  pay  attention  in  the  closing 
conference  and  listen  to  the  areas  of  concern  that  the  agents  bring  up  and  try  to  get  those  things  resolved, 
and  have  some  type  of  a  solution  worked  out  before  you  get  to  the  Board  and  the  Commission. 

Would  it  be  better  to  divulge  any  information  he  had  as  opposed  to  trying  to  keep  it  quiet? 

Well,  clearly,  it's  the  kiss  of  death  if  you  try  to  hide  something,  it  just  makes  it  much  more 
sinister.  A  lot  of  times  the  Board  and  the  Commission  can  live  with  the  crime,  but  not  with  the  fact  that  it 
wasn’t  disclosed  or  you  attempted  to  hide  it.  There  were  some  very  high-profile  applicants  working  for 
big  companies  that  almost  lost  their  license  because  they  didn’t  divulge  a  DU1  arrest.  A  DU1  arrest  in  and 
of  itself  is  not  something  that’s  going  to  preclude  you  from  being  in  the  industry,  but  the  fact  that  you  lie 
about  it,  and  then  lie  about  lying  about  it,  just  exacerbates  the  issue. 


If  you  were  asked  to  describe  Steve  DuCharme,  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  what  would  you 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


191 


say  about  him  ?  What  type  of  a  chairman  was  he? 

Well,  1  would  say  he  is  steady  and  dependable.  1  mean,  “flashy”  is  not  a  term  that  you  would  want 
to  use  to  describe  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  These  huge  publicly-traded  companies  need 
to  know,  and  the  stockholders  need  to  know,  that  the  regulation  is  going  to  be  stable,  that  decisions  are 
going  to  be  logical,  well-reasoned  and  not  emotional.  And  1  think  the  board  chairman  and  the  Board  need 
to  be  fairly  predictable.  And  so  everybody  in  the  industry  knows  the  rules,  knows  what  happens  if  you 
break  the  rules,  and  so  you’re  not  out  there  shocking  the  operators,  and  you’re  not  shocking  the 
shareholders,  knows  that  things  are  on  an  even  course,  and  everybody  plays  by  the  rules  and  the 
regulators  are  the  referees.  When  1  retired  and  somebody  asked  Bob  Miller  what  he  thought  about  my 
performance,  he  used  the  analogy  that  gaming  regulators  should  be  like  a  referee,  and  the  best  referees  are 
the  ones  that  you  never  notice.  The  game  goes  on,  it  moves  consistently  and  you  don’t  even  notice  the 
guy  in  the  striped  shirt.  And  that’s  what  a  good  regulator  should  be,  somebody  that  provides  a  solid 
foundation  for  the  gaming  industry  to  grow  and  to  flourish,  and  yet  maintain  its  reputation. 

What  do  you  feel  were  your  greatest  accomplishments  when  you  were  on  the  Board  or  when  you  were  a 
chairman? 

1  think  the  thing  I’m  the  proudest  of  is  being  able  to  convince  Governor  Guinn  to  support  the 
large  pay  raise  for  the  gaming  agents  that  came  out  of  the  last  legislature.  Again,  the  employees  of  the 
Gaming  Control  Board  had  been  losing  ground  to  every  other  state  agency  and  every  other  law 
enforcement  agency  for  a  number  of  years,  and  that  one  big  kicker  in  the  200 1  legislature  was  something 
that  I  was  very  proud  of.  And  I’m  very  thankful  that  Governor  Guinn  took  the  time  to  sit  down  with  us 
and  listen  to  our  problem  and  approve  of  our  solution. 

I  think  it  was  good  for  the  state  and  good  for  the  industry  to  retain  the  talented  individuals  that  we 
had  at  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  There  were  people  that  had  worked  there  for  a  number  of  years  that  had 
a  lot  of  institutional  knowledge,  a  lot  of  experience,  a  lot  of  skills,  that  wanted  to  stay,  that  liked  the  work, 
but  couldn’t  afford  to  because  of  other  obligations  and  responsibilities.  At  some  point  they  just  can’t 
afford  to  be  altruistic  like  Burke’s  Law  and  doing  it  as  a  hobby. 

When  did  you  resign  from  the  Board? 

I  left  January  3,  2001,  exactly  ten  years  after  I  started.  I  left  because  my  term  was  up  and  I  had  in 
excess  of  thirty  years  in  the  Public  Employees  Retirement  System.  It  was  a  matter  of  do  I  sign  up  for 
another  four  years  and  put  in  thirty-five  years  in  the  system,  or  was  it  time  to  leave?  I  was  looking  at  a  big 
fight  in  the  legislature  over  internet  gaming,  which  I  was  not  in  favor  of,  and  I  was  looking  at  some  other 
issues  that  I  just  didn’t  know  if  I  had  the  energy  to  fight.  Thirty  years  is  enough  for  government  service, 
and  so  I  look  forward  to  doing  other  things,  and  I’ve  enjoyed  my  retirement  so  far. 

At  your  retirement  party  Arthur  Marshall  a  member  of  the  Gaming  Commission,  presented  you  with  a 
watch.  Would  you  tell  us  what  he  said  when  he  presented  you  with  the  watch  and  how  you  responded? 

[laughter]  Well,  as  we  talked  earlier,  there’s  usually  some  good-natured  ribbing  between  the 
Board  and  the  Commission.  When  Mr.  Marshall  gave  me  the  watch  he  followed  it  up  with  some 


192 


instructions  on  how  to  read  the  watch,  and  then  told  me  that  the  little  hand’s  on  the  hour  and  the  big 
hand’s  on  the  minute.  And  I  told  him  that  1  already  knew  that  because  I  had  been  with  the  Board  and  not 
the  Commission,  and  that  he  might  have  to  explain  it  to  his  fellow  commissioners,  but  board  members 
already  knew  how  to  tell  time. 

Who  was  appointed  to  take  your  place? 

Dennis  Neilander.  He’d  been  working  for  the  state  quite  a  while.  He’d  worked  at  the  legislature 
and  was  an  attorney  for  the  legislature  when  Bill  Bible  recruited  him  to  be  the  chief  of  the  corporate 
securities  division  sometime  around  1996,  or  maybe  1995.  Dennis  was  the  chief  of  corporate  securities 
when  1  moved  over  to  chairman,  and  Governor  Miller  appointed  Dennis  to  fill  out  my  term,  which  was 
only  about  four  or  five  months.  When  Governor  Guinn  came  in,  two  board  members’  terms  were  up  and 
he  appointed  Bobby  Siller  to  a  four-year  term  and  Dennis  Neilander  to  a  four-year  term.  Then  when  1  left, 
Dennis  took  my  position  and  Scott  Scherer  came  over  from  the  governor’s  office  and  filled  out  the  Board. 

You  mentioned  earlier  the  Patty  Becker  law  that  prevents,  or  restricts,  people  from  going  to  work  in  the 
gaming  industry  until  a  year  after  they  have  left  the  Control  Board.  Your  one  year  is  now  up.  Have  you 
gone  to  work  in  the  gaming  industry? 

Y es,  1  have.  Actually,  when  my  cooling-off  period  expired,  1  signed  a  consulting  agreement  with 
WMS,  a  slot  manufacturer  out  of  Chicago,  and  I  do  compliance  consulting  for  them.  1  have  subsequently 
done  some  compliance  consulting  work  for  EXBER,  Inc.,  which  is  the  Jackie  Gaughan  properties 
downtown.  1  have  been  approached  by  a  couple  of  other  gaming  companies,  and  even  a  tribe  to  assist 
them  with  some  gaming  regulations.  So  1  am  involved  in  the  gaming  industry  to  some  extent,  mostly  on 
consulting.  Occasionally  gaming  attorneys  call  me  for  either  gaming  consulting  or  to  be  an  expert  witness 
in  some  trial,  so  1  do  have  some  knowledge  of  the  gaming  industry  that  apparently  is  still  valuable  to 
someone. 

In  my  police  career,  my  twenty  years  as  a  policeman  1  couldn’t  get  anybody  to  listen  to  me  unless 
I  bought  them  a  beer.  Then  my  last  six  months  with  the  police  department  1  was  the  public  information 
officer,  so  1  had  all  of  these  newscasters  sticking  microphones  in  my  face  every  day  asking  me  about  this 
robbery  or  that  robbery  or  that  homicide.  Then  when  1  got  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board  I'm  rubbing 
elbows  with  these  CEOs  and  the  board  chairmen,  and  all  of  a  sudden  they’re  saying,  “Well,  what  do  you 
think  about  my  advertising  campaign?” 

And  I  said,  “You  know,  I  got  very  bright  overnight.” 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


193 


8 

Bert  Goldwater 


Bert  Goldwater  was  born  in  1915  in  San  Francisco. 
Due  to  poor  health ,  he  was  sent  by  his  parents  to 
Reno  at  the  age  of  five  to  be  raised  by  his 
grandparents.  After  attending  Modesto  Junior 
College  and  Stanford  University,  he  graduated 
from  the  University  of  Nevada,  Reno  and  in  1939 
he  earned  a  law  degree  from  the  University  of 
Colorado  at  Boulder.  He  opened  his  first  law  office 
in  1939.  Governor  Grant  Sawyer  appointed  him  to 
the  first  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  in  October  of 
1959,  but  Goldwater  stepped  down  in  1961  in  order 
to  chair  the  state ’s  Equal  Rights  Commission, 
sen’ingfor  one  term.  Working  for  a  time  in  private 
practice,  he  was  appointed  as  a  U.S.  Bankruptcy 
Judge  by  U.S.  District  Judge  Bruce  R.  Thompson. 
Also  serving  as  president  of  the  Washoe  County 
Bar  Association  and  chairman  of  the  State  Board  of 
Bar  Examiners  and  the  National  Conference  of  Bar 
Examiners,  Goldwater  served  as  a  U.S.  bankruptcy 
judge  until  his  death  in  2006  at  the  age  of  91. 

Bert  Goldwater.  Photo  courtesy  of  Cooks  Photography,  Reno. 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  afternoon.  My  name  is  Dwayne  Kling.  It’s  August  25  in  the  year  2003.  I’m  with 
Judge  Bert  Goldwater  in  his  offices  in  the  federal  building  in  Reno,  Nevada. 

Judge  Goldwater,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have  your 
permission  to  make  available  to  the  public  the  tapes  and  transcripts  of  the  oral  history  interviews  that  we 
are  about  to  begin  today? 


194 


Bert  Goldwater:  Y es,  you  have  my  permission. 

Thank  you.  Judge  Goldwater,  when  and  where  were  you  born? 

1  was  bom  in  San  Francisco,  California,  on  January  4,  1915. 

Where  did  you  receive  your  education? 

Well,  1  came  to  Reno,  or  was  sent  to  Reno,  as  a  child  because  of  my  health  when  1  was  only  four 
or  five  years  old.  So  1  had  my  early  education  in  the  grammar  schools  in  Reno:  the  Mount  Rose  School, 
the  Reno  Junior  High  School.  And  then  1  went  back  and  lived  with  my  parents  in  Stockton,  California, 
and  I  graduated  from  the  Stockton  High  School.  And  from  there  1  went  to  Modesto  Junior  College  for 
about  a  year,  and  from  Modesto  Junior  College  to  Stanford  University.  My  health  broke  down  there 
again,  and  so  I  came  back  to  Reno,  and  I  graduated  from  the  University  of  Nevada  and  got  my  degree 
from  the  University  of  Nevada.  Then  1  went  on  to  law  school  in  Colorado,  and  I  finished  law  school  in 
Colorado  and  got  my  L.L.B.  from  the  University  of  Colorado  at  Boulder,  Colorado. 

What  was  your  first  job  after  getting  your  L.L.B.  ? 

Well,  1  came  back  to  Reno  and  1  looked  for  a  job.  And  I  couldn’t  find  any  lawyer  or  law  firm  that 
would  employ  me,  except  1  had  a  summer  job  while  1  was  going  to  law  school.  But  after  I’d  got  my 
degree  and  took  the  bar  exam,  1  opened  my  own  office.  Later  on  1  would  form  partnerships  with  other 
lawyers. 

What  year  did  you  open  your  first  law  office? 

In  1939.  When  I  took  the  bar  exam  1  opened  my  first  office. 

Did  you  serve  in  the  military? 

No,  I  didn’t,  because  of  this  asthma  that  I  had  in  San  Francisco,  where  I  was  born.  1  had  it  all  my 
life.  1  was  not  fit  for  the  service,  and  I  was  rejected. 

In  1959  the  Gaming  Control  Act  was  passed  by  the  legislature.  Would  you  tell  us  the  importance  of  that 
act? 


Well,  it  was  important  because  there  had  been  very  loose  control  over  gambling.  Grant  Sawyer 
was  the  one  that  helped  introduce  this  legislation,  which  would  give  the  state  of  Nevada  a  control  and  a 
way  to  discipline  gambling  and  licensing.  And  1  think  it  was  most  important  to  the  state,  because  at  that 
time — and  for  many  years  before  and  since — this  state  has  been  dependent  upon  gambling  taxes  for  its 
support.  And  there  was  a  lot  of  talk  that  licensing  was  not  controlled  and  that  it  should  be  controlled.  So  1 
think  the  act  was  absolutely  necessary  for  this  state.  And  its  passage  put  into  force  two  levels  of  control:  a 
gaming  control  commission  and  a  gaming  control  board,  with  surveillance  and  investigation  of  all  the 
applicants  and  control  over  the  manner  in  which  gambling  was  operated.  So  1  think  it  was  a  very 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


195 


important  piece  of  legislation.  Since  gambling  had  been  legalized  it  had  never  been  under  strict  control  as 
it  was  under  this  act. 

So  Governor  Sawyer  was  sort  of  a  visionary  who  could  see  more  problems  ahead? 

That’s  right.  There  was  a  lot  of  criticism  that  some  of  the  people  who  had  licenses  shouldn’t  have 
had  licenses,  and  that  taxes  weren’t  being  collected,  and  various  rules  and  regulations  weren’t  being 
enforced.  He  was  the  one  who  demonstrated  to  the  state  how  important  it  was,  and  then  he  got  it  passed 
by  the  legislature  and  all  set  up. 

Do  you  think  that  there  was  the  possibility  that  gaming  could  have  been  made  illegal  again  if  it  hadn  7 
been  for  Sawyer? 

No,  I  don’t  think  so.  I  don’t  think  it  would  have  been  made  illegal.  Gambling  was  instituted  in 
order  to  raise  money.  In  other  words,  this  state  became  dependent  upon  gambling,  gambling  fees  and 
gambling  taxes  for  its  income.  And  just  recently  it  has  been  realized — in  fact,  the  last  legislature  found — 
that  the  gambling  taxes  are  insufficient  to  support  the  state.  But  for  many  years  it  was  the  main  support  of 
the  state.  1  don’t  think  it  would  have  ever  been  made  illegal.  But  it  had  to  come  under  some  control  and 
some  investigative  powers. 

Well,  perhaps  it  pacified  some  people  in  the  federal  government  that  Nevada  was  showing  the  country 
that  they  were  able  to  regulate  gambling. 

Well,  that’s  right.  There  were  a  lot  of  complaints  from  the  federal  government,  particularly  in 
betting — horserace  betting — interstate  calls  and  placing  bets  on  interstate  races  and  so  on.  And  so  they 
had  to  meet  some  of  these  objections  and  some  of  these  critics.  There  were  some  complaints  that  some  of 
the  people  who  held  gambling  licenses  in  Reno  had  nefarious  conduct  in  other  states,  and  were  even 
convicted  of  crimes  or  something  in  other  states,  and  here  they  were  licensed.  And  so  it  was  to  clean  up 
any  possibility  that  there  would  be  federal  legislation  which  would  outlaw  gambling,  in  addition  to 
supporting  the  state  and  keeping  it  under  control. 

Well,  part  of  the  act  called  for  the  creation  of  a  gaming  commission  composed  of five  people.  Do  you 
recall  who  the  first  five  men  were? 

1  came  on  the  first  commission  in  October  of  1959  and  Mr.  Keefer  and  Miles  Pike  were  on  the 
first  commission.  The  others  on  the  Commission  in  1959  were  Pete  Walters,  Norman  Brown,  and  James 
Hotchkiss.  1  know  Keefer  was  a  lawyer,  and  Pete  Walters  was  a  real  estate  agent.  We  were  all  good 
Democrats.  Well,  Norman  Brown,  1  think,  was  a  Republican.  I’m  not  sure,  but  I  think  he  was  Republican. 
He  was  a  rancher. 

Yes,  wasn  7  he  from  Yerington  or  Smith  Valley? 


I  think  so.  He  was  from  a  small  town  outside  of  Carson  City. 


196 


The  way  1  recall,  you  were  named  to  replace  Miles  Pike? 

No,  1  wasn’t  ever  a  replacement.  1  was  on  the  original  commission.  1  was  aboard  ship  vacationing 
when  1  received  a  cable  asking  if  1  would  accept  the  appointment  from  Governor  Sawyer’s  office.  And  it 
was  the  first  appointment.  1  didn’t  replace  Miles  Pike.  Miles  Pike,  1  think,  was  on  the  Supreme  Court  of 
Nevada.  And  yes,  he  resigned  and  Governor  Sawyer  had  to  appoint  somebody  else.  And  at  that  time,  1 
think  Governor  Sawyer  asked  me  if  1  would  accept  it,  and  1  didn’t  want  to  accept  the  Supreme  Court 
appointment.  But  that  was  past  the  time  that  1  was  on  the  Commission.  Miles  Pike  resigned  from  the 
Supreme  Court  much  later. 

Do  you  feel  that  the  knowledge  of  gaming  industry  or  the  lack  of  knowledge  played  a  role  in  the  selection 
of  commissioners? 

Well,  it  didn’t  in  my  case,  because  1  didn’t  know  anything  about  gambling.  The  reason  1  was 
appointed,  I’m  sure,  is  because  I  was  a  very  strong  worker  for  Governor  Sawyer.  And  when  he  was 
elected  he  was  showing  me  and  the  rest  of  the  state  that  the  Democrats  were  sticking  together  and  he  was 
going  to  appoint  a  Democrat.  And  he  appointed  me  because  I  had  been  his  worker.  He  rewarded  me,  sort 
of,  by  this  appointment. 

So  he  was  showing  his  appreciation. 

Yes!  Yes,  his  appreciation  for  what  I  had  done  in  his  political  campaign  to  become  governor. 

Had  you  ever  run  for  an  elective  office? 

I  have  only  run  for  the  office  once.  When  I  was  a  very  young  lawyer  I  ran  for  the  assembly.  And 
at  that  time  I  ran  as  a  Republican  and  I  lost.  I  never  ran  for  office  again.  In  my  present  office  I  was 
appointed,  and  I’ve  never  run  for  public  office. 

Do  you  think  that  geographical  distribution  was  a  factor  in  the  governor ’s  selection  ?  Were  some  of  the 
fellows  from  Las  Vegas  and  some  from  Reno? 

I  don’t  know  what  Grant  Sawyer  had  in  mind.  Norm  Brown  was  from  Yerington.  Keefer  was 
from  Las  Vegas.  I  think  he  tried  to  divide  it  up.  He  made  Mr.  Keefer  the  chairman,  and  I  was  a  member  of 
the  Commission.  And  I  think  Keefer  was  a  strong  Democrat  in  Las  Vegas.  I  don’t  know  whether  Pete 
Walters  was  in  Elko  at  that  time  or  not.  Pete  later  came  to  Reno,  but  I  think  he  might  have  been  from 
Elko.  And  so  there  might  have  been  a  geographical  distribution  on  the  Commission.  I’m  not  sure,  but  I 
think  it  must.  And  I  think  it  would  be  a  good  idea  to  have  had  somebody  from  different  parts  of  the  state. 

Where  were  the  meetings  held?  Were  they  held  in  Carson  or  Las  Vegas? 

As  I  recall,  they  were  all  in  Carson  City.  You  know,  it’s  a  long  time  ago.  It’s  over  forty  years.  I 
don’t  remember  we  ever  held  a  meeting  in  Las  Vegas.  All  the  meetings  I  seem  to  remember  attending 
were  in  Carson  City. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


197 


You  were  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Commission  in  1959,  then.  Is  that  correct? 

I  don’t  know  when  it  was.  I’ll  take  your  word  for  it.  I  don’t  remember  the  exact  year. 

Well,  1959  was  when  the  act  was  passed. 

Well,  I’m  sure  I  was  appointed  right  after  that.  Pursuant  to  the  act,  Sawyer  created  the  Control 
Board,  and  Robbins  Cahill  was  the  chairman  of  the  Control  Board.  And  the  commissioners  were 
appointed  by  the  governor. 

Did  you  have  much  of  a  relationship  with  Robbins  Cahill  and  with  the  Board? 

Well,  yes,  because  the  Commission  used  to  hear  recommendations  of  the  Control  Board.  The  first 
application  for  a  license  was  to  the  Control  Board,  and  they  made  the  investigation,  and  then  gave  us  the 
recommendations.  We  didn’t  always  follow  their  recommendations,  but  most  of  the  time  we  did,  because 
after  all,  they  were  the  foot  soldiers  and  they  investigated  the  backgrounds  of  these  applicants  for  licenses, 
and  for  transfer  of  licenses  to  different  companies  and  coiporations.  So  we  took  their  advice,  and  we 
depended  on  them.  They  were  our  right  hand  and  the  Control  Board  was  doing  all  the  work.  We  didn’t  do 
any  work  in  investigation.  We  just  sat  in  judgment.  A  license  would  come  up  and  we  would  turn  to  the 
members  of  the  Control  Board.  I  don’t  know  whether  Robbins  Cahill  in  person  advised  us,  but  they  would 
have  somebody  there  from  the  Control  Board  who  would  then  read  a  report  to  us  or  give  us  the  benefit  of 
their  investigation.  Some  of  these  investigations  were  very  detailed.  They  went  into  the  home  and 
background  of  all  these  licensees:  they  knew  where  they  lived;  they  talked  to  their  neighbors;  they  talked 
to  their  schools  and  the  bankers  and  other  business  associates.  It  was  very  detailed. 

Did  you  meet  more  than  once  a  month? 

We  didn’t  meet  regularly.  When  there  was  enough  for  us  to  do,  we  were  given  notice  to  come 
down  there  and  meet.  Keefer  must  have  kept  in  control  of  it  somehow  or  another.  I  got  notice  when  there 
was  a  board  meeting,  and  I’d  come  to  Carson  City  and  we’d  sit  as  a  commission. 

That ’s  interesting  that  there  weren ’t  enough  things  going  on  or  enough  things  transpiring  .... 

I  think  it  was  pretty  regular.  I  think  we  would  meet  every  month,  but  I  don’t  think  there  was  a 
fixed  date. 

Not  like  it  is  now,  right? 

I  don’t  know  what  it  is  now. 

Now  it  is  a  fixed  date  every  month.  Do  you  recall  the  monthly  salary  of  a  gaming  commissioner? 


We  didn’t  get  any  salary,  as  I  recall.  I  think  it  was  a  non-paying  position.  You  were  in  the  service 


198 


of  the  state.  We  might  have  got  some  kind  of  nominal  fee  of  twenty-five  dollars,  but  I’m  not  even  sure  of 
that,  because  I  don’t  recall.  All  1  had  to  do  was  travel  from  Reno,  which  was  a  minor  thing. 

But  I’m  sure  Mr.  Keefer,  who  used  to  come  from  Las  Vegas,  was  reimbursed  for  his  travel 
expenses,  because  he  had  to  come  by  airplane  or  drive. 

What  were  you  doing  when  you  were  named  to  the  Commission?  Were  you  still  in  private  practice  in 
Reno? 


Yes,  I  was.  1  was  practicing  law,  but  at  the  time  I  was  asked  to  be  on  the  Commission,  I  was 
actually  on  vacation  in  the  Pacific  aboard  ship.  And  I  came  back  and  1  had  to  make  up  my  mind  whether 
I’d  accept  this  position.  I  had  never  even  heard  about  it,  but  I  discussed  it  with  my  then-wife,  who  is  since 
deceased.  And  we  decided  it  would  be  some  kind  of  an  honor  and  I  cabled  back  that  I  would  accept  it. 

And  so  I  was  then  given  a  formal  certificate  of  appointment,  and  I  attended  the  first  meeting  that  Mr. 
Keefer  must  have  told  me  about. 

Yes,  I  imagine  with  something  newly  created  like  that,  you  weren ’t  sure  whether  you  wanted  it  or  not.  But, 
of  course,  if  Governor  Sawyer  asked  you  .... 

My  father,  when  I  came  back,  tried  to  discourage  me.  He  said,  “It  might  be  dangerous.  You 
know,  you’re  dealing  with  these  people  and  some  of  them  are  in  the  underworld.  It  might  be  kind  of 
dangerous.”  He  was  a  little  bit  afraid  for  me  to  accept  it.  But  I  overruled  him  and  I  accepted  it.  I  didn’t 
think  it  was  that  much  exposure  to  the  underground,  but  he  was  just  warning  me.  And  he  seemed  to  know 
a  little  bit  more  about  the  people  who  would  ask  for  licenses  than  I  did.  [laughter] 

Well,  there  were  a  few  unsavory  people  around  in  those  days,  more  so  than  today,  [laughter] 

Yes.  And  there  were  some  that  already  had  licenses  who  were  members  of  some  underworld  back 
in  Pittsburgh  and  New  York  and  Detroit  and  so  on.  But  somehow  or  other  they  would  get  licenses  here 
where  they  were  actually  wanted  by  the  authorities  in  other  states,  [laughter] 

So  how  many  hours  a  month  did  you  think  you  spent  on  business?  Just  the  meetings? 

I  don’t  think  it  was  very  much.  The  only  time  I  really  spent  on  the  Commission  was  when  I 
attended  the  meetings.  The  only  work  was  the  hearings,  which  sometime  took  a  half  a  day  and  sometimes 
both  the  morning  and  the  afternoon.  But  other  than  that  I  never  spent  any  additional  time. 

You  could  read  all  the  reports  during  the  meeting? 

I  don’t  think  they  sent  us  reports  in  advance.  During  the  meeting  they  would  come  up  on  the 
agenda.  I  don’t  remember  doing  any  work  on  reports  received  in  advance. 

W  hat  gaming  problems  were  you  mainly  concerned  with  during  your  time  on  the  Commission? 


Well,  it  goes  back  a  long  time,  but  I  think  it  was  mainly  the  transfer  of  licenses  from  one  entity  to 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


199 


another,  or  from  one  person  to  another,  and  the  initial  licensing  of  individuals  and  corporations  based  on 
reports  from  the  Control  Board.  It  was  mainly  licensing.  We  had  maybe  a  few  other  issues,  but  right  now 
1  don’t  recall  any.  When  1  left  the  Gaming  Board  1  was  on  the  Human  Rights  Commission.  And  on  the 
Human  Rights  Commission  we  did  have  the  issue  of  the  gambling  industry  refusing  service  to  black 
people.  And  that  became  an  issue  in  the  Human  Rights  Commission.  But  I  don’t  recall  that  being  an  issue 
under  the  Gaming  Commission. 

When  1  was  on  the  Gaming  Commission,  1  don’t  know  this  to  be  a  fact,  but  I’m  assuming  that  I 
must  have  been  too  difficult  to  deal  with.  I  was  not  easy  on  those  who  had  records  and  backgrounds  of 
criminal  conduct  or  violations  of  laws  of  other  states.  And  so  the  legislature  amended  the  Gaming 
Commission  law  so  that  there  would  only  be  one  person  on  the  Commission  from  any  single  business  or 
profession.  And  there  were  two  of  us;  Keefer  and  1  were  both  lawyers.  So  Grant  Sawyer  called  me  in  and 
talked  to  me  about  this.  And  he  said  he’d  have  to  get  somebody  else  on  the  Commission,  because  we 
couldn’t  have  two  lawyers.  I  think  the  legislature  amended  the  law  because  of  me,  because  I  was  too 
difficult  to  deal  with. 

And  so  he  said,  “Would  you  accept  the  chairmanship  of  the  Human  Rights  Commission?”  which 
the  legislature  had  just  created,  and  1  agreed  to  do  that.  I  accepted  the  appointment  as  chairman  of  the 
Human  Rights  Commission.  And  almost  immediately  I  had  this  problem  before  me  of  a  gambling  casino 
in  Las  Vegas  that  had  refused  to  allow  black  people  to  place  bets.  Of  course,  it  was  understood  no  black 
person  could  work  in  there.  But  they  were  not  even  allowed  to  come  in  or  place  bets,  or  to  gamble.  And  I 
called  a  meeting.  I  don’t  remember  who  was  on  that  Human  Rights  Commission  with  me,  but  at  least  a 
couple  of  the  members  of  the  commission  came  to  Las  Vegas  and  sat  with  me  and  1  held  a  hearing  in  the 
federal  building  or  the  post  office.  I  had  written  letters  to  this  casino  to  appear,  and  they  didn’t  appear 
with  any  officer,  but  their  attorney  appeared,  and  he  objected  to  our  jurisdiction.  And,  of  course,  we  had 
no  subpoena  powers.  We  had  no  rights  to  do  anything.  We  had  no  authority  to  make  any  rule  or  order.  We 
decided,  I  remember  in  that  case,  that  they  were  violating  the  human  rights  of  people,  just  as  a  decision  of 
our  Human  Rights  Commission.  But  it  was  ineffectual,  because  we  had  no  way  to  enforce  it. 

You  had  no  power. 

We  had  no  powers  to  enforce  it.  These  casinos  in  Las  Vegas — and  I  guess  in  Reno  at  the  time, 
too — simply  had  a  rule,  an  understanding,  that  they  would  employ  only  white  people,  and  they  would  not 
allow  any  but  white  people  to  come  in  and  gamble,  or  to  sit  at  their  restaurants,  which  was  a  terrible  thing. 
1  think  that  the  Gaming  Commission  later  on  passed  a  rule  that  one  of  the  conditions  of  the  license  was 
that  anybody  whose  behavior  was  proper  could  come  into  a  gambling  casino.  So  what  happened 
eventually  was  that  the  Gaming  Commission  itself  made  a  condition  of  all  the  licenses  that  they  had  to 
observe  the  human  rights  ruling  that  you  couldn’t  be  excluded  by  reason  of  color  or  race. 

Well,  did  that  come  about  during  or  shortly  after  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  started  his  .  .  .  ? 

Well,  I  don’t  know  just  when  it  came  about.  But  as  I  say,  1  was  on  the  Commission.  Then  the 
legislature  met,  probably  in  1961.  They  amended  the  law  and  said  only  one  person  from  each  profession 
or  business  could  be  on  the  Commission.  So  I  was  off  the  Commission.  That  must  have  been  about  1961, 
1962.  And  Grant  Sawyer  put  me  on  the  Human  Rights  Commission.  Then  it  was  right  about  1962,  right  in 
there,  when  I  had  this  meeting,  and  I  was  rebuffed  by  this  casino.  1  mean,  they  made  it  eminently  clear 


200 


that  they  were  not  going  to  abide  by  our  ruling  because  we  had  no  powers  to  make  them.  So  we  just  made 
our  ruling  that  they  shouldn’t  be  doing  this,  but  we  couldn’t  do  anything  for  the  people  who  were 
complaining,  who  were  there  at  the  hearing. 

Did  you  get  complaints  from  other  casinos,  too,  or  just  the  one? 

No,  we  just  took  action  on  this  one  case,  because  some  black  people  made  a  complaint  against 
this  one  casino,  and  it  caused  me  to  call  a  meeting  right  away  of  our  Human  Rights  Commission.  But  we 
were  totally  ineffective.  But  the  word  got  out,  and  as  time  went  on — and  1  don’t  know  whether  Lyndon 
Johnson  was  president  or  not — the  state  of  Nevada,  through  the  Gaming  Commission  then  in  force  made 
a  rule  that  it  was  a  condition  of  your  license  that  you  can’t  refuse  service  to  anyone.  And  so  it  was  teed  off 
by  our  Human  Rights  Commission  and  put  in  effect  by  the  Gaming  Commission. 

That ’s  an  important  part  of  gaming  history.  And  that’s  only  forty  years  ago,  roughly. 

That’s  only  forty  years  ago.  Well,  Nevada  was  known  as  "The  Mississippi  of  the  West,"  and 
service  was  refused  arbitrarily  against  people  like  Filipinos  and  Mexicans,  and  blacks  and  so  on.  And  it 
was  a  terrible,  terrible  situation,  but  it  existed  here  and  we  have  to  face  it.  It’s  embarrassing  to  even 
mention  it  and  call  yourself  a  Nevadan. 

Right. 

Well,  when  you  started  out  in  the  Commission  like  that  in  the  early  days,  did  you  have  to  contend 
with  problems  such  as  not  knowing  what  the  Commission  could  do  legally?  Did  you  need  to  create  new 
regulations  and  enact  new  laws? 

You  know,  it’s  so  long  ago  1  don’t  recall  exactly  what  we  did  and  whether  or  not  we  ran  into  any 
problems.  It  seemed  to  me  that  we  just  kind  of  knew  what  we  were  supposed  to  do.  We  were  supposed  to 
pass  judgment  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Control  Board.  And  so  we  would  hear  their 
recommendations,  and  then  we  heard  different  appeals.  Sometimes  the  Control  Board  would  turn  a  man 
or  a  company  down,  and  they  would  appeal  to  the  Commission.  And  sometimes  they  would  recommend 
someone  to  the  Commission  and  then  we  would  do  that.  But  1  don’t  remember  the  regulations.  I  don’t 
think  we  had  any  litigation.  1  don’t  think  we  sued  or  anyone  sued  us  as  a  commission — well,  at  least 
during  the  time  I  was  on  there,  which  wasn’t  very  long.  1  was  only  on  there  until  the  next  legislature  met 
and  kicked  me  off. 

[laughter] 

Well,  in  effect,  you  know.  They  said  there  could  only  be  one  person  from  one  profession,  and  that 
meant  1  had  to  go,  because  Keefer  was  the  chairman. 

How  long  did  you  stay  on  the  Human  Rights  Commission  then? 

For  the  term.  1  think  it  was  a  four-year  term  1  stayed  on  there.  But  after  that  one  hearing  down  in 
Las  Vegas,  there  wasn’t  much  that  came  up  before  us.  And  most  of  the  things  what  we  could  do  were 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


201 


absolutely  blocked  by  the  fact  that  the  statute  created  us  but  gave  us  no  powers  of  enforcement,  and  gave 
us  no  subpoena  powers,  and  gave  us  nothing  to  go  on.  And  we  didn’t  even  have  any  appropriation.  It  was 
a  sort  of  a  bare  law  that  didn’t  mean  anything.  So  1  stayed  the  term. 

Do  you  feel  it  was  easier  for  an  individual  to  be  licensed  in  the  1950s  and  1960s  than  it  is  today? 

Yes,  1  think  so.  As  time  goes  on,  1  think  they’re  cleaning  up  the  gambling  business.  They  have 
large  corporations  now  that  have  a  stock  on  the  public  exchanges,  and  they  want  to  keep  it  as  clean  as 
possible.  So  1  think  it’s  very  difficult  today,  and  more  difficult  than  it  ever  was,  to  get  a  license.  And  the 
investigation  is  more  thorough,  and,  of  course,  it’s  exposed  to  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission 
for  the  stockholders  of  a  casino.  There’s  gambling  all  over  the  country  now,  and  1  think  it’s  very  difficult 
to  get  a  license  here.  It  was  never  loose.  It  wasn’t  loose  when  we  were  there.  We  required  them  to  be 
clean  as  possible.  But  1  think  it’s  getting  tighter  and  better  all  the  time. 

And  today,  I  imagine,  a  lot  of  the  investigation,  like  you  say,  is  pertaining  to  financial  things  as  much  as 
anything,  wouldn  ’tyou  say? 

Yes.  And  it’s  on  a  much  bigger  scale.  There  are  multi-million-dollar  casinos  now.  There  were  big 
casinos  that  existed  in  those  days,  too,  but  not  as  big  as  they  are  today.  They’re  huge,  and  they’re  public 
corporations.  Probably  their  whole  staff  has  enlarged  since  1  was  there  forty  years  ago.  They  probably 
have  a  huge  staff  today  to  investigate  a  big,  multi-million-dollar  casino.  I’ve  lost  touch  with  it.  [laughter] 

You  don ’t  follow  the  gaming  industry? 

No,  I  don’t. 

You  have  enough  things  to  follow  here. 

Oh,  absolutely. 

Do  you  recall  was  it  much  of  a  growth  period  when  you  were  there  in  1959  and  1960? 

Yes,  it  was  still  in  the  post-war  period.  Things  were  picking  up.  The  1960s  were  picking  up. 
People  were  investing  in  casinos  and  there  were  a  lot  of  requests  for  licenses. 

Do  you  recall  having  trouble  with  any  unsavory  element  trying  to  get  into  gaming? 

The  only  one  1  recall  is  a  man  named  High. 

Oh,  David  High? 

David  High.  I  think  the  Control  Board  turned  him  down.  I’m  not  sure.  But  anyhow,  the 
Commission  turned  him  down.  And  he’s  the  only  one  I  really  remember,  and  it  was  some  kind  of 
background  that  he  had  in  New  York — an  association  in  New  Jersey  or  New  York.  He  came  to  my  law 


202 


office  to  see  me,  not  as  a  client  but  because  he  wanted  to  know  whether  he  could  do  something  about  his 
rejection.  And  it  was  very  difficult  for  me.  1  didn’t  know  what  to  do  with  somebody  coming  to  me 
personally;  he’s  the  only  one  who  ever  did  that.  He  came  to  me  personally  in  my  law  office  and  faced  me 
with  the  fact  that  this  is  the  only  business  he  knew.  It  was  the  only  way  he  could  earn  a  living,  and  since 
childhood  he’d  almost  done  nothing  but  be  in  the  gaming  business — gambling.  And  he  wanted  to  know  if 
he  couldn’t  persuade  me  to  go  to  the  Commission  and  make  a  little  pitch  for  him  and  help  him  out, 
change  our  ruling.  But  1  told  him  that  it  was  impossible,  that  he  shouldn’t  be  talking  to  me  individually 
because  the  ethics  of  it  alone  was  bad  and  that  1  couldn’t  do  anything  for  him,  and  that  he  would  have  to 
come  in  front  of  the  Commission  formally  and  give  this  pitch.  In  other  words,  request  a  re -hearing  or 
something.  1  couldn’t  do  anything  for  him.  That’s  the  only  person  1  remember  that  really,  really  sticks  in 
my  mind.  We  rejected  some  licenses,  I’m  sure,  and  we  approved  some,  and  some  were  contested.  There 
were  some  difficult  ones  where  the  source  of  the  financing  was  questionable.  We  didn’t  want  money  from 
people  who  were  unsavory  either.  We  didn’t  want  them  indirectly  to  be  investing. 

Yes,  hidden  interests. 

Yes,  and  getting  into  the  casinos  through  the  back  door  by  putting  money  in  but  having  the 
license  held  in  another  name.  That  was  a  thing  we  had  to  look  out  for.  1  don’t  remember  who  we  rejected 
and  who  we  didn’t,  [laughter]  It’s  too  long  ago.  But  we  did  have  some  of  those  problems.  I  think  that 
problem  probably  exists  today,  too,  except  for  huge  public  coiporations  where  there  are  large  amounts  of 
stock  purchased.  Still  in  all,  they  want  to  know  who  these  blocks  of  stocks  belong  to,  and  whether  or  not 
they  are  some  kind  of  a  gang  or  people  who  wouldn’t  receive  a  license  directly,  who  are  indirectly 
holding  stock  and  putting  up  the  money.  Those  problems  exist  today  same  as  they  did  when  I  was  a 
commissioner. 

Did  Governor  Sawyer  take  an  active  interest  in  following  the  commission  hearings  and  the  board 
hearings? 

No,  as  far  as  I  know,  he  didn’t.  He  never  told  us  what  to  do  and  he  never  attended.  And  we  never 
told  him  what  we  did,  and  he  didn’t  ask  us  what  we  did.  No.  He  stood  aloof  from  this  commission.  He 
said  that  he  appointed  them  and  they  had  a  job  to  do,  and  they  represented  the  State  of  Nevada  and  that 
was  it.  He  never  got  into  it. 

Well,  his  famous  saying  is  “Hang  tough.  ”  Did  he  personally  or  verbally  give  those  instructions? 

I  think  that  he  did.  I  think  he  told  us  that  when  he  swore  us  in.  We  were  sworn  in  in  his  office. 

Our  pictures  were  taken  and  all  that.  And  I  think  he  said  first  that  he  wanted  Nevada  to  be  as  clean  as 
possible.  He  knew  that  there  would  be  a  lot  of  criticism  if  we  weren’t,  so  he  had  that  motto  of,  “Hang 
tough.”  [laughter]  Do  the  right  thing,  no  matter  what  it  takes. 

Well,  you  guys  were  kind  of  out  on  a  limb,  weren  ’tyou,  when  you  think  about  it?  Of  course,  you  had  the 
Gaming  Control  Board,  but  you  five  people  had  the  final  word  on  something  that  was  going  to  establish  a 
regulatory  system  in  the  state  of  Nevada. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


203 


Yes.  Of  course,  now  they  have  rules  and  regulations  that  we  didn’t  even  have  set  up  then.  1  think 
the  fees  have  changed.  They  have  very  strict  rules  and  regulations  now.  In  fact,  1  think  people  are  experts 
on  their  regulations. 

Oh,  I’m  sure  they  are.  [laughter]  Yes. 

Yes,  some  people  are. 

Well,  your  first  group  was  just  kind  of playing  it  by  ear. 

That’s  right.  Just  playing  it  by  ear,  trying  to  do  the  right  thing.  See,  there  was  a  method  of 
licensing  prior  to  our  appointment,  but  this  created  two  steps:  the  Control  Board  and  then  the 
Commission.  In  other  words,  kind  of  a  final  decision.  And  they  were  going  to  strain  everything  through 
there  and  make  everything  conform  to  the  requirements  of  a  strictly  clean  licensing  process. 

Do  you  figure  the  two-tiered  system  is  one  of  the  strong  points  of  the  system? 

Well,  it’s  not  two-tiered  so  much  as  you’ve  got  this  investigatory  body,  the  Control  Board.  They 
investigate  you.  So  they’ve  got  something  to  say  because  they’ve  got  all  the  facts.  They  conducted  the 
investigation,  and  they’ve  made  determinations.  So  their  recommendations  are  to  be  respected. 

Yes,  they ’ve  spent  time  and  money  and  effort. 

Yes.  Maybe  there  are  still  questions.  And  maybe  you  don’t  agree  with  them,  but  still  in  all,  they 
have  laid  the  groundwork  of  giving  you  all  the  information  they  can  about  this  individual  or  corporation 
or  partnership  that’s  applying  for  a  license.  So,  yes,  it’s  a  very  good  idea.  And  they  have  a  staff  and  they 
have  an  appropriation  to  do  this.  They  send  people  all  over. 

Did  the  Commission  even  have  a  staff  at  all  when  you  were  on  the  Commission? 

No,  our  commission  had  no  staff.  We  had  to  rely  on  the  Control  Board  for  all  investigation  and  all 

reports. 

Do  you  recall  any  time  when  you  went  against  the  Board  as  far  as  their  recommendation? 

No,  1  don’t.  I  don’t  know  whether  we  disagreed  or  not,  or  whether  it  was  a  divided  vote.  I’m  not 
sure  now  after  all  these  years.  1  don’t  remember  any  of  that.  I  think  we  all  came  to  a  unanimous 
conclusion. 

This  might  be  a  tough  question,  but  when  you  were  on  the  Commission,  what  action  or  accomplishments 
are  you  most  proud  of? 

Well,  1  personally  didn’t  do  anything.  We  acted  as  a  body.  And  I  don’t  know  whether  I  can  say  I 
was  proud  of  what  we  did.  We  just  followed  the  legislative  act  of  doing  our  duty  to  rule  on  whatever 


204 


came  before  us.  And  we  tried  to  follow  the  admonition  of  the  governor  who  told  us  that  he  wanted  us  to 
have  the  highest  possible  requirements  to  utilize  the  privilege  that  you  would  get  from  a  license  to  run  a 
gambling  place  or  be  in  the  business.  Of  course,  since  1  was  on  the  Gaming  Commission,  they  have 
required  everybody  that  works  in  gambling  to  have  a  license.  1  don’t  think  we  ever  had  that  except  for  the 
key  employees  maybe.  We  didn’t  have  a  right  to  insist  on  a  license  for  every  employee. 

Yes,  that  may  have  come  later. 

1  think  that  did.  All  we  did  was  license  the  operators.  That  was  all  we  were  going  to  do. 

And  actually,  it’s  logical  that  some  of  the  key  employees  should  he  licensed,  working  in  a  casino. 

Yes.  1  don’t  know  whether  we  had  the  control  over  licensing  key  employees  or  not.  My 
recollection  is  that  mainly  we  licensed  only  those  who  financed  it  and  operated  it. 

Would  you  comment  on  the  integrity  and  the  honor  of  gaming  regulators  that  have  served  Nevada  since 
gaming  was  legalized ? 

Well,  all  1  knew  at  that  time  was  that  we  had  these  men  1  thought  were  people  of  integrity  and 
very  high  honesty  and  ability.  1  don’t  know  of  any  case  in  which  somebody  was  influenced  by  another 
person  or  anything  that  was  “under  the  table”  or  anything  like  that.  As  far  as  1  know,  Nevada’s 
requirements  have  always  been  high  and  their  enforcement  has  always  been  very  clean  and  our 
requirements  were  either  met  or  they  were  denied  licenses.  Whatever  1  have  heard  since  then  is  hearsay 
and  observation,  and  1  have  no  reason  to  believe  that’s  it’s  still  anything  but  the  highest  standard.  The 
only  thing  1  can  say  is  that  it’s  been  a  long  time  since  1  was  on  that  gaming  commission,  and  1  was  only 
on  there  for  a  few  years,  because  the  legislature  amended  the  law,  as  1  explained  to  you  earlier. 

But  it  was  a  very  good  experience.  1  had  never  associated  with  people  in  the  gambling  business. 
The  only  one  that  1  really  knew  was  Bemie  Einstoss.  And  I  don’t  know  if  he  was  in  the  gambling  business 
when  1  was  there  or  not,  but  in  general,  it  was  a  new  world  to  me,  these  people  that  wanted  gambling. 
Some  of  them  only  wanted  slot  machines — people  who  ran  slot  machines  in  various  stores  and  service 
stations  and  bars  and  so  on.  So  there  were  different  classes  of  people.  There  were  big  casinos  and  there 
was  big  money  in  those  big  casinos,  and  then  there  were  the  little  people  that  had  a  restaurant  or  a  store  or 
something  and  they  had  to  have  a  license  in  order  to  rent  a  machine.  So  it  was  a  new  world  to  me  and  a 
very,  very  great  experience. 

And  I  was  surprised  at  how  often  it  touched  people’s  lives,  that  they  had  to  have  a  gaming 
license.  A  man  that  ran  a  restaurant  would  want  somebody  that  had  a  slot  machine  route  to  put  in  a 
machine.  He  had  to  have  a  license  to  be  there.  They  were  going  to  divide  the  money,  and  so  you  had  to 
trust  these  people  that  they  would  live  up  to  their  agreement  of  percentages  and  so  on.  But  it  didn’t  seem 
to  be  any  problem.  And  in  most  of  the  cases  there  were  no  problems  with  the  little  guys.  The  problems 
that  1  noticed  when  1  was  there,  as  1  remember,  were  the  sources  of  money  for  the  big  casinos  and  the 
investments  and  the  control  and  the  persons  behind  it — their  records,  what  they  had  done  before.  Because 
here  was  Nevada,  the  only  state  in  the  union  at  the  time  where  you  could  get  a  license  to  have  a  casino, 
and  they  would  come  here  from  all  over  and  apply  for  these  licenses,  which  were  a  privilege  from  this 
state.  They’d  learned  how  to  run  gambling  places  in  Florida  and  New  York  and  Michigan  and  so  they 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


205 


were  experienced  in  the  gambling  business.  And  in  being  in  the  gambling  business,  they  had  violated  the 
law  of  the  places  where  they  were.  We  didn’t  hold  that  against  them,  unless  they  were  actually  convicted 
or  they  had  reached  the  point  where  they  had  been  barred  by  another  state.  We  knew  these  people  had  to 
have  experience  to  run  the  gambling  and  where  would  they  get  experience?  They  got  experience  in  states 
where  you  don’t  have  licensing.  So  they  would  be  running  gambling  in  clubs  in  Tampa  and  Fort 
Lauderdale  and  various  places,  and  they  had  no  license.  They  just  paid  fines  for  violating  the  law,  a  lot  of 
them. 

Or  briber y  and  pay-off? 

And  we  don’t  know  about  that.  If  we  did  know  about  that,  and  we  knew  that  they  had  violated  the 
law,  1  think  we  would  have  probably  disallowed  them.  But  most  of  the  time  we  knew  they  had  experience 
in  illegal  gambling.  That’s  how  they  learned  the  business,  and  they  wanted  to  come  here  and  be  licensed. 
And  as  long  as  they  could  produce  a  background  showing  that  they  would  operate  a  very  clean  business, 
and  they  weren’t  convicted  of  crimes,  we  treated  them  favorably.  But  if  they  had  a  background  where 
they  had  been  law  violators  and  been  convicted  of  crimes,  we  looked  at  it  askance.  I  don’t  know  what  we 
did  in  each  case  now.  It’s  too  long  ago.  But  we’d  try  to  review  it  carefully  and  be  as  fair  as  we  could.  1 
sense  some  people  think  we  weren’t  fair,  maybe,  but  1  don’t  know,  [laughter] 

Well,  as  you  mentioned  earlier,  David  High  saying  he  couldn ’t  get  a  license,  it’s  his  whole  life. 

It  was  his  whole  life;  it’s  all  he  knew.  And  for  some  reason  or  other,  the  Control  Board 
blackballed  him.  And  when  it  came  out  to  us,  we  affirmed  them.  1  don’t  know  what  had  happened  with 
him.  There  was  something  in  his  background,  some  conviction  or  something,  and  they  just  didn’t  like 
what  he  had  done.  1  mean,  his  record  was  not  clear,  not  clean.  So  he  came  to  me  to  try  to  persuade  me  to 
personally  do  something  about  it,  but,  of  course,  1  couldn’t  do  anything  as  one  member  of  the 
Commission. 

And  there  had  to  be  dozens  of people  like  that,  who  felt  that  if  they  weren ’t  licensed,  what  could  they  do? 
They  knew  nothing  else. 

Well,  if  they  weren’t  licensed,  they  were  out,  that’s  all.  They  were  just  out.  And  there  were  so 
many  people,  as  it  turns  out,  that  grew  up  in  this  world  of  bootleggers — those  people  in  the  1920s,  they 
learned  a  business  of  importing  liquor,  which  was  against  the  law  all  that  time  until  the  repeal  of  the 
Volstead  Act  and  the  amendment  to  the  Constitution.  All  they  knew  was  bringing  in  scotch  and  other 
liquors  or  making  it  themselves,  and  they  violated  the  law.  They  were  in  the  same  position  as  those  that 
learned  gambling  as  young  men  and  that  was  all  they  did  all  their  lives  in  other  states.  And  we  had  to 
consider  that. 

And  I  don’t  know  what  was  wrong  with  High.  1  don’t  remember  his  record  now.  1  don’t 
remember  the  reasons  why  we  didn’t  give  him  a  license.  1  don’t  remember  that  at  all.  But  1  remember  him 
being  denied  a  license,  and  then  his  coming  to  my  office  to  see  if  1  couldn’t  change  that  ruling.  And  of 
course,  1  couldn’t. 


Your  brother  David  was  an  attorney  for  several  gaming  clients,  wasn  ’t  he? 


206 


Yes. 

Did  he  ever  come  in  front  of  the  Commission  when  you  served  on  it? 

No.  My  brother  David,  who  is  deceased  now,  was  a  lawyer  in  Las  Vegas  and  he  had  several 
gambling  clients.  But  the  question  of  licensing  any  of  his  clients  never  came  up.  He  never  appeared 
before  our  commission.  Never.  And  if  he  had,  1  would  have  disqualified  myself.  No,  nothing  involving 
his  practice  of  representing  gamblers  ever  came  before  us.  Apparently,  he  represented  people  who  were 
already  licensed. 

After  you  left  the  Gaming  Commission  and  the  Human  Rights  Commission ,  did  you  go  back  into  private 
law? 


Well,  1  was  in  private  law  the  whole  time.  I  stayed  in  private  law  until  the  early  1970s,  and  I  left 
private  practice  and  became  appointed  by  Bruce  R.  Thompson,  United  States  District  Judge,  as  the  United 
States  Bankruptcy  Judge.  And  then  in  the  early  1980s  1  left  the  position  of  U.S.  Bankruptcy  Judge.  Well,  1 
was  actually  a  referee  in  bankruptcy.  In  those  days  they  called  us  a  referee.  I  left  the  referee’s  office  of 
U.S.  Bankruptcy  in  the  early  1980s  and  1  went  back  into  private  practice  with  Lionel  Sawyer  &  Collins.  1 
was  there  until  1  retired,  in,  1  guess,  the  early  1990s.  And  after  1  was  retired,  Judge  Zive,  who  had  been  at 
Lionel  Sawyer  &  Collins,  became  the  United  States  Bankruptcy  Judge,  and  he  asked  if  I  would  accept  a 
recalled  position  and  I  said  yes.  And  so  he  had  me  appointed  by  the  then-authority,  and  then  we  were 
known  as  bankruptcy  judges.  1  was  recalled  as  a  U.S.  Bankruptcy  judge  sometime  in  early  1990,  and  I’ve 
been  a  recalled  bankruptcy  judge  ever  since.  And  that’s  where  1  am  right  now.  [laughter] 

Well,  thank  you  very  much  for  your  time,  Judge,  and  we  ’ll  get  back  to  you  later. 


All  right,  fine.  Thank  you. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


207 


9 

Dennis  Gomes 


Dennis  Gomes,  born  in  San  Jose,  California  in  1944, 
moved  to  Las  Vegas  in  1960.  After  graduating  from 
Bishop  Gorman  High  School,  he  earned  a  Bachelor  of 
Science  degree  in  accounting  from  Nevada  Southern 
University  (later  to  become  the  University  of  Nevada  Las 
Vegas).  After  a  decade  of  working  in  private  industry,  he 
earned  a  Master ’s  Degree  in  business  and  finance  from 
the  University  of  Washington.  A  few  years  later  Mr. 
Gomes  applied  for  a  position  with  the  Nevada  Gaming 
Control  Board  and  after  interviewing  with  governor-elect 
Michael  O  ’  Callaghan,  he  was  selected  to  head  up  the 
audit  division.  Mr.  Gomes  soon  created  a  special 
investigative  team  with  the  goal  of  “running  the  mob  out 
of  Las  Vegas.  ”  Gomes  ’  lengthy  gaming  career  included 
associations  with  some  of  Las  Vegas ’s  and  Atlantic  City ’s 
largest  hotel  casinos  and  working  relationships  with 
gaming  operators  such  as  Donald  Trump  and  Steve  Wynn. 
He  died  in  2012. 


Dennis  Gomes.  Photo  courtesy  of  Dennis  Gomes 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  afternoon.  My  name  is  Dwayne  Kling.  It ’s  July  1 7  in  the  year  2002. 1  ’m  with  Dennis 
Gomes  in  his  office  in  the  Tropicana  Hotel  Casino  in  Las  Vegas,  Nevada.  Dennis,  does  the  University  of 
Nevada  Oral  History  Program  have  the  right  to  tape  these  interviews  today? 


Dennis  Gomes:  Yes,  they  do. 


208 


Thank  you  very  much.  Dennis,  when  and  where  were  you  born? 

I  was  bom  in  San  Jose,  California,  on  January  11,  1944. 

When  did  you  come  to  Las  Vegas? 

1  came  to  Las  Vegas  in  approximately  1959  or  1960. 1  attended  Bishop  Gorman  High  School 
during  my  last  two  years  and  graduated. 

What  did  you  do  when  you  got  out  of  Bishop  Gorman? 

1  got  married  right  away  and  proceeded  to  have  a  child  almost  immediately,  [laughter]  and 
because  of  that  had  to  work  forty  hours  a  week  while  1  attended  the  University  of  Nevada  at  Las  Vegas, 
which  then  was  called  Nevada  Southern  University.  1  worked  to  support  my  wife  and  child  and  also  finish 
my  degree  in  four  years.  I  graduated  in  1966  with  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  accounting. 

Did  you  go  to  work  for  an  accounting  firm  shortly  after  that? 

Yes,  1  went  to  work  for  the  international  firm  of  Peat,  Marwick,  Mitchell  &  Co.,  which  then  was 
the  largest  accounting  firm  in  the  world.  And  they  sent  me  to  Hawaii  for  my  first  job. 

How  did  you  like  it  in  Hawaii? 

It  was  pretty  expensive.  It  had  the  highest  cost  of  living  area  in  the  entire  United  States,  and  think 
my  salary  at  the  time  was  about  six  thousand  dollars  a  year,  [laughter]  And  I  think  by  then  1  had  two 
children,  [laughter] 

How  long  did  you  stay  with  that  firm? 

I  was  with  Peat,  Merrick  for  three  years,  and  while  there  1  obtained  my  C.P.A.  certificate  and 
became  a  supervising  senior  accountant  for  them  within  their  audit  section  where  1  went  around  to  audit 
clients  and  audited  their  books  and  records  and  internal  control  systems.  1  left  there  in  1969. 

You  left  there  to  go  to  work  with  the  Gaming  Control  Board? 

No.  1  left  there  to  go  to  graduate  school.  1  was  admitted  to  the  University  of  Washington  graduate 
school  of  business.  1  went  there  in  1969  and  I  think  1  graduated  in  1971  with  a  master’s  degree  in  business 
with  a  specialty  in  finance.  1  did  quite  well  there.  1  think  my  grade  point  average  was  3.95.  [laughter] 

Well,  that ’s  pretty  close  to  perfect. 

Yes,  I  got  all  As  and  one  B.  [laughter] 


So  what  did  you  do  then? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


209 


As  soon  as  I  graduated  I  went  to  work  for  another  international  accounting  firm,  which  also  had  a 
consulting  service.  Coopers  &  Lybrand  was  the  name  of  the  firm  then,  and  1  went  to  work  as  a 
management  consultant  in  their  MIS  department.  I  did  that  for  approximately  a  year,  and  during  that  one 
year,  I  applied  for  different  law  enforcement  agencies,  including  the  Nevada  Gaming  Control  Board. 

What  precipitated  your  move  towards  gambling? 

Well,  during  my  whole  career  I  really  wanted  to  be  an  agent  with  the  FBI.  And  when  I  finally  got 
my  master’s  degree  and  my  C.P.A.,  which  would  enable  me  to  go  into  the  FBI,  my  wife  at  the  time  felt 
that  the  FBI  salary  was  too  low.  I  think  they  were  starting  at  about  twelve  thousand  dollars  a  year 
[laughter]  and  she  didn’t  want  me  to  take  a  cut  in  pay.  I  was  already  making  fifteen  thousand  dollars  a 
year  for  Coopers  &  Lybrand  as  a  consultant,  and  she  was  not  happy  about  that. 

So  I  looked  around  for  other  agencies,  and  the  opportunity  arose  to  work  for  the  Nevada  Gaming 
Control  Board.  I  learned  about  that  through  my  father,  who  was  a  friend  of  a  fellow  by  the  name  of 
George  Brookman.  George  Brookman’s  wife  was  in  the  state  assembly  and  she  knew  the  newly-elected 
governor,  “Mike”  O’ Callaghan,  and  felt  that  he  should  receive  my  application.  She  knew  I  wanted  to  get 
into  law  enforcement  and  that  I  had  a  strong  financial  background.  So  they  delivered  my  application  to 
the  new  governor,  who  had  not  yet  taken  office,  and  he  eventually  called  for  me  to  go  down  for  an 
interview. 

When  I  went  for  the  interview,  my  brother  was  also  being  interviewed  for  a  position  with  the  state 
Health  and  Welfare  Department.  So  we  both  flew  down  to  Reno  and  then  up  to  Carson  City,  and  we  went 
to  Mike  O’Callaghan’s  home  in  Carson  City  and  had  the  interview.  At  that  time  Phil  Hannifin  was  there, 
who,  I  guess,  the  governor  had  already  determined  would  be  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  and 
also  a  guy  that  was  head  of  the  welfare  agency,  George  something — 1  can’t  remember  his  last  name.  He 
was  there  to  talk  about  that.  And  we  proceeded  to  have  an  interview  with  Mike  O’ Callaghan  and  Phil 
Hannifin  and  my  brother  and  this  George. 

They  asked  me  a  lot  of  questions  about  my  philosophy  and  my  background,  and  told  me  if  I  took 
this  job  I’d  have  to  go  through  police-type  training — I  forget  what  they  called  it.  They  explained  to  me 
that  my  function  would  be  to  audit  casinos  and  to  investigate  casinos  for  skimming  and  organized  crime 
infiltration  and  make  sure  that  none  of  those  things  were  occurring.  And  Mike  O’Callaghan  told  me  that 
he  basically  didn’t  owe  the  casino  industry  anything  and  that  he  really  wanted  to  make  sure  it  was  cleaned 
up.  He  was  aware  that  there  were  some  problems  associated  with  the  industry,  and  that  if  I  got  the  job  I 
could  just  go  in  and  clean  it  out.  Phil  Hannifin  basically  reiterated  that  same  thing.  I  said  that  I  was 
confident  that  I  could  do  that,  even  though  I  had  not  had  any  law  enforcement  background,  but  I  had 
extensive  audit  experience,  that  I  realized  that  if  there  was  organized  crime  infiltration  that  if  you  were 
able  to  follow  money  that  would  be  the  important  thing,  and  that  I  would  be  willing  to  go  through 
whatever  law  enforcement  training  I  needed  to,  but  that  I  was  comfortable  with  it  and  confident  that  I 
could  more  than  handle  the  job.  And  turned  out  that  during  the  interview  of  my  brother,  they  weren’t 
crazy  about  his  philosophy  about  welfare  and  things  [laughter],  and  so  they  didn’t  select  him.  But 
ultimately  they  called  me  back  and  told  me  that  I  had  the  position.  And  I  remember  when  the  press  release 
came  out  they  were  a  little  bit  embarrassed  because  I  was  so  young,  so  they  added  a  couple  of  years  onto 
my  age.  [laughter]  I  guess  it  could  have  been  inadvertent,  but  I  always  felt  that  they  were  a  little 
embarrassed  that  I  was  only,  I  think,  twenty-six  years  old  at  the  time,  [laughter] 


210 


[laughter]  And  that  was  when? 

Nineteen  seventy-one,  I  think. 

And  were  you  hired  as  head  of  the  audit  division? 

1  was  hired  as  head  of  the  audit  division,  which  either  included  a  special  investigations  unit  or  1 
established  a  special  investigations  unit.  It  ultimately  became  audit  and  special  investigations.  They  didn’t 
really  put  any  parameters  on  me.  1  started  there  and  1  remember  walking  in  and  there  were  a  couple  of 
guys — one  guy  was  seventy -two  years  old  and  the  other  guys  were  fairly  old  and  had  been  around  a  long 
time.  And  their  orientation  was  basically  auditing  revenue  records.  The  first  thing  1  did  was  form  an 
intelligence  unit.  They  gave  me  free  hand  to  hire  and  do  anything  1  wanted  to,  and  I  hired  a  guy  that  was  a 
former  FBI  agent,  and  1  set  him  working  on  gathering  intelligence  with  respect  to  all  the  casinos.  1  had 
him  do  summaries  with  respect  to  all  the  major  licensees  so  1  could  get  an  idea  of  what  their  backgrounds 
were,  and  also  have  some  ideas  in  terms  of  priorities,  where  1  would  need  to  concentrate  my  efforts.  1  also 
established  procedures,  investigative  and  audit  procedures,  and  I  was  responsible  for  investigating  and 
determining  the  source  of  loan  funds  to  the  casinos.  That  was  a  whole  ongoing  process.  And  also,  1  felt 
that  1  was  understaffed.  1  think  at  the  time  1  only  had  six  agents  for  the  entire  state. 

By  the  time  1  finished  gathering  the  intelligence  information,  1  realized  that  we  had  some  big 
problems,  that  basically  a  great  number  of  the  casinos,  if  not  the  majority  of  them — of  the  large  ones — 
were  controlled  by  organized  crime.  It  was  at  least  my  opinion  that  that  was  true  at  the  time  based  on  the 
information  that  1  had.  And  1  felt  that  1  needed  a  lot  more  manpower  and  a  different  type  of  agent.  So  the 
first  thing  they  did,  they  sent  me  to  what  1  think  was  called  “post  school.”  It  was  a  law  enforcement 
training  and  standards  thing.  It’s  sort  of  like  a  police  academy -type  thing,  but  it  was  not  extensive.  1  can’t 
remember  how  many  weeks  it  was,  but  1  had  to  go,  and  they  had  FBI  people  that  talked  to  us,  and  they 
had  training  of  one  kind  or  another  in  dealing  with  the  rules  of  evidence,  and  taught  us  firearms.  We  had 
to  go  out  on  the  firing  range  and  do  a  lot  of  shooting. 

Where  was  it  located? 

The  Clark  County  Sheriffs  Department  firing  range  was  where  we  did  a  lot  of  that  stuff.  And 
they’d  set  up  ambushes  and  so  on,  and  basically  taught  you  the  law  enforcement  elements  of  the  job.  It 
was  fairly  extensive.  They  even  taught  us  how  to  investigate  traffic  accidents,  [laughter]  It  was  quite 
lengthy. 

It  was  after  1  had  gone  to  the  legislature  and  got  permission  to  hire  quite  a  few  more  agents.  1 
can’t  remember  how  many  1  had  exactly  at  that  time,  but  at  one  point  in  time  1  remember  1  had  about  sixty 
agents.  Most  of  the  men  had  law  enforcement  backgrounds.  Or  if  they  didn’t,  they  were  trained  by  this 
peace  officer  training  program.  And  we  were  all  sworn  in  as  peace  officers  and  had  the  right  to  carry 
weapons  and  so  on,  which  I  would  limit  depending  on  the  need  for  it  with  the  respect  to  the  agents.  But 
the  interesting  thing  was  1  was  trying  to  create  a  hybrid  agent,  a  guy  that  would  have  an  equal  facility  in 
the  financial  as  well  as  the  law  enforcement  aspects  of  the  job.  There  was  a  lot  of  resistance  by  some  of 
the  other  divisions  that  were  made  up  of  mostly  cops,  traditional  cops  that  came  off  the  street — police 
officers.  And  1  remember  in  particular  the  enforcement  division,  they  were  always  making  tun  of  my 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


211 


guys.  They  knew  we  were  going  to  be  going  to  this  peace  officer  training  program,  and  so  they  were 
making  fun  of  guys  that  they  regarded  as  accountants.  Even  though  a  lot  of  my  guys  were  ex-FBI  agents 
and  ex-IRS  intelligence  agents,  they  just  kept  saying  that  we  were  accountants  and  we  were  going  to 
shoot  our  feet  off  when  we  went  to  the  firing  range. 

So  I  had  everybody  buy  their  weapons,  and  before  we  went  to  this  training  program,  we  went  out 
to  local  firing  ranges,  and  we  practiced  and  practiced  and  practiced  and  practiced  until  every  one  of  us 
were  pretty  good  shots  on  firing  ranges,  sort  of  like  a  combat  course  where  they  use  the  body  silhouettes. 
And  we  didn’t  tell  anybody  else  that  we  were  doing  this  because  I  wanted  to  have  a  good  showing  at  this 
training  program.  So  when  we  went  through  the  training  program  my  guys  did  very  well,  and  they  taught 
us  some  self-defense  things,  and  it  was  how  I  first  got  an  interest  in  martial  arts.  I’m  now  a  master  in 
Karate,  a  fourth-degree  black  belt  in  Tong  Soo  Do  and  a  second-degree  black  belt  in  Hapkido.  And  I’ve 
done  a  lot  of  other  types  of  martial  arts,  including  grappling,  Jujutsu,  and  Kung  Fu,  and  some  other  things. 
But  it  started  all  way  back  then. 

But  during  the  course  of  this  training,  I  remember  an  interesting  thing.  Everybody  was  lined  up 
on  this  firing  range  and  the  range  master  said,  “OK,  draw  your  weapons,”  and  the  cops  from  the 
enforcement  division  were  kind  of  smirking  and  laughing  because  they  thought  that  we  were  going  to 
really  look  bad  and  they  were  going  to  show  us  up.  By  the  time  the  smoke  cleared,  every  one  of  my 
agents  had  their  shots  all  in  nice  compact  little  patterns  and  some  of  the  other  guys,  some  of  the  traditional 
cops,  weren’t  even  hitting  their  targets,  [laughter]  So  we  kind  of  shut  them  up,  and  everybody  was  real 
proud  of  themselves  and  we  celebrated  after  that.  The  accountants  basically  showed  up  the  cops,  and  it 
was  just  the  beginning.  I  mean,  we  were  establishing  a  camaraderie  and  esprit  de  coips  that,  I  think,  began 
in  those  early  days  in  that  school  and  extended  into  our  investigative  life  that  we  conducted  after  that. 

So  some  of  you  have  stayed  together  for  years  ” 

Oh,  yes.  I  still  have  some  of  them  working  for  me.  And  we  began  in  a  small  way.  We  did  a  lot  of 
work,  we  gathered  intelligence,  and  we  worked  closely  with  the  investigation  division  that  was  headed  by 
Tom  Carrigan.  I  worked  very  closely  with  him.  When  you’re  a  police  officer  and  you  go  to  work,  say 
you’re  in  a  patrol  division,  you’ve  got  an  experienced  guy  that  teaches  you  some  things  and  gives  you 
pointers.  Well,  Tom  Carrigan  was  head  of  the  investigations  division.  And  maybe  initially  it  wasn’t  the 
enforcement  division,  but  whatever  it  was,  he  gave  me  a  lot  of  guidance,  and  he  would  utilize  me  and  my 
agents  for  different  things.  We  worked  together  on  a  lot  of  things.  I  remember  one  of  the  first  things  we 
did  was  a  surprise  count  room  examination,  where  we  had  the  place  under  surveillance,  and  we  conducted 
a  raid  together  with  Tom  Carrigan’ s  group  of  people.  I  caught  the  owner  of  this  small  casino  in  northern 
Nevada,  in  Reno,  skimming  money  with  a  double  set  of  books.  It  was  an  interesting  thing:  he  had  the 
drop  bag,  he  opened  it  up  and  he  poured  the  money  out,  and  he  threw  the  bag  in  the  comer,  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

So  we  counted  the  money,  and  I  said,  “What  else  is  in  the  bag?” 

And  he  said,  “Nothing.” 

So  I  said,  “Hold  it  upside  down  by  the  bottom.”  He  held  it  upside  down  and  I  said,  “Now  shake 
it,”  and  out  popped  these  two  little  books.  And  they  had  all  the  real  numbers  in  them,  versus  the  ones  that 
he  was  recording.  So  we  had  all  the  evidence  we  needed  to  show  that  he’d  been  skimming  money. 


212 


Tom  Carrigan  was  pretty  impressed  with  our  work.  Phil  Hannifin  was  very  impressed  with  it,  and 
that  was  sort  of  the  beginning  of  enlightenment  of  the  top  people,  like  Phil  Hannifin  and  the  board 
members,  as  to  what  guys  with  financial  backgrounds  and  law  enforcement  training  could  do.  In  terms  of 
skimming  and  organized  crime  involvement,  things  of  that  nature,  that  was  the  beginning.  So  Phil 
Hannifin  kind  of  gave  me  a  free  reign.  Shannon  Bybee  was  my  immediate  boss  in  Las  Vegas,  and 
Shannon  and  1  worked  very,  very  closely  together.  We  were  like  partners  in  all  this.  1  didn’t  delegate  very 
well  in  those  days,  so  1  basically  went  out  and  did  most  of  the  investigations  myself,  particularly  the  key 
ones.  1  did  most  of  the  interrogations  and  everything,  and  I  got  total  support  from  Shannon  Bybee.  We 
planned  a  strategy  and  everything. 

And  one  by  one  we  just  began  getting  into  some  of  the  big  operators.  The  Tropicana  was  one; 
then  the  Aladdin  was  coming  in  for  licensing.  Caesars  Palace  is  another  one.  There  was  an  investigation 
there  that  1  personally  handled  that  began  with  a  loan  of  money  that  went  into  Caesars  Palace.  Since  1  was 
responsible  for  investigating  the  loan,  I  found  out  that  the  money  was  coming  from  a  particular 
corporation.  1  can’t  remember  if  it  was  an  insurance  company  or  what  it  was.  It  was  a  company  that  was 
something  investments.  It  was  a  lot  of  money.  1  pursued  this  company,  and  when  we  tracked  it,  it  didn’t 
really  show  who  the  owners  were,  but  1  remember  the  address  where  it  was  registered,  and  that  particular 
address  looked  familiar  to  me.  1  couldn’t  place  it.  And  when  1  checked  out  the  address  once  1  found  it,  it 
was  the  address  of  a  guy  by  the  name  of  Alvin  Malnik. 

Alvin  Malnik  was  an  associate  of  Meyer  Lansky.  He  was  Meyer  Lansky’s  protege  to  take  over  all 
of  Meyer  Lansky’s  stuff.  He  had  a  really  bad  background.  He  was  an  attorney  that  helped  control  the 
mob’s  money  in  the  Bahamas  and  Europe  and  1  believe  even  in  Havana.  And  this  address  was  his 
business  address  and  restaurant.  It  was  the  Forge  Restaurant  in  Miami.  So  once  we  realized  the  money 
was  coming  from  Alvin  Malnik,  then  we  investigated  it  and  found  that  the  way  the  money  originated  is 
they  sold  this  Skylight  Country  Club  to  this  Alvin  Malnik,  and  his  money  came  into  Caesars  Palace,  and 
it  was  in  terms  of  some  very  complex  cash  flow.  It  was  a  ton  of  money  that  was  going  back  out  to  him 
through  that,  and  then  subsequently  some  of  it  was  loaned  back  to  the  corporation.  So  it  was  some  major 
transactions.  Taking  the  license  away  from  Caesars  Palace  would  have  been  a  big  thing  and  politically  it 
was  pretty  tough,  1  guess.  1  remember  Phil  Hannifin  made  the  comment  to  me  when  1  gave  him  this  this 
investigative  report — it  was  very  complex  and  showed  all  this  involvement  with  Alvin  Malnik  and  all  this 
money  going  out  to  him,  and  Phil  Hannifin  always  wanted  to  do  the  right  thing — he  said,  “Geez!  You  shit 
in  my  backyard  and  now  I’ve  got  to  clean  it  up.”  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

So  the  Commission  ended  up  putting  all  kinds  of  requirements,  or  at  least  the  Division 
recommended  requirements,  contingencies  on  Caesars  Palace’s  license  that  if  they  ever  did  business  with 
Alvin  Malnik  again  they’d  take  their  license  away.  And  the  Perlman  brothers  owned  Caesars  Palace,  1 
think,  at  that  time.  Well,  in  later  years  subsequent  to  that,  we  found  another  transaction.  It  was  very 
similar,  and  it  turned  out  they  were  doing  the  same  thing  with  Alvin  Malnik.  So  1  said,  “OK,  now  it’s  time 
to  take  his  license  away.”  They  completely  defied  the  contingency.  And  I  was  very  upset  at  the  time 
because  they  never  did  take  Caesars  Palace’s  license  away.  In  fact,  it  wasn’t  until  the  Perlmans  applied 
for  a  license  in  New  Jersey  that  the  Division  of  Gaming  Enforcement  in  New  Jersey,  who  later  on  1  went 
to  work  for,  took  action.  They  had  a  copy  of  my  investigation,  that  original  one,  which  Caesars  Palace  had 
tried  to  discredit  at  the  time — 1  had  subsequently  left  law  enforcement — by  saying  1  saw  a  mob  guy 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


213 


behind  every  bush. 

But  right  during  the  course  of  that  investigation,  they  had  an  ABSCAM  FBI  investigation  in  New 
Jersey  where  Alvin  Malnik  came  in  and  was  trying  to  get  funds  from  some  supposed  Arabs  who  were 
really  FBI  agents.  And  Alvin  Malnik  was  explaining  to  them  all  the  things  they’re  doing  at  Caesars 
Palace,  [laughter]  and  how  they’re  changing  this  and  changing  that,  basically  talking  as  if  he  was  an 
owner  of  Caesars  Palace.  So  that  ABSCAM  investigation,  together  with  my  old  investigation  that  was 
alleging  all  these  same  things,  showing  that  there  were  all  these  financial  transactions  between  the 
Perlmans  and  Caesars  Palace  and  Alvin  Malnik — together,  that  was  like  confirmation  of  my  investigation. 
So  it  caused  the  Perlmans  and  Caesars  to  be  denied  a  license  then  in  the  state  of  New  Jersey,  although 
they  gave  Caesars  a  license.  They  kicked  the  Perlmans  out  of  it  and  made  them  sell  the  company.  So  that 
basically  cleaned  up  Caesars  Palace,  and  cleaned  the  mob  out  of  Caesars  Palace  because  they  were  gone. 
Although  they  did  hate  me. 

[laughter] 

During  the  course  of  that  Alvin  Malnik  investigation  of  Caesars  I  was  flying  to  New  Jersey  to 
become  the  new  chief  of  investigations.  1  was  chief  of  the  special  investigations  bureau  for  the  Division  of 
Gaming  Enforcement  in  New  Jersey.  They  hired  me  to  do  that.  And  the  newspapers  quoted  Flarry  Wald, 
who  was  head  of  Caesars  at  the  time,  as  saying  he  hoped  my  plane  crashed. 

Boy. 


Yes.  So  they  weren’t  real  happy  with  me  at  the  time. 

Did  you  actually  ever  get  threatened  physically? 

Oh,  yes.  1  received  a  phone  call  one  time  from  a  guy  that  was  an  oddball  thing.  1  can’t  even 
remember  the  nature  of  it,  but  the  guy  was  threatening  me  and  my  family,  and  1  was  getting  a  little 
nervous.  1  was  carrying  my  gun  with  me  all  the  time  when  1  was  receiving  these  threats.  1  think  he 
actually  worked  at  the  Hilton.  1  can’t  remember  what  his  name  was.  But  he  was  at  a  pretty  high  level. 
There  was  lots  of  information  around  about  him  threatening  people  with  knives  and  things  like  that.  And  1 
worried  about  it  for  a  while,  and  then  1  just  forgot  about  it  and  quit  worrying  about  it.  And  in  the 
meantime  he  got  arrested  and  he  was  convicted  of  a  contract  murder  and  sent  to  prison.  The  problem  was, 
though,  on  a  subsequent  appeal,  because  he  wasn’t  properly  advised  of  his  rights,  that  tainted  the  whole 
case,  and  it  got  thrown  out  and  he  got  let  out  of  jail.  Thankfully  he  never  did  come  after  me.  But  1  was  a 
little  worried  during  the  course  of  those  things. 

And  during  the  Stardust  investigation  there  were  a  lot  of  mob  cases  we  were  working.  We  were 
just  sweeping  through  the  gaming  industry,  and  we  also  were  placed  in  charge  of  the  financial  portion  of 
applicant  investigations,  following  the  applicants’  money.  We  were  causing  a  lot  of  licenses  to  be  denied 
by  finding  mob  connections  and  with  financial  transactions  and  a  lot  of  background  stuff. 

This  is  when  you  were  working  with  Phil? 


Y es,  with  Phil  Hannifin  and  Shannon  Bybee.  And  we  caused  one  denial  after  another.  It  seemed 


214 


like  a  continuous  thing.  And  because  they  had  never  done  a  financial  background — that  was  typically  the 
investigations  division’s  purview — I  had  proposed  to  Phil  Hannifin  and  Shannon  Bybee  that  because  we 
had  financial  expertise  and  they  didn’t,  that  became  our  investigative  responsibility.  1  started  that  as  a 
normal  procedure.  Prior  to  that  they  had  never  traced  funds,  if  you  can  believe  that.  They  never  traced  any 
funds.  All  they  would  do,  if  funds  were  coming  in  to  a  licensee,  they  would  merely  call  the  bank  and 
confirm  that  the  bank  had  the  funds;  that  was  it. 

They  didn ’t  say  where  it  came  from ,  right? 

No,  had  no  idea  where  it  came  from.  And  1  proposed  this  and  told  them  it  was  a  flaw,  and  they  all 
agreed,  and  Phil  Hannifin  let  me  create  this  whole  section.  After  we  had  a  lot  of  successes  with  this, 
eventually,  they  split  that  off  from  my  agency  and  gave  it  back  to  investigations  and  took  some  of  my 
agents  that  I’d  trained  to  do  that.  At  the  time  I  was  a  little  upset  and  told  Phil  Hannifin  that  I  was  going  to 
quit .  .  .  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

.  .  .  .and  he  says,  “Well,  don’t  let  the  doorknob  hit  you  in  the  ass.  You  can  leave.”  And  so  I 
changed  my  mind  [laughter]  and  decided  to  stay.  I  went  back  and  told  my  agents,  “Y ou  know  what,  we 
might  not  be  involved  in  applicant  investigations  anymore,  but  they’re  not  going  to  be  able  to  do  what  we 
could  do.  And  all  that’s  going  to  mean  is  we’re  going  to  have  more  to  do  with  the  existing  licensed  people 
ferreting  out  organized  crime  that  got  past  investigations.”  [laughter]  And  it  was  sort  of  a  competitive 
thing  where  we  felt  that  we  were  better,  and  maybe  it’s  competitiveness  and  elitism.  We  thought  a  lot  of 
ourselves  at  the  time.  And  1  remember  at  one  point  they  licensed  a  guy  by  the  name  of  Allen  Glick.  We 
did  a  little  bit  of  that  investigation,  but  we  were  kept  out  of  big  pieces  of  it,  because  it  really  wasn’t  all  of 
our  purview  any  longer.  But  we  did  some  of  it. 

This  was  when  Allen  Glick  was  trying  to  get  licensed  at  which  property? 

I  think  the  Hacienda  was  his  first  one.  And  1  think  we  did  a  fairly  extensive  background.  There 
was  a  lot  of  stuff  but  nothing  strong  enough  to  get  him  denied  a  gaming  license. 

Did  you  have  a  gut  feeling  that  there  was  something  wrong? 

Y es,  I  thought  he  was  dirty  from  the  beginning.  I  thought  it  was  bad,  but  he  kind  of  insinuated 
himself  into  Nevada  society  and  became  close  with  all  the  politicians,  with  everybody  around.  People  just 
trusted  him,  and  he  was  a  very  articulate,  intelligent  guy.  I  believe  we  participated  in  his  initial 
investigation,  and  at  one  point  were  pulled  off.  And  when  he  bought,  I  think,  the  Marina,  I  wanted  to  go 
down  and  investigate  the  source  of  his  funds,  that  big  financial  deal  that  he  had  in  Mexico,  and  we  were 
never  allowed  to  do  that.  In  fact,  I  believe  Shannon  Bybee  and  Phil  Hannifin  went  down  there,  and  Jack 
Stratton  went  down  to  Mexico  to  do  this,  and  I  remember  saying,  “Y ou  know  what,  that  really  irritates  me 
because  they  don’t  have  the  financial  expertise  to  do  it.  They  won’t  even  know  what  they’re  looking  at.”  I 
was  talking  about  Allen  Glick  and  how  we  weren’t  able  to  go  trace  his  transactions.  And  the  board 
members  went,  and  that  didn’t  allow  us  to  do  it.  And  I  remember  I  was  very  angry.  Their  intentions  were 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


215 


good,  and  there  was  integrity  there.  1  mean,  Phil  Hannifin  and  Shannon  Bybee  had  extremely  high 
integrity,  just  really  good  people,  but  1  remember  at  the  time,  1  said,  “That  would  be  like  me  going  down 
to  handle  a  trial  someplace  not  being  an  attorney.  They  have  no  idea  what  they’re  looking  at,  and  they’re 
not  really  going  to  be  able  to  trace  the  funds.”  And  they  came  back  and  said  everything  was  OK,  but  1 
remember  1  was  skeptical  that  they  really  didn’t  know  what  they  were  looking  at. 

Then  at  some  point  in  time  they  removed  us  from  background  investigations  of  applicants,  so  1 
said,  “Well,  it’s  just  going  to  give  us  more  to  investigate  when  people  become  licensed,  more  to  go  after.” 
1  always  felt  like  Allen  Glick  was  dirty,  and  I  had  in  my  mind  that  1  was  going  to  catch  him,  because  he 
wasn’t  going  to  get  away  with  this.  And  then  just  the  way  he  got  his  money,  he  got  it  from  the  Teamsters 
for  the  Stardust  when  he  bought  that,  and  everyone  was  aware  that  the  Teamsters  pension  fund  was 
controlled  by  the  mob.  And  so  it  just  confirmed  to  me  that  this  was  a  mob  guy,  and  it  gave  me  even  more 
determination  to  find  out  how  they  were  getting  money  out  of  the  place,  and  how  they  were  skimming, 
and  what  their  connections  were,  and  to  stop  it. 

Were  Sachs  and  Tobman  and  Rosenthal  working  for  Glick  at  the  time? 

Well,  now  the  funny  thing  is  Sachs  and  Tobman  were.  And  A1  Sachs,  1  liked.  1  thought  he  was  a 
likeable  guy  who  treated  people  right.  1  liked  Tobman,  too.  But  Frank  Rosenthal  came  in,  and  now  all  of  a 
sudden  there  was  in- fighting  in  the  company;  they  started  fighting  about  who  was  going  to  control  what. 

Rosenthal  and  Glick  were  fighting? 

It  was  Sachs  and  Tobman  against  Rosenthal. 

Two  to  one. 

Yes.  And  so  finally,  Sachs  and  Tobman  left;  they  resigned  from  their  positions  and  they  were 
gone.  And  it  was  Rosenthal  and  Glick.  Of  course,  then  1  had  a  huge  intelligence  network  of  people,  and  1 
was  getting  information  bit  by  bit.  1  was  really  concentrating  on  this  because  although  we  had  other 
investigations  going  that  we  were  successful  at,  this  was  the  big  one  to  me.  As  1  was  gathering 
intelligence,  1  gathered  more  information  that  confirmed  to  me  that  this  was  organized  crime  and  they 
were  skimming. 

Were  you  gathering  some  of  this  information  from  informants  and  some  from  your  team? 

Yes.  A  lot  from  informants,  a  lot  from  snitches  1  had,  and  a  lot  through  our  agents  that  were  out 
gathering  information  and  bringing  in  various  facts. 

Yes,  your  personal  team. 

Yes.  And  a  lot  of  things  would  happen  that  were  strange.  1  had  people  who  were  working  in 
places  who  were  telling  me  things,  too.  1  mean,  no  one  ever  said,  “Yes,  they’re  skimming  money,”  but 
there  were  things  that  just  seemed  unreasonable  that  were  happening.  1  started  analyzing  the  theoretical 
win  statistics  of  the  slot  machines  versus  what  they  were  holding,  and  they  were  holding  so  far  less  than 


216 


they  were  designed  to  hold  that  1  knew  something  was  wrong.  And  1  kept  sending  agents  out  to  check  the 
scales  and  things  to  see  if  they  were  underweighing  coin  or  something.  Every  time  they’d  go  out  there 
they’d  come  back  and  say  they  were  fine.  And  1  think  Carl  Thomas  may  have  involved  in  that  place  for  a 
while,  too.  He  was  at  Circus  Circus  with  a  guy  by  the  name  of  Jay  Samo,  and  1  had  a  snitch  right  in  the 
place  who  was  telling  me  that  they  were  skimming  money  out  of  there.  And  this  was  way  before  the 
Stardust.  This  was  like  a  year  or  so  before. 

1  set  up  the  surveillance  across  the  street  at  the  Riviera.  1  was  forced  into  using  an  enforcement 
division  agent.  His  name  was  Bob  Everett.  And  1  didn’t  want  to  use  him  because  one  time  on  a  raid  of  a 
sportsbook  he  panicked  and  disappeared,  and  after  all  the  heat  and  everything  was  passed,  he  told  me  that 
he  was  following  somebody  in  a  car,  and  1  realized  he  just  didn’t  show  up  because  he  was  afraid.  And  so  1 
didn’t  really  have  a  lot  of  faith  in  him.  But  either  Shannon  Bybee  or  Phil  Hannifin  or  one  of  them  forced 
me  to  use  this  guy,  because  they  wanted  me  to  be  cooperative  in  terms  of  the  other  divisions.  And,  of 
course,  they  didn’t  know  anything.  At  the  level  I  was  at,  1  had  more  knowledge  of  these  guys,  and  they 
were  good  enforcement  agents,  too,  but  we  just  had  our  own  group  of  guys  that  we  trusted  and  didn’t  trust 
anybody  else.  And  this  particular  agent  was  sitting  in  the  parking  lot  and  a  metro  cop  came  by  and  said, 
“What  are  you  doing?”  because  somebody  called.  The  metro  guy  that  came  was  a  guy  that  was  in  an 
intelligence  unit  for  metro  that  I’ve  always  felt  had  too  close  of  a  relationship  with  the  bad  guys  in  town. 

Well,  my  snitch  calls  me  the  next  day  and  says,  “You  might  as  well  forget  your  investigation 
because  we  just  got  word  from  Carl  Thomas  that  we  better  stop,  that  what  we’re  doing  is  skimming.” 

They  were  skimming  out  of  the  count  room  the  same  way  later  on  they  were  doing  at  the  Stardust. 
“They’ve  got  to  stop  this  because  the  Gaming  Control  Board  is  onto  it  and  it’s  monitoring  it  from  across 
the  street.”  They’d  paid  this  guy  from  metropolitan  police  department  two  thousand  dollars  for  this 
information.  So  that  was  the  end  of  that,  right?  And  so  now  I’m  pursuing  it  a  year  or  so  later  at  these  other 
places,  and  every  time  I’d  sent  agents  out  to  these  count  rooms  to  do  the  surprise  I  wanted  them  to  test  the 
scales  to  see  if  they  were  underweighing,  because  I  had  a  hypothesis  that  they  were  underweighing  coins, 
somehow  stealing  it.  And  every  time  they’d  test  the  scales,  they’d  come  out  accurate.  I’d  get  the  guys 
back,  and  I’d  say,  “ Can ’t  be.”  And  I  couldn’t  go  out  there  because  I  didn’t  want  to  put  too  much  emphasis 
on  this  because  I  didn’t  want  them  to  think  that  I  had  any  information  about  what  was  going  on,  which  I 
did,  or  I  didn’t  want  to  put  so  much  heat  on  it  that  they  would  stop  like  the  other  place  did,  and  then  I 
wouldn’t  be  able  to  catch  them.  And  then  I  find  out  that  one  of  the  agents  in  the  enforcement  division  was 
getting  money  and  furniture  and  things  like  that  from  Jay  Vandermark  that  controlled  the  Stardust  slot 
operations.  So  then  I  realized  why  every  time  we’d  come  out  there  the  scales  were  working  so  well, 
[laughter] 

They  knew  you  were  coming. 

They  knew  we  were  coming.  That  one  agent  never  got  prosecuted  or  anything.  I  don’t  know  if  he 
got  kicked  out  or  what  happened.  But  it  just  made  me  not  trust  anybody  even  more  so. 

And  then  there  was  another  point.  I  was  investigating  every  possible  aspect  of  the  Stardust  that  I 
could  find.  There  was  a  transaction  where  a  bunch  of  slot  machines  were  sold.  Well,  it  turns  out  they  were 
stolen.  The  proceeds  of  the  slot  machines  were  never  turned  over  to  the  company,  and  they  were  picked 
up  by  the  chief  financial  guy  and  the  money  was  supposedly  given  to  bribe  public  officials.  And  that  we 
couldn’t  confirm.  That  was  what  a  snitch  was  telling  us,  but  we  had  no  proof  of  that  so  we  couldn’t  do 
anything  with  that  part  of  it.  But  we  had  confirmation,  basically,  that  the  money  was  never  turned  over  to 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


217 


the  company.  And  1  couldn’t  get  anybody  interested  in  prosecuting  that.  But  it  turns  out  that  my 
investigation,  this  extremely  confidential  report  that  1  had,  was  given  by  someone  high  up  in  our  agency 
to  Allen  Glick.  And  I’m  not  going  to  say  who  gave  it  because  I  respect  the  guy  a  lot.  I  think  what 
happened  was  he  was  just  completely  convinced  by  Allen  Glick  that  Allen  Glick  was  a  victim — a  smart 
guy,  but  a  victim — and  he  trusted  him.  So  he  gave  him  this  report,  I  think,  to  try  to  tell  him  what  his  own 
guys  were  doing  to  him.  And  the  report  was  brought  to  him  by  one  of  the  guys  from  the  enforcement 
division  who  I  was  close  to,  and  he  told  me  he  brought  it  on  another  guy’s  behalf.  He  was  told  to  do  it. 

So  then  I  knew  that  for  whatever  reasons,  everybody  trusted  this  guy  too  much,  and  then  I 
couldn’t  tell  anybody  anything.  And  I  didn’t  know,  at  that  point,  who  to  trust.  I  knew  that  Shannon  Bybee 
and  Phil  Hannifin  were  totally  honest  people,  but  I  didn’t  know  who  trusted  who.  And  I  didn’t  trust  Allen 
Glick  at  all.  So  I  didn’t  know  what  to  do  with  the  rest  of  my  investigation.  I  wanted  to  trap  this  guy,  but  I 
didn’t  want  to  be  giving  information  that  might  inadvertently  get  into  the  wrong  hands.  I  knew  the  one 
agent  was  taking  stuff  from  them,  and  I  knew  that  people  high  up  trusted  Allen  Glick  when  I  didn’t  think 
he  should  be  trusted.  So  I  was  in  a  dilemma. 

Then  in  the  meantime,  I  remember,  I  got  one  bit  of  information.  A  guy  comes  in  and  he’s  telling 
us  the  system  that  they  used  at  the  Stardust  Hotel  to  bring  coin  to  the  change  booths.  And  the  system  was 
one  that  incorporated  a  change  bank  in  the  middle  of  the  casino  that  they  filled  with  coin,  and  that  they 
then  used  that  change  bank  to  sell  coin  to  all  the  booths,  to  replenish  them  as  they  got  low  on  coin.  Now, 
this  same  system  was  used  by  the  Hilton,  so  it’s  no  big  deal  in  itself  that  it  was  used,  but  I  went  and 
checked  the  Reg  [Regulation]  6  filing,  which  is  where  they  file  their  system  of  internal  controls,  and  I 
looked  through  it  and  realized  that  that  particular  aspect  of  the  system  wasn’t  included  in  their  reported 
system.  So  I  thought,  you  know,  it  might  be  used  in  some  places,  but  why  weren’t  they  reporting  it  in 
their  Reg  6  filing?  Why  isn’t  it  included  in  the  system?  I  sat  down  with  an  agent  and  I  said,  “Why  don’t 
we  figure  out  what  could  possibly  be  done  with  that  bank?”  I  said,  “Why  wouldn’t  they  report  it  to  us  if 
it’s  legitimate?  If  it’s  not  legitimate,  how  could  they  use  it  to  skim  money?”  So  I  developed  a  hypothesis 
of  how  I  thought  they  could  use  this  fund  to  skim  money.  And  my  hypothesis  was  this:  if  they 
undercounted  coin  in  the  coin  room  with  bad  scales,  then  how  could  they  convert  that  undercount?  Y ou 
know,  once  they  undercount  coin  the  coin  is  sitting  there,  and  it  means  it’s  not  counted  and  they  could 
steal  it. 

But  how  do  you  carry  coin  out  of  a  place?  You  can’t.  I  mean,  too  many  people  would  see  you.  So 
what  you’d  have  to  do  is  convert  that  coin  to  cash.  And  I  said,  “OK,  if  they  have  a  bank  of  coin  out  there, 
if  they  could  get  this  uncounted  coin  into  that  hank  of  coin  that  they  sell  to  the  change  booths — by 
“selling,”  I  mean  they  transfer  the  change  booths  and  bring  back  currency — bring  back  cash  from  the 
change  booths  and  as  the  change  booths  sell  coin  all  day  and  accumulate  cash,  then  you  come  and  get  the 
cash  and  leave  them  the  same  amount  of  coins.  So  those  change  booths  are  always  an  imprest  basis.  And 
this  booth,  if  all  the  coin  going  to  that  booth  was  skimmed-off  coin,  what  a  perfect  way  to  convert  that 
coin  to  currency  by  exchanging  it  for  the  cash  in  the  booths  and  then  you  just  take  the  cash.”  So  once  I 
figured  that  out  I  thought  I  was  really  onto  something.  I  didn’t  say  anything  to  anybody.  I  got  one  guy. 

His  name  was  Dick  Law.  He  was  my  agent.  He  was  an  attorney  and  a  C.P.A.  I  said,  “Dick,  I  don’t  want  to 
tell  anybody  that  we’re  going  out  to  do  this  raid.  But  we  have  a  requirement  where  we  can’t  do  a  raid 
without  telling  a  board  member  unless  it’s  an  emergency  and  we  can’t  get  ahold  of  him,  and  then  we 
could  do  it.  And,  in  fact,  I  totally  trust  the  board  members.  Shannon  Bybee  and  Phil  Hannifin  have  been 
the  biggest  supporters  of  ours  and  have  helped  us  do  all  these  things,  and  their  hearts  are  in  the  right 
place,  but  I  don’t  know  who  they  might  tell  or  who  might  learn  it  from  a  secretary  or  anything,  or  who 


218 


they  might  trust,  and  wrongfully  trust,  or  it  could  be  another  division  chief.”  1  didn’t  know  who  to  trust 
anymore.  1  trusted  their  integrity  and  their  ability,  but  1  was  a  little  paranoid  at  the  time.  So  1  said,  “OK, 
this  is  the  plan.  We’re  not  going  to  tell  anybody,  and  we’re  going  to  wait  until  they’re  in  Carson  City  for  a 
meeting  and  they  can’t  be  gotten  ahold  of.”  They  didn’t  have  cell  phones  and  things.  “So  we’ll  just  go  do 
our  raid  then  and  say  that  we  couldn’t  get  in  touch  with  them,  that  it  was  an  emergency  because  we  had 
this  information  where  we  thought  maybe  they  had  something  going  with  this  booth,  and  once  we  do  that, 
then  we’ll  fill  them  in  after.” 

So  it  was  just  you  and  Dick  Law? 

Y es,  it  was  just  me  and  Dick  Law.  There  may  have  been  one  other  agent,  because  we  did  some 
surveillances  first  of  Jay  Vandermark’s  house  and  the  slot  manager  at  the  Stardust.  We  had  him  under 
surveillance  for  quite  a  few  hours.  We  basically  followed  him.  We  followed  him  into  the  hotel,  and  it  was 
early  in  the  morning,  1  think,  on  graveyard.  1  had  couple  of  agents  back  on  surveillance,  and  I  went  out 
and  checked  on  them  a  couple  of  times  when  we  came  back  to  the  casino.  And  me  and  Dick  Law  walked 
into  the  casino  and  we  approached  slot  people  and  we  said,  “We  want  to  see  your  auxiliary  bank.”  We 
didn’t  know  what  else  to  call  it. 

And  he  says,  “Well,  1  better  get  the  slot  manager.”  So  he  calls  the  slot  manager  at  home. 
Vandermark? 

No,  Vandermark  was  over  all  slots.  This  was  the  slot  manager  from  the  Stardust.  And  he  says, 
“They’re  saying  they’re  asking  for  ...”  1  think  1  called  it  the  “special  fund,”  or  “special  hank.”  1  forget 
what  1  called  it.  And  so  the  slot  manager  gets  on  the  phone.  He  says,  “We  don’t  have  any  special  hank.” 
And  1  didn’t  even  know  for  sure — this  was  still  all  a  hypothesis — so  1  just  bullshitted  this  guy  and  1 
started  yelling  at  him  and  1  said,  “You  know,  1  don’t  give  a  shit  what  you  call  it.  It’s  not  semantics  we’re 
dealing  with  here.”  1  said,  “1  want  you  to  take  me  to  the  bank  that  you  have  on  the  floor  that  1  know  you 
have” — and  it  wasn’t  in  their  system,  so  1  didn’t  know  for  sure — some  snitch  told  me  this — “that  you  sell 
coin  to  all  the  booths  from.”  I  said,  “I  don’t  give  a  shit  what  you  call  it.  1  know  it’s  there.  Take  me  to  it.” 

He  says,  “OK,”  right?  He  says,  “I’ll  be  right  down.” 

And  he  comes  down,  but  in  the  meantime,  I  found  out  later  he  called  Jay  Vandermark,  and  Jay 
Vandermark  said,  “Don’t  give  him  a  key  to  the  back.”  And  so  we  go  back  there.  The  guy  comes  in  and 
he’s  shaking  like  a  leaf,  and  he  takes  me  to  it.  Now  I  know  I’m  onto  something  because  this  guy’s  shaking 
so  bad  he  couldn’t  talk  or  anything.  He  takes  me  to  the  back  of  this  big  bank,  this  big  booth  that  was  right 
in  the  middle  of  the  casino.  And  he  opens  it  up  and  there’s  two  sides  to  it.  One  is  stacked  with  coin  in 
cans.  It’s  all  wrapped  coin.  And  the  other  side,  it  was  locked,  and  it’s  got  a  slot  in  it.  And  J  said,  “What’s 
that?” 

And  he  says,  “Well,  when  we  sell  this  coin  from  back  here  to  the  booth — to  the  change  booth — 
the  envelope  we  get  of  hundred-dollar  bills  we  put  in  that  slot.  And  the  only  person  who  has  a  key  to  that 
is  Jay  Vandermark.  He  comes  around  and  collects  the  money.”  Or  wait,  no.  First  they  tried  to  tell  me  that 
money  went  back  to  the  cage.  And  I  proved  by  checking  cage  records  and  I  had  their  chief  financial 
officer  come  down  at  four  in  the  morning  or  something  and  bring  me  the  general  ledger  and  show  me  that 
there  was  no  entry  for  this  money  that  was  out  in  the  casino.  So  it  turns  out  the  coin  wasn’t  accounted  for 
anyplace,  so  that  meant  it  was  skimmed-off  coin.  It  wasn’t  on  the  cage’s  accountability  and  it  wasn’t  in 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


219 


the  general  ledger.  And  whatever  was  in  this  other  drawer  of  envelopes  wasn’t  accounted  for  anywhere, 
and  they  said  they  didn’t  have  a  key  for  it.  So  1  remember  saying,  “You  better  open  that  or  I’m  going  to 
drill  the  f-ing  thing,”  right?  They  wouldn’t  get  me  a  key.  And  Jay  Vandermark  told  the  slot  manager,  1 

learned  later  on,  “Tell  him  to  go  f _ himself,”  and  Jay  Vandermark  took  off.  He  fled  the  country.  And 

the  other  guy  wouldn’t  talk  to  me.  He  refused.  I  read  him  his  rights  and  that  was  it  for  him.  And  I  called 
engineering  there  and  told  them  to  drill  the  thing  open.  Drill  it  open  and  here  are  all  these  stacks  of 
envelopes  loaded  with  hundred-dollar  bills,  and  it  wasn’t  on  accountability  anywhere.  So  my  whole 
theory  was  right  and  1  caught  them  red-handed  with  all  the  skimmed  money. 

That’s  when  the  thing  started,  and  we  ran  to  all  the  other  three  places  and  we  found  the  same 
system  in  existence  at  all  three  places.  So  that  was  the  beginning  of  the  end  for  them.  And,  of  course,  the 
phone  calls  were  flying  around  like  crazy.  Phil  Hannifin  called  me,  and  Shannon  Bybee  called  me.  No,  I 
called  Shannon  Bybee,  but  Phil  Hannifin  called  me.  And  my  friend  in  the  enforcement  division  said  the 
switchboard — it  was  a  twenty-four-hour  switchboard — had  calls  everywhere,  just  flying  all  around  the 
place.  And  Allen  Glick,  I  think,  told  Phil  Hannifin  1  was  acting  like  a  Gestapo  agent  or  something.  But  I 
had  all  the  goods.  I  had  confiscated  all  that  money  and  took  it  back.  It  went  into  evidence  and  we  began 
our  investigation.  We  began  with  a  series  of  interrogations. 

Now,  a  lot  of  things  started  happening.  One  thing  was  there  was  a  woman  by  the  name  of  Tamara 
Rand.  She  was  the  wife  of  a  prominent  surgeon  in  San  Diego,  and  she  had  provided  five  hundred 
thousand  dollars  of  the  initial  two  million  dollars  that  Allen  Glick  had  to  put  up  to  buy  the  Stardust.  It  was 
earnest  money.  And  in  return  for  that,  he  had  promised  her  ten  percent  interest  in  the  Stardust.  She  had 
invested  in  real  estate  with  Allen  Glick  before.  So  during  the  course  of  our  investigation  we  found  out  that 
she  was  all  upset  with  Allen  Glick  because  she’s  not  getting  her  ten  percent  interest.  And  so  we  kept 
pushing  on  that  one  and  pushing  on  it,  and  finally  she  agreed  that  she  would  talk  to  us  and  I  had  heard  that 
she  was  threatening  Allen  Glick  that  she  was  going  to  tell  things  she  knew  if  she  didn’t  get  her  ten  percent 
interest.  Well,  she  basically  agreed  to  talk  to  us,  but  before  I  could  get  down  to  her  place  to  talk  to  her, 
they  found  her  in  her  kitchen  in  San  Diego  with  five  bullets  in  her  head.  She  was  killed. 

And  then  the  casino  had  kept  trying  to  say,  all  the  big  officials — Mooney  was  the  guy’s  name.  He 
was  a  Mormon  guy  that  was  the  chief  financial  officer  there — he  kept  saying  that  Jay  Vandermark  went 
on  vacation.  And  I  said,  “Show  me  the  slip  that  he’s  scheduled  to  go  on  vacation.”  There  wasn’t  any. 

And  then  he  says,  “No,  we  didn’t  do  the  paperwork.  He  just  left.” 

Well,  he  fled  the  country.  They  kept  saying  they  didn’t  know  where  he  was.  And  I  was  trying  to 
find  him  because  I  figured  they’d  kill  him,  because  in  the  meantime,  I  had  another  snitch  that  was  coming 
to  me  telling  me  things  that  were  part  of  the  Crazy  Horse.  He  owned  the  Crazy  Horse  striptease  place.  But 
he  was  associated  with  these  people  and  he  was  telling  me  stuff.  And  he  kept  coming  to  my  office.  I  said, 
“Don’t  come  to  my  office  anymore  because  these  guys  will  hurt  you.” 

And  he  says,  “No,  I’ve  worked  with  them  my  whole  life.  They  won’t  hurt  me.” 

Well,  I  said,  “OK,  if  you  come  I’m  not  talking  to  you  anyway,  so  don’t  waste  your  time,”  because 
I  didn’t  want  to  be  responsible  for  him  getting  killed.  Well,  two  or  three  weeks  later,  they  find  his  body 
out  in  the  desert  in  Las  Vegas  and  they  find  his  head  in  California.  I  can’t  remember  exactly,  but  I  think  it 
may  have  been  on  the  freeway  looking  at  traffic  or  something. 

And  you  don ’t  remember  his  name? 


No,  but  I  do  remember  he  owned  the  Crazy  Horse.  If  you  mentioned  his  name  I’d  be  able  to 


220 


confirm  it. 

How  about  Vandermark? 

I  figured  they’d  get  Vandermark,  but  he  was  key  because  he  could  tie  together  these  guys  in  all 
the  four  places,  because  he  was  in  charge  of  all  of  it.  And  he’s  the  one  that  would  get  this  money  together, 
and  according  to  our  intelligence  information,  he’d  give  it  to  Frank  Rosenthal.  And  Frank  Rosenthal  had 
orchestrated  this  whole  thing.  Meanwhile,  1  had  different  aspects  of  the  investigation.  At  one  point  1 
raided  their  book  and  I  found  excess  money  sitting  there,  and  Frank  Rosenthal  came  down  and  stood 
trying  to  talk  to  me  and  put  the  muscle  on  me  about  this  money,  because  1  was  taking  this  money,  and  it 
was  the  same  situation.  1  thought  it  was  just  excess  money,  but  one  of  the  guys — I  forget  the  guy  that 
operated  it — he  was  crying  because  he  said  it  was  his  personal  money  and  1  took  it  anyway.  1  can’t 
remember  his  name.  But  at  that  point  in  time  Frank  Rosenthal  told  Allen  Glick  this,  and  Allen  Glick  was 
accusing  me.  And  Phil  Flannifm  called  me  and  was  laughing  about  it  and  saying — he  was  very 
supportive — but  he  said,  “That  Allen  Glick  called  me  and  said  that  you’re  acting  like  a  Gestapo  agent  or 
something,  you’re  throwing  your  weight  around.”  And  Phil  Flannifm  said,  “Keep  up  the  good  work,”  or 
something  like  that,  [laughter]  So  1  definitely  had  his  support  and  Shannon  Bybee’s  support  for  this  stuff. 

1  found  out  that  Jay  Vandermark  had  a  twenty-six-year-old  son.  I  was  investigating  the  whole 
family  and  found  out  how  to  contact  him.  So  1  went  to  his  house  with  one  of  my  agents,  Larry  Clark,  and 
I  told  his  son,  “Look,  we  want  him  to  cooperate.  And  if  he  cooperates,  we’ll  protect  him,  but  if  he  doesn’t, 
they’ll  kill  him  eventually.” 

And  his  son  basically  got  angry.  Fie  said,  “1  don’t  know  where  he  is.  He’s  gone,  and  I’m  not 
going  to  see  him.”  And  he  screamed,  and  basically  threw  us  out  of  his  apartment.  So  the  next  day — and  I 
won’t  tell  you  how  1  got  this — but  1  acquired  a  picture  of  Jay  Vandermark  at  a  picnic  bench  in  Mexico, 
and  this  photograph  was  dated.  And  this  photograph  had  been  in  the  possession  of  Jay  Vandermark’s  son. 
So  that  meant  I  knew  he  knew  where  he  was.  So  I  went  back  the  next  day  and  I  said,  “This  is  really 
important  that  you  carry  this  message  back  to  your  father,  because  they  will  kill  him.  And  we  can  protect 
him,  but  we  want  him  to  cooperate  with  us.” 

And  he  starts  yelling  again  and  says — and  he  was  a  big  red-headed  kid,  1  think,  a  tall  guy,  and 
about  twenty-six  years  old,  1  think — and  he  said,  “1  told  you  1  didn’t  know  where  he  is,”  and  he  starts 
yelling  again. 

So  1  threw  the  picture  down.  I  said,  ‘Wow  tell  me  you  don’t  know  where  he  is.” 

He  says,  “Where’d  you  get  that?” 

And  I  said,  “Never  mind  where  1  got  that.  You  know  where  he  is.” 

And  he  looked  at  it  and  he  said,  “OK.”  He  said,  “I  know  where  he  is.  He’s  in  Mexico,  and  I’ll 
take  the  message  for  you.”  And  we  talked  about  exactly  what  we  had  wanted  to  tell  him  and  everything. 

He  said,  “I’m  going  to  go  see  my  father.  I’m  going  to  be  with  him  for  a  couple  of  weeks.  I’m 
going  to  be  there  in  a  week,  and  I’ll  call  you  as  soon  as  I  get  back.”  So  he  went  and  he  came  back  and  he 
called  me  on  a  Monday  or  something.  He  says,  “I’ve  gotten  back.  I’ve  talked  to  my  dad.  I  want  to  talk  to 
you.”  And  he  said  something  like,  “You  can’t  come  tomorrow.  I’ve  got  something  to  do,  but  come 
Wednesday  or  Thursday,”  or  whatever  it  was,  “and  I’ll  tell  you  what  he  said  and  what  the  arrangement 
will  be.”  Well,  a  day  before  I  can  get  out  there  I  got  a  call  from  the  metro  police  department,  who  said, 
“You  better  get  out  here.”  So  we  go  out  to  the  kid’s  apartment  and  there’s  yellow  tape  all  around  his 
place.  And  they  bring  us  back  inside  this  house  and  this  kid  is  laying  in  bed  with  his  head  crushed  flat. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


221 


So  we  attributed  it  to  something  related  to  this,  but  the  metropolitan  police  department  told  us  that 
it  was  drug  related.  And  of  course,  they  never  cooperated  with  us  on  anything,  so  we  never  quite  trusted 
that.  It  would  just  seem  too  coincidental,  but,  you  know,  maybe  it  was.  And  1  remember  hearing 
something,  that  they  had  some  guy  that  supposedly  id  it  or  something.  So  1  don’t  know.  It  was  either  real 
bad  luck  or  he  was  associated  with  it. 

And  then  another  guy  that  was  involved  in  several  of  the  count  rooms,  he  was  cooperative  with  us 
and  starting  to  tell  us  a  lot  of  stuff.  Then,  all  of  a  sudden,  he  was  going  to  a  bar  and  he  gets  dragged  out  of 
the  bar  by  three  guys.  He  was  with  somebody  else.  One  guy  held  the  other  guy  inside  the  bar,  and  two 
guys  take  him  out  to  his  car  and  beat  him  with  a  baseball  bat  and  broke  almost  every  bone  in  his  body — 
his  legs,  face,  everything.  Left  him  there,  basically  almost  dead.  So  he  was  not  in  too  talkative  of  a  mood 
after  that,  [laughter]  So  this  investigation  went  on  and  on. 

So  did  you  ever  find  Vandermark? 

Well,  apparently,  he  was  lured  back  and  killed  someplace,  and  his  body  was  disposed  of. 

In  Mexico? 

He  was  lured  back,  1  think  somebody  said  to  Arizona,  but  1  don’t  know  that  they  ever  found  his 
body  or  anything.  And  1  think  some  other  people  were  killed.  They  found  some  guy  in  a  drum  someplace. 
1  can’t  remember  all  of  them,  but  as  we  pursued  this  thing,  we  kept  trying  to  build  a  case.  It  took  us  a  long 
time  to  put  this  case  together — at  least  a  year.  We  went  to  this  friend  of  mine  who  was  a  prosecutor  with 
the  district  attorney’s  office.  And  1  said,  “Could  they  appoint  you  to  prosecute  this  case,  because  1  just 
don’t  feel  like  we’re  getting  any  headway  on  this  prosecution.  We  have  a  case  and  it’s  this  thick  with  lots 
of  stuff  in  it.”  And  1  said,  “We  got  to  start  turning  some  people  here,  because  there’s  people.  In  fact, 

Oscar  Goodman  brought  me  one  guy  that  was  willing  to  cooperate  with  us,  providing  that  we  give  him 
immunity  and  everything.” 

Who  were  you  trying  to  prosecute — Click? 

Well,  1  wanted  to  go  after  Glick,  Rosenthal,  Vandermark — and  1  was  hoping  to  go  further  than 
that  up  the  line  to  the  mob  guys,  but  1  couldn’t  get  off  first  base.  1  mean,  the  district  attorney’s  office  said 
no,  we  can’t  use  the  guy  1  wanted  to  use.  They  wanted  to  appoint  somebody  just  to  work  with  this.  They 
would  not  appoint  an  attorney  from  the  D.A.’s  office  to  work  with  us  on  these  cases.  1  pushed  and  pushed 
and  pushed.  Finally,  it  went  to  a  grand  jury.  Well,  the  grand  jury  spent  more  time  criticizing  me  and  my 
agent  than  they  did  the  business  of  getting  a  prosecution  going.  They  asked  things  like  how  come  1  didn’t 
confiscate  the  scale?  The  scale  was  about  as  big  as  this  couch  you’re  sitting  on. 

Yes.  [laughter] 

And  it  was  computerized.  1  mean,  it  was  part  of  their  operations.  And  we  proved  the  scale  was 
set.  We  examined  the  scales  that  night.  There  was  a  switch  on  the  scales  that  you  could  flip  and  make  it 
weigh  accurately,  and  you’d  flip  it  the  other  way,  and  it  was  off  by  about  20  percent  or  30  percent, 
whatever  it  was.  So  that’s  how  they  were  underweighing  the  coin.  And  we  proved  that.  We  had  all  the 


222 


documentation  of  it,  so  you  didn’t  need  to  confiscate  the  scale  to  prove  that  was  happening.  We  tested  it 
fifty  times,  and  had  eyewitnesses  of  all  the  agents  who  observed  these  tests,  and  we  used  weights  and 
everything  else.  So  we  had  the  proof.  We  didn’t  need  to  confiscate  the  scale.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  1  think 
that  switch  was  probably  still  there  for  a  long  time,  and  we  proved  that  the  switches  in  all  the  places  were 
set  to  underweigh  in  each  place. 

It  seemed  to  us  that  they  didn’t  really  want  to  get  a  prosecution  here.  So  then  1  went  to  the  state 
attorney  general,  which  1  think  was  Bob  List,  at  the  time.  Yes,  it  was  Bob  List.  And  I  wanted  a  special 
prosecutor.  But  he  refused  to  give  us  a  special  prosecutor.  He  wouldn’t  do  it.  Now,  here’s  the  biggest  case 
in  the  history  of  Nevada — skimming,  organized  crime,  everything.  We  just  proved  all  four  places  were 
involved  in  this.  They  wouldn’t  give  us  a  special  prosecutor,  and  the  Clark  County  Grand  Jury  was 
dinking  around  with  us,  so  they  weren’t  doing  anything. 

So  after  a  year  and  a  half  or  so  of  investigating,  1  finally  got  sick  of  it,  and  I  turned  the  entire 
thing  over  to  my  friends  in  the  federal  government.  The  FBI  and  a  new  strike  force  were  working  on  this. 
They  basically  took  this  stuff  and  pursued  it,  and  also  did  some  independent  wire  taps,  which  we  didn’t 
have  the  power  to  get  here.  And  so  they  further  proved  the  case.  But  it’s  funny.  1  was  the  expert  on  this 
case.  They  never  called  me  to  the  grand  jury.  And  they  never,  ever  mentioned  that  we  gave  them  any  of 
this  stuff.  This  happened  way  before  they  ever  prosecuted  these  Kansas  City  people  in  regard  to  this.  And 
we  knew  this  information  on  all  this  money  was  going  back,  we  knew  that  there  were  people  coming 
down  from  Kansas  City  and  Chicago  and  St.  Louis  that  were  getting  money  out  of  these  places.  They 
were  coming  in  and  on  a  regular  basis. 

Was  that  the  Civella  brothers? 

Yes.  Nick  Civella  and  Carl  Civella.  And  so  we  turned  it  over  to  the  feds.  They  got  the 
prosecution,  but  what  they  did  was  very  frustrating.  They  ended  up  making  Allan  Glick  a  victim.  And 
they  let  Rosenthal  go.  Rosenthal  was  almost  blown  up  in  his  car,  because,  1  guess,  the  mob  thought  he 
was  a  snitch.  1  don’t  know  if  Rosenthal  was  a  snitch  for  the  feds  or  not,  but  they  never  did  anything  to 
him,  and  they  never  prosecuted  Glick.  They  said  he  was  a  victim.  And  that  was  the  biggest  bullshit  story  1 
ever  saw,  because  1  knew  from  snitches  that  Allan  Glick  was  making  decisions.  Maybe  at  one  point  he 
became  a  victim,  but  for  a  long  time  there  he  was  part  of  this  thing,  because  he  would  lie  to  me.  1 
interrogated  him  several  times,  and  he  lied  to  me  about  all  kinds  of  things.  Maybe  he  was  afraid,  but  1  saw 
this  guy  as  a  willing  participant,  and  from  people  that  were  talking  to  me,  he  was  involved  in  a  lot  of  these 
decisions  and  deceptions.  So  1  certainly  don’t  think  he  was  purely  a  victim  here.  And  so  the  feds  didn’t  do 
anything  to  him  or  Frank  Rosenthal,  who  were  the  two  key  people  in  this  whole  thing.  And  you  know,  1 
think  that  Spilotro  was  just  some  kind  of  enforcer  or  something.  He  was  no  big  boss  in  all  this  stuff.  So 
that  was  a  frustrating  part  of  all  this. 

What  is  your  estimate  of  how  much  money  was  skimmed  from  the  Stardust  and  the  Fremont? 

Well,  1  think,  at  one  point  in  time,  we  had  an  estimate  of  about  $20  million  a  year,  from 
everything. 


From  all  the  properties? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


223 


Yes.  Well,  maybe  it  was  $20  million  total  that  was  skimmed  down  there.  1  can’t  remember 
exactly  now  what  was  in  those  reports,  but  that  raid  that  we  did,  me  and  Dick  Law  on  that  first  night,  that 
was  May  18,  1976.  And  there  were  just  a  lot  of  legs  to  this.  They  kept  Allan  Glick  in  as  a  licensee.  And 
then  what  happened  was,  1  was  investigating  Paul  Lowden,  who  was  also  a  partner  in  the  Tropicana  when 
all  these  mob  guys  were  in  there,  and  he  was  in  the  Hacienda  when  Glick  was  there.  So  I  and  my  agents 
did  an  investigation  of  Paul  Lowden,  and  did  the  background  investigation  of  him,  and  investigation  of  all 
his  transactions.  1  think  we  were  still  doing  applicant  investigations  then.  And  in  conducting  that 
investigation,  we  gathered  a  lot  of  information  about  Paul  Lowden  in  stock  transactions,  all  kinds  of 
things,  people  he  was  dealing  with.  And  the  information  we  gathered  was  sufficient  to  cause  the  Gaming 
Board  to  deny  Paul  Lowden  a  gaming  license.  But  they  did  it  on  a  two-to-one  vote.  It  was  Phil  Hannifin 
and  Shannon  Bybee  voting  against  his  license,  based  on  investigative  report,  which  was  exhaustive  and 
extensive;  and  Jack  Stratton  voting  in  favor  of  it.  He  didn’t  think  there  was  enough.  Now,  the  problem 
with  that  was,  if  it  was  unanimous,  1  don’t  think  they  could  have  overturned  it  at  the  commission  level. 

At  about  that  same  time,  Harry  Reid  was  appointed  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission  by 
Mike  O’Callaghan.  Now,  the  Gaming  Commission  was  a  quasi-judicial  body.  It  was  part-time;  it  wasn’t  a 
full  time  job  or  anything.  Before  that  it  was  Pete  Echeverria  who  was  chairman  of  the  Commission.  And 
now  all  of  a  sudden,  it’s  Harry  Reid.  Well,  the  board’s  decision  goes  to  Harry  Reid,  and  our  report  goes  to 
him,  and  right  in  the  middle  of  this  thing,  where  they’re  trying  to  decide,  Harry  Reid  starts  criticizing  our 
investigation.  He  didn’t  even  know  me  at  that  point  in  time.  And  he  didn’t  really  know  a  lot  about  this 
investigation. 

This  is  the  one  that  Hannifin  and  Shannon  voted  two  to  one  to  deny? 

Yes,  to  deny.  I’m  sitting  out  there  as  one  of  the  agents  that  did  this  investigation.  He  said,  “This  is 
the  worst  investigation  I’ve  ever  seen  in  my  life.”  And  he  says,  “It  is  so  bad,  I  wouldn’t  even  present  it  to 
my  fifth-grade  civics  class.”  [laughter]  And  then  he  went  on  and  on,  and  there  were  never  any  specifics 
about  why  it  was  bad  or  what  was  wrong  with  it,  but  he  was  very  critical,  and  when  the  Commission 
voted,  I  think  it  wasn’t  unanimous.  They  didn’t  have  to  be.  Because  the  Gaming  Board  vote  was  split,  I 
think  they  didn’t  have  to  be  unanimous.  They  just  had  to  be  a  majority.  So  I  think  it  might  have  been  like 
three  to  two,  or  something  like  that.  I  can’t  remember  exactly,  but  because  of  that,  because  Jack  Stratton 
voted  for  it,  it  didn’t  have  to  be  five  to  zero.  So  they  overturned  the  Control  Board  and  gave  Paul  Lowden 
his  license. 

I  think  they  may  have  sent  it  back  for  further  review  for  another  month  or  something,  but  anyway, 
ultimately  they  gave  him  his  license.  Phil  Hannifin  pulled  me  aside  at  approximately  that  time  at  that 
meeting.  He  said,  “Dennis,  I’m  leaving  this  position.  I  can  no  longer  stay  in  this  position  and  feel  that  I 
can  do  my  job  with  integrity  or  not  being  interfered  with.”  He  says,  “And  I  would  advise  you  to  do  the 
same  thing,  because  you’re  not  going  to  be  able  to  function  the  way  I’ve  allowed  you  to  function,  and  go 
after  people  that  are  dirty.”  So,  he  says,  “I  would  advise  you  to  get  out  while  the  getting  out  is  good, 
because  to  stay  here,  you’ll  only  hurt  yourself,  and  you  won’t  be  happy.”  And  he  said,  “I  can’t  tell  you 
any  more  than  that.”  He  wouldn’t  tell  me  any  specifics.  He  wouldn’t  say  anything.  He  was  a  very  loyal 
person.  He  wouldn’t  say  anything  about  anything,  about  any  person.  He  just  told  me  that.  And  so,  he  left. 
He  resigned,  and  a  guy  by  the  name  of  Roger  Trounday  came  in,  who  was  head  of  the  Board. 

And  so  I  started  looking  around.  I  mean,  I  realized  that  things  wouldn’t  be  good.  I  worked  for 
Roger  Trounday  for  a  little  while  and  really  didn’t  want  much  to  do  with  him  or  any  of  that  stuff.  I  just 


224 


felt  they  were  pulling  back.  1  didn’t  do  many  audits,  1  have  to  admit.  1  mean,  the  one  criticism  of  me 
during  that  period  of  time  is  that  1  did  so  few  audits,  which  was  one  of  my  primary  functions,  and  that 
there  was  like  a  nineteen-year  audit  cycle.  That  meant  1  would  get  around  to  every  major  casino  every 
nineteen  years,  [laughter] 

And  by  that  time,  they ’d  have  built  nineteen  more. 

Yes.  Right.  But  it’s  because  we  were  knocking  down  these  skimming  cases  right  and  left,  and 
organized  crime  infiltration,  and  everything  else.  There  are  lists  of  these  things  that  we  were  doing.  And  1 
felt  like  those  were  the  priority.  That  was  a  bigger  picture  and  much  more  important  to  Nevada  to  clean 
up,  and  we  did.  Little  by  little,  we  cleaned  it  all  up.  But  by  this  time,  1  felt  like  1  had  to  get  out. 

So  you  resigned  from  the  Gaming  Board  shortly  after  Phil  Hannifin  did? 

Yes.  I  can’t  remember  what  the  intervening  period  was.  It  could  have  been  even  as  much  as  six 
months  to  a  year,  but  in  the  meantime  1  was  looking,  and  1  did  leave  to  go  to  work  for  the  division  of 
gaming  enforcement  in  New  Jersey. 

Did  other  agents  resign  when  you  did? 

Yes,  all  my  key  ones  left.  Rich  lannone  was  one  of  them.  He  was  my  senior  agent.  Dick  Law 
stayed,  and  he  was  persecuted,  basically.  Richard  Bunker  went  after  Dick  Law,  mercilessly.  I  mean,  he 
just  tried  to  annihilate  him,  and  did,  basically.  He  fired  him.  He  fired  Dick  Law,  and  that’s  a  whole 
‘nother  story.  He  fired  Dick  Law  on  some  trumped-up  charges,  and  Dick  Law  ended  up  appealing  the 
termination.  And  1  helped  Dick  Law.  By  then,  1  was  out  of  law  enforcement  of  New  Jersey  and  back.  And 
every  day  we  worked  on  Dick  Law’s  appeal.  Every  single  day  we  worked  on  his  appeal.  It  took  us  like  a 
year. 

And  you  were  back  in  New  Jersey? 

No,  1  was  back  here  then.  Dick  Law  lasted  a  year  under  Richard  Bunker.  He  was  fired.  And  by 
then  1  was  coming  back.  And  Dick  Law  and  1  worked  on  this  case  every  single  night.  It  went  to  the 
different  courts.  The  termination  was  held  up  by  the  district  court  here.  Mahlon  Brown  was  his  attorney — 
Mahlon  Brown,  Jr.  He  was  always  out  to  help  the  liberal  causes  and  everything.  He  was  sort  of  an  anti¬ 
government  guy,  but  a  wonderful  guy.  And  1  don’t  think  he  charged  him  anything  for  it,  either,  if  I’m  not 
mistaken.  But  it  was  me  and  Dick  Law  and  Mahlon  Brown  working  on  this  case.  And  I  had  to  do  it 
surreptitiously,  because  I  didn’t  want  Richard  Bunker  at  the  Gaming  Board  to  be  angry  at  me  for  helping 
my  friend,  Dick  Law.  I’m  not  saying  he  would  have  done  anything  to  me,  but  I  was  a  gaming  licensee. 
And  he  was  a  powerful  guy.  So  I  had  to  do  this  surreptitiously,  but  after  it  was  overturned,  the  firing  was 
held  up  by  a  district  court.  Then  it  went  to  something  else.  Oh,  it  went  to  the  Commission  first,  held  up  by 
them,  who  was  Harry  Reid —  I  think  it  was  Harry  Reid  at  the  time.  It  went  to  district  court  and  was  held 
up  by  them.  I  forget  who  that  judge  was.  Then  it  went  to  the  state  supreme  court.  And  we  prepared  brief 
after  brief  after  brief,  [laughter] 

And  I  think  our  briefs  were  so  convincing  that  when  we  finally  went  to  the  state  supreme  court, 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


225 


we  went  in  and  listened  to  this  whole  thing.  The  state  supreme  court  made  a  decision  and  Dick  Law  said, 
“1  don’t  want  anything  from  this.  I  don’t  want  any  money.  All  1  want  is  reinstatement.  1  want  this  supreme 
court  to  say  that  this  termination  was  wrong  and  in  error.  They  have  to  reinstate  me,  but  1  will  say  that  I’m 
not  going  back  to  work.”  So  that’s  exactly  what  they  did.  They  reversed  that  termination,  said  it  was 
wrong. 

A  wrongful  termination? 

Y es,  wrongful  termination.  And  Dick  Law  basically  gave  up  any  right  to  go  back  to  work, 
though,  because  that’s  not  what  he  wanted.  He  just  wanted  to  be  vindicated.  So  that  was  that  story. 

Before  we  leave  Nevada ,  let ’s  go  back  to  October  of  1977.  Pretty  close  to  when  you  did  leave,  I  guess. 

Yes. 

There  was  a  fellow  named  Joe  Agosto.  He  was  the  owner  and  operator  of  the  Folies  Bergere  show  at  the 
Tropicana. 

Yes,  that’s  a  good  story. 

It’s  kind  of  ironic  that  that’s  where  we  ’re  sitting  today — at  the  Tropicana. 

Well,  it’s  more  than  ironic,  I’ll  tell  you.  [laughter] 

And  he  called  a  press  conference  where  he  verbally  attacked  Phil  Hannifin,  former  chairman  of  the 
board .  .  . 

[laughter] 

.  .  .  Jeff  Silver,  a  Control  Board  member,  and  yourself .  Would  you  tell  us  about  that  press  conference, 
what  he  had  to  say  about  you  and  your  wife? 

Yes.  But  first,  let  me  make  a  comment  about  Jeff  Silver.  Jeff  Silver  was  also  a  real  stand-up;  he 
was  like  Shannon  Bybee.  He  was  like  Phil  Hannifin  and  Shannon  Bybee.  He  was  a  strong  gaming 
enforcer  with  a  lot  of  integrity  and  was  very  supportive  and  everything,  too.  He  was  a  very  good  man. 

A  very  talented  man. 

Yes,  very  talented.  Right.  A  great  attorney,  too.  And  I  can’t  say  enough  about  Shannon  Bybee 
and  Phil  Hannifin — they’re  my  heroes.  Shannon  Bybee  is  one  of  my  heroes,  and  so  is  Phil  Hannifin.  Two 
of  the  people  that  I  admire  most  in  the  world — also,  Mike  O’ Callaghan.  Mike  O’ Callaghan  was  another 
one  that  had  total  integrity,  was  a  strong  individual  who  wanted  to  just  do  right  for  the  state  and  didn’t 
owe  anybody  anything  and  said  that  you  could  just  clean  up  this  mess.  And  he  wasn’t  part  of  the 
establishment.  He’s  a  guy  who  has  kept  his  integrity  from  that  day  forward  and  is  still  a  man  of  utmost 


226 


integrity.  So,  those  people — Mike  O’Callaghan,  Phil  Hannifin,  and  Shannon  Bybee — were  like  my 
heroes.  And  they  still  are  to  this  day. 

And  Jeff  Silver  was  pretty  close? 

Jeff  Silver,  too.  Yes.  They  were  people  that  just  had  so  much  integrity  and  could  have  been 
pushed  around  by  the  social  economic  political  power  structure  that  existed  in  the  state  that  was  so 
heavily  controlled  by  the  gaming  industry  at  that  time,  but  weren’t.  They  weren’t  swayed  at  all.  None  of 
them  were.  But  it  started  at  the  top  with  Mike  O’ Callaghan  who  gave  Phil  Hannifin  and  Shannon  Bybee 
the  ability  to  give  me  the  power  to  do  a  lot  of  these  things,  and  we  did  it  all  together.  1  think,  together,  all 
of  us  basically  cleaned  up  this  state. 

But  now,  back  to  the  question  of  Joe  Agosto.  That  was  another  case  where  I  was  very  interested 
in  the  Tropicana.  I  wrote  an  intelligence  memorandum  one  time  that  indicated — and  I  stress  that  it  was 
intelligence  information;  it  wasn’t  documented  or  verified  and  not  always  substantiated — that  there  were 
basically  five  mafia  families  that  were  controlling  the  Tropicana.  Now,  at  that  point  in  time  1  think  the 
Doumanis  were  at  the  Tropicana,  and  I  did  have  a  lot  of  respect  for  Ed  Doumani.  He  was  an  intelligent 
guy.  1  felt  that  he  was  just  a  wheeling,  dealing,  great  business  man,  but  that  he  sort  of  got  sucked  in  by  all 
these  people.  1  forget  the  other  guy’s  name  that  sold  the  Tropicana  to  the  Doumanis.  But  I  think  he  was  a 
bad  guy.  Hey,  I  got  his  license  denied  downtown.  He  had  the  Red  Garter.  And  he  was  a  former  owner  of 
the  Tropicana  and  sold  it  to  the  Doumanis.  He  had  a  Norwegian-type  name  or  something. 

Oh,  was  it  Gustafson? 

Gustafson!  That’s  the  guy.  Good  job.  [laughter]  Deil  Gustafson.  1  did  a  couple  twenty-four-hour 
surveillances  downtown  at  his  place  and  got  his  license  denied  there  and  was  after  him  at  the  Tropicana 
because  1  felt  the  mob  was  involved.  He  sold  the  place  to  the  Doumanis,  and  I  felt  like  Ed  Doumani  kind 
of  got  in  with  the  wrong  people — he  was  a  guy  that  had  a  lot  of  loyalty  to  his  friends,  and  I  think  some  of 
his  friends  might  not  have  been  the  right  people,  but  I  felt  that  he  wasn’t  really  a  guy  that  was  mobbed  up 
or  anything  like  that.  Of  course,  I  didn’t  know  everything,  but  I  liked  him,  and  I  felt  that  he  was  a  decent 
human  being.  But  1  didn’t  feel  the  same  about  Deil  or  a  lot  of  the  other  people  involved  there.  And  there 
were  other  elements  there  that  1  didn’t  trust  at  all.  And  Joe  Agosto  was  the  biggest  one.  He  bought  the 
show,  the  Folies  Bergere.  I  felt  it  was  a  way  to  get  mob  money  into  the  place.  So  1  started  placing  that 
operation  on  surveillance.  One  time  1  was  walking  around  there  with  my  senior  agent,  Rich  lannone,  and  I 
remember  seeing  a  guy  walking  away  from  me,  and  looked  at  the  back  of  his  head,  and  I  said,  “Rich,  I 
think  that’s  John  Joseph  Vitale,  the  mob  boss  of  St.  Louis.” 

He  said,  “How  could  you  say  that?  You’re  just  looking  at  the  back  of  his  head.” 

I  said,  “His  ears  look  familiar  to  me.”  And  I  was  always  good.  I  had  a  bad  memory  with  names, 
but  was  real  good  with  any  kind  of  facial  features.  You  could  wear  a  disguise,  and  I’d  still  know  by  the 
eyes  or  something.  And  I  said,  “I  just  feel  like  it.” 

He  convinced  me  I  was  crazy.  So  I  went  back  home,  and  I  thought  about  it  all  night  long.  I  came 
back  at  four  o’clock  in  the  morning.  I  couldn’t  stand  it  anymore.  I  couldn’t  go  to  sleep.  And  I  went  to  the 
front  desk,  went  behind  the  front  desk  and  made  them  show  me  their  records,  and  I  was  going  through 
anybody  that  was  staying  in  house.  And  I  looked  under  John  Vitale,  and  there  were  no  Vitales  in  there.  I 
looked;  I  couldn’t  find  anybody.  So  I  just  started  flipping,  one  by  one,  through  everybody  in  house, 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


227 


looking  at  addresses,  trying  to  see  if  there  was  anybody  from  St.  Louis.  Sure  enough,  1  find  this  address, 
and  I  recognize  the  address.  It  was  John  Joseph  Vitale’s  address.  And  the  guy  was  staying  there  under  an 
assumed  name.  So  then  1  knew  he  was  there.  So  1  started  wandering  around  the  place,  and  I  found  him  in 
the  floormen’s  lounge,  talking  to  some  executives  in  there.  This  was  a  big  mob  guy.  This  was  one  of  the 
biggest.  He  was  the  boss  from  St.  Louis.  That  was  a  big  mob  position. 

Then  1  knew  I  was  onto  something,  so  1  started  going  after  these  guys,  and  I  started  pursuing  Joe 
Agosto.  1  was  here  on  surveillance  constantly.  In  fact,  I  met  my  wife  there,  who  was  dancing  in  the  Folies 
Bergere.  She  was  dancing  in  the  Folies  Bergere  long,  long  before  Joe  Agosto  ever  came  there.  For  seven 
years  she  was  dancing  there.  So,  when  I  finally  nailed  Joe  Agosto — 1  mean,  1  nailed  him  to  the  wall. 
Basically,  1  think  he  got  thrown  out.  In  fact,  the  Gaming  Commission  came  in.  I  remember  Frank  Schreck 
was  a  commission  member  and  a  friend  of  mine,  and  Pete  Echeverria,  1  think,  was  the  commission 
chairman  then,  if  I’m  not  mistaken.  We  came  in  to  shut  the  place  down.  We  were  going  to  shut  it  down. 
They  had  the  order  right  there,  and  1  forget  exactly  why,  but  they  asked  me  what  1  thought,  and  we 
decided  that  we  wouldn’t  shut  them  down.  We’d  let  them  operate,  because  1  said,  “1  think  we’ll  be  putting 
a  lot  of  people  out  of  work,  the  innocent  people,  employees,  that  don’t  deserve  this.  Let’s  just  go  after 
these  guys  and  prove  a  case.” 

Eventually  1  got  Joe  Agosto,  basically,  and  I  turned  lots  of  this  stuff  over  to  the  feds,  and  they 
called  me.  They  pursued  him  in  the  grand  jury,  and  Kansas  City  called  me  to  the  Kansas  City  grand  jury, 
and  1  was  a  witness  there,  because  they  wanted  to  know,  “How  did  you  know?”  Because  all  their  wiring 
taps  and  everything  showed  these  families  1  put  in  my  intelligence  report.  “How  did  you  know  that  these 
families  were  involved?”  And  they  went  on  and  on  with  questions,  but  they  really  were  super  nice  to  me, 
and  all  the  FBI  agents  and  everything — we  sat  and  talked  before.  And  so  they  had  Joe  Agosto  nailed  with 
this.  Between  the  stuff  1  had  and  the  stuff  that  they  developed,  they  put  him  in  jail,  and  he  died  in  jail.  So, 
basically,  1  always  felt  that  1  got  him,  and  1  also  got  my  wife,  Barbara,  and  married  her.  [laughter]  We’ve 
been  married  twenty-eight  years.  She  was  in  a  dancer  in  the  Folies  Bergere, 

And  what  happened  was  Joe  Agosto  came  out  and  attacked  Jeff  Silver. 

For  using  his  influence.  His  dad  ran  junkets. 

Yes.  And  he  attacked  me  and  said  1  used  my  influence  to  get  my  wife  in  the  show  with  him. 

Yes.  [laughter] 

The  funny  thing  is,  she  was  in  the  show  before.  He  was  so  stupid  he  didn’t  know  this.  She  had 
auditioned  way  before  he  ever  bought  the  show,  and  had  that  job  based  on  an  open  audition  that  happened 
long  before  he  was  ever  there,  [laughter]  And  then  my  wife  got  angry  and  called  the  newspaper  and 
responded.  And  there  was  a  big  headline  in  the  Valley  Times.  At  the  top  of  the  newspaper  it  said, 
“Gamer’s  Wife  Strikes  Back.”  It’s  headlines — this  big!  [gestures]  She  just  set  the  record  straight. 

The  guy  was  really  nuts,  but  it  was  a  little  troubling  at  the  time,  [laughter] 

What  did  you  do  when  you  left  the  Nevada  Gaming  Control  Dennis? 


Just  before  1  left,  New  Jersey  passed  a  gaming  referendum  and  they  legalized  gambling  in 
Atlantic  City.  And  the  head  of  the  Division  of  Gaming  Enforcement,  a  guy  by  the  name  of  Bob  Martinez, 


228 


came  out  and  he  interviewed  me.  He  was  looking  for  somebody  to  go  out  there.  And  because  of  what  Phil 
Hannifin  told  me,  1  was  willing  to  interview  this  guy  and  look  for  some  other  position.  1  loved  law 
enforcement,  and  thought  it  would  be  there.  So  he  came  out  and  was  really  interested  in  me  and 
eventually  hired  me.  So  1  resigned  my  position  here  and  went  to  work  in  New  Jersey  and  I  was  to  be  the 
first  head  of  the  Special  Investigations  Bureau  for  the  Division  of  Gaming  Enforcement.  And  the  things  1 
would  be  in  charge  of  were  the  same  kinds  of  things  1  was  in  charge  of  here,  including  all  applicant 
investigations.  So  basically,  1  had  all  applicant  investigations,  all  skimming  investigations,  all  organized 
crime  investigations;  it  was  all  mine.  And  all  internal  control  evaluations.  1  don’t  think  there  was  an  audit 
function;  1  think  the  audit  function  was  handled  by  the  Commission. 

So  1  took  the  job.  1  got  there,  and  they  said  “You  can  hire  x  number  of  agents.”  When  1  went 
there,  though,  there  were  lots  of  headlines.  1  was  in  basically  every  newspaper  out  there.  Like  1  indicated 
before,  there  were  some  comments  from  Harry  Wald,  but  it  said  at  the  time  “an  undisclosed  top  executive 
from  Caesars”  said  they  hoped  my  plane  would  crash.  They  didn’t  like  me.  He  particularly  didn’t  like  me 
because  of  what  1  did  to  them. 

He  considered  you  too  hard  ass? 

Yes,  he  thought  so.  Of  course,  coming  from  a  company  that  at  the  time  was  a  mobbed-up 
company,  1  think  that  was  more  of  a  positive  statement  than  anything. 

When  1  got  there  1  had  a  reputation  already  that  preceded  me,  and  1  began  hiring  agents.  They 
gave  me  carte  blanche;  1  could  hire  them  at  high  salaries  and  get  anybody  1  wanted.  And  so  1  did  the  same 
thing;  1  was  looking  for  that  hybrid  agent. 

Did  you  bring  some  with  you  from  Nevada? 

Yes,  1  brought  Rich  lannone  and  Larry  Clark,  two  agents  from  here.  Larry  Clark  is  still  working 
for  me,  by  the  way.  And  Rich  lannone  is  a  wealthy  small  casino  operator.  So  1  brought  them,  we  started 
hiring  and  formed  a  great  group  of  investigators,  hired  them  from  all  over — law  enforcement 
backgrounds,  usually,  but  every  one  had  to  have  an  accounting  background.  The  state  police  came  in — 
and  1  didn’t  realize  the  politics  of  it  when  1  went  there — but  they  were  really  upset  that  they  didn’t  get  the 
special  investigations  bureau  under  them,  ft  was  under  the  Department  of  Law  and  Public  Safety.  It  was  a 
separate  agency.  But  the  state  troopers,  the  state  police,  were  part  of  our  agency.  They  had  certain  aspects 
of  it.  They  wanted  some  of  their  police  officers  working  for  me  as  my  agents.  And  at  first,  1  refused  to 
hire  any.  And  then  finally  they  put  so  much  pressure  on  me,  1  said,  “I’ll  hire  five.”  And  1  said,  “But  1 
won’t  hire  anybody  that  doesn’t  have  an  accounting  background,  an  accounting  degree.”  So  they 
scrounged  their  entire  force  of  police  officers  and  found  five  police  officers  that  had  accounting  degrees, 
and  I  interviewed  them.  One  of  them  was  Kevin  DeSanctis,  who  became  a  real  close  friend  of  mine  later 
on.  He  was  a  state  trooper.  He  had  an  accounting  degree,  and  so  did  the  others.  So  1  hired  them. 

When  we  started,  we  formed  an  intelligence  unit  again  and  we  started  gathering  intelligence,  and 
the  first  investigation  was  Resorts  International.  One  of  the  first  things  1  had  to  do  was  adapt  investigative 
procedures  and  help  with  the  establishment  of  internal  control  regulations.  That  really  wasn’t  my 
function,  it  was  the  commission’s  function,  but  they  wanted  me  to  work  with  the  big  CPA  firm  that  was 
doing  the  work  in  conjunction  with  the  commission.  So  1  became  part  of  a  committee  working  on  those 
control  procedures.  And  I  think  1  was  fairly  instrumental  in  a  lot  of  the  aspects  of  that.  1  felt  the 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


229 


regulations  were  overstrong  and  unnecessarily  cumbersome. 

Too  much  detail? 

Too  much  detail,  the  licensing  things  were  ridiculous.  1  mean,  they  were  still  developing  that  stuff 
when  1  was  there,  and  1  remember  questions  like,  “Are  you  a  homosexual?”  Another  question  was  “Are 
you  a  habitual  aspirin  user?”  It  was  stupid  stuff,  and  1  got  a  lot  of  it  thrown  out,  but  there  was  still  a  lot  of 
stuff  that  stuck. 

Then  1  developed  the  applicant  investigative  procedures.  1  had  started  in  Nevada  examining  hank 
accounts,  examining  safe  deposit  boxes,  examining  contents  of  safes,  and  things  like  that.  That  stuff  is 
still  in  Nevada,  and  1  brought  it  there.  So  once  we  got  all  of  that  groundwork,  we  started  investigative 
procedures  and  they  said  I’m  in  charge  of  the  first  investigation,  of  Resorts  International.  We  gathered  a 
lot  of  intelligence,  I  started  developing  snitches  and  everything.  And  one  of  the  snitches  was  a  big  guy 
within  a  certain  organization,  and  knew  a  lot  of  inside  stuff.  I  did  a  lot  of  intelligence  gathering  myself 
and  I  had  a  lot  of  snitches,  and  this  guy  tells  me  that  Resorts  International  is  the  one  that  sponsored  this 
gaming  bill,  and  they  paid  off  a  lot  of  the  legislators  that  sponsored  this  bill — I’m  not  saying  every  one, 
but  they  had  paid  off  the  key  ones,  they  said.  So  I  pursued  this  intelligence  information  further,  and 
finally  through  this  guy,  I  learned  that  there  are  actual  documents  proving  that  these  guys’  relatives  are 
getting  like  ten  thousand  dollars  a  month  each.  At  least  one  of  them  was  ten  thousand  in  public  relations 
fees,  another  guy’s  relatives  were  getting  something.  So  I  thought  if  I  could  prove  that,  and  it  turns  out 
there  was  proof  of  it  in  correspondence  and  things,  that  I  could  get  if  I  pursued  this. 

And  I  said,  “How  can  I  pursue  it?” 

They  said,  “Well,  the  stuff  is  in  these  file  cabinets  on  Paradise  Island,  just  off  of  Nassau  across 
this  bridge.  He  said  also  that  resorts  were  skimming  money  out  of  the  proceeds  that  people  had  to  pay  to 
cross  this  bridge  from  Nassau  to  Paradise  Island.  They  were  skimming  money  out  of  there.  And  this 
information  and  documentation  was  in  their  corporate  headquarters  on  Paradise  Island,  in  the  casino.  He 
told  me  where  the  file  cabinets  were  and  everything. 

I  said,  “Fine,  I’ll  just  go  get  it.” 

He  says,  “The  problem  is,  once  they  know  you’re  coming,  they’ve  paid  off  all  of  the  customs 
officials  from  the  Bahamas.  So  they’ll  know  that  you’re  coming  in.  They’ll  tell  them. 

I  said,  “Well,  I’ll  just  go  in  with  a  false  ID  and  false  occupations  and  stuff,  and  we’ll  go  in 
separately. 

He  said,  “You  can’t.  It’s  a  violation  of  international  law.  The  Bahamas  is  a  foreign  sovereign 
country  having  nothing  to  do  with  the  United  States. 

So  I  said,  “Fine.”  I  didn’t  want  to  tell  him  what  I  was  going  to  do.  So  I  came  up  with  a  scheme  for 
me  and  nine  agents  to  sneak  in  there  doing  just  what  I  told  him  might  be  a  possibility.  And  it  was  in 
violation  of  the  law;  we  knew  that.  Of  course,  I  was  getting  a  lot  of  resistance  for  everything  I  wanted  to 
do  from  the  head  of  the  agency,  Bob  Martinez.  He  was  tied  in  politically  with  everybody.  He  became  sort 
of  a  thorn  in  my  side  every  time  I  wanted  to  do  anything. 

And  he  was  your  immediate  supervisor? 

Yes,  he  was  my  immediate  boss.  But  I  don’t  know  if  I  explained  everything  to  him  exactly  the 
way  I  was  going  to  do  it.  [laughter]  I  ended  up  putting  this  operation  together  and  doing  it.  We  snuck  in 


230 


in  twos  and  we  had  two  female  agents  with  us  out  of  the  ten.  So  there  were  eight  guys  and  two  women. 
People  went  in  twos,  and  we  had  cameras  and  everything,  and  we  looked  like  tourists.  1  knew  there  was  a 
danger  there  of  us  getting  in  trouble,  because  we  had  no  jurisdiction  in  that  area  at  all.  We  were  not  peace 
officers  there;  we  were  nothing.  We  had  no  official  capacity.  But  1  felt  like  we  had  muscle,  though, 
because  once  1  got  there,  they  would  have  to  let  me  look  at  the  stuff  or  I’d  threaten  them  with  not  being 
able  to  get  their  license  if  they  weren’t  cooperative. 

So  we  got  there  and  we  put  the  bridge  on  surveillance.  We  counted  every  car  that  went  across 
from  one  building,  because  we  wanted  to  see  if  they  were  skimming.  1  think  they  figured  out  that  we’d  be 
checking  that,  because  that  came  out  to  the  dollar.  For  every  car  that  came  across,  they  turned  the  money 
over  to  the  government.  So  that  they  weren’t  doing. 

But  we  had  the  casino  under  surveillance,  and  we  saw  a  lot  of  problems  with  the  casino.  It  was  a 
bad  operation — poor  controls,  a  lot  of  things  going  wrong.  They  had  absolutely  no  control.  They  could 
have  been  skimming  money  out  of  there  all  they  wanted  to,  and  no  one  would  know.  The  controls  were 
terrible.  After  1  think  twenty-four  hours  of  surveillance,  we  shot  up  to  where  these  file  cabinets  were.  We 
told  them  who  we  were  and  showed  them  our  badges  and  everything,  and  they  just  freaked  out.  They 
didn’t  know  what  to  do.  They  said  “You  can’t  get  into  those  file  cabinets  until  we  get  authorization.” 

They  had  no  idea  what  to  do.  They  were  running  around  frantic. 

And  then  Bob  Peloquin  came  down.  He  was  a  famous  guy  from  federal  law  enforcement 
agencies,  like  strike  force  or  something.  And  he  was  hired  by  Resorts  International  to  head  up  their 
security.  He  was  rather  famous  in  terms  of  stuff  he  had  done  in  law  enforcement.  1  think  they  had  him  in 
there  to  look  good.  1  think  he  was  a  decent  guy,  too.  I  always  liked  him  and  had  respect  for  him.  They  had 
a  bunch  of  other  famous  federal  law  enforcement  people  that  were  on  his  staff.  But  1  always  felt  that  it 
was  window  dressing  and  that  these  guys  really  didn’t  know  what  was  going  on.  Before  he  came  down, 
they  said,  “Okay,  we  just  talked  to  our  board  directors,  and  they  said  you  could  get  into  this  stuff.” 

1  thought,  “Great,”  and  1  knew  what  was  in  there. 

And  they  said,  “But  you  can’t  do  it  until  tomorrow  when  they  get  here  to  release  those  documents 

to  you.” 

1  said,  “That’s  bullshit.” 

They  said,  “No,  you  can’t  do  it.” 

So  1  said,  “Fine.  Okay,  1  agree.”  So  1  pulled  out  of  my  pocket  these  seals  that  we  used  to  use 
when  1  worked  for  Pete  Merrick  Mitchell  when  we  did  surprise  bank  audits.  They  were  these  foil  things 
that  were  really  thin,  that  you  peeled  off  and  you  put  right  on  the  opening  of  a  safe,  so  that  nobody  could 
get  into  that  safe.  If  you  open  it,  they  break.  You  couldn’t  steam  them  off — nothing.  So  1  sealed  every 
single  file  cabinet,  and  they  were  shocked.  1  said,  “If  one  of  those  is  broken,  you’re  not  getting  your 
license.  So  every  one  better  be  intact  tomorrow  when  you  guys  come  in.”  And  they  looked  really,  really 
disappointed,  those  guys. 

The  next  day  Bob  Peloquin  comes,  and  we  start  going  through  the  files.  They  had  to  let  me  in. 
They  were  all  intact.  And  one  of  the  things  I  found  in  there  was  this  law  enforcement  organized  crime 
book.  It  was  a  federal  book.  It  was  a  listing  of  every  organized  crime  associate  that  existed  in  this  whole 
country.  1  always  knew  about  this,  and  could  never  get  it  because  this  thing  was  guarded  so  carefully  that 
I  could  never  get  a  copy.  I  always  wanted  a  copy  of  that,  but  couldn’t  get  it.  And  he  was  in  a  private 
company  and  had  it.  So  I  said,  “Bob.  You’re  not  supposed  to  have  this  thing.  Now,  1  want  this.  If  you  give 
this  to  me,  1  won’t  even  say  1  ever  saw  it.”  So  he  gave  me  a  copy  of  it,  and  1  got  that,  which  was  good. 
And  1  liked  him  anyway. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


231 


But  now  I’m  going  through  all  these  documents  and  1  come  across  all  these  letters,  just  like  this 
guy  said,  confirming  all  these  relationships.  And  with  some  of  these  guys,  they  said  “Yes,  there’s  a 
relationship,  but  they’re  very  unfriendly.”  Like,  one  senator’s  brother  was  getting  ten  thousand  dollars  a 
month,  but  they  tried  to  tell  me  that  the  senator  and  his  brother  were  estranged,  and  they  never  talked. 
Well,  1  found  all  this  correspondence  in  there  where  this  guy,  the  brother  who  was  getting  all  this  money, 
had  all  these  letters  with  constant  discussions  with  his  brother  about  this  same  thing — about  the  licensing, 
about  everything.  It  was  all  in  there.  There  was  documentation  about  this  guy  getting  ten  thousand  a 
month.  And  then  there  was  another  senator  whose  uncle  or  something  was  getting  x  amount  of  money  per 
month.  There  were  all  these  things.  I  had  the  goods  now!  This  was  a  major  thing.  1  was  so  happy,  1 
couldn’t  see  straight.  There  was  a  lot  of  stuff  there. 

And  really,  they  didn’t  know  what  1  had  and  what  I  didn’t  have,  because  we  were  just  left  alone 
with  these  things.  They  couldn’t  do  anything.  We’d  make  our  own  copies.  They  were  upset — really  upset. 
And  all  of  a  sudden,  I’m  down  in  the  casino  after  that,  I  had  all  the  stuff  with  me,  and  lo  and  behold,  here 
comes  this  big,  tall,  black  agent  with  a  British  accent.  He  says  he’s  with  the  Bahamian  police  or 
something,  some  law  enforcement.  It  could  have  been  their  secret  police  or  something,  I  can’t  remember. 

I  go  to  shake  hands  with  the  guy,  and  he  wouldn’t  shake  hands  with  me.  And  he  says  I’m  in  violation  of 
their  law.  He  checked  the  records  and  saw  I  didn’t  properly  register  or  something  when  I  came  through.  I 
forget  what  his  problem  was.  And  we  did  lie  about  everything  when  we  came  through  there. 

And  he  says,  “You’re  going  to  jail.”  [laughter]  I  had  heard  about  this  prison  they  had  out  there 
that  was  like  a  Devil’s  Island-type  prison  and  how  horrible  it  was.  He  basically  threatened  that  he  was 
going  to  take  me  there. 

So  I  said,  “Look,  I’ve  got  agents  all  over  this  entire  building.”  I  said,  “If  I  just  disappear,  all  hell’s 
going  to  break  loose,  and  you  could  have  an  international  incident  on  your  hands.”  The  guy  starts  looking 
nervous,  and  I  said,  “Look,  I’ll  come  down  to  your  headquarters  and  I’ll  do  whatever  you  want  me  to  do, 
but  I  got  to  go  talk  to  these  guys  first  and  tell  them  to  relax,  everything’s  going  to  be  OK.  But  if  I  just 
disappear,  all  kinds  of  things  could  happen.”  I  remember  telling  the  guy,  “This  could  start  a  war”  or 
something  [laughter]  because  I  was  desperate.  I  didn’t  know  what  to  say,  and  it  was  a  stupid  story  that  I 
was  telling  him. 

So  he  said,  “OK.”  I  got  the  address  and  I  said  that  one  of  these  guys  would  bring  me  right  down. 
He  had  a  guy  waiting  out  there  for  me,  I  think. 

So  I  lucked  out,  because  in  twenty  minutes,  I  was  off  the  island.  I  snuck  off  the  island,  and  I  was 
gone.  And  they  were  still  waiting  for  me  at  the  front  door.  And  I  had  all  the  stuff  with  me,  and  I  knew 
that’s  what  they  wanted  to  get.  That’s  why  they  wanted  to  get  me  down  there.  Of  course,  the  bad  thing 
was  I  left  all  my  agents  there.  One  of  the  troopers,  Kevin  DeSanctis,  who  later  became  a  close  friend  of 
mine,  was  there,  and  in  fact,  he  didn’t  have  any  money  or  anything.  He  jokes  to  this  day  that  I  left  him 
there  and  took  off.  But  I  had  to  get  the  stuff  back. 

So  when  I  got  back  to  New  Jersey  with  this  stuff,  everything  blew  up. 

Martinez  was  really  upset? 

Martinez  was  upset  when  he  saw  what  I  had.  I  created  a  whole  political  phase  of  this  investigation 
where  I  wanted  to  see  the  records  of  these  people  to  see  if  any  funds  or  land  or  anything  was  transferred 
from  these  relatives  to  the  guys  who  passed  the  bill,  because  I  was  told  by  a  snitch  that  all  these  guys  were 
bribed  to  pass  this  gaming  bill,  by  the  one  company  whose  stock  went  to  a  hundred  dollars  a  share 


232 


because  they  were  the  first  one  in.  And  I  also  knew  the  background  of  Resorts  International  was  Mary 
Carter  Paint  Company,  which  was  a  mob  outfit  from  the  beginning.  They  had  associations  with  all  these 
mobsters,  including  Dino  Cellini,  who  was  the  guy  who  ran  all  the  casinos  for  Meyer  Lansky,  and  Alvin 
Malnik,  the  guy  that  was  involved  with  Caesars  Palace.  So  1  felt  strongly  that  it  was  a  mob  company,  and 
1  knew  they  were  bribing  everybody,  for  one  thing,  including  the  police  in  the  Bahamas. 

So  1  started  pursuing  this  political  part  of  the  investigation,  and  all  of  a  sudden,  Bob  Martinez 
kept  trying  to  get  me  to  stop  it.  And  1  kept  saying,  “No,  I’m  not  stopping  this  thing.  We’re  supposed  to 
investigate  Resorts  International,  and  if  they  bribed  these  senators,  then  1  want  to  know  that  that 
happened,  because  they  shouldn’t  be  getting  a  license.  That’s  a  bad  thing.”  He  kept  trying  to  get  me  to 
back  off,  and  1  wouldn’t. 

So  next  thing  1  know,  they  disband  my  special  investigations  bureau.  They  have  a  big  meeting, 
and  they  say  they’re  going  to  make  some  changes.  The  governor’s  representative  was  there,  the  attorney 
general  at  the  time,  who  was  named  Degnan  at  the  time.  The  governor  was  Byrne.  And  they  had  the 
colonel  of  the  state  police  there.  And  all  my  agents  came  in,  all  the  state  troopers  were  there,  all  these 
people  were  there,  and  they  make  this  big  announcement  that  they’re  disbanding  my  special 
investigations  bureau,  and  they’re  going  to  put  me  under  the  state  police  captain,  and  I’m  still  in  charge  of 
the  resorts  investigation.  So  nobody  says  anything;  not  even  the  agents  I  brought  from  Nevada  said  a 
thing;  nobody  said  anything. 

One  guy  stands  up — Kevin  DeSanctis,  the  state  trooper  that  was  working  for  me,  who  1  didn’t 
even  know  that  well,  except  for  the  work  we  did  in  the  Bahamas.  He  stands  up  and  says,  “This  whole 
thing’s  bullshit.”  He  says,  “1  came  to  work  for  Dennis  Gomes.  He’s  the  only  one  that  has  the  ability  to 
teach  me,  he’s  the  only  one  who  knows  how  to  do  this  stuff,  and  I’m  working  for  him.  This  is  wrong.  1 
took  this  assignment  to  work  for  him,  and  this  is  political,”  or  something  like  that. 

And  as  soon  as  he  said  that — he’s  a  state  trooper — the  colonel  of  the  state  police  looks  at  him 
with  daggers,  and  that  was  like  the  end  of  his  career.  Period.  That  was  the  worst  possible  thing  he  could 
have  done,  but  he  knew  it  and  he  stood  up.  Of  all  the  people,  he  stood  up  for  me.  And  sure  enough,  they 
disbanded  it  and  put  me  under  the  state  police  captain,  named  Tony  Scalzone,  who  1  also  liked  .... 

Why  was  Martinez  trying  to  hush  it  up?  Was  he  in  on  some  kind  of .  .  .  ? 

Well,  I’ll  tell  you  how  bad  it  got  in  a  second. 

Now,  1  don’t  know  why  exactly  he  was  trying  to  do  this.  But  the  first  thing  the  state  police 
captain  does  is  tell  me,  “You  have  to  stop  the  political  phase  of  your  investigation.”  That’s  the  order  he 
gives  me. 

I  said,  “I’m  not  stopping  it  unless  you  give  it  to  me  in  writing.” 

He  says,  “Dennis,  they  will  never  give  this  to  you  in  writing.” 

And  I  said,  “Then  I’m  never  going  to  stop  it.” 

So  1  started  making  moves  to  get  the  records  of  these  relatives  of  these  powerful  people.  One  of 
these  guys  was  slated  to  be  the  next  governor  of  the  state.  I’m  continue  with  my  work,  and  I  started  to  get 
harassed.  At  first,  I  was  getting  harassed  by  the  intelligence  unit  of  the  state  police.  Bob  Guccione  from 
Penthouse  magazine  was  going  to  apply  for  a  gaming  license;  he  was  building  a  place  there.  1  went  and  I 
did  some  intelligence  work  and  actually  got  to  his  apartment  and  sat  and  questioned  him  for  an  hour  with 
several  of  my  agents.  The  state  police  intelligence  people  come  running  out  of  our  headquarters  yelling 
and  screaming  because  I  guess  they  were  trying  to  get  to  this  guy  and  couldn’t.  And  they  were  totally 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


233 


pissed  off  at  me  and  harassing  me  for  doing  it  myself.  It  started  with  small  things  like  that. 

And  then  on  a  trip  1  had  arranged — Dino  Cellini  was  this  big  mob  guy  who  ran  all  the  casinos  for 
the  mob.  But  he  had  a  good  reputation  as  being  a  decent  person  and  a  good  casino  operator,  and  1  was 
always  intrigued  by  him.  1  set  up  through  some  questionable  character  a  meeting  with  this  Dino  Cellini, 
who  agreed  to  meet  with  me  and  Bob  Martinez  in  Miami,  where  he  lived.  This  was  a  big  guy.  He  ran  stuff 
all  over  the  world.  He  ran  casinos  in  England  for  the  mob  and  everything  else,  and  basically  was  thrown 
out  of  all  these  places. 

He  was  right  next  to  Meyer  Lansky,  wasn ’t  he? 

Yes,  he  was.  So  he  agreed  to  see  us.  Bob  Martinez  had,  1  think,  some  relationship  with  this  other 
guy,  this  flaky  guy  who  set  this  up.  1  forget  what  it  was.  1  don’t  know  if  he  was  his  snitch  or  what,  but  he 
knew  him  better  than  1  knew  him.  But  1  made  the  contacts  and  did  the  work  to  set  up  the  meeting.  The 
guy  agreed  to  meet  with  me.  And  Bob  Martinez  said  he’d  come.  In  the  meantime,  1  got  hold  of  the  strike 
force  in  Miami,  a  guy  1  knew  that  was  there.  They  were  in  a  house  across  the  street  from  this  guy’s  house 
and  they  were  watching.  1  asked  if  they  would  watch  us  go  in  there  and  make  sure  that  everything  was 
OK,  and  they  said  fine,  they  would. 

When  we  got  there,  Bob  Martinez  started  getting  nervous  about  the  whole  thing.  When  we  got  in 
front  of  the  house — 1  was  driving — we  were  ready  to  go  in,  and  he  sees  cars  that  said  “Roma”  on  their 
license  plates,  and  all  this  stuff,  all  these  Mercedes  parked  in  front  of  this  big  house  in  Miami.  And  he 
says,  “1  don’t  know  if  we  should  do  this.” 

1  said,  “We’ve  got  to  go  in  there.”  1  said,  “Bob.”  He  wouldn’t  do  it.  1  said,  “Bob,  see  that  house 
over  there?  Those  are  all  federal  people;  they’re  watching  everything.  Nothing’s  going  to  happen.  1 
guarantee  you.”  1  said,  “If  you  don’t  go  in,  I’m  going  in  by  myself.” 

He  says,  “OK.” 

So  we  go  in,  and  they  bring  Dino  Cellini  out.  He’s  kind  of  lying  there.  He  starts  talking,  and  he 
starts  talking  about  regulations  and  all  that  stuff.  He  got  to  one  point  where  he  started  to  say  something 
that  was  pretty  revealing — and  he  was  dying  of  cancer,  so  he  wasn’t  always  that  rational — and  he  starts 
saying  something  to  where  one  more  sentence  and  he  would  have  given  us  some  really  strong  stuff.  I 
forgot  exactly  what  the  issue  was.  The  second  he  got  to  that,  all  of  a  sudden  three  guys  come  running  into 
the  room  and  say,  “OK  the  interview’s  over,  he’s  tired,  he’s  sick,  it’s  over,  it’s  done.”  So  basically,  boom, 
we’re  out. 

So  I  told  Bob,  “That  was  a  waste.” 

We  get  to  the  airport  and  this  flaky  guy  who  set  this  up,  he’s  with  us.  So  Bob  Martinez  comes 
over  to  me  and  says,  “Hey,  Dennis,  we  want  you  to  come  with  us  to  the  Bahamas.”  I  think  it  was  a  Friday. 
1  had  just  come  back  from  the  Bahamas  and  there  was  no  way  1  wanted  to  walk  in  there  and  have  these 
guys  stick  me  in  jail  or  something. 

I  says,  “No,  I’ll  get  in  trouble.” 

He  says,  “No,  you  won’t.  That’s  a  done  deal.”  He  says,  “There’s  some  women  down  there  that 
we’ve  set  up — some  really  beautiful  women,  beauty  queens,  and  they’re  going  to  meet  us  down  there. 
We’ve  got  one  for  you,  too,  or  several,”  or  something. 

I  said,  “I’m  happily  married.  I  don’t  want  to  do  this.”  I  said,  “You  guys  go.” 

He  says,  “No,  you  have  to  go.  I’m  telling  you  as  your  boss,  you  have  to  go.” 

I  said,  “We  have  no  jurisdiction  there,  we’ve  got  no  investigation  there,  you  can’t  tell  me  to  go.” 


234 


And  I  said,  “I’m  not  doing  it.” 

He  says,  “It’s  an  order.” 

I  said,  “I  don’t  give  a  shit.  You  go.”  And  I  went  and  got  on  the  plane. 

And  he  went  off  with  this  other  guy.  Last  thing  I  remember,  they  were  walking  down  toward 
another  gate.  A  few  minutes  before  the  plane  took  off,  I  see  him  walking  down  the  aisle  of  the  plane  I’m 
on,  and  he  sits  next  to  me.  And  he  says,  “I  decided  not  to  go.” 

Now,  we’re  flying  home,  flying  to  Newark  from  Miami,  and  he  starts  telling  me  stories.  He’s 
drinking  a  bit  and  he  starts  telling  me  stories  about  him  and  his  wife  swapping  with  somebody — one 
relative  of  his,  with  his  sister-in-law,  I  think  it  was,  or  something.  And  finally  I  looked  at  him  and  I  said, 

“I  don’t  want  to  hear  any  of  this  anymore.”  I  mean,  I  didn’t  want  to  hear  this.  It  was  just  yapping  my  ear.  I 
was  trying  to  read  or  something.  I  said,  “I  don’t  want  to  hear  this  stuff  anymore.”  And  then  he  kept  trying 
to  tell  me.  I  said,  “What  are  you  telling  me  this  for?  I  told  you  I  don’t  want  to  hear  it.” 

And  he  says,  “Because  I  feel  guilty.” 

I  said,  “Well,  that’s  fine.  Go  see  a  priest.”  [laughter] 

Then  I  said,  “But  I  don’t  want  to  hear.  I’m  not  listening  to  another  word.  I’ll  move  on  the  plane.” 
And  so  he  shut  up,  and  then  we  landed  in  Newark,  and  then  I  had  a  state  police  car.  It  was  an  unmarked 
radio  car,  but  it  had  no  markings  on  it.  It  was  my  car,  so  I’m  driving.  He’s  in  the  car,  and  we  had  Scalzone 
[phonetic]  with  us,  this  state  police  guy.  I  don’t  know  why  he  was  with  us.  I  don’t  remember  him  coming 
to  Miami  with  us,  but  anyway,  I  believe  we  had  him  with  us,  if  I’m  not  mistaken.  Anyway,  we  dropped 
him  off,  and  then  we’re  driving,  and  he  says,  “Dennis,  why  don’t  you  come  into  New  York  with  me? 
There’s  a  girl  there  that  was  a  girlfriend  of  mine.  She  works  for  the  attorney  general’s  office.  She’s  an 
A.G.,  attorney  general,  an  assistant  attorney  general.  And  she  wants  to  sleep  with  you.” 

I  said,  “She  doesn’t  know  me.  How’s  she  want  to  sleep  with  me?” 

And  so  he  says,  “No,  she  does.”  He  says,  “She’s  sexy,”  and  this  and  that.  I  forget  what  words  he 
used,  “and  beautiful.” 

And  so  I  say,  “I  can’t  take  the  state  police  car  across  state  lines,”  which  he  knew  was  a  lie, 
because  he  knew.  He  had  one,  too. 

And  he  said,  “Yes,  you  can.” 

I  said,  “No,  I  can’t.  So-and-so  told  me  I  can’t.”  I  cited  Colonel  somebody — or  not  colonel  but  a 
major  or  ...  I  forget  what  the  guy’s  name  was,  one  of  the  top  guys  there.  I  can’t  think  of  it  now,  but  I  just 
said  his  name.  I  said,  “He  told  me  I  couldn’t.  So  I’m  going  to  listen  to  him.”  That  was  just  an  excuse, 
because  I  didn’t  want  to  do  this. 

So  he  says,  “Fine.” 

So  we  get  from  Newark  almost  halfway  to  Trenton,  where  we  lived,  and  he  says,  “Dennis, 
remember  my  sister-in-law  I  was  telling  you  about?” 

“Yes.” 

He  says,  “You’ve  met  her  before.” 

“Yes?” 

He  said,  “Do  you  think  she’s  nice  looking?” 

I  said,  “Yes,  really  nice  looking.” 

I  think  it  was  his  sister-in-law.  He  says,  “She  wants  me  to  bring  you  home.” 

I  said,  “For  what?” 

He  says,  “She  wants  to  sleep  with  you.” 

And  now  I’m  trying  to  humor  him,  because  I  don’t  know  what  to  do  or  say.  I  said,  “No,  I  don’t 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


235 


think  so.”  I  said,  “What  if  her  husband  comes  home?”  [laughter] 

And  he  says,  “Ah,  her  husband’s  a  professor.” 

1  said,  “1  know  he  is.” 

And  he  says,  “He’s  off  at  some  conference  someplace.” 

1  said,  “But  what  if  he  comes  home  unexpectedly  or  something?”  1  said,  “The  husband’s  gone. 
That’s  what  you  told  me.  What  if  comes  home  unexpectedly?” 

And  he  says,  “No,  it  won’t  happen.  He  won’t  care,  anyway,”  he  says. 

So,  1  said,  “1  don’t  care.  1  don’t  want  to  take  the  risk.”  [laughter] 

And  1  don’t  know  what  to  say  to  this  guy,  because  1  told  him  fifty  times  1  don’t  play  around, 
because  I’m  happily  married.  He  wasn’t  listening  to  that. 

Was  he  just  trying  to  set  you  up? 

Y es,  he  was  trying  to  set  me  up  for  something.  He  was  trying  to  get  me  to  do  something  that  he 
could  hold  over  my  head,  or  do  something  that  he  could  control  me  with. 

Or  get  you  out  of  the  job? 

Yes.  And  so,  then  we  get  all  the  way  into  Trenton,  and  I  was  going  to  take  him  home,  and  he 
says,  “Dennis,”  he  said,  “my  wife  really  likes  you.” 

So,  now  that  kind  of  shocked  me,  and  I  didn’t  even  respond  to  it. 

And  then  in  a  little  while  he  says,  “Did  you  hear  what  I  said?” 

1  said,  “Yes.” 

He  says,  “My  wife  really  likes  you.” 

I  said,  “Yes,  1  like  her,  too.” 

And  he  says,  “She  wants  to  sleep  with  you.” 

And  I  ignored  that  again. 

He  says,  “Did  you  hear  what  I  said?” 

And  so  then  I  exploded  on  him.  No,  I  know,  before  I  exploded  I  said,  “Bob,  I  don’t  think  that  you 
and  I  would  have  too  good  a  relationship  [laughter]  if  I  slept  with  your  wife,  and  we  had  to  work 
together.” 

So  he  says,  “No.”  He  says,  “I’m  not  jealous.  So  that  wouldn’t  bother  me  at  all.” 

And  then  as  soon  as  he  said  that  I  exploded  and  started  yelling  at  him  and  called  him  some  names 
and  stuff,  a  pervert  or  something.  And  I  drove  to  my  house  and  let  him  take  my  car.  I  didn’t  want  to  be  in 
the  car  with  him  for  five  more  seconds.  I  just  got  out  while  I  was  still  in  control,  and  I  didn’t  want  to  go 
anywhere  near  his  house,  so  I  just  got  out  and  let  him  go,  and  went  in  and  told  my  wife  this  whole  story 
right  away. 

And  then  after  that  things  just  deteriorated.  It  got  so  bad  that  one  point  me  and  my  agents  had  a 
meeting  at  a  baseball  field,  pretending  like  we  were  playing  baseball,  to  talk  about  what  we  were  going  to 
do,  because  they  were  just  harassing  every  one  of  us.  And  we  were  faking  this  baseball  game,  but  we 
were  just  talking,  because  we  were  afraid  they  were  tapping  us  or  listening.  We  decided  to  go  to  this 
attorney,  and  this  attorney  tells  us,  “No,  you  better  not  do  anything.  You  shouldn’t  go  to  the  press.  You 
shouldn’t  do  anything.  Just  all  leave.”  Well,  it  turns  out  later  on  that  this  attorney  was  tied  in  with  all 
these  guys,  so  that  was  a  stupid  thing.  So  we  basically  decided  just  one  by  one  that  we  would  leave. 


236 


Now,  in  the  meantime,  the  attorney  general  comes  down,  and  the  governor.  The  governor  brought 
me  to  his  office,  because  1  wouldn’t  stop  this  political  phase.  And  Governor  Byrne  acted  like  he  was 
really  investigating  this  and  wanted  to  pursue  this  and  didn’t  want  anything  bad  to  happen.  He  didn’t 
commit  himself  to  anything.  He  acted  like  he  was  concerned.  He  says,  “I’m  going  to  have  [John]  Degnan, 
the  attorney  general,  come  and  see  you.”  So  he  came  and  saw  me.  And  basically,  they  did  this  white-wash 
investigation.  Well,  they  did  nothing.  They  just  blew  it  all  off. 

So  Resort  International  got  licensed? 

Yes.  So  1  finally  went  home  to  my  wife,  because  1  was  getting  real  nervous  about  all  these  things. 
We  had  just  moved  into  a  house  that  she  spent  a  whole  year  building.  And  1  love  law  enforcement,  so  1 
didn’t  want  to  leave,  but  1  couldn’t  do  this  anymore.  After  all  these  years  where  1  thought  1  was  helping 
society,  1  felt  like  society  didn’t  care.  And  so  1  decided  to  leave.  1  didn’t  want  my  family  hurt,  and  I  didn’t 
want  my  reputation  destroyed  by  these  people,  and  so  1  went  home  and  told  her.  She  had  spent  a  whole 
year  building  this  house,  and  we  were  only  in  it  for  two  weeks,  hadn’t  even  unpacked  boxes  that  came 
from  Vegas,  and  they  were  just  sitting  all  over  the  house.  And  she  loved  this  house.  She  started  crying. 

She  walked  out  and  looked  out  over  this  big  balcony  across  the  backyard  into  these  woods  and  cried  some 
more,  went  down,  looked  at  our  big  four-wall  fireplace  and  everything,  came  back  up  and  said,  “OK. 
When  are  we  leaving?”  [laughter]  And  so  we  eventually  left,  and  that’s  when  1  left  law  enforcement. 

1  kept  a  whole  diary  of  every  conversation  1  ever  had  with  those  people  back  then.  And  then  1  left 
and  came  back  to  Nevada,  and  Resorts  International  got  licensed.  And  the  funny  thing  is  at  one  point  their 
attorneys  came  to  me.  They  were  suing  Bob  Martinez,  and  they  wanted  me  to  testify  against  him.  The 
resorts  attorneys  came,  because  now  all  of  a  sudden  tables  were  turning.  They  were  going  after  him.  1 
don’t  know  why,  exactly.  It  was  a  guy  by  the  name  of  Brown  that  was  an  attorney  for  them,  and  Jack 
Davis,  who  was  president  of  the  company.  And  I  liked  this  Jack  Davis  guy,  but  they  sat  there,  and  he  said, 
“Will  you  testify  against  Bob  Martinez?”  because  they  knew  all  these  terrible  things  he  did,  and  he 
eventually  got  fired  from  the  agency,  1  think,  because  he  had  a  relationship  with  the  Playboy  attorney,  this 
woman. 

But  they  wanted  me  to  testify  all  these  things  that  were  going  on  when  1  was  there,  and  I  said,  “No,  I’m 
not.” 

And  they  said,  “Why  not?” 

1  looked  at  Jack  Davis  and  I  said,  “Because  your  company’s  a  mob  company,  and  if  I  was  there 
long  enough,  I  could  have  proved  it,  that’s  why.” 

And  the  attorney  looks  at  me  and  says,  “You  know  what?  1  think  you  could.” 

And  Jack  Davis  looks  at  him  and  says,  “How  could  he?  It’s  not  true!”  [laughter] 

But  I  says  that’s  the  end  of  that  story,  and  I  went  and  got  into  gaming.  My  first  place  was  Major 
Riddle  Enterprises.  It  was  for  an  old  guy  that  had  been  around  for  a  long  time,  and  was  a  part  owner  of  the 
Dunes,  too,  but  where  I  worked  was  the  Silver  Bird  Hotel. 

And  Silver  Bird  was  formerly  the  Thunderbird? 

Yes.  It  was  formerly  the  Thunderbird,  and  I  came  in  as  vice  president  and  treasurer  of  that 
operation. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


237 


Where  did  you  go  from  the  Thunderbird? 

OK.  He  died,  and  he  named  me  as  a  trustee  in  his  estate.  He  really  liked  me,  and  I  felt  like  his 
estate  was  going  to  be  a  big  mess,  and  that  everybody  wanted  everything  he  had.  The  people  that  owned 
the  land  that  he  was  leasing  there  were  powerful  bankers,  and  I  felt  that  they  were  going  to  come  after 
him,  and  after  his  estate.  And  1  didn’t  want  to  be  part  of  any  of  that,  so  1  resigned  from  that,  and  1  started 
looking  for  a  job  briefly.  Kevin  DeSanctis,  the  state  trooper  that  stood  up  for  me  that  day,  was  with  me.  1 
had  to  take  him  with  me,  because  he  didn’t  have  a  job.  They  were  going  to  annihilate  him,  and  they  said 
so.  When  we  left  the  state  police  told  us  we’d  never  work  in  the  state  of  New  Jersey  again.  So  Kevin  went 
with  me  to  the  Silver  Bird,  and  after  we  left  there,  we  went  to  work  for  a  Canadian  company  that  was 
building  a  casino,  and  we  designed  the  place  for  them.  They  ran  out  of  money,  and  so  that  fell  apart.  And 
then  1  was  looking  for  a  job,  and  1  couldn’t  find  a  job  anywhere.  1  had  a  high  profile  in  law  enforcement, 
and  1  had  financial  credentials  and  everything,  but  it  was  not  a  strong  economic  period,  either,  and  so  it 
was  hard  to  find  jobs.  And  so  finally,  1  approached  Phil  Hannifin  from  Sunima  Corporation.  Phil  Hannifin 
from  the  Gaming  Board  is  now  in  charge  of  all  the  gaming  for  Summa  Corporation,  which  was  Howard 
Hughes’  holdings. 

And  1  said,  “Phil,  1  need  a  job.”  [laughter] 

And  he  said,  “OK.  Come  and  see  me.”  He  says,  “1  don’t  have  anything  right  now.”  So  he  talked 
to  me,  and  he  says,  “OK,  Dennis,  if  you  don’t  have  anything  in  thirty  days,  then  I’ll  give  you  a  job 
working  for  me  as  a  consultant  or  something.” 

And  so  thirty  days  later  I  called  him  back  and  said,  “Phil,  I  don’t  have  a  job.”  [laughter] 

He  says,  “OK,  come  to  work.” 

And  so,  I  came  to  work  for  him,  and  he  says,  “OK.  1  got  a  problem  at  the  Frontier  Hotel.  It’s  not 
making  any  money,  and  I  want  you  to  go  look  at  it  and  find  out  why.” 

I  said,  “Could  I  hire  a  guy  as  an  auditor  for  me?” 

And  he  says,  “Yes.”  And  he  says,  “Who?” 

I  said,  “Kevin  DeSanctis.”  [laughter] 

And  he  says,  “OK.” 

So  I’ve  got  Kevin.  That  was  Kevin’s  second  job.  So  we  both  went  to  work  at  the  Frontier,  and  we 
started  analyzing  everything  there,  and  the  general  manager  there  didn’t  like  us,  at  all.  His  name  was  Phil 
Arce.  We  were  coming  up  with  all  these  findings,  and  every  time  I’d  show  Phil  Hannifin,  he’d  say,  “Oh, 
geez!”  because  this  was  really  bad.  [laughter]  And  it  was  showing  that  the  junket  programs  were  losing 
money,  and  all  these  different  programs  were  losing  money,  and  so,  he  said,  “I  want  you  to  be  the  new 
vice  president  of  casino  operations  there.” 

Of  the  Frontier? 

Of  the  Frontier.  And  he  said,  “Kevin  can  be  your  assistant  or  something — assistant  casino 
manager.” 

So,  I  said,  “Phil,  who  am  I  working  for?  Phil  Arce — the  president  of  that  property — or  you?” 

He  says,  “Well,  on  paper,  to  Phil  Arce,  but  in  reality,  to  me.” 

I  said,  “Phil,  that’s  never  going  to  work.  That’s  going  to  be  such  a  tough  situation,  it’s  going  to  be 
a  monstrosity.  I  mean,  it’s  not  fair  to  him,  and  it’s  just  not  workable.” 

And  he  says,  “Well,  I  don’t  want  to  get  rid  of  him,  and  I  think  you  could  help  him.” 


238 


I  said,  “Well,  there’s  going  to  be  a  lot  of  animosity.” 

And  he  says,  “1  don’t  care.”  He  said,  “That’s  just  the  way  it’s  going  to  work.”  And,  “You  could 
take  the  job,  or  you  could  leave  the  job.” 

1  said,  “I’ll  take  the  job,  but  it’s  going  to  be  tough.” 

Sure  enough,  it  was  tough.  But  the  profits  skyrocketed  there.  We  went  way,  way  up.  We  had 
tremendous  results  there,  and  because  of  the  results  in  that  property,  1  was  getting  more  notoriety,  and  1 
started  applying  at  other  places,  and  1  applied  at  Caesars  and  Hilton.  And  Baron  Hilton  really  liked  me.  So 
They  hired  me  at  the  Las  Vegas  Hilton,  and  I  worked  opposite  Henri  Lewin.  Henri  Lewin  was  in  charge 
of  the  hotel,  and  1  was  in  charge  of  the  casino.  We  made  huge  increases  in  profits  there,  and  Baron  Hilton 
liked  the  programs,  and  he  liked  me.  He  eventually  put  me  in  charge  of  all  the  casinos  in  Nevada  for  him, 
reporting  directly  to  him. 

You  must  have  taken  DeSanctis  with  you  again,  too? 

Yes,  1  took  Kevin  DeSanctis  with  me.  Kevin  was  my  casino  manager  there.  And,  of  course,  there 
were  other  people  there.  One  of  my  key  people  was  Bill  Robinson.  Bill  was  my  casino  manager  at  the 
Silver  Bird  and  at  the  Frontier,  and  then  1  took  him  to  the  Hilton,  and  Kevin  was  his  assistant.  He  was 
assistant  casino  manager.  In  fact,  Bill  Robinson  is  the  casino  manager  here  at  the  Tropicana. 

So  we  changed  everything,  and  then  1  promoted  Kevin  to  casino  manager  once  1  got  in  charge  of 
the  Virginia  Street  Hilton. 

Yes,  and  Kevin  DeSanctis  came  up  there. 

Y es,  he  came  up  there,  and  he  was  in  charge  of  the  casino  there  for  me,  and  Bill  Robinson  was  in 
charge  at  the  Hilton,  and  I  had  the  Flamingo,  too.  1  put  Greg  Shay  there. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


239 


10 

Phillip  (Phil)  Hannifin 


Phillip  (Phil)  Hannifin  was  born  in  Butte,  Montana  in 
1934  and  moved  to  Reno  when  he  was  ten  years  old.  A 
1952  graduate  of  Bishop  Manogue  High  School,  he 
entered  military  sendee  and  graduated  from  the 
University  of  Nevada  in  1957.  Hannifin  then  served  the 
state  of  Nevada  in  several  key  administrative  positions 
including  heading  the  Department  of  Health  and 
Welfare.  In  1977,  he  was  named  by  Governor  Michael 
O’ Callaghan  to  chair  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  a 
role  he  held  until  resigning  in  1977.  Hannifin  served  as 
chairman  during  a  period  in  Nevada  gaming  history 
that  bridged  the  days  when  casinos  were  owned  and 
operated  by  many  unsavory  characters  and  the 
introduction  of  corporate  ownership.  Six  weeks  after 
resigning  from  the  Board,  Hannifin  was  named 
director  of  Howard  Hughes  ’  Summa  Corporation.  He 
went  on  to  work  with  gaming  organizations  and 
interests  including  Harrah 's  West  and  Kirk  Kerkorian,  then  returned  to  Reno  to  work  in  the  upper 
management  of  Fitzgeralds. 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  morning.  My  name  is  Dwayne  Kling.  I’m  with  Phil  Hannifin  at  his  residence  in 
Reno,  Nevada.  Phil,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have  your  permission  to 
begin  the  oral  history  that  we  are  about  to  begin  today? 

Phil  Hannifin:  Yes. 


Let ’s  start  by  asking  when  and  where  were  you  born? 


240 


I  was  bom  October  3,  1934  in  Butte,  Montana. 

Are  you  married,  Phil? 

No,  I’m  widowed.  My  wife,  Doris,  died  three-and-a-half  years  ago.  1  have  a  son,  Brett,  who  is  an 
apprentice  for  the  Disney  Corporation  in  Los  Angeles,  and  a  daughter,  Mari  Clark,  who  is  married  with 
three  children.  She  lives  here  in  Reno. 

You  said  you  were  born  in  Montana.  Did  you  stay  there  long? 

No.  1  left  there  in  1942,  just  after  World  War  11  started.  My  father  entered  the  service,  and  my 
mother  and  1  moved  to  Wendover,  and  then  we  moved  to  Reno  in  about  1944. 

Where  did  you  go  to  grammar  school? 

1  went  to  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  right  downtown.  And  1  went  to  Bishop  Manogue  High  School.  Our 
class  was  the  first  class  that  went  for  the  full  four  years  at  Manogue  and  we  graduated  in  1952. 

When  you  got  out  of  high  school  the  Korean  War  was  going  on.  Did  you  enter  the  sendee,  or  did  you  go 
on  to  the  University  of  Nevada? 

1  didn’t  go  right  into  the  service.  1  went  to  the  University  of  Nevada  and  after  completing  two 
years,  1  went  to  Quantico,  Virginia,  for  a  Marine  Corps  officer  training  program  and  was  there  most  of  the 
summer.  When  1  came  back  to  Reno  I  went  into  what  was  called  the  aviation  cadet  program  of  the  United 
States  Air  Force.  1  learned  to  fly,  spent  some  time  there,  and  developed  ulcers,  so  came  out  of  the  service, 
went  back  to  school,  and  graduated  in  1957. 

When  you  were  going  through  school,  did  you  have  any  part-time  jobs  in  gambling? 

Yes,  1  did.  1  worked  for  Warren  Nelson  at  the  Palace  Club.  1  worked  the  graveyard  shift  dealing 
keno  and  occasionally  the  roulette  wheel.  1  worked  there  until  1  graduated,  and  then  even  after  1 
graduated,  1  worked  the  following  summer.  1  had  been  going  to  school  at  the  American  Institute  of 
Foreign  Trade  in  Phoenix.  My  wife  and  1  had  gone  down  there  after  we  were  married  in  1957.  The 
following  summer  when  1  came  back  from  Phoenix,  1  worked  for  Warren  at  the  Cal-Neva.  But  1  originally 
worked  for  him  at  the  Palace  Club. 

Was  Reggie  Parker  working  there  at  the  time? 

Yes.  “Arky”  ran  a  keno  shift,  and  he  functioned  pretty  much  as  the  keno  boss  for  the  Palace  Club. 
I  worked  on  a  number  of  different  shifts,  and  at  different  times.  Sometimes  1  worked  relief,  and  1  would 
work  directly  with  “Arky.”  But  most  often  1  was  working  graveyard  shifts,  and,  of  course,  “Arky”  didn’t 
work  graveyard,  [laughter] 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


241 


Do  you  feel  that  working  in  a  gambling  casino  helped  you  when  you  became  chairman  of  the  Gaming 
Control  Board? 

Oh,  certainly.  1  knew  some  of  the  culture  and  some  of  what  the  gaming  community  was  all  about. 
Frankly,  1  don’t  know  whether  it  was  inherited  or  not.  My  father  ran  illegal  gambling  in  Montana  before 
the  war,  and  he  and  Warren  Nelson  were  friends.  That’s  really  how  I  got  the  job  at  the  Palace  Club. 
Actually,  1  wasn’t  old  enough  to  work  in  a  casino.  When  1  came  out  of  the  service  and  1  was  going  to 
school  1  got  a  job  driving  a  cab,  and  after  a  couple  of  months  that  just  got  to  me.  One  night  1  double 
parked  the  cab  on  Center  Street  by  Douglas  Alley  and  1  went  in  and  asked  for  Warren.  1  went  over  and 
introduced  myself,  and  he  obviously  recognized  the  name.  1  told  him  1  was  going  to  school  and  needed  a 
job.  He  said,  “When  can  you  start?” 

And  1  said,  “Right  now!” 

He  says,  “Well,  go  over  to  the  pit.”  And  1  left  the  cab  double  parked,  [laughter]  When  1  left  the 
Palace  Club  in  the  morning,  the  cab  was  gone.  1  didn’t  know  what  had  happened.  Well,  surprisingly 
enough,  about  a  month  later,  a  man  came  in  from  the  cab  company,  and  he  had  a  check  for  me,  for  what 
they  owed  me  up  to  that  point  in  time.  And  they  had  sent  the  guy  down  to  give  me  the  check. 

After  you  graduated  from  the  University  of  Nevada  in  1957,  what  was  your  first  job? 

The  very  first  job  1  had  when  1  got  out  of  school  was  in  Phoenix.  Doris  became  pregnant  while  we 
were  in  Phoenix,  and  when  we  came  home  that  summer  1  was  accepted  by  Georgetown  University  in 
Washington,  D.C.,  to  go  to  law  school,  and  Senator  Bible  had  offered  me  a  job  so  that  1  could  go  through 
law  school.  But  when  we  got  here  and  found  out  that  Doris  was  pregnant  1  worked  that  summer  doing 
some  construction  work  and  also  carrying  garbage  for  Reno  Sanitation.  So  1  worked  those  kinds  of  jobs 
that  summer.  And  1  decided  that  really  it  wasn’t  appropriate  while  Doris  was  pregnant  to  go  back  to 
Washington,  so  1  tried  to  look  for  something  more  permanent.  There  was  a  job  opening  for  a  juvenile 
probation  officer  for  Washoe  County,  and  when  1  went  down  and  applied,  1  was  hired.  That  was  my  first 
professional  job. 

The  year  after  1  started,  we  began  a  campaign  to  pass  a  bond  issue.  We  were  required  to  actually 
go  out  and  get  various  community  groups  involved — especially  some  of  the  women’s  groups — to  build 
Wittenberg  Hall.  And  when  the  bond  issue  was  passed,  1  was  appointed  director  of  Wittenberg  Hall  and 
began  to  work  with  the  county  engineers,  finding  an  architect  and  then  helping  the  architect  with  the  plans 
and  helping  to  put  together  some  design  features.  1  also  traveled  through  California  and  Oregon  looking  at 
prototype  juvenile  detention  facilities,  and  then  we  let  a  contract  and  built  Wittenberg  Hall. 

Do  you  recall  what  year  that  was  completed  and  opened? 

It  was  1959. 

Did  you  have  to  staff  the  facility? 


Yes,  and  we  had  a  lot  of  people  that  are  well  known:  Sammy  Macias,  who  later  became  a 
principal  locally  in  the  Washoe  County  school  district,  and  Tony  Union,  who  also  became  a  principal  in 
the  school  district;  Frank  Sullivan,  who  I’d  known  since  high  school,  also  worked  there — he  later  became 


242 


the  chief  probation  officer  for  Washoe  County — and  Dean  Smith,  who  was  later  a  publisher  for  Gannett 
in  North  Dakota.  Dean  was  later  a  developer  here  in  Reno,  and  is  pretty  much  retired  now.  So  a  lot  of 
young  men  who  1  had  known  one  way  or  another  worked  there  with  the  youngsters.  In  the  course  of  that 
experience  in  juvenile  work,  1  met  Mike  O’Callaghan,  because  he  was  doing  the  same  thing  in  southern 
Nevada.  We  had  the  opportunity  back  and  forth  over  time  to  talk  a  bit  and  to  share  philosophy  and  so 
forth. 

In  the  early  1960s,  the  Job  Coips  was  initiated,  and  O’ Callaghan  went  to  work  for  Job  Coips  as 
the  national  administrator  for  the  Job  Coips  Conservation  Centers,  which  were  built  on  public  land  like 
Forest  Service  and  BLM  land.  And  then  he  persuaded  me  to  go  to  work  for  him. 

Did  you  report  directly  to  Mr.  O’ Callaghan? 

Yes.  1  had  a  region  out  here  in  the  West,  but  the  unfortunate  part  about  it  was  that  1  never  really 
spent  much  time  out  in  the  West.  After  the  program  started  there  was  a  tremendous  amount  of  political 
pressure  to  open  camp  after  camp  after  camp.  There  were  people  in  the  ghettos  around  the  country  just 
trying  to  recruit  these  young  kids,  and,  in  my  mind,  there  was  inadequate  planning  and  inadequate 
foundation  laid  to  really  build  this  thing  into  the  proper  kind  of  a  program.  It  was  just  kind  of  thrown 
together.  And  we  had  a  lot  of  difficulties — riots  in  the  camps  and  so  forth.  We  had  one  camp  in  Patuxent, 
Maryland,  which  was  about  ten  miles  from  Camp  David,  and  there  was  a  tremendous  amount  of  anxiety 
on  the  part  of  the  land  grant  agency  that  there  would  be  a  riot  there  and  that  President  Johnson  would  be 
unhappy.  1  spent  a  lot  of  time  there  trying  to  keep  the  lid  on  that,  and  also  in  a  place  in  Washita,  Arkansas, 
and  they  were  moving  me  all  around  the  country. 

During  that  time  was  your  wife  at  home? 

My  wife  was  at  home,  and  she  had  two  babies,  and  that  just  wasn’t  working  out.  My  little  girl 
literally  thought  1  lived  at  the  airport.  And  what  they  saw  of  me  was  the  disciplinarian,  and  it  was  just  a 
bad  situation.  1  determined  that  1  was  going  to  get  out  of  that,  and  I  started  looking  for  any  opportunity  to 
get  back  home  to  Nevada.  I  felt  like  in  a  sense  I’d  been  cast  adrift  in  this  national  scene  some  way  and  1 
was  floating  around  far  my  own  shores,  and  a  good  question  was,  “How  do  you  get  back  to  your  own 
place?”  And,  of  course,  you  needed  the  income  to  keep  the  family  going  at  the  same  time,  so  you  couldn’t 
just  quit.  1  kept  looking  and  discovered  there  was  a  department  in  the  State  Department  of  Health  and 
Welfare  that  was  looking  for  an  assistant  director.  After  I  saw  that  in  the  paper,  I  traveled  home  to  Reno 
and  went  down  and  interviewed  for  that  job.  This  was  during  the  time  that  Paul  Laxalt  was  governor.  1 
was  hired  and  went  to  work  as  the  assistant  director  of  the  health  and  welfare  agency.  After  two  or  three 
months,  there  was  a  special  session  of  the  legislature  called,  because  Medicaid  had  been  enacted  as 
legislation  at  the  national  level,  and,  of  course,  the  state  was  required  to  join  into  this.  It  had  been 
approved  by  the  prior  session  of  the  legislature,  but  they  really  didn’t  know  what  the  economic  fiscal 
aspects  of  this  health  program  for  the  poor  were  going  to  cost,  and  it  was  seriously  underfunded.  And  then 
as  it  began  to  unfold,  it  was  seriously  maladministered  in  the  sense  of  very  few  qualifications  being  set  up 
to  screen  the  people  coming  in  for  the  various  kinds  of  services.  As  a  result,  the  state  was  very  quickly  out 
of  money.  At  that  point,  the  state  welfare  director  abruptly  resigned  and  left  the  state.  Of  course,  you’ve 
got  to  remember,  even  though  Nevada  is  conservative  today,  it  was  ultra  conservative  then,  and  this 
program  was  hated  within  the  legislative  hall.  So  Governor  Laxalt  was  nearly  beside  himself;  he  had  to  be 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


243 


desperate,  because  I  got  a  call  to  go  over  to  his  office.  He  wanted  to  know  if  1  would  step  into  the  state 
welfare  director’s  role  for  the  purpose  of  getting  through  this  special  session  of  the  legislature  that  was 
called  for  the  purpose  of  finding  cures  and  corrections  for  the  Medicaid  program,  and  not  having  any 
better  sense,  1  said,  “Sure.” 

Well,  I  did  get  through  it  and  finally  reorganized  that  department,  and  got  its  priorities  set  and  got 
a  set  of  qualifications  in  place.  I  had  to  fight  a  lot  of  fights  with  the  various  federal  bureau  staff  members 
from  the  regional  office  in  San  Francisco,  who  called  for  classical  social  workers.  As  far  as  they  were 
concerned,  we  churned  out  money  somewhere  in  the  basement  of  the  capitol,  and  there  was  never  any  end 
to  it.  We  got  through  that,  but  a  couple  of  months  after  the  special  session  was  over,  the  governor  had  a 
state  director  of  parole  and  probation — this  is  now  on  the  adult  level — who  was  an  alcoholic,  and  he 
created  a  mess,  which  Governor  Laxalt  had  to  cope  with.  1  knew  that  welfare  wasn’t  my  cup  of  tea,  so  1 
went  over  there  and  1  said  1  wanted  that  job.  And  he  said  to  me,  “That’ll  be  fine,”  because  he  felt  he  owed 
me.  He  had  said  once  he  owed  me,  and,  “Whatever  you  feel  you  need,  let  me  know.” 

So  1  took  him  up  on  it.  1  wanted  out  of  welfare,  and  this  other  job  was  the  better  job  and  it  was 
more  suited  to  me.  But,  he  said,  “You  have  to  find  somebody  to  replace  you.”  1  had  worked  in  Job  Coips 
along  with  another  fellow,  by  the  name  of  George  Miller,  who  had  reported  to  O’ Callaghan.  George  had 
spent  many  years  on  the  California  Youth  Authority  administrative  system,  and  he  was  now  in  Job  Corps. 
Well,  1  got  ahold  of  George  and  told  him  what  was  going  on.  He  was  a  hardbitten  old  guy,  and  didn’t 
know  if  he  wanted  to  get  involved  with  welfare,  so  1  said,  “Why  don’t  you  just  come  out  here  and  do  the 
interviews  and  take  a  shot  at  it?”  He  was  pretty  much  tired  of  this  Job  Coips  job  hopping  at  this  point,  so 
he  came  out,  and  he  liked  what  he  saw.  He  was  a  very  capable  man,  and  Laxalt  liked  him,  so  he  became 
the  state  welfare  director  under  Laxalt.  Now  we’re  both  working  for  Laxalt,  and  then  O’Callaghan  called 
me  one  day  when  he  was  in  Carson  City.  His  family  lived  in  Carson,  and  he  wanted  me  to  come  over  and 
have  a  cup  of  coffee  with  him.  That  day  he  told  me  he  was  going  to  file  for  the  governorship  in  two 
months. 

Was  he  still  with  the  Job  Corps  at  this  time? 

Yes.  But  he  said  he  was  going  to  resign  and  he  was  going  to  come  back  and  run  for  governor.  Ed 
Fike  was  the  lieutenant  governor  under  Laxalt,  and  Ed  had  always  set  forth  that  he  was  going  to  run,  and 
everybody  in  the  state  thought  he  was  a  shoe-in.  He  had  a  mortal  lock  on  the  job.  Fike  had  already  talked 
to  me  and  told  me,  “Don’t  worry  about  your  job.  You’ll  be  fine  when  I’m  elected.”  So  1  wasn’t  worried. 
Then  here  comes  O’Callaghan,  my  friend,  and  he  says,  “I’m  running.” 

And  I  said,  “What  are  you  doing?  You  can’t  win.  There’s  no  way!  Fike’s  got  this  locked  up.” 

He  says,  “Well,  we’ll  see.” 

So  O’Callaghan  files,  and  he  runs  and  he  wins.  It  couldn’t  have  been  more  than  two  or  three  days 
after  he  won  the  election,  I  get  a  call  from  O’Callaghan  and  he  wants  to  see  me.  I  had  literally  thought 
that  in  the  course  of  the  election  campaign  he  had  promised  the  job  I  was  doing  with  parole  and  probation 
to  someone  else.  I  mean,  that  was  not  uncommon  in  that  period  of  time.  And  so  I  expected  when  I  talked 
with  him  that  day,  that  he  was  going  to  tell  me  this  bad  news,  and  that’s  what  I  was  mentally  prepared  for. 
Instead  he  told  me  he  wanted  me  to  become  the  chairman  of  gaming,  and  I  totally  misunderstood,  and  I 
thought  he  was  talking  about  fish  and  game. 


[laughter] 


244 


I  said,  “Are  you  crazy?  I  don’t  know  anything  about  gaming,”  and  our  language  back  and  forth 
was  pretty  rough  and  it  wouldn’t  work  in  this  interview,  [laughter]  but  like,  “You  goofy  son  of  a  bitch. 
What  the  hell  are  you  talking  about?!” 

“You  dumb  bastard.  Not  fish  and  game — it’s  gambling!”  [laughter]  But  it  was  a  very  big  surprise 
to  me,  and  1  said,  “Well,  I’ll  do  that,  but  on  one  condition.” 

“What’s  that?” 

1  said,  “There’s  not  going  to  be  any  politics,  and  I  do  all  the  hiring  and  firing.  We  don’t  do 
anything  on  the  basis  of  political  favor  and  I  do  all  the  hiring.”  I  don’t  know  why  God  made  me  say  those 
things,  but  he  did.  And  O’Callaghan  was  fool  enough  to  agree.  Over  the  years  Mike  and  I  had  a  close 
enough  association  to  where  we’d  had  many,  many  long  talks  about  government,  and  good  government, 
and  so  on  and  so  forth,  because  we  were  both  interested  in  that  topic.  And  so  he  agreed,  and  1  was  his  first 
appointment.  Well,  it  was  kind  of  an  interesting  exchange,  because  just  prior  to  the  election,  Milton 
Manoukian,  an  attorney  in  Carson  City  for  many  years,  had  invited  George  Miller  and  I  to  dinner,  along 
with  our  wives.  As  we’re  having  dinner  Milton  asked  George  and  me,  “What  kind  of  a  governor  would 
O’Callaghan  be  if  he  were  elected?”  1  voiced  the  opinion  that  he  would  be  fine,  except  he  had  this  terrible 
sense  of  loyalty,  sometimes  to  the  wrong  people.  And  even  though  he  recognized  them  as  being  the 
“wrong  people,”  he  would  not  abandon  them.  He  was  just  overly  loyal.  And  I  said  to  Milton,  and  George 
concurred,  that,  “You  can  look  for  some  pretty  weak  appointments  if  he  would  win.”  And  then  I  was  the 
first  appointment,  [laughter]  George  Miller  never  let  me  forget  that,  [laughter] 

Why  did  O’Callaghan  pick  you  for  gaming,  instead  of  some  other  position? 

He  wanted  somebody  he  knew,  somebody  that  he  could  trust.  He  was  a  bit  suspicious  of  gaming, 
and  he  felt  that  it  had  been  like  a  political  playpen  in  terms  of  its  staffing  and  that  the  administration  of  it 
was  politically  tainted.  He  also  felt  that  there  was  a  great  opportunity  there  for  people  to  be  bribed,  et 
cetera.  He  wanted  somebody  he  knew  and  trusted. 

So  he  felt  that  the  Allen  Abner,  and  perhaps  the  Frank  Johnson  appointments,  were  political  favors? 

Mike  never  said  that,  but  that  is  the  way  1  looked  at  it. 

Wasn ’t  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  one  of  the  most  important  jobs  in  the  state  at  that  time? 

Well,  you  know,  you’re  asking  me  to  say  something  that  sounds  very  egotistical,  and  probably 
there  were  several  jobs  that  were  always  crucial.  Gaming  Control  is  one;  the  budget  director  is  another.  1 
mean,  those  are  just  crucial  to  your  administration. 

Did  you  take  the  job  immediately  when  he  offered  it,  or  did  you  think  about  it  for  a  while? 

No.  As  1  said,  he  surprised  me  that  day,  and  1  said,  “Well,  I’ll  take  it  on  that  one  condition.”  And 
so  essentially  I  committed  to  it  at  that  time. 


What  year  did  you  take  over  the  Gaming  Board? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


245 


It  was  at  the  beginning  of  his  term,  which  would  be  January  1971. 

Who  did  you  replace  as  chairman  of  the  Board? 

Frank  Johnson. 

When  a  new  governor  comes  in,  does  he  always  appoint  a  new  chairman? 

It  was  that  way  at  that  time.  During  the  course  of  my  tenure  there,  I  lobbied  to  get  the  law 
changed  so  that  there  would  be  an  overlap  so  that  the  change  of  the  chairman  would  not  coincide  with  the 
election  of  the  governor,  and  that  was  done. 

Currently  when  the  new  governor  comes  in,  is  it  automatic  that  a  new  chairman  comes  in? 

No.  The  law  is  now  that  the  term  doesn’t  cease  when  a  new  governor  comes  in.  So  ultimately  the 
governor  can  either  wait,  or  he  can  make  a  change  by  calling  them  in  and  asking  them  to  resign,  but  I 
would  think  somebody  would  be  a  fool  to  want  to  stay  in  that  job  if  they  didn’t  have  the  support  of  the 
governor. 

You  mentioned  that  you  took  the  job  with  the  understanding  there  would  be  no  political  pressure  to  make 
decisions.  During  your  term  in  the  office,  did  you  ever  hear  comments  such  as,  “Phil  Hannifin  is 
controlled  by  Governor  O  ’ Callaghan .  He  does  whatever  Governor  O  ’Callaghan  says  to  do?  ” 

I  don’t  remember  that  I  heard  much  about  it,  but  there  was  a  column  in  the  Valley  Times  in 
September  of  1977  that  was  kind  of  interesting.  I  forget  his  name,  but  he  was  always  kind  of  a 
mouthpiece  for  Argent  Coiporation  and  Lefty  Rosenthal,  and  he  was  a  muckraker.  He  hated  Hank 
Greenspun,  and  Hank  Greenspun  and  Mike  O’Callaghan  were  always  pretty  close.  And  I  guess  he  always 
felt  that  whatever  is  going  on  is  really  Greenspun  directing  O’ Callaghan,  directing  Hannifin.  I  think  that’s 
the  way  his  head  was  working.  What  he  never  understood  and  he  didn’t  know  was  that  Greenspun  hated 
me,  and  I  didn’t  like  him.  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

So  anyway,  I  don’t  recall  during  the  course  of  time  I  was  active  down  there,  I  don’t  recall 
anybody  at  least  saying  it  out  loud  that  I  knew  about.  Harry  Claiborne,  for  example,  was  a  very  prominent 
attorney  in  Las  Vegas  in  those  early  years,  in  the  early  1970s,  and  this  was  probably  the  time  that  he  was 
on  the  way  to  federal  prison.  He  was  a  very  prominent  attorney  in  Las  Vegas,  a  very  prominent  democrat, 
and  he  was  constantly  complaining  to  the  governor  that  he  could  not  bring  an  applicant  for  licensing  in 
front  of  us  and  get  him  cleared,  [laughter] 

So  that  was  your  fault.  It  wasn  ’t  the  people  he  was  bringing,  [laughter] 


You’re  right.  Once  I  saw  him  at  the  airport — he  had  this  good-old-boy  twang — and  he  said,  “I 


246 


could  come  up  there  with  twelve  people  in  white  robes  and  you  would  send  them  away  as  sinners.” 
[laughter] 

[laughter] 

The  only  demand  O’ Callaghan  ever  made  of  me  was  that  we  will  see  Howard  Hughes — we  will 
see  him  and  talk  to  him  personally.  And  that  was  the  only  demand  he  ever  made.  He  would  call  about 
different  things  that  would  come  up.  He’d  ask  me  what  was  going  on,  and  he  had  his  own  way  of  asking, 
but  he  just  wanted  to  know.  He  didn’t  want  to  get  blindsided.  But  he  never,  ever  said,  “Appoint  this  man.” 
1  wouldn’t  work  like  that,  and  he  never  did  it. 

Well,  I  imagine  any  governor  is  asked  or  has  pressure  applied  by  someone ’s  friend  or  family. 

Well,  sure,  that’s  the  political  process.  But  my  view  of  it  is  that  the  problem  in  that  is — and  I 
know  I’ve  faced  it  myself — that  they  fall  prey  to  that  kind  of  pressure,  and  they’re  not  strong  enough  to 
simply  say,  “I  don’t  handle  gaming  control.  You  go  to  gaming  control.”  But  O’Callaghan  was  his  own 
man — always  was — and  he  just  didn’t  have  to  come  to  that  kind  of  stuff.  He  had  his  own  ideas  about 
what  was  right  and  wrong.  He  didn’t  care  who  you  were. 

When  appointing  new  members  to  the  Board  did  Governor  O  ’Callaghan  talk  to  the  chairman  about  it 
first? 


Well,  Mike  did  that.  Mike  talked  to  me.  Now,  what  List  did  I  have  no  idea.  And  I  don’t  really 
know  what  Laxalt  did  in  terms  of  talking  with  Johnson.  But  1  think  there  probably  is  some  conversation 
that  takes  place  between  the  chairman  and  the  governor  if  there  is  an  appointment  to  be  made. 

Who  was  on  the  Board  with  you  when  you  went  in? 

Well,  there  was  only  one  vacancy.  Jack  Stratton  was  still  there  from  the  prior  administration.  And 
after  about  a  week  there,  1  talked  with  O’ Callaghan  and  told  him  1  wanted  him  to  re-appoint  Stratton  and 
keep  him  on  the  Board.  Stratton  had  worked  his  way  up  through  the  agency,  so  he  really  knew  the  agency 
inside  and  out.  And  he  was  particularly  good  in  communicating  with  the  various  licensees  out  in  the  cow 
counties.  Jack  knew  them  all,  and  they  respected  him,  and  he  was  good  with  them.  Jack  Stratton  was  just 
an  enormously  good  human  being  and  a  real  Nevadan.  1  didn’t  think  we  could  get  anybody  any  more 
solid  than  him.  1  simply  trusted  him  entirely. 

Had  you  known  him  before  you  went  on  the  Board? 

A  little  bit,  but  not  well.  1  spent  a  lot  of  time  with  him  in  that  first  week  going  over  old  issues, 
new  issues,  old  problems,  and  his  frankness  and  his  cooperation  were  just  outstanding — the  kind  of  a  guy 
you  want  next  to  you.  The  other  guy  was  Shannon  Bybee,  and  he  was  appointed  by  Mike.  Shannon  was 
from  Ely  and  an  attorney — a  young  attorney — working  in  Las  Vegas.  And,  no,  1  didn’t  know  Shannon. 
Mike  called  me  and  asked  me  to  go  talk  to  him,  and  1  did.  What  do  you  know  after  a  couple  of 
conversations?  But  he  seemed  fine,  and  he  knew  a  lot  of  people,  and  he  was  younger.  I  knew  a  lot  of 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


247 


people  in  Ely  and  could  talk  to  him  and  relate  that  way.  It  was  kind  of  a  good  old  boy  thing.  So  Shannon 
was  appointed.  And  1  don’t  know  who  really  know  who  brought  Shannon  to  Mike. 

So  those  two  people,  Mr.  Bybee  and  Mr.  Stratton,  were  with  you  almost  your  entire  time  on  the  Board? 

Yes,  and  when  Shannon  left,  Jeff  Silver  was  appointed.  Jeff  was  an  attorney  in  Las  Vegas.  1 
talked  with  Jeff  a  couple  of  times,  and  1  had  met  him  before  that.  When  Jeff  came  on  board  he  stayed, 
along  with  Jack  Stratton,  until  the  time  1  left.  I  left  before  my  term  was  up,  and  they  were  still  there. 

The  chairmen  of  the  Gaming  Commission  the  majority  of  the  time  you  were  on  the  Board  were  Jack  Diehl 
and  Peter  Echeverria.  How  closely  did  you  work  with  these  two  gentlemen  when  you  were  reviewing  or 
discussing  applications  for  licensing? 

Well,  1  worked  with  them  very,  very  closely.  Jack  Diehl  was  the  rock  of  Gibraltar.  He  practiced 
law  in  Fallon,  and  1  had  an  enormous  respect  for  Jack.  He  had  just  down-to-earth,  good  common  sense, 
totally  unprejudiced.  Pete  came  on,  and  Pete  was  far  more  flamboyant.  Pete,  of  course,  had  a  great 
reputation.  He’d  been  in  the  legislature;  he  had  been  a  state  senator,  he  had  a  lot  of  political  savvy,  and  he 
was  also  an  extraordinarily  talented  trial  attorney.  And,  of  course,  he  was  a  Nevada  boy  from  White  Pine 
County.  Pete  and  1  clashed  a  lot.  That  was  because  we  looked  at  a  lot  of  situations  very,  very  differently. 
But  I  trusted  Pete.  As  with  Jack  Diehl,  1  can’t  say  enough  about  Pete.  They  were  both  excellent,  excellent 
chairmen.  Toward  the  end  Pete  left  and  Harry  Reid  came  on,  and  1  did  not  trust  Harry  Reid.  1  think  he  did 
things  for  political  gain  and  for  political  favor,  and  it  was  one  of  the  major  reasons  1  wanted  to  get  away 
from  the  Control  Board. 

You  mean  he  would  OK  licenses  or  OK  undeserving  applicants? 

Well,  yes.  There  was  a  particular  license  that  was  so  complex.  The  investigative  report  was  really 
big,  and  it  had  to  do  with  what  people  found,  at  least  on  the  face  of  it — that  there  was  fraud  indicated  in 
the  initial  issuance  of  stock  in  the  penny  stock  market.  And  you  really  had  to  study  this  thing  in  order  to 
understand  its  complexity.  We  went  through  it  thoroughly  and  we  voted  to  deny  it.  We  then  handed  it 
over  to  the  Commission  for  their  action,  and  1  think  that  their  meeting  was  two  days  later.  As  the  meeting 
started,  Harry  said,  “Well,  we  have  all  read  this.”  And  as  soon  as  he  said  it,  1  knew.  1  mean,  this  is  a  lie. 
[laughter]  They  didn’t  all  read  it!  Jack  Walsh  was  on  that  commission.  Jack  Walsh  would  have  struggled 
a  month  trying  to  just  read  it,  much  less  understand  it. 

And  1  knew  I’d  been  had.  So  1  determined  at  that  point  that  was  on  the  Hacienda,  and  Paul 
Lowden  I  was  going  to  leave.  I  had  talked  to  a  banker  here  in  Reno  that  I  knew,  and  he  assured  me  I  could 
go  to  work  for  the  hank.  And  so  I  resigned,  and  I  told  the  banker  I  wanted  to  take  about  a  month  just  to 
get  myself  together  again.  I’d  been  having  a  lot  of  ulcer  problems,  as  there  was  a  lot  of  stress  in  that  job, 
so  I  wanted  some  time  to  myself.  During  the  course  of  the  month  that  I  was  gone,  a  different  banker, 
Elmer  Vacchina  of  the  First  National  Bank,  called  me,  and  I’d  known  Elmer  through  my  family  over 
several  years.  Elmer  called  me  and  told  me  that  he  had  a  client.  He  wanted  to  sit  down  and  talk  with  me, 
and  he  was  very  reluctant  to  name  him  on  the  phone,  but  I  said,  “I’m  just  not  going  to  walk  in  and  start 
talking  to  somebody.  Who  is  it?”  Well,  it  was  Will  Lummis. 


248 


Was  he  with  Summa  Corporation? 

Yes.  He  was  the  administrator  of  the  Hughes  estate,  and  I  had  met  him  after  Hughes  died. 

Before  we  go  on  1  would  like  to  take  you  back  again  to  the  time  before  you  left  the  Gaming  Control 
Board.  We  were  discussing  two  commission  chairmen,  Jack  Diehl  and  Pete  Echeverria.  Would  you 
compare  the  two  chairmen  and  comment  on  their  work  patterns  and  work  habits? 

Well,  both  men  were  very  competent  and  capable  lawyers,  and  both  of  them  were  very  thorough 
in  their  preparation  for  the  commission  meetings.  You  have  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  Control  Board  would 
meet  first  and  go  through  its  agenda  and  vote  on  whatever  matters  were  in  front  of  it,  and  then  those 
results  would  go  over  to  the  Commission  prior  to  their  meeting.  Typically,  the  meetings  are  separated  by 
a  week,  maybe  two,  at  the  state  level.  And  even  during  the  time  that  we  were  doing  the  investigations  and 
getting  prepared  for  the  Control  Board  meetings,  if  1  recognized  particular  problems  in  a  application  that 
was  going  to  be  heard,  1  would  relate  to  Jack  Diehl  or  Pete  that  this  application  had  a  problem.  We’d  start 
to  discuss  it.  They  might  ask  for  a  particular  piece  of  information  to  be  fleshed  out  or  developed  more 
fully.  And  then  when  it  went  over  to  them,  we  would  talk  again. 

Would  the  entire  Commission  be  at  those  meetings,  or  just  the  chairman? 

Well,  typically  only  the  chairman.  Certainly  one  of  the  other  members  might  call  me  and  talk 
about  it.  There  were  a  couple  of  really  good  commissioners,  but  they  took  their  lead  typically  from  their 
chairman.  Frank  Schreck  and  Clarence  Haycock,  during  the  time  that  they  were  members,  would  often 
call  and  ask  for  additional  information  or  see  what  was  going  on  with  us  so  that  they  were  mentally 
prepared.  But  both  Jack  and  Pete  were  very,  very  thorough,  and  always  very  much  prepared.  And  if  a 
matter  came  up  in  front  of  them  that  they  didn’t  feel  they  were  prepared  to  handle  they  would  defer  it  and 
send  it  back  to  the  Control  Board  for  additional  work.  That  didn’t  happen  very  often,  but  once  in  a  while 
it  did. 

Did  you,  as  chairman  of  the  Board,  attend  all  the  Gaming  Commission  meetings? 

Yes,  1  did.  When  1  came  to  that  job,  there  were  no  real  procedures  established  for  how  these 
meetings  were  conducted  at  the  control  board  level  or  what  the  Control  Board  should  do  during  the  course 
of  the  commission  meeting.  It  was  just  kind  of  hit  and  miss.  And  we  established,  Jack  [Stratton]  and 
Shannon  [Bybee]  and  1,  a  very  deliberate  procedure  at  the  Control  Board.  For  example,  we’d  get  page 
after  page  after  page  of  what  were  called  “restricted  licensees,”  license  applications  for  slot  machines — 
fifteen  slot  machines  here,  five  slot  machines  there — and  it  was  just  time  consuming.  You’d  end  up  with 
some  little  bar  owner,  one  that  put  five  slot  machines  in,  and  you’d  find  out  that  he  perhaps  had  a  felony 
record  in  the  past,  so  you  weren’t  going  to  give  him  a  slot  machine  license.  And  so  we  developed  a 
procedure  that’s  enormous  now.  If  you  wanted  to  buy  your  own  slots  and  you  wanted  to  go  for  licensing, 
you  could  do  that.  But  if  you  didn’t,  you  would  go  out  to  a  slot  leasing  company  and  lease  them  some 
space.  And  it  wasn’t  for  a  percentage  of  the  profit;  you’d  simply  say,  “OK,  for  two  hundred  dollars  a 
month,  I’ll  give  you  this  much  work  space.”  They  would  put  in  five  or  six  or  fifteen  slot  machines,  and 
then  we  would  license  the  slot  leasing  company,  and  we  got  away  from  licensing  page  after  page  of  these 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


249 


little  individuals.  We  consolidated  the  licensing  and  that  made  it  much  neater.  We  took  what  was 
probably  a  half  a  day  into  a  half  hour. 

And  our  process  changed;  it  became  far  more  legalistic,  if  you  will,  far  more  modeled  after  the 
justice  system  kind  of  environment.  Over  time  we  drove  it  that  way  because  you  did  not  want  to  base  your 
judgement  on  other  than  what  you  might  think  of  as  solid  evidence.  You  didn’t  want  to  base  it  on  some 
kind  of  biased  opinion  or  political  pressure.  If  we  had  upfront  mechanisms  for  people,  like  evidence,  it 
took  pressure  away  from  us.  If  we  had  evidence,  then  that’s  what  we’re  going  to  go  on.  And  if  you  have  a 
feeling  about  a  guy,  the  feeling  is  not  going  to  overcome  the  evidence,  [laughter]  So  that  was  the  model 
we  kept  striving  for.  And  I  think,  overall,  that  approach  served  us  well,  with  perhaps  some  exceptions  that 
occurred  over  time,  you  just  dam  well  knew  something  was  haywire,  but  you  couldn’t  get  enough 
evidence  to  really  nail  it  down. 

Did  you  have  to  disclose  that  evidence  to  the  applicant? 

Well,  ultimately,  that  process  began.  Originally,  no.  Like  I  say,  when  I  first  walked  in  there,  there 
was  not  much  process  to  it.  [laughter]  We  developed  that  as  we  went  along.  And  then  ultimately  we  came 
up  and  we  said,  “OK,  we’re  going  to  deny  you  based  upon  .  .  .  .”  Or,  “We’re  not  going  to  deny  you,  but 
here  are  these  issues  of  concern  to  us,”  and  we’d  set  them  forth.  In  many  cases,  then  these  people  or  their 
attorneys  would  ask  to  defer  the  item  to  the  next  meeting  so  they  could  then  go  over  that.  It  gave  people 
an  opportunity  to  respond,  rather  than  to  just  hit  them  out  of  the  blue  with  this  piece  of  information.  That, 

I  think,  seems  far  more  fair,  and,  again,  it  insulated  it  from  the  various  kinds  of  pressures  that  could  occur 
if  you  don’t  follow  that  model. 

The  work  patterns  and  habits  of  Jack  and  Pete,  I  think,  contributed  to  the  way  that  process 
developed  on  the  Board,  and  then,  of  course,  inside  of  the  Commission,  because  they  brought  a  sense  of 
fairness  and  fair  play  and  tried  to  avoid  criticism  and  political  pressures,  by  way  of  the  legal  system’s 
model,  to  the  Board.  That’s  continued  to  this  day,  from  what  I  see. 

Former  governor  Paul  Laxalt  stated  in  his  book,  Nevada’s  Paul  Laxalt:  A  Memoir,  that  shortly  after 
Laxalt  was  elected  governor,  the  former  FBI  director,  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  instructed  his  FBI  people  that 
there  was  to  be  complete  cooperation  with  Nevada  authority.  Were  you  aware  that  Mr.  Hoover  had  told 
this  to  Governor  Laxalt? 

No,  I  was  not  aware  of  that,  [sigh]  [long  pause]  [laughter]  As  far  as  I  was  concerned,  the  Federal 
Bureau  of  Investigation  didn’t  get  in  our  way,  but  they  were  of  no  particular  help  to  us.  Just  to  go  forward 
as  an  example  of  this  FBI  business,  at  a  point  in  time  when  we  were  looking  at  Morris  Shenker’s 
application  for  licensing  at  the  Dunes,  there  had  been  all  kinds  of  newspaper  stories  and  Life  magazine 
stories  about  Morris  Shenker,  and  it  became  apparent  that  he  was  not  a  favorite  of  the  Federal  Bureau  of 
Investigation.  So  we  had  asked  them  and  asked  them  and  asked  them  for  information  on  Morris  Shenker. 
Our  investigation  of  Shenker  took  many  months,  and  it  wasn’t  until  right  toward  the  end  that  the  FBI 
finally  delivered  to  us  boxes  of  files  that  were  apparently  investigations  that  the  bureau  had  started,  and 
they  were  incomplete  and  fragmented.  They  were  of  no  use  to  nobody.  Not  once  in  my  memory  did  the 
federal  bureau  give  us  any  information  that  was  of  value  in  either  approving  a  license  or  denying  a 


250 


license. 

Do  you  feel  that  might  have  changed  because  of  Laxalt  leaving  office? 

No,  1  don’t  think  so.  1  just  think  that  was  the  way  the  bureau  was.  And,  in  my  own  mind,  I  was 
never  particularly  enthralled  by  the  bureau.  The  agency  that  1  really  would  have  wanted  to  have  a  better 
relationship  with  was  the  Internal  Revenue  Service,  because  1  thought  that’s  where  the  real  information 
that  1  wanted  to  see  would  be.  Doing  record  checks  of  felons,  that’s  a  very  simple  thing  anymore.  1  wasn’t 
worried  we  were  going  to  let  ex-felons  slip  into  the  nets.  When  we  started  this,  we’d  tell  our  people, 
“Follow  the  money.  Just  follow  the  money.  How  did  this  money  come  to  be  invested  in  this  property?  1 
want  to  follow  it  all  the  way  back.”  And  that  was  the  investigative  scheme  that  we  utilized  in  all  cases: 
follow  the  money.  Dennis  Gomes,  who  was  the  head  of  our,  quote,  “audit”  department  at  that  time,  was  a 
C.P.A.  and  he  had  a  master’s  degree  in  finance,  and  he  was  an  absolute  whiz  at  this  stuff.  We  were  just 
very  fortunate  to  be  able  to  get  him  in  that  stage  of  his  career.  The  FBI  was  not  all  that  good  at  that  kind 
of  stuff;  it  was  the  IRS  that  was  great  at  it.  They  would  do  things  without  ever  telling  the  state  that  they 
were  going  to  be  coming  and  talking  about  it,  sometimes  only  an  hour  in  front  of  us.  1  always  got  the 
sense  that  they  didn’t  trust  the  state  of  Nevada  or  the  people  that  worked  for  the  state,  and  1  kind  of 
resented  that.  If  there  was  any  distrust,  they  damn  well  didn’t  have  any  reason  for  it.  So  we  had  a  kind  of 
a  stand-offish  relationship,  [laughter] 

1  had  far  more  of  a  working  relationship  with  the  organized  crime  strike  forces,  which  later  came 
into  existence.  Their  people,  some  of  whom  were  justice  department  lawyers,  some  of  whom  were  former 
FBI  agents,  gave  us  far  more  cooperation  and  a  sense  of  setting  forth  places  for  us  to  go  look  in  an 
investigation  than  the  bureau.  The  bureau  was  never  very  much  help. 

Shortly  after  Governor  O  ’Callaghan  was  elected,  federal  agents  raided  the  Stardust  looking  for  credit 
ratings  and  markers  of  high  rollers.  Were  you  aware  that  a  raid  was  going  to  take  place? 

The  bureau  never  made  us  aware;  we  were  aware  after  the  fact.  We  got  a  call  from  the  Stardust, 
[laughter] 

[laughter]  Did  the  Stardust  have  to  show  them  all  their  records? 

Y es,  under  a  federal  subpoena  they  didn’t  have  much  choice.  Whatever  they  were  doing,  they 
hadn’t  told  us  anything  about  it.  They  went  in  and  grabbed  the  records  and  went  through  them.  1  don’t 
think  anything  ever  came  from  that. 

Did  Governor  O  ’Callaghan  complain  to  the  FBI  or  to  J.  Edgar  Hoover  or  anyone  about  it? 

I  don’t  know.  He  probably  called  the  local  FBI,  but  1  doubt  that  he  would  have  called 
Washington. 

Did  it  ever  happen  again? 


Yes.  1  think  only  once  at  Caesars  Palace. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


251 


So  O  ’Callaghan  might  have  slowed  them  down  some.  They  might  have  planned  on  going  somewhere  else. 

1  don’t  know  if  he  could  have.  My  guess  is  no.  The  bureau,  if  they’re  going  to  do  it,  they  do  it.  I 
don’t  think  they  would  much  care  about  the  governor.  If  he  were  a  very,  very  politically  powerful 
governor,  they  might  have  second  thoughts,  but  ordinarily  they  don’t.  They  just  do  whatever  they’re 
going  to  do. 


In  1971  at  several  press  conferences  and  various  meetings,  Governor  O ’Callaghan  expressed  fear  that 
the,  quote,  “Mob  ”  was  infiltrating  the  state  of  Nevada.  Did  he  ever  express  those  fears  to  you? 

Well,  he  talked  about  it,  but  it  was  always  in  generality.  He  didn’t  have  any  specific  information. 
In  1971  we  still  had  a  group  of  owners  who  had  been  licensed  in  bygone  days,  and,  of  course,  the 
standards  were  very,  very  different.  But  when  you  compare  a  person  who  is  making  an  application  for  a 
license  versus  a  person  who  already  has  that  license,  the  person  who  has  a  license  has  some  rights 
involved  there:  property  rights,  for  example;  a  right  to  a  job.  A  person  making  an  application  has  no  rights 
to  that  license.  So  people  who  were  already  established  there,  like  Benny  Binion,  as  an  example,  were 
never  really  licensed. 

Because  there  wasn ’t  a  licensing  process  at  that  time? 

Well,  up  until  1955,  the  county  sheriff  used  to  do  the  licensing. 

And  they  would  just  go  in  and  pay  some  money  and  get  a  license? 

Yes.  And  Benny  had  that  club  so  he  had  that  license.  That  was  just  the  nature  of  it.  There  were 
some  concerns  at  the  time,  in  various  places.  While  Moe  Dalitz  was  not  at  that  time  licensed,  many  of  the 
people  that  had  worked  for  Moe  Dalitz  were  still  active  in  the  Desert  Inn  and  in  the  Stardust,  and  to  the 
federal  government  they  were  all  suspects.  So  you’re  a  little  bit  nervous  about  some  of  those  people  in 
different  places.  At  Caesars  in  those  early  days  there  was  a  man  named  Jerry  Zarowitz,  and  Jerry 
Zarowitz  was  a  high-ranking  executive  within  Caesars.  But  Zarowitz  prior  to  that  had  a  reputation — and  it 
was  probably  true — as  the  best  odds  maker  on  baseball  in  the  world,  and  he  was  extraordinarily  astute. 
Ash  Resnick3  also  worked  there.  Mandy  Campo,  who  came  out  of  Cuba  and  was  raised  in  the  gaming  in 
Cuba  prior  to  Castro  taking  power,  worked  in  Las  Vegas.  So  there  were  people  involved  in  gaming 
around  the  state  who  might  not  have  been  able  to  get  licensed  in  our  era. 

And  most  of  the  people  you  named,  including  Ash  Resnick,  worked  for  several  years  in  gaming. 

Then  Ash  ultimately  was  denied.  I  remember  denying  him.  A  lot  of  it  was  sad.  You’d  look  at 


3 


Ash  Resnick  was  a  long-time  casino  executive  and  host  who  is  said  to  have  had  mob  connections. 


252 


some  of  these  people  and  the  only  thing  they  knew  how  to  do  was  gaming.  Some  of  them  just  made  bad 
mistakes,  and  when  they  couldn’t  continue  in  gaming  their  whole  world  was  turned  around.  No  matter 
how  you  feel  about  it,  it’s  just  sad. 

It  is,  yes.  And  a  lot  of  people  who  came  into  Nevada  to  operate  gambling  had  been  operating  illegally  in 
other  states,  even  people  like  Harold  Smith  and  Bill  Harrah. 

Absolutely! 

So  who  are  you  going  to  get  to  run  your  place  in  Nevada  except  someone  that  had  been  in  illegal 
gambling? 

Exactly.  That’s  how  it  was  done.  Nevada  was  staffed  with  people  who  came  from  illegal  joints  in 
Ohio  and  Kentucky  and  Montana.  That’s  where  those  guys  came  from. 

And  that ’s  who  had  the  knowledge  to  operate  the  casinos. 

Right. 

What  steps  did  the  Board  take  during  your  term  as  chairman  to  keep  the  hoodlum  element  from  getting  a 
larger  foothold  in  the  gaming  industry? 

We  started  to  be  very,  very  stringent  about  the  source  of  money,  to  make  the  entry  into  the 
business  difficult,  and  also  stringent  about  the  money  that  would  come  into  the  business  after  it  was 
established.  We  had  a  provision  in  the  law  called  “Loans  for  Licensees,”  and  we  really  firmed  up  the 
regulations  under  that  statute  so  that  we  could  look  at  these  in  great  detail  to  make  sure  who  the  lenders 
were.  And  then  in  many  cases  we  went  back  to  the  lender  to  ask,  “What’s  the  collateral?  Is  there 
collateral,  or  did  you  just  make  this  loan  out  of  the  goodness  of  your  heart?”  We  got  to  be  very,  very 
stringent  on  money  coming  into  the  business,  either  before  or  after  a  licensing.  And  we  began  to  look  at 
aspects  other  than  criminal  records.  We  began  to  look,  for  example,  at  what  we  used  to  call  “sharpened” 
business  practices.  It’s  where  a  guy  tended  to  be  a  bit  shady  and  fraudulent  in  the  way  he  approached 
business.  If  there  were  lawsuits,  what  was  the  nature  of  the  lawsuit?  How  valid  did  it  appear?  And  we’d 
question  him  about  it.  And  if  it  looked  really  shaky  to  us,  we’d  use  it  as  grounds  to  deny  him.  So  we  just 
tried  to  overall  tighten  up  everything.  Probably  more  importantly,  we  started  to  look  at  the  internal 
operations.  We  began  to  demand  the  licensing  of  key  employees,  and  looking  at  them  very  stringently  as 
well. 

So  the  licensing  of  key  employees  began  during  your  tenure? 

It  had  been  possible  to  license  key  employees,  but  it  had  never  really  been  implemented  and  we 
began  to  do  that.  And  we  began  to  bolster  the  regulations  and  financial  practices  within  each  of  the 
businesses.  We  beefed  up  our  auditing  staff,  always  looking  for  a  means  to  make  sure  that  the  money  and 
the  protection  of  assets  within  the  business  was  getting  to  the  end  where  the  state  got  its  share.  So  audit 
records  became  far  more  important.  We  were  forcing  them  to  go  out  and  get  certified  accounting  firms,  as 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


253 


well  as  having  our  own  staff  go  in  on  a  periodic  basis  and  audit  what  they  were  doing.  Ultimately,  this  is 
where  we  forced  them  to  create  internal  policies  and  then  we  looked  at  their  internal  audits  policies.  This 
still  goes  on  today,  and  I  don’t  think  there’s  a  business  in  this  country — not  even  banks — that  are  audited 
from  as  many  different  directions  and  as  stringently  as  the  Nevada  licensee.  And  that’s  really  what  we 
were  trying  to  build  as  a  bulwark  against  organized  crime  people  coming  in  our  industry. 

There  is  a  state  regulation  called  Regulation  6.  Would  you  explain  that  regulation? 

That’s  the  internal  audit  regulation.  What  it  did  was  to  force  people  to  provide,  within  their  own 
staff,  an  independent  group,  reporting  typically  to  the  chief  executor,  the  financial  practices  taking  place 
in  all  the  different  departments  of  a  hotel-casino.  1  don’t  think  most  people  are  aware  of  the  complexity 
involved  in  the  operation  of  a  large  hotel-casino,  because  it’s  like  a  small  city.  You  have  a  lot  of  different 
activities,  a  lot  of  different  people,  a  lot  of  different  supervisors,  and  you  have  to  know  how  to  keep  track 
of  what  they  are  all  doing.  How  does  your  purchasing  agent  operate?  What  safeguards  did  he  ultimately 
have  to  protect  you  from  overpaying  different  vendors  or  for  paying  kickbacks  to  vendors?  This  is  an 
enormously  complex  operation.  And  not  only  did  we  force  outside  auditors  on  them,  we  put  our  auditors 
on  them.  Then  we  forced  them  to  have  their  own  internal  audit,  looking  at  what  was  going  on.  And 
between  these,  if  there  were  real  serious  problems,  one  or  the  other  of  these  audits  would  find  out.  You’d 
see  the  crack  in  the  foundation.  And  that’s  how  we  did  it.  [laughter] 

So  each  casino  or  hotel-casino  would  turn  into  the  Gaming  Control  Board  their  method  of  operation.  You 
didn ’t  tell  them  how  it  had  to  be  done;  you  just  gave  them  the  guidelines? 

Nowadays,  they’re  starting  to  go  more  towards  that,  but  in  the  beginning,  we  said,  “OK,  what  you 
want  to  do  is  go  out  and  get  with  your  outside  independent  auditors  and  devise  an  internal  audit  program 
that  meets  the  national  standards  of  the  accounting  profession.  Have  that  certified  to  us  by  your  outside 
auditor  as  meeting  those  national  standards.  Now,  if  you  do  it  a  little  bit  different  than  the  guy  down  the 
street,  but  it  still  meets  those  standards,  that’s  fine  with  us.”  And  I  still  think  that’s  the  best  way.  You 
can’t  dictate  every  nuance  of  those  accounting  systems  or  those  control  systems;  I  think  it’s  foolish  for  an 
outsider  to  do  that.  1  thought  it  was  best  to  build  this  from  the  inside  out.  Outside  accounting  firms,  and 
I’m  talking  about  very  substantial  operations,  are  not  going  to  jeopardize  their  nationwide  reputation,  their 
programs,  for  the  sake  of  some  local  business.  As  long  as  it  was  certified  and  met  those  national 
standards,  we  would  say,  “OK,  now,  here’s  your  audit  plan.  Follow  it.  If  you  don’t  follow  it,  and  we  find 
out  about  it,  we’re  going  to  come  down  and  slap  you  pretty  hard!”  And  over  a  period  of  time,  that 
happened,  and  it  still  happens  today.  I  think  it’s  a  very  effective  means  of  control. 

Well ,  a  good  thing  about  it  is  that  the  casino  itself  sets  its  own  rules  to  a  degree. 

That’s  right.  And  those  rules  still  have  some  broad  framework  of  approval  within  the  accounting 
profession,  and  that  makes  sense. 

So  these  rules  would  cover  in  detail  such  things  as  in  the  pit  how  you  would  make  a  fill  for  a  game? 


Y es,  how  the  money  came  in  if  a  particular  table  had  run  out  of  money,  how  money  was  brought 


254 


to  the  table  and  accounted  for  as  an  addition  to  that  table’s  bank,  how  it  was  accounted  for  when  it  left  the 
cage,  how  it  was  accounted  for  when  we  compiled  data  as  to  the  win  and  loss  of  the  casino.  And  it  was 
because  of  what  we  were  trying  to  do  with  this  internal  audit  and  beefing  up  these  internal  controls  on 
these  operations,  that  we  made  changes  in  the  operation  of  the  baccarat  game,  which  had,  up  to  this  point, 
been  conducted  in  cash.  We  forced  casinos  to  change  from  cash  to  chips,  because  it  was  far  more 
accountable.  We  had  watched  and  watched  and  watched  the  transitory  cash  [laughter],  especially  at 
Caesars  Palace,  where  there  are  enormous  baccarat  games  where  you  would  literally  see  a  million  dollars 
in  cash  laying  around  on  the  table.  We  said,  “No,  you’re  not  going  to  do  this.”  It  took  us  months  to  wear 
the  industry  down,  but  we  finally  got  it  on  and  forced  them  to  go  to  chips.  It  was  not  such  an  issue  in 
northern  Nevada,  but  it  was  an  enormous  issue  in  southern  Nevada. 

Are  these  regulations  instituted  by  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  or  are  they  a  state  law? 

Reg  6,  like  all  regulations,  just  couldn’t  just  come  about  out  of  the  blue;  it  had  to  have  some 
background  in  law  before  you  could  make  it  a  regulation.  And  it  did.  We  had  the  right  to  audit,  and  we 
just  interpreted  that  part  of  it  as  being  a  part  of  the  audit.  We  did  make  one  major  change,  and  it’s  kind  of 
a  long  story.  We  determined  that  it  would  be  in  Nevada’s  interest  if  gaming  debts  were  collectible  in  the 
court.  Most  of  the  other  states  would  not  honor  credit  instruments  drawn  by  a  casino  because  they  were 
not  legal  debts  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  So  we  had  spent  a  lot  of  time  talking  with,  again,  the  operators  in 
southern  Nevada  who  did  enormous  amounts  of  credit  gaming,  and  we  got  input  from  the  people  up 
north,  and  there  was  a  real  division.  There  was  a  lot  of  credit  issued  in  Clark  County.  There  was  not  that 
much  in  northern  Nevada — by  my  personal  standards  a  lot  of  credit  was  issued  in  northern  Nevada,  but 
not  on  the  scale  that  it  was  in  Las  Vegas.  So  we  had  a  real  problem  trying  to  bring  these  two  sides  of  the 
state  together  to  get  some  agreement  within  the  industry,  because  we  knew  we  had  to  have  legislation  to 
do  this.  We  knew  to  go  into  the  legislature  with  the  two  sides  fighting  was  not  going  to  get  us  very  far, 
and  we  knew  we  couldn’t  go  in  alone  and  ask  for  it,  because  we’d  just  be  out  in  left  field. 

So  we  went  through  this  process  of  trying  to  get  them  to  agree,  [laughter]  1  thought  the  way  to  go 
was  to  get  all  the  major  players  together  and  I  finally  convinced  them  it  was  the  way  to  go.  [Governor] 
O’Callaghan  had  a  dinner  at  the  mansion,  and  he  invited  all  the  major  gaming  executives  in  the  state.  John 
Ascuaga  was  there,  and  Bill  Harrah  was  there,  Cliff  Perlman  from  Caesars  Palace.  And  on  down  the  line 
you  had  these  gaming  operators — General  Nigro,  who  was  running  Del  Webb  at  the  time  the  gaming 
leaders  met  and  so  on.  We  had  dinner,  and  then  we  started  the  discussion.  Cliff  Perlman,  who  was  a 
lawyer  by  training,  began  to  talk  about  this  issue,  and  he  was  pretty  much  saying  that  the  people  up  north 
were  bumpkins.  And  Bill  Harrah,  who  never  talked — Bill  Harrah  never  talked — got  so  angry  that  he  made 
a  speech.  John  Ascuaga  got  so  excited  when  everybody  was  shouting  and  back  and  forth,  that  John 
climbed  up  on  a  chair,  [laughter]  That  was  quite  a  night. 

But  out  of  that,  there  was  a  recognition  that  there  was  a  real  problem — somewhere.  1  was  able  to 
talk  to  Mead  Dixon  and  he  was  helpful  in  this  situation.  1  even  talked  to  Rome  Andreotti.  1  liked  Rome, 
and  I  got  along  with  him  and  talked  to  him  a  lot.  I  think  I  got  him  to  be  understanding.  I  don’t  think  John 
Ascuaga  ever  really  did.  I  gave  up  on  him.  But  Harrah’ s,  because  they  wanted  to  be  a  public  company, 
and  so  forth,  1  think  they  came  to  realize  this  was  the  way  it  should  go.  The  legislature  was  pretty  much 
nearly  all  for  it,  and  so  we  got  that  passed.  It  was  a  big  step  forward  for  Nevada.  Actually,  I  don’t  think 
Las  Vegas  would  have  grown  anywhere  near  the  way  it  did  without  it,  because  credit  gaming  really  made 
Las  Vegas.  Nobody  walks  around  with  two  hundred  and  fifty,  three  hundred  thousand,  five  hundred 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


255 


thousand,  nowadays  a  million  dollars  in  their  jeans  to  gamble  with,  but  they  can  get  those  markers.  And 
that  was  the  secret — making  them  [the  markers]  collectible  somewhere  else. 

Let ’s  talk  for  a  minute  about  Deputy  Attorney  General  Bud  Hicks.  What  role  did  he  play  in  gaming 
control  and  in  gaming  regulations  in  the  state  of  Nevada? 

The  situation  was,  under  the  law,  that  the  Gaming  Control  Board’s  budget  allowed  for,  in  the 
beginning,  one  deputy,  and  later  on  several  deputies,  and  they  were  appointed  by  the  attorney  general  of 
the  state.  But  they  were  paid  by  and  through  the  budget  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  At  any  rate,  Bud 
was  not  the  original  deputy  attorney  general  assigned  to  the  Board  during  my  tenure  there.  David  Polley  is 
the  first  one  1  remember.  After  David  left,  Bud  came  along,  and  Bud’s  dad  [Carl  Hicks]  had  been  in 
gaming,  and  his  brother,  Larry,  was  a  little  bit  later,  a  district  attorney  of  Washoe  County.  Bud  turned  out 
to  be  a  real  fine  attorney  for  us,  and  we  got  along  really,  really  well,  both  on  a  personal  and  a  professional 
level.  He  did  a  lot  of  good  work  for  the  Board  in  presenting  our  cases  when  we  had  disciplinary  actions 
that  would  go  in  front  of  the  Commission,  in  working  up  the  basic  approach  with  some  of  the  court  cases 
we  ended  up  fighting,  and  in  giving  us  good  advice  as  we  went  along.  The  lawyers  were  really  quite 
concerned,  1  think,  with  me,  that  I  was  going  to  overreach  on  the  constitutional  ground,  [laughter]  They 
were  always  trying  to  hold  me  back.  [Pete]  Echeverria  told  me  one  time  on  something  1  wanted  to  do, 
“Well,  that’s  not  in  the  constitution.” 

1  said,  “What  the  hell  is  the  constitution?” 

[laughter] 

We  always  kind  of  joked  about  things  like  that,  but  Bud  was  very  good,  and  I  enjoyed  working 
with  him.  He  did  a  lot  of  good  work  for  us. 

Did  he  appear  before  the  legislature  a  great  deal? 

Oh,  yes,  when  we  had  different  pieces  of  legislation  or  if  we  needed  a  new  law,  he  would  go  in 
front  of  the  judiciary  committee.  That  was  the  way  that  he  would  usually  approach  it.  And,  of  course,  on 
budget  matters  he  would  go  in  front  of  the  ways  and  means  committee.  When  we  would  go  in  front  of  the 
judiciary  committee  to  ask  for  legislation,  1  would  typically  bring  Bud  with  me  because  he  would  have 
drafted  the  original  bill.  And  then  it  would  go,  of  course,  over  to  the  legislative  council  bureau,  and  they 
would  work  with  it,  too.  But  Bud  always  went  with  me  to  assure  the  judiciary  committee,  which  was 
loaded  with  lawyers,  that  what  we  were  doing  was  appropriate  under  the  constitution  and  the  law  of  the 
state,  [laughter] 

The  things  we ’ve  been  talking  about  all  pertain  to  stricter  gaming  law  and  stricter  gaming  enforcement. 
Was  that  a  preconceived  plan  worked  out  by  you  and  Governor  O’Callaghan,  or  as  you  got  more  into 
your  job  did  you  realize  that  the  industry  needed  more  and  more  regulation? 


No,  we  didn’t  have  that  predetermined  idea  going  in.  Certainly,  although  I’d  worked  in  the 


256 


gaming  industry,  I  didn’t  know  that  much  about  the  regulation  of  gaming.  And  [Governor]  O’ Callaghan, 
as  1  said  earlier,  was  always  a  little  bit  suspicious  of  the  industry.  But  we  didn’t  have  a  particular  plan 
going  in,  except  on  a  philosophical  basis  to  provide  good  government,  and  we  took  these  things  as  they 
came,  one  after  another.  We  would  just  try  to  apply  good  common  sense — what  we  thought  of  as 
common  sense — and  we  truly  were  looking  at  what  we  thought  would  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  state 
overall.  And  sometimes  we  would  get  distracted.  For  example,  in  the  case  of  the  Aladdin,  which  we  will 
talk  about  at  some  point,  one  of  the  overreaching  concerns  that  was  in  [Governor]  O’ Callaghan’s  mind 
and  in  mine  as  well — and  1  remember  [Shannon]  Bybee  as  being  quite  concerned  about  it — was  the  fate 
of  a  lot  of  ordinary  people,  employees,  who  were  about  to  lose  their  jobs. 

Because  of  casinos  closing? 

Right.  Yes,  that’s  kind  of  a  side  note.  There  was  a  lot  of  pressure  on  us  in  different  cases  over  the 
years  where  casinos  were  in  very  weak  financial  condition — the  Mapes  is  a  place  that  comes  to  mind  real 
quickly — where  there  was  pressure  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board  to  do  something  to  prop  them  up.  And 
that  always  seemed  to  me  to  be  not  right.  You  know,  people  have  the  right  to  fail,  [laughter]  and  1  don’t 
think  it’s  the  state’s  business  to  go  in  there  and  try  to  dictate  business  practices  or  economics  to  these 
folks,  even  when  they’re  about  to  lose  their  jobs.  1  know  it  was  a  ticklish  issue  of  how  far  the  state  can  go 
or  should  go  to  preserve  jobs  or  to  preserve  the  economic  well-being  of  one  of  these  businesses.  And  1 
don’t  know  that  there’s  any  answer  to  it,  but  1  was  always  of  the  opinion  that  that  is  not  spelled  out  in 
legislation  or  in  our  mission,  the  way  we  conceive  of  ourselves.  And  while  1  had  strong  feelings  about 
them  sometimes,  I  had  to  be  very  careful  what  approach  we  took  to  those  various  problems. 

Also,  some  casinos  stayed  open  too  long.  When  they  finally  did  go  bankrupt,  they ’d  close,  oftentimes 
hurting  the  vendors. 

Oh,  I’m  sure  that  happened.  And  then  you’d  get  the  pressure  from  the  vendors  for  the  next  guy 
who  opened  it  up.  He  was  supposed  to  pay  them  off.  We  got  all  these  kinds  of  problems  which  I  thought 
was  not  the  right  thing  for  the  state  to  be  doing.  Those  were  issues  for  someone  else.  The  bankruptcy 
courts  were  designed  to  take  care  of  those  kinds  of  problems. 

Yes.  Not  the  Gaming  Control  Board. 

Right,  [laughter] 

You  mentioned  earlier  that  when  you  were  attempting  to  make  gaming  debts  legal  in  the  state  of  Nevada 
that  you  had  a  meeting  with  several  of  the  casino  owners  and  operators.  In  other  cases  when  you  were 
going  to  put  in  stronger  legislation  or  stronger  regulations  or  if  you  had  problems,  did  you  always  try  and 
bring  the  owners  together? 

Y es,  it  was  our  nature  and  our  process  to  meet  frequently,  both  in  groups  and  on  an  individual 
basis,  with  various  licensees  to  discuss  what  we  conceived  of  as  pending  legislation  or  pending  regulation 
to  get  their  input  on  it.  We  wanted  them  to  come  in  with  the  feeling  that  we  could  work  these  problems 
out.  Obviously,  they  had  a  viewpoint  on  some  of  these  things  that  in  many  cases  altered  my  viewpoint, 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


257 


because  they  brought  an  expertise  from  the  operating  side  that  I  didn’t  have.  So  it  was  kind  of  a  joint 
thing  that  we  initiated,  and  we  practiced  it  all  the  time  1  was  there.  We  would  communicate  with  these 
folks  and  see  what  their  thoughts  were.  What  were  the  problems  with  this  kind  of  regulation  or  this  kind 
of  legislation?  What  were  the  advantages?  And  you’d  try  to  work  it  out  from  there.  And  if  you  said, 

“Well,  this  language  isn’t  quite  right,”  then  the  lawyers  and  Bud  Hicks  would  work  with  their  lawyers, 
and  we’d  try  to  come  together.  You  just  had  to  work  together.  Sometimes  you  couldn’t  avoid  it,  but  1 
didn’t  think  that  we  should  always  be  in  an  adversarial  war. 

You  mentioned  earlier  that  there  was  sometimes  conflict  between  the  north  and  the  south.  Was  that  a 
common  problem  ? 

1  think  their  feeling  of  estrangement  from  one  another  was  common.  They  were  totally  different 
kinds  of  people:  the  people  up  here  have  been  here  a  long  time;  a  lot  of  the  folks  in  Las  Vegas  were  new 
and  just  coming  into  the  state.  Las  Vegas,  of  course,  was  growing  by  leaps  and  bounds  and  was  kind  of  an 
upstart,  [laughter]  Y es,  there  was  a  north-south  division  and  a  rivalry.  There  were  different  kinds  of 
business  taking  place.  Up  north  you  didn’t  have  the  marker  play.  Entertainment  here  is  a  bit  different, 
much  more  of  it  in  Las  Vegas  than  there  was  up  here. 

And  you  as  a  chairman  for  the  state  had  to  try  and  get  these  places  to  work  together. 

Well,  yes,  because  they’re  all  one  place. 

So  you  had  to  have  rules  that  were  going  to  fit  everyone? 

That’s  right.  The  accounting  rules  in  internal  audit  are  a  lot  different.  Again,  up  here  the  nature  of 
the  structure  of  the  organizations  in  many  cases  is  so  different,  and  the  way  people  handle  it  is  different. 
For  example,  how  people  handled  entertainers.  There  was  always  what  seemed  to  me  a  lot  of  decorum  in 
Reno.  1  mean,  big  names  were  here,  but  there  was  a  certain  kind  of  decorum,  1  thought.  In  Las  Vegas  they 
were  far  more  pampered  and  catered  to  and  put  on  a  pedestal.  Sinatra  on  a  couple  of  occasions  dealt  cards 
in  Caesars  Palace,  and  we  said,  “Hey,  this  isn’t  going  to  happen,  guys.  Stop  it!”  [laughter] 

And  there  were  other  occasions.  Bill  Ledbetter4  and  George  Gilgert5  from  Harrah’s  got  together 
one  night  and  went  on  a  drunk  and  Gilgert  ended  up  dealing  to  Ledbetter  over  at  Harrah’s.  Then  they 
went  over  to  Harvey’s,  and  Ledbetter  was  dealing  to  Gilgert.  1  took  both  of  their  licenses  away.  1  mean, 
there’s  things  you  don’t  do!  But,  it  was  just  a  different  world.  I  think  in  some  ways  it’s  better  now.  1  think 
there  is  more  of  a  sense  of  the  business  world,  but  in  some  ways  1  think  maybe  in  a  lot  of  ways  it  was 
better  with  the  oldtimers,  even  though  they  screwed  up  a  lot. 

[laughter] 

Do  you  think  we ’ve  had  so  many  regulations  passed  now  that  gaming  is  becoming  over-regulated? 


Bill  Ledbetter  was  general  manager  of  Harvey’s  Wagon  Wheel  at  Lake  Tahoe. 
5George  Gilgert  was  assistant  general  manager  of  Harrah’s  Tahoe. 


258 


Well,  there  are  times  I  think  that  that’s  the  case,  but  I’ve  been  out  of  touch  with  it  for  a  long  time, 
and  I’m  probably  not  the  best  observer  of  that.  Some  of  it  appears  to  me  sometimes  to  be  “make  work” 
for  the  state,  but,  again,  I’m  not  the  best  observer  at  this  point  in  my  life.  And  the  older  I  get,  the  more 
anarchistic  I  am.  [laughter] 


One  of  your  first  appointments  was  Tom  Carrigan,  as  Chief  of  Enforcement.  What  precipitated  that 
appointment?  Did  you  know  Mr.  Carrigan  before?  Did  you  feel  there  was  a  weakness  in  that  department? 

Well,  the  answer  to  both  questions  is  yes.  I  knew  Tom  before.  He  had  been  a  police  officer,  a 
captain  in  the  Reno  Police  Department.  When  I  first  met  him,  he  was  working  as  a  juvenile  officer,  and  I 
had  been  working  at  Wittenberg  Hall,  so  we  knew  each  other  from  there.  Tom  had  become  a  captain  in 
the  Reno  Police  Department.  And  at  a  point  in  my  life  I  was  not  only  the  director  of  the  state  department 
of  parole  and  probation,  but  I  also,  at  the  same  time,  was  the  director  of  the  first  state  narcotics 
department.  In  that  capacity,  I  had  reached  out  and  drafted  Tom  from  the  Reno  Police  Department,  and  he 
headed  up,  under  me,  the  original  narcotics  division  for  the  state  of  Nevada.  When  I  moved  over  to 
gaming,  I  went  back  and  took  Tom  out  of  that  job  and  brought  him  over  to  gaming  because  he  was  a  very 
competent  investigator.  The  reason  I  brought  him  over  and  put  him  in  was  because  there  was  a  man  there 
by  the  name  of  Harold  Anderson,  and  Harold  was  an  elderly  man  in  his  seventies.  Harold  had  been  an 
FBI  agent,  retired,  and  he  was  working  for  the  board  under  Frank  Johnson.  I  just  thought  that  Harold  was 
not  the  kind  of  energetic,  vital  person  I  needed  in  there.  He  had  a  great  fear  of  flying,  and  he  wouldn’t  fly 
to  Las  Vegas.  So  when  I  needed  him  in  Vegas,  it  was  like  a  full  day  before  he  could  get  there.  And  so  I 
made  a  change  and  brought  Carrigan  over. 

Did  he  stay  with  you  all  the  time  that  you  were  on  the  Board? 

All  the  time  I  was  there.  He  left  shortly  after  I  left.  About  four  or  five  months  after  I  left,  he  left 
[the]  Gaming  Board. 


In  March  of  1967,  Howard  Hughes  made  the  first  of  his  many  casino  purchases  when  he  bought  the 
Desert  Inn  Hotel  from  Moe  Dalitz.  The  State  of  Nevada  and/or  Governor  Paul  Laxalt  felt  the  presence  of 
highly-respected  businessman  would  improve  the  state ’s  image.  So  to  expedite  the  licensing  process,  Mr. 
Hughes  was  never  asked  to  make  a  public  appearance.  Who  actually  decided  that  Howard  Hughes  didn  7 
have  to  appear  there  in  those  early  years? 

I  think  that  was  a  decision  made  by  Laxalt  with  Frank  Johnson.  I  think  there  were  great  pressures 
on  Paul  to  try  to  get  rid  of  some  of  the  people  that  the  federals  were  upset  about.  And  they  had  been  upset. 
Frank  Johnson  told  me  he  had  been  fighting  with  Hoover  and  Senator  Kefauver.  So,  yes,  there  was  a  lot 
of  pressure  on  Sawyer  and  then  on  Laxalt.  So  Hughes,  I  think,  looked  to  them,  or  looked  to  Paul  and  the 
people  around  Paul,  as,  “Here’s  an  answer”:  he  buys  the  Desert  Inn,  and  Moe  Dalitz  is  gone. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


259 


Buy  something  else  and  another  one  is  gone. 

Yes.  And  so  the  issue  of  interviewing  him  probably  didn’t  seem  all  that  important  to  them  at  the 
time,  but  it  came  back  to  haunt  them.  1  guess  they  just  assumed  everybody  knows  who  Howard  Hughes  is 
and  everybody  knows  his  history.  And  he’s  obviously  not  organized  crime.  Why  do  we  need  to  fool  with 
it?  1  mean,  it  was  probably  that  kind  of  thinking.  And  if  you  push  it,  Hughes  won’t  do  it.  1  think  that  was 
probably  the  kind  of  debate  that  went  on  over  Hughes.  But  then  he  kept  acquiring  things,  became  a  large 
economic  force  in  the  state  of  Nevada,  and  still  nobody  had  seen  him.  And,  you  know,  that  was  fine,  1 
guess,  with  Hank  Greenspun  for  a  long  time,  because  Hank  thought  he  was  going  to  get  a  lot  of  economic 
benefit  out  of  it.  Hank  and  Robert  Maheu  were,  1  think,  rather  close.  Then  when  the  Hughes  Tool 
Company  moved  back  in,  and  in  a  surprise  move  went  in  and  took  over  the  cashier  cages  of  the  various 
places  and  threw  Maheu  out,  Greenspun  went  ballistic.  His  newspaper  drummed  up  an  awful  lot  of  public 
pressure,  which  is  when  O’ Callaghan  stepped  in,  and  he  later  was  pressured,  “Well,  what  are  you  going  to 
do  about  Hughes?”  And  that’s  when  he,  of  course,  said,  “We  will  meet  with  Hughes.”  [laughter]  But  at 
any  rate,  when  1  came  into  the  business,  the  coup  had  already  taken  place,  and  Maheu  was  gone.  And  the 
Hughes  Tool  Company,  not  Summa,  was  in  charge  of  these  places.  Hughes  had  retained  the  title  of 
president,  and  the  executive  vice-president,  running  the  daily  operation  of  ToolCo,  was  Raymond 
Holiday. 

Did  they  have  to  be  licensed? 

Holiday  did.  And  there  was  a  corporation  attorney  involved  in  that  business,  Chester  Davis,  plus 
there  were  several  other  names:  Bill  Gay,  and  a  guy  by  the  name  of  Howard  Lesch.  There  were  maybe 
seven  people.  But  Holiday,  Gay,  and  Davis  were  the  main  men.  The  whole  board  of  Hughes  ToolCo  were 
all  decent  human  beings  with  no  records.  They  were  just  good  business  people  running  the  Hughes  Tool 
Company. 

The  question  that  Greenspun  had  raised  was,  “Was  Hughes  alive,  and  did  he  agree  to  this  change 
of  control?”  Well,  there  was  never  any  change  of  control.  ToolCo  bought  and  owned  all  of  the  Hughes 
properties  with  the  single  exception  of  the  Silver  Slipper,  which  Howard  Hughes  owned  individually.  It 
was  not  a  corporation;  it  was  a  simple  Hughes  ownership.  ToolCo  was  definitely  a  coiporation,  and 
owned  all  the  other  properties.  Maheu  was  interesting.  On  the  one  hand,  he  would  tell  the  people  at 
ToolCo  that  they  had  no  control  over  him  because  he  was  simply  a  consultant,  not  an  employee.  Then  he 
would  tell  other  people  that  he  was  the  president  or  the  chief  executive  officer  of  Hughes’s  Properties, 
which  was  one  of  the  entities  that  ToolCo  owned  at  that  time.  So,  1  mean,  he  was  dancing  in  the  middle 
here,  and  that  was  part  of  the  problem  that  ToolCo  had  with  him.  He  wasn’t  going  to  recognize  the  board 
of  directors,  and  he  was  going  to  do  just  what  he  said  he  was  going  to  do,  whatever.  He  would  say  that  he 
had  talked  to  Hughes,  and  this  is  what  he  wants.  But  nobody  knew  if  he  did  or  didn’t!  [laughter]  Bill  Gay 
had  surrounded  Hughes  with — I  guess  the  best  term  to  use  is  a  group  of  male  nurses.  They  were  all 
Mormon.  And  I  don’t  know  that  that  means  anything,  other  than  Hughes  had  hired  Bill  Gay,  who  was  a 
Mormon,  and  Hughes  became  enamored  of  the  Mormons  because  of  their  morality:  they  didn’t  drink, 
they  didn’t  smoke,  and  he  began  to  trust  them.  As  Gay  rose  up  in  the  organization,  he  filled  in  behind 
himself  with  other  Mormons.  Ultimately,  when  Hughes  went  into  seclusion,  he  was  surrounded  by  these 
folks  who  were  all  Mormon,  and  Gay  was  the  leader  of  the  band.  He  was  operating  a  bit  outside  of 
ToolCo.  He  was  on  the  board  of  ToolCo,  but  he  was  operating  in  a  little  bit  of  a  different  area,  too.  Now, 


260 


there  were  a  lot  of  things  going  on  within  this  big  company. 

Jack  Real — that  name  becomes  important,  and  1  better  mention  him.  Jack  Real  was  an  executive 
with  Lockheed.  He  was  an  aviator,  and  he  had  a  long-term  friendship  with  Hughes.  1  first  met  with  Real 
after  1  had  come  onto  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  and  1  was,  of  course,  trying  to  determine  if  Hughes  was 
really  in  charge  of  this.  1  mean,  who  was  running  this  great  economic  block  in  the  state  of  Nevada?  Who 
was  really  in  charge  of  it?  Was  it  Maheu  and  he’d  been  illegally  deposed?  Was  it  ToolCo?  Who  was 
rightfully  running  this  operation,  and  did  they  have  the  blessings  of  Hughes,  and  was  Hughes,  in  fact, 
alive  to  direct,  because  he  was  the  licensee?  So  1  started  to  track  down  people  that  knew  Hughes  over  the 
years,  and  there  were  people  in  Las  Vegas  who  knew  him.  Del  Webb  was  one.  1  talked  to  Del  Webb.  But 
ultimately,  1  was  directed  towards  this  man  Jack  Real.  And  1  met  with  Real  in  Miami.  Real  was  the  guy 
that  organized  the  exodus  from  the  Desert  Inn.  He  brought  a  plane  up  from  Lockheed  and  landed  at  the 
North  Las  Vegas  airport.  Then  they  went  and  got  Hughes  and  took  him  down  the  fire  escape  on  the  north 
side  of  the  old  tower  of  the  Desert  Inn,  and  hustled  him  off  in  a  limo,  put  him  on  the  Lockheed,  and  that’s 
when  Hughes  disappeared. 

And  when  first  1  met  with  Real,  he  was  fairly  forthcoming.  He  told  me  a  lot  about  Hughes’s  prior, 
young  life  and  his  life  as  an  aviator.  He  wouldn’t  say  too  much  about  the  current  business,  other  than  to 
say  that  Hughes  was  alive  and  that  it  was  Hughes’s  desire  that  Maheu  be  removed  and  that  the  ToolCo 
board  of  directors  was  the  governing  body  and  properly  so.  That  didn’t  mean  that  much  other  than  1  got 
the  interview  with  him  and  got  that  perspective.  1  later  interviewed  Chester  Davis,  who  was  an  attorney, 
Bill  Gay,  and  all  of  these  folks.  So  ultimately,  we  began  the  licensing  process  for  them  so  that  we  would 
have  somebody  to  turn  to  for  the  operation  of  these  properties.  One  of  the  issues  that,  again,  came  to  bear 
was  the  pressure  from  Greenspun;  you  could  see  it.  You  could  read  it  every  morning  in  the  Sun. 
Greenspun  was  pushing  to  have  the  state  take  some  Draconian  action:  close  all  these  places  or  assume 
control  of  all  the  properties,  all  of  which  was  not  provided  for.  Taking  them  over  wasn’t  provided  for  in 
the  law,  number  one.  Closing  him  would  just  be  impossible;  there  were  too  many  jobs  at  stake,  and  too 
much  of  the  state’s  economy  had  been  taken  over  by  Hughes.  We  just  couldn’t  do  it.  In  my  mind,  you 
couldn’t  have  done  it. 

So  we  were  trying  to  find  another  solution  for  maintaining  control  over  these  operations,  and  still 
trying  to  determine  if  Hughes  is  alive  or  dead,  who’s  running  this  place,  and  should  they  be?  We  couldn’t 
close  the  Sands,  the  Desert  Inn,  the  Landmark;  there  were  just  too  many  jobs  at  stake.  They  were  held 
under  a  corporate  umbrella,  so  if  you  took  action,  you  had  to  take  action  against  all  of  them;  you  couldn’t 
single  them  out  except  for  the  Silver  Slipper,  which  was  owned  individually  by  Howard  Hughes.  So  that’s 
where  1  poked  at  him.  1  didn’t  immediately  realize  it,  but  it  became  clear  after  a  while  that  that  was  a 
particular  sore  spot,  because  that  was  the  place  where  Hughes  was  making  all  of  his  political 
contributions.  The  public  corporation  there  could  not  make  political  donations,  but  an  individual  could,  so 
he  was  making  them  through  the  Silver  Slipper,  [laughter] 

Was  that  his  main  reason  for  keeping  the  Slipper  in  his  name? 

1  don’t  know.  Maybe  it  was  an  oversight  when  he  acquired  it.  1  truly  don’t  know  the  answer  to 
that  question.  But  anyway,  it  became  the  vehicle  that  either  he  or  Maheu  chose  to  use  to  start  siphoning 
money  off  to  those  politicians  for  various  reasons,  national,  and  state.  Well,  1  finally  told  him  that  1  was 
going  to  close  the  Silver  Slipper,  unless  arrangements  were  made  for  the  governor  to  meet  with  Howard 
Hughes.  And  after  a  lot  of  back  and  forth,  back  and  forth  over  this,  it  was  agreed  that  we  would  meet  with 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


261 


Hughes.  At  the  time  it  was  agreed,  Hughes  was  in  Managua,  Nicaragua.  There’s  a  hotel  down  there  built 
like  a  pyramid,  and  he  was  staying  in  this  hotel.  O’Callaghan  and  1  were  scheduled  to  go  there,  but  three 
days  prior  to  the  time  we  were  to  leave  to  go  down  there,  there  was  an  enormous  earthquake  that  just 
devastated  Managua — the  whole  town  was  destroyed.  And,  of  course,  the  Hughes  people  didn’t  know 
whether  Hughes  was  alive  or  dead.  Nobody  knew.  It  was  about  three  days  before  Hughes  got  out,  and  I 
later  found  out  that  Hughes  got  out  of  Managua  on  a  Cushman  motor  scooter,  [laughter]  At  any  rate,  our 
trip  to  see  him  was  canceled,  obviously.  I  forget  off  the  top  of  my  head  Howard  Hughes’s  itinerary,  but  he 
went  up  to  Vancouver  for  a  while,  and  then  he  was  in  Toronto,  and  ultimately,  he  ends  up  in  London.  In 
the  meantime,  1  hadn’t  let  up  the  pressure.  Ultimately,  he  went  to  London,  and  he  established  at  the  Inn  on 
the  Park.  A  nice  hotel.  So  O’Callaghan  and  1  fly  to  London  to  meet  with  Hughes. 

Who  made  the  arrangements  for  the  meeting? 

Primarily  Gay,  but  Davis  was  involved.  Davis  obviously  was  trying  to  fight  us  off.  Anyway,  we 
get  to  London  and  we  walked  into  his  suite  at  one  [o’clock]  in  the  morning,  London  time,  and  we  left 
there  about  four  o’clock  in  the  morning.  He  appeared  in  a  bathrobe  and  slippers,  and  he  was  well- 
barbered,  clean,  and  quite  rational.  1  had  really  prepped  myself  on  Hughes’  history,  and  1  spent  some  time 
asking  him  some  rather  arcane  questions  just  to  assure  myself  who  the  hell  this  guy  was. 

Was  he  friendly  and  receptive? 

No,  he  was  an  arrogant,  egotistical  kind  of  a  man  in  that  he  was  not  the  kind  of  a  man  I’d  ever 
want  to  go  have  a  beer  with,  [laughter] 

He  acted  like  he  was  doing  you  a  favor? 

Really.  But  he  was  very  forceful  in,  “These  are  my  properties.  I’m  going  to  run  them  the  way  I 
want  to  run  them,  and  these  are  the  people  I  picked  to  run  my  properties.”  And  we  talked  about  what  his 
plans  were.  One  of  the  things  he  said  was  that  he  foresaw  the  day  when  Las  Vegas  would  be  a  regional 
hub  for  air  traffic  throughout  the  West.  Well  before  he  bought  the  casinos,  he’d  owned  vast  tracts  of  land 
in  southern  Nevada,  and  he  foresaw  the  time  when  he  would  build  this  massive  airport  and  these  hotel- 
casinos  were  going  to  fuel  all  of  this  other  development. 

Was  there  anyone  in  the  room  with  him  ? 

Oh,  yes.  Gay  was  there,  Davis  was  there,  and  two  of  what  I  call  the  Mormon  mafia,  [laughter] 

Was  it  just  you  and  Governor  O’ Callaghan  from  Nevada? 

Yes.  And  you  have  to  remember  there  was  a  point  in  time  before  this  occurred  when  Hughes,  in 
order  to  dispel  all  these  rumors  about  his  death,  had  called  a  telephonic  press  conference  with,  I  believe, 
three  reporters  that  he  had  known  for  years  and  who  knew  him.  One  of  them  was  Robert  Bennyhoff. 


Was  Frank  McCullough  there? 


262 


Yes,  I  think  McCullough  was.  Anyway,  he  called  a  telephone  press  conference  and  he  had  talked 
with  them  via  the  telephone.  He  answered  a  lot  of  questions  from  them,  and  they  all  said,  “Yes,  that’s 
Hughes.”  And  that  tended  to  diffuse  a  lot  of  the  rumors  and  so  forth.  When  we  went  over,  we  talked  to 
him  about  different  things  and  what  were  his  plans  in  Nevada  and  were  these  people  really  supposed  to 
run  it,  and  he  called  Maheu  a  lying,  thieving,  son  of  a  bitch  and  he  was  yelling.  So  we  got  the  distinct 
impression  he  didn’t  like  Maheu  and  Maheu  was  gone.  He  said,  “These  are  the  people  1  want  to  run  it,” 
and  he  pointed  to  Gay  and  Davis.  But  it  also  became  clear  that  this  was  the  first  time  that  Davis  had  ever 
seen  him.  And  Gay  hadn’t  seen  him  in  seven  or  eight  years,  but  the  Mormon  mafia  had  seen  him.  What 
the  hell  did  they  call  it?  They  called  it  the  “site” — he’s  “on  site.”  And  wherever  Hughes  was,  that  was  on 
site.  “We’re  going  to  call  site,”  they’d  say  if  they  wanted  to  talk  to  him.  I’ll  tell  you  a  cute  story  in  a 
minute.  So  anyway,  O’Callaghan,  in  the  course  of  the  long  conversation,  towards  the  end,  tells  Hughes 
that  when  he  gets  back  home  he  is  going  to  let  the  press  know  that  he  has  visited  with  Hughes,  seen  him 
and  talked  with  him  and  that  these  are  his  desires  and  so  forth.  Hughes  erupts.  He  goes  nuts,  yelling  and 
screaming.  Hughes  is  deaf,  and  he  had  an  old-fashioned  eaipiece,  like  a  plug,  in  his  ear,  and  an  amplifier  a 
little  smaller  than  a  pack  of  cigarettes.  And  then  when  you  spoke,  he’d  stick  it  out  towards  you  so  he 
could  hear.  And  he’s  yelling  and  carrying  on.  And  as  he  starts  this,  Gay  and  Davis  are  trying  to  calm  him 
down.  And  I’m  dumbfounded,  [laughter]  but  what  touched  him  off  finally  came  out.  He  believed  that  in 
the  prior  telephone  conference  with  these  reporters  he  had  committed  to  them  and  given  them  his  word 
that  if  he  ever  talked  to  the  press,  it  would  be  to  them.  So  he  felt  that  his  word  was  at  stake.  And 
O’Callaghan,  of  course,  when  this  happened,  he’s  like  a  bull,  and  he’s  bellowing  back,  “I’m  the  governor 
of  the  state,  and  I’m  going  to  talk  to  the  people  of  my  state!”  And  when  this  is  going  back  and  forth,  it 
was  crazy.  Davis  was  finally  able  to  convince  Hughes  that,  no,  Hughes  wasn’t  talking  to  the  press,  it  was 
the  governor  of  the  state  who  was  talking  to  the  press.  And  Hughes  finally  accepted  that,  which  ended  our 
visit,  [laughter] 

Did  he  ask  you  to  go? 

No.  And  it  was  not  a  good  note  to  end  on,  but  it  was  clear  that  it  was  a  good  time  to  end  the 
interview.  It  was  about  four  [o’clock]  when  it  ended,  as  he  slept  days  and  was  up  nights. 

Later  on  I  went  to  work  for  the  Hughes  organization  after  Hughes  died,  and  Will  [William] 
Lummis,  who  was  his  first  cousin,  became  the  administrator  of  the  estate.  Lummis  wanted  to  get  rid  of 
Bill  Gay’s  people  and  their  influence.  They  had  their  offices  in  Las  Vegas,  and  Gay’s  office  was  two 
floors  below  ground,  with  no  windows,  obviously,  and  Lummis  told  me,  “That’s  your  office.”  So  I  took 
over  the  office,  right?  [laughter]  The  office  was  a  big,  big  room,  but  in  one  part  there  was  a  small  door 
and  a  small  space  a  little  bigger  than  a  typical  phone  booth,  with  a  locked  steel  door.  I  didn’t  pay  too 
much  attention  to  it  for  about  a  week,  and  I  finally  called  the  buildings  people  down,  and  I  said,  “Open 
that  door.” 

“Well,  that  door  is  never  to  be  opened.” 

“Who  told  you  that?” 

“Bill  Gay.” 

I  said,  “Oh,  I’m  here  now.  Open  the  door.”  Well,  they  opened  the  door,  and  it  was  all  just  total 
concrete.  There  was  a  little  steel  seat  in  there  and  nothing  else — not  a  thing.  There’s  not  even  an  electrical 
plug.  There  is  nothing,  just  this  room,  concrete,  with  a  steel  door.  So  now  I  start  asking  questions  of  the 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


263 


people  who  had  been  there  before  and  they  said,  “Oh,  that’s  the  room  where  Mr.  Gay  always  talked  to 
Mr.  Hughes.”  He’d  get  up  from  a  meeting  and  he’d  say,  “Time  for  me  to  talk  to  ‘site.’”  And  he’d  go  in 
this  little  room  and  apparently  sit  down  there  for  fifteen  minutes,  and  come  back  out.  1  mean,  this  thing 
was  a  fairy  tale.  We  later  found  out,  too,  in  the  course  of  going  through  the  estate  and  trying  to  get  it 
straightened  around,  that  one  of  the  members  of  that  Mormon  group — 1  call  them  the  male  nurses — had 
built  a  house  in  Salt  Lake  City,  built  the  whole  house  on  a  Hughes  company  credit  card.  It  was  just  stupid. 
So  at  any  rate,  after  we  had  met  with  Hughes,  we  came  back,  and  the  governor  called  in  the  press  and  told 
them  about  our  visit,  and  that  was  pretty  much  the  end  of  that  kind  of  a  problem  with  the  Hughes  group. 

Did  Hank  Greenspun  accept  it? 

He  constantly  haiped  and  nagged  about  it,  what  they  were  doing,  what  they  weren’t  doing.  He 
wasn’t  going  to  give  up,  but  there  really  wasn’t  that  much  that  could  be  done.  Hughes  had  been  seen.  He 
said  these  were  the  legitimate  people  in  control,  and  so  we  went  from  there  until  1976,  when  Hughes  died, 
and  that’s  when  Lummis  came  in.  In  the  meantime,  before  that,  Hughes  had  told  us  the  night  we  visited 
with  him  that  he  had  wanted  this  company  renamed  Sumrna,  and  that  meant  “the  highest.”  And  it  was  a 
spin-off;  as  1  told  you,  there  was  ToolCo,  and  that  group  was  over  doing  their  thing,  and  Gay  was  out 
trying  to  do  something  else,  and  then  there  was  Maheu.  So  there  were  all  these  competing  forces  within 
the  Hughes  empire.  But  the  people  in  the  tool  company  had  been  promised  for  years  and  years  and  years 
that  they  would  get  shares  in  the  company.  And  Hughes  never  followed  through.  At  one  point,  [William] 
Hewlett  and  [David]  Packard  worked  for  him  and  he  did  the  same  thing,  promised  them  shares  in  Hughes 
Electronics,  and  never  gave  them  any,  so  they  left.  Well,  at  any  rate,  they  spun  off  Summa,  and  that  was 
what  Gay  wanted,  the  casinos  and  the  real  estate  in  Las  Vegas.  So  that  all  came  off  from  ToolCo,  and 
then  the  people  at  ToolCo  went  their  merry  way  in  the  oil  business.  And  then  the  Hughes  tool  company 
became  a  public  company  after  having  been  a  private  company  before  that. 

Did  Summa  become  a  public  company? 

No.  Never  did.  And,  of  course,  when  Hughes  died  and  Lummis  took  over,  he  had  to  work  with 
the  estate  in  order  to  try  to  unravel  all  of  this.  There  were  several  shirt-tail  relatives,  and  before  the  estate 
was  probated  some  of  those  people  had  died,  and  they  had  heirs,  and  it  really  got  to  be  a  difficult  situation 
to  handle  as  an  estate.  1  met  many  of  the  heirs,  and  they  were  just  ordinary  folks,  and  they  wanted  a  little 
bit  of  this  estate  to  buy  a  new  car  or  pick  up  a  new  carpet  or  whatever. 

And  so  the  pressures  finally  became  strong  to  sell  the  casinos.  They  were  old  and  worn  out  at  the 
time  they  were  purchased  and  we  tried  to  bring  them  back  up  to  speed,  but  you  could  never  really  get  up 
to  the  point  where  you  were  competing  with  the  Caesars  Palaces  of  the  world  or  what  Kerkorian  had  done 
over  at  the  International.  So  ultimately  it  became  clear  that  they  had  to  sell  them,  but  that’s  a  different  part 
of  the  story. 


Well,  part  of  the  reason  that  Laxalt  and  everyone  was  so  obliging  to  let  Hughes  in  was  that  they  wanted  to 
get  rid  of  the  hoodlum  element  or  the  mob.  Do  you  think  that  in  many  of  those  casinos,  although  the 
owners  were  out,  there  were  still  a  lot  of  undesirable  characters  working  there? 


264 


Yes,  I’m  sure  there  were.  I  mentioned  Jerry  Zarowitz  was  at  Caesars,  and  Ash  Resnick  and 
Mandy  Campo,  and  folks  like  that.  At  the  Stardust  there  were  an  awful  lot  of  folks  who  had  been  with 
Dalitz  in  the  old  booze-running  days  in  Cleveland.  And  so,  yes,  there  were  people  like  that  scattered 
throughout  the  business. 

In  your  judgment  was  it  a  good  thing  that  Hughes  came  into  Nevada  or  a  bad  thing? 

In  my  judgment  it  was  good.  Probably  in  importance,  Hilton’s  advent  in  Nevada  was  really  more 
meaningful  in  the  long  term,  because  that  was  really  a  big,  well-recognized,  public  company.  Y ou  have  to 
remember  that  public  companies  had  only  been  legitimized  in  the  sixty-seventh  session  of  legislature. 
They  really  were  not  that  common  yet.  Hughes  advent  was  good,  I  think,  because  it  did  buy  up  some  of 
these  places  where  ownership  had  been  suspect.  It  did  cause  problems  over  the  years  in  terms  of  the 
state’s  relationship  with  the  federal  government.  I  don’t  think  it  caused  problems  in  the  business  sense, 
and  people  like  Moe  Dalitz  in  a  lot  of  ways  were  very  good  citizens  of  Las  Vegas.  I  think  a  lot  of  those 
people  were.  Las  Vegas  became  their  home  and  they  did  a  lot  of  good  in  that  community.  But  I  think  the 
Hughes  acquisition  was  good  for  the  image  of  the  state  of  Nevada,  and  it  focused  a  lot  of  attention  on 
Nevada  getting  rid  of  all  this,  quote,  “mafia”  stuff.  However,  the  big  public  companies  that  came  in,  I 
think,  were  more  important  in  the  long  haul,  and  Hilton  was  about  the  first  of  the  big  ones  to  come  in. 
When  public  shareholding  was  allowed,  that’s  really  what  allowed  gaming  to  take  off. 

Phil,  let’s  talk  about  what  a  junket  operator  is,  and  what  role  they  play  in  Nevada. 

Well,  “junkets”  was  a  term  applied  to  trips  made  to  Nevada  by  groups  of  gamblers  who  were 
organized  in  cities  around  the  United  States  primarily.  There  would  be  a  person  from  that  area  who  knew 
most  of  what  they  called  the  “sporting  crowd,”  that  is,  the  people  who  might  like  to  gamble.  Y ou  would 
make  a  proposition  to  them  that  if  they  came  out  to  the  Dunes  or  the  Sands  or  the  Riviera,  wherever  it  was 
in  Las  Vegas,  that  their  room,  their  food,  their  beverage,  and  the  shows  would  be  paid  for  by  the  different 
casinos  and  hotels  that  they  were  staying  in.  It  was  simply  an  organized  trip,  organized  by  somebody  who 
was  a  gambler  who  knew  a  lot  of  other  gamblers  in  a  particular  area. 

When  they  first  started  out,  did  the  organizers  have  to  tell  a  casino  how  much  credit  the  players  could 
have? 


No.  When  they  originally  started — and  they  started  before  I  became  chairman — my 
understanding  of  their  genesis  was  that  in  the  beginning  there  was  no  credit;  there  was  simply  free  travel, 
free  room  and  board,  and  free  shows — that  type  of  thing.  But  as  this  thing  evolved,  then,  yes,  they  would 
talk  about  credit,  or  they  would  grant  certain  amounts  of  credit  to  various  of  these  players.  Well,  the 
casino  needed  someone  who  could  be  a  reference  point.  Let’s  say  it  was  a  group  coming  out  of  Cleveland. 
If  we  think  about  a  group  coming  out  of  Cleveland,  the  casino  people  would  need  to  understand  who  was 
coming  and  how  trustworthy  they  might  be  with  regard  to  paying  their  gaming  debts.  And  you  have  to 
keep  in  mind,  when  this  started  to  evolve,  gaming  debts  were  not  legal  in  the  state  of  Nevada;  therefore, 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


265 


they  were  not  legal  or  collectible  in  other  states.  So  it  was  really  a  gentleman’s  agreement,  and  the  casinos 
wanted  to  know  that  these  people  would  live  up  to  their  agreement.  That  was  the  origin  of  it.  And  it 
evolved  even  further  from  that,  because  later  on  as  these  groups  came,  they  learned  to  demand  more  and 
more.  There  were  higher  credit  limits,  more  time  to  pay  the  credit.  Then  some  of  them  would  come 
without  an  organized  junket.  They  would  just  come  out  on  their  own,  and  then  they  would  ask  for  their 
airfare  to  be  reimbursed  and,  of  course,  their  hotel  bills.  Then  it  really  got  to  the  point  of  being  somewhat 
ludicrous,  because  there  were  people  who  would  gamble  as  much  as  one  or  two  million  dollars  on  the  trip, 
but  then  they  would  want  a  discount  on  the  amount  that  they  lost.  Some  of  the  clubs  got  into  trouble  doing 
that,  and  it  was,  1  thought,  a  horrendous  situation.  It’s  just  a  very,  very  poor  way  to  do  business.  So  that’s 
basically  a  shortened  form  of  the  junket  business. 

Did  the  clubs  get  competitive,  as  far  as  giving  discounts?  For  example,  would  the  Dunes  give  a  larger 
discount  to  someone  and  try  to  attract  that  business? 

Oh,  junkets  became  extraordinarily  competitive,  and  the  people  who  were  adept  at  bringing  good 
gamblers  were  much  in  demand.  And  there  were  other  games  that  went  on.  For  example,  a  club  might  go 
to  a  good  junket  organizer  and  offer  him  more  than  he  was  currently  earning,  and  the  junket  organizer 
would  then  move  over  to  this  new  casino.  Some  of  the  smart  casino  owners  would  use  him  for  six  or 
seven  or  eight  months  and  acquire  the  names,  addresses,  phone  numbers,  and  credit  history  for  all  of  his 
good  customers.  Then  they  would  get  rid  of  him,  because  now  they  had  that  list,  [laughter]  They  could  do 
it  independent  of  him.  It  was  a  real  cutthroat  operation. 

By  discounting  the  amount  of  money  that  the  person  lost,  aren ’t  they  hurting  the  state ’s  portion  of  the 
gross  gaming  revenue? 

Well,  that  argument  was  my  position,  and  1  argued  it  and  argued  it.  But  ultimately,  it  was  decided 
that,  no,  until  that  money  was  paid,  it  wasn’t  gaming  winnings. 

Would  you  go  into  a  little  more  detail  of  why  it  was  so  important  that  junketeers  be  licensed? 

Well,  these  people  were  beginning  to  have  a  big  impact  on  the  business,  especially  in  Las  Vegas 
on  the  Strip,  in  terms  of  the  kind  of  gamblers  they  were  bringing  in,  the  amount  of  money  that  was 
involved  in  this  effort,  and  the  collection  of  that  credit.  For  example — again  using  Cleveland — a  man 
would  come  out  from  Cleveland,  he  would  lose  a  hundred  thousand  dollars  on  credit,  and  he  would  return 
to  Cleveland.  Then  the  casino  where  he  had  lost  the  money  would  depend  on  the  junket  organizer  from 
Cleveland  to  visit  the  man,  talk  to  him,  collect  the  money,  and  remit  it  back  to  Las  Vegas.  Well,  the  skill 
with  which  the  junket  organizer  would  collect  it  and  get  it  back  to  the  casino,  and  the  timeliness  of  getting 
that  money  back,  all  became  part  of  the  credentials  for  the  junket  organizer.  And  also,  what  was  going  on 
in  Cleveland,  how  was  he  collecting?  Was  he  breaking  legs  or  just  being  very  persuasive?  So  the  whole 
thing  called  out  for  some  kind  of  state  supervision,  and  licensing  became  the  method  to  use. 

How  did  the  total  amount  of  junkets  that  came  to  Reno  compare  to  the  amount  of  junkets  that  came  to  Las 
Vegas? 


266 


Oh,  there  were  very  few  that  came  to  Reno.  Back  in  those  days,  Harrah’s  brought  a  few  into 
Reno,  and  at  that  time  no  one  else  really  brought  anything  into  Reno.  Maybe  after  John  Ascuaga  built  his 
first  little  hotel,  he  brought  a  few,  but  they  were  minimal,  minimal.  In  Las  Vegas  they  were  a  big,  big 
piece  of  business. 

In  1975  there  were  two  Hawaiian  men,  Wilfred  Pulawa  and  Alvin  Kaohu,  who  were  entered  in  the  “Black 
Book.  ”  Several  people  applying  for  a  junketeer  license  in  Hawaii  were  denied  a  license  because  of  their 
alleged  association  with  Pulawa  and  Kauhu.  In  later  years,  did  this  action  cause  more  stringent 
investigations  into  Hawaiian  junket  applicants  than  perhaps  from  other  areas? 

Wilfred  Pulawa  and  Alvin  Kaohu  were  alleged  to  be  members  of  a  Hawaiian  organized  crime 
group,  and  they  had  very  poor  reputations  with  the  police  agencies  in  Hawaii  and  with  the  federal  agency 
in  Hawaii.  The  Gaming  Control  Board,  in  looking  at  these  people,  determined  that  they  were,  in  fact,  not 
the  kind  of  people  we  would  want  in  Las  Vegas  connected  with  our  casinos.  Hawaii  became  a  difficult 
area  for  the  Control  Board  to  work,  because  the  culture  was  somewhat  different.  Oftentimes  there  was  a 
language  problem,  and  1  think  we  always  felt  somewhat  uncomfortable  about  who  was  bringing  people 
over  from  Hawaii,  and  at  one  point  in  time,  there  was  a  significant  number  of  people  coming  over  from 
Hawaii.  Sam  Boyd  was  a  partner  in  the  Union  Plaza,  and  Sam  did  an  awful  lot  of  pioneering  as  far  as 
bringing  Hawaiian  groups  in.  And  later  on  when  Sam  and  his  son  Bill  bought  additional  casinos,  that 
Hawaiian  business  became  a  very  strong  part  of  their  whole  marketing  effort. 

In  these  junkets,  did  people  ever  bring  over  a  lot  of  cash  that  was  perhaps  illegally  gained? 

Well,  you  never  knew  how  they  got  their  cash.  We  did  get  lists  of  the  people  coming  in,  and,  in 
fact,  the  sheriff  of  Clark  County  on  a  couple  of  occasions  met  people  coming  in  on  junkets  at  the  airport 
and  turned  them  back.  Some  of  these  people  coming  in  were  people  of  very  good  reputations,  but  you 
never  know  when  someone  is  carrying  cash  how  it  was  generated. 

Some  of  the  junketeers  that  were  operating  in  Las  Vegas  at  the  time  were  quite  well  known,  such  as 
Hymie  Lazar  and  Julie  Weintraub.  Did  you  ever  come  in  contact  with  any  of  those  people? 

Oh,  yes.  1  knew  and  ran  into  Hymie  Lazar  quite  often.  What  1  remember  about  him  is  that  he  was 
looked  upon  by  the  state  as  not  a  really  good  person  to  be  involved  with.  Julie  Weintraub  primarily 
worked  for  the  Dunes.  I  think  in  later  years  he  moved  to  another  property.  But  if  my  memory  serves  me 
right,  Julie  Weintraub  was  originally  in  the  jewelry  business,  and  in  the  early  years  of  the  junket  business 
he  became  the  largest  producer  and  the  most  well-known  of  all  of  the  junket  organizers.  He  brought  a  lot 
of  people  and  a  lot  of  money  into  Las  Vegas. 


Let’s  talk  about  the  Tropicana  in  1971  and  a  gentleman  named  Deil  Gustafson. 

Deil  Gustafson  came  to  our  attention  in  1 97 1 .  He  was  a  banker  in  Minneapolis,  and  he  apparently 
was  quite  successful  and  well  known  in  that  area.  And,  of  course,  being  a  banker,  one  always  thinks  of 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


267 


him  as  being  a  pillar  of  the  community.  And  he  was  at  that  time  a  good  business  person,  apparently,  with 
no  problems  in  his  background.  He  grew  up  on  a  farm  in  Iowa.  He  had  a  master’s  degree  from  the 
University  of  North  Dakota  and  a  law  degree  from  St.  Paul,  Minnesota.  He  taught  economics  at  the 
University  of  Minnesota  and  was  involved  in  Hubert  Humphrey’s  1960  presidential  campaign.  From 
there  he  went  into  business,  and  the  Wall  Street  Journal  estimated  his  net  worth  between  twenty  and 
thirty  million  dollars  about  the  time  he  applied  for  a  license  in  Nevada. 

So  he  looked  like  a  very  good  candidate  to  own  a  casino  in  Nevada — good  background. 

Indeed  he  did,  although  the  Tropicana  at  that  point  was  somewhat  run-down  at  the  heels  and  in 
need  of  a  lot  of  capital  expenditure  to  bring  it  up-to-date.  It  had  not  been  well  run,  had  not  been  making 
money,  and  after  Deil  took  it  over,  it  continued  to  not  do  well.  He  was  soon  experiencing  a  cash  flow 
problem,  and  onto  the  scene  came  a  woman  by  the  name  of  Mitzi  Stauffer  Briggs,  who  was  an  heir  to  the 
Stauffer  Chemical  fortune.  Stauffer,  of  course,  had  operated  a  huge  plant  in  Henderson,  Nevada,  during 
World  War  11.  Mitzi  Briggs  was  probably  in  her  late  forties,  early  fifties.  She’d  been  married.  1  think  at 
that  point  in  time  she  was  divorced.  She  had  one  or  two  children,  and  she  did  have  money.  Somehow,  she 
had  been  made  aware  of  this  opportunity  to  buy  into  the  Tropicana,  and  she  was  very,  very  enthused  by 
that  opportunity;  she  really  wanted  to  be  a  part  of  it.  She  always  referred  to  the  Tropicana  as  the  “Tiffany” 
of  the  Strip,  and  it  was,  at  least  in  my  view,  far  from  that.  But  Mitzi  got  involved.  She  was  not  a  person 
who  brought  any  history  of  business  acumen  to  the  operation.  She  was,  in  my  mind,  quite  naive,  and  the 
property  continued  to  slide  downhill. 

1  think  out  of  the  business  difficulties  they  had,  they  began — which  is  not  uncommon — to  bring  in 
people  of  dubious  quality,  all  in  the  hope  that  their  business  fortunes  could  be  turned  around.  And 
ultimately,  they  brought  in  a  man  by  the  name  of  Joe  Agosto,  and  Joe  Agosto  had  a  lot  of  problematic 
history,  so  the  Gaming  Control  Board  did  a  lot  of  investigations  on  Mr.  Agosto.  And  ultimately,  if  my 
memory  serves  me  right,  Joe  was  denied,  although  there  was  still  a  feeling  that  he  may  have  been 
involved  in  making  very  significant  business  decisions  for  the  whole  of  the  company,  although  he  was 
only  leasing  the  showroom,  and  his  role  was  to  be  only  in  the  production  of  entertainment.  The  Control 
Board  continued  to  take  issue  with  that  position  and  believed  that  Mr.  Agosto  was  doing  more.  This 
whole  affair  was  still  ongoing  when  1  left  the  Control  Board,  but  I  found  it  interesting  that  after  1  left  the 
Control  Board,  Mr.  Agosto  took  out  a  full-page  ad  in  one  of  the  Las  Vegas  papers — it  must  have  been  the 
Sun — to  attack  me  personally,  because  I  had  refused  to  license  him  [laughter].  He  was  quite  irate. 

And  he  blamed  you  personally? 

Oh,  yes.  1  was  the  thorn  in  his  side. 

Were  Agosto  and  Mrs.  Briggs  eventually  forced  out  of  the  Tropicana? 

Well,  this  was  after  I  left,  but,  yes,  Gustafson  went  to  prison,  and  Mitzi  Briggs  lost  most  of  her 
fortune.  And  actually,  she  had  to  go  back  to  work.  The  last  thing  1  heard  of  her  she  was  working  as  a  clerk 
in  a  jewelry  store.  And  Agosto  and  some  of  his  minions  were  forced  out  of  gaming.  1  thought  it  was  an 
extremely  sad  situation,  because  you  took  people  such  as  Briggs  and  Gustafson,  who  had,  prior  to  getting 
involved  with  the  Tropicana,  been  very  successful.  Then  after  coming  into  a  business  that  they  did  not 


268 


understand  or  know  how  to  work  with,  they  both  not  only  lost  their  money,  but  they  lost  their  reputations. 
1  always  felt  very  sad,  especially  about  Mitzi  Briggs,  because  1  thought  it  was  such  a  personal  tragedy  that 
this  woman  would  lose  so  much  in  a  venture  in  which  she  was  so  enamored.  A  very  sad  chapter. 

She  must  have  felt  that  running  a  gambling  casino  and  making  money  was  a  very  easy  thing  to  do. 

Well,  she  was  naive.  So  many  people  don’t  understand  that  this  is  a  very  complex  business,  cash 
intensive;  there’s  a  constant  need  for  new  capital  expense.  Operating  a  fairly  large  casino  is  like  running  a 
small  city:  you  have  an  enormous  payroll,  you  have  a  huge  tax  burden,  and  your  utility  bills  are  a  king’s 
ransom  each  month.  It’s  a  very,  very  difficult  undertaking,  and  if  people  don’t  understand  how  to  market 
such  a  business  it  becomes,  for  so  many,  a  serious  failure.  We  see  that  throughout  the  gaming  history  of 
Nevada,  the  places  that  start  and  go  broke,  start  again  and  go  broke.  There  used  to  be  a  saying  in  the 
business  many,  many  years  ago  that  the  third  bankroll  would  be  the  successful  one.  [laughter]  So  it’s  not 
an  easy  business,  and  we  see  it  even  today.  We’re  apparently  about  to  see  the  bankruptcy  of  the  Aladdin 
now  after  it’s  been  refurbished  at  an  enormous  cost.  Apparently,  it’s  about  to  go  into  receivership.  So  the 
game  goes  on. 


Allen  Click  and  Frank  “Lefty  ”  Rosenthal  were  two  people  who  were  frequently  in  the  news  when  you 
were  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  and  even  long  after  you  had  resigned  from  the  board.  Would  you  tell 
us  about  Allen  Glick  and  how  he  got  his  start  in  Las  Vegas? 

Allen  Glick,  if  1  remember  correctly,  got  a  law  degree  at  Western  Reserve  University  in 
Cleveland,  and  then  went  into  the  service,  was  married  when  he  got  out  of  the  service,  and  had  one  child. 
He  was  working  for  a  title  company  in  Cleveland  when  he  became  acquainted  with  a  developer  through 
his  work  at  the  title  company,  and  that  gentleman  ultimately  offered  him  a  job  in  San  Diego.  His  name 
was  Dennis  Whitman.  Dennis  Whitman  asked  Glick  to  move  to  San  Diego  and  become  part  of  his 
development  company  there,  called  Saratoga  Development,  which  Glick  did.  He  apparently  had  an 
arrangement  with  Whitman  to  the  effect  that  if  the  company  did  well,  and  Glick  was  a  big  part  of  that 
success,  he  would  acquire  from  Whitman  a  large  stake  in  that  development  company.  And  all  of  that 
came  to  pass. 

About  that  time,  the  Hacienda  Hotel  in  Las  Vegas  came  up  for  sale.  It  was  an  older,  run-down 
property.  It  had  been  through  a  business  rearrangement  and  there  was  public  stock  available.  Judy  Bayley 
was  the  primary  shareholder  at  the  time  by  way  of  an  inheritance  from  her  husband,  Warren.  She  was 
getting  along  in  years,  and  the  place  was  up  for  sale  at  a  pretty  attractive  price.  At  any  rate,  Glick  comes 
along  and  makes  arrangements  to  purchase  the  Hacienda.  He  borrowed  money  for  the  down  payment 
from  Saratoga  Development.  As  we  got  into  the  investigation  of  Glick  and  the  source  of  his  money,  we 
found  out  that  Mr.  Whitman  had  given  Glick  45  percent  of  Saratoga  Development,  which  had  a  valuation 
of  some  two  million  dollars.  Now,  a  lot  of  that  was  in  land,  and  those  valuations  may  have  been  suspect, 
but  the  economy  at  that  time  was  in  one  of  these  real  estate  bubbles  and  everybody  thought  that  land  and 
real  estate  values  in  southern  California  would  always  go  up,  up,  up.  So  Glick  was  able  to  leverage  his  45 
percent  share  into  enough  cash  to  make  the  down  payment  on  the  Hacienda.  As  we  looked  at  that,  we 
went  back  to  Whitman  to  ask  him  why.  This  was  kind  of  an  interesting  thing  to  me.  You  go  out  and  you 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


269 


hire  a  young  attorney  in  Cleveland,  you  bring  him  to  San  Diego,  and  then  a  couple  of  years  later,  you  turn 
around  and  give  him  just  a  little  less  than  half  of  your  company — of  your  company.  Now,  why  in  the 
world  would  you  do  that? 

Mr.  Whitman,  who  seemed  to  be  simply  a  land  developer,  a  reasonable,  intelligent  businessman, 
simply  said,  “Well,  it  was  mine  to  give  away,  he  was  valuable  to  me  and  I  wanted  him  as  a  partner.”  Well, 
that  was  kind  of  a  crucial  point  to  us  in  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  because  other  than  that,  Mr.  Glick  did 
not  have  any  money.  So  to  buy  a  casino  on  the  Las  Vegas  Strip — and  the  only  way  he’s  going  to  finance 
this  is  by  the  use  of  an  interest  in  the  company  that  he  achieved  through  a  gift — didn’t  seem  wrong,  but  it 
seemed  a  bit  unusual,  perhaps  a  little  suspicious.  At  any  rate,  it  was  so  much  a  question  in  our  minds  that 
Pete  Echeverria,  who  was  the  chairman  of  the  gaming  commission  at  the  time,  and  I  traveled  together  to 
San  Diego  to  talk  to  Mr.  Whitman.  And  we  had  a  lengthy  conversation.  It  went  on  for,  I  think,  over  an 
hour.  And  Pete  Echeverria,  as  many  people  in  the  state  will  remember,  was  a  very  accomplished  trial 
attorney,  and  very  charming  at  the  same  time.  Pete  put  on  a  stellar  performance  while  at  the  same  time, 
interrogating  Mr.  Whitman  as  to  why  he  would  be  so  generous  to  Mr.  Glick  as  to  give  him  nearly  half  of 
his  company.  Finally,  Mr.  Whitman  became  so  frustrated  with  our  refusal  to  accept  his  answer,  he 
reached  out  and  picked  up  a  regular  pencil,  a  carbon,  wooden  pencil,  and  he  said,  “Look  at  this.”  He  said, 
“This  is  on  my  desk.  It’s  a  pencil.  It  belongs  to  me.”  And  he  broke  it  in  half,  and  he  threw  the  two  pieces 
away.  He  said,  “You  see,  that’s  my  pencil.  1  can  do  anything  1  want  with  my  pencil.  And  this  was  my 
company,  and  1  can  do  what  1  want  with  my  company!  1  gave  part  of  it  to  Glick.”  And  that’s  as  far  as  we 
ever  got  with  any  explanation  as  to  how  Glick  came  to  be  in  control  of  nearly  half  of  Saratoga  Land 
Development.  But  the  point  was,  Saratoga  was  a  very  legitimate  operation;  it  had  no  clouds  or  problems 
with  it.  So  there  we  are.  We  don’t  quite  know  how  this  came  to  be,  and  we’re  a  little  bit  wary  of  it,  but 
there’s  nothing  illegal  that’s  transpired,  nor  can  we  say  that  any  of  the  players  that  we  can  see  at  that 
moment  in  time  have  any  history  of  any  illegitimacy.  So  Mr.  Glick  is  licensed  at  the  Hacienda. 

That  was  the  beginning  of  a  fairly  short  career  in  the  industry,  but  he  grew  much  larger  than  the 
Hacienda,  because  he  then  got  involved  with  a  man  named  Todd  Derlachter.  Derlachter  had  been  hanging 
around  Las  Vegas  for  some  years,  and  he  knew  many  different  people  in  the  casino  business.  He  had 
some  connections  within  the  Recrion  Corporation,  which  at  that  point  in  time,  owned  the  Stardust  and  the 
Fremont  hotels,  the  Fremont  being  downtown  and  the  Stardust  on  the  Strip.  The  Stardust  had  formerly 
been  owned  by  Moe  Dalitz,  and  was  of  some  historical  note,  because  when  Howard  Hughes  bought  the 
Desert  Inn  from  Moe  Dalitz,  he  also  made  an  offer  to  buy  the  Stardust.  Then  the  federal  government  had 
stepped  in  and  said  the  Hughes  acquisition  of  the  Stardust  from  Dalitz  would  have  created  a  monopoly.  1 
don’t  think  that  ever  got  to  an  official  declaration,  but  it  was  an  informal  ruling,  if  you  will.  And  so  the 
Hughes  people  had  backed  off  from  the  acquisition  of  the  Stardust,  which  in  a  way  is  probably  too  bad, 
because  it  would  have  perhaps  alleviated  problems  that  developed  later  on  with  Recrion  et  al. 

When  Mr.  Glick  got  that  first  loan,  did  he  get  that  from  the  Teamsters? 

1  don’t  think  the  Hacienda  loan  was  a  loan  from  the  Teamsters.  But  as  he  got  into  Recrion,  which 
did  have  the  Stardust  and  the  Fremont,  he  then  apparently  got  involved  with  some  people  in  Recrion,  who 
in  turn  had  good  connections  with  people  in  the  Teamsters’  pension  fund.  And  in  particular,  Glick  met 
Delbert  Coleman.  Delbert  had  been  the  principal  shareholder  in  Recrion,  but  he  had  troubles  with  the 
SEC,  so  he  wasn’t  taking  an  active  part  in  the  company,  although  he  still  owned  a  lot  of  shares  in  the 
company.  He  apparently  introduced  Glick  to  a  man  named  Al  Baron.  Al  Baron  was  an  attorney.  1  believe 
his  home  was  in  Chicago,  and  he  was  the  asset  manager  for  the  Teamsters’  pension  fund.  Working  with 
Baron,  Glick  was  able  to  put  together  a  two-million-dollar  deposit.  He  borrowed  a  million  dollars  from 


270 


his  old  friend  Whitman  at  Saratoga  Land  Development,  and  then  using  that  million,  he  raised  another 
million  dollars  from  a  hank  in  Nashville.  So  now  he  had  two  million  dollars  and  he  used  that  money  to,  in 
effect,  put  a  binder  on  the  sale  of  Recrion,  and  it  was  really  kind  of  an  option.  If  he  hadn’t  been  able  to 
perform  the  balance  of  the  contract,  his  two  million  would  have  gone  to  Coleman. 

At  any  rate,  he  was  working  with  A1  Baron,  and  was  then  able  to  arrange  a  loan  from  the  pension 
fund.  Glick  had  already  borrowed  money  from  the  pension  fund  for  an  office  building  in  Texas,  and  I 
think  that  was  probably  a  logical  thing,  being  in  the  real  estate  development  business.  The  big  pension 
funds —  the  Caipenters,  the  Teamsters — were  always  looking  for  ways  to  employ  their  money  with  a 
good  return,  and  real  estate  was  one  of  the  ways  that  they  favored,  because  it  gave  them  some  tangible 
kind  of  collateral.  At  any  rate,  Glick,  apparently  being  already  a  customer,  if  you  will,  of  the  pension 
fund,  they  knew  him,  and  he’s  apparently  reliable  in  their  view,  so  they  loan  him  sixty-two  million  dollars 
for  the  acquisition  of  Recrion.  They  had  already  put  money  into  Recrion  prior  to  this.  They  had  ten  to 
twelve  or  fourteen  million  dollars  already  invested  in  Recrion,  and  that  was  going  bad,  so  the  loans 
weren’t  very  good.  When  they  loaned  the  sixty-two  million  dollars  to  Glick  you  could  look  at  it  from  their 
point  of  view  and  say,  “Well,  we’re  going  to  get  an  operator  in  there  that  we  trust  more  than  the  current 
operators,  because  we’ve  got  some  money  in  there  that  we  think  is  at  risk.”  So  they  lend  him  the  sixty- 
two  [million  dollars],  and  within  a  few  months,  they  refinance  the  whole  thing  to  incorporate  the  prior 
loan  they  had  in  there.  1  think  the  total  came  up  to  about  seventy-five  million  dollars  at  that  point. 

Was  there  another  extensive  financial  investigation  of  Glick  then,  and  had  he  formed  the  Argent 
Corporation  at  that  time? 

Well,  it  was  for  this  purchase  to  take  Recrion  out  of  the  picture  that  he  formed  Argent.  The  name 
“Argent”  was  an  acronym  for  A.  R.  Glick  Enterprises.  Argent  was  the  Glick  vehicle  to  take  over  Recrion, 
and  it  incorporated  the  Hacienda  ultimately.  Later  he  built  the  Marina  on  the  Strip,  which  was  right  across 
the  street  from  the  Tropicana.  ft  was  on  the  Strip  at  the  comer  of  Las  Vegas  Boulevard  and  Tropicana 
Avenue. 

Where  MGM  is  now? 

Exactly.  The  Marina  Hotel  ultimately  came  into  the  possession  of  Tom  Wiesner,  who  is  currently 
a  regent  for  the  University  of  Nevada.  Tom  was  a  businessman  in  Las  Vegas — still  is — and  he’d  served  as 
a  county  commissioner,  and  1  think  he  also  served  a  term  in  the  legislature.  Tom  ultimately  came  into 
control  of  the  Marina,  and  he  then  sold  it  to  Kirk  Kerkorian.  Kirk  added  to  the  property  the  old  Tropicana 
golf  course,  and  all  of  that  has  now  become  what  we  now  see  as  the  MGM  Grand. 

Going  back  to  Glick,  he  had  the  Tropicana,  the  Fremont,  the  Hacienda,  and  the  Marina  in  Las 
Vegas.  So  all  of  a  sudden  he’s  got  quite  an  empire,  and  it  all  started  out  with  this  gift  from  Saratoga  Land 
Development.  But  also,  1  think  it  was  partly  because  the  Teamsters  were  involved.  About  a  year  after  this 
Recrion  purchase,  A1  Baron  was  indicted  for  taking  loan  kickbacks,  not  specifically  on  the  Recrion 
purchase,  but  in  his  capacity  as  the  asset  manager  for  the  pension  fund.  I  don’t  recall  if  A1  was  convicted 
of  that,  but  there  were  a  lot  of  people  hanging  around  the  pension  fund  in  those  days  that  were  not  the 
kind  of  people  you’d  really  like  involved  in  gaming  in  Nevada. 

I’ve  read  some  things  in  the  past  about  the  concern  of  the  federal  government  that  the  pension 
fund,  by  investing  in  Nevada,  was  putting  at  risk  the  retirement  funds  of  all  its  members.  But  I  think  the 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


271 


history  of  their  investments  in  Nevada  would  show  that  all  of  their  investments  turned  out  to  be  good,  and 
they  didn’t  lose  money  in  Nevada.  So  it  wasn’t  a  problem  for  the  members  that  their  pension  fund  was 
invested  in  Nevada;  it  was  really  the  involvement  in  Nevada  of  some  of  the  people  who  were  hanging 
around  the  Teamsters’  pension  fund,  [laughter] 

Well,  Glick  and  Argent  Corporation  eventually  borrowed  a  total  of  $162,000,000 from  the  Teamsters, 
and  in  1976,  Morris  Shenker  borrowed  $40,000,000.  And  over  the  years,  several  more  million  dollars 
were  loaned  to  casinos  by  the  teamsters.  Why  did  the  casinos  borrow  money  from  the  Teamsters  rather 
than  borrowing  from  other  lending  institutions? 

The  history  of  the  loans  from  the  pension  fund  go  back  to  a  time  prior  to  the  advent  of  publicly- 
traded  companies  in  Nevada.  The  local  hanks — primarily  the  First  National  Rank  and  then  later  Valley 
Bank  in  Las  Vegas — really  didn’t  have  the  capacity  to  make  the  size  loans  that  were  sometimes  required. 
That  was  number  one.  Number  two,  the  Gaming  Commission  had  for  many,  many  years  a  regulation — 
again,  this  is  before  public  companies — that  put  a  limit  on  the  number  of  individual  investors  who  could 
come  in  to  a  property.  That  number  was  fifty:  no  more  than  fifty  individuals  could  invest  in  a  hotel-casino 
unless  they  called  them  partners.  This  made  it  very  difficult  to  raise  the  kind  of  money  that  starting  out 
required.  As  the  business  started  to  evolve  and  these  hotel-casinos  became  bigger  and  more  grand,  they 
also  became  more  expensive,  and  there  just  wasn’t  a  source,  at  that  point,  for  that  kind  of  money.  So  it 
was  only  the  Teamsters  and  a  couple  of  others  that  were  involved.  The  Carpenters’  fund  was  one  that 
comes  to  mind,  but  there  were  other  pension  funds  that  became  involved  in  the  financing  of  Nevada 
casinos.  Again,  1  reiterate,  my  view  is  not  that  the  casinos  represented  a  threat  to  these  various  pension 
funds,  but  in  the  case  of  the  Teamsters’  pension  fund,  it  was  the  Teamsters  and  the  people  affiliated  with 
the  Teamsters’  pension  fund  who  represented  a  threat  to  Nevada.  1  think  there’s  a  dichotomy  there:  1 
think,  one,  my  view  is  a  state  view,  and  the  view  that  Nevada  casinos  were  a  threat  to  the  pension  fund 
was  a  federal  view.  And  obviously,  the  federal  people  and  the  state  people  have  very  seldom  agreed  on 
the  gaming  industry  in  Nevada,  [laughter] 

When  did  the  practice  of  borrowing  from  the  Teamsters  start  to  change? 

It  primarily  started  to  change  when  public  companies  were  permitted,  because  that  opened  up  a 
whole  different  door.  But  again,  to  get  financed  through  a  public  issuance  approval  by  the  SEC,  and  even 
more  approvals  by  the  various  stock  exchanges,  was  a  difficult  proposition.  Sometimes  it  was  just  easier 
to  go  to  the  Teamsters’  pension  fund,  especially  if  the  individuals  applying  knew  people  within  the 
pension  fund.  And  as  1  said,  with  Glick,  his  entree  to  the  pension  fund  was  through  Delbert  Coleman  and 
A1  Baron,  who  were  well  connected  within  the  fund.  And,  as  you  mentioned,  Morris  Shenker  had  been  a 
personal  attorney  for  James  Hoffa  for  years,  so  obviously,  Morris  had  good  connections  within  the 
hierarchy  of  the  Teamsters  union  and  their  pension  fund.  So  again,  it  was  people  who  knew  the  pension 
fund  and  the  power  structure  that  would  approve  those  loans.  Anyway,  that’s  how  Glick  got  his  money;  it 
was  through  the  pension  fund. 

In  time,  Valley  Bank,  under  Parry  Thomas,  became  the  primary  banking  source  within  the  state  of 
Nevada.  Parry  did  that  by  putting  together  groups  of  banks,  and  Valley  Bank  would  become,  in  essence, 
the  lead  bank,  but  it  would  put  together  three,  four,  five  other  banks  to  put  together  a  pool  of  money  to 
finance  the  casino  business.  Parry  Thomas  enabled  great,  great  growth  to  take  place  in  Las  Vegas  through 


272 


that  mechanism.  Parry  Thomas  was  enormously  influential.  Everybody  thinks  of  casino  people  as  being 
powerful.  1  think  Parry  Thomas  may  have  been  the  most  powerful  man  in  the  state  for  a  long  time. 

In  1975  Frank  “Lefty”  Rosenthal  was  named  one  of  the  Stardust’s  top  executives.  Would  you  give  us 
Rosenthal’s  background? 

When  we  first  became  aware  of  him,  his  history  was  that  of  an  oddsmaker,  a  bookmaker,  and  he 
was  doing  a  lot  of  it  as  a  street  bookie,  or  as  we  called  them,  hip-pocket  bookies.  He  was  doing  it  on  an 
individual  basis  for  his  own  account  in  Las  Vegas,  and  he  was  quite  well  known.  Lefty,  as  I  came  to  know 
him,  was  one  of  the  premier  oddsmakers  for  football,  and  he  was  awfully,  awfully  good  at  doing  that. 

Jerry  Zarowitz,  who  was  working  at  Caesars  Palace,  was  probably  the  best  in  the  business  for  baseball 
oddsmaking,  but  certainly  Lefty  was  one  of  the  better  ones  in  football.  There  were  several  others  around 
town  working  for  some  of  the  smaller  books  that  weren’t  as  good.  Lefty  was  known  as  a  bookmaker- 
oddsmaker  primarily,  but  he  also  was  one  of  these  guys  who  knew  gamblers  from  all  around  the  country. 
We  didn’t  know  it  in  the  beginning,  but  he  had  a  very  spotted  history.  He’d  been  accused  of  bribing  a 
basketball  player  from  New  York  University  to  throw  a  game,  and  he  was  convicted  in  absentia  in 
Monaco  of  a  theft. 

When  we  first  saw  him  there  at  the  Stardust,  he  had  just  shown  up  and  he’s  got  a  very  important 
position.  The  Gaming  Control  Board  challenged  his  work  permit,  and  the  issue  went  to  court,  and  the 
state  lost  it.  We  had  pulled  his  work  permit,  and  the  court  said  we  couldn’t.  For  the  kind  of  job  he  was 
holding,  we  didn’t  have  enough  history  to  empower  us  to  keep  him  from  his  work  card.  So  he  continued 
to  work,  and  we  continued  to  complain  about  it.  Then  we  talked  to  the  people  at  Argent  about  it 
[laughter].  And  ultimately,  they  told  us  that  his  new  position  was  outside  the  scope  of  gaming;  that  he  was 
now  going  to  be  the  director  of  entertainment.  But  the  funny  thing  about  it  is,  every  time  1  went  into  the 
Stardust,  I’d  see  him  in  the  pit  [laughter].  So  we  continued  to  complain,  and  at  the  same  time  we  were 
complaining,  1  was  taking  it  upon  myself  to  try  to  know  this  man  a  little  better — who  he  was  and  what  he 
was  about.  And  ultimately,  as  I  said,  1  became  very  much  aware  of  his  expertise  in  bookmaking.  And  an 
awful  lot  of  what  1  learned  from  him  about  bookmaking  as  it  was  operated  in  Las  Vegas  in  those  days, 
formed  the  basis  for  my  determination  to  bring  the  various  small  books  into  the  bigger  casinos  so  that 
they  were  operated  by  the  casinos  with  a  greater  risk  to  them  should  they  do  something  wrong,  than  the 
way  they  were  out  on  the  little,  small  hole-in-the-wall  operations  along  the  street. 

So  at  this  time  no  major  casinos  had  sportsbooks  in  them? 

No.  The  one  that  came  closest,  if  you  remember,  was  Harrah’s  at  Lake  Tahoe.  And  Harrah’s  ran 
it  in  a  separate  building  [laughter]  on  the  west  edge  of  its  hotel-casino,  a  small,  little  race  and  sportsbook. 
It  was  not  connected  to  the  Harrah’s  hotel-casino;  it  was  a  separate  building,  and  it  was  right  on  the  state 
line,  [laughter]  That  was  the  closest  any  of  them  came  to  being  connected  to  a  casino. 

But  again,  through  me,  all  of  us  were  learning  about  the  bookmaking  business.  It  had  in  the  past, 
and  it  had  the  potential  in  the  future,  to  bring  a  real  disgrace  to  the  state,  the  way  it  was  being  operated.  So 
we  determined  we  would  bring  it  inside,  where  if  they  fooled  with  the  bookmaking  or  the  oddsmaking, 
they  would  be  putting  more  than  a  little  hole-in-the-wall  operation  at  risk;  the  whole  casino  license  would 
be  at  risk.  And  that’s  ultimately  how  it  happened,  1  think  for  the  better — ultimately  for  the  whole  industry 
-because  that  became  in  itself  an  enormous  profit  maker;  it  became  a  feature  in  every  big  hotel-casino, 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


273 


and  it  was  a  marketing  advantage  to  have  a  big  horse  and  racebook. 

Did  Frank  Rosenthal’s  actions  lead  to  major  casinos  being  licensed  for  sportsbooks? 

Yes;  in  my  mind,  they  did,  because  the  information  he  gave  to  me  encouraged  me  to  try  to 
convince  my  colleagues  on  the  Board,  and  ultimately  the  Commission,  to  get  this  business  into  the 
casinos. 

In  1975,  the  Gaming  Board  demanded  that  Rosenthal  be  licensed  as  a  key  employee.  What  was  the  result 
of  the  investigation  into  Rosenthal’s  background? 

Well,  of  great  concern  were  not  only  his  associates,  but  as  1  said  earlier,  we  found  out  that  he  had 
been  accused  of  bribing  a  New  York  University  ballplayer,  and  we  had  found  that  he  was  convicted  in 
absentia  in  Europe  for  a  theft.  And  he  was  associated  with  Tony  Spilotro,  who  was  a  well-known  street 
hoodlum  in  Las  Vegas,  long  alleged  to  be  a  member  of  organized  crime.  Ultimately,  Tony  and  one  of  his 
brothers  were  beaten  to  death  and  buried  in  a  com  field  in  Indiana.  But  just  to  take  a  side  bar  for  a 
moment,  the  Control  Board  had  come  across  Tony  Spilotro  at  the  time  that  Bill  Bennett  and  Bill 
Pennington  purchased  Circus  Circus  from  Jay  Samo.  We  found  that  the  gift  shop  at  Circus  Circus  was 
being  leased  to  Spilotro,  and  if  my  memory  serves  me  right,  he  was  using  a  different  name,  but  ultimately 
that  phony  name  was  Tony  Spilotro.  As  this  change  of  ownership  was  taking  place,  we  said  to  Pennington 
and  Bennett — and  Herb  Jones  was  their  attorney,  if  I  remember — “We’re  not  going  to  approve  this 
purchase  agreement,  unless  you  get  this  Tony  Spilotro  out  of  here.  You  got  to  get  him  out  of  here.”  Well, 
in  effect,  we  gave  Tony  Spilotro  a  present,  because  he  could  then  leverage  them  to  get  a  better  price  for 
the  sale  of  his  lease.  We  didn’t  want  him  in  there.  And,  of  course,  they  screamed  and  screamed  about  that, 
but  we  insisted,  and  so  they  had  to  purchase  his  interest.  So  Spilotro  was  out  of  Circus  Circus  when 
Pennington  and  Bennett  acquired  it.  But  again,  he  was  a  street  hoodlum,  and  he  was  in  the  business  of 
lending  money  for  atrocious  interest  rates,  and  everybody  was  pretty  sure  he  was  involved  with  some 
large  robberies  and  thefts  that  took  place  in  Las  Vegas.  His  history  in  Las  Vegas  is  quite  well 
documented,  but  he  was  a  bad  guy.  There  was  no  question  he  was  a  bad  guy.  And  Rosenthal  knew  him 
quite  well. 

Was  Rosenthal  denied  a  key-employee  license? 

When  we  finally  got  him  up  there  for  licensing  as  a  key  employee,  we  did  get  him  denied. 

Did  he  appeal  that  decision? 

Y es,  he  did  appeal  it,  and  that  appeal  went  to  state  district  court — Judge  Joe  Pavlikowski.  And 
Joe  Pavlikowski  issued,  in  my  mind,  a  spurious  opinion,  which  said  in  effect  that  we  had  to  license  him. 

Who  was  Rosenthal’s  attorney? 


[Oscar]  Goodman  was  his  attorney. 


274 


The  same  Oscar  Goodman  that’s  currently  the  mayor  of  Las  Vegas? 

Yes,  indeed,  the  same  Oscar  Goodman. 

Did  he  defend  or  represent  a  lot  of  applicants  during  your  tenure? 

Yes,  but  Oscar  always  was  on  the  wrong  side.  It  seemed  that  the  bad  guys  would  always  go  to 
Oscar  for  representation.  And  he  did  not  have  much  luck  with  the  Gaming  Control  Board  or  the  Gaming 
Commission  in  terms  of  getting  people  licensed. 

So  when  Mr.  Rosenthal  was  denied  a  key-employee  license,  he  appealed  to  the  district  court? 

Yes,  the  state  district  court.  And,  as  1  said,  the  state  district  court  under  Pavlokowski  said  we  had 
to  license  him.  Well,  we  at  the  state  level  then  appealed  Pavlokowski’ s  ruling  to  the  state  supreme  court, 
and  Pavlokowski  was  overturned.  Rosenthal  then  appealed  the  Nevada  state  supreme  court  decision  to  the 
federal  supreme  court,  and  they  would  not  hear  him.  They  refused  to  hear  his  argument. 

Was  it  later  discovered  that  there  was  a  possible  conflict  of  interest  in  Judge  Pavlokowski ’s  ruling? 

Well,  it  turned  out  that  Rosenthal  had  paid,  in  whole  or  in  part,  for  a  rather  large  reception  for 
Pavlokowski’s  daughter’s  wedding,  so  there  was  an  obvious  conflict  of  interest  going  on.  Most 
importantly,  his  decision,  which  1  think  was  not  well  thought  out  at  all,  was  overturned. 

About  a  year  later,  in  1976,  the  audit  division,  headed  by  Dennis  Gomes,  discovered  evidence  of 
skimming  in  the  slot  count  room.  Was  Rosenthal  still  working  for  the  Argent  Corporation  as  an 
entertainment  director  at  that  time? 

No,  he  wasn’t  working  there  then,  but  we  always  believed  that  he  had  set  it  up.  It  was  a  large- 
scale  skim  from  the  slot  machine  winnings,  and  it  was  extraordinarily  clever.  There  was  a  man  running 
the  slot  operation  at  the  time  by  the  name  of  George  Vandermark,  and  if  1  recall  correctly,  Vandermark 
had  been  brought  into  Argent  by  Rosenthal.  Vandermark  had  a  history  as  a  slot  thief,  and  apparently  a 
good  one.  But,  at  any  rate,  this  is  what  they  did  in  the  count  room.  The  slot  count  room  is  a  very  secure 
room,  and  people  go  into  it  wearing  a  pair  of  coveralls  with  no  pockets — no  way  to  smuggle  things  in  or 
out  of  the  room — and  in  that  room  there  are  big  scales  to  weigh  the  coin.  The  coin  was  not  counted  coin 
by  coin,  but  it  was  weighed  on  scales.  And  what  they  did  was  to  tinker  with  the  calibration  of  the  scales 
so  that  it  underreported  the  amount  of  money  being  weighed.  For  example,  if  you  weighed  out  ten 
thousand  dollars  in  silver  dollars,  there  might  actually  be  twelve  thousand  dollars.  Well,  now  you  have 
money  that’s  unaccounted  for,  that’s  over  and  above  what  your  accounting  records  will  detail.  The 
problem  then  becomes  how  do  you  get  that  money — which  is  coin,  and  bulky  and  heavy — out  of  that  coin 
room?  Well,  if  you  tried  to  put  it  in  your  boot,  you  couldn’t  walk.  There’s  just  no  way  to  get  it  out  of 
there  undetected. 

Well,  this  was  where  it  got  very  clever.  Out  on  the  casino  floor  in  sight  of  everyone  was  a  large 
locked  cabinet,  and  the  cabinet  was  divided  into  two  parts.  In  the  one  part,  if  you  opened  it  up — it  was 
locked — you  would  see  all  kinds  of  coin  wrapped  and  rolled.  Quarters,  dollars,  nickels,  dimes.  And  this  is 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


275 


where  the  slot  attendants  would  go  when  they  needed  more  coins.  Those  who  have  been  in  a  casino  will 
remember  seeing  a  slot  attendant  walking  around  the  casino  with  an  apron  full  of  coin,  or  sometimes  in 
more  recent  years  with  little  carts  filled  with  wrapped  coin.  Customers  who  have  a  hundred-dollar  bill  and 
want  to  buy  three  or  four  rolls  of  quarters  go  to  these  attendants,  hand  them  the  hundred-dollar  bill  and  get 
back  coins.  When  the  attendants  ran  out  of  coin,  they  go  to  this  cabinet,  take  the  currency,  which  had  now 
accumulated  in  their  apron  and  for  which  they  were  accountable — because  the  amount  of  coin  they  started 
out  with  was  known,  and  at  the  end  of  the  day  the  amount  of  currency  that  they  had  or  the  receipts  for 
currency  had  to  balance  the  amount  of  coin  that  they  had.  The  attendant  would  put  the  currency  into  a 
small  drop,  like  a  letter  drop,  on  the  one  side  of  this  cabinet — independently  locked — from  the  coin  side. 
Having  deposited  the  currency,  the  attendant  would  open  the  coin  side  and  take  an  equal  amount  of  coin 
out  and  go  about  her  business. 

Well,  what  was  going  on,  then,  was  that  that  coin  in  the  coin  side,  keep  in  mind,  was  now  two 
thousand  dollars  more  than  what  the  accounting  record  showed.  And  so  ultimately,  over  on  the  currency 
side,  there  would  be  two  thousand  dollars  more  in  currency  than  the  accountants  would  expect  to  be  in 
there.  And  along  would  come  Mr.  Vandermark,  or  one  of  his  minions,  open  the  currency  side,  take  out  the 
currency,  deduct  the  two  thousand  dollars  overage  from  the  scales,  and  go  blithely  about  their  way  now 
with  something  that  could  be  easily  hidden  and  easily  transported.  In  our  judgment,  we  believe  this 
scheme  went  on  for  well  over  a  year,  and  very  significant  amounts  of  money  were  stolen  from  the  slot 
operation  at  the  Stardust  by  that  means. 

And  it  could  have  been  even  more  widespread  than  the  Stardust.  My  memory  is  we  only  really 
got  it  nailed  down  at  the  Stardust,  but  if  I  remember  correctly,  they  were  transporting  coin  from  other 
Glick  operations,  the  Marina  and  the  Hacienda,  up  to  the  Stardust  to  count.  1  don’t  think  they  were  doing 
this  at  the  Fremont,  but  they  were  doing  it  from  the  others.  So  it  may  have  been  even  more  widespread 
than  the  amounts  we  knew  about  at  the  Stardust. 

Was  there  something  that  drew  attention  to  this,  or  did  it  just  come  up  in  a  routine  audit? 

Well,  again,  everything  that  was  going  on  at  the  Stardust  had  all  of  us  at  the  Gaming  Control 
Board — I  use  the  term  “paranoid,”  but  with  the  definition  that  I’ve  always  kind  of  humorously  looked  at: 
if  a  person  says  you’re  paranoid  and  they  are  right,  then  you  are  sick;  but  if  they  are  wrong,  then  you  are 
perceptive.  And  so  [laughter]  we  were  paranoid  about  the  Stardust  and  the  operations  there,  so  we  spent  a 
lot  of  time  there,  and  we  had  undercover  people  watching  the  slot  play  and  watching  the  operation.  We 
did  not  originally  know  of  this  cabinet  and  how  it  was  functioning.  But  there  was  a  minor  event  that  took 
place  on  the  slot  floor  that  alerted  us.  It  was  an  act  of  collusion  between  an  off-duty  change  attendant, 
where  there  was  a  jackpot  claimed  that  had  not  truly  been  hit  that  got  us  into  looking  at  the  operation  in 
the  count  room.  On  a  couple  of  surprise  audits  we  popped  in  there  and  calibrated  the  scale,  and  the  scale 
was  off  both  times.  So  we  knew  there  was  something  really  goofy  going  on  in  that  operation,  and  that’s 
when  we  finally  really  put  the  pressure  on  and  it  kind  of  fell  together. 

Did  they  have  a  slot  drop  every  day? 

Oh,  yes. 


So  they  were  taking  out  x-amount  of  dollars  at  least  once  a  day  every  day. 


276 


Yes. 

Was  it  ever  determined  where  the  money  was  actually  going? 

No.  Interestingly  enough,  Vandermark,  who  was  a  key  player  in  this,  when  it  became  obvious 
that  we  knew  what  was  going  on,  he  left.  We  finally  tracked  him  into  Mexico,  and  then  Vandermark  died 
in  Mexico.  He  had  been  murdered  in  Mexico.  So  that  was  the  end  of  that  trail. 

Well,  that  just  makes  you  wonder  even  more,  doesn ’t  it? 

Oh,  absolutely,  [laughter]  They  were  afraid  he  would  name  somebody. 

To  go  forward,  after  I  left  the  Board,  probably  around  1979,  Lefty  Rosenthal  came  out  of  a 
restaurant  in  Las  Vegas  and  opened  his  car  door  and  the  car  blew  up.  He  was  probably  quite  fortunate  that 
he  hadn’t  actually  entered  the  car  when  it  exploded,  because  he  wasn’t  killed  or  seriously  hurt. 

Was  the  Stardust  still  owned  by  Click  when  the  skimming  operation  was  discovered? 

Yes. 

Was  it  ever  proven  that  Glick  was  actually  connected  to  the  skimming  operation? 

No,  it  wasn’t.  And,  of  course,  he  claimed  that  he  was  a  victim,  not  a  participant. 

Was  Glick  allowed  to  keep  his  gaming  license? 

Mr.  Glick,  in  1979,  was  called  in  front  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  for  revocation  of  his  license. 
I  had  left  the  Board,  and  Roger  Trounday  was  the  chairman.  They  didn’t  want  to  close  Glick’s  properties 
and  put  a  lot  of  people  out  of  work,  so  the  revocation  was  delayed  for  a  while,  giving  Glick  a  chance  to 
sell  the  properties  and  get  out.  However,  there  was  a  seven-hundred-thousand-dollar  fine  levied  against 
Glick’s  operation,  Argent  Corporation,  by  the  Gaming  Commission,  and  it  was  the  largest  fine  up  to  that 
time,  that  had  ever  been  imposed.  Ultimately,  Mr.  Glick  lost  his  gaming  license.  Later  the  federal 
government  brought  some  actions,  and  Mr.  Glick  became  a  very  important  witness  for  the  government 
and  set  forth  a  story  wherein  he  had  been  the  victim  of  essentially  an  extortion,  where  his  wife  and 
children  were  threatened  by  some  very,  very  bad  people,  unless  he  allowed  Mr.  Rosenthal  pretty  much 
free  rein  to  run  the  companies.  So  that  was  the  end  of  the  Glick  era  in  Nevada,  a  very  distasteful  period  of 
time  as  far  as  the  state  was  concerned. 

By  1979,  as  we  said ,  you  had  left  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  However,  Frank  Rosenthal  was  still  with 
the  Argent  Corporation,  and  he  again  was  ordered  to  be  licensed  as  a  key  employee.  1  realize  you  had  left 
the  board,  but  do  you  recall  if  he  was  eventually  licensed  or  if  he  was  forced  out  of  the  gaming  industry? 

Rosenthal  was  ultimately  forced  out  of  gaming  and  was  entered  into  the  “Black  Book”  in  1988. 1 
don’t  know  how  many  different  attorneys  he  had.  Oscar  Goodman,  the  now  mayor  of  Las  Vegas, 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


277 


represented  him  for  some  period  of  time.  Oscar  represented  a  lot  of  tough  clients  in  the  sense  of  people 
who  had  poor  reputations,  and  that’s  how  Oscar  made  his  reputation,  defending  clients  who  had  a  bad 
reputation  [laughter]. 

Do  you  know  what  Rosenthal  is  doing  now? 

1  have  no  idea.  If  1  were  going  to  guess,  I’d  guess  that  he’s  somewhere  in  Florida.  He  always 
liked  it  in  Florida,  or  seemed  to.  There  was  a  book  written  about  him  and  that  was  later  made  into  a 
movie.  1  didn’t  read  the  book  nor  see  the  movie,  so  1  can’t  comment  on  it.6 

To  go  back  in  years  a  little  bit,  in  late  1971,  a  group  of  investors  from  the  Midwest  purchased  the  Aladdin 
from  the  Recrion  Corporation.  Who  were  some  of  the  members  of  that  group? 

Well,  in  that  group  from  the  Midwest  there  were  the  Goldfarbs,  Chuckie  Goldfarb,  Irwin 
Goldfarb,  and  a  man  named  George  George.  The  Nevada  people  were  Sam  Diamond,  who  had  been 
previously  licensed  by  the  state,  and  Don  Aiken,  who  actually  had  worked  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board 
at  one  point.  Don  was  an  accountant.  And  then  there  were  Richard  Daley  and  Peter  Webbe.  Webbe  was  a 
bit  of  a  political  personage  in  Kansas  City,  1  believe.  And  ultimately,  during  the  investigation  we  came  up 
with  information  that  they  were  connected  to  some,  essentially,  criminal  organizations  or  criminal 
associations  in  their  home  areas.  A  number  of  them  were  denied  licensing.  And  when  they  were  denied 
licensing,  then  there  was  a  problem  of  there  not  being  enough  money  to  go  forward  on  the  purchase.  At 
that  point,  Sam  Diamond  came  forth  and  put  up  more  money  to  buy  out  the  interest  of  several  of  the 
denied  applicants.  One  of  those  was  George  George,  and  that  later  became  a  problem.  But,  at  any  rate, 
there  were  a  number  of  people  denied,  and  a  number  of  people  approved.  Diamond  being  one  of  the 
people  approved,  as  was  Don  Aiken.  So  they  acquired  the  Aladdin  and  operated  it  for  several  years.  Then 
in  1975,  the  Board  received  an  application  requesting  permission  for  Diamond  to  receive  an  OK  to  sell 
some  of  his  Aladdin  shares  to  Mae  Ellen  George,  who  was,  at  that  point,  the  widow  of  George  George, 
who  had  been  denied.  The  Gaming  Control  Board  did  not  approve  that  sale,  because,  well,  first  of  all,  she 
was  George  George’s  widow,  and  even  though  he  was  dead,  the  Board  was  not  comfortable  with  the  fact 
that  his  widow  now  is  going  to  come  back  and  take  the  position  that  he  had  been  denied.  And  also,  Mae 
Ellen  George  was  related  to  a  fellow  by  the  name  of  James  “Jim”  Tamer,  and  he  was  not  considered  to 
have  a  background  that  the  state  would  like,  in  terms  of  a  licensee. 

Mae  Ellen  George  was  later  approved  by  the  Gaming  Commission,  and  it  was  a  very  heated 
debate  that  led  up  to  that  approval.  But  at  any  rate,  she  was  licensed.  Then  at  a  later  date,  1  think  1979,  the 
state  closed  the  Aladdin  Hotel,  because  they  had  reason  to  believe  that  unsuitable  interests  were  involved. 
The  whole  issue  of  Mae  Ellen  George  and  James  Tamer  did  not  really  reflect  well  on  the  state  allowing 
her  to  be  licensed,  especially  since  her  relationship  with  Tamer  was  well  known  at  the  time  of  her 
licensing.  But  it  should  be  noted  that  James  Tamer  had  people  in  Nevada  who  were  willing  to  sing  his 
praises,  and  a  couple  of  prominent  ones  were  Jackie  Gaughan,  who  was  a  very,  very  prominent  casino 
owner  in  Las  Vegas,  and  Carl  Cohen,  who  had  been  an  investor,  a  licensee,  and  a  gaming  operator  on  the 
Las  Vegas  Strip  for  many,  many  years.  Carl  Cohen  also  had  gained  my  undying  admiration  because  he 


6Casino  by  Nicholas  Peleggi. 


278 


once  punched  out  Frank  Sinatra,  [laughter]  So,  at  any  rate,  Tamer  did  get  himself,  and  so  to  speak,  the 
camel’s  nose  into  the  tent  there  at  the  Aladdin  and  that  ultimately  forced  the  state  to  close  the  Aladdin. 

In  1974,  in  November,  Morris  Shenker,  who  was  the  sole  owner  of  the  IJK  Corporation,  applied  for 
licensing  of  the  Dunes  Hotel  and  Casino.  Would  you  give  us  a  little  background  on  Mr.  Shenker? 

Morris  Shenker  was  an  attorney,  primarily  in  St.  Louis,  Missouri,  for  years.  As  an  attorney,  he 
was  quite  prominent,  not  only  locally,  but  also  nationally,  and  he  was  well  known  for  being  Jimmy 
Floffa’s  attorney.  But  that  was,  I  think,  exaggerated  to  some  degree  by  the  press.  Jimmy  Floffa  had  a 
number  of  different  attorneys,  but  Shenker  was  certainly  one  of  them.  Shenker  was  an  immigrant  to  the 
United  States.  Fie  was  a  Russian  Jew.  Fie  told  me  he  had  left  Russia  in  the  wintertime  when  he  was  a  very 
young  boy,  and  he  did  that  because  the  rivers  were  frozen  and  he  could  walk  across  the  ice,  and  that’s 
how  he  got  out  of  Russia.  There  are  people  who  would  remember  that  prior  to  World  War  11,  there  were 
many,  many  pogroms  that  took  place  in  Russia  wherein  the  Jews  were  killed  and  otherwise  abused.  At 
any  rate,  he  had  left  Russia.  He  came  to  the  United  States  not  speaking  a  word  of  English.  He  was  self- 
taught  in  the  language,  and  he  did  odd  jobs  and  hustled  with  whatever  he  could  do  to  earn  a  living. 
Ultimately,  he  put  himself  through  law  school,  getting  out  of  law  school  in  the  Depression  when  no  one 
had  money  for  an  attorney.  He  would  go  down  to  the  criminal  courts  and  defend  indigent  parties  for  no 
fee,  but  he  gained  a  great  deal  of  expertise  in  criminal  law,  and  ultimately  he  began  to  win  to  such  a 
degree  that  he  was  noticeable  and  picked  up  very  good  criminal  clients.  So  his  basic  background  was 
criminal  law. 

He  became  a  political  powerhouse  within  St.  Louis  and  within  the  state  of  Missouri  and  had  very 
strong  connections  to  Senator  Long  from  state  of  Missouri.  Morris  was  very,  very  closely  connected  to 
him  and  a  strong  political  backer.  Long  was  also  indebted  to  the  Teamsters  for  much  of  his  political 
support.  And  when  Long  had  come  to  public  criticism  and  public  awareness,  to  a  large  degree  because  he 
tried  to  keep  Jimmy  Hoffa  from  going  to  jail  and  to  get  Hoffa  out  of  jail  early,  he  was  closely  identified 
with  Hoffa.  And  in  turn,  Shenker  was  closely  identified  with  both  Long  and  Hoffa. 

Did  Shenker ’s  association  with  Long  and  Hoffa  create  problems  when  he  was  applying  for  a  license? 

Yes,  but  it  was  even  more  than  Hoffa.  Life  magazine  described  Morris  Shenker  as  being  involved 
in  a  Byzantine  maze  of  businesses,  and  that  certainly  was  the  truth.  It  was  extraordinarily  difficult  to  track 
Morris  Shenker.  It  was  difficult  to  track  all  of  his  activities  and  all  of  the  allegations  and  the  suspicions 
and  the  rumors  that  swirled  about  him,  many  of  which  were  just  ill  founded.  But  each  one  of  them  had  to 
be  run  down.  And  the  investigation  was  long  and  arduous. 

How  many  agents  did  you  put  on  the  case? 

1  think  nine  or  ten  agents  were  assigned  to  look  at  his  activities,  and  mostly,  again,  that  was 
because  there  were  so  many  different  stories  to  chase  down  and  so  many  different  business  entities  that  he 
had  been  involved  with,  and  was  involved  with,  and  had  owned  or  been  associated  with  over  the  years.  It 
was  just  a  very,  very  complex  and  complicated  investigation.  1  can  remember  on  one  occasion  1  got  a  call 
from  a  couple  of  the  agents  who  were  in  Shenker’ s  office  in  St.  Louis.  In  the  office  there  was  a  very  large 
steel  safe,  and  when  the  agents  asked  Mr.  Shenker  to  open  the  safe  so  they  could  examine  the  contents  he 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


279 


refused.  So  the  agents  called  me,  and  1  asked  them  to  put  Shenker  on  the  phone.  When  Shenker  came  on 
the  phone  he  explained  that  the  material  in  the  safe  was  really  the  property  of  a  client  and  that  there  was 
an  attorney-client  privilege,  and  he  would  not  open  the  safe.  I  suggested  to  him  that  he  had  to  choose 
between  being  an  attorney  and  representing  that  client  or  being  a  licensee  in  the  state  of  Nevada,  and  then 
he’d  know  the  result  of  that  decision  by  whether  or  not  he  opened  the  safe.  Well,  he  asked  for  a  day  to 
consider  the  issue  and  to  talk  to  the  client,  and  then  the  agents  left  the  office  after  placing  a  seal  on  the 
safe.  The  next  day  Mr.  Shenker  opened  the  safe  for  them,  and  inside  the  safe  was  only  one  file,  and  it  had 
nothing  to  do  with  Hoffa  or  anybody  else  that  we  were  interested  in.  [laughter] 

A  very  innocuous  file? 

Yes.  And  that  was  just  one  story  1  recall  of  that  investigation,  and  it  wasn’t  particularly 
significant,  other  than  the  fact  that  1  think  we  did  gain  his  attention  and  it  did  establish  that  he  had  to  be 
very  forthcoming  in  all  of  his  personal  documents,  or  he  wasn’t  going  to  get  licensed. 

1  think  what  amazed  me  most  about  Shenker  was  the  fact  that  when  we  held  a  series  of  licensing 
hearings  on  him — Grant  Sawyer  was  his  Nevada  counsel — the  man  came  before  us  and  presented  a  case 
as  if  he  were  presenting  a  case  in  a  criminal  court.  And  for  every  issue  that  we  brought  up,  he  brought 
witnesses  forward  to  give  a  totally  different  picture  of  the  event.  One  of  the  witnesses  on  his  behalf  had 
been  a  primary  prosecutor  in  the  Watergate  events.  So  they  were  not  hit-and-miss  witnesses.  One  was  a 
very  prominent  Catholic  priest  [laughter].  So  it  was  just  an  amazing  collection  of  people  he  brought 
forward  to  explain  things  that  we  thought  were  significantly  wrong.  Those  hearings  with  him  and  his 
witnesses  and  his  attorneys  and  our  staff  lasted  for  as  long  as  twelve  hours,  and  they  were  exhausting 
kinds  of  inquiries.  But  1  have  to  tell  you  that  he  knocked  just  about  every  pitch  out  of  the  park. 

1  don’t  think  he  was  a  good  businessman,  and  later  events  at  the  Dunes,  1  think,  would  bear  that 
out,  but  he  was  a  very  interesting  man.  And  1  think  the  state  didn’t  know  what  the  heck  to  think  about 
whether  he  should  be  licensed  or  shouldn’t  be  licensed.  I  think  there  was  a  real  division  within  the  power 
structure  of  the  state:  on  the  one  hand,  there  were  people  who  thought  that  merely  his  presence  would 
indicate  that  there  was  something  wrong  with  gaming  in  the  state  of  Nevada;  and  there  were  others  who 
strongly  believed  that  this  man,  like  every  man,  had  the  right  to  confront  allegations  and  suspicions  and 
rumors  and  clear  them  up,  if  possible.  And  he  did  a  good  job  of  that. 

With  Grant  Sawyer’s  help. 

Yes.  And  Grant  was  a  good  gaming  attorney.  He  understood  the  law;  he  knew  the  law.  He  was  a 
good  attorney,  but  Grant  never  ever  asked  for  political  favors,  to  my  knowledge.  And  I’m  sure  that  that’s 
the  case.  I’m  sure  he  never  asked  Mike  O’  Callaghan  for  political  favors  in  any  of  these  events.  He  just 
took  the  case  and  went  forward.  He  was  always  ably  assisted  by  a  young  man  that  I  went  to  college  with, 
Bob  Faiss.  But  Grant  Sawyer  had  been  Bob’s  mentor,  and  together  they  were  very,  very  effective  counsel. 

So  Bob  Faiss  was  his  assistant  in  several  instances? 

Oh,  yes.  Bob  became  a  very,  very  strong  gaming  attorney.  Very  knowledgeable,  and  he  was  a 
good  lobbyist  for  the  gaming  industry. 

On  the  other  hand,  Sam  Lionel,  the  other  partner  in  Lionel  Sawyer  Collins,  was  equally  strong  as 


280 


an  attorney.  He  didn’t  represent  too  many  gaming  clients  on  gaming  applications;  he  represented  them  in 
other  aspects  of  their  business.  And  he  was  also  extraordinarily  competent.  That  was  a  very,  very  good 
firm,  and  I  think  it  still  is.  [laughter] 

So  the  Gaming  Control  Board  took  approximately  four  months  to  make  a  decision  on  Shenker  because  of 
so  many  various  investigations? 

Well,  we’d  track  something  down,  and  then  Shenker  would  come  up  with  a  response  and  an 
answer  that  just  made  anything  we  found  turn  to  dust,  so  we’d  have  to  go  back  and  do  it  again.  It  just  took 
a  long  time  to  track  down  all  of  these  rumors  and  allegations  and  to  go  through  all  his  businesses.  There 
were  literally  boxes  upon  boxes  upon  boxes  of  legal  documents  and  business  documents  that  had  to  be 
read  and  analyzed,  and  it  was  very,  very,  very,  very  complicated  and  complex. 

Did  the  Gaming  Control  Board  eventually  recommend  Mr.  Shenker  for  a  license? 

Yes. 

And  the  Commission  agreed? 

Yes. 

Do  you  recall  how  many  years  that  he  owned  or  controlled  the  Dunes  Hotel?  Did  he  eventually  sell  it  out 
to  someone? 

Morris  sold  it,  but  he  was  there  and  running  the  hotel  into  the  mid-1980s.  It  was  always 
struggling.  It  never  really  was  a  strong  hotel-casino.  It  was  old,  it  was  worn  out,  and  the  financing  was  not 
real  good  in  terms  of  being  favorably  structured.  It  was  always  a  struggle  for  him,  but  he  kept  at  it  and 
kept  at  it.  1  can’t  quite  recall  whether  or  not  he  sold  it  before  he  died,  or  died  and  then  the  family  or  the 
state  sold  it. 

But  he  did  operate  it  for  several  years. 

Oh,  yes,  during  the  period  of  time  that  1  was  working  for  Hughes,  he  was  still  running  the 
business. 

Did  he  still  maintain  all  those  other  businesses  that  he  previously  had? 

No,  but  1  think  he  kept  some  of  them.  Most  of  them  were  not  huge  businesses.  They  were  mostly 
little  businesses.  He  kept  his  finger  in  different  things  around  the  country:  a  couple  of  real  estate 
developments  here  and  there,  but  he  was  focused  on  the  Dunes  and  spent  nearly  all  of  his  time  there. 


In  March  of 1975,  a  hearing  was  held  to  determine  if  Bally  Manufacturing  Company  should  be  licensed 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


281 


to  take  control  of  Nevada ’s  largest  slot  machine  distributor,  Bally’s  Distributing  Company.  Did  the 
Gaming  Board  have  any  problem  with  that  application? 

Yes.  Bally  Manufacturing  was  a  spin-off  of,  1  think,  a  company  called  Lyon  Manufacturing.  They 
had  been  making  pinballs  in  Chicago  for  years  and  years  and  years  and  had  been  a  distributor  of  the  early 
slot  machines  in  jurisdictions  like  Louisiana,  before  they  were  all  confiscated  by  the  government  and 
broken  up.  So  they  had  a  long  history  in  the  coin  game  business.  Out  here,  Bally  Distributing,  to  give  it 
some  perspective,  was  the  largest  slot  manufacturer  at  the  time  this  application  was  made,  and  nearly 
every  casino  in  Nevada  was  filled  with  Bally  slot  machines.  There  really  wasn’t  any  major  competition  at 
that  time,  so  this  was  an  extraordinarily  important  application.  It  wasn’t  one  that  we  really  wanted, 
because  we  didn’t  want  to  directly  get  into  Bally  Manufacturing.  1  think  our  perceptions  were  we  were 
going  to  find  something  that  was  very  bad  and  we  were  going  to  get  rid  of  it,  and  now  where  would  your 
state  get  slot  machines?  That  was  basically  the  question,  [laughter] 

Was  Si  Redd  with  Bally  Distributing  then? 

Si  Redd  was  with  Bally  Distributing,  and  he  also  owned  stock,  and  had  been  promised  more 
stock,  in  Bally  Manufacturing.  Si  was  an  absolute  genius  at  selling  slot  machines.  For  example,  the  dollar 
slot  machine  was  really  Si  Redd’s  creation.  In  the  early  days  it  was  nickels  and  dimes,  quarters,  and  even 
penny  slot  machines,  and  once  in  a  while  you’d  see  a  half-dollar  slot  machine,  but  nobody  ran  dollar  slot 
machines.  They  were  just  considered  too  large  a  bet.  But  Si  Redd  was  instrumental  in  convincing  the 
owner  of  a  small  casino,  which  basically  had  only  slot  machines  in  it,  to  devote  about  half  of  them  to  the 
dollar  denomination.  And  he  put  in  very  loud  what  they  called  “drop  pans,”  where  the  coins  would  drop 
when  a  winner  was  hit.  Si  put  very  loud  drop  pans  in  those  dollar  slot  machines,  and  the  racket  that  they 
created — the  noise  level  was  unbelievable.  And  the  little  casino  just  flourished. 

Was  that  in  Reno  or  in  Las  Vegas? 

That  was  in  Las  Vegas.  And  pretty  soon  others  in  the  gaming  business  started  to  pay  attention  to 
this  phenomenon,  and  they  spread  like  wildfire.  And  Bally’s  was,  again,  the  only  one  that  really  had  a 
handle  on  this  through  Si  Redd. 

Was  he  also  the  innovator  of  the  dollar-machine  carousel? 

1  think  that  was  another  one  of  Si  Redd’s  ideas.  1  can’t  fully  attest  to  that,  but  that’s  my  belief,  the 
configuration  of  putting  a  series  of  slot  machines  in  a  circular  or  rectangular  pattern  with  change 
personnel  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  machines  to  service  the  various  customers.  1  believe  that  was  Si’s 
concept  and  idea.  And  that  also  was  extraordinarily  lucrative. 

Warren  Nelson  and  Si  were  good  friends,  and  they’d  been  friends  for  a  long  time,  so  Warren  used 
a  lot  of  the  ideas  that  Si  came  up  with.  Si  would  come  up  with  these  ideas,  and  Warren  would  put  them 
into  practice  at  the  Club  Cal-Neva. 


Did  Warren  put  a  lot  of  dollar  slots  in  the  Cal-Neva? 


282 


Yes,  it  was  heavy  with  dollar  slots  and  with  noise.  The  idea  was  to  make  sure  that  everybody 
understands  there  are  winners  here,  [laughter]  And  that  really  worked. 

At  any  rate,  this  application  was  coming  through,  and  we  knew  Si  Redd  quite  well.  We  knew  the 
product,  the  slot  machines  themselves.  We  were  constantly  testing  those  slot  machines  to  make  sure  they 
were  living  up  to  the  standards  set  by  the  state,  but  we  didn’t  really  know  that  much  about  the  company 
that  manufactured  them,  and  we  didn’t  have  to  at  that  point.  All  we  had  to  do  was  be  sure  that  whoever 
was  distributing  these  slot  machines  was  licensed.  We  didn’t  have  to  really  be  too  concerned  about  who 
made  them. 

And  Si  Redd,  of  course,  was  already  licensed  as  a  distributor. 

Yes.  So  now,  we  have  the  manufacturing  company  who,  because  the  distributing  company  is 
making  so  much  money — and  they’re  the  reason  it’s  making  so  much  money — they  want  to  get  a  piece  of 
the  action.  So  they  come  forward,  and  their  president  at  the  time  is  a  man  named  Bill  O’Donnell,  and 
O’Donnell  had  worked  for  the  predecessor  company  as  a  salesman  for  many,  many  years.  He’d  been  with 
this  coin  machine  company  for  probably  in  excess  of  twenty  years. 

Who  were  some  of  the  other  major  stockholders? 

Oh,  there  were  a  number  of  people  involved.  There  was  Sam  Klein,  who  owned  about  ten  or 
fifteen  percent  of  the  company,  and  Irving  Kaye.  And  there  was  always  a  feeling  that  there  was  a  man 
with  a  hidden  interest  in  it  by  the  name  of  Gerardo  Catena.  Gerardo  Catena  had  been  identified  in  the  old 
senate  hearings  as  a  mafia  person.  So  there  was  always  the  worry  that  Gerardo  Catena  had  a  hidden 
interest  in  this  thing.  And  then  there  was  a  man  working  for  the  company  when  we  started  the 
investigation,  who  resigned  and  left  the  company,  1  believe,  before  they  were  licensed.  His  name  was 
Dino  Cellini.  Dino  Cellini  had  a  history  of  being  an  employee  of  Meyer  Lansky.  Then  there  was  a  man 
from  Belgium  by  the  name  of  Alex  Wilms,  and  Wilms  owned  maybe  ten  percent  of  the  company.  He 
became  a  problem  to  us  during  the  course  of  the  investigation.  So  we  basically  had  O’Donnell,  Klein, 
Irving  Kaye,  and  Alex  Wilms  who  held  the  majority  of  the  stock.  And  in  the  background  of  this  you  had 
concerns  over  Gerardo  Catena  and  Dino  Cellini,  which  cast  a  pall  of  mafia  intrusion  into  the  company. 
And  the  history  of  the  company  was  also  one  that  lent  itself  to  that  kind  of  worry,  because  they  had  been 
making  slot  machines  and  providing  them  to  different  locales  around  the  country,  when  in  many  of  those 
locations  they  were  illegal.  So  it  became  a  situation  that  required  a  very  strong  investigation  and  a  real 
serious  look  at  who  were  going  to  be  the  licensees  and  the  owners  of  this  operation. 

During  the  hearings  there  were  a  good  many  Nevada  people  who  came  forward  to  testify  on  their 
behalf:  Warren  Nelson,  and  Bob  Cashed,  who  later  became  lieutenant  governor,  and  at  that  time  was  a 
licensee  in  Reno.  And,  again,  they  were  represented  by  Grant  Sawyer  on  some  of  the  issues,  and  by  Don 
Carano,  an  attorney  in  Reno,  who  later  became  a  major  gaming  licensee  on  other  issues. 

So  at  any  rate,  this  was,  again,  a  very  expensive  investigation,  trying  to  go  through  all  of  old 
records  of  who  had  previously  purchased  gaming  equipment  from  the  company:  where  was  it  shipped, 
who  was  the  operator  at  the  location  where  it  was  used,  and  always  trying  to  tie  those  kinds  of  ownership 
and  operation  back  to  the  company  to  see  if  there  was  a  criminal  involvement.  Ultimately,  the  Control 
Board  recommended  licensing  of  the  company,  but  with  a  lot  of  restrictions  and  contingencies. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


283 


What  were  some  of  those  contingencies? 

Some  of  them  were  that  [Bill]  O’Donnell,  who  was  the  president,  [Sam]  Klein,  Irving  Kaye,  and 
Alex  Wilms  were  to  give  up  their  executive  positions  with  the  company  where  they  drew  a  salary.  They 
were  to  give  those  positions  up,  and  the  Gaming  Control  Board  recommended  that  they  have  all  of  their 
shares  put  in  a  trust.  So  that  was  the  recommendation.  It  was  very  complex  recommendation  that  went  up 
to  the  Gaming  Commission.  And  the  Gaming  Commission,  I  can’t  remember  what  they  did  with  all  of  it, 
but  there  was  [laughter]  a  very  heated  debate  within  the  Gaming  Commission  as  to  how  to  handle  this 
application.  The  chairman,  Pete  Echeverria,  did  not  like  the  idea  of  the  trust.  Frank  Schreck,  who  is  now  a 
very,  very  prominent  gaming  attorney,  liked  the  idea  of  keeping  the  trust  in  place.  There  was  also  a 
recommendation  that  a  former  U.S.  attorney  be  employed  by  the  company  to  assure  that  they  were  always 
in  compliance  with  federal  and  state  law.  I  can’t  quite  remember  exactly  how  the  commission  voted  on 
everything,  but  [Sam]  Klein  was  OK’d  on  a  probationary  basis,  and  later  on  he  was  seen  playing  golf  with 
Gerardo  Catena  and  forced  to  sell  his  shares  and  was  also  fined.  [Bill]  O’Donnell  did  not  stay  in  the 
company  very  long  after  the  licensing,  and  Alex  Wilms  transferred  his  interest  to  his  son  and  pretty  much 
got  out  of  the  company.  The  son  ran  a  slot  machine  company  in  Europe,  which  was  quite  successful, 
essentially  using  Bally  products.  The  son  later  came  back  to  Nevada  and  had  a  slot  route  business  in 
Nevada. 

Did  Si  Redd  have  anything  to  do  with  operating  the  company  after  Bally  Manufacturing  was  licensed? 

Si  Redd  stayed  with  the  company  for  a  period  of  time  after  that — I  can’t  remember  how  long — 
but  he  felt  that  they  had  broken  their  word  to  him  in  terms  of  some  ownership  interests  that  they  had 
promised  him,  but  did  not  go  forward  with.  So  a  bit  of  bitterness  developed  between  Si  Redd  and  Bally. 
And  it  wasn’t  too  long  after  that,  maybe  a  year  or  two — I  can’t  remember  now  the  time  period — but  Si 
left  Bally  and  formed  his  own  company,  which  ultimately  became  IGT. 

During  your  tenure  as  chairman,  you  made  many  decisions  that  were  unpopular  with  some  unsavory 
persons.  Were  you  or  your  family  ever  threatened  with  any  physical  harm? 

No,  not  that  I  recall,  and  I  probably  would  have  been  sensitive  to  it.  There  were  some  tough 
people  involved,  but  by  and  large,  I  never  felt  that  my  family  was  vulnerable  to  them  nor  threatened  by 
them,  and  I  never  felt  really  threatened  by  any  of  them  either. 

How  did  you  approach  the  position  of  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board? 

Well,  first  of  all,  I  had  had  some  experience  in  the  gaming  business,  having  worked  at  it  while  I 
was  going  to  college,  and  I  knew  a  lot  of  the  people  who  were  involved  in  the  business.  I  had  been 
involved  in  public  administration  for  a  number  of  years,  and  I’d  been  the  chief  parole  and  probation 
officer  for  the  state  of  Nevada.  I’d  been  the  director  of  welfare  for  the  state  of  Nevada,  and  I  had  been  the 


284 


first  director  of  narcotics  and  dangerous  drugs  for  the  state  of  Nevada.  So  I  had  an  extensive  background, 
and  early  on  1  learned  that  when  you  have  to  make  an  unpopular  decision,  you  don’t  try  to  sugarcoat  it, 
nor  do  you  try  to  deceive  the  people  that  you’re  making  the  decision  about;  you  just  tell  them  what  your 
position  is  and  why  you  have  a  position  and  go  forward,  and  in  a  sense  just  try  to  be  honest  with  them,  not 
necessarily  being  compassionate  always,  but  at  least  being  honest. 

So  when  I  approached  the  job,  1  approached  it  on  the  basis  that  it  was  a  job  that  required  some 
tough  decisions,  and  decisions  you  could  not  leave  in  an  abyss  or  in  a  vacuum.  Y ou  had  to  make  a 
decision,  and  it  couldn’t  be  “maybe”  or  “we’ll  see  later.”  You  had  to  analyze  the  material  given  to  you 
and  have  reasons  in  your  mind  that  you  could  rely  on,  so  you  could  tell  people  what  those  reasons  were, 
and  then  live  with  them.  There  were  times,  obviously — 1  think  there  always  are — when  you  sometimes 
take  a  tough  position  and  you  feel  a  little  bad  about  it,  because  you  know  you’re  having  a  strong  effect 
upon  somebody’s  else’s  life.  And  maybe  you  would  like  not  to  have  to  do  it  that  way,  but  you  do  it, 
because  that’s  what’s  required  by  the  nature  of  the  job  or  the  business. 

My  first  concern  was  always  the  state  of  Nevada.  This  business  is  the  economic  undeipinning  of 
the  whole  state,  and  everything  that  goes  on  in  Nevada  is  so  tied  to  the  economy  of  the  gaming  business. 
And  the  gaming  business  could  be  threatened  and  taken  away  from  us  if  we  didn’t  handle  it  very,  very 
well.  And  that  meant  in  many  cases  stringently.  There  was  always  the  concern,  at  least  in  my  mind,  that 
the  federal  government  could  step  in  and  do  something  that  would  seriously  harm  the  gaming  business, 
and  in  turn  that  would  create  great  harm  to  the  state.  So  that’s  essentially  what  was  going  on  in  my  mind 
as  I  took  this  job. 

But  the  job  was  not  only  to  work  with  the  people  in  the  business;  the  job  was  also  to  work  with 
the  staff.  And  working  with  that  staff  became  a  very  important  objective.  1  encouraged  them  to  improve 
their  position  in  the  state  in  terms  of  pay  and  reputation,  to  make  sure  that  the  efforts  that  they  expended 
were  meaningful  efforts,  and  also  to  work  with  people  in  the  legislature  so  that  you  have  the  right  kind  of 
support.  So  it’s  a  complex  job,  and  also,  1  think,  a  big  part  of  it  is  working  with  the  Gaming  Commission. 

1  was  fortunate,  1  believe,  in  working  with  some  truly  outstanding  people  who  were  on  that  commission 
and  fortunate  to  be  able  to  communicate  well  with  them,  and  to  have  a  give  and  take.  I  think  that’s  what 
really  worked  for  us  as  we  were  able  to  listen  to  each  other’s  viewpoints.  And  while  not  always  in  full 
agreement,  we  were  able  to  move  forward  on  the  basis  of  what  we  all  believed  to  be  the  right  thing  to  do, 
not  only  for  the  state,  but  for  the  people  involved  who  came  in  front  of  us. 

So  you  feel  one  of  the  key  requirements  of  a  board  chairman  is  to  maintain  a  good  relationship  between 
the  Control  Board  and  the  Commission? 

Oh,  yes,  1  think  if  you  have  any  divisive  relationship  there,  it’s  going  to  work  to  the  detriment  of 
both  institutions  and  to  the  state  at  large.  1  think  those  two  groups  have  to  be  in  concert. 

We  touched  briefly  on  one  of  the  reasons  for  you  leaving  the  position  of  chairman  of  the  Board  in  July  of 
1977,  and  that  was  a  problem  that  you  had  with  the  Gaming  Commission. 

Yes. 


And  Harry  Reid  was  chairman  at  that  time? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


285 


That’s  right.  And  I  did  not  feel  comfortable  for  a  couple  of  reasons.  We  had  a  couple  of 
experiences  there  that  made  me  uncomfortable  with  that  commission,  and  I  felt  that  it  was  best  that  1 
leave. 

Differences  as  far  as  recommendations  that  the  Board  had  made  for  certain  applicants  and  that  the 
Commission  didn ’t  agree  with? 

Exactly.  But  more  than  simply  that  we  disagreed;  it  was  the  nature  of  the  disagreement  and  the 
basis  upon  which,  at  least,  the  Commission  framed  their  disagreement.  1  just  got  to  the  point  where  1  felt 
that  it  was  my  presence  more  than  anything  else  that  was  causing  the  problem.  1  don’t  think  it  was  visible 
at  that  point,  but  /  felt  there  was  a  division  between  the  Board  and  the  Commission,  and  1  felt  it  was  my 
presence,  primarily,  that  was  the  cause  of  it.  And  that  whole  situation  stressed  me  out.  1  was  not  feeling 
well.  1  had  ulcers,  and  so  1  decided  it  was  best  to  leave. 

Were  there  any  specific  applicants  you  were  concerned  with? 

There’s  no  point  in  going  back  and  digging  that  up  on  various  people  at  this  point  in  time. 

When  you  retired ,  did  Governor  O’Callaghan  consult  you  as  to  who  should  be  named  to  fill  your 
vacancy? 

Sure.  We  talked  about  it.  In  prior  years  1  had  been  instrumental  in  advising  O’Callaghan  to  bring 
Roger  Trounday  into  state  government  from  the  public  school  system  in  the  Reno  area.  Roger  and  1  had 
known  each  other  since  grammar  school.  1  suggested  to  O’ Callaghan  that  Roger  had  all  the  attributes  that 
1  felt  would  be  good  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  He  had  a  good  reputation,  and  he  was  a  very 
intelligent  person  who  was  willing  to  explore  things.  He  would  keep  an  open  mind  on  things.  So  1  thought 
he  would  do  a  good  job,  and  1  think  he  did  do  a  good  job. 

O’Callaghan  [laughter]  tried  to  talk  me  out  of  leaving,  but,  of  course,  that  didn’t  work.  1  had  a  job 
with  a  bank,  but  1  had  a  lot  of  vacation  time  coming  and  so  forth,  so  1  told  the  people  at  the  bank  that  I 
wanted  to  wait  three  or  four  weeks  before  starting  something  else.  During  that  period  of  time,  1  was 
approached  by  a  trust  officer  for,  at  that  time,  the  First  National  Bank  of  Nevada,  who  was  representing 
Will  Lummis,  the  first  cousin  and  administrator  of  the  Howard  Hughes  estate.  And  through  him  Lummis 
offered  me  a  job  with  the  Hughes  interests,  and  ultimately,  1  accepted  that  job.  After  it  became  public, 

O’ Callaghan  tried  to  get  Lummis  to  not  hire  me  on  the  basis  that  it  would  not  look  good  to  the  public  to 
have  me  going  in  with  a  gaming  group.  1  didn’t  know  that  Mike  had  made  those  efforts  for  several  years 
afterwards.  But  it  was  inconsequential  to  me.  Lummis  didn’t  change  his  mind,  and  ultimately,  it  didn’t 
bother  me,  but  it  bothered  me  when  1  found  out  about  it — even  more  so,  when  a  year  or  so  after  1  left 
there  was  some  discussion  in  legislature  about  people  leaving  government  jobs  and  going  to  work  for  the 
industries  that  they,  quote,  “regulated.”  And  there  were  comments  made  by  different  people  that  1  thought 
were  somewhat  foolish.  And  I  still  think  they’re  foolish.  While  the  perception  may  not  be  good,  the 
reality  is  if  you  go  to  work  for  one  of  those  companies,  there’s  nothing  you  can  bring  with  you  from  your 
experience  that’s  going  to  hurt  someone  else  in  the  same  business.  Now,  of  course,  if  you  try — and  this  is 
the  only  danger — to  feather  your  nest  while  you  are  in  the  regulatory  position  so  that  you  could  get  this 
job  later  on,  clearly  that  would  be  a  bad  thing.  That  wasn’t  the  case  in  my  circumstance,  and  1  wasn’t  even 


286 


approached  by  the  company  until  1  had  left  the  Board. 

How  long  did  you  stay  with  the  Howard  Hughes  organization? 

Eight  years.  In  1985  1  left  and  went  with  Harrah’s.  The  reason  for  that  was  it  was  clear  that  the 
Hughes  estate  was  going  to  have  to  dispose  of  their  gaming  properties  in  order  to  satisfy  the  various  heirs 
to  the  Hughes  estate.  Harrah’s  had  been  acquired  by  Holiday  Inn,  and  those  folks  made  me  a  very 
generous  offer  to  become  the  president  of  Harrah’s  West,  they  called  it,  because  they  were  operating 
another  property  in  Atlantic  City.  1  was  not  responsible  for  the  Atlantic  City  property,  but  1  was 
responsible  for  Reno,  Tahoe,  and  a  property  they  had  acquired  in  Las  Vegas.  So  1  went  to  work  for 
Holiday  Inn,  or  “Harrah’s,”  Harrah’s  being  solely  owned  by  Holiday  Inn  at  the  time. 

After  a  couple  of  years  with  Harrah’s,  1  left  there  to  go  to  work  with  the  Kerkorian  interests. 
Kerkorian  wanted  to  buy  the  Sands  and  the  Desert  Inn,  which,  of  course,  1  was  quite  familiar  with  from 
my  time  with  Hughes.  He  wanted  to  put  together  another  large  gaming  company.  I’d  known  Kerkorian 
over  the  years  from  my  experience  with  the  Gaming  Board  and  respected  and  admired  him  a  great  deal.  1 
liked  him  as  well;  he  was  a  very  nice  person.  So  1  went  to  work  for  Kerkorian  and  stayed  there  about  three 
years,  then  left  to  come  home  to  Reno.  1  got  involved  with  some  friends  in  the  Fitzgerald  operation — 
actually  had  been  involved  a  little  bit  with  them  prior  to  that.  But  1  wanted  to  be  home.  My  wife  had 
become  a  serious  asthmatic,  and  I  felt  it  was  necessary  to  be  home  more  than  I  was  able  to  be  in  Las 
Vegas. 

When  did  you  go  to  work  for  Fitzgerald’s? 

In  1992. 

Are  you  still  associated  with  Fitzgerald  group  in  any  way? 

I’m  still  on  their  board  of  directors,  but  I’m  not  involved  in  any  day-to-day  activities.  I  just  take 
care  of  the  property  and  investments.  I  guess  that’s  the  best  way  to  put  it. 

Well,  thank  you  for  your  time,  Phil. 


Yes,  you’re  welcome. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


287 


11 

S.  Barton  (Bart)  Jacka 


S.  Barton  (Bart)  Jacka,  who  was  born  in  Beaver,  Utah  in 
1936,  moved  to  the  town  of  Alamo,  Nevada  as  a  small  child, 
then  to  Las  Vegas,  where  he  graduated  from  Las  Vegas 
High  School  and  later  attended  Nevada  Southern  (now  the 
University  of  Nevada  Las  Vegas).  He  began  his  career  as  a 
public  sen’ant  when  he  joined  the  Clark  County  Sheriff’s 
Department  (later  merged  into  what  is  today  called  the  Las 
Vegas  Metropolitan  Police  Department).  After  serving 
more  than  twenty  years  as  a  law  enforcement  officer,  Jacka 
became  the  Director  of  the  Department  of  Motor  Vehicles, 
and  then  the  state  Director  of  Human  Resources.  In  1984 
Governor  Bryan  appointed  Jacka  to  the  Nevada  Gaming 
Control  Board.  Jacka  pursued  a  successful  career  in  the 
gaming  industry  after  leaving  the  Board  in  1989,  acting  as  a 
gaming  consultant  to  several  companies  and  sitting  on  the 
board  of  directors  of  the  Elsinore  Corporation. 


S.  Barton  Jacka.  Photo  courtesy  of  S.  Barton  Jacka. 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  afternoon.  It’s  February  25  th.  My  name  is  Dwayne  Kling.  I’m  with  Bart  Jacka  at 
his  home  in  Reno,  Nevada.  Today  is  February  25,  2002.  This  is  the  first  in  a  series  of  oral  history 
inter-views  with  Mr.  Jacka.  1  would  like  to  ask  you,  Mr.  Jacka,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the 
University  of  Nevada  have  your  permission  to  make  available  to  the  public  the  tapes  and  the  transcripts 
of  the  oral  history  interviews  that  we  are  about  to  begin  today? 


S.  Barton  Jacka:  Yes. 


288 


Thank  you,  Bart.  Let’s  start  out  by  asking  you  when  and  where  were  you  born? 

I  was  bom  in  Beaver,  Utah,  in  June  of  1936.  I’m  married  and  1  have  five  children.  Two  are  my 
own:  a  son,  Barton  Lee  Jacka,  who’s  an  attorney  in  San  Diego,  also  licensed  to  practice  in  Nevada.  1  have 
a  daughter,  Lee  Ann  Bakch.  She  lives  with  her  husband  and  two  children  in  Las  Vegas.  1  have  a 
stepdaughter,  Heidi  Sakelarios,  who  is  my  present  wife’s  daughter.  She  and  her  husband  and  two  children 
live  in  Carson  [City].  1  have  a  stepson,  Brent  Hammack,  who  is  the  son  of  my  present  wife.  He  lives  in 
Smith  Valley  and  is  a  sheetrock  hanger.  He  lives  with  his  wife  and  four  children.  1  have  a  stepdaughter, 
Michelle  Taylor,  who  presently  lives  in  Reno  but  routinely  lives  in  California.  She  has  two  children,  and 
she’s  divorced.  She  is  the  daughter  of  my  late  wife. 

Did  you  go  to  elementary  school,  high  school  in  Beaver,  Utah? 

No.  1  moved  from  Beaver,  Utah,  when  1  was  a  year  old.  My  stepfather  had  met  my  mother  right 
after  1  was  born  and  they  got  married  and  moved  to  Los  Angeles.  We  lived  in  Los  Angeles  until  about 
1945  and  my  sister,  who  lives  in  Las  Vegas,  had  asthma  very  bad  so  we  had  to  move  out  of  California. 

We  moved  to  Nevada — packed  our  belongings  and  went  to  where  she  got  some  relief  and  that  relief  was 
obtained  in  the  area  of  Las  Vegas  in  a  little  community  called  Alamo,  Nevada,  which  is  about  a  hundred 
and  thirteen  miles  north  of  Las  Vegas,  just  south  of  Caliente.  We  decided  to  settle  there  and  my  dad  went 
to  work  for  the  water  district  in  Alamo.  My  parents  ultimately  moved  to  Las  Vegas  where  my  dad  was  in 
the  construction  business.  1  stayed  in  Alamo,  where  1  went  from  the  fifth  grade  through  the  eighth  grade. 
After  completing  grammar  school  1  joined  them  in  Las  Vegas,  where  1  went  to  high  school  at  Las  Vegas 
High  School. 

What  did  you  do  after  you  graduated  from  high  school? 

1  worked  part-time  in  an  office  equipment  store  called  Albright’s  Business  Machines,  and  then 
enrolled  as  a  freshman  at  what  was  then  called  the  University  of  Nevada,  Southern  Regional  Division — 
Nevada  Southern — now  UNLV.  1  achieved  junior  class  status  and  was  the  student  body  president  my  last 
year  at  Nevada  Southern. 

What  precipitated  you  leaving  college? 

1  became  a  Deputy  Sheriff,  for  the  then-Clark  County  Sheriffs  Department  in  1957  and  full-time 
employment  precluded  my  active  activity  in  school.  1  did  take  a  couple  classes  later  on,  but  never 
completed  my  degree. 

The  Clark  County  Sheriffs  Department  is  an  agency  that  is  no  longer  in  existence.  In  1973,  by  an 
act  of  the  legislature,  the  Clark  County  Sheriffs  Department  and  the  Las  Vegas  Police  Department  were 
merged  into  what  is  today  called  the  Las  Vegas  Metropolitan  Police  Department. 

So  were  you  included  in  that  merger? 


Yes,  I  rose  through  the  ranks  at  the  Sheriffs  Department  from  a  Deputy  Sheriff  to  a  Chief  Deputy 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


289 


Sheriff  and  I  was  a  representative  for  the  Sheriff  at  the  legislature,  lobbied  for  him  and  for  law 
enforcement,  generally,  throughout  the  state  of  Nevada.  And,  when  the  legislature  passed  the  enabling 
legislation  to  approve  the  consolidation,  1  became  a  Deputy  Chief  of  Police  under  the  Las  Vegas 
Metropolitan  Police  Department  for  a  month.  And  then  1  was  promoted  to  Assistant  Sheriff,  in  charge  of 
Line  Operations,  and  I  held  that  position  until  1  retired  in  1978. 

So  you  worked  for  the  Sheriff’s  and/or  the  Metro  for  a  little  over  twenty  years? 

Yes,  about  twenty-one -and-a-half  years. 

What  did  you  do  when  you  when  you  left  the  Metro? 

1  was  offered  an  opportunity  by  then-Govemor  List  to  journey  to  Carson  City  and  1  became  the 
director  of  the  Department  of  Motor  Vehicles  in  1979,  headquartered  in  Carson  [City].  That  gave  me  an 
opportunity  to  truly  run  an  agency  myself.  When  I  was  at  Metro  the  last  few  years,  1  was  third  in 
command  of  the  largest  law  enforcement  agency  in  the  state.  But  by  moving  to  DMV,  1  could  set  my  own 
policy  and  it  was  quite  an  opportunity. 

What  was  the  size  of  your  staff  at  DMV  compared  to  your  staff  at  Metro? 

We  had  about  twelve  hundred  employees  at  Metro  when  1  left  and,  of  course,  those  weren’t  all 
under  my  command.  By  the  time  1  retired,  1  was  the  only  Assistant  Sheriff.  Originally  the  structure  called 
for  two  and  1  ultimately  became  the  only  one  because  the  other  Assistant  Sheriff  retired.  And  when  1  went 
to  the  Department  of  Motor  Vehicles,  1  want  to  say  six  hundred  people.  1  don’t  know  for  sure.  That’s  been 
some  time,  but  about  six  hundred. 

DMV,  in  those  days  as  opposed  to  the  present,  was  comprised  of  the  registration  division,  the 
driver’s  license  division,  the  motor  carrier  division,  the  administrative  services  division,  and  the  Nevada 
Highway  Patrol.  So  six  hundred  is  about  right,  perhaps  off  a  little  bit. 

How  long  did  you  stay  at  that  job? 

1  served  in  that  capacity  for  four  years  and  when  Governor  Bryan  was  elected,  he  moved  me  to 
the  Department  of  Human  Resources  as  the  director  of  that  agency.  That  was  quite  a  change  for  me, 
having  been  a  policeman  all  of  my  life  and  then  getting  involved  with  the  social  scientists,  the  doctors,  the 
nurses,  and  so  on.  1  was  there  twenty-two  months. 

Did  you  go  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board  after  that? 

Yes,  the  Governor  appointed  me  in  September  of  1984  as  a  board  member  to  fill  the  position  of 
Patty  Becker.  He,  at  the  same  time,  announced  that  1  would  be  the  new  chairman  in  January  of  1985  to 
replace  Jim  Avance. 


Did  you  have  any  experience  in  the  gaming  industry  prior  to  your  appointment? 


290 


No,  I  had  not  been  involved  in  the  industry  at  all.  The  only  similar  familiarity  is  that  as  a  police 
officer  1  considered  myself  a  “regulator”  and  gaming  is  a  regulatory  business. 

Had  you  expressed  to  Governor  Bryan  a  desire  to  work  on  the  Board? 

Yes,  1  had  a  desire  to  work  on  the  Board — not  necessarily  in  the  chairman’s  role,  but  as  a  member 
of  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  In  fact,  I’d  indicated  a  desire  to  Governor  List,  when  he  appointed  me  as 
the  DMV  director,  but  it  just  didn’t  come  to  fruition.  So  when  Governor  Bryan  asked  me  to  serve,  that 
was  an  achievement  of  a  goal  that  1  had  had  for  a  long  time. 

Was  there  any  specific  reason  why  you  wanted  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board? 

1  thought  that  it  was  probably  a  very  dynamic  organization.  It  gave  you  a  broader  base  of 
experience,  put  you  in  touch  with  a  very  vital  industry,  and  I  just  had  the  desire  to  do  that. 

When  you  were  appointed  to  the  Board ,  was  there  a  stipulation  that  one  of  the  board  members  had  to 
have  had  law  enforcement  experience? 

Yes.  That’s  one  of  the  criteria. 

When  you  were  first  named  to  the  Board ,  who  were  the  other  board  members? 

James  Avance  was  the  chairman,  and  Richard  Hyte  was  the  other  member  of  the  board.  He  was 
an  accountant. 

You  mentioned  James  Avance  left.  Did  Mr.  Hyte  also  leave? 

Yes.  In  January  of  1985,  Mr.  Avance  left  and  1  became  the  chairman.  Mike  Rumbolz,  who  was 
the  Chief  Deputy  Attorney  General  in  Gaming,  had  been  appointed  by  Governor  Bryan  to  fill  Mr. 

Avance’ s  slot,  and  about  a  month  or  two  into  1985,  Mr.  Hyte  left  and  the  governor  selected  the  chief  of 
audit,  Guy  Hillyer,  to  serve  as  a  board  member.  Guy  served  for  the  balance  of  the  term  and  when  he  left 
to  go  into  private  industry  the  chief  of  the  audit  division,  Dennis  Amerine,  was  appointed.  So  it  was 
Dennis  and  Guy  and  Mike  Rumbolz  with  whom  I  served  until  1  left. 

The  Board  prior  to  your  tenure  had  several  two-to-one  votes  and  several  public  disagreements.  Would 
you  say  that  your  board  took  more  of  a  “team  ”  approach  on  gaming  control  matters  and  conducted  your 
meetings  in  more  harmonious  manner? 

Well,  I  wouldn’t  say  that  it  was  a  “team”  approach  because  that  was  one  of  the  criticisms  of  the 
past  board,  in  the  sense  that  it  was  a  “team”  effort  to  run  the  agency  and  the  agency  couldn’t  be  run  as  a 
team,  it  had  to  be  run  by  the  executive  director,  who  the  chairman  is  as  dictated  by  law.  But  we  certainly 
had  no  public  disagreements;  we  resolved  any  issues  amongst  ourselves.  1  think  we  were  very 
professional  and  acted  as  gentlemen  in  the  performance  of  our  duties. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


291 


Who  was  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission  during  your  time  on  the  Board? 

Paul  Bible. 

And  as  a  Gaming  Control  Board  chairman ,  did  you  work  closely  with  the  Gaming  Commission 
chairman? 

Absolutely.  The  Board  is  a  three-member  board  and  they  are  full-time.  The  commission  has  five 
members  and  they  work  part-time  in  the  sense  that  they  meet  and  they  make  the  final  determination  as  to 
licensing.  The  investigations  are  conducted  by  the  Board  and  their  staff  and  presented  to  the  Commission 
and  under  my  regime,  we  had  an  excellent  rapport  with  the  Commission.  In  fact,  right  after  1  came  into 
office,  1  called  and  asked  for  an  appointment  with  Paul  and  we  sat  down  and  we  talked  about  the  things 
that  1  didn’t  want  to  see  happen.  1  didn’t  want  public  explosions  and  even  then,  even  though  that’s  been  a 
number  of  years  ago,  people  disagreed,  but  you  can  disagree  professionally  and  responsibly.  And  that’s 
what  Paul  and  I  agreed  to  do. 

As  chairman  of  the  Board,  did  you  attend  all  the  Gaming  Commission  hearings? 

All  but  one  or  two,  perhaps,  in  my  tenure.  It  wasn’t  required,  but  1  felt  that  you  should  because 
you  provided  input  to  the  Commission  to  clarify  issues.  In  fact,  all  three  board  members  generally 
attended  meetings.  There  were  occasions  when  the  other  two  had  other  responsibilities,  but  1  was 
generally  always  there. 

Do  you  still  have  any  contact  with  Mr.  Bible  at  all? 

Oh  yes — quite  frequently,  both  from  a  professional  standpoint  and  from  a  personal  standpoint.  1 
sincerely  appreciated  serving  simultaneously  with  him  as  the  commission  chairman  while  1  served  as  the 
chairman  of  the  Board.  I  think  we  were  a  good  team  for  Nevada. 

Shortly  after  you  took  office  in  November  of  1984,  Dennis  Gallagher,  who  was  Chief  of  Investigations, 
resigned  his  position.  He  was  the  third  Chief  of  Investigations  to  resign  in  less  than  two  years.  Were  there 
any  specific  reasons  why  so  many  chiefs  resigned  in  such  a  short  period  of  time? 

1  have  no  recollection  about  the  past.  When  1  came  on  board,  Dennis  was  a  lawyer  who 
performed  well  as  a  lawyer,  but  1  preferred  to  have  someone  who  had  investigative  experience  and  we 
reached  a  mutual  agreement  that  he  would  journey  on  to  other  endeavors.  He  presently  serves  as  a 
Compliance  Officer  for  Harrah’s.  1  replaced  Dennis  with  Victor  Freeman,  who  was  at  that  time  a  Deputy 
Chief  of  the  Nevada  Highway  Patrol,  stationed  at  Carson  [City].  He’d  worked  for  me  when  1  was  at  the 
Department  of  Motor  Vehicles  and  I  knew  he  had  the  talent  that  I  found  necessary  to  bring 
professionalism  and  a  sense  of  responsibility  to  investigations  today.  He  served  from  January  of  1985 
until  December  of  1986.  He  had  a  friend  who  had  been  with  him  at  the  highway  patrol,  Paul  McGrath, 
who  ran  for  sheriff  in  Carson  City,  and  when  Paul  was  successful  in  that  election  he  asked  Vic  to  serve  as 
his  undersheriff.  So  he  left  in  December  of  1986  and  1  promoted  an  individual  from  within  the 
investigation  division,  Greg  Schatzman,  to  serve  for  the  balance  of  the  time  1  was  there.  He  continued  to 


292 


serve  after  I  had  retired  from  the  Board. 

During  your  term ,  there  was  a  major  reorganization  of  the  investigative  division  that  provided  more  man 
hours  to  the  investigators  in  the  field.  Could  you  tell  us  about  that  reorganization? 

I  wouldn’t  class  it  as  a  “reorganization”  as  compared  to  more  stress  on  professional  productivity. 
We  were  able  to  decrease  the  amount  of  time  it  took  to  handle  investigations  from  several  years  in  some 
instances,  down  to  several  months.  Now,  that’s  an  average.  1  think  that  the  reorganization,  if  you  want  to 
call  it  that,  was  enhanced  by  the  fact  the  legislature  in  the  1985  session  granted  the  Gaming  Control  Board 
the  ability  to  increase  its  manpower  and  much  of  that  manpower  was  assigned  to  the  investigation 
division. 

Were  there  ever  any  problems  created  by  unqualified  people  working  in  the  investigative  or  the 
enforcement  divisions? 

I  don’t  believe  so.  You  know,  you  can  define  “unqualified”  in  a  number  of  different  ways.  There 
were  some  that  were  better  prepared  to  perform  the  task  than  others,  and  in  the  course  of  time  while  1 
served  as  chairman  of  the  Board,  we  were  able  to  help  move  along  those  people  who  were  not  as  well 
qualified  to  perform  the  job  as  others,  with  new  people  who  came  on  board.  I  don’t  think  it  created  a 
“problem.”  It  was  just  an  evolution,  so  to  speak. 

Were  any  steps  taken  to  upgrade  the  hiring  policies  of  Gaming  Control  Board  staff  members  during  your 
tenure? 


Surprisingly,  when  1  came  on  board,  1  found  that  there  was  very  little  background  review  done  on 
agents,  at  least  not  a  sufficient  amount,  in  my  mind.  So  1  hired  an  investigator  who  had  worked  for  me  at 
the  Department  of  Motor  Vehicles,  and  his  exclusive  responsibility  was  to  conduct  backgrounds  on  all 
employees — not  only  the  investigators  and  the  enforcement  agents,  but  the  clerical  personnel  as  well.  We 
established  a  very  firm  policy  and  testing  process  that  still  exists  today.  It  didn’t  seem  to  me  equitable  that 
you  spend  all  your  time,  your  resources,  and  your  energies  to  investigate  and  review  the  background  of 
individuals  who  were  going  to  be  in  the  gaming  industry,  when  we  did  very  little  if  at  all,  with  the  people 
who  would  conduct  those  investigations.  It  just  didn’t  make  sense  to  me. 

Did  you  investigate  the  people  who  were  already  working,  or  was  this  just  for  new  hires? 

Primarily,  it  was  effective  on  a  given  date;  if  we  had  some  difficulty  then  we  went  back  in  and  did 
what  1  referred  to  as  a  “cursory”  review,  but  routinely  it  was  done  on  a  given  date  forward. 

Did  you  ever  have  to  perform  an  investigation  on  someone  currently  working,  find  out  something  wrong 
with  them  and  then  have  to  terminate  them? 

That  happened  on  occasion. 


A  few  months  after  you  were  appointed  to  the  Board,  Richard  Bunker,  former  chairman  of  the  Gaming 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


293 


Control  Board,  appeared  before  the  Gaining  Control  Board  to  be  licensed  as  a  key  employee  at  the 
Circus  Circus.  Was  this  a  difficult  hearing  for  you  and  the  Board? 

I  don’t  believe  it  was  a  difficult  hearing  for  me  and  the  Board.  In  fact  the  hearing  was  held  when  1 
was  still  just  a  member  of  the  Board  even  though  it  had  been  announced  that  1  was  going  to  be  the 
chairman  in  January.  Richard  and  I  had  worked  together  when  1  was  at  the  Metropolitan  Police 
Department.  He’d  worked  for  the  county  so  1  had  an  understanding  of  him  and  his  philosophies.  He 
became  a  member  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  simultaneously  with  me  moving  to  Carson  as  the 
Director  of  the  Department  of  Motor  Vehicles.  We  were  both  appointed  by  Governor  List.  But  there  was 
some  undercurrent  within  the  agency  that  boiled  over  after  he  left  as  its  chairman  and  those  things  had  to 
be  overcome.  But  it  wasn’t  difficult  for  me  to  overcome  those;  1  just  used  a  sense  of  fair  play  and  we 
moved  ahead  with  the  review  and  he  ultimately  was  licensed  as  a  key  employee  at  Circus  Circus. 

Did  the  Gaming  Control  Board  hold  a  closed-door  session  the  day  before  the  final  hearing  on  Mr. 
Bunker’s  application? 

I  don’t  recall  that  it  was  the  day  before  but  certainly  there  was  a  hearing,  and  what  1  refer  to  and 
what  they  referred  to  then  was  an  investigative  hearing,  which  was  commonplace.  There  were  some 
issues  that  had  to  be  resolved  and  we  had  such  a  hearing  for  Mr.  Bunker. 

So  it  wasn ’t  completely  unusual. 

No,  it  was  not  at  all.  In  fact,  in  the  first  two  weeks  that  1  was  a  member  of  the  Board,  1  attended 
an  investigative  hearing  involving  some  additional  applicants  for  the  Peppermill  Hotel/Casino.  1  liked  to 
have  the  agents  conduct  investigative  hearings  to  resolve  some  issues  which  weren’t  clear.  It  moved  the 
process  along  and  helped  speed  the  whole  applicant  review  process  considerably. 

There  was  a  newspaper  in  Reno  that  seemed  to  be  especially  opposed  to  Mr.  Bunker’s  licensing.  Would 
you  care  to  comment  on  that? 

Of  course,  the  only  newspaper  in  Reno  was  the  Reno  Gazette-Journal,  so  1  assume  that’s  the 
newspaper  you’re  talking  about.  I  don’t  recall  the  specific  articles,  but  1  didn’t  let  that  influence  my 
personal  decision  and  how  1  handled  the  licensing  from  my  personal  perspective.  And  again,  1  think  some 
of  that  problem  probably  went  back  to  when  he  served  as  the  chairman.  You  know,  in  that  role,  you’re  a 
public  figure  and  you’re  subject  to  second  guessing  and  scrutiny  as  much  in  that  office  as  some  people  in 
the  political  arena.  1  didn’t  consider  myself  to  be  in  the  political  arena,  even  though  there  are  those  who 
would  disagree  with  me,  but  you’re  under  scrutiny.  You  live  in  a  glass  bubble  like  people  who  run  for 
political  office. 

Well,  of  course,  as  you  said,  Mr.  Bunker  was  approved  as  a  key  employee  and  has  continued  to  serve  the 
State  of  Nevada  for  many,  many  years. 

Yes,  his  actual  government  jobs  ended  as  the  Chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  but  he 
went  into  the  industry  and  that’s  where  he  has  functioned.  His  last  role  was  as  president  of  the  Nevada 


294 


Resort  Association  in  Las  Vegas. 

Is  he  still  president? 

No,  he’s  retired  and  I  don’t  know  what  he  does  other  than,  perhaps,  act  in  some  consulting  role  to 
the  NRA. 


In  February  of 1985  the  Boyd  family  bought  the  Stardust  and  the  Fremont  Hotel/Casinos.  The  Stardust 
and  Fremont  had  long  been  a  thorn  in  the  side  of  regulators  when  it  was  operated  by  the  Argent 
Corporation.  Did  the  Boyd  family  purchasing  these  casinos  bring  an  end  to  the  many  problems  that 
regulators  had  faced  at  the  Stardust  over  the  years? 

Of  course,  you  have  to  understand  that  the  problems  that  they  helped  resolve  occurred  before  1 
came  onto  the  Board.  The  prior  administration  had  appointed  the  Boyd  group  as  supervisors  at  the 
Stardust  and  the  Del  Webb  Corporation  to  supervise  the  Fremont.  The  Board  during  my  time  then 
licensed  the  Boyd  group  to  purchase  both  the  Stardust  and  the  Fremont.  And,  it  pretty  well  put  an  end  to 
all  the  problems  that  had  been  created  before  with  financing  and  unsuitable  persons.  It  was  a  great 
resolution  and  it  had  been  crafted  primarily  by  the  prior  administration. 

By  James  Avarice ’s  board? 

Right.  And  by  the  Commission. 


In  October  of  1985,  the  Hilton  Hotel  Corporation  was  licensed  to  operate  and  own  a  ten  percent  interest 
in  the  Conrad  International  Hotel  and  Jupiter’s  Casino  in  Queensland ,  Australia.  Would  you  tell  us  the 
significance  of  the  licensing? 

Well,  they  were  the  first  Nevada  licensee  to  file  for  a  foreign  gaming  license.  The  application  was 
actually  filed  in  1983  and  they  started  their  operation  in  1983,  but  the  finality  of  their  approval  didn’t 
come  until  October  of  1985  when  they  were  licensed  to  own  ten  percent  of  the  casino  operation  in 
Queensland. 

Did  the  Gaming  Control  Board  send  agents  to  Australia  to  investigate  the  Australia  regulations? 

Several  agents  were  sent  over  there  including  a  member  or  two  of  the  Board.  And  that’s  one  thing 
that  I’d  like  to  note.  Prior  to  my  coming  on  the  Board,  they  used  to  routinely  send  the  board  members 
and/or  the  board  chairman  to  conduct  these  investigations,  and  I  modified  that  considerably.  1  felt  it  was 
the  role  of  the  experienced  agents  to  conduct  those  investigations,  and  the  board  members,  or  the  board 
chairmen  themselves,  only  went  on  rare  occasion  to  conduct  these  reviews.  But  the  agency  had  sent  a 
number  of  agents  from  both  the  investigation  and  audit  divisions  along  with  the  attorney  general 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


295 


representative  to  extensively  review  the  Australian  system  and  to  give  the  Board  a  sense  of  well-being 
and  the  sense  that  it  was  well-regulated  in  Australia.  They  wanted  to  be  certain  that  there  would  be  no 
embarrassment  to  the  State  of  Nevada  if  it  granted  a  Nevada  corporation  the  ability  to  operate  in  a  foreign 
jurisdiction. 

How  long  did  the  Nevada  gaming  agents  inspect  and  analyze  the  Australia  gaming  control  system? 

Well,  according  to  my  recollection,  the  investigation  of  the  review  started,  actually,  when  they 
filed  their  application  in  1983  and  continued  until  just  prior  to  their  approval  in  1985,  so  it  lasted  almost 
two  years.  To  what  extent  before  1  came  on  the  Board,  1  don’t  know. 

Was  the  Hilton  operation  held  up  until  it  was  granted  approval  by  Nevada? 

Yes.  And  there  were  several  meetings;  there’s  reference  in  another  publication  about  the  extent 
that  the  review  was  conducted.  We  required  them,  for  example,  to  develop  a  compliance  committee  and 
to  report  certain  findings  to  the  board.  Skip  Avansino,  a  local  Reno  attorney  who  served  on  the 
Commission  at  one  point,  was  recommended  to  the  Hilton  Corporation  by  the  Board  to  sit  on  its 
compliance  committee  and  he  ultimately  became  the  president  of  Hilton  Corporation  and  a  member  of 
Board  of  Directors.  So  it  was  an  intensive,  ongoing,  lengthy  review  but  well  worth  it  since  it  was  the  first 
opportunity  for  Nevada  to  ensure  that  companies  who  operated  in  foreign  jurisdictions  operated  properly 
and  that  the  regulation  in  that  foreign  jurisdiction  was  sufficient  to  satisfy  our  concerns. 

So  it  was  a  real  landmark  application  and  paved  the  way  for  many  other  organizations. 

Absolutely.  Of  course,  the  foreign  gaming  law  has  changed  considerably  since  I’ve  left  the 
Board,  and  it’s  a  little  easier  for  Nevada  companies  to  journey  into  foreign  jurisdictions  now  than  it  was 
back  then. 

Were  there  any  conditions  imposed  on  the  Hilton  Corporation  by  the  Gaming  Commission?  Was  Hilton 
allowed  to  police  their  own  operation? 

Well,  1  mentioned  the  compliance  committee  requirement,  and  that  wasn’t  new.  It  was  new  to 
Hilton  but  it  wasn’t  new  to  the  industry.  It  was  started  originally  with  Bally  Manufacturing  when  they 
first  came  to  town  and  became  a  manufacturer  and  distributor.  But  the  compliance  committee  is  the  self¬ 
policing  mechanism  that  a  company  uses  with  some  written  guidelines  that  are  approved  by  the  board 
chairman  to  ensure  that  they  operate  according  to  the  requirements  that  the  Board  lays  down.  And  that 
was  a  condition  on  their  approval,  that  they  have  a  compliance  committee,  that  they  have  a  Nevada 
representative,  a  Nevada  director.  There  were  other  conditions  but  1  don’t  recall  what  they  were. 

Did  you  go  to  Australia  yourself? 

No,  1  did  not,  but  1  did  go  later  on  when  Hilton  had  already  established  themselves  and  had  been 
approved  in  1985.  They  approached  the  Board  about  wanting  to  enter  into  an  agreement  with  some 
Turkish  individuals  to  establish  a  hotel/casino  in  Istanbul.  That  was  a  different  kind  of  a  country  than 


296 


Australia  and  I  and  my  Chief  of  Enforcement  at  the  time,  Stan  Romanski,  ultimately  journeyed  with 
corporate  counsel  from  Hilton,  Bill  Lebo,  to  Istanbul  and  Ankara  to  try  to  firm  up  some  of  the  same 
things  that  had  been  done  in  Australia  as  far  as  the  regulatory  process  was  concerned.  Prior  to  that,  1  had 
made  a  trip  to  Queensland  to  ensure  that  the  operations  were  going  as  they  were  supposed  to,  that  the 
regulatory  process  was  firm,  and  met  with  the  regulators  in  Queensland.  It  was  within  a  week  after  that 
that  we  made  the  trip  to  Istanbul  and  Ankara.  1  retired  from  the  Board  shortly  after  that  but  Hilton  did 
enter  into  an  agreement  with  this  Turkish  group  and  they  did  build  a  facility  in  Istanbul. 

In  December  of  1985,  Wayne  Newton  requested  permission  to  foreclose  on  a  parent  company  of  the 
financially  troubled  Aladdin  Hotel  to  recover  part  of  the  ten  million  owed  to  him  by  his  former  partner, 
Ed  Torres.  What  was  the  Board ’s  decision  on  that  request? 

Well,  the  Board  recommended  that  Wayne  be  given  the  ability  to  foreclose  and  the  Commission 
acted  upon  that  but  set  up  a  number  of  conditions.  As  1  recall,  this  was  a  telephonic  meeting  for  the  most 
part.  1  don’t  recall  Mr.  Newton  ever  appearing  before  the  Board  while  1  was  there,  and  I’m  sure  1  would 
recall  something  like  that.  But  there  was  a  discussion  about  his  involvement  actively  in  the  company  and 
there  were  some  conditions  placed  on  that  approval  and  gave  the  chairman  of  the  Board  the  ability  to  stop 
any  activity  if  those  conditions  weren’t  adhered  to. 

Well,  as  I  recall,  Newton  and  Torres  were  partners  at  one  time.  Is  that  correct? 

They  bought  the  hotel  in  1980  and  yes,  they  were  partners,  like  50  percent  ownership,  as  1  best 
recall.  But  that  friendship/partnership  kind  of  went  by  the  wayside  and  1  wasn’t  privy  to  all  of  the  ups  and 
downs,  but  there  was  clearly  some  difficulty  in  the  partnership  from  a  personality  standpoint. 

Did  Mr.  Newton  then  pull  out  of  it  and  let  Torres  buy  it  from  him? 

Yes.  And,  of  course,  it  wasn’t  long  after  that  that  the  bankruptcy  proceedings  began  and  that’s 
another  story. 

Were  you  involved  with  the  bankruptcy? 

Yes,  I  was.  That’s  where  Mr.  Yasuda  comes  into  the  picture — after  the  bankruptcy. 

When  did  the  bankruptcy  take  place? 

In  1985  Mr.  Yasuda  made  an  offer  to  buy,  and  he  had  a  competitor,  1  have  forgotten  who  the 
competitor  was,  but  the  bankruptcy  court  accepted  his  offer  and  he  filed  an  application  for  licensure  in 
1986. 

Was  the  Aladdin  closed  while  Yasuda  was  applying  for  his  license? 

Y es,  it  was  not  operational  during  that  period  of  time,  but  he  did  considerable  remodeling  during 
that  period  of  time. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


297 


Do  you  recall  how  long  that  the  Aladdin  was  closed? 

I  don’t  remember  when  it  closed  in  relationship  to  the  bankruptcy.  Mr.  Yasuda  wasn’t  licensed 
until  the  latter  part  of  1986,  so  it  was  closed  at  least  a  year  that  1  recall. 

Was  the  purchase  of  the  Aladdin  by  Mr.  Yasuda  the  first  purchase  by  a  foreign  investor? 

Yes,  it  was. 

Did  he  experience  any  difficulties  getting  licensed? 

Yes,  it  was  difficult  for  the  agents.  He  was  a  Japanese  citizen  and  his  holdings  were  primarily  in 
Japan  and  there  are  certain  standards  within  the  Japanese  community  that  would  preclude  our  people — 
meaning  our  agents — from  gleaning  the  information  you  need  to  glean.  So  it  was  most  difficult.  There 
wasn’t  the  cooperation  that  there  needed  to  be  and  it  took  an  inordinate  amount  of  time  to  accomplish 
what  needed  to  be  accomplished  to  satisfy  ourselves  that  Mr.  Y asuda  wasn’t  involved  with  nefarious 
people  and  that  his  money  was  where  he  said  it  was.  But  it  was  most  difficult  because  of  the  language 
barrier,  and  because  of  the  privacy  requirements  that  Japan  places  upon  their  citizens,  and  it’s  still  a 
problem  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge. 

A  problem  for  any  Japanese  investor? 

Yes. 

What  were  some  of  the  other  problems  or  difficulties? 

Well,  it  was  just  a  very  tenuous  time  and  I  know  that  even  though  1  believed  that  he  could 
understand  the  English  word,  communication  problems  between  himself  and  the  Board  and  the  regulators 
was  difficult.  1  recall  the  morning  of  the  hearing  in  Carson  [City],  just  before  it  commenced,  1  received  a 
phone  call  from  someone  alleging  that  Mr.  Yasuda  was  connected  to  the  Japanese  organized  crime 
families,  which  turned  out  not  to  be  true.  But  it  seemed  like  there  was  a  stumbling  block  at  every  step  of 
his  way  to  preclude  him  from  becoming  a  licensee  in  Nevada  and  the  end  result  was  he  got  a  limited 
license,  but  he  had  difficulties  after  that,  as  time  would  tell.  Not  that  he  wasn’t  a  proper,  suitable 
individual,  but  he  simply  didn’t  understand  the  requirements  of  Nevada.  He  didn’t  avail  himself  of  the 
right  people,  and  when  he  did  he  didn’t  follow  their  advice  and  he  ran  into  difficulty. 

Did  he  wind  up  going  bankrupt  too,  or  being  forced  out  of  the  business? 

1  can’t  remember  whether  he  went  bankrupt  or  not  because  that  was  sometime  after  1  left  the 
board.  I  did  express  to  him  that  we  realized  it  was  difficult  for  him,  and  this  was  on  the  public  record  that 
if  he  needed  questions  answered,  assistance  that  could  be  provided  legitimately,  all  he  had  to  do  was  pick 
up  the  telephone  and  call,  and  he  never  really  availed  himself  of  that,  to  my  knowledge.  At  least,  he  didn’t 
while  1  was  at  the  Board. 


298 


You  mentioned  earlier  that  board  members  went  to  Australia  to  check  out  Hilton.  Did  board  members  go 
to  Japan  or  had  you  put  in  that  rule  that  you ’d  rather  only  the  investigative  people  would  go? 

Well,  it  wasn’t  a  rule.  It  was  just  an  operational  decision  that  I’d  made,  but  1  guess  you  could  call 
it  a  rule.  Everybody  else  would  say  it  was  rule. 

[laughter] 

As  1  recall,  however,  Mr.  Hillyer  went,  because  he  had  audit  expertise.  That’s  my  recollection. 

We  were  very  selective  as  to  who  made  those  trips. 

It  must  have  been  difficult  trying  to  read  the  bank  statements. 

It  wasn’t  the  first  occasion  that  we’d  been  to  Japan.  Prior  to  my  coming  on  the  Board,  there  had 
been  a  manufacturer/distributor  licensed.  But,  this  was  the  first  time  that  a  Japanese  citizen  was  going  to 
be  licensed,  potentially,  to  operate  a  hotel/casino.  And  it  was  difficult  in  those  days  to  glean  information. 
The  agents  had  very  difficult  times. 

We  have  talked  about  two  history-making  events  that  happened  in  1985  and  1986:  the  Hilton  becoming 
the  first  Nevada  gaming  licensee  to  introduce  gaming  in  a  foreign  country,  and  Yasuda ’s  purchase  of  the 
Aladdin.  A  third  event  also  happened  that  year  involving  the  Carina  Corporation.  Would  you  tell  us  about 
that  event  and  what  was  so  unique  about  it? 

Well,  Carma  was  a  public  company  in  Canada  who,  prior  to  1984,  had  obtained  property  that  1 
refer  to  as  “The  Bourbon  Street”  hotel/casino  on  Flamingo  Road  in  Las  Vegas.  They  were  a  public 
company  and  they  wound  up  finding  themselves  in  a  position  where  they  wanted  to  operate  the  gaming 
establishment.  Of  course,  as  a  public  company  outside  the  United  States,  there  was  no  ability  pursuant  to 
our  rules  and  regulations  or  the  law  to  allow  them  to  do  that.  They  appeared  before  the  Gaming 
Commission,  in  October  of  1984  and  a  waiver  was  granted  so  that  the  Gaming  Control  Board  could 
accept  an  application  and  begin  a  review.  Their  application  was  accepted  and  an  investigation 
commenced.  In  January  of  1985,  when  1  became  the  chairman,  I,  accompanied  by  Jerry  Kowitt,  who  was 
the  Corporate  Chief  of  Security  for  me,  and  Bob  Faiss,  who  was  counsel  for  Carma,  journeyed  to  Canada 
and  spent  time  in  two  major  Canadian  cities.  The  latter  was  Montreal;  that’s  where  the  equivalent  of  the 
Canadian  Stock  Exchange  existed,  and  there  was  another  stock  exchange  in  a  western  province.  My 
purpose  for  going  up  there  was  to  review  their  regulatory  process,  in  so  far  as  public  companies  were 
concerned  and  we  did  that  in  a  short  period  of  time  while  the  investigation  in  the  interim  proceeded 
simultaneously. 

The  legislature  was  approached  by  Carma’ s  representative,  and  a  bill  was  passed  in  June  of  1985 
that  would  allow  a  public  company  from  a  foreign  country  to  have  the  same  ability  for  licensure  as  an 
American  company.  A  very  few  days  after  that  bill  was  signed  into  law,  the  Board  was  through  with  its 
investigation  and  the  law  tracked  the  criteria  that  was  developed  by  the  Board  and  the  Commission  in  its 
review  of  Carma,  so  there  wasn’t  any  hold-up,  and  they  were  licensed  as  the  first  foreign  public  company 
to  operate  a  gaming  operation  in  Nevada. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


299 


In  1979,  long  before  you  were  Chairman  of  the  Board,  federal  indictments  for  skimming  and  maintaining 
hidden  interests  in  the  Tropicana  Hotel  resulted  in  the  1983  conviction  of  Carl  Thomas,  the  Civella 
Brothers,  Joe  Agosto,  and  others.  Would  you  give  us  some  background  on  Carl  Thomas? 

He  was  active  in  the  community  before  I  became  a  member  of  the  Board,  and  actually  when  I  was 
still  in  Las  Vegas  working  for  the  Metropolitan  Police  Department.  1  did  not  know  him,  only  occasionally 
heard  his  name,  but  obviously  he  was  indicted  in  the  Tropicana  incident  and  then  subsequently  indicted  in 
the  Argent  matter  that  we  earlier  talked  about.  He  was  a  man  of  good  standing  in  the  community,  well- 
respected  both  by  community  leaders,  regulators,  and  law  enforcement.  But,  obviously,  he  wasn’t  what 
people  thought  he  was. 

Was  he  a  casino  owner  and  operator  also? 

1  recall  that  he  operated  the  Bingo  Palace  and  the  Slots-A-Fun  Casino.  He  first  came  to  my  direct 
attention  in  1985,  after  a  conviction  was  had  in  the  matter  on  the  Tropicana  and  Argent,  and  the  Board’s 
agents  considered  him  for  admission  to  the  “Black  Book.” 

Was  he  ever  sentenced  to  prison  time? 

Yes,  and  that  became  an  issue  for  us.  In  our  attempt  to  enter  him  as  a  candidate  in  the  “Black 
Book”  (that’s  the  common  name  that  everyone  calls  it;  obviously  it’s  the  excluded  person  list),  he  refused 
to  cooperate  with  our  agents.  And  we  discovered  during  the  review  for  the  “Black  Book”  that  there  had 
been  a  filing  before  the  federal  court  back  East  to  reduce  his  sentence  from  several  years  to  a  limited 
period  of  time — two  years  as  1  recall.  He  eventually  wound  up  serving  a  little  less  than  two  years  and  was 
released  back  into  the  community. 

Did  you  try  to  get  his  sentence  extended? 

When  it  was  brought  to  my  attention — the  filing  for  the  request  to  modify  the  sentence  -I  wrote  a 
letter  as  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  to  the  judge  handling  the  matter  and  pointed  out  his  lack  of 
cooperation.  Obviously  the  judge  ignored  my  request  and  he  sentenced  him  to  a  little  less  than  two  years 
and  he  was  ultimately  released,  as  1  said. 

Was  he  included  in  the  list  of  excluded  persons — the  ‘Black  Book”? 

Well,  we  had  the  hearing  in  1985  or  1986  and  his  lawyer  argued  a  number  of  issues.  The 
Commission  didn’t  accept  those  issues  as  to  the  placement,  but  he  pointed  out  that  when  he  was  released 
from  custody,  he  was  ordered,  for  a  five-year  period,  not  to  be  anywhere  near  Las  Vegas  or  the  casinos. 

As  1  recall,  he  was  not  to  go  within  fifty  miles  or  so  of  the  community.  So  the  Commission  put  the  entry 
of  the  “Black  Book”  in  abeyance  and  he  ultimately,  after  1  left  the  Board,  was  admitted  to  the  “Black 
Book”  in  1990,  if  1  recall  correctly. 


This  is  after  your  time  also,  but  do  you  know  whatever  happened  to  Mr.  Thomas? 


300 


No,  I  know  he  passed  away,  but  I  don’t  know  what  the  circumstances  were. 

What  are  your  personal  feelings  on  the  “Black  Book”? 

Well,  1  think  it’s  a  very  valuable  tool.  Sure,  there  are  not  great  numbers  of  persons  in  the  book, 
and  at  one  point  during  my  administration,  there  was  considerable  concern  about  the  Las  Vegas 
Metropolitan  Police  Department’s  attempt  to  increase  the  numbers  from  eighty  to  one  hundred  and  that 
would  have  been  mind-boggling  to  be  able  to  achieve.  I  think  the  industry  generally  accepted  my  premise 
that  that  was  too  much.  1  think  it’s  a  useful  tool  as  long  as  it’s  within  moderation,  and  I  don’t  think  there 
has  to  be  any  given  number  that  you  have  to  achieve.  It’s  not  the  type  of  an  excluded  list  that  New  Jersey 
uses,  because  almost  every  incident  of  a  disciplinary  measure  or  nature  causes  a  person  to  wind  up  on  an 
excluded  list  in  New  Jersey.  If  you  had  the  manpower,  and  you  had  the  resources,  certainly  you  could 
increase  it  more,  but  not  beyond  the  level  where  you  really  concentrate  on  the  hardcore  people  that  you 
think  will  improperly  influence  gaming  in  Nevada.  I  think  if  you  leave  it  in  the  lower  limits  it  serves  its 
purpose. 

And  as  you  said ,  if  you  put  in  too  many  people,  it  almost  becomes  worthless. 

Yes,  plus  it’s  an  extreme  burden  on  the  licensees  themselves.  By  pure  happenstance,  one  of  those 
individuals  could  wind  up  being  there.  They  do  now  have  a  “denied  applicant”  list  that’s  been  circulated 
and  cast  into  a  law,  and  the  licensees  have  to  be  concerned  with  that.  So  1  think  the  book  itself  serves  its 
purpose  as  it’s  being  utilized. 

Does  the  “denied  applicant”  law  exclude  persons  from  a  casino? 

No,  it  states  that  a  licensee  cannot  do  business  with  a  denied  applicant  unless  they  seek  special 
permission  from  the  regulators  in  Nevada.  It’s  a  list  that  is  updated  every  quarter,  it  goes  back  several 
years. 

Would  this  be  people  that  were  selling  dice  or  cards  to  a  casino? 

It  covers  all  aspects.  For  example,  an  individual  who  wanted  to  buy  an  establishment  in  Las 
Vegas  last  year  was  a  land  developer  out  of  San  Francisco.  He  became  a  denied  applicant  when  they 
turned  his  license  application  down,  so  he  cannot  do  any  business  with  any  gaming  establishment  unless 
he  seeks  special  approval  from  the  regulators. 

What  kind  of  business  would  he  do?  Or  would  he  attempt  to  do? 

Well,  he  could  become  a  landlord,  or  he  could  be  a  vendor  supplying  product  in  a  marketing 
sense,  for  example.  A  wide  variety  of  things,  and  for  each  of  those  contacts  with  a  gaming  license,  he 
would  have  to  be  approved  prior  to  the  action  taking  place.  But  he’s  not  prohibited  from  gambling,  or 
being  in  the  casino.  It’s  not  like  the  excluded  list. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


301 


Did  you  oftentimes  appear  before  the  legislature  to  lobby  for  issues  that  were  important  to  the  Gaming 
Control  Board? 

Well,  1  prided  myself  on  not  having  to  go  too  often.  We  had  a  rather  limited  program  both 
legislative  sessions  when  1  was  there,  but  1  certainly  appeared  each  session  on  budget  matters  and 
conducted  the  presentation  with  some  support.  When  it  came  to  the  technical  side  of  some  of  the 
legislation,  1  appeared  in  some  instances,  Mr.  Rumbolz  appeared  in  some  instances,  and  occasionally,  Mr. 
Hillyer  upon  request,  or  Mr.  Amerine,  but  primarily  it  was  myself  or  Mr.  Rumbolz. 

Were  you  there  if  they  had  questions  about  any  gaming  matters? 

Yes.  Any  time  there  was  a  question  from  the  legislature,  they  would  summon  me  and  1  would 
respond.  But,  I  didn’t  have  the  luxury  to  be  able  to  stay  there  for  the  entire  session,  because  we  were  an 
active  agency. 

Did  the  gaming  industry  have  a  strong  lobby  during  your  term?  Was  the  Nevada  Resort  Association 
active  then? 

The  Nevada  Resort  Association  was  in  effect  and  Northern  Nevada  also  had  an  association.  The 
law  firm  of  Lionel  Sawyer  &  Collins,  especially  Bob  Faiss  and  Harvey  Whittemore,  were  very  active. 
Richard  Bunker  was  also  involved  in  some  fashion.  It  was  a  team  concept,  but  primarily,  if  1  had  issues 
with  legislation  that  had  been  proffered,  1  would  meet  with  Bob  Faiss  and  Harvey  Whittemore. 

During  the  legislative  session  of  1985,  major  legislation  was  passed  that  was  extremely  beneficial  to 
gaming  regulators.  What  were  some  of  the  most  beneficial  laws  that  were  passed  that  session? 

From  a  personal  perspective,  1  think  that  the  budget  that  was  passed,  wherein  I  asked  for  an 
increase  in  personnel,  was  significant  as  to  the  proper  future  performance  on  a  professional  basis  for  the 
Board.  Of  course,  the  technical  legislation  that  stands  out  in  my  mind  we’ve  already  talked  about,  and 
that’s  the  ability  to  allow  foreign  public  companies  to  operate  a  casino.  Those  were  the  two  significant 
things  that  1  think  were  landmarks  for  the  Board. 

What  role  did  you  play  in  getting  this  legislation  passed?  Did  you  spend  a  lot  of  time  lobbying? 

Well,  I  didn’t  spend  an  inordinate  period  of  time,  but  1  spent  the  time  that  was  necessary, 
particularly  on  the  budget.  1  probably  spent  more  time  in  the  budget  presentation  before  two  committees 
than  anything  else.  We  supported  the  foreign  public  company  legislation  because  that  came  from  the 
industry,  but  most  of  my  time  was  spent  on  the  budget. 

Approximately  how  many  people  were  on  the  staff  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  when  you  were 
chairman? 


Well,  the  figures  for  1986  and  1987  were  about  the  same:  348  in  1986  and  364  in  1987. 


302 


Did  the  budget  increase  allow  you  to  add  more  people  to  your  staff? 

Yes.  In  1985,  they  allowed  me  to  increase  over  the  biennial  period,  a  two-year  period,  fifty-eight 
total  people,  the  majority  of  whom  were  agents.  As  I  mentioned  before,  in  my  mind,  that  was  the  most 
outstanding  piece  of  legislation  in  1985  for  the  Board  itself. 

Did  that  speed  up  the  licensing  process  quite  a  bit? 

Yes.  Of  course,  it  takes  time  to  hire  that  number  of  people  and  to  complete  their  training,  but 
ultimately,  yes,  it  did  speed  up  the  process.  My  goal  was  to  try  to  move  the  time  of  the  average 
application  process  from  twelve  to  eighteen  months  to  less  than  twelve.  We  got  the  time  down  to  an 
average  of  about  seven  to  eight  months  to  process  the  routine  applications.  So,  yes,  it  did  achieve  the  goal. 

That  is  very  important  to  the  individual ,  the  state,  and  the  property  to  get  a  speedy  decision  on  your 
license. 


Yes  it  is.  You  know,  you  have  people  who  are  interested  in  entering  the  industry,  or  someone  who 
wants  to  expand,  and  if  they’re  held  up  because  of  the  lack  of  resources  and  the  timeliness  that  it  takes  to 
process  those  applications,  that’s  tax  dollars  missing.  It’s  vital  for  applicants  to  get  speedy  decisions.  I’ve 
had  instances  when  1  sat  on  the  Board  when  people  found  out  how  long  it  would  take,  and  they  became 
disinterested  dramatically. 

In  the  mid-1980s,  you  became  aware  that  many  of  the  gaming  attorneys  coming  before  the  Board  were 
lacking  in  good  judgement  or  knowledge  of  the  industry.  What  action  did  you  take  to  help  alleviate  that 
situation? 

1  drafted  and  sent  a  letter  to  the  Gaming  Attorney’s  Group,  cautioning  them  to  help  solve  the 
problem  to  ensure  that  gaming  lawyers  who  appear  before  the  regulators  were  well-prepared  and 
represented  their  clients  in  a  better  stance  than  some  experiences  have  shown  had  previously  occurred. 
And  the  letter  was  well-received. 

Were  there  actually  any  people  that  possibly  didn ’t  get  licensed  due  to  their  attorneys  not  having  basic 
knowledge  of  the  licensing  procedure? 

1  can’t  remember  anything  that  drastic,  but  delays  occurred  as  a  result  of  unpreparedness  on  the 
part  of  counsel.  In  some  instances,  unfamiliarity  with  the  uniqueness  of  the  gaming  law  caused  delays. 
There  might  have  been  one  or  two  instances  where  perhaps  a  potential  client  had  lost  the  ability  to  glean  a 
license  because  of  the  inappropriate  conduct  of  the  lawyer,  but  the  most  difficult  part  was  the  time  that  it 
took  and  the  delays  that  took  time  away  from  us  in  processing  other  applications  that  were  better 
prepared. 


Was  there  a  regulation  created  that  governs  the  eligibility  and  conduct  of  people  who  represent 
applicants  and  others  before  the  Board  and  the  Commission? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


303 


It  wasn’t  created  as  a  result  of  that;  it  was  in  existence  already.  It  was  “Reg  10.”  It’s  been 
modified  a  number  of  times,  but  people  just  didn’t  focus  on  what  their  responsibilities  were.  They  knew 
what  Reg  1 0  was  from  conversations  with  counsel,  but  they  just  didn’t  get  into  the  nuances  of  the  specific 
regulations.  There  is  a  regulatory  book  with  rules  and  regulations  that’s  a  good  three  inches  thick  and 
you’ve  got  to  have  a  working  knowledge  of  what  those  are  to  properly  represent  your  client. 

Can  any  attorney  who  is  licensed  in  the  State  of  Nevada  appear  before  the  Board  or  are  there  certain 
exams  or  tests  you  have  to  take? 

No,  if  you’re  licensed  to  practice  as  an  attorney  in  Nevada,  you  can  automatically  appear  before 
the  Board.  And  other  enrolled  agents  can  appear  on  recommendation  from  someone  who’s  already 
enrolled  to  practice  before  the  Board.  For  example,  any  individual  can  say  they  represent  someone  as  long 
as  they’re  recommended  by  an  enrolled  agent.  They  can  appear  before  the  Board.  It’s  not  a  hard  fast  thing 
from  what  I’ve  seen.  When  I  sat  on  the  Board,  I  would  accept  input  from  people  on  given  issues  without 
regard  to  that  fact.  I  just  thought  that  was  part  of  the  common  sense  approach  to  getting  the  end  result 
achieved. 

In  April  of 1986 ,  Bally  Manufacturing  Corporation  sought  approval  to  purchase  the  MGM  Grand  Hotels 
in  Reno  and  Las  Vegas.  Would  you  tell  us  about  that  application? 

Well,  that’s  correct,  they  did  make  an  application  to  buy  the  two  MGM  properties  in  Reno  and 
Las  Vegas,  but  it  was  going  to  be  such  a  difficult  task  that  I,  as  chairman  of  the  Board,  made  the  decision 
to  bifurcate  the  application.  We  already  had  an  ongoing  compliance  requirement  for  Bally,  so  we  would 
use  that  compliance  requirement  and  continue  to  review  some  of  the  specific  people  involved  beyond  the 
deal  later  on.  It  just  made  common  sense  that  you  couldn’t  accomplish  that  in  a  timely  fashion,  so  the 
bifurcation  appeared  to  be  the  best  way  to  move  the  application  along.  After  I  was  through  with  that 
process,  I  said  that  I  would  probably  never  bifurcate  again,  because  it  became  too  long  and  too 
complicated  and  was  a  little  awkward,  but  it  achieved  the  end  result:  the  acquisition  of  two  properties  by 
someone  who  wanted  to  sell  them,  who  was  a  licensee,  to  the  buyer,  who  was  also  a  licensee — Kirk 
Kerkorian,  who  wanted  to  sell  the  two  hotels,  and  Bally  Manufacturing,  that  wanted  to  buy  them.  So  you 
had  a  seller  in  the  form  of  Kerkorian,  who  wanted  to  move  it  along,  and  you  had  a  buyer  in  the  form  of 
Bally,  and  they  both  were  licensees.  It  was  a  long,  extended  application,  and  it  ended  up  taking  us  quite  a 
while  in  the  bifurcation  to  tie  up  the  loose  ends  from  some  of  the  areas  beyond  the  deal  itself.  If  we  had 
not  approved  the  acquisition,  and  spent  time  looking  at  all  facets  of  it,  it  would  have  gone  on  to  the  point 
where  perhaps  the  sale  might  not  have  been  consummated. 

Who  were  some  of  the  officers  and  directors  of  Bally  that  applied  for  licensing? 

Well,  Bob  Mullane  was  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Bally,  and  there  was  a  vice-president,  Jim 
Rochford,  who  was  their  compliance  person.  Mr.  Richard  Gilman  was  to  be  the  principal  operating  person 
for  the  company.  He  wasn’t  licensed  in  the  initial  process  until  we  could  resolve  an  issue  with  one  of  his 
employees.  After  we  resolved  that  issue  with  her,  he  was  summarily  licensed  as  the  Chief  Operating 
Officer  for  the  hotel  companies. 


304 


A  person  named  Joe  Slyman,  the  owner  and  operator  of  the  Royal  Casino,  had  quite  a  troubled  history  as 
a  casino  operator.  Would  you  give  us  some  background  and  tell  us  about  Mr.  Slyman  and  the  troubles  the 
board  had  with  his  operation? 

Mr.  Slyman  was  the  operator  of  the  Royal  Casino  in  Las  Vegas  and  he’d  applied  for  race  and 
sports  book  licenses.  When  we  started  the  review  of  that  application,  we  kept  coming  up  with  one  thing 
after  the  other — poor  accounting  principles,  non-adherence  to  the  rules,  his  lending  procedures.  We  even 
drafted  a  complaint  at  one  point  in  time.  Then  we’d  get  certain  things  accomplished  and  we  would  grant 
limited  licenses,  and  this  limited  license  thing  went  on  way  after  1  left  the  Board,  and  finally,  the 
Commission  just  let  the  license  lapse  and  he  no  longer  was  involved  in  gaming.  It  was  a  case  of  inept 
management,  and  you  might  wonder  why  didn’t  we  stop  it  earlier?  Because  he  was  a  longtime  licensee, 
we  were  trying  to  get  him  to  comply,  but  he  simply  wouldn’t  listen  and  we  spent  an  inordinate  amount  of 
time,  manpower,  and  effort  on  his  license.  Probably  more  than  we  should  have,  in  retrospect. 

It  has  to  be  a  difficult  decision.  You  ’re  weighing  closing  a  casino,  putting  people  out  of  work  and 
depriving  the  state  of  taxes,  against  leaving  it  open  and  trying  to  help  the  individuals  and  the  state. 

As  I  said,  in  retrospect,  probably  we  should  have  closed  the  doors  early  on  because  it  clearly 
wasted  a  lot  of  time  and  effort  for  both  the  Commission  and  the  Board.  However,  1  personally  wasn’t 
necessarily  focusing  on  the  tax  revenue  part,  but  on  keeping  it  open  and  viable  and  keeping  the  people 
employed. 


In  August  of 1986,  there  was  a  gentleman  named  Charles  Bluth,  who  appeared  before  your  board 
requesting  a  license  as  owner/operator  of  the  Cal-Neva  Lodge  at  Lake  Tahoe.  Would  you  tell  us  about 
Mr.  Bluth  and  about  any  problems  the  Board  had  with  him? 

Mr.  Bluth  was  a  building  contractor  in  Southern  California  who  had  acquired  the  Cal-Neva  at  the 
lake,  and  he  was  most  difficult  from  the  standpoint  of  the  agents  trying  to  get  the  necessary  information  to 
process  the  application  and  do  it  timely.  In  fact,  at  one  point  1  had  Mr.  Bluth  and  his  counsel  come  to  my 
office  and  laid  down  certain  guidelines  that  he  was  going  to  have  to  adhere  to  or  the  item  would  not  be 
placed  on  the  agenda.  He  corrected  some  of  those  things  and  even  up  to  the  day  of  the  hearing,  still  had 
not  complied  with  some.  It  was  very  frustrating  and  I  think  that  is  evidenced  by  the  comments  of  all  three 
of  the  board  members  in  the  hearing,  and  the  fact  that  we  voted  three-zip  not  to  recommend  his  licensure. 
When  the  Commission  heard  him  the  next  week  or  so  he  was  a  transformed  individual,  both  in  his 
presence  and  his  compliance  and  so  on.  But,  I  think  that  history  will  show  you  that  he  was  difficult  even 
after  licensure.  He  was  an  individual  that  wanted  to  push  the  limits  when  it  came  to  following  the 
regulations  and,  of  course,  he  still  is  an  operator  and  the  Board  still  has  its  difficulties  with  him  from  time 
to  time.  However,  he  still  operates  the  property  and  apparently  is  successful. 


You  mentioned  something  here  I’d  like  to  go  back  to.  You  say  the  Board  recommended  denial  three  to 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


305 


nothing  and  yet  the  Commission  okayed  it.  Please  explain  how  the  Commission  can  override  your  vote. 

It  takes  a  unanimous  vote  of  the  Commission  to  override  a  denial  on  the  part  of  the  Board.  And 
that’s  an  instance  where  that  occurred. 

So  if  it  would  have  been  a  four-to-one  vote  by  the  Commission  he  would  have  been  denied? 

It  would  have  been  denied,  right. 


While  on  the  Board  several  unsavory  characters  appeared  before  you.  Were  you  or  your  family  ever 
threatened  by  any  of  those  people? 

On  one  occasion  my  daughter  was  intimidated  by  a  relative  of  one  of  the  applicants  and  then  the 
individual  made  a  visit  to  the  Las  Vegas  offices  of  the  Board  and  indicated  to  the  agents  that  my  life  was 
in  jeopardy. 

This  is  while  you  were  still  on  the  Board? 

Yes.  We  took  the  necessary  steps.  He  never  followed  through,  nor  did  he  show  up  at  any 
meetings  and  I  chalked  it  up  to  a  disgruntled  son  who  was  trying  to  defend  his  father’s  rights.  He  just  took 
the  wrong  steps  in  trying  to  do  it,  but  no  one  was  hurt.  That’s  the  only  one  that  I  recall. 

Were  there  any  eccentric,  strange  or  unusual  characters  that  appeared  before  you  during  your  tenure 
that  you  would  care  to  discuss? 

It  depends  upon  how  you  define  eccentric  or  strange.  It  was  a  very  interesting  job  and  you  were 
confronted  with  all  the  personalities  that  one  could  even  imagine.  I  think  probably  the  most  unique 
individual  was  “Cave  Rock  Manny”  [Beals],  who,  when  he  appeared  before  us,  and  he  tried  his  normal 
intimidation  techniques,  I  cut  him  off. 

Would  you  give  me  a  little  background  on  Cave  Rock  Manny? 

He  was  a  licensee  at  Lake  Tahoe  but  he  had  a  slot  machine  license  only.  When  he  appeared 
before  us,  he’d  constantly  get  up  and  interrupt  the  meeting  and  try  to  intimidate  the  witnesses. 

Was  his  casino  at  Cave  Rock,  Nevada? 

Yes,  Cave  Rock,  on  the  South  Shore  of  Lake  Tahoe.  It  seemed  like  Manny  followed  my  state 
government  career  because  he  would  tangle  with  people  at  DMV  and  he  would  tangle  with  the  Health 
Division  when  I  was  the  Director  of  Human  Resources.  He  was  an  intimidator,  a  bully;  just  his  mere  size 
would  intimidate  some  people.  I  was  prepared  for  him  when  he  came  before  the  hearing,  and,  as  I  said,  I 
shut  him  down;  I  just  ordered  him  down.  It  took  a  couple  times  to  get  that  done  and  then  he  finally 


306 


quieted  down  and  we  went  on  with  the  hearing. 


How  about  a  fellow  named  John  Anderson? 

Yes.  He  was  the  farmer  from  Davis,  California  that  owned  the  Maxim.  Right  after  1  came  on  the 
board,  1  got  a  visit — unscheduled,  unannounced — from  John  Anderson.  He  came  in  and  wanted  to 
introduce  himself  to  me.  He  was  the  licensee  for  the  Maxim  in  Las  Vegas  and  the  Tonopah  Station  in 
Tonopah,  and  he  wanted  to  talk  about  some  issues  as  they  related  to  his  licenses,  and,  as  1  recall,  he 
wanted  to  talk  about  the  Dunes,  but  I’m  not  certain  of  that.  1  simply  told  him  that  it  was  an  inappropriate 
time  for  the  conversation  and  that  he  should  prepare  himself,  contact  an  attorney,  and  come  back  and  talk 
to  me  about  what  the  issues  were.  Beyond  that  I  had  no  difficulties,  so  to  speak,  with  him.  I’m  aware  that 
after  I  left  the  Board  his  financial  kingdom  kind  of  fell  apart  and  he  had  difficulties  at  the  Maxim  and 
ultimately  had  the  Tonopah  Station  taken  back  by  the  landlords. 

Did  you  ever  have  any  political  pressure  to  make  certain  decisions,  appointments,  or  rulings? 

Absolutely  not.  When  I  took  the  job,  the  governor  and  I  chatted  about  that  and  he  recognized  that 
there  was  a  role  I  had  to  play  and  he  never  interfered,  nor  did  anyone  else. 

As  Chairman  of  the  Gaming  Board,  what  did  you  feel  was  your  uppermost  responsibility? 

To  function  in  the  role  of  executive  director  of  the  agency,  and  to  see  that  the  organization  was 
professionally  run  and  that  the  dictates  of  the  State  of  Nevada  were  met.  That’s  what  I  thought  my 
responsibility  was. 

What  words  would  you  use  to  describe  the  Chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  Bart  Jacka? 

1  would  say  that  I  was  firm  but  fair,  I  believed  strongly  in  the  open  door  policy,  not  only  for 
licensees  but  for  employees,  and  I  think  1  was  a  good  listener.  I  also  believed  that  a  philosophy  of 
common  sense  was  better  to  use  sometimes  than  anything  else. 

You  had  several  major  accomplishments  during  your  tenure.  Would  it  be  possible  for  you  to  list  what  you 
feel  were  your  major  accomplishments? 

Well,  one  of  my  goals  was  to  decrease  the  application  process  time,  which  1  believe  I  did. 
Another  was  to  establish  better  professionalism  amongst  the  troops.  Another,  one  I  accomplished  on  the 
last  day  in  office,  was  1  wanted  some  of  the  accounting  regulations  revamped  so  there  was  more 
simplification  and  the  licensees  had  a  better  chance  of  accomplishing  their  ends.  1  signed  an  order  to  that 
effect  the  day  I  left  office  in  1987. 1  wanted  to  bring  back  a  sense  of  pride  and  belonging,  and  I  think  I 
accomplished  that.  And  besides  that,  I  had  a  lot  of  tun.  I  enjoyed  the  job. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


307 


Why  did  you  resign  from  the  Board? 

Y ears  ago,  when  I  got  started  in  the  government  business,  I  said  that  I  would  try  to  work  thirty 
years  and  then  retire  and  press  on  to  something  else.  And,  that’s  exactly  what  happened.  1  was  fifty-one 
years  old  when  I  retired  and  1  had  my  thirty  years  in  service  between  state  and  local  government.  1  did  not 
know  it  at  the  time,  but  my  late  wife,  shortly  after  1  retired,  discovered  that  she  had  cancer,  and  had  1  not 
resigned  from  a  voluntary  standpoint,  1  probably  would  have  had  to  in  order  to  help  her  in  her  seven  years 
of  struggles.  1  also  thought  there  comes  a  time  in  every  individual’s  life  when  you’ve  accomplished  things 
you’ve  wanted  to  accomplish  and  your  career  comes  to  an  end.  I’d  been  very,  very  fortunate,  I  thought,  in 
the  various  jobs  I  had  to  not  have  had  undue  criticism — beyond  what  I  deserved — heaped  upon  me.  In  a 
state  agency  when  you  wake  up  every  morning,  even  though  you  think  you’re  in  control,  you  literally 
don’t  have  the  control  you  think  you  do  because  it’s  so  vast.  There  are  one  hundred  and  ten  thousand 
square  miles  that  you’re  responsible  for,  in  the  sense  of  the  word,  and  you  don’t  know  what  all  the  people 
do.  1  just  reached  a  time  when  enough  was  enough.  1  was  tired.  The  statute  talks  about  the  “executive 
director  of  the  agency,”  and  that’s  what  the  chairman  is.  And  if  you  run  the  day-to-day  operations  in  the 
agency  in  addition  to  the  public  persona  that  goes  along  with  being  the  Chairman  of  the  Board,  it’s  a  big 
role.  Besides,  1  went  from  no  glasses  to  bifocals  because  of  all  the  reading  material  that  I  went  through 
and  it’s  a  lot  worse  today  than  it  was  then. 

What  did  you  do  after  you  resigned  from  the  Board? 

1  was  hired  by  Bally’s  in  Reno.  1  worked  for  them  for  nine  years,  ultimately  becoming  a  vice 
president  of  Bally  Manufacturing.  Then  Bally  Manufacturing  spun  off  the  gaming  side  of  it  to  a  public 
company  called  Bally  Gaming  International  Inc.  with  a  subsidiary  in  Bally  Gaming  Inc.,  and  I  became 
Vice  President  of  Gaming  Compliance  for  Bally  Gaming  Inc.,  and  a  member  of  their  board  of  directors.  I 
also  became  vice  president  of  the  parent  company,  Bally  Gaming  International.  I  worked  for  them  for 
nine  years  and  monitored  their  licensing  throughout  the  world  and,  of  course,  when  I  became  a  vice 
president,  that  threw  me  into  a  licensing  role.  I  was  licensed  in  fifty-some  jurisdictions,  including  Indian 
gaming  at  the  time  I  left  in  1996. 

Who  were  you  directly  responsible  to?  The  Board  of  Directors? 

Mr.  Gilman  was  the  Chairman  of  the  Board,  and  I  reported  to  him,  and  from  a  compliance 
perspective,  the  audit  committee  monitored  some  of  my  activity.  Because  it  was  compliance  cited  my 
direct  report  at  the  parent  level  was  Mr.  Gilman. 

Is  he  the  gentleman  who  was  originally  licensed  when  Bally  Manufacturing  got  licensed? 

Well,  not  initially.  He  was  licensed  a  few  months  after  Bally  got  their  license,  when  we  resolved 
that  one  issue. 


Is  he  still  with  Bally  Manufacturing? 


308 


No,  he’s  retired.  Bally  Gaming  International  and  its  subsidiaries  were  sold  to  Alliance  Gaming  in 
1996  and  Mr.  Gilman  and  1  departed.  I’ve  since  talked  to  him  a  couple  times  on  the  phone,  but  1  don’t 
know  what  he’s  doing  today. 

Were  there  any  adverse  comments  from  the  general  public  or  the  gaming  industry  when  you  left  as 
chairman  of  the  Board  to  go  to  work  for  a  gaming  company? 

None  that  I’m  aware  of,  but  that  year  the  legislature  had  before  them  a  bill  relating  to  a  “cooling- 
off’  period.  1  wasn’t  affected  by  that  because  I  was  already  employed  in  the  private  sector.  However, 
there  was  no  negative  comment  as  far  as  I  know.  1  do  think  there  was  a  great  concern  on  the  part  of  some 
of  the  legislators  and  the  governor  himself  that  to  ensure  the  integrity  of  the  process,  there  should  be  a 
cooling-off  period.  I  never  agreed  with  that,  and  the  reason  I  didn’t  is  that  this  mind  can  only  retain  so 
many  things  and  you  cover  so  many  issues  that  I  don’t  think  it’s  significant.  And  I  don’t  think  in  the 
history  of  the  regulatory  process  there’s  been  anyone  that  has  violated  that  policy,  or  caused  any 
embarrassment  to  the  State  of  Nevada. 

But  the  law  was  passed  and  it’s  in  existence  now  and  seems  to  be  working  well. 

What  are  you  doing  now? 

I’m  a  gaming  consultant.  I  chair  the  Compliance  Committee  for  one  public  company  in  Las 
Vegas  that’s  involved  in  a  race-and-sports-book  operation.  I  also  chair  the  Compliance  Committee  in 
Reno  for  a  licensed  manufacturer — a  private  company — and  I  presently  sit  on  the  Board  of  Directors  and 
am  an  officer  for  the  parent  company  that  owns  the  Four  Queens  Hotel  in  Las  Vegas,  the  Elsinore 
Corporation.  I  also  consult  for  Elsinore  Corporation  in  compliance  matters  for  the  hotel. 

You  sound  like  you  ’re  very  busy. 

I’m  semi-retired,  but  it’s  an  interesting  business  and  it  keeps  my  mind  busy.  It  affords  me  the 
opportunity  to  do  things  I  couldn’t  do  otherwise,  and  besides,  my  wife  still  works,  and  when  she  retires 
we’ll  do  something  different. 

Is  there  anything  you  would  like  to  add  or  any  people  or  properties  you  would  like  to  discuss  or  are  we  at 
the  end  of  the  story  here? 

As  I’ve  said  in  the  past,  I  think  this  particular  job  in  gaming  was  the  most  dynamic,  most 
interesting,  most  challenging,  most  time-consuming,  and  the  most  exhausting.  But  were  I  younger,  and 
were  I  asked  to  do  it  again,  I’d  do  it  in  a  heartbeat. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


309 


12 

Bob  Lewis 


Bob  Lewis  was  born  in  Ely,  Nevada  in  1936 
and  moved  to  Reno  to  attend  the  University 
of  Nevada.  While  at  the  university  he  was  a 
fraternity  brother  of  future  Nevada  governor 
and  U.S.  Senator,  Richard  Bryan.  After 
graduation,  Lewis  sensed  in  the  U.S.  Army, 
began  a  thirty-year  career  with  the  Sierra 
Pacific  Power  Company,  and  was  central  to 
the  founding  of  the  Economic  Development 
Authority  of  Western  Nevada  (EDAWN).  In 
1984,  Governor  Biy an  appointed  him  to  the 
Nevada  Gaming  Commission,  a  position  he 
was  to  hold  for  almost  thirteen  years  with 
three  different  chairmen:  Paul  Bible,  John 
O  Reilly,  and  Bill  Curran.  After  his  time  on 
the  Board,  Lewis  remained  connected  to  the 
industry  by  serving  on  the  compliance 
committees  of  numerous  gaming  entities, 
including  the  Hard  Rock  Hotel,  the 
Venetian,  and  Konami  Gaming. 


Bob  Lewis.  Photo  courtesy  of  Bob  Lewis 


Dwayne  Kling:  It’s  December  12,  2003.  My  name  is  Dwayne  Kling.  I’m  with  Mr.  Bob  Lewis,  in  his  home 
in  Reno,  Nevada.  This  is  the  first  in  a  series  of  oral  history  interviews  with  Mr.  Lewis.  I  would  like  to  ask 
you,  Mr.  Lewis,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have  your  permission  to 
make  available  to  the  public  the  tapes  and  the  transcripts  of  the  interviews  that  we  are  about  to  begin 


310 


today? 


Bob  J.  Lewis:  Yes 

Let ’s  start  out  by  asking  you  when  and  where  were  you  born? 

1  was  bom  in  Ely,  Nevada,  in  1936. 

When  did  you  come  to  Reno? 

1  came  to  Reno  after  graduating  from  high  school  to  attend  the  university,  and  I’ve  been  here  ever 

since. 

What  did  you  do  after  graduating  from  the  University  of  Nevada? 

After  I  went  to  the  university  I  was  in  the  Army.  I  was  a  second  lieutenant  in  the  artillery  and 
spent  my  time  at  Fort  Sill,  Oklahoma. 

Was  that  during  the  Korean  War? 

That  was  after  the  Korean  War.  That  was  in  1959.  Then  I  came  back  to  Reno  and  went  to  work 
for  Sierra  Pacific  Power  Company.  And  I  worked  there  for  thirty-some  odd  years. 

Were  you  working  there  when  you  were  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Commission? 

Yes. 

What  year  were  you  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Commission? 

I  was  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Commission  in  1984  by  then-Govemor  Bryan.  I  was  appointed  at 
that  time  to  replace  an  unexpired  term  of  Ray  Avansino,  who  was  appointed  to  do  some  other  things  as  an 
attorney  for  a  trust.  And  so  he  had  to  resign  from  the  Commission,  and  then  I  fulfilled  his  unexpired  term. 

Did  you  know  the  governor  prior  to  the  appointment  or  had  you  worked  with  him  on  any  projects  or 
anything? 

Well,  we  were  fraternity  brothers  and  we  went  to  school  together.  And  then,  of  course,  I  didn’t 
see  him  when  he  went  back  to  Las  Vegas  and  went  into  law.  But  when  he  became  governor  he  was  very 
big  in  economic  development,  and  that  was  one  of  his  cornerstones  for  his  campaign.  I  happened  to  be 
doing  a  lot  of  economic  development  work  here  in  the  Truckee  Meadows;  I  was  the  original  founder  of 
ED  AWN  [Economic  Development  Authority  of  Western  Nevada],  and  then-Govemor  List  had  asked  me 
to  serve  on  a  committee  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  Commission  on  Economic  Development  and 
the  Commission  on  Tourism.  I  was  one  of  a  ten  or  twelve-member  committee  for  both  Las  Vegas  and 
Reno.  And  after  a  long  study,  we  had  made  recommendations  to  redo  that  whole  thing,  as  neither  one  of 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


311 


those  commissions  were  very  effective.  We  made  the  recommendations  to  List,  and  that  was  about 
election  time,  and,  of  course,  Bryan  beat  List.  And  we  had  done  all  this  work  and  the  committee  believed 
in  it  so  much  that  we  wanted  to  make  sure  that  this  was  earned  forward.  And  because  1  knew  Dick,  they 
asked  me  if  1  would  sit  down  and  talk  to  him.  And  1  along  with  a  couple  of  other  guys  visited  with  Bryan 
and  we  went  through  all  of  the  material.  And  he  was  very  impressed  with  what  we  had  done  and  he 
adopted  the  whole  system,  which  is  still  in  place  today. 

And  then  1  did  after  1  worked  on  that  helping  him  do  that,  it  was  really  a  strange  thing.  1  got  a  call 
one  day  from  Marlene  Lockhart,  his  assistant.  And  she  said,  “The  governor  would  like  to  have  coffee  with 
you.” 

And  1  said,  “Well,  that’s  fine.” 

And  so  we  met  at  the  old  Lyon’s  restaurant  out  on  South  Virginia,  [laughter]  He  had  just  come 
from  Las  Vegas  or  something.  And  he  asked  me  if  1  would  be  interested  in  serving  on  a  commission. 

Well,  1  thought  it  was  going  to  be  Economic  Development,  because  that’s  where  1  really  had  the 
background  and  the  knowledge  and  I’d  done  a  lot  of  things  there.  And  he  said,  “No,  no.”  He  said,  “I 
would  like  to  appoint  you  to  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission.”  Well,  to  be  honest  with  you,  I  didn’t 
know  anything  about  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission.  And  so  he  explained  a  little  bit  to  me,  and  then 
Marlene  sent  me  a  lot  of  information. 

Did  you  immediately  agree  to  go  on  the  Commission? 

No,  no! 


No? 


1  did  not  agree,  because  I  didn’t  want  to  do  something  that  I  didn’t  really  feel  comfortable  with, 
and  I  needed  to  understand  how  it  all  worked.  And,  of  course,  1  had  a  very  good  job  with  the  power 
company,  too,  besides  that.  And  1  had  to  talk  to  those  people,  which  I  did  do.  And  after  a  while  it  worked 
out  fine  and  I  agreed  to  do  it.  It’s  a  crazy  thing.  When  I  said,  “OK,  I’ll  do  it,”  he  had  already — of  course, 
he  didn’t  have  to  do  a  background  check.  He  knew  me  pretty  well. 

But  he  said,  “OK,  I’ll  meet  you  at  Lyon’s  again  for  coffee  and  we’ll  talk  about  when  you  start  and 
all  that  kind  of  stuff.”  I  went  to  Lyon’s  and  Marlene  was  there  at  that  meeting.  She  had  this  huge  briefcase 
and  she  said,  “This  is  your  material  for  the  meeting  next  week.” 

[laughter] 

Well,  I  mean,  I  didn’t  know  anything  about  the  Commission — the  operational  procedures  of  the 
commission  or  anything.  Fortunately,  Paul  Bible  was  the  chairman.  Paul  called  me — I  know  Paul  very 
well — and  he  kind  of  gave  me  the  background.  He  said,  “Look  at  all  the  information,  read  all  the 
summaries  and  so  on,  and  if  there’s  anything  in  there  you  don’t  feel  comfortable  with,  just  abstain.”  I 
didn’t  realize  that  each  commissioner  voted  on  each  agenda  item  and  the  majority  ruled  and  there  were  a 
lot  of  other  complicated  rules  in  there.  But  I  went  to  that  meeting  and  I  was  dumbfounded.  I  had  read  all 
the  material  and  it  was  fascinating.  It  was  very  interesting  to  me,  because  I  did  not  know  anything  about 
gaming.  I  had  never  been  involved  in  any  kind  of  gaming.  And  that’s  how  it  all  started. 


312 


Were  you  aware  that  there  was  another  regulatory  agency,  the  Control  Board? 

Yes,  but  1  really  didn’t  know  how  all  that  worked.  Bryan  told  me  about  that,  and  Paul  also  told 
me  about  that.  And,  of  course,  1  had  read  the  statutes  on  how  it  was  structured.  But  like  everything  else, 
that  isn’t  how  it  works,  you  know. 

[laughter]  No.  No. 

[laughter]  1  mean,  it  works  a  lot  differently.  And  then  we  just  started  from  there.  It  was  a 
fascinating,  fascinating  tenure. 

How  long  did  you  serve  on  the  Commission? 

Well,  let’s  see,  I  served  three  full  terms,  plus  the  partial  term.  I  went  on  the  Commission  in 
August  1984. 

And  then  you  retired  in  1997? 

April  1997. 

Almost  thirteen  years.  Well,  you  served  on  the  Commission  longer  than  any  other  commissioner.  What 
specifically  motivated  you  to  serve  the  State  of  Nevada  for  such  a  long  period  of  time? 

Well,  number  one,  it  was  a  very  interesting  time.  It  was  fortuitous  for  me,  because  gaming  was 
going  through  some  huge  changes.  Every  meeting  was  a  fascinating  experience  from  my  perspective.  I 
enjoyed  working  with  the  Board  and  with  the  Commission.  The  people  that  came  before  you,  the 
attorneys  and  the  business  people,  for  the  most  part,  were  fine,  fine  people,  and  they  were  very 
knowledgeable;  they  were  very  skilled  in  what  they  did.  It  was  an  opportunity  to  meet  some  really 
wonderful,  wonderful  people  who  were  highly  successful  in  gaming.  I  don’t  think  I  ever  went  to  a 
meeting  that  did  not  hold  my  interest.  I  just  loved  it.  It  was  something  that  I  really  enjoyed  doing.  And  as 
it  turned  out,  I  got  to  use  a  lot  of  my  strengths  in  business,  and  that  was  really  my  perspective.  I  always 
looked  at  things  from  the  businessman’s  side,  of  what  he  had  to  do  to  get  a  gaming  license  and  to  abide 
by  all  of  the  statutes  and  regulations  of  the  Gaming  Control  Act.  That  was  always  my  view.  It  was  more 
of  the  humanistic  business  side  rather  than  a  purely  regulatory  side.  I  know  you  have  to  balance  all  those 
factors,  but  that’s  why  they  have  a  Board  and  a  Commission.  So  I  loved  it.  It  was  very  good.  And  usually 
a  commissioner  serves  two  terms;  that’s  the  normal  process  that  governors  like,  because  they  like  to  turn 
over  the  Commission,  so  that  you  have  the  institutional  knowledge,  which  is  valuable,  but  they  also  like 
fresh  faces  and  fresh  thoughts  and  fresh  ideas.  And  I  think  that’s  a  very  good  thing.  When  I  had  finished 
my  full  third  term  I  was  ready  to  go  on  and  do  something  else.  I  figured  I’d  done  all  I  could  do  with  it. 
[laughter]  It  was  time  to  move  on. 

Did  you  feel  that  as  your  length  of  service  became  longer  and  longer,  you  had  to  spend  more  and  more 
time  on  the  Gaming  Commission  business? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


313 


Oh,  yes.  Well,  it  was  the  nature  of  the  beast.  When  1  first  went  on  the  Commission  when  Paul 
[Bible]  was  chaiiman,  our  commission  meetings  never  lasted  more  than  three  hours,  and  our  agenda  may 
have  been  eight  or  ten  pages  long.  When  1  went  off  of  the  Commission,  some  of  our  meetings  were  two 
days,  some  three  days,  and  some  continued  meetings  from  one  week  to  another  week,  and  the  agendas 
were  eighty  and  ninety  pages  long.  It  was  almost  a  full-time  job  there  at  the  end.  But  then,  of  course,  that 
was  when  gaming  was  really  booming  and  there  were  a  lot  of  changes  in  gaming  that  all  came  together: 
the  expansion  of  Las  Vegas;  the  expansion  of  gaming  in  the  state;  and  then  the  growth  of  gaming 
nationally  and  internationally.  That  all  occurred  simultaneously,  and  we  were  dealing  with  all  of  that 
stuff.  It  was  not  unusual  to  have  a  stack  of  material  several  thousand  pages  from  one  single  application. 

And  the  other  thing  was,  they  were  much  more  complex,  because  we  moved  from,  in  effect, 
single  proprietorship  licensee  or  partnerships — with  a  very  small  number  of  people  being  licensed  for  a 
property,  for  example — to  corporate  licensing.  All  of  the  financial  arrangements  that  those  people  would 
develop  for  their  various  entities  was  very  complex.  And  it  just  took  a  lot  to  understand  it.  1  know  in  our 
meetings  many  times  we  would  require  the  applicant’s  counsel  along  with  the  applicants  to  explain  to  us 
just  what  it  was  they  were  trying  to  do  before  we  ever  even  got  to  the  application.  For  the  last  two  years  1 
was  on  the  Commission,  it  was  not  unusual  to  have  an  applicant  before  us  for  several  hours.  And  so  it  was 
just  the  nature  of  the  change,  the  complexities  of  the  change. 

In  reading  about  you  I’ve  found  out  that  you  were  noted  for  your  in-depth  questioning  and  your 
knowledge  of  the  applicants.  Approximately  how  many  hours  a  week  or  a  month  do  you  think  you  spent 
preparing  for  these  lengthy  meetings  that  sometimes  lasted  for  couple  of  days? 

Well,  with  the  system  that  they  used  then — and  1  don’t  know  whether  they  do  now  or  not — the 
Board  would  hold  their  investigative  hearings  with  an  applicant,  and  then  the  commission  meeting  was 
three  weeks  later.  The  Board  had  their  meeting  the  first  of  the  month,  the  Commission  had  their  meeting 
near  the  end  of  the  month.  So  the  Board  would  have  to  go  through  their  interviews  and  then  they  would 
make  a  recommendation  to  the  Commission.  Well,  along  with  that  recommendation  comes  all  of  the 
material,  and  you  usually  had  about  two  weeks  to  read  that.  And  that  became  very  difficult,  because  we 
would  get  those  summaries  and  all  of  the  supporting  documentation  and  have  two  weeks  to  read  it  all, 
plus  1  would  go  back  to  the  Board  and  say,  "What  do  you  mean  by  this?"  When  you  were  questioning  the 
applicant,  we  could  read  the  transcripts,  but  when  you  see  them  eye-to-eye  there  are  a  lot  of  dynamics  in 
there.  Those  were  the  kinds  of  things  that  1  wanted  to  know.  But  1  would  say  that  in  that  last  term  I’ll  bet  I 
spent  sixty  hours  a  month  on  those  applicants,  exclusive  of  the  meeting — sometimes  more,  occasionally 
less. 

And  you  were  working,  of  course,  full  time  at  Sierra  Pacific  Power  in  the  meantime. 

That’s  right.  It  was  tough.  Yes,  it  was  really  tough  to  do. 

Some  corporations  or  companies,  businesses  like  that  had  to  be  lenient  with  the  commission  members,  to 
allow  them  to  get  away  from  their  real  job. 


Yes. 


314 


So  Sierra  Pacific  must  have  been  very  accommodating. 

They  were  very  good  with  me.  I  was  in  the  executive  level  of  the  company,  and  1  had  a  job  where 
1  had  to  make  sure  1  had  all  my  ducks  in  a  row  to  do  things,  but  they  pretty  much  let  me  do  what  1  wanted 
to  do.  Of  course,  you  have  to  be  very  careful  about  all  of  that,  and  it  was  kind  of  hairy  to  get  it  all  done.  In 
fact,  now,  1  don’t  know  how  1  did  it. 

[laughter]  Maybe  when  we’re  younger  we  can  do  more. 

1  think  that’s  right. 

Well,  what  were  your  biggest  concerns  when  you  were  on  the  Commission?  I  know  in  the  earlier  days 
they  had  to  worry  about  unsavory  elements  or  mafia  connections  or  mob  associations,  but  things  like  that 
kind  of  faded  away  during  your  era,  didn  7  they,  to  a  degree? 

Well,  the  unsavory  elements  did  fade  away.  There  was  still  the  problem  of  the  Teamster  loans. 

We  had  several  properties  that  had  Teamster  loans.  And  one  of  the  things  that  the  entire  gaming  apparatus 
wanted  to  do — meaning  the  Board  and  the  Commission  and  the  legislature  and  the  governor  and 
everybody — we  wanted  to  figure  out  some  way  to  have  a  mechanism  to  get  rid  of  those  loans.  And  that 
took  some  doing,  but  that  occurred  on  my  watch.  We  got  rid  of  the  last  Teamster  loan  in  my  second  term, 

I  think  it  was,  and  then  we  had  all  that  behind  us,  and  we  could  focus  on  coiporate  gaming  and  that  sort  of 
thing. 

Yes,  getting  rid  of  the  Teamsters  cleaned  up  the  whole  gaming  industry. 

That’s  right.  Yes. 

In  conjunction  with  that  you  may  have  possibly  touched  on  this  quite  a  bit  already,  but  did  the  nature  or 
the  characteristics  of  the  applicants  that  appeared  before  you  change  over  the  years  that  you  worked  on 
the  Commission? 

Oh,  like  night  and  day.  The  first  few  years  1  was  on  the  Commission  most  of  the  people  that  you 
had  in  gaming  were  gambling  people.  And  that’s  all  they  knew.  As  my  terms  evolved — my  tenure  on  the 
Commission — 1  saw  a  definite  change.  At  the  end,  they  were  guys  in  three-piece  suits  and  vests  and 
people  with  MBAs  from  Harvard  and  Yale  and  wherever  and  they  were  expert  in  finance.  They  had  all 
these  people  who  were  specialists  in  coiporate  management,  and  it  was  no  different  than  a  hank.  The  only 
thing  is,  they  had  the  expertise  of  somebody  running  a  casino.  And  they  were  very  highly  educated.  They 
understood  the  necessity.  They  understood  a  bottom  line,  and  that’s  what  they  were  focused  on.  And  it 
was  a  very  dramatic  change.  You  still  had  some  of  the  older  folks,  but  those  guys  had  begun  hiring  people 
with  MBAs  and  people  with  degrees  to  do  accounting  and  financing.  They  had  their  own  legal  staff, 
which  most  of  them  didn’t  have  in  those  early  days. 

So  you  were  really  there  during  the  bridge  era,  you  might  say,  going  from  the  individuals  to  the 
corporates. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


315 


Exactly.  But  we  worked  through  that  pretty  well.  That  wasn’t  very  difficult,  because  we  had  a 
good  regulatory  process  and  the  Board  did  a  very  good  job  investigating  who  held  what  stock  when 
investigating  a  corporate  applicant,  which,  by  the  way,  is  much  more  complex  than  investigating  a  single 
applicant — one  person  or  two  people — especially  the  financing,  because  many  of  these  corporations  have 
parent  corporations,  they  have  subsidiaries,  and  you  have  to  investigate  all  of  that.  It  got  very 
complicated.  So  all  of  that  was  going  on. 

But  the  big  thing  was  when  New  Jersey  allowed  gaming  and  then  all  of  the  other  states  began  to 
allow  gaming,  and  later  on  the  Indians  got  into  it.  And,  you  know,  in  Nevada  we  had  a  law  where  any 
gaming  outside  the  state  of  Nevada  was  considered  “foreign”  gaming.  That’s  what  the  statutes  called  it. 
Even  though  it  was  in  another  state,  it  was  called  foreign  gaming.  And  our  statutes  and  regulations  did  not 
allow  a  Nevada  licensee  to  be  involved  in  foreign  gaming  of  any  kind.  So  we  had  quite  an  extensive  tug- 
o-war,  and  we  all  didn’t  agree — meaning  between  the  Board  and  the  Commission — as  to  how  we  were 
going  to  handle  all  of  this.  My  view  always  from  the  very  beginning  was  that  if  we’re  going  to  have 
gaming  in  this  country,  let’s  have  somebody  that  we  know  running  it,  and  we  know  our  people.  Let’s 
allow  them,  because  it  was  obvious  that  they  were  the  people  who  were  going  to  be  running  these 
properties.  It  didn’t  make  any  difference  whether  they  were  in  Mississippi  or  New  Jersey  or  wherever 
they  were.  And  that  philosophy  prevailed.  The  legislature  changed  the  regulations  and  the  statutes  to 
allow  our  licensees  to  participate  in  gaming  in  other  states. 

Now,  the  other  states,  in  turn,  wanted  to  protect  themselves,  because  they  didn’t  want  the  Nevada 
guys  taking  over  their  gaming.  That  was  their  mentality  at  the  time.  And  so  what  they  did  is  they  passed 
laws  that  said,  “OK,  people  in  our  state” — Mississippi  or  New  Jersey  or  wherever — “have  to  own  5 1 
percent  of  the  corporation.”  They  had  to  be  majority  owners  of  any  coiporation  in  gaming.  And  so  what 
we  were  doing  then  was  not  only  dealing  with  our  own  people  wanting  to  go,  we  were  also  having  to  deal 
with  the  new  regulatory  processes  in  all  these  states,  because  we  wanted  to  make  sure  that  the  people  that 
they  approved  were  acceptable  in  Nevada  as  well.  And  that  got  to  be  kind  of  a  tricky  thing,  because  we 
had  some  problems  in  Louisiana  and  one  other  state,  as  1  recall.  They  did  things  that  we  would  not  allow. 
And  we  had  some  dialogue  with  them  and  said,  “Look,  we  won’t  approve  it.”  1  can’t  remember  who  the 
applicant  was.  It  was  one  of  our  licensees.  They  had  to  come  to  us  to  get  approved.  Whenever  they  went 
to  another  state,  they  had  to  get  approval  from  the  Commission,  because  we  wanted  to  make  sure  that 
number  one,  the  people  they  were  working  with  did  not  have  any  negative  affiliations  or  associations;  and 
number  two,  the  Nevada  property  was  protected.  We  didn’t  want  all  of  the  money  being  siphoned  out  of 
Nevada  to  some  other  place,  to  build  up  their  infrastructure  for  gaming.  And  so  that  was  that  was  a  big 
ball  that  we  watched  over.  And  that  was  very  difficult  for  three  or  four  years.  We  had  some  very  difficult 
meetings  with  applicants,  people  that  we  knew  in  Nevada  that  were  doing  something  in  another  state. 

Corporations  like  Harrah ’s  and  MGM  and  Ramada. 

Yes.  It  got  pretty  sticky.  But  we  got  over  it  and  then  it  worked  out  fine,  and  they  are  very 
successful  in  the  other  properties.  And  then  Indian  gaming  came.  1  got  off  of  the  Commission  before  the 
big  movement  in  Indian  gaming,  but  1  was  on  the  Commission  during  the  preliminary  discussions  of  how 
we  would  handle  all  of  these  kinds  of  things.  And  we  had  some  very  unsatisfactory  problems  with  a 
couple  of  our  licensees  that  were  involved  with  Indian  gaming.  In  fact,  we  forced  a  couple  of  them  out  of 
their  participation  with  a  couple  of  Indian  tribes  because  it  was  not  working,  [laughter] 


316 


So  anyway,  with  all  of  that,  it  was  just,  as  1  said  earlier,  so  fortuitous  to  be  there  at  that  time. 
Those  were  the  greatest  changes  that  ever  occurred  in  gaming,  and  1  just  happened  to  be  one  of  the  guys 
that  was  there. 

[laughter]  Well ,  it  had  to  be  an  exciting  time. 

Oh,  it  was.  And  that’s  why  it  was  so  fascinating,  because  every  meeting  brought  a  whole  new 
set  of  problems  and  great  challenges  and  required  a  great  of  thought  and  work,  and  that  was  very,  very 
interesting. 

Did  the  Board  and  the  Commission  in  your  later  years  become  more  involved  with  technological 
advances  in  the  industry?  I  know  we  were  talking  about  financial  changes.  Did  you  get  involved  in  the 
electronics  or  the  technology >? 

Yes,  we  did.  That’s  more  in  the  purview  of  the  Board,  but,  of  course,  the  Commission  was  very 
concerned  about  that,  because  of  the  technological  advances  in  gaming,  and  not  only  with  the  way  money 
was  handled.  Slot  machines  are  now  just  stand-alone  computers,  whereas  when  1  started  on  the 
Commission,  they  were  mechanical  devices.  They’ve  made  that  transition.  It  was  a  huge  challenge  for  the 
Board  to  keep  up  with  those  technological  changes,  and  the  whole  system.  The  Board  is  responsible  for 
the  lab  that  does  all  the  testing  of  that  equipment,  and  they  couldn’t  keep  up.  They  had  a  heck  of  a  time, 
because  state  agencies  are  very  limited  in  their  budgets,  and  getting  top  qualified  technical  people  when 
everybody  else  wants  them  is  really  tough.  But  now  they’re  up  to  speed.  They’re  doing  a  good  job.  1  was 
just  talking  with  a  licensee  in  Las  Vegas  the  other  day  and  they  don’t  have  any  problems  with  the  Nevada 
lab  and  getting  their  machines  approved  and  so  on,  which  can  be  a  problem,  because  before  they  can  put  a 
machine  on  the  floor,  that  machine  has  to  be  approved  by  the  lab,  all  of  the  EPROMS  and  how  it  works 
and  what  the  glass  says  so  that  it  doesn’t  misrepresent  anything,  and  that’s  very  time  consuming. 

And  then  they  have  to  have  a  trial  period  on  the  floor,  too? 

That’s  right.  Well,  getting  to  trial  period  .  .  . 

...  is  tough. 

Getting  to  that  point,  yes.  And  what  happened  was,  you  had  this  big  boom  in  gaming  and  you 
had  these  manufacturing  companies  coming  up  with  all  this  new  stuff.  And  here  again,  it  was  just  that  in 
that  big  crunch  time,  the  manufacturers  were  screaming  because  they  couldn’t  get  their  games  approved. 
They  couldn’t  sell  them,  and  the  licensees  couldn’t  get  the  games,  [laughter]  But  that  was  just  part  of  the 
process,  and  one  of  the  things  that  we  had  to  go  through.  And  I  think  they’ve  done  a  good  job. 

The  Commission  does  have  to  rely  on  the  Board  mainly  for  the  technology >  factor. 

Oh,  yes,  that’s  right.  Well,  the  Commission  doesn’t  have  any  resources.  The  Board  has  all  the 
resources  to  do  the  testing  and  to  do  all  of  the  things  that  need  to  be  done  for  those  machines.  And  then 
they  provide  all  those  reports  to  the  Commission.  Many,  many  times  it  was  not  unusual  for  the  Board  to 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


317 


bring  a  machine  to  the  commission  meeting  and  have  the  manufacturer  explain  how  it  all  worked. 
Whenever  we  were  approving  a  new  game,  that  was  standard  operating  procedure,  because  the 
Commissions  that  1  was  on  said,  “We  want  to  look  at  the  game.”  And  it  was  not  only  slot  machines,  but 
there  are  all  kinds  of  different  pieces  of  equipment  and  new  kinds  of  card  games.  We  had  a  policy  that  we 
wanted  to  look  at  them,  and  they’d  lay  all  this  stuff  out;  it  was  very  good.  Then  we  understood  what  we 
were  talking  about. 

You  served  on  the  Commission  with  three  different  chairmen.  Were  there  any  major  differences  in  the  way 
that  the  three  chairmen  performed  their  duties? 

Yes,  I’d  say  all  three  of  them  performed  them  differently.  All  three  of  them  were  attorneys.  When 
I  first  went  on  the  Commission,  the  Commission  depended  very  heavily  on  the  Board.  In  fact,  the 
chairman  of  the  Commission  and  the  chairman  of  the  Board  would  meet  several  times  during  the  month 
to  get  everything  squared  away,  so  that  when  an  item  came  before  the  Board,  the  Board  was  prepared  to 
deal  with  it,  and  then  when  the  Commission  got  it,  the  Commission  was  prepared.  We  knew  what  was 
going  on,  and  the  Board  and  the  Commission  worked  very  closely  together.  That  worked  very,  very  well. 
But  then,  of  course,  those  were  in  the  days  when  the  complexities  weren’t  as  significant  as  they  became 
later  on. 

When  he  was  chairman,  Paul  [Bible]  wanted  everything  done  at  a  meeting,  meaning  that  when 
something  came  before  us  he  wanted  it  completed  right  then.  He  wanted  to  get  it  out  of  the  way  and 
cleared  off  the  agenda  so  that  we  wouldn’t  have  all  of  this  stuff  lagging  behind.  Well,  in  those  days  we 
could  do  that.  Once  in  a  while  we’d  have  a  large  agenda  item  that  required  some  follow-up  work  to  be 
done,  but  not  very  often.  And  that’s  why  our  meetings  were  only  three  or  four  hours  long  at  the  most.  We 
just  cleared  them  out  and  it  was  an  easy  deal. 

But  as  we  began  to  move  into  it,  John  O’Reilly,  who  was  just  a  top-notch,  bright,  bright  guy, 
recognized  that  with  all  of  the  work  and  the  changes  that  were  occurring  in  gaming  that  we  really  needed 
to  update  all  of  our  regulations.  That’s  something  that  the  Board  and  the  Commission  do.  The 
Commission  would  say  to  the  Board,  “We  want  you  to  update  this  regulation,”  and  a  lot  of  times  the 
Board  didn’t  want  to  do  that.  And  so  we  got  into  a  kind  of  a  rub  there.  But  he  [O’Reilly]  was  bound  and 
determined  that  we  were  going  to  update  all  of  these  regulations  and  make  them  as  definitive  as  we  could 
to  apply  to  the  circumstances  at  that  time,  because  in  the  early  days  we  didn’t  know  what  was  going  to 
happen,  or  how  this  was  all  going  to  work  out.  When  John  came  on  we  had  a  pretty  good  idea.  And  so  we 
worked  through  those  regulations,  and  there  were  many  times  when  the  Commission  would  be  meeting  at 
two  o’clock  in  the  morning  going  over  regulations.  That  was  not  unusual;  we  did  that  many  times.  We 
would  have  sixteen-hour  commission  meetings  sometimes,  or  a  two-day  commission  meeting,  and  then 
we  would  begin  to  continue  them.  And  so  on  the  agenda  you’d  have  not  only  new  items  but  old  items. 

But  it  was  just  the  nature  of  the  beast. 

Who  replaced  Mr.  O  ’Reilly? 

Bill  Curran,  who  was  an  attorney  from  Las  Vegas.  Bill  was  more  interested  in  the  governance 
issues,  that’s  my  view  of  it.  He  was  more  concerned  that  everyone  had  a  fair  opportunity  to  speak  and  he 
leaned  more  toward  the  applicant  to  give  them  every  opportunity  to  do  all  of  the  things  that  they  needed 
to  present  their  case.  And  that  took  a  long  time  in  our  meetings.  Sometimes  there  was  a  reluctance  to  deny 


318 


an  applicant.  And  if  the  Board  had  recommended  denial,  a  lot  of  times  when  it  got  to  the  Commission 
there  was  some  reluctance  to  that  and  we’d  refer  it  back  to  the  Board,  and  the  Board  would  come  back 
with  new  information,  or  sometimes  the  same  information.  And  that  just  took  longer,  and  so  on. 

But  they  were  all  very,  very  capable  people — 1  think  about  that  a  lot — both  the  Board  and  the 
Commission.  1  got  to  know  a  lot  of  different  ones  because  some  of  them  only  served  four  years  or  less. 
And  gee,  what  wonderful  people  they  were.  They  were  all  good  solid  thinkers  and  they  had  their  own 
interests.  And  what  we  would  always  try  to  do  is  complement  each  other.  If  someone  had  a  great  deal  of 
skill  in  the  legal  agreements —  usually  on  the  Commission  we  tried  to  have  two  attorneys,  the  chairman 
and  another  commissioner,  and  someone  who  had  the  ability  to  look  at  legal  documents  and  kind  of  give 
the  Commission  guidance  on  how  those  went — then  others  would  be  skilled  in  other  areas  and  it  just 
worked.  We  complemented  each  other  very  well. 

The  character  of  the  gaming  regulators  over  the  history  of  the  organization  has  been  fantastic. 

Yes.  It’s  amazing.  Well,  to  me  it’s  incredible  how  competent  those  people  have  been. 

So  the  chairman  does  kind  of  set  the  tone  of  the  Commission? 

Oh,  sure.  Sure.  Now,  a  lot  of  times  commissioners  don’t  agree  with  them.  And  a  lot  of  times  1 
didn’t  agree  with  the  chairman  or  another  commissioner.  But  you  worked  through  that.  And  if  the 
chairman  knows  my  hot  buttons,  for  example,  when  he  is  introducing  an  agenda  item,  or  we’re  going 
through  it,  he’ll  make  sure  to  address  things  that  he  thinks  that  1  would  be  concerned  about,  or  the  other 
commissioners.  They  all  did  that,  and  they  all  did  it  very  well.  We  didn’t  ever  want  to  surprise  our  peers. 
We  wanted  everybody  to  understand  where  we  were  coming  from.  A  lot  of  times  there  were  some 
disagreements.  And  many,  many  times  1  would  be  on  the  short  end  of  a  four-one  vote,  or  a  three-two  vote 
or  something.  But  also  many,  many  times  1  was  on  the  long  end  of  the  three-two  vote.  That  was  more 
philosophical  stuff.  A  good  example  is  later  on  in  my  stay  on  the  Commission,  everybody  got  to  be  very 
sensitive  about  where  slot  machines  were  located,  and  maybe  others  have  mentioned  this  to  you. 

You  mean ,  as  far  as  like  laundromats  and  convenience  stores  or  .  .  .  ? 

.  .  .  and  Longs  drugstores  and  grocery  stores  and  on  and  on  and  on.  In  my  third  term  1  think  we 
had  two  hundred  thousand  slot  machines  out  there  somewhere  licensed,  and  my  view  was  it’s  a  little  bit 
late  to  be  worrying  where  you’re  going  to  put  a  slot  machine.  As  long  as  it  wasn’t  in  a  place  where  there 
was  a  greater  chance  of  violating  a  regulation  or  a  state  law,  like  minors  gambling.  1  was  not  as  sensitive 
to  all  of  that  as  a  couple  of  the  commissioners  were.  We  had  one  at  a  La  Quinta  Lodge  over  behind 
Wooster  High  School.  You  may  know  where  that  is.  It’s  clear  off  in  the  back  there  on  a  freeway  on-ramp. 

Yes,  I  know  where  it  is. 

And  they  made  an  application  for  three  slot  machines.  Well,  of  course,  we  have  a  regulation  that 
says  that  you  can’t  have  slot  machines  within,  1  think  it’s  one  thousand  feet  of  a  school,  or  a  church  or 
whatever.  And  we  soon  realized  that  sometimes  you  have  to  look  at  that  in  a  different  way.  If  you’re 
across  a  divided  highway  or  a  freeway  you  may  be  less  than  a  thousand  feet  away,  but  there’s  no  way  that 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


319 


there  could  ever  be  any  problem. 

Well,  two  of  the  guys  from  Las  Vegas  did  not  want  those  slot  machines  in  La  Quinta  because  it 
was  close  to  a  school,  and  I  said,  “Well,  here’s  what  you  do:  when  you  come  up  here  for  your  meeting” — 
we  met  in  Carson — “before  you  go  to  Carson  from  the  airport,  just  go  over  and  look  at  that,  and  look  at 
how  it  is  in  relation  to  the  school  and  the  streets  and  so  on.  There  is  no  association  with  students  at  the  La 
Quinta  motor  lodge — none.  There’s  nothing  to  attract  students  there.  They’re  going  the  other  way  to 
Longs,  where  they  already  have  slot  machines...”  [laughter] 

Yes.  Right. 

You  know,  across  Plumb  Lane.  And  1  told  them  this  in  a  meeting!  1  mean,  we  discussed  all  of  this 
in  the  open  meeting.  1  said,  “You  go  look  at  that.”  Well,  they  went  and  looked  at  it.  They  apparently  had 
had  some  kind  of  a  problem  in  Las  Vegas,  and  they  came  back  in  the  next  meeting  and  they  said,  “We’re 
not  going  to  approve  that.”  And  then  so  we  voted  and  it  was  a  three-two  vote.  The  chairman  and  the  other 
commissioner  voted  no,  and  the  rest  of  us  voted  yes.  But  that’s  kind  of  how  it  goes.  You  try  to  work  them 
out  and  then  it’s  done.  You  go  on.  You  can’t  belabor  what’s  behind  you.  [laughter] 

Some  former  board  members  have  commented  that  oftentimes  the  Commission  was  too  easy  on 
applicants.  What  is  your  opinion  of  that  comment? 

Well,  in  some  cases  1  think  that  might  be  true.  The  big  difference — and  that’s  the  wisdom  of  the 
way  our  system  is  set  up — is  that  is  the  Board  [members]  are  100  percent  regulators.  That’s  their  job. 
They  don’t  care  about  anything  else.  All  they  care  about  is  whether  this  applicant  or  whatever  the  agenda 
item  is  meets  the  standard  of  the  regulation.  And  they  have  a  lot  of  flexibility  in  that,  too,  in  just  exactly 
what  that  standard  is.  The  Commission,  on  the  other  hand,  by  design  is  made  up  of  people  who  have  a 
very  broad  background,  who  are  looking  at  the  state,  who  are  looking  at  all  of  the  issues  that  are  involved 
in  approving  an  applicant.  And  I  know  very  often  1  would  think,  “Well,  there’s  a  reason  this  guy  has  had 
a  problem,”  if  you  understand  the  business  cycle  and  whatever  it  might  be.  If  something  came  up  with  a 
limitation  from  the  Board  or  a  recommendation  for  denial,  99  percent  of  the  time  1  went  with  the  Board, 
because  1  would  agree  with  them.  I’m  just  kind  of  a  hardliner  guy.  But  there  were  times  when  1  felt  that 
the  Board  did  not  do  a  thorough  investigation,  that  their  minds  had  been  preset  before  they  started — and, 
you  know,  regulators  do  that. 

Everyone  does  it.  Yes. 

We  all  do  that.  And  I  would  say — and  1  said  it  on  the  record  many,  many  times —  “1  just  do  not 
feel  that  there  is  enough  evidence  here  for  me  to  vote  no  on  this  guy.  I’m  not  saying  I  wouldn’t  vote  no, 
but  I  don’t  have  enough  information  right  now  to  say  no  to  this  guy.”  Many  of  the  other  commissioners 
would  do  that,  too.  We  would  oftentimes  take  a  much  broader  view  than  the  Board  would  have.  We  had  a 
Board  one  time  that  was  really  tough.  Really  tough.  In  fact,  [Gerald]  Cunningham  and  I  would  argue  all 
the  time,  because  Gerry  was  one  of  those  guys  that  was  the  letter  of  the  law;  there  was  no  flexibility.  He 
didn’t  look  at  the  problems  that  a  guy  was  going  to  have  in  this  business  or  problems  that  he  may  have 
had  earlier,  that  to  my  point  of  view,  and  to  some  of  the  other  commissioners  most  of  the  time,  were 
reasonable.  And  in  those  cases  we  didn’t  go  along  with  the  Board.  So  we  had  that  kind  of  a  rub  once  in  a 


320 


while,  but  not  very  often. 

1  think  that  the  Commission  was  objective.  They  tried  to  be  objective.  We’d  talk  about  all  of 
these  fancy  applications,  these  big  applications  for  the  Hiltons  and  the  Harrah’s  and  the  like,  and  those  are 
not  the  tough  ones.  The  tough  one  is  little  Sarah  Jones  who  had  her  work  card  jerked  by  the  Board 
because  of  some  reason — theft  or  whatever  reason — and  there’s  a  process  you  go  through.  They  have  to 
come  to  the  Commission  to  get  their  card  back.  A  lot  of  times  the  Board  would  recommend  “no”  and  we 
would  overrule  the  Board.  And  when  we  overruled  the  Board,  it  had  to  be  a  unanimous  vote.  There  were 
many,  many  times  we  had  disagreements  there.  The  reverse  of  that  is  many  times  I  would  vote  “no”  when 
they’d  make  a  recommendation,  because  I  told  everybody  in  the  beginning,  “If  an  employee  steals  from 
his  employer,  he’s  done  for  me.  I  don’t  care  if  it’s  twenty-five  cents  out  of  a  coin  hopper,  he’s  done, 
because  there’s  no  way  that  you’ll  ever  know  how  many  times  he’s  done  it  before.”  And  if  a  person  has 
that  propensity,  that  was  it  for  me.  Many,  many  times  I  would  vote  “no”  and  the  rest  of  the  Commission 
would  vote  yes.  That  was  just  one  of  my  things.  Having  been  in  business,  I  know  how  important  that  is. 
[laughter]  And  you  have  employees  that  have  stolen. 

And  other  commissioners  are  the  other  way,  of  course. 

I  mean,  we  all  understood  that.  But  that  was  an  area  where  I  think  the  Board  and  the  Commission 
had  major  disagreements.  I  don’t  know  very  often  that  we  had  any  really  serious  disagreements  on  major 
applications.  We  always  worked  that  out. 

As  a  rule  of  thumb ,  how  would  you  describe  your  relationship  individually?  Was  it  pretty  good  with  the 
board  members  as  a  whole? 

Yes.  I  didn’t  ever  have  any  problems  with  any  of  the  board  members.  The  only  problem  that  I 
would  have  is  that  some  of  the  board  members  were  lifetime  government  employees.  They  were 
bureaucrats,  and  they  knew  how  to  work  the  system.  And  a  lot  of  times  I  felt  they  were  working  the 
system  to  the  disadvantage  of  gaming.  It  was  nothing  personal  with  anybody.  As  I  said,  they  were  all 
really  fine,  fine  people,  and  I  had  no  arguments  with  that.  Generally  I  got  along  with  everybody.  We 
didn’t  have  any  problem. 

During  your  tenure  more  than  two  dozen  people  were  entered  in  the  List  of  Excluded  Persons,  commonly 
known  as  the  “Black  Book.  ”  Would  you  tell  us  your  feelings  regarding  the  “Black  Book?” 

Well,  in  its  day  the  “Black  Book”  was  a  very  important  document,  because  you  were  dealing  with 
unsavory  type  characters.  That  was  in  the  days  of  Meyer  Lansky  and  all  those  guys  here,  and  the  “Black 
Book”  served  a  purpose.  But  as  we  moved  into  the  new  area  of  gaming  where  we  had  all  these  corporate 
licensees  and  all,  the  “Black  Book”  was  really  not  that  big  a  deal,  because  these  companies  policed  their 
properties  to  protect  themselves  anyway.  I  think  the  “Black  Book”  may  be  helpful  to  them,  but  I  don’t 
know  really  how  much  value  there  is  in  the  “Black  Book”  now.  I  really  don’t  know.  I  don’t  know  that 
anybody  ever  uses  it,  other  than  it’s  a  regulation  and  a  statute  that’s  been  on  the  books  for  so  long. 

So  basically  you  ’re  saying  the  “Black  Book”  probably  was  a  useful  tool  years  ago  but  as  the  years  go  by 
it  becomes  less  and  less  .  .  . 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


321 


That’s  exactly  right.  Yes.  1  think  it’s  outlived  its  usefulness. 

In  July  of  1985,  Carma,  the  Canadian  corporation,  was  licensed  to  operate  the  Bourbon  Street  Hotel- 
Casino.  Would  you  tell  us  the  historical  significance  of  that  licensing? 

Well,  that  was  the  first  foreign  gaming  license.  1  guess  it  had  some  historical  significance,  but  it 
was  no  big  deal. 

It  was  kind  of  a  door  opener,  I  guess. 

Yes,  it  was.  But  as  far  as  Carma  itself,  they  went  through  the  process;  they  were  very  good  at 
what  they  did.  They  had  the  right  people  before  us,  and  they  were  very  forthright  in  what  they  did,  they 
proved  their  case,  and  they  were  just  another  applicant. 

You  didn ’t  look  at  them  like  a  Canadian  corporation,  did  you? 

No.  It  was  no  big  deal.  As  long  as  they  were  up  to  snuff — met  our  standards— it  was  fine. 

In  October  of  1985  the  Hilton  Hotel  Corporation  was  licensed  to  operate  a  casino  in  Australia.  Would 
you  tell  us  the  historical  significance  of  that  licensing? 

Well,  that  was  one  of  the  first  ones  that  1  had  mentioned  earlier,  where  one  of  our  own  licensees 
was  licensed  to  do  business  in  another  country.  It  could  have  been  another  state;  it  would  have  been  the 
same  thing.  And  that  was  one  specifically  that  we  were  very  careful  about.  The  Commission  and  the 
Board  really  wanted  to  know  about  the  people  in  Australia,  because  the  information  we  had  had  was  that 
Australia  was  not  as  stringent.  They  did  business  in  a  different  way  than  we  did  in  Nevada.  We  really 
wanted  to  make  sure  that  we  didn’t  have  any  unsavory  or  unfavorable  associations  there,  and  we  wanted 
everything  documented,  and  we  wanted  the  Hilton  to  understand  how  we  wanted  them  to  run  their 
business  in  relation  to  the  property  in  Australia.  That  was  an  extensive  hearing  as  well,  but  it  worked  out. 

So  you  set  a  lot  of  conditions  on  that  licensing  in  Australia. 

That’s  right.  And  that’s  the  great  thing,  the  great  wisdom  about  Nevada.  You  could  condition 
licenses,  you  could  limit  licenses,  you  could  do  a  lot  of  things  to  keep  control  of  that,  or  keep  watch  on  a 
licensee.  Y ou  knew  he  had  to  come  back  to  get  either  the  condition  removed  or  the  limitation  removed. 
Because,  you  see,  Nevada’s  unique,  and  once  you  come  before  us,  and  the  Commission  says,  “Yes, 
you’re  approved,”  we  never  see  you  again,  whereas  other  states  have  limitations:  one  year,  two  years, 
three  years.  You’ve  got  to  come  back  and  renew  your  license  all  the  time.  In  Nevada,  we  don’t  have  that. 
But  by  limiting  and  putting  those  conditions,  then  they  had  to  come  back  for  either  specific  purposes  or 
general  purposes.  If  a  guy  might  have  had  some  problems,  then  we’d  say,  “Well,  let’s  limit  this  license  for 
two  years.”  Have  him  come  back  and  see  how  he’s  doing.  And  then  we’d  either  remove  the  limitation  or 
we’d  limit  him  for  another  year  or  we’d  take  his  license  away  from  him.  That  was  the  great  thing. 

A  lot  of  people  don’t  realize  the  flexibility  that  the  Board  and  the  Commission  have.  It’s  a 


322 


wonderful  system  that  we  have  now.  And  after  having  had  some  experiences  with  other  gaming 
regulatory  authorities  since  I’ve  been  off  of  the  Commission,  ours  is  just  so,  so  far  superior,  but,  of 
course,  we’ve  been  at  it  much  longer,  too. 

It ’s  been  copied  a  lot,  too,  in  other  areas. 

Yes.  That’s  right. 

Another  historic  license  application  came  before  the  Commission  in  1986  when  Ginji  Yasuda  applied  for 
a  license  to  purchase  the  Aladdin  Hotel-Casino.  Would  you  tell  us  your  memories  of  that? 

That  was  a  very  difficult  application.  That  was  one  of  the  first  applications  where  we  spent  hours 
and  hours  and  hours  on  it.  And  we  had  as  difficult  a  time  as  Yasuda’s  people  did  because  of  the  cultural 
differences.  That  was  the  first  one  we  had  ever  really  run  into. 

He ’s  from  Japan,  right? 

Yes.  That  application  was  very,  very  difficult.  We  wanted  to  really  make  sure  that  he  knew  what 
he  was  getting  into,  because  at  the  time  there  were  many,  many  people  from  Japan  and  from  Korea  who 
were  really  interested  in  getting  in  gaming,  because  they  came  to  gamble  and  they  liked  it,  and  they  were 
very  wealthy  and  they  thought,  “Well,  I’ll  have  my  own  casino.”  They  didn’t  understand  the  regulatory 
process  and  the  things  that  you  have  to  do,  how  you  have  to  toe  the  mark,  because  the  Japanese  culture  is 
just  totally  different  and  it’s  very  secretive  and  closed.  We  couldn’t  get  information,  and  we  would  argue 
back  and  forth  with  them  about,  you  know,  “Well,  you  can’t  have  that.”  And  we  said,  “Oh,  yes,  we  can 
have  that.”  And  that  was  where  the  difficulty  was.  But  we  finally  got  him  approved,  and  I  believe  we 
limited  him  on  his  first  license,  if  I  recall  correctly.  1  may  be  mistaken  there,  because  you  never  would 
know. 

At  one  point  he  said  that  I  was  discriminating  against  him. 

He  said  that  to  you  himself? 

I  had  asked  him  a  question,  and  he  didn’t  like  the  question,  and  he  told  the  interpreter  that  I  was 
discriminating.  And  then  we  had  to  have  a  little  discussion  about  that,  because,  of  course,  1  wasn’t 
discriminating  against  him  [laughter];  1  just  needed  an  answer  to  a  question. 

[laughter]  Yes.  Yes. 

But  he  didn’t  want  to  answer  it.  And  it  was  one  of  those  things  where  he  could  have  answered  it. 
He  could  have  answered  it  himself,  but  he  did  not  want  to  do  that.  He  did  everything  through  an 
interpreter. 

So  he  could  speak  English? 


He  could  speak  some  English.  You’d  ask  him  a  question,  and  he  knew  exactly  what  the  question 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


323 


was,  because  he’d  start  answering  it  before  the  interpreter  would  ask  him  the  question  in  Japanese, 
[laughter] 

Oh.  [laughter] 

But  it  worked  out.  It  worked  out  for  us  OK,  but  not  for  him. 

So  how  was  his  success  rate  as  a  casino  operator? 

His  success  wasn’t  good,  [laughter]  No. 

So  basically  the  Aladdin  went  bankrupt,  went  under,  during  his  time. 

That’s  right.  But  then,  too,  that  was  when  the  big  change  started  in  Las  Vegas  where  people  were 
migrating  from  the  old  stand-bys,  the  Aladdins  and  the  Trop  and  the  Desert  Inn,  and  they  were  moving  to 
all  these  fancy  new  places  that  Steve  Wynn  and  the  likes  had  built. 

Yes,  the  whole  demographics  in  town  moved. 

Everything  just  changed.  And  you  really  had  to  be  on  your  toes  and  understand  what  was 
happening  to  stay  in  business  if  you  had  one  of  those  older  properties.  Most  of  them  did.  Most  of  them 
did  well.  Some  of  them  didn’t.  That  [the  Aladdin]  was  one  of  them. 

Yes.  In  February  of  1989,  the  Commission  met  to  take  action  on  the  application  of  the  Sands  Hotel.  And 
by  the  way,  fanner  governor  Bob  List  represented  the  Sands.  And  the  Gaming  Control  Board 
recommended  approval  for  everyone  associated  with  the  application  except  Henri  Lewin.  Would  you  tell 
us  about  the  events  and  the  results  of  that  hearing? 

Well,  that  was  a  very  difficult  hearing.  The  owner  of  the  Sands  had  entrusted  Lewin  to  do  a  lot  of 
work  for  him  over  the  years. 

That  was  Mr.  Adels  on? 

Yes.  And  the  gaming  regulators  had  a  big  problem  with  Henri  Lewin.  When  I  think  about  that 
now,  I  think  it  was  more  because  he  just  wasn’t  forthright  with  us.  That  was  a  very  difficult  hearing.  We 
just  didn’t  want  that  association.  I  believe  we  did  license  him,  but  we  put  a  bunch  of  conditions  on  his 
licensure. 

Well,  sometime  during  the  commission  hearing  Mr.  Adelson  did  state  that  the  project  would  not  succeed 
arid  that  he  would  not  go  forward  unless  Lewin  was  licensed.  Of  course,  as  you  say,  Lewin  was  licensed. 
Do  you  know  how  successful  their  operation  was,  their  relationship?  Did  they  work  together  for  years? 

It  was  my  understanding  that  they  did  work  together  for  many,  many  years,  or  they  had  known 
each  other  for  many,  many  years  in  the  business.  And  I’m  sure  that  Adelson  saying  that  was  sincere,  but  I 


324 


think  it  was  more  intended  to  tell  us  how  important  it  was  to  get  Lewin  licensed.  Later  on  in  that 
operation,  that  all  ended.  1  don’t  know  what  happened,  but  they  separated  and  each  went  their  own  way. 
But  that’s  not  unusual. 

Well,  Adelson  himself  was  successful  at  the  Sands,  wasn ’t  he? 

Yes. 

Of  course,  now  he ’s  in  the  Venetian,  so  I  guess  he  did  well  at  the  Sands. 

He  did  very  well. 

Well,  here’s  an  interesting  case,  in  February  of  1989,  the  Commission  held  special  hearing  on  the 
Board’s  complaints  against  Ralph  Engelstad,  owner  of  the  Imperial  Palace.  Would  you  give  us  a  little 
background  on  Mr.  Engelstad  and  tell  us  some  of  the  events  that  led  up  to  that  special  hearing? 

[laughter]  Well,  for  years,  1  guess,  Mr.  Engelstad  had  German  parties,  and  he  made  a  big  deal  out 
of  it.  Engelstad  apparently  had  warehouse  after  warehouse  after  warehouse  full  of  German  memorabilia. 
He  had  automobiles,  he  had  uniforms,  he  had  thousands  and  thousands  and  thousands  of  items  .  .  . 

From  the  Hitler  Nazi  era. 

.  .  .  from  the  Hitler  Nazi  era.  And  he  would  throw  these  big  parties,  and  he’d  bring  out  all  of  this 
memorabilia,  and  he’d  have  it  set  up  like  a  museum  and  have  a  big  party.  Well,  that  offended  some  people 
in  Las  Vegas,  and  they  brought  pressure  to  bear  on  the  Board,  and  probably  on  the  governor.  1  don’t  know 
where  it  came  from.  But  it  wound  up  in  a  complaint  against  Engelstad  with  over  a  million-dollar  fine,  1 
believe  it  was.  There  was  a  lot  of  debate  over  whether  to  take  his  license  away  from  him  or  whether  just 
to  fine  him.  And  it  was  finally  decided  that  they  would  fine  him.  1  got  all  of  this  secondhand. 

But  anyway,  that  was  kind  of  a  smelly  deal  in  my  view  and,  1  think,  in  the  view  of  a  lot  of 
commissioners  and  board  members.  1  don’t  think  they  wanted  to  deal  with  it.  That  isn’t  the  kind  of  a  thing 
that  regulators  do.  1  thought  the  Commission  had  no  business  being  involved  in  that  kind  of  a  thing.  Sure, 
Engelstad  used  very  poor  judgment  in  what  he  did  and  kind  of  flaunted  it  in  the  community,  which  is 
what  1  think  really  created  problems  for  him.  And  1  think  I  said  that  in  a  meeting:  that  he  used  very,  very 
poor  judgment,  but  1  did  not  agree  that  that  was  the  forum  to  deal  with  that  kind  of  a  problem,  and  I  did 
not  feel  that  he  should  have  been  fined  over  a  million  dollars.  And  that’s  how  it  went. 

What  did  they  use  for  a  basis — that  we  didn ’t  want  those  kinds  of people  in  the  gaming  business? 

There’s  language  in  the  regulations  that  actions  that  reflect  negatively  on  gaming  are  cause  for 
suspending  of  a  license  or  disciplinary  actions  and  that  kind  of  a  thing.  That  was  what  was  used  in  the 
complaint.  And  Engelstad  agreed  to  it.  That  was  the  amazing  thing,  was  that  Engelstad  and  his  attorneys 
agreed  to  it.  Much,  much  later  1  was  talking  to  their  attorney  about  that.  We  just  happened  to  have  a  visit 
about  that,  and  1  said,  “1  could  never  figure  out  why  you  guys  didn’t  contest  that  thing.” 

And  they  said,  “Well,  we  thought  that  politically  it  was  foolish  to  do  so.”  That’s  why  they  didn’t 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


325 


do  it. 

And  I  told  him,  “Well,  you  sure  put  us  in  a  really  bad  spot,  by  just  rolling  over  and  saying,  ‘OK, 
fine  us  a  million  and  a  half  dollars,  whatever  it  was,  and  we’ll  pay  the  fine  and  get  on  with  our  business.’” 
But  that  was  not  the  forum  for  that  kind  of  a  thing  to  occur. 

Or  possibly  they  wanted  to  get  out  of  the  public ’s  eye,  and  they  were  afraid  if  they  ’d  appealed  it,  it  would 
just  be  in  the  public ’s  eye  that  much  more. 

Well,  it  shouldn’t  have  gotten  any  more  publicity  than  it  did.  That  place  was  packed  for  both  the 
board  meeting  and  the  commission  meeting.  In  fact,  they  had  to  move  it  to  a  bigger  place  for  both  the 
board  meeting  and  the  commission  meeting.  That  was  one  of  the  most  distasteful  items  I  think  I’ve  ever 
dealt  with  on  the  Commission — not  that  I  don’t  agree  that  what  he  did  was  really  stupid,  but  I  just  think 
we  handled  it  very  poorly.  We  had  no  business  doing  that.  The  guy’s  a  good  operator,  he’s  never  in  any 
trouble,  ran  a  good  place,  and  never  had  any  violations. 

Did  you  vote  against  a  1.5  million-dollar  fine  then? 

Y es,  I  did  vote  against  that.  It  was  a  great  concern  to  me  because  I  was  afraid  that  if  I  did  vote 
against  it  that  some  of  the  other  commissioners  would  go  with  me.  And  so  there  was  a  lot  of  qualifying. 
But  as  it  turned  out,  the  bulk  of  the  people  on  the  Commission  are  from  Las  Vegas.  There  were  only  two 
other  commissioners  from  the  north  at  that  time.  But  it  was  one  that  I  did  not  like.  It’s  just  not  a  good 
thing. 

Do  you  feel  that  it  would  have  been  proper  to  levy  a  smaller  fine  and  allow  it  to  operate,  or  do  you  feel 
that  it  should  have  been  closed? 

Well,  I  don’t  think  it  should  have  been  there  in  the  first  place.  I  don’t  think  that  the  regulatory 
apparatus  was  the  place  for  that.  If  somebody  had  a  complaint  or  a  problem,  they  should  have  taken  him 
to  civil  court  and  filed  charges  against  him  that  they  felt  were  appropriate,  and  had  a  trial.  But  they  chose 
not  to  do  that.  And  I  always  had  the  impression  that  that  started  at  the  governor’s  office  and  with  the 
legislature.  I  think  there  was  a  lot  of  pressure  on  those  people  to  do  something  about  that  and  that’s  where 
it  came  from. 

Who  was  the  governor  then? 

It  was  Miller.  But  it’s  just  one  of  the  things  you  deal  with. 

Over  your  many  years  on  the  Commission,  are  there  any  decisions  or  votes  or  actions  that  you  made  that 
you  would  change  if  you  had  the  opportunity? 

No.  Well,  as  I  said,  that  one  was  very,  very  distasteful.  And  there  were  many  that  were  difficult, 
but,  you  know,  that’s  what  you  were  there  for. 


Yes,  if  they  were  easy,  anybody  could  do  it. 


326 


Yes,  that’s  right.  And  there  are  many  cases  where  hindsight  is  always  20/20.  There  was  a  guy  in 
Las  Vegas  that  had  a  property  that  was  always  in  trouble  with  the  Commission  and  the  Board.  And  we 
had  him  before  us.  In  fact,  he  was  on  the  agenda  of  the  first  meeting  1  ever  sat  on. 

What  was  his  name? 

Oh,  1  can’t  remember  his  name.  And  he  was  on  the  agenda  at  the  end  of  my  second  term  for  the 
same  thing. 

Oh,  yes?  [laughter] 

And  he  just  kept  dancing  around.  He  could  always  just  skirt  around  everything.  And  finally,  one 
of  us  on  the  Commission  said,  “Enough  is  enough.  We’re  done  with  this  guy.”  The  Board  wanted  to  get 
rid  of  him,  but  1  don’t  think  they  were  quite  sure  how  the  Commission  was  going  to  take  it. 

[laughter] 

And  finally,  [laughter]  we  just  got  worn  down,  and  that  was  one  where  we  should  have  nipped 
that  right  in  the  bud  in  the  beginning. 

So  that  was  Joe  Slyman? 

Yes,  yes.  Joe  Slyman — he  was  the  man.  He  was  on  our  agenda  two  or  three  times  a  year  for  some 
problem. 

One  thing  or  another. 

Yes.  And  finally,  we  just  said,  “That’s  it,”  and  we  shut  him  down. 

You  revoked  his  license. 

Yes.  Yes. 

Took  it  away  from  him. 

But  other  than  that,  as  1  say,  going  in  you’ve  got  to  understand  that  there  are  going  to  be  some 
really  difficult  things  to  do.  And  if  you’re  thoughtful  about  them,  a  lot  of  times  you  think,  “Gee,  I’d  like 
to  have  that  vote  back,”  but  if  it’s  a  unanimous  vote  and  you  had  the  vote  back,  what  good  would  that  do? 

Yes,  it  would  still  be  four-to-one,  right?  [laughter] 


It  wouldn’t  do  you  any  good.  But,  as  I  said,  we  all  tried  to  be  attentive  to  the  other  people. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


327 


Well,  1  imagine,  too,  if  someone  gets  licensed  that  shouldn ’t  be  licensed,  he ’s  usually  kicked  out  of  there 
one  way  or  another  anyhow.  He  either  has  bad  business  practices  and  he  goes  bankrupt  or  he  does 
something  illegal  and  he ’s  put  out  somewhere  down  the  road. 

And  that’s  true.  You  know,  I  don’t  know  that  we  ever  licensed  anybody  that  shouldn’t  have  been 
licensed.  1  mean,  everybody  has  to  have  the  opportunity — as  long  as  they  meet  the  standards,  they  have 
no  negative  associations,  their  investment  dollars  are  from  places  that  are  acceptable,  they  run  a  clean 
business,  they  don’t  break  any  laws,  and  they  uphold  the  regulations  of  the  state,  you  have  to  give  them  a 
shot.  The  problem  is  a  lot  of  times  that  some  of  those  people  didn’t  really  understand  how  difficult  it  is  in 
that  business. 

Some  of  them  shouldn ’t  have  been  there. 

Yes,  they  shouldn’t  have  been  in  the  gaming  business;  they  should  have  been  in  some  other  kind 
of  a  business.  But  1  don’t  know  that’s  there’s  any  decision  that  we  did  that  we’d  want  to  turn  over. 

You  mentioned  earlier  all  the  interesting  people  that  you ’ve  met  and  come  in  contact  with  over  the  years. 
Are  there  any  one,  two,  or  three  of  them  that  would  stand  out  in  your  mind  as  unforgettable  characters? 

Well,  for  unforgettable  characters,  one  guy  was  "Si"  Redd. 

[laughter] 

Si  Redd  was  quite  a  guy.  He  was  quite  a  man.  1  mean,  he  had  nothing,  and  he  built  himself  quite 
an  empire. 

And  he  was  a  salesman,  too,  right? 

In  his  own  way.  He  was  quite  an  exceptional  guy.  And,  of  course,  Steve  Wynn  is  just  truly  a 
remarkable  person.  He  changed  gaming  in  Nevada. 

You  would  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  he  put  a  whole  new  face  on  gaming? 

Oh,  yes.  His  properties  were  totally  different  than  anybody  else’s,  and  they  were  more  attentive  to 
a  customer’s  needs,  with  all  of  the  accoutrements.  You  know,  gaming  is  gaming,  but  the  hotel  rooms  and 
how  they’re  laid  out  and  how  the  casinos  looked — they  had  palm  trees  and  waterfalls  in  the  casino. 
Nobody  ever  had  that  before.  And  Steve  started  all  of  that.  He  is  truly  a  leader  in  the  industry. 

I’ve  read  that  Bill  Harrah  was  someone  that  he  looked  up  to,  and  he  wanted  to  pattern  himself  after  Bill 
Harrah  .  .  . 

Yes. 


.  .  .  .  and,  of  course,  go  even  further. 


328 


And  he  did.  But,  you  see,  the  guys  like  Bill  Harrah  and  those  people  early  on,  they  just  had 
fancier  places  than  others.  In  other  words,  they  had  nice  thick  carpets  and  they  had  really  good  food  and 
all  that.  Well,  now  all  of  them  have  that.  When  Steve  Wynn  came  along,  he  did  more.  He  took  it  to  that 
next  step.  He  had  all  of  the  wonderful  swimming  pools  and  spas  and  all  of  the  things  that  would  make  a 
total  package  for  someone  to  come  and  gamble  in  his  place,  and  really  marketed  to  the  high  rollers  and 
gave  them  all  of  the  comforts  that  he  possibly  could.  He  had  special  suites  and  extravagance. 

So  other  properties  had  to  play  catch-up  with  him. 

That’s  exactly  right.  And  they’re  all  doing  the  same  thing  now.  The  other  guy  that  was  really 
something  was  the  guy  at  the  Horseshoe,  Ted  Binion. 

Now,  that’s  "Benny” Billion’s  son? 

Yes.  The  kids  were  all  in  a  big  fight  over  that.  We  had  revoked  or  suspended  his  license  because 
of  drug  use,  and  he  would  have  to  come  back  before  us  again,  as  I  mentioned  we’d  allowed  them  to  do,  to 
try  to  get  his  license  back.  We  went  the  rounds  with  that  guy  for  hours  and  hours  and  hours,  and  he  was 
always  one  step  ahead  in  those  days  of  how  they  could  detect  drugs.  We  required  him  to  get  a  complete 
physical  examination  every  month,  or  every  quarter.  I  can’t  remember.  Anyway,  he  goes  in  one  time,  and 
he’s  got  all  the  hair  shaved  off  of  his  body,  because  they  were  checking  hair. 

Yes.  [laughter] 

That  was  how  they  checked  hair,  [laughter]  And  so  we  were  going  through  this  all  in  a  meeting 
one  day,  and  we’re  in  this  big  argument — a  big,  heavy  discussion  -and  are  about  ready  to  deny  him  again, 
when  he  gets  up  and  walks  out  of  the  room.  I  mean,  he’s  sitting  in  the  witness  chair  and  he  just  gets  up 
and  walks  out  of  the  room!  [laughter]  And  so  we’re  all  sitting  there — I  think  John  O’Reilly  was  the 
chairman — and  John  was  just  aghast!  He  didn’t  say  a  word,  and  Binion  just  walks  right  out  of  the  hearing 
room  and  he’s  gone  for  about  ten  minutes,  and  we’re  all  just  sitting  there  waiting  for  him. 

Pretty  soon  here  he  comes  back,  and  the  chairman  said,  “What’s  your  problem?” 

He  says,  “I  had  to  go  to  the  bathroom.”  [laughter] 

But  he  didn  ’t  ask  permission? 

[laughter]  He  was  really  something  else,  that  guy. 

Getting  back  to  Engelstad ,  he  was  an  OK  kind  of  a  guy? 

Well,  I  didn’t  know  him  very  well.  He’d  never  appeared  before  us  at  any  great  length  at  all,  but 
he  seemed  fine.  Whenever  I  had  met  him  he  was  always  courteous  and  polite  and  didn’t  seem  askew  at 
all. 


Earlier  you  showed  me  a  picture  of  the  agenda  for  a  fellow  named  Ainsworth — Len  Ainsworth?  He  was 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


329 


an  Australian  slot  machine  manufacturer,  is  that  right? 

Right.  Right. 

In  this  picture  you  ’re  holding  a  group  of  binders  that  appears  to  be  at  least  four  feet  tall. 

That’s  right,  [laughter] 

Would  you  tell  us  about  that  picture  and  about  Ainsworth  and  what  created  all  that  paperwork? 

Well,  Ainsworth’s  company  wanted  to  be  licensed  in  Nevada  as  a  slot  manufacturer.  And  as  1  had 
mentioned  to  you  earlier,  Australia  does  things  a  lot  differently  in  their  gaming  regulatory  apparatus  than 
we  do  in  Nevada.  Many  things  that  they  do  over  there  would  not  be  acceptable  in  Nevada.  Australia  is  a 
very  heavily  unionized  country,  and  the  government  is  unionized.  There  are  all  these  different  unions,  and 
the  unions  really  drive  the  economy  in  Australia  to  a  great  extent.  And  to  us  it  was  like  going  back  forty 
years. 

A  lot  of  the  people  that  Ainsworth  was  associated  with,  and  the  way  he  made  his  deals  and  sales 
and  so  on,  were  not  acceptable  to  the  Nevada  regulators,  and  many  of  the  people  that  worked  in  his 
company  were  not  acceptable  in  Nevada,  either.  And  we  had  told  him,  “You  have  to  change  your  way  of 
doing  business;  you  can’t  do  business  that  way  in  Nevada,  and  you  can’t  have  these  people  in  your 
company.  If  you  want  to  resubmit  an  application  to  us,  and  all  of  these  things  are  cleaned  up,  we  would 
accept  your  application,  but  we  cannot  accept  your  application  the  way  you  have  it  now.”  That  application 
went  on  for  over  a  year  before  we  finally  said,  “No,  we  won’t  approve  Ainsworth.” 

Oh,  he  never  got  licensed? 

He  never  got  approved.  We  sent  it  back  to  the  Board  to  give  him  an  opportunity  to  clean  it  up  and 
it  never,  ever  came  back. 

What  was  the  name  of  his  slot  machine  company?  Was  that  the  Aristocrat? 

Yes. 

What  actions  or  accomplishments  while  you  were  on  the  Commission  are  you  most  proud  of? 

Well,  as  1  mentioned  to  you  earlier,  the  fact  that  1  was  involved  in  the  implementation  part  of 
corporate  gaming,  the  licensure  of  corporate  gaming  in  Nevada,  and  also  involved  in  that  transition  from 
gaming  only  in  Nevada  to  gaming  throughout  the  United  States  and  worldwide,  having  our  licensees 
involved  in  that,  and  having  that  work  as  well  as  it  did.  It  was  really,  really  something  special  to  be  a  part 
of  all  that.  And  not  many  folks  ever  get  that  kind  of  an  opportunity — to  see  all  of  that,  to  be  a  part  of 
everything  that  has  transpired  in  that  ten  years.  That  was  a  dramatic  change  in  gaming  and  in  the  gaming 
industry. 


And  you  played  a  major  role  in  the  regulation  of  that. 


330 


I’m  very  proud  to  have  been  a  part  of  that. 

When  did  you  resign  from  the  Commission? 

Well,  I  didn’t  resign.  When  your  term  is  up  you’re  replaced,  or  you’re  reappointed  at  the  pleasure 
of  the  governor.  At  the  end  of  that  third  term  I  was  pretty  much  figuring  I  was  done,  and  1  had  made  no 
advances  to  anybody  saying,  “Well,  I  would  be  interested  in  doing  it  again.”  So  that  was  when  the 
governor  appointed  a  new  person  in  my  place. 

Did  the  governors  oftentimes  appoint  a  democrat  or  republican  depending  on  their  party  affiliation? 

No!  There’s  a  requirement.  There’s  a  statutory  requirement.  You  cannot  have  more  than  three 
members  of  the  Commission  of  the  same  party.  So  you’ve  always  got  to  have  three  Democrats  and  two 
Republicans  or  three  Republicans  and  two  Democrats. 

Who  replaced  you  on  the  Commission? 

Sue  Wagner. 

What  are  you  doing  now ,  Bob?  Are  you  involved  with  the  gaming  industry  in  any  way? 

Yes,  I  am,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  [laughter]  When  the  Commission  got  into  coiporate  gaming,  if 
there  was  any  kind  of  a  feeling  of  uncertainty  or  you  were  unsure  about  how  they  might  do  things,  the 
Commission  would  require  the  licensee  to  establish  a  compliance  committee.  We  called  it  an  “oversight 
committee”  in  those  days.  And  that  oversight  committee  would  be  responsible  for  making  sure  that  they 
adhered  to  all  of  the  regulations.  They  had  to  submit  to  the  Board  who  the  members  of  that  oversight 
committee  were  and  so  on  and  so  forth.  We  did  that  for  a  few  licensees.  Well,  that  worked  out  pretty  well, 
and  then  the  Board  adopted  regulations  where  every  publicly-held  corporation  was  required  to  have  a 
compliance  committee.  And  on  that  compliance  committee  they  had  to  have  a  compliance  officer;  they 
had  to  have  a  chairman;  they  could  have  any  number  of  members  they  wanted,  but  one  member  had  to  be 
an  independent,  outside  member  and  someone  who  was  familiar  with  the  gaming  regulatory  process  and 
so  on.  And  I  always  laughed  at  that.  I  always  said,  “Well,  the  Control  Board  is  making  jobs  for 
themselves  when  they  get  through  with  their  work.” 

[laughter] 

Well,  lo  and  behold,  1  had  an  attorney  from  Las  Vegas  call  me  and  say,  “Hey,  how  would  you 
like  to  be  on  a  compliance  committee?” 

I  thought  that  over  and  thought,  “Gee,  I’d  like  to  do  that,  because  I’d  like  to  stay  involved.”  And 
the  long  and  short  of  it  is  that  now  I’m  on  the  compliance  committee  of  the  Hard  Rock  Hotel,  I’m  on  the 
compliance  committee  of  the  Venetian,  and  I’m  on  the  compliance  committee  at  Konami  Gaming,  which 
is  a  slot  manufacturing  company.  They’re  all  in  Las  Vegas,  and  it’s  very  interesting. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


331 


I  imagine. 

It’s  very  interesting  seeing  it  from  the  other  side.  You’re  required  to  have  quarterly  meetings. 
And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  I’ve  had  to  cancel  a  couple  of  our  interviews  because  1  had  to  attend  those 
meetings.  1  was  down  there  last  week.  I’m  down  there  day  after  tomorrow.  And  it’s  really,  really 
interesting. 

Mr.  Adelson  is  still  with  the  Venetian ,  right? 

Oh,  yes. 

That  is  kind  of  interesting.  He  appeared  before  you  as  a  commissioner  ten,  fifteen  years  ago 
and  here  you  are  on  that  committee. 

Of  course,  I  never  see  him.  But  the  Venetian  is  now  the  largest  hotel  in  the  world. 

Oh,  is  that  right? 

Yes.  1  have  had  security  guys  tell  me  that  they  have  eighty -two  thousand  people  a  day  go  through 
the  Venetian  Hotel.  And  now  they’re  getting  ready  to  build  a  multi-billion-dollar  property  on  Macao. 

Oh,  is  that  right? 

Yes,  they’re  doing  very,  very  well. 

Is  there  anything  else  you  would  like  to  add  to  this  interview? 

No,  you  got  it,  Dwayne.  That  was  fun. 


Thank  you  very  much  for  your  time. 


332 


13 

Arthur  Marshall 


Arthur  Marshall  was  born  in  Cleveland,  Ohio  in 
1929.  After  attending  Kent  State  University, 

Cleveland  College,  and  John  Marshall  Law  School, 
he  moved  permanently  to  Las  Vegas  with  his  family  in 
1959.  There,  he  co-founded  Marshall  Rousso,  now 
Marshall  Retail  Group,  or  MRG,  a  privately  owned 
retail  apparel  chain  in  the  Western  United  States,  and 
served  as  its  President  from  1959  to  1988.  He  was 
appointed  to  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  in 
1997  by  Governor  Bob  Miller,  and  reappointed  twice 
by  Governor  Kenny  Guinn.  After  serving  for  twelve 
years,  he  stepped  down  in  2009.  Marshall  also  served 
as  a  Director  of  Western  Alliance  Bancorporation 
and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Bank  of  Nevada.  He 
was  instrumental  in  the  formation  of  the  Nevada 
office  of  the  Anti-Defamation  League. 


Art  Marshall,  ca.  2002.  Photo  courtesy  of  Art  Marshall. 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  afternoon.  This  is  Dwayne  Kling.  It ’s  May  13,  2004.  I’m  with  Art  Marshall  in  his 
office  in  Las  Vegas,  Nevada. 

Mr.  Marshall,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have  your  permission 
to  make  available  to  the  public  the  tapes  and  the  transcripts  of  the  oral  history  interviews  that  we  are 
about  the  begin  today? 

Arthur  Marshall:  Yes,  it  does. 


Thank  you.  Art,  let’s  start  out  by  asking  when  and  where  were  you  born? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


333 


I  was  bom  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  on  September  4,  1929. 

What  college  or  university  did  you  attend? 

1  attended  Kent  State  University  in  Kent,  Ohio,  and  1  attended  Cleveland  College,  which  was  part 
of  Western  Reserve  in  Cleveland.  And  1  started  John  Marshall  Law  School,  but  never  got  very  far. 

When  did  you  come  to  Nevada? 

We  came  to  Nevada  initially  in  1956.  We  were  here  for  a  short  period  of  time,  maybe  somewhere 
under  six  months,  and  went  back  to  Cleveland,  then  returned  to  Nevada  in  1959  and  have  been  here  ever 
since. 

What  precipitated  your  move  to  Nevada? 

My  wife’s  family  lived  here.  They  had  a  small  dress  shop  on  the  Strip  called  Sara’s  of  Las  Vegas, 
and  my  father-in-law  prevailed  and  convinced  me  to  give  up  a  job  in  Cleveland  and  to  move  west,  that 
this  was  where  all  good  things  were  going  to  happen. 

So  did  you  go  into  business  with  your  father-in-law,  or  did  you  start  your  own  business? 

We  were  in  business  together  for  a  short  time.  He  had  three  daughters.  One  daughter  already  lived 
here.  Her  husband  was  a  chiropractor.  There  was  my  wife,  the  daughter  that  lived  in  Cleveland,  and  there 
was  a  daughter  and  her  husband,  who  lived  in  Los  Angeles.  His  name  was  Herbert  Rousso.  My  father-in- 
law  was  a  guy  who  wanted  family  to  be  around  him,  so  he  convinced  Herbert  Rousso  to  come  and  join 
this  little  store,  and  he  retired  and  gave  the  two  of  us  the  opportunity  to  run  this  little  business. 

That  was  the  ideal  situation  for  everyone,  then. 

It  was  a  great  situation. 

Would  you  relate  to  us  some  of  the  organizations  and  institutions  that  you ’ve  been  associated  with  during 
your  time  in  Nevada? 

Well,  let’s  see,  1  was  president  of  the  merchants  bureau  of  the  Chamber  of  Commerce;  I’m  the 
past  president  of  Temple  Beth  Sholom,  which  was  in  its  time  the  major  and  probably  only  Jewish 
community  temple  in  Las  Vegas  at  the  time;  I’m  the  past  president  of  the  Jewish  Federation  of  Las  Vegas; 
I’m  the  past  chairman  of  the  State  of  Israel  bonds  campaign;  I  was  a  board  member  of  the  Las  Vegas 
Chamber  of  Commerce;  I  served  as  a  board  member  of  the  State  of  Nevada  Public  Employee  Retirement 
Fund.  Those  are  the  major  ones. 

Yes,  that’s  quite  an  impressive  list.  You  didn  7  mention  anything  about  politics.  Were  you  ever  involved  in 
politics  in  Nevada?  Did  you  ever  run  for  any  offices? 


334 


No,  I’ve  never  run  for  any  office. 

When  were  you  appointed  to  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission? 

On  April  28th  of  1997. 

Who  did  you  replace  on  the  Commission? 

I  replaced  Bill  Urga,  and  1  was  appointed  by  Governor  Bob  Miller. 

Had  you  known  the  governor  prior  to  his  appointment? 

Yes,  1  knew  the  governor  for  some  time. 

He  was  the  district  attorney,  wasn ’t  he? 

He  was  district  attorney,  and  our  paths  crossed  numerous  times. 

Did  you  ever  have  any  experience  in  the  gaming  business  prior  to  your  appointment? 

None  whatsoever. 

During  your  time  on  the  Commission,  were  you  ever  pressured  by  the  governor  or  anyone  in 
administration  in  regards  to  commission  business? 

Never  once. 

Why  did  you  feel  that  it  was  important  that  you  accept  an  appointment  to  the  Commission? 

Well,  1  was  very  flattered.  1  think  the  Commission  is  considered  the  most  important  body  of  its 
type  in  the  state,  and  1  was  interested.  1  had  been  related  to  the  gaming  business  in  our  dress  shops  over 
the  years  and  had  a  lot  of  familiarity  with  that  side  of  the  town,  so  to  speak,  and  I  thought  it  would  be 
interesting.  1  thought  there  was  something  that  1  could  contribute,  and  1  was  very  pleased  to  be  appointed. 

You  have  dress  stores  in  various  Strip  casino  locations? 

That  was  the  company  that  my  brother-in-law  and  1  took  over  from  our  father-in-law.  We  had  a 
small  store  called  Sara’s  of  Las  Vegas.  We  opened  a  second  and  a  third  Sara’s,  and  then  we  were  able  to 
get  the  hotel  dress  shop  at  the  Sahara  Hotel,  and  from  there  we  went  from  the  Sahara  to  the  Sands,  and 
eventually  we  were  in  most  of  the  hotels  in  Las  Vegas.  Some  years  later  1  kind  of  retired  from  the 
business.  My  partner,  Herb  Rousso,  wanted  to  retire,  so  1  bought  him  out  of  the  business  and  turned  it 
over  to  my  son.  And  my  daughter  had  an  interest.  My  son  ran  and  had  the  major  share  of  business,  and  1 
just  decided  that  it  was  time  for  me  to  do  other  things.  And  1  got  involved  in  banking. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


335 


What  are  the  names  of  your  stores  now? 

Originally  the  stores  were  called  Sara’s  of  Las  Vegas,  and  we  then  opened  into  the  hotels,  and 
eventually  they  translated  into  the  name  of  Marshall-Rousso.  That’s  what  many  of  them  are  called  today. 
It’s  no  longer  a  Marshall-Rousso  company;  it’s  now  called  Marshall  Retail.  Marshall  Retail  group  is  the 
parent  company,  but  there  are  a  lot  of  Marshall-Rousso  stores  in  the  hotels.  Some  of  them  have  individual 
names  and  individual  identifications,  but  most  of  the  stores  are  known  as  Marshall-Rousso. 

So  you  must  have  had  like  thirty  or  more  stores? 

No,  at  the  time  1  turned  the  business  over  to  my  son,  we  had  eight  stores.  He  now  has  somewhere 
in  the  forty,  fifty  range. 

To  get  back  to  being  a  commission  member,  it  requires  many  hours  of  work  and  frequent  trips  to  Carson 
City  for  meetings.  With  all  these  hardships,  why  were  you  willing  to  accept  a  second  term  as 
commissioner? 

First  of  all,  1  thought  it  was  a  privilege  to  continue  to  serve.  Second  of  all,  1  thought  you  get 
better — the  longer  you’re  there  the  better  you  get  at  doing  it — and  1  really  enjoyed  the  job.  1  don’t  mind 
the  travel  or  the  time. 

“Enjoy”  is  a  key  word  because  I’ve  talked  to  some  other  commission  members.  They  said  it  was  fun  and 
it  was  exciting,  the  job  of  a  commissioner  member.  So  you  enjoyed  it? 

Yes.  Yes.  You  can  participate  in  doing  things  that  you  think  are  important  to  the  industry  and  the 
state,  and  you  get  to  learn  an  awful  lot. 

And  you  meet  enjoyable  people. 

And  you  meet  people  of  all  sizes  and  shapes,  [laughter]  Some  are  very  colorful,  and  some  of  them 
are  very  interesting. 

Would  you  accept  the  third  term  if  it  were  offered? 

I  would  if  it  were  offered.  Of  course,  that’s  the  governor’s  choice. 

Yes.  And  hasn  ’t  he  stated  that  he  would  prefer  to  get  some  new  members  on  the  Commission? 

I’m  not  quite  sure  of  that.  1  think  he  made  that  statement.  1  don’t  think  he  was  talking  about  the 
Gaming  Commission;  1  think  he  was  talking  in  regards  to  something  else.  But  after  making  that 
statement,  he  did  re-appoint  Commissioner  Gurrola  for  a  third  term. 


Oh,  he  did? 


336 


Yes. 

How  many  hours  a  week  or  a  month  do  you  spend  on  commission  business,  counting  your  meetings  and 
readings? 

It  varies  depending  on  the  load  of  applicants.  1  would  guesstimate  that  we’re  probably  spending, 
plus  the  meeting  day,  somewhere  around  twenty  hours  a  month,  maybe  twenty-five. 

Do  you  spend  more  time  or  less  time  now  than  you  did  when  you  first  became  a  commission  member?  Are 
you  more  familiar  with  the  operations  and  is  it  easier  now? 

It’s  hard  to  answer  that,  because  initially  we  had  a  different  type  of  situation.  When  Bill  Curran 
was  chairman,  we  went  over  every  single  application  at  the  meeting,  and  so  the  meetings  were 
considerably  longer.  Brian  Sandoval  came  in  and  decided  to  take  advantage  of  an  item  called  a  “consent 
agenda,”  which  is  something  I  guess  that  they  do  at  the  legislature,  and  we  no  longer  have  eight  and  ten 
and  twelve-hour  meeting  days. 

And  exactly  what  is  a  "consent  agenda?" 

A  “consent  agenda”  would  mean  that  the  commissioners  have  read  all  of  the  applications  and 
they’ve  come  to  a  certain  number  of  them  where  they  have  no  objection  to  the  recommendation  by  the 
Gaming  Control  Board.  And  because  none  of  the  commissioners  feel  that  they  need  any  additional 
conversation  or  discussion  on  those  items,  they  are  put  on  the  consent  agenda.  So  what  happens  is  that 
they’ve  got  the  transcript  of  the  hearings  in  front  of  the  Control  Board,  and  those  are  listed  in  the 
numerical  sequence — those  that  aren’t  pulled  out  of  consent — and  you  maybe  will  pass  ten  or  twelve  or 
fifteen  at  a  time,  and  they’re  just  consented  to. 

And  that  means  you  have  no  questions  either,  of  any  of  the  people? 

We  have  no  questions,  right.  But  when  our  papers  come  every  month,  we  are  given  a  form  in 
which  we  can  request  anyone  to  appear.  In  other  words,  if  any  commissioner  has  a  reason  to  want  to 
discuss  something,  then  that  item  is  not  on  the  consent  agenda,  and  we  just  advise  Marilyn  Eppling,  who 
is  our  secretary,  and/or  the  chairman.  The  chairman  generally  calls  each  of  us.  In  fact,  he  always  calls 
each  of  us  prior  to  the  meeting,  several  days  or  a  week  before  the  meeting,  to  discuss  whether  we  share 
the  feeling  of  who  should  or  should  not  be  on  the  consent  agenda. 

So  you  have  a  new  chairman,  of  course,  now.  Since  Mr.  Sandoval  left,  you  have  Mr.  Pete  Bernhard.  Does 
he  use  the  consent  system,  also? 

He  used  the  consent  agenda  as  well.  Yes,  he  does.  But  don’t  misunderstand.  We  do  not 
automatically  put  everything  on  the  consent  agenda.  If  there’s  any  issue  at  all  that  we  think  needs  further 
discussion  with  the  applicant,  it’s  not  on  the  consent  agenda.  There  are  many  types  of  applications.  For 
example,  you’ll  get  some  that  are  perfunctory;  somebody  that’s  been  licensed  two  or  three  times, 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


337 


someone  that  has  a  convenience  store  and  this  is  the  second  or  third  time  they’ve  appeared  before 
licensing,  there’s  never  been  an  issue  with  them,  there’s  no  reason  for  us  to  even  bring  them  forward  to 
the  commission  hearing,  and  many  times  their  appearances  are  waived  by  the  chairman  so  that  they’re 
spared  the  expense  of  coming  to  Carson  City  or  Las  Vegas  if  they  live  in  rural  Nevada. 

It  seems  a  logical  way  of  doing  it  when  there  aren  ’t  questions  of  anyone  and  the  Board  has  pretty  much 
given  it  100  percent  OK. 

It  is  a  logical  way  to  do  it.  It’s  not  meant  to  indicate  in  any  way  that  the  Commission  just 
automatically  rubber  stamps  the  Board.  That  doesn’t  happen.  1  can  assure  you  that  does  not  happen.  We 
are  an  independent  body,  and  we  are  the  final  deciders  of  all  of  these  issues,  and  you’re  certainly  familiar 
with  the  fact  that  we  can  reverse  any  decision  that  the  Board  makes. 

Would  you  tell  us  how  you  feel  the  philosophy  of  the  board  members  and  the  philosophy  of  the 
commission  members  differ,  if  you  do  feel  that  there  is  a  difference?  1  don ’t  know  if  you  ’ve  ever  heard  this 
quote  by  Shannon  Bybee.  He  was  often  quoted  as  saying,  “The  Board  dispenses  justice,  and  the 
Commission  dispenses  mercy.  ” 

1  couldn’t  say  it  better,  [laughter]  The  Board  has  a  different  task:  their  task  is  to  do  the 
investigation;  their  task  is  to  ferret  into  the  history  of  the  applicant.  They  have  to  look  at  it  very  carefully 
and  the  Board  comes  from  a  different  make-up.  We  have  people  on  the  Board  that  come  out  of  the  police 
or  the  area  of  law  enforcement  who  have  their  own  view  based  on  their  own  experience  on  issues.  The 
Commission  is  comprised  of  people  from — well,  we  have  a  lawyer,  we  have  a  former  legislator,  a 
lieutenant  governor,  we  have  Radha  Chanderraj  who  is  a  CPA,  and  now  just  graduated  and  passed  the  bar. 
I’m  a  businessman.  So  we  come  from  different  walks  of  life  than  the  Board,  who  are  full-time  employees. 
I  would  say  Shannon  Bybee  just  couldn’t  have  said  it  better. 

[laughter] 

Well  we ’ve  mentioned  some  of  the  differences.  What  philosophies  of  the  Board  and  the 
Commission  are  the  same? 

I  don’t  think  there’s  a  real  major  difference  between  the  philosophies  of  the  Board  and  the 
Commission.  The  idea  is  to  make  Nevada  gaming  honest,  to  keep  it  at  the  reputation  that  it  has.  We’re 
there  to  help  the  state  and  protect  the  state  and  protect  the  industry.  I  don’t  really  see  a  great  difference. 
We  may  approach  things  differently,  but  we’re  working  towards  the  same  end.  We  see  some  things  a  little 
differently  than  they  do,  and  we  don’t  necessarily  always  agree  on  issues.  We  see  them  differently. 

Well,  over  the  years  there  have  been  good  relationships  and  bad  relationships  between  the  Board  and  the 
Commission.  How  do  you  feel  the  relationship  has  been  between  the  Board  and  Commission  during  your 
tenure? 


I’d  say  it’s  good.  I  must  say  in  the  seven  years  I’ve  been  on  the  Commission  I’ve  never  seen  an 
area  of  a  real  major  problem.  I’ve  seen  some  divisions  on  certain  issues,  but  they  were  the  kind  of 
divisions  that  were  meant  with  great  integrity,  and  afterwards  we  could  go  out  and  have  a  cup  of  coffee.  I 


338 


don’t  think  there  are  any  personal  or  personality  problems. 

Do  you  feel  it’s  very  important  that  the  Commission  works  with  the  Board  and  not  disagree,  at  least  in 
public?  There  have  been  some  instances  in  years  past  where  there  have  been  disagreements  in  public. 
What ’s  your  feeling  on  that? 

That’s  a  good  question.  1  don’t  know  actually  how  1  want  to  answer  that,  [laughter]  1  think  part  of 
the  democratic  system  of  debate  is  that  sometimes  you  may  have  to  flush  out  a  matter  that  you  don’t  agree 
on  in  public.  1  believe  it  has  to  be  done  with  courtesy  and  the  spirit  of  trying  to  do  better  for  everybody 
involved.  I’ve  never  seen  it  get  personal.  There  are  issues  we  don’t  agree  on,  and  haven’t  agreed  on,  and 
we’re  better  for  it. 

Some  people  have  complained  that  the  application  process  is  too  lengthy.  What  is  your  feeling  on  that? 

1  think  we’ve  got  a  good  system,  and  I  don’t  think  we  should  tinker  with  it. 

It ’s  worked  for  many  years. 

It’s  worked  for  many  years.  1  think  we’re  considered  the  granddaddy  of  all  regulatory  systems, 
and  I  think  it  works  well.  I  don’t  think  it’s  broken.  1  don’t  think  we  have  to  fix  it. 

Do  you  feel  that  the  gaming  industry  is  or  was  in  danger  of  being  overregulated?  I  think  you ’ve  probably 
answered  that  in  your  last  statement. 

No.  No,  I  don’t. 

You ’ve  sen’ed  with  three  different  chairmen  during  your  time  on  the  Board,  and  you  mentioned  them  all 
earlier.  Do  you  feel  that  the  Commission ’s  actions  were  any  different  under  the  different  chairmen? 

Y es,  under  Bill  Curran  we  examined  every  single  application,  and  to  be  honest  with  you,  1 
enjoyed  that.  1  thought  it  was  important.  Under  Brian  Sandoval,  he  brought  his  experience  in  the 
legislature  and  did  more  of  a  consent  agenda  item,  and  1  got  to  appreciate  that  as  well.  So  it  was  a 
question  of  learning  a  new  way.  Peter  Bernhard  is  closer  to  a  mix  between  Curran  and  Sandoval.  Peter,  1 
think,  delves  very  carefully  into  every  application,  and  I’m  very  pleased  with  that.  I’ve  had  the  good 
fortune  of  three  great  chairmen,  and  they’ve  become  three  very  good  friends.  I  value  each  of  them 
appropriately.  I  think  Bill  Curran  was  a  great  teacher  and  a  great  friend.  Sandoval  is  a  young  man  who  I 
have  the  absolutely  highest  regard  for.  My  family  and  I  sponsored  him  for  the  attorney  general.  I  can’t 
think  of  a  better  guy  for  the  job.  I  think  his  future  is  way  ahead  of  him.  I  think  Brian’s  a  high-integrity, 
great  young  man.  He  will  be  whatever  he  wants  to  be  in  this  country,  and  Peter  Bernhard  is  a  jurist.  I 
watch  Peter  Bernhard,  and  I  listen  to  how  he  runs  a  meeting  and  I  think  to  myself,  “Boy,  there’s  a  guy  that 
should  sit  on  the  federal  bench.”  He’s  just  that  good. 


That  talented. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


339 


He’s  just  that  good. 

Well,  that ’s  quite  a  compliment  for  all  three  of  them. 

It’s  a  blessing  because  they  were  all  very  close  friends,  and  they  treat  the  members  of  the 
Commission  as  equals.  We’ve  not  had  the  experience  of  a  chairman  who  overrides  us.  They’ve  just  been 
marvelous.  They’ve  made  the  difference. 

So  they  don ’t  dominate. 

No.  No,  they’re  partners — absolutely  partners. 

Well,  the  state  of  Nevada  is  fortunate,  too,  to  have  had  so  many  good  commissioners  and  chairmen. 

1  agree.  I  agree.  Bill  [Curran]  taught  me  you  don’t  give  a  ticket  and  a  lecture,  [laughter]  If  you’re 
going  to  send  the  guy  to  jail,  don’t  give  him  a  lecture,  [laughter]  He  doesn’t  want  to  hear  it. 

[laughter] 

There  were  a  lot  of  things  to  learn  in  the  beginning.  Brian  taught  me  a  different  way  of  how  to  do 
things.  Brian  was  always  totally  prepared.  If  there  was  some  issue  or  item  that  needed  attention  that  was 
important  to  the  state,  like  the  NCAA  or  something  like  that,  he  knew  when  he  came  in  with  a  prepared 
statement  that  he  had  worked  on  and  worked  on  and  worked  on.  Peter  does  exactly  the  same  thing. 

You  were  a  commissioner  in  1998  when  some  of  the  largest  casinos  in  the  world  were  licensed,  and  one 
of  them  was  the  Bellagio.  What  was  your  reaction  to  the  opening  of  this  billion-dollar  property? 

I  was  100  percent  for  it.  We  had  the  privilege  of  having  Steve  Wynn  come  up,  and  he  took  us 
through  the  history  of  his  entire  concept  of  Bellagio,  and  I  don’t  think  there  was  a  sound  in  the  room  for 
whatever  time  it  took  Steve  to  explain  to  us.  Everybody  was  totally  involved  in  hearing  what  he  had  to 
say.  He  mesmerized  the  situation.  He  explained  the  concept,  how  it  was  born,  what  his  plans  were,  and 
we  welcomed  Bellagio.  I  mean,  we’re  not  a  gambling  town  anymore.  We’re  a  destination.  And  it  was  the 
hotels  like  Bellagio  and  MGM  and  the  Venetian  that  have  done  that.  I  welcomed  the  Bellagio. 

You  were  saying  what  a  great  presentation  Mr.  Wynn  did  at  his  licensing  application.  Was  there  a 
question  about  sales  tax  exemption  for  his  art  collection? 

That  never  came  before  the  Gaming  Commission.  That  would  have  been  before  the  Tax 
Commission.  We  never  had  any  involvement  in  that. 

What  was  it  he  was  asking  for?  Do  you  recall? 

I’m  not  quite  sure,  but  it’s  my  recollection  that  he  was  asking  to  be  excluded  from  paying  sales 
tax  on  those  purchases.  And  I  didn’t  quite  totally  understand  it,  because  Steve  Wynn  is  a  certified  art 


340 


dealer.  He’s  a  buyer  and  a  seller.  And  1  am  under  the  impression  that  he  would  have  been  licensed  as 
such,  or  the  hotel  would  have  been  licensed  to  buy  and  sell,  or  he  is  licensed  as  an  art  dealer  to  buy  and 
sell.  And  as  a  buyer  and  a  seller,  he  would  have  no  sales  tax  to  pay.  Like  car  dealers  don’t  pay  sales  tax  on 
their  inventory.  People  who  buy  their  inventory  pay  sales  tax.  And  when  they  sell  to  another  car  dealer, 
there  is  no  tax.  It’s  a  nontaxable  event.  So  1  never  quite  understood  what  that  meant.  But  since  it  wasn’t 
an  issue  in  front  of  us,  I  didn’t  have  to  deal  with  it. 

Is  he  building  another  hotel-casino  now? 

Yes,  he’s  building  the  Wynn  property  on  the  grounds  of  the  old  Desert  Inn. 

Does  he  have  a  name  for  it? 

It’s  going  to  be  called  “Wynn.”  It  was  originally  going  to  be  called  the  “Le  Reve,”  which  was  the 
name  of  a  Picasso  painting  that  Steve  and  Elaine  [Mrs.  Wynn]  owned.  The  announcements  that  1  read 
were  that  people  thought  his  own  name  and  his  own  imprint,  after  all  the  years  he’s  been  involved,  would 
be  a  good  thing  to  do,  and  he  was  convinced  to  change  it  to  “The  Wynn  Hotel.”  1  think  it’s  a  good  idea. 

I  do,  too.  I  agree  with  what  you  say  about  how  he ’s  left  such  an  imprint  on  Las  Vegas  and  Nevada.  It ’s  a 
good  idea.  So  it ’d  be  called  "The  Wynn. " 

Yes. 

Is  there  an  anticipated  opening  for  that? 

I’m  not  sure  of  the  date.  1  think  it’s  a  year  or  so  from  now.  I’m  not  quite  sure  of  that. 

Does  he  have  a  separate  art  gallery  in  town,  too? 

No,  what  I’m  aware  of  is  that  his  art  collection  was  housed  in  the  existing  Desert  Inn  property 
that  was  not  demolished,  part  of  the  new  properties  that  were  built  near  the  end  of  the  Desert  Inn 
experience.  And  it’s  my  understanding  now  that  that  collection  is  being  sent  to  Reno  for  an  exhibition  and 
will  remain  in  Reno  until  the  hotel  is  finished  and  it  can  be  brought  back  to  The  Wynn. 

That  ’ll  be  interesting. 

In  1999  after  two  years  of  debate,  the  Commission  voted  three-to-two  to  restrict  the  licensing  of 
slot  machines  in  businesses  that  are  not  casinos.  Would  you  tell  us  how  you  voted  on  that  measure  and 
your  feelings  in  general  as  to  where  slot  machines  should  or  shouldn ’t  be  allowed? 

I  voted  in  favor  of  that  decision,  and  it  was  based  on  the  experience  of  the  commissioners  who  I 
served  with,  Mr.  Curran  and  Mr.  Gurrola.  I  respected  their  experience  prior  to  mine,  and  they  were  trying 
to  accomplish  something  that  I  think  was  worth  doing.  We  wanted  to  give  guidelines  to  people  who  were 
interested  in  coming  to  Nevada  to  do  gaming,  and  we  were  running  into  situations  where  people  were 
coming  and  thinking  they  had  the  right  to  have  slot  machines. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


341 


You’d  have  someone  who  was  coming,  say,  from  another  state,  had  never  been  in  gaming,  and 
had  an  idea  that  maybe  they’d  open  up  a  certain  kind  of  business  and  they  could  put  slot  machines  in  it 
because  they  thought  it  kind  of  fit  the  mold.  And  they  did  not  always  understand  that  they’d  have  to  go 
out  and  hire  someone  experienced  in  the  gaming  world,  particularly  a  law  firm  that  did  gaming  law,  to 
help  them  to  understand  whether  their  business  would  qualify.  From  time  to  time,  we’d  see  someone  who 
would  come  from  another  state  and  have  a  plan  and  start  working  and  put  money  up  and  develop 
something,  and  then  when  they  got  to  the  threshold  of  gaming,  it  wasn’t  the  kind  of  place  that  slot 
machines  would  fit  into.  And  so  I  think  that  the  idea  of  Chairman  Curran  at  the  time  was  to  define  what 
was  or  was  not  going  to  work  as  far  as  gaming  was  concerned.  Of  course,  the  way  the  regulations  are 
written,  and  the  way  the  Commission  operates,  we  can  make  exceptions  if  we  feel  it’s  appropriate.  So  that 
gave  everybody  a  better  barometer.  You  know,  if  you’re  going  to  open  up  a  mortuary,  we’re  not  going  to 
put  slot  machines  in  the  waiting  room.  I  once  made  a  remark  at  the  meeting  that  people  will  be  dying  to 
play  there,  [laughter]  and  they  thought  it  was  funny,  but  it  wasn’t  worth  mentioning,  [laughter] 

Yes.  [laughter] 

Certain  things  have  been  changed,  and  f  don’t  think  we  were  interested  in  expanding  gaming 
beyond  what  it  currently  has.  There  was  a  movement,  if  you  remember,  at  the  time.  There  were  people 
who  were  concerned  that  gaming  was  seeping  into  every  nook  and  cranny  of  the  state  as  far  as  homes  and 
residential  neighborhoods  are  concerned,  and  1  think  we  were  trying  to  not  curtail  it,  but  just  to  identify 
where  it  belonged. 

Yes,  I  heard  even  doctors  or  dentists  requested  a  slot  license  for  patients  to  play  while  they  ’re  waiting. 

That’s  correct.  Anybody  who  thought  they  had  enough  people  to  be  entertained  were  coming  in 
and  asking,  “Would  1  qualify?” 

Yes.  [laughter] 

So  I  think  that  what  that  did  was  it  protected  the  public  from  an  overabundance  of  gaming,  it 
made  life  easier  for  the  Control  Board,  and  it  also  protected  the  people  who  wanted  to  get  in  that  business. 
They  knew  that  wasn’t  the  way  the  plan  was  going  to  work. 

Did  it  become  a  Nevada  state  law,  or  did  it  become  a  regulation? 

I  think  it  became  a  regulation.  Yes,  I’m  sure  it’s  a  regulation,  not  a  legislative  act.  It  just  meant 
that  if  you  were  going  to  have  a  7-Eleven,  for  instance,  we  defined  certain  parameters  of  size.  It  had  to  be 
a  certain  number  of  square  feet  before  you  were  eligible  for  that.  And  if  you  fit  that  eligibility  size,  you 
then  could  apply  and  go  through  the  regular  process. 


You  dealt  a  lot  with  social  issues  during  your  tenure.  Do  you  recall  any  other  social  issues  that  came 
before  the  Commission  that  you ’d  care  to  discuss?  Were  you  involved  with  the  themed  slot  machines  at 
all? 


342 


Yes,  we  were  involved  with  that.  We  were  concerned  about  attracting  underage  [players],  and 
between  the  Control  Board  and  the  Commission,  1  think  we  drafted  an  appropriate  set  of  safeguards  to 
make  sure  that  didn’t  happen.  The  industry  is  very  good  about  that.  They  do  research,  and  they  have 
companies  that  go  out  and  determine  whether  Monopoly,  for  example,  or  Popeye,  is  considered  an  adult 
game  or  a  child  game.  They  have  ways  of  researching  how  many  toys  are  currently  sold  with  some  of 
those  [themes].  Obviously,  1  think  you’ve  got  to  be  seventy  years  old  to  know  who  Betty  Boop  is,  for 
instance. 

Yes. 


We  wanted  to  make  sure  that  those  particular  games  would  not  attract  some  youngster  who’d  be 
going  through  the  casino  and  who  would  want  to  come  over  and  be  attracted  to  the  game.  1  think  the 
industry  itself  has  done  a  pretty  good  job  of  that.  1  don’t  recall  anybody  coming  to  us  with  something  that 
was  far  off  the  wall. 

In  December  of 1999,  the  Commission  unanimously  approved  the  largest  gaming  transaction  in  state 
history,  Park  Place  Entertainment  Corporation ’s  three-billion-dollar  purchase  of  Caesars  World,  Inc. 
What  were  your  feelings  about  that? 

1  supported  it.  We  looked  at  it  very  carefully.  We  did  not  think  it  monopolized  anything.  We 
supported  it. 

1  thought  it  was  a  great  step.  We  were  uniting  some  of  the  most  important  properties  in  the 
gaming  industry  in  this  state. 

There  are  several  theme  hotel-casinos  in  Las  Vegas.  Do  you  have  a  few  comments  about  any  of  them  that 
you  would  care  to  mention? 

I  do.  1  think  the  theming  of  the  hotels  has  actually  accomplished  the  destination  idea.  My  wife 
and  I  were  at  the  little  outdoor  cafe  at  Paris  some  years  back  and  we  were  having  lunch,  and  I  heard  the 
people  at  the  next  table  saying,  "Isn’t  this  fun,  we  were  in  Venice  last  night,” — of  course,  meaning  the 
Venetian — “we’re  in  Paris  now,  and  we’re  going  to  Lake  Como  for  dinner,”  which  meant  Bellagio. 

[laughter]  Yes. 

I’ve  had  people  say  to  me  that  you  can  have  all  the  attributes;  you  don’t  have  to  go  to  Europe. 

You  can  come  to  Las  Vegas  and  capture  Europe.  And  then,  of  course,  we  have  New  York,  New  York,  and 
I’ve  got  a  very  cute  story  about  New  York,  New  York.  I’m  sure  you  know  who  Charles  Rangel  is.  He’s  a 
leading  member  of  the  House  of  Representatives.  He’s  a  congressman.  And  Charley  told  me  a  story — 
he’s  got  this  deep  voice.  You  know,  it’s  kind  of  a  raspy  voice  [speaking  in  a  raspy  and  deeper  tone].  I’m 
trying  to  emulate  it.  He  usually  comes  out  to  Las  Vegas  from  time  to  time  as  one  of  the  leaders  of  the 
Democratic  Caucus,  and  he’ll  come  out  for  various  political  reasons.  And  generally,  he  takes  the  red-eye 
back  and  forth,  but  he  did  have  some  extra  time  one  day,  and  he  went  over  to  New  York,  New  York  to  see 
what  they  had  accomplished.  Two  or  three  months  later  he  was  in  his  offices  in  Washington,  D.C.,  and 
someone  came  in  and  said,  “You’re  not  going  to  believe  this,  but  one  of  my  neighbors  was  at  New  York, 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


343 


New  York  a  couple  of  months  ago,  and  they  have  a  look-alike  who  looks  and  sounds  just  like  you 
walking  around.”  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

And,  of  course,  that  was  Charley.  So  I  think  what  we’ve  done  as  far  as  theming  is  marvelous.  It 
makes  Las  Vegas  exciting. 

Yes,  it  definitely  does. 

And  1  think  a  lot  of  people  come  here  for  that.  Otherwise,  why  not  go  to  an  Indian  casino 
somewhere  near  where  you  live?  The  Indian  casinos  are  wonderful.  I’ve  gone  to  some  of  them  and 
they’re  very  impressive,  but  they  do  not  offer  the  Las  Vegas  package. 

That ’s  right. 

And  I  don’t  think  it’s  possible  for  anybody  to  put  it  together.  You  can’t  put  the  Venetian  and  the 
Wynn  and  the  Bellagio  and  Paris  and  MGM  and  Mandalay  Bay  and  even  the  Stardust,  you  can’t  put  those 
all  together  [anywhere  else].  You  can’t  combine  them.  There’s  no  other  place  in  the  world  that  can  do 
that. 

No.  The  Indian  casinos  are  all  pretty  much  stand-alone  casinos. 

They’re  stand-alone,  and  you  can  go  and  gamble.  That’s  about  all  you  can  do.  And  some  of  them 
may  have  added  golf  courses.  I’m  not  quite  sure.  They  do  have  some  entertainment,  but  they  don’t  have  O 
[the  Cirque  du  Soleil  production  at  the  Bellagio]  and  1  think  O  cost  ninety  million  dollars  to  stage.  They 
don’t  have  Celine  Dion.  And  from  my  understanding  Celine  Dion  has  made  an  enormous  difference  at 
Caesars.  The  restaurants  are  full;  the  Forum  is  full;  everything  is  full  before  the  show.  People  have  to 
come  into  the  facility  before.  They  probably  dine  there  and  go  on  to  the  show,  and  then  they  stay.  1  think 
it’s  turned  out  to  be  very  successful.  O  does  the  same  thing.  All  of  the  major  shows  are  an  attraction  you 
can’t  find  anywhere  else. 

And  you  know  the  quality  of  them  because  some  of  them  have  been  on  for  so  many  years.  O  has  been  on 
for  quite  a  few  years,  hasn ’t  it? 

O  has  been  on,  and  the  Mystere  shows.  The  Siegfried  &  Roy  show  brought  in  over  a  billion 
dollars  into  the  Mirage.  It  was  outstanding.  They  led  the  world  in  magic  shows.  Now  you  have  other  great 
magicians  doing  shows.  It’s  Las  Vegas. 

Yes.  The  Folies  Bergere  has  been  at  the  Tropicana  for  fifty  years,  hasn ’t  it?  [laughter] 

That’s  right.  That’s  right. 


Or  did  it  use  to  be  at  the  Stardust  and  now  it ’s  at  the  Tropicana? 


344 


No,  the  Stardust  had  the  Casino  de  Paris.  The  Folies  Bergere  is  the  Folies  Bergere.  It  really  was 
"the  show"  in  Las  Vegas.  But  those  were  long  ago.  Those  were  different  times.  I’m  sure  people  still  see  it. 
Hallelujah  Hollywood  is  still  at  Bally’s — great  show. 

And  that  played  in  Reno  for  several  years. 

And  that’s  where  Siegfried  &  Roy  started.  They  were  part  of  that  show.  Of  course,  I  go  back  to 
the  days  of  Sinatra  and  Steve  [Lawrence]  and  Eydie  [Gorme].  Steve  and  Eydie  just  played  the  Stardust, 
and  they  were  sold  out.  Someone  offered  somebody  in  the  hotel  ten  thousand  dollars  for  two  tickets,  and 
there  were  no  seats  available.  Steve  said  had  he  known,  he  would  have  sold  them  two  tickets. 

But  when  Frank  Sinatra  would  come  to  town,  it  was  like  New  Year’s  Eve,  because  we  had  the 
dress  shop  at  the  Sands  during  those  years  when  they  were  shooting  Oceans  11.  It  was  fun. 

That  had  to  be  a  party  every  night. 

It  was  fun.  Everybody  had  a  good  time,  and  the  stars  would  participate.  They’d  sit  in  the  coffee 
shop.  They’d  say  hello  to  everybody.  They  never  had  to  hide.  They  didn’t  need  security.  Red  Skelton 
would  have  breakfast  every  morning  in  the  Sands  coffee  shop  and  talk  to  any  fan  that  would  come  over; 
he’d  sit  and  chat  with  him.  They’d  be  comfortable.  They’d  come  in  and  out  of  our  shops.  I  remember  Jack 
Benny  and  his  wife  coming  in  and  out  of  the  store  at  the  Sahara;  Danny  Thomas;  all  of  them.  It  was  an 
unbelievable  time. 

One  of  the  things  that  continues  to  make  this  a  destination  is  the  fact  that  we  probably  have 
restaurants  as  fine  as  anyplace  in  the  world.  All  the  hotels  have  remarkably  great  restaurants.  The 
Venetian  has  a  number  of  restaurants,  the  Bellagio  has  a  number  of  restaurants,  Mandalay  Bay  has  some 
great  restaurants.  All  of  the  hotels  have  brought  in  the  best  of  food. 

And  some  famous  chefs  have  opened  restaurants. 

Very  famous  chefs.  It’s  a  dining  experience.  It  didn’t  used  to  be  that  way.  If  you  remember,  we 
had  the  buffet  or  the  chuck  wagon.  And  I  don’t  know  if  you  remember,  but  the  Flamingo  chuck  wagon  at 
midnight  was  a  buck — one  silver  dollar.  Now  it’s  Wolfgang  Puck,  Emeril,  Charlie  Palmer.  All  these  guys 
are  first  class. 

There  again,  that ’s  something  the  Indian  casinos  will  probably  never  have. 

Yes,  between  shopping,  retail,  and  food.  It’s  my  understanding  in  many  of  the  hotels  non-gaming 
revenue  is  equal  to  gaming  revenue.  That  was  not  the  way  it  happened  originally. 

No,  it  never  used  to  be  that  way.  Well,  these  shopping  malls  have  brought  in  tens  of  thousands  or 
hundreds  of  thousands  of people,  also. 


Absolutely. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


345 


1  saw  in  the  paper  today  that  March  of  this  year  was  the  second  largest  visitor  month  in  the  history  of  Las 
Vegas.  It  was  over  three  million  people. 

I  saw  that.  Yes. 

And  I  thought  that  was  interesting.  It  was  showing  that  everything’s  turning  around  as  far  as  some  of  the 
fear  from  9/11  starting  to  fade  away. 

I  hope  so. 

It’s  very  encouraging  to  have  the  second  highest  volume  month  in  history. 

It  is  encouraging,  and  also,  we  are  probably,  from  what  I’m  told,  the  convention  capital  of  the 
world.  The  conventions  here  have  great  attendance,  and  the  people  are  happy  to  work  all  day  and  happy  to 
be  able  to  have  the  experience  at  night  of  fine  dining  and  shopping  and  gaming  if  they  want.  I  know  that 
some  of  the  major  conventions  come  back  year  in  and  year  out.  This  where  they  want  to  be.  I  think 
Sheldon  Adelson  kind  of  led  the  pack  with  that. 

[laughter]  Yes. 

I  remember  when  he  first  started  to  do  conventions  with  COMDEX  at  the  convention  center, 
there  were  some  hotels  who  didn’t  want  to  give  up  their  rooms  at  lower  rates  to  conventioneers  because 
they  didn’t  think  that  they  gambled,  but  I  think  everybody  is  now  trying  to  capture  that  convention 
business. 

Yes,  I  think  the  entire  state  of  Nevada  is  that  way  now. 

Yes. 

Northern  Nevada  was  the  same  way;  they  didn ’t  want  these  convention  people,  and  now  they  ’re  out 
desperately  seeking  them. 

Well,  it’s  made  a  difference.  Mandalay  Bay  built  a  convention  center.  I  don’t  have  any  idea  what 
Wynn  is  doing.  The  MGM  has  expanded  their  convention  facilities.  Sheldon  Adelson  at  the  Venetian  has 
one  or  two  million  square  feet,  so  obviously,  it’s  pretty  tough  to  match  that.  But  he  really  built  his  hotel 
around  the  convention  business.  And  according  to  the  numbers  I  saw  in  the  newspaper  recently,  he’s 
posted  unbelievable  results  for  the  first  quarter,  just  unbelievable  results. 

That ’s  great. 

In  October  of 2000,  Station  Casinos  was  fined  $475, 000  to  settle  a  complaint  from  the  Nevada 
Gaming  Control  Board  regarding  an  anonymous  mailer  sent  out  by  a  former  Station  Casinos  executive, 
Mark  Brown.  Would  you  tell  us  about  that  incident  and  your  feelings  regarding  the  size  of  the  fine? 


Well,  there’s  not  a  lot  to  tell  you  about  the  incident,  because  I  think  it’s  been  well  documented.  I 


346 


think  part  of  the  big  problem  was  that  they  didn’t  disclose  who  was  responsible  for  what  the  mailers  were, 
and  it  was  sent  out  anonymously,  and  1  think  that  the  control  board  felt  that  was  a  violation.  1  think  the 
incident  was  well  handled  as  far  as  the  Control  Board  was  concerned,  and  we  think  that  the  stipulation  in 
the  settlement  was  appropriate.  1  remember  making  a  comment  that  1  have  used  since  in  regards  to  other 
situations,  and  my  comment  was,  “Some  of  this  had  to  do  with  what  1  sometimes  refer  to  as  ‘corporate 
arrogance.’” 

[laughter] 

In  other  words,  they  feel  they  can  do  no  wrong.  It  so  happens  1  think  that  Stations  is  a  fine 
organization.  1  think  they  do  a  good  job  in  the  industry.  They’re  a  great  part  of  the  public  community.  1 
just  think  that  sometimes  that  some  of  us,  including  our  administrations  in  various  parts  of  the  nation, 
think  that  we  can’t  do  anything  wrong  and  we  have  to  look  out  for  any  of  us,  including  gaming 
commissioners,  for  being  too  arrogant.  So  1  used  the  word  "corporate  arrogance,"  and  their  counsel  took 
exception  to  it  privately. 

Oh,  privately,  [laughter]  In  July  of 2002,  the  Hard  Rock  Hotel  &  Casino  was  fined  a  hundred  thousand 
dollars  to  settle  a  Gaming  Control  Board  complaint  that  sex  acts  were  taking  place  in  the  casino.  Would 
you  tell  us  about  what  you  recall  about  that  incident? 

Well,  that  was  a  rather  serious  incident,  and  during  the  hearing  it  appeared  that  the  president  of 
the  Hard  Rock,  who  had  just  come  aboard,  wasn’t  as  familiar  as  1  thought  he  should  be  with  the  incidents. 
1  was  kind  of  surprised  that  he  hadn’t  viewed  all  the  tapes  and  all  the  material  that  the  Control  Board  had 
talked  about.  1  made  a  comment  that  1  think  was  kind  of  shattering  to  him,  and  I  said,  “Maybe  a  million- 
dollar  fine  would  have  gotten  your  attention.”  And  he  staggered  at  that  comment.  1  was  quite  distressed, 
but  then  he  explained  away  that  the  reason  he  didn’t  get  into  it  totally  was  because  their  attorneys  and  he 
and  everybody — he  wasn’t  part  of  the  organization  at  the  time  this  incident  took  place — since  they  had 
agreed  to  the  fine,  they  had  agreed  to  all  the  penalties,  that  he  just  wanted  to  go  forward.  But  1  did  want 
him  to  understand  how  seriously  1  looked  at  that  situation,  and  I  was  sure  he  got  the  message. 

It  was  a  lounge  act  where  they  were  having  sex? 

No,  there  was  activity  going  on  in  the  bar,  or  in  whatever  the  nightclub  was — 1  don’t  remember 
now  exactly  what  the  name  of  the  facility  was — that  was  improper.  It  might  have  been  late-night  activity. 
Now,  without  protecting  anybody — and  it  isn’t  my  intention — it’s  hard  for  me  to  imagine  that  the  license 
holders  would  risk  their  license  for  this  kind  of  behavior.  What  this  is  in  our  experience  is  generally  some 
employees  who  see  an  opportunity  to  change  the  rules  a  little  bit,  and  perhaps  get  a  nice  big  toke  or 
something  for  turning  a  blind  eye  to  things. 

Oh,  OK. 


And  I  think  that — I’ve  used  the  word  before — “rogue”  employees  sometimes  can  do  you  in.  And 
candidly,  you  can  compare  that  to  what’s  going  on  in  the  world  today,  where  people  who  are  doing  things 
that  their  superiors  certainly  wouldn’t  want  them  to  do.  And,  of  course,  the  buck  stops  at  the  top,  and  so 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


347 


the  owners  and  licensees  have  to  take  the  heat  for  what  their  employees  do. 

So  1  thought  we  had  handled  that  situation  in  the  best  interests  of  the  state  as  well  as  the  industry 
and  the  public.  At  the  time  that’s  what  1  believed. 

Yes.  Well  big  part  of  your  job  is  to  protect  the  reputation  of  the  industry. 

And  to  protect  the  state.  Y ou  could  take  all  these  things  and  expose  them  fully,  fully,  fully,  and 
bring  them  onto  60  Minutes,  because  I’m  sure  that  somebody  likes  to  be  able  to  talk  about  things  that  are 
shocking,  and  get  a  lot  of  mileage  out  of  it.  It  wouldn’t  change  the  penalty  system.  All  it  would  do,  I 
think,  would  be  to  damage  the  state  of  Nevada  and  the  industry  as  a  whole. 

In  January  of 2004,  the  Gaming  Commission  suspended  the  gaming  license  of  the  Horseshoe  Casino 
owned  by  Beck}’  Binion  Behnen.  Would  you  please  comment  on  that  closing? 

Well,  that  license  was  suspended  because  of  the  fact  that  Becky  Behnen’s  bankroll  had  been 
seized  by  creditors,  and  so  the  Horseshoe  no  longer  had  the  financial  ability  to  maintain  the  responsibility 
of  a  proper  bankroll.  And  so  we  had  really  little  or  no  option  but  to  close  her  down.  As  far  as  the  closing 
is  concerned,  I  totally  supported  the  Harrah’s  MTR  [Gaming  Group]  transaction.  I  thought  it  solved  a  lot 
of  problems.  It  solved  Becky  Behnen’s  problems  financially  to  a  certain  extent.  I  don’t  know  this 
factually,  but  I  think  the  Horseshoe  was  a  very  expensive  proposition  for  her,  and  I  think  it  probably 
impacted  her  wealth.  This  gave  her  a  chance  to  come  out  from  under  a  little  bit.  I  hope  she  salvaged 
something.  I’m  hoping  she  did. 

The  other  very  important  issue  to  me,  and  probably  most  important,  was  that  we  put  somewhere 
around  nine  hundred  people  back  to  work,  and  put  them  back  to  work  quickly.  I  have  a  lot  of  confidence 
in  downtown.  Harrah’s  is  a  marvelous  licensee.  They’re  a  responsible  company,  they’re  very  good 
people,  and  I  saw  a  great  opportunity  for  them.  They  obviously  didn’t  want  to  keep  the  Horseshoe  for  a 
long  term,  so  they  brought  MTR  in,  and  I  think  MTR  made  a  great  real  estate  transaction.  If  it  all  works 
out  like  everybody  hopes  it  will,  I  think  MTR  got  a  great  casino  for  a  very  good  price.  Harrah’s  got  what 
they  wanted,  which  was  the  Horseshoe  name  in  the  state  of  Nevada,  and  the  employees  got  back  to  work. 
And  Becky  Behnen,  who  tried  desperately  to  maintain  her  father’s  legacy,  maybe  got  a  little  bit  of 
financial  relief.  So  I  think  in  the  long-run  it  was  a  great  solution. 

Good  for  everyone. 

Good  for  everyone. 

You  mentioned  Harrah ’s  getting  the  use  of  the  name  “Horseshoe  ”  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  Does  that  still 
go  on  after  MTR  takes  over? 

Yes,  after  MTR  takes  over,  it  will  be  Binion’s.  It  won’t  be  Binion’s  Horseshoe.  The  MTR  people, 
it’s  my  understanding,  wound  up  with  the  Binion  name.  The  Harrah’s  people,  who  bought  Horseshoe 
properties  outside  of  the  state  from  Horseshoe  Gaming  from  Jack  Binion,  will  have  now  owned  the 
Horseshoe  license  or  name  or  trademark  for  the  state  of  Nevada,  which  I  think  covers  the  entire  country. 
In  other  words,  they  owned  it  elsewhere,  and  so  they’ll  have  the  Nevada  license,  which  gives  them  great 


348 


opportunities  to  take  that  whole  thing  and  work  with  it.  It’s  a  good  transaction  for  them;  it’s  a  good 
transaction  for  Nevada;  it’s  a  good  transaction  for  the  employees. 

So  they  could  build  another  casino  and  call  it  Harrah  ’s  Horseshoe? 

I  don’t  know  if  they’ll  call  it  Harrah’s  Horseshoe,  but  they  can  open  Horseshoes  wherever  they 
want  to.  And  there  is  talk  now — we  don’t  know;  this  is  just  newspaper  talk — that  Harrah’s  is  looking  for  a 
Strip  hotel,  or  to  do  something  on  the  Strip  that  might  be  called  “The  Horseshoe.”  They’re  a  good 
company.  Phil  Satre  is  a  fine  person. 

This  is  a  very  recent  incident:  in  March  19,  2004,  the  Commission  imposed  and  agreed  upon  a  one- 
million-dollar  fine  on  the  Venetian.  Would  you  tell  us  why  the  fine  was  imposed? 

This  was  a  rather  serious  situation.  The  complaint  had  to  do  with  the  fact  that  at  the  Venetian, 
some  of  their  employees  which  1  referred  to  as  “rogue”  employees  had  a  drawing  in  which  they  gave 
away  some  automobiles,  and  the  participants  in  the  drawing  were  high-level  casino  customers.  And  it 
turned  out  that  the  gentleman  or  the  party  that  won  the  number  one  car  was  the  largest,  heaviest  loser  in 
that  group,  and  the  guy  that  won  the  second  car  was  the  second  heaviest  loser  in  the  group,  and  so 
obviously,  somebody  cheated.  And  this  was  actually  casino  employees  cheating  at  gaming.  Even  though 
they  weren’t  benefiting  in  any  way — there  was  no  financial  benefit  to  the  hotel  or  the  licensee — they  were 
doing  something  that  is  absolutely  1 00  percent  wrong.  As  Peter  Bernhard  said,  and  as  1  said,  this  is 
probably  as  serious  a  violation  that  I’d  seen,  because  this  was  cheating  at  gambling,  which  is  absolutely 
forbidden  and  not  acceptable.  It  was  carefully  handled  to  the  credit  of  the  Venetian.  They  found  it 
internally,  and  they  brought  it  to  the  attention  of  the  Control  Board.  They  self-reported.  This  is  the 
information  that  I  was  given.  And  self-reporting  it,  that  says  a  lot. 

Speaks  highly,  yes. 

It  speaks  highly  for  the  licensee.  I  can’t  possibly  imagine  a  licensee  that  would  jeopardize  a 
multi-billion  dollar  investment  to  give  a  car  to  the  wrong  guy.  They  would  rather  buy  the  ten  cars  than 
jeopardize  this  investment.  So  whatever  reason  the  employees  had  to  do  this  was  to  enhance  their  own 
image  of  being  able  to  keep  these  high-rolling  customers  on  their  property  by  throwing  goodies  at  them. 

We  were  disappointed  in  the  amount  of  time  it  took  for  this  to  come  to  the  Commission.  After 
investigation,  and  after  conversation  with  the  Control  Board,  it  became  clear  to  us  that  part  of  the  reason 
that  it  took  so  long  was  the  process  was  that  the  attorneys  for  the  Venetian  and  the  deputy  district  attorney 
generals  were  in  the  midst  of  negotiation,  and  they  would  talk  and  arrange  things,  and  then  lots  of  time 
would  go  by  before  they  got  back  on  track  on  that  issue.  I  think  it’s  something  that  won’t  happen  again.  I 
think  that  as  a  result  of  our  comments  and  a  result  of  more  conversation  with  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming 
Control  Board,  they’re  not  going  to  let  the  time  lapses  get  away  from  them.  I  think  everybody  understood 
clearly  that  the  Venetian  was  prepared  to  stipulate  to  the  wrongdoing  and  to  pay  a  fine.  I  just  think  we  got 
caught  in  lawyer  talk.  And  the  lawyers  talked,  and  maybe — I’ll  be  cute — and  maybe  they  got  more 
billable  hours,  so  the  longer  it  took,  the  more  they  charged  the  hotel  for  the  time  they  were  taking\to  do 
this.  If  you  settle  it,  you  can’t  get  paid. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


349 


That ’s  right,  [laughter] 

So  maybe  the  lawyers  are  the  people,  [laughter]  Forgive  me.  But  it  was  a  serious  situation,  and 
the  fine  was  appropriate,  and  1  think  as  a  result  of  that,  in  situations  like  this,  the  Control  Board  is  on 
target  now  to  not  let  time  take  its  toll  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  state  and  the  industry,  because  the 
situation  was  resolved.  A  speedy  resolution  would  have  said  more  for  everybody,  and  it  just  got  away 
from  everybody. 

Do  you  feel,  or  did  the  Commission  feel ,  that  criminal  action  should  have  been  taken  against  the 
individuals  involved? 

I’m  not  well  enough  versed  as  to  be  able  to  answer  that  appropriately.  I  think  if  the  state  felt  there 
were  reason  for  criminal  actions,  the  attorney  general’s  office  would  have  proceeded. 

Were  the  people  terminated,  or  the  rogue  employees? 

Yes,  it’s  my  understanding  they  were  all  terminated  immediately  at  every  level. 

So  that,  as  you  mentioned  earlier,  was  probably  the  most  serious  violation  of  gaming  regulations  that  has 
happened  since  you ’ve  been  on  the  Commission. 

At  first  glance  I  can’t  think  of  anything  else.  There  might  be  something  there,  but  it  doesn’t  come 

to  mind. 

Over  your  several  years  on  the  Commission  a  lot  of people  have  come  in  front  of  you,  a  different  kind  of 
people,  unsavory  elements.  Were  there  any  particular  applicants,  either  individuals  or  companies,  that 
caused  you  a  great  deal  of  concern? 

That’s  not  something  1  would  comment  on,  because  I  don’t  think  it’s  fair  or  due  process  to  talk 
about  people  without  them  being  able  to  defend  themselves.  I  just  don’t  think  it’s  appropriate.  There  were 
people  who’ve  been  denied.  I  think  they’ve  been  denied  appropriately.  And  the  people  who  have  been 
licensed,  I  think  were  licensed  because  they  were  suitable.  But  I  don’t  want  to  single  anybody  out. 

What  do  you  think  is  the  largest  problem  facing  the  gaming  industry  at  this  time? 

Well,  I  think  the  proliferation  of  Indian  gaming  is  a  concern.  My  own  opinion  is  that  I  don’t  quite 
understand  why  Indian  gaming  doesn’t  have  the  same  responsibility  on  the  tax  rolls  as  regular  gaming 
does.  I  think  that  the  infrastructure  that  you  have  to  do  to  provide  roads  and  water  and  sewer  to  Indian 
gaming  facilities  is  the  same,  and  I  think  they  should  pay  their  way.  I  think  it  gives  them  an  advantage 
that  is  really  unfair.  There  are  a  lot  of  reasons  why  the  Indians  think  they  should  be  excluded,  but  I  think 
it’s  gone  beyond  what  anybody  expected  it  to. 

The  costs  of  doing  business  are  becoming  excessive.  You  can’t  open  a  hotel  anymore.  Mama  and 
Papa  can’t  open  a  little  hotel.  Today  everything  is  a  billion  dollars,  so  it’s  a  lot  different  than  it  used  to  be. 
But  yet,  we  see  in  rural  Nevada,  and  we  see  it  elsewhere,  where  boutique  entrepreneurs  who  are  clever 


350 


and  who  offer  good  service  and  good  food  and  fun,  are  able  to  be  successful.  I  think  it’s  a  healthy 
industry. 

Well,  as  we  mentioned  earlier,  March  of  this  year  being  such  a  record  month  indicates  that  things  are 
healthy  or  getting  healthier,  perhaps. 

I  think  so. 

Have  you  thought  much  about  internet  gaming  and  what  problems  it  could  present? 

Well,  internet  gaming  is  still  something  that  we  will  have  to  consider,  and  so  I  can’t  comment  too 
much.  We  were  charged  by  the  legislature  to  come  up  with  some  rules  and  regulations  regarding  internet 
gaming.  We  haven’t  gotten  there.  As  long  as  it’s  considered  illegal  by  the  federal  government  and  the 
Department  of  Justice,  we  haven’t  really  addressed  the  problem,  because  until  it’s  legal,  there’s  no  point 
in  spending  the  effort,  the  time,  the  money,  to  find  something  that  the  Department  of  Justice  says  is 
illegal. 

I  have  concerns  about  internet  gaming  and  about  the  possibility  of  underage  gaming,  the 
possibility  of  people  dealing  with  companies  that  won’t  be  honest,  the  possibility  of  encouraging  the  anti¬ 
gaming  world  to  have  more  ammunition  to  throw  at  us  because  possibly  compulsive  gaming  will  hurt 
people  who  can’t  handle  their  responsibilities  the  way  they  should.  And  they’re  innocent  of  it;  it’s  a 
disease,  according  to  the  compulsive  gaming  studies.  So  I  don’t  know  whether  letting  the  genie  out  of  the 
bottle  is  a  good  idea. 

There ’s  an  awful  lot  of  it  going  on. 

It  is.  It  is  going  on,  but  I  think  a  lot  more  would  go  on  if  we  went  on  the  internet.  And  I  wouldn’t 
like  to  see  some,  oh,  bedridden  senior  citizen  lose  his  or  her  prescription  drug  money  because  they  don’t 
have  anything  else  to  do  and  they  become  victim  to  compulsive  gambling. 

Right  in  their  own  living  room. 

Yes.  It’s  a  restricted  industry,  and  I  think  because  it’s  restricted  I  think  people  have  got  to  go 
there  [to  a  casino] — they  should  go  there.  There’s  a  lot  of  new  technology  coming  up,  and  all  of  this  may 
change,  and  they  may  be  able  to  establish  who’s  on  the  other  end  of  the  wire  or  wireless  and  prove  that 
it’s  somebody  of  age  and  somebody  appropriate.  I’m  sure  they’re  all  working  on  it.  I  need  to  know  a  lot 
more  about  it  before  I  can  intelligently  tell  you  where  I  really  sit.  If  we’re  going  to  have  internet  gaming, 
Nevada’s  licensees  should  be  allowed  to  participate  and  not  be  at  a  disadvantage.  If  internet  gaming  is 
going  to  happen,  then  they’re  entitled  to  the  same  opportunity,  and  their  shareholders  are  entitled  to  the 
same  opportunity.  But  first  we  have  to  get  the  Department  of  Justice  to  tell  us  it’s  OK. 

Right. 


So  I  think  I’ve  covered  that,  [laughter] 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


351 


Yes.  [laughter] 

Some  of  my  friends  are  for  it,  and  some  of  my  friends  are  against  it,  and  I’m  with  my  friends, 
[laughter] 

You ’ve  been  described  as  the  conscience  of  the  Commission  and  the  member  most  likely  to  sway  other 
members  ’  votes.  Would  you  care  to  comment  on  that  description? 

Yes.  My  wife  was  very  upset  when  she  thought  that  my  hat  would  no  longer  fit  on  my  head 
[laughter]  and  that  1  could  no  longer  get  through  the  door  because  my  head  had  swollen  up  so  much.  1  was 
very  flattered.  1  think  1  have  a  very  strong  relationship  with  each  of  the  commissioners.  We  like  each 
other  and  respect  each  other  very,  very  much.  1  don’t  think  I’m  any  more  influential  with  any  of  them 
than  they  are  with  me.  But  I  was  flattered  for  the  comment.  I  thought  it  was  a  nice  thing  to  say.  I  probably 
should  have  sent  that  reporter  a  bouquet  of  some  kind. 

[laughter]  Yes,  who  wrote  that? 

I  think  it  was  Jeff  Simpson.  I’m  not  sure. 

Was  it?  [laughter] 

I’m  not  sure  who  it  was.  I’m  not  sure  if  it  was  the  Las  Vegas  Sun  or  the  Las  Vegas  Review- 
Journal.  It  was  a  very  flattering  article,  and  I  was  pleased. 

Well,  now  that  we ’ve  heard  how  you  were  described,  how  would  you  give  us  your  description  of  Art 
Marshall  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  member? 

I  know  that  the  big  guys,  if  they’ve  done  their  work  right  and  they’ve  applied  appropriately  and 
they’ve  got  their  attorneys,  I  know  that  most  of  them  can  be  found  suitable.  I  would  say  Art  Marshall, 
Nevada  Gaming  Commission  member,  is  happiest  when  we  can  give  back  somebody’s  work  card  and 
give  it  back  to  somebody  who  needs  a  second  chance.  I  learned  that  from  Bill  Curran.  The  first  thing  that 
Bill  used  to  read  in  the  volumes  of  material  we  get,  he  told  me — I  don’t  know  if  he  did  it  every  time — but 
he  would  look  at  the  work  permits.  And  with  the  work  permit,  what  happens  is  that  somebody  has  lost 
their  work  permit  and  they  go  to  a  hearing  officer,  and  they  apply  with  the  hearing  officer  for  a  second 
chance,  and  the  hearing  officer  will  recommend  either  to  sustain  the  objection  or  to  reverse  the  objection. 
That  then  goes  to  the  Control  Board,  and  the  Control  Board  will  either  accept  or  deny  the  hearing 
officer’s  recommendation,  and  then  that  goes  to  the  Commission. 

If  someone’s  denial  is  overruled  and  they  get  their  card  back,  we  don’t  have  to  see  it.  But  if  their 
denial  was  upheld,  the  objection  was  sustained,  that  person  has  the  privilege  of  appealing  to  the 
Commission.  And  depending  on  the  length  of  time  and  whether  it  was  the  first  or  second  appeal,  they 
either  have  a  year  to  come  back  if  we  don’t  give  it  to  them  or  five  years  to  come  back.  And  I  felt  the  five- 
year  rule  was  a  bit  harsh.  What  we  were  doing  was  suggesting  to  certain  people  that  we  thought  it  wasn’t 
timely  to  give  them  their  card  back,  and  that  maybe  a  little  more  time  should  pass  and  they  should  have  a 
job  in  some  other  field  or  they  should  prove  that  they  were  worthy  of  another  chance.  What  we  would 


352 


have  to  do  because  of  the  five-year  rule  is  we  would  have  to  ask  them  to  withdraw  their  appeal  so  that  if  it 
didn’t  happen,  then  they  could  come  back  without  having  to  wait  five  years. 

That  got  a  little  cumbersome  as  far  as  regulations.  They  had  to  waive  a  180-day  rule,  which 
meant  the  Commission  had  to  act  within  180  days.  And  so  when  we  re -drafted  the  work  permits  and  all 
the  work  permit  cards,  we  were  able  to  change  that  five-year  rule  to  five  years  unless  deemed  otherwise 
by  the  Commission.  And  what  I’ve  noticed  since  that’s  happened  is  that  there  seems  to  be  a  lot  more 
flexibility  in  the  whole  process.  It’s  important  to  me  to  give  people  who  are  deserving  a  second  chance.  1 
have  less  of  a  problem  with  it,  1  think,  than  the  Control  Board  does.  But  again,  I  say  that  with  great 
respect  because  they  come  out  of  a  police  background,  and  they  are  dealing  with  people  at  a  different 
level  in  life  than  1  deal  with  in  my  life.  1  can  be  more  flexible  because  1  don’t  have  the  same  experience 
that  they  have,  and  1  could  be  wrong.  But  1  think  that  in  the  seven  years  I’ve  been  on  the  Commission,  it’s 
my  understanding  that  of  all  cards  where  we  overruled  them  and  gave  them  back,  I  don’t  think  too  many 
people  have  failed  that  trust  we’ve  placed  in  them.  We’ve  had  a  couple,  but  not  too  many.  And  1  also 
don’t  think  we’re  going  to  destroy  the  gaming  industry  by  giving  a  card  back  to  somebody.  The  worst 
thing  that’ll  happen  is  if  they  get  in  trouble,  they’ll  lose  their  card,  and  that’s  pretty  much  the  end  of  it  for 
them. 

And  the  people  you  ’re  talking  about  are  on  a  lower  level  of  employment. 

People  I’m  talking  about  are  dealers  and  change  people  and  people  like  that  who  need  a  job  in  the 
industry  to  make  a  better  living.  Some  of  them  make  some  mistakes,  and  some  of  them  are  dreadful  and 
they  don’t  deserve  to  be  given  a  second  chance.  But  I  don’t  know,  second  chances  are  not  a  bad  idea  for 
people  who  deserve  them. 

Well  don  ’tyou  believe  that  a  lot  of people  that  get  a  second  chance  do  a  better  job  the  second  time 
around? 

Our  experience  is  that  they  do.  We  had  a  guy  who  had  probably  come  back  over  a  period  of  ten 
years  and  he’d  been  turned  down  every  time  he  came  back.  In  the  prior  regulatory  system,  just  before  this 
new  change — and  it  may  still  be  this  way  now;  I  don’t  want  to  make  myself  look  silly — if  the  Control 
Board  votes  to  deny,  and  it’s  the  second  time  around,  the  Commission  has  to  unanimously  vote  to  get  it 
back,  which  is  the  same  as  it  is  for  a  licensee.  If  the  Control  Board  denies  someone  for  a  license,  the 
Commission  can  overrule  the  Control  Board,  but  it  has  to  be  unanimous.  If  the  Control  Board  approves 
someone  for  a  license,  we  can  deny  them  by  majority  only.  But  to  overrule  them  on  a  license  that  they’ve 
denied,  we  have  to  do  it  unanimously.  And  it’s  not  easy  to  get  a  five,  even  on  a  work  card.  But  we  do  it, 
and  we’ve  done  it  numerous  times  and  it  isn’t  that  we’re  happy  that  we’ve  overruled  the  Control  Board. 
That’s  not  the  issue.  It’s  that  it  feels  good  to  be  able  to  give  somebody  a  second  chance. 

We  had  a  man  who  came  to  us  over  a  period  of  years.  I  think  he’d  probably  been  back  for  ten 
years,  and  the  Control  Board  just  never  saw  fit  to  give  him  his  card  back.  And  after  ten  years,  I  thought  it 
was  appropriate,  and  I  kind  of  helped  start  the  pack  rolling,  and  we  did  get  him  a  five.  Actually,  we  got 
him  a  four,  because  one  of  the  commissioners  was  absent  that  day.  We  would  have  gotten  that 
commissioner.  And  this  man  was  in  his  fifties — maybe  early  sixties — hadn’t  worked  in  the  industry  for 
ten  years,  had  put  two  children  through  college  with  scholarships  and  graduated,  had  worked  in  the 
restaurant  business  as  a  busboy  or  a  waiter  for  ten  years,  supported  his  family.  He  was  so  emotionally  [big 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


353 


sigh]  involved  after  we  gave  him  his  card  back  that  he  wasn’t  capable  of  driving  his  car.  That’s  how 
emotional  he  became.  He  had  to  sit  outside  for  an  hour.  He  cried  like  a  baby  when  we  gave  him  his  card 
back,  and  then  he  wrote  each  of  us  a  letter  thanking  us  for  giving  his  honor  back  to  him  and  his  credibility 
back  in  front  of  his  family.  And  he  probably  never  would  go  back  into  gaming.  He  really  didn’t  want  to 
go  back,  he  just  wanted  to  have  that  burden  discharged  from  him.  That  feels  good. 

That ’s  a  wonderful  story. 

Yes.  John  Wilhelm  asked  me  one  day,  “What  do  you  like  best  about  being  on  the  Gaming 
Commission?” 

And  1  said,  “Those  are  very  good  times,  and  you  know  you’ve  done  something  right.”  I’m  sure 
we’ve  given  a  couple  of  cards  back  and  people  failed  the  test,  but  I  think  most  of  them  have  survived  it. 
And  1  think  as  a  result  of  how  we’ve  been  acting,  the  Control  Board  has  kind  of  softened  up.  It  goes  back 
to  Shannon  Bybee. 

[laughter]  Right.  Justice  and  mercy. 

They’re  the  police  department  and  we  are  mercy,  [laughter] 

Yes.  [laughter] 

We  are  mercy!  I  believe  our  job  is  not  to  play  “Gotcha!”  I  don’t  believe  in  playing  “Gotcha!”  If 
we  can,  in  any  way,  protect  the  state  and  the  industry  by  bringing  things  to  the  attention  of  licensees 
before  they  get  out  of  hand  and  protect  the  player,  the  state,  the  licensee,  I’d  like  that  system  better  than 
trying  to  see  if  we  can  get  them  to  fail  and  punish  them.  I’m  proactive  rather  than  reactive.  I  know  how 
tough  it  is  for  people  to  be  in  business,  and  I  know  how  tough  it  is  for  people  to  be  able  to  build  a 
business.  Our  licensees,  most  of  them  are  very  credible.  I  think  that  they  employ  a  lot  of  people  who  have 
a  better  lifestyle  in  Nevada  than  they  could  have  anywhere  else  in  this  country. 

I  agree  with  that  100  percent. 

There  are  a  lot  of  nice  cars,  a  lot  of  nice  RVs,  a  lot  of  nice  boats,  a  lot  of  nice  homes  here  in  a 
strata  of  people  who  weren’t  fortunate  enough  to  have  great  educations,  but  Nevada  has  provided  them, 
and  the  gaming  industry  has  provided  them,  with  great  opportunities.  My  experience  with  almost 
everybody  that  I  know  in  the  industry,  all  of  the  top  guys — and  because  of  my  previous  business  I  know 
some  of  these  people,  and  I’m  proud  to  know  most  of  them — is  that  a  lot  of  them  are  what  we  used  to  call 
“handshake  guys.” 

Yes.  [laughter] 

I  have  to  tell  that  to  people  from  time  to  time:  “Remember,  we  built  this  industry  on  handshakes.” 


You  ’re  meaning  your  handshake  is  your  word. 


354 


Y our  handshake  is  your  word.  When  you  think  about  it,  the  old  timers  ...  in  the  old  days  of  the 
gaming  industry  there  weren’t  pieces  of  paper.  Somebody  called  somebody  and  said,  “I’m  betting  so 
much  on  the  baseball  game  or  the  football  game  or  whatever  it  is,”  and  it  was  an  honor  system.  There  was 
a  lot  of  honor  among  the  gaming  industry.  1  can  tell  you  this  in  my  own  experience;  we  built  several  hotel 
shops  years  ago  without  leases.  We  went  out  and  borrowed  more  money  than  I  ever  knew  would  ever 
exist  and  never  lost  a  moment’s  sleep,  and  those  leases  were  delivered  thirty  days,  sixty  days,  ninety  days, 
six  months  later  just  as  agreed,  and  it  was  all  handshake.  And  those  were  the  biggest,  oldest  names  in  the 
industry:  guys  like  Bill  Bennett,  Circus  Circus;  Carl  Cohen  at  the  Sands;  Jack  Entratter  at  the  Sands; 
Milton  Prell  with  the  Sahara;  Bill  Boyd.  You  can’t  get  a  better  handshake  guy  than  Bill  Boyd.  Terry 
Lanni,  outstanding;  Phil  Satre;  Mike  Ensign.  These  are  great  guys — great  guys. 

Top  of  the  line. 


These  are  all  top  guys.  It’s  a  privilege  to  know  them,  really.  They’re  gentlemen. 

You  sound  as  though  you  ’re  proud  to  be  associated  with  them. 

I’m  proud  to  be  associated.  Sheldon  Adelson,  a  very  philanthropic  man.  A  hard  businessman, 
tough  .  .  .  maybe  tough’s  not  the  right  word,  but  a  visionary.  Steve  Wynn’s  a  visionary. 

Steve  Wynn  compared  himself  to  Bill  Harrah  one  time  as  far  as  being  visionary. 

I  have  no  comment,  [laughter] 

Big  spread  there,  [laughter] 

I  have  no  comment.  I  don’t  know  the  basis  of  that  comparison,  but  I  really  do  believe  that  Steve 
Wynn  had  a  lot  to  do  with  changing  the  town  into  a  destination.  Kirk  Kerkorian —  handshake.  He  hires 
the  best  people — doesn’t  operate  himself,  but  hires  the  best  people.  If  you  look  at  the  line-up  of  people 
that  have  worked  for  him  over  the  years — Burton  Cohen,  A1  Benedict,  Terry  Lanni,  Alex  Yemenidjian  - 
you’ll  see  top-quality  people  and  people  of  high  regard. 

Are  there  any  decisions,  votes,  or  actions  you  made  while  you  were  on  the  Commission  that  you  would 
change  if  you  had  the  opportunity? 

I  really  can’t  think  of  any. 

Would  you  tell  us  about  some  of  the  most  unforgettable  persons  that  you  have  met  while  serving  on  the 
Commission,  some  of  your  fellow  members  or  people  that  came  before  you,  or  people  that  made  an 
impression  on  you? 

Well,  I’ve  developed  as  a  result  of  these  relationships  with  the  three  chairmen  of  the  Commission, 
Steve  DuCharme,  Bill  Bible,  who  I  have  a  huge  regard  for.  Bill  Bible  may  be  as  good  a  regulator  as  ever 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


355 


walked  the  earth.  And  [Bill]  Curran,  as  1  mentioned  to  you  before,  Sandoval,  and  now  Peter  [Bernhard], 
Dennis  Neilander  is  a  whiz — just  a  whiz.  1  used  to  accuse  Bible  of  Dennis  being  his  secret  weapon.  Bill  is 
head  of  corporate  security  for  Bill  Bible  on  the  Control  Board.  Dennis  is  exceptional,  and  he’s  a  nice 
person. 

Bill  Curran  and  1,  we’ve  become  lifelong  friends.  Brian  Sandoval  and  1  are  lifelong  friends,  and 
I’m  just  proud  of  all  these  people  that  I’ve  gotten  to  know  well.  It’s  a  privilege.  1  did  not  know  Phil  Satre 
before.  I  consider  him  a  good  friend.  I’ve  enjoyed  meeting  Gary  Loveman,  who  is  a  Harvard  guy  who’s 
very  bright.  Mike  Ensign  1  met  as  a  result  of  the  Gaming  Commission.  1  never  had  met  him  before.  1 
really  like  the  Fertittas.  I’ve  gotten  to  know  them.  Carl  leahn  came  in  front  of  us,  and  he  was  impressive. 
Donald  Trump  was  here  recently,  and  behaved  very  nicely.  He  was  quite  well-mannered  and  behaved.  My 
granddaughter  wanted  me  to  do  what  he  does  on  the  show,  just  twist  my  finger  and  say  “Denied!”  but 
1  didn’t  think  that  was  appropriate,  [laughter] 

[laughter]  No,  not  for  a  grown-up. 

I  don’t  think  he  deserved  that,  [laughter]  but  she  thought  that  was  a  good  idea:  “Grandpa,  would 
you  just  wave  your  finger  at  him  and  say,  ‘Denied!’”  you  know,  like  “You’re  fired!”  or  whatever  he  does. 
1  haven’t  seen  the  show. 

I  haven ’t  either. 

As  1  told  you,  I’ve  known  Mr.  Kerkorian  for  a  long  time.  I’ve  met  some  very  impressive 
people — their  names  don’t  necessarily  come  to  me — people  who  have  represented  licensees,  attorneys 
and  accountants  who  are  very,  very  bright  when  it  comes  to  managing  money  and  doing  things  for  the 
benefit  of  their  customer,  their  legal  tax  planning  and  things  like  that.  Y ou  get  to  see  some  people  at  a 
level  you  would  never  get  to  see.  So  there  are  a  lot  of  interesting  things  that  happen  all  the  time. 

Do  you  have  any  final  comments  or  observations  regarding  the  gaming  industry  that  you  would  care  to 
make  at  this  time? 

1  think  that  Nevada  has  the  ideal  system.  1  would  absolutely  always  want,  if  possible,  to  make 
certain  that  we’d  never  change  the  two-tiered  system,  that  the  Control  Board  should  do  its  investigative 
work,  do  its  recommending,  and  then  have  the  Commission  be  the  final  arbitrator.  It  isn’t  because  1  sit  on 
the  Commission;  it’s  because  I  see  what  works.  1  think  it  protects  the  industry,  it  protects  the  licensee,  and 
it  protects  the  state.  The  state,  first  of  all,  because  that  way  you  have  a  two-tiered  system  with  a  check- 
and-balance  like  the  Senate  and  the  House  of  Representatives,  and  I  think  it  gives  a  measure  of  fairness 
that  only  can  come  from  that,  because  you  don’t  have  the  autocracy  of  a  one -board  oligarchy,  if  that’s  the 
right  word.  You  have  a  presidium  or  a  Politburo  of  three  guys,  and  you’re  never  going  to  know  who  the 
three  guys  are,  and  that  way  we  make  it  possible  that  there’s  total  justice  in  this  system.  With  this  two- 
tiered  system,  it’s  imperative  that  it  be  kept  up.  Whether  Art  Marshall  goes  or  stays,  1  would  never  want 
to  see  that  changed. 


That ’s  the  key,  that  two-tier  system. 


356 


I  think  that’s  absolutely  the  greatest  leveler  for  the  state,  the  industry,  and  the  player,  because  you 
never  know  when  you  will  get  somebody  who  is  zealous  over  what  they  believe  in. 

Yes,  it ’s  very  true. 

And  if  you  get  somebody  who  is  overzealous,  this  way  you  have  safeguards  against  it,  or  if  you 
get  somebody  who  is  underzealous.  In  other  words,  if  you  get  somebody  that  is  too  lax,  this  two-tiered 
system  makes  it  work.  Remember,  in  the  seven  years  that  I’ve  been  here,  I  would  say  to  you  that  we’ve 
probably  agreed  95  percent  of  the  time.  It’s  maybe  even  more  than  that. 

But  the  times  we  disagree  are  important.  There  are  issues  where  we  take  a  different  position,  and 
they’re  important.  I’m  a  guy  that  was  concerned  about  what’s  called  “unintended  consequences,”  things 
that  are  said  that  have  far-reaching  effect.  You  know,  that  old  cartoon,  “Plan  ahead,”  and  the  guy  ran  out 
of  paper. 

Our  responsibility  as  the  Commission  is  to  make  sure  that  there  are  very  few  unintended 
consequences,  and  1  think  that  that  gives  the  Control  Board  the  privilege  of  doing  more  because  they’ve 
got  this  safety  net  around  them  to  a  great  extent.  They’ve  got  this  rubber  bumper.  1  have  a  boat  that  my 
grandchildren  run  in  Coronado.  It’s  got  a  big  rubber,  inflatable  tube  around  it,  so  when  they  come  by  my 
boat,  they  can’t  damage  it.  They  can  come  up  against  it  and  bang  up,  but  they  can’t  hurt  anything  because 
they  have  this  big  rubber  bumper.  I  think  the  Commission’s  a  big  rubber  bumper  for  the  Control  Board. 

That ’s  a  good  comparison. 

And  with  that,  I’m  done,  [laughter] 

Well,  thank  you  ven >  much  for  your  time,  Art. 


It’s  been  fun. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


357 


14 

Wayne  Pearson 


Wayne  Pearson  was  born  in  1930  in  East  Ely,  Nevada, 
attending  schools  in  the  area  prior  to  enrolling  at  the 
University  of  Nevada,  Reno.  He  graduated  in  1952  and  after 
serving  in  the  military  during  the  Korean  War,  he  received  a 
master’s  degree  from  the  University  of  Nevada  in  1957  and  a 
doctor  of  philosophy  from  Cornell  University  in  1959.  When 
he  returned  to  Nevada  he  was  employed  on  the  staff  of  the 
Nevada  Gaming  Control  Board,  where  he  worked  on  audits, 
investigations,  and  enforcement.  In  1963,  at  the  request  of 
Paul  Laxalt,  he  resigned  the  position  to  work  for  Nevada ’s 
Republican  Party  as  its  executive  director.  After  Mr.  Laxalt 
was  elected  governor,  he  appointed  Pearson  to  the  Gaming 
Control  Board  on  January  l,  1967,  a  position  Pearson  held 
until  1969.  He  then  moved  to  Las  Vegas  and  started  a 
consulting  firm,  specializing  in  business  and  political 
consulting. 


Wayne  Pearson,  1998.  Photo  courtesy  of  Wayne  Pearson. 


Dwayne  Kling:  The  date  is  November  20,  2002.  Does  the  Oral  History  Program  have  your  permission  to 
tape  and  transcribe  these  inter-views  that  we  are  about  to  begin  today? 

Wayne  Pearson:  Yes,  Mr.  Kling,  you  certainly  do. 

Let ’s  start  out  by  asking  when  and  where  were  you  born  ? 


1  was  bom  November  10,  1930  in  East  Ely,  Nevada. 


358 


Where  did  you  go  to  high  school? 

Ely,  White  Pine  County  High  School.  1  attended  grade  school  in  McGill,  and  high  school  in  Ely.  1 
graduated  from  White  Pine  County  High  School  in  1948. 

After  you  graduated  high  school  did  you  go  on  to  a  college  or  a  university? 

Yes,  1  started  the  University  of  Nevada  in  Reno  fall  of  1948  and  1  graduated  in  1952.  Then  1  did  a 
year’s  work  on  my  master’s  degree,  following  which  in  the  summer  of  1953  1  went  into  the  Army.  1 
served  during  the  tail  end  of  the  Korean  War.  1  never  got  out  of  the  country,  but  1  may  as  well  have  been. 

1  was  at  the  White  Sands  Proving  Ground  in  New  Mexico,  and  we  crossed  the  border  to  fight  the  Battle  of 
Juarez  many  a  night,  [laughter] 

After  you  completed  your  military  career  did  you  go  on  to  further  your  education? 

Yes,  1  came  back  to  Reno  and  1  received  my  master’s  degree  in  1957.  Then  1  went  to  Cornell 
University  and  started  working  on  my  Ph.D.,  and  1  completed  that  in  the  fall  of  1959.  My  degree  was 
actually  educational  psychology  and  measurement.  1  wasn’t  much  interested  in  the  education  part  of  it.  1 
was  more  interested  in  the  measurement  part — the  statistics  and  sampling  and  probability  theory  and  that 
type  of  thing. 

How  did  you  happen  to  go  to  Cornell? 

1  had  a  friend  from  McGill  named  Garth  Blackham  who  had  previously  gone  there  in  the  same 
program.  1  think  it  was  primarily  through  his  influence  that  1  was  offered  an  assistantship  there  in  the 
testing  bureau  at  Cornell.  Probably  the  reason  1  got  in  there  is  through  his  influence. 

What  did  you  do  after  you  got  your  Ph.D.  from  Cornell? 

1  had  decided  some  time  ago  that  I  wasn’t  interested  in  academics  professionally,  as  opposed  to 
just  about  all  my  other  student  friends  back  there  at  Cornell.  They  were  all  looking  for  jobs  in  university 
settings,  teaching  positions.  But  1  had  always,  even  back  in  my  high  school  days,  been  interested  in 
gambling.  And  1  had  become  interested  in  the  Gaming  Control  Board  through  another  friend  of  mine  who 
was  working  for  them  back  in  the  1950s.  So  in  the  spring  of  1959  1  wrote  a  personal  letter  to  Governor 
Grant  Sawyer,  who  I’d  got  to  know  quite  well  when  he  was  running  for  the  Board  of  Regents  in  about 
1956.  He  was  still  in  Elko  at  the  time,  and  he  had  lost  a  close  race  for  the  Board  of  Regents.  They  were 
elected  statewide  in  those  days.  He  carried  every  county,  1  think,  except  Clark.  But  1  got  to  know  him 
quite  well  and  I’d  worked  hard  for  him. 

I  told  him  in  my  letter  that  there  were  some  contributions  that  I  thought  I  could  make  to  gaming 
control.  So  in  his  answer  he  said,  “By  all  means  when  you  get  out  here  later  this  summer  or  this  fall,  drop 
by  and  see  me.”  So  1  finished  school  the  middle  of  September  and  I  drove  back  out  West,  and  1  went  into 
his  office — this  was  about  the  middle  of  October  1959 — and  we  talked  for  a  while.  Then  he  picked  up  the 
phone,  and  he  called  Ray  Abbaticchio,  who  was  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  Quite  an 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


359 


interesting  conversation.  In  effect  what  he  said  was,  “Ray,  I’m  sending  this  young  fellow — his  name  is 
Wayne  Pearson — down  to  see  you  and  I  want  you  to  give  him  a  job.”  [laughter]  So  I  walked  down  the 
street  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board  where  Ray  Abbaticchio  met  me  and  hired  me  on  the  spot. 

[laughter] 

I  guess  you  can  glean  from  that  that  in  those  days  governors  were  a  lot  more  directly  involved  in 
gaming  control  than  they  are  today.  Both  Governor  Sawyer  and  Governor  Laxalt  were  very  much 
involved. 

Did  you  work  in  casinos  at  any  time  when  you  were  going  to  the  University  of  Nevada? 

A  little  bit.  In  the  winter  and  spring  of  1953  I  worked  weekends  tending  bar  in  the  Nevada  Club. 
And  in  the  spring  of  1957,  when  I  was  finishing  up  my  master’s  and  waiting  to  go  back  to  Cornell  I  used 
to  go  catch  up  on  the  baseball  scores  on  the  second  floor  of  the  Nevada  Club.  They  had  a  big  board  where 
they  posted  the  scores,  and  I  noticed  that  they  didn’t  have  anybody  who  was  posting  the  scores.  They’d 
come  in  on  the  ticker  tape,  and  once  in  a  while  a  security  guard  or  somebody  would  come  by  and  try  and 
get  them  up  to  date.  But  it  wasn’t  being  done  very  well.  So  I  went  down  to  the  cage,  straight  up  to  Mr. 
Fitzgerald,  and  I  said,  “Mr.  Fitzgerald,  you  need  somebody  posting  the  scores  up  there  on  that 
scoreboard.” 

And  without  looking  up  he  knew  who  I  was.  He  remembered  me,  and  he  said,  “Who’s  the  best 
right  fielder  in  the  American  League?” 

I  said,  “Well,  tough  question,  but  I  think  I’d  probably  have  to  say  Jackie  Jensen.” 

He  said,  “What  about  that  young  fellow  with  the  Detroit  Tigers?” 

I  said,  “Well,  A1  Kaline’s  pretty  good,  too.  I  won’t  argue  there  with  you  too  much.” 

So  he  said,  “OK,  go  on  upstairs  and  go  to  work.” 

[laughter] 

So  for  the  next  two  or  three  months  I  posted  the  scores  on  the  scoreboard  at  Nevada  Club. 

Did  they  have  betting  on  the  games? 

No.  It  was  just  a  convenience  to  the  customers. 

He  was  probably  partial  to  Kaline  because  they  were  both  from  Michigan. 

Y es,  from  Detroit.  Exactly.  I  guess  it  was  a  good  thing  I  thought  of  that  comeback  with  Kaline  or 
he  might  not  have  hired  me. 

[laughter]  Is  it  true  in  those  days  that  Mr.  Fitzgerald  had  to  personally  see,  interview,  or  talk  to  anyone 
that  was  hired? 


I’m  not  sure  of  that.  I’ve  heard  that  same  story,  so  it  could  very  well  be  true.  He  certainly  was  a 


360 


hands-on  operator,  that’s  for  sure — he  and  his  wife.  And,  of  course,  they  lived  right  there,  up  above  the 
casino.  He  had  lived  there  ever  since  he  had  been  shot  outside  his  southwest  Reno  home. 

Did  he  hire  you  as  a  bartender? 

No,  1  had  another  friend  who  was  working  there,  and  they  were  looking  for  somebody  to  work 
part-time  on  weekends.  On  Sunday  it  was  a  twelve-hour  shift,  from  about  ten  in  the  morning  till  ten  at 
night.  Oh!  Tough  shift.  Never  got  off  my  feet.  Never  took  a  break  in  twelve  hours.  He  did  not  personally 
hire  me  for  that,  but  the  bar  manager  did. 

Did  you  gamble  when  you  were  going  to  college,  or  were  they  pretty  strict  as  far  as  keeping  an  eye  on 
minors? 


Well,  the  answer  is  yes  and  no.  Yes,  1  gambled,  and  no,  they  were  not  very  strict  in  those  days.  In 
fact,  1  never  once  was  asked  for  identification  to  establish  my  age  all  the  time  1  was  an  undergraduate  at 
University  of  Nevada,  Reno — never.  And  I  think  that  was  pretty  true  for  everyone  in  those  days.  1  think 
the  philosophy  was  as  long  as  you  behaved  yourself  and  acted  like  an  adult  they  would  treat  you  like  an 
adult.  And  I  wouldn’t  say  1  gambled  much,  but  oh,  yes,  some.  We  would  bet  on  the  football  games,  both 
college  and  pro  games. 

So  when  you  went  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board  you  had  been  exposed  to  gaming,  but  you  weren  7  really 
knowledgeable  about  gaming  per  se. 

Oh,  1  would  consider  myself  very  knowledgeable. 

Oh,  you  would?  Had  you  made  a  study  of  the  games  even  at  that  time? 

Oh,  sure.  Y es,  1  had. 

After  Mr.  Abbaticchio  hired  you,  how  did  your  career  start? 

Well,  1  was  assigned  to  the  audit  division,  but  1  did  a  lot  of  work  for  the  investigations  and 
enforcement  divisions  in  Carson  City.  1  also  spent  a  lot  of  time  in  Las  Vegas.  A  wonderful  gentleman 
named  David  Malcolm  was  the  head  of  the  audit  division  and  we  developed  a  very  good  relationship. 
They  decided  they  would  make  me  a  jack-of-all-trades.  They  would  use  me  on  research  projects  as 
needed,  and  in  between  1  would  assist  in  the  audit  division.  1  helped  conduct  background  investigations 
on  applicants,  mostly  on  the  financial  side.  1  also  did  studies  on  “drop  and  win.”  There  wasn’t  much 
known  about  “drop  and  win,”  and  1  made,  1  think,  some  pretty  significant  findings. 

One  of  the  interesting  projects  that  first  year,  1960,  came  about  because  the  Board  received  some 
complaints  alleging  that  people  in  southern  Idaho  were  unhappy  with  the  new  casinos  in  Jackpot,  alleging 
that  they  were  hurting  the  economy  of  southern  Idaho.  And  so  the  Board  asked  me  if  1  could  go  up  there 
and  assess  the  situation.  So  1  did.  This  was  in  September.  The  reason  1  remember  it  so  well  is  1  remember 
watching  that  first  famous  television  debate  between  John  Kennedy  and  Richard  Nixon  from  my  motel 
room  in  Twin  Falls,  Idaho,  one  evening  while  I  was  up  there.  I  spent  about  ten  days  or  two  weeks  there, 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


361 


and  I  came  back  and  1  wrote  a  report  to  the  Board  which  said,  in  effect,  that  opinion  was  split  up  there 
whether  or  not  the  Jackpot  casinos  were  hurting  the  economy  of  southern  Idaho.  Some  people  said  yes, 
some  people  said  no.  But  everybody  then  gave  the  same  answer,  that  they  didn’t  regard  it  as  Nevada’s 
fault.  They  blamed  themselves  because  they  said,  “We  had  slot  machines  up  here  and  we  got  rid  of  them. 
So  we  don’t  blame  Nevada  at  all,  we  blame  ourselves.  And  more  power  to  Jackpot  and  more  power  to 
Nevada.” 

Did  you  say  you  went  to  work  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board  in  1959? 

Yes,  November  first.  The  legislature,  during  the  1959  session,  had  created  the  Gaming 
Commission  to  take  place  of  the  old  Tax  Commission,  and  I  believe  they  were  appointed  and  went  into 
effect  on  July  the  first. 

So  they  came  into  being  shortly  before  you  went  to  work  for  the  Board? 

Y es,  a  few  months  before. 

Who  were  the  first  commissioners? 

The  first  chairman  was  Miles  Pike.  A  few  months  later  he  was  replaced  by  an  attorney,  Milton 
Keefer,  from  Las  Vegas.  Another  was  James  Hotchkiss,  also  from  Las  Vegas.  He  owned  an  armored  car 
company.  I  think  another  attorney,  Bert  Goldwater,  from  Las  Vegas  was  also  one  of  the  first  members. 
Then  from  Reno  there  was  a  fellow  named  Pete  Walters,  and  a  rancher,  Norman  Brown,  from  Smith 
Valley. 

When  the  first  commission  was  created  was  the  idea  accepted  by  the  gaming  industry  as  a  whole? 

I’m  not  sure.  I  wasn’t  there  at  that  time.  From  what  I  could  glean  there  was  kind  of  a  “wait  and 
see”  attitude.  But  this  was  a  very  activist  commission —  I  think  probably  in  part  it  was  because  the 
governor  had  announced  he  was  going  to  have  a  “hang  tough”  policy.  “Hang  tough,”  he  directed  the 
Board  and  Commission.  And  so  they  did.  They  embarked  on  several  programs,  all  of  which  were 
controversial.  One  of  them  was  they  were  not  going  to  permit  anyone  who  already  had  a  gaming  license 
to  have  any  more.  They  would  grandfather  those  in  place,  those  who  already  had  multiple  licenses,  but 
nobody  else  could  get  a  second  one.  That  raised  a  firestorm  of  protest.  The  governor  even  said  publicly 
that  he  was  going  to  have  to  look  into  it  and  straighten  that  matter  out.  The  Commission  then  backed 
down  within  a  month  or  two. 

I  remember  another  one  which  was  controversial,  and  I  think  this  involved  Dick  Graves  for  some 
reason.  Every  quarter — and  they  still  do  it  this  way — each  casino  pays  its  quarterly  gross  gaming  tax,  and 
then  they  get  a  license  again  for  the  next  quarter.  The  new  Gaming  Commission  was  going  to  try  and  take 
the  position  that  the  license,  in  effect,  came  to  an  end  each  quarter  and  they  were  entitled  to  judge  whether 
or  not  they  were  going  to  renew  the  license.  Anyway,  the  attorney  general  issued  an  opinion  and  said  no, 
they  could  not  do  that,  that  once  a  permanent  license  had  been  granted  by  the  Board  and  the  Commission 
it  was  permanent,  and  it  could  only  be  suspended  or  revoked  for  a  just  cause  under  the  law. 

I  also  remember  a  third  major  policy  that  they  came  down  with  that  was  the  so-called  “Black 


362 


Book,”  or  the  book  of  excluded  persons  [List  of  Excluded  Persons ].  It  listed  persons  who  were  to  be 
excluded  from  entering  a  licensed  gaming  establishment  in  Nevada.  1  believe  they  established  the  “Black 
Book”  in  the  late  spring  of  1960.  Well,  the  casinos  didn’t  like  this  because  they  said,  “How  are  we 
supposed  to  know  who  these  fellows  are?  How  are  our  employees  supposed  to  recognize  them?”  Y ou 
know,  they  were  all  out-of-towners:  Los  Angeles,  Kansas  City,  Chicago  .  .  .  Sam  Giancana  from  Chicago 
was  one  of  them,  and  Tom  Dragna  from  Los  Angeles  was  another.  And  the  Civella  brothers  from  Kansas 
City  were  couple  of  more.  So  the  casinos  said,  “Here  you’re  going  to  take  our  license  away  if  we  cater  to 
these  people.  How  are  we  supposed  to  know  who  they  are?”  It  actually  wasn’t  very  well  received  by  the 
Gaming  Control  Board  staff  either.  1  think  the  staff  pretty  much  regarded  it  as  a  publicity  stunt,  that  the 
Board  and  Commission  were  just  trying  to  show  how  tough  they  were. 

Did  the  Commission  push  for  the  “Black  Book’’  more  than  the  Board? 

I’m  not  sure  of  that.  But,  of  course,  it  was  up  to  the  Board  to  enforce  it.  One  of  the  original  names 
in  the  “Black  Book”  was  a  fellow  named  Marshall  Caifano.  He  went  by  the  name  of  Johnny  Marshall.  He 
spent  a  lot  of  time  in  Las  Vegas,  and  I  believe  he  had  business  interests  here  in  Las  Vegas.  He  was  defiant 
over  this  new  “Black  Book,”  and  he  made  it  a  point  to  test  the  Board.  He  would  regularly  go  into  the 
casinos  just  to  see  what  we  would  do.  The  chairman  said,  “We’ve  got  to  do  something  about  this,”  and  he 
put  together  teams  to  follow  Johnny  Marshall  around  town.  I  remember  one  stretch  in  the  winter  of  1960. 
Myself  and  another  fellow  were  on  the  swing  shift,  and  it  was  our  job  to  follow  him  from  about  seven  at 
night  till  seven  in  the  morning.  Johnny  Marshall  was  sweet  on  Roberta  Linn,  the  singer.  Well,  she  just 
happened  at  that  time  to  be  appearing  in  the  Stardust  lounge.  Every  night  he  would  go  in  there  and  listen 
to  her,  and  when  she  would  finally  end  her  last  set,  which  would  be  around  three  in  the  morning  or  so, 
they  would  go  someplace  and  have  breakfast.  And  we’d  follow  them.  I  remember  them  going  to  the  old 
Colonial  House  on  the  Strip  several  nights,  and  he  knew  we  were  following  him.  We’d  be  sitting  at  the 
bar  while  they  ate,  and  he’d  send  us  over  a  drink. 

[laughter] 

One  day  they  went  to  the  Golden  Nugget,  and  had  breakfast  there,  and,  of  course,  we  followed 
them.  She  was  staying  at  the  Diplomat  Apartments  on  Paradise  Road  and  when  he  took  her  home  one 
night  in  this  taxicab  they  got  out,  went  in  together,  and  we’re  sitting  out  in  this  car  in  the  cold  waiting  for 
him  to  come  back  out,  but  he  never  did.  So  naturally  we  thought,  “Well,  he’s  spending  the  night  with 
her.”  But  what  he  did  was  he  gave  us  the  slip.  He  went  out  another  door,  and  some  other  agents  picked 
him  up  on  the  golf  course  the  next  morning. 

[laughter] 

Anyway,  Ray  Abbaticchio  really  rubbed  the  industry  the  wrong  way  over  the  enforcement  of  this 
“Black  Book.”  And  1  think  it  probably  led  to  his  not  being  re-appointed. 

Did  he  purposely  go  into  casinos  where  he  knew  Marshall  would  be? 


Yes,  sometimes  he’d  go  in  by  himself.  I’ll  never  forget  one  incident.  I  wasn’t  there —  it  happened 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


363 


earlier  in  the  evening — but  1  was  told  about  it  by  the  people  who  were  there.  Johnny  Marshall  was  in  the 
lounge  of  the  Desert  Inn,  sitting  there  with  two  or  three  of  the  Desert  Inn  hosts  that  he  knew.  Some  staff 
from  the  Board  was  there,  and  I  think  Ray  Abbaticchio  was  there,  too.  There  was  a  party  being  held  in  the 
Desert  Inn  Country  Club  and  one  of  the  owners — I  think  it  was  Allard  Roen — went  in  the  casino,  got 
behind  Johnny  Marshall’s  chair  and  pulled  him  right  out  that  front  door  right  into  the  driveway.  And  the 
people  who  saw  this  said,  [laughter]  “It  was  an  astonishing  sight  to  see.”  The  Desert  Inn,  amongst  others, 
had  been  put  on  notice:  “Hey,  you’re  catering  to  this  guy.  You’re  allowing  him  to  come  into  the  casino 
and  you’re  putting  your  license  in  jeopardy.” 

So  when  Mr.  Roen  saw  him  he  just  made  sure  he  got  out  of  there. 

Right.  And,  as  I  said,  Ray  Abbaticchio  really  ruffled  feathers.  I  was  told  by  two  different  sources 
that  the  industry  in  Las  Vegas  sent  the  governor  a  message:  “You  either  get  rid  of  him  or  we’re  going  to 
get  rid  of  you.”  What  they  meant  by  that  was  we’re  going  to  defeat  you  at  the  next  election,  because 
Lieutenant  Governor  Rex  Bell  had  already  announced  that  he  was  going  to  run  for  governor  in  1962.  And 
so  in  1961  Ray  Abbaticchio  was  not  reappointed. 

Did  Mr.  Abbaticchio  show  any  prejudice  to  the  casinos  that  catered  to  the  excluded  people? 

Oh,  yes.  Those  that  he  thought  were  in  non-compliance  he  gave  orders  to  the  agents  to  harass 
them.  They’d  go  right  up  the  tables,  stop  the  action  and  pick  up  and  check  the  dice  and  do  it  over  and  over 
again.  They  might  question  whether  or  not  somebody  had  had  too  much  to  drink  and  maybe  shouldn’t  be 
gambling  and  things  like  that.  I  think  he  was  trying  to  make  them  look  bad  and  trying  to  harass  them  so 
much  that  they  would  say,  “ Uncle ,  we  give  up.  We’ll  comply.” 

Was  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  creation  of  the  “Black  Book”  because  of  the  possibility  of  skimming  in 
Nevada  casinos? 

No,  I  don’t  think  so.  I’d  never  heard  that  mentioned  in  the  board  offices.  This  concern  about  the 
skimming  came  up  a  few  months  later,  after  the  presidential  election  in  1960.  As  you’ll  recall,  the  new 
president,  John  Kennedy,  appointed  his  brother,  Robert,  as  attorney  general,  and  right  away  the  new 
attorney  general  showed  a  real  hostility  towards  Nevada’s  gaming  industry,  which  caught  everybody  by 
surprise,  because  the  gaming  industry  had  really  supported  J.F.K.  in  the  election.  They  thought  they  were 
going  to  have  a  real  friend  in  him.  All  of  the  Kennedys  had  spent  a  lot  of  time  in  Nevada,  both  in  Las 
Vegas  and  at  Lake  Tahoe.  The  Rat  Pack  had  been  close  to  J.F.K.  for  several  years,  and  they  worked  hard 
for  his  election.  So  when  his  brother  Bobby  showed  all  this  hostility  towards  Nevada’s  gaming  industry 
right  after  he  took  over  they  were  all  surprised.  They  just  didn’t  understand  it,  and  they  felt  betrayed. 

Was  Grant  Sawyer  governor  then? 

Yes.  And,  you  know,  in  retrospect,  it’s  a  fortunate  thing  for  Nevada  that  he  won  the  governorship 
in  1958  and  not  Charlie  Russell.  Charlie  Russell  was  a  wonderful,  wonderful  man;  personally,  I  just 
adored  him.  But  looking  back,  if  Charlie  Russell  had  been  re-elected  in  1958  instead  of  Grant  Sawyer 
there’s  no  telling  how  bad  it  could  have  been  for  the  industry,  because  when  Bobby  Kennedy  started 


364 


making  it  known  what  his  plans  were  for  this  state,  the  few  people  who  knew  it  were  not  only  surprised, 
they  were  panicked,  starting  with  Governor  Sawyer.  The  reason  1  know  all  of  this  is  because  of  Ed  Olsen. 
He  was  not  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  yet,  but  he  had  been  hired  on  the  staff  as  a  public 
information  officer.  He  and  1  shared  an  office  and  we  became  very,  very  close,  and  it  is  obvious  that  Ed 
Olsen  also  was  very  close  with  the  governor.  It  was  sometime  in  the  spring  of  1961 — I’d  say  probably 
about  March  or  April — when  Ed  Olsen  confided  to  me  that  the  governor  had  been  going  back  to 
Washington,  D.C.,  meeting  with  both  the  attorney  general,  Robert  Kennedy,  and  the  president  himself; 
that  the  attorney  general  had  said  he  was  convinced  the  gaming  industry  in  Nevada  was  thoroughly 
corrupt,  that  all  the  places  were  skimming  massive  amounts  of  money,  and  he  wasn’t  going  to  tolerate  it; 
he  was  going  to  have  the  federal  government  take  over  the  industry  in  Nevada.  The  first  thing  he  was 
going  to  do  was  send  hundreds  of  federal  agents — FBI  agents  and  Internal  Revenue  agents — into  the 
state,  place  them  in  all  the  casinos  and  have  them  count  the  money,  et  cetera,  et  cetera. 

Ed  Olsen  told  me  that  the  only  way  that  Governor  Sawyer  was  able  to  hold  the  attorney  general 
off  on  those  plans  to  come  in  and  take  over  control  in  Nevada’s  gaming  industry  was  when  he  went  to  the 
president  himself  and  pleaded  the  political  argument.  He  told  the  president,  “If  you  do  this  you’ll  destroy 
me.  I  can’t  be  re-elected.  You’ll  ruin  the  Democratic  Party  in  Nevada  for  years  and  years,  and  you  won’t 
be  able  to  carry  Nevada  in  the  1964  election.”  Ed  said  on  that  basis  the  president  backed  his  brother  off, 
but  the  governor  had  to  agree  to  one  thing,  that  we  would  do  our  best  to  get  to  the  bottom  of  the  skimming 
allegations.  So  Ed  Olsen  came  to  me  and  said,  “Is  there  any  way  we  can  go  about  doing  this?” 

And  I  said,  “Sure.” 

And  he  said,  “How?” 

I  said,  “We’ll  set  up  undercover  teams  who  will  count  a  given  table  for  a  given  shift.  And  then 
sometime  later — a  week,  two  weeks  later,  whatever — we’ll  send  in  a  couple  of  our  auditors  and  ask  to  see 
the  stiff  sheets.  Won’t  tell  them  from  what  shift,  and  they’ll  just  look  over  a  whole  bunch  of  them  and 
they’ll  take  down  the  figure  that  we’re  looking  for.” 

Would  you  explain  “stiff  sheet”  to  someone  not  familiar  with  the  term? 

Oh,  yes,  that’s  a  gaming  industry  term.  It’s  a  big  sheet  of  paper  that  lists  each  game,  and  when 
the  game  is  counted  you  write  down  on  the  sheet  what  the  drop  and  the  win  was  for  that  game. 

Ed  said,  “Do  you  think  this  is  possible?” 

I  said,  “Sure.”  So  I  went  and  got  a  couple  of  little  pocket  counters  and  took  Ed  up  to  Lake  Tahoe. 
We  went  to  Harrah’s  Tahoe,  and  I  said,  “All  right,  you  go  to  that  end  of  the  crap  table  and  I’ll  stay  on  this 
end.”  I  said,  “I’ll  make  a  little  signal,  I’ll  put  my  hand  through  my  hair  and  we’ll  start  counting  at  that 
point  for  twenty  or  thirty  minutes.  Then  I’ll  give  you  the  same  signal  to  stop,  and  we’ll  wander  out  and 
compare  totals.”  We  did  and  he  was  astounded  that  we  were  right  on  the  button.  It  was  really  quite  easy  to 
do,  so  he  went  running  back  to  the  governor,  told  him  that  he  thought  it  was  possible  for  us  to  do  this.  So 
the  governor  gave  me  the  green  light  and  told  me  to  start  putting  this  thing  together.  Then  I  thought  who 
could  I  use  to  do  this  count.  These  were  just  part-time  positions.  I  thought  of  fellows  I’d  gone  to  college 
with,  and  I  started  contacting  them  and  they  were  all  anxious  to  do  it.  They  were  mostly  school  teachers 
and  school  administrators. 


How  many  people  did  you  select  for  this  count? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


365 


I  think  I  used  teams  of  eight.  We  worked  mostly  in  Las  Vegas,  but  we  did  Reno,  too,  and  Lake 
Tahoe  quite  a  bit. 

Oh,  would  you  assign  two  people  to  a  crap  table? 

No.  All  eight  would  work  a  table  during  the  shift  generally  for  thirty  minutes.  And  we  just  kept 

rotating. 

Did  you  do  a  count  for  the  entire  shift,  the  entire  eight  hours? 

From  the  moment  the  box  went  on  the  table  to  the  moment  it  came  off.  Y es,  till  they  took  that 
paddle  out. 

Did  you  observe  all  types  of  games,  like  craps,  roulette,  and  twenty-one? 

Only  craps  and  occasionally  twenty-one,  but  mostly  craps.  They  were  easier  to  count,  for  one 
thing.  When  1  say  “easier”  1  mean  easier  in  the  sense  that  you  could  maintain  your  anonymity,  because 
there  were  crowds  of  people  standing  around  the  crap  table.  The  most  work  to  this  thing  actually  was  the 
logistical  work,  setting  it  all  up,  getting  plane  reservations  and  automobiles  and  room  reservations  and 
that  type  of  thing.  A  lot  of  work.  And  then  afterwards,  collecting  the  counts,  totaling  them  all  up,  and  then 
sending  in  our  auditors.  It  didn’t  take  very  long  until  the  results  started  to  be  significant.  It’s  probably 
going  to  surprise  some  people  when  I  say  that  the  two-year  study  showed  that  by  and  large  there  were 
only  a  handful  of  casinos  in  the  state  that  were  skimming.  The  big,  big  majority  of  them  never  skimmed  a 
penny.  And  you  could  see  which  ones  weren’t  skimming  right  away  when  you  looked  and  saw  who 
participated  in  the  count.  If  you  had  a  situation  when  a  couple  of  the  individual  owners  themselves  were 
the  only  ones  who  participated  in  the  count,  that  raised  a  red  flag.  Those  were  the  places  that  skimmed. 
But  the  places  that  had  just  count  teams  of  employees  doing  the  counting — Harrah’s,  Harolds,  most 
places — they  never  skimmed  a  dime.  Specifically,  we  found  there  were  only  two  major  hotels  in  Las 
Vegas  that  skimmed.  They  were  the  Flamingo  and  the  Riviera. 

And  this  was  over  a  two-year  period? 

Yes.  Right. 

Did  those  teams  work  seven  days  a  week? 

No.  They  would  work  down  here  in  Las  Vegas  only  during  the  school  years,  particularly  on  long 
weekends,  holiday  weekends — Thanksgiving  vacation,  Labor  Day  vacation,  Christmas  time,  and  so  forth. 
Then  in  the  summer  we’d  work  a  lot  in  the  Reno  and  Tahoe  area. 

Did  the  Kennedys  ever  see  those  results? 

You  know,  I’m  not  sure.  I  would  prepare  them  and  Ed  Olsen  would  take  them  to  the  governor. 
Another  interesting  thing  about  that  is  that  the  Board — or  at  least  the  chairman  of  the  Board,  Ray 


366 


Abbaticchio — was  out  of  the  loop  on  this  project.  He  did  know  about  it,  because  every  now  and  then  he 
would  make  a  remark  to  me,  something  to  the  effect  of,  “I  understand  the  project  is  going  pretty  well,” 
something  like  that. 

And  I’d  say,  “Yes,  it  is.” 

[laughter] 

And  other  than  that  it  was  from  Ed  Olsen  straight  to  the  governor.  I  thought  about  that  a  lot: 
“Why  isn’t  the  chairman  of  the  Board  in  on  this?”  And,  of  course,  I  can’t  answer  that.  1  can  only 
speculate.  It  may  have  been  because  he  had  already  come  into  disfavor  with  the  governor  by  that  time 
over  his  enforcement  of  the  “Black  Book.”  That’s  a  possibility.  It  might  be  because  of  his  FBI 
background.  Maybe  the  governor  didn’t  totally  trust  him  in  this  matter.  1  just  don’t  know.  But  I  think  it’s 
an  interesting  thing,  that  he  was  out  of  the  loop. 

Did  you  say  that  at  that  time  Ed  Olsen  was  only  the  public  information  officer? 

That’s  it.  We  actually  started  this  program  in  the  late  spring  of  1961,  and  we  were  still  doing  it 
when  I  left  the  Board  in  the  late  summer  of  1963. 1  think  they  continued  it,  actually,  for  a  little  bit  beyond 
that. 

So  the  only  problems  you  found  were  in  southern  Nevada:  the  Flamingo  and  the  Riviera? 

We  did  find  one  in  northern  Nevada:  Cal-Neva  Lodge,  Lake  Tahoe.  But  that’s  all.  There  were  a 
few  places  we  would  count  and  we’d  never  find  a  discrepancy,  and  then  we’d  count  it  again  after  maybe 
having  counted  the  place  a  half  a  dozen  times,  and  there’ d  be  a  small  discrepancy.  Our  count  would  be  a 
little  bit  over  the  casino’s.  So  1  would  wonder  to  myself,  is  this  a  case  of  the  owner  saying,  “Well,  we 
need  a  little  bit  of  walking-around  money  for  the  next  week  or  two,”  so  they  might  go  in  and  take  a  few 
bucks  off?  But  they  weren’t  doing  it  regularly.  I  characterize  those  results  as  inconclusive.  But  there  were 
only  two  places  like  that  here,  and  only  one  in  northern  Nevada. 

Did  you  count  smaller  casinos  in  towns  such  as  Winnemucca,  Lovelock ,  and  Fallon? 

No,  we  didn’t.  We  did  Carson  City.  And  we  even  did  the  smaller  ones  at  Lake  Tahoe  on  North 
Shore.  We  did  just  about  every  one  in  Reno  and  Sparks. 

You  asked  the  question  a  moment  ago,  “Did  the  governor  make  these  results  available  to  the 
Kennedys?”  And  I  don’t  know  for  sure  whether  he  did  or  not.  Y ou  see,  overall  the  picture  was  pretty 
good  for  the  state,  so  he  may  have  just  given  him  the  overall  results.  I  can’t  answer  that  question. 

But,  of  course,  eventually  the  Kennedy  group  did  back  away. 

Of  course  when  J.F.K.  was  assassinated  in  1963  his  brother  resigned  as  attorney  general  not  too 
much  long  after  the  assassination.  When  he  resigned  there  was  a  great  big,  collective  sigh  of  relief  here  in 
the  state  of  Nevada.  Oddly  enough,  though,  the  federal  government  intervention  in  Nevada  did  not  cease, 
as  a  lot  of  people  had  hoped,  once  L.B.J.  became  president.  The  FBI  was  involved  in  massive  illegal 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


367 


wiretapping  and  some  burglaries  down  in  Las  Vegas  in  1963,  1964,  1965,  and  I  think  into  1966.  And,  of 
course,  that  is  what  led  to  the  big  blowup  between  Governor  Sawyer  and  J.  Edgar  Hoover.  Governor 
Sawyer  made  the  charge  that  the  FBI  decided  that  the  Constitution  didn’t  apply  to  the  state  of  Nevada, 
just  to  all  the  other  states. 

[laughter]  Was  J.  Edgar  Hoover  the  person  who  was  pushing  the  FBI  to  continue  the  wiretapping? 

1  believe  so. 

Were  there  hard  feelings  between  Hoover  and  Sawyer? 

Oh,  yes,  but  I  don’t  think  there  were  originally.  1  think  originally  the  hard  feelings  were  between 
Governor  Sawyer  and  Bobby  Kennedy.  But  after  Kennedy  was  gone  a  lot  of  this  stuff  continued,  and  so 
then  the  focus  shifted  to  J.  Edgar  Hoover. 

Do  you  feel  that  the  accusations  Hoover  made  against  Sawyer  were  partially  to  blame  for  Sawyer  losing 
the  election  to  Laxalt? 

I’ve  heard  it  both  ways.  I  was  no  longer  with  the  Board  during  the  1966  governor’s  race,  and  I 
was  actively  involved  in  the  Laxalt  campaign  effort.  In  fact,  1  was  doing  all  the  public  opinion  polling  for 
Paul  Laxalt. 

Well,  to  interject  a  minute,  when  and  where  did  you  first  meet  Paul  Laxalt?  Were  you  on  the  Board  at  that 
time? 


1  was  on  the  staff.  1  didn’t  actually  meet  Paul  until  probably  in  the  early  1960s.  I’d  gone  to  school 
with  one  of  his  brothers,  Peter,  who  we  all  called  Mickey.  And  I  was  friendly  with  quite  a  few  people 
around  Carson  who  were  very  friendly  with  Paul  Laxalt:  Jerry  Dondero,  Ed  Allison,  and  John  Tom  Ross, 
who  was  his  brother-in-law.  One  thing  led  to  another  and  when  1  did  get  to  meet  him  we  became  friendly. 
In  the  summer  of  1963,  he  told  me,  “The  Republican  Party  has  got  to  get  more  organized  and  involved.” 
And  he  said,  “We’re  going  to  create  the  position  of  statewide  executive  director,  and  I’m  going  to  see  that 
they  offer  you  the  position.  Would  you  be  interested?” 

I  said,  “Gosh,  let  me  think  about  it.”  I  had  become  somewhat  disillusioned  with  the  Board.  I 
couldn’t  understand  why  they  wouldn’t  do  something  about  the  few  places  that  were  skimming.  I  used  to 
have  long  discussions  with  Ed  Olsen  about  this. 

Had  Olsen  replaced  Abbaticchio? 

Yes,  he  replaced  him  in  1961.  Ed  and  I  were  close.  I  had  long,  long  discussions  with  him  about 
lots  of  things.  I  thought  someday  I  might  like  to  be  on  the  Board,  but  I  didn’t  think  that  I  was  ever  going 
to  be  appointed  to  the  Board  from  the  staff,  although  Ed  himself  had  gone  from  the  staff  to  the  Board.  But 
he  was  the  only  one.  There  was  another  vacancy,  and  I  thought  David  Malcolm,  who  was  then  head  of  the 
audit  division,  really  should  have  received  it,  but  the  governor  appointed  Butch  Leypoldt,  the  sheriff  of 
Clark  County.  So  I  said  to  myself,  “I’m  at  a  dead  end  here.”  I  didn’t  think  there  was  any  possibility  that 


368 


Grant  Sawyer  was  going  to  run  for  a  third  term,  because  the  perception  around  Nevada  was  that  he  had 
made  such  an  issue  over  Charlie  Russell  running  for  a  third  term  back  in  1958  that  how  could  he  do  it?  It 
was  just  a  given  that  he  wasn’t  going  to  run  for  a  third  term.  Of  course,  he  did,  which  surprised  me.  But 
anyway,  putting  that  all  together  1  thought,  “Oh,  what  the  heck,  this  is  a  good  opportunity.”  So  1  told 
Laxalt  “Yes.”  They  created  that  new  position,  executive  director  of  the  Republican  Party  for  the  state,  in 
the  summer  of  1963. 1  resigned  from  the  Board  and  was  named  to  that  position  in  August  of  1963. 

What  were  your  job  responsibilities  or  duties  there:  to  tie  the  Republican  Party  together  or  to  create  a 
better  image? 

Oh,  not  so  much  image,  but  mainly  to  get  the  party  organized  in  Clark  County.  There  virtually 
was  no  Republican  Party  in  those  days.  The  registration  was  three-to-one  Democrat,  and  they  didn’t  have 
a  headquarters,  so  I  got  involved  raising  money  to  get  a  headquarters  open.  Interesting  story  in  that 
regard:  there  was  an  insurance  salesman  named  Paul  McDermott  who  had  been  on  the  old  Tax 
Commission,  and  he  was  a  strong  supporter  of  Paul  Laxalt — good  friends.  And  1  said,  "I  need  your  help. 
I’m  trying  to  raise  some  money  down  here  to  get  this  party  going." 

So  he  said,  “All  right.”  And  he  arranged  some  appointments  for  me.  I  remember  one  of  them  that 
1  thought  was  really  significant:  he  arranged  an  appointment  with  Moe  Dalitz  for  me.  I  remember  sitting 
across  the  desk  from  Moe  Dalitz — very  friendly,  real  gentleman.  He  nodded  his  head  and  he  said,  “Y es, 
we  need  a  strong  two-party  system.”  He  said,  “I’ll  help.” 

We  said,  “Now,  we’re  not  asking  for  a  lot  of  money.  We’re  only  going  to  ask  for  five  hundred 
dollars.  We  just  want  everybody  to  give  five  hundred  dollars.” 

He  said,  “Well,  you  ought  to  hold  a  big  dinner  and  sell  tables  of  ten  for  five  thousand.” 

We’d  just  held  a  dinner  a  few  weeks  before  that  at  the  Stardust,  and  raised  a  nice  chunk  of 
money.  But  anyway,  I  remember  Moe  Dalitz  picking  up  the  telephone  and  calling  owners  of  a  number  of 
other  casinos  on  the  Strip.  He  was  very  friendly  about  it,  but  it  was  really  almost  an  order  to  them.  You 
know,  “We’re  all  going  to  do  this,  and  we’re  counting  on  you  also.  So  I’m  going  to  put  you  down  and  tell 
them  yes.”  [laughter] 

As  part  of  your  job  did  you  become  a  pollster? 

Well,  yes.  Actually  I  started  that  when  I  was  on  the  Board  and  doing  some  polling.  I  told  you 
about  the  one  job  up  in  Idaho,  and  I  actually  did  a  little  of  it  in  the  1962  election,  dabbled  in  it  a  little  bit. 

Were  you  hired  to  do  that? 

No,  I  just  did  it  kind  of  as  a  hobby.  Of  course,  a  lot  of  my  professional  training  was  in  sampling 
theory,  probability  theory,  and  so  forth. 

To  get  back  to  J.  Edgar  Hoover  and  the  1966  election,  let  me  say  this  first.  Paul  Laxalt  had 
already  decided  he  was  going  to  ask  Ed  Olsen  to  stay  on  as  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  and 
he  authorized  me  to  tell  that  to  Ed,  which  I  did.  Then  late  in  the  campaign  I  heard  on  the  radio  one  day  in 
Carson  that  Ed  Olsen,  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  had  compared  J.  Edgar  Hoover  to  Hitler. 
My  heart  dropped  into  my  stomach.  I  got  on  the  phone  to  Ed,  and  I  said,  “Ed,  what  are  you  doing?” 

He  said,  “What  are  you  talking  about?” 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


369 


I  said,  “I  just  heard  on  the  radio  that  you  compared  J.  Edgar  Hoover  to  Hitler .” 

He  said,  “What!  I  said  no  such  thing.”  He  called  me  back  an  hour  or  two  later  and  he  said,  “1  said 
it.”  [Mr.  Pearson  makes  this  last  remark  with  an  inflection  to  reflect  Mr.  Olsen  said  it  with  a  regretful 
tone.] 

1  said,  “What  happened?” 

He  said,  “They  convinced  me  that  the  statement  has  to  stand.  I’ve  got  to  swallow  it.  1  said  it.” 

1  said,  “You  know  what  this  means,  don’t  you?” 

He  said,  “1  know.  If  Laxalt  wins  the  election  I’m  gone.” 

I  said,  “That’s  right.” 

So  then  Governor  Sawyer  himself  took  another  shot  or  two  at  J.  Edgar  Hoover.  Then  Paul  Laxalt 
and  I  and  a  couple  of  others  huddled,  and  Paul  said,  “My  goodness.  I  privately  agree  on  principle  with 
some  of  the  criticism  of  the  FBI.”  (In  fact,  Paul  Laxalt  was  the  very  first  one  to  criticize  the  wiretapping 
publicly.  He  did  it  in  1963  at  a  Republican  fundraiser  at  the  Stardust  Hotel.)  But  he  said,  “I  think  I’m 
going  to  win  this  election,  and  we  can’t  have  J.  Edgar  Hoover  and  the  FBI  on  our  backs.”  So  he  issued  an 
apology  to  J.  Edgar  Hoover  on  behalf  of  the  state  of  Nevada.  Well,  some  of  our  political  people  down 
here  thought  that  was  a  big  mistake.  Paul  McDermott  thought  so.  Bob  Brown,  who  was  the  editor  of  the 
Las  Vegas  Review-Journal,  he  thought  so.  And  some  of  the  people  in  the  gaming  industry  thought  it  was 
a  big  political  mistake.  They  said,  “You’ve  lost  the  election.  You  just  lost  the  election  when  you 
apologized  to  Hoover.”  So  then  Paul  Laxalt  asked  me,  “What  do  you  think?” 

I  said,  “There’s  only  one  way  to  know.  Let’s  go  back  out  and  we’ll  poll  again.”  We  had  just 
finished  a  day  or  two  before.  “We’ll  do  it  again.”  I  put  it  together  fast  and  we  went  back  out  and  we 
polled  again.  No  change  whatsoever.  It  hadn’t  made  any  difference  one  way  or  the  other. 

That ’s  strange.  You  think  it  would  have  brought  it  up  or  down  one  way  or  the  other. 

Yes.  It  had  no  effect. 

So,  of  course,  the  end  of  the  story  is  that  Grant  Sawyer  lost  the  election. 

And  again,  as  it  was  fortunate  for  the  state  that  Sawyer  had  been  elected  in  1958  so  a  Democrat 
was  governor  when  the  Kennedy s  came  in.  Again,  it  was  very  fortunate  for  the  state  and  the  gaming 
industry  that  Sawyer  lost.  If  he’d  happened  to  win,  oh,  my  goodness,  no  telling  what  would  have 
happened,  how  this  industry  would  have  been  harassed  by  the  FBI.  In  fact,  J.  Edgar  Hoover  phoned  Paul 
the  night  of  the  election  when  NBC  declared  Paul  the  winner  of  the  governor’s  race.  Hoover  called  him 
immediately,  congratulated  him,  and  said,  “I’m  looking  forward  to  working  with  you  and  we’ll  have  a 
good  relationship,  et  cetera,  et  cetera.” 

Were  you  considered  to  be  an  efficient  pollster? 

Yes,  I  didn’t  have  very  many  problems.  Of  course,  I  was  about  the  only  pollster.  You  know,  if 
you’re  the  only  one  that  makes  you  the  best,  but  it  also  makes  you  the  worst. 


What  campaigns,  prior  to  or  after  the  1966  campaign,  did  you  work  on? 


370 


In  1964  he  ran  for  the  senate  against  Howard  Cannon  and  lost  by  forty-eight  votes  statewide.  I 
was  involved  in  that  campaign,  and  then  again  in  1966.  Later  on  when  he  ran  for  the  U.S.  Senate  and  won 
in  1974, 1  was  deeply  involved,  as  1  was  in  1980  when  he  was  re-elected. 

So  you  worked  with  him  on  several  elections? 

Oh,  yes. 

Were  you  considered  to  be  an  optimistic  campaigner? 

1  regarded  myself  as  a  realist.  My  philosophy  in  life  generally  has  been  to  assume  the  worst  is 
going  to  happen  and  then  try  to  see  that  it  doesn’t.  Or  if  it  does,  make  the  best  out  of  it.  I’ve  approached 
everything  that  way,  not  only  politics. 

Did  Governor  Laxalt  have  a  nickname  for  you? 

Oh,  he  didn’t  so  much,  but  the  others  did.  They  called  me  “The  Embalmer,”  because  they  thought 
that  1  wasn’t  optimistic  enough.  They  would  say,  “This  is  going  to  happen,”  all  these  good  things  were 
going  to  happen,  and  I’d  say,  “Well,  maybe  not.” 

[laughter] 

[laughter] 

So  they  were  comparing  you  with  an  undertaker. 

Right,  [laughter] 

Do  you  feel  that  your  opinions  and  your  judgments  had  an  impact  on  several  of Mr.  Laxalt ’s  decisions 
regarding  his  political  career? 

Well,  he’d  be  a  better  one  to  ask  than  me,  but  since  you  asked  me,  I’d  say  probably  yes, 
particularly  in  1964  and  1966.  He  gives  me  quite  a  bit  of  credit  in  his  book7,  stating  that  I  had  a  major 
impact  upon  his  decision  to  run  for  governor  in  1966. 

You  had  his  ear,  you  might  say,  at  that  time. 

Yes,  I  think  so. 

When  Paul  Laxalt  became  governor  in  1967,  who  did  he  appoint  to  the  Gaming  Commission  and  to  the 
Gaming  Control  Board? 


7  The  book  is  entitled:  Nevada's  Paul  Laxalt:  A  Memoir 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


371 


What  he  did,  in  effect,  was  to  fire  almost  everybody  on  both  the  Board  and  the  Commission.  He 
asked  for  their  resignations — all  of  them  except  Norman  Brown.  In  those  days,  even  though  they  were 
appointed  for  terms,  the  board  members  and  commission  members  served  at  the  pleasure  of  the  governor. 
Governor  Laxalt  was  unhappy  with  both  the  Board  and  the  Commission,  except  for  Norman  Brown  and 
Ed  Olsen,  who  1  indicated  would  have  been  retained  had  not  Ed  uttered  that  unfortunate  quote  comparing 
J.  Edgar  Hoover  to  Hitler.  So  he  appointed  three  new  members  of  the  Board:  Alan  Abner,  the  chairman, 
from  Reno,  who  had  been  in  advertising  and  public  relations  work;  Keith  Campbell  from  Las  Vegas,  who 
had  been  the  undersheriff;  and  myself.  On  the  Commission  he  asked  Norman  Brown,  the  rancher  from 
Smith  Valley,  if  he  would  stay  on,  and  Norman  agreed.  The  other  four  members  were  Henry  Berrum  from 
South  Lake  Tahoe,  who  had  been  in  the  legislature,  and  three  from  Las  Vegas:  George  Dickerson,  an 
attorney,  and  former  district  attorney,  was  named  chairman  of  the  commission;  George  Von  Tobel,  from  a 
prominent  business  family  in  Las  Vegas,  who,  1  think,  had  been  in  the  legislature  at  one  time;  and  Dr. 

Sam  Davis,  an  optometrist  who  was  very  prominent  in  the  LDS  community. 

Was  there  any  one  specific  person  that  you  replaced  on  the  Board? 

No,  not  really;  inasmuch  as  all  three  changed  at  the  same  time,  1  wouldn’t  say  so. 

Were  you  in  charge  of  any  specific  division? 

Yes,  1  was  in  charge  of  the  audit  division.  We  would  all  commingle,  get  involved  in  other 
divisions,  but  my  main  responsibility  was  the  audit  division. 

You  were  appointed  to  the  Board  along  with  Alan  Abner,  but  he  left  after  only  a  few  months  on  the  Board. 
Who  replaced  him  as  chairman? 

Frank  Johnson,  a  journalist  who  had  worked  for  Reno  newspapers.  We  had  hired  him  originally 
as  a  public  information  officer;  however,  when  Abner  left,  Frank  took  his  place. 

Your  first  year  on  the  Board  was  a  very  important  year  in  gaming  history.  What  do  you  think  was  the 
most  important  event  that  took  place  your  first  year? 

1  suppose  you  could  make  a  case  for  the  arrival  of  Howard  Hughes.  That  was  certainly  the  most 
noteworthy.  Of  course,  the  story  is  that  that  Howard  Hughes  arrived  here  Thanksgiving  evening  and  took 
the  suite  at  the  top  of  the  Desert  Inn  and  allegedly  refused  to  leave  over  New  Year’s  when  they  wanted  it 
for  a  high  roller.  So  he  said,  “How  much  do  you  want  for  this  place?  I’ll  buy  it.” 

[laughter] 

And  I  think  that’s  a  true  story,  because  I’ve  had  the  owners  of  the  Desert  Inn  at  the  time  tell  me 
that  that  actually  happened. 

You  said  that  it  was  the  most  noteworthy  event.  Do  you  also  feel  that  it  was  the  most  important  event  that 
happened  your  first  year  on  the  Board ,  or  was  there  something  else  that  overshadowed  it? 


372 


I’m  not  sure  it  overshadowed  it,  but  there  was  another  very  important  thing  that  happened.  I  went 
to  Paul  Laxalt  before  he  even  became  governor  and  told  him  that  I  believed  strongly  there  were  some 
deficiencies  in  the  statute  covering  gaming  control.  One  in  particular  simply  had  to  be  changed,  and  that 
was  the  statute  which  specified  what  penalty  the  Board  and  Commission  could  use  to  punish  a  casino  for 
an  infraction.  The  only  penalty  available  at  that  time  was  license  suspension  or  revocation.  That’s  all. 
Nothing  else.  In  other  words,  the  death  penalty,  no  matter  how  trivial  the  offense.  As  a  result,  the  industry 
was  well  aware  that  the  Board  and  Commission  were  not  going  to  suspend  or  revoke  the  license  of  a 
major  hotel-casino.  The  economic  and  political  consequences  were  too  great.  They  simply  were  not  going 
to  shut  down  a  hotel-casino  in  Las  Vegas  that  employed  two  or  three  thousand  people  or  more. 

I  had  had  a  lot  of  discussions  with  Ed  Olsen  about  this,  and  he,  in  effect,  said,  “We  simply  can ’t 
shut  these  places  down.”  I  was  arguing  that  sometime  the  Board  and  Commission  should  set  an 
example — as  reluctant  as  they  were  to  do  it.  We  should  take  the  license  away  from  one  of  these  places  to 
set  an  example  for  everybody  else  to  get  them  to  shape  up,  because  there  was  quite  a  bit  of  casino 
cheating  going  on  in  Las  Vegas  right  on  the  Strip  during  the  1960s. 

They  were  cheating  the  customers? 

The  customers,  absolutely.  Quite  a  bit  of  it.  And  it  was  known  to  quite  a  few  people,  too.  So  I  told 
Paul,  “Paul,  we  simply  have  to  change  the  law  so  the  Board  and  Commission  can  impose  additional 
penalties.” 

And  he  said,  “Well,  like  what?” 

I  said,  “Fines.  Give  the  Board  and  Commission  the  power  to  fine  these  places  with  no  limit.”  So 
he  asked  Bill  Sinnott,  who  also  was  a  former  board  member,  who  was  then  an  assistant  of  his,  to  get 
together  with  me  to  help  draft  some  suggested  changes  in  the  law.  So  we  did.  There  were  others  that  we 
drew  up  too,  but  I  feel  that  was  the  main  one.  That’s  the  most  important  one.  And,  of  course,  as  you’re 
probably  aware  since  then,  the  Board  and  Commission  have  used  that  punishment  hundreds  of  times  and 
have,  on  occasion,  fined  some  of  these  casino  licensees  some,  whew,  astronomical  amounts,  much  more 
than  I  ever  had  in  mind  when  I  told  the  governor  we  had  to  do  this. 

It’s  certainly  on  a  par  with  Howard  Hughes  coming  into  town.  Howard  Hughes  is  gone,  but  the  fines  have 
become  larger  and  larger. 

To  get  back  to  Howard  Hughes;  his  first  purchase,  of  course,  was  the  Desert  Inn.  Did  Mr. 

Hughes  ever  appear  before  the  Board? 

No,  nor  any  place  else  that  I  am  aware  of. 

[laughter] 

Although  there’s  one  theory  held  by  some  of  his  own  people  that  he  did  travel  around  town,  even 
around  the  state,  in  disguise.  There’s  a  fellow  named  Perry  Lieber,  who  had  been  with  Hughes  in  Los 
Angeles  as  a  publicist,  who  followed  him  to  Las  Vegas,  and  later  on  became  general  manager  of  the 
Landmark  Hotel-Casino  when  Hughes  bought  it.  Perry  Lieber  told  me  personally  he  believes  the  story  is 
true  that  Hughes  was  out  in  the  desert  hitchhiking  and  was  picked  up  by  Melvin  Dummar,  the  fellow  from 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


373 


Gabbs.  Perry  Lieber  told  me  he  believes  that  it  actually  happened.  Perry  Lieber  also  told  me  he  thought 
there’s  a  real  possibility  that  the  so-called  Mormon  will  that  Melvin  Dummar  delivered  to  the  church  was 
genuine.  Now,  this  comes  from  a  fellow  who  had  been  with  Howard  Hughes  for  years. 

Was  it  customary,  or  was  it  mandatory,  in  1967  that  the  applicants  had  to  appear  before  the  Board  when 
applying  for  a  license? 

No,  it  was  neither  mandatory  nor  customary.  The  conference  room  that  we  used  for  the  hearings 
for  both  the  Board  and  Commission  was  a  little  conference  room  down  in  the  old  Industrial  Commission 
Building  on  East  Musser  Street,  just  about  two  blocks  due  east  of  the  capitol  building.  That  place  only 
accommodated,  jammed  full,  maybe  a  hundred  people.  If  we  were  to  tell  everybody  they  had  to  come,  we 
would  have  had  to  find  a  different  place.  So  we  discouraged  people  from  coming  unless  there  was  a 
problem  with  their  application.  We  had  our  office  manager  send  out  a  letter  each  month  to  all  the 
applicants  who  were  going  to  be  on  the  agenda,  informing  them,  “You’re  going  to  be  on  this  month’s 
agenda” — for  the  board  meeting  such  and  such  a  date,  or  the  commission  meeting  such  and  such  a  date — 
“Your  attendance  is  not  required.  You’re  welcome  to  come  if  you  like.”  And  for  those  that  we  wanted 
there  we  would  say  in  the  letter,  “Your  attendance  is  required.”  So  I  would  say  over  the  years,  during  the 
Sawyer  and  Laxalt  administrations,  probably  a  maximum  of  20  percent  of  the  applicants  were  at  those 
meetings. 

That ’s  interesting  because  some  people  have  made  an  issue  of  the  fact  that  Laxalt  just  more  or  less  gave 
Hughes  a  license  without  him  having  to  appear.  It  sounds  as  if  it  wasn  ’t  such  an  uncommon  thing. 

No.  It  was  not  until  the  1970s  that  the  Board  decided  to  require  all  applicants  to  appear. 
Personally,  I  think  it’s  a  big  mistake.  I  mean,  why  make  some  little  mom  and  pop  operation  in  Las  Vegas 
that’s  going  to  put  a  couple  of  slot  machines  in  some  place  spend  all  that  money  to  travel  to  Carson  City, 
not  once  but  twice,  for  a  board  meeting  and  two  weeks  later  to  a  commission  meeting,  when  you’ve 
already  decided  you’re  going  to  give  the  guy  a  license.  I  don’t  think  it’s  right.  Certainly  Hughes  wasn’t 
the  only  applicant  who  didn’t  ever  attend  any  of  our  meetings;  hardly  any  other  notable  applicant  attended 
the  meetings.  I  don’t  ever  remember  seeing  Bill  Harrah  show  up  at  any  of  the  meetings  when  one  of  his 
properties  was  licensed  for  something,  or  Harvey  Gross,  or  most  of  the  rest  of  them.  A  fellow  that  used  to 
come  was  Del  Webb.  He’d  show  up  all  by  himself.  He  wouldn’t  bring  an  attorney,  nor  anybody  else.  And 
he  would  sometimes  come  by  himself  to  attend  little  private  meetings  with  us.  [laughter]  He  was  just  a 
delightlul  guy. 

Did  Governor  Laxalt  ever  apply  any  pressure  on  the  Board  or  the  Commission  to  approve  Mr.  Hughes ’s 
application? 

No.  But  he  did  intercede  and  use  pressure,  if  you  want  to  call  it  that,  to  not  let  him  proceed  on 
acquiring  a  property.  The  governor  and  all  of  us  had  an  agreement  with  Bob  Maheu,  who  was  Hughes’s 
representative,  that  after  the  purchase  of  the  Landmark,  that  was  to  be  his  last  acquisition.  By  then  the 
Justice  Department’s  anti-trust  division  was  starting  to  stick  its  nose  into  it  and  was  threatening  to 
intercede  and  investigate  whether  or  not  there  was  an  anti-trust  matter  involved  here.  And  when  we  found 
out  that  Bob  Maheu  was  holding  some  discussions  with  the  Dunes,  well,  the  governor  hit  the  ceiling  and 


374 


he  told  us  that  that’s  the  end.  He  also  called  Bob  Maheu  and  told  him,  “That’s  the  end.”  And  he  chewed 
him  out  pretty  good  for  doing  that  after  he’d  had  that  agreement  with  him  there  were  to  be  no  more 
licenses. 

Some  people  have  said  that  Howard  Hughes  was  the  savior  of  Nevada  gaming.  What  is  your  feeling  on 
the  importance  of  Hughes  coming  into  gambling  at  that  time?  Was  he  a  savior? 

I’m  not  sure  if  I  would  say  he  was  a  savior.  Had  J.F.K.  lived  and  been  re-elected  in  1964,  and 
Bobby  Kennedy  was  still  attorney  general,  then  perhaps,  and  probably,  Hughes  coming  to  Nevada  would 
have  been  more  important  with  respect  to  maybe  saving  the  industry,  if  you  want  to  use  that  term.  But 
Hughes’s  coming  to  Nevada  certainly  was  good  for  the  image ,  both  in  and  out  of  the  state.  It  just  caught 
the  attention  of  the  entire  country.  Opinion  polls  I  used  to  see  showed  that  the  people  in  the  state  of 
Nevada  thought  it  was  a  good  thing.  The  percentage  of  approval  was  in  the  nineties.  So  certainly  from  the 
PR  standpoint  it  was  good. 

Did  people  feel  that  Hughes  had  eliminated  an  unsavory  element? 

Yes,  there  was  that  type  of  conjecture.  Personally,  I  didn’t  cater  to  that  notion  so  much.  I  knew  all 
of  those  people.  I  thought  most  of  them  were  gentlemen,  and  were  honorable,  honest  people,  people  of 
their  word.  There  was  one  property  that  he  bought  where  we  were  glad  he  interceded,  and  that  was  the 
Frontier. 

Because  there  were  some  unsavory  people  in  there? 

Well,  we  just  weren’t  comfortable  with  them. 

Oftentimes  when  he  purchased  a  property  he  would  remove  the  owner,  but  did  he  keep  a  lot  of  the  same 
people  as  operators? 

Yes,  the  good  people  he  kept.  That’s  true. 

Earlier  you  asked  me  about  important  events  that  happened  in  1 967  that  were  really  important, 
and  I  would  like  to  add  one  more  thing.  The  new  governor  persuaded  the  legislature  to  pass  legislation 
legalizing  public  ownership  of  Nevada  casinos.  That  was  really  important,  particularly,  thinking  in  terms 
of  what’s  happened  in  the  last  ten,  fifteen  years.  Without  public  corporations  you  couldn’t  build  a  major 
casino  in  the  state  today.  No  one  individual  has  that  kind  of  money  anymore. 

Yes,  the  Corporate  Gaming  Act  opened  a  lot  of  doors. 

And  there  was  a  lot  of  opposition  to  that  act.  Grant  Sawyer,  for  one,  was  opposed  to  it,  as  he  has 
admitted  publicly  since  then.  And  there  is  some  irony  there  because  he  really  benefited  from  it  later  on 
after  he  was  no  longer  governor.  He  joined  the  Lionel  Sawyer  &  Collins  law  firm  and  he  ended  up 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


375 


representing  a  lot  of  the  public  companies  and  making  a  fortune,  [laughter]  He  admitted  in  later  years  how 
much  he’d  benefited  from  it. 

1  would  say  you  could  make  a  case  that  that  has  saved  our  industry,  considering  how  many  other 
states  now  have  legalized  gambling.  With  the  advent  of  Indian  gaming  in  neighboring  states  and  the 
competition  that  it  is  giving  us,  without  these  great  big,  huge,  new  super  hotel-casinos  we  wouldn’t  be 
competitive  anymore. 

Didn ’t  Steve  Wynn  recently  break  ground  on  a  new  casino? 

Yes,  he  did,  just  a  couple  of  weeks  ago. 

That ’s  the  Le  Reve? 

Yes.  And  he  went  public.  From  what  1  read  in  the  papers  they  had  a  little  bit  of  difficulty  on  the 
IPO,  but  they  finally  got  it  off  the  ground,  and  they  have  had  groundbreaking  ceremonies.  1  think  a  billion 
and  a  half  dollars  was  the  construction  cost  figure  that  I’ve  read. 

To  get  back  to  Howard  Hughes,  I’ve  heard  stories  that  there  were  late-night  telephone  conferences 
between  the  board  and  commission  members  to  speed  up  the  approval  of  Mr.  Hughes ’s  license.  Were  you 
involved  in  any  of  those  late-night  calls ? 

One  time.  It  wasn’t  a  license  application  as  such;  it  was  when  they  bought  the  Frontier.  Their 
attorney,  Tom  Bell,  another  UNR  graduate,  had  kept  us  apprised  that  they  were  negotiating  with  the 
Frontier,  and  we  said,  “Be  our  guest.  We  encourage  that.” 

And  he  said,  “We’ll  keep  you  informed.  We’re  going  to  be  acquiring  all  of  their  assets,  including 
the  bankroll — all  the  cash.  When  we  sign  that  contract  we  want  you  to  give  us  permission  to  go  in  there 
immediately  and  participate  in  that  operation  so  we  can  watch  the  cash.” 

We  told  him,  “All  right,  you  let  us  know  once  you  sign  that  contract.”  One  night  I’m  in  Carson 
City — that’s  where  1  lived — and  1  get  a  call  from  Tom  Bell.  It  was  about  nine  o’clock  at  night  and  he  said, 
“We  just  signed  the  contract.”  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

He  said,  “Can  you  get  it  on?” 

1  said,  “1  think  so.”  And  so  we  used  the  emergency  provision  in  the  gaming  regulations.  It  only 
requires  three  commission  members  in  order  to  use  this  provision  to  allow  somebody  to  participate  in  an 
operation  on  an  emergency  basis  while  their  application  for  the  license  is  being  considered.  So  we  did  that 
to  allow  them  to  get  in  there  and  watch  the  bankroll. 

What  were  some  of  the  major  problems  or  situations  facing  gaming  regulators  in  1967? 


Electronics  is  one  area  where  we  spent  a  lot  of  time.  That  was  part  of  Governor  Laxalt’ s 


376 


legislative  package  that  he  sent  to  the  legislature.  It  had  a  provision  for  the  licensing  of  manufacturers  and 
distributors  of  electronic  games.  Later  we  drafted  regulations  to  implement  it.  We  spent  a  lot,  a  lot,  a  lot 
of  time  on  that.  It’s  probably  a  good  thing  we  did  because  that’s  when  the  electronic  games  were  starting 
to  come  into  vogue.  We  also  adopted  a  whole  new  Regulation  Six  regarding  accounting  procedures.  A  lot 
of  the  casinos  didn’t  like  it  too  much.  They  said,  “You’re  piling  so  much  work  on  us,  we’re  going  to  have 
to  put  clerks  right  in  those  pits.” 

[laughter] 

We  said,  “Well,  why  don’t  you?”  And  so  a  lot  of  them  did.  They  usually  would  employ  women. 
They’d  sit  right  there  in  the  pit.  They  called  them  pit  clerks  and  they  would  record  credit  and  things  like 
that. 

At  the  same  time  we  instituted  new  counting  room  procedures.  We  forbade  individual  owners 
from  participating  in  the  soft  count.  The  “soft”  had  to  be  counted  by  non-owners.  “Soft”  is  a  gaming 
industry  slang  term  for  currency. 

How  many  people  were  required  to  be  in  the  count  room? 

We  said,  “You  have  to  set  up  three-person  counting  teams,  and  you  have  to  supply  us  with  the 
names  of  the  individuals  who  would  participate  in  those  teams.”  And,  of  course,  the  threat  was  when  we 
made  periodic  visits  and  saw  somebody  in  there  counting  who  wasn’t  on  the  list  they  provided  us,  then 
they  were  in  trouble. 

Would  you  say  that  the  count  room  is  the  most  vulnerable  area  in  a  casino? 

Yes.  Although  1  have  to  say  1  was  really  surprised  and  kind  of  dumbfounded  by  what  happened 
years  later  in  the  Stardust,  when  they  skimmed  the  hard  count  room8.  Jay  Vandermark  was  the 
mastermind  of  that.  1  had  never  considered  that  possibility  back  in  the  1960s.  For  one  thing,  a  lot  of  the 
places  in  Vegas  didn’t  even  have  many  slots.  There  was  a  time  when  they  had  no  slots.  They  thought  slots 
detracted  from  the  class  of  the  casino.  And  they  finally — sometime  in  the  late  1950s  maybe — said,  “Well, 
we’ll  put  a  few  in  just  to  keep  the  women  occupied  while  their  husbands  are  shooting  crap.  But  we  still 
don’t  like  them  very  much.”  They  were  too  noisy.  The  slots  were  not  considered  a  major  part  of  the 
casino  operation,  and  so  1  never  thought  much  about  skimming  the  slots.  1  gave  it  a  little  bit  of  thought, 
but  1  said,  “God,  how  would  you  go  about  it?”  It  seemed  to  me  so  difficult  and  that  you’d  have  to  employ 
other  people,  and  other  employees,  so  1  pretty  much  discounted  it  as  being  a  threat.  But  yet  it  apparently 
happened  in  the  Stardust  later  on  in  1976. 

It  is  interesting  that  you  bring  up  how  the  source  of  revenue  has  changed  over  the  period  of  years.  It  used 
to  be  mainly  from  craps,  and  then  twenty-one  became  stronger,  and  now,  of  course,  the  slot  machines  are 
the  dominant  source  of  revenue. 

Right.  And  another  change,  of  course,  is  that  now — for  most  of  the  hotels  1  believe  this  is 


The  hard  count  room  is  where  the  money  from  the  slot  machines  is  counted. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


377 


accurate — non-gaming  revenue  actually  exceeds  gaming  revenue. 

Yes,  that  goes  along  with  that  new  philosophy  that  each  department  must  be  self-sustaining. 

Yes.  And  I’m  not  sure  1  like  this  new  trend.  For  one  thing,  it  makes  it  awfully  expensive  for  locals 
to  take  relatives  and  friends  from  out  of  town  to  these  floor  shows  at  the  price  they  charge. 

In  1963  Frank  Sinatra  gave  up  his  gaming  licenses  at  the  Cal-Neva  Lodge  and  the  Sands  after  a 
disagreement  with  gaming  regulators.  In  1967  he  became  embroiled  in  a  fistfight  with  Carl  Cohen  of  the 
Sands  Hotel-Casino  in  an  argument  over  credit.  Did  you  know  Mr.  Sinatra? 

Yes,  1  did,  but  not  while  1  was  with  gaming  control.  It  was  some  years  later  when  1  was  with  the 
university,  and  every  year  he  would  put  on  a  big  concert — a  fundraising  concert — for  the  athletics 
department,  and  1  was  in  charge  of  it. 

It  started  out  at  Caesars  Palace  as  a  sit-down  dinner,  and  it  got  to  be  very  big.  We  had  three 
thousand  five  hundred  people  to  a  sit-down  dinner  in  Caesars  Palace,  and  Frank  Sinatra  put  on  a 
tremendous  show.  1  think  the  first  time  1  met  him  was  that  night.  We  had  a  private  little  party  for  the 
members  of  the  Board  of  Regents,  some  of  the  people  from  the  athletics  department,  and  Frank  Sinatra 
and  some  of  this  friends.  1  was  supposed  to  have  dinner  with  him  in  1966 — shortly  after  the  election — in 
the  Sands  Flotel  one  night.  It  was  put  together  by  General  Charles  Barron,  who  was  an  employee  there 
who  knew  Sinatra.  It  was  to  be  the  governor-elect,  Paul  Laxalt,  and  his  wife  Jackie,  Alan  Abner,  myself, 
and  Charlie  Barron.  But  something  came  up  and  the  governor  wanted  me  to  go  hold  hands  with  Bob 
Brown,  the  editor  of  the  Las  Vegas  Review-Journal — 1  guess  maybe  by  this  time  the  former  editor.  Fie 
was  unhappy  about  something,  and  Governor-Elect  Laxalt  wanted  me  to  go  hold  his  hand.  So  1  went  and 
did  that  with  Bob  Brown,  and  I  didn’t  get  to  have  a  private  dinner  with  Frank  Sinatra  like  the  others  did. 
You  know,  at  the  time  it  didn’t  bother  me  at  all,  but  now  it  bothers  me  a  little  bit. 

Do  you  recall  when  Sinatra  got  in  that  argument  with  Carl  Cohen? 

1  remember  the  incident  very  well.  Sinatra  had  been  gambling  and  drinking  and  partying  all  night 
long  and  had  got  out  of  line.  Carl  Cohen  wasn’t  in  a  particularly  good  mood  either,  and  so  he  popped  him. 
[laughter] 

Was  there  any  disciplinary  action  taken? 

No,  as  Sinatra  wasn’t  a  licensee  at  the  time. 

Were  you  on  the  Board  when  Sinatra  got  licensed? 

No.  However,  I  was  on  the  staff  in  the  early  1960s  when  he  got  his  license  at  the  Cal-Neva 


Lodge. 


378 


Did  Ed  Olsen  ever  talk  to  you  about  his  problems  with  Sinatra? 

We  talked  some  about  the  Cal-Neva  Lodge.  You  know,  there  was  even  speculation  that  Joe 
Kennedy,  father  of  the  Kennedy  brothers,  had  a  piece  of  the  Cal-Neva.  It  was  pure  rumor  and  speculation 
and  never  any  proof,  but  he  used  to  spend  quite  a  bit  of  time  up  there,  or  at  least  some  time  up  there.  1 
personally  saw  him  up  there  in  the  early  1960s.  1  saw  him  in  the  pit  like  he  was  an  owner,  walking  around 
conversing  with  pit  bosses. 

There  was  a  pretty  well-founded  rumor  that  Ted  Kennedy  spent  quite  a  bit  of  time  up  there  right 
after  the  Democratic  Convention  in  1960.  In  fact,  some  people  said  that  he  ended  up  in  the  family 
doghouse  because  they  thought  that  he  wasn’t  paying  enough  attention  to  the  campaign.  Supposedly  he 
was  in  charge  of  the  campaign  in  the  western  states,  and  Kennedy  didn’t  do  very  well  in  the  western 
states.  They  were  looking  for  a  scapegoat,  and  so  they  made  poor  young  Teddy  their  scapegoat  because 
he  was  spending  too  much  of  his  time  partying  at  the  Cal-Neva  Lodge.  But  that’s  all  rumor,  [laughter] 

The  Frontier  was  operating  during  your  time  on  the  Board.  Did  you  have  any  problems  with  that 
property? 

We  weren’t  happy  with  all  the  persons  licensed.  The  outgoing  Board  and  Commission  the  last 
month  prior  to  the  Laxalt  administration  taking  over  in  1967  found  the  Frontier  and  all  of  the  applicants 
who  had  applied  for  a  license  suitable  for  licensing.  The  attorney  general  gave  the  opinion  that  the 
licensing  was  proper  and  that  we  were  stuck  with  it;  however,  a  few  more  applicants  came  in  later  on  and 
we  were  able  to  deny  them  because  we  didn’t  like  their  backgrounds. 

Who  were  the  people  that  were  licensed  at  the  Frontier  by  the  previous  regime? 

They  were  a  group  headed  by  Maurice  Friedman  and  Anthony  Zerilli,  and  most  of  them  were 
from  Detroit.  In  later  years  the  federal  government  indicted  several  of  them  for  various  cheating  scams. 
Of  some  note  and  interest,  one  of  those  licensees  of  the  Frontier  was  none  other  than  Steve  Wynn.  This 
was  his  entry  into  Nevada  gaming.  He  was  a  young  fellow  at  the  time,  still  in  his  twenties,  out  of 
Maryland,  as  1  recall.  He  just  had  a  small  interest,  maybe  five  percent.  But  that  started  Steve  Wynn  in 
Nevada,  and  he  went  from  there. 

Did  you  eventually  get  rid  of  the  unsavory  people  that  were  in  the  Frontier,  or  did  they  sell  out? 

What  happened  was  Howard  Hughes  decided  to  buy  them  out,  and  naturally  we  encouraged  him 
all  the  way. 


Would  you  tell  us  about  the  original  Circus  Circus  application? 


That  was  an  interesting  application.  That  was  one  of  the  biggest  ones  that  came  along  in  our  new 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


379 


administration.  It  was  also  in  1967,  as  I  recall.  Circus  Circus  was  the  brainchild  of  Jay  Sarno,  who,  along 
with  Nate  Jacobson,  built  Caesars  Palace.  The  Circus  Circus  was  probably  the  first  real  licensee  in  the 
state  that  deliberately  tried  to  be  a  family-themed  hotel-casino.  It  was  originally  just  a  casino;  the  hotel 
was  built  later.  Some  of  the  members  of  our  commission  weren’t  too  happy  about  Circus  Circus’s  idea  of 
mixing  kids  and  adult  gamblers.  And  on  top  of  that  it  had  a  real  adult  aspect  to  it.  There  was  a  closed 
booth,  where  you  could  stick  in  quarters,  push  a  button  and  a  pretty  young  woman  would  stand  up  and 
dance  topless.  And  it  was  right  where  the  kiddie  games  were.  Our  commissioners  weren’t  too  sure  about 
licensing  the  Circus  Circus. 

[laughter] 

My  recollection  is  they  only  gave  them  a  provisional  license — a  conditional  license — for  a  certain 
period.  I  recall  it  had  come  to  the  attention  of  the  Commission  somehow  that  Circus  Circus  had  borrowed 
some  money  from  a  bank,  a  routine  thing,  and  had  not  reported  it  to  the  Commission  as  required.  The 
commission  then  said  they  were  not  going  to  extend  their  license;  they  were  going  to  shut  them  down. 

And  I  regarded  this  as  capital  punishment  for,  in  effect,  jaywalking. 

[laughter] 

I  was  appalled.  I  ran  straight  over  to  the  governor’s  office  and  told  the  governor  and  Bill  Sinnott 
about  it.  The  governor  was  disbelieving.  He  couldn’t  believe  the  Commission  would  do  such  a  thing. 
Fortunately,  when  the  matter  came  up  at  the  meeting,  an  attorney  for  Circus  Circus  produced  a  letter  they 
had  sent  to  one  or  the  other,  the  Board  or  the  Commission,  notifying  them  of  that  loan,  so  they  were  off 
the  hook.  I  don’t  know  what  would  have  happened.  I  guess  the  way  the  majority  of  those  commissioners 
were  sounding,  they  were  not  going  to  renew  their  license  and  the  Circus  Circus  was  going  to  be  shut 
down.  And  that  would  have,  I’m  sure,  produced  a  real  crisis  within  the  administration.  Of  course,  I  don’t 
know  what  the  governor  would  have  done,  but  I  think  he  would  have  gotten  involved  and  would  have 
done  something. 

When  they  first  opened,  they  charged  admission.  Everybody  who  went  through  the  door  had  to 
pay  an  admission.  And,  of  course,  that  was  controversial.  A  lot  of  the  veteran  gamblers  on  the  Strip  said, 
“You  can’t  do  that.  You  can’t  charge  a  good  gambler  admission  to  the  door.”  But  they  did!  Then  when 
Bill  Bennett  and  [William]  Pennington  came  in  and  bought  it  out  they  changed  the  policy.  It  was  free 
admission  after  that. 


Do  you  have  any  interesting  anecdotes  or  recollections  that  you ’d  like  to  talk  about  that  happened  during 
your  time  on  the  Board,  or  before? 

Oh,  gosh,  [laughter]  There  were  so  many.  And  some,  for  one  reason  or  other,  I  would  be  reluctant 
to  talk  about.  One  I  might  mention  was  when  I  was  still  on  the  staff.  I’ll  tell  you  about  an  incident  we  had 
with  a  fellow  named  Edward  Thorpe  who  wrote  a  book  called  Beat  the  Dealer.  In  the  middle  of  winter, 
January  1963,  Ed  Olsen,  chairman  of  the  Board,  got  a  call  from  Mickey  MacDougall,  who  supposedly 
was  a  real  card  expert  and  an  expert  on  magic  and  cheating  and  so  forth.  He  was  in  Las  Vegas  with  Ed 


380 


Thorpe  and  he  said  that  Ed  Thorpe  had  retained  him  to  observe  the  action  while  Ed  Thorpe  was  using  his 
card  counting  method  to  beat  the  twenty-one  games  in  Las  Vegas.  Mickey  MacDougall  told  Ed  Olsen  that 
Thoipe  had  been  cheated  at  quite  a  few  places  down  here,  and  he  wanted  to  come  up  to  Reno  or  Carson 
and  talk  to  Ed  Olsen  about  it.  Ed  said,  “Well,  come  on  up.” 

So  Ed  and  1  went  over  to  Reno  to  a  motel,  the  Bundox,  right  on  the  river,  next  to  the  Holiday 
Hotel-Casino.  Mickey  MacDougall  proceeded  to  tell  us  how  awful  it  was  in  Vegas,  how  much  cheating 
was  going  on  in  the  twenty-one  games  down  here,  and  how  they  had  really  cheated  Thoipe.  But  Thorpe 
was  hot-to-trot  to  go  gamble.  He  didn’t  want  to  stay  and  talk  about  all  this.  He  wanted  to  go  next  door  to 
the  Holiday  and  start  playing,  [laughter]  So  Ed  Olsen  said,  “Go  with  him.”  Thoipe  goes  straight  to  the 
cashier’s  cage  and  bought  quite  a  few  green  twenty-five-dollar  checks.  Then  he  goes  over  to  a  twenty-one 
table  and  proceeds  to  lose  it  all  in  about  fifteen  minutes.  He  lost,  1  don’t  know,  maybe  one  thousand,  two 
thousand  dollars — quite  a  bit.  Then  in  the  door  come  Mickey  MacDougall  and  Ed  Olsen,  and  MacDougall 
says,  “What  happened?” 

Thorpe  says,  “Well,  1  lost  it  all.” 

And  MacDougall  asked  me,  “Did  they  cheat  him?” 

1  said,  “1  don’t  think  so.” 

Then  MacDougall  said  to  Thorpe,  “Well,  you  dummy,  you’re  supposed  to  wait  for  me.  I’m 
supposed  to  be  with  you  to  protect  you.” 

[laughter] 

Then  MacDougall  said,  “Well,  all  right,  let’s  get  going.  Let’s  go  up  the  street.”  Ed  told  me  to  tag 
along  and  observe,  and  so  we  walk  on  up  the  street.  The  first  place  we  go  into  was  the  Golden  Hotel  and 
we  sit  down  at  a  twenty-one  table.  I’m  at  first  base.  Thorpe  is  sitting  at  shortstop.  Mickey  MacDougall’s 
at  third  base.  Ed  Olsen  had  given  me  a  little  money  to  gamble  with  so  I’m  gambling  a  little  bit,  too.  We’re 
playing  along  when  all  of  a  sudden,  I  saw  the  dealer,  a  good-looking  young  woman,  dealing  a  second.  She 
was  bubble-peeking,  and  from  my  first-base  position,  I  could  see  the  top  card  when  she  peeked. 

[laughter] 

My  God!  We  stayed  there  probably  two  hours.  Thoipe  lost  quite  a  bit  of  his  money — a  thousand 
dollars,  maybe.  She  dealt  him  second  after  second.  Now,  I’m  sick  at  my  stomach,  because  naturally  I 
assumed  if  I  see  it,  obviously  Mickey  MacDougall  is  seeing  it  too.  When  we  go  out  the  door,  Thorpe 
turns  to  MacDougall  and  says,  “Wasn’t  she  dealing  me  seconds?” 

And  MacDougall  said,  “No,  she  was  just  lucky.” 

Whew!  [laughter]  I  told  Ed  Olsen  about  that.  I  said,  “Wow.”  I  said,  “I  thought  for  sure  there  was 
going  to  be  a  real,  real  scene  raised.”  And,  of  course,  I  would  have  had  to  say,  yes,  she  was  dealing 
seconds.  Several  months  later  I  became  acquainted  with  the  dealer.  I  asked  her  if  she  remembered  the 
incident.  She  just  smiled  and  winked. 

Ed  Thorpe  made  quite  an  impact  on  the  state  of  Nevada  with  his  card  counting  system.  Did  you  ever 
count  cards  yourself? 


Oh,  sure,  most  every  player  did,  or  at  least  tried.  I  have  a  good  friend  named  Sam  Blazek.  His 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


381 


nickname  is  “Black  Sam” — an  oldtimer.  He  worked  all  over  the  state,  and  the  north  end  of  the  lake,  but 
mostly  in  Las  Vegas.  1  think  he’s  with  an  Indian  gaming  casino  now  back  in  Oklahoma.  He’s  well  into  his 
eighties.  Good  friend  of  mine.  In  the  early  or  middle  1970s  he  ran  a  twenty-one  table  at  one  of  those  little, 
tiny  sawdust  joints  in  North  Las  Vegas.  The  table  maximum  was  ten  dollars,  and  all  they  had  was  one 
twenty-one  table.  So  1  started  playing.  1  remember  the  woman  who  owned  it.  Her  name  was  Marie  Floyd. 
Bless  her  heart,  she  was  the  licensee  and  a  very  sweet  woman.  She  had  a  husband  named  Rush  Floyd,  a 
casino  executive  in  the  Sahara.  Sometimes  he’d  come  down  there  when  he  got  off  duty,  but  he  didn’t 
work  there  regularly.  So  this  one  night  I’m  down  there  visiting  with  Black  Sam,  and  one  thing  leads  to 
another  and  1  start  to  play  some  twenty-one.  1  was  unusually  shaip  that  night  at  counting  the  cards.  So  1 
started  beating  their  brains  out  at  ten  dollars  a  pop.  Finally  she  puts  her  husband  in  to  deal.  He  comes  in 
and  1  continue  to  win.  1  won  their  whole  bankroll  off  their  table.  It  was  about  a  thousand  dollars. 

[laughter] 

[laughter] 

Now  she’s  crying  and  feeling  bad,  so  1  said,  “Here,  Marie,”  and  1  gave  it  all  back  to  her.  “1  was 
playing  for  fun.  1  don’t  want  your  money.” 

[laughter] 

Oh,  she  jumped  for  joy,  and  she  hugged  me  and  kissed  me.  [laughter] 

We  should  point  out,  of  course,  that  counting  cards  is  definitely  not  illegal.  Like  you  say,  anybody  that 
wants  to  be  a  good  card  player  should  keep  track  of  cards. 

Sure,  in  all  card  games:  poker,  pinochle,  bridge,  et  cetera. 

On  September  30,  1969  Paul  Laxalt  announced  that  he  would  not  run  for  governor  in  the  upcoming 
election.  You  were  still  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board  at  that  time.  What  was  your  reaction  to  that 
announcement? 

Well,  naturally  1  was  disappointed.  But  even  though  he  hadn’t  tipped  his  hand  to  me  or  anybody 
else  that  1  really  know  of,  1  wasn’t  too  surprised.  1  knew  he  was  not  happy  being  governor.  1  think  it  had 
less  to  do  with  the  job  itself  than  it  did  with  the  effect  that  he  thought  it  was  having  on  his  family.  But  1 
resigned  immediately.  1  had  been  thinking  about  resigning  anyway.  Being  on  the  Board,  though  in  some 
respects  it  was  a  satisfying  experience,  in  some  it  wasn’t.  It  was  not  satisfying  to  me  personally.  For  one 
thing,  1  couldn’t  afford  it. 

[laughter] 

It  only  paid  fifteen  thousand  dollars,  and  it  just  wasn’t  enough.  You  know,  when  you  travel  a  lot 
you  get  in  social  situations  where  you  can’t  be  a  freeloader  all  the  time.  You  can’t  expect  somebody  else 


382 


to  pick  up  the  check,  you  got  to  do  it  yourself  a  certain  amount  of  the  time.  1  really  couldn’t  afford  it  and  1 
didn’t  get  along  very  well  with  one  of  the  other  persons  on  the  Board.  So  1  had  been  thinking  of  going  to 
the  governor  anyway  and  saying,  “Paul,  I’m  probably  going  to  have  to  go.” 

Were  you  surprised  that  he  didn ’t  ask  your  advice?  He  had  checked  with  you  on  so  many  things  all  his 
political  life. 

Oh,  I  don’t  know.  Sometimes  he  was  that  way;  he  would  like  to  keep  things  under  his  hat  and  to 
himself.  So,  no,  I  wasn’t  really  all  that  surprised  in  that  regard. 

Did  Governor  Laxalt  try  and  talk  you  into  staying  on  the  Board? 

Yes.  A  number  of  people  came  over  to  my  house  and  tried  to  talk  me  out  of  it,  but  my  mind  was 
made  up. 

Who  did  Governor  Laxalt  name  as  your  successor? 

Jack  Stratton,  who  had  been  the  office  manager  for  a  long  time.  Very,  very  capable  fellow.  In 
fact,  when  we  went  on  the  board  in  1 967  the  first  thing  we  did  was  not  only  say  we  were  going  to  keep 
him,  we  gave  him  a  raise  right  on  the  spot  the  first  day. 

What  did  you  do  after  you  left  the  Board? 

I  moved  to  Las  Vegas  and  I  started  my  own  consulting  business.  I  specialize  in  business  and  in 
political  consulting.  And  simultaneously,  a  lifelong  friend  of  mine  from  McGill — originally  from 
McGill — named  Bill  Ireland,  was  named  the  first  football  coach  here  at  UNLV.  And  he  told  me,  “I’ve  got 
to  have  your  help  in  starting  this  program.” 

I  said,  “Sure.”  So  I  got  involved.  I  did  it  on  a  voluntary  basis  for  a  year  or  so,  and  then  the 
university  asked  me  if  I  would  please  come  full  time.  After  I  thought  about  it,  I  said,  “I’m  going  to  have 
to  decide  what  I’m  going  to  do.  Am  I  going  to  go  this  way  or  am  I  going  to  go  into  the  gaming  industry?” 
And  I  decided  to  go  with  the  athletics  department.  I  was  their  fundraiser  and  development  officer,  then 
became  the  associate  athletic  director,  all  the  time  keeping  my  business  and  political  consulting  career 
going. 

Did  you  work  as  a  coach  or  assistant  coach? 

No,  not  as  a  coach;  I  was  in  the  administrative  end  of  the  athletic  department.  In  1994  I  was 
elected  to  the  UNLV  Athletics  Hall  of  Fame,  and  I’m  proud  of  that.  In  fact,  I’m  still  part  time  with  the 
university.  For  the  last  almost  twenty  years  I’ve  been  with  the  museum  and  the  Harry  Reid  Environmental 
Research  Center,  where  I’m  in  development  work.  I  also  lobby  a  little  bit  and  I  try  to  chase  federal  grants 
and  contracts. 


Did  you  ever  work  with  Paul  Laxalt  after  you  resigned  from  the  Board? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


383 


Oh,  sure!  We’re  best  of  friends.  I  worked  in  the  1974  campaign  when  he  replaced  Alan  Bible  in 
the  senate  and  in  his  1980  campaign,  and  I’ve  helped  him  a  lot  with  other  projects. 

1  did  actually  work  some  in  the  gaming  industry.  1  was  court  appointed  to  the  board  of  directors 
of  the  Dunes  Hotels  and  Casinos  in  1978  as  an  independent  director,  and  1  stayed  with  them  from  1978 
until  the  year  2000 — twenty-two  years.  1  was  on  the  audit  committee  on  the  Dunes  board  all  that  time.  1 
also  did  consulting  work  for  a  number  of  the  hotel-casinos:  Binion’s  Horseshoe,  The  Golden  Nugget, 
Hilton  Hotels,  the  MGM,  to  name  a  few. 

What  other  projects  are  you  currently  involved  with,  Mr.  Pearson? 

For  the  last  six  years  I’ve  been  working  on  behalf  of  Governor  Kenny  Guinn.  I  worked  in  his  first 
election  campaign,  and  I  have  worked  with  him  since  he  was  elected.  I’m  winding  that  down  now,  and  I 
will  be  finished  in  January.  Also,  my  wife,  Jerrie,  keeps  me  interested  in  things.  I  was  a  long-time 
bachelor  and  finally  married  in  1991.  Best  move  I  ever  made.  She’s  the  love  of  my  life. 

If  you  had  to  do  it  all  over  again  would  you  work  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board  again?  Was  it  a  good 
experience? 

Oh,  it  was  a  great  experience,  even  though  in  some  respects  it  was  frustrating  and  a  little  bit 
exasperating.  But,  yes,  a  wonderful  experience.  And  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  be  there  during  an  era — 
the  1960s — which  I  think  was  the  most  interesting  and  significant  decade  of  gaming  control  in  Nevada’s 
history. 

Thank  you  very  much  for  your  time. 


You’re  welcome. 


384 


15 

Harry  Reid 


Senator  Harry  Reid  served  as  chairman  of  the 
Gaming  Commission  from  1977  to  1981.  He  was 
appointed  to  the  position  by  Governor  Michael 
O  ’Callaghan  after  serving  as  O  ’Callaghan ’s 
Lieutenant  Governor.  Senator  Reid’s  term  on  the 
Commission  was  a  tumultuous  one  as  operators 
such  as  Frank  Rosenthal,  Al  Sachs,  Allen  Glick, 
James  Tamer,  and  Joe  Agosto  were  creating 
problems  for  gaming  regulators  and  the  state  of 
Nevada  due  to  their  alleged  connections  to 
organized  crime.  Born  in  Searchlight,  Nevada  in 
1939,  Reid  graduated  from  Utah  State  University 
and  earned  a  law  degree  from  George  Washington 
University.  He  won  election  to  the  Nevada  State 
Assembly  followed  by  sendee  as  Lieutenant 
Governor,  Gaming  Commissioner,  and  two  terms  in 
the  U.S.  House  of  Representatives.  He  entered  the 
U.S.  Senate  in  1986,  and  was  re-elected  four  times, 
with  the  final  term  beginning  in  2010. 


Senator  Harry  Reid.  Photo  courtesy  of  Harr y  Reid. 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  afternoon.  My  name  is  Dwayne  Kling.  This  is  Friday,  December  the  thirteenth, 
2002.  I’m  with  Senator  Harry  Reid  in  his  offices  in  the  Federal  Building  in  Reno,  Nevada. 

Senator  Reid,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have  your  permission 
to  make  available  to  the  public  the  tapes  and  the  transcripts  of  the  oral  history  interviews  that  we  are 
about  to  begin  today? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


385 


Harry  Reid:  Yes. 

Thank  you.  Senator,  when  and  where  were  you  born? 

I  was  bom  in  Searchlight,  Nevada,  December  2,  1939. 

Where  did  you  go  to  college  or  university? 

1  went  on  an  athletic  scholarship  to  the  College  of  Southern  Utah,  in  Cedar  City,  Utah.  It  was  then 
a  branch  of  Utah  State  University.  1  then  went  on  an  academic  scholarship  to  complete  my  bachelor’s 
degree  in  Logan,  Utah  at  Utah  State  University.  Following  that,  1  went  to  George  Washington  University, 
where  1  got  a  law  degree.  And  I  have  done  graduate  work  at  UNLV  [University  of  Nevada,  Las  Vegas]  in 
history,  after  that,  with  no  degree. 

When  were  you  appointed  to  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission? 

1  believe  it  was  June,  1977. 

Who  appointed  you  to  the  chair? 

Governor  O’ Callaghan. 

How  long  did  you  serve  as  chairman  of  the  Commission? 

I  believe  I  served  four  years  and  one  month. 

Who  did  you  replace  as  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission? 

Pete  Echeverria. 

You  say  that  Governor  O’ Callaghan  appointed  you  to  the  Commission.  Had  you  known  Governor 
O  ’Callaghan  prior  to  your  appointment? 

He  was  a  government  teacher  of  mine,  my  senior  year  in  high  school.  That  was  his  first  year  of 
teaching.  He  taught  me  government,  and  also  taught  me  how  to  box — to  fight. 

He  was  quite  a  boxer,  wasn ’t  he? 

Yes,  he  really  was. 

During  your  four  years  as  a  chairman,  there  were  several  distinguished  persons  that  served  on  the 
Gaming  Commission  with  you.  Would  you  give  us  the  recollections  of  some  of  those  people?  Do  you 
recall? 


386 


Oh,  I  can  recall  any  number  of  them:  Clare  Haycock,  Walter  Cox,  Jack  Walsh,  George  Swarts, 
Stuart  Engs,  [Richard]  McDougal  from  Lovelock,  Carl  Dodge.  1  can’t  think  of  any  others. 

I  think  that ’s  all. 

Yes. 

Do  you  have  any  special  recollections  of  any  of  those  people  that  you ’d  like  to  tell  us  about? 

1  have  special  recollections  of  every  one  of  them,  [laughter] 

Are  there  any  that  you ’d  care  to  share  with  us,  or  are  there  just  too  many?  Mr.  Cox  was  quite  a 
character. 

Oh,  they  were  all  interesting  people.  Clare  Haycock  is  a  self-made  man.  He’s  a  wealthy  man  now. 
He  is  somebody  that  I  used  to  work  in  service  stations  with,  for  Standard  Stations.  He  got  on  the 
commission  upon  my  recommendation  to  Governor  O’ Callaghan.  And  he  was  there  for  many  years  and 
did  a  really  fine  job.  Walter  Cox  was  an  O’Callaghan  appointee.  He  is  a  former  newspaperman.  He  was 
very  old  when  he  served  on  the  Commission — I’m  sure,  into  his  eighties.  Wonderful,  loveable  man.  Jack 
Walsh  was  the  manager  of  the  Algiers  Hotel,  a  former  Nevada  Highway  patrolman.  He  was  involved  in 
gambling  in  its  early  development  in  Las  Vegas.  He  lived  in  the  Algiers  Hotel  property  that  he  ran,  a  non¬ 
gaming  property  on  the  Strip.  An  interesting  side  note  about  Jack  Walsh  is  that  for  all  the  meetings  we 
had  in  Carson  City,  he  never  flew  to  one  of  them;  he  always  drove.  He  was  afraid  to  fly,  so  he  drove 
every  place.  Stewart  Engs  is  a  heavy-equipment  dealer  up  here  in  northern  Nevada,  a  successful 
businessman.  I  served  with  him  for  not  a  long  time  on  the  Commission,  but  he  was  very  good.  He  quit;  it 
took  too  much  of  his  time.  Richard  McDougal  was  a  successful  rancher.  He  grew  some  kind  of  seed  that 
sold  well.  He  did  this  in  Lovelock,  and  it  sold  around  the  world.  He  was  also  a  very  talented,  well- 
prepared  rancher/businessman.  George  Swarts  was  a  certified  public  accountant.  Senator  Carl  Dodge  was 
a  long-time  senator.  He  retired,  and  he  was  called  into  public  service  by  Bob  List.  And  he  was  my 
successor,  as  I  recall. 

Yes.  When  you  became  chairman,  did  you  institute  any  new  policies  or  procedures  at  the  hearings? 

My  main  attribute  was  making  sure  that  meetings  didn’t  take  long.  We  tried  to  expedite 
everything.  In  fact,  I  ran  into  Cy  Ryan  last  night,  who  was  a  reporter  originally  for  the  United  Press 
International,  covered  gaming  matters  in  Nevada  for  decades,  and  is  now  a  reporter  for  the  Las  Vegas  Sun 
newspaper.  He’s  based  in  Carson  City.  And  he  said  that  he  wanted  to  make  sure  I  got  back  on  the 
Commission,  because  with  everybody  else,  their  meetings  went  too  long. 

[Laughter] 

I  really  worked  the  meetings  quickly.  We  had  some  very  tumultuous  times  during  my  tenure,  and 
as  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission,  we  had  to  close  hotels,  impose  large  administrative  fines.  We 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


387 


did  lots  of  things.  We  held  a  lot  of  hearings  on  policy  issues  like  cooling-off  periods — how  long  you 
should  have  to  wait  after  you  leave  the  Commission  or  Control  Board  before  you  can  go  to  work  for  the 
industry.  1  think  we  did  a  lot  to  get  rid  of  organized  crime  in  the  gaming  industry. 

Prior  to  being  appointed  to  the  Commission,  were  you  aware  of  any  hidden  interests  or  any  organized 
crime  connections  in  Nevada  gaming? 

You  know,  it’s  interesting.  1  was  born  and  raised  here  and  had  been  around  gambling  all  my  life, 
had  been  lieutenant  governor.  1  set  up  the  meeting  between  Howard  Hughes  and  Mike  O’ Callaghan  in 
London.  1  did  that  myself,  and  also  involved  in  that  meeting,  of  course,  was  Phil  Hannifin.  But  even 
though  that  was  the  case,  1  thought  the  term  “organized  crime”  was  something  for  comic  books  or 
magazine  articles.  I  down  deep  didn’t  know  it  really  existed,  or  believed  it  existed.  I  think  if  1  had  a 
shock,  a  surprise,  at  any  given  time  during  my  political  career,  it  would  have  been  recognizing  the 
influence  of  organized  crime  in  Nevada. 

Did  you  feel  it  was  more  in  southern  Nevada  than  northern  Nevada? 

Yes.  The  illegal  gaming,  the  organized  crime  people,  because  there  was  so  much  money  to  be 
made  in  southern  Nevada,  they  seemed  to  go  south.  Of  course,  there  were  some  organized  crime  problems 
in  the  north  in  earlier  years,  but  they  were  relatively  minor  compared  to  the  heavy  involvement  in  Las 
Vegas. 

So  that  was  a  rude  awakening  and  an  early  surprise  when  you  went  on  the  Commission? 

That’s  true. 

During  your  term  as  chairman  you,  as  well  as  all  gaming  regulators,  made  determined  efforts  to  rid 
Nevada ’s  gaming  industry  of  unsavory  characters  and  organized  crime  connections.  I’d  like  to  ask  you 
about  some  of  the  individuals  and  the  properties  they  were  involved  with  that  came  before  you  and  the 
Commission  for  licensing  or  disciplinary  actions  while  you  were  chairman. 

OK. 

Do  you  remember,  or  you  want  to  talk  about  Frank  “Lefty”  Rosenthal  and  his  association,  and  Allen 
Click? 


Rosenthal  was  a  man  who  fixed  college  games.  He’d  been  convicted  of  tampering  with  athletes 
and  fixing  scores,  betting  on  lines  that  were  developed  because  players  didn’t  perform  as  they  should. 
That  was  his  original  crime,  and  he,  during  the  period  of  time  that  1  was  involved  in  the  chairmanship  of 
the  Commission,  was  heavily  involved  in  things  going  on  in  Nevada.  We  didn’t  know  his  involvement, 
totally.  But  Rosenthal,  he  even  looked  mean:  tall,  skinny  guy,  squinty  eyes.  1  have  no  doubt  that  he  was 
capable  of  killing  people.  1  have  no  doubt  that  he  was  involved  in  organized  crime.  And  he  attempted  to 
get  a  license,  and  we  wouldn’t  give  him  a  license.  The  movie  that  they  made  about  him,  Casino,  1 
wouldn’t  see  that.  1  wouldn’t  pay  five  cents  to  see  him  glamorized  in  any  way,  because  he’s  not  a 


388 


glamorous  guy.  He  was  a  thug,  a  high-level ...  he  was  a  criminal. 

1  had  a  number  of  run-ins  with  him,  some  of  which  you  still  see  on  TV  today.  They  keep  running 
the  same  video  over  and  over  again,  after  all  these  years,  of  the  confrontation  1  had  with  him  in  the 
Commission. 

Would  you  tell  us  a  little  about  that  confrontation?  Didn ’t  he  try  and  turn  it  into  a  shouting  match? 

He  was  good  at  diverting  attention  from  his  own  past,  his  own  record.  I  don’t  really  remember.  1 
think  he  wanted  a  hearing,  and  we  postponed  it,  or  he  wanted  to  get  a  license,  and  we  denied  him.  The 
confrontation  1  had  with  him  was  in  Las  Vegas.  We  denied  him  a  license.  As  1  recall,  we  were  in  Reno  or 
Carson  City.  So,  whatever  we  were  doing  at  the  Commission  level,  he  didn’t  like  it.  And  he  had  had  a 
hair  transplant. 

Oh? 


And  so  he  had  a  hat  on,  and  it  made  him  look  more  like  a  criminal  with  that  little  hat  that  he  wore. 
He  had  the  hat  on  because  he’d  had  plugs  put  in  his  hair  so  he  wouldn’t  be  bald.  And  he  said,  “Didn’t  you 
come  to  my  hotel  and  have  lunch?” 

And  I  said,  “1  don’t  know.”  But  the  fact  is  that  1  came  with  Brian  Greenspun  to  have  lunch  with 
him  and  a  man  by  the  name  of  Jerry  May.  It  was  a  meaningless  thing  for  me.  But  the  fact  is,  1  guess  it  was 
meaningful  to  him. 

What  was  he  implying  by  you  coming? 

He  was  implying  that  he  was  my  pal  or  something. 

Oh,  that  you  were  buddy-buddy,  so  you  could .  .  .  . 

Yes.  But  1  was  not  afraid  of  him  from  an  academic  standpoint.  1  was  just  afraid  of  him  because  he 
was  a  thug,  and  I  believed  he’d  killed  people  before.  1  had,  during  the  time  that  1  was  on  the  Commission, 
many  threats  on  my  life.  My  wife  found  a  bomb  on  the  car.  It  was  meant  for  me.  We  had  a  number  of 
telephone  calls  to  my  office.  We  had  to  vacate  the  office.  We  had  to  cover  the  picture  windows  in  our 
home.  1  carried  a  gun  until  1  went  to  Washington.  So  it  was  a  difficult  time,  and  I  don’t  know  if 
Rosenthal — how  closely  he  was  involved  in  all  that. 

1  had  other  problems  where  people  who  wanted  a  gaming  device  tried  to  bribe  me.  They  were 
turned  over  to  the  federal  authorities,  and  it  could  have  been  them,  because  there  were  some  bad  people 
involved  in  that,  too.  They  were  convicted,  by  the  way,  of  bribery.  So  we  had  all  kinds  of  problems  with 
someone  trying  to  hurt  me  physically.  Whether  it  was  Rosenthal  or  not,  1  don’t  know. 

Was  Rosenthal  the  most  vocal  person,  or  the  worst  person  you  ran  into,  as  far  as  denying  them  licenses? 

Oh,  1  don’t  know  if  he’s  the  worst.  There  are  some  people  who  were  more  stealthy  than  he.  He 
was  very  vocal.  He  had  his  own  TV  show.  He  tried  to  buy  his  way  into  high  society.  But  there  were  other 
bad  people.  You  mentioned  Allen  Glick.  Allen  Glick  was  an  extremely  interesting  person.  1  can 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


389 


remember  once  Phil  Hannifin  told  me  that  he  thought  he  had  ice  water  for  blood.  He  passed  a  polygraph 
test. 

Allen  Click  did? 

Yes.  He  was  somebody  that  was  used — very  typical.  Organized  crime  uses  somebody  that  has  a 
good  record,  and  he  did.  We  didn’t  know  he  was  organized  crime,  but  he  was.  There  were  a  lot  of  things 
that  1  learned  about  organized  crime.  Y ou  asked  the  question — 1  thought  that  maybe  when  I  went  on  the 
Commission,  especially  after  having  talked  to  Pete  Echeverria,  he  told  me  all  these  ghost  stories.  I 
thought  Pete  was  just  talking. 

Embellishing? 

Y es,  embellishing,  making  things  worse  than  what  they  were.  But  Pete  was  right.  There  were  all 
kinds  of  strange  things  going  on.  But  1  thought  there  may  have  been  something,  some  involvement  with 
the  Chicago  organized  crime.  1  was  very  surprised  when  a  large  pile  of  wiretaps  came  out  from  the  FBI 
that  the  real  bad  people  during  this  era  were  not  mob  people  from  Chicago,  but  from  Kansas  City — I 
didn’t  even  know  they  had  a  mob  in  Kansas  City — led  by  two  brothers  named  Civella  [Carl  and 
Nicholas],  and  they  were,  obviously,  pretty  bad  people.  On  one  of  the  wiretaps  Glick  says,  “Well,  what 
should  I  do?” 

And  one  of  them  says,  “Sell  the  son  of  a  bitch” — talking  about  the  Stardust  Hotel — so  they  did. 
[Laughter] 

They  absolutely  controlled  everything  Glick  did.  Another  bad  person  during  that  era  was  a  man 
by  the  name  of  Joe  Agosto.  I  had  represented  Agosto’s  wife  in  a  divorce,  previously,  and  I  knew  Joe 
Agosto  a  little  bit  from  that,  because  it  was  a  friendly  divorce.  It  wasn’t  an  adversary  proceeding.  But 
what  I  didn’t  know  is  that  Joe  Agosto  was  bragging  to  these  gangsters  in  Kansas  City  that  he  was  paying 
me — I  don’t  know  how  much  it  was — $10,000  a  week,  or  something.  He  gave  me  a  name.  He  had  names 
that  he  gave  people,  supposedly,  with  this  type  of  communication  they  did  among  gangsters,  I  was  known 
as  “Mr.  Clean.” 

Mr.  Clean? 

Mr.  Clean,  that  was  my  name,  my  gang  name,  or  whatever  they  called  it — and  he  said  he  was 
giving  me  $10,000  a  week.  Joe  Agosto  really  didn’t  exist.  Joe  Agosto  was  a  person  who  had  died,  and  this 
man,  who  had  an  Italian  name — he  was  from  Italy — assumed  his  name,  stole  this  identity.  So  Joe  Agosto 
was  really  a  dead  man.  And  Joe  Agosto  had  done  some  things  in  Las  Vegas  previously.  He  built  the 
Golden  West  Shopping  Center,  and  then  he  came  back  many  years  later  in  the  capacity  of  a  person  who 
purchased  the  Lido  de  Paris  [Folies  Bergere ]  show — I  think  that’s  what  it  was  called — at  the  Tropicana 
Hotel.  He  owned  the  show,  and  the  show  was  a  big  production  number  with  ladies  dancing  around  with 
their  breasts  bobbing  up  and  down  uncovered,  and  other  things.  It  was  a  famous  show,  drew  lots  of 
people.  That  was  his;  he  owned  it. 

And  he  did  a  number  of  very  bad  things.  He  was  tied  into  the  Kansas  City  people,  but  the  one 


390 


thing  he  did  that  was  worse  than  anything  that  I  know  of,  is  there  was  a  wonderful  woman  by  the  name  of 
Mitzie  Stauffer  Briggs.  She  was  the  heir  of  the  Stauffer  chemical  fortune.  And  she  was  interested  in  Las 
Vegas,  and  Joe  Agosto  and  others  wined  and  dined  her.  She  lost  her  entire  fortune  in  Las  Vegas.  She  lost 
everything.  Last  1  heard,  she  was  waiting  tables — a  woman  who  was  extremely  wealthy. 

So  she  bought  into  the  Tropicana? 

Oh,  yes.  She  was  the  principal  owner. 

Principal  owner? 

She  lost  everything. 

So  they  skimmed  it  from  her  one  way  or  the  other? 

Yes.  And  so  that’s  Joe  Agosto.  Joe  Agosto  was  eventually  arrested,  and  he  died  in  prison.  That’s 
a  good  place  for  him  to  be — in  prison. 

So  he  tried  to  smear  your  good  name. 

He  was  a  bad  guy.  Oh,  yes.  He  did  a  good  job,  too.  1  was  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission  at 
the  time,  and  it’s  hard  to  disprove  a  negative — like  the  old  term  says,  “Do  you  still  beat  your  wife?”  Well, 
if  you  say  yes,  it’s  real  bad,  but  if  you  say  no,  it’s  an  acknowledgment  that  you  did  beat  her  at  some  other 
time.  And  that’s  kind  of  the  predicament  1  was  in.  1  mean,  how  do  you  disprove  somebody  giving  you 
$10,000  a  week? 

Yes.  [laughter] 

But  what  was  done  is  the  Gaming  Control  Board  hired  two  retired  Texas  Rangers  to  come  in  and 
investigate  me.  They  hired  the  international  accounting  firm  of  Elmore  Fox  and  Company  [phonetic]  to 
check  all  my  financial  records,  and  they  went  back  to  every  client  that  had  paid  me  more  than  $250.  They 
checked  to  make  sure  1  could  prove  that  1  had  done  the  work,  that  it  was  a  legitimate  billing.  1  had  to 
prove  how  I’d  purchased  my  furniture,  that  1  hadn’t  bought  things  with  cash  from  the  $10,000  a  week  that 
they  were  supposedly  giving  me.  It  went  on  for  quite  some  time,  and  it  was  a  difficult  situation.  But  it  all 
worked  out. 

In  the  long  run,  you  wound  up  looking  better  than  you  did  before,  possibly. 

Well,  I  don’t  know  about  that.  But  at  least  it’s  over  with.  There  were  lots  of  bad  people.  I’ve 
given  you  a  few  of  them. 

How  about  Tony  Spilotro?  Was  he  involved  with  Rosenthal? 


The  answer  is  yes.  Tony  Spilotro,  though  I  didn’t  have  any  dealings  with.  Rosenthal,  Agosto, 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


391 


Glick — I  had  dealings  with  them.  1  knew  them.  Spilotro,  1  almost  had  dealings  with  him.  1  came  a  hair  of 
a  fraction  away  from  doing  something  very  bad.  1  was  asked  by  Jerry  May,  who  was  a  client  of  mine — he 
was  a  public  relations  guy — to  have  lunch  with  Tony  Spilotro.  1  didn’t  know  Tony  Spilotro  from  Bob 
Donahue.  The  name  meant  nothing  to  me.  And  so  lunch  was  set  up  at  the  Las  Vegas  Country  Club,  at  a 
certain  day  and  time,  and  I’m  getting  ready  to  go  out  there,  and  my  friend  says,  “Where  are  you  going?” 

I  said,  “I’m  going  to  lunch.” 

And  he  said,  “With  whom?” 

I  said,  “Jerry  May  and  Tony  Spilotro.” 

He  said,  “ What ?!” 

I  said,  “I’m  going  to  lunch  with  Jerry  May  and  Tony  Spilotro.” 

He  said,  “Oh,  you  can’t  do  that!” 

I  said,  “Why?” 

He  said,  “He’s  a  bad  guy.  He’s  known  as  ‘Ice  Pick  Tony.’  He’s  known  to  ice  pick  people  in  the 
head — hang  them  on  meat  lockers  and  ice  pick  them  in  the  head.  That’s  where  he  got  his  name — he’d  kill 
them.  He’s  a  killer  and  runs  a  lot  of  what  goes  on  in  Las  Vegas  that’s  bad.”  [Editor’s  Note:  Tony  Spilotro 
was  also  known  as  “Tony  the  Ant’’  and  “Tough  Tony.  ”] 

So  I  canceled  the  lunch.  That’s  the  closest  I  came — and,  you  know,  it  would  have  been  a  harmless 
lunch,  but  I  don’t  think  it  would  have  been  very  easy  for  me  to  overcome  the  fact  that  I  was  seen  having 
lunch  with  a  big  gangster. 

Yes. 


But  that’s  how  naive  I  was  about  things  dealing  with  organized  crime,  because  that  meeting  was 
set  up  a  week  or  day  or  two  after  I  had  assumed  the  chairmanship  of  the  Gaming  Commission. 

Oh,  that  soon? 

Yes. 

Was  Jerry  May  a  friend  of  yours  prior  to  that  time? 

Oh,  yes.  I  represented  Jerry  May  for  years.  Jerry  May  also  got  in  trouble  and  eventually  went  to 

prison. 

Oh,  he  did? 

Yes. 

It  wasn ’t  a  very  friendly  thing  to  do,  to  invite  you  to  lunch  with  Spilotro. 

He  was  just,  I  guess,  trying  to  make  himself  look  good. 


Do  you  remember  a  fellow  named  Carl  Thomas? 


392 


Oh,  sure. 

Did  you  have  any  dealings  with  Carl  Thomas? 

I  knew  Carl  Thomas,  but  not  much.  He  was  kind  of  a  man  about  town,  and  1  wasn’t.  He  did  a  lot 
of  things  at  the  university,  and  he  was  well  respected  in  the  gaming  industry.  And  it  was  Joe  Agosto  that 
got  him  in  trouble. 

Oh? 


Because  he  was  working  at  the  Tropicana. 

Oh,  Carl  Thomas  was  working  at  the  Tropicana? 

Yes.  And  that’s  where  he  agreed  to  do  the  skim,  at  the  Tropicana.  He’s  the  one  that  took  the 
money  from  Mitzie  Stauffer  Briggs.  He  knew  how  to  do  it,  you  see.  Others — the  Rosenthals  and  the 
Agostos — didn’t  know  how  to  do  it.  He  knew  how  to  steal. 

Yes. 


And  on  the  wiretap  that  was  picked  up,  he  said,  “1  hate  to  do  this.  This  will  jeopardize  my  whole 
career,”  or  words  to  that  effect.  And  it  did,  because  someone  was  listening. 

Well,  you  say  he ’s  a  man  about  town.  He  was  well  known  and  well  respected. 

Well  respected,  that’s  right.  1  may  have  said  hello  to  him  or  something,  but  I  didn’t  know  him. 

He  never  came  up  for  licensing  during  your  tenure? 

1  don’t  remember  anything  about  that.  No.  If  he  did,  1  don’t  remember. 

So  it  must  have  been  a  shock  to  a  lot  of  the  city  of  Las  Vegas. 

Oh,  it  sure  was.  Yes. 

Do  you  recall  a  person  named  James  Tamer,  involved  with  the  Aladdin? 

Jimmy  Tamer — yes,  1  do.  1  forgot  about  the  Aladdin.  We  closed  the  Aladdin. 

Yes. 


The  Aladdin  wasn’t  tied  into  Kansas  City.  The  mob  tie  there  came  out  of  Detroit.  There  was  a 
guy,  as  1  recall —  1  think  the  guy’s  name  was  Goldberg,  or  something  like  that. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


393 


Goldfarb,  maybe.  Charles  Goldfarb? 

Yes,  that’s  what  it  was.  He  was  a  pawnbroker  or  something  in  Detroit.  And  he  and  Jimmy  Tamer 
were  involved  in  the  ownership  of  the  Aladdin  Hotel.  We  thought  it  was  owned  by  people  out  of  St. 

Louis.  1  may  even  have  met  Jimmy  Tamer  over  the  years.  I  don’t  recall  doing  that.  He  was  represented  by 
a  fine  Las  Vegas  lawyer  by  the  name  of  Gary  Logan,  but  1  don’t  really  remember  him  too  much  more 
than  just  what  1  told  you.  Their  case  was  pretty  easy  to  prove.  There  wasn’t  much  there.  We  had,  again, 
wiretaps.  And  that’s  how  we  proved  their  connection.  And  we  closed  that  hotel. 

Is  that  one  Judge  Harry  Claiborne  got  involved  in? 

Y es,  he  issued  an  injunction  to  stay  the  closure,  but  it  got  closed  anyway;  it  just  took  a  little  bit 
longer.  Claiborne  was  a  federal  judge  at  the  time. 

Yes.  It  seemed  like  he  opened  it  and  closed  it,  and  had  a  little  problem,  but  you  say  it  didn  7  take  long? 

No,  as  1  recall,  we  accomplished  what  we  wanted.  1  remember  doing  that.  1  was  the  chairman,  and 
1  ordered  the  closure  of  the  hotel,  banged  the  gavel,  meeting  adjourned,  and  got  out  of  there  real  quick, 
because  there  was  press  from  all  over  the  country  there.  They  didn’t  tell  me  1  had  to  sign  the  orders. 

Oh,  the  orders. 

So  they  had  to  find  me  to  get  the  orders.  That  slowed  things  down  a  few  minutes,  [laughter] 

Did  you  ever  come  in  contact  with  Judge  Claiborne  over  that  incident? 

No. 

Do  you  remember  a  fellow  named  Frank  Master  ana? 

Not  really. 

He  was  a  large  bookmaker  and  a  .  .  .  . 

1  remember  the  name,  but  1  don’t  remember  anything  about  him,  no. 

How  about  Al  Sachs  and  Herb  Tobman? 

Oh,  sure.  1  knew  Al  Sachs.  1  think  Al  just  died  not  long  ago. 

Oh,  he  did? 

Herb  Tobman,  of  course,  I’ve  known  for  many,  many  years.  He  was  a  great  athlete.  Herb  Tobman 
was  a  great  athlete. 


394 


Oh,  is  that  right? 

I  remember  as  a  young  boy  I  would  come  from  Searchlight  and  watch  him  and  my  brother  play 
softball,  fast -pitch  softball.  During  those  days,  like  you  came  here  to  play  hardball,  the  joints  in  Las 
Vegas  would  bring  in  people  to  play  softball.  It  was  a  big  sport. 

Oh. 


And  Tobman  was  one  of  those  people  that  came  in  from  outside  the  state.  He  had  played 
basketball,  and  he  was  just  an  outstanding  and  gifted  athlete.  He  still  is.  Herb  must  be  seventy-five,  eighty 
years  old.  I’ll  bet  he  could  beat  either  one  of  us  in  a  handball  game.  He  just  is  a  great  athlete.  So,  yes,  I’ve 
known  Herb  for  years.  He  has  a  great  personality,  wonderful  guy.  And  he  was  in  a  number  of  different 
businesses  over  the  years,  furniture  ...  I  don’t  remember  all  the  business  end,  but  he  and  A1  Sachs  had 
known  each  other  for  years,  and  they  came  into  ownership  after  some  of  the  Argent  peoples — the  name 
the  corporation  was  called — were  booted  out.  He  and  A1  Sachs  took  over. 

There  were  some  who  said  that  A1  Sachs  was  an  organized  crime  guy.  1  don’t  know  that  to  be  the 
case.  I’ve  talked  pretty  frankly  about  some  of  these  other  people  because  we  could  see  that,  and  it  was 
clear.  1  don’t  know  that  about  A1  Sachs.  1  always  kind  of  liked  him,  and  I  don’t  know  if  he’s  connected  or 
not.  Now,  Herb  Tobman  wasn’t  connected.  Herb  Tobman  may  have  been  involved  in  some  of  the  things 
Sachs  was  doing.  If  he  was,  1  don’t  know  anything  about  it.  But  Herb  Tobman  was  just  a  person  involved 
in  lots  of  different  charitable  things  over  many,  many  years  in  Las  Vegas.  I  think  he  made  a  few  bucks  in 
the  Stardust  deal,  although  1  don’t  really  fully  understand  all  that  went  on  between  him  and  Sachs. 

Were  they  eventually  asked  to  leave  the  Stardust?  Was  their  license  revoked,  or  do  you  recall? 

I  don’t  know  how  it  came  about.  I  don’t  think  it  was  during  my  tenure  there,  but  I  do  think  that 
they  were  asked  to  give  up  their  license.  There  may  have  been  a  disciplinary  proceeding,  and  they  sold 
out  or  something.  1  don’t  really  know  what  happened.  1  know  they  don’t  run  the  hotel  anymore. 

No. 


Herb’s  daughter  is  married  to  John  Moran  Jr.,  whose  father  was  a  long-time  sheriff  of  Clark 

County. 

That ’s  interesting. 

Yes.  She’s  a  lovely,  sweet  woman,  Marilyn  Moran.  And  John  Moran,  her  husband,  is  an 
outstanding  lawyer,  and,  of  course,  John’s  father — everybody  loved  John  Moran. 

Oh. 


He  could  have  run  for  sheriff  for  another  hundred  years,  and  no  one  would  touch  him.  And 
Marilyn  Tobman  is  also  a  nice  lady. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


395 


Shortly  after  you  took  office,  there  was  a  question  about  a  loan  made  to  the  Tropicana  hotel  by  Jack 
Urich,  who  had  applied  to  become  a  partner  in  the  Tropicana. 

That  was  one  of  the  first  things  I  did  there.  I  remember  that  very  clearly. 


Was  it? 


Two  of  the  things  1  did  fairly  quickly  were  quite  controversial:  the  first  thing  was  Paul 
Lowden  ....  Paul  Lowden  had  been  involved  in  music.  1  don’t  know  if  he’s  a  band  leader  or  something 
like  that.  And  he  started  getting  into  the  management  of  hotels.  At  the  very  first  meeting  that  1  ever 
conducted  as  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission,  there  were  a  number  of  things  on  the  agenda,  but  the 
one  thing  on  the  agenda  that  the  five  commissioners  had  to  handle  was  the  licensing  of  Paul  Lowden.  And 
the  Gaming  Control  Board  had  turned  him  down. 

Yes. 


And  to  overturn  a  ruling  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  takes  a  unanimous  vote.  I’m  a  brand  new 
chairman  of  the  Commission.  Everybody  sitting  there  is  a  veteran. 

Yes. 


They  had  been  there  a  long  time.  And  I’m  reading  the  papers  on  this  guy,  Paul  Lowden.  What’s 
wrong  with  him?  The  Gaming  Control  Board  said  they  didn’t  like  him,  and  they  were  going  to  turn  him 
down  because  he  had  gone  out  and  gotten  his  money  from  financial  promoters.  I  said  to  myself,  “Well 
what’s  wrong  with  a  promoter?”  I  thought  to  myself,  “Well,  if  you’re  going  to  have  a  mine,  and  you  need 
money  for  it,  you  go  out  and  promote  to  raise  the  money  so  you  can  dig  the  dirt.  If  you  want  to  build  an 
office  building,  you  go  out  and  promote  yourself  so  you  can  get  money  to  build  that.  So  what’s  wrong 
with  raising  money  from  promoters?” 

And  I  said  that.  I  said  words  to  the  effect  of,  “An  eighth-grade  civics  student  could  understand 
this  is  a  lousy  ruling  that  we’re  going  to  deny  somebody  a  license  because  he  raised  his  money  through 
financial  promoters,  people  whose  business  is  to  raise  money.”  And  so  it  was  a  big  deal.  We  overturned 
the  Control  Board,  which  isn’t  done  very  often. 

The  other  thing  that  I  remember  that  was  very  controversial  was  Jack  Urich,  something  that  he 
had  with  oil.  I  think  it  was  oil  or  something  like  that  in  Southern  California,  but  he  had  money.  And  the 
Tropicana  Hotel  was  going  to  go  broke  if  it  didn’t  get  an  infusion  of  cash.  It  needed  money.  And  Jack 
Urich  had  agreed  to  do  that.  The  Gaming  Control  Board  thought  that  they  hadn’t  had  enough  time  to 
check  out  his  money,  and  that  maybe  he  wasn’t  a  good  guy. 

I  looked  at  it  a  little  differently.  I  said,  “This  guy’s  not  going  to  become  an  owner.  He’s  lending 
money.  And  we  have  a  choice  of  okaying  this  loan  or  closing  the  hotel,  putting  thousands  of  people  out  of 
work.  I’m  going  to  go  ahead  and  see  if  I  can  get  my  commissioners  to  go  with  me  and  approve  the  loan.” 
And  they  did.  So  the  Control  Board,  you  see,  Phil  Hannifin  and  all  those  guys,  who  I  like  very  much,  they 
got  their  way  with  everything  until  I  came  along. 


396 


Oh. 


Until  1  came  along,  whatever  they  did,  it  was  over.  The  Commission  never  challenged  anything 
they  did.  Well,  1  challenged  everything  they  did.  And  they  were  really  upset  with  me  on  the  Jack  Urich 
thing.  1  can  remember  soon  as  it  was  over:  Bang!  “Meeting  adjourned.”  Oh,  they  were  so  upset  at  me.  1 
had  the  votes.  That’s  all  that  counts. 

Yes. 


1  only  needed  a  few  votes,  and  1  got  it.  And  so,  yes,  1  remember  that  very  well.  1  kept  the  hotel 
open,  and  I’m  glad. 

Didn  ’t  Phil  Hannifin  resign  shortly  after  that? 

I  don’t  know.  I  don’t  remember  when  Phil  resigned.  He’d  been  on  the  board  a  long  time. 

Quite  a  while? 

Yes. 

It’s  very  important  to  keep  the  employees  working ,  plus  it  also  generates  a  little  tax  revenue  for  the  State 
of  Nevada. 

Yes.  1  wasn’t  going  to  let  the  hotel  close  unless  1  had  some  good  reason  for  doing  it.  The  other 
thing  that  we  established  at  the  Aladdin,  that  we  didn’t  have  in  place  at  the  Tropicana,  was  the 
ability  ...  if  the  state  closes  a  hotel,  what  are  you  going  to  do,  just  put  all  those  people  out  of  work?  And 
what  we  did  at  the  Aladdin  is  1  had  developed  a  scenario  so  we  could  establish  a  receiver,  a  state- 
appointed  receiver,  and  that  person  could  run  the  hotel.  And  that’s  what  we  did  at  the  Aladdin,  and  that 
worked  out  quite  well.  Leo  Lewis  was  the  guy  that  we  had  run  the  place  for  quite  some  time,  and  also  we 
had  another  person,  Ed  Nigro.  So  that’s  something  1  developed. 

That  was  a  good  idea ,  and  it 's  been  used  countless  times  since  then.  Of  course,  Del  Webb  had  a 
management  team  at  one  time  some  place  or  other ,  and ,  I  think,  the  Boyd  family. 

I  don’t  remember. 

I  think  they  went  in  and  ran  a  place  somewhere.  You  mentioned  those  two  places,  the  Aladdin  and  the 
Tropicana.  Were  there  any  other  incidences  where  you  remember  keeping  a  place  open? 

[laughter]  I  don’t  know.  1  can’t  remember  all  of  them.  All  1  know  is  that  the  Commission  was 
never  looked  at  the  same  after  we  did  that  with  Paul  Lowden  and  Jack  Urich,  and  there  were  other  things. 
I  did  not  want  to  be  a  rubber  stamp  for  the  Control  Board.  And  I  wasn’t. 


Well .... 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


397 


I  rebelled  all  the  time.  And  sometimes  it  was  kind  of  difficult,  because  1  had  to  get  four  other 
commissioners  to  go  along  with  me,  because  it  all  usually  had  to  be  unanimous. 

You  have  to  recommend  a  denial ,  and  it  has  to  be  unanimous. 

Yes.  If  they  recommend  denial,  it  has  to  be  unanimous,  [laughter] 

Well,  people  have  said  it’s  a  two-tier  regulatory >  system. 

1  know,  but  it  was  a  bad  system.  And  maybe  it’s  gotten  a  little  better.  We  had  the  same  lawyers 
that  they  had.  That  was  not  a  good  situation.  So  I  had  to  become  my  own  lawyer  part  of  the  time. 

Yes,  the  same  attorney  general  or  deputy  attorney  general  represented  both. 

Yes,  that  wasn’t  good. 

Well,  you ’ve  kind  of  touched  on  this  briefly.  I  was  going  to  ask  you  about  the  relationship  between  the 
Gaming  Control  Board  and  its  staff  with  the  Gaming  Commission. 

Well,  1  had  the  highest  respect  for  those  people  who  served  on  it,  and  they  were  full-time 
people —  we  were  part-time.  But  the  reason  the  Board  and  Commission  were  established  is  so  that  there 
would  be — I  thought  we,  the  Gaming  Commission,  were  the  board  of  directors.  They,  the  Gaming 
Control  Board,  were  the  officers  of  the  coiporation.  That’s  how  I  looked  at  it. 

Yes. 


And  the  board  of  directors,  as  I  considered  myself,  we  don’t  always  have  to  follow  what  the 
officers  think  we  should  do.  That’s  basically  how  I  looked  at  it. 

Yes. 


The  Board  felt  that  they  were  the  board,  the  commission,  the  jury,  the  prosecutor — they  felt  they 
were  everything.  I  don’t  follow  the  Commission  that  closely  anymore,  but  I  think  that  during  my  four 
years  there  they  knew  one  thing — that  is,  that  we  were  not  the  rubber  stamp  of  the  Control  Board. 

They  brought  the  facts  or  the  data  or  the  information  to  you,  to  the  Commission,  and  you  made  your 
decision  from  there. 

Right. 

Well,  Phil  Hannifin  was  chairman  part  of  your  time  there,  and  I  think  Roger  Trounday  was  chairman  of 
the  board  the  rest  of  the  time. 


398 


Right. 

You  worked  with  Roger  Trounday  pretty  closely,  didn  ’tyou? 
Yes.  And  I  worked  with  Phil  even  closer. 


Closer. 


You  know,  I’m  the  one  that,  as  1  said,  set  up  the  meeting  with  him  and  O’Callaghan  and  Howard 
Hughes.  1  did  that.  So  1  worked  with  Phil  quite  closely,  and  I  like  him  a  lot.  He  kind  of  dropped  out  of 
sight.  1  haven’t  had  a  lot  of  dealings  with  him,  nor  has  anyone  else.  He’s  been  kind  of ...  . 

A  recluse? 

Yes,  not  around  very  much.  But  1  was  part  of  state  government  when  O’ Callaghan  and  I  brought 
him  into  state  government.  Roger  Trounday  was  assistant  principal  out  here  at  a  high  school  when  we 
brought  him  into  state  government.  1  like  Roger  a  great  deal.  He’s  a  fine  man,  as  is  Phil  Hannifin,  but  1 
didn’t  always  agree  with  him. 

[laughter]  Doesn ’t  mean  you  have  to  agree  with  him  just  because  you  like  him,  right? 

Yes.  Or  dislike  him. 

Or  dislike.  I  have  a  couple  other  instances  here  where  the  Commission  disagreed  with  the  Gaming 
Control  Board.  I’d  like  to  read  them  off  and  see  if  you ’d  care  to  comment  on  them.  [Reading]  “In  August 
of  1978,  the  Gaming  Control  Board  recommended  that  the  race  and  sports  book  at  the  Stardust  and 
Fremont  Hotel-Casinos  be  stripped  of  their  license.  The  Commission  instead  voted  to  fine  the  operation 
$100, 000  and  let  it  continue  to  operate.  ”  Do  you  recall  that? 

1  recall  we  did,  on  a  couple  of  different  occasions  with  Argent  properties,  we  affixed  fines.  There 
was  one  time  when  we  assessed  them  a  $700,000  administrative  penalty.  1  don’t  remember  when  that 
was,  but  we  did  that.  At  that  time  it  was  the  largest  administrative  fine  in  the  history  of  the  country.  So 
there  were  times  that  we  did  that.  I  don’t  really  remember  all  the  relevant  facts  of  that. 

That  one  you  mentioned  about  the  $700, 000  fine,  that  was  another  one  I  was  going  to  bring  up,  because 
the  board  recommended  a  $12  million  fine  against  the  Argent  corporation  and  Allen  Click. 

Yes.  Well,  maybe  we  should  have  fined  them  more,  but  ours  was  still  the  largest  fine  in  the 
history  of  the  country  up  to  that  time. 

Also,  this  one  in  1979, 1  believe  Roger  [Trounday]  was  the  chairman  of  the  board  then.  In  1979  the  Board 
recommended  for  denial  the  application  of  Al  Sachs  and  Herb  Tobman  to  purchase  the  Stardust  and  the 
Fremont,  and  then  the  Commission  okayed  the  purchase. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


399 


Oh,  is  that  right?  OK. 

You  and  I  discussed  that  a  little  bit  earlier. 

Yes.  I  told  you  my  relationship  with  Tobman.  It  was  very  close.  Sachs,  1  had  no  relationship  with, 
but  then  1  knew  who  he  was.  So  1  don’t  really,  again,  know  why  we  overruled  the  Board.  But  obviously, 
there  must  have  been  good  reasons. 

Yes.  When  Frank  Sinatra  was  licensed  as  a  key  employee  at  Caesar ’s  Palace,  there  was  an  editorial  in 
the  Reno  paper  that  said  that  you  showed  poor  judgement  in  singing  the  praises  of  Mr.  Sinatra  and 
okaying  his  license. 

Yes,  that  was  very,  very  interesting — the  investigation  of  Frank  Sinatra.  It  was  at  the  time  the 
most  expensive  investigation  the  gaming  authorities  had  ever  conducted.  All  over  the  world  we  sent 
agents.  And  we  couldn’t  find  anything  wrong.  1  did  sing  the  praises  of  Sinatra.  1  met  him  at  the  hearings, 
you  know,  but  1  never  knew  Frank  Sinatra,  never  liked  his  singing. 

Yes. 


1  don’t  like  his  singing — still  don’t. 
[laughter]  You  ’re  one  in  a  million. 


1  never  have.  Fle’s  not  my  kind  of  singer.  1  liked  his  movie  acting.  He  was  very  good. 


Yes. 


1  didn’t  like  his  singing.  But  1  found  him  to  be  a  most  charitable,  good  person — not  publicly.  He 
picked  fights  with  people — and,  you  know,  physically.  But  as  far  as  helping  people  who  were  down  and 
out  he  was  wonderful.  And  I  said  nice  things  about  him,  never  regretted  a  minute  having  done  that. 

I  think  Frank  Sinatra  was  maligned.  1  think  a  lot  of  his  persona  was  generated  by  public  relations  people 
to  make  him  kind  of  sexy. 

Yes. 


But  we  couldn’t  find  anything  wrong  with  him.  We  tried.  We  absolutely  tried.  I  don’t  remember 
the  editorial  in  the  Reno  Gazette-Journal.  They  usually  write  nice  things  about  me.  And  a  lot  of  people  up 
here  didn’t  like  Sinatra,  because  he  bashed  somebody  around  and  had  some  ties,  they  thought,  to 
Giancana  years  ago.  But  our  investigation,  professionally  done,  costing  millions  of  dollars,  never  found 
anything  wrong. 

I  think  some  of  the  people  were  still  concerned  because  of  that  incident  at  the  Cal-Neva  Lodge,  which  was 
close  to  twenty  years  ago. 


400 


A  long  time  ago.  Yes.  So  that’s  a  thing  1  feel  very  good  about.  My  only  regret  is  that  somebody 
sent  me  a  poem  about  Frank  Sinatra,  and  1  read  that  damn  thing. 

Oh? 

1  always  felt  so  stupid  having  read  that  poem,  which  was  pretty  bad. 

Was  it  a  laudatory  poem? 

Yes. 

[laughter]  And  poorly  written,  besides. 

Yes.  And  that’s  why  I  feel  bad  about  it. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


401 


16 

Michael  Rumbolz 


Michael  Rumbolz,  who  was  born  in  Biloxi,  Mississippi,  in 
1954,  was  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board  on 
January  2,  1985.  A  little  over  two  years  later,  he  was 
named  chairman  of  the  Board,  the  youngest  person  ever  to 
be  named  to  that  position.  Rumbolz  had  financed  his  way 
through  the  University  of  Nevada,  Las  Vegas  first  by 
working  as  a  busboy  and  waiter  in  the  steak  house  of  the 
Stardust  Hotel  and  Casino  and  later  as  a  poker  dealer  at 
the  Golden  Nugget.  He  then  earned  a  law  degree  from  the 
University  of  Southern  California.  Rumbolz  was  a  deputy 
attorney  general  on  the  staff  of  Attorney  General  Brian 
McKay  prior  to  his  appointment  to  the  Board  by  Governor 
Richard  Bryan.  After  retiring  from  the  role  of  regulator, 
Rumbolz  sen’ed  in  several  key  positions  with  gaming 
industry  giants  including  Trump  Enterprises,  Circus 
Circus,  the  Windsor  Casino  Consortium,  Anchor  Gaming, 
and  Acme  Gaming. 


Michael  Rumbolz.  Photo  courtesy  of  Michael  Rumbolz. 


Dwayne  Kling:  I’m  in  Las  Vegas,  Nevada.  I’m  currently  at  the  Tropicana  Hotel  to  interview  Michael 
Rumbolz,  former  chairman  of  the  Nevada  Gaming  Control  Board. 

Mr.  Rumbolz,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have  your  permission 
to  record  the  interview  that  we  are  about  to  begin  today  on  July  17,  2002? 


Michael  Rumbolz:  Yes. 


402 


When  and  where  were  you  born,  Mike? 

I  was  bom  March  20,  1954  in  Biloxi,  Mississippi,  and  my  family  moved  to  Las  Vegas  when  1  was 
in  the  sixth  grade. 

Did  you  attend  school  here  in  Las  Vegas? 

Yes.  1  went  to  school  two  years  in  Carson  City  and  Reno,  but  ever  since  the  sixth  grade  I’ve  been 
in  Las  Vegas. 

Did  you  go  to  the  University  of  Nevada,  Las  Vegas? 

1  did.  1  have  a  degree  in  political  science  from  UNLV. 

When  you  were  going  to  college,  or  when  you  were  growing  up  in  Las  Vegas,  did  you  work  in  any  of  the 
casinos? 

1  did.  1  started  as  a  busboy  at  the  Stardust  Hotel,  and  then  later  I  worked  as  a  waiter  in  the  steak 
house  at  the  Stardust  Hotel  until  1  reached  the  age  of  twenty -one.  While  1  was  finishing  college,  1  dealt 
poker  at  the  Golden  Nugget.  Then  when  1  was  attending  law  school  I  was  a  blackjack  dealer  at  the  Circus 
Circus. 

When  you  were  at  the  Stardust  were  Al  Sachs,  Herb  Tobman,  and  “Lefty  ”  Rosenthal  working  there? 

Yes,  they  were.  Herb  Tobman  actually  hired  me  as  a  busboy  and  then  promoted  me  to  waiter.  He, 
at  that  time,  was  the  food  and  beverage  director.  Allen  Glick  was  the  owner  at  that  time.  Al  Sachs  was 
involved  in  management,  and  “Lefty”  Rosenthal,  or  Frank  Rosenthal,  was  also  there. 

What  was  Frank  Rosenthal ’s  position  at  that  time? 

His  position,  as  1  recall,  was  general  manager,  and  then  later  he  was  entertainment  director.  It  was 
pretty  clear,  though,  as  an  employee,  that  Frank  was  the  boss  of  the  entire  place.  If  he  asked  you  to  do 
something  you  did  it.  [laughter] 

Where  did  you  obtain  your  law  degree? 

From  the  University  of  Southern  California.  In  1980  1  graduated  and  came  back  to  Las  Vegas  and 
practiced  law  for  about  three  years  with,  at  that  time,  Jones,  Jones,  (Mel)  Close  &  Brown. 

Did  they  have  quite  a  few  casino  clients? 

They  did.  While  1  was  in  private  practice  we  had  a  variety  of  clients  that  were  in  the  gaming 
industry,  but  we  also  handled  quite  a  few  acquisitions.  We  handled  the  purchase  of  the  Sands  Hotel  by  the 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


403 


Pratt  brothers  from  Texas.  We  handled  the  purchase  of  the  Aladdin  for  Ed  Torres  and  Wayne  Newton, 
and  also  handled  the  purchase  of  the  El  Rancho  for  Ed  Torres.  At  that  time  it  was  the  Silver  Bird.  And  we 
also  handled  the  estate  of  Major  Riddle.  He  owned  the  Silver  Bird,  the  Silver  Nugget,  and  a  variety  of 
hotel-casinos.  Mel  Close  was  the  executor  of  the  estate. 

Is  that  one  reason  you  went  to  work  for  that  firm,  because  they  had  so  many  casino  clients? 

That’s  exactly  right.  After  I  received  my  law  degree  1  wanted  to  practice  gaming  law  and  be 
involved  with  casino  operations,  and  that  firm  and  one  other  at  the  time,  Lionel  Sawyer  &  Collins,  were 
probably  the  two  firms  that  had  the  most  gaming  clients,  and  that’s  why  1  went  to  work  there.  While  1  was 
working  there  1  was  dealing  principally  with  regulatory  law,  with  an  emphasis  on  gaming. 

Did  you  eventually  go  to  work  in  the  attorney  general’s  office? 

Y es,  it  was  actually  pretty  strange  the  way  that  occurred.  Brian  McKay  had  been  elected  attorney 
general.  Brian  McKay  had  been  a  newcomer  to  Nevada  politics,  had  never  run  a  political  race  before  and 
ended  up  beating  a  seasoned  veteran  of  politics,  who  also  was  a  member  of  a  family  that  had  been 
involved  in  Nevada  politics  for  quite  a  while.  So  Brian  getting  elected  was  a  shock,  1  think,  to 
everybody — not  the  least  of  which  was  Brian,  [laughter]  He  was  sort  of  shocked  that  he  had  actually  won 
it.  But  he  was  very  close  friends  with  a  partner  in  the  law  firm,  Joe  Brown.  And  he  and  Joe  had  talked 
about  the  chief  of  the  gaming  division,  and  Joe  had  recommended  me  for  that  spot.  Brian  and  I  discussed 
it,  and  I  explained  to  Brian  that  at  the  time  that  there  was  a  man  in  the  gaming  division  of  the  attorney 
general’s  office  who  I  thought  was  perfect  material  to  become  chief.  His  name  was  Jack  Godfrey.  So  I 
told  Brian  that  Jack  Godfrey  should  be  his  chief,  but  that  if  Jack  said  no,  that  I  should  be  his  chief. 

We  talked  for  about  half  an  hour,  and  a  week  later  Brian  came  back  to  me  and  said,  “Well,  Jack 
decided  to  take  the  position  and  I’m  going  to  take  your  advice.”  [laughter]  I  said,  “That’s  pretty  smart.” 
And  he  then  offered  me  the  position  of  chief  deputy  attorney  general  for  southern  Nevada,  which  was 
actually  a  higher  position  in  the  office,  because  it  was  over  all  of  southern  Nevada,  including  the  gaming 
division,  which  I,  of  course,  immediately  accepted,  [laughter] 

You  must  have  been  fairly  young  at  that  time. 

I  was  twenty-eight,  [laughter]  And  I  was  pretty  fresh,  [laughter] 

Had  you  known  Brian  McKay  before? 

I  had  never  met  him  until  the  day  he  interviewed  me. 

You  must  have  made  a  good  first  impression. 

I  guess,  [laughter]  Either  that  or  else  I  buffaloed  him. 

So  you  were  working  in  the  attorney  general ’s  office  prior  to  being  appointed  to  the  Board. 


404 


I  was.  I  was  in  the  attorney  general’s  office  for  two  full  years.  A  year  and  a  half  of  that  was  in  the 
central  office  in  Las  Vegas,  where  1  actually  administered  southern  Nevada,  and  gave  regulatory  advice  to 
a  variety  of  agencies.  But  then  six  months  prior  to  my  going  on  the  Board,  Jack  Godfrey  quit.  Actually,  it 
was  the  end  of  the  term  and  he  said,  “I’ve  had  enough.”  And  he  left  and  1  took  a  demotion  to  become 
chief  of  the  gaming  division,  because  that  was  where  I’d  always  wanted  to  go.  So  five  and  a  half  months 
into  that  role  was  when  I  had  an  interview  with  Governor  Bryan  about  whether  or  not  I  would  go  on  the 
Gaming  Control  Board.  So  1  went  from  being  head  of  southern  Nevada  to  being  head  of  gaming  to  being 
on  the  Gaming  Control  Board. 

When  you  were  in  the  attorney  general’s  office  were  you  involved  in  any  well-known  cases? 

Probably  the  best -known  case  would  have  been  the  Stardust  license  revocation,  and  the 
revocation  of  the  licenses  of  both  Mr.  Sachs  and  Mr.  Tobman.  That  was  the  highest  profile.  Prior  to  that 
we’d  had  a  variety  of  cases  involving  medical  malpractice  and  revocation  of  doctors’  licenses  and  schools 
that  were  being  set  up  to  advise  people  not  to  pay  their  taxes,  where  we  revoked  them  and  threw  them  out 
of  the  state.  But  the  highest  profile  would  have  been  the  Stardust. 

Was  Allen  Glick  gone  by  that  time? 

He  was  gone.  That’s  correct.  Sachs  and  Tobman  were  running  it  under  Trans-Sterling. 

Was  “Lefty”  Rosenthal  with  them  then? 

“Lefty”  actually  was  gone  by  the  time  we  went  for  the  revocation.  Most  of  the  allegations  against 
both  Sachs  and  Tobman  had  to  do  with  not  cleaning  up  what  we  had  identified  to  them  as  significant 
accounting  problems  within  the  organization,  including  what  we  believed  to  be  skimming. 

Was  working  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board  a  goal  that  you  had  set  for  yourself? 

I  don’t  know  that  1  set  that  as  a  goal,  but  it  certainly  was  something  that  I  admired  other  people 
doing.  I  had  seen — and  by  this  time  1  had  actually  had  them  as  clients — a  variety  of  people  in  those  roles, 
and  always  thought  that  that  would  be  a  tremendous  way  to  give  back  to  the  state.  Perhaps  I  should 
digress.  When  1  went  to  law  school  1  was  a  member  of  the  WICHE  program,  the  Western  Interstate 
Council  on  Higher  Education,  which  both  gave  me  stipends  to  go  to  law  school  out  of  state,  and  also 
helped  underwrite  some  of  my  tuition  for  having  gone  out  of  state,  because  at  that  time  Nevada  had  no 
law  school.  And  part  of  that  grant  and  stipend  required  me  to  come  back  and  practice  in  the  state,  but  I 
could  have  satisfied  that  in  private  practice.  It  just  always  seemed  to  me  that  doing  something  on  the 
public  side  would  have  been  better  payment.  And  so  for  me  going  on  the  Control  Board  was  to  some 
degree  a  payback  of  what  the  state  had  already  provided  me. 

Let ’s  go  back  to  your  interview  with  Governor  Richard  Bryan. 

Well,  to  set  the  stage  a  little  bit,  Brian  McKay  was  a  Republican  and  was  the  highest  elected 
officer  of  the  Republican  Party  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  And  Richard  Bryan,  former  attorney  general,  then 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


405 


governor,  was  the  highest  elected  Democratic  state  officer.  So  there  was  a  natural  tension  between  the 
two,  and  yet  1  had  represented  Governor  Bryan’s  appointees  as  the  chief  deputy  attorney  general.  And 
word  apparently  got  back  to  him  that  1  was  not  playing  politics  with  the  office,  and  1  had  been  a  registered 
Democrat  all  my  life.  So  when  1  met  with  him  the  first  thing  that  we  talked  about,  was  the  fact  that  1  was 
actually  carrying  out  my  obligation  as  an  attorney  to  represent  my  clients,  even  though  they  happened  to 
be  Democratic  appointees.  That  actually  went  really  well  because  1  basically  told  him  that  1  didn’t  care  if 
they  were  Democrats  or  Republicans.  They  were  just  my  clients,  and  1  was  going  to  give  them  the  best 
representation.  And  1  don’t  know  if  that  won  the  day  or  not,  but  he  ended  up  appointing  me.  [laughter] 

[laughter]  And  you  had  never  met  him  before? 

Had  never  met  him  before. 

Who  did  you  replace  on  the  Board? 

It  was  kind  of  a  weird  shift  that  went  on.  When  1  became  chief  deputy  attorney  general  it  was 
about  the  time  that  the  governor  had  indicated  that  he  would  not  reappoint  Jim  Avance,  who  was  then 
chairman  of  the  board  whose  term  was  going  to  end  in  December,  and  that,  in  fact,  he  was  bringing  Bart 
[S.  Barton]  Jacka  in  to  replace  Patty  Becker,  who  had  resigned,  and  that  Bart,  while  serving  as  a  board 
member,  was  going  to  be  the  new  chairman  as  of  January.  So  Jim  Avance,  Bart  Jacka,  and  Richard  Hyte 
were  the  board  members  when  1  was  chief  deputy  attorney  general,  but  it  was  clear  that  Jim  Avance  was  a 
lame  duck — a  very  public  lame  duck — and  that  Bart  Jacka  was  the  de  facto  chairman,  if  you  will.  So 
when  1  went  on  it  was  as  a  result  of  Bart  Jacka,  who  had  replaced  Patty  Becker,  moving  up  to  chairman 
leaving  an  opening,  and  1  filled  basically  an  open  position.  Jim  Avance  went  off,  Bart  moved  up,  1  moved 
in.  And  within  two  to  three  months  Dick  Hyte  resigned  and  left  as  well.  Guy  Hillyer  took  his  place. 

How  old  were  you  when  you  were  appointed  to  the  Board? 

1  was  thirty  years  old. 

Were  you  the  youngest  person  appointed  to  [the]  Board? 

No,  1  wasn’t.  Actually,  1  think  it’s  close  to  a  tie,  although  I’m  not  certain.  I  believe  Patty  Becker 
was  slightly  younger  than  Jeff  Silver.  I  know  at  the  Commission  level  that  the  youngest  was  Frank 
Schreck. 

Were  you  the  youngest  person  ever  appointed  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Board? 

Yes,  I  was.  I  was  thirty-two  when  1  was  appointed  chairman. 

How  important  do  you  feel  it  is  that  there  is  a  good  relationship  or  a  good  rapport  between  the  Gaming 
Commission  chairman  and  the  Gaming  Control  Board  chairman? 


That’s  very  tough.  It  is  important  that  there  be  at  least  some  agreement  as  to  the  direction, 


406 


because  if  there  isn’t  that  minimal  kind  of  support  between  the  two,  the  licensees  in  the  industry  really 
suffer,  because  they’ll  get  whip-sawed  in  between  the  two  bodies.  So  at  least  an  understanding,  a  basic 
understanding,  an  underlying  agreement  on  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  authorities  over  the 
industry  is  probably  critical.  Beyond  that,  as  to  whether  or  not  a  given  licensee  or  a  given  type  of 
background  is  an  appropriate  background  to  be  involved  in  gaming  or  not,  I  don’t  know  that  that  really 
matters.  The  Commission  has  the  ultimate  decision-making  authority.  And  in  my  view,  the  Board  needs 
to  be  the  whip  hand,  needs  to  be  a  bit  tougher  and  more  strenuous  in  regulation  and  how  they  treat 
applicants  than  perhaps  the  Commission.  The  Commission,  1  think,  has  an  obligation  to  use  their  business 
background,  I  mean,  by  virtue  of  the  way  the  statutes  indicate  who  is  to  be  selected  for  the  two  bodies.  1 
think  the  Commission  is  required  to  use  a  bit  more  business  judgement  and  allow  a  bit  more  leeway  for 
individuals  coming  into  the  industry  than  perhaps  the  Board  should.  There  were  several  times  during  my 
tenure  as  a  board  member  and  as  chairman  when  1  was  fairly  certain  that  I  was  voting  against  an  applicant 
that  was  going  to  be  approved  ultimately,  but  1  really  wanted  that  applicant  to  understand  that  even 
though  they  were  going  to  ultimately  get  approval,  that  they  were  going  to  be  watched  and  looked  over. 

And  that  it  wasn ’t  that  easy  to  get  licensed ,  is  what  your  vote  indicated? 

Exactly.  Exactly.  That  this  is  not  a  cakewalk,  and  don’t  feel  that  you’ve  been  able  to  buffalo  the 
system  because  we  are  going  to  keep  an  eye  on  you  and  we  don’t  approve  of  these  things.  But  we  don’t 
disapprove  of  them  so  greatly  that  we’re  going  to  keep  you  out  of  a  livelihood. 

And  there  again,  they  need  a  unanimous  vote  if  you  recommend  for  denial,  right? 

Yes,  that’s  a  nice  thing.  1  love  the  statutory  scheme  setting  up  gaming  control  in  the  state  of 
Nevada,  because  the  Board  is  a  recommending  body.  Their  recommendation  carries  a  tremendous  amount 
of  weight  when  it’s  negative,  [laughter]  And  1  think  that’s  appropriate.  1  think  forcing  someone  to  get  a 
unanimous  approval  from  the  Commission  over  a  denial  by  the  Board  is  appropriate.  If  somebody  is 
being  turned  down  by  the  day-to-day  regulators,  and  the  part-time  regulators  are  going  to  give  an 
approval,  I  think  they  ought  to  be  in  unanimous  agreement.  I  think  it’s  a  beautiful  scheme. 

Who  were  some  of  the  chairmen  that  you  worked  with  on  the  Board? 

1  worked  with  two  chairmen  of  the  commission:  Paul  Bible  was  chairman  while  1  was  a  board 
member,  and  then  both  as  a  member  and  as  a  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  1  worked  with  John 
O’Reilly.  And  there  were  a  variety  of  commission  members  that  went  through  during  my  tenure. 

It  seems  like  most  Commissions  are  dominated  by  the  chairmen.  How  do  you  feel  about  that? 

1  think  that’s  true.  Certainly  the  chairmen  of  the  Commission,  their  personality,  will  set  a  tone  for 
the  rest  of  the  Commission.  And  more  often  than  not,  their  views  of  gaming  regulation  will  set  the  tone 
for  the  Commission  as  well.  And  the  chairman  is  really  the  person  at  the  commission  level  who  has  the 
most  day-to-day  interaction  with  the  Board  and  the  agents.  It  would  be  very  rare  that  1  would  have  private 
conversations  with  any  member  of  the  Commission  about  any  given  subject.  And,  in  fact,  1  can  only  think 
of  perhaps  one  time  during  my  tenure  as  chairman  of  the  Board  when  1  spoke  with  a  commission  member. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


407 


It  was  almost  exclusively  with  the  chairman. 

And  he  would  be  the  person  who  would  set  the  agenda  as  well.  One  of  the  things  that  occurred 
during  the  time  I  was  on  the  Board  is  we  started  to  try  and  figure  out  how  to  best  set  our  meeting 
schedule,  if  you  will,  taking  the  tough  applications  up  front  when  we  were  fresh  and  ready  to  go  as 
opposed  to  taking  them  later  in  the  day,  or  perhaps  during  the  second  day  of  our  meetings.  We  had  some 
marathon  meetings;  we  had  meetings  that  went  until  one,  two  in  the  morning  for  issues  like  the  takeover 
of  Caesars  World.  And  in  doing  that,  the  commission  chairman  was  always  actively  involved,  because 
whatever  the  Board  did  would  ultimately  then  translate  two  weeks  later  into  what  the  Commission  had  to 
do.  And  if  the  Board  took  an  extremely  difficult  or  sensitive  issue  late  in  the  day,  and  it  ended  up  carrying 
over  into  late  in  the  evening,  that  schedule  had  already  been  set,  and  therefore  that  item  would  come  up 
very  late  in  the  Commission’s  day.  And  so  just  the  procedural  workings  of  the  Board  and  Commission 
required  that  there  be  some  close  discussions  with  the  chairman  of  the  Commission. 

That  scheduling  that  you  mentioned,  all  the  boards  didn  ’t  do  that,  did  they?  Didn  ’t  some  boards  have  the 
easiest  ones  first? 

Exactly.  In  fact,  for  years  the  restricted  licenses  were  first,  and  they  were  in  whatever  order  they 
happened  to  show  up  in.  And  that  meant  that  you  may  have  a  problem  with  a  particular  bar  location  or  a 
bar  owner  or  a  supermarket  owner  or  whatever.  It  might  fall  at  the  beginning,  in  the  middle,  or  at  the  end 
of  the  day.  And  those  items  would  all  be  acted  on  while  you  had  the  non-restricted  licensees,  the  major 
casino  owners  and  their  staff,  sitting  there  listening  for  hours,  [laughter]  to  something  that  had  no  bearing, 
or  had  no  meaning.  Actually,  I  would  credit  Bart  Jacka  with  trying  to  get  some  semblance  of  order  to 
what  was  going  on  at  the  board  level  when  he  was  chairman.  Ultimately  when  I  was  chairman  we  moved 
all  of  the  restricted  items  to  a  second  day  and  held  them  all  at  the  same  time  so  we  had  no  non-restricted, 
or  generally  had  no  non-restricted  items  on  it  that  day.  And  then  we  put  them  in  order  of  difficulty.  If 
there  were  areas  of  concern  identified  by  staff,  those  would  come  first,  and  we  would  do  all  of  those,  then 
we  would  go  on  to  the  perfunctory  ones  where  it  was  a  location  simply  changing  landlords  or  moving 
machines  or  changing  the  position.  The  really  simple  stuff  that  was  pretty  much  rote  went  on  the  second 
day.  And  then  the  first  day  we  did  the  same  thing  with  the  non-restricted  applications.  Those  that  were 
going  to  either  require  lots  of  questioning  or  had  lots  of  areas  of  concern  would  come  first.  So  it  became 
pretty  well  known  in  the  industry  that  if  you  were  number  one  or  two  on  the  agenda  you  were  in  trouble, 
[laughter] 

Well,  talking  about  people  that  might  have  been  in  trouble,  in  1977  Joe  Slyman  was  licensed  as  the  owner 
of  the  Royal  Casino,  and  shortly  afterwards  Paul  Dottore  was  named  general  manager.  In  1982  and  1983 
an  undercover  operation  alleged  that  millions  of  dollars  had  been  laundered  through  the  Royal  Casino ’s 
cage,  and  Slyman  and  Dottore  were  soon  to  face  federal  fraud  charges.  In  1985,  the  year  you  went  on  the 
board,  and  the  same  year  that  Slyman  and  Dottore  stood  trial  for  fraud,  the  Treasury  Department  decided 
to  broaden  the  scope  of  the  Bank  Secrecy  Act  so  that  it  included  casinos.  Would  you  explain  the  Bank 
Secrecy  Act  to  us  and  the  impact  that  it  would  have  on  gaming  in  Nevada? 

Sure.  I  spent  a  lot  of  time  in  front  of  congressional  committees  and  dealing  with  the  Treasury 
Department  and  the  Internal  Revenue  Service  over  this.  The  Bank  Secrecy  Act  had  required,  up  until  that 
point,  banks  and  financial  institutions  to  report  individuals  who  were  conducting  transactions  in  cash  in 


408 


excess  of  ten  thousand  dollars,  which  meant  if  you  were  to  deposit  cash  of  ten  thousand  dollars  or  more, 
you  had  to  fill  out  a  particular  form  at  the  bank.  And  that  form  would  include  your  social  security  number, 
some  identity  credential,  and  some  other  background  information  about  you.  It  had  your  address,  for 
example,  of  either  your  business  or  your  home.  The  bank  put  in  your  physical  description,  but  you  had  to 
personally  fill  out  a  lot  of  information  on  the  form,  and  the  hank  then  filled  in  more  information.  That 
information  was  all  sent  to  the  Internal  Revenue  Service  and  to  the  Treasury  Department.  That  was  fine  in 
the  setting  of  a  hank  where  somebody’s  walking  up  with  cash  to  a  cashier’s  cage.  You’ve  got  an 
individual  standing  in  front  of  you.  It’s  very  easy.  They  say,  “You  want  to  take  money  out  of  here,  or  put 
money  in  here,  here’s  the  form  you  have  to  fill  out.” 

Principally  the  Internal  Revenue  Service  had  determined  that  they  believed  the  money  was  being 
moved  about  in  the  casino  industry  in  ways  that  were  defeating  the  Rank  Secrecy  Act,  so  that  if 
somebody  wanted  to  deal  with  laundering  large  amounts  of  cash,  in  particular  small  bills  into  large  bills — 
because  they  were  looking  primarily  at  drug  dealing  at  the  time,  although  they  believed  there  were  other 
nefarious  activities,  but  drug  dealing  was  where  they’d  focus — that  it  could  be  done  in  casinos  throughout 
Nevada  relatively  easily.  Someone  could  bring  in  twenty-five  thousand  in  ten-dollar  bills  to  a  cage  and 
have  it  changed  to  hundreds.  Well,  it  took  a  while  for  us  to  explain  to  the  federal  regulators  that  that  was 
not  the  case,  that  casinos  weren’t  in  the  business  of  changing  money  for  money  because  they  didn’t  get 
anything  for  doing  that.  What  they  wanted  was  money  going  across  the  table,  and  hopefully,  staying 
across  the  table  once  it  went  across,  [laughter] 

But  in  any  case,  they  decided  to  change  the  Bank  Secrecy  Act,  Title  21  of  the  Federal  Code  of 
Regulations,  to  include  casinos  as  financial  institutions  the  way  that  phrase  was  defined.  This  meant  that 
every  time  somebody  had  a  ten-thousand-dollar  or  greater  cash  transaction  in  a  casino,  no  matter  where  in 
the  casino,  they  were  going  to  have  to  fill  out  forms,  which  would  have  left  Nevada  in  the  position  of 
having  these  forms  underneath  every  Blackjack  table,  every  baccarat  table.  Obviously,  all  the  casino 
cages,  even  the  slot  floor,  might  have  to  include  these  so  the  people  could  fill  out  the  Bank  Secrecy  Act 
forms  and  send  them  to  the  IRS.  Obviously,  that  was  an  unworkable  situation.  It  really  made  no  sense  for 
a  casino  operation.  And  so  we  spent  a  lot  of  time,  both  in  front  of  senate  committees  and  house 
committees,  and  in  private  meetings  with  the  IRS  and  with  the  Treasury  Department,  trying  to  explain  to 
them,  first,  how  a  casino  operates,  how  money  moves  around  a  casino  floor;  and  then  secondly,  why  what 
they  were  looking  for  was  going  to  be  disruptive  and  I  wouldn’t  say  impossible,  but  certainly  very 
difficult  to  try  and  enforce  on  a  casino  floor.  And  since  it  would  become  a  federal  law — and  under 
Nevada  state  law  any  violation  of  any  law  by  a  licensee  can  result  in  revocation,  federal,  state  or 
otherwise — we  would  be  taking  on  the  task  of  having  to  look  over  the  shoulder  of  every  casino  operator 
to  make  sure  they  fulfilled  their  obligations  under  this  federal  law. 

In  discussions — and  at  the  time  it  was  Paul  Bible  who  was  chairman  of  the  Commission,  Bart 
Jacka  of  the  Board  and  myself  as  a  member — I  was  given  the  responsibility  of  working  with  the  federal 
government  on  this  issue.  And  so  I  spent  a  lot  of  time  in  Washington  trying  to  get  the  federal  government 
to  understand  both  our  concerns  as  well  as  the  obligations  of  the  industry  to  the  State  of  Nevada.  And 
ultimately,  we  came  to  the  decision  that  it  would  be  easier  for  Nevada  to  enact  its  own  regulation  that 
would  somewhat  mirror  Title  21,  somewhat  mirror  the  federal  banking  regulations,  impose  it  upon 
Nevada  licensees,  and  receive  an  exemption  from  the  change  in  federal  law  as  long  as  we  had  our  own 
reporting  system.  And  I  was  able  ultimately  to  convince  the  feds  that  a  reporting  system  to  us  would  be  in 
their  best  interest,  because  it  would  not  require  them  then  to  send  hordes  of  agents  out  to  the  state  of 
Nevada  to  roam  around  casinos  and  see  whether  or  not  these  forms  were  getting  filled  out  properly. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


409 


And  ultimately,  that’s  what  occurred.  They  did  change  the  Rank  Secrecy  Act,  to  include  casinos 
as  financial  reporting  institutions,  and  we  were  able  to  get  an  exemption  from  that  as  a  result  of 
Regulation  6a,  which  we  adopted  and  which  created  a  Nevada-based  reporting  system  that  we  then  shared 
with  the  federal  government.  And  the  funny  thing  is  that  after  we  adopted  all  of  that,  we  took  the  forms 
that  were  being  filled  out  by  the  casinos  and  sent  to  us,  which  we  then  agreed  to  share  with  the  federal 
government,  and  we  processed  them  and  looked  at  them.  We,  in  some  cases,  fined  casinos  for  violations 
for  not  reporting  properly,  et  cetera.  But  we  then  sent  all  these  forms  to  the  federal  government,  who 
promptly  put  them  in  a  warehouse  and  ignored  them  for  about  ten  years,  [laughter] 

Did  the  trial  of  Slyman  and  Dottore  help  to  generate  the  inclusion  of  casinos  in  the  Bank  Secrecy  Act? 

1  think  the  timing  of  it  was  coincidental.  The  Internal  Revenue  Service  wanted  this  information. 
They  were  looking  for  mattress  money.  They  really  wanted  to  know  the  names  of  restaurant  owners  who 
had  not  reported  cash  in  their  businesses,  or  automobile  dealerships  who  had  been  hiding  money  off  the 
books.  That  was  their  real  interest.  The  fact  that  Slyman  and  Dottore  had  gone  to  trial  really  just  caused  us 
more  heartburn  in  our  negotiations  with  them  than  ever  really  becoming  a  central  issue.  Every  time  I 
would  say  to  them,  “Look,  this  isn’t  really  occurring  in  Nevada,”  they  would  then  point  to  Slyman  and 
Dottore  and  say,  “Well,  wait  a  minute!  We  got  guys  on  trial  now.”  So  I  would  be  stuffed  in  respect  to  that 
argument,  [laughter] 

Do  the  casinos  in  all  the  other  states  fall  under  the  Bank  Secrecy  Act? 

They  do.  At  the  time  that  the  law  was  passed  by  congress,  there  really  were  only  two  jurisdictions 
with  casino-style  gaming:  that  was  Nevada  and  New  Jersey.  And  New  Jersey  chose  not  to  join  with  us  in 
our  negotiations  with  the  government,  and  instead  chose  to  be  under  the  Bank  Secrecy  Act  and  regulated 
by  the  federal  government.  The  result  of  that,  several  years  later,  was  that  the  federal  government  came 
after,  criminally,  several  casinos  in  Atlantic  City  for  violations  of  the  act,  as  well  as  coming  after  several 
individuals.  And  at  that  time,  once  the  criminal  actions  were  undertaken,  the  New  Jersey  industry  decided 
maybe  they  should  try  and  follow  Nevada’s  lead,  but  by  then  it  was  too  late,  [laughter]  They’re  still  under 
the  Internal  Revenue  Service  and  Treasury  Department,  [laughter] 

Are  the  Indian  casinos  exempt  because  they  are  sovereign  nations? 

They’re  not.  They  made  that  argument.  About  five  years  after  we  passed  Regulation  6a  here  they 
made  that  argument  and  lost  it  in  federal  court,  and,  in  fact,  have  to  comply  with  the  federal  act.  Now, 
what  happens  is  that  in  most  cases  other  than  Connecticut — which  is  really  an  aberration  in  Indian  gaming 
because  they  are  so  large  and  they  handle  so  much  money — there  really  are  very  few  tribes  that  would 
ever  approach  that  ten-thousand-dollar  limit  anyway.  They  just  don’t  do  the  business. 

The  Royal  Casino,  operated  by  Slyman  and  Dottore,  proved  to  be  a  big  problem  for  regulators  in  Nevada, 
as  during  a  two-year  period,  between  1986  and  1988,  they  had  dozens  of  Regulation  6a  violations.  What 
action  did  the  Gaming  Control  Board  finally  take  in  1986? 


Initially  we  had  disciplinary  actions  with  Joe  Slyman,  one  of  which  led  to  an  agreement  that  his 


410 


license  be  limited  in  time  so  that  we  would  have  a  handle  on  him  every  year.  Under  Nevada  law,  the 
burden  is  on  the  applicant  to  prove  both  their  ability  as  well  as  their  good  character  with  respect  to  a 
gaming  enterprise.  Once  they’re  licensed  the  burden  shifts  to  the  state  to  show  either  their  bad  character 
or  lack  of  ability  in  order  to  remove  a  license.  So  we  were  in  a  position  where  when  all  these  violations 
occurred  we  had  to  prove  either  bad  character  or  lack  of  ability  or  whatever  in  order  to  revoke  a  license. 
As  a  result  of  our  disciplinary  actions,  Mr.  Slyman  agreed  to  a  limitation  in  the  time  his  license  would 
expire,  and  then  he  would  have  to  renew  it  at  that  time,  which  would  put  the  burden  back  on  him  to  prove 
to  us  that  he  had  the  ability  and/or  was  of  good  character.  Once  that  was  in  place  we  then  had  a  series  of 
hearings  over  those  limited  licenses  when  they  were  about  to  expire,  because  of  his  continuing  inability  to 
comply  with  regulation.  And  it  became  clear,  1  think,  from  the  numerous  hearings  that  we  held  that  while 
he  may  have  been  very  sincere — and  I  say  “may  have  been”  because  I’ve  never  really  determined  for 
myself  whether  he  was  or  not  capable  of  running  an  operation  under  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the 
Gaming  Control  Board — ultimately  we  allowed  his  limited  license  to  expire,  which  was  the  same  result  as 
revoking  it;  they  closed  the  place.  And  there  were  other  things.  It  wasn’t  just  the  regulations  with  respect 
to  money  laundering  or  the  way  he  kept  safekeeping  money  behind  the  cage,  but  also  his  association  with 
James  Tamer  who  was  a  revoked  licensee  and  was  in  the  “Black  Book”  at  the  time,  the  List  of  Excluded 
Persons.  Joe  Slyman  had  admitted  to  meeting  with  him  in  a  hotel  in  Las  Vegas,  which  would  have  been  a 
violation  by  Mr.  Tamer.  It  would  have  been  a  misdemeanor  violation  for  even  being  in  a  casino.  And  Joe 
Slyman  admitted  that  he  had  met  with  him  and  had  dealings  with  him. 

That ’s  almost  a  cause  for  a  revocation,  isn ’t  it? 

Exactly.  Y es,  that  in  and  of  itself  was  a  huge  problem. 

So  eventually  was  his  license  suspended? 

Well,  it  was  allowed  to  expire,  so  the  casino  closed  and  then  went  through  a  series  of  attempted 
sales.  Ultimately  it  was  sold  to  someone  who  was  suitable  to  reopen  the  casino. 

Where  was  it  located? 

The  Royal  was  located  on  Convention  Center  Drive,  which  is  perpendicular  to  the  Las  Vegas 
Strip  and  to  Las  Vegas  Boulevard  South.  It  is  probably  two  hundred  yards  to  the  east  of  Las  Vegas 
Boulevard  directly  down  from  the  Stardust  Hotel.  And  currently — I’m  not  sure — I  believe  it’s  still  called 
the  Royal,  although  I  haven’t  been  by  it  in  a  long  time. 

In  1986  Charles  Bluth  applied  for  a  license  to  operate  the  Cal-Neva  Lodge  at  North  Lake  Tahoe.  Would 
you  tell  us  about  that  application  and  any  problems  the  Board  may  have  had  with  the  licensing  of  Mr. 
Bluth? 


Yes,  as  I  recall,  we  had  a  variety  of  concerns  about  Mr.  Bluth,  not  the  least  of  which  was  the  way 
he  had  conducted  business  prior  to  his  wanting  to  come  into  the  gaming  industry,  and  that  was  what 
appeared  to  be  business  through  litigation.  He  was  consistently  in  lawsuits.  And,  you  know,  lawsuits  in 
America  are  a  way  of  life,  and  I  think  everybody  on  the  Board  and  Commission  understands  that,  but 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


411 


when  you  see  a  tremendous  number  of  lawsuits — and  by  that  1  mean  far  and  away  more  lawsuits  than  you 
would  expect  anyone  to  be  involved  with  in  their  entire  lifetime — and  you  see  that  encapsulated  in  a  ten- 
year  period,  [laughter]  you  really  have  concerns  that  if  this  person  comes  into  the  gaming  industry  that 
they’re  going  to  be  in  lawsuits  with  their  vendors,  and  potentially  even  the  state  over  things  as  simple  as 
collecting  taxes.  As  1  recall,  that  was  our  biggest  concern  with  Mr.  Bluth.  I  know  we  went  through  several 
hearings  with  him  and  ultimately  granted  him  a  limited  license,  limited  in  time,  until  we  could  be  assured 
that  he  was  actually  going  to  be  running  his  operation  as  a  business  and  not  as  a  back-up  for  some  legal 
practice  that  somebody  may  have,  [laughter] 

Well,  did  he  seem  to  have  the  appearance  that  so  many  people  do  when  they  come  into  Nevada,  that  they 
are  more  or  less  untouchable,  that  they  don ’t  feel  that  a  license  is  a  privilege? 

Oh,  yes.  And  I  wouldn’t  want  to  single  him  out  because  there  were  so  many  that  appeared  in  front 
of  the  Board  [laughter]  when  1  was  there  that  had  an  attitude  that  frankly  they  didn’t  understand  licensing, 
they  didn’t  understand  the  idea  of  privilege  versus  right,  and  presumed  that  this  was  a  zoning  change  that 
they  were  asking  for  and  that  they  somehow  had  a  God-given  right  to  it.  It  was  amazing.  And  certainly  he 
fell  into  that  category,  the  number  of  people  that  came  in  front  of  us  with  significant  problems  for  us  as 
regulators,  in  their  background,  whether  it  be  business  or  personal,  who  then  stood  there  in  front  of  us  and 
basically  said  to  us,  “What’s  wrong?!  Why  aren’t  you  giving  me  a  license!?  What  do  you  mean  I  can’t 
have  this?”  And  that  was  a  problem.  And  yes,  he  ruffled  a  lot  of  feathers  amongst  regulators  just  with  his 
attitude,  which  was  basically,  “Go  to  hell.” 

[laughter] 

You  know,  “I’ll  do  what  I  want  to  do,  and  if  you  don’t  like  it,  tough.”  But  once  we  explained  to 
him  that  that’s  not  quite  the  way  it  works,  and  if  we  go  to  hell  we  take  your  license  with  us,  [laughter] 
then  1  think  he  got  the  understanding  of  what  it  was  all  about.  But  1  think  for  a  year  or  maybe  two  years  of 
his  limited  license,  he  continued  to  butt  heads  with  our  investigators,  with  our  auditors,  with  anybody  who 
came  on  the  property. 

He  sounds  like  kind  of  a  maverick. 

Yes.  And  then  he  had  a  very  unfortunate  incident  where  his  son  ended  up  killing  an  intruder  in  his 
home  in  California.  I  think  that  made  everybody  a  bit  more  sympathetic,  but  we  still  had  to  keep 
explaining  to  him  that  it  was  a  privilege  and  not  a  right,  [laughter] 

In  1986  a  well-known  Las  Vegas  casino  operator,  Carl  Thomas,  was  nominated  for  the  List  of  Excluded 
Persons,  commonly  known  as  the  “Black  Book.  ”  During  the  hearings  for  Thomas ’s  inclusion  in  the  black 
book,  you  were  asked  to  specify  the  criteria  that  would  result  in  Thomas ’s  entry  in  the  book.  What  were 
some  of  the  criteria  you  listed? 

I’d  have  to  look  at  a  transcript  to  give  you  a  complete  answer.  But  clearly,  number  one  would  be 
his  conviction  for  his  involvement  in  helping  organized  crime  skim  from  casinos.  In  addition,  his 
affiliation  with  organized  crime  members.  Mr.  Thomas  had  been  tape  recorded  on  a  bug  that  had  been 


412 


placed  in  the  basement  of  a  home  in  St.  Louis  where  the  Civella  brothers,  who  were  at  that  time  in  charge 
of  an  organized  crime  family,  met  with  Carl  Thomas,  and  he  explained  to  them  how  to  properly  skim 
money  from  the  Tropicana  Hotel  and  Casino.  That  affiliation  with  them — obviously,  his  knowing 
involvement  and  participation  in  a  skimming  operation  for  the  Civellas — as  well  as  his  own  skimming 
operations  that  he  had  admitted  to,  were  more  than  enough  to  include  him  in  the  “Black  Book.” 

The  issue  at  the  time  that  we  were  looking  at  his  inclusion,  and  probably  the  controversy  that 
ended  up  surrounding  his  appointment  to  the  “Black  Book”  by  the  Board,  was  that  he  was  in  prison  and 
had  not  cooperated  with  gaming  control  authorities  in  identifying  other  members  who  had  been  involved 
with  him  in  various  skimming  operations  over  the  years.  Because  of  his  refusal  to  cooperate  at  all,  it  was 
alleged  that  his  nomination  to  be  included  in  the  “Black  Book”  was  retribution  somehow,  or  additional 
punishment  somehow  by  the  Board  of  a  man  who  was  doing  his  time,  but  who  was,  in  fact,  cooperating 
with  the  federal  government.  He  was  willing  to  testify  at  a  criminal  trial  in  Kansas  City  regarding  the 
Civellas  and  others  who  had  been  involved  in  skimming  operations,  but  that  somehow  the  State  of 
Nevada  was  trying  to  further  punish  him  by  saying  he  was  not  cooperating. 

What  1  tried  to  make  clear  at  our  hearings  over  Carl  Thomas  was  that  we  would  appreciate  it  if  he 
would,  in  fact,  help  us  by  identifying  other  members  of  his  various  skimming  operations,  and  let  us  know 
who  may  still  be  in  the  industry  that  would  have  been  involved  in  those  operations  so  that  we  could 
remove  them.  And  most  importantly  identify  him  as  somebody  who  had  been  such  a  high-ranking 
executive  in  a  variety  of  gaming  enterprises,  and  had  even  owned  gaming  enterprises,  to  be  that  corrupted 
and  that  fully  involved  in  cheating,  not  just  the  State  of  Nevada,  but  potentially  cheating  thousands  of 
tourists,  that  that  was  in  the  lexicon  of  gaming  a  death  sentence;  that  you  should  not  only  never  be 
allowed  back  into  the  industry,  but  you  should  be  a  pariah;  you  should  never  be  allowed  to  walk  onto  a 
casino  floor  again.  That  if  anybody  deserved  the  highest  punishment  it  would  be  somebody  of  Carl 
Thomas’s  background,  and  somebody  who  had  done  the  kinds  of  things  he  had  done.  And  it  was  a 
difficult  argument  because  1  think  people  in  the  face  of  it  looked  at  it  and  said,  “Well,  no,  it  just  looks  like 
you  want  to  force  him  to  try  and  help  you.”  And  that  really  wasn’t  it.  He  really  was  a  pariah  and  deserved 
to  be  excluded  from  gaming  circles  throughout  the  world. 

Was  he  highly  thought  of  in  the  community? 

Extremely  highly  thought  of.  He  was  very,  very  well  liked.  It  was  the  only  time  that  we  had  a 
“Black  Book”  candidate  in  front  of  the  Board  when  1  received  phone  call  after  phone  call  after  phone  call 
from  people  1  had  known  for  years  telling  me  what  a  wonderful  man  he  was.  And  1  had  to  tell  each  of 
them  in  turn,  “I’m  sorry  he’s  such  a  wonderful  man.  It’s  a  shame  that  he  has  fallen  so  far,  but  there  is 
absolutely  no  way  I  ever  want  him  to  walk  on  a  casino  floor  again.”  And  he  went  on  prior  to  his  death  to 
get  very  involved  in  Las  Vegas  real  estate.  He  had  a  real  estate  development  company,  and  he  was  buying 
and  selling  properties  all  over  southern  Nevada.  But  then,  amazingly,  he  died  in  a  one -car  crash  in  rural 
Oregon.  And  I  guess  conspiracy  theorists  will  ultimately  decide  what  that  was  all  about.  But  yes,  his 
death  was  very  surprising  to  us. 

It  appears  as  if  people  accepted  him.  To  be  a  success  in  real  estate  you  need  to  have  a  lot  of  friends. 

Absolutely.  1  don’t  believe  he  ever  lost  the  friendship  of  the  people  he  had  worked  with,  and  I 
don’t  think  he  ever  lost  their  respect,  which  amazes  me,  because  I  thought  if  anything  they  should  look  to 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


413 


the  fact  that  here  is  a  man  who’s  prepared  to  take  our  number  one  industry,  that  we  need  to  protect  and 
nurture,  and  trash  it — which  to  me  is  even  worse — a  bunch  of  outsiders,  a  bunch  of  people  who  are  not 
Nevadans  who  weren’t  members  of  the  gaming  fraternity,  if  you  will,  and  he  was  prepared  to  trash  it  for 
them. 

Is  there  actually  a  criterion  for  listing  people  in  the  “Black  Book?  ” 

There  is.  It’s  in  regulation,  and  it’s  very  precise.  It  talks  about  convictions  of  crimes,  notorious 
and  unsavory  reputation,  affiliation  with  others  who  are  members  of  criminal  enterprises,  et  cetera.  It’s  a 
very  specific  list.  And  in  most  cases — in  fact,  in  virtually  every  case — someone  who  is  nominated  for  it 
hits  more  than  one  of  those  criteria.  But  you  only  need  one  in  order  to  be  included.  And,  yes,  probably  the 
one  that’s  the  most  difficult  to  deal  with  is  “notorious  and  unsavory  reputation.”  Regarding  Frank 
Rosenthal,  “Lefty”  Rosenthal’s  inclusion  in  the  “Black  Book” — he  only  had  one  prior  conviction,  and  that 
was,  1  believe,  in  the  1960s,  and  it  was  for  fixing  a  college  basketball  game.  But  that  was  the  only 
conviction  he  had.  Other  than  that,  what  we  had  was  “notorious  and  unsavory  reputation,”  which  was 
extremely  well  documented,  [laughter]  But  still  a  more  difficult  standard  than  an  objective  one  where  you 
can  say,  “Well,  here’s  a  conviction,  here’s  no  conviction.”  You  know,  “Here’s  somebody  who’s  done  this 
or  not  done  that.”  Instead  we  had  a  lot  of  newspaper  reports,  a  lot  of  intelligence  sources  from  a  variety  of 
places.  In  fact,  most  of  the  intelligence  was  from  various  organized-crime  task  forces  around  the  country, 
and  what  they  had  gathered  about  “Lefty”  Rosenthal. 

What  official  body  actually  nominates  someone  for  inclusion? 

The  Gaming  Control  Board  makes  the  nomination.  We  actually  restructured  it  when  1  was  on  the 
board.  The  List  of  Excluded  Persons,  the  “Black  Book,”  had  not  been  added  to  for  years  when  1  joined  the 
Gaming  Control  Board.  It  had  really  gone  out  of  favor  as  a  tool  of  enforcement,  if  you  will,  for  the  Board. 
In  doing  some  research  on  it  when  1  joined  the  Board,  1  found  it  originally  had  been  proposed  by  a 
member  of  the  Board  who  was  an  ex-FBI  agent,  and  who  had  been  accustomed  to  Hoover’s  Ten  Most- 
Wanted  List.  And  he  thought,  “What  a  great  idea.  We’ll  have  our  ten  most-notorious  list,  and  these  people 
will  never  be  allowed  to  go  in  a  casino.”  The  original  book  itself  was  a  group  of  people  who  had,  in  the 
1950s  and  1960s,  been  pretty  notorious  and  involved  in  gaming  crimes  and  a  variety  of  things. 

Was  it  Ray  Abb aticchio  that  started  the  list? 

Yes,  it  was.  But,  in  any  case,  it  really  hadn’t  been  used  much.  Occasionally,  somebody  would  be 
added  to  it,  but  it  really  hadn’t  been  much  of  a  tool  other  than  a  statement  by  the  Board  that  these  people 
are  really  persona  non  grata  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  When  we  got  on — and  by  “we”  1  mean  Bart  Jacka, 
myself  and  Guy  Hillyer — we  decided  that  we  would  take  it  seriously.  And  so  we  tasked  the  special 
investigations  and  intelligence  division  to  start  putting  together  background  information  on  people  from 
the  1970s  and  1980s  who  would  deserve  to  be  nominated  to  go  onto  this  list.  1  think  in  the  first  couple  of 
years  that  1  was  on  the  Board,  we  put  eight  new  individuals  onto  the  list.  We  nominated  eight,  and  all 
eight  were  included  by  the  Commission.  And  in  making  it  a  more  active  list,  we  looked  to  the  State  of 
New  Jersey,  which  had  their  own  excluded  persons  list.  But  theirs  was  extensive,  and  it  was  a  very  quick 
proceeding.  It  was  done  outside  of  the  regulatory  body.  It  didn’t  require  that  the  New  Jersey  Gaming 


414 


Commission  to  do  much  more  than  stamp  approval  over  what  was  otherwise  a  hearing  in  front  of  an 
administrative  judge,  where  the  agents  would  bring  the  information  and  the  individual  would  have  a 
chance  to  refute  it,  and  the  administrative  law  judge  would  make  a  decision.  It  would  go  to  the 
Commission,  the  Commission  would  stamp  it,  and  boom,  they’re  on. 

Ours  was  a  much  more  complicated  process,  and  so  it  was  more  difficult.  In  New  Jersey  they 
were  putting  people  who  snatched  pocketbooks  on  their  list  of  excluded  persons.  Ours  required  much 
more  due  process  and  chances  for  the  person  to  be  heard,  required  the  Board  to  do  much  more 
background  checks.  And  so  between  special  investigations  and  the  attorney  general’s  office  we  were 
getting  more  cases  prepared  and  ready  to  go  in  front  of  the  Commission.  We  put  about  eight  people,  1 
think,  in  our  first  two  years.  The  Board  nominated,  the  attorney  general’s  office  and  special  investigations 
pulled  together  the  background,  and  we  held  hearings  in  front  of  the  Commission  to  put  them  in  the 
“Black  Book.”  And  1  believe  it  has  been  accelerated  beyond  that  today. 

You ’ve  mentioned  “Lefty”  Rosenthal  earlier,  and  the  reasons  for  putting  him  in  the  book.  Were  you  on 
the  Board  when  he  was  put  into  the  “ Black  Book?  ” 

Yes,  1  was  chairman  of  the  Board  when  “Lefty”  was  put  in.  For  me  it  was  kind  of  an  amazing 
circle,  if  you  will.  1  had  worked  at  the  Stardust  Hotel  in  the  late  1960s,  early  1970s,  when  “Lefty” 
Rosenthal,  although  not  titular  head  of  the  property,  certainly  was  in  charge  of  the  property.  We  as 
employees  all  knew  that  he  was  in  charge  of  the  property  and  what  he  was  doing,  but  it  took  the  gaming 
authorities  awhile  to  be  able  to  prove  that  and  force  him  out  of  there,  [laughter]  So  then  years  later — a 
decade  or  more  than  that,  fifteen  years  later  probably — to  bring  him  in  front  of  the  Commission  and  to  be 
included  in  the  “Black  Book”  was  really  coming  full  circle,  and  certainly  didn’t  gain  me  a  friend, 
[laughter] 

[laughter] 

He  was  rather  upset.  The  current  mayor  of  Las  Vegas,  Oscar  Goodman,  was  his  lawyer.  Between 
the  two  of  them  1  think  1  was  called  probably  more  names  than  1  was  aware  were  available  to  be  called, 
[laughter]  But,  yes,  we  nominated  him,  and  I  actually  appeared  at  the  commission  hearing  to  see  that  he 
was  put  in  the  “Black  Book,”  and  he  was.  Part  of  his  defense  was  that  he  wasn’t  even  coming  to  Nevada 
anymore.  But  1  would  note  that  not  long  after  that  he  went  onto  the  internet  and  set  up  his  own  website  to 
start  touting  sports  wagering  information,  [laughter] 

Was  that  his  strong  point? 

Yes,  he  had  always  been  either  a  bookmaker  or  a  lines  and  odds  setter.  And  apparently,  the  one 
thing  that  in  his  heyday  he  did  extremely  well  was  forecast  the  outcome  of  sporting  events  by  doing  a  lot 
of  research,  and  in  some  cases  spending  a  little  money  to  make  sure  the  outcome  was  the  same  as  he 
predicted,  [laughter] 

[laughter]  Who  were  some  of  the  other  people  entered  in  the  “Black  Book”  during  your  tenure  on  the 
Board? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


415 


We  put  in  probably  the  first  husband  and  wife  duo,  the  Vaccaros,  John  and  Sandra.  John  and 
Sandra  had  run  an  especially  prolific  cheating  ring,  and  they  were  involved  in  table  cheating,  but  slot 
cheating  was  what  they  specialized  in.  In  fact,  they  had  a  slot  mechanic  who  set  up  the  jackpots,  who  was 
probably  the  finest  slot  cheat  that  1  have  ever  come  across.  In  fact,  one  of  the  stories  about  their  cheating 
ring  was  they  would  set  up  small  jackpots — five  thousand  dollars,  three  thousand  dollars,  four  thousand 
dollars — in  order  to  give  them  money  to  live  on  while  they  worked  toward  setting  up  million-dollar, 
multi-million-dollar  jackpots.  They  were  ultimately  brought  down  by  a  million  six  [$1,600,000]  jackpot 
set  up  in  Lake  Tahoe  where  the  collector  tried  to  take  all  of  the  money,  was  then  in  fear  of  his  life,  and 
finally  rolled  over  and  explained  to  authorities  what  he’d  been  doing,  and  that  was  what  brought  the 
Vaccaro  gang  in.  Their  mechanic  who  actually  set  up  the  machines  was  so  good  that,  in  setting  up  one  of 
these  five -thousand-dollar  jackpots  for  living  money,  he  opened  the  machine  at  a  hotel  in  Reno  and  found 
out  that  the  reel  mechanisms  were  broken,  and  he  couldn’t  set  up  the  phony  jackpot.  So  he  took  the  entire 
set  of  reel  mechanisms,  which  is  fairly  weighty,  hid  it  under  his  coat,  walked  out  to  his  van  outside, 
repaired  them,  brought  them  back  in  and  set  up  his  jackpot  to  get  him  four  or  five  thousand  dollars  to  live 
on.  That’s  how  good  he  was.  [laughter]  So  catching  that  gang  was  huge.  And  then  making  sure  that  they 
never  went  into  casinos  again  was  even  more  important  because  clearly  their  proclivity  was  to  continue 
on  cheating  slot  machines  the  rest  of  their  lives,  [laughter]  They  had  no  other  line  of  business,  [laughter] 

Some  people,  like  the  Vacarros,  for  example,  are  included  in  the  “Black  Book”  because  of  their  slot 
cheating  ability.  Is  there  anything  to  prevent  people  who  have  been  entered  into  the  “Black  Book”  from 
entering  into  an  establishment  such  as  a  bar  or  an  airport  area  where  there  are  slots,  but  no  other  kind  of 
gaming? 

No,  they’re  actually  allowed  to  go  through  restricted  areas.  One  of  the  concerns  about  the  “Black 
Book” — and  it’s  actually  been  litigated;  it  was  litigated  by  Anthony  Spilotro — was  the  argument  that 
because  gaming  is  so  pervasive  throughout  Nevada,  that  you  are  hindering  someone’s  ability  to  associate 
with  others  in  violation  of  the  Constitution  and/or  to  travel  freely  in  violation  of  the  Constitution.  Because 
at  one  point  the  Union  Pacific  Railroad  station  for  Las  Vegas  was  at  the  Union  Plaza  Hotel  at  the  base  of 
Fremont  Street,  the  argument  was  that  you  could  not  get  on  a  train  without  going  through  a  non-restricted 
location,  and  if  you  were  in  the  “Black  Book,”  that  would  be  a  crime  for  you  to  do  that.  And  the  court 
threw  that  out,  indicating,  first  of  all,  there  were  other  routes  to  get  to  the  train  station  without  having  to 
walk  through  the  casino;  you  can  actually  get  there  other  than  that.  And  the  Board’s  view  was  that  being 
in  a  restricted  location  was  not  a  violation;  it  was  only  non-restricted  locations  that  you  were  excluded 
from,  meaning  that  it  had  to  have  more  than  fifteen  slot  machines  and/or  table  gaming.  And  so  going  into 
a  grocery  store  was  acceptable  for  somebody  who  was  in  the  “Black  Book.”  And  actually,  going  through 
the  airport,  even  though  that’s  non-restricted,  has  always  been  viewed  as  an  exception  to  the  “Black 
Book,”  because  it  was  never  the  intention  of  the  exclusion  list  to  keep  people  from  being  able  to  get  on  an 
airplane. 

Presently  there  are  some  large  casinos  that  are  slots  only.  Are  “Black  Book”  members  excluded  from 
them? 


Yes,  their  non-restricted  licensing  status  would  probably  entail  a  violation  for  anybody  who’s  on 
the  List  of  Excluded  Persons,  in  particular  those  who  gained  their  entry  into  the  list  as  a  result  of  being 


416 


slot  cheats.  To  have  that  kind  of  an  exclusion  not  valid  in  a  location  with  a  hundred  machines  would  be 
ridiculous,  and  obviously  would  defeat  the  purpose. 

In  1987  Ginji  Yasuda  was  licensed  as  the  owner  of  the  Aladdin.  Would  you  tell  us  about  that  application 
and  why  it  has  such  historical  significance? 

Yes.  Mr.  Yasuda  was  a  Korean,  but  a  naturalized  Japanese  for  purposes  of  passports,  who  had 
significant  sums  of  money  as  a  result  of  owning  real  estate  in  Tokyo.  He  became  the  very  first  Japanese 
national  to  be  licensed  by  the  Gaming  Control  Board  to  own  a  casino  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  The  way  that 
came  about  is  the  Aladdin  had  been  in  significant  financial  trouble  for  a  number  of  years,  and  ultimately 
was  in  bankruptcy.  Mr.  Yasuda  had  been  a  high-roller  in  Las  Vegas  for  a  number  of  years,  and  had  been 
hosted  in  Las  Vegas  by  a  gentleman  named  Ash  Resnick.  Ash  worked  for  the  Caesars  World  organization 
at  Caesars  Palace  and  was  Mr.  Yasuda’ s  host  whenever  he  came  to  town.  And  Mr.  Yasuda  used  to  come 
to  town  and  lose  millions  of  dollars  during  his  stays. 

At  some  point  Mr.  Resnick  told  Mr.  Y asuda  of  the  availability  of  the  Aladdin.  By  this  time  Ash 
had  moved  to  the  Dunes  Hotel  and  Casino.  He  told  Mr.  Yasuda  about  the  Aladdin’s  availability  in 
bankruptcy  and  got  him  interested  in  being  an  owner.  So  Mr.  Yasuda  went  through  the  bankruptcy  court 
process  and  purchased  the  hotel  for  about  fifty-one  to  fifty-two  million  dollars,  which,  while  not  a 
bargain,  was  a  very  good  price.  He  purchased  it  out  of  the  bankruptcy  that  had  been  filed  by  Ed  Torres. 

Ed  Torres  and  Wayne  Newton  had  owned  it  jointly.  Torres  bought  out  Newton  and  then  went  into  the 
bankruptcy  and  sold  it  to  Y asuda. 

While  the  Gaming  Control  Board  had  gone  through  investigations  in  Japan  previously — we’d  had 
two  slot  machine  manufacturers  from  Japan  that  had  been  licensed  by  the  Board — this  was  the  first  time 
that  the  Board  was  licensing  an  individual  for  casino  ownership  who  was  Japanese,  or  a  Japanese 
national.  And  as  a  result,  the  Board,  through  its  investigation  division  had  to  acquire  a  lot  of  skills  that  it 
didn’t  have — first  of  all,  the  Japanese  language,  [laughter]  but  also  getting  contacts  and  sources  in  Japan 
that  would  provide  the  Board  with  the  kind  of  information  necessary.  For  example,  in  Japan  a  criminal 
record  is  considered  extremely  private  and  may  not  be  shared,  so  the  Japanese  police  could  not  tell  us 
whether  or  not  Mr.  Y asuda  had  a  criminal  background,  because  it  was  illegal  for  them  to  share  that 
information.  So  we  had  to  develop  a  variety  of  avenues  of  information  sharing,  a  lot  of  which  was  by 
having  agents  over  there  getting  up  close  and  personal  with  Japanese  bureaucrats  and  Japanese  police.  So 
really,  it  forced  the  Board  to  set  up  a  network,  an  information  network,  that  never  existed  prior  to  that, 
because  the  previous  investigations  had  been  in  large  part — and,  in  fact,  almost  exclusively — focused  on 
the  companies  and  not  individuals.  We  had  never  really  done  the  kind  of  personal  history  investigation  of 
a  Japanese  national  that  we  were  required  to  do  under  Mr.  Yasuda’s  application. 

As  it  turned  out,  it  was  good  for  the  Board  to  go  through  that  process  given  what  happened  in  the 
next  couple  of  years  when  we  had  two  or  three  other  Japanese  nationals  come  through  and  we  already  had 
our  basis  of  information  in  place,  and  so  it  worked  out  very  well.  Unfortunately  for  Mr.  Y asuda,  he  ended 
up  getting  a  license,  which  meant  that  he  was  able  to  then  run  the  Aladdin.  He  promptly  ran  it  into  the 
ground.  He  spent  a  significant  amount  of  money  renovating  it,  only  to  end  up  losing  it  to  bankruptcy 
years  later. 


Did  he  hire  experienced  Nevada  personnel  to  operate  the  property? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


417 


Y es,  he  did.  He  hired  individuals  who  knew  the  business  and  could  have  run  it  profitably  for  him. 
The  problem  was  that  he  wouldn’t  let  go.  And  probably  the  most  telling  story  about  Mr.  Yasuda  is  how  he 
treated  high-rollers.  One  of  the  things  he  felt  was  going  to  make  the  Aladdin  extremely  profitable  was  his 
knowledge  and  his  friendship  with  other  Japanese  nationals  who  had  a  lot  of  money  and  enjoyed 
gambling.  And  so  his  plan  was  to  buy  several  aircraft.  He  then  would  use  one  of  his  own  aircraft — a 
737 — fill  it  up  with  friends  of  his  who  were  high-rollers  as  well,  fly  it  to  Las  Vegas,  have  them  stay  at  the 
Aladdin,  and  he  would  then  make  a  lot  of  money.  Problem  was  he  would  do  that — they  would  come  to 
Las  Vegas,  they  would  stay  at  the  Aladdin — but  he  was  so  fond  of  gambling  he  wanted  to  gamble  with 
them.  But  he  couldn’t  do  it  at  the  Aladdin,  which  he  owned,  so  he  would  take  them  to  the  Dunes  or  to 
Caesars  Palace,  and  they  would  lose  all  their  money  there.  In  the  meantime,  he’s  hosted  them  and  he’s 
paid  for  everything  for  them,  and  naturally  he  ended  up  with  no  profits. 

[laughter] 

On  top  of  which  he  would  lose  money  when  he  went  gambling  with  them,  so  he  just  couldn’t 
quite  get  out  of  his  own  way  in  order  to  allow  the  place  to  become  profitable. 

Are  there  any  other  interesting  applications  that  you  recall? 

Well,  we  had  another  Japanese  national  who  purchased  the  Dunes  Hotel  and  Casino.  He  had  been 
an  officer  in  the  Japanese  navy  in  World  War  11.  His  background  investigation  took  a  significant  amount 
of  time,  principally  because  he  had  been  involved  in  as  many  as  thirty  different  corporations  in  Japan. 

And  while  doing  his  personal  background,  we  also  had  to  then  look  at  least  superficially — in  some  cases 
in  some  depth — at  these  various  companies  that  he  had  been  an  owner  of. 

What  was  his  name? 

Masao  Nangaku.  In  any  case,  we’d  spent  approximately  eleven  months  in  this  background 
investigation  with  agents  in  Japan  and  the  United  States,  and  it  finally  was  time  for  us  to  consider  the 
application,  and  it  was  in  the  month  of  December.  And  our  meeting  in  December  was  scheduled  for 
December  7.  Since  1  was  chairman  at  the  time,  1  felt  it  was  probably  inappropriate  to  have  the  meeting  on 
that  date.  It  was  going  to  be  contentious,  and  I  wasn’t  sure  whether  he  was  going  to  get  licensed  or  not, 
but  1  knew  1  didn’t  want  to  hold  it  on  December  7  with  a  member  of  the  Japanese  navy  from  World  War 
II,  so  we  moved  it  to  the  eighth,  [laughter]  And  he  was  licensed.  Then  the  Dunes  ended  up  in  bankruptcy 
within  two  years  of  his  ownership  of  that  location,  [laughter] 

Is  there  anyone  else  you  recall? 

We  did  have  one  gentleman  who  had  been  one  of  the  original  owners  and  builders  of  Caesars 
Palace  and  he  came  back  twenty  years  later  and  was  trying  to  purchase  a  majority  interest  in  a  machine 
manufacturing  company.  And  he  was  in  a  wheelchair  some  of  the  time.  It  wasn’t  mandatory  that  he  be  in 
a  wheelchair,  but  his  body  had  been  racked  with  several  different  diseases  and  problems,  so  he  used  a 
wheelchair  probably  80  percent  of  the  time.  And  I  recall  we  had  an  investigative  hearing  because  of  some 
issues,  Bart  Jacka  was  chairman  at  the  time,  and  Bart  told  him,  “If  you  can  walk  to  the  podium  at  our 


418 


hearing  on  yours,  I’ll  vote  for  you.” 

And  sure  enough  [laughter]  at  the  hearing,  when  we  had  the  open  meeting,  he  got  up  out  of  his 
wheelchair,  walked  the  four  or  five  feet  to  the  podium,  and  Bart  did  vote  for  him.  1  voted  no,  and  Bart 
voted  yes.  [laughter]  In  fact,  1  think  Guy  [Hillyer]  and  I  both  voted  no. 

So  he  got  denied? 

Yes,  he  did. 

The  1980s  and  the  1990s  were  periods  of  gaming  transition  and  the  beginning  of  legalized  gaming 
throughout  the  United  States.  What  role  do  you  feel  the  state  of  Nevada  and  you  personally  played  that 
helped  make  gambling  more  acceptable  in  the  other  parts  of  this  country? 

Well,  let  me  speak  to  Nevada  first.  The  state,  1  think,  was  integral  in  the  expansion  of  gaming 
throughout  the  United  States.  1  can’t  tell  you  the  number  of  discussions  1  had  with  legislators  in  different 
jurisdictions,  all  wanting  to  know  whether  or  not  1  believed,  or  others  in  Nevada  believed,  that  we  could 
have  a  clean  industry.  In  fact,  to  some  degree,  the  amount  of  competition  the  state  of  Nevada  sees  today  is 
a  result  of  our  success  in  cleaning  up  the  industry.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  variety  of  actions  taken  in  the 
1970s  and  1980s  to  weed  out  both  problem  individuals,  but  also  corrupted  companies,  then  1  don’t  think 
many  of  the  other  jurisdictions  that  now  have  gaming  would  have  accepted  it.  The  fact  that  we  were  able 
to  make  it  a  corporate  culture  and  show  the  rest  of  the  world  that  you  could  have  both  individual  owners 
who  are  clean  alongside  public  companies  that  could  invest  multiple  millions  if  not  billions  of  dollars  to 
make  an  industry — if  it  had  not  been  for  that,  1  think  most  of  the  other  jurisdictions  would  have  turned  it 
down. 

1  spent  most  of  the  end  of  the  1980s  and  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  in  New  Jersey  with  the 
Trump  organization,  but  after  that  1  spent  a  tremendous  amount  of  time  talking  with  legislators,  and, 
frankly,  brand  new  regulators.  When  some  jurisdictions  would  decide  to  have  gaming,  they  would  appoint 
a  board,  and  then  the  board  members  would  start  scattering  about  trying  to  find  anybody  who  knew  what 
the  heck  it  was  they  were  supposed  to  be  doing,  [laughter]  because  they’d  never  had  anything  like  that  in 
their  state  before.  And  so  1  spent  a  lot  of  time  talking  with  legislators,  talking  with  regulators  about  the 
kinds  of  tenets  that  founded  Nevada  gaming  and  what  our  whole  purpose  was  in  regulating  gaming  in  the 
state,  and  why  things  were  important. 

Even  so,  and  it  seems  silly  from  a  Nevada  perspective,  but  in  some  jurisdictions  things  as  simple 
as  internal  controls  in  your  accounting  were  foreign  to  them.  They  didn’t  understand  why  Nevada  would 
bother  worrying  about  how  monies  were  accounted  for,  and  why  they  didn’t  simply  accept  the  check  at 
the  end  of  the  month  for  the  taxes.  And  in  those  conversations  most  of  my  time  was  spent  trying,  first  of 
all,  not  to  be  patronizing  to  the  people  that  1  was  talking  with,  because  they  simply  were  coming  from  a 
lack  of  knowledge.  They  weren’t  backward  people,  [laughter]  It  wasn’t  like  we  were  trying  to  go  to  a 
third-world  country.  But  by  the  same  token,  their  questions  were  so  simplistic,  and  their  views  on  gaming 
were  so  simplistic,  that  it  really  required  an  education.  And  that  education  process  in  many  cases  took 
months.  There’s  one  particular  regulator — 1  won’t  name  him — but  1  probably  spent  the  better  part  of  two 
hundred  hours  over  the  course  of  six  months  trying  to  make  him  understand  what  it  was  about  gaming 
that  was  unique,  why  it  had  to  be  regulated,  why  the  different  methods  of  regulation  were  either  effective 
or  ineffective,  and  frankly,  just  get  him  up  to  the  point  where  he  could  feel  comfortable  as  a  regulator  of 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


419 


the  industry. 

These  were  the  kinds  of  things  that  we  passed  on  to  the  other  jurisdictions.  And  I  mean  “we,” 
because  the  whole  time  1  was  on  the  Board  we  had  different  jurisdictions  from  Canada  and  Australia  and 
from  outside  the  U.S.  that  would  come  to  us  and  ask  us  how,  why,  et  cetera.  But  we  had  been  the 
recipients  of  a  tremendous  learning  curve  that  the  state  had  gone  through,  that  other  regulators  had  gone 
through.  Y ou  know,  the  idea  of  internal  controls  certainly  wasn’t  mine,  [laughter]  I  didn’t  come  up  with 
that.  It  took  a  long  time  for  us  to  get  there.  And  in  many  cases  our  regulations  were  the  result  of  a 
problem.  I  mean,  something  cropped  up,  there  was  a  problem,  and  once  that  problem  was  identified,  then 
a  regulation  was  looked  at  to  try  and  solve  it  for  the  future,  [laughter]  We  had  been  the  recipients  of  all 
that  had  gone  before  us,  and  all  of  the  wisdom  that  they  had  acquired  through  the  mistakes  that  had  been 
made  in  the  past.  So,  yes,  by  and  large,  1  tried  not  to  be  smug,  [laughter] 

Were  there  any  organizations  fanned  during  the  1980s  that  were  of  benefit  to  the  gaming  industry  as  a 
whole,  and  also  to  the  state  of  Nevada? 

Yes,  actually  there  were  two.  The  first  one  started  out  as  the  National  Association  of  Gaming 
Attorneys,  NAGA.  It  was  formed  by  Nevada  lawyers  in  1981.  At  the  time  the  attorneys  that  formed  it 
were  the  premier  gaming  lawyers  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  At  the  initial  meeting,  1  was  the  lowly  associate 
at  Jones,  Jones  who  had  to  draft  the  articles  of  incorporation  and  the  by-laws  for  this,  [laughter]  But  the 
meeting  was  amongst  Bob  Faiss,  Bud  Hicks,  Mike  Sloan,  Frank  Fahrenkof,  Shannon  Bybee,  Frank 
Schreck,  and  Lyle  Rivera.  And  they  formed  the  National  Association  of  Gaming  Attorneys  with  the  intent 
of  including  New  Jersey  attorneys  as  well,  being  the  only  other  gaming  jurisdiction  in  the  U.S.  at  the 
time,  which  they  did.  Once  the  group  was  incoiporated  and  had  their  by-laws  in  place,  they  immediately 
brought  in  three  or  four  of  the  premier  gaming  attorneys  from  the  state  of  New  Jersey  and  held  their  first 
meeting,  1  believe,  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  After  that  it  was  determined  that  they  should  be  offshore  for  all 
of  their  meetings.  And  as  a  result,  the  whirlwind  tour  of  the  world  began  for  gaming  lawyers,  having  held 
meetings  now  in  places  like  Prague,  Venice,  London,  Paris,  Monte  Carlo.  They’ve  pretty  much  seen  the 
world.  It  evolved  into  the  International  Association  of  Gaming  Attorneys,  and  now  has  attorneys  from 
probably  sixteen  different  countries  that  are  members,  including  all  of  the  jurisdictions  in  the  United 
States  that  have  any  kind  of  gaming,  and  has  developed  into  probably  the  most  significant  organization 
for  the  legal  studies  of  the  gaming  industry  and  their  regulations. 

Then  in  1988,  while  1  was  a  regulator,  a  group  of  us  met  in  Australia  at  an  International 
Association  of  Gaming  Attorneys  convention.  A  group  of  regulators  got  together  and  we  formed  the 
International  Association  of  Gaming  Regulators.  There  were  about  ten  of  us  present  at  the  inaugural 
meeting.  And  that  organization  has  blossomed  so  that  it  now  includes  regulators  from  probably  thirty 
different  countries.  They  meet  annually,  generally  just  prior  to  and  during  the  Association  of  Gaming 
Attorneys  meeting  in  whatever  locale  they’re  meeting  in,  and  truly  allows  regulators  to  not  just  exchange 
views  and  ideas,  but  allows  them  to  forge  bonds  of  cooperation,  which  was  the  initial  impetus  for  putting 
it  together,  where  information  would  be  shared,  all  regulatory  techniques  would  be  shared  where  you 
could  find  someone  with  a  joint  interest  in  an  applicant.  If  that  company  or  that  individual  was  crossing 
borders  in  order  to  grow  their  business,  you  could  then  share  the  information,  and  perhaps  share  the 
regulatory  duties  of  watching  what  they’re  doing.  And  so  those  two  organizations,  I  think,  have  been  key 
in  bringing  the  business  of  gambling  on  a  worldwide  scale  into  some  focus  for  both  the  attorneys  and  the 
people  who  were  charged  with  regulating  them. 


420 


Do  you  still  belong  to  both  organizations  now? 

You  can’t  belong  to  the  International  Association  of  Gaming  Regulators  unless  you  are  one.  So  1 
was  ousted  as  soon  as  1  left  the  Board,  or  politely  left  off  the  charter,  [laughter]  But  I’m  a  member  of  the 
board  of  trustees  of  the  International  Association  of  Gaming  Attorneys.  The  trustees  actually  meet  twice  a 
year,  but  the  organization  meets  annually.  Last  year’s  convention  was  to  be  in  Paris,  and  it  was  following 
too  closely  on  the  heels  of  9-1 1  [September  11,  2001],  so  that  was  canceled.  We  had  a  meeting  in  London 
instead,  and  this  year  we’ll  be  meeting  in  San  Diego. 

What  are  some  of  the  actions  currently  being  taken  by  the  industry  to  improve  gambling’s  image? 

Probably  the  most  pressing  issue  for  the  industry  has  been  problem  gambling.  And  I  hate  to  say  it, 
but  Nevada  has  really  been  lagging  behind  other  jurisdictions  in  this  regard. 

Is  New  Jersey  pretty  active  on  this  issue? 

New  Jersey  has  been  active  in  it  for  years.  Even  back  in  the  early  1990s  when  I  was  in  New 
Jersey,  they  had  very  active  campaigns  for  problem  gamblers,  as  well  as  teenage  or  underage  gaming. 

One  of  the  earliest  programs  put  in  place  was  actually  a  result  of  a  disciplinary  action  against  Harrah’s. 
Harrah’s  had  been  caught  with  underage  gamblers  on  their  casino  floor,  and  while  the  New  Jersey 
commission  fined  some  hundreds  of  thousands  of  dollars,  probably  the  more  important  thing  is  they 
required  that  they  put  together  an  ad  campaign  that  was  not  just  in  terms  of  billboards  and  television  but 
also  a  pro-active  campaign  in  schools  to  combat  underage  gambling.  And  Harrah’s,  being  what  I  believe 
to  be  the  good  coiporate  enterprise  that  they  are,  then  took  that  to  heart  and  actually  went  further  with  it 
than  the  state  required,  and  really  became  very  active  in  both  problem  gambling  and  underage  gambling. 
In  fact,  in  New  Jersey  in  the  1990s,  all  advertising  from  any  casino  was  required  to  include  a  phone 
number  for  problem  gamblers.  So  they’ve  been  very  active  in  that  area.  And  while  I  personally  believe 
that  the  best  information  out  there  shows  us  that  probably  less  than  two  percent — closer  to  one  percent — 
of  all  people  exposed  to  gambling  will  develop  a  true  problem  with  gambling,  it’s  still  something  that 
can’t  be  ignored,  and  the  industry  has  an  obligation  to  deal  with  it. 

The  Nevada  industry  really  put  its  head  in  the  sand  for  decades  and  tried  to  ignore  it  as  if  it  was 
not  going  to  cause  them  any  concern  ever.  And  it  wasn’t  until  Nevada-based  gaming  businesses  started  to 
go  into  other  jurisdictions  that  they  realized  that  they  were  going  to  have  to  do  something  with  respect  to 
this.  And  luckily  for  the  industry,  at  that  time  the  American  Gaming  Association  had  been  formed  and 
really  acted  as  a  vehicle  to  allow  the  members  of  the  industry  to  get  involved  in  problem  gaming  without 
directly  doing  something  at,  for  example,  their  own  properties.  Unfortunately  to  say,  it  wasn’t  until 
probably  1 994  or  1 995  that  the  local  gambling  industry — and  by  local  I  mean  the  slot  machine  route 
operators  and  the  restricted  locations:  the  bars,  the  taverns,  the  supermarkets — got  involved  in  that  issue 
as  well.  And  that  was  really  as  a  result  of  the  City  of  Las  Vegas  trying  to  impose  certain  restrictions  on 
them,  and  the  industry  finally  ended  up  recognizing  that  they  too  had  to  deal  with  that.  So  they’re  now 
dealing  with  problem  gaming  as  well.  My  personal  view  is  that  there’s  probably  far  more  money  being 
spent  on  informing  the  public  than  there  should  be  and  not  enough  money  being  spent  on  helping  treat 
those  people  with  the  problem  than  there  should  be.  But  I  think  over  time  that  will  balance  itself  out.  A 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


421 


problem  now,  however,  is  in  the  United  States,  you  don’t  have  to  be  in  a  jurisdiction  that  allows  gaming; 
all  you  have  to  have  is  a  computer  and  an  internet  service  provider  and  you  can  gamble  all  you  want, 
[laughter] 

What  do  you  consider  to  be  your  most  important  accomplishments  during  your  time  on  the  Board? 

Boy,  that’s  tough.  Let’s  see.  Regulation  6a,  keeping  Nevada  casinos  out  from  under  the 
regulatory  supervision  of  the  Internal  Revenue  Service  and  the  Treasury  Department,  1  think  has  been  key 
to  keeping  the  Nevada  industry  as  healthy  as  it  has  been.  Those  regulations  will  be  stifling  to  many  Indian 
jurisdictions  that  have  run  afoul  of  them  but  have  not  yet  been  brought  to  task  about  them.  I  spent  a 
significant  part  of  my  time,  both  in  the  attorney  general’s  office  and  on  the  Board,  helping  Congress 
shape  its  policy  toward  Indian  gaming.  This  is  probably  not  well  known:  the  original  bill  that  would  have 
authorized  Indian  gaming  at  a  federal  level  was  killed  by  the  state  of  Nevada.  Brian  McKay  and  Paul 
Laxalt,  on  behalf  of  the  industry,  were  able  to  kill  the  first  bill  that  was  introduced.  The  next  year  that  a 
bill  was  then  taken  up,  we  in  Nevada  had  shown  the  Congress  the  way  to  allow  regulated  Indian  gaming, 
and  that  was  by  virtue  of  having  signed  a  compact  with  the  southern  Nevada  Paiute  tribe  that  would  allow 
them  in  Laughlin  to  open  a  casino  that  would  be  regulated  by  the  State  of  Nevada,  under  a  compact,  but 
that  would  not  be  taxed  by  the  State  of  Nevada.  The  compact  called  for  inter-governmental  payments  to 
be  made  by  the  tribe  to  the  State  of  Nevada  for  the  cost  of  regulation  once  they  opened  a  casino.  And  they 
now  have  that,  although  it  took  them  many  years  to  get  the  financing  to  do  so.  By  having  done  that  in  the 
state  of  Nevada,  the  home  of  legalized  gaming,  I  was  then  able  to  go  back  to  Congress  and  show  them 
that  a  state  government  could,  in  fact,  work  with  a  sovereign  tribe  within  their  geographic  borders  and 
regulate  the  gaming  enterprise  through  agreement  government  to  government.  That  was  not  the  approach 
that  was  originally  taken  by  Congress,  but  it  was  the  approach  that  was  ultimately  adopted.  And  it  really 
was  adopted  because  Nevada  proved  it  could  be  done.  And  so  I’m  very  proud  of  my  time  spent  in  trying 
to  make  that  come  to  fruition. 

Let  me  think,  what  else?  One  of  the  things  that  I  did  enjoy,  and  I  feel  very  proud  of,  is  getting  the 
industry  to  understand  that  gaming  regulation  can  be  very  professional,  can  be  as  professional  as  they  are 
when  they  run  their  businesses,  and  that  we’re  not  necessarily  the  bad  guys;  we’re  more  the  cop  on  the 
beat.  We  are  somebody  who  can  help  as  well  as  arrest.  We  can  go  into  an  operation  and  give  them  as 
much  support  as  they  need  in  any  situation.  That  cooperation  with  the  industry,  I  think,  is  something  that 
has  now  become  pretty  much  a  standard  routine  and  policy  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  and  I’m  pretty 
proud  of  that. 

Yes.  That ’s  a  very  good  point ,  that  you  ’re  there  to  help  them  and  you  ’re  not  there  to  pick  on  them. 

Well,  exactly.  There  was  a  time  before  I  was  on  the  Board,  if  somebody  identified  themselves  as 
an  agent  of  the  Board  everybody  left  the  room,  [laughter]  Nobody  wanted  to  be  around,  like  the  IRS:  “I’m 
here  to  help  you,”  and  everybody  ran  away.  But  I  think  during  my  tenure  there  we  were  able  to  get  the 
industry  to  understand  that  there  were  a  lot  of  things  we  can  do:  we  can  be  a  blocker  for  them,  we  can  be  a 
tackier  for  them  and  when  they  need  help  we  can  help  them. 

As  an  attorney  who  has  served  on  the  Board ,  along  with  having  served  as  a  counsel  for  gaming 
applicants,  what  advice  would  you  give  to  an  aspiring  gaming  attorney  representing  a  client  before  the 


422 


Board? 


First  and  foremost  be  prepared.  If  you’re  going  to  appear  in  front  of  the  Control  Board  and  the 
Commission,  you  really  need  to  know  everything  there  is  to  know  about  your  client’s  background,  any 
issues  they  may  have.  Y ou  need  to  be  able  to  explain  that.  Y ou  need  to  really  create  a  stream  for  the 
Board  and  the  Commission.  You  need  to  be  able  to  start  at  point  A  and  take  them  to  point  B  or  C  or  D, 
and  do  that  in  a  way  that  is  undoubtedly  in  your  client’s  best  interest,  but  also  is  very,  very  honest, 
because  lack  of  honesty  would  be  the  first  thing  that  will  kill  you.  If  you’re  not  viewed  as  credible  in  front 
of  the  gaming  regulators,  then  your  client’s  dead  to  begin  with.  Doesn’t  matter  how  good  they  are. 

When  did  you  resign  from  the  Gaming  Control  Board? 

I  didn’t  actually  resign.  I  believe  I  held  three  different  terms  of  office.  When  I  was  first  appointed 
I  was  appointed  to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  Patty  Becker,  which  had  about  two  years.  Once  that  term 
expired,  I  was  reappointed  to  it  for  my  own  four-year  term,  and  then  Bart  Jacka  resigned  a  couple  of 
months  later  and  I  was  appointed  to  fill  his  unexpired  term,  [laughter]  which  lasted  for  the  rest  of  what 
would  have  been  a  full  four-year  term.  So  I  did  four  years  and  left  after  the  last  of  my  three  appointments 
expired,  [laughter] 

Was  there  any  particular  reason  that  you  left? 

Absolutely.  No  question  about  it.  I  left  because  then-lieutenant  governor,  soon-to-be  governor 
Bob  Miller,  had  proposed  a  cooling-off  period.  When  Bob  Miller  was  lieutenant  governor  he  had  been 
pushing  this  legislation  to  require  gaming  regulators  and  the  Public  Service  Commission  regulators  to 
spend  a  year  outside  of  the  industry  prior  to  going  to  work  for  the  industries  they  regulated.  Worthy  and 
laudable  goal.  I  told  him  when  he  was  lieutenant  governor  and  proposing  this,  that  I  felt  he  was  being 
very  short-sighted,  certainly  with  respect  to  gaming,  in  that  his  legislation  would  only  cover  eight  of  us: 
three  members  of  the  Board,  five  members  of  the  Commission.  And  I  explained  to  him  that  that,  in  my 
view,  made  us  look  like  people  that  couldn’t  be  trusted.  And  if,  in  fact,  what  he  wanted  to  do  was  to  avoid 
the  appearance  of  impropriety,  what  he  should  propose  is  that  no  member  of  the  agency,  whether  it  be  a 
secretary  or  a  chairman  of  the  Board,  would  be  allowed  to  go  into  the  gaming  industry  for  a  year  after 
they  left.  The  rule  in  New  Jersey  at  that  time  was  a  year  for  staff  and  two  or  three  years  for  the  members 
of  the  commission.  And  so  I  told  him  that  in  my  view,  that  was  the  way  to  do  it.  Don’t  single  out  three 
political  appointees  on  the  Board  and  five  political  appointees  on  the  Commission  because  you  make  it 
look  as  if  we  ’re  the  ones  that  can’t  be  trusted,  when  I  guarantee  an  agent,  who  has  just  completed  an 
investigation  is  going  to  be  much  more  worthwhile  to  somebody  in  the  industry  who  wants  to  do 
nefarious  activities  than  I  am. 

He,  for  whatever  reason,  chose  not  to  do  that.  So  once  his  legislation  passed,  it  was  passed  as  a 
restriction  on  anybody  appointed  to  the  job  in  the  future,  which  meant  that  myself  and  others  who  had 
already  been  appointed  were  not  covered  by  it.  We  were,  quote,  “grandfathered  in,”  unquote.  I  was  in 
Australia  at  the  inaugural  meeting  of  the  International  Association  of  Gaming  Regulators  where  we  set  up 
the  organization,  and  he  called  me,  having  been  elected  governor — this  is  toward  the  end  of  1988,  toward 
the  end  of  my  term  where  it  would  expire  naturally — and  said  to  me  that  Bill  Bible,  who  had  been  the 
head  of  budget,  was  going  to  be  his  choice  for  chairman,  but  would  I  stay  on  for  two  or  three  months  and 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


423 


allow  him — him  being  the  governor — to  use  Bible  in  the  role  of  lobbyist  at  the  legislature.  And  1  said  to 
him,  “No,  Bob.  I’m  sorry,  Governor  Miller.  It’s  not  going  to  happen,  because  I  told  you  that  your 
legislation  was  horrible.  I  told  you  how  to  correct  it.  You  chose  not  to  listen  to  me.  And  if  I  accept  a 
reappointment  from  you,  even  for  a  three  or  four-month  period,  I  will  be  covered  by  the  law  that  I  told 
you  was  stupid.” 

And  so  I  did  not  choose  to  stay  on,  and  I  left  at  the  expiration  of  my  term.  What  I  did  do  though, 
because  I  believed  in  the  spirit  of  what  he  was  trying  to  do,  is  I  did  not  go  to  work  for  any  licensee  that 
had  ever  been  licensed  in  front  of  me  or  who  had  come  before  me.  So  as  a  result  of  my  own  personal 
convictions,  I  went  to  work  for  Trump,  who  was  never  licensed  in  the  state  of  Nevada. 

Were  other  regulatory  agencies  covered  under  that  law? 

Only  the  Public  Service  Commission  and  gaming. 

So  you  were  one  of  the  last  regulators  not  restricted. 

Let  me  see,  it  was  myself  and  Dennis  Amerine  who  was  the  board  member  in  charge  of  the  audit 
division,  and  I  believe  Gerry  Cunningham  also,  who  was  in  charge  of  enforcement.  Yes,  the  three  of  us 
were  the  last  ones. 

When  you  left  you  say  you  went  to  work  with  Mr.  Trump.  How  long  did  you  stay  with  Mr.  Trump? 

I  was  with  Donald  for  approximately  three  and  half,  four  years.  Initially  the  idea  was  to  put 
together  a  project  in  the  state  of  Nevada,  whether  it  be  building  from  the  ground  up  or  buying  an  existing 
casino  and  modifying  it.  We  had  a  horrendous  accident  for  our  organization:  we  had  three  of  the  most 
senior  executives  in  the  Trump  gaming  organization  killed  in  a  helicopter  crash  in  New  Jersey.  And  as  a 
result,  in  1989, 1  went  back  to  New  Jersey,  worked  first  with  Robert  Trump,  his  brother,  to  open  the  Taj 
Mahal  casino,  and  then  continued  working  back  there  as  executive  vice  president  of  Trump  Castle.  And 
that  lasted  until  early  1992,  when  I  had  pretty  much  had  enough  of  New  Jersey  regulation,  but  more 
importantly,  had  enough  of  New  Jersey  and  the  East  Coast.  I  grew  up  in  Nevada,  I  love  Nevada.  I  had  no 
interest  in  living  in  New  Jersey  or  New  York,  or  anywhere  on  the  East  Coast. 

So  where  did  you  go  when  you  left  Mr.  Trump?  Did  you  come  back  to  Nevada? 

For  a  very  short  period  of  time  I  was  with  Anchor  Gaming,  which  at  that  time  was  simply  a  slot 
machine  route  and  one  casino  in  Colorado.  While  I  was  there  we  designed  and  built  a  second  casino  in 
Colorado.  Ultimately  it  became  the  most  profitable  casino  in  the  state  in  Black  Hawk.  But  I  was  there  for 
only  about  seven  or  eight  months  and  then  I  went  with  Circus  Circus  Enterprises,  now  Mandalay  Bay 
Group.  I  was  director  of  coiporate  development  for  them,  and  in  that  role  I  spent  a  lot  of  time  on  the  road 
looking  at  gaming  opportunities  in  other  jurisdictions,  principally  U.S.  but  also  outside  of  the  United 
States.  And  during  my  tenure  in  that  position  I  was  seconded  to  a  consortium  of  Circus  Circus,  Caesars 
World,  and  Hilton  Hotels  Corporation  to  build  and  open  the  temporary  casino  in  Windsor,  Ontario.  And 
so  I  was  the  first  managing  director  of  Windsor  Casino  Limited.  Opened  it,  got  it  up  and  running,  and 
then  went  back  to  Circus  Circus  as  the  head  of  corporate  development.  Just  after  I  got  back  I  was  asked 


424 


again  to  go  back  to  Anchor  Gaming,  and  I  became  president  and  CEO  of  Anchor  Gaming,  which  at  that 
time  was  a  public  company  with  a  market  value  of  about  fifty,  sixty  million  dollars.  And  when  1  left  five 
years  later  it  was  about  five  hundred  million.  It  had  been  as  high  as  a  billion,  but  it  came  back  down, 
markets  being  what  they  are.  [laughter] 

And  now  you  ’re  with  Acme  Gaming? 

Acme  Gaming  is  a  company  1  started  so  that  1  have  a  vehicle  to  consult  with  casino  operators  and 
internet  gaming  enterprises  that  are  looking  for  some  help.  But  by  and  large,  I’m  retired.  My  wife  says 
“unemployed;”  I  say  “retired.”  [laughter] 

[laughter]  You  are  married? 

I  am  mamed. 

And  how  many  children  do  you  have? 

I  have  no  children.  But  I’ve  been  lucky  enough  to  marry  a  woman  who  knows  more  about 
finances  than  I  will  ever  learn.  She’s  an  M.B.A.  out  of  Oregon,  and  was  the  head  at  one  time  of  the 
Gaming  Control  Board’s  coiporate  investigations  section.  So  she  was  in  charge  of  coiporate 
investigations  into  every  public  company  for  about  a  seven-year  period.  And  subsequent  to  that  she  was 
the  person  who  set  up  and  built  the  internal  coiporate  section  at  IGT,  so  she  was  in  charge  of  all  their 
compliance  throughout  the  world. 

Is  she  still  working? 

No,  I  forced  her  to  retire,  [laughter] 

Are  there  any  other  comments  that  you  would  like  to  add? 

The  only  thing  I  would  say  is  I  think  this  is  a  tremendous  program  [the  Oral  History  Program’s 
interviews  with  former  gaming  regulators],  a  tremendously  worthwhile  program,  and  I  look  forward  to 
listening  to  everybody  else’s  interview. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


425 


17 

Brian  Sandoval 


Governor  Brian  Sandoval  was  appointed  to  the 
Gaming  Commission  in  1998,  becoming  its 
chair  the  following  year.  Sandoval  was  born  in 
1963  in  Redding,  California,  grew  up  in  a  rural 
area  in  Sparks,  and  graduated  from  Bishop 
Manogue  High  School  in  Reno.  He  received  his 
Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  from  the  University  of 
Nevada  in  1986  and  his  law  degree  from  the 
Ohio  State  University  Moritz  College  of  Law  in 
1989.  Following  several  years  of  private 
practice  in  Reno,  he  was  elected  to  the  Nevada 
Assembly  in  1994  and  reelected  in  1996.  In 
1998,  he  resigned  from  the  legislature  to  accept 
the  appointment  by  Governor  Bob  Miller  to  the 
Gaming  Commission.  Sandoval  stepped  down 
from  that  role  in  2001.  In  2002  he  was  elected 
Attorney  General  of  Nevada,  and  in  2005  he  was 
appointed  United  States  District  Judge  for  the 
District  of  Nevada.  He  was  elected  the  30  th 
Governor  of  Nevada  in  2010  and  re-elected  in 
2014. 


Brian  Sandoval,  ca.  2003.  Photo  courtesy  of  Brian  Sandoval. 


Dwayne  Kling:  This  is  Dwayne  Kling.  It ’s  February  24th  in  the  year  2004.  I’m  with  Brian  Sandoval  in  his 
office  in  Carson  City,  Nevada. 

Mr.  Sandoval,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have  your  permission 
to  record  this  interview? 


426 


Brian  Sandoval:  Yes,  it  does. 

Thank  you  very  much.  Let’s  start  out  by  you  telling  me  when  and  where  you  were  born. 

1  was  bom  on  August  5,  1963  in  Redding,  California. 

How  did  you  happen  to  get  to  Nevada? 

When  1  was  young,  our  family  moved  around  quite  a  bit.  My  father  was  employed  by  the  Federal 
Aviation  Agency,  and  so  1  was  bom  in  Redding.  We  moved  from  there  to  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  and  from 
there  to  Los  Angeles,  California,  and  then  from  there  to  Fallon,  Nevada.  And  he  had  received  a  promotion 
to  Fallon,  which  some  people  wouldn’t  call  a  promotion,  [laughter]  You  know,  1  dearly  love  Fallon,  but 
for  some,  to  move  from  Los  Angeles  to  Fallon  was  a  big  change.  And  then  from  there  we  moved  to 
Sparks,  and  that’s  where  1  was  raised. 

So  did  you  experience  your  early  education  there  in  Sparks,  in  the  grammar  schools? 

No,  1  attended  St.  Therese’s  Little  Flower  Elementary  School  in  Reno,  and  thereafter  attended 
Bishop  Manogue  Lligh  School  in  Reno,  and  then  the  University  of  Nevada. 

When  you  were  a  young  man  did  you  have  any  role  model  that  you  patterned  yourself  after? 

You  know,  I’ve  always  admired  Abraham  Lincoln  from  the  earliest  of  ages,  just  based  on  his 
perfomiance  as  the  president  and  the  courage  and  conviction  that  he  exhibited  as  well  as  his  ability  to 
succeed  despite  a  very  challenging  background  and  a  very  humble  beginning. 

It’s  quite  a  good  role  model,  [laughter] 

Yes.  And  then  as  1  grew,  obviously  my  parents  were  strong  role  models  for  me.  They  both 
worked  very  hard,  they  both  had  full-time  jobs,  and  enabled  us — my  brother  and  my  sister  and  I — to 
attend  the  Catholic  schools.  And  so  1  admire  them  greatly.  Then  as  1  moved  on  and  got  into  college, 
Senator  Paul  Laxalt  is  probably  one  of  my  greatest  icons  in  terms  of  statesmanship  and  representing  the 
state  of  Nevada. 

After  you ’d  received  your  degree  at  the  University  of  Nevada  in  Reno,  where  did  you  get  your  law 
degree? 


1  attended  the  Ohio  State  University  College  of  Law.  1  applied  to  several  different  schools  and 
decided  to  go  there.  That’s  where  my  brother  had  attended  veterinary  school.  It  had  a  very  respected  law 
school,  and  1  was  eager  to  see  a  different  part  of  the  country.  And  so  1  moved  to  Columbus  and  spent 
three  years  there. 


After  you  received  your  degree,  did  you  come  back  to  Nevada? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


427 


Yes.  While  1  was  in  law  school,  1  worked  at  the  Ohio  Supreme  Court  as  a  judicial  extern,  and  that 
was  a  great  experience  for  me.  1  also  had  worked  for  a  small  law  firm  in  Columbus  and  had  an 
opportunity  to  stay  there,  but  1  was  very  eager  to  get  home.  Y ou  know  the  old  saying,  “Y ou  can  take  the 
kid  out  of  Nevada,  but  not  the  Nevada  out  of  the  kid,”  and  it  was  important  for  me  to  return  to  Nevada.  1 
was  fortunate  to  obtain  employment  with  a  very  large  statewide  law  firm,  McDonald,  Carano,  Wilson, 
McCune,  Bergin,  Frankovich  &  Hicks,  and  began  my  legal  career  there.  After  getting  out  of  law  school  I 
immediately  took  the  Nevada  Bar  Exam  and  the  California  Bar  Exam  and  was  fortunate  to  have  passed 
both  of  those  on  my  first  attempt. 

That  was  a  good  law  firm  that  you  got  started  out  with. 

Yes.  And  I  had  some  great  mentors  there,  one  of  which  was  Larry  Hicks,  who’s  now  a  federal 
judge,  and  John  Frankovich,  who’s  a  very  prominent  attorney  in  the  state.  Those  are  the  two  that  1  spent 
most  of  my  time  with.  I  did  a  lot  of  work  for  Spike  Wilson.  They  were  great  role  models  in  terms  of  how 
an  attorney  conducts  himself,  and  they  conducted  themselves  with  honor,  with  integrity,  treating 
everybody  the  same.  1  really  learned  a  lot  of  good  lessons  from  them. 

Shortly  after  you  went  to  work  for  that  law  firm ,  did  you  run  for  legislature? 

Well,  it  wasn’t  shortly.  1  began  work  at  the  McDonald  firm  in  1989  and  spent  approximately  three 
years  there,  and  then  1  moved  to  another  law  firm,  the  Robison,  Belaustegui,  Robb  &  Shaip  firm.  And  the 
reason  for  my  change  was  that  that  firm  was  representing  the  City  of  Sparks  in  a  very  large  environmental 
case  involving  the  Sparks  tank  farm,  and  1  had  been  recruited  by  the  Robison  firm  to  play  a  prominent 
role  in  the  prosecution  of  that  case.  So  it  was  a  great  opportunity  to  get  at  the  forefront  of  probably  one  of 
the  most  important  environmental  cases  in  the  history  of  northern  Nevada.  1  worked  with  that  firm  for 
several  years,  and  in  1993,  one  year  later,  toward  the  end  of  the  year  made  the  decision  to  be  a  candidate 
for  assembly. 

What  motivated  you  to  become  a  legislator? 

ft  was  part  of  what  1  had  mentioned  before.  1  had  a  great  admiration  for  Abraham  Lincoln  and  had 
always  had  a  strong  interest  in  public  service  and  statesmanship  and  making  things  better.  When  1  was  in 
grade  school,  1  was  a  class  president.  When  1  was  in  high  school,  1  was  the  student  body  president.  At  the 
university  1  was  the  student  legal  director,  and  when  1  was  in  law  school,  1  participated  in  student 
government.  And  then  even  before  1  had  chosen  to  run  for  the  legislature,  I’d  been  very  active  civically.  1 
served  on  the  Board  of  Adjustment  for  the  City  of  Reno.  1  was  on  another  entity  called  the  Citizens’ 
Policy,  Planning,  and  Advisory  Commission.  1  belonged  to  the  Kiwanis  Club.  And  so  it  was  important  for 
me  to  be  civically  active  and  to  give  back  to  the  community,  and  1  had  always  been  interested  in  elected 
public  service. 

Jim  Gibbons  had  made  a  decision  to  run  for  governor  at  the  time,  and  my  wife  and  I  resided  in  the 
legislative  district  where  he  was  vacating  to  run  for  governor.  So  I  sat  down  with  her  and  we  talked  it  over 
and  made  a  decision  to  run  for  office.  It  was  much  sooner  than  I  had  anticipated  getting  involved  in  a 
campaign.  I  believe  I  was  twenty-nine  at  the  time,  and  I  had  thought  later  on,  perhaps,  when  I  was  in  my 


428 


forties  or  so  there  would  be  an  opportunity.  But  this  was  a  unique  opportunity  to  get  involved,  and 
nobody  really  knew  who  1  was.  1  decided  that  1  would  announce  my  candidacy  for  the  legislature  and  I 
worked  very  hard.  1  knocked  on  ten  thousand  doors.  We  walked  the  entire  district  twice,  and  in  the 
primary  1  received  75  percent  of  the  vote,  and  in  the  general  election  received  80  percent  of  the  vote. 

That ’s  quite  impressive. 

Well,  it  was  just  fortunate,  looking  back,  that  1  still  have  the  pair  of  shoes  that  1  wore. 

[laughter] 

They’re  worn  smooth.  But  1  would  spend  seven  days  a  week.  I’d  get  out  of  the  law  office  and  I’d 
immediately  go  to  the  precinct  and  knock  on  the  doors  and  introduce  myself  to  the  voters  and  ask  about 
the  issues  that  were  important  to  them  and,  apparently,  it  made  a  very  positive  impression.  And  this  was 
something  that  I  wanted  very  badly  and  I  was  willing  to  do  what  it  took  in  terms  of  campaigning 
aggressively  and  meeting  people  to  get  elected,  and  was  fortunate  to  get  a  good  result. 

Meeting  someone  face-to-face  does  make  a  definite  difference,  I  feel. 

It  does.  It  does.  And  it’s  different  than  seeing  a  piece  of  paper  with  somebody’s  picture  on  it. 

They  can  look  at  you,  they  can  ask  you  questions,  they  can  evaluate  how  you  present  yourself. 

Yes.  So  how  long  a  term  is  the  assembly? 

It’s  two  years.  I  served  two  terms  in  the  legislature.  In  my  first  term  I  served  on  the  judiciary 
committee  and  also  acted  as  the  vice-chairman  of  that  committee.  That  was  the  year  that  there  was  a 
historical  21-21  tie  in  the  legislature.  I  also  served  on  the  taxation  committee,  the  labor  and  management 
committee,  and  the  natural  resources  agriculture  and  mining  committee.  And  that  was  an  important 
committee  for  me  because — and  I  mentioned  this  previously — we  grew  up  in  a  rural  area  in  Sparks,  and 
we  raised  sheep  and  made  a  lot  of  connections  with  people  throughout  the  state  with  regard  to  that.  So 
that  carried  forward  to  the  legislature.  I  believe  in  my  first  term  I  sponsored  five  bills.  Four  of  them  were 
signed  into  law. 

And  then  I  was  re-elected  without  opposition  to  a  second  term  and  was  also  appointed  to  several 
interim  committees.  I  served  on  the  state  sentencing  commission,  the  juvenile  justice  commission.  There 
was  a  community  advisory  committee  with  regard  to  the  release  of  sex  offenders  that  set  up  the  guidelines 
when  someone  who  is  a  sex  offender  was  released:  what  kind  of  notice  schools  would  get,  parents  would 
get,  Boy  Scouts  would  get,  all  the  various  civic  groups.  And  I  also  served  on  the  Tahoe  Regional  Planning 
Agency  oversight  committee,  because  Lake  Tahoe  was  something  that  was  very  important  to  me.  And 
then  in  my  second  term  I  served  on  the  same  committees,  with  the  exception  of  the  labor  and  management 
committee.  I  believe  in  that  session  ten  of  the  eleven  bills  that  I  sponsored  were  signed  into  law,  and  most 
of  them  had  to  do  with  law  enforcement  and  public  safety  and  strengthening  the  driving-under-the- 
influence  laws. 

We  passed  a  law  that  essentially  prohibited  a  convicted  felon  from  suing  his  victim.  It  had  been 
brought  to  my  attention  that  someone  had  broken  into  an  individual’s  house  and  was  injured  while  they 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


429 


were  doing  that  and  turned  around  and  sued  the  homeowner,  which  to  me  is  incredulous,  and  so  that  was 
a  piece  of  legislation  that  was  passed. 

1  was  very  proud  of  a  tax  measure  that  1  had  that  was  approved  that  eliminated  sales  tax  for  casts 
and  splints.  That  was  something  that  was  very  beneficial  to  senior  citizens. 

There  was  another  provision  that  eliminated  the  property  tax  upon  homeowners  associations  if 
they  allowed  their  parks  to  be  used  by  the  general  public.  That  A:  saved  taxes  and  B:  encouraged  these 
homeowners  associations  and  these  subdivisions  to  open  up  their  facilities  to  the  general  public. 

You  did  some  good  work  in  just  two  terms,  [laughter] 

[laughter]  You  know,  1  was  very  motivated  to  make  a  difference,  and  1  just  thought  that  there’s  a 
difference  between  being  a  legislator  and  doing  the  work  of  a  legislator.  It  certainly  was  not  enough  for 
me  just  to  be  there.  It  was  important  for  me  to  make  a  difference.  It  is  still  my  priority  for  parents  to  have 
their  children  play  in  the  front  yard  and  not  have  to  worry  about  that,  to  have  their  children  walk  to  school 
and  have  it  be  a  safer  place.  So  if  there  was  anything  that  1  could  do  to  increase  the  quality  of  life  for  the 
people  in  northern  Nevada  and  throughout  the  state  of  Nevada,  1  was  going  to  do  that.  Looking  back,  1  did 
get  a  lot  done,  and  I’m  very  proud  of  that  now. 

Yes,  especially  being  a  newly-elected  legislator. 

Yes. 

A  lot  of  those  people  have  to  be  in  office  a  long  time,  it  seems  like,  before  they  accomplish  much. 

Well,  in  fact,  they  told  me  my  first  term,  "You’d  be  lucky  if  you  got  one  bill  passed." 

[laughter]  Yes. 

And  then  similarly,  “With  your  sophomore  session,  if  you  get  one  or  two  you’d  be  very  lucky."  1 
was  very  aggressive  when  1  sponsored  a  bill.  I’d  meet  with  all  the  members  of  the  committee  where  the 
bill  was  going  to  be  heard  to  see  how  they  felt  about  it  so  that  when  1  came  to  a  hearing  there  were  no 
surprises  and  1  was  able  to  address  some  of  the  concerns  before  I  got  there.  And  then  if  I  got  it  through  the 
committee,  then  I’d  chat  with  every  member  of  each  house  about  the  bill  to  ensure  that  1  had  the  votes  in 
hand.  It’s  just  one  of  those  political  lessons  that  someone  needs  to  know  early  on  in  the  Nevada 
legislature,  at  least  in  the  assembly:  you  need  to  know  how  to  count  to  twenty-two,  and  in  the  Nevada 
senate  you  need  to  know  how  to  count  to  eleven.  So  1  worked  those  very  hard,  and  was  very  fortunate  to 
get  a  lot  of  strong  support  for  my  legislation. 

You  prepared  yourself  to  put  it  mildly,  [laughter] 

Yes.  I  research  my  bills.  These  weren’t  just  issues  that  just  popped  in  my  head.  These  were  issues 
that  my  constituents  had  approached  me  with.  These  are  issues  that  I  had  researched  myself  and  felt 
important.  Another  bill  that  I  was  quite  proud  of  that  I  probably  had  to  work  the  most  on  was  an 
environmental  bill  that  allowed  those  who  had  perhaps  contaminated  the  soil  to  turn  themselves  in,  and  by 


430 


doing  so,  A:  it  would  encourage  clean-up,  and  B:  they  would  not  be  subjected  to  penalties.  They  could 
use  the  money  that  would  have  gone  to  the  penalties  for  the  cost  of  the  clean-up.  After  1  had  passed  that 
legislation,  there  were  several  entities  that  took  advantage  of  that,  which  led  to  the  clean-up  of  several 
properties  that  were  contaminated  that,  in  turn,  had  contaminated  the  ground  water,  which  were  cleaned 
up  because  of  this  bill.  And  so  it  always  makes  you  feel  good  about  the  things  that  you  passed  if  you  look 
back  and  see  that  the  legislation  has  been  used  for  the  purpose  that  it  was  intended. 

When  were  you  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Commission? 

1  was  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Commission  in  1998. 

Who  did  you  replace? 

1  replaced  a  woman  by  the  name  of  Debby  Griffin.  She  was  an  accountant  who  sat  on  the  Gaming 
Commission,  and  she  had  served  two  terms.  This  was  something  that  1  did  not  seek.  1  was  aware  of  the 
Gaming  Commission  through  my  experience  on  the  judiciary  committee,  but  1  had  never  practiced 
gaming  law  in  my  law  practice.  It  was  one  of  those  unique  stories  where  it  was  a  Monday  night,  late  at 
night,  and  I  received  a  phone  call  from  a  representative  of  the  governor’s  office — Governor  Miller — who 
said,  "Would  you  be  interested  in  appointment  to  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission?"  1  had  already  been 
gearing  up  for  my  re-election  to  my  third  term,  and  my  first  response  was  “No  .  .  .”  [laughter],  that  1  was 
very  satisfied  with  the  legislature  and  that  1  was  very  excited  about  going  into  a  third  term. 

And  you  were  still  active  with  the  Robison  law  firm? 

No,  actually  by  that  time,  1  had  left  the  Robison  law  firm  to  go  in  a  partnership  with  one  other 
attorney.  There  were  some  members  of  the  firm  who  weren’t  supportive  of  my  legislative  service  because 
it  got  in  the  way  of  billable  hours.  And  I  felt  the  best  way  for  me  to  satisfy  that  concern  was  for  me  to  go 
into  practice  with  another  individual  and  basically  be  my  own  partner  so  others  wouldn’t  have  to  worry 
about  how  many  hours  1  was  billing  and  such.  So  1  had  gone  in  practice  with  a  gentleman  by  the  name  of 
Theodore  Gamboa,  a  really  fine  man  who  was  very  understanding  and  supportive  of  my  legislative 
service. 

But,  in  any  event,  1  got  a  phone  call  at  ten  o’clock  .  .  .  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

...  in  the  evening  on  a  Monday  evening  at  the  end  of  March  of  1998,  and  I  said  that  1  wasn’t 
interested.  The  individual  on  the  other  end  of  the  call  said,  "Well,  you  might  want  to  think  about  this, 
because  some  people  wait  their  entire  lives  for  an  opportunity  to  be  appointed  to  the  Nevada  Gaming 
Commission."  And  so  1  sat  down  with  my  wife,  1  talked  to  some  close  friends,  and  after  looking  at  all  the 
possibilities,  1  decided  to  take  my  course  of  public  service  in  a  new  direction.  1  saw  a  unique  opportunity 
to  really  get  involved  in  Nevada’s  largest  industry,  the  economic  engine  that  essentially  runs  the  state. 
And  I’d  met  with  different  individuals  to  chat  about  this.  One  prominent  person  was  Senator  Bill  Raggio, 
and  he  actually  encouraged  me  not  to  take  the  appointment  because  it  would  probably  lead  to  the  end  of 
my  political  career. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


431 


After  having  thought  everything  through — and  at  the  time  1  had  two  young  children — 1  decided  it 
would  be  best  for  me  to  accept  this  appointment.  So  the  next  day,  because  1  had  to  make  this  decision 
within  twenty-four  hours,  1  resigned  from  the  state  legislature.  1  submitted  my  resignation  to  the  governor 
and  accepted  the  appointment  to  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  and  had  my  first  hearing  the  next  day. 
[laughter] 

[laughter] 

So  it  was  quite  a  trial  by  fire. 

Had  you  known  Governor  Miller  before?  Naturally,  you  knew  him  through  the  legislature  to  a  degree. 
Yes. 

Had  you  had  any  personal  contact  with  him? 

No.  And  this  appointment  was  a  complete  surprise.  1  had  worked  with  Governor  Miller  on  the 
truth-in-sentencing  effort  in  the  state  legislature  and  on  the  judiciary  committee.  So  we  had  worked 
together  on  a  professional  basis,  but  from  a  social  basis,  we  had  never  had  any  casual  conversation.  1  was 
just  as  surprised  as  anybody,  because  a  Democratic  governor  was  seeking  to  or  had  asked  if  a  Republican 
legislator  would  be  interested  in  this  appointment.  So  1  was  extremely  honored  that  he  would  consider  me. 

Across  party  lines,  if  you  want  to  call  it  that. 

Yes.  And  I  had  a  great  amount  of  respect  for  him,  and  that  played  a  big  role  in  my  decision  as 
well.  If  the  governor  was  willing  to  reach  out  his  hand  to  offer  this  to  me,  1  felt  that  it  was  quite  a 
compliment,  and  it  was  something  that  1  felt  that  out  of  respect  for  him  1  should  accept. 

How  long  did  you  serve  as  a  commission  member  before  being  named  chairman? 

One  year.  I  was  appointed  in  April.  Governor  Guinn  was  elected  that  November,  and  then 
subsequently,  the  term  of  Bill  Curran,  who  had  been  the  chairman,  was  up.  Governor  Guinn  graciously 
asked  if  I’d  be  interested  in  becoming  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission,  and  1  was  very  honored 
to  accept  that  appointment. 

Had  you  known  Governor  Guinn  prior  to  your  appointment? 

No.  I  had  met  Governor  Guinn.  We  did  not  know  each  other  socially  and  he  was  another 
individual  for  whom  1  had  a  tremendous  amount  of  respect,  for  the  issues  that  he  considered  important 
and  for  the  way  he  conducted  himself.  Everybody  knew  that  there  was  going  to  be  a  new  chairman,  and 
there  were  a  lot  of  individuals  who  had  been  mentioned  as  potential  candidates  for  that  position.  1  was 
fortunate  enough  to  get  the  offer. 


How  old  were  you  when  you  were  appointed  chairman? 


432 


I  was  thirty-five,  and  according  to  some — I  didn’t  know  it  at  the  time — [laughter]  that  made  me 
the  youngest  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission  in  the  history  of  the  state. 

That ’s  quite  an  achievement  also,  [laughter] 

[laughter]  Well,  as  I  said,  1  was  just  as  surprised  as  anybody.  1  had  spent  my  first  year  really 
working  hard  to  read  all  the  regulations  and  read  the  law  and  understand  very  well  how  the  gaming 
industry  works.  And  then  1  had  had  experience  at  the  legislature  in  how  to  run  a  meeting,  chair  a  meeting 
because  that’s  an  art  in  and  of  itself.  When  1  think  back,  that  hard  work  pays  off. 

Yes,  it  does. 

And  1  felt  like  even  though  1  was  young  of  age  that  1  had  a  lot  of  experience  that  1  brought  to  the 
table  and  that  it  was  an  appointment  based  on  the  merits,  because  I  hadn’t  had  any  previous  relationship 
with  Governor  Guinn. 

You  were  also  chairman  of  the  gaming  policy  review  board.  Would  you  tell  us  the  make-up  of  that  board 
and  its  duties  and  responsibilities? 

Yes.  The  gaming  policy  review  board  was  a  product  of  a  piece  of  legislation,  Senate  Bill  208, 
which  sought  to  limit  the  expansion  of  neighborhood  casinos  in  Clark  County.  And  what  the  law  provided 
was  that  if  a  property  had  been  approved  for  a  gaming  establishment,  and  that  approval  had  come  from  a 
local  elected  entity — for  example,  the  Clark  County  Commission,  or  a  city  council — for  example,  the 
North  Las  Vegas  City  Council — the  residents  would  have  the  ability  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the 
Gaming  Policy  Review  Panel.  And  then  the  Gaming  Policy  Review  Panel  was  empowered  to  review  the 
decision  of  the  local  government  entity,  and  either  to  adopt  its  decision  or  reverse  it.  So  as  chairman  of 
the  Gaming  Commission,  1  was  a  member  of  that  board.  The  members  of  that  board  asked  if  I  would 
serve  as  the  chairman.  The  other  members  consisted  of  a  member  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  two 
citizens  of  Clark  County,  and  a  member  of  a  tribe. 

We  heard  two  cases  while  1  chaired  that  committee.  One  was  an  establishment  in  Spring  Valley  in 
Las  Vegas  that  had  been  approved  by  the  Clark  County  Commission,  and  ultimately,  our  panel  decided  to 
reverse  the  decision  of  the  Clark  County  Commission,  which  created  a  lot  of  controversy  in  and  of  itself. 
But  based  on  the  presentations,  we  didn’t  feel,  and  1  didn’t  feel  personally,  that  the  proposal  for  that 
establishment  met  the  requirements  of  Senate  Bill  208,  which  had  subsequently  become  state  law.  After 
that  there  was  another  challenge  in  North  Las  Vegas,  where  the  North  Las  Vegas  City  Council  had 
approved  a  gaming  establishment  for  a  location  there,  and  the  residents  there  appealed  to  the  Gaming 
Policy  Review  Panel,  and  we  conducted  ourselves  exactly  the  way  we  did  in  the  first  case.  Based  on  my 
findings,  the  property  in  North  Las  Vegas  was  actually  an  inferior  proposal  to  the  one  that  we  had  already 
rejected.  That  vote  was  a  three-to-two  vote  to  reverse  the  North  Las  Vegas  City  Council’s  decision.  The 
vote  in  the  first  case  was  a  unanimous  decision,  five-to-zero. 

Both  of  those  cases  created  a  tremendous  amount  of  controversy,  because  there  was  some 
frustration  on  the  part  of  the  local  governments  that  it  wasn’t  appropriate  for  an  elected  panel  to  be 
reversing  a  decision  of  an  elected  body.  But  as  1  expressed  to  them,  1  understood  their  frustration,  but  we 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


433 


were  charged  with  the  duty  under  state  law,  and  if  they  felt  that  there  was  a  constitutional  issue,  then  they 
should  take  that  up  with  the  district  court  in  the  Nevada  Supreme  Court.  1  was  not  going  to  disregard  my 
duties  as  imposed  by  the  state  legislature. 

Is  the  gaming  policy  review  board  still  active? 

It  has  not  met  since  1  sat  on  the  policy  review  board,  and  there  could  be  several  explanations  for 
that.  One  explanation  is  that  the  panel  essentially  made  it  very  clear  that  they  were  going  to  strictly 
construe  the  law,  and  that  therefore,  there  probably  weren’t  many  applications  that  could  meet  the 
requirements  as  set  forth  by  the  precedent  that  we  made  in  our  decisions  with  regard  to  those  two 
proposed  establishments.  But  since  that  time,  no  gaming  company  has  sought  to  locate  a  new 
establishment  outside  of  a  gaming  enterprise  zone.  And  I  think  one  of  the  reasons  for  that  is  the  precedent 
that  was  set  by  the  board  at  the  time  1  sat  on  it. 

Are  you  theoretically  still  on  the  board? 

1  am  not.  The  seats  on  that  board  are  set  by  statute:  two  members  of  the  public,  a  member  of  the 
Gaming  Control  Board,  a  member  of  the  Gaming  Commission,  and  a  member  of  an  Indian  tribe. 

But  there  still  is  a  board? 

Yes.  It  could  be  constituted.  What  would  happen  is  if  there  was  another  appeal  by  the  citizens, 
then  the  governor  would  have  to  appoint  the  two  public  members.  The  governor  would  send  out  a  letter  of 
interest  to  the  tribes,  and  the  tribes  would  designate  a  representative.  And  then  amongst  the  Gaming 
Commission  members  and  the  Gaming  Control  Board  members,  they  would  need  to  select  who  they 
would  like  to  represent  their  respective  entities. 

As  we  headed  into  the  twentieth-first  century,  the  focus  of  gaming  regulators  began  to  shift  to  social 
issues.  As  you  were  chairman  during  these  changing  times,  would  you  discuss  some  of  these  social  issues 
and  tell  us  what  actions  were  taken  by  the  Commission  during  your  tenure?  Do  you  want  to  begin  with 
the  neighborhood  casinos?  You  can  tell  us  about  the  regulations  or  statutes  that  have  been  put  in  place  to 
prevent  encroachment  of  casinos  in  residential  areas. 

Yes.  1  believe  that  had  a  lot  to  do  with  what  we  just  discussed  with  regard  to  the  Gaming  Policy 
Review  Panel.  The  legislature  had  anticipated  the  great  expansion  of  neighborhood  casinos,  particularly 
in  southern  Nevada,  because  this  legislation  was  limited  to  southern  Nevada.  From  my  perspective,  1 
looked  at  that  law  through  the  Gaming  Policy  Review  Panel,  not  through  the  Gaming  Commission.  But 
there  has  been  no  expansion  of  neighborhood  casinos  outside  of  districts  that  had  already  been  approved 
for  that  purpose  as  a  result  of  the  decisions  of  the  Gaming  Policy  Review  Panel. 

From  the  Gaming  Commission  perspective,  1  don’t  think  we  did  anything  specific  with  regard  to 
neighborhood  casinos  with  the  exception  of  ensuring  that  there  were  areas  within  the  casino  where  minors 
would  not  be  confronted  with  having  to  go  through  a  gauntlet  of  slot  machines.  1  know  that  when  we 
reviewed  several  of  the  properties,  if  they  had  movie  theaters,  we  wanted  to  ensure  that  there  was  ingress 
and  egress  to  the  movie  theaters  or  the  bowling  alleys  so  that  a  minor  would  not  have  to  go  through  a  slot 


434 


area  or  a  gaming  area.  We  were  very,  very  strict  about  that. 

Would  you  care  to  discuss  a  little  bit  more  about  any  of  the  issues  you  faced  there  regarding  children  and 
minors  being  allowed  around  gaming  areas? 

Yes.  Another  point  I  wanted  to  make  is  that  we — “we”  being  the  Gaming  Commission — were 
very  aggressive  in  terms  of  the  licensees  that  violated  the  rules  associated  with  minors  being  near  the 
games.  To  give  two  specific  examples,  there  had  been  some  instances  with  one  property  where  there  were 
repeated  examples  of  minors  who  were  allowed  to  play,  and  so  we  fined  that  property  a  substantial 
amount.  There  was  another  instance  where  one  of  the  large  licensees  in  southern  Nevada  had  opened  an 
attraction,  and  on  its  first  day,  many,  many  children,  or  minors,  came  to  the  property  and  had  lined  up 
through  the  casino.  And  the  line  was  allowed  to  wind  its  way  through  several  of  the  slot  machines  and  the 
games. 

This  property  had  been  warned  about  that,  and  despite  the  warning,  had  allowed  this  to  occur.  So 
the  fine  in  that  instance  was,  1  believe,  a  half  million  dollars  as  well  as  a  submission  of  a  plan  to  address 
that  issue  in  the  future.  1  was  very  proud  of  the  Commission  for  the  stand  that  it  took  while  1  was  the 
chairman  in  terms  of  ensuring  that  minors  were  separated  from  gaming  and  that  there  would  be  a  zero 
tolerance  policy  with  regard  to  minors  being  in  the  casinos. 

I  guess  it’s  been  a  problem  for  many  years,  actually.  You  look  back  to  a  few  years  ago  when  dinner  shows 
were  prevalent  and  children  were  going  to  the  dinner  shows,  and  they ’d  be  lined  up  going  to  the  shows.  I 
can  remember  security  people  would  have  to  keep  working  all  the  time  to  keep  them  away  from  there. 

Right.  And  we  also  know  there’s  a  reality  that  with  the  restaurants  and  some  of  the  features 
within  the  establishments,  that  minors  are  going  to  be  on  the  property.  But  the  message  that  we  wanted  to 
send  is  that  if  you  are  going  to  have  those  types  of  attractions,  you  must  have  ingress  and  egress  that  will 
allow  for  the  separation  of  the  minors  from  the  games.  And  I  don’t  want  to  stop  this  on  a  negative  note.  1 
felt  that  the  industry  was  very  receptive  and  took  our  recommendations  very  seriously.  As  1  walk  through 
the  establishments  now,  1  see  that  they’ve  made  that  effort. 

How  about  child-themed  slot  machines?  Weren  ’tyou  active  in  that  area? 

Yes.  That  was  another  issue  that  presented  itself  for  the  first  time  while  I  was  the  chairman  of  the 
Commission.  The  slot  manufacturers  were  getting  very  creative  in  terms  of  the  licenses  they  were 
obtaining  for  the  slots.  And  a  concern  grew,  not  only  in  the  state,  but  nationally.  Senator  John  McCain 
from  Arizona  became  interested  in  it  and  called  them  “slots  for  tots,”  because  there  had  been  some 
machines  proposed  in  other  states  that  used  cartoon  themes  and  themes  that  were  attractive  to  children. 

As  chairman  of  the  Commission,  1  worked  with  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  and 
we  felt  that  we  needed  to  get  out  in  front  of  this  issue  and  adopt  regulations  in  Nevada  so  that  Nevada 
would  be  the  leader.  As  a  side  note,  I  feel  it  is  very  important  that  Nevada  be  the  global  leader  in  terms  of 
gaming  regulation,  that  we  get  out  ahead  of  this  so-called  “slot  for  tots”  issue.  And  so  we  spent  several 
weeks  conducting  hearings  with  the  gaming  industry,  with  the  slot  manufacturers,  and  with  the  public, 
obviously,  to  come  up  with  a  set  of  regulations  that  would  in  the  first  instance,  protect  children,  so  that 
you  would  not  have  slot  machines  that  are  attractive  to  children,  but  at  the  same  time,  preserve  the 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


435 


creativity  of  the  gaming  industry  and  the  gaming  manufacturers  so  that  they  could  manufacture  games 
that  were  nostalgic  that  would  keep  Nevada  at  the  forefront  of  gaming. 

And  I  felt  we  achieved  this  balance.  Ultimately,  we  adopted  a  series  of  tests  and  regulations  that 
contained  tests  that  prohibited  any  type  of  theme  that  would  be  attractive  to  children  or  a  theme  that  could 
not  be  less  than  twenty-one  years  old.  So  in  other  words,  if  there  was  an  old  show  that  was  at  least 
twenty-one  years  of  age,  that  would  allow  it  to  leap  one  hurdle.  The  next  hurdle  was  you  have  to  go  out 
and  conduct  surveys  to  see  if  it’s  still  attractive  to  children.  To  give  a  specific  example,  Mickey  Mouse — 
obviously,  that  idea  is  older  than  twenty-one  years,  but  it  is  still  attractive  to  children,  so  that  is  a  theme 
that  would  not  pass  muster. 

So  Lucille  Ball  would  be  OK. 

Yes!  And  there  is  a  Lucille  Ball  machine.  That  show  or  that  theme  was  more  than  twenty-one 
years  of  age.  They  have  to  hire  experts  to  go  out  and  ask  children  if  they  know  who  Lucille  Ball  was. 

[laughter] 

There  was  a  theme,  and  I  can’t  recall  it  right  now,  but  they  had  done  this  testing,  and  out  of  five 
hundred  children,  less  than  ten  had  heard  of  it.  And  those  were  the  indicators  that  we  were  looking  for, 
that  contemporary  kids  would  not  know  or  be  familiar  with  something,  and  therefore,  they  would  not  be 
attracted  to  it  if  it  was  a  slot  machine.  It  was  a  very  interesting  intellectual  exercise.  Obviously,  things  like 
Spiderman  and  comic  book  characters  and  things  that  are  currently  on  television  would  not  be  eligible  to 
be  put  on  a  slot  machine.  There  were  themes  that  were  adopted  in  other  states  that  would  not  be  allowed 
in  Nevada.  One  was  South  Park.  A  lot  of  people  aren’t  familiar  with  South  Park.  It’s  a  very  irreverent — 
offensive,  in  my  opinion — cartoon  that  was  actually  very  appealing  to  eighteen-year  olds.  And  in  the  state 
of  Mississippi  they  allowed  for  those  slot  machines,  whereas  in  Nevada  we  said,  “Don’t  even  bother 
trying  because  we  won’t  approve  that.” 

But  that’s  where  more  of  the  concern  came,  not  just  for  the  small  kids  but  minors  who  were 
perhaps  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  twenty-one  who  might  be  attracted  to  something,  because 
they’re  the  ones  who  are  closest  to  the  age  of  majority. 

Yes.  And  games  like  “ Jeopardy  ”  or  “Wheel  of  Fortune,  ”  were  they  under  the  same  type  of  scrutiny,  or 
they  ’re  not  characters  per  se? 

Well,  they  were  in  a  special  category,  because  “Wheel  of  Fortune”  and  “Jeopardy”  and 
“Monopoly”  were  approved  before  the  adoption  of  this  regulation. 

And  not  to  get  too  technical,  but  previously,  before  the  adoption  of  this  new  regulation,  the 
Gaming  Control  Board  had  exclusive  jurisdiction  to  accept  or  reject  a  theme.  The  Gaming  Commission 
never  had  the  opportunity  to  review  it  until  these  new  adoptions  were  approved.  The  only  time  that  the 
Gaming  Commission  would  have  the  opportunity  to  review  a  theme  prior  to  the  adoption  of  the  new 
regulation  was  if  one  were  to  be  rejected  by  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  That  would  allow  the  applicant  to 
appeal  to  the  Gaming  Commission. 

That  may  be  a  little  more  detail  than  you  were  seeking,  but  thereafter  1  felt  that  it  was  important 
to  adopt  that  new  regulation  because  now  you  have  the  input  of  the  Gaming  Commission  and  the  Gaming 


436 


Control  Board.  The  Gaming  Control  Board  would  review  it  first  and  make  a  recommendation  to  the 
Commission.  The  Commission,  as  with  all  the  other  issues  that  come  before  it,  could  accept  or  reject  the 
recommendation  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board. 

What  has  the  gaming  industry  and  the  industry ’s  regulators  done  about  problem  gamblers,  and  what  are 
they  currently  doing? 

That  issue,  problem  gaming,  was  very  prominent  while  1  was  on  the  Gaming  Commission,  and 
while  we  were  there  we  adopted  new  regulations  that  required  anybody  with  slot  machines  or  gaming  to 
be  progressive  in  the  training  of  their  employees,  to  recognize  someone  who  might  have  a  gaming 
problem,  and  if  they  do,  to  approach  that  player  and.  A:  advise  them  that  they  could  exclude  themselves 
from  that  property,  and,  B:  give  them  information  with  regard  to  the  treatment  of  problem  gambling.  We 
also  required  that  all  the  establishments  carry  literature  with  regard  to  problem  gaming,  so  if  you  walk 
through  a  casino  now  you’ll  see  pamphlets  that  reside  on  the  machines  where  individuals  can  call  a  1-800 
number.  I’d  like  to  see  the  industry  go  a  little  bit  further.  In  fact,  the  industry  has  itself  proposed 
legislation,  or  did  propose  legislation  in  the  2003  session  of  the  legislature  that  sought  to  tax  themselves 
and  provide  funding  for  counselors  to  treat  individuals,  and  for  some  reason  that  legislation  was  not 
adopted. 

Did  it  die  or  was  it  voted  against? 

I  believe  that  it  died.  It  was  heard  in  a  committee  and  never  got  out  of  a  committee.  My 
understanding  is  that  there  will  be  another  effort  in  the  2005  session  of  the  legislature,  by  the  industry,  to 
seek  a  program  by  which  individuals  who  have  a  problem  can  seek  treatment.  But  we  have  some  very 
sophisticated  individuals  in  the  state.  In  fact,  if  you’re  going  to  treat  problem  gaming,  you  have  to  go  to  a 
board  now  and  get  a  license  to  do  so,  which  I  think  is  better  for  the  public  safety  and  health  and  interest, 
so  that  if  you  do  have  a  problem  and  you  go  to  a  counselor,  that  person  has  been  certified  by  the  state.  So 
the  state  has  done  many  things.  I  think  it  can  do  more. 

So  the  state  had  put  out  what  you  might  call  minimum  requirements  that  all  casinos  must  reach.  Are  some 
casinos  going  above  and  beyond  that  as  far  as  doing  more  advertising  or  more  notification  to  the  public 
as  far  as  television  ads  or  things  of  that  nature? 

Yes,  one  stands  out.  Harrah’s  has  taken  a  very,  very  progressive  approach  and  a  leadership 
position  within  the  industry.  It’s  going  the  so-called  “extra  mile”  in  terms  of  promoting  this  and  funding 
it.  And  f  know  that  this  was  an  important  issue  to  Phil  Satre,  who  is  the  former  chairman  of  the  board.  So 
their  company  jumps  out  at  me,  and  they  in  fact,  I  think,  were  trying  to  lead  the  effort  within  the 
legislature. 

For  many  years  betting  on  games  that  Nevada  college  teams  or  university  teams  were  participating  in 
was  prohibited.  Would  you  tell  us  when  and  why  that  ban  was  ended  and  your  role  in  that  decision? 


Well,  Nevada  is  the  only  state  in  the  union  that  allows  for  legalized  sports  betting.  And  we  are 
very  proud  of  the  fact  that  we  strictly  regulate  all  gaming,  but  within  gaming,  sports  betting  is  the  most 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


437 


strictly  regulated  portion  of  that.  In  approximately  1998  or  1999,  Senator  John  McCain  introduced 
legislation  that  would  prohibit  legalized  sports  betting  in  the  state  of  Nevada  on  college  sports.  The 
impetus  for  that  was  that  there  had  been  several  scandals  throughout  the  country  with  regard  to  sports 
betting  and  cheating  and  fixing  games.  What  was  not  mentioned  is  that  none  of  those  scandals  originated 
in  the  state  of  Nevada. 

Also,  it  was  important  to  know,  the  support  that  Senator  McCain  brought  for  that  legislation  was 
that  if  he  were  able  to  eliminate  legalized  sports  betting  in  the  state  of  Nevada  on  college  sports,  that  it 
would  eliminate  illegal  sports  betting  in  the  other  forty-nine  states.  We  in  Nevada  got  a  good  laugh  out  of 
that.  When  you  started  to  really  look  at  the  issue,  the  heresy  involved  in  that  legislation  became  very 
apparent.  One  of  the  astounding  statistics  was  that  approximately  three  billion  dollars  was  wagered 
illegally  on  college  sports,  whereas  in  the  state  of  Nevada  less  than  one  percent  of  that  figure  was 
wagered  on  college  sports. 

Another  issue  that  Senator  McCain  raised  was  that  if  you  eliminated  legal  sports  betting  on 
college  sports  in  the  state  of  Nevada,  that  newspapers  across  the  country  would  stop  printing  the  line  on 
those  games.  During  the  hearing  the  state  of  Nevada  presented  a  letter  from  one  of  the  national  newspaper 
entities  that  represented  all  the  newspapers,  and  those  newspapers  said  regardless  of  what  happens  in  the 
state  of  Nevada,  they  would  continue  to  publish  those  lines  because  the  readers  like  it,  and  for  recreational 
puiposes,  not  for  betting  purposes.  If  somebody’s  team  is  a  big  underdog,  they  like  to  know  how  big  of  an 
underdog  they  are. 

So  as  a  result  of  that  1  testified  before  Senator  McCain  at  the  U.S.  Congress.  1  also  testified  before 
the  House  of  Representatives,  the  Judiciary  Committee.  We  did  not  receive  a  very  positive  reception  as 
the  Nevada  contingent.  In  fact,  it  was  loaded  the  other  way  where  you  had  all  the  celebrity  coaches  and 
the  head  of  the  NCAA  that  testified  in  front  of  us. 

Ultimately,  the  legislation  was  not  approved,  and  1  think  that  was  a  good  thing,  because  all  it 
would  have  done  if  it  were  approved  would  have  been  to  encourage  illegal  sports  betting  throughout  the 
country,  and  also,  1  think  it  would  have  strengthened  the  sportsbooks  in  Mexico  and  the  Caribbean  and  on 
the  internet.  It  would  have  pushed  them  there.  It  also  would  have  created  an  incredible  black  market  for 
sports  betting  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  As  1  said  before,  1  am  very  proud  of  the  fact  that  there  had  never 
been  a  scandal  that  emanated  from  our  state,  and  that  was  because  of  the  way  that  we  strictly  regulated, 
and,  in  fact,  1  thought  we  set  a  template  for  something  that  should  be  considered  throughout  the  country. 

Was  it  brought  up  during  that  time  that  Nevada  did  not  allow  betting  on  the  Nevada  teams? 

Yes! 

And  why  was  that  in  effect? 

That  was  a  question  that  we  anticipated  in  terms  of  detail.  Historically,  there  was  a  gaming 
regulation  that  prohibited  legal  sports  betting  on  the  universities  in  the  state  of  Nevada  or  if  another 
university  sports  team  came  to  the  state  of  Nevada  to  play.  1  personally  did  some  research  as  to  what  the 
origin  of  that  was,  and  it  was  a  very  simple  explanation.  And  that  was  that  when  the  regulation  was 
adopted,  which  was,  1  believe,  in  the  late  1960s,  the  University  of  Nevada,  Las  Vegas,  UNLV,  was  in  its 
infancy.  The  University  of  Nevada,  Reno,  UNR,  did  not  have  a  really  successful  sports  program,  and  the 
population  of  the  state  was  very  small,  three  or  four  hundred  thousand  at  the  time.  And  there  was  a 


438 


concern  on  the  part  of  the  regulators  that  if  they  allowed  legal  sports  betting  on  Nevada  teams,  that  those 
who  resided  outside  of  the  state  would  feel  that  Nevada  residents  would  have  an  advantage  because  they 
were  so  close  to  the  schools  and  the  population  was  so  small.  The  example  I  used  was  that  when  a  large 
corporation  has  a  sweepstakes,  it  typically  prohibits  employees  from  being  eligible  to  participate  in  that 
sweepstakes,  because  if  the  employee  won,  they  would  say  that  there  was  a  fix,  or  inside  information. 

Similarly,  in  the  state  of  Nevada,  if  Nevada  residents  were  able  to  bet  on  the  Nevada  games, 
because  of  the  proximity  of  the  residents  to  the  athletes,  and  the  small  size  of  the  universities,  then  they 
would  have  access  to  what  was  deemed  “inside  information.”  With,  1  guess,  the  development  of  strict 
regulation  in  the  state  of  Nevada,  that  was  no  longer  a  concern.  And,  in  fact,  what  concerned  me  the  most 
was  that  now,  although  you  could  not  bet  legally  in  the  state  of  Nevada  on  a  Nevada  team,  you  could  bet 
illegally  on  a  Nevada  game,  either  on  the  internet  or  in  Mexico  or  the  Caribbean. 

Therefore,  if  somebody  actually  wanted  to  fix  a  game,  they  would  go  to  a  Nevada  athlete, 
because  there  was  no  regulatory  authority  that  oversaw  the  Nevada  games.  1  wanted  to  protect  our  athletes 
from  that,  so  we  dropped  the  rule  that  prohibited  legal  sports  betting  on  the  Nevada  teams  in  the  state  of 
Nevada,  which  brought  those  games  within  the  Nevada  regulatory  system.  And  that  is  something  that  has 
been  very  well  received.  The  action  on  those  games  is  actually  less  than  other  more  prominent  teams  in 
college  basketball,  the  Kansases  and  the  Dukes,  and  in  college  football,  the  Ohio  States  and  the  USCs. 

The  Nevada  games  get  very  little  action.  There  is  some,  but  now  those  athletes  have  the  protections  of  the 
Nevada  regulatory  authorities  when  they  did  not  have  that  previously. 

When  you  were  tightening  the  regulations,  did  the  NCAA  cooperate  with  you  in  any  way?  Did  you  have 
meetings  that  they  attended? 

No.  That  was  one  of  my  greatest  disappointments  about  that  entire  issue,  that  the  NCAA  was 
making  naked  allegations  regarding  the  state  of  Nevada.  I  personally  wrote  a  letter  to  the  president  of  the 
NCAA  saying,  “If  you  are  aware  or  have  specific  information  with  regard  to  sports  betting  practices  in 
Nevada  on  college  sports,  bring  them  to  our  attention.  Please  come  to  our  meeting.  You  are  hereby  invited 
to  the  next  meeting  of  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission,  wherein  you  can  present  the  evidence  that  you 
possess  that  shows  that  legal  sports  betting  in  the  state  of  Nevada  has  a  negative  effect  on  the  rest  of  the 
country  and  college  sports.”  Despite  these  invitations,  the  NCAA  did  not  show  up  once  to  any  of  our 
meetings.  They  tried  to  wage  a  war  in  the  press  versus  ever  coming  up  with  any  specific  examples,  and  at 
the  end  of  the  day  my  analysis  was  they  did  not  have  any  evidence,  because  if  they  did,  they  certainly 
would  have  come  here  to  present  it.  1  think  that  that  is  another  reason  why  this  legislation  was  never 
adopted,  because  there’s  absolutely  nothing  to  it. 

Do  you  think  that  the  issue  is  dead ,  it’s  settled,  or  would  it  come  up  again? 

It  will  never  be  settled.  I  don’t  like  to  use  the  word  “never”  often.  My  understanding  is  Tom 
Osbourne,  who  was  the  former  coach  of  the  University  of  Nebraska,  has  legislation  that  seeks  to 
accomplish  the  same  thing  that  the  McCain  legislation  did.  Senator  McCain  has  said  often  that  he  intends 
to  attempt  to  attach  his  bill  to  another  bill,  because  he  realizes  as  a  stand-alone  bill  he  will  not  get  the 
support  of  the  membership,  but  that  he  will  seek  to  attach  it  to  a  bill.  Our  congressional  delegation  has 
been  and  will  continue  to  be  very  vigilant  in  terms  of  watching  this,  and  I’m  confident  that  this  issue  will 
come  up  again.  Certainly  if  1  have  an  opportunity,  1  would  like  to  go  back  and  testify  with  regard  to  the 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


439 


demerits  of  that  legislation. 

Well,  in  the  state  of  Nevada,  we  ’re  getting  solid  support  from  both  Democratic  and  Republican  parties  as 
far  as  the  legislators,  is  that  right? 

Yes!  Our  own  delegation  has  been  fabulous  in  terms  of  working  together  to  defeat  the  legislation 
and  working  both  sides  of  the  house.  Senator  Reid  and  Senator  Ensign  in  the  U.S.  Senate,  Congressman 
Porter,  Congressman  Gibbons,  and  Congresswoman  Berkeley  have  all  been  very  aggressive,  particularly 
Congresswoman  Berkeley,  in  this  regard.  And  in  fact,  my  understanding  is  that  there  were  some  within 
the  House  of  Representatives  leadership  that  proposed  contrary  legislation,  and  that  didn’t  receive  a 
hearing  as  well.  But  they  have  been  very  effective  in  preventing  the  approval  of  that  bill. 

Is  there  any  way  you  could  estimate  the  loss  of  revenue  to  the  state  of  Nevada  if  sports  betting  were 
prohibited? 

If  all  sports  betting  were  prohibited  it  would  be  tens  of  millions  of  dollars.  In  southern  Nevada 
Super  Bowl  weekend  and  the  NCAA  tournament  are  two  of  the  biggest  weekends.  Super  Bowl  weekend 
is  the  biggest  weekend  for  Las  Vegas,  and  for  the  rest  of  the  state,  for  that  matter.  So  not  only  do  you 
have  to  look  at  it  from  a  gaming  revenue  standpoint,  you  have  to  look  at  it  from  a  restaurant  standpoint, 
you  have  to  look  at  it  from  a  room  standpoint,  from  a  sales  tax  standpoint,  because  when  those  tourists  are 
here  they  buy  things,  and  that  translates  into  jobs.  And  if  you  were  to  remove  all  that  input,  you  would 
have  people  in  our  state  that  would  be  laid  off.  1  vaguely  recall  one  of  the  conservative  estimates  that  ten 
thousand  people  would  lose  their  jobs  if  even  the  college  sports  portion  of  this  was  eliminated.  So  it 
would  have  an  incredibly  detrimental  effect  on  our  state. 

What  a  lot  of  people  don ’t  realize  either,  is  that  there ’s  residual  betting.  People  come  not  to  just  bet  on 
the  Super  Bowl.  If  they  win  some  money,  they  ’ll  play  twenty-one  or  craps  after  the  game  is  over. 

1  think  this  issue  really  came  to  the  forefront  during  this  past  Super  Bowl.  Only  fifty  thousand 
people  get  to  go  to  the  Super  Bowl,  so  people  like  to  come  to  a  place  where  they  can  have  fun  and  watch 
the  game  with  a  larger  group  and  have  the  ability  to  participate  in  other  forms  of  entertainment  in  terms  of 
gambling,  and  the  restaurants  and  shows.  And  the  NFL,  less  than  a  week  before  the  Super  Bowl,  wrote  a 
letter  to  the  properties  saying  that  you  could  not  show  the  Super  Bowl  on  anything  larger  than  a  fifty-inch 
screen,  which  1  felt  was  incredibly  penal  and  unfounded  and  retaliatory.  Many  people  liked  to  come  to 
Las  Vegas,  and  all  it  did  was  require  the  properties  to  be  creative  in  terms  of  going  out  and  renting  more 
screens.  The  people  are  still  going  to  come.  They  want  to  come  here,  and  1  think  it  encourages  interest  in 
the  game,  which  is  to  the  benefit  of  the  NFL. 

Well,  didn ’t  the  network  not  allow  any  advertising  from  Las  Vegas,  too? 

1  believe  the  NFL  has  input  as  to  what  commercials  are  aired  during  the  Super  Bowl,  and  so  the 
networks,  via  the  NFL,  did  not  allow  for  any  commercials  with  regard  to  Las  Vegas  during  the  Super 
Bowl.  However,  there  were  some  other  cable  networks  that  had  Las  Vegas  commercials  that  were  not 
showing  the  Super  Bowl,  and  so  the  NFL  has  declared  its  intent  to  prohibit  that  as  well. 


440 


Again,  I  just  see  unfortunately,  a  retaliatory  and  penal  approach  on  behalf  on  the  NFL  when  I 
think  that  the  state  and  the  NFL  could  work  very  well  together  on  it.  And  then  if  you  saw  some  of  the 
commercials  that  they  did  air,  they  were  much  more  offensive  than  anything  that  Las  Vegas  would  have 
advertised. 

Internet  gaming  has  become  a  situation  that  needs ,  and  will  continue  to  need ,  significant  attention.  What 
has  the  state  of  Nevada  done  in  the  past ,  and  what ’s  it  currently  doing,  to  monitor  internet  gambling? 

Internet  gaming  was  an  issue,  or  was  the  last  issue  that  1  was  focused  on  during  my  chairmanship 
on  the  Commission.  1  always  viewed,  and  still  view,  the  state  of  Nevada  as  taking  a  leadership  role  with 
regard  to  any  issue  associated  with  gaming.  At  the  time — 1  believe  it  would  have  been  2000,  2001 — 
internet  gaming  was  becoming  more  and  more  prominent  throughout  the  globe.  1  believe  it’s  an  eight  to 
ten-billion-dollar  industry  right  now  in  that  there  was  a  big  push  to  legalize  internet  gaming  and  begin  to 
regulate  it,  because  it  was  currently  unregulated  and  there  were  a  lot  of  individuals  that  were  playing  on 
the  internet  and  had  no  idea  whether  the  game  was  fair.  And  if  they  did  win,  they  didn’t  get  paid.  So  there 
was  a  strong  push  for  the  state  of  Nevada  to  study  whether  internet  gaming  can  be  properly  regulated. 

The  2001  legislature  passed  legislation  that  gave  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  and  the 
Gaming  Control  Board  the  ability  to  study  internet  gaming  to  determine  whether  it  can  be  properly 
regulated.  Prior  to  my  departure  from  the  Gaming  Commission,  1  had  initiated  those  hearings  to 
determine  whether  you  can  determine  whether  the  person  who’s  betting  is  over  the  age  of  twenty-one, 
that  they  reside  in  a  jurisdiction  where  gaming  would  be  legal,  to  ensure  that  the  games  are  fair,  and  to 
ensure  that  people  get  paid.  1  began  that,  and  ultimately,  it  was  determined  that  the  technology  did  not 
exist  to  assure,  or  “to  reasonably  assure,”  as  the  statutory  language  provided,  that  the  person  who  was 
playing  was  twenty-one,  et  cetera.  My  understanding  is  that  right  now  we  are  in  a  holding  pattern  in  the 
state  of  Nevada,  and  until  the  technology  catches  up  to  ensure  that  all  those  issues  have  been  adequately 
answered  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  gaming  regulators,  internet  gaming  will  not  be  legalized  in  the  state  of 
Nevada.  However,  it  has  not  stopped  its  growth  globally,  and  the  conservative  estimate  is  that  it  will  grow 
to  be  a  ten  to  twenty-billion-dollar  industry.  The  issue  for  us  economically  is  that  this  is  money  that 
perhaps  will  go  to  the  internet  versus  the  state  of  Nevada.  And  so  I’m  sure  that  our  regulators  are 
constantly  monitoring  the  developments  in  that  regard,  but  as  of  right  now,  I  don’t  see  it  becoming  legal 
in  our  state  in  the  very  near  future. 

Were  there  ever  or  are  there  now  any  Nevada  properties  that  are  actively  pursuing  the  idea  of  online 
gaming? 

There  were  a  couple  of  Nevada  licensees  that  were  engaged  tangentially  with  internet  gaming. 
There  was  one  that  operated  a  legal  sports  betting  site  in  Australia,  and  where  it  became  an  issue  was  that 
one  of  our  agents  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  was  able  to  place  a  bet  from  Nevada  on  this  Australian 
website,  which  subjected  that  Nevada  licensee  to  discipline  and  ultimately  to  their  exiting  the  business  in 
Australia.  The  MGM  Mirage  invested  in  a  legal  internet  gaming  site  that  was  licensed  by  the  Isle  of  Man, 
which  is  an  island  off  of  Ireland,  but  it’s  my  understanding  that  they  have  since  sold  or  removed 
themselves  from  that  venture  because  they  could  not  guarantee  that  somebody  from  the  United  States 
would  be  unable  to  place  a  bet.  And  to  their  credit,  they  explored  it.  They  determined  that  the  technology 
was  not  there  to  ensure  that  individuals  did  not  reside  in  places  like  the  United  States  where  internet 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


441 


gaming  is  illegal,  and  that  it  wasn’t  a  worthwhile  venture. 

The  last  thought  I’d  like  to  state  is  the  Justice  Department  and  the  United  States  Attorney  General 
has  inserted  himself  in  this  issue  and  has  issued  a  letter  to  the  State  of  Nevada  that  it  is  the  position  of  the 
Department  of  Justice  that  internet  gaming  is  illegal  and  that  any  person  who  places  a  bet  or  receives  a  bet 
is  subject  to  prosecution.  The  Gaming  Commission  and  the  Gaming  Control  Board  were  concerned  that 
we  didn’t  want  to  subject  any  of  our  licensees  to  potential  prosecution  by  the  federal  authorities,  so  that 
was  another  reason  that  we  had  determined  that  it  wasn’t  appropriate  to  move  forward. 

Did  he  send  the  same  letter  to  other  states  that  had  gaming  in  them? 

He  did  send  the  letter  to  New  Jersey.  Nevada  and  New  Jersey  were  the  only  two  states  that  were 
exploring  whether  internet  gaming  could  be  properly  regulated.  I  think  the  statement  that  the  Department 
of  Justice  was  making  is  that  even  if  you  find  that  internet  gaming  can  be  properly  regulated,  that  you 
could  not  pass  state  legislation  that  would  make  it  legal  because  there  is  not  federal  legislation  that 
legalizes  it.  So  that  pretty  much  ended  the  inquiry  anyway,  because  it  would  be  a  moot  point  until  the 
U.S.  Congress  were  to  adopt  legislation  that  would  allow  states  to  move  forward. 

And  that  might  never  happen  either. 

It  might  not  ever  happen,  and  that  did  create  some  interesting  legal  issues  in  terms  of  the 
supremacy  clause  and  states’  rights,  which  we  never  got  to,  because  we  just  didn’t  feel  that  it  was 
necessary.  But  in  terms  of  a  legal  exercise,  it  would  be  interesting  to  determine  whether  the  Department 
of  Justice  or  the  Federal  Wire  Act  specifically  in  this  instance  would  have  primacy  over  a  state’s  ability  to 
engage  in  internet  gaming. 

And  that  ruling,  I  guess,  could  be  changed  if  a  different  administration  came  into  action? 

Well,  yes.  A  new  attorney  general  could  interpret  the  Wire  Act  differently  and  issue  a  different 
opinion.  But  I  think,  given  the  history,  that  an  attorney  general  would  wait  for  the  Congress  to  act.  And, 
in  fact,  there  are  several  pieces  of  active  legislation  within  the  United  States  Congress  that  seek  to  either 
prohibit  internet  gaming,  or  there’s  another  piece  that  would  allow  states  to  explore  it,  but  neither  of  them 
has  made  it  through  the  process.  If  one  of  those  were  adopted  and  signed  by  the  president,  it  would  create 
the  bright  line  that  would  give  the  indication  to  the  states  which  way  to  go,  particularly  in  Nevada  and 
New  Jersey. 

Were  there  any  other  social  issues  that  came  to  the  forefront  during  your  tenure  on  the  Commission  you ’d 
care  to  talk  about?  We  talked  about  the  minors  gaming  and  the  “slots  for  tots  ”  theme. 

Yes,  and  we  talked  about  neighborhood  gaming  and  problem  gaming.  We  adopted  some  other 
regulations  with  regard  to  the  restricted  licensees  and  adopted  some  very  strict  regulations — I  should  have 
mentioned  this  previously — in  grocery  stores.  We  now  require  in  the  construction  of  a  new  grocery  store 
that  if  they  have  slots  that  they  be  separated  and  be  located  in  an  alcove,  and  we  limited  the  locations 
where  slot  machines  or  video  poker  could  be  located,  either  to  a  grocery  store,  a  drugstore,  a  convenience 
store,  and  I  can’t  recall  the  fourth  location. 


442 


Was  it  a  laundromat? 

No.  That  was  one  of  the  examples  that  we  specifically  sought  to  exclude  because  children  would 
be  in  laundromats  and  could  be  exposed  to  this  machine  without  anybody  watching.  So  whereas  you 
previously  would  see  slot  machines  in  car  washes,  laundromats,  and  in  the  entry  area  of  some  businesses, 
you  no  longer  can  do  that. 

Oh,  another  location  where  you  can  is  a  liquor  store,  and  obviously,  you  have  to  be  twenty-one  to 
buy  liquor,  so  we  felt  it  was  appropriate  that  they  would  be  allowed  to  have  slots.  But  we  were  very 
aggressive  in  terms  of  limiting  the  locations  where  you  could  have  slots  outside  of  casinos,  and  if  you’re 
one  of  those  locations,  there  are  very  strict  requirements  within  those  locations  where  you  can  locate  the 
machines,  and  you  have  to  have  somebody  24/7  watching  the  machines  to  ensure  that  minors  aren’t 
playing  them.  So  1  was  very  proud  of  that  as  well. 

Was  there  ever  any  individual  or  corporation  that  applied  for  licensing  that  caused  you  a  great  deal  of 
concern,  someone  with  perhaps  an  unsavory  background? 

Well,  1  have  two  answers  to  that:  most  of  the  time,  somebody  who  applies  for  a  gaming  license 
who  has  a  background  like  that  never  makes  it  to  the  hearing  portion  because  it  is  made  clear  to  them  that 
they  are  not  going  to  be  approved.  And  the  consequences  associated  with  a  rejection  by  the  board  and  the 
Commission  are  very  grave  for  a  potential  licensee.  So  often  what  will  happen  is  if  there  are  concerns,  we 
will  advise  them  what  those  concerns  are  and  to  go  back  and  work  on  those,  and  perhaps  come  back  in  a 
couple  of  years  and  show  us  a  track  record  of  having  improved  upon  that  issue. 

There  was  one  individual  who,  despite  the  fact  that  he  was  encouraged  not  to  go  to  the  hearing 
phase,  did  apply  anyway  and  was  rejected  by  the  board,  and  was  also  unanimously  rejected  by  the 
Commission  because  of  the  way  he  had  conducted  himself  in  his  business  affairs.  We  were  also  very  strict 
with  applicants  who  had  even  been  seen  associating  with  unsavory  figures,  and  they  were  advised  not  to 
socialize  with  any  of  those  folks,  even  though  these  contacts  were  very  informal. 

During  my  tenure  we  were  very  strict  with  regard  to  the  “Black  Book,”  or  the  Nevada  List  of 
Excluded  Persons,  which  are  those  persons  who  because  of  their  backgrounds,  their  associations  with 
organized  crime,  are  not  allowed  to  even  step  foot  in  a  Nevada  gaming  establishment.  We  were  very 
strong  on  that.  1  guess  I’m  being  a  little  evasive  in  terms.  I’m  hesitant  to  mention  anybody  specifically 
with  regard  to  who  we  disapproved  or  encouraged  not  to  apply.  But  I’d  end  this  on  a  positive  note  in 
terms  of  this  issue,  in  that  I  was  very  proud  as  a  Gaming  Commission  chairman  and  on  behalf  of  all  the 
regulators  of  how  vigilant  we  were  to  ensure  that  anybody  that  had  any  type  of  association  with  organized 
crime  would  not  be  able  to  get  a  gaming  license  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  I  think  that  the  people  of  our  state 
can  be  very  confident  that  the  industry  is  well  run,  is  independent  of  any  of  these  unsavory  influences,  and 
that’s  because  of  how  strict  we  are  with  regard  to  those  who  get  a  gaming  license.  It’s  very  difficult  to  get 
through  that  door. 

Did  the  idea  of  creating  salons  in  casinos  to  provide  privacy  for  high  rollers  come  before  the  Commission 
during  your  tenure? 


Y es,  that  was  another  piece  of  legislation  that  was  introduced  by  the  gaming  industry  to  solve 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


443 


what  they  perceived  as  an  issue.  There  were  some  very,  very  large  bettors — in  the  gaming  parlance, 
“whales” — who  bet  a  minimum  of  a  million  dollars  during  their  visits  and  either  wanted  privacy  because 
they  didn’t  want  people  to  know  how  much  they  were  betting,  or  had  security  concerns  that  they  could  be 
kidnapped  or  harmed  because  people  would  be  able  to  see  how  much  they  were  betting.  Just  to  back  up, 
the  Nevada  law  provides  that  all  gaming  shall  be  public,  and  that  any  member  of  the  public  can  have 
access.  So  legislation  was  introduced  and  adopted  that  would  allow  for  private  gaming  salons.  Under 
certain  circumstances,  an  individual  who  woidd  bet  a  certain  amount  of  money  and  have  a  certain  line  of 
credit  could  apply  for  or  could  ask  to  gamble  within  one  of  these  private  gaming  salons  and  not  be  viewed 
by  the  public.  But  it  would  still  be  subject  to  twenty-four-hour  surveillance  by  the  gaming  authorities, 
and,  in  fact,  when  it  would  happen,  one  of  the  gaming  agents  would  be  in  attendance  to  ensure  that  the 
game  is  fair. 

Ultimately,  that  regulation  was  adopted  after  my  departure  from  the  Gaming  Commission  and 
there  are  at  least  two  properties,  1  believe,  Caesar’s  or  Park  Place  Entertainment  and  the  MGM,  that  have 
these  private  gaming  salons.  My  understanding  is  that  they  are  not  being  used  that  often,  but  they  are 
available.  The  big  issue  for  me  was  that  the  gaming  be  open  and  public,  or  open  and  subject  to  strict 
regulation  and  that  Nevada  not  lose  opportunities  to  other  states  that  had  similar  regulations  that  were 
working  well.  We  were  losing  a  lot  of  these  large  bettors  to  other  states  and  other  countries  and  so  it  still 
preserved  the  integrity  of  the  gaming  industry,  while  at  the  same  time  ensuring  that  we  keep  those  large 
bettors  to  keep  our  industry  healthy. 

In  the  past,  as  well  as  today,  concerns  have  been  expressed  that  certain  individuals  or  corporations  could 
create  a  monopoly  in  the  gaming  industry.  Under  your  leadership  did  gaming  regulators  create,  update, 
or  strengthen  regulations  that  would  more  specifically  address  the  possible  impact  of  casino 
consolidations? 

We  had  hearings  that  studied  that — monopolies  or  anti-trust  issues.  Essentially,  the  legal 
conclusion  that  we  came  to  while  1  was  on  the  Commission  is  that  it  would  be  practically  impossible  to 
have  a  monopoly  because  there  is  legal  betting  in  forty-eight  states  now  on  different  forms  of  gaming,  and 
that  you  have  full-scale  gaming,  1  believe,  in  excess  of  twenty  states,  and  that  number  is  increasing.  You 
also  have  competition  from  the  tribal  gaming  or  the  tribes  in  the  state  of  California  and  in  other  states 
throughout  the  country.  So  whereas  in  the  early  1970s  when  Nevada  was  the  only  state  that  had  gaming, 
you  would  have  concerns  that  one  company  would  own  all  the  properties.  Now,  although  there  has  been 
consolidation,  that  consolidation  has  been  a  positive,  because  consolidation  has  allowed  for  the 
improvement  of  our  properties  to  compete  in  a  global  and  a  national  environment.  So  1  was  never 
concerned  about  that. 

There  was  also,  1  guess,  a  peripheral  concern  in  terms  of  market  power,  that  if  you  had  too  much 
consolidation  that  it  could  put  certain  businesses  out  of  operation,  so  that  if  you  sold  bread  to  the  casinos 
and  one  property  was  bought  out,  then  they  bought  bread  from  your  competitor,  and  you  wouldn’t  have  a 
fair  shot.  But,  again,  based  on  all  the  studies,  it  is  still  a  very  competitive  environment  in  that  regard.  My 
understanding  is  that  the  Board  and  the  Commission  continue  to  look  at  that  issue.  In  fact,  there  were 
some  thresholds  that  were  studied  to  determine  whether  one  company  was  getting  too  much  market 
power.  But  I’m  not  aware  of  any  companies  whose  application  to  open  a  property  was  rejected  because  it 
would  give  them  too  much  power  in  an  area. 

The  issue  came  up  at  Lake  Tahoe  when  Harrah’s  bought  Harvey’s,  in  that  it  had  approximately 


444 


60  percent  of  the  gaming  revenue  at  Lake  Tahoe,  and  perhaps  more.  But,  again,  when  you  overlay  that 
with  the  competition  from  the  tribes  in  California,  as  well  as  the  competition  from  the  other  states,  the 
alternative  was  for  some  of  these  smaller  properties  to  close,  and  I  didn’t  think  it  would  be  good  for  the 
state  of  Nevada  to  have  boarded-up  properties  at  Lake  Tahoe.  The  issue  came  up  in  Las  Vegas  with  some 
of  these  neighborhood  casinos  that  were  buying  distressed  properties  that  they  invest  in  and  provide  jobs. 
That  was  another  issue  for  me,  that  the  alternative  was  to  have  a  boarded-up  casino  and  have  all  these 
people  of  the  state,  our  citizens,  put  out  of  work. 

So  in  the  end,  my  conclusion  was  that  it  was  good  for  the  state  for  some  of  these  stronger 
properties  to  be  able  to  buy  the  distressed  properties.  And  although  they  would  gain  a  greater  market 
share  in  that  area,  in  the  end  it  would  be  better  for  the  community  and  better  for  the  state. 

Another  example  1  now  recall  was  Mesquite.  In  Mesquite  there  was  one  gentleman  who  1  believe 
had  80  percent  of  the  market  there,  but  again,  the  alternative  was  to  have  a  large  property  that  was  vacant 
and  dilapidated  and  put  people  out  of  jobs.  And  so  in  the  final  analysis,  it  was  a  good  thing. 

Well,  historically,  it  first  came  up,  I  guess,  in  the  late  1960s,  early  1970s,  when  Howard  Hughes  bought 
so  many  properties,  and  that  was  looked  into  at  that  time.  So  like  you  say,  it’s  a  continual,  ongoing 
situation. 

1  think  it  was  more  valid  of  an  issue  back  then,  again,  because  Nevada  was  the  only  state  that  had 
legalized  gaming  in  the  country.  There  was  no  competition.  So  at  that  time  if  Howard  Hughes  was 
allowed  to  buy  them  all,  he  could  set  the  percentages  on  the  machines,  he  could  set  the  prices  on  the  food 
and  what-have-you,  to  the  detriment  of  the  patrons,  whereas  now  if  someone  attempts  to  do  that,  the 
patron  will  go  somewhere  else,  because  there  are  so  many  different  alternatives  for  people  to  seek.  If  I’m 
somebody  that  comes  to  the  state  and  somebody  tries  to  set  their  room  rates  too  high  or  set  their  machines 
too  tight  or  wants  to  use  four  decks  or  what-have-you  on  their  games,  I  can  go  to  another  place  where  the 
machines  are  looser,  the  food  prices  are  less,  the  room  rates  are  less,  and  all  things  being  equal,  they’re 
going  to  go  to  the  other  place.  So  1  think  that  competition  is  alive  and  well  in  the  state  of  Nevada. 

Are  there  any  votes,  decisions,  or  actions  that  you  made  while  on  the  Gaming  Commission  that  you  would 
change  if  you  had  the  opportunity? 

I  don’t  think  so.  Fortunately,  in  hindsight,  I  can’t  think  of  any  of  the  major  issues  that  I  would 
have  approached  any  differently.  I  think  it  just  goes  back  to  my  approach:  before  1  make  a  decision,  I 
research  things  very  well  and  I  read  all  the  information,  and  just  thinking  back,  I  can’t  think  of  anything  I 
would  change.  There  are  a  lot  of  issues  that  you  really  struggled  over  while  you  were  there,  but  for  the  big 
ones  that  we’ve  talked  about — the  “slots  for  tots,”  the  neighborhood  casinos,  the  other  issues — I  think  we 
did  the  right  thing.  And  fortunately,  1  think  history  has  been  kind  to  the  decisions  that  we  made  while  I 
was  on  the  Gaming  Commission  and  has  made  our  industry  stronger  and  our  state  stronger. 

I’ve  talked  to  other  regulators  who  have  said  that  they  have  OK’d  properties  when  they  really  didn  ’t  want 
to,  but  there  was  no  reason  not  to  deny  them,  and  oftentimes  the  property  failed  to  make  it  due  to  poor 
management  or  lack  of financing,  or  things  of  that  nature.  Did  you  ever  find  yourself  in  any  spot  where 
you  wanted  to  turn  them  down,  where  you  felt  that  it  would  be  in  their  best  interest  to  turn  them  down? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


445 


Well,  you  raise  an  interesting  issue,  and  it  may  be  a  concern  with  how  our  regulatory  system  is  set 
up.  What  happens  is  you  will  have  some  very  good  individuals  that  have  the  financial  wherewithal  to  buy 
a  property,  and  so  they  will  go  through  the  investigatory  process,  and  they  won’t  have  anything  negative 
in  their  background,  and  it’ll  show  that  they  have  the  financial  wherewithal  to  support  a  gaming  venture. 
And  so  they  overcome  that  hurdle,  and  then  the  issue  comes  with  regard  to  their  business  acumen. 
Typically  these  people  will  be  buying  a  distressed  property  and  they’re  saying,  “Well,  we’ll  make  it.  We 
can  do  it  different.  I’ve  hired  people.  Although  I’ve  never  run  a  gaming  property  before,  1  have  the  right 
managers.”  So  by  the  time  it  gets  to  us  they’ve  sometimes  invested  a  hundred,  two  hundred  million 
dollars  into  this  venture.  And,  yes,  1  had  many  concerns  about  their  ability  to  make  it,  but  at  the  same  time 
if  1  were  to  deny  them  at  that  time,  they  would  have  wasted  millions  and  millions  of  dollars.  Given  that 
the  individual  had  a  solid  financial  background,  albeit  not  a  gaming  background,  1  would  give  them  the 
benefit  of  the  doubt  that  they  would  hire  the  appropriate  management  to  come  in  and  operate  the  casino  in 
a  successful  way. 

Unfortunately,  there  have  been  a  couple  of  instances  where  we  have  approved  individuals  that 
operated  for  a  year  or  two  and  then  didn’t  make  it,  and  were  losing  too  much  money  and  ultimately  either 
sold  or  closed  the  property.  So  that  was  very  disappointing.  But  going  back,  1  probably  would  have  done 
the  same  thing,  because  the  alternative  is  to  leave  that  location  closed  and  not  have  jobs  and  for  it  to 
become  even  more  dilapidated,  whereas  we  decided  to  give  this  person  who  is  sophisticated  and  is  taking 
all  the  risk,  the  ability  to  go  forth  and  try  to  overcome  that  risk.  1  would  say  the  great  majority  of  the  times 
they  do  make  it,  but  there  are  some  unfortunate  instances  where  either  the  property  will  go  out  of  business 
or  the  person  will  sell  the  property  after  making  a  substantial  investment  for  far  less  than  the  investment 
that  they  had  made,  and  then  the  person  who  comes  in  after  that  is  the  one  that  does  well  and  benefits 
from  some  of  the  mistakes  that  were  made  previously. 

I  think  we  pretty  well  covered  this  with  your  many  accomplishments,  but  is  there  any  specific  action  or 
accomplishment  during  your  time  in  the  Commission  that  you  ’re  most  especially  proud  of? 

Probably  the  aggressive  and  strong  approach  that  we  took  with  regard  to  the  NCAA.  1  think 
despite  a  lot  of  national  pressure,  we  stood  our  ground  and  withstood  a  lot  of  attacks  through  media,  and  1 
was  very  proud  of  the  Commission  when  it  did  that.  1  was  very  proud  of  the  Commission,  1  would  say, 
overall,  with  the  firm  approach  it  took  with  the  industry.  And,  no,  there  were  no  favorites.  Everybody  was 
treated  the  same,  and  if  a  licensee  made  a  mistake,  the  Commission  was  very  hard  on  them.  There  are  a 
lot  of  complaints  from  the  industry  associated  with  that  type  of  an  approach,  but  at  the  same  time,  I  think 
for  the  well-being  of  the  state  of  Nevada,  the  people  who  visit  here  and  the  people  who  live  here  must 
have  complete  confidence  in  our  gaming  industry,  and  they  will  not  have  that  unless  they  are  strictly 
regulated.  So  1  felt  that  the  Commission  while  1  was  there  lived  up  to  that  platitude  and  will  continue  to 
set  an  example  for  future  commissioners  to  come. 

So  that  was  basically  your  main  philosophy,  you  wanted  to  keep  the  industry  strong  for  the  citizens  and 
for  the  future. 

Yes.  Yes,  for  the  well-being  of  our  state. 


How  would  you  describe  your  relationship  with  the  Nevada  Gaming  Control  Board  when  you  were  on  the 


446 


Commission? 

It  was  excellent.  1  served  with  three  chairs  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  Bill  Bible  was  the 
chairman  when  1  first  came  on  the  Commission,  and  subsequently  Steve  DuCharme,  and  then  last  was 
Dennis  Neilander.  Bill  Bible  was  only  on  there  a  short  time,  and  so  1  didn’t  have  much  of  a  professional 
relationship  with  him.  Steve  DuCharme  and  I  got  along  really  well,  and  we  communicated  quite  often, 
which  was  something  that  had  not  happened  all  the  time  before  that.  There  is  always  going  to  be  friction 
between  the  board  and  the  Commission,  because  that’s  the  way  our  system  has  been  developed:  the  board 
makes  recommendations  and  the  Commission  has  the  final  say.  It  can  accept,  reject,  or  modify,  though. 

So  whenever  the  Commission  would  take  a  different  approach  than  that  which  was  recommended  by  the 
board,  there  would  be  some  grumbling,  and  I  think  that’s  healthy. 

With  Dennis  Neilander  .  .  .  Dennis  is  a  person  that  I  had  known  while  I  was  in  the  legislature,  and 
so  we  had  a  longstanding  relationship,  and  it  was  a  very  positive  one.  There  were  issues  where  we  agreed 
to  disagree.  There  were  some  cases  that  were  prosecuted  before  the  Gaming  Commission.  One  had  to  do 
with  a  tax  dispute,  and  the  Commission  did  not  agree  with  the  board  and  rejected  its  case.  That  was  a 
huge  monetary  issue,  and  it  upset  some  of  the  board  members,  but  ultimately,  I  felt  that  that  was  the  right 
decision.  But  at  the  end  of  the  day,  Dennis  and  I — he  says,  “I’m  still  going  to  be  mad  at  you  for  that,  but 
we’re  still  friends.” 

[laughter]  Yes. 

I  think  that  is  a  good  thing  for  the  Board  and  the  Commission  to  have  that  open  line  of 
communication,  but  there  always  has  to  be  that  theme  that  indeed  the  Commission  has  the  final  say  with 
regard  to  all  gaming  matters.  That  is  how  Grant  Sawyer  developed  the  system,  and  that’s  how  it  is  to  this 
day.  And,  as  I  said,  I  think  that  it’s  important  because  the  Commission  brings  a  different  perspective 
because  it  is  five  members  of  the  public  who  may  perhaps  view  things  and  give  licensees,  give  people 
with  work  permits  another  chance  in  terms  of  a  review  of  their  application. 

While  we  were  off  the  tape  you  used  an  interesting  term  for  the  relationship  between  the  Board  and  the 
Commission.  Would  you  repeat  that  again? 

We  were  discussing  the  relationship  between  the  Gaming  Control  Board  and  the  Nevada  Gaming 
Commission  and  I  said  that  there  is  a  dynamic  tension  between  the  two  that  has  existed  and  will  exist 
forever,  which  I  think  strengthens  our  system  of  regulation  because  we  have  a  two-tiered  system,  where 
you  have  a  three-member  board  that  oversees  a  staff  of  three  to  four  hundred  that  regulates  the  industry  on 
a  day-to-day  basis,  that  makes  recommendations  to  a  five-member  commission  that  are  five  members  of 
the  public  that  will  have  different  philosophies  and  different  experiences.  That  creates  a  tension,  but  at  the 
same  time  a  balance  between  the  full-time  regulators  and  the  part-time  commission  members. 

So  I  think  it’s  something  akin  to  the  U.S.  Constitution,  where  you  have  this  separation  and 
balance  that  has  withstood  the  test  of  time.  In  fact,  I  think  if  history  is  a  teacher  it  has  shown  that  it  has 
allowed  Nevada  to  become  the  premier  gaming  regulatory  authority  in  the  world.  When  I  was  on  the 
Commission  I  used  to  travel  and  speak  at  different  gaming  conferences,  and  regulators  from  other  states, 
when  they  were  asked  a  tough  question,  they’d  look  at  me  and  say,  “Well,  why  don’t  you  just  have  Brian 
answer,  because  we’re  going  to  do  what  Nevada  does  anyway.” 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


447 


[laughter] 

And  so,  as  I  said,  I  am  ...  I  keep  using  this  word  "proud,"  but  I  truly  am  proud  of  our  system  and 
the  people  that  have  participated  in  it  throughout  time. 

Well,  historically  over  the  years  there  have  been  a  few  major  confrontations  between  the  Commission  and 
the  Board.  It  has  evidently  made  it  stronger. 

Yes.  There  will  be  cases,  there  will  be  discipline  cases,  there  will  be  tax  cases,  there  will  be 
licensing  cases  where  the  board  makes  its  recommendation,  and  the  Commission  may  modify  a 
recommendation  with  regard  to  a  gaming  application.  If  the  board  is  seeking  to  collect  a  tax,  the 
Commission  may  reject  its  argument  and  say  that  no,  no  tax  is  due,  and  that  is  always  not  a  happy  day 
between  the  Board  and  the  Commission. 

The  Board  may  seek  to  penalize  a  licensee,  and  the  Commission  may  reject  that  or  modify  it  or 
actually  even  take  a  more  aggressive  approach  than  the  board  did.  And,  again,  if  you  talk  to  a  board 
member,  they  might  say,  “What  do  they  know?” 

[laughter] 

“Ha  ha,  what  does  the  Commission  know?  They’re  not  on  this  on  a  day-to-day  basis.” 


Yes. 


And  [if]  you  talk  to  a  commission  member,  a  commission  member  might  say,  “Well,  they’re 
locked  in  this  bubble  and  they  don’t  have  any  perspective,  and  they  have  this  tunnel  vision.” 

Yes. 


And  so,  again,  it  brings  you  back  full  circle  to  this  balance  and  this  dynamic  tension,  that  between 
the  two  of  them,  the  Board  and  the  Commission,  you  come  out  with  a  good,  fair,  balanced  result,  which 
results  in  a  very  strong,  vibrant  gaming  industry  that  is  the  envy,  1  believe,  of  the  country  and  the  world. 

Well,  it  has  certainly  been  copied  in  just  about  every  gaming  locality. 

Yes.  And  as  you  talk  to  other  regulators,  1  think  that  is  with  the  exception  of  New  Jersey.  New 
Jersey  has  just  a  one -tier  system,  but  it  has  an  executive  director  who  does  all  the  investigations  and  such 
and  makes  a  recommendation  to  that  five-member  board,  so  it’s  set  up  a  little  differently  than  ours  is.  And 
1  guess  you  could  debate  all  day  long  which  one  is  better,  but  certainly  I’m  supportive  of  the  Nevada  plan. 

When  did  you  leave  the  commission? 

1  left  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  in  August  of  2001. 1  had  been  interested  or  had  become 
aware  that  Frankie  Sue  Del  Papa,  the  then-attorney  general,  had  indicated  that  she  was  not  going  to  run 


448 


for  re-election.  The  attorney  general’s  position  was  an  office  that  1  had  always  admired  and  respected,  and 
so  as  soon  as  1  made  the  decision  that  1  would  at  least  consider  being  a  candidate — 1  hadn’t  made  the 
decision  that  1  was  going  to  be  a  candidate  for  attorney  general — 1  immediately  resigned  from  the  Gaming 
Commission  because  1  did  not  want  anybody  to  accuse  the  Commission  or  accuse  me  of  making  any 
votes  or  considering  anything  that  might  be  considered  to  have  been  politically  motivated.  So  1  resigned 
from  the  Commission  before  1  even  declared  my  candidacy  so  that  the  integrity  of  the  Gaming 
Commission  and  the  Nevada  gaming  regulatory  system  would  not  be  in  question.  Approximately  two 
months  later,  after  having  talked  to  my  family,  1  made  the  decision  to  be  a  candidate  for  attorney  general, 
but  it  was  very  important  to  me  to  step  off  that  commission,  because  1  did  not  want  any  decision  coming 
out  of  there  to  be  criticized  that  it  had  been  motivated  by  something  other  than  a  decision  on  the  merits. 

Who  replaced  you  as  chairman  on  the  Commission? 

The  gentleman  who  replaced  me  was  Peter  Bernhard.  He  had  previously  been  the  chairman  of  the 
Nevada  Ethics  Commission  and  was  a  very  successful  attorney  in  southern  Nevada,  very  well-respected, 
and  had  conducted  himself  with  honor  on  the  ethics  commission.  So  he  was  the  one  that  took  the 
chairman’s  slot.  It  was  a  little  controversial  given  that  a  current  member  of  the  Commission  at  the  time 
was  not  elevated  to  the  chairmanship,  but  it’s  very  important  that  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming 
Commission  also  be  a  lawyer,  because  there  are  so  many  legal  issues  that  the  Commission  confronts,  and 
the  other  four  members  were  not  attorneys.  And,  again,  Pete  has  done  a  fabulous  job  and  continues  the 
legacy  of  a  strong  chairman. 

There  is  no  statute  or  regulation  that  a  member  of  the  Commission  must  become  a  chairman  then, 
evidently? 

No,  there’s  no  elevation  that  the  vice-chairman  will  become  the  chair.  In  fact,  there  is  a  vice- 
chairman,  but  it  is  done  out  of  tradition  rather  than  legal  requirement,  so  that  if  the  chairman  has  a  conflict 
or  something,  the  vice-chairman  can  step  up  and  run  the  meeting.  But  in  terms  of  the  chairmanship,  that’s 
purely  a  decision  of  the  governor,  and  I’m  certain  the  governor  considered  a  lot  of  different  candidates, 
and  ultimately,  Chairman  Bernhard  was  selected.  I  think  all  the  other  commissioners  recognized  that  it 
was  important  to  have  an  attorney  chairing  the  Commission. 

Yes,  even  more  so  every  year  you  need  an  attorney.  That’s  about  all  I  have  for  today.  Is  there  anything 
that  you  would  like  to  say  before  we  close? 

Just  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  share  my  experiences  on  the  Commission  with  you.  I  hope  it 
was  very  helpful.  Indeed  it  was  an  honor  of  a  lifetime  for  me  to  serve  in  that  capacity.  I  had  the 
opportunity  to  confront  some  historical  issues  while  I  was  on  the  Commission,  and  I  am  hopeful  that  for 
the  decisions  we  made,  history  will  show  that  they  were  for  good  for  the  state.  I’m  just  thankful  that  I  had 
the  privilege  of  representing  the  state  in  that  capacity. 

Well,  thank  you  very  much  for  your  time. 


You’re  welcome. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


449 


18 

Frank  Schreck 


Frank  Schreck,  2003.  Photo  courtesy  of  Frank  Schreck. 


Frank  Schreck  was  born  in  1943  in  Henderson, 
Nevada,  where  he  attended  elementary  through  high 
school.  He  graduated  from  Yale  University  in  1965 
and  received  a  law  degree  from  the  Boalt  Hall  School 
of  Law  at  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley.  He 
then  moved  to  Las  Vegas,  where  he  practiced  in  a 
firm  alongside  Norman  Hilbrecht  and  Teny  Jones.  In 
1971,  newly-elected  Governor  Mike  O’Callaghan, 
who  had  been  Schreck ’s  mentor  and  high  school 
teacher  in  Henderson,  appointed  Schreck  to  the 
Nevada  Gaming  Commission.  Schreck  was  only  27  at 
the  time.  He  served  on  the  Gaming  Commission  for 
four-and-a-half  years,  during  a  period  when  the 
gaming  business  included  very  few  publicly-traded 
companies.  Schreck  stepped  down  in  1975,  taking 
into  his  law  practice  his  former  colleague  Shannon 
Bybee,  who  had  declined  a  reappointment  to  the 
Board.  Over  the  years,  Schreck ’s  firm  represented 
some  of  the  world’s  largest  gaming  companies, 
including  Caesars,  Mandalay  Bay,  Harrah ’s,  Stations 
Casino,  and  MGM  Mirage. 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  morning,  this  is  Dwayne  Kling.  I’m  with  Frank  Schreck  in  his  office  in  Las  Vegas, 
Nevada.  Today  is  May  14,  2004. 

Mr.  Schreck,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have  your  permission  to 
make  available  to  the  public  the  tapes  and  the  transcripts  of  the  oral  history >  interview  that  we  are  about 


450 


the  begin  today? 

Frank  Schreck:  Yes,  it  does. 

Let ’s  start  out  the  interview  by  asking  you  when  and  where  you  were  born. 

I  was  bom  November  13,  1943  in  Henderson,  Nevada. 

What  colleges  or  universities  did  you  attend? 

1  went  all  the  way  through  elementary  and  grade  school,  high  school  in  Henderson,  Nevada.  1 
graduated  from  Basic  High  School,  and  went  to  Yale  University.  I  graduated  from  Yale  University  in 
1965  with  a  bachelor  of  arts  degree.  1  then  attended  the  Boalt  Hall  School  of  Law  at  the  University  of 
California,  Berkeley,  from  1965  through  1968,  and  graduated  in  1968  with  a  J.D.  degree. 

How  did  you  happen  to  get  to  Yale  University?  It  seems  like  a  long  way  from  Henderson. 

Yes,  it  was,  and  it’ll  probably  tie  into  a  lot  of  things  we’ll  talk  about,  at  least  the  earlier  part  of  my 
career.  My  mentor  and  a  high  school  teacher  of  mine  was  Mike  O’ Callaghan.  And  Mike  O’ Callaghan  and 
my  mother  both  thought  it  would  be  a  good  idea  for  me  to  go  back  East  to  school,  because  1  had  never 
been  east  of  Utah.  1  was  dead  set  on  going  to  USC  and  play  basketball,  but  they  prevailed,  and  1  decided 
to  apply.  And  actually,  they  did  most  of  the  application  for  me  to  Harvard  and  Yale,  and  1  selected  Yale, 
which,  in  retrospect,  it  was  one  of  the  great  decision  I’ve  ever  made. 

Were  you  a  pretty  good  basketball  player  in  high  school? 

Y ou  know,  1  was  a  pretty  fair  basketball  player  in  high  school. 

But  you  didn ’t  play  it  in  college? 

Actually,  I’m  old  enough  to  have  played  in  the  era  when  freshman  couldn’t  play  on  the  varsity 
teams,  and  1  started  all  of  the  freshman  games.  And  then  1  had  a  lot  of  school  work.  At  Yale  nobody  cared 
much  about  basketball.  Basketball  is  a  very  long  season  with  a  lot  of  road  trips,  and  1  just  wanted  to  play, 
so  two  of  us  from  the  varsity  went  and  played  AAU  [Amateur  Athletic  Union]  basketball  just  for  fun. 

So  that  was  your  career  in  basketball. 

What  did  you  do  after  you  received  your  law  degree? 

1  came  back  to  Las  Vegas  to  practice  law.  It  had  always  been  my  intention  to  come  home.  I  just 
love  Nevada.  When  1  was  looking  at  colleges,  a  dear  family  friend,  who  was  a  canasta  partner  with  my 
mother  but  was  also  a  high  school  teacher  at  Las  Vegas  High  School,  had  as  a  student  an  individual  by  the 
name  of  Norman  Hilbrecht,  and  Norman  had  just  graduated  from  Yale  Law  School.  Since  I  had  applied  to 
Y ale,  they  thought  it  was  a  good  idea  for  me  to  meet  him.  While  he  was  in  Y ale  Law  School  he  had  been 
an  advisor  on  the  undergraduate,  freshman  campus,  and  Norman  talked  to  me  about  Yale  and  told  me 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


451 


what  a  great  opportunity  it  was.  It  was  one  of  the  factors  in  deciding  to  go  to  Yale.  At  the  same  time  he 
said,  “What  are  you  going  to  do  in  the  future?” 

And  I  said,  “I’m  going  to  be  a  lawyer.” 

And  he  said,  “Well,  if  you  go  to  law  school,  look  me  up  in  Las  Vegas  and  maybe  we  can  get  back 
together.”  And  that’s  just  exactly  what  I  did.  I  was  going  to  law  school.  I  kept  in  touch  with  Norman.  And 
when  I  was  in  law  school,  Norman  and  another  individual,  who  is  still  my  partner,  Terry  Jones — Terry 
had  graduated  from  Harvard  Law  School — had  their  two-man  practice,  and  I  worked  in  the  summers  for 
them  as  well  as  another  job  clerking,  and  then  when  I  graduated,  then  passed  the  bar,  1  went  to  work  for 
Norman  and  Terry.  I’ve  been  in  that  same  law  firm,  only  with  different  names  and  different  people,  since. 
I’ve  only  had  one  job. 

That ’s  a  long  time  to  be  in  one  position. 

And  it’s  scary,  but  that  was  about  1968,  so  it’s  thirty-six  years. 

When  were  you  appointed  to  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission? 

I  was  appointed  by  Governor  O’Callaghan  probably  in  December  of  1970,  and  I  took  office  in 
January  of  1971.  As  you’re  aware,  the  statutes  prohibit  a  governor  from  appointing  more  than  three 
individuals  from  the  same  political  party,  and  Governor  O’Callaghan  was  succeeding  a  Republican 
governor,  who  had  three  appointees  that  were  Republicans  and  two  Democrats.  For  the  three  Republicans, 
their  term  expired  in  April  of  1971,  and  I  guess  traditionally  when  there’s  a  new  governor,  the  individuals 
whose  terms  are  getting  ready  to  expire  submit  their  resignations.  They  were  all  three  Republicans,  but 
the  other  two  were  Democrats,  so  Governor  O’ Callaghan  only  had  one  Democrat  that  he  could  appoint. 

He  selected  me  and  two  Republicans — Walter  Cox  and  Clyde  Turner — and  we  all  took  office  in  1971. 

You  replaced  Ken  Turner,  didn ’t  you? 

Yes.  Ken  Turner  was  an  ob/gyn,  I  believe  in  Las  Vegas. 

I  was  going  to  ask  you  if  you  knew  Governor  O  ’Callaghan  prior  to  your  appointment,  but  you ’ve  already 
explained  you ’ve  known  him  since  you  were  in  high  school. 

Yes.  He  was  my  hero,  my  mentor.  Everybody  has  one.  I  was  very  close  to  Governor  O’Callaghan 
all  the  way  through  high  school  and  through  college.  When  I  was  in  law  school,  he  was  in  Santa  Rosa 
with,  I  think,  the  Office  of  Emergency  Preparedness.  We  would  have  lunch  together,  dinner  together  at 
different  times.  His  family  was  very  close  to  my  family  in  Henderson.  When  I  was  growing  up  and  going 
through  high  school,  my  sister,  who  was  four  years  older  than  I,  had  Governor  O’Callaghan  also  for  a 
teacher.  My  parents  were  kind  of  like  his  surrogate  parents  in  Henderson,  always  keeping  him  in  line.  So 
the  families  became  very,  very  close,  and  I  became  very  close  to  him,  and  we  kept  that  relationship  going. 

When  he  decided  to  run  for  office,  I  remember  I  was  going  up  to  a  parole  hearing,  the  only  one 
that  I’ve  ever  been  to,  at  the  prison  in  Carson  City.  The  son  of  a  friend  of  my  mother’s,  a  colleague 
working  in  VoTech  School,  a  very  nice  woman,  had  run  into  some  problems.  They  didn’t  have  much 
money,  and  he  was  coming  up  for  parole,  so  she  asked  if  I  would  go  and  help  them  out.  I  did  a  lot  of  that 


452 


pro  bono  work  in  those  days.  So  I  went  up  and  I  told  Mike  1  was  coming  up,  and  he  said,  “I’m  here.  Why 
don’t  you  stay  with  me  and  Carolyn,  and  I  got  some  things  I  want  to  talk  to  you  about.”  So  1  went  up  to 
the  parole  hearing  and  then  stayed  with  Mike  that  night,  and  when  we  had  dinner  he  said,  “I’m  going  to 
run  for  office.”  It  was  my  suspicion  that  he  was  going  to  run,  but  I  thought  he  was  going  to  run  for 
Congress  against  Walter  Baring,  who  was  a  person  that  was  defeatable  in  the  Democratic  primary,  but 
never  in  the  general  election,  because  he  got  more  Republican  votes  than  Democratic  votes.  He  shocked 
me  by  saying,  no,  he  was  going  to  run  for  governor. 

At  that  time,  Governor  Laxalt  had  announced  that  he  wasn’t  going  to  run  for  re-election.  He  was 
very  popular  man  in  the  state,  and  his  lieutenant  governor,  Ed  Fike,  was  a  very  popular  guy,  and  very 
wealthy,  and  had  obviously  all  the  establishment  support,  and  Mike  had  basically  himself,  and  he  said  that 
he  was  going  to  run  for  that  position.  These  were  the  days  where  basically  you  didn’t  run  two-year 
campaigns  like  they  do  now.  We’d  ran  maybe  for  six  months  or  something.  But  at  that  point,  I  said, 
“Mike,  you  know,  you’re  not  going  to  have  any  money  compared  to  what  the  other  side’s  going  to  have. 
But  one  thing  you  do  have  is  that  if  you  can  get  in  a  room  and  talk  with  ten  people,  six  of  them  will  vote 
for  you,  and  two  of  them  will  be  thinking  about  it,  and  two  of  them  will  hate  your  guts.”  So  I  said,  “You 
got  to  get  around  the  state  and  talk  to  everybody  you  can.”  In  those  days,  the  state  was  only  four  or  five 
hundred  thousand  people,  so  you  could  do  that.  And  that’s  what  he  did.  He  just  started  off  that  year  and  it 
was  one  of  those  Pied  Piper  campaigns  where  truly  the  best  guy  won.  We  had  very  little  money.  My 
mother  hocked  a  diamond  engagement  ring  to  buy  bumper  stickers  and  stick-ons  right  near  the  end  of  the 
election.  It  was  bare  bones,  but  it  was  where  the  person  who  should  be  elected  was  elected.  He  was  a  guy 
that  everybody  loved  then.  He  just  passed  away,  and  probably  is  still  the  most  revered  politician  in  the 
history  of  this  state. 

Right.  Well  he  left  a  lot  of  legacy,  but  also,  the  Gaming  Control  Board  and  the  Gaming  Commission 
people  like  Phil  Hannifin  and  Roger  Trounday  and  yourself ,  of  course,  were  appointed  by  him. 

Yes.  In  fact,  if  you  want  some  really  fun  background  about  the  kind  of  guy  Mike  is,  when  he  was 
running  for  election — and  in  those  days  I  was  twenty-six  years  old — 1  was  such  a  fan  of  Mike’s.  It  was 
like  following  a  movie  star  around,  in  my  opinion;  he  was  a  person  1  just  respected  so  much,  and  there 
wasn’t  anything  that  I  wouldn’t  do  to  try  to  help  him  get  elected.  But  I,  in  all  honesty  in  my  heart,  think 
we  had  a  hundred-to-one  chance  to  win.  In  fact,  when  we  opened  our  campaign  headquarters,  it  was  right 
down  here  on  Charleston  Street,  at  Fifteenth  and  Charleston,  and  we  rented  a  space  in  a  building  at  the 
end  of  a  shopping  center  that  had  been  vacuum  cleaner  sales  location.  When  we  had  our  campaign 
headquarters  opening,  we  had  maybe  two  hundred  people.  Out  of  that,  one  hundred  and  eighty  of  them 
were  from  Henderson  and  were  former  students.  Ten  of  them  were  the  political  hangers-on  that  you  see, 
and  ten  of  them  were  just  bums  walking  up  the  street,  seeing  if  there  was  free  hot  dog  and  beer,  who  just 
popped  in.  Ed  Fike  was  opening  about  two  or  three  weeks  later,  and  everybody  who  was  anybody  was 
there,  including  all  the  major  Democrats:  the  Lambs,  the  Mahlon  Browns,  Senator  Brown,  Jerry  Mack, 
Perry  Thomas.  Everybody  was  there;  we  had  nobody.  And,  in  fact,  to  add  insult  to  injury,  the  Democratic 
state  central  committee  chairman,  Denny  Hill,  and  county  chairman,  Bill  McGarry,  endorsed  Hank 
Thomley,  who  was  Mike’s  primary  opponent,  [laughter]  In  those  days,  the  political  party  leaders  never 
endorsed  somebody  in  a  Democratic  primary.  And  in  ours,  both  heads  endorsed  the  other  guy. 


[laughter] 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


453 


The  rest  is  history,  though.  Mike  was  elected,  and  because  of  it  there  were  about  six  of  us  that 
were  his  little  strategy  group  that  would  meet  at  six  o’clock  in  the  morning  once  a  week,  sometimes  twice 
a  week  if  there  was  a  reason  to.  It  was  Grant  Sawyer,  A1  Bramlett,  Jack  Lehman,  George  Rudiack,  an 
attorney  that  passed  away  a  number  of  years  ago,  and  myself.  1  think  there  was  one  more,  but  1  just  can’t 
recall.  But  we  would  meet  and  strategize  and  talk  about  the  campaign  and  what  we  should  do.  And  true  to 
Mike’s  character,  after  he  was  elected,  he  left  and  1  think  he  went  to  Hawaii  for  a  week.  His  stump  was  all 
bloody  from  his  leg  walking  around,  so  he  took  some  time  off  and  then  came  back  and  decided,  “Now 
we’ve  got  to  form  a  government,”  because  nobody  had  given  any  thought  to  it.  At  least,  1  certainly  hadn’t 
because  1  was  trying  to  see  if  we  could  win,  and  1  didn’t  think  we  could.  Mike  was  focused  on  winning. 
Governor  Sawyer  and  some  of  the  others  like  A1  Bramlett,  who  was  the  head  of  the  culinary  union  then, 
were  people  that  had  been  in  politics  for  a  long  time.  They  weren’t  neophytes  like  us,  and  so  I’m  sure  they 
had  their  eye  on  what  was  going  to  go  on  after  he  was  elected. 

He  called  us  all  together  after  he  came  back  from  Hawaii.  It  was  his  first  meeting,  and  he  got  the 
same  six  people  that  he  had  consulted  with  all  along,  even  though  now  he  was  the  governor-elect  and 
everybody  now  wanted  to  be  his  friend.  And  he  made  an  announcement  when  we  sat  down.  He  said, 
“Look.  We’ve  got  to  think  about  putting  the  government  together.”  He  said,  “I’ve  already  made  my  mind 
up  on  two  appointments.”  And  he  said,  “The  two  are,  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  is  going  to 
be  Phil  Hannifin,  as  the  guy  had  worked  with  the  Job  Corps  campus  and  stuff.  And  Phil,  I  think,  is  going 
to  do  a  splendid  job.”  And  he  said,  “I  only  have  one  Democrat  I  can  appoint  to  the  Gaming  Commission, 
because  the  two  Democrats  that  on  there  have  two  years  left  and  they  have  not  submitted  their 
resignations.”  And  he  said,  “I  decided  I  was  going  to  appoint  Frank  Schreck.”  And  at  that  time  I  was 
twenty-seven  years  old.  I  was  leading  anti-war  demonstrations  and  integrating  the  elementary  schools,  so 
I  was  kind  of  like  the  William  Kunstler  of  Las  Vegas,  and  totally  out  of  step  with  the  general  political 
philosophy  of  the  community.  But  still,  I  was  somebody  that  was  close  to  Mike  and  he  trusted.  And  I  can 
tell  you  that  A1  Bramlett  fell  out  of  his  chair,  and  Grant  Sawyer  fell  out  of  his  chair,  because  they  had 
other  people  in  mind  that  they  wanted  appointed. 

Sure. 


And  for  Mike  to  come  out  of  the  box  and  appoint  me — not  only  was  I  doing  all  of  the  integrating 
and  anti-war  demonstrations,  but  I  was  also  twenty-seven  years  old,  which  was  probably  half  the  age  of 
the  youngest  guy  who  had  ever  been  on  the  Commission.  Later  on,  Mike  appointed  to  the  Gaming 
Control  Board  Shannon  Bybee,  who  unfortunately  passed  away  a  year  ago.  Shannon  was  in  his  early 
thirties.  And  since  then  other  younger  people  like  Michael  Rumbolz  and  some  others  have  been 
appointed,  but  none  as  young  as  me,  nobody  up  to  that  time.  I  think  on  the  Gaming  Commission  the 
youngest  had  to  be  in  their  fifties. 

So  you  ’re  still  the  youngest  person  ever  to  have  been  on  the  Commission? 

Oh,  yes,  I’m  sure  I  am.  And  believe  me,  it  caused  a  lot  of  shockwaves  in  the  established 
community,  to  see  me  get  appointed.  It  shocked  me!  I  had  no  idea.  I  didn’t  ever  ask  for  anything.  I  was 
naive  about  it.  Everybody  else  had  things  that  they  wanted  to  now  get  because  Mike  was  elected,  but  I 
had  never  thought  about  that,  and  when  he  appointed  me  to  the  Commission,  it  literally  shocked 


454 


everybody.  And  me! 

[laughter]  That  is  funny.  He  hadn ’t  ever  discussed  it  with  you. 

Oh,  no,  never.  I’d  never  discussed  appointments.  I  mean,  up  until  the  election  night — we  had  a 
guy,  and  to  this  day  1  can’t  remember  his  name.  I’ve  been  in  a  lot  of  political  races,  but  in  the  days 
without  computers,  whether  he  was  lucky  or  not,  this  was  unbelievable.  It  was  election  night  and  the 
results  were  coming  in,  and  we  had  laid  out  tables  of  precincts,  and  as  they  came  in  we  were  tabulating.  It 
was  probably  about  eight  o’clock  at  night,  eighty-thirty,  and  we  were  losing,  and  I  was  depressed.  And 
this  guy — he  had  worked  in  Hubert  Humphrey’s  campaigns,  had  been  a  major  demographics  guy — he 
walked  through.  He  had  just  had  his  orientation  that  day  about  where  precincts  were  and  what  was 
mostly  Democratic  and  Republican.  He  walked  down  and  he  looked  at  all  of  these  votes  that  had  come  in, 
and  most  of  the  votes  had  come  in  from  Republican  districts,  which  I  wasn’t  focused  on.  [laughter]  1  was 
just  depressed.  And  he  said,  “You’re  going  to  win.” 

1  said,  “What?!” 

He  said,  “No,  you’re  going  to  win.”  He  said,  “Look  at  these  votes.  North  Las  Vegas  isn’t  in  yet, 
Henderson’s  not  in,  and  the  black  community  in  Westside  is  not  in.  Those  are  all  going  to  be  Democratic 
votes.”  He  said,  “You’re  going  to  win.” 

Well,  we  got  right  up  to  near  the  end  and  it  was  nip  and  tuck,  and  we  looked  and  we  hadn’t  gotten 
any  votes  counted  yet  from  the  black  community  where  we  knew  we  would  be  very  heavily  favored.  So  1 
remember  Marvin  Sedway,  one  of  the  all-time  great  guys.  He  was  an  assemblyman,  and  a  political  junkie. 
We  were  driving  down  to  see  what  the  heck  was  going  on  in  those  precincts,  what  happened  to  the 
ballots,  blah,  blah,  blah,  and  as  we  were  driving,  on  the  radio  the  announcement  came  over  that  we  went 
from  four  or  five  hundred  votes  ahead  to  six  thousand  votes  ahead.  And  I  knew  what  had  happened:  those 
votes  came  in.  That’s  exactly  what  happened,  and  1  think  we  ended  up  winning  by  nine  thousand  votes  or 
something  like  that.  It  was  fantastic. 

But  typical  of  Mike’s  character,  he  appointed  somebody  like  me  who  would  be  the  last  choice 
that  would  be  picked  by  the  establishment  or  anybody  else,  [laughter] 

Who  was  the  chairman  of  that  Commission? 

Jack  Diehl.  And,  in  fact,  it  was  interesting,  Mike  also  told  me,  he  said,  “Frank,  we  have  two 
Democrats  on  there.  1  don’t  know  who  they  are.  They  didn’t  submit  their  resignations,”  and  it  was 
Norman  Brown  and  Jack  Diehl.  And  he  said,  “You  know,  1  have  the  right  to  pick  the  chairman.”  He  said, 
“1  would  just  as  soon  have  you  be  chairman.  Go  up  and  tell  me  who  this  Jack  Diehl  guy  is.” 

And  I  said,  “Mike,  don’t  push  this.”  [laughter]  I  said,  “Right  now  they’re  already  in  shock.  1  don’t 
have  any  qualms  about  my  own  personal  abilities,  but  I’m  twenty-seven  years  old  and  we  may  need  an 
older-looking  guy  up  there.  But  let  me  go  up  and  see  about  this  Jack  Diehl.”  Well,  I  went  up  and  I  met 
with  Jack  Diehl,  and  to  this  day,  I’d  be  hard  put  to  find  a  nicer,  finer  gentleman,  an  unbelievably  good 
chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission.  This  is  a  guy  that  ran  a  meeting  where  everybody  got  their  say  in, 
but  it  didn’t  last  long.  I  mean,  nobody  felt  that  they  were  cut  off.  Just  a  consummate  administrative  lawyer 
and  chairman.  And  I  went  back  to  Mike  and  I  said,  “Hey,  you  got  as  good  a  chairman  as  you’ll  ever  get.” 

I  said,  “Just  forget  about  me.  I  mean,  I’m  still  kind  of  a  political  lightening  rod.  You’ve  got  a  wonderful, 
wonderful  chairman." 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


455 


Did  he  stay  as  chairman  the  entire  time  you  were  on  the  Commission? 

No,  he  served  out  his  term,  and  he  wanted  to  go  back  into  practice.  Mike  asked  me  again  if  I 
thought  about  being  chair,  and  I  said,  “No,  no,  just  get  an  older  guy.  I’m  comfortable  1  could  do  the  job, 
but  1  think  that  the  industry  and  everything  else  expects  somebody  that  has  a  lot  more  age  and 
experience,”  and  so  he  appointed  Pete  Echeverria. 

So  you  worked  with  the  two  different  chairmen:  Echeverria  and  Diehl? 

Yes,  two  different  chairmen.  I’ll  tell  you  a  really  nice  story.  I  don’t  know  if  you’ve  done  research 
on  Walter  Cox,  who  is  just  a  wonderful,  wonderful  guy.  He  was  the  editor  of  the  Pizen  Switch  newspaper, 
and  just  a  real  character  and  a  wonderful  man,  and  a  much  older  guy.  Walter  was  in  his  late  seventies 
when  he  was  appointed,  but,  as  I  indicated,  when  I  was  appointed,  there  were  a  lot  of  newspaper  articles 
about  the  neophyte.  Back  in  those  days,  Don  Digilio  used  to  write  the  major  political  column,  and  he  had 
a  whole  column  dedicated  me  as  the  neophyte,  saying  that  someday  I  may  be  a  good  lawyer,  but  at  this 
point  in  time  I  shouldn’t  be  on  the  Gaming  Commission,  blah,  blah,  blah.  I  was  twenty-seven  years  old, 
and  when  I  went  up  to  get  sworn  in  at  the  secretary  of  state’s  office,  I  went  over  with  Walter  Cox.  It’s  the 
first  time  I’d  met  Walter.  We  went  in  and  got  sworn  in,  and  as  we  were  walking  out,  there  were  three 
newspaper  reporters  that  were  standing  there.  And  one  of  them,  a  female,  started  asking  me,  well,  what  do 
I  think  about  being  on  the  Commission,  saying  that  I  just  got  out  of  law  school  and  how  do  I  think  I  could 
handle  the  job?  I  was  kind  of  wise-ass,  and  so  I  told  her,  “Well,  you  know,  I  have  a  law  degree,  and  so  I 
understand  regulations  and  statutes  and  know  how  to  study  them.”  And  I  said,  “I  think  on  that  basis  I’ll 
have  more  insight  than  the  person  I’m  replacing.”  And,  you  know,  the  person  I  was  replacing  was  a 
gynecologist. 

So  it  was  my  little  tongue-in-cheek  with  her,  but  it  floated  right  over  their  heads.  Thank  goodness, 
in  retrospect.  But  then  another  fairly  aggressive  reporter  jumped  in  and  he  said,  “Well,  yes,  you’re  only 
twenty-seven  years  old.  How  much  experience  do  you  really  have?!”  And  before  I  could  utter  a  word, 
Walter  Cox,  who  after  this  became  my  hero,  stepped  in  front  and  he  said,  “Son,  between  the  two  of  us  we 
have  fifty  years  of  experience.”  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

And  I’ve  loved  Walter  Cox  ever  since.  We  became  dear  friends,  and  he  was  just  a  wonderful, 
wonderful  guy. 

Norm  Brown  was  on  that  commission,  too. 

Norm  was  honest.  You  wouldn’t  ever  call  Norman  a  hale  fellow  well  met.  He  was  a  conservative 
rancher,  didn’t  pal  around  and  go  have  drinks  with  us.  He  was  a  very,  very  nice  guy,  a  very  well- 
intentioned  guy.  He  just  served  the  two  years  of  his  term  and  left.  He  wasn’t  a  big  participant.  One  thing  I 
can  remember  about  Norman,  he  voted  against  a  restricted  application  for  a  bar  somewhere  in  the  middle 
of  Nevada  because  of  the  name.  It  was  too  racy  for  him.  It  had  some  sexual  connotation  to  it,  and  so  he 
voted  against  it  because  of  that.  That  was  Norm. 


456 


I  can  tell  you  a  story  about  Jack  Diehl.  When  we  had  our  meetings,  we’d  go  over  and  have  a  drink 
afterwards  in  Las  Vegas.  And  we  went  over  to  a  bar  in  one  of  the  hotels.  It  was  a  cocktail  lounge,  but  it 
was  a  cocktail  lounge  that  was  frequented  by  women  of  the  night.  And  so,  as  you  know,  Jack  had  one 
glass  eye,  or  maybe  you  didn’t  know.  Jack  Diehl  only  had  one  eye.  And  we’re  sitting  at  the  table  and 
having  a  cocktail,  and  two  girls,  who  obviously  were  in  that  profession,  came  over  and  sat  pretty  close  to 
where  we  were.  1  looked  at  them  and  then  Jack  looked  at  them,  and  he  looked  at  me  and  he  said,  “Now 
you  know  what  makes  one-eyed  Jacks  wild.”  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

But  it’s  that  kind  of  a  group  that  we  had.  It  was  just  really,  really  a  fun  group  to  work  with.  And 
we  were  there  before  open  meeting  laws,  so  we  did  a  lot  of  stuff  that  guys  can’t  do  today.  And  if  you 
want,  as  we  go  through  this,  1  can  tell  you  some  of  the  funny  stories  of  things  we  did. 

In  1971,  the  Tropicana  was  sold  to  a  Deil  Gustafson.  Would  you  tell  us  about  Mr.  Gustafson  and  his  time 
at  the  Tropicana? 

Well,  it  was  kind  of  a  disruptive  time  in  a  regulatory  sense,  1  guess.  He  was  from  Minnesota  or 
something.  My  recollection  is  that  he  was  a  banker  and  seemed  on  his  application  to  be  a  very  credible 
guy  who  had  a  finance  background  and  was  coming  into  the  Tropicana.  And  the  Tropicana  had  never 
really  had  any  problems  before,  that  1  can  recall.  So  it  was  fine  and  he  was  licensed,  and  then  after  that 
there  were  problems  that  occurred.  From  a  regulatory  standpoint,  and  from  1  think  a  financial  standpoint, 
the  property  wasn’t  doing  well.  There  were  people  involved  in  the  property — Joe  Agosto,  1  think, 
appeared  at  that  time,  and  we  didn’t  know  a  lot  about  him,  but  we  were  learning  about  him,  and  the 
company  was  close  to  being  insolvent,  and  they  were  having  cash  infusions  on  a  constant  basis,  getting 
emergency  participation  for  the  people  who  would  end  up  buying  it  from  Deil  Gustafson.  1  remember  1 
was  going  to  see  if  1  could  find  it,  but  1  didn’t  look  hard  enough — 1  still  have  the  original  of  an  order 
signed  by  the  Gaming  Commission  delegating  to  me  the  authority  to  close  the  Tropicana  Hotel  as  a  result 
of  my  almost  daily  reviews  that  1  went  over  with  Dennis  Gomes  at  that  time,  who  was  the  chief  of  audit. 
We  would  go  over  and  count  down  the  cage  and  make  sure  they  had  enough  money  in  the  cage  to 
continue  the  gaming.  If  not,  1  could  serve  that  order  and  the  place  would  be  closed,  which  was  kind  of  an 
awesome  responsibility,  because  no  major  casino  had  ever  been  closed,  and  1  didn’t  want  to  be  the  first 
person  to  do  that.  So  fortunately,  at  that  point,  “Tiger”  Mike  Davis  loaned  two  million  dollars  to  the 
Doumanis,  because  they  were  going  through  this  process.  And  that  money  went  in,  and  then  eventually 
Mitzi  Briggs  gave  them  the  more  money  and,  supposedly,  put  it  on  a  more  stable  financial  basis. 

But  didn ’t  she  wind  up  getting  hurt  a  great  deal? 

She  ended  up  losing  all  of  her  money  there.  And  that’s  another  interesting  one — my  father 
worked  for  Stauffer  Chemical  Company  in  Henderson  for  over  thirty  years  and  was  good  friends  with  her 
father,  John  Stauffer.  And  then  she  married  Briggs  from  Briggs  and  Stratton,  so  she  was  a  very  wealthy 
person.  And  when  she  came  up  for  licensing,  it  was  clear  to  me  that  she  was  not  a  businesswoman.  She 
was  a  person  that  really  didn’t  understand  things  very  well,  and  1  was  concerned  about  her  getting  fleeced. 
And  actually,  when  she  came  up  for  licensing,  it  was  my  last  meeting  on  the  Commission,  and  1  actually 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


457 


at  that  meeting  asked  her  if  she  really  understood  the  responsibilities  of  being  an  owner  and  the  risks 
involved  in  it.  And  she  was  there  with  her  lawyer,  a  guy  named  Smith  from  Palo  Alto,  1  remember,  and 
she  said,  “Yes,  I  do.  Yes,  I  do.”  But,  you  know,  1  didn’t  believe  that  she  did,  and  it  proved  out  in  later  life 
that  she  didn’t.  And  my  understanding  is  somebody  told  me  that  years  ago  she  was  a  waitress  in  town. 

I ’ve  heard  that ,  yes. 

It’s  just  sad.  I  mean,  she  had  to  have  lost — and  that’s  big  money  in  those  days — twenty-five  to 
thirty  million  bucks. 

Yes.  And  no  way  to  get  it  back. 

Oh,  no,  it  was  gone.  It  was  gone.  I  think  they  just  brought  her  in  and  fleeced  her. 

Well,  I  think  that  Joe  Agosto  was  involved  in  that,  too. 

Yes,  Joe  Agosto  helped  fleece  her.  No  question  about  it.  There  were  bad  guys  there. 

Did  the  Doumani  brothers  wind  up  buying  it? 

Yes. 

And  ironically,  Dennis  Gomes  is  now  the  chief  executive  officer  at  the  Tropicana. 

Right.  And,  in  fact,  when  we  were  going  over  there,  we’d  made  sure  we  cleared  any  potential 
conflict,  when  we  would  go  over  and  count  the  cage  down  and  stuff.  Dennis’s  wife,  Barbara,  who  was  a 
really  wonderful  woman  and  a  major  sponsor  of  those  early  days  of  Nevada  Dance  Ballet,  was  a  dancer  at 
the  Tropicana.  So  we  kept  telling  Dennis  we  would  put  his  wife  out  of  work,  [laughter] 

It  kind  of  gives  you  a  flavor  for  the  way  the  regulatory  process  worked  in  those  days  to  a  certain 
degree,  or  the  latitude  you  had  before  open  meeting  law  requirements,  that  preclude  what  we  did. 
Especially  when  we  went  to  northern  Nevada  we’d  meet  for  breakfast  with  Pete  Echeverria,  the  chairman, 
and  basically  all  the  gaming  commission  members  had  breakfast  together  and  we’d  go  over  the 
applications  that  we  were  going  to  hear,  and  talk  about  what  people  felt  about  it,  things  you  can’t  do 
anymore.  I  remember  one  time  it  was  a  guy  that  was,  I  think,  the  casino  manager  at  the  Tropicana  during 
this  period  of  time,  and  he  had  been  involved  in  a  Friar’s  Club-type  scam.  If  you  remember,  the  Friar’s 
Club  used  to  play  very  high  stakes  gin.  And  at  the  Friar’s  Club,  they  had  a  guy  that  was  peeping  through  a 
hole  and  telling  somebody  what  the  cards  were. 

Yes,  1  remember  that  one. 

Well,  this  person  had  been  involved  in  a  similar  type  event  in  Las  Vegas,  but  the  person  they 
cheated  was  Jay  Samo. 

So  we  were  sitting  talking  about  it,  and  this  guy  was  tangentially  involved  in  it,  and,  you  know, 
geez,  what  were  we  going  to  do  with  him,  and  so  kind  of  joking  said,  “Well,  you  know,  there  is  some 


458 


socially  redeeming  value  to  cheating  Jay.”  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

So  maybe  it’s  not  as  bad  as  if  it  was  a  regular  guy.  And  so  we  decide,  “Well,  we’re  going  to  make 
him  sweat.”  So  we  said,  “OK,”  and  we  designated  one  commissioner  to  make  a  motion,  but  after  there 
was  a  call  for  the  motion,  I’d  wait  thirty  seconds  or  sixty  seconds.  There’d  be  dead  silence,  and  then  1 
would  make  a  very  reluctant  motion  to  approve.  And  then  there’d  be  dead  silence  again,  and  then  there’d 
be  a  very  reluctant  second.  And  then  we  would  go  down  the  thing,  so  it  turned  out  three-to-two,  and  the 
third  was  the  final  approval  vote,  and  the  last  vote  on  it  for  approval  was  Walter  Cox.  And  as  we  went 
through  this  whole  charade,  Walter  voted  the  wrong  way.  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

Oh,  yes,  a  denial.  And  1  was  the  one  that  made  the  motion.  So  1  looked  at  Walter  real  fast  and  he 
asked  for  a  reconsideration,  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

Well,  the  best  laid  plans,  you  know. 

Yes,  yes.  But  like  you  say,  you  could  not  do  this  today. 

No,  you  can’t  do  that  today,  but  we  made  him  sweat.  We  wanted  to  exact  our  pound  of  flesh,  you 

know? 

Yes.  [laughter] 

We  had  some  good  times.  Walter  was  great.  I  remember  one  time  we  had  a  house  of  ill  repute 
come  up  for  licensing  for  a  slot  machine,  and  so  1  said,  “Y ou  know,  wait  a  second.  My  understanding  is 
that  to  have  a  restricted  license  you  have  to  be  in  an  adult  place,  and  it  has  to  have  a  liquor  license,”  in 
those  days.  “So  adult  and  liquor  and  no  minors.”  1  said,  “The  whorehouse  qualifies  for  that.” 

[laughter] 

1  said,  “That’s  what  the  law  is.”  1  said,  “The  state  says  you  can  have  one.  If  the  county  wants  it, 
it’s  county  option.  The  county  says  it  wants  them.  It’s  a  legal,  licensed  business!  And  it’s  adult,  and  it  has 
liquor,  and  it’s  no  minors.”  1  said,  “So  why  can’t  it  have  slot  machines?” 

“Well,  you  know,  it’ll  tarnish  the  reputation  of  the  state  of  Nevada.” 

1  said,  “Give  me  a  break.  Come  on!”  [laughter]  So  we  got  starting  to  vote  for  it.  1  made  a  motion 
to  approve  the  application.  1  said,  “You  know,  if  somebody  other  than  me  made  the  law,  I’d  have  no 
problems  with  it.” 

And  Walter  Cox  said,  “Well,  as  long  as  they  don’t  have  quarter  slot  machines,  because  1  don’t 
want  Nevada  being  known  as  having  two-bit  whorehouses.” 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


459 


[laughter] 

And  then  another  time  in  the  course  of  the  discussion  he  said,  “You  know,  that’s  not  a  bad  idea, 
because  that  may  be  the  only  slot  1  can  fill.”  [laughter]  But  that’s  how  our  meetings  went.  Needless  to  say, 
Walter  and  1  lost  three-to-two,  but  we  stood  up  for  our  own  principles. 

We’d  had  another  one,  and  this  was  after  Clair  Haycock  came  on  board.  There  was  a  guy  that 
came  in  as  the  casino  manager  and  general  manager  of  the  Sahara,  and  he  had  just  gotten  off  five  years 
parole  after  having  served  five  years  in  prison  for  killing  his  wife.  She  had  been  having  an  affair,  and  he 
caught  her  and  he  shot  her  full  of  holes  and  reloaded  his  gun,  1  think  my  recollection  is,  and  shot  her  some 
more,  and  the  Gaming  Commission  approved  it  three-to-two.  1  voted  against  it  and  Haycock  voted  against 
it.  And  1  said,  “You  know,  hey,  1  want  to  see  the  guy  rehabilitated  and  have  another  job,  but  not  a  licensed 
position.”  1  said,  “ft’s  kind  of  early  in  the  game  after  just  getting  off  parole,  to  give  him  the  Good 
Housekeeping  stamp  of  approval  from  the  State  of  Nevada.”  But  they  voted  for  him  and  he  got  licensed. 

And  about  six  months  later  we  had  a  case  where  a  guy  was  in  the  middle  of  his  divorce  and  he 
lied  on  some  interrogatories  in  his  divorce  when  he  was  talking  about  what  money  that  he  had.  He  hid 
some  money  away,  and  that  was  his  investment  in  his  gaming  venture  that  he  was  getting  licensed  for.  He 
had  lied  during  the  course  of  his  divorce  about  it,  and  that  was  discovered.  So  we  get  to  the  vote,  and  1 
vote  against  him  again  to  be  consistent,  and  the  guy  gets  denied.  And  Clair  Haycock,  who  voted  in  favor 
of  this  one,  said,  “Well,  you  know,  the  message  that  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  is  sending  is  that  if 
you  have  a  problem  with  your  wife,  don’t  lie  on  the  interrogatories  in  the  course  of  the  divorce,  just  kill 
her.”  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

But  that  was  one  of  the  more  interesting  licensings  that  we  went  through. 

To  go  back,  in  December  of  1971,  the  Aladdin  Hotel-Casino,  which  was  in  dire  financial  straits,  was 
purchased  from  the  Recrion  Corporation  by  a  group  from  the  Midwest.  Do  you  recall  some  of  the 
members  of  that  group? 

Yes!  1  remember  Richard  Daly  and  Peter  Webbe,  and  the  Goldfarb  brothers,  and  George  George, 
Sam  Diamond,  who’s  still  around. 

Sam  Diamond  is  still  around? 

Yes.  In  fact,  1  represented  Sam  just  recently  on  an  application.  He’s  still  running  poker  games. 

Oh,  is  that  right?!  [laughter] 

Well,  actually,  now  he’s  not  running  ...  on  the  race  and  sportsbook  he  was  a  consultant. 


What  problems  did  those  applicants  face  when  they  applied  for  licensing? 


460 


Well,  when  we  got  their  first  applications,  they  had  some  other  individuals  that  had  applied  and 
Mrs.  George,  she  ended  up  getting  licensed,  and  there  were  some  individuals  that  we  were  always 
concerned  were  lurking  in  the  background.  1  know  Sorkis  Webbe  was  an  individual  that  we  were 
concerned  about,  but  his  brother,  Peter  Webbe,  got  licensed.  And  in  those  days,  our  investigative 
techniques  weren’t  as  finely  honed  as  they  are  now.  We  didn’t  have  the  benefit  in  those  days  of  FBI 
wiretaps  and  those  types  of  things. 

Didn ’t  have  a  budget  either,  did  you? 

No,  not  much  of  a  budget.  And  there  are  things  that  you  just  really  couldn’t  ferret  out.  We  all  had 
a  gut  belief  that  Peter  Webbe  was  sitting  there  as  a  alter  ego  for  Sorkis  Webbe  and  that  Mrs.  George  was 
for  her  husband,  but  there  was  nothing  we  could  really  prove  about  it.  So  1  think  we  licensed  them  with 
some  restrictions.  1  think  there  were  one  or  two  that  we  threw  out  in  that  bunch,  but  1  think  it  ended  up 
that  Peter  Webbe  and  Mrs.  George  were  licensed.  I’m  not  sure  if  Daly  got  licensed,  but  he  may  have  been 
and  one  got  out  of  the  Goldfarb  brothers.  1  think  there  were  a  couple  of  them  where  the  application  as 
originally  submitted  was  not  going  to  fly,  because  there  were  some  people  that,  in  fact,  we  felt 
uncomfortable  with.  And  then  working  in  the  background  also  with  Sorkis  Webbe  was  Jim  Tamer,  and 
people  with  bad  reputations  from  the  Detroit  area.  So  we  culled  some  of  those  people  out,  and  we  ended 
up  with  a  group  that  I  guess  we  could  live  with,  with  certain  restrictions.  Like  we’ve  discussed,  Sam 
Diamond  was  the  one  person  there  that  had  some  gaming  experience  and  had  been  licensed  in  the  state, 
and  I  think  we  probably  trusted  him  a  whole  lot  more  than  anybody  else  there. 

Well,  there  again,  a  big  thing  was  that  you  were  able  to  keep  the  casino  open. 

And  that  was  important,  because  it  was  going  to  close  otherwise.  There  was  no  other  choice.  You 
always  say  that  economics  doesn’t  prevail  over  strict  regulations,  but  that’s  easy  to  say  outside  of  the 
context  of  causing  a  loss  of,  in  those  days,  a  thousand  jobs. 

Yes,  that ’s  very  important. 

And  we  thought  we  could  get  a  handle  on  him,  because  we  monitored  him  pretty  closely,  and 
eventually  we  did  kind  of  chase  him  out  of  the  state  because  it  was  clear  that  Peter  Webbe  was  holding  for 
Sorkis  Webbe  [laughter]  and  that  Mrs.  George  was  holding  for  Mr.  George.  1  mean,  it  turned  out  our 
suspicions  were  eventually  proved.  But  they  left.  They  moved  away. 

And  James  Tamer,  I  believe,  wound  up  in  the  “Black  Book.  ’’ 

James  Tamer  is  in  the  “Black  Book.”  Sorkis  died  before  they  could  ever  do  anything  about  him. 
But  his  brother,  Peter  Webbe,  was  spotless.  As  1  recall,  he  was  a  lawyer  in  Detroit,  and  there  was  no 
negative  information  about  him  at  all.  Mrs.  George  was  a  businesswoman  herself,  and  she  was  different 
than  Mitzi  Briggs — not  just  somebody  with  money,  but  she  had  been  in  business. 

Well,  I  guess  sometimes  you  may  have  wanted  to  turn  someone  down,  but  you  really  didn ’t  have  enough 
basis  to  deny  them. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


461 


Oh,  yes.  And  some  of  the  ones  we’re  going  to  talk  about  in  a  little  while  were  people  that  you  had 
gut  feelings  about.  1  remember  there’s  one  of  them  that  we’ll  talk  about  where  Shannon  Bybee  had  said 
on  the  record,  “Y ou  know,  1  had  to  drink  this  big  glass  of  milk  this  morning  to  settle  my  stomach  before  1 
could  make  a  motion  for  approval,”  because  in  his  stomach  he  knew,  in  his  gut  he  knew  that  there  was 
something  wrong,  but  he  couldn’t  prove  it. 

Well,  that ’s  what  we  ’re  going  to  talk  about  next  probably,  Allen  Click  and  the  Argent  Corporation. 

Glick  was  very  smooth,  very  bright.  There  was  no  indication  that  he  had  any  mob  connections  at 
the  time.  When  he  first  got  licensed,  1  think  the  Hacienda  was  the  first  thing  he  got  involved  with.  It  was  a 
small  place  and  he  could  financially  handle  that  himself,  so  there  weren’t  any  real  concerns  that  were 
raised  in  the  course  of  that  investigation.  But  1  think  the  Board  subjected  him  to  a  polygraph,  which  was 
very  rare  in  those  days,  because  they  just  had  that  gut  feeling  that  there  might  be  something  wrong.  My 
understanding  is  that  he  passed  it  with  flying  colors  at  that  time  about  some  associations  and  relationships 
and  then  eventually  he  went  on  to  acquire  the  Marina  and  then  the  Stardust  properties. 

Was  that  the  person  that  Shannon  was  upset  about,  or  had  the  gut  feeling  about? 

No,  I  think  that  was  Morris  Shenker. 

In  years  to  come,  as  you  mentioned,  Allen  Glick  expanded  his  holdings  when,  like  you  say,  he  went  into 
the  Stardust.  When  you  were  on  the  commission,  did  the  Stardust  Casino  executive,  Frank  "Lefty" 
Rosenthal  ever  appear  before  you  to  be  licensed? 

He  didn’t  appear  before  me,  but  this  is  a  tidbit  that  probably  nobody  knows,  and  1  thought  about 
whether  1  should  talk  about  it,  but  1  will.  For  a  number  of  years  1  had  tried,  discussed  and  cajoled  with 
Phil  Hannifin  to  call  “Lefty”  Rosenthal  forward  for  licensing,  as  he  was  food  and  beverage  then  and  he 
had  that  TV  show,  and  obviously  he  was  something  more  than  a  food  and  beverage  manager.  And  the 
Commission  doesn’t  have  the  right  to  call  somebody  forward,  so  1  talked  to  Phil  on  a  number  of  occasions 
about  why  isn’t  “Lefty”  Rosenthal  called  forward  for  licensing?  A  number  of  years  went  by  and  he  finally 
was  called  forward  for  licensing,  and  actually,  that  call  forward  was  my  last  meeting  on  the  Gaming 
Commission.  It  was  Mitzi  Briggs  and  “Lefty”  Rosenthal,  which  made  my  day.  It  was  a  great  day  for  me. 

1  subsequently  have  an  opinion,  after  discussing  things  with  people  in  the  past,  because  1  knew 
what  a  hard-nose  regulator  Phil  Hannifin  was.  He  was  a  give -no -quarter  guy,  and  I  could  never 
understand  why  “Lefty”  Rosenthal  was  never  called  forward  earlier.  And  I  guess  opinion  protects  me,  but 
my  belief  is  that  he  was  a  federal  informant — that  basically  a  federal  agency  asked  Phil  not  to  do  that, 
because  there  would  have  been  no  other  reason  that  Phil  wouldn’t  have  called  him  forward.  And  that 
finally  made  sense  to  me.  1  could  never  understand  that  piece  of  the  puzzle.  It  was  just  not  like  him  [Phil] 
to  not  call  Lefty  forward. 

It’s  an  interesting  theory. 


And  another  thing  about  “Lefty”  Rosenthal  1  thought  was  always  interesting  is  that  way  back  in 


462 


the  early  days,  all  the  race  and  sportsbooks  were  outside  of  casinos. 
Right. 


They  weren’t  in  casinos.  And  the  reason  they  weren’t  in  casinos  is  the  federal  government  had  a 
ten  percent  tax,  a  gross  tax  on  the  top  of  their  revenues.  Well,  the  margins  in  the  race  and  sportsbooks  are 
not  that  big,  so  basically  the  only  way  that  the  race  and  sportsbook  could  survive  independently  was  to  lie 
to  the  federal  government  on  taxation  issues,  because  it  couldn’t  survive  otherwise.  And  that’s  the  reason 
why  gaming  would  not  allow  those  to  go  into  big  gaming  casinos,  because  we  knew  these  guys  were 
having  to  provide  false  figures,  or  do  something,  because  they  couldn’t  afford  to  stay  in  business  and  pay 
that  ten  percent  tax.  1  remember  Senator  Cannon  got  it  rolled  back  to  two  percent.  When  he  got  it  rolled 
back  for  two  percent,  we  had  the  gaming  policy  committee,  which  is  provided  by  statute,  which  1  don’t 
think  has  met  in  fifteen  years  or  something.  But  it  did  meet.  O’ Callaghan  had  it  meet  a  couple  of  times, 
and  it  met  at  this  time  on  the  issue  as  to  whether  or  not  race  and  sportsbooks  should  be  allowed  into 
casinos,  and  we  decided  that  from  a  policy  standpoint  they  should  be  allowed  to,  because  the  excise  tax 
now  was  two  percent. 

In  the  course  of  those  public  meetings  and  the  commission  hearings  on  the  regulations  for  that, 
nobody  knew  who  “Lefty”  Rosenthal  was.  He  was  running  the  Rose  Bowl  race  and  sportsbook.  He  came 
up  to  speak.  I’ll  never  forget.  He  kind  of  stood  up  and  he  said,  “Well,  you  know,  I’m  not  a  lawyer,  and  I 
just  can’t  speak  very  articulately  about  stuff,  but  I  do  know  the  business,”  and  he  went  on  and  on.  And 
actually,  he  provided  us,  in  terms  of  an  education  on  race  and  sportsbooks,  more  than  anybody  else  had, 
so  several  of  us  commented  as  to  our  appreciation  for  the  information  he  provided:  “Forget  being  a 
lawyer.  You  did  a  great  job,  blah,  blah,  blah.”  Well,  from  that  second  forward,  you  couldn’t  get  a 
microphone  out  of  his  face.  He  went  up  to  the  commission  meeting  at  Carson  City — we  had  it  up  there — 
and  you  couldn’t  shut  him  up,  and  that  was  the  way  he  was  the  rest  of  the  way  forever.  He  was  a  legend  in 
his  own  mind.  This  is  before  we  knew  all  the  contacts  that  he  had.  But  it  was  funny  that  we  kind  of  gave 
him  his  big  opening  to  become  the  celebrity  that  he  believed  he  was. 

Yes.  [laughter]  But  he  was  big  in  Las  Vegas  for  a  few  years. 

Yes,  he  had  his  television  show,  which  I  watched — if  you’re  a  masochist  and  you  want  to  watch 
something  that  is  so  bad  it’s  funny.  I  used  to  watch  that.  I  mean,  seriously,  he  was  so  bad  it  was  funny. 
People  would  be  mocking  him  behind  him,  and  he  wouldn’t  understand  because  he  had  such  a  big  ego.  It 
was  just  fun  to  watch. 

In  1972,  Governor  O’Callaghan  made  the  decision  that  he  wanted  to  meet  Howard  Hughes  face-to-face 
to  determine  if  Hughes  was  really  alive  and  competent.  How  was  the  Commission  informed  of  Governor 
O  ’Callaghan ’s  determination? 

Well,  actually,  it  wasn’t  just  Governor  O’Callaghan  that  met  with  Howard  Hughes.  He  took  Phil 
Hannifin  with  him.  And  Phil  Hannifin,  being  the  type  of  person  that  he  is,  wouldn’t  trust  his  own 
observations  to  know  this  is  Howard  Hughes,  so  he  rolled  his  fingerprints.  And  so  that’s  how  we 
confirmed  it  was  Howard  Hughes.  They  wanted  to  know  directly  from  Mr.  Hughes  if  what  was  going  on 
in  his  reorganization  of  his  gaming  company,  was  what  he  wanted  and  was  at  his  direction  and  that  he 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


463 


understood  what  was  going  on.  He  said  he  did,  and  that  was  it. 

So  Phil  wrote  up  a  big,  long  report ,  and  then  Phil  appeared  before  the  Commission? 

Yes.  He  discussed  what  they  had  asked  Mr.  Hughes  and  his  responses  and  Phil  stated  that  he  and 
the  governor  were  convinced  that  they  did  talk  to  Howard  Hughes  and  that  what  was  going  on  in  the  state 
of  Nevada  with  reorganization  of  his  gaming  properties  was  what  he  wanted  to  have  done. 

I  thought  that  was  a  really  important  meeting. 

Yes,  it  says  that  you’re  not  going  to  just  deal  with,  as  we  used  to  say,  “ghosts,”  or  people  that  may 
not  exist,  or  people  that  we  don’t  know  what  their  real  intentions  are,  because  at  this  point,  he  was 
sequestered  away,  and  we  didn’t  know  if  somebody  else  was  running  his  life  or  that  he  was  a  prisoner  in 
his  own  estate.  We  needed  to  have  some  face-to-face  meeting,  either  in  a  public  meeting,  which  we  knew 
would  never  take  place,  or  a  face-to-face  meeting  with  the  governor  and  the  regulator  where  we  could  be 
assured  that  what  was  going  on  was  something  he  knew  about,  understood,  and  was  agreeable.  1 
remember  in  talking  to  Hannifin,  he  said  that  he  had  researched  a  bunch  of  set  questions  that  only  a  guy 
like  Howard  Hughes  would  know.  And  some  of  it  had  to  do  with  aviation.  He  said  when  he  got  to  some 
of  those  questions,  which  were  really,  really  technical  and  ones  that  only  a  guy  like  Howard  Hughes 
would  know — and  nobody  studying  to  be  Howard  Hughes  would — he  said  that  even  though  [Hughes]  had 
kind  of  concaved  eyes,  real  hollow  eyes,  he  said  you  could  see  them  light  up  just  like  burning  rays  when 
he  started  talking  about  airplanes  and  the  technical  aspects  of  them  and  everything.  He  said  his 
personality  within  that  face  just  totally  changed  when  he  got  into  what  clearly  he  loved.  And  Phil  said 
without  question,  he  talked  to  Howard  Hughes. 

This  is  a  little  out  of  order,  but  I  asked  you  a  question  about  Morris  Shenker  in  1974.  So  let’s  get  back  to 
that  and  tell  us  what  you  recall  about  the  investigation  of  Morris  Shenker  and  his  application  to  get  into 
the  Dunes  Hotel. 

Well,  Morris,  at  the  time  he  applied,  was  a  very  well-known,  fairly  controversial  lawyer  out  of  St. 
Louis.  He  had  represented  members  of  organized  crime.  He  had  represented  good  guys  and  bad  guys. 

Very  flamboyant,  very  bright  guy.  All  of  us  had  some  severe  reservations  about  whether  or  not  he  was 
good  for  the  state  of  Nevada  because  of  his  past  contacts  and  some  of  the  information  that  was  slowly 
developing  about  the  Teamster  pension  funds  and  organized  crime  involvement.  And  so  we  all  had  some 
real  concerns,  but  once  again,  as  a  lawyer  on  the  Commission,  1  always  felt  that  if  1  could  not  prove 
something,  1  didn’t  have  the  right  just  to  go  with  my  gut.  1  felt  that  1  needed  to  have  facts,  and  if  the  facts 
aren’t  there,  1  just  can’t  say  that  1  feel  some  way.  It’s  got  to  be  established.  Shannon  Bybee  was  the  same 
way,  and  I  think  this  was  the  licensing  where  he  put  it  on  the  public  record  that  in  the  morning  before  the 
hearing  he  drank  a  huge  glass  of  milk  so  he  could  settle  his  stomach  before  he  made  a  motion  to  approve 
Morris.  1  think  all  of  us  kind  of  felt  that  way,  because  we  just  couldn’t  put  our  finger  on  it,  and  we  all  felt 
that  if  we  had  all  the  information,  he  wouldn’t  be  a  suitable  person.  But  we  didn’t  have  all  the 
information,  and  based  upon  the  information  we  had,  he  got  licensed. 

So  he  came  to  you  as  being  recommended  for  approval  by  the  Gaming  Control  Board. 


464 


Oh,  yes.  Oh,  yes. 

What  was  the  final  result? 

He  was  licensed  to  own  the  Dunes  Hotel,  and  did  own  it  and  ran  it  for  a  long  time. 

And  he  was  successful  there  at  the  Dunes? 

Fairly  successful,  but,  you  know,  one  never  knows  about  that  operation. 

[laughter] 

We  have  much  more  sophisticated  financial  reporting  and  auditing  now  than  we  had  in  those 

days. 

In  March  of  1975,  Bally’s  Gaming,  Inc.  applied  to  take  control  of  Bally  Distributing  Company.  The 
reputations  of  several  principals  were  questioned  extensively  regarding  their  past  histories  and  their 
current  associates.  What  was  the  Board’s  recommendation  to  the  Commission? 

1  can’t  really  recall  what  the  Board’s  recommendation  was.  1  know  there  were  a  lot  of  issues  with 
respect  to  individuals  involved  with  Bally  Manufacturing.  There  was  a  guy  named  Dino  Cellini,  who  was 
a  representative  of  one  of  Bally’s  distributors  doing  distributing  in  Europe,  and  in  America,  1  think,  that 
was  linked  to  organized  crime.  There  was  a  guy  named  Sam  Klein.  There  was  a  guy  named  Green  that 
had  been  linked  to  the  company  that  had  alleged  nefarious  contacts  with  organized  crime.  The  company 
itself  had  been  in  the  pinball  business  and  then  into  slot  machines,  and  so  it  carried  whatever  negative 
matters  that  related  to  those  old  businesses.  So  it  was  an  application  that  created  a  lot  of  concern  with  both 
the  Gaming  Control  Board  and  the  Gaming  Commission.  1  remember  the  commission  meeting  was 
somewhat  contentious.  1  had  taken  positions  different  than  Chairman  Echeverria.  1  felt  that  some  of  the 
people  really  weren’t  suitable  to  being  licensed.  And  in  the  order  that  they  came  up,  there  was  a  vice- 
president — and  I  can’t  remember  what  his  name  is — that  came  up,  and  1  made  a  motion  to  deny  that 
individual. 

Was  that  Sam  Klein? 

I  don’t  know  if  it  was  Klein  or  Kaye.  Kaye,  probably. 

Oh,  Irving  Kaye? 

Yes.  I  can’t  remember  which  one.  But  1  know  that  that  motion  passed  three-to-two  and  he  was 
denied.  And  then  the  chairman  and  chief  executive  officer,  Bill  O’Donnell,  who  1  had  more  concerns 
about  than  this  other  individual,  came  forward,  and  he  was  approved  three-to-two,  and  1  believe  1  voted 
against  his  approval.  And  he  created  more  problems  for  me  in  my  analysis  of  their  backgrounds  than  the 
other  individual  1  had  voted  to  deny,  and  who  was  denied.  And  so  when  1  came  back  from  lunch,  I’d 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


465 


given  it  a  lot  of  thought,  and  I  said  it  to  myself,  “That’s  not  fair.  1  don’t  have  as  much  concern  about  the 
person  that  was  denied  as  the  person  that  the  Commission  had  approved.”  So  1  actually  reopened  the  vote 
on  that  individual  and  changed  my  vote,  because  he  caused  me  less  concern  than  the  person  that  ran  the 
company  that  they  were  licensing.  So  why  should  this  guy  be  stigmatized  if  the  Commission  in  its  infinite 
wisdom  was  going  to  license  the  chairman  and  chief  executive  officer  who  1  had  more  concerns  about?  So 
it  was  a  fairly  interesting  licensing.  1  know  1  had  a  couple  give-and-takes  with  Chairman  Echeverria  with 
respect  to  what  1  believed  we  should  be  doing  as  opposed  to  what  we  did. 

Was  that  one  of  the  more  contentious  meetings  that  you  ever  had? 

Yes,  1  think  with  Pete,  1  think  it  was  maybe  the  only  contentious  meeting  that  we  had. 

And  things  like  that,  when  the  meeting’s  over,  everything’s  forgotten,  right? 

Oh,  yes!  Yes.  Pete  was  a  great  guy.  We  had  differences  of  opinion.  1  think  he  had  a  closer 
relationship  to  Bally’s  and  to  the  lawyers  that  were  representing  Bally’s,  and  he  was  probably  more 
accepting  of  some  of  the  positions  they  took  than  1  was.  And  one  of  the  things  that  came  out  of  Bally’s 
licensing  was  the  requirement  that  they  have  a  compliance  committee,  which  was  the  first  in  the  history  of 
the  state.  Now  that’s  actually  routinely  imposed  on  companies  that  operate  in  more  than  one  jurisdiction. 
But  this  was  the  first  one  that  we  crafted,  and  the  purpose  for  the  compliance  committee  was  to  keep 
checks  on  who  they  did  business  with  and  to  try  to  ensure  that  they  didn’t  do  business  with  ...  1  think 
Abe  Green  was  one  of  the  guys,  and  Dino  Cellini  was  another  one  of  the  individuals  that  Bally  wouldn’t 
do  business  with  anymore,  and  we  had  their  compliance  committee  supposedly  monitor  that.  But  that  was 
the  first  compliance  committee,  and  now  public  companies  and  other  companies  that  are  in  multiple 
jurisdictions  all  are  required  to  have  very  sophisticated  compliance  committees. 

That ’s  interesting  that  that  was  the  first  one. 

Well,  it  was  because  we  were  still  unsure  as  to  whether  or  not  we  were  doing  the  right  thing  when 
we  licensed  them,  and  I  guess  one  of  the  safeguards  you  can  try  to  build  into  it  is  that  the  regulatory 
process  in  Nevada  is  self-regulating.  You  do  an  investigation  at  the  beginning  and  you  either  approve  or 
you  deny  somebody’s  application.  Once  they’re  approved,  they’re  there  for  life  unless  they  quit,  die,  or 
it’s  taken  away.  We  don’t  have  annual  renewals  or  bi-annual  renewals  like  other  states  do.  So  the  first 
investigation  has  to  be  good  enough  to  make  your  decision,  because  that  person  is  there  forever  unless 
you  find  some  reason  to  be  able  to  deny  him.  And  sometimes  when  you  have  to  make  that  decision  and 
it’s  a  close  call,  you  can  limit  license  or  condition  license  in  certain  ways,  and  this  one  I’m  sure  we 
conditioned  on  creating  this  compliance  committee,  which  would  assist  in  the  self-regulating  aspect  of 
their  regulatory  obligations.  And  by  that  I  mean  the  compliance  committee  would  have  a  formal 
responsibility  of  reporting  on  a  monthly  basis  or  a  quarterly  basis  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board  what  was 
going  on  within  the  company  in  certain  areas  that  we  were  interested  in. 

And  then  you  can  put  them  on  a  probationary  basis  also,  is  that  right? 


In  those  days  you  did.  They  don’t  do  that  anymore.  What  they  do  now  is  they  give  them  limited 


466 


licenses,  and  they  do  that  because  if  they  were  on  a  probationary  basis,  then  it  was  believed  that  the  state 
would  have  the  burden  of  proof  in  showing  that  they  shouldn’t  be  licensed  anymore,  and  it  was  like  a 
revocation.  Whereas  a  limited  license  now  is  given  for  a  certain  period  of  time,  and  then  it  lapses  unless 
you  get  it  renewed,  and  receive  a  new  license,  where  you  have  the  burden  of  proof  once  again  at  proving 
your  suitability,  then  your  license  is  gone.  So  the  state  figured  out  a  way  to  keep  the  burden  shifted  to  the 
applicant  as  opposed  to  it  shifting  back  to  the  regulators. 

What  other  applications  came  before  the  Commission  during  your  tenure  that  you  would  care  to  comment 
on? 


I’m  sure  there  are  many  of  them.  One  1  can  remember  that  was  unique  was  when  Hughes  Tool 
wanted  to  reorganize  their  coiporation,  which  required  shifting  of  some  licensing  and  some  gaming 
approvals  to  Summa  Coiporation.  And  at  that  time,  a  very  powerful  man  in  the  community,  Hank 
Greenspun,  was  in  the  midst,  1  think,  of  some  litigation  with  Summa  over  some  issues,  and  he  vehemently 
opposed  in  his  newspaper  and  came  personally  and  made  almost  a  half-an-hour  to  forty-five-minute 
presentation  in  front  of  the  Commission  in  opposition  to  their  licensing.  That’s  back  when  there  were 
some  investigations  going  on — federal  investigations — that  by  rumor  had  implied  that  Hughes  Tool 
executives  were  involved  in  some  nefarious  secret  activities  with  either  the  CIA  or  money  being  given  to 
presidential  candidates.  There  were  some  issues  raised  and  Mr.  Greenspun  felt  that  we  shouldn’t  license 
until  those  were  all  resolved.  1  personally  talked  with  him  prior  to  the  meeting.  1  met  with  him  and  I  told 
him  that  I  couldn’t  support  that  kind  of  position,  even  though  1  had  the  utmost  respect  for  Hank,  because 
those  issues  that  he  was  talking  about  might  never  be  resolved,  and  this  was  a  company  that  was  currently 
licensed  and  was  just  going  through  a  reorganization.  So  nothing  was  really  changing;  it  was  just 
reorganization  with  its  coiporate  entities,  and  I  didn’t  see  any  reason  to  stop  that.  But  it  was  an  interesting 
vote  on  the  Commission.  Two  commissioners  abstained  for  various  reasons,  none  of  which  1  thought  were 
worthy  of  abstaining,  and  three  of  us  voted  on  it,  and  we  did  approve  the  reorganization,  and  Hank  was 
still  my  friend. 

Another  one  I  thought  that  had  a  little  twist  to  it  was  when  we  licensed  the  MGM  at  the  big  MGM 
property.  I  know  there  was  a  lot  of  intrigue  with  respect  to  that  property,  some  belief  that  certain  people 
didn’t  want  it  to  be  there  because  it  might  be  so  big  and  attract  so  many  customers  that  it  would  hurt  the 
business  of  other  casinos,  and  so  there  was  a  lot  of  pressure  on  the  Commission  in  those  days  to  maybe 
not  allow  that  large  project,  because  it  was  far  bigger  than  any  casino  project  in  the  history  of  Nevada  to 
go  forward.  Kerkorian  was  building  it,  and  1  think  to  the  credit  of  the  regulatory  agencies  that  none  of  us 
felt  that  that  was  our  responsibility  to  regulate  competition.  If  he  was  going  to  build  a  better  mousetrap, 
then  he  was  going  to  catch  more  mice,  and  that’s  the  way  the  free  enterprise  system  worked,  and  that’s 
the  way  that  the  gaming  industry  should  work.  And  it’s  stayed  that  way  ever  since  that  time. 

And  they  keep  building  them  bigger. 

But  now  people  believe  that  if  someone  builds  a  big  place  next  to  the  one  you  own,  it’s  great 
because  you’re  going  to  take  some  of  those  people  and  bring  them  into  your  casino  if  you’re  doing  the 
right  marketing  job.  So  that  type  of  restrictive  thought,  it  doesn’t  exist  anymore. 


When  did  you  resign  from  the  Commission? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


467 


My  last  meeting,  1  think,  was  August  1975.  It  could  have  been  July,  but  1  think  it  was  August 
1975.  And  it  was  interesting.  1  had  just  been  reappointed  for  a  new  four-year  term  in  April  of  that  year, 
but  a  person  that  1  had  a  tremendous  amount  of  respect  for,  Shannon  Bybee,  who  was  on  the  Gaming 
Control  Board  during  the  whole  time  1  was  on  the  Commission,  had  four  children,  and  the  Control  Board 
paid  something  like  twenty-five  thousand  dollars  a  year  and  he  couldn’t  afford  to  stay  on,  so  he  was  not 
going  to  accept  a  reappointment  and  was  going  to  go  on  into  private  practice.  And  1  wanted  Shannon  to  be 
part  of  my  law  firm.  1  felt  that  1  couldn’t  stay  on  the  Gaming  Commission  and  do  that  because  of  the 
appearance  of  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  And  so  1  called  up  Governor  O’Callaghan  and  told  him  that  1 
appreciated  being  reappointed,  and  I’m  sorry  that  just  several  months  later  1  had  to  tell  him  that  I  had  to 
resign  because  1  was  going  to  bring  Shannon  into  my  law  firm  and  I  felt  that  there  would  be  an 
appearance  of  a  conflict  because  Shannon  was  going  to  want  to  probably  get  involved  in  gaming  work,  or 
is  well  known  for  his  gaming  work,  and  I  thought  that  it  would  be  irresponsible  for  me  to  stay  on  the 
Commission  and  bring  him  into  the  firm.  So  I  told  the  governor,  and  he  understood.  And  so  I  resigned  my 
position  effective,  1  think,  August  of  1975. 

So  you  and  Shannon  were  fairly  close. 

Yes,  Shannon  was  one  of  my  favorite  people,  and  as  you  know,  he  passed  away  last  year. 


Yes. 


Tremendous  person.  Probably  no  person  I’ve  ever  met  had  greater  integrity.  He  was  a  tremendous 
Gaming  Control  Board  member,  and  he  was  the  kind  of  person  1  wanted  to  practice  law  with,  so  1  gave  up 
my  seat  on  the  Commission  so  I  could  do  that.  We  practiced  law  for  a  number  of  years  together,  and  then 
Shannon  went  in-house  with  the  Golden  Nugget,  and  we  still  continued  to  work  together,  because  we 
represent  the  Golden  Nugget.  And  eventually,  when  Shannon  left  the  Nugget  and  left  Atlantic  City  and 
came  back,  he  worked  out  of  our  offices  as  an  “of  counsel”  lawyer,  and  then  we  served  on  compliance 
committees  together,  and  1  participated  in  some  of  his  academic  ventures  at  the  university  when  he 
created  the  first  gaming  program  out  there,  a  real  sophisticated  gaming  program  at  UNLV.  He  was  a 
person  1  admired  through  my  whole  relationship  with  him  and  was  very,  very  sad  to  see  him  pass  away. 

Who  replaced  you  on  the  Commission? 

George  Swarts. 

And  after  leaving  the  Commission  you  went  right  to  work  with  Shannon  immediately? 

1  worked  with  Shannon.  We  got  together,  and  part  of  our  idea  was  since  we  had  been  on  the 
regulatory  side,  we  had  developed  an  expertise  in  gaming  law,  which  you  couldn’t  develop  anywhere 
else.  The  university  didn’t  teach  gaming  law.  We  had  no  law  school,  and  Nevada  was  the  only  state  with 
casino  gaming,  so  no  other  university  had  an  education  based  on  gaming  law.  And  we  both  felt  that  would 
be  a  good  niche  for  us  to  have,  because  Shannon  came  into  my  very  small  law  firm.  I  was  still  with 
Norman  Hilbrecht  and  Terry  Jones,  the  two  that  originally  hired  me,  and  myself,  and  Shannon  was  the 


468 


fourth.  So  we  decided  to  focus  on  that,  and  it  took  a  while  to  start  developing  it,  because  our  reputation 
was  that  we  were  the  hard-nosed  regulators.  When  we  left,  probably  the  greatest  cheer  wasn’t  for  us 
coming  to  work  for  these  guys,  it  was  the  cheer  that  we  were  gone.  But  we  didn’t  mind  it,  because  in  the 
long  run  that  proves  to  your  advantage,  and  it  did.  Shannon  joined  me,  and  then  we  started  developing 
slowly  a  gaming  practice.  Shannon  left,  and  eventually  I  brought  Mike  Sloan  in.  He  came  over  from  Jones 
Vargas  at  that  time — it  was  Jones,  Jones  in  those  days.  And  Mike  and  I  then  continued  that  development 
of  the  gaming  practice,  and  it’s  just  gone  on  since  then,  and  contrary  to  my  major  competitors’  publicity 
campaign,  we’ve  developed  into,  by  far,  the  largest  gaming  practice  anywhere.  We  represent  four  of  the 
five  largest  gaming  companies  in  the  world,  and  for  the  fifth,  1  represent  half  of  it,  and  that’s  MGM 
Mirage.  1  still  represent  to  a  great  degree  the  Mirage  resort  side  of  it  with  Bobby  Baldwin,  who  stayed  on 
after  Steve  sold  out.  In  fact,  1  represented  the  whole  company  on  the  most  major  disciplinary  action  in  the 
history  of  the  state,  and  that  was  the  Regulation  6a  currency  transaction  reporting  violations,  which  we 
settled  a  year  ago  or  so  for  five  million  dollars. 

What  are  the  other  four  largest  gaming  companies? 

The  other  four  now  are  Caesars  Entertainment,  which  is  a  combination  of  Hilton,  Bally’s,  and 
Caesars;  Mandalay  Bay;  Harrah’s;  and  then  in  this  town,  Stations  Casino. 

Oh.  Was  it  Caesars  World ,  or  is  it  Park  Place? 

Caesars  World  was  purchased  by  Park  Place.  They’ve  now  changed  their  name  to  Caesars 
Entertainment.  Well,  Hilton  purchased  Bally,  and  Bally  was  run  by  Arthur  Goldberg.  And  Arthur,  even 
though  he  was  purchased,  he  came  over  and  basically  took  over  the  gaming  side,  and  Mr.  [Stephen] 
Bollenbach  took  over  the  hotel  side.  And  they  then  acquired  Caesars  and  spun  off  the  hotel  section  and 
became  just  a  gaming  company,  which  was  Park  Place,  and  that  was  named  for  the  Park  Place  facility  in 
New  Jersey  that  Bally’s  had.  But  then  wiser  minds  prevailed  and  decided  that  the  one  real  name  that  that 
company  had  that  everybody  in  the  world  knows  and  associates  with  gaming  is  Caesars,  so  they  renamed 
the  company  Caesars  Entertainment. 

Oh,  so  there  is  no  Park  Place. 

No.  Park  Place  was  just  a  name,  and  it’s  gone. 

So  you  would  definitely  have  to  say  that  your  time  on  the  Commission  was  beneficial  to  you  in  the  rest  of 
your  career. 

It  was  more  than  beneficial;  it  determined  what  I  would  do  for  my  career.  I  had  no  expertise  in 
anything  [laughter].  When  I  went  on  the  Commission  I  was  just  a  young  lawyer  in  general  practice.  I’ve 
represented  people  from  DUIs  to  juvenile  cases  to  murder  cases,  personal  injury  work.  I’ve  done  a  little 
bit  of  everything,  but  I  eventually  focused  on  gaming  and  was  fortunate  enough  to  develop  a  large  enough 
practice  where  that’s  all  I  do.  And  I  have  other  lawyers  in  my  firm  now;  we  went  from  four  to  almost 
thirty. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


469 


Is  that  right? 

And  we  do  a  lot  of  corporate  commercial  labor,  real  estate,  real  property  issues  with  respect  to  a 
lot  of  our  major  clients,  and  others,  not  gaming. 

In  the  almost  thirty  years  since  you  left  the  Commission,  what  are  some  of  the  major  changes  you ’ve  seen 
in  the  type  of  applicant  applying  for  licensing? 

Well,  what’s  really  changed  is  that  it’s  become  very,  very  sophisticated.  In  the  old  days  before  1 
even  was  on  the  Commission,  it  was  perceived,  and  1  think  rightfully  so,  that  the  process  was  much  more 
political  or  good-old-boys-oriented  than  that  it  was  really  a  legitimate  legal  practice.  In  the  old  days  it  was 
kind  of  funny.  When  1  first  started  practicing  law,  in  the  Nevada  Resort  Association,  most  of  the  casinos 
were  represented  by  Cliff  and  Herb  Jones,  and  eventually  Grant  Sawyer  picked  up  all  of  that  business  and 
for  years  Lionel  Sawyer  &  Collins  represented  most  of  the  major  casinos  and  the  Resort  Association.  And 
then  I’ve  developed  my  practice  over  the  years  with  Mike  Sloan,  who  then  left,  and  with  other  partners 
that  I’ve  had.  I’ve  basically  taken  over  most  of  the  major  gaming  clients  and  the  Nevada  Resort 
Association.  I’m  sure  somewhere  down  the  line  in  history  there  will  be  somebody  replacing  me,  but  so  far 
they’re  not  on  the  horizon,  so  I’m  breathing  easy. 

[laughter]  Well,  you  don ’t  have  the  problem  of  unsavory  element  so  much  in  the  gaming  business 
anymore. 

No,  to  get  back  to  your  question,  the  point  of  that  whole  long  diatribe  was  that  gaming  used  to  be 
who  you  knew,  and  it  wasn’t  a  very  sophisticated  practice.  Now,  thirty  years  later,  it  is  a  highly  technical, 
sophisticated,  administrative  law  practice.  You  have  to  know  what  you’re  doing.  You’re  dealing  now  with 
billions  and  billions  of  dollars.  We  have  restaurants  that  are  built  now  that  cost  as  much  as  some  of  the 
hotels  when  I  was  on  the  Commission  cost.  The  old  good-old-boy  system  doesn’t  work  any  longer, 
because  you  need  to  have  somebody  that  actually  knows  what  the  regulatory  system  is,  how  you  fit 
different,  highly-complex  financings  within  the  regulatory  structure,  how  you  work  the  licensing  process 
to  enable  certain  structures  to  work.  For  example,  Colony  Capital,  when  it  bought  Harvey’s,  devised  a 
way  to  split  voting  shares  and  non-voting  shares  to  allow  a  fund  that  had  a  lot  of  limited  partners  and  very 
well-respected  big  pension  funds  and  institutions  to  invest  in  the  gaming  industry  without  being  licensed. 
There’s  just  a  lot  of  sophistication  now  in  the  practice.  For  me  that’s  protection,  because  you  can’t  be  just 
some  guy  that’s  popular  with  the  governor  who  comes  in  and  says,  “I’m  going  to  run  it,”  because 
nobody’s  going  to  hire  him.  It  doesn’t  matter  if  you  know  the  governor.  I’ve  known  all  the  governors, 
fortunately. 

And  as  a  matter  of  fact,  I  might  just  pop  it  in  now,  because  I  may  forget,  but  probably  one  of  the 
things  I’m  most  proud  of  in  all  the  time  I’ve  been  involved  in  the  regulatory  process  is  that  we  now  have 
twenty-four  straight  years  of  the  chief  executive  of  the  state  letting  the  gaming  regulators  do  their  job:  no 
political  influence,  no  discussions,  no  direction,  just  allowing  the  Board  and  the  Commission  to  do  what 
they  were  appointed  to  do.  That  has  not  always  been  the  case.  There  was  a  lot  of  concern  with  Governor 
List’s  administration,  people  that  were  involved  in  that,  and  Frank  Sinatra  issues  and  people  feeling  that 
politics  played  a  greater  role  in  the  regulatory  process  than  it  should.  With  Dick  Bryan  as  governor  for 
eight  years  and  Bobby  Miller  for  ten  years  and  now  Governor  Guinn — when  he  finishes  his  eight  years, 


470 


we’ve  had  a  really,  really  great  run,  which  has  assisted  the  state  immeasurably,  because  Wall  Street  firms 
and  other  people  dealing  with  the  state  of  Nevada  and  investing  billions  and  billions  of  dollars  feel  very 
comfortable  that  the  regulatory  environment  that’s  been  created  in  the  state  of  Nevada  is  one  that  they  can 
invest  in,  and  they  can  rely  upon  it  and  feel  comfortable  that  their  billions  of  dollars  are  going  to  be  in  an 
industry  that  is  properly  regulated.  There’s  enough  flexibility  in  it,  but  also  a  strictness — hut  it’s  a  fair 
strictness.  And  1  think  it’s  in  great  deal  due  to  the  three  governors  that  we’ve  had,  those  last  three 
governors  and  the  people  they’ve  selected  and  the  fact  that  they’ve  let  those  people  just  do  their  job  and 
not  interfere  with  any  of  them. 

1  remember  when  Governor  Miller  was  leaving  office  and  he  was  going  to  come  out  looking  for  a 
job,  and  he  and  1  had  been  close  forever.  1  was  the  chief  political  fundraiser  for  both  of  Governor  Bryan’s 
gubernatorial  runs  and  his  first  senate  run,  and  1  was  the  chief  fundraiser  for  both  of  Governor  Miller’s 
governor  elections.  And  1  have  been  the  co-chief  fundraiser  for  both  of  Governor  Guinn’s  elections.  Been 
kind  of  AC/DC  because  of  two  Democrats  and  one  Republican,  but  1  always,  like  a  lot  of  Nevadans,  just 
go  for  the  person  1  think  is  the  most  qualified,  not  what  party  he  belongs  to.  So  I’ve  been  very  much 
involved.  And  so  if  there  was  anybody  that  could  have — and  I’m  not  bragging  about  this — but  could  have 
political  influence,  I’m  a  personal  friend  and  I’m  their  chief  fundraiser.  One  of  the  greatest  conversations 
I  had  when  Bobby  was  saying,  “OK,  I’m  going  to  interview  for  three  large  law  firms:  you  and  Lionel 
Sawyer  and  Jones  Vargas,”  who  eventually  he  went  to  work  for,  and  one  of  the  discussions  we  had  was 
about,  well,  did  I  expect  him  to  get  involved  in  gaming?  And  I  said,  “No,  Bobby,  that  isn’t  what  I  would 
envision  you  doing  in  our  firm.  There  are  other  areas  that  we’re  not  involved  in  that  you  could  really  help 
out  in,  but  I  want  to  just  tell  you  something.”  I  said,  “In  the  last  ten  years  has  there  been  anybody  really 
closer  to  you  than  me  in  terms  of  the  political  aspects  and  being  involved  in  gaming?” 

And  he  says,  “No.” 

“Well,”  I  said,  “In  the  last  ten  years  have  you  ever  called  me  to  ask  me  a  favor  in  the  gaming 

stuff?” 

He  says,  “No.” 

And  I  said,  “In  the  last  ten  years  have  I  ever  called  you  and  asked  you  for  a  favor?” 

He  says,  “No.” 

And  I  said,  “You’re  totally  irrelevant  to  the  gaming  process.”  And  I  said,  “That’s  the  greatest 
compliment  I  could  ever  give  you,  because  that’s  the  way  it  should  be.”  And  I  said,  “So,  no,  I  really  don’t 
need  you  for  the  gaming.  I’ve  kind  of  got  that  sewed  up.”  I  said,  “You  know,  there  are  other  areas  that 
you’d  be  valuable  in.”  The  same  goes  for  Dick  Bryan,  who  was  the  same  way,  and  Kenny  Guinn.  I  think 
people  in  this  state  will  never  probably  know  that  or  understand  how  important  that  has  been  to  the 
growth  of  this  industry.  There’s  been  no  politics,  basically,  in  the  regulatory  process  in  twenty-four  years. 
And  I  don’t  know  who  the  next  governor  is  going  to  be,  but  I  hope  he  continues  that  tradition. 

Well,  in  years  past,  like  you  say,  they ’d  walk  into  O  ’Callaghan ’s  office  or  anywhere  and  say,  “How ’s 
about  putting  my  buddy  in  as  casino  manager?  ”  He  would,  what  I  heard,  pass  it  on  to  somebody  else. 

He ’d  say,  “  Well,  go  see  Jack  Stratton,  or  go  see  someone  else.  I  don ’t  want  to  talk  about  it.  ’’ 

Yes,  Mike  was  that  way,  but  I’m  just  talking  about  the  ones  where  I’ve  been  a  lawyer  on  the  other 
side.  As  a  regulator,  Mike  never  interfered  with  anything  I  did,  so  you  could  put  him  into  that  same 
category.  I’m  not  excluding  Mike.  I’m  talking  from  my  vantage  point  as  a  gaming  lawyer  who  would  be 
on  the  other  side,  and  if  there  was  political  influence,  trying  to  use  that  to  get  my  client  something  that  he 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


471 


shouldn’t  deserve,  that  kind  of  stuff.  And  that  just  does  not  occur.  It’s  done  on  its  merits,  and  that’s  the 
way  I  always  wanted  it  anyway,  because  1  figure  if  it’s  on  its  merits,  then  the  best  guy’s  going  to  win. 

That ’s  right. 

And  I  don’t  mind  the  competition  if  it’s  a  level  playing  field. 

What  are  the  major  problems  currently  facing  gaming  in  the  state  of  Nevada ,  or  do  you  think  we  have 
major  problems? 

Yes,  1  think  we’ve  got  a  lot  of  major  problems  in  the  sense  the  gaming  industry  itself  faces  this 
onslaught  of  Indian- American  gaming  chipping  away  at  all  of  our  markets.  Gaming  is  an  impulse  activity 
for  a  lot  of  people,  and  if  you  can  get  your  back  scratched  by  driving  ten  miles  as  opposed  to  getting  in 
horrible  traffic  and  driving  six  hours  from  L.A.  up  here,  you’re  going  to  go  ten  miles  away.  That’s  what’s 
happening  to  a  lot  of  the  business  here.  It’s  why  when  Steve  Wynn  announced  that  he  was  going  to  do  the 
new  project,  people  were  saying,  “Well,  jeez,  with  the  Indian  reservations  coming  on  and  all  of  this 
competition,  why  would  you  do  that?” 

And  he  said,  “Look,  you  can  have  Indian  reservation  casinos  anywhere  you  want.  What  I’m 
trying  to  do  is  develop  just  what  Nevada  and  Las  Vegas  has  done,  and  that  is  make  them  a  destination 
resort  where  gambling  is  only  just  one  of  the  amenities.  The  Indians  are  never  going  to  be  able  to  do  what 
we  can  do  here  in  Las  Vegas,  and  that’s  provide  a  whole  structure  that’s  non-gaming  that  people  want  to 
go  to.”  Vegas  always  re-creates  itself.  And  I  think  what’s  happened  now.  You’ll  see  the  huge  expansion, 
and  as  you  can  read  quarterly  reports,  we’ve  had  the  greatest  quarter  we’ve  ever  had  in  the  history  of  the 
state. 

And  March  was  a  record  month  for  visitors. 

And  March  was  a  record  month.  What’s  happening  is  that  it  is  a  destination  resort,  and  a  lot  of 
people  would  be  shocked  to  know  that  in  most  of  these  major  resorts  now,  gaming  accounts  for  much  less 
than  50  percent  of  the  total  revenues  generated  from  these  major  resort  complexes.  The  area  they  make 
most  of  their  money  in  now  is  rooms,  because  they’ve  raised  their  room  rates  substantially,  but  they’re 
still  less  than  not  even  comparable  rooms,  rooms  that  aren’t  anywhere  near  as  nice,  in  New  York  and 
Chicago  and  San  Francisco  and  L.A..  And  they’re  now  not  afraid  to  charge  prices  that  are  not  quite  that 
high,  but  moving  up  there  to  $250,  $275  for  a  room  on  a  weekend.  In  Los  Angeles,  San  Francisco  it’s 
$350  or  more,  and  the  rooms  aren’t  as  nice,  but  Vegas  used  to  give  those  rooms  away  for  $125. 

And  any  increase  in  the  room  rate,  because  they’ve  already  paid  for  the  room  and  they’ve  already 
paid  for  getting  it  fixed  up,  all  goes  right  to  the  bottom  line.  If  you  add  $25  onto  that  room  rate  for  one 
night,  that  goes  right  to  the  bottom  line.  And  so  Las  Vegas  has  reinvented  itself,  and  I  think  this  has  been 
one  of  the  major  last  reinventions,  because  I  don’t  know  where  you  go  from  there.  Now  it’s  purely  a 
destination  resort  where  gaming  is  an  amenity,  just  like  shopping  is  an  amenity. 

For  years  and  years,  since  I  was  bom  and  raised  here  and  represent  so  many  casinos,  I  could  eat 
almost  anywhere  I  wanted  for  nothing.  I  mean,  I  could  get  comped  everywhere.  I  just  wouldn’t  go  to  the 
Strip.  There  are  a  lot  of  local  restaurants  I’d  eat  at,  because  I  didn’t  think  the  Strip  food  was  that  good. 
When  Steve  brought  in  the  Bellagio  he  said  two  things  need  to  be  changed  in  Nevada:  we’ve  got  beautiful 


472 


places,  but  what  we  don’t  have  is  high-end  retail  and  we  don’t  have  great  food.  And  so  what  he  did  with 
the  Bellagio,  he  brought  in  high-end  retail —  now  you  see  high-end  retail  in  all  these  other  places — 
because  he  said,  “Now  people  that  used  to  fly  over  us  to  Los  Angeles  or  San  Francisco,  or  New  York 
going  the  other  way,  will  come  here  for  retail  because  they  can  get  the  same  stuff  and  other  things.”  And 
then  food,  he  brought  in  Le  Cirque  and  Prime  and  Aqua  and  all  of  these  great  restaurants,  and  Picasso’s, 
which  is  still  ranked  the  finest  in  Vegas  and  the  finest  in  this  country.  And  now  to  compete  with  him, 
when  the  Venetian  gets  open,  they  bring  in  Lutece  and  all  of  their  great  restaurants,  and  Mandalay  Bay 
brings  in  theirs,  and  now  you  literally  have  in  Las  Vegas,  basically  all  the  greatest  chefs  in  the  world, 
almost  all  of  them,  and  certainly  in  the  United  States,  having  a  restaurant  here.  Thomas  Keller  from  the 
French  Laundry,  which  for  years  has  always  been  the  best -rated  one,  two,  or  three  in  the  country,  has  now 
opened  Bouchon.  Every  major  chef  is  represented  here  in  Las  Vegas.  So  now,  from  what  1  thought  was 
mediocre  food,  in  all  honesty,  now  we  have  the  finest  food  anywhere  in  the  world,  and  it  makes  us  a  place 
people  want  to  come,  whether  they  gamble  or  not. 

Yes,  basically  it  used  to  be  the  big  deal  buffet  and  an  inexpensive  breakfast ,  and  that  was  about  it. 

You  know,  it  was  an  interesting  experience  for  me.  My  late  wife’s  late  father  came  to  town — he’s 
an  old  Connecticut  Yankee  from  New  Hampshire — and  1  was  taking  him  to  Siegfried  &  Roy  at  the 
Mirage  on  Thanksgiving.  1  hadn’t  been  out  to  a  show  in  a  while,  and  certainly  not  on  a  holiday  like  that. 
And  my  recollection  from  growing  up  here  was  always  that  for  any  family  holiday,  there’s  nobody  in 
town.  They  would  literally  furlough  20  to  30  percent  of  the  employees  beginning  at  Thanksgiving,  bring 
some  back  New  Year’s  Eve,  and  then  go  all  the  way  through  February.  You  could  shoot  a  cannon  through 
the  hotels  at  Christmas  time  and  Easter  time  and  graduation  week  in  June.  Anything  that  was  a  family 
holiday,  there  was  nobody  in  Las  Vegas.  And  for  three  months  they  used  to  furlough  20  and  30  percent, 
and  close  all  the  gourmet  restaurants.  1  go  into  the  Mirage  with  that  frame  of  mind,  and  all  1  see  it  is 
packed,  wall-to-wall  on  Thanksgiving,  people  with  baby  strollers  and  everything  else.  And  1  finally 
realized,  when  1  started  asking  people,  that  at  Christmas  you  can’t  get  a  room,  Easter  you  can’t  get  a 
room.  What’s  happened  is  people  found  this  as  a  destination  resort.  The  people  are  coming  here  bringing 
their  families  and  they’re  enjoying  the  stay  here  for  reasons  other  than  just  gambling.  And  then  also  in 
some  of  those  soft  periods,  early  on  we  artificially  supplemented  the  tourist  population  with  the  big 
conventions.  The  rodeo,  Comdex,  and  those  obviously  helped  out,  but  now,  Christmastime  is  packed. 

This  town  is  packed.  Easter,  Thanksgiving,  you  can’t  get  a  room.  It’s  totally  different  than  the  way  it  used 
to  be.  Gaming  has  become  an  acceptable  form  of  entertainment  in  this  country,  and  what  we  provide  in 
terms  of  quality  rooms  for  great  prices  still,  even  though  they’re  a  lot  higher  than  they  used  to  be,  and  the 
types  of  restaurants  and  food  and  the  shopping,  and  then  all  the  entertainment,  whether  you  want  to  pay 
for  it  or  not  pay  for  it,  it’s  incredible.  And  that’s  why  March  had  the  highest  tourist  month  in  the  history 
of  the  state. 

And  it  can  satisfy  any  age  group,  with  the  arcades  for  the  children ,  and  there ’s  something  for  everyone  of 
every  age. 

Yes.  And  there  was  a  little  push  when  Treasure  Island  was  built  to  maybe  make  this  more  family- 
friendly  for  kids,  and  1  think  that  was  a  short-lived  experiment.  They’ve  taken  out  the  big  arcade  they 
built  in  Treasure  Island,  [laughter]  They  changed  the  ship  thing  to  a  more  adult  theme.  That  just  reflects 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


473 


the  attitude  all  over  town.  The  hotels  and  casinos  decided  we’ll  make  it  so  it  doesn’t  discourage  families 
from  coming  here,  but  this  is  still  adult  Disneyland. 

What  are  your  thoughts  on  internet  gaming? 

I’ve  had  the  same  consistent  thought  for  a  long  time,  and  that  is  that  I  doubt  that  I’ll  see  it  in  my 
lifetime.  I  know  a  lot  of  companies  clearly  that  I  didn’t  represent  or  advise,  several  companies  decided  to 
spend  lots  of  money  going  to  the  Isle  of  Man  and  getting  licensed  to  get  all  set  up  for  when  Nevada  and 
the  United  States  allowed  internet  gaming.  I  thought  it  was  all  pie  in  the  sky  because  it’s  prohibited  right 
now  both  federally  and  in  all  fifty  states.  The  federal  government  pre-empts  everybody  first  of  all,  and  the 
federal  government  is  never  going  to  approve  that  form  of  gaming.  They’re  not  going  to  expand  the  scope 
of  gaming  with  the  congress  that  we  have  and  the  feeling  in  this  country.  There’s  not  going  to  be  any  kind 
of  legislative  expansion  of  gaming  by  allowing  internet  gambling.  I  don’t  think  they’ll  outlaw  it  like  they 
tried  a  couple  of  different  times,  because  I  think  there  are  all  kinds  of  reasons  why  people  lobby.  Special 
interests  won’t  allow  that  to  happen.  So  its  life  or  death  remains  the  definition  of  the  federal  statutes  by 
the  U.S.  Justice  Department,  and  the  U.S.  Justice  Department  is  never  going  to  allow  internet  gaming,  and 
that’s  clear.  And  they  are  the  final  arbitrator  on  it,  because  Congress  isn’t  going  to  take  action  one  way  or 
the  other,  in  my  opinion.  Or  if  they  ever  take  any  action,  it’ll  be  to  outlaw  it,  but  I  don’t  even  see  that.  But 
the  federal  government  will  not.  And  then  if  it  got  by  that,  there’s  fifty  states  that  outlaw  it.  So  I  think  the 
likelihood  of  internet  gaming,  in  terms  of  being  able  to  sit  on  your  computer  and  run  a  casino  if  you  live 
in  Utah  or  Hawaii,  is  zero,  at  least  as  far  in  the  future  as  I  can  see. 

Let ’s  go  back  and  talk  a  little  bit  about  the  type  of  applicant  that  the  gaming  people  are  seeing  now.  What 
changes  have  taken  place? 

When  I  first  started  on  the  Commission,  there  were  very  few  publicly-traded  companies  that  were 
in  the  business.  Most  of  them  were  all  family -owned,  like  Laxalt’s  company  the  Ormsby  House,  and  the 
Binion’s  Horseshoe  Club.  It  was  basically  all  individually  or  corporate-owned,  but  not  publicly-traded 
companies.  Now,  Steve  Wynn’s  new  project  is  2.4  billion  dollars.  The  costs  of  these  projects  are  so  great 
that  you  need  access  to  public  funds.  So  basically,  every  major  client  that  comes  in  has  some  public 
aspect,  either  debtors  or  equity,  to  it.  It’s  basically  a  public  company  industry.  There  are  still  some  small 
survivors,  but  not  many,  and  we’ll  see  those  finally  fade  out.  Outside  of  the  little  mom-and-pop  casinos, 
everything  is  going  to  be  a  publicly-traded  company. 

And  the  other  major  thing  I’ve  seen  since  I  was  on  is  the  change  in  financing  and  the  acceptability 
of  investments  in  Nevada  gaming  by  Wall  Street  and  financial  institutions.  When  I  was  on  the 
Commission,  there  were  three  major  hanks  in  Nevada,  and  only  one  would  loan  to  the  gaming  industry. 
The  one  that  did  was  Valley  Bank,  and  it  was  not  the  biggest  at  that  time.  The  two  biggest  of  the  major 
banks  in  Nevada  wouldn’t  loan  to  major  gaming  projects  in  the  state  of  Nevada,  and  that’s  why  the 
Teamster  pension  fund  was  one  of  the  only  sources  for  the  capital.  Now,  with  all  the  expansion  that’s 
occurred  over  the  last  twenty  years,  the  gaming  industry  is  a  darling  of  Wall  Street.  You  can  see  their 
stock  prices  and  it’s  a  big  cash-flow  business.  I  don’t  know  another  business  that  is  such  a  cash-flow 
business  as  the  gaming  business  is,  and  Wall  Street  is  showing  its  confidence  in  the  industry  and  the 
people  that  run  it  and  the  people  that  regulate  it  by  investing  billions  and  billions  and  billions  of  dollars. 
We’ve  done  this  year  alone  with  our  clients  probably  five  billion  dollars-worth  of  financing,  just  within 


474 


twelve  months,  including  Steve  Wynn’s  financing.  But  it’s  incredible  the  change  that  has  taken  place  in 
the  financial  world.  And  1  used  to  joke  about  it,  because  you  could  almost  see  it  change.  It  wasn’t  because 
of  Nevada.  It  was  when  Resorts  [Casino]  opened  up  in  New  Jersey,  and  Resorts  was  a  three-dollar  stock. 
And  it  went  to  three  hundred  dollars  in  about  four  months.  1  used  to  joke  to  my  Wall  Street  friends,  1  said, 
“Well,  1  can  see  your  analysis  now:  gaming  has  gone  from  a  criminal  enterprise  to  a  growth  industry.” 

[laughter] 

And  that’s  exactly  the  way  it  worked.  They  were  making  money  at  it,  so  they  all  threw  money 
into  it.  And  then  fortunately  for  the  state  of  Nevada,  that’s  continued  to  occur,  because  there’s  no  way  in 
the  world  you  can  build  Wynn  Resorts  or  the  Venetian’s  new  project  or  your  Mandalay  Bays  or 
Bellagio’s  thousand -room  expansion — and  these  are  all  two,  three-hundred-million-dollar  expansions, 
except  Steve’s  is  2.4  billion,  and  the  new  one  that  Sheldon  Adelson  is  talking  about  is  over  a  billion.  And 
without  Wall  Street  financing  and  institutional  financing  and  that  acceptability,  it  wouldn’t  have 
happened.  That  has  been  a  major  change  from  thirty  years  ago  when  the  two  biggest  banks  in  Nevada 
wouldn’t  loan. 

Any  more  thoughts  on  interesting  applications? 

Yes,  I’ve  had  a  bunch  of  interesting  applications.  Part  of  the  fun  of  my  job  are  the  people  that  1 
end  up  representing,  and  when  you’re  their  gaming  attorney,  they’ve  got  to  disclose  to  you  information, 
both  personal  and  financial,  that  they’ve,  in  a  lot  of  cases,  never  disclosed  to  anybody  on  the  face  of  the 
earth.  And  usually  you  meet  them  as  a  stranger  and  they’ve  got  to  then  tell  you  everything  about 
themselves,  and  you  get  to  pry — before  the  gaming  investigators  do — into  all  types  of  nooks  and  crannies 
of  their  professional  and  business  and  personal  life.  And  it’s  been  very  interesting.  I’ve  had  the  pleasure 
of  representing  Sumner  Redstone — you  can  figure  out  pretty  much  what  he’s  worth  by  looking  at  the 
value  of  Viacom  today — and  Ron  Perlman,  you  can  go  look  at  the  value  of  Revlon — or  Carl  Icahn,  and 
you  look  at  the  public  companies.  But  one  that  really  sticks  in  the  mind,  because  he’s  so  private,  and  his 
vast  wealth  is  not  tied  up  in  a  public  company,  unlike  some  guys  I’ve  represented  is  a  guy,  Marvin  Davis, 
a  person  who  has  no  public  companies.  Everything  he  owns  is  held  privately,  and  nobody  really  knows 
about  him.  It  was  really  fun  to  sit  and  talk  with  him,  as  the  only  one  guy  alive  outside  of  himself  who 
knew  the  whole  financial  picture.  People  knew  bits  and  pieces,  even  his  general  counsel,  his  chief 
financial  officer,  but  none  of  them  knew  the  whole  picture — just  his  right-hand  guy,  who  was  a 
combination  C.P.A./lawyer.  And  now  he  had  to  divulge  everything  to  me,  a  stranger,  and  it  was  an 
interesting  experience.  What  happens  after  those  is  usually  you  get  a  pretty  good  bonding  with  those  guys. 
If  you  have  any  kind  of  a  personality  at  all,  you  end  up  being  friends  with  them.  I  continue  my  friendship 
with  Marvin,  even  though  he’s  never  done  anything  in  the  state,  a  perennial  tire  kicker.  But  I’ve 
maintained  a  personal  relationship  and  friendship  with  him.  All  of  these  years  have  been  interesting,  and 
dealing  with  people  at  that  level .  .  .  it’s  interesting  to  hear  them  tell  their  stories  about  how  they 
accumulated  their  wealth. 

Well,  is  there  any  truth  to  the  statement  that  if  someone  thinks  they  would  have  trouble  getting  licensed, 
they  call  Frank  Schreck? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


475 


I  think  that  probably  we  have  right  of  first  refusal  on  most  business  that  comes  into  the  state.  I’m 
not  demeaning  anybody  else  or  any  competitors,  but  I  think  we’ve  established  such  a  reputation  in  terms 
of  our  representation  of  clients  that  when  they  ask  around  to  either  Wall  Street  firms  or  big  international 
law  firms  like  the  Skadden,  Alps  and  the  Latham  &  Watkins  of  the  world,  or  they  go  to  the  big  financial 
institutions  and  other  gaming  people,  even  ones  I  know,  I’ve  gotten  some  big  referrals  in  the  past  from 
people  I  didn’t  even  represent  that  were  represented  by  other  counsel.  We  have  a  pretty  good  reputation 
out  there,  so  we  get  more  than  our  fair  share  of  contacts  in  terms  of  being  the  person.  The  only  one  I  ever 
had  that  really  came  out  and  kind  of  auditioned  me  on  the  phone  was  Don  Trump  years  and  years  ago. 

Oh,  he  auditioned  you  on  the  phone?  [laughter] 

Yes,  he  auditioned  myself  and  probably  what  I’d  consider  the  two  major  competitors.  I  have 
lawyers  who  are  very  good  gaming  lawyers,  and  he  hired  me,  and  it  was  a  strange  situation.  It’s  too  long  a 
story  to  tell  you,  but  it  was  back  in  the  days  when  Holiday  Inns  owned  the  Harrah’s  properties  and  he  was 
looking  at  doing  a  takeover,  and  one  of  my  clients  posed  a  conflict  of  interest  when  he  said  that  he  might 
be  a  white  knight  and  buy  one  of  Harrah’s  Tahoe  properties.  And  so  I  terminated  my  relationship  with 
Mr.  Trump.  But  he  called  me  a  couple  of  times  again.  When  he  tried  to  take  over  Bally’s,  he  called  me 
and  said  that  client,  which  was  Steve  Wynn,  couldn’t  create  a  conflict  for  him  now  because  he  wasn’t 
involved  with  Bally’s. 

I  said,  “You  know,  I  don’t  need  to  ask  Steve  because  I  represent  Bally’s,  so  I  can’t  represent 
you.”  And  then  he  did  it  again  another  time  when  he  and  Steve  were  fighting,  although  they’re  friends 
now,  and  so  I  said,  “I  can’t  represent  you  because  Steve’s  my  friend.”  But  I  recommended  Mike  Rumbolz 
to  him,  so  Mike  became  president  of  Trump  Nevada.  I  used  to  introduce  Mike  when  he  was  on  a  panel 
with  me  and  say  “CNNO,”  chief  non-operating  officer. 

[laughter] 

And  then  actually  when  Don  Trump  came  into  town  this  last  time  for  the  Riviera  [to  buy  9.9 
percent  of  the  Riviera],  his  general  counsel  called  me  and  he  said,  “Don  said  now  you  can  represent  us.” 

And  I  said,  “Actually,  I  can’t  because  9.9  percent  of  the  company  sounds  hostile  to  me  when  I 
represent  the  Riviera.”  So  I  didn’t  represent  him  although  I  talked  to  the  president  of  the  Riviera  later,  and 
he  said,  “Ah,  I  didn’t  care.  You  could  have  represented  him.”  But  it’s  fun  representing  those  kinds  of 
personalities.  And  then  there  have  been  some  really  screwy  type  of  investigations  I’ve  gotten  into.  Bobby 
Baldwin  is  the  president  of  Bellagio  and  the  Mirage  Resorts.  Probably  the  most  bizarre  licensing  I  ever 
did  was  Bobby’s,  and  it  would  take  two  hours  to  explain  the  whole  thing.  It’s  funny  how  these 
investigations  go  along.  Everything  was  fine,  and  the  investigation  was  basically  completed.  The 
investigator,  whos  first  investigation  it  was,  went  over  to  interview  the  personal  references,  which  are 
really  throw-aways.  I  mean,  the  personal  reference  always  says,  “Hey,  he’s  a  great  guy,”  and  that’s  all 
there  is  to  it. 

Well,  one  of  his  personal  references  was  Jack  Binion,  one  of  his  best  friends,  and  Jack  said,  “Oh, 

I  got  to  tell  you,  Bobby  Baldwin  is  the  greatest  guy  in  the  world.  You  can’t  believe  what  he  did  for  this 
poker  player  that  always  came  down  to  the  Binion’s  Horseshoe.  Everybody  really  liked  him,  and  he  was 
arrested  for  a  triple  murder  in  Oklahoma  City,  where  somebody  killed  two  dope  dealers  and  an  innocent 
bystander.  And  they  put  him  on  trial,  and  Bobby  went  back  and  helped  get  a  lawyer  for  him  and  helped 


476 


monitor  a  lot  of  stuff.”  Needless  to  say,  Bobby’s  involvement  in  a  guy,  the  triple  murder  and  dope 
dealers — that  reopened  the  entire  investigation.  And  it  was  really  funny.  There  are  so  many  facets  to  this, 
but  because  of  his  involvement,  1  believe  the  district  attorney,  who  got  all  the  credit  for  this  conviction — 
and  we’ll  jump  to  the  end — had  really  convicted  the  wrong  guy,  had  convicted  this  guy  and  sent  him  to 
death.  And  he  was  on  death  row  in  Oklahoma,  this  poker  player,  and  Bobby  got  “Racehorse”  Haynes’s 
law  firm  to  do  the  appeal  for  this  individual.  And  when  it  was  known  that  “Racehorse”  Haynes  was  a 
tremendously  well-known  defense  lawyer,  an  excellent  lawyer  in  the  Southwest,  all  of  a  sudden  the 
gaming  agent,  when  he  went  back  to  look  into  this,  was  told,  “Oh,  there’s  some  undercover  agents  you 
need  to  go  talk  to.”  He’d  already  talked  to  the  undercover  agents.  Nothing  was  there.  They  told  him  about 
an  illegal  twenty-one  game  that  occurred,  where  there  were  five  people,  one  of  which  was  an  unknown 
male  when  they  did  their  report  six  months  earlier,  but  that  unknown  male  was  now  Bobby  Baldwin.  And 
it  was  so  absurd,  because  it  was  this  low-stakes  twenty-one  game,  and  the  guy  didn’t  fit  Bobby’s 
description  or  anything,  but  1  think  it  was  the  district  attorney  who  was  angry  because  Bobby  is  getting  a 
real  lawyer  involved  in  this  case  where  he  took  all  the  credit  for  the  conviction.  And  to  make  a  long  story 
short,  he  was  identified  as  being  in  this  twenty-one  game,  but  he  wasn’t  in  it.  It  was  nonsense,  and  we 
could  show  he  was  in  the  hotel.  But  we  get  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  and  the  Gaming  Control 
Board — Patty  Becker — made  a  motion  that,  “1  don’t  care  if  the  Commission  overrules  me,  but  1  have  to 
vote  denial  because  he  was  identified  by  these  two  female  undercover  agents.”  And  then  another  board 
member  said,  “1  second  it,  but  1  also  agree  with  Patty.  I  don’t  care  if  the  Commission  overrides  this 
decision,  but  I’ll  second  it.”  And  then  the  chairman  voted  for  it,  but  he  came  up  to  me  afterward  and  he 
said,  “Jeez,  if  you  guys  would  have  taken  another  polygraph  test,” — we  already  took  one  and  passed  it — 
“I  would  have  voted  in  favor  of  it.” 

So  1  said,  “Jeez,  that’s  a  great  deal.”  So  we  went  to  the  Gaming  Commission,  and  obviously  got 
Bobby  approved,  but  it  was  such  a  funny  thing.  One  of  the  interesting  parts  of  it  is  that  in  the  course  of  it, 
the  chairman  had  asked  us,  because  he  was  a  former  police  officer,  to  do  a  polygraph,  and  he  selected  the 
polygrapher.  It  was  a  guy  that  just  retired  out  of  Metro.  And  Bobby  said,  “Sure,  I’ll  go  down  and  do  it.” 

And  I  said,  “Bobby,  you  want  me  to  pick  you  up?” 

“No.”  And  the  deal  was  that  the  chairman’s  head  of  enforcement  was  a  former  polygrapher 
himself,  so  we  worked  out  the  questions.  And,  you  know,  on  a  polygraph  it’s  yes  or  no  responses  that  you 
develop:  “Were  you  there  at  such  a  such  date?  Did  you  do  this?”  and  it’s  a  yes  or  no  type  question. 

And  so  I  took  Bobby  over  to  the  polygrapher,  and  he  said  that  we’d  worked  out  the  questions 
already,  and  gave  them  to  him.  And  I  said,  “Bobby,  you  want  me  to  come  in  with  you?” 

And  he  said,  “No,  no,  I’ll  meet  you  at  a  conference”  we  were  going  to  go  to  later  that  night.  There 
was  a  gaming  conference  in  town.  So  about  four  o’clock  I  get  this  call,  and  Bobby  said,  “You  need  to 
come  down  here.” 

And  I  said,  “What  do  you  mean?” 

And  he  said,  “No,  you  need  to  come  down  here.” 

I  said,  “Well,  why?” 

And  he  said,  “Just  come  down  here.” 

So  I  went  down,  and  we  walk  in,  and  across  the  wall  the  polygrapher  has  taped  these  charts.  One 
of  them  is  a  squiggly  line,  and  another  is  a  squiggly  line,  and  the  last  one’s  a  straight  one. 

And  Bobby  says,  “Ask  him  what  that  line  is.” 

And  I  said,  “What’s  that  line?” 

And  he  said,  “Well,  that’s  upper  respiratory.” 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


All 


I  said,  “If  that’s  upper  respiratory  then  you’ve  proven  Bobby’s  dead.” 

[laughter] 

And  he  said,  “Well,  he’s  either  a  shallow  breather  or  I  put  it  on  wrong.” 

[laughter] 

I  said,  “Oh,  God!  Oh,  no!” 

And  then  he  started  indicating  to  me,  “Well,  I  got  some  real  concerns  about  Bobby’s 
truthfulness.” 

I  said,  “You  got  to  be  kidding  me.” 

And  Bobby  said,  “Oh,  no,  no!  Ask  him  about  the  questions  he  asked  me.” 

And  I  said,  “Bobby,  I  don’t  have  to  ask  him  about  the  questions  he  asked  you.  We  gave  him  the 
questions.  Both  Chairman  Avance’s  guy  and  my  guy  we  gave  him  the  questions.  We  worked  out  the 
questions.” 

“Oh,  no,  no,  no.  Ask  about  it.” 

I  said,  “Well,  did  you  ask  him  the  questions  we  provided  you?” 

“No,  no,  no.”  He  said,  “Those  were  just  yes  or  no  answers.  I  like  to  provoke  a  response.” 

I  said,  “You  got  to  be  kidding  me.” 

And  Bobby  says,  “Ask  him  what  the  first  question  was.” 

And  I  said,  “What’s  the  first  question?” 

And  this  incident  supposedly  took  place  in  Oklahoma  City  at  a  place  near  Eighty-Fourth  and 
Waverly.  I’ll  never  forget  the  address.  I  said,  “What’s  the  first  question?” 

He  said,  “My  first  question  was,  ‘Assume  you  were  at  the  house  at  Eighty-First  and  Waverly. 
Were  you  involved  in  a  twenty -one  game?”’ 

[laughter] 

[laughter]  I  mean,  “assume  something”  in  the  polygraph  exam.  I  just  looked  and  crossed  my  eyes. 
I  immediately  called  the  chairman.  I  said,  “What  in  the  world  did  you  get  us  into?!”  But  that  was  the 
squirreliest  license  I’ve  ever  been  through,  and  Bobby  got  recommended  for  denial  at  that  level,  but  the 
Commission  overruled  it  five-to-zero,  and  he’s  gone  on  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  casino  executives  in  the 
town.  And  it  was  all  over  an  incident  that  never  occurred. 

[laughter] 

But  the  really  great  punchline  to  all  that  is  that  “Racehorse”  Haynes,  in  the  federal  appeal, 
because  this  guy  had  been  on  death  row  at  the  Oklahoma  and  the  supreme  court  of  Oklahoma  twice, 
denied  his  appeals  so  he’s  on  death  row  for  four  years.  “Racehorse”  Haynes  developed  the  information 
that  the  D.A.  hid  and  which  I  think  precipitated  Bobby’s  problem  in  Oklahoma  City.  The  North  Carolina 
state  police  had  given  this  district  attorney  the  specific  description  and  identity  of  a  former  state  trooper 
that  was  known  to  be  in  that  area,  and  one  of  the  guys  killed  was  the  boyfriend  of  his  estranged  girlfriend, 
and  that  the  person  that  did  the  killing,  his  MO  was  silver-tipped  bullets,  and  all  of  them  were  killed  with 


478 


silver-tipped  bullets.  Also,  the  guy  always  wore  a  red  baseball  hat,  and  had  a  very  ashen  face,  and  that 
description  didn’t  match  this  poor  poker  player.  At  the  federal  hearing  after  that  evidence  was  submitted, 
the  federal  judge  turned  to  the  district  attorney,  “1  don’t  want  there  to  be  a  two-hour  delay  in  releasing  this 
man  from  the  state  penitentiary.  He’s  been  in  there  long  enough,”  and  he  was  released  that  day.  So  Bobby 
literally,  by  going  down  and  getting  involved  in  that,  saved  this  man’s  life.  Saved  his  life.  But  that’s 
probably  the  screwiest  case  1  ever  had.  There  were  more  twists  and  turns  in  that  licensing  than  1  can  even 
talk  about.  Bobby  and  I  still  joke  about  it  to  this  day,  and  we  joke  about  it  with  Patty  [Becker]. 

It’s  a  great  idea  to  preserve  a  lot  of  this  information  for  posterity,  because  everything  changes 
with  time,  and  this  will  seem  as  ancient  as  some  of  the  stuff  1  saw  when  I  first  got  on  the  Commission 
thirty  years  earlier. 

Yes.  Well  I  want  to  thank  you  again  for  giving  us  your  time.  And  like  you  say,  this  will  be  important 
somewhere  down  the  line. 

Well,  it’ll  be  fun  for  people  to  listen  to,  hopefully.  1  hope  I’ve  made  it  a  little  entertaining  and  not 
just  a  dry  one. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


479 


19 

Jack  Stratton 


Jack  Stratton  was  born  in  1921  in  Elko,  Nevada 
and  grew  up  in  Reno,  attending  Reno  High  School. 
After  sen’ing  in  the  Navy  in  World  War  II,  he 
returned  to  Reno  and  worked  at  several  jobs 
before  asking  an  old  family  friend,  Governor 
Charles  Russell,  for  help  finding  a  job.  Russell 
sent  him  to  Robbins  Cahill,  then  the  head  of  the 
State  Tax  Commission,  but  soon  to  be  the  first 
chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  Cahill 
hired  Stratton  as  a  sales  tax  representative,  and 
when  the  Gaming  Control  Board  was  created  in 
1955,  he  named  Stratton  the  office  manager.  That 
was  the  beginning  of  a  career  with  the  Board  that 
was  to  last  for  almost  thirty  years.  Stratton  was 
appointed  to  the  Board  by  Governor  Paul  Laxalt 
in  1969  and  when  he  retired  in  1983  he  had  served 
on  the  Board  longer  than  any  other  member  and 
was  one  of  the  first  to  have  been  appointed  from 
an  entry-level  position. 


Jack  Stratton,  1978.  Photo  courtesy  of  Jack  Stratton. 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  afternoon.  My  name  is  Dwayne  Kling.  I’m  with  John  Jack  Stratton  at  his  home  in 
Carson  City,  Nevada.  This  is  a  first  in  a  series  of  interviews  with  Mr.  Stratton.  It ’s  being  conducted  in  his 
home  in  Carson  City.  Mr.  Stratton,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have  your 
permission  to  make  available  to  the  public  the  tapes  and  transcripts  of  the  oral  histories  that  we  are 


480 


about  to  begin  today? 

Jack  Stratton:  Yes. 

When  and  where  were  you  born,  Jack? 

I  was  bom  in  Elko,  Nevada  on  December  28,  1921. 

Are  you  married? 

Yes.  I  have  been  marred  to  Donna  Palm  since  1992.  It  is  my  second  marriage.  In  1943  1  was 
married  to  Maxine  Wiedmaier,  a  native  of  Lovelock.  1  was  in  the  Navy  at  the  time,  and  I  came  home  one 
weekend  and  we  were  married  shortly  before  1  went  overseas.  We  only  had  one  child,  a  son,  and  he 
passed  away  in  1993.  Maxine  passed  away  in  1987. 

How  did  you  happen  to  come  to  Reno  from  Elko? 

Well,  I  was  born  in  Elko,  but  1  was  raised  on  a  ranch  out  in  Butte  Valley.  My  father  had  a  ranch 
there  and  my  mother  was  a  school  teacher.  There  were  only  five  or  six  of  us  in  the  entire  school.  1 
completed  eight  grades  of  school  in  Butte  Valley  and  when  my  father  passed  away  in  1933  1  lived  with 
my  uncle  in  Oakland  and  went  to  school  there  for  one  year. 

The  next  year  1  moved  to  Reno  and  lived  with  my  aunt  while  1  went  to  school  at  Reno  High.  My 
mom  stayed  in  Butte  Valley  until  she  leased  out  the  ranch  in  1937  and  then  she  moved  to  Reno.  1  finished 
high  school  in  1939  but  took  two  or  more  three  courses  so  1  could  graduate  in  June  with  my  class. 

When  you  got  out  of  high  school  did  you  go  to  work,  or  did  you  go  to  the  University  of  Nevada? 

Well,  1  was  working  most  of  the  time  I  was  in  high  school  as  we  didn’t  have  a  lot  of  money.  My 
mother  had  bought  a  rooming  house  over  on  Sixth  Street  and  I  turned  my  check  over  to  her  every  week.  1 
worked  for  Western  Union  delivering  telegrams.  I  rode  my  bike  all  over  Reno,  but  of  course,  Reno  was 
not  very  big  in  those  days.  1  would  work  from  three  in  the  afternoon  until  ten  at  night. 

1  did  that  for  a  couple  of  years  when  I  was  going  to  high  school  and  then  1  went  to  work  for  Bill 
Ramos,  who  owned  the  Lake  Street  Pharmacy.  That  paid  forty  dollars  a  month,  which  was  pretty  good 
pay.  [laughter]  Then  when  1  went  to  the  university  1  worked  for  Bill  Ramos  at  his  main  store  on  Second 
and  Virginia  Streets  as  a  soda  jerk.  In  addition  1  worked  for  the  Nevada  Meat  Packing  Company  that  was 
down  there  by  Flanigan  Warehouse.  My  job  in  the  afternoon  was  to  load  the  chutes  and  then  in  the 
evening  1  had  to  clean  the  killing  room.  1  used  big  hoses  to  wash  down  the  killing  room.  There  were  two 
or  three  of  us  from  the  university  that  worked  there. 

When  you  enrolled  in  the  university,  did  you  have  a  specific  goal  in  mind? 

1  studied  agriculture,  but  1  had  in  mind  one  day  to  become  a  veterinarian.  But  that  went  sour;  it 
just  didn’t  come  about.  1  couldn’t  afford  it,  for  one  thing.  Shortly  after  1  started  the  university,  World  War 
11  broke  out.  1  was  working  a  summer  job  for  the  Department  of  Highways  in  the  summer  of  1942  and  1 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


481 


was  on  a  surveying  crew  in  Battle  Mountain  when  1  got  my  notice  to  report  for  induction.  So  1  came  back 
to  Reno,  but  1  was  one  day  late  to  report  to  Salt  Lake  City  for  a  physical  so  1  joined  the  Navy  and  1 
reported  in  to  active  duty  in  September  of  1942. 

1  went  to  boot  camp  in  San  Diego  and  then  they  put  [me]  in  the  medical  corps  school  and  1  did 
my  training  at  the  Mare  Island  Navy  Base.  They  made  me  a  Pharmacist  Mate  because  1  had  worked  at  the 
Lake  Street  Pharmacy.  1  guess  they  didn’t  know  all  1  had  done  there  was  jerk  sodas.  After  my  training  1 
was  assigned  to  the  Marine  Corps.  The  Marine  Coips  doesn’t  have  a  medical  outfit  so  the  Navy  provides 
that  service.  I  wore  the  Marine  uniform  and  the  whole  works. 

Where  did  you  go  after  you  completed  your  training  at  Mare  Island? 

1  was  assigned  to  what  they  called  an  “Aline  outfit”  at  the  Tanforan  Racetrack  near  San  Mateo.  It 
had  been  a  Japanese  internment  camp  for  a  while  before  being  converted  to  a  hospital.  We  were  later 
transferred  to  San  Diego  for  some  more  training  and  then  after  a  few  months,  across  the  pond  we  went. 

A  troop  ship  took  us  to  Hawaii  and  then  on  to  our  first  operation,  the  invasion  of  Saipan  and 
Tinian.  After  that  operation  we  went  back  to  Hawaii  for  sixty  days  of  R  and  R  [Rest  and  Recreation] .  Our 
next  operation  was  the  invasion  of  Iwo  Jima.  1  was  there  on  the  first  day  of  the  invasion  on  both  Iwo  Jima 
and  Saipan. 

As  medical  corpsman  did  you  cany  any  kind  of  weapon? 

We  were  issued  a  fifty  caliber  carbine  and  some  carried  a  pistol. 

Were  you  constantly  in  the  front  lines  all  during  the  engagements? 

1  was  in  a  hospital  unit,  so  we  were  just  back  of  the  line  but  some  times  parts  of  our  unit  would  go 
to  the  front  lines  if  we  were  losing  too  many  corpsmen.  1  never  got  into  that;  1  was  always  in  the  operating 
room  handling  the  instruments  and  that  was  quite  a  job.  We  didn’t  have  the  tools  they  do  now,  they  were 
pretty  ancient,  but  we  saved  a  lot  of  lives. 

Were  there  female  nurses  there  also? 

No.  All  the  nurses  were  male.  The  female  nurses  in  the  Navy  were  usually  in  the  hospitals  here  in 
the  states,  or  were  in  Honolulu.  They  were  never  in  the  combat  area  that  1  know  of. 

Did  you  stay  on  Iwo  Jima  until  the  campaign  was  over? 

Yes.  We  had  been  schooled  for  a  seventy-two  hour  operation  and  1  think  we  were  there  for 
twenty-six  days,  [laughter]  It  was  an  experience  that  you  would  never  want  to  go  through  again,  but  1  am 
kind  of  proud  to  have  been  a  part  of  it.  It  was  exciting  sometimes  and  sometimes  it  wasn’t. 

Was  it  frightening  at  times,  too,  or  didn  ’tyou  have  time  to  be  frightened? 


That’s  a  good  answer  right  there — you  didn’t  have  time  to  be  frightened.  1  will  say  this:  if 


482 


anybody  says  they’re  not  scared  when  somebody  is  out  there  shooting  at  them,  they’re  a  damn  liar. 

After  the  battle  for  Iwo  Jima  was  over,  did  you  remain  on  the  island? 

No.  I  was  with  a  portable  unit  and  we  were  sent  back  to  Maui  to  begin  training  for  the  invasion  of 
Sasebo,  Japan.  In  fact,  we  completed  training  and  were  on  a  transport  ship  in  the  Marshall  Islands, 
heading  for  Japan  when  they  dropped  the  bomb.  We  thought  Truman  was  the  greatest  guy  in  the  world, 
[laughter]  Now  they  are  saying  that  he  shouldn’t  have  done  it,  but  he  saved  the  lives  of  millions  of  people, 
not  only  on  our  side,  but  on  their  side  as  well.  I’ll  tell  you  that  port  city  of  Sasebo  was  really  fortified. 
There  was  a  narrow  opening  into  a  big  bay.  It  isn’t  too  far  from  Hiroshima  where  they  dropped  the  bomb. 
We  landed  there  after  the  war  was  over  and  we  stayed  there  about  a  month  and  I  had  enough  points  to  go 
home  and  there  were  thirty  other  guys  in  my  outfit  that  went  back  to  the  states  with  me.  We  came  home 
on  the  troop  ship,  the  U.S.S.  Fallon,  [laughter]  We  landed  at  San  Diego  and  I  got  my  discharge  at  Camp 
Shoemaker,  near  Livermore,  California  in  November  of  1945. 

What  did  you  do  when  you  returned  to  Reno? 

My  wife  was  working  as  the  night  manager  of  a  hospital  in  San  Mateo,  so  we  lived  there  for  six 
or  eight  months.  I  had  applied  for  to  the  veterinary  college  at  Colorado  State  University  and  when  I  was 
accepted  in  September  of  1946  we  bought  a  little  trailer,  first  trailer  on  the  road,  I  think,  [laughter]  and 
headed  for  Colorado.  When  we  got  back  there  they  said,  “Well,  you’ll  have  to  wait.  There  is  only  room 
for  forty-five  students  in  the  college  and  the  state  boys  have  preference.” 

I  said,  “Well,  how  long  do  I  have  to  wait?” 

And  he  said,  “Well,  it  could  be  four  or  five  years.” 

I  said,  “I’m  going  home.” 

I  went  back  to  the  University  of  Nevada,  and  while  I  was  going  to  school  I  started  working  for  the 
Oregon-Nevada-Cal  Fast  Freight  Company.  My  boss  there  was  Frank  North  and  he  used  to  see  that  I  got 
plenty  of  work.  I  quit  the  University  after  I  had  about  eighty  credit  hours.  I  just  couldn’t  seem  to  get 
what  I  wanted  there,  so  I  decided  it  was  best  to  quit.  I  delivered  freight  around  town  for  quite  a  while  and 
then  my  boss  said  he  would  see  about  getting  me  my  own  agency.  So  they  sent  me  to  Roseburg,  Oregon 
for  two  years  and  then  they  transferred  me  to  Coos  Bay,  Oregon  which  was  quite  a  bit  bigger  operation, 
and  I  was  there  until  1 954.  And  then  I  decided  I  wanted  to  come  back  to  the  sagebrush,  [laughter]  I  got  a 
job  with  the  Ringsby  Freight  Company.  They  had  an  office  at  Second  and  Kietzke  and  they  were 
primarily  meat  haulers,  but  they  did  carry  freight  from  places  like  Los  Angeles  to  here.  I  was  a  dock 
foreman  for  them  but  when  the  big  strike  hit  in  May  of  1955  there  wasn’t  any  work  and  I  decided  I  would 
go  to  Carson  City  and  look  for  a  job.  I  knew  Governor  Russell  real  well  and  I  also  knew  Robbins  Cahill 
real  well.  I  stopped  to  see  Charlie  Russell  first  and  he  sent  me  down  to  see  Robbins  Cahill. 

What  year  was  this,  Jack? 

This  was  in  June  of  1955  and  Cahill  was  the  head  of  the  Tax  Division.  The  Gaming  Control 
Board  hadn’t  been  created  yet,  so  he  didn’t  have  anything  for  me  there  right  at  the  moment,  but  he  did  get 
me  a  position  as  a  sales  tax  representative.  My  territory  was  from  Brady’s  Hot  Springs  to  the  state  line 
clear  up  to  Denio,  Wendover,  Ely,  and  Elko.  The  sales  tax  law  was  to  become  effective  in  July  of  1955 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


483 


and  it  was  my  job  to  explain  to  people  how  the  law  would  work  and  how  the  tax  was  to  be  handled. 

1  used  to  have  meetings  in  towns  like  Elko,  Wells,  Tonopah,  Winnemucca,  Lovelock  and  Tonopah 
and  between  those  towns  1  would  visit  any  little  businesses  that  needed  help.  1  had  a  state  car  and  I  got  a 
small  amount  like  ten  dollars  per  diem  and  that  didn’t  even  pay  for  my  hotel  room,  but  it  was  good 
experience. 

It  is  interesting  that  you  could  walk  in  the  Governor’s  office,  say  hello  and  ask  him  for  a  job.  In  how 
many  states  could  you  do  that? 

You  couldn’t  do  it  anywhere  nowadays.  Charles  Russell  had  owned  the  Ely  Record,  a  newspaper 
in  Ely,  and  he  was  a  good  friend  of  my  mother  and  father.  He  used  to  come  out  to  our  ranch  to  go  sage 
hen  hunting.  1  carried  sage  hens  for  Charlie  Russell  when  1  was  only  about  four  or  five  years  old.  We  went 
back  along  ways  together.  He  was  a  wonderful  person. 

How  did  you  know  Robbins  Cahill? 

Robbins  Cahill  had  an  Associated  Garage  in  Sparks  right  across  from  where  Ascuaga’s  Nugget  is 
now.  I  worked  for  Bill  Zundel  who  owned  the  Shell  Garage  just  down  the  street  from  Cahill’s  garage.  If 
we  needed  something  we  would  run  over  to  Cahill’s  and  vice  versa.  So  that  is  where  1  got  to  know  him. 
That  was  even  before  he  was  an  assemblyman. 

Well,  the  job  I  had  with  the  sales  tax  division  was  just  part  time  and  when  1  came  back  to  Carson 
City  in  September  to  turn  my  car  in,  1  got  a  message  to  go  see  Robbins  Cahill,  so  1  went  over.  Bob  says, 
“How  would  you  like  to  come  to  work  on  the  Gaming  Board?”  So  1  said,  “Well,  if  I  can  get  a  salary  that’s 
comparable  to  what  1  can  make  in  the  freight  business,  why,  I’m  interested,  yes.”  Of  course,  the  strike  was 
still  on  and  I  went  to  work  for  Bob  Cahill  the  next  day  as  office  manager  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board, 
[laughter] 

Well  office  manager  is  a  pretty  good  start.  How  many  people  were  in  the  office? 

We  didn’t  have  too  many.  There  were  maybe  only  fifteen  or  twenty  in  the  entire  organization  and 
that  includes  both  northern  and  southern  Nevada.  Now  there  are  four  or  five  hundred,  [laughter] 

As  office  manager  did  you  have  two  or  three  clerks  or  secretaries  working  for  you? 

Yes.  And  I  did  a  lot  of  the  investigations  by  correspondence  on  individuals  at  that  time.  1  didn’t  go 
out  in  the  field.  We  had  one  or  two  investigators  that  would  do  investigating,  not  locally,  but  out  of  town 
or  when  they  had  to  go  back  east  or  something  like  that;  however,  it  was  not  nearly  as  extensive  as  it  is 
now. 

Did  the  Control  Board  have  an  office  in  Las  Vegas,  also? 

Yes.  In  fact  you  may  have  heard  of  Bill  Gallagher.  He  was  the  office  manager  here  and  when  he 
was  transferred  to  Las  Vegas,  1  took  his  place.  He  later  was  appointed  to  the  Board  when  Newell  Hancock 
resigned. 


484 


It  sounds  like  you  had  a  multitude  of  duties. 

Yes,  along  with  my  other  duties  1  also  presented  all  the  applications  to  the  Tax  Commission.  [The 
Tax  Commission  preceded  the  Gaming  Commission  which  came  into  being  in  1959  during  Governor 
Grant  Sawyer’s  term.]  The  first  time  1  took  an  application  before  the  Commission  was  about  a  week  after 
I  went  to  work,  [laughter]  Scared  to  death!  But  it  wasn’t  like  it  is  now;  then,  unless  there  was  a  problem 
with  the  applicant,  he  usually  didn’t  come  in  for  the  hearing.  The  hearings  were  held  in  the  Governor’s 
office  as  he  was  the  chairman  of  the  Tax  Commission.  There  were  very  few  press  people  there  and  as  1 
said,  the  applicant  usually  didn’t  even  come.  We  (the  Board  and  myself)  had  to  have  all  the  answers. 

That  has  changed  now.  During  Phil  Hannifm’s  term  it  was  made  mandatory  for  the  applicant  to 
appear  at  the  hearings.  Prior  to  that  if  there  was  a  problem  with  an  individual,  or  the  Commission  wanted 
to  question  him  we  would  call  him  up  and  say,  “You  be  here.” 

Who  was  on  the  Control  Board  when  you  went  to  work  there  as  Office  Manager  in  1955? 

Well,  Robbins  Cahill  was  the  Chairman  and  the  other  two  board  members  were  Newell  Hancock 
and  Bill  Sinnott.  Newell  was  an  accountant  and  Bill  was  a  former  FBI  agent. 

I  imagine  a  lot  of  applications  were  almost  automatic — people  requesting  a  twenty-one  game  in  a  bar,  or 
a  few  slots? 

Yes.  We’d  check  them  out  pretty  well  as  to  their  background  and  their  finances.  That  was  the  big 
thing,  their  finances — where  was  their  money  coming  from?  If  you  didn’t  know  where  their  money  was 
coming  from,  you  figured,  well,  it  must  be  coming  from  a  source  that  doesn’t  want  to  be  known. 

Were  you  actually  a  part  of  the  investigative  team  in  your  early  years  with  the  Board? 

Yes,  at  first,  when  1  was  working  under  Robbins  Cahill.  He  had  a  couple  of  other  investigators — 
Art  Jewett  and  George  Coffin.  They  were  pretty  knowledgeable  people  and  knew  how  to  run  an 
investigation.  There  were  also  a  couple  of  enforcement  agents  out  there  observing  different  casinos  to  see 
that  everything  was  running  smoothly  and  honestly. 

Did  all  license  applications  have  to  go  through  Carson  City?  If  you  were  being  licensed  in  Las  Vegas,  did 
you  still  have  to  come  to  Carson  City? 

In  the  first  years  of  the  Board  once  in  a  while  they’d  go  to  Las  Vegas,  but  it  wasn’t  a  routine  thing 
every  other  month  like  it  is  now.  Maybe  every  third  month,  or  something  like  that,  we’d  got  Las  Vegas  for 
a  meeting. 

Did  you  have  to  go  to  Las  Vegas  for  the  hearings? 

Yes,  1  did.  1  had  to  take  all  the  files  to  Las  Vegas  and  drive  down  there  with  no  air  conditioning  in 
the  car.  It  wasn’t  too  bad.  Just  roll  all  the  windows  down,  and  away  you  go.  There  was  no  speed  limit  in 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


485 


those  days,  [laughter] 

Did  you  have  any  other  duties? 

Yes.  In  fact,  sometimes  1  would  go  out  with  the  investigators  and  enforcement  agents  and  pick  up 
dice  and  cards  in  the  casinos  to  see  if  they  were  legitimate. 

Was  your  title  ever  changed? 

No,  1  was  always  the  “office  manager,”  but  now  the  title  has  been  changed  to,  1  believe, 
“Applicant  Services.”  He  is  responsible  for  taking  applicants  and  reviewing  them  to  see  that  they  are  in 
order.  That’s  all. 

Were  the  investigations  pretty  in-depth  even  in  the  early  years? 

Oh  yes.  Estes  Kefauver,  a  senator  from  Tennessee,  came  to  Nevada  in  1950  to  conduct  hearings 
and  he  wanted  to  close  gambling  worldwide.  So  it  was  up  to  Nevada  to  either  get  rid  of  the  bad  ones  or  be 
threatened  with  losing  gambling  all  together. 


You  went  to  work  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board  in  1955.  In  what  year  were  you  appointed  to  the  Board 
itself,  and  who  appointed  you? 

1  was  appointed  to  the  Board  in  1 969  by  Paul  Laxalt,  a  Republican  governor.  An  opening  had 
been  created  when  Wayne  Pearson  resigned  from  the  Board.  Paul  had  only  a  few  months  left  to  go  on  his 
term  and  he  wasn’t  going  to  run  again,  so  he  called  me  up  and  says,  “Come  on  up  to  my  office.  I  want  to 
talk  to  you  about  being  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board.”  [laughter] 

When  1  got  to  his  office  1  said,  “Give  me  a  few  minutes.  I’d  like  to  talk  this  over  with  my  wife.” 
He  says,  “You’ve  got  five  minutes.”  [laughter] 

So  1  went  over  to  his  phone  and  called  my  wife.  She  says,  “Well,  you’re  in  the  gambling  business, 
you  might  as  well  take  a  chance.”  So  1  went  to  work  the  next  day. 

Had  anyone  else  ever  been  appointed  to  the  Board  from  an  entry-level  position? 

Yes.  Bill  Gallagher  was  the  first  one  and  1  was  the  second. 

Who  was  chairman  of  the  Board  when  you  were  appointed? 

Frank  Johnson.  He  had  replaced  Alan  Abner.  When  Laxalt  left  office,  Mike  O’Callaghan  became 
governor.  He  appointed  Phil  Hannifin  to  take  Frank’s  place,  Shannon  Bybee  to  take  Keith  Campbell’s 
place  and  he  kept  me  on.  Phil,  of  course,  was  named  chairman  of  the  Board. 

Did  you  know  Mike  O  ’Callaghan  before  he  ran  for  governor? 


486 


No,  I  didn’t.  I’d  met  him  once  or  twice  on  his  campaign  trail,  and  that’s  about  it. 

So,  over  the  years  were  you  appointed  to  the  Board  by  both  Democratic  and  Republican  governors? 

Yes. 

Was  that  commonplace,  or  were  most  appointments  made  along  party  lines? 

Well,  the  Gaming  Commission,  I  think,  requires  that  a  Republican  governor  is  supposed  to  have 
three  Republicans  and  two  Democrats  on  the  Commission  and  it’s  the  other  way  around  with  a 
Democratic  governor.  But  the  Board  never  had  that.  In  fact,  nobody  ever  asked  me  what  1  was.  Of  course, 
it’s  known  that  1  am  a  Democrat  and  always  have  been,  but  sometimes  I  wonder,  [laughter]  1  was  never  a 
true  Democrat  and  I  never  voted  a  straight  Democratic  ticket  in  my  life.  I  voted  for  the  individual. 

Did  you  work  very  long  with  Frank  Johnson? 

When  I  was  office  manager  Frank  was  the  chairman,  so  I  worked  with  him  quite  a  bit.  He  was 
Barron  Hilton’s  cousin  and  he  went  to  Las  Vegas  to  manage  the  Hilton  down  there.  I  was  in  contact  with 
Frank  quite  a  bit.  I’d  known  Frank  for  many,  many  years,  and  all  of  a  sudden  he  was  diagnosed  as  having 
cancer  in  his  jaw  and  it  went  right  to  his  brain.  He  didn’t  live  very  long  after  that. 

So  he  was  a  good  chairman? 

Yes.  Frank  knew  his  way  around.  He  had  also  been  a  great  newspaper  columnist  for  a  Reno 
newspaper  before  going  to  work  for  the  Board.  He  was  replaced  by  Phil  Hannifin. 

Who  were  some  of  the  other  chairman  you  worked  with? 

I  later  worked  for  Roger  Trounday,  and  then  Richard  Bunker.  They  all  had  their  own  ways  of 
accomplishing  things,  but  I  never  worked  for  a  better  bunch  of  people  than  those  chairmen. 

Basically  what  you  are  saying  is  that  you  worked  in  harmony. 

We  sure  did.  We  had  some  two-to-one  votes.  Sometimes  our  ideas  did  vary  and  a  lot  of  times  I 
voted  on  my  own.  It  was  just  call  your  own  shots.  Nobody  ever  told  me  what  or  who  to  vote  for. 

[laughter] 


After  Phil  Hannifin  resigned,  Roger  Trounday  took  his  position.  Had  you  known  Roger  prior  to  that 
time? 


I  had  known  him  a  little.  My  brother  had  gone  to  high  school  with  him  and  had  played  baseball 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


487 


with  him,  so  I  knew  Roger  through  their  association.  Roger  and  Phil  were  both  very  diplomatic.  This  was 
Roger’s  first  shot  in  gaming,  so  he  was  a  little  cautious  going  into  it.  He  relied  on  me  quite  a  lot  to  help 
him  when  he  first  started,  but  he  soon  didn’t  need  a  lot  of  help. 

You  later  worked  with  Richard  Bunker.  Was  that  a  harmonious  board ,  also? 

There  were  some  little  differences  there,  but  1  never  entered  into  them.  1  figured  that  was  their 
problem.  No  one  was  telling  each  other  what  to  do,  as  far  as  approving  or  denying  an  application  or  how 
to  proceed  with  a  hearing,  or  anything  like  that. 

Was  the  chairman  always  the  administrative  person  on  the  Board? 

Yes,  the  chairman  always  was  the  administrator. 

Was  it  his  responsibility  to  see  that  things  such  as  applications,  tax  audits,  and  investigations  kept  moving 
smoothly? 

Yes.  He  would  oversee  things  like  and  he  would  conduct  sessions  with  the  people  that  worked  in 
our  investigative  division,  the  enforcement  division  and  accounting.  We  would  have  summaries  on  the 
applicants,  and  after  we  had  reviewed  these  summaries,  we  could  ask  questions  of  the  staff:  how  they  got 
the  information,  or  explain  it  a  little  more  and  then  we  were  ready  to  go. 

Did  the  three  of  you  discuss  each  application  privately? 

Sometimes  we  would,  but  usually  it  was  done  at  the  hearings  and  you  were  on  your  own  as  to 
which  way  you  were  going  to  go.  [laughter] 

Did  the  three  of  you  ever  sit  around  and  discuss  the  applicant  and  say,  "I  am  going  to  vote  for — " 

No,  not  as  far  as  voting  was  concerned.  No  way!  No  way,  shape,  or  form. 

To  return  to  the  early  days  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  who  replaced  Robbins  Cahill  as  chairman  of  the 
Board? 


He  was  replaced  by  Ray  Abbaticchio  and  at  about  that  same  time  Ned  Turner  and  George  Ullom 
were  appointed  to  the  Board. 

In  1959  the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  was  formed  and  it  replaced  the  Tax  Commission  as  far 
as  regulating  gaming.  Miles  Pike  was  the  first  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission  and  the  only  person 
that  came  over  to  the  Gaming  Commission  from  the  Tax  Commission  was  Norman  Brown  from  Smith 
Valley. 

Miles  Pike,  who  was  a  Reno  attorney,  was  only  on  the  Commission  for  a  year  or  so  and  then  he 
was  replaced  by  Milton  Keefer.  1  worked  with  many  other  commission  chairmen  over  the  years. 


488 


Did  the  board  members  have  much  of  a  relationship  with  commission  members?  Did  you  see  them  other 
than  at  the  monthly  meetings? 

I  would  see  them  once  in  a  while,  or  they  would  call.  Sometimes  they  would  have  information  for 
you  or  they  might  have  a  question  as  to  what  was  going  on  with  a  particular  applicant.  A  lot  of  people  that 
had  problems  would  contact  a  commissioner  for  help  with  their  application,  but  they  soon  found  out  that 
didn’t  work.  1  used  to  get  a  kick  out  of  Mike  O’Callaghan.  Somebody  would  call  him  and  say,  “1  want  to 
come  over  and  talk  about  a  particular  situation  in  my  application.” 

And  Mike  always  said,  “Come  on  in.” 

Then  he  would  call  me  or  Hannifin  or  somebody  on  the  Board,  and  the  guy  would  come  in,  and 
Mike  would  say,  “Well,  I  don’t  know  anything  about  this,  but  these  two  guys  will  know  about  it.” 
[laughter]  And  these  guys  would  just  sink.  He  was  quite  a  guy,  that  O’Callaghan.  He  was  a  very  fine 
governor. 

Do  you  have  any  special  memories  of  Chairman  John  (Jack)  Diehl? 

Jack  was  appointed  by  Paul  Laxalt.  He  was  a  very  good  chairman.  1  had  gone  to  the  University 
with  him  and  1  really  liked  him.  He  was  the  kind  of  guy  that  just  kept  everything  moving,  boom,  boom.  1 
used  to  laugh  at  him.  Some  attorney  would  come  in  to  talk  for  somebody,  and  Jack  always  started  out, 
“Now  before  you  get  your  knees  locked  in  .  .  .  You  could  just  see  the  attorney  tighten  up.  Lots  of  times 
when  an  attorney  tells  a  story  he  will  tell  the  same  story  two  or  three  different  ways,  and  Jack  would 
always  catch  him:  “We’ve  heard  about  that.  You  got  anything  else?”  And  that  would  throw  people 
completely  off,  but  I’ll  tell  you,  he  was  a  very  shaip  individual. 

Of  course,  there  were  other  chairmen  that  were  lawyers,  such  as  Harry  Reid,  Pete  Echeverria,  and 
Carl  Dodge.  Dodge  was  also  a  legislator  and  1  talked  to  him  many  times  when  in  he  was  in  the  legislature. 

Did  you  ever  testify  before  the  legislature? 

We  did  testify  on  certain  bills  and  legislation.  Sometimes  they  would  call  you  for  your  opinion  of 
a  certain  deal,  whether  it  would  be  good  or  bad  for  gaming.  And,  of  course,  we  had  our  own  budgets  and 
what  have  you  to  set  before  the  legislature.  Primarily,  the  chairman  would  do  that,  but  once  in  a  while  1 
had  to  go  over  there  myself. 


There  was  an  individual  named  Frank  “Lefty”  Rosenthal  who  was  associated  with  Allen  Click  and  the 
Argent  Corporation  who  worked  at  the  Stardust  Hotel-Casino  for  many  years.  Would  you  please  tell  us  a 
little  about  Mr.  Rosenthal? 

Well,  we  knew  that  “Lefty”  had  a  background  in  illegal  bookmaking  and  had  had  some  trouble 
with  the  law  before  he  came  to  Las  Vegas  so  we  were  watching  him  pretty  closely.  We  called  him  in  for 
licensing  as  a  key  employee  and  after  a  very  thorough  investigation  we  decided  that  he  was  not  suitable  to 
be  licensed.  So  then  he  changed  his  job  title  to  entertainment  director  or  something  like  that  and  he  was 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


489 


supposed  to  stay  away  from  the  gambling  end  of  the  business. 

Well,  one  night  Roger  Trounday  and  1  were  walking  around  in  the  Stardust  and  we  saw  “Lefty” 
right  in  the  middle  of  the  pit.  We  just  kept  walking.  After  we  walked  out  the  front  door  of  the  Stardust, 
Roger  says,  “I’ll  go  around  and  come  back  through  the  sports  book  and  you  come  back  in  the  front  door 
and  we’ll  see  what  is  going  on.”  [laughter]  It  was  very  interesting.  “Lefty”  wasn’t  there. 

So  we  immediately  called  him  in  again  to  be  licensed,  because  he  was  not  supposed  be  involved 
with  gaming.  1  will  say  that  “Lefty”  was  one  of  the  most  knowledgeable  persons  1  have  ever  known  when 
it  came  to  bookmaking.  Of  course,  he  had  done  that  all  his  life,  and  one  of  the  reasons  we  denied  him  a 
license  was  because  of  him  rigging  a  basketball  game  on  the  east  coast. 

Was  he  ever  accused  of  being  involved  in  any  skimming  operations  in  Las  Vegas? 

We  never  really  tied  him  into  it,  but  I’m  sure  that  he  was  right  in  the  middle  of  it.  We  investigated 
a  skimming  operation  at  the  Stardust,  and  a  number  of  people  were  involved  in  that,  and  a  number  of 
them  were  not  licensed,  but  they  skipped  out  before  we  could  get  our  hands  on  them. 

Were  you,  or  your  family,  ever  threatened  by  any  of  the  unsavory  element  that  you  investigated? 

1  never  was  and  I  never  carried  a  gun  for  protection.  Many  times  I  walked  through  the  casinos  in 
Las  Vegas  by  myself  and  I  thought  nothing  of  it. 

There  is  a  book  called  The  List  of  Excluded  Persons,  or  the  “ Black  Book.  ”  Did  the  Gaming  Control 
Board  play  a  part  in  creating  that  book? 

“The  Black  Book”  started  during  Ray  Abbaticchio’s  regime.  He  was  an  ex-FBI  man,  and  he  was 
dead  set  on  getting  his  “ten  most  wanted.”  [laughter]  So  they  started  this  “Black  Book,”  and  I  think  some 
of  the  individuals  listed  should  not  have  been  in  there.  Of  course,  I  wasn’t  a  board  member  at  the  time. 

Did  the  Board  vote  on  who  was  included  in  the  book? 

The  Board  recommended,  but  the  final  decision  was  made  by  the  Gaming  Commission. 

How  many  people  were  entered  in  the  first  “Black  Book”? 

There  were  eleven  in  the  first  book.  We  didn’t  put  too  many  in  it  during  my  times  on  the  Board. 

Was  “Lefty”  Rosenthal  entered  in  the  Black  Book? 

Yes,  he  was,  but  it  was  after  I  had  left  the  Board. 


A  lady  named  Mitzi  Stauffer  Briggs  was  licensed  at  the  Tropicana  Hotel  in  the  seventies.  Would  you  tell 
us  a  little  about  your  experience  with  Mrs.  Briggs? 


490 


Mitzi  Briggs  was  part  of  the  Stauffer  family  that  owned  Stauffer  Chemicals.  She  was  licensed  at 
the  Tropicana  Hotel  and  made  a  major  investment  in  the  property.  It  was  a  mistake  for  her  to  do  that.  She 
was  way  over  her  head.  She  wasn’t  knowledgeable  about  the  gambling  business,  and  1  am  sure  that  there 
were  people  that  took  advantage  of  her.  She  eventually  lost  just  about  every  dime  she  ever  had.  Mrs. 
Briggs  used  to  write  Phil  [Hannifin]  and  1  a  letter  every  once  in  a  while,  [laughter]  but  she  wasn’t 
criticizing  us,  she  was  just  seeking  advice  and  help.  But  there  was  nothing  we  could  do;  we  were  not  in  a 
position  to  help  her  operate  the  Tropicana.  She  was  very  confused.  She  had  invested  all  this  money  in  the 
Tropicana  and  she  knew  nothing  about  gambling,  nothing  at  all. 

She  was  eventually  forced  out  of  the  Tropicana  when  it  was  discovered  that  Joe  Ergots  had  made 
management  decisions  that  allowed  funds  to  be  diverted  to  Kansas  City  mobsters. 

It  appears  as  if  there  were  a  lot  of  skimming  activities  or  diverting  of funds  during  the  sixties  and 
seventies,  even  into  the  eighties,  and  that  the  boards  you  were  on  did  a  great  deal  to  bring  that  type  of 
activity  to  an  end. 

Well,  we  did  do  something  about  them.  That  is  what  we  were  hired  to  do  and  it  is  fortunate  we 
caught  so  many  of  them.  We  did  our  best  to  clean  things  up. 

The  FBI  often  became  involved  in  these  cases.  Did  the  state  of  Nevada  request  the  assistance  of  the  FBI? 

No,  we  exchanged  information,  but  we  never,  to  my  knowledge,  ever  directed  the  FBI  to  go  in 
and  bug  somebody,  or  anything  like  that.  They  had  a  bigger  force  than  we  did.  [laughter]  Once  in  a  while 
they  came  up  with  some  good  information  and  then  it  was  up  to  us  to  follow  through.  We  had  the  power 
to  follow  through.  We  could  close  a  casino  down,  or  keep  people  from  working  in  a  casino,  whereas  the 
FBI  didn’t  have  the  authority  to  do  that.  In  fact,  we  did  close  down  the  Aladdin.  Of  course,  Judge  Harry 
Claiborne  got  it  open  again  in  six  hours,  [laughter]  But  we  had  no  problem  closing  it.  Roger  [Trounday], 
[Richard]  Bunker  and  myself  were  on  the  Board  at  that  time. 

When  did  you  resign  from  the  Gaming  Control  Board? 

In  December  of  1982. 1  had  worked  twenty-eight  years  for  the  state  at  that  time  and  it  was  also 
the  end  of  my  four-year  term.  1  had  told  Governor  Bob  Fist  in  June  or  July  that  1  planned  on  retiring.  1 
was  sixty-one  years  old  at  the  time  and  I  had  a  very  sick  wife  at  home. 

We  were  also  having  a  tough  time  with  the  Mapes  Hotel  about  that  time.  I  was  wrestling  with 
Charlie  Mapes  about  the  financing  of  the  property  and  we  wanted  to  close  it,  but  the  judge  wouldn’t  let 
us.  I  had  a  lot  to  do  with  the  Mapes  financing.  I  was  in  court  nearly  every  week.  That  really  made  me 
want  to  retire,  [laughter]  because  1  always  felt  that  judges  were  trying  to  take  over  the  Gaming  Control 
Board’s  duties  and  I  wanted  no  part  of  it.  We  were  hired  to  do  a  job  and  they  were  trying  to  step  in. 
Anyhow,  the  Mapes  was  closed  for  good  in  December  of  1982  just  a  short  time  before  1  left  the  board. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


491 


In  the  seventies  the  Ponderosa  Hotel  was  owned  by  Larry  and  Kathy  Tripp.  Would  you  tell  us  about  any 
problems  the  board  had  with  the  Tripps? 

Well,  they  both  owned  the  Ponderosa,  but  Larry  was  pretty  old  at  the  time  and  he  was  involved  in 
other  activities,  like  construction  and  what  have  you,  and  he  didn’t  get  involved  much  in  the  daily 
operation.  We  had  a  lot  of  problems  with  Kathy’s  record-keeping;  we  could  never  get  her  squared  around 
as  to  keeping  records  properly.  1  was  always  over  there  with  an  auditor,  [laughter]  She  used  to  come  in 
the  office  crying  every  once  in  a  while  about  how  we  were  crucifying  her,  and  we  weren’t.  We  were  really 
trying  to  help  her  get  the  hotel-casino  in  order.  She  was  careless,  she  just  didn’t  want  to  comply  with 
record  keeping  regulations. 

We  finally  issued  her  an  ultimatum:  “Get  this  thing  in  order,  or  we  are  going  to  get  you  out  of 
here.”  We  gave  her  a  year  to  get  things  straightened  out,  but  when  she  didn’t  do  it,  we  closed  the  casino 
part  of  the  hotel.  She  tried  to  run  the  hotel  and  restaurant  part  of  it,  but  that  didn’t  last  long. 

What  were  some  of  the  changes  that  occurred  in  gaming  industry  during  your  time  on  the  Board? 

The  coiporations  coming  in.  In  1969  corporations  were  OK’d  by  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  but 
it  wasn’t  until  late  in  the  seventies  that  many  coiporations  were  licensed.  Prior  to  that  it  was  all 
individuals  or  small  corporations  where  you  could  license  every  individual  in  the  corporation.  It  was,  of 
course,  impossible  to  license  every  one  in  the  big  coiporations,  so  a  law  was  set  up  for  licensing  key 
employees  and  persons  owning  five  percent  or  more,  or  the  ones  who  were  active  in  the  operation.  We 
also  licensed  all  the  officers  in  the  operation.  It  complicated  licensing  quite  a  bit,  but  the  coiporations 
created  a  source  of  funds.  Before  that,  the  banks  didn’t  loan  that  much  money.  That  is  how  the  Teamsters 
Union  was  able  to  get  involved  in  casinos  when  the  casinos  couldn’t  get  loans  from  hanks. 

The  banks  were  hesitant  to  loan  money  to  casinos? 

Most  of  them  were.  Perry  Thomas  from  the  Bank  of  Las  Vegas  loaned  a  lot  of  money  to  casinos, 
and  to  my  knowledge  he  did  all  right  with  those  loans,  but  he  could  only  loan  so  much.  One  of  the  main 
reasons  the  legislature  OK’d  corporate  gaming  was  so  that  casinos  didn’t  have  to  go  to  the  unions  for 
loans. 

Was  Governor  Paul  Laxalt  instrumental  in  getting  that  bill  passed? 

Yes,  he  was.  Also,  Jack  Diehl,  Wayne  Pearson  and  Keith  Campbell  were  helpful.  Our  attorney, 
Don  Winne,  rode  that  bill  through  the  legislature  and  he  was  a  big  help.  He  had  been  an  agent  for  the  FBI, 
but  he  left  the  FBI  to  come  to  work  for  the  state.  The  bill  was  a  lifesaver  for  the  gaming  industry  because 
it  didn’t  have  to  rely  on  the  unions  anymore.  Teamster  money  had  got  us  into  a  whole  lot  of  trouble. 


Were  you  on  the  board  when  Howard  Hughes  got  his  first  license? 


492 


Yes,  I  was  there.  He  was  first  licensed  at  the  Desert  Inn  and  then,  shortly  after,  he  bought  the 
Frontier,  which  was  right  across  the  street.  The  word  was  that  the  sign  on  the  Frontier  was  bothering  him, 
and  they  wouldn’t  turn  it  off,  so  he  bought  the  property,  [laughter]  Before  it  was  over  he  had  purchased 
eight  or  ten  casinos. 

Did  anyone  ever  have  any  concerns  that  he  was  buying  too  many  casinos  and  that  he  would  control  the 
gaming  in  Las  Vegas? 

Oh,  we  were  concerned,  but  at  that  time  it  was  kind  of  a  necessary  thing.  We  needed  to  keep  those 
places  going  for  the  good  of  the  economy  of  the  state.  He  also  presented  a  good  clean  image  for  the  state 
at  a  time  when  we  did  have  an  image  problem. 


After  you  left  the  Board ,  did  you  retire  completely? 

1  did  work  one  year  for  Pete  Cladianos,  on  the  board  of  directors  of  the  Sands  Regency  Hotel.  The 
company  was  going  public  and  he  needed  an  outside  director.  He  called  to  ask  me  if  1  would  be  interested 
and  I  said,  “Well,  I’ll  handle  it  for  a  year.”  There  wasn’t  an  awful  lot  to  it.  We  would  meet  every  once  in  a 
while  and  discuss  certain  situations.  We  had  a  shareholders  meeting  at  the  end  of  the  year  and  that  was  it 
for  me.  1  was  re-elected  for  another  term,  but  I  advised  them  that  1  just  couldn’t  handle  it.  That  was  the 
time  1  was  really  having  a  hard  time  with  my  wife  and  her  cancer.  1  needed  to  spend  a  lot  of  time  with 
her,  so  1  just  dropped  out.  That  was  my  last  contact  with  gaming. 

Is  there  anyone  that  you  worked  with  on  the  Board  that  you  keep  in  contact  with? 

Just  Phil  Hannifin  and  Roger  Trounday.  In  fact,  I  have  to  get  a  hold  of  Roger  and  go  to  lunch  one 
of  these  days,  [laughter]  He  called  the  other  day  and  wanted  me  and  Hannifin  to  get  together  for  lunch.  1 
also  keep  in  touch  with  Bud  Hicks;  he  was  the  Board’s  attorney. 

If  you  had  it  to  do  over  again,  would  you? 

I  sure  would.  There  was  something  new  every  day  and  it  was  never  boring.  You  met  all  kinds  of 
people,  both  good  and  bad,  and  the  job  kept  you  on  your  toes.  We  had  some  very  good  licensees,  and  we 
had  a  few  bad  ones  that  we  had  to  do  something  about,  and  we  did — that  was  our  job. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


493 


20 

Roger  Trounday 


Roger  Trounday  was  born  in  Reno,  Nevada  in  1934  and 
graduated  from  Reno  High,  earning  bachelor ’s  and  master ’s 
degrees  from  the  University  of  Nevada,  Reno.  He  then 
worked  in  several  Reno  schools  as  a  teacher  and 
administrator.  In  1971,  Governor-elect  Mike  O'Callaghan 
appointed  him  to  direct  the  Department  of  Human 
Resources  and,  six  years  later,  to  chair  the  Gaming  Control 
Board.  Serving  from  1977  to  1979,  Trounday  resigned  after 
disagreements  with  then-Governor  Robert  List  and  board 
member  Richard  Bunker  during  the  sale  of  the  Argent 
Corporation ’s  properties  to  Al  Sachs  and  Herb  Tobman. 
Trounday ’s  frank  and  revealing  revelations  provide  us  with 
an  insider’s  look  into  an  unpleasant  episode  of  gaming 
regulation  history .  Following  his  resignation  from  the 
Board,  Trounday  worked  in  management  at  Caesars  Tahoe, 
and  later  as  operations  officer  for  John  Ascuaga ’s  Nugget 
for  fourteen  years.  He  retired  in  2001. 


Roger  Trounday,  ca.  1978.  Photo  courtesy  of  Roger  Trounday. 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  afternoon.  My  name  is  Dwayne  Kling.  I’m  with  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the 
University  of  Nevada.  Today  is  October  30,  2002.  I’m  with  Roger  Trounday,  and  we  ’re  at  my  home  in 
Reno,  Nevada.  Roger,  does  the  Oral  History  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have  your  permission 
to  go  ahead  with  the  tapes  and  transcriptions  that  we  are  about  to  begin  today? 


Roger  Trounday:  Yes,  they  do. 


494 


Thank  you,  Roger.  I’ll  start  out  by  asking  you  when  and  where  were  you  born? 

I  was  bom  in  Reno,  Nevada,  on  March  18,  1934. 

What  schools  did  you  attend  in  Reno? 

1  started  at  the  Catholic  schools  at  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  and  then  in  the  third  grade  1  went  to  Mary 
S.  Doten  for  over  three  years  before  transferring  to  Orvis  Ring,  where  1  finished  my  elementary 
schooling.  1  went  to  junior  high  school  at  Northside  Junior  High  School,  which  was  then  in  downtown 
Reno,  and  then  went  to  Reno  High  School.  When  1  started  there,  the  school  was  on  Fourth  Street.  It  later 
became  a  junior  high  school  when  they  built  the  new  Reno  High  School  on  Booth  Street. 

Did  you  finish  high  school  when  it  was  located  on  Fourth  Street? 

No,  1  was  a  part  of  the  first  class  that  graduated  from  the  new  Reno  High  School  on  Booth  Street. 

Did  you  go  on  to  college  after  graduating  from  Reno  High? 

Yes.  1  went  to  the  University  of  Nevada,  Reno,  and  got  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  education  and  later 
a  master’s  degree  in  education  and  public  administration. 

Did  you  receive  a  scholarship  to  go  to  the  University? 

1  got  what  was  known  in  those  days  as  the  Harolds  Club  Scholarship,  which  was  probably  the 
premier  scholarship  that  was  given  out  in  Nevada  at  that  time.  There  were  only  seventeen  high  schools  in 
the  state,  one  in  each  county,  and  basically  the  Smith  family  gave  a  scholarship  to  each  of  the  high 
schools  in  the  state,  and  I  was  the  recipient  of  one  of  them  when  1  graduated  from  Reno  High  School. 

What  year  did  you  graduate  from  the  University  of  Nevada? 

1  graduated  in  1956  with  my  bachelor’s  degree,  and  then  got  my  master’s  degree  in  1965. 

What  were  some  of  the  activities  you  participated  in  while  you  were  at  the  university? 

1  played  both  basketball  and  baseball  at  the  university.  1  lettered  four  years  in  baseball  and  three 
years  in  basketball,  and  my  coach  for  both  sports  was  Jake  Lawlor. 

Are  you  married,  Roger,  and  do  you  have  children? 

Yes,  I’m  manned  to  Gail  Altenburg.  She  is  from  Carson  City  and  we’ve  been  married  forty -six 
years.  We  have  three  children:  a  son  Steve,  a  daughter  Susan,  and  a  daughter  Catherine.  Susan  and  Steve 
live  here  in  Reno.  Our  daughter,  Catherine,  lives  in  Winnemucca.  Her  husband’s  a  veterinarian  there,  and 
he’s  from  a  long-time  ranching  family. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


495 


Where  was  your  first  position  when  you  got  out  of  college? 

My  first  teaching  job  was  at  Central  Junior  High  School,  which  was  the  old  Reno  High  that  was 
on  Fourth  Street.  1  taught  there  for  three  years — well,  two  years  teaching,  one  year  as  a  counselor.  Then 
my  fourth  year  I  decided  I  wanted  to  become  an  administrator,  so  1  thought  I’d  better  get  some  elementary 
school  experience.  I  taught  at  Peavine  Elementary  School  for  one  year,  and  then  the  next  year  I  became 
the  principal  of  Florence  Drake  Elementary  in  Sparks.  I  started  that  school  from  the  ground  up,  and  I  was 
there  for  eight  years.  Then  I  went  to  Hug  High  School  as  a  vice-principal. 

Was  that  your  last  teaching  and  administrative  job? 

Yes. 

Why  did  you  leave  the  education  field  to  go  to  work  for  the  State  of  Nevada? 

Some  friends  of  mine  in  town  asked  me  to  meet  them  in  their  office,  where  they  asked  me  if  I 
would  be  willing  to  talk  to  Governor-Elect  Mike  O’Callaghan  about  working  in  his  administration.  I  had 
never  met  the  man,  but  I  said,  “Sure,  I’d  be  happy  to  meet  with  him.”  So  a  few  days  later  they  came  by 
and  picked  me  up  and  we  went  to  a  basketball  game  at  Manogue  High  School,  where  Governor 
O’Callaghan’s  son  was  playing  on  the  junior  varsity  team.  At  halftime  we  went  in  one  of  the  classrooms 
and  we  visited  and  talked.  He  wanted  me  to  be  an  aide  on  his  staff.  I  later  called  him  and  told  him  I 
wasn’t  interested  in  going  into  politics  as  such;  he  then  asked  me  to  become  the  director  of  the 
Department  of  Human  Resources.  He  asked  me  to  come  to  Carson,  so  I  did  and  I  met  with  him  and  the 
then  Lieutenant  Governor-Elect  Harry  Reid.  I  then  agreed  to  become  the  director  of  the  Department  of 
Human  Resources,  which  at  that  time  entailed  welfare,  mental  health,  and  mental  retardation,  services  to 
the  blind,  all  youth  institutions,  the  health  department,  and  environmental  health.  It  was  the  largest 
department,  as  far  as  employees  were  concerned,  in  the  state. 

Who  were  the  people  that  recommended  you  to  Mr.  O’ Callaghan? 

They  were  Don  Carano,  Bob  McDonald,  and  Spike  Wilson,  who  were  attorneys,  and  Ed  Fuetsch, 
who  was  more  of  a  real  estate  man  as  opposed  to  an  attorney.  Those  were  the  four  that  I  met  with,  and  Ed 
Fuetsch  is  the  one  that  took  me  to  the  basketball  game  and  introduced  me  to  O’ Callaghan. 

Evidently,  their  opinion  was  highly  thought  of  by  Governor  O  ’Callaghan. 

Apparently  so.  They  had  also  helped  him  with  his  campaign.  O’Callaghan  also  called  Pete 
Echeverria,  who  was  a  good  friend  of  mine,  for  some  follow-up,  and  Pete  gave  me  a  good 
recommendation.  I’d  known  Pete  for  many,  many  years. 

How  long  did  you  stay  with  the  human  resources  department  ? 


I  had  been  the  director  of  the  Department  of  Human  Resources  for  six  and  a  half  years  when 


496 


Governor  O’ Callaghan  called  me  and  asked  me  to  come  to  his  office.  He  told  me  that  Phil  Hannifin  was 
not  feeling  well  and  was  going  to  have  to  leave  his  position  as  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control 
Board.  He  then  asked  me  if  I’d  be  interested  in  being  named  to  the  Board.  He  wanted  me  to  go  over  only 
if  I  was  interested.  He  wasn’t  going  to  force  me  to  go,  but  he  said,  “I’d  like  you  to  take  the  position,”  so  I 
told  him  that  I  would. 

Was  Mr.  Hannifin ’s  resignation  a  surprise  to  the  gaming  industry,  and  to  Governor  O  ’Callaghan? 

Well,  yes,  I  think  it  was.  There  were  several  people  that  knew  he  had  not  been  in  good  health, 
because  he’d  been  in  pretty  bad  health  for  a  while,  but  it  finally  got  to  the  point  where  he  was  really 
getting  quite  ill  and  was  losing  consciousness  and  passing  out  at  times.  So  he  decided  it  would  be  best  if 
he  stepped  away  from  the  pressure  that  comes  with  that  particular  position.  While  people  knew  he  was  ill, 
they  didn’t  realize  that  he  was  as  ill  as  he  was  and  that  he  would  ultimately  have  to  resign  from  the 
position. 

Had  you  ever  had  any  experience  working  in  the  gaming  industry? 

No.  No,  I  never  had.  But  the  only  qualification  that  O’Callaghan  wanted  from  me  was  honesty. 

He  said,  “I  just  want  somebody  that  will  do  a  good  job  and  that  will  be  honest.”  He  felt  I’d  proven  myself 
as  an  administrator  in  running  a  department  as  large  and  as  vast  as  the  Department  of  Human  Resources. 
What  he  wanted  was  an  administrator  to  run  the  Gaming  Control  Board  and  carry  it  forward.  The 
knowledge  of  the  gaming  side  of  it  per  se  was  something  that  he  said  I  could  learn  from  staff  members.  I 
would  have  to  rely  on  them  and  learn  it  the  best  way  I  could. 

Did  you  have  any  difficulty  becoming  familiar  with  the  gaming  business  and  its  regulatory  statutes? 

No,  although  I  spent  quite  a  bit  of  time  studying  it.  It’s  not  an  easy  task  to  be  able  to  take  an  entire 
N.R.S.  section  and  learn  it  and  spend  time  on  it,  particularly  when  you  don’t  have  a  lot  of  personal 
background  in  it.  But  once  I  got  into  it  and  started  reviewing  some  of  the  cases  and  studying  the  law  and 
that  sort  of  thing,  then  I  gradually  picked  it  up  and  I  got  into  it  quite  well.  At  that  point  the  two  colleagues 
I  had  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board  were  Jeff  Silver  and  Jack  Stratton,  and  I  just  think  the  world  of  both 
of  those  men.  I  think  their  talents  and  their  honesty  were  impeccable  and  they  were  a  great  help  to  me. 

Did  you  get  any  assistance  from  the  attorney  general  or  deputy  attorney  generals? 

The  chief  deputy  attorney  general  assigned  to  gaming  at  that  time  was  Bud  Hicks.  Bud,  who  was 
an  outstanding  attorney,  had  done  a  great  deal  of  work  with  the  Gaming  Control  Board  during  Phil 
Hannifm’s  reign,  and  he  was  a  big  help.  I  enjoyed  working  with  him  very  much.  He’s  a  very 
knowledgeable  and  straightforward  guy.  I  really  enjoy  that.  He  was  probably  the  biggest  help  I  had  in  the 
initial  transition  period. 

Did  Governor  O  ’Callaghan  ever  interfere  with  or  get  involved  with  the  business  of  the  Gaming  Board? 


He  never  called  me  on  a  gaming  issue.  When  I  was  the  director  of  Department  of  Human 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


491 


Resources  he  would  call  me  at  various  times  to  ask  about  something  that  was  going  on  at  a  certain 
hospital  or  mental  health  program  or  a  youth  institution  program.  But  after  1  became  chairman  of  the 
Gaming  Control  Board,  he  never  called  me  once  to  come  over  and  discuss  anything  with  him.  1  did  go  to 
him  with  one  issue,  however.  1  took  it  to  his  attention  when  1  was  first  going  through  the  files,  but  that 
was  something  1  took  to  him;  it  wasn’t  anything  that  he  called  me  on.  He  would  always  tell  people  that 
would  ask  him  for  an  appointment  about  gaming  issues,  “I’ve  got  a  commission  and  a  gaming  control 
board  and  1  let  them  do  their  business.”  He  never  did  get  involved  in  any  of  our  issues. 

That  speaks  very  highly  of  him. 

It  does.  The  only  time  he  would  get  involved  was  when  there  was  a  state  policy  gaming  board 
meeting.  He  chairs  that  board  that’s  made  up  of  people  in  the  industry  and  regulators,  both  the 
Commission  and  the  Gaming  Control  Board.  We  would  meet  once  or  twice  a  year  to  discuss  gaming 
policy  and  some  of  the  things  that  needed  to  be  done.  That  was  the  only  direct  involvement  that  1  ever 
experienced  from  Governor  O’ Callaghan. 

Was  that  true  of  all  governors,  or  did  you  have  a  different  experience  with  other  governors? 

1  had  a  different  experience  with  Governor  List.  Governor  List  was  on  the  phone  a  great  deal  with 
me  after  he  was  elected  governor,  and  his  involvement  with  gaming  issues  was  much  more  active.  It 
eventually  got  to  a  difficult  point  in  my  chairmanship  when  he  started  bypassing  me  to  go  directly  to  the 
Las  Vegas  board  member,  Richard  Bunker.  He  was  cutting  me  out  of  the  loop,  because  some  of  the  things 
that  they  wanted  to  do  1  just  didn’t  think  were  right.  He  started  bypassing  me  consistently  as  the  term 
went  along. 

Roger,  let ’s  discuss  that  situation  more  in  depth  later  on  in  the  interview  when  we  get  into  another 
licensing  situation. 

During  your  tenure  were  there  situations  where  the  casino  operators  felt  that  the  Gaming  Control 
Board  was  their  adversary? 

Yes.  1  think  there  was  some  feeling  from  some  properties  that  the  Gaming  Control  Board  was 
their  adversary.  1  don’t  know  all  the  history  of  the  Gaming  Control  Boards  that  were  prior  to  when  1  was 
there,  but  1  do  know  that  the  Gaming  Control  Board  that  was  chaired  by  Phil  Hannifin  was  very  active. 
Also,  their  accounting  department  and  the  enforcement  department  became  very  active  in  the  business, 
much  more  so  than  they  had  been  previously,  by  passing  new  accounting  regulations  and  making  it  much 
more  difficult  to  do  some  of  the  things  that  had  taken  place  previously.  That  created  more  of  an 
adversarial  situation,  not  in  the  sense  that  they  were  constantly  at  each  other,  because  no  matter  how  you 
look  at  it,  as  a  Gaming  Control  Board  member  you  are  not  only  a  regulator,  but  you’re  also  a  partner, 
because  the  taxes  that  you  collect  belong  to  the  state. 

You  can’t  be  so  heavy-handed  with  gaming  regulations  that  you  get  to  the  point  where  it  hurts  the 
industry,  because  the  state  is  very  dependent  on  that  revenue.  There’s  a  fine  line  that  you  have  to  walk, 
because  if  you  don’t  have  a  good  regulatory  scheme,  then  you  don’t  have  a  good  industry.  That’s  the 
scheme  that  the  Hannifin  regime  came  up  with,  and  we  continued  to  follow  it  up.  So  there  was  some 
adversarial  feeling  when  we  started  pushing  regulations  and  having  hearings  on  regulations  that  we  were 


498 


going  to  put  forward.  There  were  people  that  thought  we  were  going  to  kill  the  industry  as  we  were 
constantly  pushing  new  regulations  to  try  and  tighten  up  some  of  the  loopholes  that  we  had  recognized, 
but  not  to  the  point  where  we  snuffed  out  the  industry  at  the  same  time.  So,  yes,  there  were  some 
adversarial  feelings  at  times  between  some  members  of  the  industry  and  the  board. 

Did  you  try  to  establish  a  better  working  relationship  between  the  operators  and  the  Board? 

Yes.  We  started  having  more  public  meetings  where  we  would  propose  a  regulation,  and  we  had 
public  hearings  where  we  would  allow  the  industry  to  make  comments  about  our  proposed  regulations  so 
that  they  would  have  some  input  into  them.  Then  we  would  draft  up  the  final  regulation  and  present  it  to 
the  Commission,  and  that  is  when  they  would  have  to  make  their  decision.  They  would  hear  our 
presentation  of  what  we  wanted  in  a  regulation  and  hear  if  the  industry  felt  that  we  were  going  too  far.  It 
was  at  that  public  hearing  the  regulation  would  become  a  final  act  and  a  true  regulation  if  the  Commission 
voted  for  it. 

Did  a  lot  of  casinos  and  a  lot  of  operators  realize  that  without  a  good  regulatory  system  their  business 
couldn ’t  exist? 

Very  many  did.  Because  at  that  time  Nevada  casino  operators  were  at  a  point  where  they  could 
not  get  financing  for  expansion  and  the  development  of  their  casinos,  because  the  banks  were  very 
reluctant  to  put  money  into  casinos,  and  neither  would  the  insurance  companies.  Casinos  had  not  really 
gone  into  the  public  sector  as  publicly-traded  companies  to  any  great  extent  because  of  the  distrust  of  the 
people  at  the  SEC — and  other  public  sectors — about  the  gaming  industry.  We  recognized,  and  many 
casinos  recognized,  that  we  needed  to  have  a  high  degree  of  credibility.  We  had  to  show  that  the  industry 
was  regulated  and  controlled  and  that  we  had  gotten  the  undesirable  elements  out  of  the  industry.  We  had 
to  show  we  were  getting  the  mob  out  of  the  industry  so  that  we  could  go  out  and  encourage  financing  to 
come  in  in  order  to  expand  and  develop  new  casinos.  We  did  have  a  good  deal  of  support  from  many  of 
the  people  in  the  industry  because  they  recognized  that  the  only  way  they  were  going  to  be  able  to  grow 
and  develop  their  properties  was  if  they  could  get  public  money.  At  that  time  that  source  of  revenue 
wasn’t  available  to  them  because  the  financial  world  was  afraid  of  the  gaming  industry’s  involvement 
with  the  mob  and  other  unsavory  elements  in  the  state. 

I’ve  heard  Bill  Harrah  was  a  staunch  advocate  of  gaming  regulation. 

Very  much  so.  He  was  one  of  the  real  strong  advocates  of  gaming  regulations.  Jackie  Gaughan  in 
Las  Vegas  was  a  real  proponent  of  pushing  for  stronger  regulations.  John  Ascuaga  was  a  big  proponent  of 
pushing  regulations,  but  Bill  Harrah  certainly  was  one  of  the  leaders  in  pushing  for  strong  regulations. 
There  was  a  lot  of  support  from  the  industry  as  a  whole  to  support  what  we  were  trying  to  do:  setting  up 
some  regulations  so  that  we  could  honestly  go  to  the  business  community  and  say,  “Hey,  we  are  a  highly- 
regulated  and  a  legitimate  business.” 

If  I  understood  you  correctly,  you  believe  that  the  entire  philosophy  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  started 
to  change  during  Phil  Hannifin ’s  reign,  and  you  continued  that  philosophy  during  your  tenure. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


499 


Yes,  it  started  with  Governor  O’ Callaghan.  He  wanted  to  follow  up  on  what  he  thought  the 
previous  governors  had  done.  Grant  Sawyer  certainly  got  the  system  well  on  its  way  and  Governor  Laxalt 
had  taken  another  step  toward  getting  some  things  done.  But  when  O’ Callaghan  came  in  he  made  it  a 
priority  that  he  was  not  going  to  allow  gaming  to  just  drift  along  without  some  very  strong  regulatory 
schemes.  The  push  that  we  got  as  his  appointee  was  that  he  wanted  a  strong  regulatory  system  to  control 
the  gaming  industry.  Phil  Hannifin  was  his  first  appointee,  and  when  Phil  got  ill,  1  was  his  next  appointee, 
and  we  carried  it  through.  O’Callaghan  wanted  tighter  regulations.  He  disagreed  with  previous  governors 
about  how  Howard  Hughes  was  licensed.  We  have  a  policy,  not  a  regulation,  that  any  licensee  who  wants 
a  license  must  appear  in  person  when  he  gets  licensed  before  the  Commission,  but  Howard  Hughes  was 
never  required  to  appear  in  person.  Governor  O’ Callaghan  disagreed  with  that  and  said  he  personally 
wanted  to  see  Howard  Hughes — to  see  that  he  was  alive,  to  see  that  he  was  in  control,  and  that  he  had  the 
mental  capability  to  be  able  to  control,  because  at  that  point  he  owned  quite  a  few  casinos.  1  don’t  know 
how  many  casinos  were  under  his  control  at  that  time,  but  a  good  number  of  them,  and  he  was  growing  all 
the  time.  When  O’Callaghan  took  office  he  stated  that  he  personally  wanted  to  know  that  Howard  Hughes 
was  in  fact  living,  in  control  of  his  faculties  and  able  to  control  the  dynasty  he’d  built  in  Las  Vegas.  That 
was  when  O’ Callaghan  and  Phil  Hannifin  went  to  London  and  met  with  Howard  Hughes  privately. 

Do  you  feel  that  Governor  Paul  Laxalt  was  perhaps  a  little  lax  in  not  demanding  Hughes  to  appear,  or  do 
you  feel  that  Mr.  Laxalt  felt  it  was  more  important  to  get  a  good  clean  image  into  the  gaming  business? 

Well,  1  think  he  was  caught  on  the  horns  of  that  particular  dilemma  you  just  described.  He  wanted 
him  in  because  he  obviously  brought  in  the  image  of  a  legitimate,  well-known,  respected  businessman  to 
the  community  as  opposed  to  the  image  that  only  gangsters  were  involved  in  gaming.  Governor  Laxalt 
obviously  had  to  let  policies  slide  and  to  say  that  he  would  let  Hughes  go  ahead.  But  when  O’ Callaghan 
came  in  he  just  felt  that  it  had  to  be  settled  permanently  and  take  some  steps  toward  closing  some  of  the 
loopholes. 

It  worked  out  OK  because  Laxalt  did  allow  him  to  come  in,  and  then  Mike  O’ Callaghan  steps  in 
and  locks  the  door  and  makes  sure  that  he  is  a  real  person  and  that  he  was  in  fact  in  control.  The  concern 
everyone  had  was,  “Who  is  in  fact  running  the  Hughes’s  empire?”  Was  he  in  fact  in  control?  Were  his 
mental  capabilities  such  that  he  was  in  charge,  or  was  he  just  a  shadow  of  his  former  self?  Laxalt  got 
Hughes  in  there  without  having  the  lid  closed,  but  O’Callaghan  came  in,  closed  the  lid  and  said  yes.  He 
felt  comfortable  that  Hughes  in  fact  was  the  man  in  charge. 

It  goes  back  to  the  problem  that  they  were  having  in  the  gaming  industry  of  not  being  able  to  get 
public  money  to  put  into  the  business  in  order  to  expand  and  do  the  things  they  wanted.  Hughes  brought 
that  money  and  he  brought  the  reputation  of  a  legitimate  businessman,  which  opened  up  the  avenues  to 
banks  and  investment  bankers.  When  you  start  getting  a  legitimate  businessman  like  Howard  Hughes  to 
come  into  the  industry,  it  makes  it  a  different  environment  completely. 

You  were  a  chairman  during  an  especially  troublesome  time  with  casino  scandals  happening  in  the 
Tropicana,  the  Aladdin,  and  the  Argent’s  four  properties:  the  Stardust,  the  Marina,  the  Hacienda,  and  the 
Fremont.  Let’s  talk  about  the  Tropicana  for  a  while.  In  September  of  1977,  shortly  after  you  became 
chairman,  a  millionaire  oil  man  from  Whittier,  California,  Jack  Urich,  wanted  to  loan  the  Tropicana 
Hotel  1.5  million  dollars.  Would  you  tell  us  about  that  request  and  the  Board’s  decision  on  that  matter? 


500 


Well,  the  Tropicana  was  a  troubled  property.  There  was  always  suspicion  that  their  money  was 
going  out  the  back  door  and  that  an  undesirable  element  was  taking  money  out  of  it.  There  was  an 
uneasiness  about  the  Tropicana  and  its  financial  condition.  Then  Mitzi  Stauffer  [Briggs]  came  in  and  put 
a  considerable  amount  of  her  own  personal  money  into  the  operation;  she  was  just  pouring  money  in 
there.  She  had  no  experience  in  gaming,  and  the  gaming  control  people  felt  like  that  she  was  just  pouring 
money  in  there  not  knowing  really  what  she  was  doing.  Well,  at  that  time  the  gaming  control  people 
started  spending  quite  a  bit  of  time  at  the  Tropicana,  and  discovered  there  were  not  enough  funds  there  to 
meet  the  bankroll  requirements.  Urich  came  along  at  that  point,  and  no  one  knows  who  made  the  initial 
contact  with  him,  whether  it  was  Mitzi  Briggs  or  whether  it  was  other  members  of  management;  however, 
he  did  want  to  put  money  into  the  operation.  We  found  out  later  that  he  had  previously  put  some  money 
into  the  operation  without  our  approval,  which  is  illegal.  And  when  we  held  the  hearing  on  his  request  to 
loan  money,  we  found  enough  things  that  were  undesirable  as  far  as  his  business  competence,  that  we  did 
not  support  his  request. 

Another  member  of  that  organization  was  a  gentleman  by  the  name  of  Deil  Gustafson,  who  was  a 
real  estate  man  from  the  Minneapolis  area  who  had  made  quite  a  reputation  for  himself  in  many  big  real 
estate  dealings.  He  was  also  a  guy  that — 1  won’t  say  that  he  was  crooked — would  always  cut  comers  on 
his  business  deals,  and  so  we  never  looked  at  him  as  a  real  viable  person  to  come  in  and  run  the  business. 
We  also  didn’t  know  how  he  appeared  on  the  scene.  These  people  with  money  just  kept  showing  up  and 
putting  money  into  it,  and  we  didn’t  know  where  they  were  coming  from.  Who  had  made  the  initial 
contacts?  Who  was  running  the  Tropicana?  And,  of  course,  we  always  felt  that  Joe  Agosto9  was  the 
mob’s  representative  in  there.  He  never  got  any  publicity  of  any  kind,  and  was  pretty  much  a  guy  that 
played  in  the  background,  but  we  felt  very  sure  that  he  was  the  guy  that  was  pushing  the  buttons  for  the 
mob  in  that  operation.  Although  he  said  that  he  was  not  involved  in  the  gaming,  he  was  involved  in  the 
Folies  Bergere  show  there  and  he  was  the  man  that  we  suspected  all  along  was  running  the  operation. 

To  get  back  to  Urich,  after  the  Gaming  Board  recommended  denial  for  the  loan  that  Urich  wanted  to 
make  to  the  Tropicana,  did  the  Commission  agree? 

When  our  recommendation  went  to  the  Commission  they  overturned  us  on  a  three-to-two  vote, 
which  is  not  the  way  a  recommendation  from  the  Gaming  Control  Board  is  overturned  by  law  or  by 
regulation.  By  law  it  must  be  a  unanimous  vote  of  the  Commission.  But  the  chairman  [Harry  Reid]  said  at 
that  time  that  it  was  an  emergency  situation  and  the  loan  had  to  be  okayed  in  order  to  keep  the  facility 
open.  So  based  on  what  the  chairman  felt  was  an  emergency  at  the  casino,  he  was  going  to  allow  a  three- 
to-two  vote  to  go  through.  At  that  point  1  felt  that  we  needed  to  try  and  protect  the  integrity  of  the  gaming 
regulation,  and  so  1  asked  for  some  clarification  from  the  attorney  general’s  office  as  to  what  constitutes 
an  “emergency.”  The  attorney  general  felt  that  this  situation  was  not  that  much  of  an  emergency  per  se, 
and  fell  back  on  the  definition  of  emergency.  It  was  discussed  that  at  the  next  session  of  the  legislature  it 
would  have  to  be  addressed  as  to  what  an  emergency  actually  is.  So  we  had  a  disagreement  between  the 
Board  and  the  Commission.  We  felt  that  it  was  not  an  emergency;  they  did.  It  should  have  taken  a  five-to- 
zero  vote  to  overturn  us,  but  a  three-to-two  vote  did  go  through  and  the  money  did  go  into  the  operation. 
Subsequent  to  that,  we  called  Mr.  Urich  in  for  licensing,  as  he  wanted  to  come  in  as  a  fifty  percent  owner 
of  the  operation.  At  that  time  we  did  a  full-fledged  investigation  on  him,  conducted  our  hearing,  and  we 


9  Agosto  was  entered  in  the  “Black  Book”  in  1979. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


501 


recommended  denial.  That  denial  was  upheld  by  the  Commission  and  Mr.  Urich  was  not  allowed  to  come 
into  the  operation. 

You  mentioned  earlier  that  the  two  major  owners  of  the  Tropicana  at  that  time  were  Mitzi  Briggs  and 
Deil  Gustafson,  but  that  Joe  Agosto  was  controlling  the  operation.  Did  the  Board  eventually  call  Mr. 
Agosto  up  for  licensing? 

Y es,  we  did,  and  it  became  a  major  problem  trying  to  get  him  to  come  forward  for  licensing.  He 
consistently  held  the  fact  that  he  was  not  involved  in  gaming,  he  was  involved  in  other  parts  of  the 
operation,  whether  it  be  the  Folies  Bergere,  the  food  and  beverage  operation,  or  whatever  it  might  be.  We 
had  to  go  through  quite  a  bit  before  getting  him  to  come  in  and  put  in  his  application  for  licensing.  It 
became  pretty  much  of  an  all-out  effort.  We  didn’t  have  any  substantial  proof  of  his  involvement  in  the 
operation  until  at  one  point  we  heard  a  tape  that  the  U.S.  Attorney’s  office  brought  into  our  Las  Vegas 
office.  Jeff  Silver  [fellow  board  member]  and  1  listened  to  the  tape  that  the  attorney  general  brought  in, 
and  it  was  Joe  Agosto  talking  to  the  Civella  brothers  [Carl  and  Nick],  along  with  a  businessman  in  Las 
Vegas  by  the  name  of  Carl  Thomas,  who  at  that  time  was  manager  of  the  Bingo  Palace  [later  to  become 
Palace  Station],  They  were  sitting  in  a  restaurant  in  Kansas  City  talking  about  how  to  rip  off  the  count 
room  of  a  gaming  operation. 

Did  this  come  up  while  Agosto  was  being  investigated  for  his  application? 

It  was  while  we  were  trying  to  call  him  up  for  licensing.  Long  after  we  had  said  to  him,  “Y ou 
must  come  forward  for  licensing,”  he  and  his  attorneys  were  arguing  with  us  that  he  did  not  have  to  come 
in  for  licensing.  It  was  during  that  process  that  the  U.S.  attorney  came  in  and  brought  this  tape  to  us. 

We  soon  initiated  a  joint  operation  between  the  Gaming  Control  Board  and  the  FBI.  The  FBI  had  never 
worked  hand-in-hand  very  much  with  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  but  on  this  one  instance  Jim  Powers, 
who  was  the  head  of  the  FBI  in  Nevada,  called  me  and  asked  me  if  I  could  come  to  Las  Vegas  and  meet 
with  him,  and  1  did.  He  then  asked  if  we  could  have  a  member  of  our  Gaming  Control  Board  accounting 
staff,  who  was  very  familiar  with  the  cage  operation  there,  be  involved  in  a  hit  that  they  were  going  to 
make  at  the  cage  at  the  Tropicana.  1  assigned  a  Gaming  Control  Board  agent,  George  Tsacayonis,  who 
was  the  head  of  our  accounting  and  audit  department.  His  assignment  was  to  work  with  the  FBI  agents 
when  they  went  in  and  took  over  the  cage.  He  had  just  headed  up  the  audit  that  was  done  at  the  Tropicana 
and  was  very  familiar  with  the  process  and  the  procedures  that  the  operation  followed,  and  he  knew  where 
they  kept  all  of  their  transaction  forms  and  that  sort  of  thing.  George  and  1  were  the  only  two  who  knew  of 
our  involvement  in  the  operation.  1  didn’t  include  other  board  members  and  1  didn’t  include  other  staff 
members.  It  was  just  the  two  of  us,  and  George  met  privately  with  the  FBI  on  what  his  role  was  to  be.  The 
Civella  group  had  a  courier  who  had  left  Kansas  City  to  come  to  Las  Vegas.  He  then  had  gone  to  the 
Tropicana,  picked  up  some  money,  put  it  in  a  briefcase  and  then  gone  back  to  the  airport.  The  minute  that 
the  airplane  was  airborne  the  FBI  and  George  went  in  and  seized  the  cage  and  attached  all  of  the  records. 
The  FBI  in  Kansas  City  arrested  the  courier  as  he  got  off  the  plane  with  the  money  that  was  in  the 
briefcase.  It  took  years  before  that  case  came  to  trial  and  before  the  Civellas  were  finally  convicted.  But  it 
all  came  about  because  of  a  working  relationship  that  1  personally  had  with  Jim  Powers.  The  FBI  and 
gaming  had  never  really  worked  together  very  well  in  the  past,  and  the  FBI  seldom  got  involved  with  us. 


502 


How  much  did  that  fellow  have  in  his  briefcase  when  he  got  off  the  plane? 

I  may  have  been  told,  but  1  don’t  recall  how  much  actual  cash  he  had  in  the  briefcase. 

Did  the  FBI  take  the  money  back  to  the  Tropicana,  or  what  happened  to  it? 

Whatever  transpired  there  in  the  U.S.  Attorney’s  office  as  to  how  they  were  going  to  take  care  of 
that,  we  weren’t  involved  in.  I  don’t  recall  if  Bud  Hicks,  our  attorney  general  at  that  time,  was  involved 
with  the  U.S.  Attorney’s  office,  but  we  had  no  further  dealings  with  it. 

Was  Agosto  eventually  forced  out  of  the  Tropicana? 

Yes,  when  we  got  started  getting  all  this  information  then,  we  were  able  to  get  Joe  Agosto  out  of 
the  operation  at  the  Tropicana. 

During  Agosto ’s  investigation  he  stated  in  a  taped  conversation  that  he  had  control  over  a  member  of  the 
Nevada  Gaming  Commission.  Would  you  tell  us  your  recollections  of  that  incident? 

Mr.  Agosto  made  reference  to  the  fact  that  he  had  a  man  he  called  “Clean  Face”  as  someone  that 
he  could  control,  and  Clean  Face  represented  Harry  Reid,  who  was  the  chairman  of  the  Commission.  I 
think  the  reason  he  made  that  inference  was  because  Harry  Reid  was  a  law  partner  with  an  attorney  by  the 
name  of  Jay  Brown,  and  Jay  Brown  represented  Joe  Agosto.  But  when  Harry  Reid  became  chairman  of 
the  Gaming  Commission  they  separated  their  law  practice.  Harry  Reid  went  out  on  his  own  and  Jay 
Brown  stayed.  But  the  reference  was  made,  however,  that,  “Don’t  worry,  we’ve  got  Clean  Face  and  we’re 
able  to  control  him.” 

Was  Harry  Reid  eventually  cleared  of  any  wrongdoing? 

Yes.  The  FBI  and  the  U.S.  Attorney’s  office  followed  up  on  the  accusation,  and  they  determined 
that  it  was  just  a  bragging  statement  that  Joe  Agosto  had  made  and  that  there  was  no  substance  to  the  fact 
that  Reid  could  be  controlled. 

Was  Mr.  Agosto  eventually  entered  into  the  “Black  Book?  ” 

Yes,  he  was.  We  had  a  hearing  and  did  introduce  him  into  membership  in  the  “Black  Book”  club. 

What  became  of  the  Tropicana  owners,  Briggs  and  Gustafson? 

They  got  out  when  the  two  Doumani  brothers  bought  the  property.  But  we  were  never 
comfortable  with  the  Doumani  brothers,  either.  The  Tropicana  never  really  got  in  a  strong  position;  they 
were  always  struggling  to  make  it.  They  were  constantly  fighting  the  fact  that  they  couldn’t  keep  their 
bankroll  up,  and  it  was  always  a  struggling  property.  When  the  two  Doumani  brothers  wanted  to  come  in 
we  were  not  comfortable  with  them  as  operators;  however,  we  could  not  find  any  reason  to  deny  them. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


503 


The  Aladdin  also  had  a  long  history >  of  regulatory  problems  prior  to  and  even  after  your  tenure.  Would 
you  give  us  a  little  background  on  some  of  the  Aladdin ’s  problems? 

Yes,  my  best  recollection  on  the  Aladdin  is  that  the  Gaming  Control  Board  under  Phil  Hannifin 
felt  pretty  certain  that  there  was  mob  influence  in  the  operation  of  the  Aladdin,  and  there  were  several 
people  that  were  the  mob’s  representatives  in  the  Aladdin.  Sorkis  Webbe,  Richard  Daley,  and  James 
Tamer  were  people  that  were  all  affiliated  one  way  or  another  with  the  mob,  and  the  Board  felt  very 
uncomfortable  that  they  were  in  there.  The  Board  started  the  process  of  trying  to  zero  in  on  them  and  get 
them  to  the  point  where  they  were  no  longer  involved  in  the  gaming  operation.  The  first  move  that  we  had 
to  make  on  that  was  to  call  those  people  in  for  licensing.  When  we  called  James  Tamer  in  for  licensing, 
that  created  quite  a  stir,  because  he  said  he  had  no  part  of  the  gaming  operation,  that  he  was  the  man  that 
dealt  with  entertainment  and  some  other  things.  They  had  a  big  theater  there  called  The  Aladdin  Theatre 
for  the  Performing  Arts.  The  theater  had  become  quite  a  scandal  because  it  had  had  a  huge  construction 
cost  overrun.  The  Board  felt  like  the  construction  company  also  had  some  mob  ties,  so  that  whole  thing 
was  very  murky  and  muddy.  When  we  started  bringing  those  individuals  up  for  licensing,  we  eventually 
got  to  the  point  where  we  had  to  go  in  and  take  over  the  operation  of  the  Aladdin.  We  put  our  man,  Leo 
Lewis,  in  there  to  run  the  operation  during  this  interim  period  while  we  were  trying  to  get  new  ownership 
to  come  in  and  take  over  the  Aladdin.  Subsequently  while  Leo  was  running  that  operation,  we  again 
called  Tamer  in  for  licensing  and  found  him  to  be  an  undesirable  person.  We  also  had  a  hearing  where  we 
announced  that  we  were  not  getting  any  cooperation  from  the  current  ownership  of  the  Aladdin  in  their 
effort  to  find  new  owners  to  come  in  and  replace  them  as  they  had  been  ordered  to  do.  We  wanted  to  shut 
the  place  down,  “we”  being  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  but  we  needed  the  approval  of  the  Commission. 

We  had  scheduled  a  hearing  before  the  Commission,  but  we  were  not  certain  they  would  support 
our  recommendation.  We  called  in  our  department  heads  and  our  various  division  chiefs,  because  we 
would  have  to  use  every  gaming  agent  we  had  available,  both  from  the  north  and  the  south  if  we  went  in 
to  close  it.  The  only  people  that  we  brought  into  the  planning  meeting  were,  however,  our  division  chiefs, 
and  we  said,  “We  cannot  let  the  information  leak  out  that  we  are  trying  to  close  this  place,  because  if  we 
do  it  will  create  a  real  problem.”  After  we  laid  out  our  attack  on  how  we  were  going  to  conduct  the 
closing  of  the  Aladdin,  we  had  our  chiefs  put  all  of  the  agents  into  busses  and  had  them  riding  around  in 
busses  while  we  conducted  the  hearing.  We  were  afraid  one  of  our  agents  might  leak  something  about, 
“Well,  we’re  going  to  go  down  and  close  the  Aladdin.”  The  minute  we  got  the  vote  from  the  Gaming 
Commission  that  said  yes,  they  were  going  to  support  our  recommendation  for  closure,  we  radioed  our 
chiefs  who  were  riding  in  those  busses  and  told  them  to  go  in  and  seize  the  operation.  And  they  did.  Our 
man,  Leo  Lewis,  who  was  the  general  manager,  was  not  aware  of  what  we  were  going  to  do.  When  he 
came  up  to  me  after  the  vote  he  said,  “What’s  happening  now?” 

1  said,  “Leo,  we’re  already  doing  it.  We’re  closing  your  place  down  right  now.”  He  took  off  and 
went  down  to  the  Aladdin.  Then  the  Gaming  Control  Board  with  Ray  Pike,  who  at  that  time  was  our 
deputy  attorney  general,  went  to  the  Aladdin  and  went  up  to  the  executive  offices.  Then  the  four  of  us, 
three  board  members  and  the  deputy  attorney  general,  got  to  the  front  door,  but  only  two  people  went  into 
Sorkis  Webbe’s  office.  Ray  Pike,  who  was  the  deputy  A.G.  [attorney  general],  and  1  went  in  and  told 
Sorkis  Webbe  that  we  were  downstairs  closing  his  place.  And  the  man  lost  it,  he  started  frothing  at  the 
mouth.  We  got  some  water  for  him  and  told  him  to  “Back  off.  Cool  it.”  1  don’t  know  what  he  thought  was 


504 


going  to  happen  to  him  personally,  but  he  literally  fell  apart.  We  then  closed  the  operation  down.  We  had 
our  gaming  agents  go  in  and  seize  the  cage,  we  sealed  off  all  the  slot  machines,  took  all  the  hanks  off  the 
tables,  and  started  taking  money  out  of  the  slot  machines,  and  putting  it  in  the  cage.  We  let  the  hotel 
operation  and  the  food  operations  continue,  but  the  gaming  was  closed  down. 

How  long  did  it  stay  down? 

Only  for  twenty-four  hours,  because  we  got  a  restraining  order  from  Judge  Harry  Claiborne 
telling  us  that  we  could  not  close  it  down,  and  so  we  had  to  open  it  up  again.  We  told  Leo  to  go  back  in 
there  and  run  it,  and  we  went  through  the  process  then  of  getting  the  current  owners  out  of  the  Aladdin. 

Did  Sorkis  Webbe  go  back  into  his  office? 

No,  we  had  he  and  his  people  vacate  the  property.  The  man  who  was  functioning  as  the  general 
manager  was  a  gaming  man  with  a  pretty  good  reputation  so  he  stayed  on  as  the  general  manager,  but  Leo 
Lewis  called  all  the  shots.  There  were  a  lot  of  people  in  Las  Vegas  that  came  to  this  man’s  defense, 
stating  that  he  was  a  good  man,  and  that  he  was  not  involved  with  Webbe  and  the  others.  Eventually  he 
was  cleared  and  was  allowed  to  continue  working  in  the  industry.  But  for  several  years  he  was  not  able  to 
work  in  the  industry  because  of  his  associations.  We  felt  that  he  knew  who  was  running  that  place,  and 
these  people  were  not  people  that  were  licensed  to  be  operators.  He  should  not  have  been  listening  to 
them. 

After  H any  Claiborne  ruled  that  the  Aladdin  must  be  reopened ,  was  his  decision  contested  by  anyone? 

Y es,  we  contested  it,  but  at  the  same  time  we  felt  that  we  had  gotten  our  point  across  that  we 
wanted  these  people  out,  and  we  would  go  so  far  as  to  close  the  place  if  necessary.  However,  we  were 
aware  we  were  putting  a  lot  of  people  out  of  work  by  closing  it,  so  we  allowed  it  to  continue  operating 
under  the  control  of  Leo  Lewis  and  try  and  get  new  owners  in  there  to  clean  out  the  people  that  were  no 
longer  wanted  in  the  state.  When  we  closed  the  Aladdin  it  was  a  decision  we  thought  about  long  and  hard. 
But  the  current  owners  and  operators  were  not  trying  to  find  an  owner,  and  so  we  just  wanted  to  get  our 
point  across.  We  felt  we  had  reached  the  point  where  tax  revenue  and  jobs  became  secondary  to  the  fact 
that  we  had  to  exert  the  authority  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  because  of  the  bigger  picture.  What  we 
were  trying  to  do  was  tell  the  world,  the  business  community  and  the  banking  community,  that  we  do,  in 
fact,  control  gaming  in  Nevada.  It’s  not  run  by  whoever  wants  to  run  it.  We  were  caught  in  the  throes  of 
trying  to  still  meet  that  goal  of  letting  the  world  know  that  gaming  was  being  controlled  in  Nevada,  and 
still  protecting  jobs  and  revenue  for  the  state.  When  we  felt  we’d  been  pushed  to  the  point  where  we  had 
no  choice,  we  had  to  shut  them  down  in  order  to  get  our  point  across.  And  it  worked. 

Who  eventually  purchased  the  Aladdin? 

Ed  Torres.  He  formed  a  partnership  with  entertainer  Wayne  Newton,  and  they  came  in  and 
bought  the  Aladdin  in  order  to  keep  it  going  and  to  get  the  unsavory  element  out  of  there.  Later  that 
relationship  really  got  quite  ugly,  but  that  is  another  matter.  But  as  far  as  who  got  the  undesirable  people 
out,  it  was  Ed  Torres  and  Wayne  Newton. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


505 


In  1978  several  major  hotel-casinos,  including  the  MGM,  Circus  Circus,  and  Sahara  Reno,  opened  in 
Reno.  Did  so  many  casino  openings  in  such  a  short  period  of  time  present  a  workload  problem  for  the 
staff  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board? 

Y es,  we  had  to  pull  people  from  some  of  the  other  departments  in  order  to  conduct  investigations 
of  the  gaming  people.  Now,  one  advantage  we  had  was  that  many  of  the  people  that  went  to  work  at  the 
MGM  and  some  of  the  other  properties  had  worked  in  the  industry  before,  so  they  were  not  newcomers  to 
us.  We  had  some  recollection  of  who  they  were  and  had  some  knowledge  of  their  backgrounds.  It  wasn’t 
like  we  had  to  go  chasing  these  candidates  all  across  the  country,  or  even  internationally,  as  you  do  with 
some  applicants.  Most  people  that  went  to  work  in  management  positions  at  those  expanded  casinos  were 
people  that  were  already  in  the  industry  here  in  Nevada.  And  so  the  investigation  wasn’t  as  complex  as 
some  of  them  get  to  be.  It  was  all  done  pretty  much  right  here  within  the  state. 

And,  of  course,  most  of  the  new  properties  were  already  operating  casinos  in  Las  Vegas. 

Yes.  And  when  you  have  people  like  Glen  Neely  and  Jack  Pieper,  people  that  have  been  in  the 
industry  for  many  years,  and  have  always  had  good  reputations,  it  makes  it  easier.  There  never  had  been 
any  cause  of  concern  for  their  backgrounds  or  their  associations.  And  so  the  investigations,  while  they  did 
go  through  them,  and  did  all  the  financial  backgrounds  and  all  that,  it  wasn’t  like  the  Urich  investigation 
that  we  mentioned  earlier.  1  mean,  we  had  to  chase  this  guy  all  over  the  world.  He  had  business  dealings 
all  over. 


In  May  of  1978  there  was  another  problem,  the  Argent  Corporation.  The  Board  fded  a  complaint  stating 
that  half  a  million  dollars  had  been  siphoned  from  the  race  and  sportsbook  of  the  Stardust  and  Fremont 
Hotels.  What  rulings  did  the  Commission  make  on  this  case? 

We  immediately  took  our  case  to  the  Commission.  Now,  the  difference  between  this  and  a 
licensing  situation  is  that  in  a  licensing  we  conduct  a  hearing,  a  full-blown  hearing,  and  we  come  to  a 
decision,  on  the  licensing  of  an  individual,  and  that  goes  forward  as  a  recommendation  to  the 
Commission.  To  overturn  our  recommendation  takes  a  unanimous  vote  of  the  Commission.  So  it  has  to  be 
a  five-zero  vote.  In  this  case  we  had  no  hearing  prior  to  this.  We  were  taking  the  Commission  a  violation. 
We  had  found  this  operation  to  be  in  violation  so,  therefore,  we  were  taking  to  the  Commission  things 
that  we  were  finding  where  no  paper  trail  existed  that  could  tie  up  all  the  loose  ends.  That  looseness 
caused  us  to  feel  that  there  were  five  hundred  thousand  dollars  that  was  unaccounted  for. 

When  we  made  our  presentation  to  the  Commission  they  did  not  unanimously  vote  in  our  favor. 
They  did  impose  a  fine  on  them,  but  we  were  looking  for  them  to  close  the  operation  down.  We  were  that 
concerned  about  it,  because  Nevada  was  fairly  new  in  the  race  and  sports  business  at  that  time,  and  we 
knew  the  federal  government  and  the  federal  agencies  were  looking  at  us  very  carefully  to  see  how  we 
were  conducting  operations  in  Nevada.  We  felt  this  was  such  a  major  violation  that  we  needed  to  take  it  to 


506 


the  Commission.  We  were  very  disappointed  when  they  turned  us  down  three-to-two. 

But  it  forced  us  to  then  go  back  and  strengthen  the  regulations  that  we  had  in  place,  because  we 
could  see  that  there  were  some  loopholes  that  we  needed  to  close.  We  held  some  workshops  around  the 
state  where  we  allowed  the  operators  to  come  in  and  react  to  the  regulations  that  we  had  drafted  to  see 
what  we  should  do  to  strengthen  the  race  and  sportsbook  regulations  in  Nevada.  We  didn’t  want  to  have 
any  future  problems  of  this  nature.  Those  hearings  were  very  productive.  Some  of  the  operators  were  very 
helpful  to  us.  They  knew  that  they  had  a  good  thing  going  by  being  able  to  operate  legitimately  in 
Nevada,  and  they  were  very  helpful  to  us  as  we  were  developing  new  regulations  to  govern  the  race  and 
sportsbooks  in  Nevada.  We  then  took  the  improved  version  of  the  regulations  to  the  Commission  and  it 
was  approved.  So  while  we  were  very  upset  about  the  fact  we  lost  this  violation  case — and  we  felt  very 
strongly  we  were  right  and  that  they  had  taken  the  money — it  did  serve  a  purpose  in  the  fact  that  it  helped 
us  strengthen  our  regulations  and  made  race  and  sportsbooks  a  legitimate  operation  in  Nevada.  We  now 
felt  we  could  control  the  operations  much  better  than  we  were  able  to  in  the  past. 

Had  most  of  the  operators  operated  illegal  sportsbooks  or  racebooks  in  other  areas? 

You  know,  1  don’t  think  while  1  was  on  the  Gaming  Control  Board  we  had  one  person  who  ever 
appeared  before  us  for  licensing  to  be  an  operator  of  the  race  and  sportsbook  who  did  not  have  multiple 
arrests  for  illegal  bookmaking.  But  that  was  our  problem,  when  we  went  through  the  licensing  procedure 
they  were  all  arrests  but  no  convictions.  We  went  to  law  enforcement  people  in  New  York,  the  East 
Coast,  and  Ohio  to  find  out  the  story  behind  these  individuals  being  arrested  but  no  convictions.  And  they 
said,  “Well,  we  just  would  break  up  the  book  and  let  them  go.  We  didn’t  make  a  big  thing  out  of  it.”  So 
here  we  were  in  a  position  to  operate  sportsbooks  with  people  that  had  arrests  but  no  convictions,  and 
they  were  so  happy  to  be  able  to  work  in  a  legitimate  operation  that  they  were  very  helpful  to  us  as  far  as 
establishing  a  good  set  of  regulations.  There  haven’t  been  a  lot  of  changes  made  on  regulations  governing 
race  and  sportsbooks  since  then.  Now,  the  internet  is  going  to  cause  some  other  problems.  They’re 
obviously  going  to  have  to  make  some  major  changes  to  the  regulations  involved  there.  I’m  not  current 
with  that,  but  I  can  foresee  that  there  is  going  to  have  to  be  some  major  work  done  on  controlling  the 
internet  gambling  that’s  going  to  be  taking  place. 

Did  you  ever  consider  the  possibility  of  closing  all  the  race  and  sportsbooks? 

Yes!  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  had  some  discussions  regarding  whether  we  had,  in  fact,  made  a 
mistake  by  even  allowing  them  to  go  into  the  various  operations  in  Nevada.  We  were  concerned  about  the 
race  and  sportsbooks  very  definitely.  We  were  especially  concerned  because  we  knew  the  federal 
government  was  watching  us  very  carefully.  To  this  day  we’re  the  only  state  that  allows  sports  betting. 
There  was  an  act  passed  in  Congress,  led  by  Senator  Bill  Bradley,  that  outlawed  all  sports  betting,  except 
in  Nevada. 


The  Commission  also  went  against  your  recommendation  on  Ash  Resnick.  Would  you  give  us  a  little 
background  on  Mr.  Resnick? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


507 


Yes.  Ash  Resnick  was  a  host  in  Las  Vegas  when  the  host  business  was  just  beginning.  Most 
places  didn’t  have  a  lot  of  hosts.  Most  of  the  people  that  were  operating  the  games  were  the  hosts.  But 
Ash  became  a  legitimate  host.  He  was  a  former  professional  basketball  player  in  the  early  days  of 
professional  basketball  and  was  a  very  gregarious  guy.  Played  golf  and  was  generally  liked  by  most 
people  that  he  ever  ran  into.  The  problem  that  we  had  with  him  was  that  he  was  working  in  establishments 
such  as  the  Aladdin  and  the  Tropicana  where  we  were  uncomfortable  with  some  of  the  operators  that 
were  in  those  establishments.  We  called  him  forward  for  licensing  as  a  key  employee,  because  we  felt  that 
he  was  dealing  with  such  big  money  that  we  wanted  to  know  more  about  him.  He  was  not  only  issuing 
credit,  he  was  collecting  markers,  and  he  had  all  the  comp  privileges.  We  did  a  lot  of  investigative  work 
on  him,  but  we  could  never  track  down  how  he  accumulated  his  wealth,  and  he  was  a  reasonably  wealthy 
man.  He  had  a  beautiful  home  in  Las  Vegas  and  he  had  assets  that  were  substantial.  He’d  established  a 
pretty  good  net  worth  for  being  just  an  employee  that  didn’t  make  very  much  money.  1  mean,  his  salary 
was  minimal.  We  were  also  very  uncomfortable  with  his  recordkeeping,  both  his  personal  records  and 
also  his  records  on  markers.  If  he  went  out  to  collect  a  hundred-thousand-dollar  marker,  he  would  come 
back  with  sixty  thousand  and  say  that  was  the  most  he  could  get  from  the  guy,  and  it’s  better  to  get  the 
sixty  thousand  than  not  get  anything.  However,  there  was  no  way  that  he  could  justify  how  he  had 
accumulated  his  money,  other  than  the  fact  that  we  suspected,  and  were  fairly  well  convinced,  based  on 
tracking  his  personal  finances,  that  he  was  making  collections  on  these  markers  and  keeping  part  of  the 
money  himself. 

We  had  a  hearing  on  him  that  lasted  the  better  part  of  a  day,  and  we  recommended  denial  of  Mr. 
Resnick  based  on  what  we  were  able  to  find,  and  recommended  to  the  Commission  a  denial.  It  was  a 
unanimous  vote  by  the  Board,  and  we  went  to  the  Commission  and  they  overturned  us  and  allowed  him  to 
continue  to  operate  as  a  licensee  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  That  was  not  a  pleasant  defeat  for  us.  We  felt  that 
we  had  been  wronged.  But  Ash  was  one  of  those  kinds  of  guys  that  everybody  that  knew  him  liked  him. 
He  was  a  loveable  kind  of  guy,  but  he  just  wasn’t  honest  about  the  way  he  handled  his  finances. 

Is  he  still  living? 

No,  he  passed  away  several  years  ago. 

You  mentioned  the  Tropicana  and  the  Aladdin.  Did  he  work  at  any  other  casinos? 

Those  are  the  only  two.  He  may  have  worked  at  some  other  properties,  but  1  wouldn’t  feel 
comfortable  naming  them  based  just  on  my  memory.  But  1  definitely  know  he  worked  at  both  the  Aladdin 
and  the  Tropicana.  And  those  were  two  establishments  that  we  were  constantly  dealing  with  as  far  as 
having  illegal  operators  being  in  there.  And  so  it  just  added  to  the  problems  we  were  having  with  those 
establishments. 

How  important  is  it  that  the  Board  and  the  Commission  have  a  good  working  relationship?  Can  you 
maintain  a  good  working  relationship  when  opposing  decisions  are  made? 

That’s  a  good  question.  You  need  to  have  a  good  relationship  because  you  are,  in  essence,  the 
gaming  regulatory  arms  of  the  state.  You  have  to  work  jointly  to  watch  out  for  the  best  interests  of  the 
gaming  industry  and  for  the  state  of  Nevada.  But  it’s  a  situation  comparable  to  passing  a  law  in  one  house 


508 


of  a  legislative  body,  and  not  getting  it  passed  in  the  other  house.  Our  entire  governmental  system  is  set 
up  on  checks  and  balances. 

There  would  be  times  when  we  as  the  people  that  were  out  in  the  field  working  day  to  day 
regulating  the  industry  felt  that  a  certain  decision  would  be  what  would  be  best  for  the  industry,  but  the 
Commission  disagreed.  1  do  think  there’s  some  value  to  the  check-and-balance  system,  because 
sometimes  people  can  get  tainted.  These  five  commission  members  are  people  that  are  out  in  the 
community.  They  may  have  a  broader  view  of  a  problem  or  a  situation  than  those  of  us  that  are  in  the 
regulatory  scheme  day  in  and  day  out.  Twenty-four  hours  a  day  that  was  our  business,  and  we  saw  it  from 
our  perspective.  Hopefully,  you  would  think  that  you  had  honorable  commission  members  and  they 
would  see  it  from  a  broader  point  of  view,  and  they  would  look  at  a  situation  with  a  little  different 
perspective.  1  would  be  a  defender  of  the  current  system  of  the  checks  and  balances,  but  boy,  it  gets 
difficult  when  the  Commission  overturns  you  on  some  cases  when  you  feel  so  positive  that  you  had  a 
good  case  and  that  you  had  made  a  good  presentation.  But  the  next  day  you  have  to  be  working  together 
to  try  and  come  up  with  best  policy,  the  best  regulations,  and  the  best  presentation  to  the  legislature  to 
continue  to  strengthen  gaming.  So  it’s  a  fine  line  to  draw  between  somebody  that’s  going  to  be  passing 
judgement  on  your  work  and  somebody  that  you  have  to  work  hand-in-hand  with  in  order  to  continue 
strengthening  the  gaming  industry. 

And,  like  you  say,  it’s  a  checks  and  balance  system.  It’s  a  two-tiered  system.  If  the  Commission  and  the 
Board  weren  ’t  going  to  disagree  once  in  a  while  you  wouldn  ’t  need  a  two-tiered  system. 

Yes.  It’s  tough  to  take  a  defeat,  though. 


In  late  1978  and  early  1979  the  Board  and  the  Commission  were  concerned  with  the  licensing  of  Frank 
“Lefty”  Rosenthal  at  the  Stardust  Hotel-Casino.  This  problem  had  also  occurred  in  past  years.  Would 
you  relate  to  us  the  events  that  transpired  at  an  unprecedented  joint  meeting  of  the  Board  and  the 
Commission  held  in  1979? 

We  were  constantly  having  problems  with  the  Stardust  Hotel.  It  started  when  Allen  Glick  was 
licensed  as  the  general  operator.  He  was  just  an  attorney  that  happened  on  the  scene  and  was  apparently 
selected  by  the  mob  representation  to  be  their  front  man  in  Nevada.  1  had  several  private  meetings  with 
Allen  Glick,  and  1  honestly  feel  that  he  didn’t  realize  how  muddy  a  water  he  was  getting  into  when  he  got 
affiliated  with  those  people,  but  he  was  there. 

And  then  he  got  in  and  couldn  ’t  get  out? 

Couldn’t  get  out.  He  told  me  flat  out,  he  says,  “1  have  no  control  over  ‘Lefty’  Rosenthal.”  But  we 
couldn’t  get  anything  on  “Lefty”  because,  again,  “Lefty”  was  very  clever  at  staying  outside  of  the 
conditions  required  to  bring  someone  in  for  licensing.  Nevada  law  is  fairly  broad,  but  he  was  always  on 
the  outskirts.  One  night  when  Bud  Hicks,  Jack  Stratton,  and  1  walked  into  the  Stardust,  “Lefty”  Rosenthal 
was  right  in  the  middle  of  the  pit.  Now,  why  he  was  in  the  middle  of  the  pit?  He  allegedly  was  the  food 
and  beverage  director  for  a  while  and  then  became  entertainment  director.  He  had  no  reason  to  be  in  the 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


509 


middle  of  the  pit.  We  observed  his  actions  in  the  pit,  and  when  he  saw  us  watching  him,  he  got  out  of  the 
pit  in  a  big  hurry.  We  ultimately  felt  we  had  enough  personal  observations  and  personal  instances,  that 
our  agents  had  seen,  that  showed  that  he  was  exercising  some  control  over  the  gaming  operations  in  the 
Stardust.  At  that  time  we  called  him  forward  for  licensing.  The  current  mayor  of  Las  Vegas,  Oscar 
Goodman,  was  his  attorney.  And  Oscar  is  an  excellent  attorney.  He  is  a  very,  very  astute  attorney  and  did 
an  excellent  job  for  Rosenthal.  But  we  felt  at  that  point  that  we  had  enough  information  to  require  he  be 
brought  forward  for  licensing,  and  we  requested  a  joint  hearing  between  the  commission  and  the  board  to 
say  to  “Lefty”  Rosenthal,  “We  think  you  exert  enough  influence  over  this  operation  to  be  called  up  for 
licensing.”  Their  argument  was  that  he  had  no  involvement  with  the  gaming.  At  the  conclusion  of  the 
joint  meeting  the  Commission  voted  that  he  should  be  brought  forward  for  licensing. 

So  the  purpose  of  the  meeting  was  to  show  a  united  front  and  to  let  Goodman  and  Rosenthal  know  that 
you  were  going  to  go  ahead  with  it? 

Y es,  that  we  definitely  had  enough  information  to  call  him  forward  for  licensing. 

What  was  Goodman  and  Rosenthal’s  reaction  to  that  decision? 

They  were  extremely  upset  with  it,  but  we  went  ahead  and  started  our  investigation  and  began  the 
process  of  bringing  Rosenthal  up  for  licensing. 

Were  you  still  chairman  of  the  Board  when  he  came  before  the  Board  and  the  Commission  to  get  licensed 
as  a  key  employee? 

No.  1  had  just  left.  1  was  in  the  process  of  leaving  when  we  had  our  hearing,  but  the  Commission 
had  not  had  theirs.  They  had  to  delay  their  hearing  for  a  while,  so  I  was  not  directly  involved.  We  had 
recommended  a  license  denial,  and  we’d  also  recommended  inclusion  in  the  “Black  Book.”  At  the  same 
time  we  went  after  Rosenthal,  we  went  after  Tony  Spilotro.  Not  only  did  we  not  want  him  licensed,  we 
did  not  want  him  involved  in  the  gaming  operation  at  all,  and  both  Spilotro  and  Rosenthal  were 
eventually  listed  in  the  “Black  Book.” 


In  July  of  1979  the  Control  Board  recommended  that  the  Argent  Corporation  owners  be  fined  twelve 
million  dollars.  What  was  the  reason  for  that  huge  fine? 

We  felt  that  was  the  way  to  collect  the  amount  of  money  that  we  discovered  was  missing  when 
we  went  into  Argent  Coiporation.  We  then  added  on  a  penalty  fee  that  ultimately  brought  the  total  to 
twelve  million  dollars.  The  debate  was  over  how  much  actually  had  been  skimmed,  and  we  determined  it 
was  somewhere  between  three  million  and  seven  million  dollars.  So  we  took  the  top  number  and  added 
five  million  to  the  top  of  that  as  a  penalty  and  made  that  our  recommendation. 


What  did  the  Commission  do  with  your  recommendation? 


510 


When  the  Commission  heard  that  that  was  the  amount  that  we  were  going  to  come  up  with,  they 
reviewed  our  case,  and  Chairman  Reid  held  a  meeting  with  our  attorney  and  myself  to  talk  about  the  fine. 
We  had  heard  that  Argent  Corporation  was  going  to  challenge  our  recommendation  in  the  courts.  Nevada 
gaming  law  had  never  truly  been  challenged  in  the  courts,  and  we  were  concerned  that  while  our 
regulatory  system  could  be  supported  under  our  state  law  and  in  a  regulatory  sense,  we  didn’t  feel  that  it 
could  stand  a  courtroom  challenge,  where  you  have  to  prove  things  to  a  greater  degree  than  we  had  to  as 
far  as  our  regulations  were  concerned.  We  felt  we  could  go  ahead  and  carry  our  case,  but  in  discussion  we 
felt  that  the  fine  was  too  excessive.  So  our  deputy  A.G.  [attorney  general]  and  myself  met  with  the  Argent 
people  to  talk  about  the  fine.  One  of  the  things  that  we  wanted,  above  all  else,  was  to  get  Allen  Glick, 
“Lefty”  Rosenthal  and  their  people  out  of  Nevada  gaming.  So  we  came  to  the  conclusion  that  we  would 
lower  the  fine,  with  the  understanding  that  Argent  would  sell  the  company  and  Glick,  Rosenthal,  and 
[Frank]  Mooney,  who  was  their  controller,  or  their  money  man,  would  be  gone.  And  that’s  the  way  it 
came  down  from  the  Commission  when  they  had  their  hearing;  they  were  found  guilty  of  taking  the 
money,  we  levied  a  fine  of  seven  hundred  thousand  dollars  on  Argent,  and  Argent  Corporation,  and  the 
individuals  involved,  were  to  get  out  of  the  gaming  business.  They  were  given  until  December  of  1980 
[eighteen  months]  to  find  someone  to  buy  their  position  out  of  their  ownership  of  the  Argent  Corporation. 

When  Argent  was  ordered  to  sell  their  properties,  who  came  forward  then  to  make  the  purchase? 

It  took  a  while  for  anyone  to  surface,  and  we  kept  reminding  Argent  Corporation  that  we  were 
keeping  an  eye  on  them  and  the  clock  was  ticking.  The  new  purchasers  that  came  forward  were  Alan 
Sachs  and  [Herb]  Tobman,  and  when  they  were  suggested  as  being  the  new  operators,  we  ordered  them  to 
come  in  for  licensing. 

What  were  Sachs  and  Tobman  doing  prior  to  making  their  offer?  Were  they  working  in  the  casino 
industry? 

Alan  Sachs  had  a  history  of  having  worked  in  casinos,  and  he  had  a  considerable  background  in 
casino  operations.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it’s  alleged — I  don’t  know  if  it’s  ever  been  proven — that  he  was  the 
man  that  originally  hired  Rosenthal  in  a  casino  operation.  Tobman  had  been  in  business  and  been  a 
businessman,  but  he  did  not  have  as  much  of  a  casino  background  as  Sachs  did.  Sachs  was  the  gaming 
man. 

What  was  the  reaction  from  the  gaming  industry  to  Sachs ’s  and  Tobman ’s  offer  to  purchase  the  Argent 
properties? 

1  think  the  industry  people  that  were  concerned  about  what  was  happening  in  gaming  were  happy 
to  see  that  there  was  going  to  be  a  change  of  ownership  at  the  Stardust.  The  fact  that  the  mob  was  in  there 
had  not  only  been  known  in  Nevada  but  it  was  known  across  the  country.  It  was  also  known  that  we  were 
trying  to  get  those  individuals  out  of  there.  So  the  legitimate  operators  in  Nevada  were  happy  to  see  that 
we  had  forced  them  out,  and  they  were  happy  that  new  people  were  going  to  come  in  to  the  operation. 
Sachs  and  Tobman  had  been  in  Las  Vegas  for  a  good  number  of  years,  and  I  think  the  fact  that  they 
stepped  forward  was  well  accepted  by  the  people  that  were  in  the  industry. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


511 


Did  you  have  any  fear  that  you  were  actually  letting  the  same  group  run  it,  only  under  different  names? 

Yes,  we  did.  We  had  heard — or  we  had  this  inference — that  Sachs  and  Rosenthal  had  had  some 
kind  of  an  association  previously,  whether  it  was  employee/employer  or  friends  or  whatever.  So  we  did 
have  some  fear,  but  they  had  a  good  reputation  in  the  community,  and  they  weren’t  looked  at  as  being  bad 
people.  But  when  we  got  into  the  investigation  more  and  more  indications  were  starting  to  surface  that 
there  may  very  well  be  a  connection  between  Sachs  and  Tobman  with  the  original  members  of  the  Argent 
ownership  and  some  of  the  mob  members  from  Kansas  City  and  Chicago. 

When  you  began  the  investigation  of  Sachs  and  Tobman  was  it  an  extremely  in-depth  investigation?  Did 
you  look  a  little  bit  deeper  than  you  would  have  on  other  people? 

It  was  our  regular  investigation.  They  had  to  submit  their  financial  statements,  had  to  submit  their 
background,  had  to  submit  the  source  of  funds  that  they  were  going  to  use  to  replace  the  money  that  had 
been  put  in  there  by  the  previous  Argent -owned  operation.  We  wanted  that  money  out  because  there  was 
a  considerable  amount  of  Teamsters  pension  fund  money  in  the  operation  and  we  wanted  it  replaced  with 
legitimate  money.  They  had  to  submit  their  complete  package,  and  once  they  submitted  that  package — 
and  it  didn’t  come  in  all  at  one  time;  it  came  in  kind  of  piecemeal — then  we  started  our  investigation. 

Do  you  recall  how  long  the  investigation  lasted? 

It  took  several  months.  And  as  we  were  pursuing  it  we’d  get  briefings  on  where  they  were  on  the 
investigation,  what  they’d  found  and  how  far  they’d  gone.  Then  some  concerns  started  to  develop  that  the 
source  of  funds  may  not  be  changing.  The  whole  situation  started  to  get  a  little  muddy  and  we  wanted  to 
follow  up  on  some  of  the  areas  of  concern  that  were  being  developed  by  the  investigation. 

Was  there  pressure  put  on  the  Board  or  on  yourself  to  speed  up  the  investigation  of  Sachs  and  Tobman? 

Not  initially.  The  initial  part  of  the  investigation  kind  of  just  ran  its  course.  But  then  when  we 
found  these  additional  areas  of  concern,  and  we  started  sending  our  investigators  back  to  find  additional 
information  and  that  naturally  stretched  the  investigation  out  further.  Then  there  was  some  pressure, 
letting  us  know  that  we  needed  to  hurry  up  and  get  this  investigation  taken  care  of  and  get  the  licensing 
moved  forward. 

Was  Governor  O  ’Callaghan  still  the  governor? 

No,  it  was  Governor  List. 

Did  the  pressure  to  speed  up  the  investigation  come  from  Governor  List? 

Governor  List  talked  to  me  about  the  investigation.  1  told  him  where  we  were,  what  had 
happened,  that  we  had  some  additional  information  that  we  needed  to  follow  up  on  and  that  we  were 
pursuing  those  avenues  at  this  time.  And  he  says,  “Well,  we’ve  got  to  move  this  thing  forward.” 

And  1  said,  “Well,  we’re  moving  it  as  rapidly  as  we  can,  but  as  we  get  more  information  that  we  have 


512 


concerns  about  it’s  going  to  take  us  longer  than  we  thought  to  get  the  investigation  carried  out.”  Later  1 
found  out  that  Governor  List  got  impatient  with  my  answer  when  1  told  him  we  were  following  other 
sources,  and  he  went  to  control  board  member  Richard  Bunker  and  told  him  to  move  the  process  faster.  1 
later  discovered  List  and  Bunker  were  having  private  meetings  to  discuss  the  hearing  and  to  speed  up  of 
the  process  without  my  knowledge. 

Had  Richard  Bunker  replaced  Jeff  Silver  on  the  Board? 

That’s  correct.  Jeff  Silver’s  term  had  expired  and  he  was  not  reappointed.  Richard  Bunker  had 
been  appointed  to  the  Board  by  Governor  List. 

Was  Governor  List  more  involved  in  the  Board ’s  business  than  Governor  O  ’Callaghan? 

Very  much  so.  Governor  List  would  call  on  a  weekly  basis  to  see  what  was  going  on  with  this 
investigation  or  about  such  and  such  a  problem  that  was  going  on.  When  1  became  the  chairman  of  the 
Gaming  Control  Board,  Governor  O’Callaghan  maybe  called  me  once  or  twice  in  the  entire  year  and  a 
half  that  1  was  the  chairman  during  his  term.  So  there  was  a  considerable  difference  between  the  two 
governors. 

What  were  some  of  the  concerns  that  the  Gaming  Control  Board  had  with  Sachs  and  Herb  Tobman? 

Well,  it  was  financial  and  also  with  their  associations  and  who  they  were  answering  to.  Who  were 
they  ultimately  going  to  be  responsible  to?  Was  it  going  to  be  just  themselves  that  would  carry  this  thing 
forward,  or  were  they  going  to  be  involved  with  people  in  the  Argent  Corporation?  Where  was  the  money 
coming  from  that  they  needed  to  operate  the  facility?  We  were  starting  to  see  some  clouds  develop  when 
we  got  further  into  our  investigation  and  we  were  concerned  that  we  might  still  be  dealing  with  the  same 
people  that  we  had  been  dealing  with,  only  with  a  different  cast  of  characters  as  officers.  That  it  was 
different  people  in  the  front,  but  the  same  cast  of  players  in  the  back. 

When  Governor  List  appointed  Richard  Bunker  to  the  Board ,  did  he  consult  with  you? 

No.  No,  he  didn’t.  He  didn’t  call  me  about  him.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  1  don’t  recall  how  1  became 
aware  that  Richard  Bunker  had  been  appointed,  whether  Governor  List  called  me  or  if  1  read  it  in 
newspaper.  I’m  not  sure  exactly  how  that  happened. 

Do  governors  usually  check  with  the  chairmen  or  other  board  members  regarding  an  appointment? 

I’m  not  sure.  I  was  O’Callaghan’s  appointment,  and  Jeff  Silver  and  Jack  Stratton  were  already  on 
the  Board.  I  came  in  from  the  outside,  and  this  was  the  first  governor  appointment  to  the  Board  that  I’d 
experienced,  so  I  really  didn’t  have  any  knowledge  as  to  how  it  had  been  taken  care  of  previously.  I  had 
never  talked  to  any  previous  Gaming  Control  Board  chairmen  about  it. 


Had  you  known  Richard  Bunker  before  he  was  appointed? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


513 


Yes,  I’ve  known  Richard  Bunker  for  a  good  number  of  years.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  1  first  met 
Richard  Bunker  when  we  were  both  in  high  school  and  we  played  basketball  against  one  another. 

What  line  of  work  was  Mr.  Bunker  in  before  he  came  on  the  Board? 

He  had  been  a  lobbyist  for  some  companies  in  Las  Vegas,  mostly  public  entities.  He  was 
affiliated  with  the  city  manager’s  office,  when  he  was  appointed  to  the  Gaming  Control  Board. 

You  mentioned  earlier  that  Richard  Bunker  and  Governor  List  had  meetings  about  the  Sachs-Tobman 
investigation.  What  are  some  of  the  specific  incidents? 

1  knew  they  were  on  the  phone  a  great  deal.  There  were  people  in  the  Gaming  Control  Board 
office  in  Las  Vegas  that  let  me  know  that  Governor  List  was  talking  to  member  Bunker  on  the  phone  a 
considerable  amount  of  time.  Also,  1  knew  that  Richard  Bunker  had  flown  to  Carson  City,  without  my 
knowledge,  and  had  met  with  Governor  List  at  the  mansion,  not  at  the  office. 

Do  you  have  any  idea  why  Governor  List  was  in  such  a  hurry  to  get  this  applicant  OK’d? 

Yes.  1  think  number  one,  this  was  our  avenue  of  being  able  to  get  the  Argent  Coiporation  group 
out  of  the  state  of  Nevada.  We  had  made  a  commitment  to  do  that  and  we  wanted  to  get  them  out. 
However,  by  doing  that  we  also  said  that  we  wanted  to  make  sure  that  we  were  in  fact  replacing  the  back¬ 
room  members  of  the  Argent  Coiporation  that  were  running  the  place.  And  as  the  investigation  moved 
forward,  our  investigators  were  finding  that,  in  fact,  this  may  not  have  been  the  case.  But  when  1  told 
Governor  List  that,  he  didn’t  feel  that  Tobman  and  Sachs,  who  had  been  in  Las  Vegas  for  a  good  many 
years,  were  involved  at  all  with  the  former  regime  of  the  Argent  Corporation.  So  he  was  anxious  to  push 
it  forward,  and  1  was  not  anxious  to  move  the  investigation  any  faster  than  we  should  as  long  as  we  had 
leads  out  there  that  were  showing  us  that  there  may  be  something  more  than  what  was  on  the  surface. 

There  was  a  member  of  the  auditing  division  named  Dick  Law  who  had  assembled  a  two-hundred  page 
report  on  the  Stardust  operation  and  on  Al  Sachs  and  Herb  Tobman.  That  report  was  withheld  from  the 
Commission.  Could  you  tell  us  anything  about  that  report  and  why  the  Commission  never  saw  it?  Did  the 
Board  see  it? 

1  saw  parts  of  it,  but  1  never  saw  the  final,  completed  document.  But  in  the  parts  that  1  did  see 
Dick  Law  had  jumped  to  some  conclusions  and  I  wasn’t  able  to  factually  follow  a  trace  on  a  source  of 
investigation  and  come  to  a  conclusion  that  could  be  satisfied  with  good  facts.  It  seemed  like  he  was 
expressing  his  view  and  making  some  assumptions  that  were  not  substantiable.  We  just  did  not  have  any 
material  that  would  substantiate  the  conclusion  that  he  came  to  on  a  certain  case.  We  told  him  we  needed 
more  information  on  that,  but  his  report  was  all  part  of  the  process  that  we  were  going  through  on  this 
investigation.  Although  I  had  him  separated  from  the  investigators  who  were  going  out  in  the  field  doing 
the  actual  investigation,  he  was  part  of  the  audit  group  that  was  investigating  what  had  happened 
previously  during  the  slot  scam.  However,  he  was  never  able  to  really  come  to  a  conclusion  that  we  felt 
was  factual  enough  to  carry  forward  in  case  we  did  have  a  court  challenge.  And  so  while  1  never  saw  the 
completed  document,  1  wasn’t  totally  comfortable  with  the  parts  that  1  did  see.  He  had  not  completed  that 


514 


report  when  we  had  the  hearing  on  Argent  Corporation,  and  it  was  shortly  after  that  that  1  left  the  Board. 

So  1  never  saw  the  final  report. 

So  if  the  Board  never  saw  the  report  in  its  final  form,  is  that  why  it  didn ’t  go  to  the  Commission  ? 

1  assume  so,  because  with  the  parts  that  1  saw,  as  far  as  1  was  concerned,  he  was  still  working  on 
putting  it  together.  We  were  waiting  to  have  something  more  substantial  from  him  when  the  scheduled 
date  of  the  hearing  was  accelerated  to  the  point  where  we  went  ahead  without  the  benefit  of  any  of  his 
report. 

Did  you  feel  you  had  so  much  pressure  that  you  had  to  go  ahead  with  the  hearing?  You  couldn  7  have  put 
it  off  another  month  or  two? 

Well,  1  wanted  to  put  it  off,  but  1  had  a  couple  of  board  members  that  I  had  to  deal  with,  and  they 
felt  comfortable  that  we  had  enough  on  the  case  to  go  ahead  and  make  a  decision  on  Sachs  and  Tobman.  1 
never  did  hear  again  from  the  governor,  once  he  realized  that  1  was  going  to  let  the  investigation  follow  its 
course.  The  other  board  members  felt  that  we  had  a  good,  completed  investigation  and  so  we  went  ahead 
with  the  hearing. 

Whatever  happened  to  Dick  Law?  Did  he  get  terminated  after  you  left  the  Board? 

Yes,  he  did. 

Did  he  appeal  that  termination? 

Y es,  he  did  appeal  it,  and  he  did  win  his  appeal. 

At  the  Sachs-Tobman  hearing,  did  the  Nevada  Gaming  Control  Board  recommend  denial  or  approval  for 
their  application? 

It  was  an  interesting  meeting.  The  hearing  lasted  probably  two  or  three  hours.  And  during  that 
time  Jack  Stratton  and  I  asked  all  the  questions.  Mr.  Bunker  never  asked  one  question  during  the  hearing. 
We  made  a  recommendation  that  we  would  approve  their  licensing,  but  they  were  to  only  get  a  one -year 
provisional  license,  which  meant  that  they  would  have  to  come  back  to  us  within  a  year  to  substantiate 
that  they  had  in  fact  been  following  all  the  procedures  and  conditions  that  we  were  going  to  put  on  them. 
That  was  our  recommendation,  and  it  went  forward  with  a  three-nothing  vote.  But  when  it  went  to  the 
Commission,  the  Commission  then  reversed  us.  1  later  found  out  that  some  of  the  commissioners  had  met 
privately  with  Mr.  Bunker  and  Mr.  Reid.  They  had  agreed  that  they  would  reverse  our  decision,  and 
instead  of  making  it  a  provisional  license  they  gave  them  a  full  license,  which  then  put  the  burden  of  proof 
on  the  Gaming  Control  Board  rather  than  on  Argent  Corporation. 

The  decision  made  by  the  Commission  caused  you  to  resign  your  position.  Would  you  expand  on  that 
incident  and  tell  us  why  you  felt  it  was  necessary  for  you  to  take  such  drastic  action? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


515 


When  1  found  out  that  they  had  had  private  meetings  between  the  control  board  hearing  and  the 
commission  hearing,  and  that  they  had  had  private  meetings  with  Richard  Bunker  being  in  attendance, 
then  1  knew  that  the  system  of  Gaming  Control  Board  as  1  thought  it  should  be  run  was  out  of  whack,  and 
that  1,  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  was  being  cut  out  of  the  pattern  by  the  List 
administration.  I  felt  that  1  was  not  doing  the  job,  and  it  bothered  me  so  much  that  1  decided  1  should 
submit  my  resignation. 

Who  did  Governor  List  name  to  replace  you  as  chairman? 

Richard  Bunker  replaced  me  as  chairman. 

Did  Mr.  Bunker  serve  out  his  full  term? 

No.  I’m  not  sure  on  the  exact  times,  but  he  got  into  some  difficulty  because  he  had  his  secretary 
collecting  donations  for  political  campaigns.  The  Gaming  Control  Board  historically  has  never  been 
involved  in  any  kind  of  politics,  and  so  with  that  in  mind,  he  submitted  his  resignation  when  it  was 
discovered  that  he  was  collecting  campaign  money. 

Was  Governor  List  still  governor  then? 

Governor  List  was  just  going  out  of  office  and  Governor-Elect  Richard  Bryan  was  just  coming  in. 

Did  any  problems  come  up  with  Sachs  and  Tobman  later  on? 

Y es,  eventually  it  was  found  that  what  we  had  suspected  was  the  case,  that  they  were  basically 
front  men  for  the  unwanted  element.  And  so  subsequently  they  did  have  their  license  revoked  by  future 
actions  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  and  the  Commission,  which  made  me  feel  good. 

During  your  tenure  as  a  chairman,  you  made  many  decisions  that  were  unpopular  with  an  unsavory 
element.  Were  you  or  your  family  ever  threatened  at  any  time  with  physical  harm? 

No.  I  was  concerned  about  it,  and  I  did  get  some  threatening  letters  and  postcards  and  things  of 
that  nature,  but  nothing  that  was  too  significant.  I  remember  talking  to  the  top  agent  for  the  FBI  in  the 
state  at  that  time,  Jim  Powers,  and  telling  him  my  concerns  about  it.  He  said,  “You  know,  this  won’t  help 
you  when  you’re  wife  is  going  to  your  funeral,”  was  the  way  he  put  it.  But  he  said,  “I  don’t  think  the  mob 
could  take  the  heat  that  would  come  down  if  something  happened  to  a  Nevada  regulator.  And  so  1  don’t 
think  that  there’s  any  reason  for  you  to  be  concerned.”  And  frankly,  I  took  him  at  his  word.  Maybe  1  was 
naive,  but  I  never  felt  from  that  point  on  that  I  really  had  anything  to  be  concerned  about. 

Was  Frank  Rosenthal  one  of  the  biggest  individual  problems  that  you  and  the  Board  had  to  contend  with, 
during  your  term  as  chairman? 


516 


1  would  say  he  probably  was,  because  he  was  such  a  visible  man.  He  became  kind  of  a  man- 
about-town  in  Las  Vegas.  He  was  well  known,  was  involved  in  a  lot  of  activities  in  the  community,  had 
his  own  television  program,  wrote  an  article  for  a  newspaper.  He  just  became  part  of  the  community. 
When  we  started  going  after  him  as  far  as  his  licensing  was  concerned,  it  was  difficult  because  there  were 
a  lot  of  people  in  the  community  that  said,  “Oh,  why  don’t  you  just  leave  well  enough  alone  and  let  him 
be  here?”  But  that  didn’t  mesh  with  our  bigger  picture  of  trying  to  clean  up  the  mob  influence  in  Nevada 
so  we  could  get  the  legitimate  money  and  financing  into  the  state  to  ensure  we  had  a  strong  gaming 
economy.  We  felt  we  had  to  continue  to  move  after  him,  and  he  was  certainly  more  visible  than  any  of  the 
others.  Joe  Agosto  was  not  nearly  as  visible.  He  was  kind  of  a  man  behind  the  scenes  in  most  instances, 
and  he  was  not  that  active  in  the  community.  James  Tamer  was  not  that  active  in  the  community.  Allen 
Glick,  while  he  was  the  general  manager  of  the  Argent  Corporation,  was  basically  not  a  very  visible 
public  man.  He  didn’t  become  the  community  personality  that  “Lefty”  Rosenthal  became. 

Allen  Glick  later  testified  that  he  was  an  innocent  victim  of  all  this.  What’s  your  feeling  on  that? 

Well,  1  don’t  think  he  was  an  innocent  victim;  1  think  he  knew  what  was  going  on.  Did  he  have 
control  of  the  situation  that  he  was  in?  No.  I’m  sure  he  found  himself  in  some  real  deep  water,  and  he  was 
just  a  good  boy  and  kept  a  public  image  that  he  was  the  man  that  was  in  charge,  but  in  reality  he  was  not 
the  man  that  was  calling  the  shots  and  making  the  major  decisions.  But  I’m  sure  he  knew  what  was 
involved  and  who  the  people  were  that  were  involved. 

Was  there  one  applicant  or  licensee  you  would  call  the  most  unforgettable  character  you  ever  met? 

One  of  the  funniest  we  ever  had  was  a  guy  that  wanted  to  come  in  and  open  a  sportsbook  in 
Fallon,  Nevada.  He’d  been  a  bookie  and  he’d  run  a  lot  of  illegal  books  across  the  country.  But  he’d  also 
been  an  umpire  in  the  Sunset  League  in  Nevada,  which  was  a  professional  baseball  league.  He  was  a 
character,  [laughter]  When  we  were  asking  him  direct  questions  about  his  involvement  in  illegal 
sportsbooks,  the  man  was  blunt  and  forward  about  things,  [laughter]  He  would  say,  “Yes,  I  did  that.  I  did 
this.  I  did  that.”  We  asked  him  if  he  knew  what  a  bag  man  was  and  he  said,  “Yes,  I  was  one.”  [laughter] 

[laughter] 

He  had  the  entire  place  in  stitches  laughing  about  some  of  the  funny  things  he  did  while  he  was 
collecting  money  and  the  people  that  he’d  met.  We  voted  him  down,  but  it  was  one  of  the  more  enjoyable 
decisions  that  we  had  in  the  sense  that  he  just  kept  us  laughing.  But  he  just  wasn’t  the  type  of  person  that 
we  wanted  running  one  of  our  sportsbooks. 

The  other  most  colorful  person,  other  than  “Lefty”  Rosenthal,  of  course,  was  the  man  that  I  spoke 
of  briefly  earlier — Ash  Resnick.  He  was  certainly  a  man-about-town  in  Las  Vegas,  well  known  by  the 
entire  community,  was  a  golf  hustler,  but  a  man  who  was  very  kind  and  gregarious.  He  just  loved  people 
and  he  loved  being  around  them,  but  he  also  liked  to  keep  part  of  the  money  that  he  collected,  and  that 
was  when  we  had  our  problems  on  his  licensing. 

There  seems  to  be  quite  a  few  people  that  were  well  liked  by  the  community  as  a  whole.  Wasn ’t  Moe 
Dalitz  another  one  of  those  that  was  well  liked? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


517 


Yes,  very  much  so.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  when  he  built  a  casino  in  downtown  Las  Vegas  he  said, 
“Well,  I’m  not  going  to  be  the  licensee,  I’m  not  going  to  run  the  place  so  I  don’t  need  to  be  licensed.” 
Well,  fortunately,  in  Nevada  regulations  there  is  a  clause  that  says  if  you  are  to  participate  in  revenues 
from  a  casino,  whether  it  would  be  in  rental  fees  or  in  supplying  goods  to  the  operation,  we  could  say  that 
you  would  be  participating  in  gaming  revenues,  and  we  could  call  you  in  for  licensing.  When  we  looked 
at  the  arrangement  that  they  had  established  at  the  casino  in  Las  Vegas  with  Moe  Dalitz,  we  called  him  in 
for  licensing.  Within  a  month  after  we  called  him  in  for  licensing,  the  Conference  on  Christians  and  Jews 
named  him  as  Man  of  the  Year  because  he’d  contributed  a  million  dollars  to  their  campaign.  However,  we 
never  were  able  to  bring  him  in  for  licensing  because  he  sold  the  building  and  there  was  no  way  for  us  to 
continue  forward  with  the  licensing  procedure  at  that  time.  Interesting  though  was  that  the  people  that 
were  going  to  be  running  that  operation  were  Tobman  and  Sachs. 

Would  you  tell  us  about  Tony  Spilotro?  Did  you  have  any  connection  with  him? 

We  were  very  aware  of  Mr.  Spilotro.  We  had  been  alerted  by  the  U.S.  Attorney’s  office  and  the 
FBI  that  he  had  come  out  to  Nevada  and  we  let  it  be  known  that  we  were  not  going  to  tolerate  his 
involvement  with  any  of  the  gaming  operations.  He  didn’t  get  involved,  but  he  set  up  a  pawn  shop 
operation  in  the  community.  He  was  allegedly  sent  out  by  the  mob  to  keep  an  eye  on  “Lefty”  Rosenthal, 
because  as  the  web  was  closing  in  on  Rosenthal  and  the  Stardust  and  some  of  the  other  places,  the 
revenues  leaving  the  state  and  going  to  Kansas  City  and  Chicago  were  starting  to  shrink.  The  mob  bosses 
wanted  to  know  what  was  happening,  and  Spilotro  was  sent  out  here  to  keep  an  eye  on  Rosenthal.  We  had 
his  history  and  we  definitely  said  that  if  he  set  foot  in  a  casino  he  would  automatically  be  called  in  for 
licensing.  We  watched  his  movements  around  town  very  closely  to  be  certain  that  he  stayed  out  of  the 
casinos. 

When  you  watch  someone  like  that  is  a  specific  individual  given  that  assignment? 

No.  We  have  a  lot  of  undercover  agents,  and  they  were  all  very  familiar  with  his  appearance. 

They  had  a  lot  of  pictures  of  him,  and  if  he  went  into  any  casino  we  knew  about  it.  Once  we  called  him 
when  we  saw  him  in  one  of  the  casinos  and  he  said,  “Well,  I’m  not  involved  in  the  casino  operations,” 
although  we  did  feel  he  was  picking  up  some  markers  and  that  sort  of  thing,  but  we  were  never  able  to 
prove  it.  We  moved  directly  onto  Spilotro  after  the  Rosenthal  and  Argent  situation,  because  of 
Rosenthal’s  and  Spilotro’s  relationship.  We  knew  that  they  were  friends,  or  associates  and  we  moved  to 
have  Spilotro  placed  in  the  “Black  Book.” 

Was  he  entered  into  the  “Black  Book?  ” 

Yes,  he  was. 


Would  you  tell  us  about  Carl  Thomas? 


518 


Carl  Thomas  was  a  licensee  at  the  Palace  Station.  [Formerly  the  Bingo  Palace,  now  known  as 
Station  Casino],  He  was  the  general  manager  of  that  operation,  and  he  was  certainly  a  man-about-town, 
very  highly -respected  businessman,  was  active  in  many  civic  clubs,  and  was  certainly  well  known  in  the 
community.  We  were  frankly  shocked  when  the  U.S.  Attorney  came  to  our  office  in  Las  Vegas  and 
played  a  tape  on  which  Carl  Thomas  was  talking  to  the  Civellas  [Nick  and  Carl]  and  Joe  Agosto  [from  the 
Tropicana]  and  telling  them  how  to  rip  off  the  soft-count  room.  We  were  amazed,  and  naturally  we  started 
our  investigation  procedures  with  Carl  Thomas.  He  very  quickly  resigned,  sold  his  shares  in  the  club  to 
Frank  Fertitta,  and  the  Fertitta  family  still  is  the  driving  force  behind  the  Palace  Station  operation  [now 
known  as  Station  Casino],  which  is  the  one  that’s  soon  going  to  be  opening  the  Indian  gaming  operation 
in  Auburn. 

We  took  Carl  Thomas’s  license  from  him  and  he  relinquished  it  without  a  fight  when  he  realized 
what  was  going  on.  Subsequently,  he  left  the  state  of  Nevada  after  he  shamed  himself,  but  a  future  board 
and  commission  put  him  in  the  “Black  Book.”  We  didn’t.  We  just  took  his  license  from  him,  asked  him  to 
get  out  of  the  gaming  business,  and  he  turned  it  in  automatically  without  any  trouble. 

The  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  is  one  of  the  more  influential  people  or  important  people  in 
the  state  of  Nevada.  What  are  some  of  the  characteristics  or  work  habits  that  it  takes  for  an  individual  to 
become  chairman? 

Well,  [laughter]  you  have  to  be  willing  to  commit  hours.  There’s  no  doubt  that  there  were  a  lot  of 
ten,  twelve -hour  days,  and  there  were  several  seven-day  weeks.  When  you’re  working  on  an  important 
case  you  have  to  make  yourself  available  by  phone,  or  if  you  leave  town  you’ve  got  to  let  people  know 
where  you  can  be  reached  on  a  twenty-four-hour  basis.  When  you  went  on  vacation  you  always  either  left 
a  phone  number  where  you  could  be  reached  or  called  the  office  on  a  daily  basis.  So  the  demands  are  very 
extensive  with  a  lot  of  demand,  particularly  in  Las  Vegas,  from  the  media.  There  are  reporters  and 
television  stations  all  over  the  place.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  day  after  I  announced  my  resignation  from 
the  Gaming  Control  Board,  two  television  stations  from  Las  Vegas  were  at  my  front  door,  because  they 
knew  why  I  had  resigned.  But  I’d  made  a  promise  to  Governor  List  that  I  was  not  going  to  go  public  with 
any  of  our  problems.  I  just  didn’t  feel  like  I  wanted  to  make  a  big  stink  about  it.  I  thought  that  would 
cause  more  harm  than  good,  and  I  told  him  I  would  not  speak  to  the  media.  I  didn’t  get  my  vindication 
until  several  years  later  when  Tobman  and  Sachs  were  thrown  out  of  the  gaming  business.  But  there’s  an 
awful  lot  of  media  scrutiny  in  Las  Vegas  from  both  television  and  the  written  paper.  And,  of  course,  when 
I  was  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  there  was  a  newspaper  called  The  Valley  Times  that  was 
run  by  Bob  Brown,  and  one  of  his  writers  who  wrote  a  column  in  his  newspaper  two  or  three  times  a 
week  was  “Lefty”  Rosenthal.  Bob  Brown  was  a  pretty  good  newspaper  man,  but  “Lefty”  had  convinced 
him  that  the  Gaming  Control  Board  was  bad  for  the  state,  and  so  he  was  constantly  on  us.  He  had  a  young 
writer  on  his  staff  that  was  always  on  us.  Ironically,  one  year  after  I  had  left  the  Gaming  Control  Board  I 
went  to  Las  Vegas  for  a  meeting,  and  as  we  were  entering  this  restaurant  I  heard  somebody  call  my  name, 
and  I  turned  around  to  see  this  young  man  walking  up  to  me.  He  says,  “You  probably  don’t  remember 
me.” 

And  I  said,  “Yes,  I  remember  who  you  are.”  It  was  the  reporter  that  was  constantly  on  us. 

And  he  said,  “I  want  you  to  know  I’m  doing  a  documentary  that’s  going  to  come  out  on 
television.  It’s  called  Mob  on  the  Run,  and  it’s  going  to  talk  about  what  gaming  control  was  doing,  and 
did  do,  to  get  the  mob  out  of  the  state  of  Nevada.”  And  he  said,  “You  were  part  of  that  documentary,  and  I 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


519 


wanted  you  to  know.”  He  says,  “Y es,  me,  the  guy  that  used  to  give  you  all  that  trouble.” 

He  did  have  his  life  threatened,  and  his  car  was  blown  up  in  Las  Vegas.  Then  he  went  to  Hawaii 
on  a  vacation  and  drowned  while  he  was  in  there.  Don’t  know  if  he  had  a  heart  attack  while  he  was 
swimming  or  if  it  was  foul  play.  You  always  suspect  that  something  may  have  happened.  1  have  a  copy  of 
that  documentary.  The  Gaming  Control  Board  agents  brought  me  a  copy  of  the  documentary  that  was  run 
in  Las  Vegas,  and  it’s  a  pretty  good  reflection  of  the  efforts  being  made  at  that  time  to  get  the  mob  out  of 
the  state  of  Nevada. 

What  was  that  writer ’s  name? 

Ned  Day  was  his  name.  He  got  to  be  very  highly  thought  of  in  Las  Vegas,  particularly  when  he 
started  running  articles  against  the  mob  influence  in  Las  Vegas,  and  in  support  of  what  gaming  control 
was  doing.  He  became  quite  famous  in  Las  Vegas  when  he  put  together  this  television  documentary.  Our 
son  was  working  in  Las  Vegas  at  the  time,  and  one  of  his  co-workers,  after  it  appeared  on  television,  said 
to  our  son,  “Say,  are  you  related  to  that  Trounday  that  was  on  that  television  program?”  [laughter] 

And  our  son  said,  “No.”  [laughter]  He  didn’t  want  to  be  tied  into  that.  He  said,  “1  didn’t  want 
somebody  bumping  me  off.”  [laughter] 

There  are  a  lot  of  opportunities  for  people  in  the  position  that  you  held  to  be  bribed  or  to  be  compromised 
in  one  form  or  another.  Does  the  Gaming  Control  Board  have  a  totally  clean  record  all  throughout  the 
years? 


Yes.  By  and  large,  1  would  say  most  governors  and  most  commission  members  and  most  Gaming 
Control  Board  members  have  been  very,  very  good  people.  They’re  honest  and  they  want  to  do  what’s 
right  for  the  industry,  and  they  want  to  do  what’s  right,  period.  Every  time  someone  has  tried  to  cut 
comers,  it  has  come  to  light  very  quickly.  The  reputation  of  the  gaming  industry  in  Nevada  is  just  too 
valuable  for  anybody  to  fool  around  with. 

We  talked  earlier  of  why  you  left  the  Board.  Would  you  tell  us  where  you  were  employed  after  you  left  the 
board? 


After  1  left  the  Board  1  was  scared  to  death,  frankly.  I  was  unemployed  and  had  three  kids;  two  of 
them  were  in  college  and  one  was  a  senior  in  high  school  and  was  going  to  be  in  college  that  fall.  I  was 
frankly  quite  concerned  what  1  was  going  to  do,  and  1  just  started  looking  for  jobs.  It  was  at  that  time  that 
the  Caesars  Palace  people,  Harry  Wald,  Cliff  Perlman,  and  Pete  Echeverria,  who  was  the  same  man  that 
helped  me  in  my  appointment  with  Governor  O’ Callaghan,  came  and  talked  to  me  about  going  to  Lake 
Tahoe  and  working  for  Caesars  Tahoe.  1  was  relieved  to  be  offered  a  job,  because  at  that  point  1  was  quite 
concerned.  My  wife  was  teaching  at  the  time,  so  it  wasn’t  that  we  didn’t  have  any  salary  coming  in,  but  it 
was  an  expensive  time  in  our  life. 

What  position  did  you  take  at  Caesars? 

1  became  the  general  manager.  Caesars  had  just  opened,  so  they  had  an  individual  there  running 
it,  but  only  on  a  temporary  basis.  He  was  a  Las  Vegas  guy  and  he  wanted  to  go  back  to  Las  Vegas. 


520 


Caesars  Tahoe  is  a  wonderful  property,  but  it’s  never  going  to  make  any  money.  It  has  had  very  few 
years,  even  today,  when  it’s  made  any  money  because  it’s  so  small  and  it’s  so  limited.  You  know,  you  get 
a  four-hundred-and-fifty-room  hotel  at  Lake  Tahoe  and  the  seasons  being  what  they  are  and,  it  was  just 
tough  to  make  money.  And  not  to  make  a  profit  year  in  and  year  out  just  got  to  me  and  f  finally  scheduled 
a  meeting  with  Mr.  Perlman  and  told  him  that  I  was  leaving  the  organization.  Several  general  managers 
have  gone  to  Caesars  Tahoe  and  put  in  a  year  or  two  and  then  left,  because  the  pressure  of  not  making  any 
money  is  really  tough. 

Can ’t  they  grow  or  expand  at  all? 

No.  TRPA  [Tahoe  Regional  Planning  Agency]  will  not  allow  it.  When  you  opened  the  property 
you  had  to  submit  a  footprint  of  the  exact  size  of  your  operation,  and  you  could  not  make  any  changes  on 
your  floor,  as  far  as  expanding  the  gaming  area  was  concerned,  once  that  footprint  was  submitted.  It  was 
just  too  small  a  place  to  really  be  able  to  generate  enough  revenue  to  make  it  profitable.  I’ve  talked  to 
several  people  in  the  Caesars  organization  and  they  all  said  it’s  just  a  constant  struggle  up  there  to  make 
it. 

At  the  time  that  you  left  the  Board  and  went  into  the  gaming  industry  were  there  any  adverse  comments 
from  anyone  in  the  gaming  industry  or  general  populace  saying,  ‘‘How  do  you  go  from  being  a  gaming 
regulator  to  a  gaming  operator?  ” 

Y es,  there  was  a  good  deal  of  discussion  about  that;  that  it  just  did  not  give  the  public  the  proper 
impression  when  you  left  as  being  the  main  regulator  of  the  industry  and  then  immediately  after  you 
resign  go  to  work  in  the  industry.  It  just  gives  the  appearance  of  possible  impropriety.  And  so,  yes,  there 
was  some  concern  about  it,  a  lot  of  discussion  about  it,  and  subsequently  legislation  was  introduced  that 
made  a  one -year  cooling-off  period  mandatory. 

After  you  left  Caesars  Palace  did  you  stay  in  the  gaming  industry? 

Yes,  I  went  to  Wendover  for  a  short  time  and  helped  start  a  small  casino  there.  But  it  was  just  too 
hard  living  there;  it  was  too  difficult,  too  isolated,  as  far  as  my  family  was  concerned,  and  so  we  left  there 
and  came  back  to  Reno.  Then  I  started  working  for  John  Ascuaga’s  Nugget  in  Sparks  and  worked  there 
for  fourteen  years  until  I  retired. 

When  did  you  retire,  Roger? 

On  June  30,  2001. 

Looking  back  on  why  you  left,  do  you  have  regrets  that  you  had  to  leave  the  Board?  Would  you  have  liked 
to  have  remained  as  chairman  if  things  had  been  different?  Would  you  have  liked  to  have  stayed  on  the 
Board  a  little  longer? 

Yes.  Yes,  I  would  have  liked  to  have  finished  out  my  term.  I  didn’t  like  the  fact  that  I  quit.  That 
was  the  first  job  I’d  ever  quit.  When  I  was  appointed  to  something  I  felt  that  I  should  fulfill  my  obligation 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


521 


and  finish  out  my  term.  Yes,  I  do  regret  that  1  didn’t  finish  out  my  term,  or  couldn’t  finish  it  out,  but  the 
pressure  was  just  mounting  more  and  more.  1  knew  that  1  wasn’t  effective  without  the  governor’s  support. 
It  was  a  situation  that  wasn’t  good  for  me,  and  it  wasn’t  good  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board,  because  of 
the  very  divisive  situation  that  was  going  on.  It  got  to  the  point  where  the  Las  Vegas  office  was  told  not  to 
communicate  with  the  Carson  City  office.  There  was  a  real  breakdown  in  communication  taking  place, 
and  it  was  just  not  good. 

I  imagine  the  third  member  of  the  Board ,  Jack  Stratton ,  was  placed  in  uncomfortable  positions  at  one 
time  or  another ,  also. 

Yes,  he  was.  Jack  was  older  and  he  was  close  to  his  retirement  years,  and  so  it  didn’t  impact  him 
as  much  as  it  did  me,  because  1  was  being  bypassed  while  1  was  supposedly  the  chairman  of  the  Board,  as 
opposed  to  being  just  a  member  and  being  bypassed.  But,  yes,  I’m  sure  Jack  was  caught  in  some  difficult 
positions. 

Roger,  what  accomplishment  are  you  most  proud  of  that  happened  during  your  term  on  the  Board? 

1  think  the  thing  that  I’m  most  proud  of  is  the  fact  that  we  were  able  to  finish  what  the  previous 
board  and  the  previous  commission  had  done  to  clean  up  the  gaming  and  get  the  mob  influence  and  the 
Teamster  money  out  of  the  state  of  Nevada  so  that  we  could  get  legitimate  investments  into  the  industry 
from  banks,  insurance  companies  and  publicly-traded  companies.  Also,  the  fact  that  we  held  the  hearings 
that  got  rid  of  Joe  Agosto,  got  rid  of  James  Tamer,  got  rid  of  “Lefty”  Rosenthal,  got  rid  of  Allen  Glick, 
and  put  Tony  Spilotro  in  the  “Black  Book.”  We  were  able  to  get  that  element  out  of  the  gaming  industry, 
and  make  it  a  legitimate  business,  so  that  when  we  sat  down  with  banks  and  insurance  companies  and 
they  asked  us  how  we  regulated  the  industry  we  could  demonstrate  to  them  how  we  did  it:  we  showed 
them  our  accounting  procedures;  we  showed  them  all  the  investigations  that  applicants  had  to  go  through; 
we  showed  them  our  enforcement  capabilities  and  what  we’re  able  to  do.  So  I  think  our  biggest 
accomplishment  was  to  finish  the  job  that  had  been  started  by  getting  the  mob  influence  out  of  Nevada 
and  letting  the  general  public  know  that  we  were  a  very  legitimate  business.  We  didn’t  have  any  outside 
influence  that  was  skimming  money  from  us,  and  the  State  of  Nevada  could  rely  on  the  revenue  that  was 
generated  by  the  gaming  industry. 


Earlier  you  were  talking,  Roger,  about  how  the  mob  was  run  out  of  town  and  cleaned  up  during  your 
tenure.  What  kind  of  association  did  you  have  with  the  FBI  and  the  attorney  general ’s  office? 

Well,  prior  to  Phil  Hannifin  and  Pete  Echeverria’s  reign  as  chairmen  of  the  Board  and  the 
Commission,  the  relationship  was  virtually  non-existent,  because  the  FBI  would  not  work  with  anyone 
else.  Gaming  control  in  Nevada  was  very  suspect.  They  just  didn’t  feel  that  we  were  effective, 
particularly  when  they  knew  that  there  was  mob  influence  in  the  gaming  industry  in  Nevada,  and  mob 
money  here  from  the  Teamsters  money.  However,  when  Nevada  demonstrated  that  they  were  getting 
those  people  out  of  the  state  of  Nevada,  then  our  credibility  with  both  the  FBI  and  the  U.S.  Attorney’s 
office  improved  dramatically  and  we  began  working  closer  with  the  FBI.  They  shared  information  with 


522 


us,  and  certainly  they  had  the  capability  of  having  authority  in  areas  other  than  in  Nevada,  and  we,  of 
course,  were  confined  to  having  authority  only  in  the  state  of  Nevada.  But  by  sharing  their  capabilities 
with  us,  things,  such  as  wire  taps  and  those  kinds  of  things  we  gained  invaluable  information  that  helped 
us  put  our  cases  together  to  get  these  people  out.  When  we  gained  credibility  with  them,  then  they  were 
willing  to  share  their  information  with  us,  which  was  very  helpful  for  us  in  getting  people  out  of  the  state 
of  Nevada. 

The  improvement  in  the  relationship  occurred  primarily  during  Mike  O’ Callaghan’s 
administration,  because  that  was  when  the  biggest  push  was  made  to  get  the  mob  out  of  the  state  of 
Nevada.  When  they  saw  the  effort  that  we  were  making,  then  they  became  partners  with  us.  That 
relationship  has  been  off  and  on  since  then.  There  have  been  times  since  then  when  the  relationship  with 
the  FBI  has  been  very  poor,  and  there  have  been  other  times  when  they’ve  worked  well  together.  A  lot  of 
it  depends  on  who  the  people  were.  After  we  gained  credibility  1  had  meetings  with  Jim  Powers,  who  was 
the  top  agent  for  the  FBI  in  Nevada.  1  met  with  him  privately  on  a  couple  of  occasions  and  talked  about 
information  they  had  and  where  we  were.  We  worked  jointly  with  them  and  supported  them  on  the  hit 
that  they  made  on  the  Tropicana.  They  said  they  could  not  have  done  that  if  it  hadn’t  been  for  our 
relationship.  To  this  day  1  have  a  wonderful  relationship  with  Jim  Powers.  1  think  he’s  an  outstanding  law 
enforcement  officer. 

When  gaming  became  legal  in  New  Jersey,  did  the  FBI  ask  for  any  help  from  Nevada  gaming  control 
people? 


Not  initially.  1  was  only  on  the  Board  for  a  short  time  once  gaming  started  in  New  Jersey.  But  I 
did  go  back  there  and  did  spend  some  time  with  the  regulators  that  were  appointed,  and  we  had  a  good 
relationship.  The  man  that  was  the  head  of  the  gaming  enforcement  there  was  a  man  by  the  name  of 
Robert  Martinez.  Fie  was  an  attorney,  and  he  and  I  had  a  good  relationship.  We  shared  information,  but  1 
don’t  know  how  the  relationship  has  been  since  then.  I  do  know  it  was  good  when  they  went  in.  They 
wanted  to  do  a  good  job.  They  knew  that  the  spotlight  was  on  them  and  that  they  had  to  do  a  good  job. 
Their  law  is  much  tougher  than  the  Nevada  law  as  far  as  the  licensing  process  is  concerned.  They  went 
well  beyond  what  the  Nevada  law  does. 

If  you  had  to  do  it  all  over  again  would  you  still  want  to  be  gaming  control  chairman? 

Oh,  yes.  1  enjoyed  it.  It  was  a  challenge.  It  was  difficult  and  a  lot  of  pressure.  You’re  dealing  with 
people’s  lives  and  making  some  tough  decisions  with  people,  but  1  felt  that  we  did  a  good  job  for  the  state 
of  Nevada  and  for  the  industry.  And  so,  yes,  1  enjoyed  it  very  much,  and  it  was  probably  the  most 
stimulating  time  of  my  life.  But  it  was  tough.  1  mean,  there’s  no  doubt.  It’s  not  something  you  want  to  do 
for  a  long  period  of  time,  because  the  pressures  are  pretty  tough.  It  did  finally  affect  Phil  Hannifin’ s 
health.  That’s  the  reason  he  left,  and  the  reason  1  was  appointed,  was  because  his  health  deteriorated  so 
badly.  And  so  the  pressure  does  get  to  you,  but,  yes,  I  wouldn’t  trade  the  experience  1  had  there  for 
anything. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


523 


21 

Sue  Wagner 


Sue  Wagner  was  born  in  Portland,  Maine  in  1940,  and 
grew  up  in  Tucson,  Arizona.  She  graduated  from  the 
University  of  Arizona  in  1962,  earned  her  master’s  degree 
in  histoiy  from  Northwestern  University  in  1963,  and 
moved  to  Reno  with  her  husband  in  1969.  In  1974  Wagner 
was  elected  to  the  Nevada  Assembly  and  re-elected  in  1976 
and  1978.  From  1981  to  1989,  she  served  in  the  Nevada 
Senate,  where  for  two  legislative  sessions  she  chaired  the 
Judiciaiy  Committee,  through  which  all  gambling-related 
bills  pass.  Encouraged  to  run  for  statewide  office,  Wagner 
was  elected  Lieutenant  Governor  in  1990,  despite  suffering 
injuries  in  a  serious  small  plane  crash  on  Labor  Day  of 
that  year.  After  serving  one  term,  she  chose  not  to  run  for 
re-election.  Wagner  was  named  by  Governor  Bob  Miller  to 
the  Nevada  Gaming  Commission  in  1997  and  was 
appointed  by  Bill  Bible  to  a  special  committee  to  study 
compulsive  gambling.  She  stepped  down  from  the 
Commission  in  2009. 


Sue  Wagner.  Photo  courtesy  of  Sue  Wagner. 


Dwayne  Kling:  Good  afternoon.  This  is  Dwayne  Kling.  It ’s  June  22,  2004.  I’m  with  Sue  Wagner  in  her 
home  in  Reno,  Nevada,  and  we  are  about  to  begin  our  first  interview. 

Mrs.  Wagner,  does  the  Oral  Histoiy  Program  of  the  University  of  Nevada  have  your  permission 
to  make  available  to  the  public  the  tapes  and  transcripts  of  the  oral  history  interviews  that  we  begin 
today? 


524 


Sue  Wagner:  Yes,  they  do,  but  I  would  appreciate  if  you’d  call  me  Sue. 

Very  good.  Thank  you. 

Sue,  let’s  start  out  by  asking  you  when  and  where  were  you  born? 

1  was  bom  in  Portland,  Maine  on  January  6,  1940. 

When  did  you  come  to  Nevada? 

Oh,  1  had  a  stop-off  in  Tucson,  Arizona,  before  1  got  here.  My  father  was  ill,  and  the  Maine 
winters  and  climate  just  didn’t  do  him  any  good,  so  we  moved  to  Tucson,  Arizona  in  1950,  when  it  was 
just  a  little  Podunk-y,  small  place.  And  1  pretty  much  grew  up  there  starting  in  the  fifth  grade.  1  went  to 
the  University  of  Arizona  as  an  undergraduate.  One  of  the  reasons  my  family  picked  going  from  Maine  to 
Tucson  was  because  there  was  a  university  there.  They  had  a  couple  of  other  choices  in  the  West  where 
the  air  and  so  on  would  have  been  good,  but  they  chose  that  for  educational  purposes. 

1  went  to  Northwestern  University  for  my  graduate  education,  met  my  husband,  and  was  married. 
Then  my  husband  got  his  Ph.D.,  and  then  he  moved  in  1969  to  Reno,  because  he  had  a  job  with  the  Desert 
Research  Institute. 

When  you  first  moved  to  Reno  after  having  lived  in  Arizona  for  several  years,  what  was  your  reaction  to 
the  neon  lights,  the  slot  machines  in  stores,  and  just  the  glitter  of  downtown  Reno? 

Well,  it  was  pretty  shocking,  actually.  1  was  on  the  plane  and  I  had  my  one-month-old  son  with 
me  at  that  time,  and  1  had  only  heard  about  Reno.  1  was  coming  from  Tucson,  where  all  my  friends  and 
family  were,  except  for  my  husband,  who  picked  me  up  at  the  airport.  It  was  January  twentieth;  it  was  the 
day  Richard  Nixon  got  sworn  in.  I  remember  these  political -type  events  in  my  life.  He  picked  me  up  at 
the  airport  and  he  drove  down  Virginia  Street,  and  I  couldn’t  believe  it.  First  of  all,  it  was  snowing  and 
there  was  all  this  slushy,  dirty  snow,  and  there  were  all  these  lights  on,  and  the  aiiport  had  slot  machines, 
and  I  was  not  really  all  that  impressed,  to  be  honest  with  you. 

[laughter]  Shortly  after  moving  to  Reno,  you  won  a  seat  in  the  state  assembly.  What  motivated  you  to  run 
for  an  elective  office? 

Well,  I  had  been  running  for  office  probably  since  the  fifth  grade,  whether  it  was  president  of  the 
class  in  junior  high  school  or  high  school.  1  was  very  active.  And,  in  fact,  at  the  university  in  Arizona,  I 
was  a  student  body  officer.  So  1  think  when  my  husband  met  me,  he  probably  figured  1  might  do  this,  but 
probably  not  as  soon  as  1  did. 

[laughter] 

And  several  years  after  I  moved  to  Reno,  I  got  involved  in  a  woman’s  campaign  for  the  city 
council.  Her  name  was  Pat  Hardy  Lewis.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  she  became  the  first  woman  on  the  city 
council  here  in  Reno.  I  have  no  idea  why  1  thought  that  at  the  time  why  that  was  so  exciting,  why  1  was 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


525 


thinking  it  was  a  great  thing  for  a  woman  to  get  elected.  But  1  did.  1  was  interested  in  it  because  there 
weren’t  any  women  on  any  of  these  boards  or  commissions — very  few  in  the  state  legislatures  around  the 
country.  It  started  with  just  meeting  her  at  a  coffee,  which  used  to  be  held  in  people’s  homes,  but  now 
with  so  many  women  going  to  work,  that’s  not  normally  the  case.  But  I’d  met  her  and  then  I  helped  her 
get  elected.  By  the  end  of  her  campaign  I  was  organizing,  directing  all  of  the  precinct  walking.  She  was 
the  first  person  that  had  done  that,  going  door-to-door,  and  I  learned  that  from  that  campaign.  And  several 
years  later,  or  maybe  just  a  year  later,  I  really  thought  about  running  for  the  state  legislature.  1  was 
attracted  to  that  job  because  it  was  only  every  other  year,  and  I  thought  that  would  work  out  better  with 
my  own  family.  My  kids  were  very  small  at  that  time.  When  1  ran,  they  were  only  four  and  five. 

And  it  was  a  shock — that  was  the  biggest  issue  of  my  entire  campaign.  1  had  prepared  myself  on 
all  these  different  issues,  but  nobody  asked  me  any  questions  about  those.  All  they  asked  me  was  about: 
Was  my  husband  going  to  divorce  me?  How  could  I  go  off  and  leave  these  small  children?  They’re 
probably  going  to  grow  up  to  be  juvenile  delinquents!  It  hadn’t  been  done  in  this  state  at  all,  but  certainly 
not  in  Reno.  So  that  was  a  huge  issue.  I  just  was  so  blindsided  by  that.  And  what  I  learned  later, 
interestingly  enough,  was  that  women  my  own  age  supported  me  in  the  smallest  amount.  Men  voted  for 
me  way  more  than  women  in  my  age  bracket,  and  at  that  time  I  was  thirty-four.  I  think  it  was  because  it 
was  at  the  beginning  of  the  women’s  movement  and  things  were  beginning  to  change.  Women  didn’t 
quite  get  that,  but  they  knew  something  was  going  on,  and  they  were  very  unsettled  by  it.  So  that’s  pretty 
much  why  I  ran. 

And  your  husband ,  of  course,  was  in  full  agreement  with  your  running. 

Oh,  yes,  absolutely.  I  would  not  have  done  it  otherwise. 

Well,  you  won  the  first  election  you  ever  participated  in,  is  that  correct? 

That’s  right. 

And  how  many  other  campaigns  and  elections  did  you  have?  Give  us  a  kind  of  a  brief  synopsis  of  the 
offices  that  you  held  in  your  political  career. 

Well,  I  was  elected  to  the  assembly  in  1974,  1976,  and  1978. 1  think  in  the  last  election  I  didn’t 
have  anybody  run  against  me.  But  one  of  the  things  I  learned  was  that  it  isn’t  an  every-other-year  job.  I 
think  one  of  the  reasons  that  I  didn’t  have  opposition  was  the  fact  that  I  would  go  out  and  knock  on  doors 
even  if  I  didn’t  have  an  opponent,  because  I  love  to  campaign,  and  I  love  serving.  Some  people  like  one 
or  the  other,  but  a  lot  don’t  like  either  of  them. 

[laughter] 

I  met  a  lot  of  really  interesting  people,  and  they  told  me  what  was  on  their  minds.  However,  I  had 
decided  with  my  husband  in  1980  that  it  might  be  better  if  I  ran  for  the  senate  for  several  reasons:  one,  it 
was  twice  as  long,  a  four-year  term  rather  than  two;  and  secondly,  you  really  were  more  powerful, 
because  there  was  only  half  as  many  senators  as  there  were  assembly  people — twenty  and  forty  at  that 
time.  I  was  planning  on  doing  that  when  my  husband  was  killed  in  an  airplane  crash  in  1980.  He  was 


526 


doing  some  experiments  for  DRI.  And  I  didn’t  know  whether  I’d  be  able  to  do  this  or  not.  I  remember  to 
this  day,  I  had  a  huge  get-together  here  in  my  own  home  after  the  services  at  Trinity  Episcopal  Church. 
And  my  sister,  who  was  here  at  that  time,  overheard  two  people — two  assembly/??*?/; — talking  about  me  in 
my  own  living  room  the  day  of  my  husband’s  funeral  saying,  “Oh,  good,  she  won’t  probably  run  for  the 
senate  now,  and  we  can.”  I  remember  who  those  people  were.  I  don’t  hold  a  grudge,  but  it  thrust  me  into 
saying,  “I  am  going  to  run.”  And  that  probably  wasn’t  the  best  reason  to  make  that  decision,  but  I  think 
my  husband  would  have  wanted  that  anyway.  I  think  it  worked  out  better  with  our  family,  hopefully.  And 
1  do  know  at  that  time  that  if  I  had  been  just  Mrs.  Peter  Wagner  who  lost  her  husband,  people  wouldn’t 
have  rallied  round  me  as  much  or  offered  me  jobs.  1  have  to  believe  it  was  because  1  was  a  state  legislator. 
Governor  Bob  List  at  the  time  offered  me  a  position,  but  I  ultimately  decided  to  take  a  three-quarter  time 
job  at  DRI. 

And  I  did  run  for  the  senate  and  win  in  1980.  And  at  that  time  we  ran  “at  large,”  meaning  we 
could  elect  two  senators.  And  one  of  the  former  senators,  Cliff  Young,  who  wound  up  being  on  the 
supreme  court  and  was  in  congress  before  that,  he  came  to  me  and  told  me  that  he  wasn’t  going  to  run  in 
1980  and  that  he  would  support  me.  Well,  that  was  a  big  thing — a  big  boost.  So  I  did  do  that.  He  used  to 
run  with  Bill  Raggio  as  a  team,  and  we  did  a  little  bit,  but  the  two  of  us  did  not  have  a  lot  of  opposition  in 
that  race.  We  both  won.  And  then  in  1984  I  believe  we  had  cut  the  seats  down  to  single-member  districts, 
and  I  was  re-elected  in  1984.  And  I  don’t  remember  if  I  had  any  opposition.  In  1988, 1  did  not;  I  know 
that  for  a  fact.  But  I  had  some  people  urging  me  to  run  for  a  statewide  office  in  1 990,  which  I  did.  And 
actually,  I  was  on  a  cycle,  because  half  the  senators  are  up  every  two  years,  so  there  was  some  follow-up 
with  people,  a  continuity  in  the  senate.  But  I  was  on  a  cycle  where  I  would  be  in  the  senate  even  if  I  lost. 

I  ran  for  lieutenant  governor  in  1990.  And  I  was  in  a  plane  crash  myself,  campaigning,  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  on  Labor  Day,  and  broke  my  neck  and  back  and  was  pretty  much  out  of  it  for  quite  a  long  time, 
but  I  did  get  elected  lieutenant  governor.  And  the  outpouring  of  support — it  was  just  overwhelming  in  the 
state.  I  mean,  I  can’t  even  .  .  .  bushe lfuls  of  cards  and  letters.  And  they  set  up  a  voicemail  at  the  hospital 
here,  and  then  I  was  shipped  out  to  U.  Cal  Davis  Hospital  in  Sacramento.  And  I  was  there  for  some  time, 
and  they  even  set  up  a  voicemail  there,  although  a  lot  of  people  didn’t  know  I  had  been  moved.  They  did 
some  surgery  on  me  there. 

So  I’ve  had  a  long  elective  career  in  this  state,  one  which  I  thoroughly  have  enjoyed,  but  clearly,  I 
did  not  feel  up  to  campaigning  again  in  1994.  Although  I  have  to  say,  Governor  Miller  and  his  staff  really 
urged  me  to  do  so,  because  actually  we  had  a  very  good  relationship,  the  two  of  us,  even  though  we  were 
of  different  political  parties.  And  I  think  he  wanted  that  to  continue,  but  I  decided  not  to  do  that.  He  said  I 
could  have  whatever  I ...  I  wouldn’t  say  he’d  give  me  anything  in  state  government,  but  if  I  was 
interested  in  something.  He’d  call  me  and  ask  me  if  I’d  like  to  head  up  this  or  that,  but  it  would  have  been 
a  full-time  job.  And  if  I  had  wanted  to  do  that,  I  would  have  run  for  office.  So  I  decided  that  it  would  be 
really  great  to  be  on  the  Gaming  Commission,  because  it  was  perceived  to  be  part  time,  and  it  is,  but  I  had 
to  wait  until  there  was  an  opening,  so  to  speak,  in  northern  Nevada.  They  pretty  much  thought  about  seats 
being  geographically  oriented:  so  many  from  Clark  County,  maybe  one  from  the  rural  areas,  or  not,  and 
two  from  northern  Nevada,  I  should  say.  One  appointment  did  come  up,  but  that  particular  person  was 
reappointed,  and  they  were  a  friend  of  the  governor’s  chief  of  staff.  So  I  had  to  wait  till  the  next  Reno  seat 
came  up,  and  it  was  Bob  Lewis.  Governor  Miller  did  appoint  me  to  that  position,  and  then  I  was 
reappointed  by  Governor  Guinn.  And  Governor  Guinn,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  was  one  of  my  co-chairs  for 
my  campaign  for  lieutenant  governor  in  1990,  and  was  very,  very  supportive  and  helped  me  a  lot  in  that 
particular  race.  So  I  wound  up  being  on  the  Gaming  Commission,  which  is  why  we’re  here  today. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


527 


When  you  were  lieutenant  governor,  who  was  governor? 

Bob  Miller. 

And  who  did  he  defeat  in  the  election? 

He  defeated  a  man  who  lived  at  Incline  Village.  It’s  not  Jim  Galloway,  who’s  a  county 
commissioner  now,  but  the  name  sounds  fairly  similar.  In  fact,  1  was  very  surprised  that  I  even  went 
ahead  and  ran,  because  Brian  McKay,  who  was  then  attorney  general,  was  the  one  that  approached  me 
about  running  for  lieutenant  governor  initially,  because  he  was  going  to  run  for  governor.  And  he  was 
kind  of  coming  from  Clark  County.  I  was  in  northern  Nevada.  You  don’t  run  as  a  ticket,  but  he  thought  it 
would  be  great  if  he  had  a  Republican  woman — well,  of  course,  it’d  be  a  Republican — a  woman  in  the 
other  part  of  the  state.  And  so  when  he  talked  to  me  about  it — 1  think  we  were  in  Elko  at  some  function,  a 
Republican  function — I  started  thinking  about  it,  and  I  pretty  much  decided  I  would  do  it.  And  then  he 
called  me — actually,  he  had  his  wife  call  me  and  tell  me  that  he  wasn’t  going  to  run.  And  I  was  already 
down  the  road  a  bit,  so  I  went  ahead  and  ran.  Maybe  physically  it  would  have  been  better  if  I  hadn’t,  but 
things  worked  out  for  a  reason,  I  guess.  The  reason  being,  I  guess  I’m  much  more  mellow  and  laid  back 
not  being  in  elective  office  than  I  was,  according  to  my  family. 

You  had  the  full  support  of  the  entire  Republican  Party,  also,  is  that  right? 

Yes,  I  did,  although  I  felt  that  if  I  could  lose,  it  would  be  in  a  Republican  primary  rather  than  in  a 
general  election.  I  had  a  lot  of  Democratic  support  because  I  was  more  moderate  than  a  lot  of 
Republicans  in  our  state.  So  I  suspect  exactly  what’s  going  on  now  in  Clark  County,  that  Republicans  are 
running  against  Republicans  who  were  both  in  the  legislature,  one  supporting  taxes  last  session  and  one 
not,  and  that  would  be  the  kind  of  thing  that  I  probably  thought  I  might  have.  The  only  Republican 
opposition  I  had  in  the  lieutenant  governor’s  race  was  Pro-life  Andy  Anderson. 

Oh,  that  was  your  only  opponent. 

And  that  was  his  legal  name.  He  had  it  changed  because,  of  course,  it  would  point  out  a 
difference  in  that  position  between  he  and  I.  But  it  wasn’t  much  of  a  race.  Although  I  did  wonder  where 
those  thirteen  thousand  people  were  from  who  voted  for  him. 

[laughter]  He  had  thirteen  thousand  votes? 

I  don’t  know.  Well,  out  of  hundreds  of  thousands,  I  think.  It  was  either  thirteen  hundred  or 
thirteen  thousand.  I  can’t  believe  it  was  just  thirteen  hundred.  But,  you  know,  there  are  certain  religious 
groups  in  our  state  who  do  not  support  my  positions.  And  I  had  been  involved  in  an  unbelievable  number 
of  issues.  I  chaired  the  senate  judiciary  committee,  and  that  issue  was  emotional,  controversial,  and  I 
seemed  to  be  singled  out.  I  was  pretty  outspoken  on  the  subject,  so  that’s  fair  that  I  was. 


What  Democrat  did  you  defeat  then  in  the  election? 


528 


In  the  general  election,  her  name  was  Jeannie  Ireland,  and  her  husband  had  been  a  football  coach 
practically  everywhere  in  the  state.  His  name  was  Bill  Ireland  and  he  was  a  Republican.  And  my 
understanding  is,  Senator  Harry  Reid  got  Mrs.  Ireland  to  run  against  me.  I  think  Harry  does  a  great  job  for 
our  state,  but  he  does  have  a  tendency  if  he  sees  a  potential  opponent,  he  tries  to  maneuver  them  around  or 
to  help  defeat  them  so  they  are  not  a  possible  opponent  in  an  upcoming  election.  So  I  think  he  probably 
would  have  preferred  Bill  Ireland,  but  at  that  time  he  was  a  Republican.  So  Jeannie  Ireland  was  urged  to 
run,  and  I  guess  Harry  promised  money  and  a  lot  of  other  things.  I  think  she  filed  the  last  day.  And  so  that 
was  my  Democratic  opponent.  I  had  been  told  that  people — I  don’t  know  who  these  people  were — after 
the  plane  crash  had  said  that  I  was  brain  damaged,  and  that  nobody  would  know  about  it  until  after  the 
election  was  over.  So  I  had  to  have  a  press  conference  here  in  my  living  room,  in  my  home,  and  invited 
all  the  press.  I  had  my  doctor  come  up  from  Sacramento.  In  fact,  my  campaign  manager  at  the  time, 
Stephanie  Tyler,  who  was  also  in  the  plane  crash  with  me,  was  here,  and  I  remember  one  of  the  reporters 
when  we  got  done  saying,  “Well,  you’re  just  as  ornery  as  you  were  before,  so  you  must  be  OK.” 

[laughter]  Yes,  right. 

So  that  kind  of  diffused  that  issue.  But  literally,  I  was  not  able  to  go  anywhere  from  the  primary 
election  to  the  general  election.  So  I  had  to  keep  running  the  same  ads  over  and  over  and  over  again.  And 
I  had  people  volunteer,  like  Virgil  Getto,  who  was  a  senator  from  Fallon.  He  was  in  the  Pahrump  parade, 
and  he  had  my  big  banner.  And  even  Democrats,  like  Dina  Titus,  did  something,  and  so  I  had  a  lot  of 
other  support  in  addition  to  just  people  in  the  state. 

Yes.  Well  in  that  crash  that  happened  in  September  of 1990  on  Labor  Day,  you  mentioned  several 
injuries.  Do  those  injuries  still  have  an  effect  on  you? 

Yes,  they  do.  And  I  am  in  a  lot  of  pain  unless  1 — I  have  some  medication  that  helps  me.  But  I 
think  most  people  now  feel  I  had  been  fused  incorrectly,  because  when  I  lie  down  and  when  I  get  the 
pressure  off  me,  if  I  sit  up  straight  or  if  I  stand,  all  the  weight  is  .  .  .  my  head  is  trying  to  pull  itself  back  to 
be  situated  over  my  spine,  which  it  isn’t.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  I  don’t  think  about  that  too  much 
because  nobody  here  in  Reno  wanted  to  operate  on  me,  and  that’s  the  reason  I  believe  I  was  sent  down  to 
the  U.  Cal,  Davis  hospital  in  Sacramento.  I  didn’t  become  a  quadriplegic  or  a  paraplegic,  so  that’s  a  real 
big  positive. 

Yes.  Kind  of  that  glass  half full,  half  empty. 

Yes.  Yes.  Exactly.  So  it’s  a  story  that  is  pretty  incredible  when  you  think  about  plane  crashes  and 
my  family. 

Yes,  a  lot  of  people  probably  didn ’t  realize  that  your  husband  was  killed  in  a  plane  crash,  also. 

That’s  right.  That’s  right. 


That  was  a  small  plane,  also,  right? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


529 


Yes,  it  was.  It  was  owned  by  DRI. 

Does  your  lengthy  legislative  experience  help  you  as  a  gaming  regulator? 

Yes,  it  does  in  many  ways.  Not  only  am  I  somewhat  familiar  with  the  issues,  and  some  more  than 
others,  but  it  also  gives  you  an  idea  of  how  to  behave  on  a  panel  or  in  a  committee  or  a  commission.  And 
the  big  thing,  1  think,  was  the  fact  that  when  I  first  got  on  the  Commission,  it  was  so  poorly  run,  and  other 
people,  I’ve  learned,  didn’t  feel  that  way.  But  because  I’d  worked  my  way  up  in  the  legislature  and 
viewed  many  people  and  how  they  handled  a  committee  and  witnesses  and  so  on,  I  just  couldn’t  believe 
how  disjointed  it  was  run.  I  suggested  that  we  do  something  that  was  done  in  the  legislature,  where  you 
have  a  consent  calendar,  where  if  no  one  has  an  objection,  issues  or  bills  are  put  on  a  calendar  and  then 
you  might  vote  for  four  or  five  things  all  at  the  same  time.  But  if  you  had  a  problem — and  I’m  now 
speaking  about  the  legislature — and  I  wanted  to  take  off  Senate  Bill  4,  then  I’d  just  make  that 
announcement  and  that  would  go  off  to  a  different  calendar  to  be  discussed  and  voted  on  individually.  But 
if  nobody  had  any  problem  with  it,  if  it  was  just  a  technical  change,  there  was  no  point,  and  we  took  care 
of  a  lot  of  things  like  that. 

That  was  not  the  case  on  the  Gaming  Commission.  When  I  brought  this  concept  up  no  one  was 
interested  in  it.  But  when  Brian  Sandoval  became  chairman,  since  he  had  been  in  the  assembly — in  fact, 
represented  the  same  assembly  district  I  did — then  we  talked  about  it,  and  he  was  very  open  to  it.  And  we 
do  operate  that  way  today,  and  it’s  just  so  much  better.  It’s  so  much  more  streamlined.  And  the  same 
thing,  if  you  read  all  your  material  and  you  want  to  have  restricted  number  five,  you  want  to  have  that 
person  come,  you  do  that,  even  if  you’re  the  only  one.  So  it’s  the  same  sort  of  thing. 

Right. 


I  think  that  those  kinds  of  experiences  are  really  important.  In  addition,  both  Brian  and  our 
current  chairman  had  chaired  other  panels  before.  Previously,  a  member  would  just  butt  in  and  ask 
anybody  a  question.  Now  we  go  through  the  chairman,  as  it  should  be,  as  we  used  to  do  it  in  the 
legislature.  So  a  lot  of  those  procedural  things  I  think  are  important,  in  addition,  of  course,  to  the 
substantive  issues.  Many  of  them  have  to  do  with  issues  from  the  legislature.  And  when  you’re  starting  to 
read  the  background  material  and  you  find  out  that  you  were  chairing  the  senate  judiciary  committee 
when  that  particular  bill  was  passed,  then  most  of  the  rest  of  your  members  on  the  Commission  listen  to 
what  you  have  to  say,  and  normally  you  will  determine  the  direction  that  that  issue  will  take,  because  you 
were  there.  I  mean,  hopefully,  you  have  an  institutional  memory  and  recognize  why  that  became  law.  So  I 
think  those  are  some  of  the  things  that  I  feel  my  experience  did  help  me  with. 

Well,  things  such  as  the  consent  calendar  and  addressing  the  chairman  prior  to  asking  questions,  is  that  a 
written  stipulation,  or  is  that  just  something  that  the  chairman  proposes? 

Yes,  it’s  something  that  the  chair  directs.  But  now,  that’s  the  history  of  the  Commission.  So  I 
suspect  when  people  move  on  or  move  off,  then  it’s  going  to  be  run  that  way  now.  I  can’t  imagine 
anybody  saying,  “Oh,  I  want  to  hear  from  absolutely  everybody,  even  if  nobody  asks  a  question,”  or  the 
fact  that  anybody  can  just  butt  in.  Sometimes,  one  would  say,  “Does  anybody  have  a  plane  to  catch?  I’ll 


530 


take  you  first.”  It  was  a  stampede,  literally,  to  the  microphone.  And  in  addition  to  that,  the  restricted 
items,  which  are  having  fifteen  slots  or  less,  used  to  be  taken  first,  and  by  six  p.m.  or  seven  p.m.  at  night, 
we  might  get  around  to  the  non-restricted  items.  And  some  of  those  were  very  controversial.  People  were 
so  exhausted,  so  tired,  that  that  was  flipped  around,  too;  non-restricteds  came  first,  and  it  makes  eminently 
better  sense.  So  those  are  indeed  procedural  things,  but  wow,  if  you’ve  been  there  before  and  then  you’re 
there  now,  what  a  difference.  One  of  my  commissioner  friends  and  1  were  having  a  discussion  about  this 
subject  recently,  and  he  was  shocked  that  I  felt  this  way.  But  1  go  back  to  the  fact  that  it  was  not  run  well, 
and  my  experience  there  in  the  legislature  told  me  that  and  drove  me  in  a  different  direction. 

Are  most  of  the  restricted  items  now  on  a  consent  calendar? 

In  fact,  last  month  they  all  were.  But  normally  there  are  a  few.  This  was  the  only  month  I 
remembered  none  of  them,  [pause]  And  some  of  the  non-restricteds  are  as  well. 

You  served  on  several  senate  committees,  and  you  chaired  a  few  of  them.  Were  there  any  that  were 
especially  related  to  the  gaming  industry? 

The  judiciary  committees,  and  I  served  on  those  every  single  session  1  was  in  the  legislature.  And 
that  would  have  been  eight  times.  Started  out  in  the  assembly  when  a  Reno  assemblyman,  Bob  Barengo, 
chaired  the  committee,  and  1  kind  of  took  my  direction  from  a  friend  of  mine,  Jean  Ford,  who  was  in  the 
assembly  at  that  time.  You  could  read  what  each  committee  did,  but  you  don’t  really  know  if  you  haven’t 
been  there  before.  So  1  did  choose  the  judiciary  committee  and  two  others.  Almost  every  gaming  bill — in 
fact,  all  of  them — did  go  through  the  judiciary  committees  until  the  one  time  I  chaired  it  when  I  was  in 
the  senate.  I  will  tell  you  why  something  changed  then,  and  it  had  to  do  with  taxes.  But  everything  that 
dealt  with  the  gaming  industry  did  go  through  the  judiciary  committee.  And  so  there  were  three  times  I 
served  on  that  in  the  assembly,  never  chairing,  because  the  Republicans  were  always  in  a  minority 
position. 

Because  1  was  not  in  the  majority  party  until  I  was  in  the  senate,  1  didn’t  get  to  chair  any 
committees.  But  if  you’ve  been  on  there  for  a  while  and  you  understand  what  the  issues  are,  you’ve  a 
pretty  good  feeling  for  them,  and  it  makes  it  easier,  I  think,  to  know  how  one  would  vote  by  having  heard 
some  of  the  same  things,  or  somewhat  similar  things,  in  the  past.  When  I  got  to  the  senate,  I  was  able  to 
chair  the  senate  judiciary  committee  in  the  1987  and  1989  sessions,  because  at  that  point,  the  Republicans 
finally  became  the  majority  party  in  the  senate — they  still  were  not  in  the  assembly — and  haven’t  been 
since.  1  think  one  time  it  was  tied,  and  that’s  why  they  changed  the  numbers  and  made  it  now  an  odd 
number  in  both  the  senate  and  the  assembly  so  that  would  not  happen  again,  in  addition  to  the  fact  that 
now  supreme  court  justice  Bob  Rose  had  voted  to  break  a  tie  in  the  senate  when  he  was  lieutenant 
governor  and  president  of  the  senate.  That  was  another  reason — because  some  didn’t  like  the  way  he 
voted,  to  make  it  clear  that  the  lieutenant  governor  probably  couldn’t  break  a  tie  again.  And  because  I’d 
had  this  long  career,  that  would  have  been  eight  different  times  I’d  been  on  the  judiciary  committee.  But 
by  the  time  I  was  in  the  majority  party,  I  think  that  Senator  Raggio,  who  was  then  the  majority  leader,  felt 
that  my  experience  on  preceding  judiciary  committees  was  important.  I  do  know  that  I  had  several 
interviews  with  people  in  the  press  saying,  “Well,  how  are  you  going  to  do  this?  You  don’t  normally 
support  everything  the  political  party  does.  So  how  are  you  going  to  behave  now  in  a  leadership  position, 
how  are  you  going  to  deal  with  that?” 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


531 


And  I  said,  “Well,  1  think  people  by  now  know  pretty  much  that  I  don’t  go  along  just  to  get  along, 
or  get  along  to  go  along  or  whatever,  but  the  fact  that  1  look  at  every  issue  as  it  comes.”  And  because  of 
that  position  1  was  in,  1  did  have  a  much  heavier  role  in  gaming  matters  than  1  probably  had  had  in  the 
past.  In  addition  to  that,  under  1  think  it  was  Governor  Richard  Bryan  put  me  on  the  gaming  policy 
committee,  which  at  that  time  actually  did  meet  and  did  things.  And  so  1  felt  when  Governor  Miller 
appointed  me  to  the  Gaming  Commission,  those  were  some  of  the  points  1  made  to  the  press  at  that  time 
as  to  why  1  thought  that  this  was  a  good  appointment.  In  addition  to  that,  actually,  was  another  reason  1 
felt  that  it  was  a  good  appointment,  and  1  did  talk  to  Governor  Miller  about  this,  that  at  the  time  there  was 
a  national  committee  looking  at  gaming  in  our  country.  And,  in  fact,  Bill  Bible,  who  at  that  time  was 
chairman  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  when  1  came  on  the  Gaming  Commission,  he  served  on  this 
national  board.  And  1  told  Governor  Miller  that  as  far  as  my  reputation  was  concerned,  there  was  nothing 
that  anybody  could  get  out  of  my  closet,  because  there  were  no  skeletons  there,  and  I’d  be  a  very  good 
appointment  for  him  even  if  1  didn’t  vote  the  same  way  everybody  did  all  the  time. 

[laughter] 

1  was  also  the  prime  sponsor  of  the  ethics  commission.  That  may  not  be  a  bad  thing  at  all, 
particularly  because  at  this  time  it  appeared  that  the  majority  of  the  national  committee  was  not  in  favor  of 
gaming  expansion,  or  had  a  different  view  of  gaming  than  those  that  regulate  the  industry  in  our  state  do. 
At  that  time,  it  was  not  nearly  as  prevalent  in  every  state  as  it  is  today;  that  was  in  1997.  So  that  was  some 
years  ago. 

Well,  was  Bill  Clinton  president  then? 

Yes,  he  was. 

So  did  he  appoint  some  people  to  that  committee,  also? 

Yes!  He  appointed  Bill  Bible  as  one  of  them.  And  I  don’t  remember  who  else.  1  think  Terry 
Lanni.  But  Bob  Miller  was  obviously  instrumental  in  getting  that  appointment,  because  it  wouldn’t  have 
been  fair  for  any  commission  not  to  be  balanced,  just  like  the  9/11  Commission  is,  as  we’re  speaking  right 
now.  1  think  Bill  Bible  is  extremely  smart,  very  capable,  and  regulated  the  gaming  industry  in  our  state 
rather  well. 

I  believe  Terry  Lanni  was  on  that  committee,  also. 

Yes,  he  was.  Terry  Lanni  is  president  of  the  MGM/Mirage/Mandalay  Bay. 

[laughter]  Yes. 

Soon  to  be,  maybe. 

When  you  were  appointed  to  the  Commission,  did  you  feel  because  of  your  legislative  experience  and 
your  term  as  chairman  of  the  tourism  committee  that  you  were  quite  knowledgeable  of  the  gaming 


532 


industry  and  its  regulations? 

I  did.  I  was  wrong,  but  I  did.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  did  forget  that  I  chaired  the  tourism 
commission  by  virtue  of  being  lieutenant  governor.  And  pretty  much  that’s  it.  You  know,  at  that  time 
tourism  was  gaming  and  not  much  else,  like  horseback  riding  or  mountain  climbing  or  golf.  Of  course,  it 
helped  me  by  virtue  of  some  of  the  things  we’ve  already  talked  about,  in  addition  to  promulgating  the 
rules  and  regulations  that  would  flesh  out  a  bill,  but  not  go  beyond  the  substance  of  the  legislation.  And, 
in  fact,  the  Gaming  Commission  does  not  come  under  the  Administrative  Procedures  Act.  It  was  taken 
out  of  that  when  1  was  in  the  senate  earlier.  So  there  were  those  kinds  of  things,  how  you  get  from  A  to  B, 
how  extensive  the  information  that  regulators  have  on  any  applicant,  it’s  just  incredible,  and  the  fact  that 
the  staff,  hundreds  of  people  who  work  for  the  Gaming  Control  Board  regulating  the  gaming  industry  and 
how  qualified  and  incredibly  good  these  people  are.  1  mean,  when  you  read  a  report  about  somebody,  Mr. 
A  comes  forward  and  wants  a  gaming  license;  if  you  don’t  want  us  knowing  something,  you  better  not 
apply  for  a  gaming  license.  Some  things  are  not  necessarily  important  whether  one  gets  a  gaming  license 
or  not,  but  most  everything  is.  If  the  financial  underpinning  isn’t  there,  then  we  would  really  look  at  that 
with  great  concern — and  particularly  because  we  look  at  publicly-traded  corporations  to  a  large  extent 
rather  than  privately  held  ones,  although  several  here  in  northern  Nevada  are  privately  held. 

But  it’s  a  fantastic  experience  and  quite  different  than  1  had  thought.  1  mean,  1  learned  a  whole 
lot — I  could  underline  “whole”  many,  many  times — about  our  number-one  industry,  and  1  think  that’s 
very  positive.  In  addition  to  that,  however,  as  I’ve  already  talked  about,  1  think  there  were  some  things 
that  1  came  to  that  Commission  with  that  other  people  did  not.  Harry  Reid  was,  1  believe,  the  last  former 
legislator  who  had  been  on  the  Gaming  Commission.  So  1  think  somebody  that  comes  from  the  legislative 
perspective  brings  something  quite  different  than,  say,  a  businessman  would,  or  an  attorney.  1  think  that’s 
very  important. 

Did  you  have  a  transition  problem  going  from  being  a  legislator  to  a  regulator? 

Well,  in  the  very  first  meeting  that  1  had,  these  men  came  with  boxes  of  material,  literally.  Knock 
on  the  door  and  here’s  a  box,  here’s  another  box,  here’s  another  box  of  background  material.  I  just 
couldn’t  even  believe  the  amount  of  reading  that  I’d  have  to  do.  And,  in  fact,  at  one  point  I  said  to  myself, 
“1  don’t  know  if  I  can  do  this  job.”  Then  I  thought  to  myself,  “Y ou  know  what,  1  bet  not  one  of  those 
guys,  one  of  those  men,  have  said  to  themselves,  ‘Gee,  I  don’t  know  if  I  can  do  this  job.’  So  why  would  I 
say  that?”  And,  of  course,  I  could.  I’m  glad  that  I  was  not  going  to  be  in  public  office  after  being  on  the 
Gaming  Commission,  because  I  think  it  might  be  hard  to  determine  how  you  treated  the  people  who  had 
the  deep  pockets  in  our  state.  I  think  that  might  be  hard.  Hopefully,  it  wouldn’t  have  been  hard  for  me, 
because  I  had  been  in  that  position  in  the  legislature. 

And  I  might  say,  one  of  the  other  things  that  when  I’m  talking  about  running  in  the  middle  of 
your  term,  clearly  people  who  give  donations  know  if  you’re  not  going  to  win  that  job,  you’re  going  to  be 
right  back  there,  in  this  case,  chairing  the  senate  judiciary  committee  again.  And  as  I  said,  I  have 
absolutely  nothing  in  my  background  that  gives  me  a  moment’s  worry.  In  fact,  a  lot  of  my  fellow 
legislators  did  not  like  the  fact  that  I  created  the  ethics  commission  and  other  things  which  I  think  are  so 
important  when  people  are  publicly  elected  and  wanting  you  to  trust  them.  They  should  be  above 
reproach.  But  I  think  that  it’s  quite  a  different  matter  from  looking  at  one  piece  of  legislation.  And 
normally,  philosophically,  you’ll  feel  this  way  about  a  bill  that  deals  with  medical  malpractice  versus  that 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


533 


way.  But  I  think  as  a  regulator  you’ve  really  got  to  be  very  tough,  because  this  is  a  huge  industry  and  you 
want  to  make  sure  that  it’s  run  the  way  you  think  it  should  be  run.  And  1  do  believe  it  is. 

So  there  is  quite  a  difference  between  being  a  regulator  and  being  a  legislator. 

1  think  so.  1  think  so.  And  I’ve  talked  about  some  of  the  similarities,  but  1  think  there  is  in  terms 
of  public  policy  and  how  one  gets  from  A  to  B.  Well,  1  would  hope  that  legislators  would  be  tough,  too. 
But  1  think  that  as  this  is  a  very  visible  industry  in  our  state,  it’s  really  important.  Although  1  have  learned 
that  most  people  have  no  idea  how  the  gaming  industry  is  regulated.  1  had  been  asked  a  number  of  times 
to  go  and  speak  to  Republican  women’s  groups,  and  1  would  bring  Brian  Sandoval,  who’s  now  our 
attorney  general,  with  me  because  1  had  a  feeling  that  he  would  be  running  for  something  later  on.  And 
we  explained  what  being  a  regulator  was  all  about,  and  no  one  had  an  idea  of  the  size  of  our  budget,  how 
many  people  worked  for  NGC.  We  described  all  the  different  divisions  there  are  under  the  Gaming 
Control  Board.  People  had  no  idea.  They  didn’t  know  that  there  were  two :  the  Control  Board  and  the 
Commission,  and  these  were  people  that  were  interested  in  politics.  These  were  mainly  Republican 
women’s  groups.  They  definitely  know  how  the  legislature  works,  because  each  legislature,  whether  it’s  a 
federal  or  the  local,  or  even  a  county  or  the  city  council,  they  all  sort  of  run  the  same  way. 

And  they  ’re  studied  in  schools,  whereas  the  Gaming  Commission  or  Gaming  Control  Board,  to  my 
knowledge,  are  not. 

No.  That’s  true.  I’ve  never  thought  about  that.  But  clearly,  when  you  see  the  little  flow  chart,  the 
bill  goes  from  here  to  here,  that  doesn’t  work  always  that  way,  either.  1  also  teach  a  class  for  the  political 
science  department  at  the  legislature  every  other  year.  And  the  students  almost  solely  come  from  the 
political  science  department,  and  they  realize  that  it  doesn’t  quite  work  the  way  they  learned  in  the 
classroom  on  campus. 

[laughter] 

But  you’re  right,  there’s  probably  no  discussion  of  this  at  all  in  our  schools. 

Yes,  it  maybe  should  be  taught  in  some  places,  because  it ’s  such  an  important  part  of  the  entire  state. 

There  should  be  at  least  a  little  discussion  about  it  in  our  state,  1  think.  That’s  a  good  point.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  I’m  going  to  bring  that  up. 

In  1999  some  rules  were  established  for  compulsive  gamblers.  William  Bible  appointed  you  to  a 
committee  to  study  the  problem  of  compulsive  gamblers.  What  are  your  thoughts  on  solving  some 
compulsive  gambling  problems? 

It’s  a  really  tough  question.  I  guess  there  are  two  ways  to  look  at  it:  one  is,  hey,  these  people  are 
adults,  that  to  meddle  in  their  lives  and  tell  them  that  they  can’t  do  this  or  they  shouldn’t  do  that  might  not 
be  appropriate  for  government  to  do.  I  do  think  that  it  is  a  serious  problem  with  a  very  small  percentage  of 
our  population  or  populations  as  a  whole,  that  I  think  there  are  people  who  have  what  we  generally  say 


534 


“an  addictive  personality.”  And  that  1  realized  as  time  went  on,  the  reason  that  people  tend  to  drink  and 
smoke  while  they’re  playing  the  slot  machines,  that  these  all  kind  of  go  together.  And,  in  fact,  there  has 
been  some  research  done  by  Harvard  University  dealing  with  problem  gambling,  and  1  think  they’ve 
already  been  able  to  zero  in  on  a  chemical  element  in  the  brain  that  tends  to  be  one  that  leads  one  to 
become  addictive.  And  I  guess  if  that  is  true — and  1  think  I’ve  read  that  for  sure — that  it  would  seem  like 
maybe  there  was  some  medicine  people  could  take  that  would  make  them  less  addictive.  But  I’m  not  sure 
we’re  quite  there  yet. 

But  I  think  it  is  a  problem,  but  how  far  you  get  involved  in  any  state.  I  think  at  some  point, 
hopefully,  someone  will  discuss  treatment  programs.  You  know,  should  there  be  funding  from  the  state 
for  treatment  programs?  I  suppose  people  would  say,  “Well,  if  we  contribute  money  for  that,  we’re  saying 
there  is  a  big  problem,  because  we’re  going  to  give  some  money  towards  a  treatment  program.”  I  have  no 
idea.  But  I  know  that  the  people  that  are  involved  in  this  here  in  Nevada,  and  some  of  the  gaming  casinos 
have  been  very  upfront,  at  the  beginning  of  this  discussion.  The  one  I  think  of  is  Harrah’s,  that  they  have 
been  pretty  much  a  leader  in  dealing  with  this  problem.  Some  states  allow  you  to  tell  them  that  they  are  a 
problem  gambler,  and  when  the  blackjack  dealer  recognizes  you  and  kicks  you  out,  that  places  a  terrible 
burden  on  a  twenty-one  dealer  or  somebody  else.  And  it’s  not  up  to  them  to  recognize  a  problem  gambler. 
That’s  asking  them  to  be  a  little  psychiatrist  or  little  psychologist  or  whatever. 

In  some  states  people  have  asked  for  nothing  to  be  sent  to  their  home  that  says  “Come  on  down 
this  week  and  you’ll  get  special  treatment.”  I  think  it  is  a  problem,  and  hopefully,  the  industry  will  look  at 
it.  I  was  hoping  that  something  might  come  out  of  this  national  panel.  But  I  think  that  because  there  are 
very  few  people  percentage -wise  in  any  state,  actually,  that  maybe  people  don’t  think  it’s  as  important  to 
deal  with,  but  I  think  we  should.  And  I  think  Nevada  should  be  a  leader  in  this.  What  we’ve  done  to  date 
really  is  to  educate  employees — that  was  part  of  our  charge — and  I  think  a  little  warning  is  stuck  on  each 
slot  machine,  with  a  phone  number  to  call  if  you  think  you  need  help.  And  there  have  been  people  in  this 
state  that  have  testified  before  that  committee.  One  of  them  is  Carol  O’Hare,  and  she  is  kind  of  the  leader 
in  our  state  on  this  subject.  She  used  to  be  a  problem  gambler.  There  was  a  woman  that  testified  before 
this  committee  that  we’ve  just  mentioned  that  had  embezzled  a  lot  of  money  from  a  non-profit  that’s  very 
well-known  in  Clark  County.  And,  in  fact,  she  was  being  sent  off  to  I  don’t  know  if  it  was  prison  or  jail 
for  embezzling.  And  the  judge  allowed  her  to  come  before  our  committee  and  talk  about  that  before  she 
went  behind  bars — not  bars  as  in  drinking  bars,  but  bars  in  prison  or  jail. 

And,  wow!  It  just  blows  your  mind.  I’ve  gambled  once  in  my  life  with  a  roll  of  nickels,  and  I 
couldn’t  understand  why  people  think  it’s  fun  and  entertaining.  But  evidently  many  people  do,  and  it 
becomes  an  addiction  for  some.  And  this  woman,  if  you’d  met  her,  if  she  could  have  sat  on  a  panel  with 
you,  you’d  think,  “Wow,  she  really  knows  a  lot.”  She  had  a  college  degree  and  this  and  that.  She 
mortgaged  her  home  in  addition  to  embezzling  money  from  this  non-profit,  and  all  kinds  of  things.  And 
it’s  a  real  shame  when  you  see  people  like  that  and  you  know  that  there  is  a  problem.  I  think  that  possibly 
the  local  hangouts  may  be  more  important.  I  don’t  know,  because  sometimes  people  will  feel  more 
comfortable  in  a  Boulder  Station  maybe  than  at  the  Bellagio.  But  I  do  think  there  has  been  some  work 
done  on  this,  and  hopefully,  there  will  be  more,  because  I  do  think  it’s  a  problem.  I  think  it  would  be  an 
overwhelming  problem  if  internet  gaming  becomes  legal,  if  that  comes  into  every  home  and  you’re 
allowed  to  bet  on  it  from  the  United  States  of  America,  which  you’re  not  now.  I  could  see  that  as  being 
huge.  I  mean,  somebody  could  roll  out  of  bed  and  just  go  right  to  their  computer.  I  think  there  would  be 
more  of  a  problem  than  actually  having  to  get  up,  get  some  clothes  on,  get  in  your  car,  and  drive 
someplace. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


535 


Yes.  [laughter] 

Have  there  been  any  other  social  issues  in  front  of  the  Commission  during  your  term? 

Well,  1  think  one  might  be  an  issue  that  was  brought  to  us  by  the  now  Attorney  General  Brian 
Sandoval.  When  you  go  certain  places,  let’s  say,  a  drugstore  or  a  grocery  store,  with  children,  there  are 
slot  machines — should  they  be  there?  Is  that  the  right  place?  Kids  are  going  to  go  with  their  mommies  and 
daddies  to  a  variety  of  different  places  where  there  are  slot  machines.  We  did  pass  a  regulation  in  terms  of 
limiting  the  spread  of  slot  machines  into  businesses  other  than  casinos.  Strangely  enough,  1  was  opposed 
to  that,  because  1  think  that  this  issue  was  pretty  much  brought  forward  to  some  of  the  commissioners  by 
people  who  had  just  moved  here  from  Illinois  or  California  or  some  other  state  where  they  were  shocked, 
as  1  was,  when  1  first  moved  here,  on  seeing  slots  in  airports  and  all  of  these  different  places.  To  me, 
Nevada  is  different  than  any  other  state.  We’ve  had  gambling  going  on  since  the  1930s  in  this  state.  It  was 
not  an  overwhelming  issue  for  me.  1  think  that  this  is  still  a  wild  and  wooly  West  state,  and  I  these  slot 
machines  are  a  part  of  that.  Of  course,  1  don’t  even  see  them  anymore.  You  get  oblivious  to  them,  but  1 
did  not  support  that.  It  didn’t  seem  to  me  that  a  good  enough  case  had  been  made.  Chairman  Sandoval  did 
bring  this  issue  to  the  attention  of  the  Commission,  as  did  the  previous  chairman.  But  1  just  did  not  feel  a 
good  enough  case  had  been  made  to  change  the  direction  of  our  state  as  an  open-gambling  state. 

Well,  you  raised  your  children  in  the  Reno  area.  Were  they  affected  in  any  way? 

In  fact,  1  asked  them  that  very  question. 

Oh?  [laughter] 

My  son  was  one  month  old,  and  my  daughter  had  not  been  bom  yet  when  we  moved  here,  and 
neither  one  of  them  even  thought  about  it.  They  were  not  interested  in  it.  Neither  one  of  them  has  ever 
gambled.  1  mean,  maybe  they  have,  as  a  lark  or  something.  But  neither  one  of  them  drinks  or  smokes,  so 
they  must  not  have  that  addictive  gene. 

[laughter] 

But  they  were  surprised  that  somebody  thought  it  was  an  issue,  and  so  was  1.  That  was  not  the 
reason  I  voted  against  it,  because  they  didn’t  think  it  was  an  issue,  but  1  was  interested  in  asking  them  that 
very  question,  and  I’m  glad  you  brought  it  up  because  I  would  have  forgotten  about  it.  Brian  Sandoval 
and  I  made  an  appointment  with  Bruce  Bledsoe,  who  then  was  the  opinion  page  editor  of  the  Reno 
Gazette-Journal.  And  we  both  came  in  and  talked  from  our  different  perspectives.  And  he  wrote  a  great 
editorial — but  then  I  always  thought  he  wrote  good  editorials — and  presented  both  of  our  arguments  and 
took  both  of  our  positions  that  this  is  a  uniquely  different  state  than  other  gambling  venues.  I  felt  fairly 
good  when  I  read  it  that  he  got  my  view.  But  then  he  and  I  used  to  agree  on  a  lot  of  things  when  1  was  in 
the  legislature. 


You  did?  [laughter] 


536 


Absolutely.  That’s  why  1  miss  him. 

Would  you  care  to  comment  on  what  we  call  the  “theme  ”  slot  machines? 

Yes,  1  will.  It  kind  of  fits  in  again  with  the  children  issue,  that  there  was  concern  about  the  fact 
that  possibly  some  of  the  slots’  themes  would  attract  kids.  I  suspect  that  people  who  read  this  will  know 
what  a  theme  is.  Some  people  who  hear  the  “Wheel  of  Fortune”  or  who  like  the  TV  show  may  want  to 
play  that  machine.  They  might  be  attracted  to  some  other  kind  of  theme  that’s  presented  on  the  face  of  the 
slot  machine  itself.  Some  people  became  concerned  about  this  whole  “slots  for  tots”  issue.  Many,  many 
workshops  were  held  on  this  subject,  that  in  the  future  when  there  was  a  theme  that  appeared  to  be  a 
cartoon  or  maybe  a  board  game  that  kids  play,  that  that  would  be  a  theme  that  we  should  take  a  look  at.  It 
initially  would  go  to  a  hearing  officer,  and  that  person  would  bring  forward  the  transcript  of  that  hearing. 
And  then  sometimes  they  want  to  keep  this  information  confidential,  because  a  lot  of  money  has  been 
invested  possibly  into  doing  a  kind  of  theme,  and  there  might  be  contracts  made  with,  let’s  say,  Warner 
Brothers,  because  they  might  own  “Looney  Tunes”  or  something  like  that.  And  so  sometimes  these  are 
kept  in  confidence.  We  must  ask  general  questions,  but  we  know  the  subject,  and  we  have  to  somehow 
weave  our  way  through  the  questioning  so  we  don’t  let  everybody  else  in  the  room  know. 

The  last  one  that  we  discussed,  which  was  just  last  week,  was  Garfield  the  cat  from  the  comic 
strip — f  have  a  cat  that  looks  kind  of  like  Garfield,  and  I’ve  never  read  the  comic  ship.  Basically,  the 
Control  Board  found  this  to  be  an  adult  cartoon,  with  an  adult  message,  that  it  was  not  a  kiddie  thing  at 
all.  In  fact,  in  discussing  it  with  one  of  the  members  of  the  Control  Board,  the  response  was  this  is  so 
much  more  adult-directed  than  Battleship,  which  was  another  theme  we’ve  had  in  the  recent  past  that’s  a 
board  game,  1  later  learned.  And  when  I’ve  read  all  the  material,  it  was  clear  that  it  was.  The  cat  is  very 
sarcastic,  the  cat  isn’t  a  fun  little  animal;  it’s  like  a  real  human  being  who’s  kind  of  lazy.  And  at  this  very 
moment  comes  a  movie  called  Garfield  that  was  going  to  open  up  the  Friday  after  the  Commission  was 
going  to  hear  this.  So  we  wanted  to  know  how  the  movie  was  marketed,  whether  kids  went  to  the  movie 
with  parents  or  without  parents,  or  just  adults. 

It  is  ironic  that  this  motion  picture  comes  out  right  at  the  time  the  Commission  is  discussing  this 
particular  potential  theme.  There  were  some  critics  or  1  guess  the  chairman  had  a  list  of  comments  made 
as  a  result  of  this  movie.  There  were  some  people  who  took  their  children.  Most  of  the  movie  theaters, 
according  to  the  information,  were  kind  of  half  and  half.  And  sometimes  if  the  cat  acted  silly  or  fell  off  a 
chair  or  something,  the  kids  laughed,  but  as  far  as  the  real  dialogue,  it  was  more  adult-oriented. 
Everything  1  read  was  that  the  movie  is  a  very  bad  movie.  If  you  read  one  of  the  critiques,  you  would  not 
go  and  see  it.  But  other  than  that,  the  real  issue  was:  is  it  driven  towards  children?  Well,  the  Commission 
voted  unanimously  in  favor  of  that  theme,  so  that  will  now  go  from  being  approved  to  our  electronics 
division  who  will  give  the  seal  of  approval  to  the  mechanics  of  the  machine.  We’ve  now  decided  that  the 
Garfield  theme  is  OK. 

Another  theme  that  we  had  approved  was  Battleship.  And  1  think  there  was  another  one  before 
that,  but  1  don’t  remember  what  it  was.  1  had  never  played  Battleship.  It  is  a  board  game.  And  our 
chairman  at  that  time,  Sandoval,  felt  that  it  was  definitely  a  children’s  game.  1  had  gone  to  a  number  of 
stores  to  see  where  it  was  stocked.  The  people  that  are  making  the  machine,  go  out  and  spend  an 
incredible  amount  of  money  to  have  polls  done  for  them,  or  researching  the  Nielsen  rating  if  it  happened 
to  be  a  cartoon  or  a  TV  show,  such  as  Bewitched.  They  tell  us  how  many  people  listen  to  that  show,  and 
what  were  the  ages.  There’s  a  big  investment  into  one  of  these  themes.  Getting  back  to  the  Battleship 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


537 


board  game,  I  was  unfamiliar  with  it.  I  don’t  think  it  had  been  around  when  my  children  were  young.  1 
went  and  looked  in  several  stores  as  to  where  they  placed  it:  was  it  with  the  toys,  or  was  it  with  a  section 
of  Monopoly  and  a  variety  of  adult  games  like  that?  And  I  always  found  it  in  the  adult  section,  although 
Mr.  Sandoval  felt  that  it  was  directly  related  to  children.  1  think  there  was  one  more  before  that,  but  1 
don’t  remember. 

Was  Battleship  rejected  then? 

It  got  approved.  1  want  to  finish  that  discussion,  because,  you  know,  children  are  not  supposed  to 
be  in  casinos,  and  so  they  shouldn’t  be  seeing  the  themes  on  these  slot  machines,  either.  One  of  the  things 
that  we  did  do  on  this  last  one,  saying  that  they  cannot  go  into  any  restricted  area.  That  was  being 
oveiprotective  because  those  would  be  the  places  that  you  would  see  children  with  their  parents,  for 
example,  at  the  grocery  store,  the  drugstore,  the  laundromat,  or  getting  gas,  or  similar  places.  The  people 
that  brought  that  to  us,  the  manufacturer,  had  no  problem  with  restricting  it  in  that  way,  as  well.  And  I  did 
want  to  make  a  point  that  people  will  hire  all  kinds  of  outside  consultants  to  prove  their  particular 
position.  1  think  it’s  kind  of  an  interesting  area.  1  don’t  really  think  we  had  to  do  it,  because  again, 
children  are  not  supposed  to  be  in  a  casino,  and  if  they  are,  they  should  just  be  walking  right  through.  In 
Las  Vegas,  of  course,  there  are  many  movie  theaters  in  casinos,  and  we  made  it  clear  that  anything  that 
got  built  in  the  future  should  make  sure  somebody  could  walk  from  the  parking  lot  to  a  movie  theater  and 
not  go  by  any  of  the  gaming  tables  and/or  slot  machines.  There  was  an  issue  with  children,  and  it  was  a 
Star  Trek  theme,  I  believe.  This  was  not  a  slot  machine,  but  this  was  a  ride  that  they  could  get  on.  And 
before  getting  on,  sometimes  there  was  a  long  line,  and  at  some  point  in  the  line,  there  were  slot  machines 
and  gaming  tables  right  there.  They  were  not  far  enough  away.  So  in  that  case,  we  made  them  change 
where  people  were  lining  up  to  get  on  this  particular  ride  and  fined  them  $350,000.  That’s  something 
different,  but  it  ties  into  the  whole  issue  of  minors  and  gambling.  We  do  feel  strongly  about  that  in  this 
state,  but  in  my  mind,  we’ve  pretty  much  done  everything  that  I  think  you  could  do.  In  fact,  I  was  waiting 
at  the  airport  one  day  with  one  of  our  gaming  agents,  and  we  saw  these  youthful-looking  people,  and  I 
said,  “You  know,  you  should  go  over.  They’re  playing  that  slot  machine.” 

“No,  you  do  it.  You’ve  got  the  badge.”  I’m  a  peace  officer  by  being  on  the  Commission.  I  have  a 
badge.  I  don’t  know  where  it  is,  but  I’ve  got  one.  So  I  went  over  and  asked  this  young  woman  her  age. 

She  was  so  offended,  and  she  went  and  got  her  driver’s  license,  and  she  was  like  twenty-eight,  [laughter]  I 
said,  “Some  day  you’re  going  to  be  happy  that  you  look  about  eighteen.”  I  didn’t  do  that  again,  but  then 
I’ve  never  seen  ...  I  did  see,  last  time  I  was  in  Las  Vegas,  which  was  a  month  ago,  a  woman  bringing  her 
small  child  through  slots  and  tables,  but  they  were  walking  right  through  and  going  to  shops  and  things 
that  are  located  in  a  lot  of  the  casinos  there.  So  I  think  we’ve  pretty  much  wrapped  up  that  subject,  I 
would  think. 

In  1999  the  Commission  approved  Park  Place  Entertainment  Corporation ’s  three-billion-dollar  purchase 
of  Caesars  World ,  Incorporated.  With  this  purchase,  Park  Place  became  owners  of  seventeen  gaming 
properties  in  three  states  and  two  countries.  Did  this  concentration  of  gaming  properties  into  the  hands  of 
a  few  corporations  concern  you  or  anyone  on  the  Commission? 

I  can’t  speak  for  anybody  else  on  the  Commission,  because  it  really  hasn’t  been  discussed  as  a 
potential  policy  question.  However,  obviously,  when  this  came  before  us,  I  had  some  concerns.  And,  of 


538 


course,  other  things  have  happened  since  then,  and  some  are  still  going  to  happen.  They  have  not  been 
before  the  Control  Board  and  the  Commission  yet,  but  they  will  be.  1  think  when  an  acquisition  happens 
the  question  becomes  how  many  properties  are  too  many  to  be  owned  by  one  coiporation.  And  I  realize 
it’s  difficult  to  know  what  to  do  and  how  to  do  it.  1  realize  this  went  all  the  way  back  to  Howard  Hughes’s 
days,  and  we  might  talk  about  that  a  little  bit  at  some  other  point — Multiple  Licensing  Regulation  Criteria 
3.070.  But  the  fact  is  that  this  is  a  concern  of  mine.  1  don’t  know  if  it  could  be  regulated  by  a  certain 
percentage.  1  guess  you  could  also  question  the  Station  Casinos  or  the  Boyd  group.  What  part  of  a  market 
do  they  have  as  far  as  the  local  casinos  go?  In  general  this  broad  question  might  be  decided  easily  on  the 
amount  of  revenue,  or  the  number  of  slot  machines,  or  percentage  of  market,  or  a  variety  of  different 
criteria,  1  suppose.  1  guess  they  would  be  arbitrary  decisions.  We  could  decide  what  is  too  much,  or 
maybe  there  shouldn’t  be  any  restriction.  Maybe  it  should  be  survival  of  the  fittest.  I  do  think  that  is 
happening  in  Reno.  But  I  feel  this  is  something  that  would  come  from  the  Control  Board  to  the 
Commission.  It  sure  would  be  interesting  workshops  or  hearings.  So  1  would  think  that  this  will  be  a  high- 
priority  considering  recent  activities,  even  after  this  one  dealing  with  Caesars  World  and  Park  Place. 

You  were  going  to  refer  to  Howard  Hughes  when  he  purchased  so  many  casinos  in  the  late  1960s,  early 
1970s. 


Well,  that’s  when  this  whole  idea  of  competition  or  lack  thereof  came  before  the  regulators.  1 
think  it  must  have  been  during  Paul  Laxalt’s  administration. 

Yes. 


1  guess  at  that  point  there  was  concern.  1  want  to  say  it’s  regulation  3.070  that  dealt  with  this 
particular  issue.  1  think  that  he  was  kind  of  a  Pac  Man  scarfing  up  different  properties  in  Las  Vegas.  It  did 
raise  a  question  in  the  regulators’  minds.  1  think  that  has  brought  us  to  today  and  questions  of  monopoly 
or  anti-competitiveness.  And  very  often,  if  not  always,  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  has  to  take  a  look 
at  any  potential  anti-competitive  problems.  And  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  has  not  found  that  to  be  a 
problem  to  date  with  many  or  any  mergers.  They  looked  at  Harrah’s  acquisition  of  Harvey’s  up  at  the 
lake,  because  that  is  a  much  smaller  market,  and  you  have  them  owning  now  two  of  the  biggest  properties 
up  at  South  Lake  Tahoe,  and  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  said  okeydokey.  But  1  think  that  in  some 
instances  regulators  have  relied  on  the  FTC  verdict. 

[laughter]  Yes. 

But  1  think  at  some  point  in  Nevada,  we’re  going  to  have  to  take  a  very  serious  look  at  this  issue. 
It  may  be  at  the  end  of  the  day  for  whatever  reason  we  decide  that  it’s  acceptable  to  allow  all  mergers,  but 
1  think  it  needs  to  be  addressed.  And  I  can  say  that  1  have  already  talked  to  both  the  gaming  commission 
chairman  and  the  control  board  chairman  about  this  very  subject  as  of  last  week,  or  maybe  even  the  week 
before.  1  have  mentioned  it  to  the  control  board  chairman  several  different  times  through  the  years. 

Did  you  approach  them  about  any  specific  properties? 


In  terms  of  the  gaming  commission  chairman,  yes;  it  was  a  result  of  the  MGM  Mirage/Mandalay 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


539 


Bay  news.  With  the  gaming  control  board  chairman,  1  have  approached  him  about  that,  and,  1  think, 
Mesquite,  Nevada.  I  don’t  know  if  you’re  familiar  with  Mesquite. 

Not  real  familiar  with  it. 

Most  all  properties  are  owned  by  one  group.  It’s  not  the  Strip,  but  the  questions  are  still  the  same. 
In  Mesquite  a  labor  union  wanted  to  get  a  hold  there.  Well,  if  one  entity  owned  everything,  they  could  just 
freeze  out  a  labor  union:  “If  you  want  to  work  for  us,  don’t  support  the  union.”  If  a  worker  continued  their 
support,  they  would  probably  have  to  either  move  to  another  community  or  find  another  kind  of  job.  I’m 
not  saying  this  happened,  but  I  suppose  it  could.  Y es,  to  answer  your  question,  I  thought  we  should  look 
at  this  issue. 

Do  you  have  any  more  comments  on  that  subject,  Sue? 

Well,  I  think  I’d  just  say  that  we’ve  seen  this  picking  up  steam.  The  MGM  Mirage  bought  out  all 
of  Steve  Wynn’s  properties,  but  recently  sold  two  of  them — the  Golden  Nugget  downtown  and  in 
Laughlin — to  two  young  men.  But  other  than  that,  they  picked  up  quite  a  few  properties  in  that  merger.  I 
know  that  some  people  felt  we  regulators  should  have  made  a  bigger  issue  out  of  that.  Since  then  the 
Gaming  Commission  voted  unanimously  to  combine  the  Boyd  Group  and  the  Coast  Casinos,  owned  by 
the  Gaughn  family  in  Las  Vegas,  two  very  old  gaming  families  whose  dads  actually  came  to  Las  Vegas 
and  started  early  in  this  new  business  in  southern  Nevada.  And  each  of  these  families  has  a  very  good 
reputation. 

In  January  2001  the  Commission  lifted  a  longstanding  ban  on  wagering  on  Nevada  college  teams  and  put 
in  force  some  new  sports  betting  regulations.  Did  the  NCAA  work  with  Nevada  regulators  to  get  these 
new  programs  in  place? 

Well,  part  of  what  happened  was  that  the  NCAA  has  been  looking  with  a  negative  eye  to  the  fact 
that  sports  wagering  is  legal  in  Nevada.  They’ve  had  a  number  of  coaches — popular  coaches — come  to 
D.C.  to  testify  in  favor  of  repealing  that  law.  I  know  that  Senator  John  McCain  from  Arizona — he  chairs 
the  commerce  committee  in  the  United  States  Senate — has  been  very  hot  on  this  topic.  He  feels  that  no 
state  should  allow  betting  on  college  games.  The  only  reason  the  NCAA  ever  knew  there  was  point 
shaving  going  on  at  Arizona  State  University  was  the  fact  that  we  reported  it  to  them — the  state  of 
Nevada  did.  And  the  NCAA  would  never  have  known,  if  sports  betting  was  not  legal  in  Nevada.  They 
had  no  idea  at  all.  I  mean,  people  know  what  goes  on  in  Nevada.  They  know  that  they  can  place  bets  on 
different  sporting  events,  but  it’s  all  done  legally.  During  March  Madness,  the  NCAA  basketball 
tournament,  I  happened  to  be  in  Las  Vegas  at  that  time.  There  were  thousands  of  kids  at  the  place  that  I 
was  staying,  all  having  a  wonderful  time  betting  on  all  these  different  basketball  teams. 

I  would  much  rather  have  them  there  than  sitting  up  in  their  dorm  room  taking  bets  and  then 
calling  a  bookie  on  the  phone  and  making  an  illegal  wager.  I  just  don’t  understand  why  they  don’t  see  it 
that  way — but  they  don’t.  And  getting  back  to  Nevada,  Brian  Sandoval  had  gone  back  to  testify  before 
Senator  John  McCain’s  committee,  and  one  of  the  zingers  he  said  was,  “Well,  if  it’s  so  good  and  so 
legitimate,  why  don’t  you  allow  betting  on  your  own  teams?  There  must  be  something  wrong  if  you  don’t 
allow  people  to  bet  on  UNR  and  UNLV.”  Brian  came  back,  and  we  took  that  ban  off  to  allow  people  to 


540 


bet  on  our  homegrown  teams.  That’s  why. 

As  far  as  the  NCAA  working  with  us,  no,  I’ve  got  to  say  I  don’t  think  so.  I  think  they’ve  been 
working  against  us.  We  did  have  a  panel  at  one  of  our  meetings,  and  we  had  somebody  representing  .  .  . 
maybe  there  was  somebody  from  the  NCAA  on  that  panel,  but  I  do  specifically  remember  from  the  NFL, 
the  National  Football  League.  And  they  also  didn’t  want  betting  on  their  games,  but  guess  what,  they 
went  away  and  we  haven’t  heard  from  them  again.  You  know,  it’s  possible  they  just  wanted  to  get  some 
press,  and  good  press.  But  it’s  an  issue  where  there  is  no  other  side,  in  my  mind.  There  just  isn’t. 

In  June  of 2003,  the  Commission  fined  the  Mirage  five  million  dollars.  Would  you  tell  us  the  reason  for 
such  a  large  fine? 

It  had  to  do  with  the  fact  that  employees  were  not  filing  reports  at  a  certain  time,  and  they  had 
piled  up  for  a  very  long  time.  That  person — and  I  think  it  was  maybe  more  than  one — got  fired 
immediately,  and  it  was  the  largest  fine  that  we  have  ever  levied. 

Were  those  anti-laundering  reports? 

Y es,  they  were — Regulation  6A. 

Is  that  still  the  largest  fine? 

Well,  I  can’t  think  of  any  one  that’s  been  bigger,  because  this  just  happened  not  even  two  years 

ago. 

In  January  2004,  Tim  Poster  and  Tom  Breitling  appeared  before  the  Commission  to  be  licensed  as 
owners  of  the  Golden  Nuggets  in  Las  Vegas  and  in  Laughlin.  Would  you  tell  us  about  the  hearing  and  the 
problems  that  Poster  and  Breitling  brought  with  them  to  the  hearing? 

Yes,  this  just  happened  when  these  two  young  men  wanted  to  be  licensed  because  they  wanted  to 
buy  the  Golden  Nuggets  from  the  MGM  Mirage  Coiporation.  They  were  two  very  young  men  in  their 
thirties — I  think  they  were  even  younger  than  my  own  children.  They  started  initially  selling  rooms  in  the 
Las  Vegas  casinos.  I  believe  they  sold  their  company,  which  was  called  Travelscape.com  to  Expedia.com 
for  over  a  hundred  million  dollars.  And  here  are  two  young  people  who  have  all  this  money,  and  I  think 
they  were  kind  of  at  loose  ends,  not  knowing  exactly  what  to  do  with  the  rest  of  their  lives — or  their 
money.  One  of  the  things  we  did  learn  in  that  hearing  was  that  they  also  had  a  partner  that  was  going  to  be 
a  passive  investor — Andre  Agassi.  They  had  gone  to  high  school  with  Andre,  the  famous  tennis  player 
who  lives  in  Las  Vegas.  And  it  appeared  as  if  maybe  they  had  been  a  target  of  people  with  questionable 
backgrounds.  They  had  been  sort  of  lured  into  Rick  Rizzolo’s  company. 

Rick  Rizzolo  was  rather  an  unsavory  character? 

He  was  indeed.  He  was  in  the  adult  entertainment  business.  It  was  pretty  clear  to  the 
investigators — I’ve  mentioned  what  a  terrific  job  they  do.  Poster  particularly  had  more  time,  I  guess,  to 
play  around  a  little  bit.  He  was  eating  in  this  restaurant,  Piero’s,  anywhere  from  three  or  four  nights  out  of 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


541 


every  week,  where  Rizzolo  and  some  of  his  buddies  hung  out.  And  Rizzolo  did  indeed  come  into  contact 
with  people  that  the  gaming  agents  knew  something  about,  that  they  were  associated  with  organized 
crime.  And  so  that  was  a  big  concern  of  ours,  and  1  think  it  would  be  of  any  regulator.  One  of  the  control 
board  members  is  the  former  head  of  the  FBI  in  the  state.  1  think  he  was  head  of  the  whole  state,  but 
certainly  the  one  in  Las  Vegas. 

Who  is  that ? 

His  name  is  Bobby  Siller.  And  he  made  it  really  clear  that  these  were  exactly  the  kind  of  people 
that  somebody  might  try  to  lure  in.  They  were  rich,  they  were  young,  they  might  be  kind  of  seduced  by  all 
this  attention  that  they  were  getting.  And  so  1  think  they  may  have  been  somewhat  surprised  at  the  amount 
of  time  we  spent  grilling  them.  And  clearly,  one  of  the  major  concerns  that  some  of  us  had  was  they  had 
no  gaming  experience,  nobody  that  they  had  as  other  investors  had  any  gaming  experience,  and  we  were 
concerned  about  that.  But  they  did  agree  to  keep  almost  everybody,  keep  on  all  the  management,  and  we 
felt  much  more  comfortable  about  that.  1  know  1  did  ask  some  specific  questions;  they  were  questions  that 
were  shown  on  this  new  television  program  called  The  Casino. 

Would  you  tell  us  a  little  bit  about  that  TV  program? 

Yes,  1  will.  It’s  being  produced  by  the  same  man  who  has  produced  Survivor  and  The  Apprentice 
programs  starring  Donald  Trump,  who  was  another  person  before  the  Gaming  Commission  not  very  long 
ago.  So  the  producer  had  big  successes,  although  he’s  also  had  some  bombs.  And  the  ones  that  haven’t 
done  well  are  ones  that  don’t  have  competition  among  them,  that  are  just  kind  of  viewing  something,  like 
the  opening  of  a  restaurant.  1  watched  The  Apprentice  right  before  Donald  Trump  came  to  our  Gaming 
Commission  meeting  so  1  would  at  least  know  something  about  him  from  that.  And  this  program,  it  was 
suggested  by  both  the  two  young  men,  Poster  and  Breitling,  that  they  were  going  to  show  people  what  it 
was  like  to  get  a  gaming  license  and  to  run  a  gaming  casino.  And  it  is  being  shown  currently  on  Fox 
television  on  Monday  nights,  because  it  just  was  on  last  night.  1  think  that  they  may  give  America  the 
wrong  image. 

Are  they  actually  filming  things  as  they  are  happening? 

They  are,  but  they’ve  selected  certain  things  that  hopefully  will  get  more  people  to  watch  the 
show  the  next  week.  You  know,  that  new  expression  that  Las  Vegas  is  using.  What  is  it? 

“What  happens  here  stays  here.  ” 

“What  happens  here  stays  here.”  Yes.  Sort  of  that  image.  1  think  we  got  the  idea — or  certainly  I 
did — when  they  were  testifying.  And  they  did  start  the  first  program,  which  was  a  week  ago,  with  their 
experience  at  the  Gaming  Commission.  1  thought  they  were  very  energetic  and  very  sharp  to  already  have 
this  program  lined  up.  It’s  clearly  great  advertising  for  them,  and  the  Golden  Nugget  for  downtown  Las 
Vegas,  and  to  some  extent  for  the  gaming  industry.  But  because  they  are  taking  over  a  casino  in 
downtown  Las  Vegas  which  has  had  some  difficulties,  to  say  the  least,  the  Strip  has  just  kind  of  been  the 
five-hundred-pound  gorilla.  1  think  that  those  are  positive  things.  1  think  because  of  the  experience  they 


542 


had  at  the  commission  meeting,  they’re  going  to  be  a  lot  more  aware  of  what  they  should  do  as  owners,  or 
what  they  should  not  do.  1  mean,  you  have  to  figure  these  kids  are  like  they  got  in  the  candy  store  and 
they’re  just  sampling  a  little  bit  of  everything.  The  property  in  Laughlin,  they’re  going  to  try  to  do  a  little 
cross-marketing  with.  But  clearly,  they  have  a  lot  of  marketing  ability.  They’ve  got  to  be  somewhat 
creative  to  have  created  this  company  in  their  twenties  and  sold  it  in  their  early  thirties  for  that  kind  of 
money. 

So  their  biggest  problem  as  far  as  getting  licensing  was  the  company  that  they  kept,  the  people  they 
associated  with. 

Y es,  to  a  large  extent. 

Were  there  any  conditionings  put  on  the  approval  as  they  had  to  keep  the  same  management  team? 

I’m  not  sure  it  was  a  specific  condition.  I’d  have  to  go  back  and  look  at  my  records,  but  it  was 
clear  that  that’s  something  that  was  verbalized  at  the  hearing.  They  got  the  message.  And  there’s  actually 
another  TV  program  about  a  casino  going  on  as  well  on  a  different  channel.  So  Las  Vegas  is  hitting  a 
heyday  on  television  programming  right  now. 

And  Reno  is  not. 

And  Reno  is  not. 


No. 


Oh!  Reno  911! 

Oh,  yes.  911.  Yes.  [laughter] 

Hey!  I  happen  to  watch  the  Daily  show  which  comes  on  right  after. 

In  the  past  year,  some  casinos  have  used  billboard  ad  campaigns  that  are  offensive  to  many  people. 

Would  you  tell  us  what  happened  at  the  March  2004  commission  meeting? 

The  meeting  reminded  me  a  lot  of  the  legislative  hearings  when  there  has  been  a  controversial 
issue.  There  were  many  people,  and  it  was  certainly  organized  by  not  only  women,  mothers  with  children, 
but  there  was  an  occasional  male  there  as  well.  It  had  been  organized  and  it  appeared  to  be  made  up  of 
people  of  religious  organizations.  And  that’s  why  I  say  reminded  me  of  some  of  the  things  in  the 
legislature.  They  were  offended  by  some  of  the  billboards  used  by  the  Hard  Rock.  And  I  have  to  say  that  I 
think  the  billboards  were  in  extremely  poor  taste.  But  the  reason  that  the  Gaming  Control  Board  was 
concerned  was  not  because  of  the  racy  views  or  words,  but  was  the  fact  that  there  were  words  that  were 
used  that  suggested  that  cheating  went  on  in  gaming.  For  the  life  of  me,  I  can’t  remember  the  other  word 
used,  but  they  were  not  found  offensive  to  the  Control  Board  in  the  way  that  the  public  was  offended  by 
it;  they  were  offended  by  the  use  of  the  words  that  affected  the  image  of  gaming  and  gaming  control  in 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


543 


Nevada. 

The  people  came  back  again,  and  that  was  in  March,  and  then  we  were  going  to  vote  on  that  very 
issue  that  I’ve  just  described  at  a  later  meeting,  and  maybe  that  would  have  been  in  May.  But  we  did  take 
testimony  again,  and  we  had  the  attorney  representing  Hard  Rock  there  as  well.  They  had  come  up  with  a 
one-hundred-thousand-dollar  penalty  or  fine  against  three  of  the  concerns,  and  that  was  the  most  possible. 
And  1  guess  there  were  a  lot  of  negotiations  that  went  on  between  the  control  board  attorney  and  the  hotel 
itself.  Interestingly  enough,  at  the  end  of  all  this  testimony,  the  chairman  of  the  Gaming  Commission  said 
that  we  would  not  be  voting  that  day,  but  would  possibly  move  it  over  to  another  hearing.  That  was  a 
surprise  certainly  to  me,  and  I  think  it  was  to  the  other  members,  but  we  all  tended  to  support  the 
chairman  in  the  direction  that  he  wanted  to  take  this  issue.  We  have  not  done  anything  on  it  yet  as  of  this 
day,  which  is  in  the  end  of  June. 

The  northern  Nevada  area  especially  is  starting  to  see  a  great  deal  of  activity  with  properties  wanting  to 
open  so-called  “neighborhood  casinos,  ”  the  type  of  casinos  that  the  Station  Casinos  operation  in 
southern  Nevada  has  had  so  much  success  with  in  past  years.  Do  you  see  a  problem  with  neighborhood 
casinos,  either  in  Las  Vegas  or  northern  Nevada? 

You  know,  1  don’t  think  I  do  in  Las  Vegas.  Clearly,  the  community  there  has  not  organized  to  any 
extent  to  protest  them  except  in  one  instance,  and  that  was  done  when  Brian  Sandoval  was  chairman  of 
the  Commission.  And  1  believe  that  they  had  to  get  another  piece  of  property  because  of  the  concern  of 
the  neighborhood.  Here  in  northern  Nevada,  it’s  a  totally  different  story,  as  I’m  sure  I’ve  mentioned  in 
prior  tapes,  the  fact  that  northern  Nevada  has  never  been  totally  engaged  in  gaming  as  being  something 
that  they  have  opened  their  arms  and  hugged.  I  think  in  this  case,  because  we  do  have  neighborhood 
advisory  boards,  that  it  will  become  a  big  issue,  and  it  has  become  a  big  issue.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  when 
Jeff  Siri  and  Donald  Mousel  both  testified  before  the  Gaming  Commission  about  this  neighborhood 
casino,  which  was  going  to  be  on,  I’m  going  to  say,  Fourth  Street  and  up  in  the  northwest  part  of  town — 

McCarran? 

And  McCarran,  maybe.  I  had  kiddingly  said  to  both  Jeff  and  David  that  they  better  not  count  their 
chickens  before  they’re  hatched,  because  David  and  I,  in  our  neighborhood,  had  protested  the  building  of 
the  Walgreen’s  drugstore,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  and  Jeff  Siri  used  to  live  right  around  the  comer  from  me. 
We  were  able  to  get  that  killed  and  defeated.  So  I  told  them  that  they  may  run  into  some  opposition  as 
well.  And  indeed  they  did.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  they  did  to  such  an  extent  that  that  piece  of  property  did 
not  come  into  play.  I  know  that  they’re  looking  around  now  for  a  different  venue,  but  I  think  that  it’s 
going  to  be  difficult,  because,  as  I  say,  people  here  have  not  embraced  gaming  the  way  Las  Vegas  has. 
Although  I  think  if  the  right  piece  of  property  is  found,  I  think  that  they,  Siri,  Mousel,  and  the  Cal-Neva, 
would  have  a  very  upscale  place.  But,  you  know,  it  raises  red  flags  to  many  people,  particularly  because 
people  have  moved  to  northern  Nevada  from  different  states,  and  this  is  something  quite  different  for 
them.  And  if  that’s  where  you  live  and  that’s  where  the  school  where  the  children  go,  it’s  going  to  present 
some  problems.  It  may  do  better  in  an  area  where  all  the  development  has  not  occurred  yet,  such  as  the 
Tamarack  Junction. 


There  are  regulations  now,  aren ’t  there,  about  how  close  a  casino  can  be  built  to  a  school? 


544 


Yes,  and  to  a  religious  building  as  well.  It’s  Regulation  3.010 — unsuitable  locations.  But  if 
somebody  doesn’t  protest  that,  it  doesn’t  mean  automatically  that  it  would  be  defeated.  Let’s  say 
somebody  proposed  a  neighborhood  casino  within  x  number  of  feet  of  an  elementary  school;  that  doesn’t 
automatically  knock  that  out.  The  Commission  would  look  at  that,  and  possibly  people  from  the 
neighborhood  would  come  in  and  testify  as  well.  But  1  think  with  the  Station  Casinos,  for  example,  that 
that  has  become  a  very  not  only  lucrative  business,  but  also  one  that  1  think  people  tend  to  go  along  with 
in  Clark  County. 

It’s  a  very  recognized  casino  chain. 

Absolutely  it  is.  1  think  it  would  be  recognized  as  the  most  important  and  influential 
neighborhood  casino  organization.  There  are  some  others,  but  they  are  certainly  the  king  of  neighborhood 
casinos. 

Well,  some  of  these  casinos  that  are  talking  about  moving  to  outlying  areas,  is  this  happening  because 
they  have  lost  their  license  location  in  downtown  Reno  because  of  the  Reno  ReTRAC? 

Yes,  in  many  cases  that  is  right  that  they’ve  been  grandfathered  in,  meaning  that  they  don’t  have 
to  build  a  hotel  with  a  minimum  of  two  hundred  rooms.  They  can  take  that  license  because  the  trench 
would  come  too  close  to  that  business  or  through  that  business,  [laughter]  So  they’ve  been  allowed  to  take 
that  license  and  move  with  it,  so  to  speak.  At  one  time,  for  the  Peppermill,  it  started  with  a  lobbyist  named 
Harvey  Whittemore.  The  license  was  sold  to  Harvey,  but  Harvey  did  not  have  a  gaming  license.  So  he 
then  sold  it,  1  think,  for  a  dollar  to  the  Peppermill,  and  then  they  were  looking  at  taking  that  license  and 
building  a  place  in  southwest  Reno.  That  presented  real  problems  for  the  Atlantis,  because  it  was  getting 
awfully  close  to  their  domain,  and,  in  addition,  they  were  looking  at  building  something  out  in  that  area  as 
well.  So  because  they  filed  a  lawsuit,  and  because  it  appeared  that  it  would  drag  on  for  a  very  long  time, 
Peppermill  and  Whittemore  are  now  looking  at  the  Spanish  Springs  area.  In  addition,  other  groups  that 
also  have  licenses  are  looking  at  Spanish  Springs  as  well. 

Which,  of  course,  has  been  a  booming  residential  area  for  the  last  few  years. 

Yes,  it  is.  And  interestingly  enough,  however,  it’s  still  rather  new.  So  the  possibility  maybe  of 
getting  something  built  there  is  going  to  be  much  more  likely  than  it  was  in  the  Fourth  Street,  McCarran 
area. 

In  your  opinion,  are  many  of  the  Reno  casinos  now  concentrating  their  marketing  on  local  residents 
rather  than  marketing  outside  the  state  of  Nevada? 

1  think  that’s  true,  and  1  think  part  of  it  is  a  result  of  September  1 1th  in  the  fact  that  people  were 
coming  from  further  distances — that’s  one  of  the  reasons — and  because  airline  traffic  and  airport  security 
presented  a  problem.  Those  that  did  market  to  locals  are  the  ones  that  did  very  well,  or  continued  to  do 
well,  during  this  period  of  time.  The  other  major  reason  that  1  think  1  might  add  is,  of  course,  Indian 
casinos.  And  I  think  that,  again,  those  have  sucked  off,  if  you  will,  or  vacuumed  up  many  of  the  tourists 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


545 


that  would  come  to  Reno,  and  now  they  don’t  have  to  because  they’re  visiting  casinos  in  Washington, 
Oregon,  northern  California,  and  that  market  is  diluted.  Those  casinos  that  understood  that,  and  have 
always  focused  on  people  that  live  here,  were  the  ones  that  did  well  and  are  continuing  to  do  well.  A  good 
example  is  the  poor  Siena  [Hotel-Casino].  Mr.  Ng,  who  is  the  owner,  a  wonderful  man,  had  a  terrific 
application  before  the  Gaming  Commission,  and  unfortunately,  he  opened  his  property  about  a  week  after 
September  1 1th.  I  think  he  really  believed  that  this  was  a  boutique  casino  and  that  many  of  his  associations 
and  contacts  in  the  Bay  Area  would  come  here,  but,  again,  many  of  those,  he  assumed  would  be  coming 
by  plane,  not  necessarily  driving.  And,  of  course,  we  have  the  winters  that  some  people  don’t  want  to 
cross  over  Donner  summit  in  the  wintertime,  so  there  were  these  other  opportunities  for  people  to  get  their 
entertainment  from  casinos  that  are  now  very  available  to  them  in  the  northwestern  part  of  our  country. 

Of  course,  at  the  Indian  casino  there  at  Thunder  Valley,  one  of  their  advertisements  is,  “Why  put  on 
chains?  ” 


Yes,  exactly. 

"Come  in  here  and  play. "  [laughter] 

And  that’s  a  very  nice  property.  1  don’t  know  if  we’ve  talked  about  this  before,  but  that’s  being 
managed  by  the  Station  Casinos  that  we  just  discussed  earlier,  and  they,  of  course,  have  enough  property. 

I  went  through  it  about  a  week  before  it  opened,  because  the  son  of  one  of  my  friends  is  head  of  the  table 
games  there.  And  they  have  a  lot  of  property  where  they  can  build  a  hotel,  which  is  obviously  in  the 
master  plan.  So  all  of  these  things  really  pointed  out  that,  hey,  you  know,  locals  are  pretty  darn  good 
customers.  And  you  can  look  at  a  casino  such  as  the  Sands,  both  the  Atlantis  and  the  Peppermill,  although 
they  do  have  a  clientele  outside  of  the  state,  but  they  also  market  locals  as  well. 

What  do  you  feel  about  the  fact  that  the  Indian  casinos  are  standing  there  alone  all  by  themselves, 
whereas  if  someone  comes  to  Reno,  there ’s  a  multitude  of properties  that  a  person  can  go  to? 

Well,  1  think  that  obviously  is  the  real  attraction  that  downtown  Reno  and  South  Virginia  Street 
offer.  1  guess  it  depends  upon  what  the  customer  wants.  If  the  customer  is  only  interested  in  going  and 
pulling  slot  machine  levers  and  maybe  getting  a  less  expensive  meal,  then  they’re  going  to  be  satisfied 
with  Thunder  Valley  or  some  of  the  other  places.  1  think  the  biggest  thing — and  everybody  says  the  same 
thing,  so  it’s  nothing  that  1  thought  up — is  that  the  special  events  we  have  in  Reno  are  the  thing  that  will,  1 
think,  stand  us  in  good  stead.  Not  only  that  if  they  aren’t  doing  well  at  the  Silver  Legacy,  they  go  across 
the  street  to  Harrah’s  and  hope  that  their  luck  changes. 

Right. 


And  that  also  is  important,  but  just  last  weekend  from  the  taping  that  we’re  doing  today,  there 
was  a  “Blues  and  Brews”  that  was  put  on  downtown,  where  there  were  the  breweries,  and  then  they  had 
blues  music.  I  guess  that  drew  quite  a  crowd.  Of  course,  nothing’s  like  Hot  August  Nights,  but  you  have 
the  rodeo,  you’ve  got  a  lot  of  things  now  ongoing,  particularly  through  the  summer  where  that’s  another 
attraction  that  the  Indian  casinos  can’t  duplicate.  They  can  duplicate  in  many  cases  the  entertainment, 


546 


because  I  have  noticed  that.  In  fact,  even  in  Arizona  some  of  the  casinos  that  I’ve  been  through  have  the 
same  entertainment  as  we  have  here.  Sometimes  we  get  an  amazingly  popular  performer  that  comes  to 
Lawlor  Events  Center.  I’m  thinking  of  Prince,  I’m  thinking  of  Cher,  some  of  those  bigger  names.  I  know 
the  entertainment  kind  of  dropped  off  here  in  Reno  because  when  the  big  entertainers  that  used  to  be  in 
Sammy’s  showroom  at  Harrah’s  or  out  at  the  Nugget,  they  became  so  expensive  that  they  found  it  was 
not  in  their  best  interest.  In  addition,  they  would  play  in  large  venues  such  as  a  football  stadium  or 
Madison  Square  Garden  or  Staples  Center.  So  they’re  getting  back  to  realizing  that  entertainment  is  also  a 
draw.  They’re  not  the  top  tier  of  entertainers,  but,  as  I  say,  a  lot  of  them  you  can  see  right  at  some  of  the 
Indian  casinos.  You  know,  I  guess  I  could  throw  out  a  name,  but  I’m  not  going  to  because  I  might  be 
wrong,  [laughter] 

[laughter]  Well ,  the  thing  with  those  special  events  you  mentioned ,  also,  they  ’re  more  than  a  one-day 
situation,  whereas  in  Indian  casinos,  most  of  them  don ’t  have  the  hotel  rooms  yet. 

I  think  that  many  of  them  will  be  getting  the  hotel  rooms  and  golf  courses  and  the  other 
amenities,  if  you  will,  but  I  think  you’re  right.  To  get  away  for  a  weekend  is  something  that’s  being 
marketed  as  well.  And  during  the  summer  months  there’s  no  big  problem.  We’re  definitely  constrained  by 
being  on  the  east  side  of  the  Sierras  in  that  way.  Of  course,  we’re  dam  lucky  we’ve  got  them  there,  too.  I 
was  just  looking  at  the  number  of  passengers  going  through  McCarran  Airport  just  last  month  in  Las 
Vegas.  It  was  their  best  March,  I  think,  it  was,  or  maybe  May,  of  any  May  in  the  history  of  Las  Vegas.  So 
they’re  just  doing  so  well.  And  they  don’t  have  quite  the  same  problems  that  northern  Nevada  does  in 
terms  of  Indian  casinos.  They’ve  got  the  L.A.  area,  San  Diego  area,  plus  people  come  to  Las  Vegas  from 
all  over  our  country,  or  the  world,  for  that  matter.  It’s  in  a  class  that  nobody  else  touches.  Maybe  Macao 
will  be  breathing  down  their  backs,  but,  again,  they’re  going  to  be  rather  limited  there  as  well  in  terms  of 
numbers  of  casinos. 

And  no  mountain  passes  that  they  have  to  pass. 

And  no  mountain  passes.  No,  I  think  you  get  in  one  of  those  boats  and  go  right  from — would  it  be 
Singapore?  Yes,  I  think  so.  And  I  guess  it’s  not  that  far  from  mainland  China  to  Macao.  And  Macao,  if  I 
remember  correctly,  used  to  be  owned  by  Portugal,  and  then  it  was  turned  over  to  the  Chinese.  I  think  I’m 
right  about  that.  So  out  of  the  three  licenses,  which  I  think  we’ve  talked  about  before,  you’ve  got  Adelson, 
Sheldon  Adelson  of  the  Venetian,  Steve  Wynn  of  Wynn  Resorts,  and  then  the  third  one  is  going  to  be  the 
MGM.  They  got  it  in  a  different  way,  by  going  into  business  with  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Ho,  who  was  the 
monopolistic  ...  he  was  totally  in  control  of  gaming  in  Macao  until  just  recently.  But  the  MGM  did  not 
get  one  of  the  three  licenses.  They  lost  out.  But  they  didn’t  really  lose  out  because  now  they’re  going  into 
business  with  the  daughter,  and  they’ll  be  splitting,  of  course,  the  revenue.  It  won’t  all  flow  towards  the 
parent  company.  But  that  has  got  to  be  the  biggest  market  on  the  face  of  the  planet. 

Right. 


So  if  they  have  to  split  it,  I  guess  that’s  not  too  terribly  bad. 

[laughter]  Yes.  Does  being  the  only  commission  member  from  northern  Nevada  concern  you  in  any  way? 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


547 


Yes,  it  does.  First  of  all,  you’re  sort  of  hanging  out  here  by  yourself,  and  I  have  no  idea  with  the 
other  four  members — and  I  get  along  very  well  with  all  of  them — if  they  get  in  touch  with  each  other  or 
they  see  each  other  at  events.  1  don’t  know  that.  1  mean,  clearly,  they  don’t  discuss  things  in  violation  of 
the  open-meeting  law,  but  if  there’s  some  function,  maybe  a  dinner  honoring,  let’s  say,  Terry  Lanni, 
president  of  the  MGM,  well,  they’re  all  probably  going  to  go.  1  know  that  Art  Marshall,  who  you’ve  also 
interviewed,  very  often  when  there’s  a  big  event  such  as  the  Anti-Defamation  League,  he  makes  sure  that 
I  know  that  he  will  get  a  ticket  for  me  and  take  care  of  it  as  his  guest.  I  don’t  do  that  just  because  I  don’t 
like  to  travel  as  much  anymore. 

And  the  other  reason,  of  course,  is  the  fact  that  the  issues  that  we  have,  the  problems  we  have,  are 
quite  different  than  the  ones  that  Las  Vegas  has.  We’ve  talked  about  this  in  a  variety  of  different  ways — 
in  fact,  just  in  the  last  question.  So  even  if  you’re  talking  about  northern  Nevada,  Elko  is  quite  different 
from  Mesquite  in  terms  of  properties  in  the  outlying  areas.  1  feel  that  Brian  Sandoval,  the  past  chair,  and  1, 
had  a  lot  in  common,  because  we  both  represented  the  same  district  in  the  assembly.  We  didn’t  talk  about 
things  that  often,  but  sometimes  we  did,  and  I  don’t  have  that  opportunity  now.  And  maybe  there  will  be 
another  member  from  northern  Nevada — 1  would  think  probably  not  on  an  ongoing  basis,  because 
Governor  Guinn  broke  that  kind  of  pattern  of  having  two  from  northern  Nevada  and  three  from  Las  Vegas 
when  he  did  not  appoint  another  northern  Nevada  person  the  last  go-around  that  he  had.  And  so  that  went 
to — the  chairman,  actually,  Peter  Bernhard,  took  Brian  Sandoval’s  place,  so  now  there  are  four  down 
there.  1  think  the  biggest  concern  is  the  fact  that  the  issues  are  so  different,  and  sometimes  1  have  to  be  the 
spokesperson  from  northern  Nevada,  even  though  it  was  pointed  out  to  me  that  really  1  represent  the  state. 
And  that’s  true,  we  all  do.  It’s  not  called  Northern  Nevada  Gaming  Commission. 

[laughter] 

But,  in  fact,  we’re  talking  about  neighborhood  casinos  and  Station  Casinos.  1  really  quizzed  them 
rather  extensively  about  Thunder  Valley,  that  they  were,  you  know,  really  going  to  suction  off  much  of 
the  revenue  that  would  come  to  northern  Nevada  by  managing  that.  Well,  they  saw  an  opportunity  and 
they  took  it.  They  have  shareholders  that  they  have  to  answer  to.  I  understood  that,  but  1  did  make  quite  a 
record  of  it  for  the  transcript,  because  1  thought  1  needed  to.  So  that  does  present  some  problems,  1  think, 
by  having  only  one  person. 

Yes.  And  like  you  say,  with  Thunder  Valley,  no  one  else  on  the  Commission  is  really  going  to  support  you 
on  that  possibly,  because  they  see  no  problem  with  it  down  there. 

Yes,  but  interesting  enough,  Commissioner  Marshall  does  come  to  my  defense  occasionally,  and  I 
believe  he  did  on  this  very  issue,  pointing  out  to  the  Station  Casinos  after  1  got  done  with  what  I’m  sure 
they  thought  a  very  long  discussion  of  this,  that  Commissioner  Marshall  said  to  the  Station  Casinos 
people,  “You  know,  you  really  should  take  a  look  at  Reno.”  And  he’s  done  that  a  number  of  ways,  which 
I  really  have  appreciated  a  lot.  But  it’s  not  the  same  thing  as  feeling  like  you’ve  got  to  defend  or  represent 
an  area  of  the  state  that  nobody  else  represents.  So,  yes,  1  do  think  it’s  kind  of  a  problem. 

I  wonder  if  the  situation  has  ever  come  up  where  someone  has  thought  about  making  it  a  regulation  or  a 
statute  that  there ’s  geographical  appointment  of  commissioners.  In  years  past,  the  so-called  “cow 


548 


counties  ”  had  representative  people  like  Walter  Cox. 

And,  I  suppose,  maybe  Carl  Dodge. 

Carl  Dodge  from  Fallon,  yes. 

Yes.  But  that  was  done  just  by  practice,  right? 

As  far  as  I  know. 

Yes.  Well,  clearly,  there  is  a  not  a  regulation  now,  because  the  governor,  of  course,  appointed  a 
Las  Vegan  for  the  position  of  chairman.  I  don’t  know  how  I’d  feel  about  that.  I’d  have  to  give  that  a  lot 
more  thought.  1  suspect  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  get  it  on,  for  one  thing,  just  by  virtue  of  the  make-up 
of  the  Board  and  the  Commission  at  this  point,  in  addition  to  the  governor  being  from  Clark  County.  I 
think  that  people  would  say  that  it  really  is  the  governor’s  choice.  He  or  she — hopefully,  there’ll  be  a  she 
in  the  future — that  that’s  their  jurisdiction,  and  one  wouldn’t  want  to  hamstring  them.  And  maybe  1  might 
feel  that  way  as  well. 

You  have  described  yourself  as  being  tough  and  hardnosed.  Does  that  description  fit  your  entire  lifestyle, 
or  are  you  tough  and  hardnosed  only  when  acting  as  a  member  of  the  Commission? 

Well,  1  suppose  you  should  really  ask  that  question  of  my  children. 

[laughter] 

First  of  all,  1  certainly  wouldn’t  limit  it  just  to  the  Commission.  Probably  people  would  describe 
me,  if  they  used  that  term,  in  my  involvement  in  the  legislative  process  as  well.  1  would  say  that  might  fit 
my  public  performance,  if  you  will,  and  maybe  it’s  the  view  that  other  people  have  of  me.  1  remember  1 
was  just  dumbfounded  by  this.  And  1  will  not  mention  the  name  of  the  person,  but  it  is  a  male  lobbyist 
who  is  very  well  known  and  who  has  been  involved  in  the  legislative  process  for  quite  a  long  time.  And  at 
one  time  he  told  me  that  he  became  very  nervous,  and  not  only  ill  at  ease,  but  was  uncomfortable  in 
coming  to  lobby  me  because  1  guess  I  scared  him  a  little  bit.  And  I  just  couldn’t  even  believe  that 
description,  but  when  1  read  this  description  of  myself  that  you  just  asked  me,  1  immediately  thought  of 
that  description.  So  that,  of  course,  is,  again,  in  a  relationship  that  you  would  have  in  my  public  life.  I 
think  that  probably  if  you  ask  people  that  were  my  friends,  they  might  say  that  that  is  probably  a  fairly 
good  description. 

1  was  going  to  say  maybe  before  1  ran  for  office  people  would  not  have  described  me  that  way, 
but  1  suspect  that  wouldn’t  be  true  now,  and  maybe  that  is  how  people  see  me.  In  a  way  that’s  good,  in  a 
way  it  isn’t  very  good.  1  guess  that  it’s  helped  me  get  through  some  difficult  times  in  my  life  by  not  being, 
I  guess,  the  other  description  would  be  soft  and  submissive.  1  don’t  know.  But  to  be  honest,  1  guess  1 
would  describe  myself  that  way.  As  I  say,  that’s  probably  a  good  thing  when  it  comes  to  the  public  part  of 
my  life,  probably  not  so  good  in  the  private  part  of  my  life.  My  daughter  is  now  engaged,  and  I’ve  met 
everybody  that  she’s  been  serious  about  or  has  brought  home.  I  don’t  know  how  many  guys.  And  it  turns 
out  that  the  guy  that  she  decided  she  was  going  to  marry  is  one  1  didn’t  get  a  chance  to  meet.  So  1  guess  1 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


549 


would  kiddingly  say  1  didn’t  scare  him  away,  [laughter]  So  1  think  that,  yes,  1  am,  as  far  as  my 
performance  on  the  Gaming  Commission. 

You  were  interviewed  for  or  you  participated  in  a  book  called  Maverick  Spirit. 

Yes. 

What  was  the  name  of  the  gentleman  who  edited  that? 

Richard  Davies  at  the  university. 

Yes.  And  he  picked  how  many  people  to  interview? 

Well,  1  don’t  remember.  I’m  going  to  say  maybe  ten,  twelve,  something  like  that.  And  I  think  it 
was  people  since  World  War  11 — if  I  remember,  that  sticks  out  in  my  mind. 

Did  he  interview  them  and  then  write  an  article  about  them  after  the  interview? 

No,  what  happened  was  that  he  selected  different  people  to  write  the  chapter  on  an  individual.  I’ll 
give  you  an  example.  Initially,  the  chairman  of  the  then  political  science  department,  Eric  Herzik,  was 
going  to  write  a  chapter  on  Bill  Raggio.  It  turns  out  that  he  didn’t  have  time  to  do  it,  so  somebody  else 
wrote  it.  And  a  different  person  wrote  a  chapter  on  Steve  Wynn  or  on  Jerry  Tarkanian.  So  there  were 
different  authors,  depending  upon  who  the  subject  was.  In  my  case,  I  had  maybe  met  this  woman  a  couple 
of  times  but  did  not  know  her  well,  Pat  Klos.  She  has  been  involved  in  a  number  of  things  in  our 
community,  and  her  son  is  a  lobbyist  and  a  president  of  R  &  R  Advertising.  Her  first  husband  actually  has 
been  the  mayor  of  Boulder  City  for  quite  some  time.  So  we  got  to  know  each  other,  and  she  took  it  from 
the  perspective  that  the  reason  I  was  chosen  is  because  I  was  not  the  typical  Republican  or  interested  in 
the  typical  issues  that  most  women  were,  such  as  education,  human  resources,  those  kinds  of  issues.  And 
that’s  the  reason  I  was  chosen  to  have  this  chapter  written  about  me.  Maybe  the  hardnosed  aspect  comes 
into  it,  too. 

[laughter]  I  was  going  to  say  that.  I  was  wondering  if  the  “maverick”  tied  in  with  being  hardnosed. 

No,  I  think  actually  it  had  more  to  do  with  supporting  issues  that  were  different  than  other 
Republicans  and  because  I  took  stands  on  issues  that  other  Republicans  did  not. 

During  your  time  on  the  Commission,  you ’ve  served  with  two  other  women:  Debbie  Griffin  and  Radha 
Chanderraj .  Were  there  many  times  that  the  voting  was  three-to-two  with  the  female  members  of  the 
Commission  in  a  minority? 

Actually  I’ve  given  this  some  thought,  and  I  would  probably  say  no,  unlike  the  legislative  process 
when  this  happened  a  lot.  I  think  there’s  a  definite  kind  of  leadership  style.  The  style  for  women  is 
different  from  males,  but  it’s  not  as  prevalent  in  the  Gaming  Commission  work.  There  have  been  several 
exceptions  to  that,  such  as  domestic  violence — if  an  applicant  has  had  any  kind  of  problem  with  that,  and 


550 


you  normally  see  that  coming  out  in  the  restricted  licenses  more  than  the  non-restricted  licenses,  that 
being  fifteen  slots  or  less,  such  as  in  a  7-Eleven,  and  1  think  we’ve  talked  about  this  before.  Sometimes 
you  see  this  come  up,  or  if  somebody  has  a  drinking  problem  or  used  drugs.  Maybe  women  will  perceive 
that  differently  than  men.  1  particularly  become  very  concerned  when  someone  has  been  involved  in 
domestic  violence.  And  someone  might  say,  “What’s  that  got  to  do  with  having  a  gaming  license?” 
Probably  a  good  question.  To  me  it  seems  as  if  they  cannot  live  by  the  rules  of  society.  That  is  something 
you  should  not  do.  There  are  a  lot  of  laws  dealing  with  it,  but  then  if  they  can’t  somehow  live  within  those 
boundaries,  they’re  probably  going  to  have  a  difficult  time  adhering  to  the  gaming  laws  and  regulations. 

One  instance  comes  to  my  mind  that  the  Control  Board  sent  to  the  Commission,  unanimously 
recommended,  a  man  who  lived  in  a  state  other  than  Nevada.  I’ve  been  involved  in  this  issue  legislatively, 
and  he  was  a  classic  domestic  abuser,  and  when  1  say  “classic,”  1  mean  really  bad.  And  so  1  started  asking 
questions,  and  by  the  time  1  was  done,  the  Commission  unanimously  voted  not  to  give  him  a  license.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  1  had  at  least  one  of  the  Control  Board  say,  “Gosh,  I’m  sorry  I  voted  to  give  him  a  license.” 
I  was  so  concerned  about  this  particular  man  that  during  the  meeting,  1  left  my  chair  and  went  and  spoke 
to  the  head  of  the  enforcement  division  of  the  Gaming  Control  Board  and  asked  that  the  police  be  notified 
in  this  city  in  an  adjoining  state  that  this  man  is  going  to  come  back,  and  he’s  probably  going  to  be  so 
angry  and  blame  it  on  the  woman  who  he  basically  blamed  everything  on.  And  they  were  ahead  of  me. 
They  already  had  done  that,  which  made  me  feel  very  good.  In  that  case,  that’s  kind  of  unusual.  That 
doesn’t  happen  that  often.  But  as  far  as  looking  at,  let’s  say — we’ll  use  a  good  one — Steve  Wynn  coming 
before  the  Commission  when  he  was  licensed  for  the  Bellagio,  there’s  no  distinction  made,  I  don’t 
believe,  on  gender  in  most  of  the  cases.  As  I  say,  that’s  not  true  in  the  legislature.  There’s  a  big 
difference.  The  only  difference  between  the  women  would  be  the  education  of  Radha  Chanderraj  because 
she’s  from  India.  She  received  a  law  degree  from  the  University  of  Bombay,  but  went  back  to  UNLV  law 
school  and  has  just  finished  getting  a  law  degree  from  them.  So  that  will  be  her  bent.  Rather  than  being  a 
gender  issue,  it  might  be  a  legal  issue  or  looking  at  it  from  an  attorney’s  perspective. 

Did  you  have  something  more  you  wanted  to  add  to  that,  Sue? 

I  did.  At  my  very  first  meeting,  the  restricted  agenda  came  before  the  non-restrictive,  meaning  the 
things  that  were  less  important  in  a  way,  because  that,  again,  was  the  fifteen  slots  or  less.  I  think  with  the 
first  three  agenda  items  I  voted  no  on,  it  was  four-to-one,  four-to-one,  four-to-one.  And  there  was  an 
attorney  in  the  back  of  the  room  who  1  heard  said  to  whoever  was  sitting  next  to  him,  “My  gosh,  is  she 
going  to  be  tough!” 

[laughter] 

And  after  I’d  been  there  for  a  while,  I  realized  I  probably  was  a  little  too  tough.  So  I  guess  in  that 
case,  yes,  I  was,  and  it  did  probably  add  to  my  reputation  of  being  tough  and  hardnosed  [laughter].  But 
after  a  while  I  realize  that  there  were  things  that  were  not  as  important  in  the  long  run  as  I  thought  they 
were  at  the  very  first  meeting. 

And  it  might  vary  according  to  an  individual. 


Oh,  absolutely. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


551 


Some  men  might  be  more  softhearted  than  other  men,  of  course. 

Yes.  Yes,  1  can  think  of  some  issues  that  that  would  be  true  of. 

Are  there  any  other  situations  you ’d  like  to  bring  up,  Sue? 

Well,  one  of  the  other  areas  that  I’ve  not  mentioned  is  whether  the  Commission  gives  back  a 
work  card  or  not.  And  with  the  former  chairman,  Mr.  Curran,  we  spent  a  great  deal  of  time  on  this.  He  felt 
it  extremely  important  that  these  people  get  every  break  in  the  world.  And  actually,  the  Commission  is 
only  supposed  to  discuss  or  ask  questions  based  on  the  record,  not  something  new.  In  fact,  they  didn’t 
used  to  have  an  audience,  if  you  will,  before  the  Commission  until  Mr.  Curran  became  the  chairman.  That 
becomes  pretty  emotional  sometimes.  And  it’s  become  apparent  that  if  you  are  able  to  have  an  attorney 
represent  you,  you  have  a  much  better  chance  of  getting  a  work  card  back,  although  1  think  that 
commissioners  really  respond  to  someone  who  takes  responsibility  for  what  they  did  and  apologizes,  and 
then  the  Commission  votes.  One  of  the  other  areas  where  1  think,  as  far  as  I’m  concerned,  that  would  be  a 
gender  issue  is  if  the  male  owes  the  former  spouse — or  children — child  support  and/or  alimony.  And  if  he 
was  in  arrears  and  appeared  that  he  didn’t  care,  I  would  not  support  that  person  at  all.  But  that  is  an  issue, 
again,  that  started  with  me  in  the  legislature  and  carried  on.  I  don’t  think  other  women — and  I  can’t  think 
that  either  Debbie  or  Radha  felt  quite  the  same  way.  I  don’t  remember  them  verbalizing  anything  like 
that.  But  as  far  as  I’m  concerned,  that  would  definitely  be  an  area  that  I  would  feel  strongly  about. 

Over  your  many  years  on  the  Commission  you  have  had  to  make  many  decisions  and  many  rulings  on 
various  people  and  corporations.  If  you  could  change  any  vote  or  any  recommendation,  would  you  do  so? 

I  can  think  of  one,  and  I’m  sure  there  were  quite  a  few.  I’ve  never  said  that  all  my  decisions  were 
right.  This  was  a  top  CFO,  I  think,  of  a  major  property.  He  had  been  picked  up  for  something  he’d  done 
wrong  in  a  state  other  than  Nevada,  and  he  didn’t  fess  up  to  it.  I  think  it  was  a  DUI.  He  left  it  off  his 
personal  history,  and  that’s  something  we  do  feel  strongly  about,  that  if  somebody  ignores  when  it  says, 
“Have  you  ever  been  arrested?”  and  you  say,  “No,”  and  you  had,  and  you’ll  say,  “Well,  I  didn’t  know  it 
was  a  real  arrest  because  I  didn’t  go  to  court.”  And  there  are  some  people  who  don’t  quite  understand  the 
system,  and,  hopefully  it’s  explained.  We  brought  this  up  a  number  of  times.  Some  people  don’t 
understand  the  difference  between  an  arrest  and  whether  it  was  a  felony  or  a  misdemeanor  or  gross 
misdemeanor.  But  in  this  case  this  man  was  way  up  there  in  terms  of  responsibility,  and  he  did  not  list  this 
on  his  personal  history.  And  because  he  was  a  major  player  in  a  major  property  in  Las  Vegas,  I  just  didn’t 
take  it  as  seriously  as  I’ve  done  with  other  people,  and  licensed  him.  He  was  unanimously  approved.  In 
talking  to  other  members,  several  felt  the  same  way  I  did.  I  should  have  voted  no,  I  think,  because  he  had 
done  something  that  I  had  voted  no  on  in  many  other  instances.  So  that  is  definitely  one  that  I  would  think 
that  I  didn’t  vote  correctly,  and  I’m  sure  there  are  a  lot  of  others  as  well. 

Approximately  how  many  hours  a  month  do  you  spend  on  commission  business,  Sue? 

Well,  most  of  the  time — in  fact,  probably  all  of  it — is  spent  on  reading  the  reports  that  we  get  and 
preparing  yourself  based  upon  the  agenda  for  that  month’s  meeting.  As  most  know,  we  meet  once  a 


552 


month  at  a  minimum.  This  month  there  was  a  special  meeting  as  well,  in  addition  to  our  regular  meeting.  1 
spend  probably,  Fd  say,  a  week,  and  sometimes  more.  This  last  meeting  1  definitely  spent  more,  because 
it  was  a  very  busy  and  important  agenda.  But  1  probably  spend  more  time — takes  me  longer — than  other 
members  because  my  eyesight  was  damaged  in  the  plane  crash,  and  so  1  have  to  deal  with  it  a  little  bit 
differently.  It  would  be  wonderful  if  1  could  get  everything  in  bigger  print,  but  [laughter]  that  would  be 
above  and  beyond  the  call  of  duty,  1  think,  for  the  staff.  So  that’s  about  what  I  would  say,  a  week  to  ten 
days. 

Do  you  spend  more  time  now  than  when  you  started,  or  less,  or  is  it  about  the  same? 

Well,  maybe  1  should  say  1  read  differently  than  when  1  first  became  a  commission  member, 
rather  than  more  or  less,  and  1  know  a  little  bit  more  what  to  look  for.  1  remember  having  this  discussion 
with  my  children.  My  son  was  actually  at  the  capital  when  Governor  Miller  appointed  me.  And  by  the 
time  we  had  gotten  home,  1  just  couldn’t  believe  the  boxes  of  material  being  delivered  to  me.  1  talked  with 
him  about  it,  and  he  said,  “Well,  Mom,  it’s  probably  just  like  being  in  the  legislature.  You’re  going  to  get 
a  better  idea  as  you  did  then  on  what  amendment  to  look  for  and  what  the  bill  basically  said,  and  that  was 
a  learning  experience.”  And  he  was  right.  1  basically  said,  “1  know  what  to  look  for.”  Before,  1  looked  for 
everything  and  anything,  and  that  is  almost  too  overwhelming  in  some  ways  to  remember  everything, 
because,  as  1  mentioned  to  you,  1  believe  for  the  last  meeting,  one  application,  the  one  from  Japan,  was 
eight  inches  of  material  on  one  application,  and  that’s  pretty  tough  to  do. 

One  out  of  many  applications. 

Oh,  one  out  of  many.  That  was  just  one.  So  1  guess  that  1  would  answer  it  that  way. 

Your  term  will  be  expiring  in  2005.  Would  you  serve  another  term  if  the  position  is  offered  to  you? 

Yes,  1  would.  And  I’ll  be  done  in  April  of  2005. 1  do  know  that  Governor  Guinn,  who  has 
reappointed  me,  that  he  said  when  he  was  initially  elected,  or  early  in  his  first  term,  that  he  felt  that  two 
terms  was  pretty  much  enough  for  anybody  to  have  on  any  board  or  commission,  and  he  used  the  Gaming 
Commission  as  the  example.  So  I  suspect  he  means  what  he  says.  Most  of  the  time  it’s  been  one  person’s 
term  comes  up.  In  my  case,  Art  Marshall  and  I  were  appointed  on  the  same  day  in  the  same  year.  So  our 
appointments  will  be  up  at  the  same  time.  That’s  two  out  of  a  five-member  group. 

So  as  time-consuming  as  the  job  is,  and  as  tiring  as  it  is  sometimes,  you  still  enjoy  doing  the  job? 

I  do.  I’ve  had  a  lot  of  people  say,  “Why  would  you  want  to  do  it  again?”  because  normally,  I’ll 
say  how  much  reading  there  is  [laughter]  or  I  can’t  do  this  because  I’ve  cloistered  myself  off  that  week 
before.  But  I  realize  that  the  Gaming  Commission  and/or  Control  Board  are  terribly  important  to  the  state. 
Regulating  that  industry  is  paramount  in  terms  of  the  reputation  we  have,  not  only  in  this  country  but 
around  the  world.  I  won’t  say  I  really  enjoy  it — that’s  probably  not  the  right  term.  I  do  enjoy  the  people  I 
work  with.  I  feel  that  it’s  an  important  responsibility.  And,  yes,  I  would  certainly  serve  again  if  the 
governor  asked.  And  I’m  going  to  let  him  know  at  some  point  that  I’m  interested. 


GAMING  REGULA  TION  IN  NE  VADA 


553 


[laughter]  You  ’re  going  to  let  him  know  that  you  ’re  interested,  [laughter] 

And,  you  know,  that’s  not  going  to  probably  make  a  whole  lot  of  difference,  but .  .  . 
It  might.  You  never  know.  Can ’t  lose  anything. 

No,  that’s  right. 

Because  his  term  is  going  to  be  up  in  2006. 

Yes,  that’s  right. 

That’s  all  I  have,  Sue,  unless  you  have  anything  you  want  to  add  in  conclusion. 

No.  No,  1  don’t  think  so. 

Well,  thank  you  for  your  time. 

OK,  great! 


