Paul Gemmill: 

Recollections of Mining Ventures, 
Life in Eastern Nevada 
and the Nevada Mining Association 


Interviewee: Paul Gemmill 
Interviewed: 1974-1975 
Published: 1978 
Interviewer: Mary Ellen Glass 
UNOHP Catalog #077 


Description 

Paul Gemmill is a native of California, born in Clearwater in 1907. The family engaged in mining in California, 
Mexico, and in Lincoln County, Nevada. Gemmill received his education in California and Nevada, graduating from 
the Mackay School of Mines at the University of Nevada in 1930. He then entered his chosen profession in Lincoln 
County, Nevada, as a mining engineer and exploration geologist. Working variously as an independent operator 
and while employed by Combined Metals, Inc., he developed expert knowledge of metals and nonmetallics. Mr. 
Gemmill became general manager of Combined Metals in 1956, leaving the position to become a consultant in 1962. 

One of Mr. GemmilFs important mining ventures was the exploration and development of properties near Tecopa 
in the Death Valley area; he organized the Shoshone Mines, Inc. as a result of discoveries there. 

In 1964, after more than thirty years of active mining and mining engineering, Paul Gemmill accepted a position 
as executive secretary of the Nevada Mining Association, the trade association for the mining industry. 

Mr. Gemmill was a keen observer of his environment. He remembered his professional activities, the day-to-day 
life of the mining towns, the civic affairs, even the humor of his workmates with clear detail. Researchers who wish 
to know about the real life of miners and prospectors will find here a fruitful source. 



Paul Gemmill: 

Recollections of Mining Ventures, 
Life in Eastern Nevada 
and the Nevada Mining Association 




Paul Gemmill: 

Recollections of Mining Ventures, 
Life in Eastern Nevada 
and the Nevada Mining Association 


An Oral History Conducted by Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1978 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp@unr.edu 
http://www.unr.edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1978. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words maybe quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 


Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Introduction xi 

1. Recollection of My Family and Our Early Mining Ventures 1 

Grammar and High School 

2. Lincoln County Power District 13 

3. Impressions of Professors and Acquaintances at the University of Nevada 19 


S. Frank Hunt, Free Enterprise Mining 
Women Mining Students 

4. Depression Mining 33 

Machinery 
The Comet Mine 
Railroading and The Prince 

Lost Mines, Location Comet Mine after Gemmill Family Moved to Pioche 

Prospecting 

Bristol Mine 

Mining Accidents 

5. Characters in Pioche, Nevada 57 


6. Tecopa: The Glory Hole or Pay Dirt 


71 



Paul Gemmill 


viii 


7. Some Concepts on Geology of Eastern Nevada 79 

8. Mining Lore 83 

Tools and Terminology 
Blasting; Superstitions 
Clothing 
“In” Jokes 

9. Ideas on Society and Culture of the 1930s in Eastern Nevada 97 

10. Free Enterprise, Labor Incentives, and the Old Stope Program 115 

Blacks in Eastern Nevada Mining During the 1940s 

The Old Stope Program 
Unions 

11. Last Years with Combined Metals 127 

Fossil Rosin (Resin) 

Beryllium 

12. Land Development Work in Lincoln County 137 

13. Mining Legislation and the Nevada Mining Association 143 

14. Conclusion 159 

Philosophical Reflections 

Age 

Freedom 

Atheists 

Religion 

Public Lands vs. Mining Lands 


Original Index: For Reference Only 


177 



Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Paul Gemmill 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Introduction 


Paul Gemmill is a native of California, 
born in Clearwater in 1907. The family 
engaged in mining in California, Mexico, 
and most importantly in Lincoln County, 
Nevada. Paul Gemmill received his education 
in California and Nevada, graduating from the 
University of Nevada Mackay School of Mines 
in 1930. He then entered his chosen profession 
in Lincoln County, as a mining engineer and 
exploration geologist. Working variously as 
an independent operator and employed by 
Combined Metals, Inc., he developed expert 
knowledge of metals and nonmetallics alike. 
Mr. Gemmill became general manager of 
Combined Metals in 1956, leaving the position 
to become a consultant in 1962. 

One of Mr. Gemmills important mining 
ventures was the exploration and development 
of properties near Tecopa in the Death Valley 
area; he organized the Shoshone Mines, Inc. 
as a result of discoveries there. 

In 1964, after more than thirty years of 
active mining and mining engineering, Paul 
Gemmill accepted a position as executive 
secretary of the Nevada Mining Association, 


the trade association for his industry. In 
this position, he directed the affairs of the 
Association until his recent retirement. 

At all times, Mr. Gemmill was a keen 
observer of his environment. He remembered 
with clear detail, not only his own professional 
activities, but also the day-to-day life of the 
mining towns, the civic affairs, even the 
humor of his workmates. Researchers who 
wish to know about the real life of miners and 
prospectors will find here a fruitful source. 

When invited to participate in the Oral 
History Project, Paul Gemmill accepted 
readily. He was a cheerful and hospitable 
chronicler of his life history through ten 
taping sessions, all at the office of the Nevada 
Mining Association between November, 
1974 and October, 1975. The rather long 
time period was caused by Mr. Gemmills 
suffering a heart attack in the winter of 1974; 
he recovered enough to resume taping in July, 
1975. Mr. Gemmills review of his oral history 
transcript resulted in numerous changes 
to clarify language and statements, but no 
revision of the information itself. 



Paul Gemmill 


xii 


The Oral History Project of the University 
of Nevada-Reno Library preserves the past 
and the present for future research by tape 
recording the memoirs of people who have 
been important participants and observers 
of the development of Nevada and the West. 
Resulting transcripts are deposited in the 
University Libraries at Reno and Las Vegas. 
Paul Gemmill has generously donated his 
literary rights in his oral history to the 
University of Nevada, and has designated the 
volume as open for research. 

Mary Ellen Glass 
University of Nevada-Reno 
1978 



1 


Recollection of My Family and 
Our Early Mining Ventures 


Well, starting with when I had already 
arrived in 1907, June 28,1907, the family was 
living in Clearwater, California, in a little red 
house down in the salt grass country where 
my grandparents on both sides had come 
out to settle. Without going back into my 
grandparent’s background, why, my mother’s 
folks came from the South and had the typical 
viewpoint about things (of a southerner) and 
had, along with her parents and others, the 
attitude of the South toward a lot of things, 
including the slave problem and everything 
else. And I might say at this point that she 
certainly didn’t have any bias against the 
Negro race. She knew that they were mostly 
uneducated, at the time she knew anything 
about ’em and her folks knew anything about 
’em. You have to relate it to the situation of the 
background. She felt that the North had been 
very disruptive in the way they handled this 
whole situation and that the South was much 
kinder to the Negro, really; and had been 
much more sympathetic toward the Negro 
than developed out of what came later. But, 


of course, they did not—at that time—treat 
them as equals. All right. So that was where 
she came from. Mother’s maiden name was 
Elizabeth Lewis, and she had brothers John, 
Andrew and George. 

Well, on my father’s side, his father was a 
Scotchman and had a broad brogue that you 
could hardly understand, and he played the 
fiddle. And later on he offered to give me the 
old fiddle that he had bought when he was 
a young fella. And I ultimately wound up 
learning to play just enough so that he gave 
me the fiddle. And I’ve had a lot of fun with 
that fiddle. I’ve still got it. I don’t play it very 
much, unless I get down to the old Pioche 
house, and we have a party goin on and play 
the player piano, and then I can play the fiddle 
a little bit along with the piano to drown me 
out. Pump the piano, and play the fiddle, and 
have everybody singing. So the fiddle that he 
gave me has been a real good thing to have, 
and I’ve had a lot of fun with it. 

Well, coming back to my mother. She 
was a strict Presbyterian and believed very 



2 


Paul Gemmill 


strongly in her religion, and did what she 
could to get us kids to grow up and became 
baptized into the church and so forth, and 
did what she could to get us to attend. And 
I wasn’t very good at attending, and if I 
could get out of it, because of a trip into the 
mountains with my dog and my friends, or 
something like that, she was pretty liberal 
and would let me do that. But if you didn’t 
have a good reason, why, you had to go to 
church when I was a young, little kid. And 
as we grew up, she started out before we 
could read, reading to us—a lot. At bedtime, 
we’d practically all go to sleep while she was 
reading to us. She never did take on a job for 
hire at anytime.She spent her whole lifetime, 
while the family was growing up, tending to 
the family and doing what she could to train 
us. She had gone to normal school and learned 
to be a teacher, which I suppose didn’t involve 
any more than today you’d get going to high 
school, I suppose, because that’s the way they 
did then; and they didn’t really turn out too 
bad a teacher. She was a good teacher—for 
us. For instance, it’s no credit to me, but it’s 
a credit to her, that although I went through 
school and never did have enough English 
grammar to be able to conjugate a sentence 
(and I hardly know what it means to this day), 
still I got very good grades in English all the 
way through, because it’s just the way—you 
know, like you can teach the parrot I guess, 
to talk. Right? 

On the other hand, I might throw in a 
little comment here; that in high school, I was 
trying to get through two years of Spanish. It 
took me three and a half years to get through 
two years of Spanish because there was too 
much of it that was taught on the basis of 
English grammar. And if they’d taught me 
like the parrot, I’m sure I wouldn’t have had 
any trouble [laughs]. Fortunately, my violin, 
and my music, and natural ear for music and 


everything got me by so I got recommended 
credits that substituted for the poor credits in 
Spanish [laughs]. 

Another thing I might say about my 
mother, and I think this is very important 
because it’s followed me throughout my 
lifetime, and I see it more myself now than I 
did earlier. That is this; she didn’t want to hear 
things that were bad. She preferred to ignore 
what was bad, unless you can do somethin’ 
about it. If you couldn’t do anything about 
it, you just don’t want to think about it.And I 
relate this now to a lot of the things I see on 
the television (sometimes I like to call it the 
“idiot box”) where they emphasize so much 
of what’s bad, or a disaster, and all the rest of 
this stuff that’s going on in the world, and I 
think that maybe a lot of people have already 
had things to say about that, but it kind of 
bothers me that in our “one man, one vote” 
society today, there’s so much attention given 
to that kind of a thing instead of the positive, 
the constructive kind of thing. Now we’ll leave 
my mother. [Laughs] I’ve covered, I think, a 
fair, well, what I consider the important things 
about what she gave me. 

Now, my father, in my early years, I didn’t 
see too much of Dad ’cause he was busy 
earning a living. There were five in our family. 
I had a younger brother, John Garrison, and a 
younger sister, Mary Betty, and I had an older 
brother, David Lewis and sister, Delia, so that 
I was right between, in between the bunch. 
And when I was born, they tell me that my 
father went out and bumped his head on the 
windmill, because at that time he had a girl, 
and then a boy, and he wanted a girl the next 
time, and I turned out to be a boy [laughs], so 
he didn’t like that. Well, he didn’t really hold 
it against me. I’m not saying that he was—. 
But I do remember that, you know, as tar as 
us three boys were concerned, he didn’t pay 
much attention to which was which. And lots 



Recollection of My Family and Our Early Mining Ventures 


3 


of times he’d say, “David—Jack—Paul—go do 
so and so.” He wouldn’t know which one he’s 
talkin’ to. 

Well anyway, my father, David Byrd, 
and his brother (two brothers), Mark and 
Jesse, were rather mechanically inclined; and 
one of ’em—an uncle Jesse that died rather 
young—was so much interested in machinery 
and everything, that he built a tractor down 
in California. I guess it was one of the first 
gasoline tractors or something—on the 
farm—and through that kind of experience, 
why, my father was asked to go out and 
install a gasoline hoist at a prospect out in the 
California desert. It’s near Cima, California. 
Of course, he knew enough about the 
machinery and everything, and put the thing 
on a foundation. When he got it installed for 
sinking a little shaft, why, he saw that they 
needed to know what they were digging out 
of the hole. So he wrote to my mother and got 
a book on assaying so that he could run slop 
coppers. And from that, plus his mechanical 
background, all of this, I guess, while I was 
a baby, or it probably was before I was born 
’cause by the time I came along, he was already 
a mining engineer. He didn’t have any college 
or any training as such, but by the time he 
knew how to install a gasoline hoist and run 
slop coppers, you know, he was a mining 
engineer [laughs], in those days. They didn’t 
graduate very many of’em, and so when that 
experience was over, I think it qualified him f 
or being asked to go down to Old Mexico and 
take over an operation of an English company 
at a silver mine. 

Actually, there were two different silver 
mines and two different sojourns to Mexico, 
and I haven’t those spelled out. Somewhere, 
I looked for my father’s resume of his life 
experiences, which wasn’t very long, but it 
would have given that, but it didn’t matter.* It 
was on one of the trips down there on a ten- 


day mule-back ride into the back country from 
the railroad that I think my first recollections 
come (although I do have a dim recollection of 
playing with frogs in a washtub out in the yard, 
and I believe it was at the little red house, but 
I’m not sure). But down in Mexico then, they 
tell me that I learned to talk Mexican before 
I did English, playing with the Mexican kids. 
Didn’t do me any good later, because when I 
came back to the United States they tell me 
that I wouldn’t listen because I thought it was 
baby talk or something. My first recollection, 
I think, in Mexico was a water flume coming 
down from the mill and probably carrying the 
tailings down for disposal, and the flume was 
leaking water. 

I remember that my uncle, Mark, was 
down there briefly, and I remember a story 
or two on my older brother, who’s real good, 
was a real good story teller. (He’s dead now, 
David.) There was an accident at the mine 
of some kind, and a Mexican was killed. 
And it made such an impression when my 
brother David—a little tyke—went running 
to Joe Askew (one of the characters that was 
helping my father around there, from Texas) 
and told him about the accident. Joe listened 
attentively, and went to get something to 
go over and help out on account of this 
accident. And Dave saw that it made such an 
impression that he followed it immediately 
with, “and then after that happened, why, my 
uncle fell down the shaft and he got killed, 
too.” Well, Joe, of course, recognized it. He 
said, “Young man,” he said, “you’ve overbet 
your hand!” And then he doubted whether 
the accident had happened. [Chuckles] Well 
anyway, it’s just one of those little things that 
I remember about that area. 


*Copy in Special Collections 
Department, UNR Library 




4 


Paul Gemmill 


And another story from that time is that 
they had a Chinese cook in camp. And this, 
of course, I don’t remember because I was 
too young. But I remember the story very 
well, and I think it’s a good one to relate. This 
Chinese cook was a pretty good cook, and he 
served wonderful meat pie. And so there was 
meat pie, and then a few days later, meat pie 
again. And about the third time, you know, 
they thought this was pretty good meat pie. 
And when too much time passed, and they 
asked him, what about some more of that 
meat pie? Well, he says, “Missy Gemmill! No 
more puppy, no more pie.” [Laughs] Then they 
knew what had happened to the pups. So I 
guess I’ve eaten dog before. [Laughs] 

Anyway, the next thing (the thing I do 
remember other than the flume coming from 
the mill) was apparently on the way out on 
this ten-day mule-back ride, they had a box, 
they told me, that they put on a mule, and I 
rode in this box on the back of the mule. And 
as the mule walked along, part of the time 
I’d sleep, and they were afraid I was gonna 
wobble my head off. But anyway, we camped 
overnight along the trail, and I remember 
very distinctly—I have a good, clear picture 
of a phonograph under the pine trees with 
this big horn, you know, playing the music 
in the evenings. So apparently we camped 
in the evening with the phonograph playing, 
and I guess the folks were havin’ a ball. And 
we came out of Mexico. I suppose Dad might 
have stayed in Mexico on other operations, 
except that the revolution broke out, you 
know, and that’s the reason he left. 

When he came back to California and 
started lookin’ into what he’d do next, why, 
mining apparently was kind of dull—and 
this must have been when I was oh, I guess, 
under five or somethin’ like that—and so 
he happened to know a man by the name 
of J. D. Thompson in Pasadena that had an 


interest in things in Lincoln County. I guess, 
if I recall correctly (and I could be mistaken 
on this), I think it was the same Thompson 
that had an interest in the Geyser ranch and 
in the Cal Neva Mining Company, which’ll 
show up much later down the line. But his 
interest in the Geyser ranch, and my father’s 
acquaintance with him for some reason—I 
think maybe he was the man that got my 
father, you know, introduced my father for 
goin’ down to Mexico, but I don’t know. It 
may have been that, or it may have been a 
cousin of my father’s. But anyway, Thompson 
had this interest in the Geyser ranch and had 
made some kind of a deal. And he put my 
father in on it. And my father, on account of 
mining being kind of dull (but his background 
in farming, too, from the salt grass southern 
California country), why, he went out as a 
partner, in some manner or other, to the 
Geyser ranch, which is between Pioche and 
Ely on the county line, Lincoln and White 
Pine County line. We were there then, and 
we lived in a two story ranch house. And my 
father in the course of running the ranch, 
selling pigs and livestock, you know, going 
to Ely and so forth, I think at first driving a 
team of horses, and then later on he bought 
one of the first Ford automobiles, I think, that 
Roy Orr ever sold. My father bought one, and 
Mr. Thompson bought one—the first two 
Ford automobiles that were bought through 
Roy Orr in Pioche, Nevada—while we were 
at Geyser ranch. 

And we weren’t there too long. I don’t 
know whether it was a year and a half or 
something. Anyway, I know that we were 
there at least through one full winter and 
into another, because it was on Christmas 
Eve that we were all in the living room of 
the house. My father was away down in Los 
Angeles somewhere. I think at that time the 
decision was being made to sell out at the 



Recollection of My Family and Our Early Mining Ventures 


5 


Geyser ranch, in some kind of a deal. And so 
he was away from home on Christmas Eve. 
And I smelled smoke. We were sitting in front 
of the fireplace, and I guess preparatory for 
Christmas and so forth—probably had our 
stockings hung up. And I smelled smoke. 
They tell me I kind of lisped; and they used 
to make me say, “Thome people thay I lithp, 
but I can’t pertheive it till I go to thay thoap.” 
[Laughs] Well anyway, when I smelled smoke, 
I told my mother; I said, “Mom, I thmell 
thmoke!” And so she jumped up to see where 
it was coming from. She went over and down 
the hallway, and the smoke was billowing 
out from cracks around the door from the 
room where my younger brother was in his 
crib.She opened the door, and it was full of 
smoke, dense smoke. She went over to the 
crib, and it was a metal bed of some kind— 
baby’s bed—and when she felt the metal, it 
was hot. She grabbed him out of the bed and 
ran down the hall out of the house. And the 
whole thing burst into flames in the bedroom. 
Nobody knows how it ever started, and the 
flames came out the door, went down the 
hall, rolled back over the roof, and within 
twenty minutes, they tell me, that house was 
practically burned to the ground. Nobody got 
hurt. We just lost everything we had. Well, my 
Uncle Mark had moved out there, was living 
in a log cabin that’s still there at Geyser ranch, 
a little ways from the old house, and he rushed 
over, of course. He managed to get in through 
a window into the room that my father had 
his office and things, because he thought there 
was some important papers and things that 
should be saved—the first thing he thought 
of. So he grabbed this desk and threw it out 
through the window, but it was too late to do 
much of anything else. And hell, it didn’t have 
much of anything in it. So we came out of that 
losing everything—piano, and clothes, and 
everything—and had to stay, everybody in 


this log cabin. Well, when my father got back, 
we moved to Pioche. I guess he had made the 
deal on the ranch, and we were out of that. 

But, while he was at the ranch, he had 
gotten well acquainted with some people in 
Ely—that is, leaders in Ely—including Mr. 
[C. B.] Lakenan, who was then the general 
manager of the Nevada Consolidated Mining 
and Smelting Company, or whatever the 
name was at that time—now the Kennecott 
operation. On account of my father’s mining 
experience, they had gotten to be kinda 
friends while my father was at the ranch. So 
father was invited to come up, because they 
were converting the whole operation from 
gravity separation into flotation. Dad was 
invited to come up and work in the laboratory, 
and learn about flotation as an assistant in 
the laboratories; and I guess they were even 
putting some of this to work in the plant by 
that time. We got established in Pioche in a 
house there, where my younger sister Betty 
was born, and where my younger brother Jack 
was coming out of a very serious lung problem 
that came from this smoke. He had bronchitis 
for a long time, and the folks tell me that I was 
not very good to him ’cause I’d tease him, you 
know. But, I can’t help that. Maybe it’s in my 
nature to tease people. [Laughs] And if it is, 
it’s not on purpose, it’s probably an instinct 
[laughs]. 

Anyway, from that experience, with 
flotation in mineral concentration, my father 
made the decision to go out and see what he 
could do in applying flotation somewhere. 
Now he must have had a little bit of money 
from the Geyser ranch deal or something, 
because he had enough apparently to travel 
on and to have the wild idea that he could do 
somethin’ all on his own, you know? Well, he 
tried a place or two and some experiments 
that didn’t work. Finally, he happened to go 
through Prescott, Arizona and was looking, 



6 


Paul Gemmill 


inquiring around about where something 
might be done, and someone introduced him 
to a man that had a deal on the old Crown 
King mine, and this was at Crown King, 
Arizona, high in the Bradshaw Mountains 
above Prescott. 

And this man’s name was Randolph, 
and he was an Army officer (had been), 
and he’d been playing around trying to do 
something with the gravity mill tailings from 
this Crown King mine. Well, it happened 
that these tailings contained rather clean 
sulfide minerals in quartz and rather coarsely 
crystalline and so forth. They had operated 
a mill there; and what process, I don’t know, 
but it must have been gravity and possibly 
some amalgamation. But anyway, it was an 
old style mill, and the tailings ran real good 
in zinc and some lead and copper, and of 
course, had residual quantities of gold and 
silver. So, the total value in those tailings 
looked pretty good to my father. So he went 
up to the old Crown King camp, and at that 
time, there was a railroad into camp—it had 
been a good producer, the camp had. This 
railroad went up ten switchbacks up the side 
of the Bradshaw Mountains to get there. And 
I think on practically all of these switchbacks 
there was a big, high wood trestle that the 
train would go over, see. And I remember 
that very distinctly. 

The experiments he conducted up at 
Crown King, using hydraulic power to run a 
little flotation cell, or a compressor to make 
air for a flotation cell. The cells at that time 
were called callow cells, and they pumped air 
into them through a canvas blanket; instead of 
being mechanical cells, you aerated the pulp 
with bubbles through a blanket at the bottom 
of the cell. Anyway, he decided that through 
the use of different kinds of oils and so forth, 
he could make two different concentrates: one 
that would run high enough in zinc to sell, 


and the other would be sold at the Haciempa 
Smelter, which was a lead-copper, or copper 
smelter, I guess. I don’t know whether it was 
lead smelter or copper smelter or whatnot. But 
at any rate, it would accept the concentrate 
that carried copper, and lead, and gold, and 
silver primarily, while the zinc concentrate 
would go somewhere else probably. I don’t 
know whether it was Oklahoma or Texas or 
where. 

But anyway, at this time, things were 
stirring up in the World War I situation. And I 
can’t tell ya exactly what year, the dates of this, 
but anyway, the price of zinc was high. I think 
above twenty cents. In today’s language that 
would be way above the present price of zinc, 
of course. It’d be like having dollar a pound 
zinc today, at least. And the processors, the 
guideline that he had to follow was to make 
at least a forty percent zinc concentrate to 
sell his zinc concentrate, which was a key to 
making this thing successful. 

Well, again he went to the book and 
learned how to assay for zinc. And he ran his 
own assays. And then when he and Randolph 
needed money to alter the mill, they had 
to build their own flotation cells. I think 
he infringed on a patent in order to do it, 
but nobody stopped him. He was just a guy 
playing around on the sidelines. So he built 
cells out of wood and had castings made to 
stretch the blanket over. I don’t know where 
they got a compressor, a blower I mean, to 
aerate the cells. And they did alter the mill 
for the very small sum of $2500; and they 
borrowed this— he and Randolph—in joint 
venture with a man by the name of Viele, 
I think it is, who was the president of the 
Arizona Power Company. And Viele couldn’t 
believe that anybody could make a mine, or 
anything in a mine business, go with $2500, 
but he went on the note—all three of ’em on 
the note at the bank, to borrow $2500. They 



Recollection of My Family and Our Early Mining Ventures 


7 


didn’t quite make it, and the winter hit ’em, 
and they had to go and get another $500 or 
something (maybe it was $1,000), but anyway, 
it was a very modest amount of money to put 
this thing into operation. And they started 
producing concentrate. 

My father assayed the concentrate. They 
had a carload ready to go, and he assayed it, 
and he got forty-two and a half percent zinc 
or somethin’ like this. And of course, that 
was not very much over what it had to be, so 
he took the samples down to the assayer in 
Prescott. And the assayer in Prescott didn’t 
give him forty percent. He gave him somethin’ 
under forty percent, but complimented him 
on making such a high grade concentrate. 
A lot of people had tried it and failed. He 
was very much depressed, so he went back 
and reassayed this thing, and resampled and 
reassayed, and still came up with about the 
same result. So he took the pulp (or sent it, I 
don’t know) to Phoenix to an umpire assayer, 
who came up with the same thing he did. 
And so he faced the first assayer with this 
Phoenix result; and the Prescott assayer said, 
(he knew Dad pretty well by that time), he 
said, “Well, Dave, he said, “I just didn’t want 
you to be foolin’ yourself.” He said, “I thought 
you probably were, you know, givin’ me the 
best of it when you gave me the sample- So I 
just had to discount that a little. I didn’t want 
you fooling yourself. [Laughs] So anyway, the 
carload was shipped, and it came out all right, 
and the venture was a success. 

Grammar and High School 

Well, as for my experiences in Crown 
King, I was goin’ to school there. And in the 
course of events (and I can’t tell you exactly 
how long we were there, but I guess it was 
until, you know, the war was over), my 
father was instrumental—he and Randolph 


and Viele— they put in a tramway up to 
the Wildflower mine, had a superintendent 
running the Wildflower mine that was a very 
good man. And he was a Finlander; and he 
brought Finlanders to be miners, and they 
did a very good job mining. I think the whole 
venture at the Wildflower, however, was a 
non-paying proposition. The tailings were 
where they made the real money. They also 
tried a little venture up at the Tiger mine. 

And I remember we moved up to the 
Tiger for a little while during the summer, 
when I had to walk to Crown King for my 
violin lessons. And my brother had to see 
that I got over there, and I think that most 
of the time instead of walking, he’d walk, 
but I was riding a burro, and he had to walk 
along behind the burro to make the burro go 
[laughs]. And I remember that very well. 

We enjoyed playin’ around with the 
Mexican kids there (in Crown King) and 
everything. All the kids had B-B guns there. 
And I remember one time, a very distinct 
picture in my mind, of the old, eighty-year 
old white-headed carpenter, a big husky fella, 
bending over, building one of these flotation 
cells or something else. Anyway, he was a 
millwright, bending over his work with his 
pants stretched real tight, and one of the kids 
was poppin’ him in the seat of the pants with a 
B-B gun from behind the bushes [laughs], and 
he’d straighten up and slap himself, wondering 
what had happened. I don’t know what came 
of that. But anyway, and I remember the 
kids playin’ around with dynamite caps and 
blowin’ tin cans, which kids’ll do you know, if 
you don’t keep ’em out of sight. So you gotta 
look, watch, or kids’ll get in trouble. 

Well, we left Crown King then, and went 
to Pasadena. I’m not sure, I think my father 
had bought a house in Altadena when he left 
Geyser ranch—yes, he must have, because, 
see, I went to [school there] after the first 



8 


Paul Gemmill 


grade. When we went to Altadena from 
Geyser ranch—well, we had a short sojourn 
over in southern Utah with my grandparents 
for a while near Lund during the summer, I 
think, where they were tryin’ to raise peanuts 
over there on a short stay in some kind of a—I 
don’t know whether it was a Desert Entry, I 
guess they didn’t have Desert Entries then— 
but anyway, they took up a little land under 
whatever law was applicable and tried out a 
little venture there that they soon left. They 
were really from California and went back to 
California. But we were over there for a short 
while, and then I think that’s where my father 
got the place in Altadena and probably was the 
time when he was getting things going up at 
Crown King. So afterward, after he got things 
going up there, was when we actually moved 
up there [to Crown King], and I remember 
going up on the train, and getting out in 
Crown King when there was about two feet 
of snow—on this train up this switchback and 
everything. And then we went back, after the 
Crown King experience, we went down back 
to Altadena, and I, of course, went back to 
school there. And in Crown King, I must have 
been around nine years old or so during the 
time that the family was out there, somewhere 
along in that time. 

We went back to Altadena, and I finished 
grade school in Altadena, going to the 
Altadena grade school. In the meantime, 
my father—we’re really on the subject of my 
father, at the present time, filling in with me 
too, I guess—but my father was looking for 
the next thing to do after Crown King, and the 
Pittman Act was on, the Silver Purchase Act 
passed by Key Pittman. A dollar an ounce for 
silver was still applicable, and mining people 
generally (or at least my father) believed that 
this was here to stay and so he went to Calico, 
California—an old famous silver camp. (The 
story goes, they had ten thousand Chinese 


in camp there at one time or something. 
I believe it was one of the camps that was 
operated by the Chinese that were imported 
to build railroads. And when some of these 
railroads got built, why, then there were lots of 
people; and these Chinese were pretty good, 
I guess, chloride miners and so forth, and 
their time wasn’t worth much, and the old 
camp of Calico had been largely operated with 
Chinese help.) Well, he sampled up some of 
the stope fills and so forth and decided that he 
would build—of course, he was familiar with 
cyanide because the Mexican experience was 
cyaniding of silver ore by leaching process. 
This was heap leaching really. It was where 
the Mexican help would stack the ore into 
tanks, lightly, so that the fluid could penetrate 
through the ore and leach the silver out and 
then the Mexican help would muck the tanks 
out, you see. Well anyway, I think he built a 
more sophisticated plant at Calico, where he 
had some counter current tanks and so forth; 
although I can’t really tell you too much about 
it. I worked there one summer as a water boy. 
It was awful hot summer. My older brother 
and I were both helpin’ there during school 
vacations that summer. [Just] when he got 
it all put together and started turning out 
bullion, (I remember the first bullion seeing it 
be poured into sort of a wash basin really, and 
it was the shape of a wash basin), the Pittman 
Act went off. So the bottom dropped out of 
the prices, so then he lost whatever he’d put 
in, which was, I guess, his principal assets, 
other than maybe what he had in the house 
in Altadena. He’d made some pretty good 
money at Crown King, and so I guess he was 
still able to move. 

His next move was up to Baldwin Lake 
and a gold mine up there where there was 
already a forty-stamp mill, and some people 
that owned it wanted to sell it. I think at that 
point he got acquainted with Howard Squires, 



Recollection of My Family and Our Early Mining Ventures 


9 


and it was through Howard Squires or their 
combination—anyway, they went up there 
and tried to take this on and pay for the mine 
out of its own production and so forth. That’s 
up near Big Bear Lake in the mountains east 
of San Bernardino. And it was an open pit 
sort of a gold mine, but run, more or less, 
using a millhole method. In other words, an 
adit driven under the pit, and then you mine 
the ore and drop it down a raise, and pull it 
out, and ore went to this forty-stamp mill. 
This turned out to be a failure. And low ore 
grade was the same reason that they had an 
opportunity to try. Whoever’d run it before 
hadn’t made it go. Gold then was $20.67 an 
ounce, and they did produce some bullion, 
but they couldn’t make the stiff payments 
they had to make, and so they walked away 
from that. 

The next phase was, I may have this a little 
out of order, but my father also went into the 
graphite business in southern California in 
San Francisquito Canyon mining graphite. 
Because out of his flotation experience he’d 
been called on as a consultant to go back to 
the South—the southern states somewhere— 
and advise on installing flotation graphite 
plants—on at least a couple of trips, I don’t 
know. And through that he got acquainted 
with graphite and heard something about 
the graphite business, thinking maybe these 
deposits in California would be a good thing. 
So he got acquainted with a man by the name 
of Bowles, who had been a salesman for Dixon 
Graphite Company, and they put in a graphite 
mill up at the deposit, or maybe part of the 
mill was in there already, I don’t know. But 
anyway, he put the flotation process into it and 
was making very good graphite concentrate. 

There again, I remember working for 
a vacation or summertime or something, 
drying graphite. This graphite had a little bit 
of pyrite with it, so when you dry it over the 


dryer hot plate, you got a lot of sulfur fumes 
off of it— sulfur oxide fumes. And it’d be very 
strong in your nostrils. And I’d stand over 
the dryer drying graphite. It went through 
a Huntington mill, and got bagged or put in 
drums most of it, and shipped to a warehouse 
in Los Angeles. They had a warehouse facility, 
and this fella Bowles was trying to sell. 

Well, graphite was turned out a lot faster 
than he could sell it. And the competition 
was with a brand name— Dixon Graphite 
company—and it was pretty tough to break 
into the market, even though you might 
know that you got a better product. And so 
there was flake graphite, and foundry facing, 
and different grades of graphite were made 
by screening it to different sizes and keeping 
it clean. And among other things, we made 
at that plant, a graphite grease, and called 
it Gemmill’s Gritless Graphite Gear Grease 
[laughs]. I think the only product that sold 
pretty good was Gemmill’s Gritless Graphite 
Gear Grease, but that didn’t sell very much 
graphite. We did get into the foundry facing 
a little, but finally piled up the warehouse full 
of graphite and had to quit. And it was years 
before that was really all sold off. This fella 
Bowles didn’t have very much luck trying to 
break into the graphite business. So that was, 
I think, where my father dropped some more 
money before it was over. 

And following that, he had another 
venture, I think, into a little subdivision in a 
canyon not too far from Altadena; I remember 
he went out dividing up an area into some 
lots. Now it maybe that the gold mountain or 
that thing up at Baldwin Lake came after—I 
guess it did come after the graphite business, 
because I think it came in conjunction with 
his acquaintance with Mr. Howard Squires. 
So, I think through my father’s acquaintance 
with Mr. Thompson,, Squires and my father 
came out to the Virginia Louise mine in 



10 


Paul Gemmill 


Lincoln County. And the folks landed in the 
Cal Neva house. The company was called Cal 
Neva, and the mine was the Virginia Louise 
mine; and the best house on the Cal Neva 
property is a house that my wife and I later 
on remodeled and have as sort of our second 
home down there (that we don’t own, but is 
still owned by the Cal Neva Mining Company. 
We have some stock in the Cal Neva Mining 
Company). But we spent quite a bit of money 
on this old place, and we’ve got all our old 
furniture down there now. 

Well anyway, my folks moved into that 
house for a year when it was just lined with 
tongue and groove on studs, and was not 
insulated, and had nothing but wood stoves 
and so forth in it. And there was no power in 
those days (early 1920s). You had kerosene 
lamps, or also they had these gasoline lanterns 
and lamps that had the mantles, they called 
them. You’d put a mantle on and then light 
it, and the mantle would burn down to an 
ash and made a very nice, bright light. As 
far as refrigeration went, at that time you 
had a burlap covered box—open box, burlap 
covered—and set a pan of water on top and 
let the burlap dip into the water, and through 
osmosis, the water would keep the burlap 
damp, and with the dry atmosphere (which is 
practically all the time in the state of Nevada) 
you had a pretty good cooler. And you’d have a 
door on the front of it, and it’d be covered with 
screen plus the burlap, see. And you could 
keep butter pretty good and keep milk pretty 
good. So that worked out all right. I guess that 
most people today wouldn’t even know about 
that, you know. Folks then moved into one of 
the Prince houses, a ridge west from the Cal 
Neva house. 

So life out there at that time was quite a 
bit of fun, but by the time the folks moved 
out there, you see, I was starting into high 
school. And I didn’t want to quit school. My 


older brother didn’t go past high school. He 
went out and went to work with them. And 
so he was out there all the time. But I stayed 
down in Altadena. I had a scoutmaster by 
the name of Jim Miller that was—he and his 
parents were—building a house high in the 
upper part of Altadena. And he had a cabin 
out in back of the house (they were out of the 
cabin and into the house), and so they let me 
use the cabin in back. So I did this and got by 
on very small change. 

I worked at a rose nursery in Altadena 
where a lady was running it; a very good 
worker. And it wasn’t too far away from this 
place up in Altadena. So I’d leave school and 
go to work in the evenings or on weekends 
at the rose nursery. Learned a little bit about 
budding, you know, the exotic types of roses 
on to the Ragged Robin wild rose. I don’t 
know whether I’d be good at trying to do it 
now, but I learned how it was done then. And 
you’d raise the bush from a slip of the wild 
rose in a can. If you wanted a tree rose, you’d 
let it grow up three or four feet high in a five 
gallon can, trim all the branches except a few 
little branches at the top. You’d bud on the 
exotic rose that you want—it took and started 
to grow so it could feed the roots, then you 
cut off the rest, and you’ve got a strong root 
system for a rose bush that would otherwise 
maybe have trouble living, if you didn’t take 
careful care of them. 

Well, I went on into high school. I didn’t 
make too good a grades in grammar school, I 
think I was just sort of an average student. But 
when I took a course in mechanical drawing 
at high school, it enthused me. And I also 
got rather enthused—now talking about all 
of high school—I got enthused about physics 
and chemistry, things of that nature. And I 
had already sort of come to the conclusion I 
was gonna be a mining man. So these things 
that interested me, I had no trouble making 



Recollection of My Family and Our Early Mining Ventures 


11 


good grades in. But, like I told you earlier, the 
business of having to get through two years 
of Spanish as a required subject was really a 
tough thing to do. I had a little fun with my 
music. I had an English music teacher that 
used to kid me about being a Scotchman, and 
we had a lot of fun together. And I played a 
little bit in the junior college orchestra. 

So coming back to my father then, he and 
Howard Squires were operating the Virginia 
Louise mine and shipping ore to the smelters 
in Salt Lake. And this was along toward 
the end of any shipments. The old (Prince 
Company) company had built a railroad from 
the Pioche depot around to the mine. It was a 
ten-mile railroad and was served by the Union 
Pacific Railroad Company—branch line to 
Pioche. Then the Prince Company [the old 
company] had two old locomotives that had 
been Southern Pacific passenger locomotives, 
that were used for hauling the ore. Between 
the Virginia Louise Company and the Prince 
Company, [they] had shipped some million 
tons or so of ore to the Salt Lake smelters 
as flux ore. Well, toward the end of this was 
when my father and Howard Squires arrived 
there, operating the Virginia Louise mine. 
And the old Prince Company was in trouble. 
They had paid about $550,000 in dividends, 
but then they were spending what they had 
left sinking a shaft, thinking they were gonna 
find quite a body of high grade silver ore. And 
they contracted the shaft on a cost-plus basis, 
and it broke them. At that stage, I think it was 
through Howard Squires, that an acquaintance 
was brought into the picture, by the name of R. 
P. Sherman. Mr. Sherman had made, the story 
goes that I recall, some eight million dollars or 
so in the gravel business in southern California, 
in the Los Angeles area. And from that, he 
had expanded into various other things and 
diversified. Among other things, he had a lot of 
property up at Lake Tahoe, and he had the—. It 


was known as the Cal Neva Enterprise, anyway. 
And he had companies down in Mexico, two 
different companies: one of ’em automobiles, 
one of’em in the cosmetic business; and one, a 
National Cash Register sales company. 

At that time, I guess Sherman was doing 
pretty well, and he came into the picture 
to reorganize the Prince Company and go 
after this ore that had been encountered 
with a couple of drill holes. Well, my father 
did the—sort of the financial raising of the 
money through Sherman and his associates 
and kept the money coming in while Howard 
Squires was running the mine. And of course, 
my father was there a good part of the time, 
if not most of the time. They moved an 
electric generating plant in from Hiawatha, 
Utah, burning coal. It was a turbine plant— 
rather inefficient apparently, because they 
sure used an awful lot of coal. And they put 
electric pumps in the shaft and succeeded in 
unwatering the Prince shaft with these electric 
pumps and driving out to where the diamond 
drill hole had encountered the silver. When 
they got there, the silver didn’t amount to very 
much. It was a carload or two, and that was it. 
Just sort of a freak encounter with the drill hole. 
(And I might say at this point, that I’ve had 
freak encounters with drill holes since then. 
[Laughs] I’ve seen this happen several times 
in my experience. And there isn’t anything 
that can substitute for actually going out and 
having a look, and sometimes you’re better 
off to develop a property initially with actual 
development rather than trusting it to drill 
holes, if it’s a small property.) Anyway, they 
were disappointed. At one stage when they 
first hit it, my father happened to be away and 
Howard Squires wired him, “All we need now 
is mine cars; and we gotta buy at least ten mine 
cars.” So they ordered the ten mine cars and got 
’em shipped, and before they got there, they 
found out they didn’t have all this ore [laughs]. 



12 


Paul Gemmill 


So they proceeded anyway and developed 
the mine to a limited extent, proving up sulfide, 
zinc, lead, silver—ore that years later was 
mined under more or less my supervision— 
well, it was much later. So this thing then, 
was put on ice and put to rest until something 
could be done about the zinc ore that was 
opened up, see. Zinc with a little silver and 
lead. Now mind ya, this ore down on the 
lower level was sulfide ore—ore that had not 
been oxidized— whereas all the million tons 
or so that had been shipped out of the upper 
levels of the mine and the Louise mine was 
oxidized ore that was good for a lead smelter 
in its fluxing of other ores. And the reason that 
sale of flux ore came to an end, there was no 
further market for it in a large tonnage. The 
sulfide ores in Salt Lake area—other mines 
up there— had gotten into the sulfide zones 
rather than their oxide zones, and the smelters 
still needed flux ore, but the (Salt Lake Valley 
area) production of pyrite (iron sulfide) was 
then roasted and became a flux that competed 
with the imported Prince and Virginia Louise 
fluxing ore and was cheaper. So that, although 
the Prince and Louise mines weren’t depleted 
of their reserves, they were closed down shortly 
after the experience down on the lower level in 
the Prince mine. They closed down the lower 
level, and Bill Franklin was hired as the mine 
superintendent. He had worked with my father 
and Squires on a couple other small ventures 
in the county. And he went on shipping some 
ore from there until probably ’27 or ’28. But 
there just wasn’t enough demand for it at that 
time to do very well, and so that also came to 
a halt. There’s a little story I’d like to tell on Bill 
Franklin. I don’t know whether Bill would like 
it or not [laughs]. By the time this was going 
on, the folks had moved over into the best of 
the Prince houses, instead of the old Cal Neva 
house, and my sister was out there keeping 
the books—my older sister Delia. And my 


mother was living there in what we called the 
“white fence” house. And the yard, we made no 
attempt because of the water and everything to 
have a lawn or anything like that, but it must 
have been at the time when there’d been some 
good rains or somethin’, but weeds came up all 
over the yard, in back of this nice picket fence 
around the house. And they grew up almost 
as high as the fence, some of ’em. And every 
evening why we’d gather in the screened-in 
porch out in front, and my father, when he 
was around, would have Howard Squires over 
and maybe Bill Franklin would come over, and 
Mother would make some lemonade, that was 
cooled in the burlap air cooler. And they’d sit 
around and discuss one thing and another. 
Sometimes have somebody from town like 
Charlie Thompson over, Well, this had been 
a weekend (I think it was over a weekend 
anyway), and Mother’d said those weeds didn’t 
look very good. So I got some colored paper, 
cut discs out, and pinned flowers on a lot of 
these weeds. Everybody laughed about it. 
Pretty soon Howard Squires came over in the 
evening to visit, and he looked over the fence, 
“Oh my gosh,” he says, “what kind of flowers 
are those?” “They must be wild.” He went 
through the gate, and when he looked close, 
why, of course, he got a big chuckle out of it. 

Pretty soon Bill Franklin came along, 
and he went through a similar discourse and 
says, “Golly, what in the world? What are 
those? I never saw anything like that before?” 
So he came around, and when he saw what 
they were, he just got mad as a wet hornet 
[laughs]—’’anybody that’d fool somebody 
like that.” [Laughs] Well, Bill was much more 
serious-minded, see, than Howard. Howard 
was more the promoter type; and Bill Franklin 
was the operator guy, you see [laughs]. 




Lincoln County 
Power District 


My father and my brother David were 
down in Old Mexico, in Mexico City where 
they were taking care of the problems of three 
companies down there for R. P. Sherman. 
And while this was going on, that’s when I left 
the Pasadena City College or junior college, 
and came up to the University of Nevada. 
And those summers I was spending out at 
the Ruth mine out of Ely and going to the 
University of Nevada. So that when I went 
to the University of Nevada, although our 
family was having financial, well, tight period 
prior to that time, why by that time Dad was 
doing pretty well in Old Mexico, and I didn’t 
have to do any work to support myself in the 
University. I was well funded—not liberally, 
but I was taken care of. And following that 
(I’d say it probably occurred before I got out 
of the University, well it did), my father and 
my brother were down at the Virginia mine 
on the Mother Lode, and started a gold mine 
down in California and operated it for awhile, 
but I haven’t the dates exactly straight on this. 
It must have been the last year I was in school. 
And by the time I graduated, my brother 


Dave had completed the undertaking over at 
the Virginia mine and was out at the Prince 
camp, and came over to my graduation, which 
was in 1930. 

And my father, by that time, had had 
a heart attack, I recall that he’d had quite a 
bit of trouble in the last period of his time 
in Old Mexico. And when he came back, he 
went into the hospital, and was put on a diet 
and given nothing to eat for, I don’t know, 
a month or so. Finally, seemed to be on the 
road to recovery; and had had this stroke; and 
one side of his face and one arm was partially 
paralyzed, but he was coming out of it. And 
during that time, my brother Dave was very 
attentive and took care of the affairs of the 
family very adequately. But, by the time he got 
considerably improved, the proposal to bring 
Hoover Dam power to the mines was initiated 
by my father and Jim Elton, the Anaconda 
manager from Utah, and Mr. Jack Buehler of 
the Bristol Silver Mines Company, and Mr. E. 
H. Snyder of Combined Metals Production 
Company. Jim Elton was the name of the 
manager of the smelter for Anaconda. And all 



14 


Paul Gemmill 


of’em put forth some effort to try and organize 
the importation of Hoover Dam power to 
Lincoln County Plans were laid in 19341935. 
But at any rate, my father was instrumental 
in getting the Nevada Legislature to pass the 
Enabling Act for establishing power districts. 
He came over and worked with the legislature 
while they were pursuing this undertaking of 
the Enabling Act. And I think Jack Buehler 
was also quite active in that process of getting 
the Enabling Act accepted by the Legislature. 
Of course, both of them being Nevada 
residents, it was up to them to try and get 
the legislature to act on this. And my father 
recounted meeting certain legislators, names 
of which I don’t recall, but who were very 
cooperative with him; and they managed to 
get this Enabling Act passed. I think that it 
may be that attorney A1 Scott was helpful on 
that thing too at the time. Because you know, 
he had been in the legislature and had been 
a prominent Nevada citizen from Pioche. 
So I’m trying here to think who should get 
credit for that activity. And I think maybe my 
wife’s father, J. C. Jensen, who was connected 
in certain respects, with Snyder and the 
Combined Metals from its very inception, as 
a matter of fact. I think he could have been 
rather prominent in the scheme, but he was 
from Utah, of course. And so I think the 
Enabling Act was worked on primarily by 
Jack Buehler of Bristol and my father. Well, 
they succeeded in getting that, and then by 
(this must have been in ’34 and ’35, along in 
there) and by ’35, when I went to work at the 
Bristol silver mine at Bristol, I know that right 
then at that time, I was engaged in helping out 
with some reports that were connected with 
the Lincoln County Power District Enabling 
Act—well, with the Power District Enabling 
Act. And, of course, this was set up so that 
other power districts could be organized. 


After the Enabling Act, the next step was 
to secure federal money available through loan 
and grant to design and build the 156 mile, 
69KV powerline and distribution system. And 
my function was to draw up plans for the miners 
in times of mining depression, and everybody 
was aware at that time of the fluctuating prices 
of metal. Lots of people don’t understand that 
to operate a mine is not a matter of high profit, 
generally speaking because on the average, it’s 
a highly competitive business, and although 
maybe there are not a lot of reserves identified 
at any one time, there’s an awful lot of say, zinc 
or lead or whatever you’re after, in the ground 
somewhere, that you don’t know about. And 
when you have a good price, everybody goes 
lookin’ for it, and pretty soon some people 
come up with findings, and pretty soon there’s 
a little bit too much produced, and then the 
price goes to the dogs. I should say, goes to 
hell. And you feel the results right quick. 
So it was recognized, and it has been right 
along, that this is an up-and-down game. And 
probably there’s no metal that it’s more true of 
than mercury, which has competition from 
tremendous deposits of mercury in Spain and 
in Italy, where they sometimes hold the price 
up, and that allows American producers to get 
going. And then when they’re gettin’ too much 
of the market, why, the foreign producer just 
floods the market again and closes U.S. mines, 
So we’ve seen that a lot. Well, it’s not exactly the 
same thing with zinc (lead-zinc is really the 
mining experience that I’ve been in most of my 
workin career), but I’ve seen several times, in 
that period of time, when you had fluctuations 
that would either look pretty good to you or 
would close you down, see. 

So it was well recognized that was the case. 
And under President Roosevelt, I recall that 
his political discourse ran to the, very much 
to the social forces, you know, and what could 
be done for the “common man” and so on, you 



Lincoln County Power District 


15 


know. And so it was part of that philosophy 
that was being used when I drew up plans for 
little farm areas in Panaca Valley, all up and 
down the valley; showing that a miner could 
have his little plot of ground and raise food, and 
have his job in the good times; and when he 
was laid off during a period of depression, he 
could go back and he wouldn’t have to starve. 
See [laughs]. Well, it was a nice sounding thing, 
and I think it had a good deal to do with getting 
the thing through, and getting approval of a 
loan and grant from the federal government. 
Nevertheless, that cheap power has resulted in 
being a boon to Lincoln County farmers and 
ranchers. 

Now I already mentioned the loan and 
grant from the federal government, which of 
course, up to that time, I was just talking about 
the Enabling Act. Well, after the Enabling Act, 
of course came the problem of finance, and I 
think at this point it’s well to mention that the 
suppliers of copper (I believe it was probably 
Anaconda and Phelps-Dodge. I mean, those 
two seem to be in the back of my mind. I’m not 
sure that that’s right, but I think it is), supplied 
copper, taking revenue bonds in lieu of cash 
and at a very reasonable price at the time, 
because the times were kinda tough then, and 
the copper wasn’t a very high price. 

But this powerline, 156 miles of69,000-volt 
transmission line was a novel undertaking in 
some respects; and somewhere in the record 
the engineers that provided the workability 
of the line for certain loads and everything, 
should be highly complimented, because it 
was very successful; and it was General Electric 
Company (one of the equipment suppliers) and 
their engineer who was very much relied on, 
and this supplier help is so typical of problem 
solving in the mining business, no doubt in all 
manner of building. 

And the reason I mention it is that our 
American system of supplying the mining 


industry with all kinds of equipment— in this 
case it was a powerline, you know—and the 
primary reason for the powerline was based 
on mines, not on other uses of power (which 
at that time didn’t figure would be very great). 
It had to be based on the mines, and it was 
on a very small fraction of the ultimate load 
that came over that line that the economics 
were figured. And it was presumed that the 
power rate might be, would be over two cents 
a kilowatt hour, and it was not very long after 
the line was built rates were less than half that 
two cents per KWH. The availability of power 
on a sliding scale downward—the more you 
used, the less it was gonna cost—because this 
was a non-profit thing owned by the county; 
and so if you had a heavy use for power, like 
pumping water to develop a mine, if you used 
a lot of power, it lowered cost per unit, you 
know; the more you used, as the use went 
up, why, your fundamental rate being based 
on falling water charges at the dam on the 
other end and fixed charges were spread over 
expanded consumption. And we found that 
the powerline was very efficient in transmitting 
the power with very little line loss compared 
with, I think it was quite a bit less than was 
figured. And then in later years, many years 
later, I became one of the directors of the power 
district and eventually the chairman of the 
board of the Lincoln County Power District. 
And so I’ve been through that experience. At 
this point, I’ll just go on telling a little about 
that. 

Through evolution of engineering and the 
ability to put in control equipment that would 
keep the voltage regulated, this transmission 
line was found to be capable of transmitting, I 
suppose, three times as much as was originally 
thought. And it could transmit a lot more, I 
think, than has ever been transmitted over it, 
in the way of load, without having excessive 
heating of the line. You might run into, of 



16 


Paul Gemmill 


course, heavier line losses, but if your power 
cost on the input end is not excessive, then 
your line loss doesn’t have to be excessive. 
So that there is a lot of flexibility in that 
transmission system. And the thing has been 
highly successful. The bonds were paid off in 
record time. I can’t tell you how many years, 
but they were paid off, and the power rate 
came way down to less than a half a cent a 
kilowatt-hour, as for any sizable consumer. 

The other thing that I think must be 
mentioned here is that the whole thing was 
set up so that any primary consumer, whether 
it’s a ranch out here in the hills or anywhere, 
was allowed to buy the power at the primary 
rate. It didn’t go through a utility or anything 
of the kind, except when it got into, say, the 
town of Pioche, where there had to be a utility 
to set up the distribution system or keep the 
distribution system operating, or to Caliente 
and so forth- But in between, if two or three 
ranchers or farmers wanted to get together and 
establish an extension of a tertiary line from 
the secondary line, to two or three ranches, 
why, they could arrange between themselves 
and pay that same primary rate. And it’s been 
very beneficial to the ranchers and farmers of 
Lincoln County. 

And in recent years, shortly before I left 
there and came to this job (and at that time 
I was chairman of the board), we arranged 
for financing of the line up Lake Valley. The 
original system did have branch lines that went 
various places in the county, like to Caliente 
and to Gold Springs out to the east (which is 
the mining community that didn’t develop 
in that time, because it was a gold area). That 
line stayed idle for some time and finally was 
torn out and replaced and put elsewhere to 
supply ranches. But, a branch line went out 
to the Bristol mine. So, as I say, shortly before 
coming up here, there was a proposal to go 
up toward Geyser ranch to Desert Entrymen 


in Lake Valley, up around Pony Springs area, 
which was not as far as Geyser ranch, but 
eventually the line did extend to Geyser ranch. 
And a government loan was secured through 
the REA, and financed by a surcharge on the 
power going up that valley, and they still got 
cheap power for pumping water and so on. 

And so, over the years, the uses other than 
mining, even during times when all the mines 
have been down—here recently there came 
legal problems with some of the companies, 
and all the smelters closed down, partly due to 
“ecology” and everything, and outlets for lead- 
zinc concentrates were not found readily; and 
so there has been quite a period of the mines 
being totally down in Lincoln County—and 
yet the power district survived very nicely on 
the other users, the towns, the ranchers, and 
farmers and so forth. It shows in setting up 
anything of that nature, the wisdom of not 
trying to hog everything, but make sure that 
you’ve set it up so everybody has the benefit. 
And this thing has been a highly successful 
venture, and in talking to somebody like 
myself, who believes wholeheartedly in private 
enterprise and the fundamental principle of 
private financing, not through government. 
I have to say that this thing would never have 
been done, at that time, during the ’30s, on any 
basis other than that government help. And 
I just have to recognize that. And it’s been a 
highly successful thing for the county, and 
I think for the benefit of the general public. 
Now that’s a funny thing for me to be saying, 
in a way. But being intimately connected with 
it for as long as I was, why, I can recognize that 
it’s sure been a great thing for Lincoln County, 
and it still is. 

Now the next thing. There has been, after 
this extension up Lake Valley, there was an 
extension over to the Atlanta mine, and an 
attempt was made to run the Atlanta mine by 
Eugene Jordan and Associates at thirty-five 



Lincoln County Power District 


17 


dollars an ounce for gold. And this did not 
succeed due to the very hard ore that this mine 
has in it, and some of the other difficulties. But, 
the line was put in at that—number of years 
ago. This was probably ’65 or ’66.1 don’t know. 
It was after I was up here in Reno that they 
were attempting to run the Atlanta mine. And 
they bought a mill secondhand that Mr. [Roy 
A.] Hardy had over at Golconda and moved it 
down there. Certain things like the crushing 
plant and so forth were inadequate. But now 
with the price of gold high, higher—I don’t 
like to call it high, because the price of gold is 
only now what I’d call on a parity basis with 
the thirty-five dollar price at the time that it 
was first established by Mr. Roosevelt. In other 
words, inflation has gone on to an extent where 
this price of above a hundred and fifty dollars 
is about parity with thirty-five dollars. In other 
words, it (gold) was a constant price during 
all of that time that prevented a lot of our gold 
mines from being active. And the same thing 
can be said for silver. We’ll talk about that a 
little more some other time. 

But anyway, the line is in. Standard Slag 
has gotten the deal on the mine. And they’re 
now down there activating the mine. Part of 
the reason for doing it, and an important part 
of the reason John Harmon says, who is the 
manager for Standard Slag, is that the water 
is already developed, the powerline is already 
out there, and he would regard having to build 
a powerline, even, as a major undertaking 
today, starting with about two years of ecology 
study before you could build it, which is, 
of course, asinine and ridiculous, all due to 
environmental impact red tape. 

And one of the things I complain about 
today is one of new regulations of the 
Department of Interior, requiring that before 
you can build a powerline or before the Interior 
Department can approve a powerline (its 
importance doesn’t matter, if it involves a new 


right-of-way), you can’t start doing anything 
about it until you’ve had a study and gotten an 
approval from various federal agencies. Even 
if you’re a subdivision of government, even if 
you’re the county, you can’t do it. And under 
past practices (and I’m not sure that the law has 
changed that much) but under past practices, 
any county has had the right of eminent 
domain or has had the right of access on public 
domain. And I personally laid out rights-of- 
way, did this for the line up Lake Valley, shortly 
before the line was built; laid it out, had another 
fella spot where the poles would go, but I laid 
out the course of it, and drew up a map, and 
sent it in to the Bureau of Land Management. 
But we didn’t wait to get an answer—I don’t 
know whether they’ve got an answer yet! But 
we didn’t wait to get an answer. We went ahead 
and built it! That’s the way it oughta be done, 
because there isn’t anybody in those faraway 
departments that know as much as the local 
people who are doing the job! So here was a 
subdivision of the county building a powerline, 
and it just is absolutely ridiculous that that 
kind of freedom to go ahead and do the right 
thing isn’t still available to a local subdivision 
of government. And I can’t understand why 
this kind of ridiculous roadblocks are put into 
our work to just gum it up! Now. Did I sound 
mad? [Laughs] 

Okay. I’ve gotten way off the beaten track 
here I guess, in talking about the, you know, 
the period up to—. But I thought this power 
district thing was very important, because it 
has been a boon to a lot of people and not just 
the mining people. 




3 


Impressions of Professors 
and Acquaintances at the 
University of Nevada 


Well, we’re on a chapter here concerning 
the period of time and experience of my 
coming to the University of Nevada, and the 
acquaintances that I made at that time, and 
a little bit of looking back into the graduates 
that are now operators in Nevada, and other 
graduates that have important positions 
outside of Nevada. But, first of all, a few 
comments about some of the old timers that 
really were much before my time, that I picked 
out to say a few words about, because I either 
know about what they were doing or knew 
them personally And in that category, I’m 
sure that someone else like one of the deans 
of the school up there, or others that were of 
those earlier times, could have pointed out 
a lot of famous mining people that made 
big reputations—that came from Nevada, in 
mining. 

But, to start in with some that I do know 
of the older group; one of ’em I got very well 
acquainted with, that I had known slightly 
before I left the University in 1930, but I 
got well acquainted with when I came back 
here in 1964, is Fred de Longchamps. And 


Fred had operated his own Talapoosa mine 
successfully, but also he’d gone into studying 
architecture and became a well-known, wide- 
ranging architect. And a very personable 
person, and I knew him quite well before he 
died a few years ago. 

Then others that were early graduates, 
for instance, would be Roy Hardy, who only 
died recently in his late eighties. Roy was here, 
had formerly been in the same office with 
my predecessor, and I got to know him very 
well and worked closely with him on several 
things. He had been a Virginia City operator 
of mines up there, and had associated with 
a close friend of his, Alex Wise, who was 
truly a Virginia City operator in mining and 
milling. And, of course, one of the professors, 
Walter Palmer, a 1905 graduate. (I didn’t 
mention that Roy Hardy graduated in 1910.) 
Walter Palmer graduated in 1905. And he’d 
been out in industry and was back here as a 
professor of metallurgy. And I took courses 
under him. Ott F. Heizer was a well-known 
Nevada operator. I don’t know what year 
he died, but he became well known and 



20 


Paul Gemmill 


famous over the state of Nevada. Woodruff 
E. Romig, I think he was called “Tex” Romig 
(if I’m not mistaken), became famous as a 
developer of new mining methods at Climax, 
and was a very personable and positive mine 
operator that made things go his own way 
and successfully He’s a graduate of 1922 of 
the Mackay School of Mines. Alfred Merritt 
Smith, whom I was acquainted with for 
years before coming over here, was a wide- 
ranging state personality and had done a 
number of mining jobs; and had worked 
in South America—known “Long Tom” 
Smith because of his experience in placer 
mining—was a very well-known person, and 
was state engineer in later years. And let’s see. 
I guess that about covers the early ones. Oh 
well, of course, since I did mention Palmer, I 
should also mention that Jay Carpenter, also 
a 1907 graduate, I found as a professor here. 
And Vincent Gianella was a professor here. 
Vincent Gianella’s field experience, I suppose 
mostly was just while he was teaching, but he 
did have a lot of experience around the state 
as a geologist. Jay Carpenter had been an 
operator in the Tonopah area and elsewhere 
(I think, in California) before, in his earlier 
period, and came here as the director of 
the Mackay School of Mines. And another 
one was William Smythe, who also was a 
professor of mine. And he had been out in 
industry before coming here to teach. I don’t 
know just when, but he was a graduate in 
1914. Carpenter was a graduate in 1907, and 
Gianella in 1920. I’m skippin’ around here, 
maybe got some of these things a little out of 
order, but—. 

I guess the next thing to mention is to go 
then to the current mine operators—people 
with responsible positions— that are former 
graduates of the Mackay School of Mines and 
now operating mines in Nevada. Now, I’d like 
to point out here, for a person to be a mine 


operator or in a very responsible position 
with the company, sort of making it go from 
a dollars and cents angle, turns out usually 
to be the student who had the objective of 
being a graduate in mining engineering. And 
yet, that doesn’t mean that others who maybe 
don’t become well known or famous, may be 
the kind of people that are digging deep into 
technical aspects; whereas the man who comes 
to the top and runs the operation, usually is 
not the man who digs deep in all areas. The 
operator gets more or less of a broad-ranging 
viewpoint, and winds up havin’ to be more 
of a human engineer than anything else. But 
he has to understand all these facets of the 
problems. So I’m not pointing—highlighting 
these particular people that are now operators, 
or became famous as operators, as necessarily 
being more intelligent or anything like that, 
but they just happened to be that kind of 
people and are well known. And it’s part of 
what makes the reputation of the school, 
however. And the school does have a very fine 
reputation going way back. And even in spite 
of the fact that the school has gone through a 
slack period since I graduated there when—. 
In fact, when I graduated there, engineers 
who were turned out around that time, and 
for a few years thereafter, were plentiful in 
the mining industry, and they were forced 
almost to start in at the bottom, and try to 
work up. Whereas now, people are so hungry 
for a mining engineer graduate, that they get 
a pretty good job startin’ right out. And it so 
happened that we had several of these young 
engineers that graduated from this school, 
who went through our so called “beginners 
mill” down at Pioche, starting in as just stope 
engineers, and surveyors, and so forth. It 
didn’t hurt ’em. That experience wasn’t at all 
missed on ’em. 

Well, coming then to the people that are 
now operating in the state of Nevada that 



Impressions of Professors and Acquaintances at the University of Nevada 


21 


were graduates about that time or later, I 
come down here first to Tom Cahill, 1935 
(but I don’t know whether he finished his 
schooling here, or went elsewhere, or what, 
because he’s listed as expected to graduate in 
’35). Nevertheless, I assume that he got his 
training here basically. And he’s the manager 
at Basic, Inc. at Gabbs at the present time; and 
he’s been with them for a number of years and 
worked up into that position. 

And then I come down to D. Lemaire, a 
1938 graduate. Was the manager of Jackson 
Mountain Iron mine for years, and now with 
Cordex Exploration. 

Then there’s Jack Frank, who’s the 
manager out at Kennametal; has a very 
responsible job there in tungsten and 
manufacturing of tungsten products. 

Come down then to Bob Fulton, who is 
known all over the United States, but also I 
put him in here—he’s not really operating 
a mine in Nevada, but he was a director of 
Newmont; and left Newmont recently and is 
now the president of McIntyre Porcupine in 
Canada. But, I put him in here because he 
was very much responsible, had sort of the 
overall responsibility, for the exploration 
in northern Nevada that came up with the 
Carlin mine that Newmont has. And he and 
Byron Hardy were the ones that carried out 
the exploration work; although I understand 
it was John Fivermore—and I don’t know 
where John Fivermore graduated from—but 
anyway, he was the one, I think, that broke 
the rock off of the right outcrop that led to 
this so [laughs] Carlin mine—I’m trying to 
sorta give the right credit where it belongs. 
But Bob Fulton, of course, was the chief 
geologist for Newmont that was responsible 
for that. And wound up as a director of 
Newmont, before finally going with the 
Canadian outfit. And I knew Bob Fulton. 
I, of course, knew his father very well, who 


was the director of the Mackay School of 
Mines when I came here and for a few years 
thereafter. 

Then I come down to Fred Gibson with 
Pacific Engineering Products Company in 
Henderson; his father and the family were 
responsible, I think, for establishing this 
enterprise down there. Brother Jim is a good 
personal friend of mine through contacts in 
the legislature, and a few other contacts since 
I came up here; although I knew his father 
pretty well when I was down at Pioche—his 
father being down in Fas Vegas. 

Byron Hardy, I mentioned already, was 
connected with the Newmont development. 
I put him in here with the current Nevada 
operators simply because of the Carlin 
mine; although he’s now, I think, manager 
of exploration for Newmont in the Tucson 
office. He moved away from Elko, Nevada 
several years ago. 

And Royce Hardy [Sr.] was a graduate in 
1910. Well, I guess I didn’t mention up here 
that Jack Frank was a graduate in ’51. Gibson 
in ’51. Byron Hardy in ’41. And Royce Hardy 
in 1947. And I also put him in here, in the 
Nevada operating category, for a particular 
reason: that he grew up with his father in 
connection with the Getchell mine, and came 
back after he went with Duval, and well, he’d 
been with the Department of Interior as 
assistant director, as I understand it; and was 
with Duval when they investigated the Battle 
Mountain enterprise that’s going right now. 
And he was responsible for approving this as 
an enterprise for Duval and made extensive 
studies of that, and is a widely recognized 
person in the mining industry. 

John R. Harmon is next; a graduate 
in 1951, who is the western manager for 
Standard Slag. These are just some that 
caught my eye as I thumbed through the list 
of graduates. 



22 


Paul Gemmill 


So, now a few that I haven’t mentioned 
that are operating outside of Nevada, that 
I happened to notice and know something 
about. Let’s see. There’d be Harve Ashby, who’s 
now retired, was a graduate in ’31, and one 
that I got to know very well when I was going 
to school, was, when I went down and visited 
with him in San Manuel, the resident engineer 
for that very large copper operation with their 
deep shafts. And it was quite a responsibility 
for a person taking charge of that mine layout 
and development. 

Then there’s John D. Burgess, who I got to 
know while he was a student. He came over to 
Pioche on one of these tours that the students 
go on. He is the director and manager for 
Cyprus mines in Cyprus. 

And I see that Robert E. Kendall, who I 
don’t place—I might’ve met him somewhere 
along the line. But he’s vice president of 
U.S. Borax Company, which is a very large 
company, and deserves mention of course— 
along with a lot of others that I probably haven’t 
had my attention drawn to. 

Then there’s William C. Kinnon, a 1930,1 
expect, 1930 graduate—he may have finished 
somewhere else, I don’t know. Anyway, he 
was, I think, in charge of the engineering for 
Red Mountain Company down in California, 
for Mines Exploration. And now he has his 
Kinnon Associates consultant business in 
Wickenberg, Arizona. 

Victor Krai, who I got to know quite well, 
because he was here at the University for a 
number of years after leaving school. And 
when I’d come over here, I got acquainted with 
him, and corresponded with him. A graduate 
in ‘38, and got his master’s degree in ‘51. He’s 
manager of Knox Mining Corporation, a 
subsidiary of Hannah Mining Corporation, 
Rockland, Maine—a real responsible position. 

And Kenyon Richard, who I got to know 
very well, because we did some geological 


work together down at Pioche, while he was a 
geologist for American Smelting and Refining 
Company; and I think before he retired, he got 
up to be the chief geologist for AS and R over 
in Arizona. And was widely known through his 
very good work. Well, those are the ones that 
came to my attention as I went through here. 

Now the ones that I directly associated 
with while I was going to school, I’d like to 
mention them. There’s Robert Adamson, 
who’s been with the Ingersoll-Rand Company 
in New York for years, a graduate of the same 
class as I, 1930. Norman Annett graduated 
in 1932, but was there when I was going. 
As you recall, I was only at Nevada for two 
years—my last two—having come from 
Pasadena City College, at that time called 
Junior College. Annett is living in Wellington 
[Nevada] and is a consultant engineer. 

And I mentioned Harve Ashby before. 
He was one I got acquainted with first hand. 
He was a graduate in 1931. 

August Dixon, graduated in ‘28, but he 
was around there enough—I got acquainted 
with him at that time, and of course, 
known him since. And he became the mine 
superintendent for Basic, and was retired 
a couple or two or three years ago. I’ve 
forgotten just when. 

“Stub” Dubravac, Stephen R. Dubravac, 
was an acquaintance of mine from when 
I was working in the Ruth mine during 
summer vacations and going to school. And 
we came over, and my first year up here at the 
University, he was a roommate of mine. And 
then he went to Alaska and attended school 
up there for another year, and he graduated 
in 1931. He became, I think, the supervisor 
for basic management at Henderson for a 
number of years. 

Norman Ericson was there, and I got 
acquainted with him going to school. Knew 
him quite well. Graduated in 1930. 



Impressions of Professors and Acquaintances at the University of Nevada 


23 


There was Minten E. Elarris, graduate 
in 1932. I saw him a few years back, I think, 
before coming up here, or maybe it was since 
coming up here, and discovered that he was 
a U.S. Forest supervisor down in California. 
Some of these fellas wind up in different 
occupations [laughs] than they start out. But, 
apparently he was healthy and doing quite 
well. 

And then there was Orville Moyes, a 1930 
graduate. I ran into him while I was in Salt 
Lake, residing in Salt Lake for a few years. 
And he was a consultant mining engineer 
for the Jen Corporation in the uranium field, 
and our people were associated with this in a 
mine contracting capacity. 

Then there was Santos Murillo, Murillo 
(I don’t know whether you pronounce it 
“Murillo” or “Mer-eeyo;” I guess Spanish 
is “Mer-eeyo”), who was a 1928 graduate, 
and I think finishing up a little bit of work 
after I went there in ‘29. He went back to the 
Philippines, and somewhere I heard that he 
became one of the top people in their, well 
their bureau of mines, whatever they call it 
over there. 

And Victor Pimentel was a ‘28 graduate. 
I got acquainted with him. He’s down in 
Brazil, I believe now, and associated with 
some mining company there. 

There was Robert Prince, a 1931 graduate, 
who got well involved in mining, and I think 
was killed in a mine accident. There was Fred 
Roumage, a 1931 graduate, and got his EM 
degree in ‘41. He’s listed here in Reno. He 
hasn’t come around to see me, and maybe 
he’s off somewhere else [laughs]. 

There’s Weaver A. Solomon, who was 
a good student I recall. He is graduate in 
‘29, and he’s listed as being retired and 
down in Moneterey Park, but he was in the 
Philippines, and was one, I think, you know, 
on the [Bataan] big march during the war 


years—I guess went through quite a bad 
experience there. 

There was Harold Vaughn, 1930 
graduated believe he’s involved in water 
engineering down in California in the 
agricultural area. 

There was Wally White, who was a 
1930 graduate and had spent years with the 
Nevada Department of Health, or whatever 
you call it. And he’s still with ’em, I guess. Is 
he retired? [He works for Incline Village.] 
I think I have heard that he was with the 
Incline Village outfit. 

Now a few more comments. There’s some 
of these fellas that wound up at Pioche in our 
operations there. And I got further acquainted 
with ’em over there—either young engineers 
or more or less contemporaries. One of 
’em was—. We’ll start again alphabetically. 
We start with Sam Arentz, Jr., graduated 
in 1934. We worked very closely together 
for a few years there when I was geologist 
in charge of engineering, and I was doing 
this for the Bristol Company and the Prince 
Company and Combined Metals, and he was 
the resident superintendent for Combined 
Metals. This was during the period, I guess, 
from ‘45 to about 1949 or ‘52, somethin’ like 
that I guess. 

And John T. Atkins, who came over 
there as a young engineer. I don’t know 
what previous experience he had had. And I 
mentioned him before as manager for Utah 
Construction in Shirley Basin—a uranium 
mine, I think. (Maybe I didn’t mention 
him. I should’ve.) John Atkins came there 
as a young engineer and worked up to being 
the head mine engineer for us. A very good 
young fella, with a nice family. 

And Frank Eastman was there when I 
started doin’ some work for Combined Metals 
in 1945. He was there, I think, as the chief 
mine engineer, but he left soon after that. He 



24 


Paul Gemmill 


was a graduate in 1942. He’s in Tucson, but I 
don’t have any occupation listed for him. 

There was Fred Porteous. Came there as 
a young engineer in 1948, graduate. Worked 
with us for several years and got involved 
in the perlite operation, after doing mine 
engineering. He’s now self-employed, and 
has a small mining company of his own over 
at Gabbs. 

There was John Russell, a 1942 graduate, 
who became our mine superintendent 
over there, Bob [Robert R.] Durk left. (Bob 
Durk came from Idaho.) But he’s with Utah 
International over in Wyoming, running 
a uranium mine, I understand. John was a 
very fine young fella. Been a Marine in the 
war years, and has an aggressive attitude and 
yet he’s a very quiet person. He’s kind of an 
unusual person, and I have a great regard for 
him. 

And associated down there I might 
mention, too, Byron Hardy was—see I still 
had a little connection with the Bristol 
Company and Byron and I worked together in 
the development of some exploration project 
adjacent to Bristol. And he later on, after going 
to Arizona and New Mexico and winding up 
at the Groundhog mine, where I visited him, 
he later came back as manager of Bristol for a 
few years until he went with Newmont up at 
the Carlin mine. So I had gotten pretty well 
acquainted with Byron. 

Well this kind of reviews the student side 
of the thing; and I did mention professors, but 
I’ll go back now, and mention, of course, that 
at that time in ‘29, Walter E. Clark was the 
president of the University. Mr. [FredE.] Bixby 
was the dean (I guess they call ’em) of College 
of Engineering. And the others in the college 
of Engineering separate from the Mackay 
School of Mines that I got well acquainted 
with, beside Mr. Bixby.I think I had a course 
under Mr. Bixby. Then there was [Horace] 


Boardman. And I know that I had some 
special surveying course under Boardman. 
And there was [J. Claude] “Geology” Jones 
[laughs]. Of course, I had a course under 
him. But he was listed under the College of 
Engineering. And Stanley Palmer. Of course, 
I had my electrical course under Stanley, and 
he tried to get me to shift from mining over 
to electrical. The reason is kind of amusing. 
The reason for this is because of a special 
professor I had in junior college that taught 
electricity from the fundamentals.That is, 
instead of just, you know, learning the formula 
for electrical equations for solving electrical 
problems, he believed that any student had to 
learn how these units were ever developed in 
the first place, and the history of these units of 
electricity— like the coulomb (quantity) and 
the rate of flow being an ampere, which is one 
coulomb per second, and the volt—you know, 
how these were derived in the first place. Well, 
I was so familiar with this at the time—my 
professor down there had taught me, and in 
fact I wound up correcting physics papers for 
him because I got so wrapped up in this; so 
interested, you know—that when I went into 
a course in electricity, and I was called to the 
blackboard to solve a problem, for which I was 
supposed to have these formulas in my head 
and go ahead and solve the problem, I didn’t 
remember the formulas, but I knew how to 
derive it. So I derived the formula over on the 
side, and solved the problem. And then the 
Professor Palmer asked me what I was doing. 
Of course, he knew, you know, but he wanted 
me to tell the class what I was doing. And so 
I did. I explained this to the class. And then 
he got ahold of me afterwards and he said, 
“I’d like you to transfer into my electrical 
course.” Well that, of course, I felt real good 
about, but I was all set to be a miner. So I 
always liked Palmer very much because we 
got a good start. 



Impressions of Professors and Acquaintances at the University of Nevada 


25 


On the other hand, I got a very poor 
start with Jay Carpenter. Oh, I got a horrible 
start with Jay Carpenter, because Jay had a (I 
guess it turned out to be good) a good habit 
of making his students keep copious notes 
on his lectures. And you had to, at the end of 
each semester, you had to turn in a notebook 
that showed that you were keeping copious 
notes on what he told you in class. Well, I’d 
never been trained to do that, and I didn’t 
really believe in it, at the time. I believed in it 
later [laughs]. So when I came up to the end 
of the first semester under Jay Carpenter, I 
got a condition in the course, because I hadn’t 
kept a good notebook, see. Look at my desk 
[gesture over piles of papers]! I guess maybe 
you can understand [laughs]. So anyway, I got 
a condition, and he gave me a book to read and 
outline. Well, when I went home Christmas 
vacation, I guess it was, we had had to turn our 
notebooks in prior to that for him to inspect, 
why he gave me this book to outline, and I 
had to spend part of my Christmas vacation 
going through this book and outlining it. 
But he was kind of kind to me. The book was 
well-titled in all the chapters, so it was easy 
to copy the titles down and make an outline. 
I think he knew what he was doing. He was, 
I think, making an object lesson out of this or 
something. And I learned somethin’ from it, 
because that taught me to do what I was told 
to do as a student, you know, if I wanted to 
get a good grade. And so the next semester I 
kept a good notebook for Jay Carpenter. Then 
I got a good grade [laughs]. 

Well, then of course, in the Mackay 
School of Mines was Carpenter, Couch, 
Walter Palmer, and Bill Smythe. And I had 
courses under all of ’em. And the dean of 
men was Mr. Raymond Leach that year. 
And I think Haseman was the dean of men 
for the next year, in 1929, ‘30. And I had a 
course under Haseman too. He taught the 


advanced mathematics. After you’ve had your 
calculus, and differential equations, and all 
this stuff, why then you’re supposed to take a 
course in what they call mechanics—a math 
course in mechanics. And he taught that. And 
when I started that course, I was very, very 
disappointed to find out that Prof Haseman 
taught it in the British system of units. And all 
of my training, coming up to the University 
from junior college was—. We started right 
out in physics or chemistry, or any course, 
we were in CGS units, see. And of course, 
in order to relate this to the British system 
of units was a little bit unusual for me. And 
I thought, well, I’m gonna have a hard time 
in this course, because I’m gonna be behind 
others and everything in being able to handle 
these damn units. [Laughs] It made me kind 
of mad, you know. But the problems were 
all given in British units, and of course that 
wasn’t bad. It was just that it didn’t—I wasn’t 
familiar with ’em in the mathematical sense. 

But, I had a funny experience. I guess I 
oughta relate this, although I wouldn’t want 
any student to take it as a good example. I was 
in his course; and had—this came up at one of 
the final exams. (I don’t know whether it was 
a quarterly exam or the last one. I think it was 
one of the earlier ones.) It (the experience) 
wound up giving me a great deal of confidence 
in it, after that. But I’d been out practically all 
night on a party with some of the other boys, 
and I’d consumed a lot of apricot cordial along 
with [laughs], along with a chicken noodle 
dinner with lots of chicken grease in it, I guess. 
And the doggone, the oil apparently didn’t 
allow the apricot cordial to take effect, and 
I guess I must have had an awful lot of it. In 
fact, I think the chicken came from thievery, 

and it was-Well to explain that a little 

bit—it was the Sundowners. I had become a 
member of the Sundowners. And one of the— 
I’m not certain that this was related to that 



26 


Paul Gemmill 


experience, but I think it was—one of your 
requirements was to steal a chicken. Earlier, 
I, understand, the Sundowners had to ride the 
rails, you know, underneath the freight cars 
or something, but that was discarded before 
I was there. And you had to go out and steal 
a chicken. I understand that the ranchers and 
farmers knew about this, and if you ever got 
caught why you paid a big enough penalty 
so they weren’t out. Well, I was with a couple 
of them that succeeded when I got initiated. 
Anyway, leading up then to this particular 
night, why we had this big chicken noodle 
party, you know. And came up, oh, I suppose 
it must have been after three or four in the 
morning before we were through. I went 
down to the Wolf Den, which was just below 
the school there, and had some orange juice 
for breakfast. I didn’t feel like eating. But I felt 
like havin’ something, so I had some orange 
juice. And apparently, that cut through the 
grease and caused the alcoholic content to 
come forward. And my first course, my first 
class, I should say, was Jay Carpenter’s class. 
But I was all right in his class I guess. I don’t 
think anybody really caught up with the fact 
that I was inebriated. And I got out of there 
and had to walk down the length of the quad, 
and up the second floor, or third, whatever it 
is, to Haseman’s course. And he had a pretty 
good-sized bunch of students in that course. 
And I went in to take this examination. And 
from that minute on, I didn’t remember 
anything. And I came back to life realizing 
that I was around in the next class, which 
was Geology Jones class over at the mining 
building. And I was up at the board trying to 
explain how to determine the dip and strike 
from three drill holes intersecting a certain 
bed or vein, you know. And I was doin’ all 
right in theory, but I couldn’t add or subtract 
straight. And the class was kinda makin’ fun 


of me, and so was Jones. I mean he was kind 
of a, you know, a pretty good guy; it didn’t 
bother him any apparently. 

So I was beside myself. What the hell had 
I done in this exam? And I asked some of the 
others, after I got out, what I did. Did I take 
the exam or not? And one of ’em said, “Yeah 
You were one of the first ones to get up and 
walk out.” 

And I said, “No! I guess I just didn’t do 
it then.” 

“You handed in your paper and walked 
out.” Well I thought, “Well I sure flunked that.” 

You know, when the papers were passed 
out, I had the highest grade in the class, which 
was, I think, a ninety-one or somethin’ like 
that. I’ve forgotten. And the errors were, you 
know, just technical errors. I still came up 
with the right answers on these problems. 
And this is not given here as an illustration 
of what anybody should try and do, cause it’ll 
never work out that way again in the world! 
But I must have had that thing, that exam, 
so anchored in my mind, I must have turned 
everything else off, even my awareness while 
I was doin’ it. It’s a funny experience. I had to 
relate it ’cause I’ve related this so many times 
since that it’s a—it was quite an experience. 
I’m sure I did much better than I would have 
done fil’d have just been in my normal senses 
because, you know, I’d have been worried, or 
worried myself, or something [laughs]. Well, 
that’s one of the experiences in there that I 
had to relate. 

One of the fellows that I associated a lot 
with while I was there was Hardy O’Dell. 
Hardy and I had a thing going that meant a lot 
to both of us, I guess. We both had old Dodge 
automobiles. [Laughs] And I remember we 
took a couple of trips out to Pyramid Lake 
and hobnobbed around together. I’ve never 
run into Hardy O’Dell since. But he’s working 



Impressions of Professors and Acquaintances at the University of Nevada 


27 


for Kennecott up at Garfield, I believe. And 
I’ve known of him being up there, but I have 
never run into him since. 

And another that I associated quite a bit 
with that was a roommate of mine—I’ll have 
to think of his name—was Bill Copren. I think 
he was just taking arts and science course 
or something, but Bill and I hit it of f pretty 
good and roomed together. I think the first 
year I was rooming—or first semester, I guess 
it was—I was rooming with Stub Dubravac. 
And then I wound up rooming with Bill 
Copren at Lincoln Hall. By the way, I never 
did even try to get into a fraternity, because I 
came up there just for the last two years, and 
a very serious-minded character I guess, as 
far as my studies were concerned. And, well 
Bill (I’ll try and explain him a little bit) was a 
character of his own. He was taking a special 
course in the military training—other than 
just the required course, I think. I think he 
wound up being in the lumber business up in 
Sierraville or somewhere up there. And I’ve 
seen him a time or two. He dropped down 
here, and he dropped into see me one time. 
And he had a definite allowance from home, 
I guess, to go to school on. And the first thing 
he’d do, is pay his laundry bill and pay his 
board bill (where at that time we were eating), 
and he’d go downtown and gamble with the 
rest of his money. And usually, of course, he’d 
lose, and be broke, maybe havin’ to borrow a 
little money for spare change here and there. 
But, his allowanced come, and he’d clear up 
all his debts, and then he’d have somethin’ left 
over. And sometimes, when he was lucky, why, 
he darn near lost out on his studies, because 
his money would last too long see [laughs]. 
But he was a helluva good guy, and very, very 
personable. Lots of good humor. 

And I did look back at the old yearbook 
for that first year to see who it was at that 


time that I got pretty well acquainted with, 
you know, to remind myself a little bit. And 
Michael Lawlor in the Sundowners. (I wasn’t 
a Sundowner, the first year, of course.) Orville 
Moyes was prominent in one of the geology 
courses. I think he was taking a geology 
course of some kind, and not so much of 
an engineering course. Then with Ernest 
Nichols—pretty much of a playboy fella 
[laughs]. And I think he graduated that first 
year. And I think he’s one that was on the 
chicken noodle party [laughs]. And so this, 
if that’s true, then it means that I was going to 
Haseman s course the first year I was there. 
I guess that’s probably right. Then there was 
Thomas E. Brown. I think he was rooming 
in the Lincoln Hall; probably is how I got 
acquainted with him. You know, we’d play 
cards up there once in a while, poker and 
so forth, penny-ante. And Clifford Carlson. 
And I think in the engineering courses I got 
acquainted pretty well with Derrill Angst. I 
don’t know what he’s doing now. I haven’t tried 
to run that down. But he was over in, I believe, 
electrical engineering. And another one in 
electrical engineering was Walter Ballerstein, 
who I figured was—as I recall, he was a very 
good student. And I guess Norman Erickson. 
I don’t know whether—I think he must have 
been staying in Lincoln Hall. Glenn Lawlor, 
I’ve forgotten how I got pretty well acquainted 
with him at that time. And Hardy O’Dell 
I mentioned, and Harold Vaughn. Well, I 
didn’t try to go through the second year on 
the acquaintances, but I think they’re pretty 
well covered in what I said before. 

So I suppose, speaking of the school 
time, one comment I’d make about it is 
that I thought the training we got there 
was very good, and it was very practical. 
And I think going back over the years, 
the reasons this school has stood out as a 



28 


Paul Gemmill 


mining school was the fundamentals. The 
emphasis on fundamentals. And I’ve had 
in my experience in the field and industry; 
I’ve had the experience of training, well not 
training, but having under my supervision 
engineers that had a good background in 
mathematics and chemistry and physics. 
That really is, that really does it. If you know 
those fundamentals, and you’ve had a good 
drubbing in ’em, you can go right to the top, 
whether you’ve graduated or not, in being an 
operator. The other thing you need though, 
and it’s very important, and it’s the thing that 
maybe I didn’t realize as much then as I have 
after going through the mill of industry—the 
other thing you need is a good feeling for the 
other fellow. Mr. Hoover, who I got acquainted 
with in the Pioche operation because of his 
visiting there a number of times, calls it 
“human engineering.” [Laughs] One of the 
things that he pointed out, and I’ll say it right 
now to kinda illustrate the point, he said the— 
of course he’d had world-wide experience in 
Russia, China, Burma, Australia, everywhere 
you know, and his stories on mining were 
fantastic. Maybe we’ll get on that subject 
somewhere. But one of the things to illustrate 
this point that he made a point of, and I’ve 
repeated this a number of times about this 
“human engineering” business and so forth. 
One of the points that he made was the 
difference between an American engineer 
of that time and a British engineer. Now the 
British engineer of Mr. Hoover’s time had been 
steeped in the humanities, you know, and his 
engineering was just part of his very, very, 
detailed training. The, the British engineer 
did not have the urgency about him that the 
American engineer had. And the American 
engineer had the urgency of the whole mining 
business, being a business that’s there to make 
a profit, and that ore is somethin’ that can be 
mined at a profit. And if it can’t be mined at 


a profit, it’s not ore. You know, that kind of 
thing. And if you’re gonna make money here, 
you gotta get goin’ and do it right now, see. 
That kind of difference. And so he illustrated 
it in this way; that when the British engineer 
was about to set up a mining enterprise, you 
know; it had already been explored enough 
to know that you’re gonna do it, and you’re 
gonna build a plant, and you’re gonna sink a 
shaft. First you’re gonna sink a shaft to mine 
the ore, and then get prepared for the plant. 
But the British engineer would take a long, 
long time—maybe a matter of several years 
planning all this, and doing it in great detail, 
and debating how even where they’d sink the 
shaft. And you’d get the American crew of 
engineers on the job, and they’d go out there 
and argue a few minutes—of course he didn’t 
say a few minutes—but he says they’d size it 
up rather quickly, and somebody’d point on 
the ground or spit on the ground, and say, 
“Sink the shaft here [gesture], put the mill over 
there [gesture] and let’s get goin,” see. And so 
he said that this was a very, a very striking 
difference that he ran into in his time. And I 
can see [laughs] the difference pretty well; and 
I think most people who’ve had experience 
around the world would see it. I haven’t had 
experience around the world. My experience 
has been pretty well concentrated in Nevada, 
California, Utah, and very little in Arizona— 
just trips. So, I’ve been sort of restricted in my 
area, but of course the mining world is pretty 
small, and a lot of people cross your trail on 
their way somewhere else. 

S. Frank Hunt, 

Free Enterprise Mining 

About the [S. Frank] Hunt trips and 
whether he was around at the time I was 
going to school, that came in later. But it was 
a very productive thing. In fact it was the 



Impressions of Professors and Acquaintances at the University of Nevada 


29 


Hunt funding that brought some of these 
students down to the operation that I was 
connected with in Pioche at the time. And I 
think this was when I was at Bristol. It must 
have been mainly in the period from 1935 to 
‘39, somewhere in there, because I remember 
they came down and stayed in the Prince 
bunkhouse, I think, the first year. Well going 
back to Mr. Hunt. You know, my recollection 
of the story is rather simple. He promoted 
and raised money from people who didn’t 
even have too much money, to sink a shaft on 
an iron gossan that he believed was a copper 
gossan. And he had, I’m not gonna mention 
any names here because one of these people 
was a friend of mine—a good guy [laughs] 
that came from Anaconda and looked it 
over, and said, “No. It’s no copper gossan,” 
and turned it down as far as Anaconda was 
concerned. And anyway, Hunt didn’t, it didn’t 
destroy his belief. This is a very important 
thing, because the mining law is based on 
the free access of the individual to the public 
domain, and if he’s right, he has a right to 
succeed, and if he’s wrong he’s just wasted his 
time or his money or whatever. And I think 
the Hunt experience is very illustrative of 
what we need to preserve. He didn’t give up. 
And at that time we didn’t have any SEC. We 
didn’t have anybody going out to try and stop 
him because he was gonna do a useless thing, 
or gonna destroy the landscape, or anything 
else. And anybody that put money into his 
venture, they didn’t have to think that the 
government was gonna protect ’em, or that his 
venture had to be exposed and reported on 
in a certain fashion, and everybody warned 
that it probably won’t work and all this. If 
anybody put their money in there, they knew 
they were on their own, even if it was the lady 
running the rooming house or what, and he 
had that kind of people helpin’ him. And he 
succeeded, see. 


Now that isn’t the only illustration of that 
kind of a thing, but it was one of the prominent 
illustrations. And the history of mining is full 
of these things. The experts don’t find these 
things. The experts come along after they’re 
found, and evaluate ’em, and probably very 
knowledgeably evaluate them. And if it’s a 
good one like that one was, why Anaconda 
was right back in there after Hunt found it. 
And they took it over, you know, and they 
arranged for the long truck haul, and this 
was the origin of Wells Cargo [laughs] you 
know—well, not the origin of it ’cause Joe 
Wells had done some trucking for Anaconda 
up in Utah you know, in connection with the 
smelter operation earlier, and he was just the 
logical one to get the contract. But anyway, it 
made the Wells Cargo thing from there on, 
because it was [laughs] —after this long truck 
haul of high grade ore to the railroad from the 
mine at Mountain City. 

Well, I think what I was interested in 
pointing out here more than anything else, 
was the fact—because it illustrates something 
in regard to the mining law—the fact that for 
every man with his feet on the ground, acting 
conservatively, and being sure of his ground, 
and where he’s going and how the thing will 
come out financially, for every person that is 
trained to have that attitude (and that’s the 
attitude that a mining engineer has to have, 
or a geologist working for a mining company 
or anybody)—he’s got to be a conservative 
or else he’s gonna be out pretty quick. And 
that’s just the way the thing should be. But for 
every one like that, there’s a dozen or maybe 
a hundred (I don’t know how many) people 
that are overly optimistic. And usually they’re 
not engineers. They’re the layman that doesn’t 
believe that it isn’t there. He’s gonna prove it’s 
there, see. And they’re just gonna go ahead 
anyway. And there are a lot of those people, 
if they got a little showing that, you know, 



30 


Paul Gemmill 


they’ll build up an imaginary thing about it, 
and they’re gonna keep on lookin’ and workin’. 

So, I think it was Jay Carpenter that 
first pointed it out, that the mining activity 
over the state, at the time that I was going to 
school, he thought (if you counted the efforts 
of the prospector, and the original exploring 
efforts and everything), it was generally a 
losing proposition, this exploration business 
and early development. And the small mine 
operator segment—all was on the overall, 
certainly, a losing proposition, even to the 
extent that the famous Comstock Lode was 
by and large a losing proposition to the 
operators. The people that made the big 
money were the promoters, and the exchange, 
and people like that you know. And the thing 
right there I want to point out is that every 
ounce of silver, every ounce of gold that came 
from the Comstock and went to the U.S. 
Treasury as support for our currency and for 
our economy was just as good as if it’d made a 
big profit. And these are things that have to be 
borne in mind all the time. You’ve got to allow 
these individuals to go lose their money if 
they want to. Then when you’re raising money 
from the general public, you’ve got to let the 
general public gamble just like you do when 
you let ’em gamble with a slot machine. And 
you shouldn’t put ’em down for gambling. But 
you should, in my opinion, you should just 
loosen up on this SEC regulation because it 
hasn’t done any good. 

There’ve been more people lose money 
investing money with the so-called protection 
of SEC, than ever lost money under the other 
system, because there’s been more of an 
attitude by the investor that, “Well, I know 
the government’s there to protect me.” And 
the government isn’t there to protect him. It 
isn’t there protecting him anyway. Because 
the slick operator can go around any of these 


doggone regulations that you want to set up. 
And he does. People think they’re protected, 
but they’re not. 

Now I’m talkin’ about the mining industry 
of course. And this is peculiar, maybe, to the 
mining industry, in a sense. But I’ve been 
reading this American Institute of Economic 
Research or whatever it is, in Barrington, 
Massachusetts. Is that where it is? Great 
Barrington. And they have a recent illustration 
of this SEC problem published by Harwood, 
that I think is right to the point. And he’s 
not talkin’ about just the mining industry. 
He’s talkin’ about all manner of investments 
in business enterprises. And anyone that’s 
interested in that phase should dig up those 
reports and read ’em, because I can’t do 
what he’s done in reporting on them. But, I 
do believe this, and I recall that early in my 
operating experience—as an operator—when 
I was superintendent at the Prince mine, after 
the Caselton mill was built, I was involved in 
going around meeting with mining people 
here and there, in the early war years. And I 
got well acquainted with a man from Montana 
by the name of Trauerman, who was running 
the Montana Mining Association. And he and 
I were (and that was at the early days of SEC) 
both mad at SEC, because SEC was tryin to 
put the squeeze play on the kind of activities 
we thought had to be furthered and promoted. 
Well, in short, since that time SEC has failed 
to stop anything really. But in other words, 
our concern that mining wouldn’t be allowed 
to thrive, was ill founded because SEC didn’t 
get that (didn’t really stop promotions). They 
just publish all of these things you gotta do, 
and all this paperwork you gotta put out, and 
make it more profitable for the attorneys and 
the slick promoters. You gotta go through that 
avenue before you get there, that’s all. But, it’s 
still done [laughs]. 



Impressions of Professors and Acquaintances at the University of Nevada 


31 


Women Mining Students 

[I will discuss women in the School of 
Mines.] Well, there was one student, Betty 
something. I can’t think what her name was. 
Bowman, Betty Bowman. That came down 
on one of these tours. She was a graduate. 
Let’s see. Let’s see when she graduated. I’m 
quite sure she did graduate. And she traveled 
around with these [laughs], these students 
and was very—Bowman, Betty C. Bowman, 
1937, B.S. in Mining Engineering. This list 
gives her address as 2580 Raleigh Drive, San 
Marino, California 91108. Well, she was one 
of the boys as far as hiking to the top of the 
hill, and diggin’ right into everything that they 
were lookin’ at, and I think she got a good 
education. I suppose there’ve been a number 
of others. Has the number increased in recent 
years? I haven’t noticed. 

Well, I’ve had some experience in other 
ways with women in this mining industry, 
Of course, ruling out the secretaries and 
office people, people of that kind. Why, I 
know that Anaconda used women extensively 
in their map work. A field man goes out 
and maps, and fixes up his notes. Whether 
they’re good, bad or indifferent, they come 
out lookin’ pretty good after the ladies have 
gotten through [laughs] in the drafting office, 
you see. So, I know they were used way back 
for many years in that way. But as far as 
women getting into the operating end, it’s 
only very recently that I’ve heard of women 
actually taking men’s jobs like say—and this 
applies more to open pit mining (I don’t know 
underground mining where it’s done)—but 
in open pit mining, they’re actually driving 
trucks. These big—doesn’t matter how big 
the truck is, it’s powered by power steering 
and everything. They can do just as good a 
job as a man can, and maybe they’re a little 


more reliable, as far as, you know, stickin with 
the job, and doing it without goof in’ off, you 
know. I think they probably are more reliable. 
[Laughs] 

* * * * * 

Well, now as a further comment about 
school at the Mackay School of Mines and 
my particular interest there, I think it might 
be well to point out that the professor that 
got me steamed up here, like Dr. Elston in 
physics did in Pasadena College, was Vince 
Gianella. All the others were good, you know, 
and all that, but Vince had a way with him of 
getting into talking and relating experiences 
and gettin you all fired up about what he was 
teaching. He was teaching mineralogy and 
petrography at the time. And I think he was 
studying for his doctor’s degree and so forth, 
while I was there. But I got so interested, I 
guess in Vince Gianella, that I got keenly 
interested in petrography [laughs]. And I’d 
stay late in the evening even, in his lab, workin 
on thin sections and studying them and so 
forth. Although I have a problem with my 
vision, that is I’ve got a—I’m partially color 
blind. It means that I’m not color blind totally, 
but I have a weakness for red. And I can mix 
up greens and browns and things, you know. 
So you’d think this might be kind of bad 
in petrography because of the color charts 
and everything. But I found out that I had a 
certain advantage in a way, because I could 
detect minute shades of color that were not 
generally visible to the normal person. Vince 
and I had a little fun with that. So anyway, I 
got good grades out of Vince, and enjoyed his 
course immensely. 

I think outside of that, other courses 
that were applied—lower division work and 
everything—were interesting to me, and I 



32 


Paul Gemmill 


think I had a real good background coming 
up from junior college to Nevada. I had no 
trouble with that except for one thing: I was 
deficient in the number of credits that I had. 
If I was gonna graduate with two years of 
work from there on, why, I had to find some 
way of either taking more courses, jammin’ 
in somethin’ extra—and that didn’t seem to 
be easy to do with the schedule they had and 
everything. But, fortunately, in my experience 
in high school years and so forth, why, I’d 
been around the mines in summers, and I had 
done a good deal of assaying with my father’s 
operations, and so I was given the opportunity 
to take an examination in fire assaying and 
got that credit behind me right away, and that 
made up for what I needed. So I started right 
out as a junior. 

I don’t think that as far as my interests 
there at school are concerned—engineering 
course is always heavy you know, and I guess 
that most of the engineers—it’s historically 
true that people who take a heavy engineering 
course play kinda hard. And so my other 
interest outside of school [laughs] was to play 
hard, although I don’t think I was very far out 
of line, doing bad things. I was a smoker. But 
I was a smoker before I ever got into junior 
college. So I wound up being a heavy smoker. 
It wasn’t ‘til maybe fifteen years or so ago that 
I quit, after smoking heavily, three packs a day 
or more for years. Took a little doin’ to quit, 
but I did. I had a little encouragement, because 
I could tell that at that rate of smoking, the 
ends of my fingers and my toes would start 
turning a little numb, and if I’d cut down to 
less than a half a pack, why that’d cure it, but 
that was misery. And so I gradually managed 
to—.It took me about two years of fightin it 
[laughs] to quit. So that’s one thing that I—. 
And of course I learned to drink, not before 
I came to the University. I guess I must’ve 
learned to have a highball while I was havin’ 


a good time, while goin’ to the University. It’s 
never been a problem with me. There’ve been 
times when I drink a little bit too much, and 
then quit. Because you know, it can easily get 
to be a habit. And when it gets to be a habit, 
and you recognize it’s a habit, then you better 
quit. So you quit for awhile [laughs]. 

[This was during prohibition though.] 
Yes, but that made it all the more interesting 
you see. And so you’d get alcohol some way 
or other, and mix it and so forth. Well, down 
at Pioche it was Judge Nores with his Pioche 
drugstore, and the cooperation of the doctor, 
that he always had “alkehol” on hand, and 
he made “Pioche Specials” out of pure grain 
alcohol and soft drinks, you know pop of 
some kind or other. “Pioche Specials.” 

I didn’t get any steamed-up interest in 
the girls while I was goin there. And I think 
I can say that for most of the engineers that I 
was associating with in school there, that was 
typical—that you have this heavy course and 
your interest in the girls comes later [laughs]. 
Maybe you were earlier. Well, in Pasadena 
I was mildly interested in one or two along 
the line, but I guess I was a serious-minded 
character there for a number of years (laughs). 



4 


Depression Mining 


To start with, graduating from the Mackay 
School of Mines in 1930, summer of 1930. 
My brother came over from Pioche, where 
he was at that time, and we had a party one 
evening. Had to stay two or three days after 
the school term was over, because my old 
Dodge had broken down. And I think we 
went downtown—after my brother came to 
my graduation—we went downtown with 
Stub Dubravac and somebody else. I think 
it may have been Harve Ashby. I don’t know. 
But, one of the valves stuck and pushed a piece 
out the side of the motor. And so we had to 
dig up—well, we had to turn to another old 
Dodge that I had back of the Lincoln Hall. 
There was lots of area to park out there, and 
not too many students had automobiles then. 
And I had a Dodge, a prior Dodge, that I had 
come up there with. And we managed to tear 
that motor down and put one together that 
would work in the Dodge that we were gonna 
drive home. So that took a couple of days. And 
we had a terrible piston slap in it, but it was 
workin’ all right. 


And I’ll never forget the trip back. Of 
course the roads weren’t all paved like they 
are now or anything. Mostly it was gravel 
roads and so forth. We went back to Pioche 
in that, and drove most of the night to get 
there. And this motor was clapping along with 
this heavy piston slap, but I was really pretty 
well convinced that it wasn’t really hurtin 
the motor any. And when my brother’d drive, 
why he’d drive cautiously, wondering if it was 
gonna blow up. And then when I’d drive, why 
I’d speed it up [laughs], and he thought I was 
crazy. But we got there. 

Machinery 

Well, that summer the Prince Company 
was having some churn drilling done, and 
so we spent some time on that during the 
summer. But, by that tall (I guess it was) 
there was a deal put together by my father 
and Snyder of Combined Metals, because 
they were after a hoist and compressor and 
some machinery for putting the surface 



34 


Paul Gemmill 


facilities together at the Caselton shaft. And 
the Prince Company had owned a property 
over in Arizona—the Arizona-Binghamton 
property— that had been closed down 
earlier, and was time to dispose of some of 
the equipment. The mill had been sold, as 
I recall. And so we went over there. And in 
the meantime Stub Dubravac had come to 
visit, and he went along with us. My younger 
brother Jack, and my older brother Dave, 
and myself, after fixing up the old Dodge 
some more—tearing it down and puttin’ it 
together again, and getting a little better fit 
on the pistons—why, [laughs] we headed for 
Arizona, and the Arizona-Binghamton mine 
and took out this equipment. 

And the experience over there that is 
notable was that you go out of Mayer, Arizona 
over to the Arizona-Binghamton mine on 
a country road, and you cross the Agua 
Fria River. And in the course of taking the 
machinery out, we had a man in Mayer, a 
trucker, that had a couple of old White trucks 
with hard rubber tires that came and hauled 
the equipment to the railroad. And we had to 
tear the equipment down, put it on cribbing, 
and then transfer it onto the truck, because we 
were on a side hill there. And one afternoon 
we had this Ingersoll-Rand Imperial-Type 
Ten compressor up on cribbing, down below 
the old compressor house; and along came 
a rainstorm. I knew about, you know, these 
flash floods in the desert country. I’d seen 
’em from way up in the Bradshaw mountains 
when we were out there at Crown King, 
earlier. You could look over the valleys down 
in the low country, from—not from Crown 
King so much as from the Tiger mine, where 
we were one summer. See these flash floods 
hit way down the valley. But, this is the only 
time that I was right in the middle of one 
to the extent that we were at that time. This 
thing started to rain, and it rained— you’ve 


heard the term pitchforks or bucketfuls, 
and it was sure doin’ it. And we got into a 
building there and we were under cover for 
awhile. And it only rained, I think, that way 
for a matter of twenty minutes or somethin’ 
like that. But as it—as the rain came down, 
it undercut the cribbing that the compressor 
was up on—a bunch of railroad ties— and the 
compressor landed down on the ground, and 
that undid days [laughs] work of cribbin’ up 
the compressor. And then, it was gettin late 
afternoon by that time, we went to go home, 
and we got down to the Agua Fria River— 
just below camp, practically at the edge of 
camp—and here was a wide stream bed; and 
we’d wondered if the water ever came up high 
enough for the cable bridge across there to 
be—have to be ten feet or so or whatever it was 
off the stream bed. But sure enough, here we 
saw the water coming down, and rising. When 
we got down there, there was two or three feet 
clear across this wide stream bed. And to my 
recollection, it must’ve been 100 feet wide. 
And pretty soon it started on goin up and up 
and up, and it got up within a couple of feet 
of this cable bridge. And then it was late that 
evening before it really went down to where 
we could drive across the stream bed. I guess 
it was ten o’clock that evening before we could 
go back into Mayer. So that was an experience 
that I’ve never forgotten. 

Afterwards we went up to the old Crown 
King camp and hauled equipment out of 
there. And I think in my father’s experience, 
I had mentioned this railroad that went 
over ten switchbacks to go up there. Well, 
the railroad had been taken out, but the 
old trestles over these deep canyons in the 
Bradshaw Mountains—there were a number 
of these trestles that had been built up for the 
roadbed, and the old railroad bed was used 
for just a road, but when you came to these 
trestles why they had put ties in-between the 



Depression Mining 


35 


former ties to fill it in, but it was very rough, 
of course. And as you go over this with these 
hard-tired trucks, why the whole bridge—and 
some of ’em are probably over a hundred feet 
above the floor of these canyons you see—and 
you’d go over this bridge, and it would start 
getting a synchronous sway to it, with the 
action of the truck [laughs]. And you sit way 
up there in those high seats on these old White 
trucks, look down, and they’re kinda scary. 
Anyway we hauled machinery from up Crown 
King too, and we got our shipment of f. And it 
went back to Pioche, and that Nordberg hoist 
is still in there on the Caselton shaft. 

We also moved an old, old-time hoist 
with a big eighty horsepower, early-type of 
electric motor. It must’ve been made way 
back when, oh, when they made a lower 
speed motor, and they used lots of wiring in 
it. And it must’ve been made about 1910 or 
before. We hauled this hoist over, a double¬ 
drum hoist, for the Prince mine. And it was 
later put in on the Prince shaft by my father. 
And it had brakes that were just band brakes. 
The Norberg hoist that was brought over for 
Combined Metals and sold to them, had 
post brakes. It would still be regarded as a 
modern hoist. But this other one was not, 
and it was put together with bolts. Even the 
foundation was just bolted together. And the 
brakes on each drum were band brakes that 
would brake only if you were going in the 
right direction with that particular drum. 
In other words, each side, each drum, if that 
drum was unwinding and the skip (or cage, 
whatever you were using) was going down 
the shaft, then that brake would tend to hold 
it, because it was wrapping the right way to 
pull the band around the drum, see. And then 
the other brake wouldn’t be effective for that 
thing, because the other drum would be going 
the wrong direction for the band. Well, the 
experience I’m gonna tell ya is in regard to the 


use of this hoist in the Prince shaft later on. 
And I’ve forgotten whether it was soon after 
we put it in or not. We managed to supply 
camp water for the Prince camp by putting a 
pump down in the shaft—on the five hundred 
level; a little sump pump down at the water 
level, and then another pump, plunger pump, 
Triplex, pumped it up to the surface, and up 
to the tank on the hill. And one time I’d go 
down, and another time my older brother 
Dave would go down to attend to the pump 
when we needed water. And so I was letting 
my brother down the shaft with this hoist, 
and got down near where I had to stop, pulled 
on the brake and it wasn’t there. The pin had 
come out [laughs] and I didn’t have any brake 
on that side. And I pulled with all my might 
on the other brake, and all it would do was 
just keep the thing from gaining speed. I 
wouldn’t, I couldn’t stop the thing goin’ down. 
I visualized, you know, havin’ him go down 
and smash through the—well, we didn’t have 
any chairs on the station and he’d have gone 
into the water. So I had only one alternative, 
and I knew that it was liable to blow the motor 
up. But I plugged, what they call “plugging” 
the motor. The control, turnin’ it one way 
would be for goin up and the other way was 
reverse, see. And so I had to put the motor 
in reverse of the direction the ancient motor 
was spinning, for that side of the thing to stop 
the cage. Well, of course, my heart was in my 
throat and everything, but I did, I plugged the 
motor and it got the cage stopped about two 
or three feet off of the station, up above the 
station. And, of course, once it was stopped, 
why that other brake held all right, and then 
I was able to put the pin back in the other 
band brake. And my brother kept ringin’ for 
me to let it down. By that time, why, I guess he 
decided there was somethin’ the matter, and 
he got the pump started. And when he came 
up, he started [laughs] wondering what the 



36 


Paul Gemmill 


hell, why didn’t I know where that thing was 
supposed to stop. And of course, it wasn’t ‘til 
then that he knew what had happened. But 
[laughs] that was an experience that I never 
will forget. 

Well, let’s see now, I’ve gotten a little bit 
ahead of myself because the fall of 1930 really 
was—let me think now. It was not when we, 
I guess that was not when we were pumpin’ 
the water. I can’t recall exactly. But anyway, 
that fall, late that fall, I went to work. Took 
my old Dodge and headed for Bauer, Utah. I 
was gonna go to work for Combined Metals 
at Bauer, Utah. I had a sort of a promise of a 
job from Mr. Snyder. And so I was gonna go 
up there and work. And I headed for Bauer 
with my old Dodge. And I got up to, oh, up 
above Geyser ranch, between Geyser ranch 
and Ely in the next valley there, and it was 
the first fall storm of the season and it was 
snowing, and the car came to a crashing halt 
with the rear wheels locked, and I found out 
there was nothin’ I could do about it, because 
it was the drive shaft bearing that was shot. 
And before leaving Pioche, I had smashed a 
fingernail, and I had a blood blister under the 
fingernail; and it was causing a lot of trouble. I 
finally drilled a hole in the fingernail, and let 
the blood out, but that caused some infection. 
Well, after a cold night and first snow flurry 
of the season, a car came from the Ely way, 
and I got a ride back to Pioche. Sold the old 
Dodge to Roy Orr, where it was and as it was 
for twenty-five dollars. And I took the train 
to Bauer, Utah. 

I worked up there part of that winter, after 
getting the finger taken care of with frequent 
trips in to the doctor in Tooele. Well, then I 
went to work for Sam Craig, who was the mine 
engineer. So I had some of my first experience 
there in actual underground surveying and 
so forth along with Sam Craig. And we were 
busily occupied catching up old stopes that 


hadn’t been surveyed and outlined for awhile. 
And I spent a very cold winter there. Bauer is 
a terrifically cold place. It’s down in a hole in 
the bottom of the valley. And there’s a lead- 
zinc flotation mill. In the wintertime, why the 
wind blows through there and drifts the snow. 
It was pretty cold. 

Well anyway, came spring, and they 
decided that I oughta be sent back to Pioche 
to work with Clair Hagen, who was the 
mine engineer at Pioche. And I went down 
to work there. And right away I was put on 
underground surveying and mapping and 
did a little bit of geologic mapping. And 
pretty soon, Chief Buehler came out, and 
he was the National Lead’s chief geologist. 
(National Lead then had a controlling 
interest in Combined Metals.) And he had 
me run an insoluble residue laboratory on 
the limestone and dolomite formations of 
the hills there, to try and come up with the 
insoluble residues that would be diagnostic 
as to what formation the sample came from. 
This would be for the purpose of predicting 
by surface sample insoluble residues how far 
down to the favorable ore bed, you see, in 
the mountain ranges. Well, I had quite a little 
experience with that, but it was not successful 
in determining the formation by just picking 
out rocks and havin’ them analyzed. But, 
nevertheless that experience was valuable, 
because I learned enough about formations so 
that with the custom—well, with the universal 
habit of the faults there to be normal in their 
relationship (in other words, with the hanging 
wall on the downside, and the sequence 
of dark and light limestones with different 
bedding thicknesses and so forth), it became 
not too difficult to go from one faulted block 
to another and identify what formation you 
were in mapping surface geology. 

So, I got then, to be placed on the surface 
geological mapping, and did some of that with 



Depression Mining 


37 


an engineer shooting me in, and I was running 
the rod. Well, that didn’t last too long because 
we went then in, of course, into the depression 
years. And Combined Metals closed down 
their operation, which was through the 
number one shaft over at Pioche. And they’d 
been shipping this ore to Bauer, Utah. But it 
didn’t pay any longer. Even the real good ore 
was only worth around four dollars per ton 
back at the mine. And they closed down. But 
they still were running some development on 
the eight hundred level of the new Caselton 
shaft (and as I said before, the hoist that was 
in there was from the Arizona-Binghamton). 
And in the meantime they had sunk the shaft 
down to fifteen hundred-foot depth, and the 
bottom level was at fourteen hundred; and 
when that was being done, one of the jobs, 
while I was on the engineering staff, was 
regular measurement day in the shaft. Bill 
Franklin was the boss of the shaft crew. So our 
engineering crew had these various duties of 
the surface geologic mapping when we had 
time for it, and some underground surveying, 
and measuring up the shaft, and things like 
that, a certain amount of drafting. 

But, when they closed down the 
operations, both the Caselton and the number 
one, everything went down, except for some 
development work on the eight-hundred level 
in the Caselton shaft, where the CM bed block 
(ore bed) was at the eight level. And a fairly 
long drift was being driven out to the south. 
Well, I took a job then when the things went 
down, running a mucking machine, a Finley 
loader, one of the first two that was, I think, 
made and sold as a commercial model. This 
Finley mucker was invented by a Mr. Finley, 
who I think had been working at Butte, I 
believe, for Anaconda. And Mr. Jim Elton, 
the manager of the International smelter at 
Tooele, I guess, was the one that was partly 
responsible for Combined Metals being able 


to get this mucking machine. And it was a 
brand new type of machine at that time. (That 
would’ve been about 1931 or ‘321 guess, goin’ 
into ‘32.1 haven’t got the dates exactly right.) 

But anyway, my roommate was on one 
shift and I was on the other. And we were 
running a little competition on who could 
ever get the most muck out. (I don’t know 
whether I mentioned this before or not.) 
And we drove several hundred feet on the 
eight-hundred level. And I did manage to 
muck more muck than my roommate did, 
but my secret of doing this was that I’d muck 
a car with the mucker (and we only had hand 
tramming and it was about a twelve-hundred 
foot tram I think, or something like that, out 
to the pocket), so I’d run with that car out to 
a relay trammer and do part of the tramming 
to keep myself busy, and help the trammers. 
And in that way I was able to beat Rod Phipps, 
who was my roommate at that time. He was 
a former churn driller. 

But anyway, that came to an end with the 
completion of, or coming close to the end 
anyway, of the amount of development work 
they wanted to do. And I recall that the Bristol 
mine had been closed down too. Bristol was 
a direct shipping property, twenty-five miles 
north of Pioche. And some of the Bristol 
people were in there working on the eight 
hundred level. Wages were pretty low. 

The Comet Mine 

Well the folks, my father and brothers, 
decided to try and do somethin’ with the old 
fissure mine over on the west slope of the 
Highland range that the Prince Company had 
at that time. It had some oxidized lead, silver, 
gold type ore in it. And there was an old mill 
there that had been operated for a few years 
by the man by a name of Smiley, years before. 
And they altered the mill for milling some ore 



38 


Paul Gemmill 


and trying to make things go. And so I went 
with them out to the Comet mine. And we 
spent time out there during the very bottom 
of the depression. And we were tryin’ to run 
this property when there was no other mine 
in the county running. It was the only thing. 

Some of the time out there—although we 
were hiring men at a dollar a day and their 
board, and they got the dollar a day a couple 
of years later, when we were able to find it. But 
they did eat well, and we had a crew that got 
along beautifully. We had about ten or twelve 
people, I think. And we mined and milled. 
And although it was a very difficult ore to mill 
we did make some concentrates, and shipped 
some to the smelter. 

And one of the incidents in that connection 
that I think is worth relating, this was oxidized 
ore, or almost completely oxidized ore, and it 
was in a hard quartz fissure, and some of the 
values were locked up in the lead carbonate. 
And so, although the recovery was poor, we 
got a half a carload of concentrate to ship. 
And of course, it was a long, hard process to 
get that much, so we wanted to ship it. And 
we had to get this shipped, because we were 
running short of—we had to have a little 
cash. And we got Dave Mathews, who had a 
flatbed truck. He didn’t have a dump truck, 
but he had a flatbed. And he came up, and he’d 
get the concentrate mucked into the truck, 
and he hauled it down to Caliente; and we 
shipped half a car of good grade concentrate 
through a Mr. X, who also sort of represented 
the county in collecting county gaming taxes, 
you know. We had found out that down in 
Delamar camp, there were some leasers down 
there shipping a little bit of gold ore, and we 
found out that we could get this concentrate 
put in a car, in one end of a car, and one of 
the small shipments of gold ore in the other 
end of a car, and send it up to the A. S. and R. 
copper smelter where this gold ore was going. 


The half car of lead concentrate then would 
be turned around and shipped over to their 
lead smelter. 

And while that was in transit, was when 
the “bank holiday” took place. And my father 
was, at that point, back in New York talkin’ to 
some friends of his about mining. The worst 
time in the world to try and finance anything, 
but anyway, he was back there, and he knew 
some prominent people. And the “bank 
holiday” hit, and nobody had any money. 
I don’t know how he got by. He must have 
had a little cash on him. But everybody was 
in the same boat anyway, so it was sort of a 
laughable matter. I mean you’re—there wasn’t 
anybody really, of our people, anyway and in 
our situation, that was hurting for somethin’ 
to eat. And so we got along pretty good. 

But here we’d shipped this car, this half 
car of ore, and we’d done it under the name 
of a Mr. X that was handling the shipping of 
this gold ore, shipped the whole car under his 
name, and of course the money was gonna 
come through him back to us you see. And 
that was the arrangement. Well, we thought 
that it was about time for the returns to come 
from this car, and we contacted Mr. X about it. 
And no, it hadn’t come yet. We waited another 
week, and in the meantime, Dad was back 
there needing some money to get home, and 
we didn’t have any. And so we waited a week 
or so and went down to see Mr. X, and by that 
time it certainly should’ve been there. I think 
that, well, probably before we went down, we 
contacted the smelter, and they said they’d 
paid it. So we went down to get it. And he 
was very evasive to start with. And we faced 
him with the fact that the smelter said they’d 
sent it some time ago. And he said, “Well,” 
he says, “you know I am collecting license 
fees from the gambling establishments in the 
county. It’s my responsibility.” I don’t know 
what his title was or anything. But anyway, 



Depression Mining 


39 


he was collecting county taxes. And he says, 
hed collected quite a bit of that, and due to the 
bank holiday he didn’t have any money, hed 
had to use the tax money, but it came to the 
time when he had to pay the fees to the county 
And about that time that he had to submit 
the fees, why, he received the money from 
the smelter on our concentrate. And he kinda 
fidgeted and said [laughs], “Now, of course I 
do owe it to you, but you know I don’t have it.” 
[Laughs] So, I guess we sort of indicated that 
he’d better “collect some taxes for us,” and we’d 
be back in a matter of two or three days, and 
give him a little time to get it. And of course 
we were quite provoked. Hut we went back 
within a matter of two or three days, and he 
had it. I don’t know where he got it, but he had 
it [laughs]. Just one of the little experiences 
you see, that come along in tight financial 
times. I’m sure that countless thousands of 
respectable people were juggling any funds 
they could lay hands on— “Borrowing from 
Peter to pay Paul” during those days. 

Well, this gentleman really turned out to 
be a good citizen. He’d been an assayer in the 
past, and he got a job with the state. He had 
a good reputation. I wouldn’t want to belittle 
his reputation. I suppose that he just got in 
such a tight spot that he couldn’t help himself 
[laughs]. And I look back at it with a sense of 
humor more than anything else, because this 
was goin’ on everywhere, you know. 

We were able to feed everybody because 
we were able to go down to Panaca, a little 
Mormon community, where everybody had 
their cow, and their milk and their everything. 
And some of ’em had beef that they could 
sell—I think the price was under six cents 
a pound or somethin’ for a finished carcass. 
And [laughs] we had a cellar up there at the 
mine that we could hang it in. We had a lady 
cook, Irwin Buehler’s wife. Irwin was a cousin 
to Jack Buehler. And Irwin’s wife had been a 


cook at Bristol. And she came up there, and 
she was our cook. And oh, we ate high on 
the hog, you know; even though times were 
bad, we had plenty to eat. And one of the 
things—talk about the present fuel prices and 
everything. This really didn’t bother us very 
much. We were out there in the hills, and 
all heating was—any cook stove or anything 
else—was wood-fired stove, and our problem 
was simply to go down periodically and gather 
up some old, dead trees, down below camp, 
and get ’em on our homemade truck, and run 
’em up to camp, and start up the Ford engine 
that ran the saw, and saw out the wood for 
the wood fireplace, and the home that my 
mother and folks were in, and the other stoves 
around camp. 

In the course of that wood gathering and 
sawing, we had a bad accident. Rod Phipps 
of the Finlay mucker experience was there 
with us. And he had a cabin, and was living 
alone. And he had a little monkey stove that 
took very short wood. He had to saw his wood 
oh, about, six or eight inches long. And so he 
had to have special sawing. And one evening 
when there was quite a bit of snow on the 
ground, and we were running out of wood, 
and we had to go down below camp, and 
gather wood. And it was a blow, blustery day. 
And we had quite a time gathering this wood. 
Got it back up into camp, sawed up enough 
for everybody, except Rod who had to go on 
and saw some special wood for himself. And 
he started to do this late in the evening. And 
sawing these short pieces of wood, the saw 
caught and twisted his hand around. He had 
gloves on, but it cut the back of his hand and 
cut the ligaments going to his fingers in the 
back of his hand. Well, it meant of course, here 
was an emergency. And he had to take off for 
Pioche, and see the doctor, Doctor Hastings. 
Well, Rod Phipps had a Ford coupe, and my 
brother Dave had a Ford coupe. I think they 



40 


Paul Gemmill 


were identical models. And so chains were put 
on, and there was lots of snow. And the snow 
had been blowing and drifting and freezing 
for a couple of days, and it was a bitterly 
cold night. In fact, there was a report on the 
radio that night, that it was the coldest time 
over the certain areas of the west in eighty 
years, or somethin’ like that. We had a radio 
out there. The folks got this report. Well, we 
loaded, there were six of us, took these two 
Ford automobiles from the old Comet mine. 
And the road at that time went down to what 
was known as the Comet siding, down the 
valley below Panaca, between Panaca and 
Caliente—down along a long slope. And we 
got past the range, the high road, pretty well, 
because a lot of that wasn’t drifting too bad. 
But when we got to going down the long slope 
from the Highland range to Panaca Valley, this 
was kind of open country, you know, and the 
snow was just drifting. Any depression was 
filled right away, and there was a lot of crust 
over part of it. And these cars going down 
there would ride on the crust a little ways, 
and then drop through. And then you’d have 
to get everybody to kind of lift the car up a 
little bit, and get it going again on the crust. 
Because you couldn’t, no way would the car 
go breaking through the crust in certain 
sections. So there were sections there that 
we had an awful time getting through. Then 
you’d go to another section maybe, where 
the drifting snow had practically made the 
ground bare. So it wasn’t all that way, but 
there were some very difficult places. And 
we had serious doubts as to whether we were 
gonna get through, for awhile that night. 
Well, we arrived at Pioche, I think about 
one-thirty in the morning. And we’d left 
the camp by five o’clock in the evening. And 
we’d had some heated rocks at Rod Phipps’s 
feet, and the rest of us were keeping from 
freezing by activity more than anything else. 


All of us nipped parts of our toes or fingers or 
something. Irwin Buehler was along on that 
trip, and Charles Thompson was along on 
that trip. That was the son of Charlie senior 
of Thompson Merchandise. And my brother 
Dave and myself. My younger brother, Jack, 
was instructed to stay in camp and take care of 
[laughs] the wood and the stoves. And Irwin 
Buehler felt his finger getting numb when we 
got down to the valley, got on the highway 
where we could start making some time, and 
he bit his finger a little bit [gesture] to see 
if he could feel something, and he couldn’t. 
But when he got to the doctor’s office, why 
he’d bit half, practically into the bone on 
his finger, and didn’t know it, ’cause it was 
frozen [laughs]. Well, there wasn’t anybody 
lost any fingers or anything out of being 
frozen, but everybody had some troubles 
with the frostbite for a while afterwards. 
And I remember I had trouble with my heels 
more than anything else, after that, sort of a 
chilblain or something, from the frost. And it 
was a helluva night. We got in to Dr. Hastings, 
and he pulled the ligaments together in the 
hand and fixed it up. That was the worst 
accident that we had while we were, during 
our Comet experience [laughs]. But it was a 
memorable experience. 

I’m trying to think whether there was any 
other experience out there that was worth 
relating. As far as I was personally concerned, 
I was sort of in charge of running the mine 
end, and my brother Dave, was in charge 
of running the mill end, haywiring things 
together and everything. But, running the 
mine didn’t mean that I didn’t also enter into 
the job of doing some work. I was mucking 
behind one of the best miners in the county, 
Reed Hall. Later on I had him working for 
me out at the Bristol mine, and he was one of 
my top miners and later an excellent leaser in 
the mine. We ran the mine at Bristol, later on, 



Depression Mining 


41 


mostly by leasing, and he was one of the top 
leasers. Well anyway, I mucked behind Reed 
Hall, in doing some development down on 
the Comet two-eighty level. We had a vertical 
shaft to the one sixty-eight, and then an offset 
to the old Incline. And we were hoisting up 
the Incline and driving a little drift on the two- 
eighty. And Reed was the miner, and I was the 
mucker. And it wasn’t until later that I had 
experience myself as a machine miner—you 
know, runnin the drill. Even though I was a 
graduate engineer, I hadn’t, at that time, come 
up to the point of being a miner. [Chuckles] 
Well, anyway, that sort of relates the Comet 
experience. 

Railroading and The Prince 

When we wound up our little operation at 
the Comet mine, why then we moved into the 
Prince mine. We had, by that time, a financial 
arrangement that my father had put together 
for Combined Metals, and the international 
Smelting Company of Anaconda’s, and the 
Gemmill family, the principal stockholders of 
the Prince. Ha had made some stock trades 
and so forth. Had got ten thousand dollars 
from them, which was a lot of money in those 
days, so that we could do some development 
work at the Prince mine. We had done some 
churn drilling and gotten an indication of a 
high block of material in the CM bed, above 
the three hundred level. And so the plan 
was to drive out on the three hundred level 
and then raise up to this block and see if we 
couldn’t find some shipping ore in that block. 
So, at that point, and this must have—it was in 
‘33,1 guess. We moved into the Prince, and my 
brother, who was pretty mechanically inclined 
and adept, steamed up the old locomotive or 
got it prepared. And I got some leasers to work 
in the mine while we were doing this drifting 
on the three hundred level. And I took one 


shift with the drill, running a jackhammer, 
a mounted jackhammer on a bar, which 
we had a machine we thought—. It was a 
pretty good machine, but the mount was not 
properly made, and we had a lot of trouble 
with the mounting. But, I took one shift as a 
miner, and let’s see, Vic Cottino took the other 
shift. Vic Cottino is now the supervisor for 
Ely Valley mines—lookin’ after things down 
there. And he’s been with that for some time. 
Well, Vic Cottino took one shift, and I took 
the other, and we each had a mucker with us, 
and we drove that drift out there on the three 
hundred level. Before getting started, we had 
to rehabilitate a cave-in or a chute that had 
let loose—fix that up. And we got that done. 
While that was being done, I set up some lease 
operations in the mine, and whenever it was 
necessary, why, I’d go on the opposite shift 
from when I was running the drill—on maybe 
night shift I’d be doing that—and I’d take a day 
shift to run the assay office and see what ore 
the leasers were producing. Well, they weren’t 
really leasers. It was a leasing type operation, 
but we were paying ’em wages. 

And we accumulated several hundred 
tons of ore in the old Prince bins before, you 
know, having to haul it. And then we went 
with the locomotive to get U.P. gondolas at 
Pioche and haul the ore. And at that time, 
why I became the brakeman [laughs], and my 
brother Dave was the engineer, and Stewart 
Mahaffe was the fireman. (Stewart had a 
drinking problem. And most of the time he 
was a little bit wobbly, but he was real good 
at what he did all the time. Earlier, he had 
been the operator of a three-lung gas engine 
at Virginia Louise mine, when the folks first 
moved out there to operate a lease at Louise. 
Stewart Mahaffe was a fella that could always 
make the three-lung engine go that supplied 
the air for the mine. And whenever anybody 
else would have trouble on the other shift, 



42 


Paul Gemmill 


why they’d call on Stewart Mahaffe. No matter 
how drunk he was, he could come up there 
and adjust something, and make the engine 
go.) Well, Stewart Mahaffe was a fireman on 
the locomotive; and the old locomotive had 
a little belly in the firebox where, you know, 
it’s all bolted together with stay-bolts they call 
’em, and somebody had gotten the thing too 
hot with not enough water in it sometime, 
and there was a little belly in the top of the 
firebox. But new stay-bolts had been put in. I 
guess it wasn’t too dangerous, but anyway he’d 
screw down the pop-off valve a little bit, and 
raise the pressure, and say, “Well, I don’t know 
whether it’ll take it, but we’ll try a little more 
pressure,” you know [laughs]. Well, we made a 
few trips to town with that locomotive. Went 
over to get cars, loaded ’em up, and made the 
trip two or three times after that. And we 
had to learn about—well, I think we had a 
man come up from the Union Pacific Station, 
which at that time was a division point in 
Caliente. We had a real good maintenance 
man come up and look the locomotive over, 
and show us how to roll the tubes, and you 
know, and everything. In fact, I guess, maybe 
we were short of something or other. But we 
got that oriented all right, so we were able to 
do the thing. 

Well, I remember on one of these trips, 
taking that ore over to town for shipment to 
the Tooele smelter of Anaconda. I remember 
on one of these trips we got to Pioche depot 
with the ore and started back, and we 
developed a leak in the boiler tubes. And it 
practically put the fire out, and we had to coast 
back down to get more water, but we had to 
first roll the tubes. Instead of getting back in 
daylight, why, we were cornin’ back at twelve 
o’clock midnight or something to Prince, with 
the locomotive and maybe a car or two. A 
couple, I think we hauled up to four cars at a 
time. I don’t recall. 


But anyway, it was either two, or three 
or four, but we were coming back, way late 
at night. And we hadn’t fixed a light on the 
locomotive, didn’t think it was needed, you 
know. At one point out of Pioche a ways, why 
the railroad crosses the highway; and at that 
time the highway was paved with gravel only. 
There was no hard pavement on it. But it was 
rather freshly surfaced and the gravel was 
kind of loose. You know, if a car kept in the 
ruts, you could go pretty good, but if you got 
off in the loose gravel, why, it kind of makes 
you swerve around, you know. Well, we got 
out with the locomotive, and it was chugging 
along, and had what they called monkey 
motion valve action. And it’d go chug-chug, 
chug, chug, chug, chug, chug-chug; you know 
an irregular pattern. 

And we were chugging along and chuggin 
along, cornin’ up and we had it fixed all right, 
and it wasn’t leaking, and we were makin it 
fine—goin’ maybe fifteen miles an hour—I 
don’t know. And we came to the highway, 
and here came a car from the Ely direction 
toward Pioche, down the highway; and he was 
hummin. He was really goin. He must have 
been goin’ forty-five miles an hour [laughs]. 
You know at that time, on that highway, that 
was quite a speed. Anyway, he was cornin’ 
down and you could hear his motor almost 
hum, and we were just ready to cross the 
highway. We didn’t have to stop for him or 
anything, but he was within fifty or a hundred 
feet ahead of us when he crossed. But just 
before he crossed the railroad, my brother 
reached up and pulled the whistle cord 
[laughs],And we were all watchin this guy, 
and I guess it startled him so much, he just 
about wrecked his car, because as he crossed 
the railroad and realized that somethin’s 
goin’ on, why then he started swervin’ all 
over the place—the gravel had him then, 
you know. And we were just scared to death 



Depression Mining 


43 


he was gonna tip clear over. But he righted it 
finally, stopped for a while, and we went on 
by [Laughs] So that was a humorous situation. 

Speaking of railroading; one of the 
summers while I was still in—this is clear 
out of place, but it’s all right, because we 
were talkin’ about this railroad—the Prince 
railroad, which was owned at that time—ten 
mile railroad owned by the Prince, you see. 

And during the time that my father and 
Squires were shipping flux ore from the Prince 
mine, and after the VirginiaLouise experience 
I think—but anyway, it doesn’t matter. They 
were shipping this flux ore. And one of the 
summers that I was out there, my job, I think 
the first summer I was out there, they gave 
me a job at the Louise mine when they were 
leasing there, and I was designated the job of 
running the change room. They had a change- 
house man, cleanup man and so forth, but 
they gave me a job doing the plumbing in the 
change house, because it needed quite a little 
bit of repair. And so my first, I tell people that 
my first job around the mines where I actually 
got pay—I had lots of jobs where I didn’t get 
paid that my father would give me to do. But 
the first job I had where I was actually on 
a payroll was this change-house plumber. 
[Chuckles] That was when I was still in high 
school or junior college or somethin’. 

And another summer that I was out 
there, why I was given the job of maintaining 
the trackage—the ten miles. Because in the 
winter time, they had a section gang—I think 
three men were on the railroad to maintain 
it—and Wheeler, the father, Jim Wheeler; 
James Wheeler and Jim Wheeler. Anyway, 
Jim Wheeler, the father, was the locomotive 
engineer, and he was a cripple (that is, he had 
one leg quite a bit shorter than the other)— 
and a very flamboyant character. And he 
used to be very jealous of his prerogatives, 
and he had to have everything just the way 


he wanted it.Howard Squires was the guy that 
was dealin’ with him, and Howard and he had 
real, tough arguments, because they were both 
kind of flamboyant [laughs]. I remember that. 
And Jim Wheeler, the son, Jimmy Wheeler 
we called him. That was it! Jim Wheeler and 
Jimmy Wheeler. Jimmy Wheeler, the son, was 
the fireman. And then they had, you know, the 
trackage was maintained by this section gang. 

But in the summer time, when I was up 
there, this particular summer—whatever 
summer it was—why I was given the job of 
going over the railroad and watching for loose 
fishplates or places where there were two or 
three ties broken in the same spot, and having 
to replace a tie. They had a speeder that I 
ran, and I was the whole section gang, that 
particular summer. So, I had a track gauge that 
I’d gauge—make sure that if there was some 
danger of the track spacing being out, why 
I’d put a tie in and pull rails together and so 
forth. But there wasn’t too much maintenance 
having to be done, and so one person could 
do it. 

And I remember on one particular 
occasion, I went over ahead of the train and 
got over what we call the “point” area, and 
down the other side was mostly coasting, 
into the Pioche depot. So you were probably 
a third of the way to Pioche when you got 
up to the point of the mountain, and then 
you turn around the “point” and drift down 
to Pioche. Well, I was on the downhill part, 
and the train was behind me. And I was goin’ 
along lickety split in the speeder, and at that 
point I just wanted to keep ahead of the train, 
because Jimmy Wheeler and his father were 
behind me, and when they got to the coasting 
side, why they made pretty good time. I 
don’t know what miles per hour this was or 
anything, but anyway, they made pretty good 
time cornin’ downhill. And I had been on the 
track working in the morning, and then the 



44 


Paul Gemmill 


train came along, so I got on the speeder and 
kept ahead of ’em. And I was going down the 
other side, and came to an old road crossing 
where it had some plank laid between the 
rails for a road crossing, and a chip had come 
out and was laying up on the rail. And I saw 
it, but there was nothin’ I could do but keep 
goin’, because the train was behind me, and 
I thought it would kick off you know. But it 
didn’t. It kicked me off. And [laughs] so I was 
bounced off of the track and bouncing down 
on the ties, and the speeder was goin at a pretty 
good speed at the moment. And it knocked off 
all the tools and paraphernalia that I had on 
the speeder. And Jimmy and, no I mean Jim 
Wheeler, the engineer, put the brakes on, and 
they got it stopped all right before it got up 
to me. And Jim got out and helped me back, 
put the thing back on the track, picked up the 
tools, and so I got going ahead of the train, 
and we went on. Well, they still made pretty 
good time, and I thought everything was all 
right until I looked down, and I saw that one 
of the wheels had been bent, so that every 
time it came around, why it’d just about go 
off. In fact it looked like it was going to drop 
inside of the track gauge. You know, one wheel 
was bent. So I figured out right quick that the 
right thing to do was for myself to sit back on 
the opposite corner, so even if that wheel did 
get within the track gauge, why it wouldn’t 
go down between, and we made it fine into 
town, and I think we managed to straighten 
the wheel up a little after gettin’ into town. 
[Laughs] So, just another one of those little 
experiences you remember. 

Lost Mines, Location Comet Mine 
After Gemmill Family Moved to 
Prince 

And in here comes a little story of a lost 
mine. These two leasers, and I can’t think 


of what their names were. I can dig it up 
somewhere, but it doesn’t matter. Times 
were a little bit rough still, you know. And 
whenever you could go down into the valley at 
Cottontail Knoll, and shoot some cottontails, 
why this augmented the food supply see. So 
they’d go down in the evening, and they had a 
gun, and they’d try to get some meat that way. 
And there was also the sheepmen, Thorley’s 
outfit, down at the springs, Ely Springs down 
at the bottom of the valley west of Highland 
Range. And so I think they’d go over and 
visit the fella, a man by the name of King, 
an old timer down there. And he had a rock 
proppin’ open the door, that looked a little 
bit attractive, and he thought it oughta run 
somethin’, it might be ore. And these fellas, 
these leasers, came back up to my brother at 
Comet with it, with this rock one evening, 
and told about King thinking he had found 
something that might be worth assaying on 
one of his trap lines, where he put the stake 
in, an iron peg to hold the trap for trapping 
of coyotes. And so Dave had the thing laying 
around over at his assay office over at the 
Comet mine for a day or two until he was 
ready to assay, and then he put it through 
the crusher, and crushed it up and assayed it; 
and it went over a hundred ounces a ton in 
silver, I think a hundred and twenty ounces, 
or somethin’ like that. That’s what he told me. 
Well, these fellas, of course, he told them what 
it was, and they went back to talk to King. But 
they didn’t reveal what the rock would go, and 
they kept hintin’ around about that rock. And 
of course, immediately they made Mr. King 
suspicious. And he wouldn’t tell them where 
he got it, see. Well, the Comet thing came to 
an end and Dave moved back into the Prince, 
and we were going on with some development 
at the Prince, on the three-hundred level, 
which I was heavily involved in and so was 
my brother Dave. And later on (I don’t know 



Depression Mining 


45 


how much later), after the leasers had left and 
everything, why Dave and I decided to try and 
run this thing down and you know, go see 
about it, and tell what the story was, and see 
if we couldn’t find out where this came from. 

Well, in the meantime Mr. King had died. 
And there was a younger fella out there that 
was in charge or had been lookin’ after things. 
He happened to be in Panaca at the time, and 
we went and saw him. And so he thought 
he knew where Mr. King musta gotten that 
rock. And we went out with him across the 
valley from the Ely Springs, and he took us 
over to a dark colored lava flow, and said he 
thought that must be where Mr. King got 
this rock, ’cause the rock was kind of a dark 
color. [Laughs] And of course, there wasn’t, 
didn’t look like there’d be anything in that. 
So whatever it is, whatever that sample came 
from, that story is still unsolved. There’s a little 
lost mine story for you [laughs] My suggestion 
to anybody that wanted to look for that 
would be to look for a showing somewhere 
or other of oxidized manganese, you know, 
black material. And the reason I say that is on 
account of a later experience in that general 
area down there. 

Another lost mine story, since we’re on 
that subject in our present discussion, is 
the story that Ed Snyder tells about a great 
big man by the name of Freudenthal, Ed 
Freudenthal, that was a mining promoter and 
prospector in Pioche, and a very successful 
promoter. How he got ahold of people that 
would come, you know, from the east or 
somewhere, and invest in his ventures. 

Supposed to be a very heavy man, a very 
large man. And when he’d get on a horse or 
a mule—it may have been a mule that he 
rode, I don’t know—why, he was heavy for 
almost any horse. But, it was awkward for 
him to get on and off of his animal. So he 
had a long-handled hammer that he could 


knock a piece of rock off [gesture] with, and 
he carried tongs (like blacksmith tongs with 
a long handle), that he could reach down and 
pick up a piece of that rock. And he’d go out 
with a jug of whiskey in one saddlebag, and 
the other saddlebag for the specimens, or 
rocks, and whatever. And he’d hang the tongs 
and the hammer on his outfit. And he might 
be gone two or three days, because, you know, 
sometimes he’d hit the bottle pretty heavy 
[laughs]. And he’d go where there was a spring 
or something, and he had, of course, a little bit 
of food to eat. But, he went on this one trip. 
And when he came back from his prospecting, 
he always had some samples, and it was at the 
time that Ed Snyder was running an assay 
office in Pioche. Now, this must’ve been in, 
oh, 1913, ‘14, ‘15, I don’t know, somewhere 
back in—. (Because it was before—. You see 
Ed Snyder— somebody could tell us when he 
graduated from Michigan School of Mines, 
and was to run an assay office in Pioche. 
And he also, at the same time, went around 
sampling dumps and looking at different 
properties, and shipping a little ore now and 
then. So that he, you know, was always busy, at 
that time, that was sort of his occupation, soon 
after gettin out, graduating as a engineer.) 

And Freudenthal came in with the sample 
(with several samples I guess). But one of 
his samples ran pretty good in silver. I don’t 
know how good. Let’s say it ran real good 
in silver. Let’s say it ran a hundred ounces 
or fifty ounces or something. And I think it 
was supposed to run pretty good in copper 
at the same time—silver, copper ore. And 
when Snyder assayed it, and told Freudenthal 
about it, why, Freudenthal heads out to locate 
a claim. And he was gone that time two or 
three days. Came back, and he couldn’t find 
it. And after some discussion, it appeared that 
he had probably been hittin the bottle pretty 
hard when he found it originally, and it was 



46 


Paul Gemmill 


too vague in his mind, so he never did find 
where that came from. And, I guess others, 
along about the same time, went out and tried 
to go over the area that Freudenthal thought 
he was in when he found it; and nobody ever 
did find it. So that’s a lost mine! [Laughs] 

Now there are two lost mines in the 
Pioche area, that is the Lincoln County area. 
I have an idea—that is, my impression, from 
what Snyder said—that Freudenthal was 
out toward the Jackrabbit, and west of that 
area, maybe even beyond the Bristol range. 
I don’t know. But, it’s somewhere off out 
in that area. It might’ve been, well, in the 
hills clear across the valley out there. I don’t 
know. ‘Cept, Freudenthal being as big and as 
heavy and everything, as he was, it might’ve 
been that this was a showing somewhere in 
the north end of the Bristol range. So if you 
want to go lookin’, why you can go out there. 
And I’ll tell you where you can find all kinds 
of good specimens, just right on the surface 
of the ground. All you gotta do is walk over 
where the Bristol tramway goes from Bristol 
to Jackrabbit, and it’s abandoned. And some 
of the towers are down, and the cables are 
down and everything; but if you walk that 
tramway, every little while you find ore, in 
the years that that tramway operated, why 
a bucket dumped, and there’s a little pile of 
scattered ore, mineral scattered around. And 
if you could gather all that together, you could 
make several shipments of pretty good ore to 
the smelter, if there was a smelter to ship it 
to any more [laughs]. But, you can find some 
beautiful specimens along that old tramway, 
if you know how to recognize the ore. Some 
of it that would polish very nicely, copper 
specimens. 

So, the lost mine that I would go lookin’ 
for would be under the Bristol tramway 
[laughs]. Knowing that you’re interested in 
rocks and things like that, I think you’d have 


fun lookin’ there. Now, that’s a little secret. It’s 
all right to have it in the write-up for future, 
hut for right now let’s keep it a secret [laughs] 
until after next year or so, because I’m gonna 
go out and find some specimens. 

* * * * * 

Well, let’s see. This is still during the time, 
of course, of my father’s existence, and we’ve 
gotten clear off into a tangent area here of the 
railroad, and I even went back, you know, to 
earlier times. And later on (before closing of f 
this railroad deal), about the time that the deal 
was made to raise funds for the development 
in the three hundred level of the Prince—. 
(Where Dad got money from Anaconda and 
Combined Metals in trade for some stock that 
he had optioned from Mr. Sherman and his 
associates, you see. And just what the dealings 
were there I can’t relate at all because I don’t 
recall it. I don’t know that I ever knew.) But 
anyway, in that deal Anaconda and Combined 
Metals each wound up with 800,000 shares 
of Prince stock; and my father and family 
(at that time, it was all in the name of my 
father) had about an equal amount, I guess, 
and miscellaneous Prince stockholders had 
the rest—a three million-share corporation. 
And the preliminary arrangements were then 
made to negotiate with the Union Pacific 
railroad to take over that ten miles of railroad, 
because Combined Metals was in the process 
of thinking about building a mill over on the 
Caselton side of the mountain, sinking the 
shaft and all this I guess. Now that thought 
of Union Pacific taking the railroad over 
may not have generated at that particular 
time that money was secured, and probably 
didn’t because that was pretty early in the 
game. But later on it was negotiated, and the 
Prince Company deeded the Prince railroad 
to the Union Pacific at the time the Caselton 



Depression Mining 


47 


mill was being contemplated, which must 
have been after the power line was in. That’s 
right. And it was at the time of negotiating 
the Lincoln County Power District thing, I 
think—now I’m straight on that—that the 
Caselton mill was then considered, and it 
was, the railroad was to be deeded to Union 
Pacific, and when the mill was being built, 
this happened. And the Union Pacific went 
in and changed the rail from fifty-pound rail 
or fifty-six-pound rail to ninety-pound or a 
hundred and twenty-pound, I don’t know. 
Anyway, heavy rail—much easier to maintain. 
So ever since the time of the Lincoln County 
Power District completion and the— well, 
completion, no, that was in ‘37 that the Power 
District was completed. But the Caselton shaft 
development continued and the Caselton 
mill was finally completed in 1941. So you 
see, it took time to do these things. But by 
that time, the Union Pacific had the railroad 
and had rehabilitated it, and ran the main, 
or branch line facilities of the Union Pacific, 
right around to the Prince and Caselton. 

Prospecting 

In 1934, we had come to the point of 
concluding our development and found no 
ore that we could mine in that drift I was 
telling you about; and so there was a period of 
time there when I didn’t have any special work 
to do, and I took to going around looking at 
properties. And I examined a gold mine in 
Baja California that my father and younger 
brother had looked at and gotten a pretty 
good gold assay out of the little vein in the 
Escondido mining district, south of Ensenada. 
And so I took my old Dodge and went down 
to examine this shaft. They only got a surface 
assay. So I took my old Dodge and headed 
out, and got down there and found that the 
area was habitated by a few natives, and there 


was some company that had some of the 
properties there; had a watchman—a Chinese 
watchman—that was also a cook. And so he 
did the cooking, and I had that taken care of 
for me. I had my bedroll. But I had to use my 
poor Spanish to get the natives to set me up a 
hand winch, you know, in the old style—they 
had one somewhere around there. We had 
to mount it over the shaft. And I had to get 
a sling and go down this seventy-foot shaft. 
(I should have called that, a hand windlass 
is what they call these hand operated things, 
you know. It’s a wooden pole with a rope 
wrapped around it, and a handle that goes out 
and gives you leverage so that you operate it 
between a couple of standards of wood with 
notches cut in for the shaft that goes through 
the pole. Yeah.) And anyway, they set this 
up, and we had a rope, and we fixed a sling; 
and I went down the untimbered shaft. The 
samples, when I got back to the Prince, why 
I started up the assay office and assayed the 
samples I’d gotten down the shaft, and started 
in at the top with twenty-foot, no not twenty- 
foot, probably twelve-foot width of the vein, 
running fairly good. I’ve forgotten what, but as 
it went down, it got narrower and it would up 
at the bottom of the seventy-foot shaft about 
eight inches wide and a trace of gold [laughs]. 
Well, the shaft was respectable size. In fact, 
it was on a slight incline and rather large at 
the top, because of the width of the vein, so I 
had to have a pole, a forked stick that I’d force 
myself out to the hanging wall where the vein 
was, to sample it, on my swing. I’d push myself 
out and put the rope on the fork of the stick so 
I could hold myself over there to sample the 
vein. And I sampled it every five feet down the 
shaft. So that was that. We didn’t do any more 
with the Escondido mining district. 

But the other trip was a trip down to see 
Mighton’s prospect, which my father had 
known of years before. And he wanted me 



48 


Paul Gemmill 


to go down and see this. Well Mighton had 
had a deal or two on his mine, and they had 
driven an adit in there several hundred feet on 
flat lying probably thirty-five or forty degree 
dip contact between metamorphics and an 
Alaskite type material. Sort of an acid type 
intrusive. And this had disseminated specks of 
pyrite throughout. And apparently this pyrite 
carried what gold values were in it. Up at the 
surface, it had assayed pretty good, probably 
from weathering and concentration. But, 
when you sampled the material in this adit, 
it was fairly wide, and would’ve constituted 
a pretty good size ore body, but pretty low 
grade. I think it went about two dollars and 
ninety cents a ton or somethin’ like that. It 
might be of some interest in the future, I 
don’t know. 

But anyway, when I got to Mighton’s 
cabin and went in, why, I found out that he 
was living on wheat. The county would dole 
out, you know, chicken feed to anybody that 
wanted it. The government was giving free 
food to people that were in need of it. But, in 
those days, compared with today, there was 
quite a difference in the program. In those 
days, they gave you the bare necessity. They 
didn’t give you the money to buy it with or 
anything like that. They gave you—like in 
this case, he was living on wholegrain wheat, 
see. Same as you’d feed chickens. And that’s 
what they’d give ’em—a sack of wheat, when 
he asked for it see. And presumably he’d be 
raisin’ chickens. But he didn’t. He was doin’ 
his prospecting and just living. And I found 
out that they also gave ’em—these old timers 
out in the hills down there—tried to give 
them about a day, at least a day every month 
of road work, you know to keep the roads 
up. And they’d go pickin’ out boulders on the 
roads, and cleanin’ up. And so when he’d get 
a little money, he told me that he used some 
of this money to buy some butter. And he 


liked butter on his wheat. But he’d soak it you 
know, and then cook it. And if he had butter, 
he’d use butter on it— otherwise just soak 
the wheat, and cook it. It’d swell up. I tried it. 
And you know, before I got away (I was there 
I guess ten days or something, or at least a 
week; I don’t know), and I got kinda used to 
it. I opened up my box of groceries, and we 
divided it, but I kinda liked that wheat. I got 
used to it. You take a handful of it you know, 
and when you’d eat that, you felt full. I think 
it was pretty nourishing. And anyway, that’s 
the way relief was doled out in that particular 
desert area, at that time. And of course, he 
was far, far better off than some of the wealthy 
people, people who had been wealthy down 
in southern California— some of the cases 
I know about—where they’d lost everything 
they had, but they didn’t have a remote idea 
of how to get by, you know. And sometimes 
there’d be suicides, and it was a mess. So this 
old fella out there, he was doin’ great. He was 
happy and everything. 

But 1935 rolled around, and I’ve forgotten 
when I did what (but it may be I might have 
looked at another thing or two during that 
time), but it was also during that time that F. 
W. “Slim” Anderson, geologist for Anaconda 
in Salt Lake, came down. And Slim and I 
mapped all the levels of the Prince and the 
Virginia Louise mine—both mines—and 
took eight hundred samples of the remaining 
ore in the mines, and had them assayed at 
Union Assay office in Salt Lake. So we made 
complete geologic maps on a scale of fifty feet 
to the inch, and separate assay maps showing 
where all of these samples, cut samples, were 
taken. And about that time, I guess it was in 
the spring of 1935, I took that information 
and independently worked up an ore reserve 
estimate—called it an ore reserve estimate— 
of course, anything that isn’t marketable in 
mineral, that you can’t sell at the time, is not 



Depression Mining 


49 


ore, it’s protore. But at any rate, it had been ore, 
and it still sits there in the mine. It hasn’t been 
mined yet. But I worked up the ore estimate 
for the mine, or whatever you call it—protore 
estimate. My brother worked up the past 
history of the mine and the statistics on 
former shipments and everything, and mining 
costs. And we put that together in a report 
that’s been used ever since, for the oxidized 
iron, manganese, lead, zinc, silver reserve of 
the Prince and Virginia Louise mine. And so 
that was all written up in a bound report and 
distributed to everybody concerned. 

Bristol Mine 

About the time that was in the process 
of being completed, why, Jack Buehler from 
the Bristol mine, came in and visited us, and 
his supervisor, his superintendent at Bristol, 
Bob Bonamarte, was leaving, and going to 
the Philippines. I think he went to work for 
Benquet Consolidated. I don’t know how 
you spell that, but it’s one of the famous gold 
mines in the Philippines. I think he was going 
over there, had a job with Benquet. And he 
was a little behind on his surveys. And of 
course, being superintendent, he was also the 
engineer. You didn’t have a staff, you know. 
And so Jack wanted to catch up the surveying, 
and he came in, wanted to know it I would 
take the job for a couple of weeks or so to 
catch up the engineering. I don’t know just 
what he really had in mind, but anyway, I went 
out and I think I was given an understanding 
that maybe I’d be there for a month or so. He 
didn’t know how long it’d take me, but my 
salary would be a hundred and fifty dollars 
a month, which looked awful good [laughs]. 
Bristol was just getting started again, or had 
just gotten started again, to doing a little bit in 
the way of shipping ore, and they had started 
doing a little bit of leasing in the mine. I think 


they had—I’m not sure whether the leasing 
was very extensive. I think he had started a 
couple of leases. 

And I went out there and did catch up 
some engineering work. But right away, Jack 
was goin’ off on a trip for some reason. Oh, 
I think he was connected at that time with 
doing work about the powerline, see. And 
so right away, he asked me to stay. Even 
before I finished the surveying, why we got 
acquainted, and I guess we related pretty 
good together. I was anxious and he was, too, 
I guess [laughs], to have some help. So he 
asked me to take charge of the works while 
he was gone, see. And A1 Thorpe was the 
accountant. And of course, he was keepin’ 
track of the books, and the shipment records 
and all of that. And so really what I did was 
take one shift, while the shift boss took the 
other part of the time. And well, I had a lead 
miner that could take a shift, at one point. So 
I stayed on there as—really developed into 
being the superintendent at Bristol, and also 
the geologist, the engineer, and so forth. 

And so I was used to platting underground 
geology, and had a fair amount of experience 
at it by that time. So I kept my notebook with 
me going through the mine in a supervisory 
capacity. And when surveying needed to be 
done, I’d get the transit and run the survey. I’d 
keep the maps up anyway with the Brunton 
surveys, and geologic mapping, at the same 
time that I’d go from one place in the mine 
to another supervising. Maybe I’d go (allow 
headings to go) for quite a distance and a lot 
of complicated level work before I’d ever take 
the transit and undertake the job of actually 
catching up the transit surveys. I found that 
Brunton work came out plenty good. It was at 
least as accurate as the geology [laughs]. And 
we started building up a set of leasers—mostly 
these were Italian miners that had been there 
before, before the mine was closed down 



50 


Paul Gemmill 


earlier, and they had come back. And they 
were back on the job, and I guess theyd been 
just livin’ as best they could in the meantime. 
Well, Buehler and Bonamarte had a pretty 
good crew built up of experienced men. Two 
or three leases were going in the old stopes, 
and Bristol had a day’s pay crew working 
in what was known as the twelve forty-five 
winze area. 

The mine areas were designated, and this 
was a good plan. They were designated by the 
hundred-foot-square blocks in accordance 
with the coordinate system of the surveys. 
And so when you’d look at any particular level 
like on say the twelve hundred level, why you’d 
start in with 1201, 1202. And this company 
work was twelve hundred forty-five block, as 
I recall. This twelve hundred forty-five winze 
started out in that block, you see. And it went 
down four or five levels, on probably about a 
fifty-degree slope or something like that. And 
they had a crew of day’s pay men in there. 

Dominick Belingeri was the blacksmith; 
and he was a pretty good all around mechanical 
hand. He could take a shift supervising, if 
you needed to have him do it. He kept the 
steel up, and he kept the tram line in repair. 
Mont Epperson was the tram man—we had a 
tramway strung over the mountain, 8,000 feet 
long. Mont was the tram superintendent. And 
Adair, Bill Adair was in charge of running 
the railroad, the narrow gauge railroad, 
from Jackrabbit to the Pioche depot. And I 
think Clessen Buehler, another relative of the 
Buehlers—I’ve forgotten just what relative—a 
younger fella—was working with Adair and 
running the railroad. 

So our process was mining, and hoisting, 
and sorting. We had us an old beet sorter fixed 
up for an ore sorter over the tram bins. And 
most of the ore that came out of the mine, 
except for the lease ore (which they kept clean 
on their own), any of the company produced 


ore was not kept as clean, naturally. And this 
is one point where I got a very good feeling 
for the difference between a man doing a 
thing for himself and doing it under pay for 
somebody else; and it’s come in very useful 
later on. To see how a real good leaser could 
go into any old stope that the company had 
operated (locations that became uneconomic 
for company operation), and the right kind 
of a leaser could go in there and still make 
himself some good money under a split-check 
leasing system; where the company would 
supply the air and the machines and all of 
that, and they would produce by knowing the 
ore themselves; and they’d bring up samples, 
and they’d be run through the assay office— 
wouldn’t charge ‘em for the assaying, but let 
’em know what their samples were running. 

Well, during the course of this time, up 
until the time my father died, I had only 
gotten introduced to Bristol. And then I had 
to go leave for Los Angeles on a trip to his 
funeral. And at that time he was in Altadena, 
and he had a heart attack that killed him, 
although he’d gotten over his illness largely, his 
former stroke. He had already set up an office 
in the basement of the house on Boulder Road 
in Altadena. And there was a vacant lot next to 
the house, and there was an incinerator there, 
and he took a bunch of papers he wanted to 
throw out, and put a fire in the incinerator, 
and caught the brush afire, and he ran with 
water to put it out. I guess he got too excited. 
My mother was at church at the time. It was 
on a Sunday. So he just keeled over dead. 
Well, I guess the neighbors saw the fire and 
everything, and that’s how he was taken care 
of. So that was, I guess I’ve completed the 
period of time my father was still alive with 
that statement. 

Then I went on at Bristol, working 
night and day really. I’d do my engineering 
calculations, work up my notes at night, 



Depression Mining 


51 


and I’d figure ore values. Then when Jack 
Link, the assayer, would go on a vacation, 
I’d put somebody in supervisory capacity or 
whatever I was doing in that regard, and I’d 
do the assaying for a couple of weeks. And 
when the blacksmith, Belingeri would leave, 
why I’d do the blacksmithing. And I’d learned 
to do the blacksmithing out at the Comet 
mine, where you were really doing it for pretty 
hard quartz ore. And you temper different for 
the hard ore than you do the lime ore. But, I 
did have the experience. And I used to take 
quite a pride in being able to do change house 
plumbing or railroading [laughs]. But this 
was typical, I think, of those days. Anybody 
trying to run a small property just had to be a 
jack of all trades, you know. And it was good 
experience. 

So we had a period there then until starting 
up the Prince mine (after the Caselton mill got 
built. Well, the Caselton mill was completed, 
I think, in 1941. So that, you see, the rest of 
the time from ‘35 till ‘40—kinda breaking this 
off at 1940 when I was at Bristol). So coming 
back then to my experience there at Bristol, 
there were several instances of finding a new 
ore body in a very interesting mine. And the 
underground conditions are real attractive in 
that mine, because you see a new face every 
day, and maybe it’ll be a little streak of ore 
that you dare to follow, and maybe it’ll open 
right out into a big face of ore. This experience 
was one of operating a mine where you never 
had any ore reserves, really. You were faced 
with trying to estimate where you were gonna 
come out just by the number of faces that were 
productive at the particular time, because the 
ore bodies are very irregular, and they’re like 
a, almost like cavities in a tooth. They just go 
anywhere see. And you have great difficulty 
projecting an ore body from one level to 
another—in going down, say, if you’re on the 
ten-fiffy-level, and you want to open up the 


fifteen [hundred] and you’ve got a drift out in 
that general direction, why you think you can 
project it (the ore), but usually you can’t; and 
you have to drive a raise and practically break 
through into the stope above before you start 
following it down. And then you take a short 
bite at a time, and you follow the ore body 
down to the next level. So there was a lot of 
interesting work in that mine. 

But coming back then, to the ideas 
developed from our leaser experience 
at Bristol. Ever since that time I have 
recognized—I think I probably knew it 
before then ’cause I’d done a little—I left that 
out, but we made a shipment or two when I 
was in high school, summer vacation. But I’d 
learned, you know, the attitude of a leaser, 
and then seen the attitude of the man you 
hire. When I went out to Bristol in those days, 
we always had men on the rustling line too. 
And if somebody let you down, or went off 
on a binge and got drunk for a day or two, 
why when he got back his job was replaced 
from the rustling line, see; unless he was a real 
good, careful miner that, when he was sober, 
could mine where he’d keep ore clean and 
do a good job. Well, of course, I always took 
them back in preference to a green man. But, 
trainees usually came from young fellas from 
farms over in southern Utah. And some of 
those would right away develop into real good 
men. And I remember particularly, a couple 
of those situations, where those boys, through 
just a little bit of experience, would want a 
lease, and take it, and through their energy 
and enthusiasm they’d do a good job, and 
make some good money. It doesn’t take too 
long if a fella wants to do it bad enough, see. 

Well, Bristol involved a number of 
experiences. I remember a case of one fella 
that was a leaser—a poor leaser—he wasn’t 
too good at it. He had lots of enthusiasm and 
would undertake development, hopin’ to find 



52 


Paul Gemmill 


somethin’ behind the rock, and didn’t have 
much luck doing it, you know. But, he did 
manage to make some shipments, and was 
eeking out a living with his leasing. And he 
fell in love with a floozy and got married to 
her. He wound up blowing off a finger to get 
the compensation to buy her a ring [laughs]. 
And I never will forget the party that was 
given for him. And he was highly sentimental 
about this gal you know. Everybody knew 
what she was. And she was right from the red 
light district really, but she bounced around 
the country a lot in other camps, and wasn’t 
known to Pioche too well, but you could tell 
almost by a very brief encounter with her what 
she was. Well, I’m trying to think of the song 
that this fella—the one that I’m talkin’ about— 
had played at this party. It was one of the very 
sentimental songs, and I can’t think what it 
was at the moment, but anyway, we used to 
laugh about it.* Because he found out soon 
after that, when he didn’t have any money left, 
why she was off and gone you know. And it 
practically broke his heart. [Laughs] 

But this reminds me of another story that 
goes—and it is supposed to apply to a fella that 
had been at Bristol before I went out there, 
and supposed to be a true story. This miner 
was going with one of these gals that had a 
shady reputation; and she was rather plump. 
And he’d take time of f from work, and lost 
out two or three times, and had to hit the 
rustling line thereafter, in order to get back 
on. But nevertheless, he was very enamored 
with her, and finally he took time off and got 
permission, and was gone for a week or so. 
And when he came back—and came back 
after a time and got on again—the boys asked 
him about, well, did he get married, you know. 
They knew he’d been gone with this gal. He 
says, “No. No.” He didn’t get married. “Well, 
why not? I thought you had it in mind that 
while you were gone, you were gonna get 


married.” “Well,” he says, “I,” he says, “Really,” 
he says, “I found out that she’s just nothin’ 
but a great big low-grade proposition.” You 
know that’s a term applied to mining—a big 
low-grade proposition [laughs]. 

Mining Accidents 

Well, those Bristol days involved not just 
all fun. We had some serious accidents. We 
had one man that drilled into a missed hole, 
who had a big family. A man by the name 
of Wiley. Had a big family. He was drivin a 
little raise in the stope area below the twelve 
hundred level in the twelve forty-five winze 
area. And we were operating two shifts; and 
the man that came before him on the other 
shift had drilled a raise round; and when 
Wiley went in there one corner of the raise 
round was not removed. That is, apparently, it 
looked like it hadn’t been drilled out. And he 
looked for a hole, couldn’t find one, thinking, 
you know, there might be powder in a hole. 
And he called in his adjoining miner that 
was workin somewhere near and asked him 
to look for a hole. And neither one of them 
could find where there’d been a hole drilled 
into that corner. 

But, his partner that he called over there, 
said, “Well, nevertheless, you’d better not drill 
the corner, because you can’t tell, there still 
might be somethin’ there.” 

And so he said, “Well, I won’t then.” So 
Wiley went ahead and drilled his round, and 
came time to go for powder, and Wiley, I 
guess, became very nervous about what kind 
of a round he was gonna break. 

So this other miner said, “Let’s go for 
powder;” and Wiley said, “Just a minute,” he 
said, “I got one more pop to drill.” And he 


*Recalled later song named “Gold 
Mine in the Sky.” 




Depression Mining 


53 


turned around and drilled into that corner, 
drilled into a missed hole and it killed him. 
One of those things that really, how would 
anyone but Wiley have prevented it see? 

And here he had a big family. At that 
time, the way NIC handled their insurance, 
why that was totally charged up to the Bristol 
account, of course, to educate those kids and 
everything. Well, that was kinda bad. We had 
previously had one other accident by a single 
man, who had ignored a loose boulder that 
was over in the area he was workin’ in— just 
had refused to bar down. He was kind of a 
bull-headed miner. But he was single. That 
hardly affected the rate of Bristol. [Laughs] 
Boulder fell on him, and crushed him; and 
I think it cost a hundred and fifty dollars to 
bury him, and only that went against the rate. 
Well, I began to see, I began to feel that when 
I looked at the insurance going up that this 
was not really—fundamentally was a poor 
way to have this insurance set up, because it 
would tend to make the employer turn down 
people with families [laughs] and hire single 
men because they would cost less, see. So that 
began to bug me a little bit. 

But anyway, that wasn’t the only serious 
accident we had. We had a miner that was 
anxious to get on the skip and be a skip tender. 
Well, coming back, before him we had a skip 
tender that had been on the skip tender job 
for some time. And this is an open shaft on 
rail on a slope of seventy-five degrees or so; 
the shaft is seventeen hundred feet deep. 
When I went out to Bristol, the bottom level 
that we were operating was, I think the twelve 
hundred level. And we wanted to go down 
to the fifteen hundred, shortly thereafter. I 
don’t know what year it’ve been. In going 
down to the fifteen hundred level, some of 
the bulkhead was obviously rotten, and so 
we had to do a timbering job to change the 
door. You lift a door at each level to go down 


to levels below, and you let the door down, 
and let the skip set on it when you fill the skip. 
Well, the door under the skip was rotten, and 
the timbers that supported the framework 
that the door let down on, and everything, 
needed to be changed. And so, one of the 
experienced shift bosses, Joe Elsmore, an all 
around timberman miner, along with the 
skip tender was instructed to change the 
framework. And the carpenter built a new 
door and it was sent down. And all this was 
changed. And the skip tender went down 
to load out from the fifteen hundred level. 
(We’d been loading out for some time after 
the bulkhead had been changed.) And in the 
process, after you’ve unloaded a pocketful of 
muck, the process of getting away from there 
to another level would be to lift up the door, 
and the skip tender that was pulling the chute, 
would jump from his little platform down 
onto the platform alongside the door to lift it 
up after he’d raised the skip. Well, he jumped 
down, and when they had changed the timber, 
they thought that the two stubs on the end 
were in good shape, because they’d used a 
pick and tested ’em, and they were all right, 
but unfortunately they failed to test right back 
at the end where the stub went into the hitch 
on the foot wall of the shaft see. And they 
decided not to change that stub on that end. 
They didn’t go ask anybody or anything. They 
just decided that it was okay. But it wasn’t. 
And when Wiley jumped down onto that little 
platform alongside of the door, why the stub 
gave way, and he fell from the fifteen hundred 
down to the bottom of the shaft, below the 
seventeen hundred level, and of course, it 
killed him. And that was my, I guess that was 
my second experience of overseeing a fatality. 
And right at the time that this happened—it 
was at lunch time—that’s the reason he was 
getting away from the pocket, and the skip 
wasn’t running. And Irwin Buehler and I 



54 


Paul Gemmill 


came out to the station I guess on the twelve 
or somewhere, and waited, and waited, and 
waited, and no action. We couldn’t get the 
skip, so we hiked down ladders to see what 
was the matter, and that’s when we discovered 
it. And so we had to go down below the fifteen 
hundred, down to the bottom of the shaft 
that hadn’t been operative for years. And you 
couldn’t run the skip clear down there because 
even the stubs under the rail were rotten. And 
so anyway, Wiley had to be pulled up with a 
rope, to get him out of there. So that was a 
bad one. And he had a big family. 

And Wiley was replaced by another skip 
tender, a miner that I started to mention 
before, who had been wanting the skip job. 
You know, he’d like to get that instead of 
being a miner. And, well, we gave it to him. It 
turned out later we learned from his mother 
he had had fainting spells when he was a 
child. And he’d had this trouble even while 
he was older—and I think maybe some of 
this was why he didn’t like being a miner— 
running a jackhammer. But he was a nice 
fella. And he had a good-sized family. And 
apparently his trouble hadn’t been caught by 
the doctor; he’d been passed. And he hadn’t 
said anything about it to anybody. Well, he 
wasn’t skip tender very long until one day 
when we were transferring some rail from 
the surface down to the two hundred level 
of the mine; and Mont Epperson, the train 
man, was helping to do this, because the 
trains didn’t happen to be running that day. 
And so he was, Mont was loading rail up on 
the surface into the skip, and then it was the 
skip tender’s job to help unload it from the 
skip down on the two hundred level. Mont 
would ride the skip with the rail down to the 
two hundred; and then he’d get of f on the two 
hundred, and the skip tender would pass the 
rail to him, and he’d pick the rail and carry 
it back in the drift, and lay it down. Well, he 


took the rail out—I guess it was on the last 
piece, I don’t know. But when he came back, 
why the skip tender was gone. And of course, 
there wasn’t anyplace for him to have gone 
except down the shaft. Well it wound up, at 
that particular time when I was ready to go 
down the shaft, and Jack Buehler and Mr. 
Ed Snyder was in camp and were gonna go 
down to see something underground; and 
we were all up there ready to go down when 
Monty (Mont Epperson) was handling this 
rail. So Mont was gonna take that load down 
and come back. And when he came back, he 
was all pale and excited. The skip tender had 
disappeared, and he must have gone down 
the shaft. So anyway, I went with Mont then, 
and we went down the shaft. And we picked 
the skip tender up in pieces from there to the 
seventeen hundred. And that was a bad one. 

We had one other one that was a single 
man, a leaser that was inattentive to little 
dribblings from above, working in a stope 
area. And same thing as with the first single 
man that had gotten it. You know, if a man 
won’t protect himself—I’ve said many times 
since, that safety comes with the man at the 
face, not with inspections near so much as 
with the individual that’s responsible for his 
own safety. And you’ll note that in every case 
that I’ve mentioned, it was a matter of either 
not barring down for your own protection, 
and there’s nobody else in the mine—the 
supervisor may come around and warn you 
that you haven’t barred that rock down or 
something (and I’ve done that many a time), 
but he isn’t there all the time [laughs] .And 
the man that’s working in the working place 
is the man that has to watch it, for his own 
protection. Or if there’s a dribble, and showing 
somethin’s liable to fall, well you don’t work 
under it, see. And he’s got to be the guy to 
watch his neck, even though this later one, 
single man, the leaser, was an experienced 



Depression Mining 


55 


miner. And his partner warned him when he 
said, “Well, don’t go out there,” he said, “it’s 
dribblin’.” Well, he went out anyway with his 
wheelbarrow of ore to dump it [laughs], and 
that’s when he got it, see. 

And in these other two cases, the later 
skip tender was certainly at fault for not sayin 
somethin’ about his problem, havin’ fainting 
spells. And the earlier skip tender, I don’t say 
that he or the man that helped replace the 
bulkhead—. It isn’t a thing where you’d say 
they didn’t think they were using caution, 
but the lesson that I suppose you’d learn out 
of this is that if you got—you certainly oughta 
test the end of the stull that’s in the hitch if 
you’re gonna say it’s okay, you know. But they 
thought it was in good shape. And so it isn’t 
somethin’ that even a safety man, if he were 
on there just for that purpose, on the crew, 
might have missed that one. And the other 
ones certainly you know. Well, a safety man, 
I suppose, might be more particular about a 
man’s health record, but without knowing and 
with the man hiding it from you [laughs], I 
don’t know, see. 

So these are things, and I’ve said ever 
since:yeah, you can pass laws and you can 
print code books on safety and everything, but 
mining per se, yes, it’s more hazardous than 
a lot of occupations. I don’t think it’s more 
hazardous than flyin your own plane. I don’t 
think it’s more hazardous than goin skiing. I 
don’t think it’s more hazardous than a helluva 
lot of things that people do voluntarily. 
And if you’re gonna be an underground 
miner, you should just recognize that you’re 
layin’ yourself open to more hazard than 
workin behind a desk, or than a lot of other 
occupations. And then if you decide you want 
to do it, there shouldn’t be anything to prevent 
you from doin’ it [laughs]. You do it because 
you want to. So this is a big factor that I see 
in the thing. And I think the public generally 


is led to believe that the underground miner 
is being unnecessarily imposed on, by this 
hazard, you see. And I have never liked 
that attitude of the media in talkin’ about it, 
because it just naturally is a more hazardous 
business, and if you don’t like the hazard you 
shouldn’t be a miner. And in this country, with 
the freedom to move where you want to move 
and everything, I guess— [laughs] that’s the 
attitude I have anyway! Certainly I’ve spent 
many years in underground mining and knew 
about the hazards and watched my own safety 
and tried to watch the safety of the others. 




5 

Characters in Pioche, Nevada 


I guess some of the other things that should 
be put in here would relate to community, and 
some of the stories that floated around, you 
know. 

And one of the characters in Pioche that 
I grew to get acquainted with and became a 
very good friend of mine later on—his name 
was Owen Walker, a highly imaginative 
character. He was good at anything hed tackle; 
a good mechanic, a good miner, good, almost 
anything. And he could have been a whale of 
an actor. He could spend the most ordinary 
day, and when hed tell you about it, why you 
became enthralled because of the way hed tell 
you, you know. And Owen Walkers father 
was an engineer, a self-made engineer—Frank 
Walker. I don’t know, I guess he’d had a high 
school education. Maybe as much as that, I 
don’t know. But anyway, he was the county 
surveyor. He probably hadn’t had a high 
school education, but he probably had, you 
know, gone further than just grammar school 
perhaps. But he was the county surveyor, 
and the water right engineer, and so forth. 
And everybody that needed somethin’ done 


called on Frank Walker. And Owen Walker 
was one of his boys, and he had a couple of 
others. Owen’s brothers—one of’em, Orville, 
we called “Piute” Walker was [laughs] one of 
’em, and he was a hoist engineer. And anyway, 
Owen was the one that I’m gonna tell a story 
or two about. 

The story is about Owen Walker and Chet 
Cook (long before I was at Bristol. It must 
have been before the c 20s. It was in the days 
of the Model-T Ford trucks, you know— 
that kind of thing), Owen and Chet had 
some sort of a concession in the Company 
store at Bristol. And they sold beer. And the 
workmen would come in and play cards, and 
it usually was the old company store, you 
know, that always skimmed off a good part of 
the men’s wages in the store for overalls and 
whatever they wanted to buy, and for beer. 
And Owen and Chet had this concession 
in the store out there. Well, they were doin’ 
pretty well with it, so the story goes; and so 
they decided to get beer wholesale, rather 
than goin’ in just to one of the clubs and 
buyin their beer, why they had a shipment 



58 


Paul Gemmill 


come in. Well, when the shipment arrived, 
why, Owen’s wife (and possibly it was due to 
his bein’ away from home) had gone home to 
her mother. (I guess maybe she might have 
been havin’ a baby, I don’t know. They had 
several children, three or four.) Anyway, she 
was away. And so Owen said to Chet, “Well, 
we’ll just store it in my house.” They unloaded 
the beer, and it amounted to more than one 
truckload, so they hauled the beer up and 
put it in the living room of Owen’s house, up 
on the hill in Pioche. And they took the last 
truckload right on out to Bristol. And when 
that was gettin’ low, they came in to get the 
next truckload of beer out of the living room. 
And they opened the door—Owen’s story 
goes that they exclaimed, “My Cod. We’ve 
been highjacked.” The beer was halfway 
down from the ceiling. And they started to 
look at it, and unload it, and they discovered 
that the weight of the beer had caved the 
floor in [laughs] .So of course, hearing Owen 
tell that story, with the embellishments and 
everything was great. 

And also there was a story about runnin’ 
off of the Dugway Road with this truck full 
of beer and everything. Anyway, Owen could 
really tell ya about that. 

Another one that happened, I guess, 
during the thirties, it must have been.You 
know, everybody got their radios going, And 
it was a great thing to have a long aerial. Well, 
Owen’s house was on the slope of a quartz 
side hill, there. And up at the top of the hill, 
must have been over a thousand feet away 
from his house. And so he got a big pole 
up on top of that hill, and stretched a wire 
all the way down to his house for his radio. 
And he had—he was real proud of his radio 
reception because of his aerial. And a storm 
came along and lightning hit this aerial, and 
it came down into the house, set the curtain 
on fire (I don’t know how, but anyway), and 


it knocked out his daughter. And she was 
knocked out and fell on the floor, and his 
wife was screaming, and things were in an 
awful shape. But Owen, according to his 
story, didn’t lose his head at all. He was there, 
and he didn’t lose his head over this. He 
immediately grabbed his shotgun and went 
out and shot the aerial down, before he did 
anything else [laughs]. 

Owen was a great hunter. And you know, 
most of the old timers like Owen and others 
around the county, kind of believed the 
animals were there for them. And even after 
Fish and Game—he was active in Fish and 
Game by the way; he’d always make trips to 
their meetings and everything. But Owen 
didn’t think, and others didn’t think much of 
poaching you know—out of season—for the 
natives. If it was outsiders, that’s somethin’ 
else. But anyway, he went down to Pahranagat 
Lake, after it had been designated, I guess, a 
hunters’ club for a duck hunting club. And 
he was poaching, had his truck alongside the 
lake, and I guess he was alone. I didn’t hear 
that anybody was with him. But he’d gotten 
some duck, I guess, already. And he saw a 
couple of fellows walkin’ down the shore of the 
lake toward him. And the natural inclination 
of anybody would be, well jump in the truck 
and beat it before they got there, because they 
might ask you for your card or whatever you 
have. Maybe it’s a badge you wear, I don’t 
know. But anyway, before they got up to 
Owen, why he was the first one to speak, and 
he walked up toward them and he says, “You 
fellas got your tags with ya?”—or your license, 
whatever it took. “Oh, yes.” And they showed 
him and said, “Gosh, we’re glad somebody’s 
lookin’ after this. We’ve heard there’s been 
poachin goin on.” [Laughs.] Well, that was 
Owen. Now you can start to imagine what 
kind of a mind he had, you know. He always 
had the right answer. 



Characters in Pioche, Nevada 


59 


Well Owen had been (years before when 
Ed Snyder was just getting things going over 
at the Number One mine, you know) — 
Owen had been Snyders master mechanic. 
And at that time a master mechanic was 
the mechanic, the mechanic of the crew, you 
know. But he was, with his imagination and 
everything, he could haywire things together 
and make almost anything run. So, as the 
company grew up, and even after I went 
back with Combined, he was still the master 
mechanic. This was along about, oh ‘45 or 
‘46, (of course I’m gettin out of the dates now, 
but we’re talkin’ about Owen Walker, see), 
when the mechanical crew had to be much 
bigger—the perlite plant had gotten goin’ and 
the mill there had been built and was going 
and the mine crew was bigger and there was a 
lot goin on—there had to be a good-size crew. 
Clem Walker, younger brother of Owen, was 
prominent in the mechanical department, 
so he was given the job of being master 
mechanic, and Owen was given his truck to 
go out and prospect [gestures] you know. And 
the reason for this was, makin’ out all these 
paper reports and kind of drudgery that you 
had to do being a supervisor didn’t suit him 
at all. If there was a special problem, he’d be 
there with a wrench doin’ the job, and his crew 
would be watchin’ him [laughs]. 

He hated like hell to make out reports. 
He didn’t like that idea at all. And he didn’t 
make out adequate reports. And it’d get next 
to him every once in awhile, and bother him 
so much that he’d go on a bender. 

Well, he was a favored person, of course 
with Ed Snyder, and with everybody else for 
that matter. So instead of doing anything 
else with him, we just did what Owen liked 
to do, which was let him go out, and take a 
company pickup, and go prospecting. And he 
had a burro and a horse, and he had the horse 
trained and the burro trained to jump into the 


back of his pickup, you know, to get up into 
the pickup. And I have some good pictures 
of Owen and his burro in his pickup. There 
was a special unit set up for Owen where he 
had ten percent of anything he’d find that 
the company wanted to develop, see. And so 
for years that was his occupation. And when 
things finally went down where the company 
wasn’t operating at Pioche any more, why 
Owen still went on prospecting, but under a 
plan where the Millbank interests, who had 
a big interest in Combined Metals, furnished 
money for prospecting; and Larry Requa, 
the son of Mark Requa that was a partner 
of Mr. [Herbert C.] Hoover— Larry Requa 
used Owen in doing prospect work for the 
Millbanks for several years. 

Well so much for Owen. I think the stories 
about Owen are about as good as I can think 
of for the kind of people and everything. 
And of course, there’s just lots of stories 
that wouldn’t fit in print at all [laughs], were 
floatin’ around, you know, among the men. 

One story, I guess this would apply to 
the ‘30s and the ‘40s, anyplace you want to 
put it, so I’ll just repeat it now. There was one 
of these roughneck miners in the Caselton 
mine that, you know, they’d carry their lunch 
underground and then sit around talkin’. And 
the young engineers, when we had several 
of ’em, measuring up stopes and everything 
there, sometimes they’d wind up eating their 
lunch with some of the miners in a particular 
stope, you see. And I’ll never forget when one 
of these young engineers came out, and when 
he’d think about what happened at noon he’d 
laugh. And the story goes that this man—we’ll 
call him “Tom,” ’cause that was his first name. 
I won’t give you the rest—was sittin’ there 
tellin’ about this close friend he had. And his 
friend was leaving or something, and he was 
sure sorry to see him leave. And he was talkin’ 
with, you know, pretty crude language. But he 



60 


Paul Gemmill 


says, “You know that fella,” he says, “he was my 
best friend.He was a good friend. You know 
how good he was? You know whenever we felt 
like it, hed sleep with my wife, and Id sleep 
with his’n.” [Laughs] This young engineer 
comes out, he said, “My God!” He says, “How 
much of that goes on around here?” That’s 
how good a friend he was. Oh, “He was just 
like a brother,” he says, “just like a brother.” 
[Laughs] Oh me. 

Charlie Thompson, that had the grocery 
store and general merchandise store in Pioche 
on one side of the street, and the Christians, 
with the general merchandise store on the 
other side of the street, were the two—. I think 
mining supplies like powder, rope, and some 
of these things that you’d use around the mine, 
was more often handled by the store that was 
run by the Christians. And Charlie Thompson 
was a little heavier on the grocery end and, 
things of that kind. Although, I think you 
could get groceries on either side, and mining 
supplies either side. 

But Charlie Thompson we’ll speak about 
first. He was an old timer. And he’d been there 
when they had a fire that really—I don’t know 
what date the fire was—but it was a bad fire. 
And it had been rough on him, and I guess 
destroyed the store he had or something. And 
so he got very, very enthusiastic about having 
a fire department; and promoted the red—I 
guess it was a Dodge truck at that time, and 
made great business out of keeping the fire 
department active, and volunteer firemen 
always ready, and having a good signal, 
ready, you know, for first indication of a fire 
anywhere in town. And after that, there was 
a fire after Charlie was gone, but I don’t recall 
anything like the early fires that Pioche had. 
And I guess Charlie was probably responsible 
for that fire protection being as good as it was. 

And in connection with that, it had to 
be—you had to have water. And Charlie was 


always concerned about the water mains, 
because the water came from over in the 
Highland range; and the pipe had been put in 
by the Army Engineers way, way back there 
somewhere in the early days of Pioche. And I 
think the first pipe was probably one of these 
wood stove, you know, pipes. And later on, it 
was made out of, I think, riveted steel. And 
then later, other sections, you know, had to be 
replaced once in awhile. And it came up over 
the hill to a tank on the hill above Pioche. And 
from there it was distributed down through 
town. Well, due to this water coming out of 
limestone up at the springs (Highland Spring, 
and Floral Spring, and these springs all more 
or less in the same general area out there) 
so, water was very hard. I mean it had pretty 
much the maximum of lime in it. And of 
course, that would precipitate out in the pipe, 
and the pipes would get corroded—or not 
corroded, I’d call it plugged—by the buildup 
of this lime inside of the pipe. Of course, a 
change in temperature, when you’ve got lime 
dissolved in water at one temperature, say a 
warmer temperature, and then it gets cold, 
why, that causes precipitation. In other words, 
you could dissolve more in water at a high 
temperature than you do a low temperature. 
So that explains this buildup. But anyway, 
the buildup was bad, and sometimes Charlie 
would be watchin’ that, and they’d cut pieces 
of pipe, a four-inch pipe, but it wouldn’t have 
over an inch and a half of open area left in 
the middle of it. I remember that was one of 
the problems he used to talk a lot about in 
regard to reduced water flow and pressure for 
fire protection. 

Well, talkin’ about Charlie and his personal 
characteristic, he was a very fast talker. He 
was energetic, just a little guy, lightweight, 
and very community spirited. And he used 
to come over to the house and visit with the 
folks quite a bit. He usually drove a pickup. 



Characters in Pioche, Nevada 


61 


Of course, his early pickup was a Ford pickup, 
you know, in the early days. Roy Orr had the 
first automobile agency in Pioche (and one of 
the first in the state of Nevada, I understand). 
And the first two Fords that Roy Orr sold, after 
he got the Ford agency, was one to Charlie 
Thompson, and one to my father, when my 
father happened to be at Geyser ranch in a 
short interlude, after being in Old Mexico at 
a silver mine. And Charlie, when hed drive 
his pickup—of course later on he had other 
pickups—hed go and get in his, whether it 
was on Main Street or where it was—hed get 
in his pickup, and he’d get the motor going, 
and get the motor going real good, and then 
hed let the clutch peddle out [laughs]. And 
the back wheels spin [two-handed spinning 
gesture], and pretty soon the car’d get goin’ 
you know [laughs]. He never got out of that 
habit. And so you always knew, if you saw that 
car going somewhere, and gettin’ started up, 
you could always tell Charlie, because that’s 
the way it got goin. 

That’s sort of, I think that sort of shows 
you what kind of a fellow he was. He was just 
that way with everything you know. Dive right 
into everything. And a pretty good guy. 

He had a son, Charles Thompson, Jr., who 
later became a graduate from the School of 
Mines up here, and also a land surveyor, and 
did water well work around Lincoln County 
a little bit. Oh, his son, by the way (since we’re 
on that subject), I think when things went to 
pot in Pioche after his father had died, and 
the mines were down, closed down later on, 
why, he sold out their theater, and Charles, Jr. 
finally wound up going—got married—finally 
wound up going to Alaska, and became the 
highway engineer, or else in charge of the 
highway engineers in Alaska. I don’t know just 
where he is right now. I haven’t heard from 
him in some time. He graduated from the 
school up here. It would’ve been a few years 


after my time, probably ‘35 or ‘36. It’d be in the 
list. And, I followed him up later on in ‘62 to 
‘64, where he’d done some of the water work, 
and I had to go on with it. So I saw some of 
his work in that area. 

Oh, I was gonna tell you that Thompson, 
Sr., beside having a store, had the theater—the 
Gem Theater. And he was pretty proud of this, 
you know he had established the first theater, 
I guess, first “electric movies,” they were called 
electric movies, were very important, they 
were electric in Pioche in what was called 
the Thompson Opera House, and the Gem 
Theater, see. 

This was a wood frame building, two 
stories high; and the bottom story, real high 
ceiling, so the second floor was up pretty 
high, and that was the theater. And then he 
built this Gem Theater, more substantially, 
right alongside of the original Thompson 
Theater; converted this to a dance hall— the 
upstairs of this original theater to a dance 
hall. And well it seems to me I’m a little 
wrong, ’cause this must have been a dance hall 
and theater, where they just moved the seats 
out, because I remember you go and dance; 
a crowd of people would be in there, and the 
whole hall would get to swaying, you know 
[laughs], because it was just a frame building 
and not too substantial. And the floor would 
kind of move up and down a little bit as you 
danced. But it made nice dancing [laughs]. 
Well anyway, the Gem Theater then that was 
built right alongside of it, I think it tended to 
support this older one better after that. And 
that theater was there and being run as long 
as Charlie Thompson, Sr. lived. And when his 
boy took it over, why, it wasn’t doing very well 
after that, when the mines started to close the 
population started to drop of f after mid-’50s. 

Now moving from there to Roy Orr and 
what he was like. He was a great one to tell— 
well, to pull people’s leg, tell stories, to talk— 



62 


Paul Gemmill 


just a good conversationalist. And hed always, 
if you were with him maybe like on a trip to 
Vegas for somethin’ or other, and you’d go into 
a restaurant, why, he was always ready to kid 
the waitresses and have some fun with them, 
some way or other, you know. Roy, when you’d 
meet him on the street or at his Ford agency 
in Pioche, always had a cigar in his mouth, it 
was never lit, and he’d chew it down to where it 
was almost nothing left. The story that I tell on 
him frequently is that a visitor to a town came 
through that had heard about Pioche and was 
very curious about the old-timers, and knew 
that Roy was one of ’em. And when he found 
Roy, and got talkin’ to him, he said, “Well,” he 
says, “I’m sure glad to meet you Mr. Orr.” He 
says, “You and Pioche are almost synonymous 
in people’s minds any more. Have you lived 
here all your life?” 

Roy spit on the ground, he said, “Well, not 
yet.” That was his way of thinkin’, you know. 
It was always quick. He’d come out with a 
surprising thing. It was not—I mean he didn’t 
have a line of jokes, and that kind of thing, but 
his wit was, you might say, original wit. And 
I always enjoyed him very much. 

While we’re talkin’ about Roy, we should 
mention a little bit that I’ve heard about 
his early experiences. Ed Snyder told about 
hiring Roy with his car for a trip. (This 
was not a Ford agency automobile. It may 
have been before the Ford agency days or 
somethin’. It may have been that Roy was 
in the automobile repair business, or rental 
business, or something before that. I don’t 
know.) But Ed Snyder told a story of hiring 
Orr to take him out to, I guess it was to the 
Groom mine or somewhere near the Groom 
mine. I think there was another property a 
little further out than the Groom mine, way 
out in the desert country. And this was not 
a Ford automobile. It was some other kind 
of an automobile, that had a weakness of 


breaking axles. And anyway, they got out 
there, and they ran into trouble not too 
far from Pahranagat Valley, and walked 
somewhere, and got some help, and got the 
thing towed in to some ranch (possibly at 
Hiko) where Roy could work on it, and he 
had to rebuild an axle or somethin’ like that, 
out of nothin’—you know, out of some pieces 
of farm equipment or something. And I think 
that happened on the way out. And Snyder 
was very reluctant to go on, but Roy says, 
“Oh, it’s all right. We’ll make it all right.” They 
were way out in the country. They made it. 
And Snyder had great respect for [laughs] 
Roy’s—well, his nerve and his ability as well. 
He could do just about anything [laughs], 
you know. 

Well, off of Roy then, Sam Whitney 
was a character I got to know in Pioche. 
He was running or was in charge of the 
Amalgamated Pioche properties. The 
Amalgamated Pioche Mining Company 
has records that would show this was a very 
large company from the standpoint of stock 
distribution. There were lots of stockholders 
in a large stock issue of this company, I 
understand. And they had an office back 
in New York. I had a little experience with 
them, because Combined Metals, during 
the time it was producing heavily from the 
so-called Caselton ore channel, had a lease 
on Amalgamated property that had quite a 
bit of good ore in it—that is, sulfite ore in 
what’s known as the CM bed (Combined 
Metals Bed). And, in fact, I think that the 
first lease that got Combined Metals started 
was the Greenwood lease, and I don’t know 
whether Sam Whitney was around in those 
days. I think there was a man by the name 
of Van Waggenen, that was connected with 
it; and I don’t know when Sam Whitney 
came into the thing. But that first lease in the 
Greenwood, my own father had something 



Characters in Pioche, Nevada 


63 


to do with being in with Ed Snyder on 
it briefly. But then Dad left, because he 
had other ventures—I’ve already told you 
something about that. And down the line 
somewhere why, Sam Whitney stepped in 
there as the manager for Amalgamated. And 
I remember that he was very, very meticulous 
about handling every little piece, pipe fitting 
or anything else that the company owned, 
you know [laughs]. And he was a large fella, 
a very positive sort of a character. And he 
had a very nice wife, that was prominent in 
the Eastern Star, and so on, Mrs. Whitney. 

One personal experience that I remember 
well relating to Sam Whitney that I chuckle 
over once in awhile, is when we had a—I 
think it was a Lions dinner. And there was 
quite a gathering, a regular banquet. And I 
haven’t mentioned Joe Cohen. (Joe Cohen is 
running the Cohen store down there now.) 
But Joe Cohen’s wife had a habit, early in the 
game, you know, of wearing pants instead 
of a dress around town. In those days there 
weren’t too many women that did that. Joe 
Cohen and his wife were late coming into 
the hall, and everybody was seated. Sam 
Whitney was over here in a central location, 
and others all around. Sam had a very deep 
voice. And when the door opened, and these 
two came in, why, Joe Cohen’s wife was 
dressed in a very nice dress, and looked real 
nice. And of course, their entrance caused 
a lull in all the conversation. And Sam 
Whitney said—and everybody could hear 
it because his voice is so deep—he didn’t 
intend for everybody to hear it—but he said, 
“You know that’s the first time I’ve seen Sarah 
Cohen, without her pants on” [laughs]. Or, 
“Can you imagine seeing Sarah without her 
pants on?” or something like that. You know. 
That was quite amusing. And the whole hall 
just burst out in laughter including Joe Cohen 
and the rest. 


Well, Joe Cohen was the son of the Joe 
Cohen, Sr. that established a shoe store, years 
earlier. And Joe Cohen, Sr. would have been 
back to the date in time of the Thompson 
store, the Christian store, and that date, the 
1920s and early ‘30s. He came and established 
a shoe store in Pioche, a small shoe store. And 
later on, they built this up into, you know, 
clothing store and so forth. And it’s still there. 
Joe Cohen, Sr., died, and the son is running it. 
And he’s been a very public spirited person, 
and always joins into anything that’ll help the 
town or community. So he’s one of the good 
citizens of Pioche today. Been there a long 
time. I don’t know just how old Joe would be 
now. He’d probably be somewhere around my 
age. I don’t know. 

Then, Owen Walker, we mentioned. Well, 
Owen Walker should’ve been an actor. His 
father, Frank Walker, was an old-timer, a 
self-made everything: mechanic, surveyor, 
everything else; and even wound up teaching 
shop in the high school later on. I remember 
Frank Walker, at the time the Prince mine 
was being unwatered in the ‘20s. Why, Frank 
Walker was working for my father and Mr. 
Squires in the shop at the Prince. It had 
been, the Prince shaft had been sunk using 
steam boilers and steam pumps, you know. 
And they had converted the mine plant to 
using the boilers for running steam-electric 
turbines that they’d gotten from the Sunnyside 
coal mine over in Carbon County, Utah. And 
then they had a Byron-Jackson electric sinker 
pump in the shaft, to unwater the shaft. They 
were getting away from this steam pump 
business. The old company had sunk the shaft, 
and was having trouble, and lost the water, 
and went broke about the time that we went 
to Pioche after the first World War period, 
when my father had been over in Arizona 
and elsewhere. (I’m just tryin’ to place the 
date here approximately.) So that when my 



64 


Paul Gemmill 


father and Mr. Squires took a lease on the 
Virginia Louise property and were shipping 
ore in the maybe ‘21, ‘22, along there, why, the 
Prince Company was having their difficulties, 
and they lost the pumps and they were out 
of money They had spent their last money 
sinkin’ the shaft, tryin’ to get down to where 
a drill hole had shown some good silver ore. 
They got the shaft sunk down deep enough 
to drive out to the drill hole. But they lost the 
pumps, were broke. Owen Walker was lookin’ 
after things for ’em. Now this is where Owen 
comes in. And Owen, when this last thing 
happened (I might have this story just a little 
bit twisted, but anyway, it’s the story that he 
told on himself), he was so disappointed, and 
he’d worked so hard, night and day, keepin’ 
things goin’, and keeping the pumps from 
breakin’ down and so forth, that he got so 
discouraged, that he just disappeared, and 
went to Caliente, and jumped on a train, and 
went to Salt Lake or somewhere [laughs], 
and he was gone. And of course, Owen did 
enjoy goin’ on a bender now and then. And, I 
think he went to work at some mine—I think 
it was the—well, it was up in Eureka, Utah 
or somewhere. And he went to work for a 
while. I guess he, you know, sent his pay to 
the family. He had a family by that time. And 
finally, he came back to Pioche (and during 
what periods of time, I don’t know). But Owen 
had done almost everything. He leased at the 
Mascot silver mine in Pioche, he and Chet 
Cook had been partners. Earlier than the 
Prince experience, when they lost the pumps 
and everything, why, Owen and Chet Cook 
had had their store at Bristol. 

Now coming back to Owen’s father, 
though, that was the mechanic at Prince when 
my father converted over to an electric pump 
system (Byron-Jackson sinker pump—one 
that you put on a crosshead and let down, 
and lift the water, and have to, you know, 


add the pipe as you lowered the water and 
so on). Why, this Byron-Jackson sinker 
pump, a brand new one, kept burning out 
bearings. And we had, they had—I was just 
a school kid of course—but they had a lot of 
problems with the Byron-Jackson Company 
sending out their men, or sending different 
bearings. And obviously there was somethin’ 
the matter with that pump. And it was Frank 
Walker, Owen’s father, that decided that it just 
wasn’t made right. So he took the frame of 
the pump and put it in a great, big lathe that 
the old company had had there. It was an old, 
oldtimer, but it was big enough. And he put 
that in there, mounted it some way or other so 
he could test for a lineup in the actual casting. 
And the casting, where the two main bearings 
went, held the bearings so they were out of 
line. And he lined it up by boring out so that 
the bearings would line up, and shimming 
where he had to shim. Got the bearings lined 
up, and from there on they had a good pump 
[laughs] and unwatered the mine; went out 
after high grade silver ore that didn’t turn out 
to be there. Well, there was a shipment or so 
there. That goes into a mining story. I was just 
telling about Frank Walker, and the kind of a 
fellow he was. 

Well, Frank did a lot of surveying around 
the county, and I guess he was the first 
county surveyor, since early days; you know, 
since back in the ‘80s. He was well enough 
acquainted with the art to do the water work 
around the county and so forth, and do 
people’s water well application and things 
like that. He didn’t care particularly how 
he printed or anything like that (and his 
maps showed it), but the information was 
there. And then later on, due to his natural 
mechanical ability, why, he was even hired as 
a teacher, of shop work, down in Panaca in 
the high school down there. And till he was 
eighty or so, I think he was doing some of that, 



Characters in Pioche, Nevada 


65 


you know, teaching kids. So that’s the Walker 
people. And of course, there were other 
members of the Walker family. Actually, it was 
a younger brother of Owen that became the 
master mechanic when Owen was given the 
prospecting venture. That was Clem Walker. 

Now let’s get back to any of the other old 
timers. I’m tryin to think of any others that 
dated back into the old time era, that I knew. 

Well, Ed Snyder, himself of course, was, as 
I say, an assayer for a while at Pioche. He and 
his brother, George Snyder—George Snyder 
was a very capable promoter, in that he was 
very personable. He didn’t do wild promoting 
particularly. He was also practical, an operator 
kind of a fella that would get in and do the 
job along with the men, but his father, W. F. 
Snyder (the father of Ed Snyder and George 
Snyder), was a well-known mining man up 
in Salt Lake. And of course, he was the one 
that got the boys into the mining business. 
There were four. Let’s see. George Snyder, 
Ed Snyder, Guy Snyder, and Neil Snyder 
were the four brothers. Of these brothers, 
George Snyder was sort of the personality 
man. He could get your money, and tell ya 
you’ll never get it back, and you’d like it. You 
know, I mean that kind of a fella. He really 
had the personality. He was, at one time, the 
head of the Republican party up in the state 
of Utah. The state chairman, or whatever, in 
the state of Utah. And when Mr. Hoover was 
running at one time or another for election, 
why, coming through Utah, George Snyder 
got acquainted with Mr. Hoover. And it was 
through that, that Mr. Hoover got interested 
in the Pioche situation, and sent Mr. Larry 
Requa out to have a look. 

And at that time, and prior to that time, 
even up through the time that—well, let’s 
see, about 1943 or somethin’ like that—the 
National Lead Company had had a controlling 
interest in Combined Metals through a bond 


issue, and stock issue—complicated corporate 
arrangement, anyway. And, Mr. Hoover was 
very much interested in the story he heard, 
so he sent Larry Requa down to have a look. 
And Larry Requa came down at the time the 
mine was going and all; and a drill hole had 
intersected a good showing of ore way over 
on the west end of the Caselton ore channel. 
And Larry Requa was correct in assuming— 
like others did, that the ore channel would 
continue west from blocks of ore then being 
mined. Obviously, the reasons for drilling 
the holes was projection of an ore channel, 
that seemed to have a lineup adjacent to the 
so-called Greenwood fissure on one end, 
but the Greenwood fissure seemed to sort 
of disappear, and the Assuring turned in a 
different direction for the next ore block; but 
the ore channel was still lined up in an east- 
west direction. So on the theory that maybe 
it would extend that far, they drilled and went 
through into the footwall side of a big fault, 
found some ore, and it was good grade. So on 
the basis of that kind of information, Larry 
Requa projected a continuous ore body in 
between. And the Millbanks and the Hoovers 
bought National Lead out. That would’ve 
been, I don’t know, maybe around c 43 or 
somewhere in there. Anyway, we already 
had the Prince mine going, and shipping to 
the Caselton mill at that time. The Caselton 
mill had been built, while the National Lead 
had its interest. And I think that the company 
owed National Lead—. I think the buy-out 
took about three million dollars. (I don’t 
know. The figure isn’t important.) But, at 
least the Millbank people—it was a family, 
a long established, well-to-do family. Mr. 
Jeremiah Millbank, Sr. was the senior one 
of the family at the time—had various large 
interests at different times. But, one of the 
prominent interests was a—I guess even a 
controlling stock interest to Southern Railway 



66 


Paul Gemmill 


or something like that. I mean they were very 
wealthy people; and they were supporters of 
Mr. Hoover, very strongly especially for all of 
the good work he did in humanitarian area, 
and later on the Boys’ Clubs and everything. 
(I mean, you know, when Mr. Hoover was 
even president, he didn’t take a salary, because 
he didn’t have to have a salary, didn’t have to 
have the money.) And anyway, the Millbanks 
were great supporters of Mr. Hoover, and 
friends, and they used to come out and visit, 
Mr. Millbank and his wife, with Mr. Hoover. 
And Jeremiah Millbank, Jr., the son, became 
active later on in the affairs of Combined 
Metals. So they came into the picture then in 
early c 40s. And, the projection of that ore body 
turned out to be correct, and it all worked out 
very well. 

Gettin’ off the subject that we’re on 
here, but since we’re mentioning it, later 
on the company got in their most serious 
difficulty when they attempted to go into the 
manganese business. And maybe we’ll say 
somethin’ about that at another time. 

Coming back to the old time days in 
Pioche. I think I can remember only one 
fire in the time, important fire. You know 
fires in these old camps were quite a thing; 
and Pioche had had a couple of them that 
practically wiped the town out, you know? 
And I can remember probably the most 
devastating fire that was had in the period of 
time I was around there anyway. It happened 
at a time when I was on my way to California. 
And from Prince camp we saw the smoke 
rising up over the mountain between Prince 
and town. And I drove out over to Zero 
Pass, and looked down on the town to see 
this fire. And it burned out, oh, I think Joe 
Cohen’s Leader store, and one of the bars, 
and—maybe three buildings. It must not’ve 
touched the Gem Theater, because the Gem 
Theater was, I think, made of concrete block 


or somethin’, just below there. Anyway, these 
things were rebuilt, but there were some 
stories in connection with that; and especially 
in connection with the bar that had a lot of 
liquor stored in the basement. And there were 
lots of people in town that were dashin into 
this basement while the fire was goin’ on, 
carrying out cases of liquor that got scattered 
all over town [laughs]. And the story about the 
police. One of the policemen anyway who was 
supposed to be there watchin things, they say, 
had rushed to get his camera, and get up on 
the hill to take pictures [laughs]. So there were 
several, you know, stories of that kind, about 
the fire.But, we were on our way so you could 
tell, I mean, from where we were watching, 
you could tell the fire department was very 
active, and apparently they were gonna keep 
it from spreading, and they did. So. 

Oh, there was one other fire—speaking 
of fires. I happened to be away at the time— 
Prince mine was running, and I was still 
advising Bristol and getting out to the Bristol 
mine a good part of my time. This must’ve 
been, let’s call it, say 1945, somethin’ like 
that. Why, I got a call out at Bristol, that there 
was a fire in the warehouse and compressor 
house, which was right adjacent to the 
Prince shaft. And Prince has big, old, wood 
headframe—tall, heavy, wood headframe. 
The hoist had been moved around, and the 
headframe had been shifted in a different 
direction to what it had been before in order 
to line up for a twocompartment hoisting of 
cars. Previously, the headframe was set the 
wrong way. But, anyway, the fire broke out, 
(and nobody knows just how it happened) in 
the warehouse. And it spread very rapidly on 
account of the bursting of cans of turpentine, 
and materials of that kind they had in the 
warehouse. The fire department was called. 
I was called out at Bristol, twenty-five miles 
away, and of course, I rushed in as fast as I 



Characters in Pioche, Nevada 


67 


could go. By the time I got there, they had it 
under control and all. But, there were a few 
funny incidents. 

At that time, Sam Arentz was I believe 
an engineer, maybe the head engineer—I’ve 
forgotten. Probably the head engineer for 
Combined Metals up at Caselton. (Later on, 
I went to work for Combined Metals, while 
I was still serving, doing some of the work at 
Bristol, and still serving at the Prince.) But, 
at the time this happened, why, the Caselton 
crew came down to help. Everybody saw the 
smoke. And Sam was there. And, if you ever 
talk to Sam, ask him about the Prince fire, and 
the fact that he got tangled up with some of 
the electric wires that fell down, and it made 
him dance all over the place [laughs]. He was 
there tryin to help to help put the fire out. He 
practically got electrocuted. 

But, Doug Jackson was in charge, you 
know the mine foreman; and there was a 
crew underground. And this could have been, 
you know, a disastrous situation, because it 
could’ve gotten started into the headframe 
and the shaft timber. And Doug, immediately 
went wherever he could, gathering up sheets 
of iron, and covering the shaft; and spent his 
time with a couple of men protecting that 
while the fire was being put out over here. 
I thought that was pretty good presence of 
mind. So. Well, those are the only fires that 
amounted to anything, during my experience 
down there. Of course, there’ve been small 
house fires, or a building burned down in 
Pioche, I suppose a number of times, but—. 

Vern Stever in Pioche, had a store—that is, 
his wife, Muff Stever, had a store, selling soft 
goods. And Vern, at the time, was our head 
assayer over at the Caselton assay office. And 
he had a crew of helpers. Some of ’em were 
ladies, that would work in the assay office, 
where they were running lead and zinc assays, 
and copper once in a while; and fire assays on 


gold and silver and so forth. Well, Vern had 
trouble with his sewer. He had trouble with 
his sewer there at the store. And somebody 
advised him that a way to clear it out—he’d 
tried the wire, and this and that. The sewer 
line ran out in front of the store, and into the 
main sewer going down Main Street. And 
somebody advised him to use just a little 
bit of dynamite, just enough to give it a jar 
[laughs]. And so he decided to try it. And so 
he—well, you can almost predict the rest of 
the story. He got advice on how much to use 
from people, different ones. And finally, it 
wasn’t gonna do any good if you only put so 
much in; you’d better put four times that much 
or somethin’. I don’t know how much he did 
put in. But, he managed to get it slid down the 
sewer to a certain place under the sidewalk 
somewhere, and lit the fuse, and everybody 
got a little bit out of the way, expecting just 
a little jar. And it blew right up through the 
sidewalk, and smeared all the goods in the 
showcase [laughs]. And he’d been a miner, a 
leaser, so forth, and he knew a little bit about 
these things, but he didn’t know just how 
much to put in the sewer. 

During the early days of Combined 
Metals at Pioche, the company was financed 
by National Lead Company; and National 
Lead had done a lot of churn drilling for 
exploration work back in the Tri-State field. 
So when it came to trying to find ore—you 
know, do exploration work by drilling—why, 
it turned out that a bunch of Keystone rigs, 
Keystone Number Five rigs, were sent out 
from the Tri-State, along with some drillers 
and helpers. And among these people were 
some of the drillers that stayed on and made 
their home there, even after the exploration 
was over. One of these individuals, one of the 
top drillers was Ira Haven. 

Ira Haven probably went to work when 
he was twelve, or somethin’ like that, and he 



68 


Paul Gemmill 


couldn’t write his name, even, when he came 
there. I think he learned a little bit so he could 
make out drill reports, you know. Well, he 
could write some figures, and he usually had 
a helper that could write anyway. During the 
period of time he was there, I think he had 
learned a little bit about reading, you know; 
but he hadn’t had even a grammar school 
education. And he was probably the best 
driller of all, that ever hit the camp, because 
he had just learned it from scratch, see, with 
the best drillers back there. Well, Ira Haven, 
after the period of time that a lot of drilling 
was going on (that included—oh, I guess it 
went up through into the ‘30s you see, about 
well, up to the depression, in that period of 
time, ‘28, ‘29, ‘30, and all along there, they 
were doing quite a bit of drilling). 

Well later, Ira took on contracting of ore 
haul and so forth, and had some trucks. But 
he got to be pretty well known around the 
community, and decided to run for sheriff. 
And he thought he was quite a ladies’ man. 
He really thought, you know, that he—. He 
dressed very—with rather fancy clothes—and 
was a very fine lookin’ fella. He was a good 
lookin’ specimen, you know. And he’d wear 
a broad-brimmed hat, and go around really 
lookin’ pretty nice. And when he decided to 
run for sheriff, why, he got himself two pistols 
on his belt. He had a firearm on each side, 
and goin’ around. He was sure he was gonna 
win [laughs] sheriff. And he didn’t make any 
bones about saying, that at least the ladies 
would vote for him, you know [laughs]; and 
he’d get plenty of votes. Well, when the chips 
were down, he didn’t get all those votes. 
And, in fact, it didn’t look very good. He lost 
by quite a margin. And the story goes that 
somebody asked him—he’d shown up in 
town with both the pistols still on—after the 
election, why, here he was with these guns 
he was wearing. And somebody asked him, 


since he’d lost running for sheriff, when the 
purpose in wearing the guns was to show 
how he’d conduct himself, how come he still 
had the guns on? “Well,” he says, “anybody 
that gets that few votes, better wear guns.” 
[Laughs] “It seems to me, I haven’t got very 
many friends.” [Laughs] 

You’re after somethin’ humorous, and 
sort of based on an actual experience. Judge 
Nores had a drugstore during the Prohibition 
era (and prior to that, I guess) on the main 
street of Pioche. And during the Prohibition, 
he served what he called “Pioche Specials.” 
He had—he could get from the doctor a 
prescription for alcohol, so he managed to 
get lots of alcohol. Then he’d mix it with soft 
drinks of one kind or another, but whatever 
the drink was, he called it “Pioche Specials.” 
Depending on how inebriated a person was 
gonna buy another “Pioche Special” from 
him, you know, in a pop bottle, why he’d 
start cutting down on the amount of alcohol, 
as they got more inebriated. And it worked, 
according to him, it worked better both ways; 
they didn’t get sloppy drunk as fast, and he 
made more money that way [laughs]. He just 
started cuttin’ down the amount of alcohol in 
a pop bottle, see. 

Well, Judge Nores was a very public 
spirited sort of a fella. And later on, he 
acquired the newspaper—running of the 
newspaper. He was the editor, and I think 
the paper itself was owned by John Janney. 
And he was, of course, in the middle of things 
politically because he had the paper, and all 
the politicians that come around would want 
to get next to Nores. He ran for election as 
the justice of the peace, and got elected. 
And later on, there was a recorder that was 
doing something, absconding with some 
money or something like that; or else it was 
the treasurer. I’ve forgotten which. But, they 
called a grand jury. And in the course of the 



Characters in Pioche, Nevada 


69 


investigation, the grand jury looked into the 
justice of the peace office, and through sort of 
a fluke, they discovered that Judge Nores was 
pocketing money that he didn’t report, you 
know, the fines. And this was mainly due to 
a check that was made out to pay a fine, and 
didn’t appear in records. So, they told Judge 
Nores that he wouldn’t be prosecuted if he 
would just retire from office, and let it go at 
that ’cause this wasn’t a big amount of money 
or anything. Of course, his argument was that 
it was the only decent pay he got out of the 
office, was once in a while to take enough to 
compensate him for the effort and so forth 
[laughs]. And so they let him off. He was too 
popular, you know, in a way, to take to trial. 
And they didn’t want to do that, and told him 
if he’d just retire from the office, why they’d let 
him off. So he did. But then he went around 
town, and he had a pet phrase, the “dutty 
bastards.” “The dutty bastards, look what the 
dutty bastards did to me.” “But I’ll fix ’em,” he 
says, “I’ll run for election,” and he said, “I’ll 
get elected again.” He was a southerner, and 
had kind of southern accent. And he said, 
“I’ll get elected again.” Well, he did. He ran 
for election, got elected again. And this has 
always been a sort of an illustration to me of 
what the public is really like, you know. Here’s 
a man who’s definitely proven to be taking 
money that didn’t belong to him. And they 
elected him again. I think it was after that he 
ran for—and I’m not sure about this, yeah, I 
think it was—it was after that that he ran for 
state senate. And he was a state senator from 
Lincoln County for a period of time. And so 
you see the public isn’t as inflexible. When 
they’re close to the person. They’re not near 
as firm in their convictions as if it’s somebody, 
say, the president of the United States or 
somebody does somethin’ that is on TV, why, 
the public reaction is great, you know. They 
can swing the public any old way they want 


’em, when they get ’em on TV [laughs]. This 
is just a little personal observation. 

Anyway, during the course of this 
experience with Judge Nores, why, my brother 
Dave being a pretty good two-handed drinker, 
and he’d be over town with the boys every 
once in a while. And the judge would walk 
in. Of course, he was always ready to have a 
drink, and he bought drinks, too. It was kind 
of fun to play a joke on Nores, because Nores 
was kind of, he was a different person than the 
rest of ’em. He had a different set of morals, 
that he claimed came from his southern 
plantation background. I don’t know where it 
would’ve been, but it was a funny background 
anyway. And he didn’t have the hesitancy 
about what you or I or most people would 
call a moral approach to things. He just didn’t 
have the wee small voice. It’s hard to explain, 
but he just didn’t—. There wasn’t a book of 
morals for him, see. And he’d readily admit 
it. And he’d brag about how he handled this 
liquor business you know; and make better 
money for himself, and he’d be protecting the 
guy by not havin’ him drink as much—and 
he paid the same, you know. Well, anyway, 
Nores was always a butt of a joke, one way 
or another. And he was rather thickheaded, 
so it didn’t soak in, you know. And, the story 
goes that one time he came into the bar, and 
Dave, my brother, had decided, before he got 
there (for some reason or other, they knew 
he was gonna come in). And they worked 
up a petition. Got all the fellas at the bar to 
sign it, that stated, “We citizens of Lincoln 
County herewith petition for the resignation 
of Judge Nores as being not qualified to hold 
the office of justice of the peace, and proof of 
the fact—” is this and that. And made it kind 
of legal language, you know, along that theme. 
So they passed it over to him, and he glanced 
at it, and saw all these names, and he signed 
it. [Laughs] And then they bugged him about 



70 


Paul Gemmill 


it a little bit. Of course, with his mentality, he 
took it very seriously And it was, oh, it was 
just terrible. And he wanted to buy them all 
drinks, and have em tear it up [laughs]. 

Another character that I knew quite 
well, that was a good joke player around the 
community, was Art Bernard. Art Bernard, 
as a young fella, always had fun playin’ jokes. 
Well, one of the jokes that was played by 
Art and his friends, was played on Judge 
Nores. Judge Nores visualized himself as a 
great ladies’ man. And there were a couple 
of gals that came in town—he’d made some 
kind of remark about gettin’ acquainted 
with them. The story was goin’ around that, 
well, Art and others created the story that 
these gals were approachable and one of 
these gals that Nores particularly liked the 
looks of, and liked to get acquainted—had 
her eye on him, and she’d like to meet him, 
you know. And, the boys had set this up so 
that he’d have a chance to meet her out by 
the golf course—which is quite a ways out; 
nothing but a hardpan golf course, and no 
grass or anything. And it was out near the 
big ditch that comes down Lake Valley, 
Patterson Wash, the drainage ditch, which 
is a U-shaped ditch, and drops off about ten 
feet from the bank down to the bottom. 

Well, they set this up so that Nores went 
out at night time, and was supposed to meet 
this gal that had a very jealous father. He 
couldn’t get acquainted with her in the open. 
It’d have to be a secret. So, Nores went out 
to meet this gal, and when he got there, well 
the boys were ready for him. And you know, 
he went out, and he saw a figure up here and 
hollered, you know, “Hello,” or something. 
(You’d have to get the real story from Art, 
because he can tell it right.) Anyway, they 
fired some shots as though this was the 
father, you know [laughs], and Nores took 


off running through the brush, and ran down 
below the golf course, and landed in the 
big ditch and broke his hip. [Laughs] Now, 
the straight of that story, if you want to get 
it, you ought to get it from Art, himself. Of 
course, Art was a good miner, and a good 
supervisor. He shifted for me out at Bristol 
for a while. And then later, you know, he got 
to be deputy mine inspector for a time, then 
ran the State pen very handily. Did a good 
job. But as a young fella, he was a prankster. 



6 


Tecopa: The Glory Hole 

or Pay Dirt 


I guess it must have been fall of ‘36, or 
spring of‘37, with an arrangement consented 
to by the company officers, Jack Buehler and 
I were encouraged (because they weren’t 
payin’ any high salaries or anything), but we 
were encouraged to go and look for somethin’ 
on our own, if we wanted to. So we set up a 
little fund that we’d put about fifteen dollars a 
month into, or somethin’ like that. And we’d 
hear of some property that oughta be looked 
at. So when Jack was not too busy with his 
powerline work or somethin’, and could stay 
in camp a few days, why I’d take my car, or 
use Jack’s car, and go look at the property. And 
usually it’d come to us through a promoter or 
somebody’s story. I guess during the period 
of late, well, from there till ‘40, 1939 or ‘40,1 
think at one time I figured I looked at about 
forty properties. I was always the one that’d go 
look. And one time I’d take my Ford V-8 and 
the next time I’d take Jack Buehler’s Chevrolet 
coupe. We’d alternate that you know. This 
fund would pay for the gas and whatever the 
cost was. 


Well in the process, I looked at a property 
in 1937, down in Death Valley area—the old 
Tecopa properties. And of course my objective 
was to look for a property that was, you might 
say a poor man’s mine—something that could 
be operated without a big capital investment, 
because we didn’t have any money. And this 
property appealed to me. It was brought 
to my attention by Clinton Ray and Sam 
Greenwood, a couple of mine promoters. 
And I went and looked at it in 1937. It was 
several mines there in a group known as 
the Tecopa mines. It went Noonday and the 
Gunsight, The War Eagle, Grant. I remember 
those names. And I met the man who had it, 
Dr. [L. D.] Godshall, who had been manager 
of the Haciempa smelter over near Prescott, 
Arizona at one time, and had smelted ore 
from the old Tecopa mines. The property 
had a branch railroad eleven miles long, 
from the Tonopah and Tidewater line. And 
this property apparently had shipped up to 
that time- -1 think the report that I got from 
Doc Godshall indicated there’d been about 



72 


Paul Gemmill 


three million dollars of production from 
the various Tecopa mines. Well, Godshall 
wanted to make a deal all right at that time. 
I don’t know whether he had picked up the 
property himself at that time or not. I think 
he got it as a tax sale or somethin’ you know; 
and it had long since, or several years before, 
gotten into some kind of trouble legally or 
otherwise, and he managed to get ahold of it. 
And there was a chance to sell the rail from 
this eleven mile railroad to the Japanese. And 
so his terms were, if you were gonna come in 
and do anything with the property, why you 
had to at least put up the money for that rail, 
if you wanted to save the railroad, and so on. 
And at that time, it looked like that was the 
thing to do. And so I wrote up a little report on 
it, and I submitted it to Mr. [Ed] Snyder, and 
his brother George Snyder, and the Snyder 
family, who were at that time heavy stock 
owners in Bristol, would then be the ones to 
take it from there and try to find the money 
to do something with the understanding that 
I would participate and Jack Buehler would, 
for having brought somethin’ to light, see. 

Well, the reaction was they’d better check 
up on it, and have some others look at it. So 
Ken Cochran (who was then working for 
Combined Metals. See in the meantime, 
Combined Metals had gotten activated again, 
and Ken Cochran was the engineer), and L. G. 
Thomas, who was then the superintendent for 
the Caselton-Combined Metals operation— 
Ken Cochran and L. G. Thomas went down 
to check up on this property. They came 
back with the report that in their view, why 
the property had merit as an oxidized zinc 
producer, because in the bottoms of the 
old stopes, secondary zinc had precipitated 
out. I didn’t regard that as a very attractive 
possibility because I was lookin’ for a poor 
mane s mine. You know to do somethin’ with 


this oxidized zinc meant somethin’ beyond 
my capability and remains uneconomic to 
this day. 

Well, in the meantime, I don’t know 
whether it happened right then, but/shortly 
after that, the railroad was torn out—that is 
the eleven miles of rail into Tecopa was taken 
up and sold to the Japanese. And Mr. Snyder 
wanted to know, after he got their report, 
why he wanted to know if Jack Buehler and I 
were interested in going ahead and tryin’ to 
do somethin’ about this. And I said, “Well, 
on the basis of that report, no.” Because my 
opinion was that, the only thing to do that I 
could be interested in, would be to find some 
more of the high grade like they’d shipped 
before. They’d shipped quite a bit of real good 
lead ore with good gold and silver values in 
it. And I figured that, although I hadn’t done 
enough on the ground or studied enough to 
know where I would do any particular work 
at that time in 1937— examination—why I 
figured a property with as much spread as 
these different shafts and everything, surely 
had some places to find some more of this ore 
like they’d shipped before. So I said no, and 
Jack went along with me. And we continued 
to look at a few more properties. 

But in 1938, in June, 1938, I married 
Jack Buehler’s wife’s sister, Fern Jensen. Her 
father was a mining man, and had been 
instrumental in helping Combined Metals get 
off the ground in its inception much earlier. 
And, in fact, I think he had put a little bit 
of money into the initial moves of getting 
Combined Metals going. I don’t know too 
much about that story, but he had also earlier, 
been a manager of mining enterprises for the 
Knight Investment Company. And Mr. Knight 
was a well-known mining figure in the Salt 
Take City area. “Uncle Jesse” Knight they 
called him [laughs]. I think he was a devout 



Tecopa: The Glory Hole or Pay Dirt 


73 


Mormon. Certainly, J. C. Jensen was, and my 
wife is certainly a devout Mormon. And Jack 
Buehler, and Freda, and all of ’em. 

So I got married to Fern in June ‘38. And 
we fixed up a cabin while we were planning 
to get married. I did some work on fixing up 
one of the old houses at Bristol camp up on 
the hill. And she did some shopping in Salt 
Lake for folderol [laughs], things you need 
[laughs]. And I made a trip up there, and we 
shopped for furniture, that was to be shipped 
down. And Jack Buehler and Freda Buehler, 
his wife, had two girls that were old enough at 
that time to be interested, and they came up 
and painted the house for us while we were on 
our honeymoon [laughs]. And when we get 
back, why everything was set up for us. That 
was awfully nice, we had a party there for the 
whole camp. And Fern put on a big—I don’t 
know how she got that many people in the 
house—but she put on a party there, but first 
the camp had a party for us down in the valley 
at Bristol Well.(Bristol Wells is near three old 
charcoal ovens; we used to call them coke 
ovens, they’re charcoal ovens. And there used 
to be a smelter down there in the bottom of 
the valley back in the ‘80s.) But we’d go down 
there for ball games and parties. 

That part of it is worth doing a little 
relating about— how you’d entertain yourself 
in that time.You didn’t go spending big 
money, but you’d get maybe a lot of hot dogs, 
and have a whole tubful of hot dogs on the 
fire, you know. And I guess you’d boil ’em. I 
don’t know. You’d have a lot of goop to put on 
’em and some buns. And everybody’d eat all 
they wanted, and you’d have beer. And maybe 
play a ball game while the gals watched, and 
talked to each other [laughs], and had a lot 
of fun you know. 

And you were hobnobbin’—there wasn’t 
any class distinction. In fact, I grew to 


appreciate the miners, recognizing the trail 
they’d come over, the education they had 
and everything. Among those fellas there, a 
Montenegrin, a great big man, tremendous 
man with whiskers that rolled up, you know 
(gesture stroking mustache], and he’d keep 
’em [laughs] trimmed. That is a mustache, 
big mustache, not any more beard, but just 
a big mustache. Mike Wich was his name. 
A tremendous fella. He couldn’t read or 
write. But he ran a lease. And he knew how 
to figure, and he’d always have three or four 
men with him running his lease. And these 
leasees would operate in the old stopes where 
the company operations didn’t pay anymore. 

And then we’d set up these split-check 
leasing units where the company would 
furnish, you know, the air, and the drills, and 
do the blacksmithing, and do the assaying, 
and do all those things. And the men would 
get half of the net smelter returns, you see. Or 
depending on the place, sometimes you varied 
that a little bit, depending on how good or 
how bad it was, but generally that was the way. 
And these Italians were awfully good leasers: 
Tom Grasse, John Piontoni, oh, I could think 
of several Italian names, you know Belingeri, 
Dominic Belingeri was our blacksmith (he 
was Italian, of course) and a damn good one, 
good mechanic, good welder. His son (same 
name) is Lincoln County Recorder. 

But Mike Wich, coming back to him, 
he was the strong, powerful Montenegrin. 
He couldn’t read or write, but he could sure 
run a lease. And everybody liked him. He 
was always helpin’ somebody out. He never 
banked a lot of money. He always made 
excellent money leasing, but when he made 
it, he’d split it up, take his share and he gave 
the same share to everybody else (although 
maybe he’s doin’ half the work you know), but 
he gave the same share to everybody else. And 



74 


Paul Gemmill 


then what he’d do with his money, once he got 
his part of it, he starts helpin’ other people 
out that needed help. [Laughs] That kind 
of a fella, and I grew to have a great regard 
particularly for this man. He was a real human 
being. And the thing, the sad thing was that 
he drank liquor almost like anybody would 
drink milk. Of course he was big framed, big 
fella, and I guess he could stand quite a bit 
of it. And he had a gallon jug. Oh, he never 
bought it by the quart or anything; he’d buy it 
by the gallon. And he had the gallon jug under 
his bunk. (You know, we had a bunkhouse. 
Most of the workers were there as single men. 
They might be married with a family over 
in southern Utah or somewhere, you know. 
That is, outside of these Italians. The Italians, 
if they had a family in the U.S., their family 
would be there you know. But there were a 
number of them that were single. We had two 
bunkhouses at that time. One of them burned 
down later.) But Mike would have his jug of 
liquor under his bed, and when he came out of 
the mine to clean up, he’d go and get a shower, 
and clean up, and take a whole glass of liquor 
to freshen up with [laughs]. 

Then Mike would have more heavy drinks 
after dinner. The boarding house was running, 
and the cook was Madge Buehler, wife of Jack 
Buehler’s cousin, Erwin. By the way, he, Erwin 
and Madge were with us out at the Comet 
mine too, before my Bristol days. At Bristol, 
Erwin Buehler was one of my shift bosses on 
the opposite shift usually, from the shift I took 
care of before we graduated to having two 
shift bosses. And he was a great big powerful 
man. His wife, Madge, was a real good cook. 
She was our cook out at the Comet mine 
when everything was dead too. That Comet 
mine was the only mine goin’ in the county. 
Well, anyway, back to the Bristol boarding 
house. Mike Wich would usually come into 
the boarding house after dinner, and there’d 


be some of us gathered around, and we’d play 
some pinochle. And this, he was real good at. 
He understood that plenty well. You know, 
he’s usually the winner. And again he’d have 
a water glass of liquor by his place, see. 

Well eventually I guess, this kinda caught 
up with Mike and he got ulcers. And he went 
to the hospital, I believe, in Cedar City [Utah], 
the first time. Erwin Buehler took him over, 
and he was told that he couldn’t have any 
more liquor, that he had to quit. From that 
day on he never took another drink. He just 
quit, just like that. Very strong [laughs] power, 
willpower, whatever it took. Well he got pretty 
good again, and got to workin’. And then he 
got sick. And this time, Erwin took him to 
Ely into the hospital there. And I guess it was 
too late. Anyway he died in the hospital of a 
bursted appendix. And that was kinda sad. 

Oh, he had a New Year’s that was different 
than the other New Year’s Day. I don’t know 
what date of the year it was. But he’d always 
get a pig and roast it on the sidehill, out in the 
open, and he’d really load it up with garlic. If 
you could stand the garlic, it was delicious 
[laughs]. He’d turn it, you know, on a stick 
over a fire; and had anybody that wanted to 
eat any, why, they could have it. I wasn’t that 
much in love with the amount of garlic he 
put in it, but anyway, that was his New Year’s. 

Well, during this period, I guess that 
some of these things may be, some of these 
experiences, might be of interest. It was in 
the year that I got married, that I went down 
to see the folks with my wife, with Fern. And 
on the way by Baker, California, I told Fern I 
was gonna make a deal some day on that mine 
up north of there [laughs] at Tecopa; and we 
were gonna make some money out of that 
some day. I don’t know whether I was lookin’ 
at a crystal ball or not, but that’s the way it 
eventually turned out. And it was in 1939, 
that I went back to have another look. I’d been 



Tecopa: The Glory Hole or Pay Dirt 


75 


approached again by Ray and Greenwood 
on another mine, and been to look at it, a 
property that had some potential all right, 
but I told ’em that the one that I’d like the best 
was this Tecopa thing, and I thought that if 
the railroad branch had been torn out that 
wouldn’t stop the thing from going, you know, 
if you get your nose into some high grade ore, 
and they were asked to go back and check up 
on this. So they went to see Dr. Godshall. By 
this time Dr. Godshall had undertaken to do 
some development work, and gotten a party 
by the name of Mrs. Beldon interested, and 
who put up a little bit of money, and had 
sunk a shaft on what was known as the Hitler 
claim, on a little showing. And he got down, 
I’ve forgotten what the depth was (probably 
130 feet or something like that) and opened 
up a little bit of ore about two feet wide; and 
drifted along for, maybe a hundred feet with 
the ore swelling and pinching a little bit; and 
there’d been a little fault offset and the drift 
ended. Well anyway, they reported, after 
seeing Dr. Godshall, that he had been doing 
this work. The rail had been sold all right, 
but he was interested in makin’ a deal. He 
wanted twenty-five thousand dollars down, 
and wanted a hundred and fifty thousand for 
the property or somethin’ like that. 

Well, the fact that he had opened somethin’ 
up, according to the story, why I went down 
and made an examination, sampled up what 
I could see, and went back and did some 
calculations on what the probable ore would 
bring represented by the showing that had 
been opened up. I figured about nine hundred 
tons could probably be mined there, if it was 
mined selectively and carefully. And I knew 
about what I could get from the smelter for it, 
under the contracts I’d been familiar with. So 
Jack Buehler and I decided to go ahead and see 
what we could do about it. Well, I went to the 
bank in Pioche and borrowed two hundred 


and fifty dollars, and Jack Buehler put up two 
hundred and fifty. And I went down to see the 
Ray and Greenwood people. Their families 
thought they were crazy, you know. And they 
didn’t have any money themselves. 

Oh, I should mention a little bit about 
the examination. Fern and I went down then. 
And she set up to do a little cooking with a 
little gas stove; and Ray and Greenwood and 
I would wander around, while I was doin’ a 
little mappin and figuring and sampling. And 
I looked at all the properties then, and got 
some ideas on what I would do, but mainly, 
of course, this Hitler shaft, so-called. And 
Ray always had his liquor bottle around, but 
Greenwood was a very straight laced sort of 
a fella. Both of ’em were Mormons but Ray 
didn’t pay any attention to the “good book” 
[laughs]. And they arrived there in an old 
Ford with their groceries, but, you know, the 
groceries that they had consisted primarily of 
boxes of corn flakes and canned milk [laughs], 
and liquor, for Ray. Well, he’s a very—both 
of ’em were pleasant people, and we enjoyed 
them. And Fern felt soft-hearted about the 
corn flakes diet, and wound up cookin’ for the 
bunch, you know, in the old superintendent’s 
house. And on the way down, we’d found a 
turtle, desert turtle, and we had that tethered 
by the cabin, and she fed it lettuce. Of course, 
we shopped at the grocery store in town, and 
we ate pretty well. Ray was always singing 
a song, “Here Comes the Man with the 
Mandolin,” you know, when he’d come in, he’d 
be whistling it or singin’ it. So this turned out 
to be one of our theme songs, we like to this 
day, because of the way this venture turned 
out. 

And so, coming back then to the report, 
and finally going down and working with 
Dr. Godshall, why, I realized that there 
wasn’t any chance, you know, of just raising 
twenty-five thousand dollars, and the only 



76 


Paul Gemmill 


way I knew was to persuade Dr. Godshall 
that we meant business and would really try 
to do somethin’—and partly on the advice of 
Ray and Greenwood, saying you can’t go to a 
fella like that and expect to get a deal out of 
him unless you pay him somethin’ you know. 
And so that’s why a thousand dollars option 
money was made ready. In order to get the five 
hundred dollars from Ray and Greenwood, or 
two hundred and fifty dollars each from them, 
why I had to go to their folks, you know, their 
daughter and son, whoever they were, and 
talk to them about it. And I guess I persuaded 
them to give each one of them two hundred 
fifty dollars. So we had a thousand. 

I had a thousand dollars with me when 
I went to talk to [laughs] Dr. Godshall at 
his big home down in, I think it was over 
toward Hollywood there somewhere, and I 
went alone. Ray and Greenwood said, “No, 
we shouldn’t go. We don’t want to be present.” 
They may have had some other reason. I think 
they had somebody else back of ’em on the 
first examination, and this time they didn’t 
want to be out in front. I don’t know. Anyway, 
I went there. Sat down and talked with Dr. 
Godshall, and I opened up my report and 
let him read it; and said, “Now, I haven’t any 
basis to go on here except to let you know 
what I can do. Can’t come up with twenty-five 
thousand when it’s totally a pig in a poke, but 
I do figure there’s this nine hundred tons, and 
there’s about twelve thousand dollars net in 
it, net profit.” 

“Well,” he says, “that’s not too bad.” He 
says, “In the first place,” (after reading my 
report) he says, “young fellow,” he says, “I 
feel after reading your report, if I were twenty 
years younger,” he says, “you wouldn’t have to 
go any further; we’d just go ahead and do this.” 
But he says, “Under the circumstances, with 
Mrs. Beldon being involved and everything,” 
he says, “I think the right answer here is, you 


just dig up that twelve thousand dollars before 
you start doing any producing, as the down 
payment on this hundred and fifty thousand 
dollar purchase price, and I think we can 
talk business.” [Laughs] And so we drew up 
an agreement then. And he got the thousand 
dollars. That was a thousand dollars of the 
twelve. So we had eleven thousand to find. 

I didn’t know where we were gonna get it. 
But I went to Salt Lake then, and I arranged 
for some more time of f, and went to Salt 
Lake. And I talked to the Snyders. And Ed 
Snyder was gonna go down and have a look. 
But anyway, so that I wasn’t losin’ any time, I 
went to the different smelters about treating 
the ore. And I found out that International 
didn’t want the ore, because of its dolomite 
content. (Later on they did treat it.) And U. 
S. Smelting, Refining and Mining Company 
were also afraid of the dolomite that was in 
the ore, because they’d had some experience 
with it, and with the particular ore they were 
treating, at that time, it didn’t work good. So 
I went over to AS and R [American Smelting 
and Refining]. 

At that time there were three lead smelters 
in Salt Lake valley. And this would require a 
lead smelter. Direct shipping—lead ore with 
the gold and silver in it see. Low insoluble. 
A good kind of smelting ore, providing that 
you didn’t have something in it that they 
didn’t like. Well, AS and R said, “We’ll have 
no trouble with that. We’d love it.” And in fact, 
I got to the point where they said, “Lookin’ 
at the report, if it’s like you say it is, if we can 
check you out and it’s just like you say, we’ll 
finance it for you. 

And right then that evening at the hotel, 
I got a wire or a telephone call (I’ve forgotten 
which) from Ray and Greenwood (from Ray, I 
think it was) telling me that he had contacted 
a man by the name of Buford Davis, and he 
was the operator for United Verde Extension 



Tecopa: The Glory Hole or Pay Dirt 


77 


people, from over in Arizona. After they’d 
closed down the United Verde Extension 
property—a big copper mine—some of the 
former officials led by George Kingdon had 
gone into a gold mine up in Idaho, I believe 
it is, called the Golden Anchor. And they 
had mined this out—figured that it was 
terminated, type of ore changed or something, 
and they closed that down. 

So they were looking for something else, 
and Buford Davis was ready to meet me down 
at the property to check my report. Of course, 
I’d given the promoters a copy of my report. 
Normally, I wouldn’t do that any more, but 
anyway, I did. And they had shown it, and 
so I scooted back down without going ahead 
with AS and R. I went back down and met 
with Buford Davis. And he took a couple 
of samples where I’d taken ’em. He checked 
those out and was satisfied. Right away, why 
we had another meeting down there, where 
Jack Buehler and I went down and met with 
the Arizona crowd: Mr. George Kingdon, 
Mr. A. B. Peach, and Buford Davis were all 
there. And Jack Buehler and I were there. 
Well, general terms were arranged right then, 
Johnny on the spot. They were to put up 
twenty-five thousand dollars. They were not 
to get the twenty-five thousand back. It was 
kind of a funny arrangement we had there. 
But anyway, they were sold on it. This wound 
up with it making a deal. There were some 
complications in it and some delays. No use 
repeating, but it got put together. 

Well, this operation then, got off the 
ground, and then in 1940 it got going. And by 
the Christmas of 19411 think it was, Fern and 
I got our first dividend check—well not really 
our first dividend check. The first dividend 
check we ever got was from the Haciempa 
Hotel in Prescott, where my father had had 
a little interest; and that’d been distributed 
around to the different members of the family. 


We got a dividend check of ten cents. Our 
second dividend check, from this mine, was 
five thousand dollars. And those of us that 
put the thing together—the two promoters, 
and Jack Buehler and myself—each came 
out with a ten percent interest, stock interest, 
in Shoshone Mines, Inc., which I organized 
under my own name before this deal, see. My 
brother, Jack, my younger brother, by that 
time was out of school and had passed his bar 
examination, and was out at Pioche practicing 
law. And he had put the company, you know, 
put the company legal papers together for 
us. And so, as I recall, he got some stock. 
And I had had George [C.] Heikes go down 
and look at the property; George Heikes was 
a geologist with National Lead I’d gotten 
acquainted with, and he’s a good friend of 
mine to this day. And George had gone down, 
because we thought maybe we’d have to raise 
public money or somethin’ to do this job, and 
we needed an independent report. Well, he’d 
gone down to look at it. But before we ever 
needed any report from him, why this other 
deal materialized. And so we were off the 
ground. And so it worked out pretty good. 
The only thing is, we went into the war years, 
and the War Production Board had set up a 
premium price plan for the production of base 
metals. And in this plan, they had the basic 
principle involved that the precious metals 
were not what they were after, and they were 
not inclined to pay any escalation of costs on 
the basis of your precious metals. But if you 
needed a premium on your ore, why it would 
be based on either the lead or the zinc or the 
copper base metal content, but no premium 
for the precious metal in the ore. 

Well as it turned out, we, of course, went 
into the war years with this operation and 
costs escalated terrifically, as you can well 
imagine, particularly with wages, and all the 
good men went into the services. So that 



78 


Paul Gemmill 


didn’t work out very good. But nevertheless, to 
make a long story short, why, Fern and I came 
out well in the venture, and eventually the 
mine got sold to Anaconda. And between our 
dividends and our capital gain in the business, 
why, we made a nice stake out of it that later 
on I was able to use to multiply some more. 

I’m unusual in the mining business, I 
think. One of few who get an opportunity to 
put somethin’ together for themselves. I’m 
unusual in that I have never gone broke. You 
know you have to be an extreme optimist to 
do these things in the first place; and then 
you’ve got to be an extreme conservative or 
you’ll go broke [laughs]. So I think weathering 
the depression years is what saved me. I’ve 
never taken a long shot risk that I didn’t have 
my rear protected, you know. Well I didn’t 
get into the service during the war, ’cause, 
we were involved in war essential base metal 
production at Pioche during that time. Then 
I talk about the windup of Tecopa we’re 
up into the late c 40s, you see. Being in the 
lead-zinc mining business and all, why I was 
not allowed—couldn’t have gone to war if I 
wanted to. 



7 


Some Concepts on 
Geology of Eastern Nevada 


I mentioned, let’s see, getting out of 
school in 1930, and then going to work up 
at Bauer, Utah, and coming back to Pioche, 
and getting into underground surveying and 
underground mapping of geology And you 
know, mapping the faults because we had to 
trace the bed to where it was displaced by 
faults. And a little bit of stope geology, and 
then they transferred me onto surface work, 
where we were setting up a triangulation 
system. And this triangulation system was 
going to be the basis for an underground 
connection clear through the mountain. And 
I worked some on that. 

And I think I did mention that Chief 
Beuhler put me to work on the insoluble 
residue laboratory. (He was the chief geologist 
for the National Lead Company, which at 
that time controlled Combined Metals.) 
My job was to follow in the footsteps of Mr. 
McQueen s work in the tri-state area. He had 
been very effective in identifying formations 
through insoluble residue (dissolving the 
rock, you know, small samples of the rock 
in hydrochloric acid) and coming up with 


the insoluble fraction; identifying small 
fossils and other tiny particles under the 
microscope as diagnostic for the different 
formations. The same process did not show 
characteristic variety in the formations of 
the Cambrian limestones in the Pioche area. 
There was a benefit I got from that, however, 
in that I went through a lot of the geologic 
column of carbonate rocks taking samples 
for insoluble residue preparation, and I got 
acquainted with the general appearance of 
the rocks, and more importantly, acquainted 
with the sequence of the field appearance of 
rocks from one formation to another. The 
USGS Professional Paper 171, had segregated 
some of the lower part of the Highland Peak 
Cambrian formations that were not difficult 
to segregate like the limes immediately above 
the “Chisolm” shale, and what we call the 
“Davidson Blue,” and then the “Davidson 
Dolomite,” and “Davidson Black” were 
recognized readily as formation units. But, 
the “Highland Peak” generally was just 
lumped into four thousand feet of Cambrian 
limestones and dolomites, admittedly very 



80 


Paul Gemmill 


difficult to segregate. You had to kind of live 
with the geologic column, in order to separate 
the carbonate units in surface mapping. 

So from there, and going to Bristol later 
with that experience, and applying some of 
that to Bristol, and identifying the so-called 
“Platy Dolomite” below the twelve hundred 
level at Bristol, and measuring its thickness, 
and finding it compared almost exactly with 
the thickness in the Ely range, I continued to 
have a good deal of interest in the geologic 
column, because it was rather important 
in predicting the depth to the ore-bearing 
horizons. 

This “C.M.” ore bed is a black carbonaceous 
limestone embedded down in the Pioche 
shale, and it’s the first limestone above 
the basement quartzite. Therefore, when 
mineralizing fluids come up through the 
underlying quartzite and shale, and under the 
proper structural relationships, and probably 
at the right depth below the surface, and 
whatever other factors might be important, 
these mineralizing agencies act as though the 
CM bed is hungry for them, and so there’s a 
spread of mineralization in the CM bed. 

There are other factors, that I believe, 
from long experience, are very important in 
that “blotter effect,” namely the carbonaceous 
nature of the bed, the thin-bedded nature 
of the bed, and the fact that the underlying 
siliceous footwall shale (we called it) which is 
maybe ten feet thick in a lot of places—layer 
of almost quartzite, which lays in there almost 
like a pane of glass. When the fault blocks get 
stepped around a little bit, why this brittle 
layer just under CM limestone cracks up, and 
it acts as a means of distributing the fluids to 
the bed that’s immediately over it, and allows 
the bed to become replaced as a blanket bed 
of ore. It’s very important structurally, I think, 
to explain why we had the wide channels of 
ore lying in this bed. 


And there’s no use in this discussion, I 
think, of going any deeper into the theory 
behind the ore being there, except to say 
that most of the faulting has been pretty well 
demonstrated to be pre-mineral; and that 
the age of mineralization therefore, has to be 
quite late. As time went on and more studies 
undertaken by different people, one of ’em, 
an important one was Dr. Earl F. Cook, who 
came in studying the flow-rocks—what’s 
called ignimbrite lava flows—which are fluid 
extrusives that apparently flowed across the 
country rather rapidly to seek their own level. 
The dates of these flows earlier than and offset 
by the faulting, has pretty well demonstrated 
that the mineralization has to be very late 
as compared with most of say, the porphyry 
copper deposits of the state of Nevada, which 
usually date from thirty million years before 
present on back. And this Pioche District 
mineralization, in both the Bristol mine and 
the Pioche area, I think can be demonstrated 
to be maybe in the order of less than ten 
million years ago. And I think too, that the 
mineralization of copper ores in the Bristol 
mine is probably due to an early porphyry 
copper occurrence somewhere down deep 
below the Bristol mine that has been reworked 
by later mineralizing fluids. Lale fluids picked 
up copper and brought it up, and put it down 
where it is in the high limes in Bristol. Now 
we’re talking about—well, studies have gone 
on since, you know, the ‘30s. I mean these 
interpretations started back there, and since 
USGS Professional Paper 171. 

But the geologic column has been very 
important in looking for ore because of this 
bed that I told you about— this fifty foot 
thick bed that seems to act more or less like 
a blotter down there, embraced in the Pioche 
shale. And therefore, studying the higher 
formations, and knowing where you are in 
different fault blocks, can give you some 



Some Concepts on Geology of Eastern Nevada 


81 


idea of where you’re gonna find that bed. 
Projected position of favorable lime beds 
in relation to evidences of mineralization at 
the surface have been used to postulate good 
exploration targets. From years of experience 
only oxidized manganese showings have 
been recognized as surf act mineral leakage 
connected with known channels of bedded 
ore. The surface distribution of oxidized 
manganese coming from what was primary 
deposition as a carbonate mineral (manganese 
carbonate) becomes oxidized, and it’s just a 
black waddy-looking manganese—at least 
it gives some hope that in the area of that 
manganese distribution there would be 
mineralization in the CM bed. And of course, 
it has to be recognized that if faulting is pre¬ 
mineral, there are chances for mineralization 
to come up and bypass the CM bed to where 
the CM bed is faulted out of that particular 
section, you know. And so there are a lot of 
vagaries to this thing. It isn’t all a simple thing 
at all. And like most mining which is risky 
anyway, this simply adds to your problems. 

Since we’re on that subject, why of course 
I had a real privilege in working with [Charles 
F. Park, Jr.] Dr. Charlie Park (Dean of School 
of Mineral Science) of Stanford University 
back in the period when we were operating 
the Prince mine in the ‘40s. He was sent in 
by USGS to complete a map of the Ely range 
there and asked me to work with him a little 
on it, because I had been familiar with the 
formations. In fact, he encouraged me to 
make an application to join the Geologic 
Society of America and the Society of 
Economic Geologists, and he sponsored me. 
And I grew to have a high regard for Dr. Park, 
at that time. 

We used to have lengthy debates over 
structure and so forth. And there was another 
fellow working there with him. Well, first, 
Jack Frost was there the first summer, who 


is now working with Exxon as one of their 
foreign field geologists, I think has a very 
responsible job. And then following him 
came C. Mack Tschanz. He and I used to have 
the most argument, argument over thrust 
faulting, versus normal faulting. Mack with 
Pampayon has written, more recently, of the 
geology of Lincoln County, a professional 
paper, USGS. Very good job. And he finally 
came around to admitting the possibility of 
some of my wild thinking in that paper, on 
slide faulting [laughs]. In fact, I think here it 
might be well to state, in as simple terms as 
possible, that I developed through experience 
down there, not through any super intellect, 
but through continuous experience in the 
district, developed the idea that what was 
called thrust faulting in Professional Paper 
171, wasn’t thrust faulting at all. It’s simply 
slide faulting off of the elevated mountain 
range blocks. And it couldn’t be thrust faulting 
by any studies from other surrounding areas, 
because there has been no thrust faulting 
positively identified that was as late as it 
would have to be to involve those ignimbrite 
flows that have been definitely identified and 
age-dated. So, it’s just that simple. And then 
if you call this flat faulting, slide faulting, and 
you have a reverse relationship of the material 
above and below the flat fault, it’s also simple 
to explain that there’s been a steep normal 
fault perhaps and usually not in evidence, 
because the slide fault has cut it off and placed 
older rocks that have been elevated out over 
younger rocks, giving a reverse fault position. 
But it’s simply due to a combination of two 
normal displacements—the steep fault and 
the flat slide fault. 

The application of this principle to 
mountain ranges in Lincoln County and 
elsewhere leads to the conclusion that some 
of these mountain ranges have been elevated 
tremendously more than any previous 



82 


Paul Gemmill 


geologic evidence has postulated; and that 
the steep bordering faults in some of these 
mountain ranges has to be in the order of 
from ten or twelve thousand feet up to thirty 
to forty or fifty thousand feet, in the rather 
late basin and range fault system. And Id be 
prepared to argue with anybody on that point 
[laughs]. don’t know whether you understood 
what I said [laughs]. 

And I think slide faulting has a good deal 
of importance in relation to understanding 
the oil in Railroad Valley— which I believe 
has migrated from a very deep source up into 
the broken slide fault rocks of both broken 
igneous rock and limestones in Railroad 
Valley, and capped by much later lake beds, 
which formed the cover. And that again is 
something I’d like to argue with somebody. 
[Laughs] Well, since we’re on the subject, 
the structural concept did reach print after 
I came here to this office [Nevada Mining 
Association] in 1964, as a result of being asked 
to write up the geology of the ore deposits of 
the Pioche district, which I did for this Graton 
Sales volume of AIME. 

Of course, the right answer to goin’ after 
this structural concept and researching the 
thing, and getting it accepted in the minds 
of other people is another problem. And I’ve 
found that it takes years, to come up with a 
general acceptance of some new concept like 
that. It isn’t somethin’ you just print up and 
tell somebody. It doesn’t get accepted. So 
there’s a time lag. And I think the importance 
of this is very great for the state of Nevada 
in the study of structural geology, because if 
this becomes generally understood Lincoln 
County (where we don’t have the confusion 
of “Nevadan” thrust faulting—that is, the 
earlier thrust faulting that is recognized in the 
Roberts Mountain thrust, and the Golconda 
thrust, and these others that are so pervasive 
in a lot of the state in the northern part and 


the western part), if it’s true in eastern Nevada, 
then the same thing is very obviously true 
around the other mountain ranges of Nevada. 
But when you’re also involved with what is 
really thrust faulting, of a much earlier period, 
then there’s some very, very knotty problems 
in interpretation. You see a simple-minded 
person (like myself) with enough study in 
that area can see this, where the fella maybe 
that comes from up in northern Nevada, tends 
to think, “Oh, that guys s just crazy, see.” But 
you’d have to take him down there and rub his 
nose in it. I’ve never been able to get anybody 
to do that. [Laughs] 

Well now, have I given you enough long¬ 
haired geology [laughs] ? 

I guess we’ll start covering some of 
the terms that you asked me to be talked 
about, terms and names used in a mining 
operation, particularly in underground 
mining operation. 



8 


Mining Lore 


Tools and Terminology 

Of course, you start out, you know, with 
the old-timer methods. Before my time, and 
it was long before my time, that they used the 
arrastra, and for hoisting had the animal, the 
mule or the horse, pull a bucket up by running 
around the shaft with the cable thatd go along 
the ground and over a sheave, and down the 
shaft to pull the bucket up (known as a horse 
whim). Those tools were before my time. 

But, during my time, during the earlier 
part of my experience in the early, well c 20s, 
we were still using what we call a stationary 
gas engine that was really run on light diesel 
oil, out at the Comet mine running the 
compressor that supplied air for drilling and 
for running a small air hoist. And I operated 
that, and had to now and then, repair it, like 
re-pore the main bearings and things of that 
kind. And this was a sixty horsepower “gas” 
engine. There’s still some of these around the 
Lincoln County mines that are sitting there 
idle. Lincoln County now has very reliable 
electric power from Hoover Dam. But, those 


gas engine days came after the steam power 
that was previously used, when even a small 
mine would have a boiler using wood fuel. 
They’d gather wood and run their little steam 
engine for either generating power to hoist 
with, or to run a compressor. So we’ve come 
up to the time of electric power and so forth, 
the time of my principal experience. 

And the underground drifting—drifting 
is to drive out from the shaft, along the strike 
of the ore body, providing you’re working in 
a vein. Lots of times you’re not working in 
a vein. In Bristol mine, for instance, the ore 
bodies were very irregular, and there was no 
strike or form to some of them. Some ore 
bodies did have form, and others didn’t. So 
the term “drift” in some mines, simply means 
a drive off of the shaft or on a sub-level. And 
so it’s (the term is) used very loosely. 

A crosscut—if you’ve got a long drive, 
then you cut across it. It’s frequently called a 
crosscut, when it doesn’t crosscut anything. 
But, the term “crosscut” truly means, in a 
vein mine or fissure mine, a drive that cuts 
across the formation; where the drift would 



84 


Paul Gemmill 


be on the strike, and the crosscut would be 
across, the formation. So, after you’ve gotten 
underground, you have those two terms for 
level drives. 

And then you have the winze, or 
sometimes if it’s large and deep, it’ll be called 
the underground shaft. And the collar is 
another term. That’s the beginning point to go 
down. It’s the collar of the winze or the shaft. 

And the drilling is done with leyners, 
and a leyner is mounted usually on a vertical 
or horizontal bar, to hold it, because it’s very 
heavy. And sometimes these leyners are heavy 
enough so it’d take two men to lift ’em. And 
the evolution of this came to the jackhammer 
and jackleg. The jackhammer really came first. 
The jackhammer was first named, I think, 
as the Ingersoll-Rand hand-held machine. 
I think it was sort of a trade name—their 
machine—but it became loosely used, and any 
hand-held machine was called a jackhammer. 

And this evolved about in the late 
1940s, the leyner and the jackhammer, in 
underground use, were pretty much replaced 
for stoping ore by a jackhammer mounted on 
an “air leg” that would support it. And a man, 
all he had to do was balance the hammer on 
the top of the air leg, and instead of using a 
lot of different changes of steel, which would 
be limited by the length of a shell of a leyner, 
he could take a long piece of steel, and run 
it clear into the ground, if he didn’t have to 
have changes on account of wearing the bit 
gauge. So, most of the underground work, in 
stoping particularly was then done, instead 
of with a leyner, would be done with a so- 
called jacklegs, what I’m talking about, in a 
small mine. 

Now you get into the larger underground 
mines (particularly where they’re on bedding 
like the Pan American mine in Lincoln 
County); they now have a mobile unit with 
heavy machines on long shells that are 


either operated by a screw, or operated by 
a pneumatic push to the drill. And these 
are—(of course, there’s nothing unique about 
these names), but you call the machine that 
is either on a rail, or trackless equipment like 
on rubber-tired equipment or something, 
or on what they call crawler tracks like a 
bulldozer has; they call these machines their 
“jumbos.” And the “jumbo” is, of course, a 
pretty common thing now. It would be used 
in today’s operation, instead of driving a 
heading, or drift, or crosscut, with a leyner, 
hand-operated leyner, or with even a jackleg, 
why, instead you’d have a type of “jumbo” in 
order to make better progress. The “jumbo” 
came for drifting and cross-cutting drives, was 
pretty commonly used in, oh, in the ‘40s, all 
through there. And sometimes you’d make 
your own “jumbo” in the shop, usually these 
would be on mine rail. 

Now the early stoper—. A stoper is a 
machine, an air machine, the same as a leyner 
or a jackhammer, but it’s mounted with a stiff 
leg that goes directly out behind it, and you 
point the whole machine in the direction 
you re gonna point the hole. And it’s used in 
driving raises, or advancing stopes upwards. 
And the early ones were called “wiggle-tail.” 
And the reason for the “wiggle-tail” name, 
obviously, was that they had no ratchet for 
rotation of the steel. Later, machines had a 
built-in ratchet that the air operated as the 
machine was drilling. As the hammer moved 
back and forth, it kept the steel turning. But 
the early stoper, the “wiggle-tail,” had no 
ratchet. All it had was a hammer that kept 
hammering the steel, and the steel had no 
collar for holding it in the machine, because 
you were always drilling up. And so you’d have 
special steel for the “wiggle-tail,” or for the 
stoper, for that matter. But, you had a handle 
on it that stuck out about a foot, and you’d 
turn it with your hand; as the machine was 



Mining Lore 


85 


operating, you’d turn it back and forth with 
this handle that stuck out from the machine 
in order to keep the steel bit cutting all parts 
of the hole bottom. 

Now, when you’re driving a heading, the 
holes that you drill have names. The cuts, cut 
holes, are drilled at a slant, and usually they’re 
drilled from the breast of the heading (and 
the name is self-explanatory) down on the 
slope toward the bottom of the heading, as 
you’re advancing. Those are called cut holes. 
Now there’s an upside-down cut hole, which 
would be drilled from, say, waist height up on 
a slope, and then you’re breaking the ground 
out first with that kind of a cut hole. But, the 
common one is the one that’s drilled down, 
either way those are called cut holes. 

Then you have relievers. These are the 
next, and then breast holes, and back holes 
(which means, say you might have three 
cuts, and then some relievers drilled above 
those, and then the breast holes, and then 
the back holes), and then the lifters are the 
bottom holes drilled right down on the floor. 
The sequence in detonating loaded holes is 
critical, so that the cut holes are supposed to 
go first, and cut back in as far as the depth 
of the round. And then the other ones just 
break to it. And it’s very important that the 
cut holes go first. 

And this reminds me of a story [laughs] 
about Jack Buehler, who was at one time my 
boss, and later my partner. Jack Buehler told a 
story about taking a bunch of girls through the 
mine up at the, I think it was the Iron Dragon 
mine in Utah, out in the Eureka district. And 
these high school kids would come and take 
a tour through the mine. And this foreman 
was explaining when they got to the heading, 
telling them about the cut holes, the relievers, 
the breast holes, the back holes, and the lifters; 
and he said, “The cut holes have to go first in 
order to make the round break. If they didn’t 


go first, why, the first holes wouldn’t break 
anything, ’cause they’re driven in almost 
straight, and they wouldn’t have any way of 
breaking out.” And he explained this, and one 
of the girls was very much interested, and kept 
taking notes, and trying to draw a picture of 
it. And she kept repeating the question, and 
he was getting a little irritated at her. (This is 
a crude miner, shifter. A shifter, by the way, is 
the shift boss—is the boss— direct boss over 
the men, in say, a section of the mine on a 
given shift. And he is under the foreman or 
the superintendent over him.) So, anyway, this 
fellow was explaining, and finally about the 
third time, he was getting pretty irritated. And 
finally he said, “You drill the cut holes, the 
relievers, the breast holes, the back holes, and 
then the lifters.” And he says, “If the cut holes 
don’t go first, you’re screwed.” [Laughs] And 
in those days, that was very embarrassing. 
Today it wouldn’t be. [Laughs] Well, anyway, 
that was quite a story as I remember. Very 
funny at the time. 

Now let’s see. Well, you come to the shaft, 
of course, and you hoist the ore, older mines 
commonly hoisted loaded mine cars in which 
case they call it caging cars. You’d have the 
mine cars, a train of mine cars come out to 
the shaft (or maybe in a smaller mine, single 
cars might be just hand pushed, and a larger 
operation might have a motor trammer, 
which is commonly a battery locomotive 
running on rails, and you haul out a train 
of cars to the shaft station, where you’d have 
switching arrangements and chairs to rest the 
cage at track level.) You roll a car on the cage, 
and if you had a double compartment shaft 
and the cage is in counter balance (which is 
common), why, one side would be down at 
the level that you’re hoisting from, while the 
other one is up at the collar of the shaft, and 
somebody up there is taking the car of f to 
dump it into the ore bin. And down below, the 



86 


Paul Gemmill 


empty car is taken off and a loaded one is put 
on the other side just about the same time; and 
then when it’s ready, why, the other one comes 
down, see. So that’s caging cars. But, also, and 
more common, an operation would be set up 
with skips; either a single-compartment skip 
or double-compartment skips. Only a skip 
is loaded from a pocket, called a skip pocket 
down under the shaft station where the cars 
come out and dump into this pocket. And 
then there’s a chute that can be pulled into 
the skip, and then the skip tender—. (That’s 
another name, “skip tender” is a man that 
handles the skiploading for hoisting and 
lowering all materials including men.) 

If it’s a two compartment shaft, he’s just 
down at the pocket loadin’ out the ore or 
waste, whatever’s being hoisted; and when 
one side comes down, he loads that, and the 
other side, he loads the other one. And when 
he’s emptied the pocket, why then he goes to 
a different level, or whatever else needs doing 
by the hoist. 

In sinking a shaft, in my time, this was 
usually done by hand. That is to say, I don’t 
mean the whole operation by hand, but I 
mean the miners were drilling with heavy 
jackhammers or leyners used as jackhammers, 
down holes, of course, and sometimes they’d 
be sinking below the water table, and have to 
wear rubber suits in order to keep relatively 
dry. And there’d be several men on the 
bottom, in a shaft, like say, the Caselton shaft, 
which was a two compartment plus man-way, 
pumpway compartment. 

And I recall in the early ‘30s, when that 
was being sunk, I was regularly measuring it 
up on measure day, and go down, get yourself 
all wet with about 800 gallons a minute of 
water failin’ down on you from higher up 
[laughs]. And after the blast, why all the 
mucking—. Mucking is another word, of 
course, where they’re picking up the material 


by hand with a shovel, and shoveling it into 
the sinking bucket (which is frequently called 
a can) that’s under a crosshead. Now what 
happens—the crosshead comes down, to rest 
at the bottom of the timber. You’re timbering 
the shaft as you go down, and you have a 
timber across that stops the crosshead, but the 
cable goes through the crosshead, and holds 
on to a hoisting bucket; and the bucket goes 
on down to the bottom, and the men muck the 
blasted rock into the bucket. And when they 
ring the hoist signal and the bucket comes up, 
it picks up the crosshead then, and goes up to 
the top, and safety door let down by hoistman 
engaging a tail chain under the bucket, so 
lowering dumps the bucket into a surface 
bin for disposal. And that’s the operation of 
sinking a shaft, in my time. 

Now they’ve got more modern devices, I 
think now, for bottom mucking, and so forth, 
to get away from the hard, hand labor, because 
that’s what you call a rough bottom when 
you don’t muck off of a muck sheet. And you 
wonder what a muck sheet is. Well, as used in 
a heading where you’re hand mucking it, is a 
plain piece of steel, maybe three-feet wide, or 
four-feet wide (depending on the size of the 
heading) and several feet long; and you blast 
to get most of the muck piled up on the sheet, 
and then you can use a square point shovel, 
and you can do a better, faster job of hand 
mucking into the car. 

Well, of course, in more recent years, 
and the development came during my time, 
we saw introduction of the Finley mucker. I 
don’t know whether I mentioned that to you 
anywhere before. But, the Finley mucker was 
invented and developed at Anaconda’s Butte, 
Montana operations by a man by the name of 
Finley. And one of the first two Finley muckers 
came to Pioche—I’ve forgotten where the 
other one went, probably somewhere in 
Utah—and the one of’em that came down to 



Mining Lore 


87 


the Caselton operation of Combined Metals, 
was used on the eight hundred level of the 
shaft in driving a heading south to explore the 
CM bed. And I was laid off of the engineering 
crew in the fall of‘31,1 guess it was, somethin’ 
like that. But I went on working as an operator 
of the Finley mucker, driving that heading. 
And my roommate, Rod Phipps (real good 
personal friend of mine, and a churn driller, 
formerly) was taking the other shift. And we 
were running a competition on how many 
cars of muck we could muck with the Finley 
mucker. So that just about dates the time that 
the Finley mucker came into existence. And 
it’s an overshot mucker run by, at that time 
was all run by air. And the bucket was on a 
cradle or rocker, so that as you let the bucket 
go forward, it would also dip down and rest 
with the lip right on the floor; and then you 
turn another handle, an air valve, that would 
activate the power motor, air motor, driving 
the wheels. And so you’d drive this vehicle 
into the muck pile. And then when you went 
as far as you could go nudging into the muck 
pile and got a dipper load, you’d activate the 
other lever that raised the bucket on the cradle 
and overshoot it you’d be standing on the side 
of the vehicle—and it would center the thing 
first, because you could turn it on a swivel 
after you had the dipper down. You could turn 
it and pick up along one side or the other— 
and then as you raised the bucket, it would 
center first, then it would overshoot right by 
your head, and over into the car in back of 
you, that was hooked onto the back of the 
mucking machine. And it was a tremendous 
advance really, in driving headings, because 
prior to that time mucking was all hand 
mucking, like I told you, where you have a 
muck sheet, and you’d use square-point shovel 
and so forth. 

Well, there really hasn’t been very much 
advance in mucking over this old Finley 


mucker. I think they’ve come up now with 
some rubber-tired equipment that you 
can use. But, I don’t know that that’s very 
common. There’s been so little underground 
mine development over a period of some 
time, you know. All the big operations have 
been in copper usually, and goin’ into open 
pit operations to get the ore—that for some 
twenty years there have not been a lot of 
places operating underground properties. 
And in Nevada here, there was quite a period 
in which there were very few underground 
operations because of the low precious metal 
prices, you know. And even though you 
might have a lead-zinc mine, it was maybe 
established at a time when the precious metal 
price meant quite a bit to the value of the 
ore, because valves are all in there together 
you see. So, there hasn’t been an awful lot 
of development for the typical underground 
mine where you were operating a fissure or 
something like that. 

Well, let’s see. We’ve pretty well covered, I 
think, the common terms used, just in talking 
about these things, of the things that I hadn’t 
made notes of. Came to mind ’cause of a 
muck sheet, a square-point shovel [laughs]; a 
round-point shovel you use when you’re “on 
the rough,” called the rough. And you’re on 
the rough, naturally, when you don’t have a 
muck sheet to muck off of. It’s logical enough. 

Blasting 

Dynamite, so-called powder, blasting 
powder, comes in different strengths, of 
course. And there’s no use getting into the 
technical side. You know, it’s nitroglycerine, 
supplied as “gelatin;” it comes in different 
strengths. And then in some ground, you use 
a higher strength, like sixty percent they call 
it, and other places use forty, and so forth, 
depending on how the ground breaks, and 



88 


Paul Gemmill 


how tough it is to break. It’s pretty safe to use 
really You could throw sticks of dynamite at 
people, and scare ’em, and it’s not gonna hurt. 
It won’t go off. A straight jar, unless it’s a super 
jar that a cap can give, a blasting cap can give— 
it won’t go off. The nitroglycerine in a box of 
powder, if it’s sittin around long enough, can 
leak; can migrate out of the dynamite into the 
paper, into the box. I think there have been 
cases where old dynamite is touchy, you know. 
And there’ve been accidents for that reason. 
But you can take dynamite and burn it, and 
it’ll just cause a fire. It won’t cause a big blast. 
So it’s pretty safe that way. 

But, when you have it in a drill hole that’s 
where you’re driving a heading; and you’ve 
loaded the holes, and all the holes didn’t go off, 
and you’ve got a “missed hole”— I’ve known 
of several cases where a man would drill into 
a “missed hole” and the powder would be 
cornin’ out of his drill hole, you know, and 
it didn’t go off because the drill didn’t hit the 
primer. But, if he drills into a “missed hole” 
and hits the cap that’s inserted on the end of 
the fuse and into the powder to make it go off, 
the cap’ll go off with the pounding of the drill 
on it (and that’s strong enough to cause a cap 
to go off), and then, of course, the cap will 
set off the remaining dynamite. And there’ve 
been numerous cases over a period of time, 
of people getting blasted by drilling into a 
“missed hole,” and hitting the cap. 

And in my own experience, out at Bristol 
we had one case of a man with a large family, 
drilling into a “missed hole. “ 

And another case, two cases at Caselton 
we had. One of’em was in a raise, but I wasn’t 
with the company at that time. It was just 
before I went with ’em again. It must’ve been 
about c 43 or four, I don’t know. They had four 
men in a raise that had a blast; and whether it 
was a “missed hole” I’m not sure, or something 
that set it off. I think it was during the time 


they were loading powder that somethin’ 
happened. It would probably have been, 
maybe the cap being jammed against the wall 
of the hole while loading, or some thing where 
it set off the powder. Killed all four of’em. 

The other case was in the Caselton mine, 
while I was there. The miner drilled into a 
“missed hole,” and the blast blinded him. And 
he committed suicide. He got over this, and he 
could see just a little bit. He even could see to 
drive his car around a little bit, but—. And he 
was an educated person. He had a family. But 
it just got next to him, and he couldn’t take it, 
and he committed suicide about a year later, 
I think. So, it’s been, for the miner, a hazard. 

So, underground mining has had, in the 
aggregate, probably quite a few accidents of 
that kind. Drilling into a “missed hole” is 
a bad possibility—one of the hazards that 
still remains with underground mining. 
But the kind of powder they’re using (the 
kind of explosive they’re using I should say, 
to be technically right) has been changed 
so that most of the explosive that’s now 
used underground, in blasting drill holes, 
is actually fertilizer. Ammonium nitrate 
fertilizer pellets. And, they use a stick of 
dynamite to detonate the nitrate. Set it off 
with a fuse and blasting cap just like straight 
dynamite. The charge of pellets needs some 
carbon with it. That is, they usually use fuel oil 
with the fertilizer pellets, and, in a measured 
mixture; that makes it just about as good as 
dynamite. In fact, it’s quite a saving in blasting 
underground. But, it came after my time. I’ve 
never used it, except out like at our perlite 
quarry, or outside somewhere, where we were 
still operating after the mines went down. I’ve 
seen it used there. 

And, there was another kind of powder— 
an ammonia-type powder. Trade name 
“Trojan” that didn’t cause the headaches that 
regular powder caused. This ammonia-type 



Mining Lore 


89 


powder was used sometimes in dead air places 
you know, where you could get by with less 
ventilation. But, that’s about all I can tell you 
about dynamite and powder. 

Superstitions 

Well, superstitions, among the public, of 
course, are, if you had a stick of dynamite and 
threw it, why, I laughs] it’d blow you up. 

Well, the superstition that women 
shouldn’t be allowed to go underground, is 
one that I faced several times. And especially 
this was true among the Italian work force 
out at Bristol. They didn’t like to see a lady go 
underground. Other places, I think, among 
the, well say, the Mormon community, and 
you know, the American fellas, I don’t recall 
that having any particular significance. And I 
can’t think of any other superstitions that, you 
know, particularly related to my experience 
or my time. 

Of course, there’re the superstitions of 
having a dream, and finding ore bodies, these 
things that I’ve heard stories about. And I 
think there’s supposed to be the mine up in 
Utah somewhere, that was discovered by a 
dream—went out and dug where nobody else 
would dig, and came up with a big discovery. 
But this was just a story in my—I mean I 
wouldn’t have any verification of that. 

Well, speaking of superstitions, and how 
superstitions can develop into something that 
doesn’t appear in the individual’s mind at all, 
as being a superstition, I’ll tell ya a little story 
that happened to me, personally. There’s a 
group of claims, Mountain Lion claims, over 
the Highland Peak area, that eventually my 
brothers and I acquired from the fellow that 
had it. He owned a bar in the town of Pioche, 
and he died. His estate had to be settled. And 
he had two different properties. One was 
south of Bristol, and the other property was 


this Mountain Lion property. Well, Johnny 
Valente was his name. While Johnny Valente 
was still alive, and f or years before the trip I 
made out to look at his property, why, Johnny 
kept the mine going by the more irregular 
workers in the mines. They were usually, oh, 
had lots of experience, but they liked their 
liquor pretty well, and so they were always 
in debt to Johnny Valente, because he was 
always ready to put ’em in debt to him. And 
then when they’d run up a bill, why, he’d have a 
place for ’em to go work it off, out at his mine. 
It’d be either the Mountain Lion or it’d be the 
Wood Butcher mine, south of Bristol. And of 
course, they got almost no money out of him. 
He’d take the food and rationed liquor out to 
’em, and they were usually in debt to him. And 
they knew their work was not a highball job. 
They’d go out there to dry out, after being on 
a bender, you know. And of course, maybe the 
first day or two, they didn’t do too much work, 
but on the other hand, I’ve seen the opposite 
happen. A fella that was mad at himself for 
going and spending all his money, or for going 
and drinking so much that he got sick—why, 
when they come back to work they’d just work 
all the harder to work it off, you know. A sort 
of self punishment. But anyway, Johnny would 
send these fellas out, and there were some 
that were perennially doing this, all the time. 
They’d come in town. And he’d advance ’em— 
after they’d kind of worked it off a while—he’d 
advance them enough to get drunk on again, 
and then they’d be back out there, see. Well, 
I’m a little bit off the story in telling that, but 
it just occurred to me that that was a typical 
thing that was going on in the earlier period 
when I was out there. 

Well eventually, Johnny got murdered. 
Some fella shot Johnny. And I’ve forgotten. 
It was a barroom thing of some kind. I can’t 
tell you the details. But anyway, A1 Scott, the 
attorney at that time, had to settle the estate. 



90 


Paul Gemmill 


And before Johnny had died, why, I had 
gone out to look at his property, and hiked 
clear over the mountain, from the east side 
to the west side. And he took me over the 
trail. In fact, I went with a friend of mine, 
over and down to the property where hed 
been digging out ore on the other side, and 
we saw some showings that the old-timers, 
had dug way up on the Highland range, I 
don’t know how long ago. But these were on 
unpatented mining claims. There was a shaft 
about seventy feet deep up there, and a little 
adit that was apparently started to connect 
with the shaft, and two other diggings where 
they’d dug out a little bit of rich ore way up in 
the high limestone horizon. 

And after returning from this trip, why, 
I had—now I’m gonna tell you what I think 
happened—I had a dream about this walkin’ 
over the mountain, how Johnny Valente 
had taken me under a tree and showed me 
a little diggin’, probably not over a foot deep, 
but two or three feet long, and a streak of 
lead carbonate ore about, oh, two or three 
inches wide at the widest, but a showing that 
you’d certainly want to dig on if you had the 
property, see. I had that in mind, and it got 
fixed in my mind, that that was there, and later 
on, of course, it was not a showing that you 
think you can make money on or anything 
like that, but it was just an impression I had. 
And so later on, when we acquired the claims, 
and A1 Scott was selling it (we bought the 
group of claims for a few hundred dollars), 
and then I had to do quite a bit of mapping 
on it. In fact, before Johnny died, why it was 
the Prince company that had an option on the 
claims. And while I was mappin’ it and the 
Prince Company had it, I looked, and looked, 
and looked, and looked for that streak of ore. 
And I’ll swear to you today that there wasn’t 
an inch of that ground up on top that I didn’t 


cover, and I couldn’t find that showing of lead 
carbonate. And so finally I went to this friend 
that had been with me and Johnny Valente, 
walkin’ over the mountain, and asked him if 
he thought he could find it. He said, “What are 
you talkin’ about?” And I described this. He 
said, “We didn’t see anything like—. I never 
saw anything like that.” I thought well, there 
you go, see. Now, if it hadn’t’ve been that that 
friend was with me when we did walk over the 
mountain— it was easy wasn’t it, for me, with 
time drifting down the line, to let that little, 
little thought slip into my mind as a fact, see. 
And I’m not crazy, but I could’ve continued 
believing. If it hadn’t’ve been that friend was 
along, I’d still think Johnny had shown that, 
and that the wash or the rains had covered 
it up or somethin’ like that, see. [Laughs] 
So, there’s an example of how a thing could 
happen. My mind’s eye can to this day see the 
streak of lead carbonate. 

There’s the superstition of the willow 
stick, of course. And, here you come into 
an area that I had quite a bit of experience 
with—that even some of the—without 
mentioning any names—some of the officials, 
well, engineers, and people connected with 
Combined Metals, actually hired a fella with 
electronic equipment in the early days of 
geophysical exploration, that claimed to be 
able to put certain elements in a little tube 
in his machine, and then he’d be prospecting 
for that with his electronic equipment. And 
of course, to me, this was really far out, and 
there was no foundation in it at all. He didn’t 
ever find anything. But they hired him, and 
he had a real fancy, big box with all kinds of 
dials and equipment. And he’d shoot these 
currents into the ground, and tell you what to 
look for. He’d get the information on where 
you were mining, and then he’d try to trace it 
where it was gonna go from there, and things 



Mining Lore 


91 


like that. And, of course, some of us would 
laugh at this, but still, he was hired and paid 
to do it [laughs], by somebody else in the 
organization. 

Of course, geophysical equipment came 
into existence, and Mr. Hoover’s son, Herbert 
Hoover, Jr. became interested in geophysical 
prospecting. And he was, as I understand it, 
criticized by his father, who thought it was sort 
of a wild idea to even follow such a thing. But 
Herbert Hoover, Jr. was highly successful with 
his—what’d they call it? United Geophysics 
Company? His was one of the earliest 
companies to use electrical geophysical 
instruments and develop them; and found 
a copper mine and mining district (that is, 
rejuvenated a known area that had showings 
of copper and might have been developed 
for some other reason), but nevertheless 
he ran the geophysical equipment over the 
area and pinpointed where to find the high 
grade in a very low grade environment, and 
was successful with it. In fact, from there on, 
I think Herbert and his organization were 
successful several places around the world. 
And, so, geophysical prospecting did come 
into its own. And think he was one of the 
pioneers. 

And speaking of the forked stick, or 
“divining rod” in prospecting, for metals; 
you can turn clear back into the pages of 
De Re Metallica, that was translated by the 
Hoovers, Mr. and Mrs. Hoover—this was the 
first treatise on mining, written in the 1500s. 
And in there, they describe, at some length, 
the arguments over the willow stick or these 
things. And the writer warns against relying 
on it too heavily [laughs] in very beautiful 
language—it should be quoted somewhere. 
And in that book—that’s one of the most 
fascinating books on mining, because they 
describe the veins, you know, and they 


describe how to build milling machines, and 
how to build your assay furnace. Everything 
is done from scratch, you know. And how 
to reduce the ores and how to smelt the 
ore—of course, usually in a very small way. 
A very fascinating book, and with all kinds of 
woodcuts in it. I’d refer anyone to, if you want 
to really delve into the origin of mining, you 
know, as we know it. And you’d be surprised 
at how much of our present technology really 
grew right out of things that they discovered 
back there, at that time, without knowing 
anything like what is known now about 
chemistry and physics and mechanics. In 
other words, cut and try development. 

One of the things that intrigues me, and 
I’ve got to get a set of needles for determining 
the grade of bullion— that is gold-silver 
bullion, you know? They show a picture 
in there of twenty-four needles. They’re I 
suppose, pencil in size, pencil-like, on a ring, 
twenty-four of’em, grading all the way from 
one in twenty-four parts—one part silver in 
twenty-four total—up to one part gold in 
twenty-four see, so that this relates direct to 
the karat bullion grade; twenty-four karat 
would be pure gold, you see, if you’re talking 
gold. And ten karat would be ten units of 
gold to fourteen units of silver, you see. 
And the way you use it, is to rub the item to 
be tested or a “touchstone”—this is a stone 
that has a rough surface something like the 
bottom of a non glazed porcelain dish. You 
know, some of these jugs that are made with a 
rough surface, or in the laboratory, they have 
the streak plates. And it really was a streak 
plate that they’d be using.You want to know 
what karat, or how pure your bullion is, you 
rub it on the stone. It’ll make a mark. Then 
you compare it with the mark that one of 
these needles would make, and your expert 
can say, well this is fifteen karat, or eighteen 



92 


Paul Gemmill 


karat, and so forth. So I gotta have a set of 
those. [Laughs] 

Clothing 

You asked about mining people and 
their clothing. Of course, in the underground 
mines, they come to the change room, and 
they take off what clothes they wear to work, 
and put on their diggers (so called), and take 
the diggers and go underground with ’em. 
There’s a vast difference of course, between 
one man and another, as far as how clean he 
keeps his diggers. 

We had one man; he had a nickname, 
“High Pockets” from Pioche, that would come 
over to the Prince mine, and he always wore 
boots, whether he was goin’ underground or 
not. But he never used the change room. He’d 
come over in his clothes, and he developed an 
odor that even the other miners couldn’t take. 
And so when he went underground, he had 
to go alone on the cage [laughs] He worked 
in a sort of a leaser type situation. He was 
diggin on a streak of ore, and pretty good at 
it. And he’d be put to work by himself over 
there, and dig out his own ore. When it came 
to goin home though, you had to watch him. 
He was liable to have sticks of powder in his 
boots, because he also had a prospect that he 
was workin on [laughs]. 

But, going on with this business of what 
their customary wear is. Whenever you 
get out in the desert country, with the old 
time prospector—which reminds me of old 
Schodde, who had the Schodde mine. The 
mine was actually named after him in the 
west slope of the Highland range. He’d go to 
his mine, and he sold it several times over. He 
knew just how to dig on a little streak of ore, 
and the minute he made a little showing out 
of it so that it looked like it was opening up, 
why, he always stopped right there. And then 


he’d deal with somebody on his mine. And he 
shipped a little bit of ore, but it had very little 
production up to that time (late 1920s). Well, 
some of it was pretty high grade ore, they say, 
maybe a hundred tons or so. But, anyway, he 
always went around in woolen underwear. 
And he didn’t wear a shirt. But he did wash 
it, but it would get to looking a very dingy 
gray, you know [laughs], because he didn’t 
bleach it or didn’t really do more than you 
might say, rinse it out. And he’d wear a pair 
of pants or jeans or something like that over 
the underwear. But, other than that why he 
had his long-sleeved woolen underwear. And 
this is not too typical of the more moderate 
climate like Lincoln County, Nevada, but 
they tell me that down in the desert country 
of California where it’s much warmer, that 
it was more typical for a prospector to wear 
woolen underwear right in the middle of the 
summer, ’cause it was insulation. You think 
of woolen underwear being something to 
keep you warm; it’s true. But it also keeps you 
from, you know, getting burned by the sun. So 
you wear a broad-brimmed hat and woolen 
underwear. And when you perspire, why, your 
perspiration evaporates with cooling effect, 
and you don’t get the direct rays of the sun. I 
suppose it wouldn’t be healthy to go out in the 
middle of Death Valley without anything on, 
because you’d quickly get too much, you’d get 
sunstroke. And these prospectors apparently 
could do; you know, they could get by where 
other people wouldn’t. And I understand that 
in the earlier days especially, why the people 
generally down there in that desert country 
wore woolen underwear in the summertime. 
That’s an interesting thing. 

Well, you were mentioning this Stever 
experience about the blowing up the sewer. 
And I have a special thing about sewers, 
and working on them, and so forth, that 
permeated my existence. 



Mining Lore 


93 


I started out as assistant change house 
plumber, was one of my first summer jobs 
for a day’s pay at the Virginia Louise mine—a 
steam boiler that heated water for the men to 
take showers. And shortly, the head man was 
put elsewhere, and I was the change house 
plumber. But, also about that time was when 
I was still going to school in Pasadena, but 
vacations and summer vacations and so forth, 
they seemed to save up the sewer jobs for me 
to take care of. Crawling under the houses, 
and working on faulty sewers [laughs], 
cleaning ’em out, and so forth. 

Well, I’ve never gotten away from that. I’ve 
had those jobs—in fact, I just recently had a 
job at the house we got for our daughter—the 
first thing we discovered was the sewer wasn’t 
any good. So, I’ve never really gotten away 
from that. Somehow, other people seem to 
avoid sewer duty [laughs], but I can’t get away 
from it. Okay. Enough for that. 

“In” Jokes 

Well, you wanted to get on to some of 
the horrible type of stories that miners like, 
and the kind they really get a kick out of, and 
stories get pretty crummy, you know. And 
yet, among a bunch of hard rock miners and 
men, you can get a laugh out of ’em. This is 
an example. (I suppose that you could go 
on ad infinitum with these stories. In fact, I 
must’ve heard a tremendous number of ’em 
that I forget, because it’s seldom, any more, 
that I run into somebody [laughs] I can relate 
these stories to. I used to know quite a few of 
’em you know, when you’re hobnobbing with 
the fellas, but I kind of forget ’em.) 

One of’em, you mentioned this one about 
the high grade ore when the foreman would 
come out of the mine, and you’d ask him how 
the face looked. He’d just blasted into a new 
face of ore. If it was a good-looking face of ore, 


why he’d say, “Oh, it shines like a diamond in 
a goat’s ass!” You know. And you’d ask him 
how steep the fault was that he went through 
to get to this new face. “Well, about as steep 
as a cow’s face,” indicating, as I think I said 
before, most of these fellas where I worked, 
mainly in Lincoln County (during the time 
that I was close to the men, you know, and 
going through the mine all the time), came 
from southern Utah. And they had a farming 
background, you know? And they were darn 
good workmen, and used to work, because 
they were put to work when they were kids, 
you know. Today, we have the problem that so 
many young people aren’t put to work early 
enough to know what work or responsibility 
is. But, anyway, that’s the kind of crew we 
built up. 

And, one of the stories, for instance, that 
went the rounds was about the old bull and 
the young bull. The old one and the young 
one were at a fence, lookin’ over the fence at a 
bunch of heifers. And the old bull says, “Boy,” 
he says, he started stompin’ a little bit. And 
he said to the young bull, “Let’s break down 
the fence and go take on one of those heifers.” 
The young one says, “Hell fire. Let’s take ’em 
all on!” You know, like that. [Laughs] 

Another one I made note of, was the 
miner that was mining ore and shippin’ it to 
the smelter. And this goes to the idea among 
small mine shippers, direct-shipping ore to 
the smelters, and it’s probably quite true, 
that people other than the miner himself 
are the ones that make most of the money 
out of mining ore. For instance, it is a fact 
that in lead-zinc mining, and milling, and 
producing, there is about one-third of the 
total metal price, on the market, that goes 
to the refiners and smelters, about a third of 
it goes to transportation, about a third of it 
comes back to the mine, which, if it’s a lead- 
zinc sulfide mine, the mine has to operate 



94 


Paul Gemmill 


its own mill, and mine its ore, and so forth. 
So they have to do the whole thing on about 
a third of the market price. Well, this story 
then, relates somewhat to that. I have shown 
why the miner doesn’t see very much of 
the market price coming back to him. And 
so the story is that the miner was shipping 
a carload of ore that he had figured would 
pay; and so he laboriously mined it, hauled 
it to the railroad, got it shipped, and when 
finally he got the report back on it from the 
smelter, why, after the deductions, there wasn’t 
anything left. In fact, he owed about five or 
six bucks [laughs] to pay the balance; you 
know, after smelter treatment charges, and all 
the rest. So, hell, he didn’t have any money, 
but he had some turkeys, so he wrote a letter 
to the smelter superintendent and told him 
that he didn’t have any money to take care of 
his indebtedness, but he was shipping, under 
separate cover, a turkey, that maybe this would 
take care of his indebtedness. And so time 
went on, and they accepted it all right, wiped 
his indebtedness off. And in due course of 
time, why, another turkey arrived [laughs] at 
the smelter with a note from the shipper that 
he was shippin another car of ore [laughs]. 

This reminds me of something, an actual 
fact that happened, and it caused quite a little 
fun around the property. Combined Metals 
Reduction Company had a bunch of checks 
printed, bundles came out from the printer, 
and nobody noticed until they made up all 
the checks for the payroll, that the checks said 
not Combined Metals Reduction Company, 
but Combined Metals Deduction Company. 
[Laughs] The deduction business is quite a 
deal among the miners. Most of ’em aren’t 
very good at keepin’ track of their accounts or 
anything, and they frequently think that Mr. 
“deduct” has his hand in their pocket. 

Well, another story that went the rounds 
among the miners and prospectors, is the 


fella that came into the smelter office with a 
sample of high grade, and laid it in front of 
the smelter superintendent’s desk, and said, 
“What’d’ya think of that?” 

And the smelter superintendent said, 
“Well, that looks pretty good,” he says, “but 
usually we see a lot of these specimens like 
this;” he says, “we have learned from long 
experience that high grade like that just comes 
usually in small bunches, and doesn’t really 
produce very much. But,” he says, “we’re 
generally after a deposit that’s big, and usually 
it’s low grade, and it has to be worked with big 
equipment, and a big plant, and concentrating 
facilities, and everything;” and he says, “we’ve 
stopped sending men out to look at these 
high grade showings. They’re usually just 
little streaks.” 

So the prospector left, but in about a 
month he came back. And he laid a rock on 
the desk, and it didn’t look like much. And he 
says, “I think I got what you want.” 

The smelter superintendent said, “Yes, but 
what have you got?” 

He says, “It’s just what you wanted—it’s a 
whole mountain. Big? My God,” he says, “Low 
grade—Jesus!” [Laughs] 

Another one about a sample. Maybe it 
was the same superintendent of the smelter, 
and saw the sample laid on his desk. And he 
happened to be a horse fan, or raised horses 
also, on the side, as a hobby. And when the 
fella came in with his high grade sample, he 
picked it up and looked at it. And he said, 
“Well, that’s pretty good, that’s a pretty good 
lookin’ piece of rock.” He says, “I’ll show you 
my favorite horse,” and he pulls out a horse 
hair [gesture, laughs] and lays it on the desk 
[laughs]. 

Here’s another one that went the rounds, 
and was considered kinda funny. A prospector 
goes to the big city lookin’ for somebody to 
help him out. Gets a room in a hotel, and he 



Mining Lore 


95 


was ragged and dirty, and he had to clean up 
and put on another suit of clothes, and so 
forth. And he got in the tub, and by golly, he 
didn’t have any soap. And so he had to get 
out—wet—and went and rang f or the bellboy, 
and the bellboy came to the door. And he 
let him in. And the fella jumped back in the 
tub, and as he was doing it, why, he told the 
bellboy that he didn’t have any soap, and he 
wished he’d go and get him some soap. And 
the bellboy just went to the door, and just as he 
was closin’ the door, why, this fella let out a— 
expelled gas under the water. And the bellboy 
was a long time cornin’ back. Finally, when 
he came back, why water was gettin’ cold 
in the tub, and the fella was gettin madder 
and madder all the time. The bellboy finally 
returned, handed him the soap, and he also 
had, in his other hand, a bottle of beer. And 
the prospector says, “I’m glad you brought 
me the soap finally. I thought you’d never get 
here. But, what’s the beer all about?” 

“Oh,” he says, “just as I went out of the 
door, I’m sure, I heard you say, ‘Bbell bboy, 
bbring me a bbottle of Bbudweiser!” [Laughs] 

Then the prospector went to heaven, 
and found that there were quite a few other 
prospectors there. They hadn’t all gone to 
hell. And here it was; streets were paved with 
gold, and it was really quite a place to be for 
a prospector, in a way. But it soon became 
boring. And this particular fella, the late 
corner, got bored, you know—there wasn’t 
any good stories among former prospectors 
about where they’d found new showings and 
so forth, and it kind of rankled him. So he 
started a rumor that there had been a gold 
discovery down in hell. And, first thing you 
know, why, two or three of’em were gone. And 
the rumor went on a little while longer, more 
prospectors left, and finally he was the only 
one left. Without his prospector friends and 
after quite a little while, why, our prospector 


got so despondent, and so lonesome for these 
other fellas, that he finally went to St. Peter, 
and asked to be let out, and he wanted to go 
down to hell. St. Peter said, “Well why, what’s 
the matter with you? I notice that the other 
prospectors have gone, telling me that there’s 
a story going the rounds that there is a new 
showing of gold down in hell. Prospector 
says, “Yeah, there might be something to 
that rumor. I’d like to go down and find out.” 
[Laughs] That’s typical of the prospector, and 
there’s more truth to that than you might 
imagine. 

They’re a breed—the ones that actually 
find—I have known two or three—the ones 
that really spend whatever time they can, and 
of course, they usually have to earn a living 
some way or other. But, it isn’t the value of the 
find, really that steams ’em up, it’s the prospect 
of reward—the prospect of finding; and when 
they find something that looks pretty good, 
they lose interest right away. They want to go 
lookin’ again. And this is a fact. I’ve seen it 
happen, that a feller’ll open up a fairly good 
little showing, and rather than digging on it 
some more, he’ll go lookin’ for another one 
somewhere, see. He’ll think maybe he’ll find 
a bigger one, or a better one somewhere, see. 

So, it is a trait of the prospector, and it’s a 
thing that people generally don’t know, and it 
comes into what we’re gonna talk about later, 
the affairs of the Association in the mining 
industry and legislation—that if you don’t 
retain the prospect of reward, in the equation, 
people aren’t gonna look, because it’s that 
feeling that when they find something, they 
can have it—they don’t have to go with their 
hat in hand and ask the government to give 
’em a lease or have it put up to competitive 
bid, which of course, would completely rule 
out their desire to look. And, surprisingly, 
most deposits are found by the individual 
prospector or a small mining company 



96 


Paul Gemmill 


following after the prospector, and maybe 
are reactivated a dozen times before they get 
big enough or important enough for a sizable 
mining company to step in and buy it. And 
then they use their geological department to 
appraise it and so forth, but they very, very 
seldom send their geological department 
out and find a mine in this western desert 
country Okay 

Back to stories, there’s the one about the 
doctor in Pioche. It used to be told on the 
doctor that was there prior to Dr. Hastings. 
Dr. Hastings was there for most years while I 
was there. And I’ve forgotten what the name 
of the prior doctor was. But, they tell about 
this patient that was about eighty years old 
that married a young bride, and was going 
off on his honeymoon. And he came into the 
doctor to say that he was a little bit afraid that 
he wouldn’t be able to perform the ceremonies 
expected by this young bride, and is there 
anything that the doctor could give him to 
help him out so as to invigorate him and make 
him potent? And the doctor said, “Well, really, 
Joe,” he says, “the medical profession has been 
interested in this, of course, for generations, 
ever since civilization started,” but he says, 
“and they’re always cornin’ up with somethin’. 
There are herbs and roots and medications 
and everything,” but he says, “to the best of my 
knowledge, there’s nothing that really works. 
But,” he says, “you never know. Somebody’s 
liable to come up with somethin’” and he says, 
“I have a new pill here. You can take it along 
and try it.” And he says, “I’d like to know how 
it works. They claim that it has this potential. 
And I don’t believe it, but I’d like to know 
anyway how it works.” 

“Well,” he says, “how will I let you 
know—?” 

“Oh,” he says, “send me a wire, and say, 
‘passed examinations’ or something like that.” 
So, a couple of weeks went by, and nothing 


happened. Finally, he got a wire. And it 
was a very simple wire; it said, “Flunked in 
everything but French.” [Laughs] Now, that’s 
terrible. I shouldn’t—. 

That’s all—. I don’t know when I made 
these few notes, but there’re oh, there’re just 
thousands, of course, of stories. This is along 
the vein though that the miner, and the reason 
I tell these most horrible ones is that, it’s in 
that vein they really enjoy conversing and 
talking with each other and so forth. 



9 


Ideas on Society and Culture 
of the 1930s in Eastern Nevada 


Now were gonna be speaking a little bit 
about the general situation in the 1930s, and 
some of the feelings that a lot of us had who 
were actually in the business of tryin to make 
a living from scratch. And I guess we were 
living pretty close to the ground, pretty close 
to reality. And of course, the depression had 
hit, and we were in it and later coming out 
of it. The first thing that I would say is that 
we had the feeling that the program—that 
is the people that I was associated with— 
had the feeling that the program that Mr. 
Roosevelt initiated in trying to bring us out 
of a depression, was in truth a delay of the 
natural process that would’ve gone on to bring 
us out. And in many cases, Mr. Roosevelt did 
things that went against the grain, as far as we 
were concerned. And I’m especially speaking 
about “we” as the ones close around me: the 
family, the mine operators, and I’d say some 
of the men that I associated with who were 
usually the people that didn’t want to have 
any relief. They’d work for somethin’ to eat 
almost, rather than go on the relief roll. That’s 


the kind of people that I’m talkin’ about. And 
I guess that I was imbued with the private-free 
enterprise systems so thoroughly that a lot of 
things that happened went against the grain. 

For instance when the price of copper 
started to go up where we could make 
a little bit of money at the Bristol mine, 
why Mr. Roosevelt came out and made an 
announcement that the price was too high, 
and immediately the market dropped from 
about seventeen cents to twelve cents [laughs]. 
I don’t know what the date was, but the Taylor 
Grazing Act, I guess was passed along about 
that time—sometime in the ‘30s. of course, the 
very idea that the public domain in Nevada 
would be under control was, in my view, just 
Nevada’s problem. Taylor grazing went against 
the grain as far as I was concerned. It’s true I 
saw the evidence of improper— well, I don’t 
like to call it improper—saw the evidence 
of the human occupancy of the area having 
spoiled some things. For instance, I know that 
over in Delamar Valley, some of our friends 
from Panaca, old timers, older men at that 



98 


Paul Gemmill 


time—early ‘30s, mid ‘30s—Dave Mathews 
for instance, used to say that in his youth you 
could drive across Delamar Flat, and the grass 
was there, native grass, up to a horses belly 
And by the time we were operating, struggling 
along at the Comet mine, and goin’ down to 
the Cottontail Knoll to shoot a cottontail, that 
valley was denuded. And there had been a vast 
change. Apparently evolution went from the 
grass being eaten off and killed by sheep, to 
sagebrush taking over, and then the sagebrush 
finally being partly killed off to where most of 
the bushes were up on mounds of dirt. And 
the wind blew away the soil from around 
remaining sage and now today, that whole 
valley is a cloud of dust every time there’s a 
wind. And there’s no way that it’ll ever come 
back to being what it was, you know, what 
Dave Mathews talked about. 

This and other things made me very 
much on the side of the cattlemen for the 
use of the range, versus the sheepmen, who 
with the sheep’s hoof would kill off—if you 
overgraze with sheep, the sharp hoofs kill off 
the roots and destroy the foliage. Now this 
is my opinion, see. I’m not saying— I’m not 
any expert on that kind of thing at all. But, 
nevertheless, this same thread of thought has 
gone through my mind a number of times, and 
even up until the 1950s, I’ve been observing 
things. From a recent land development 
I’ve been in, I have an idea that the whole 
state exhibits evidence of destruction of the 
ground cover that earlier was responsible for 
streams flowing the year round. In certain 
places where there were streams flowing all 
year round, denudation came to the point 
where the precipitation runs off fast, in the 
times when the snows are melting, run-off 
goes down to the bottom of the valley, and 
flows out in the mud flats and evaporates, and 
it doesn’t even get in the ground water system. 
I think this whole state has a tremendous 


amount of water that gets evaporated, rather 
than getting into the ground water, where 
much more of it used to get into the ground 
water. Precipitation on limestone areas, does 
get into the ground water system because 
our massive limestones are porous enough 
to absorb the rain and melting snow, so that 
part gets into the ground water system. I 
maybe didn’t state that just right. If you have 
limestone mountains (it’s been my experience 
and the Bristol underground experience 
proved it), when snows come and they go to 
melt, water soaks right into the ground and 
there never was a stream there, because only 
a flash flood could cause runoff. When you go 
into the volcanic or siliceous, shaley mountain 
ranges, then this is where vegetation retards 
runoff. If you don’t have retarding of the 
melt, to hold the water back and let it seep 
slowly into the cracks and later come out in 
springs and so on, then of course, the runoff 
comes rapidly and you don’t really get it into 
the ground water system. There’s ways of 
regenerating stream flow, and I’ve had a little 
fun doing that in more recent years. But let’s 
get off of that subject now. That’s enough. Let’s 
get back to mining! 

In the 1930s, I think maybe I mentioned 
before, we always had at Bristol, and earlier 
at the Prince and around, always a rustling 
crew. If you needed more men, you could 
pick ’em up, and usually you got them from 
the farm communities over in southern 
Utah. And there was always somebody on 
your payroll—if he saw that there was an 
opportunity for another man, why he had 
a friend or a relative or somebody that’d be 
over there right quick to pick up the job. And 
so there was a reservoir of people that were 
doing, well, living on more meager income 
around the farms and probably eating what 
they raised themselves, and things like that. 
It was a reservoir of workmen, of very good 



Ideas on Society and Culture of the 1930s in Eastern Nevada 


99 


workmen, that were energetic and wanted 
the work. And there was no problem in that 
period of men coming to you and gangin’ 
up together to force you to pay ’em more 
or to make work that shouldn’t be made by 
reducing each task to “specialty” work. 

In other words, it was easy, if you got a 
man trained as a miner or as a mechanic or 
anything of that kind—he’d do multiple jobs 
without any thought of complaint, you know. 
Well this day has gradually disappeared; and 
people regard themselves more and more and 
more as specialists, you know. We had a whole 
society of generalists. Even a fella that never 
even got through grammar school, if he was 
an adult, why he figured he could do anything, 
and he’d tackle anything. We haven’t got that 
kind of feeling any more, because the people 
have been educated (and I think wrongfully) 
that they should go farther and farther and 
farther into school, or else they’ll wind 
up never having a job. And we’ve seen the 
politicians lay this on the line so prominently 
that to many the can-do attitude is dampened. 

Yet, I know business people, and there’s 
some of them right here in Reno Rotary Club 
that have been very, very successful—you 
know, my age or older that didn’t even get 
through grammar school. But it didn’t stop 
them. They were used to goin’ to work as a 
child. And there again, I say that in those days 
there was no question about kids being raised, 
especially on a farm, where they went to work. 
They had their duties, you know, from the 
first time that they could be productive. And 
it didn’t hurt ’em. It made ’em good. It made 
good people out of’em. And then we’ve come 
along through the evolution of our society 
to the point where, you know, we have child 
labor laws that get more and more restrictive. 
It came from a part of the country and the 
earlier industrial revolution, where there was 
child labor used in sweat shops. Undoubtedly 


it was true, and there were laws that became 
passed to correct that. 

I’m reminded of the problems of mining, 
and the problems to the entire mining 
industry, generated through the coal mining 
in Appalachia today. That, the bad that has 
happened in Appalachia reflects on the whole 
mining industry, to the point where Congress 
is encouraged to pass laws that are impossible 
laws—laws that put burdens on the mining 
industry that shouldn’t be there. I mean for 
instance, the idea that they should pass a law 
that says you can’t—and we have it in our 
environmental law now that was upheld by 
the courts—saying you’re not supposed to do 
anything that would pollute the atmosphere. 
You’re supposed to keep it at least as clean as 
it’s been. It’s a non-degradation law that, if 
enforced, makes it impossible to talk about 
going out here in the country somewhere 
and starting up a property— I don’t care what 
you’re doing, little will be accomplished where 
you don’t do anything to the atmosphere. 
Even people do it. People themselves are our 
biggest polluters. And so non-degradation is 
not a realistic objective. 

In that connection, I remember recently 
we had a panel discussion for the students 
up the University, and the environmental 
staff man, [Dick] Serdoz, was on the panel 
and something came up about particulate 
pollution; and he made the remarkable 
statement in answer to a student question 
that there are particulates generated, that are 
so fine that they never settle. And that simply 
isn’t true. Even large molecules get settled 
out. And in fact, tiny specks of silver iodide 
are used to cause precipitation of water in the 
atmosphere, and cause rain. And nature has 
been putting particles just as fine as they can 
be produced, into the atmosphere from the 
beginning of time, indisputable. So this is the 
kind of extreme view that slips into thinking. 



100 


Paul Gemmill 


And I don’t question—I think Mr. Serdoz was 
honest, and he believed it. But he was then 
new in the job and learning [laughs] you 
know. And I didn’t say anything in rebuttal 
to that, because it was just a small class of 
students. It wasn’t gonna change society to 
show disagreement, you know. 

But, I see so much of this, that it has me 
extremely disturbed to think that at the same 
time we’re in an economic squeeze today (and 
here we were leaving the ‘30s), but we’re in an 
economic squeeze today, and after the trail 
that grew up under, and the experience of 
the c 30s, and seeing that it was really the local 
government that was always what governed 
with cooperation that time, and we’ve 
more and more exported our problems to 
Washington expecting that whatever problem 
you have, you can get after your congressman 
or your senator and get the answer, and they’ll 
come back and fix it for you. And we’ve got 
to get away from that, because it’s just not in 
the nature of things that that kind of thing is 
gonna bring the solutions. You’ve got to get 
it closer to home. 

And getting into the mining, actual mine 
operation end of the thing—we had our mine 
inspector who was an elected official—we 
were all very much in favor of that, because 
as an elected official the mine inspector really 
had to be acceptable to both the laboring crew 
and the operators. He had to be somewhat of a 
politician. He had to be real firm in enforcing 
regulations dealing with management or 
labor. And we were very fortunate in Nevada, 
all through the years in having a man that 
really took hold, and made the office work. 
Well, the first loss in that area that we suffered 
was when through, I think mainly, the labor 
union movement, and again, let’s not forget 
the coal mines and the Appalachian situation 
with their influence on public thought. 


Through all of that, the union movement 
was insistent on getting more power (and 
they have grown tremendously in power), 
and they have caused Congress to decide that 
the federal law should be written to improve 
mine safety, and have more inspections, and 
so forth. Well, inspections don’t make mine 
safety. Mine safety is made by the workmen, 
especially underground. And I’m talkin’ 
about metal mining now. There are things 
undoubtedly in coal mining, such as dust that 
causes these disastrous explosions and all that. 
There’s something there that wasn’t a factor in 
any of my experience. 

But, at any rate, the vast majority 
of accidents in metal mining, are the 
underground mining things that are really 
under the control of the man at the face, more 
than anything else, and the bosses; the shift 
boss, the supervisors can do much for safety 
’cause they’re there every day, whereas an 
inspector from, whether it’s the state level or 
the federal level, does well to get there now 
and then. And there’ll never be a time in an 
underground, complicated underground 
mine employing a number of men, when 
a person couldn’t go through and find 
violations, any day of the week almost. There’s 
a board sticking over there with a nail in it, 
or there’s a rock that should have been barred 
down and something else somewhere. And if 
he wants to, the inspector goes through your 
mine looking for either minor infractions or 
gives truly helpful hints. 

So it was, generally speaking, in the 
accidents that I’ve been familiar with; these 
accidents were more a function of having a 
hazardous industry. It isn’t like sittin behind 
a desk—you are going into a hazardous 
industry the same as you go into hazard when 
you go skiing. Or if you have a desire to do 
it and jump out of a parachute for the fun of 



Ideas on Society and Culture of the 1930s in Eastern Nevada 


101 


it or sky dive, why you’re takin’ a chance, but 
you’re doing it on your own volition. And it’s 
always been my thought that any man must 
choose his own risks. In the days when there 
were a lot of people that had to find almost 
any kind of a job to go to work, there was 
simply the choice of risk factor there. And 
especially today, if a person plans to work in 
a mine, he should decide not to if he doesn’t 
want to engage in somethin’ that’s more risky. 
And to the extent that occasionally a miner 
drills into a missed hole and gets blasted, or to 
the extent a falling rock gets him even though 
he’s been careful and barred down. (Usually it 
doesn’t. If he’s been careful and barred down, 
he’s not the man that gets hurt. It’s the guy that 
won’t even bar down, and he’ll look up at a 
slab, and walk under it anyway and dare it to 
come down. I’ve seen those people.) 

So, I think that the public is lead astray, in 
a way, when the news comes out that there’s 
been a mine accident. You know the public 
soon forgets an airplane accident. A hundred 
people are killed in a plane accident, and in 
the matter of a day or two why the public 
doesn’t think any more about it. But let it be 
a mine accident of some kind—like recently 
we had that horrible fire up at the Sunshine 
mine [Idaho]—well Lord, that’s pointed to, 
and there was a great stew made over it for 
a great length of time. Rightfully, in regard, 
of course, to the people that are trying to 
research why it happened, and what could 
be done to prevent another situation like that 
and so forth. But what I’m talkin’ about is just 
the fact that the public has a horrible thought 
of anybody that goes underground [laughs] 
you know. That’s the public. But what about 
the man that does it and wants to do it, see. 
And this is the difference. I went into the 
business, and went underground day after 
day all through the mine, in underground 


mining. Had close calls on havin’ accidents, 
myself. And I saw a lot of ’em that were close 
calls beside some that were fatals. So there’s a 
difference in that way. 

Then society, your relationship to the 
people around you, there’s been, of course, 
quite a change in that. In one sense we had 
a segregation of what I’d call the upper level 
of society versus the lower level and I’m not 
talkin’ about dollars. I would put some of 
the most wealthy families (in the kind of 
classification I’m talkin’ about) along with 
some of the poorer people that had no chance 
of getting anywhere. I think the backbone of 
society in this country was among the middle 
class (so-called); the people that regarded 
their religion as a very important part of their 
life; people who held themselves above the 
rank and file of people around them; and as 
Mr. Hoover liked to put it, “Be an uncommon 
man.” Don’t do horrible things because you 
see the other person do it, and say well that 
gives you license to do it. Freedom has to 
come from inside each person, each and 
every person. And the only way that you can 
achieve freedom is through self-discipline. 
(This has always been my feeling about it.) 
And freedom isn’t license. Freedom is the 
right to govern yourself, so that you won’t 
have to be governed by somebody else. And if 
you succeed in governing yourself, controlling 
your animal instincts, and placing yourself 
on a higher plane than the people around 
you (most of the people around you), and 
always searching for the guy that’s a little 
better than you are and want to associate with 
him—that’s, I think, the way you achieve self- 
satisfaction and success with your own life. 
And that’s not money, it’s a way of thinking 
and acting. 

We saw a lot of that in the ‘30s, and I don’t 
think I’ve seen as much of it—that kind of 



102 


Paul Gemmill 


thinking—as time went on. I think that we 
see more and more social leveling. Even our 
government has adopted a program that says, 
“mix society up, turn it upside down, get ’em 
all doin’ the same thing!” You know, pass 
laws that give people the right to do these 
crazy things and everything, and don’t allow 
somebody to have a higher thought of himself 
because of his personal view of himself. It is 
not right. I mean the law seems to more and 
more point that way. And I don’t believe in it. 
didn’t believe in it [laughs] and they haven’t 
convinced me yet [laughs]. So I don’t know. 
Does that kinda tell you how and where I 
think we maybe lost something? You know, 
you talk about the good old days. Well, the 
good old days, usually when they’re referred 
to, people say, well they weren’t so good, 
and they start tellin you how we’ve lived on 
a higher and higher plane of affluence—no 
question about that. 

Economically, we have come great strides 
forward; you know as far as the material 
things that you have around here, and the ease 
with which you can have ’em—if you don’t 
watch what the other fella has and get jealous 
because you don’t have quite as much—why, 
sure society has come a long way with having 
more material things. But there’s the other 
side. And it’s the other side that I’m talkin’ 
about where I think we’ve got to turn things 
around a little more, and get more people 
trying to be unusual people, not just more of 
the same. And the kids, as they come up, are 
at a great disadvantage because they aren’t put 
to work, when they’re young, with solid duties 
that mean something to the family and so on. 

Well, I think maybe I haven’t said enough 
about the mine operation and some of the 
things that were learned, not just at Bristol 
but before that. You know, I’d done a little 
bit of leasing and tested the self-employment 
feeling. But out of this experience and seeing 


men that had no background at all, no 
training in mining or anything of the kind, 
come to the mine there, and in a very short 
time become good enough to, say, want a 
lease in the old part of the mine, someplace 
that the company had operated and didn’t pay 
to mine any more. And so the first thing you 
know, we built up a crew of leasers, we called 
them; and we had a system of split-check 
leasing at Bristol, that was quite successful 
there for a period of time, between 1935 and 
‘39, along there you know. Where they’d be 
given blocks of ground, and the company 
would furnish—I probably mentioned this 
before, but—the company furnished power, 
air, and a machine drill, and the blacksmith 
would sharpen the tools, and so forth. Bristol 
required less sharpening and less problem that 
way than most, because in limestone the ore 
was usually soft and easy to drill. 

Well anyway, they would—oh, on the 
average they’d get say half of the net smelter 
returns. And at that time we had the tramway 
running which conveyed ore over the 
mountain and down to the Jackrabbit side. 
And we had the narrow gauge railroad 
running from Jackrabbit to Pioche. And 
later, after the Prince line got activated by the 
Union Pacific—we put an unloading station 
in at what we called the Atlanta station, along 
the railroad, and cut out the last part of the 
narrow-gauge railroad. So the system was that 
each leaser would produce at least a carload 
for a shipment, and get it into his ore shoots or 
his pockets or someplace. And then the skip 
tender would hoist his shipment, and it would 
be kept separate, in separate bins. 

Most leasers kept their ore clean in the 
stope, but some of ’em would mine lower 
grade ore at a higher rate and still make good 
money, and they would maybe want to use 
the ore sorter over the tram bin. So their ore 
would be hoisted and trammed over to the 



Ideas on Society and Culture of the 1930s in Eastern Nevada 


103 


train bin, and as it was trammed in a one- 
ton car and dumped onto the sorter, why 
one partner in the lease would be there at 
the ore sorter, sorting waste from ore as it 
dropped into the tram bin. And Company 
ore was always sorted because, as was pretty 
clear, the miner if it wasn’t his own ore why 
he wasn’t so particular about keepin’ it clean. 
And so company ore always had to be sorted, 
and you had to have a hired man on the ore 
sorter, sorting the waste out. Well, then the 
tram would start up. Maybe there’d be three 
or four bins there that’d be full; and some of 
’em would be company ore and some of ’em 
lease ore, but it would all be kept separate. It’d 
be sent over to the Jackrabbit side, and put 
in separate bins there, and loaded into the 
narrow gauge railroad cars. And the railroad 
would haul about two hundred and forty tons 
at a time. And most of the time, Bill Adair was 
in charge of the railroad. And later on when 
Mont Epperson left as the tram man, why 
Bill Adair took over both tram maintenance 
and railroad operation. Clesson Buehler, 
another relative of the Buehler family, was 
usually with him as an assistant. And they’d 
repair everything, and then steam up the old 
locomotive, and take a trip to town. 

I remember one winter when we had some 
heavy snows. (They weren’t heavier than usual 
necessarily; weren’t heavier than several other 
winters, but we had a lot of wind and drifting.) 
And all of the railroad cuts from Jackrabbit 
into Pioche were filled up with snow. Even 
though on the ridges, why, the snow would be 
blown off largely, but it’d be filling the cuts in 
the railroad. So we came to the time we were 
storing ore in every place we could find in 
the mine, because we couldn’t produce; they 
couldn’t get the train over the railroad. And 
so finally they got ahold of a large snowplow 
from the Highway Department, and mounted 
it on a loaded ore car ahead of the locomotive. 


And Bill Adair steamed up the old locomotive, 
and all of us were over there to help out. We 
had a crew from the mine. And we went over 
to see if we could break a trail through to 
Pioche. And Bill would back up the engine 
and give it all the steam, and plow into one 
of these railroad cuts. And usually he might 
go a third of the way, or halfway through it, 
and then the old thing would stall. Then you’d 
spend hours, muckin’ out so he could back out 
again. And then he’d give it another ram. Well, 
in the course of that day, or maybe it took two 
or three days, we did get the railroad finally 
cleared to town. And after, I think, about a 
month of not being able to ship, or maybe 
it was six weeks, and having everything full, 
why then we got everything shipped. [Laughs] 

And I remember in the mine that there 
were several places, you know, the chutes in 
the mine—everything had backed up. You 
couldn’t hoist any more or anything, so we’d 
have to move men around to showings of 
ore and hope that it would work out. And 
I recall that during that time we found two 
small ore stopes that probably wouldn’t have 
been found otherwise. We just had to work 
where streaks of ore were. And it was quite 
an experience. But later on, after my time at 
Bristol, the whole process got changed. The 
tramway was discontinued and the railroad 
abandoned for trucking right from the mine 
to the Pioche depot. 

Well, this basic principle of the miner 
being in charge of his own economic take, 
with how well he did right there at the face— 
(the leaser, in other words, under the split 
check leasing system) was—I guess it was a 
natural plan that came with having done a 
little leasing myself, while economic results 
provided a good education in motivation, 
that was valuable to apply in other ways later 
on in other operations. And the motivation 
and incentive that is provided by giving the 



104 


Paul Gemmill 


man his territory relates certainly to the 
territorial instinct of the animal kingdom. 
And it also relates to the status instinct of the 
animal kingdom. And it’s not all in the human 
animal; it’s in lots of animals. 

But it was a very valuable experience. 
It did show, and in other experiences has 
shown, that you can expect at least double 
the productiveness out of a person that is in 
charge of his own affairs. Because it isn’t all a 
matter of just sheer physical effort. That isn’t it 
at all. It’s a matter of the way your mind works. 
And I think that I have the same instinct as 
everybody else; and I think that you can read 
it in yourself, if you turn around and look at 
yourself. Everybody can see that—it could 
be largely in doing what you like to do versus 
doin’ somethin’ you don’t like to do. It doesn’t 
all apply to dollars and cents, you know. So it’s 
a very important thing to understand, and I 
don’t think that educators do understand very 
much—scientifically understand—very much 
about the total number of instincts and drives 
that enter into the operation of individuals 
and society. And I think it’s a study that has 
been long neglected. We’ll talk some more 
about that another time. 

Now, still staying with the ‘30s, I think the 
local government has the best chance—and 
at the time we’re talkin’ about, in the ‘30s, 
of course it was a tremendous incentive to 
anyone in a day, in a time when jobs were 
scarce, and they’d go after almost any kind 
of a job; that’s why there was a tremendous 
incentive to get on a government payroll. And 
then there was the incentive to do pretty good 
work once you’re on there, to keep the job, you 
know. And I think that a lot of that has been 
lost. Naturally, there would be less incentive 
to doing your best, I think, when there’re jobs 
any old way you want to turn [laughs]. Good 
or bad, I don’t know. But I think that the best 
chance rests with local government for this 


country to get our personal drives working 
for the benefit of society as a whole. I don’t 
think it’s at the national level. And I don’t 
know how we’re gonna turn this around to 
get the local level more and more responsible, 
when the bureaucracies have the incentive to 
grow bigger all the time, built into the way the 
system works. And of course, I’m not the only 
one to say that. I guess you get it from almost 
anybody that supervised people through that 
period [laughs]. Isn’t that right? 

I had some contacts with some of 
these local governmental people who were 
interested in mining. How did I get along 
with them in these instances? Got along 
just fine. For instance, well Art Bernard, for 
instance, was a miner in Pioche. And Art 
worked for a short while out at Bristol as a 
shift boss for me, and was a very good man. 
He was pretty independent. I mean I’d make 
the rounds to where Art had somebody 
workin and he would start a drift off in some 
direction that I didn’t know anything about 
sometimes [laughs]. But, I mean it was always 
constructive. And later on he became a deputy 
mine inspector. This went into the ‘40s. When 
we were working at the Prince, he came 
around and gave us a firm deadline on getting 
the second exit (safety manway) up from the 
eight hundred-level. And we planned where 
we’d do it, and told him. And he was around 
regularly to see how that was progressing. 

And Bob Wilkin (presently a local 
contractor in Lincoln County) had been a 
shift boss up at Combined Metals; and he 
came down at the Prince and drove that 
raise for us from the eight hundred-level up 
to the five [hundred]; put a hole through for 
secondary exit. And so going back of that, 
we had, oh, I’ve forgotten just when different 
mine inspectors were in, but we had a system 
of course, where any of these leasers, these 
split-check leasers at Bristol were not on a 



Ideas on Society and Culture of the 1930s in Eastern Nevada 


105 


payroll so they were independent operators; 
they could do things that the company 
couldn’t do. For instance a raise in the Bristol 
mine, say if we wanted to drive a high raise, 
why, according to the rule book, you had to 
have timber up within a certain feet of the 
back of the raise to maintain a manway and 
ladders timbered off from broken rock in the 
chute. Well, in at least two or three cases, we 
had an objective of driving high raises for 
holing through from a lower level to a level 
or stope above. One case was a raise from 
the fifteen hundred-level up to the twelve 
[hundred] eighty in Bristol. We drove the 
raise, oh, I’d think about sixty-feet, timbered 
off. And this gave us pretty good muck 
capacity there. And then from there on, in 
order to avoid the expense of timbering (but 
not only the expense of timbering, also the 
expense of the payroll that we would have to 
put out to drive the raise on through), why, 
we let a lease to Narducio Domenici. And that 
became known as the Domenici lease. And it 
was a very, very successful lease, because this 
raise was headed into an area where there 
was a showing of ore. It wasn’t any certainty, 
but it looked like a prime bet, and so we were 
anxious to get it through. 

Well, Narducio started driving this raise 
from the sixty-foot height on up to the twelve 
[hundred] eighty level, which meant, oh 
from, let’s see—two hundred twentyfeet less 
sixty would be one [hundred] sixty, wouldn’t 
it? One hundred sixty-foot advance driven 
without any timber, that is without timbering 
at all. He carried a threequarter inch cable 
up with him. And he’d have a stull—the 
raise was slightly less than vertical, perhaps 
seventy-five degrees or eighty—and he’d 
have a stull that he’d take up for each round, 
of advance and he’d put it right down next 
to the footwall side of the raise, next to the 
lower edge of the raise. And he had a way 


of tying his stoper underneath that timber 
for protection from the blast. For access you 
just had to climb this three-quarter inch 
cable that was always wet and mucky from 
drill sludge when visiting for measure-up. 
And I had to go up there regularly to keep 
him on line with my Brunton, and inspect 
the mineralization he was goin’ through. 
The dead-end raise was gassy, served only 
by compressed air for ventilation. Domenici 
would carry a sack of onions to eat when 
threatened with powder headache; claimed 
chewing onion was a specific remedy. And 
he got into some ore, even on the way up 
there. And finally we broke the hole through. 
And from there on he mined for a long, long 
time. He had a number of partners, and the 
Domenici stopes became a major portion of 
our production— very good silver ore with 
good copper content. 

Well, the reason I cited this is that, you 
see, this idea that an independent could do 
what he wanted to, and the state Inspector’s 
rule book didn’t say they were gonna control 
him. And at that time I guess most would 
have thought regulating the leaser would 
be just as far out as government sayin’ you 
gotta wear certain protective devices if you’re 
gonna go skiing see [laughs]. Yeah, that was 
the attitude. And if you wanted to risk your 
neck, why, you know, it was up to you as an 
independent contractor. 

You might say, “Well, what about the mine 
safety angle on that kind of a deal?” Well, 
peculiarly we had, during that period that 
I was in charge at Bristol, we had some bad 
accidents. And I think I mentioned some of 
those. But those accidents in every case would 
have happened regardless of whether or not 
the independent leaser had come under mine 
inspector authority in the rule book. And as 
far as anybody could anticipate, the rule book 
was being followed, you know. 



106 


Paul Gemmill 


If you pass a law that you’re not supposed 
to drill into a missed hole, that doesn’t stop 
you from drillin’ into a missed hole, if you 
don’t think [laughs] there’s a hole to drill into 
see. So there’s certainly a limit to what the 
rule book can do for you. One of the leasers 
was working in a place where the back was 
dribblin’ a little bit, every once in a while, and 
he just would look up at it and not even get 
out of the way, and he got caved on. 

[One of the things you noted in reading 
these reports of the mine inspectors was 
that there were a lot of complaints about 
dry drilling, and orders that this had to be 
changed.] 

Well at the time that I went to the Bristol, 
things were just being converted out at 
Bristol on this wet versus dry drilling. And 
of course Bristol was a mine that probably 
had very little to do with ever giving anybody 
silicosis, because it was in a high purity 
limestone. The dust that was most damaging 
at Bristol would have been whenever they 
drilled into high grade copper ore that 
had arsenic in it. And I do believe that one 
man, a leaser, met his Maker on account of 
the dust from that oxidized copper ore. It 
wasn’t—I don’t think it was considered an 
industrial accident even. It wasn’t that kind 
of a thing. He just became sick, and I do not 
know whether the arsenic-copper drilling 
was proven to be the cause. 

Let’s see. There was another case where a 
young fella, real husky, young fella from over 
in Utah, had a tram job; was tramming out 
of the May Day tunnel where there was a big 
draff, an updraft (because it was connected 
with the surface through the Tempest and 
the Hillside mines) and there was a strong 
draft through there. And in the cool weather, 
this long tram from those chutes that were 
connected back out to the surface—the draft 
was pretty cold, and the fella pushing a car 


in, was workin’ pretty hard, and then he’d 
ride the car out downgrade most of the way. 
And he’d get warmed up and cooled way 
down and he caught pneumonia. And Mrs. 
Gemmill had a part in tryin’ to help him 
out after he got sick you know. But he died 
very quickly. And at that high altitude, seven 
thousand feet, you know, and everything, 
why there just wasn’t—they didn’t have these 
modern miracle drugs or anything, and that 
killed him. But it was pneumonia that killed 
him. Now I don’t recall whether that got 
classified for industrial compensation either. 

But, as I say, the dry drilling at Bristol 
probably wasn’t the hazard that it had been at 
other properties where there was a silicious 
type of rock. For instance, in Lincoln County, 
the Delamar mine was the famous, world¬ 
wide example of men just working very brief 
periods of time in the dry quartzite dust, and 
developing silicosis, and dying very quickly. 
And an awful lot of’em. (Major production 
of Delamar was in 1892 to 1908.) 

Then I went to Bristol in ‘35.And the 
Bristol mine, after the depression closure; had 
just gotten started up again, I don’t know, for a 
year or so prior to my arrival. And we had dry 
machines at that time, jackhammers. We had 
dry jackhammers, but we had spray nozzles 
that fit on to the side of the machine, and you 
direct the spray into the hole [laughs] while 
you were drilling. And it worked pretty good. 
And for the amount of dust we got out of the 
hole that didn’t get sprayed, and especially in 
limestone. I’m sure that we really didn’t have 
much to worry about. And as a little time went 
on, we bought modern machines that had the 
water needles that inject water into the hollow 
steel and pressure water tanks or water lines 
were provided all around the mine. Usually it 
was with a pressure tank, not with pipelines 
leading into the different areas. But the miners 
would have to have a pressure tank, and pack 



Ideas on Society and Culture of the 1930s in Eastern Nevada 


107 


some water in to fill the pressure tank, and 
drill with water. 

So water use soon became the standard 
drilling procedure, except for one thing. 
For at least a couple of years there, we had 
“Lop-eared” Jim and Tony Argento [laughs], 
who were pretty good single jackers. And 
they could go into a remote stope, you know, 
where there wasn’t even any air, and where 
there was some small showing of ore—and 
usually on Company account. They were, both 
of ’em were irregular in their work periods, 
because they’d work a certain length of time, 
then they’d have to go on a bender. And so 
when they came back, you knew that you 
could make money with them, because they 
knew the ore. And they’d work just about 
the same as if they were leasing, ’cause they’d 
start punishing themselves, you know. They’d 
work harder because they’d spent all [laughs] 
their money. And so we used them in that 
way sometimes, and put ’em in a remote area. 
Well singlejacking in that moist ore you know, 
there wasn’t any dust problem really, and so 
water wasn’t a problem. [Laughs] 

I guess we’ve pretty well covered the period 
of the ‘30s. You could go on.I’ve probably 
given you a little more than necessary of the 
philosophy of the ‘30s, but you probably get 
it from everybody that you talk to. 

Well, the government moved in. It was 
accelerated undoubtedly by that depression. 
And the depression (and I’ll swear that I 
believe it) was lengthened greatly by Mr. 
Roosevelt, though pro and con argument will 
continue ad-infinitum. And I’ll never forget 
one of the older ladies that we knew and 
had great respect for—one of the prominent 
ladies of Pioche— that was visiting at our 
house at the Prince mine (this was of course, 
later, because it was after we had moved into 
the Prince; it had to be in the early ‘40s). But 
anyway, she was there with some other ladies 


at a bridge party, my wife was putting on. 
And I came home to lunch, and something 
was said about Mr. Roosevelt. I made some 
derogatory comment about Mr. Roosevelt. 
And this lady spoke up very indignantly, and 
said, (it’s hard to believe this, but she did and 
a very nice lady too), spoke up and said, “Well 
next to God, Mr. Roosevelt is the greatest 
man that ever lived, and I just don’t want to 
hear any more comments like that.” You know 
[laughs]. Oh, next to Christ, I think she said, 
next to Christ, Mr. Roosevelt is the et cetera, 
et cetera. 

But her family were mostly Republicans, 
you know. (And there must have been an awful 
friction in that family over that [laughs].) 
Well, they weren’t all Republicans, no, 
because there were very few Republicans in 
the county. But what I mean is that they were 
conservatives, not believing in a lot of these 
things that were done, you know. And that 
was really the start of this big government, 
wasn’t it? It certainly generated over that and 
over the depression. And mind you, it wasn’t 
very many years after the ‘30s that we came 
up with the 1946 Full Employment Act, which 
simply says, that regardless of economics or 
anything, that if they’re unemployed over 
some level or other, you’re gonna have the 
government step in and employ. 

Of course, the employment that was 
instituted in the ‘30s should be mentioned— 
the CCC camps and these things. And we 
had a good-sized CCC camp out near the 
Delmue’s ranch. Now about some of the fellas 
that went to that CCC camp. They were put to 
work on more or less make-work things. They 
would go out on the range putting in little 
dams that usually got washed out and didn’t 
do any good you know—in the gullies; and 
things of that kind. But they were work crews. 
And some of the fellas from those camps were 
really hungry when they went into them and 



108 


Paul Gemmill 


came out really sayin pretty good things about 
having been with this CCC program. I know 
that we had a couple of men at Caselton later 
that had gone through that, and they’d seen 
things get pretty hungry, and they turned out 
to be awfully good people. So it wasn’t all bad. 

The question that’s always been uppermost 
in my mind about that kind of an operation— 
make-work thing—is that we surely have far, 
far more opportunities than to go out and 
rake leaves or build little structures that don’t 
mean anything. To put that kind of work to 
beneficial use and to productive use, and not 
only productive use, but why, in a case like 
that, can’t work be generated in the private 
sector that government pays for all right, but 
as a capital expenditure? Why do we have to 
have it as, you know, a cost of government? 
Isn’t there a way that we can—?. Well for 
instance, there’s a project that’s a dream that 
I’ve thought of for many years, and that is 
a realistic thing: the importation of water 
to the great desert areas, including Nevada; 
importation of water from up north, you 
know, down through this area—or diversion 
of water from one section of the country to 
another. I don’t think it would be productive 
for the government to go hiring government 
employees to go do it, but I think that under 
our private enterprise system—I’ve heard 
some people say we don’t have free enterprise 
any more, but we gotta fight like hell to keep 
private enterprise, not free enterprise. 

Well, this business of how you employ 
the unemployed, I think if it’s a pork-barrel 
deal, where you distribute this around to 
different localities or different places, ’cause 
Congressman X or Senator Y is entitled to 
a certain amount, and it doesn’t matter how 
he spends it, but you apportion it around for 
that reason, that doesn’t really make too much 
sense to me. But the idea of the government 
sponsoring projects that are so long range 


that private industry has no reason for doin’ 
it, in other words it’s too long range to come 
out as an industrial enterprise for near term 
profit making, but still to have great economic 
benefit. And we look back to the Hoover Dam 
as just such a thing, and how it was done, see? 
Well, I don’t think that that entered in as a 
debit in the federal budget, you know. I think 
it was a capital investment. 

Now why, if we’re gonna have the Full 
Employment Act, why shouldn’t we have an 
act that is companion to it as to what—there’s 
a why, now why not have a what, what we 
do with it. You see, this old idea of incentive 
enters into all of these things, and I’m lookin’ 
at a map on the wall [gesture] over there; 
the checkerboard pattern across the state of 
Nevada. At one time our government leaders 
decided that a railroad was important enough 
to give the captains of industry a lot of land to 
raise money to build a railroad. And they gave 
this checkerboard pattern to the railroads. 
And of course, anything like that would 
certainly be frowned on today [chuckles], 
wouldn’t be possible. But outside of mixing 
up so-called public lands with private land 
(which at that time was not considered bad 
because it was anticipated at that time that all 
land would become private land so it was only 
a matter of tryin to find somebody that would 
pay somethin’ for it or would use it and they’d 
make it private land. They’d practically give it 
to somebody that would use it see; that was 
the theory. So the checkerboard pattern didn’t 
hurt under that plan of disposition. 

And this, placed the disposed land on the 
tax rolls of the counties. Notice the counties 
of Nevada were largely divided up, and if 
you looked at the old railroad pattern, you’d 
find that the county pattern was created to 
take advantage of having some railroads in 
each county. And the evolution of the county 
boundaries went that way so that they’d have 



Ideas on Society and Culture of the 1930s in Eastern Nevada 


109 


taxing power over some railroad land. And 
in Lincoln County, I know that for years 
(I watched that down there), the county 
would’ve been broke, and real flat broke for 
many years if it wasn’t for the Union Pacific 
railroad running through a lot of the county, 
and the big taxes that the Union Pacific 
railroad paid. And this, a long time ago, 
brought the thought to me and we should’ve 
had a look at how we raise tax money. And I 
think it’s even more true today. 

People seem to lose sight of the fact that 
the railroad rates, freight rates, are a function 
of railroad costs. To loosen up transportation, 
would be a tremendous boon to this wide- 
open country. And of course being in 
mining and shipping raw rock and ore at 
great distance, I’ve seen a terrific escalation 
in transportation costs. And I’ve seen the 
very complicated way they have determining 
freight rates that is just hopelessly complicated 
and non competitive. 

Getting back to the tax situation, in my 
view this country would be much better off 
to take all taxes of f of all railroads property, 
railroad property that has anything to do with 
transportation. Now if it’s railroad property 
that is producing oil like Union Pacific’s oil 
well property, then that’s somethin’ else. But 
I think that the taxes we have on our railroads 
has gone so far that it’s produced an incentive 
in the trucking industry to compete with 
the railroads for transcontinental freight, 
and believe me, there’s a terrific amount of 
that going on. And look how ridiculous it 
is. On a railroad, as far as the actual cost of 
running the equipment (exclude the taxes and 
exclude government imposed red tape), you 
can run that railroad and transport tonnage 
for between a cent and two cents a ton mile 
or somethin’ like that. (I don’t know. I think 
it’s closer to a penny a ton-mile on a major 
railroad.) And there isn’t any way that the 


trucks can transport tonnage for, well, maybe 
five cents a ton-mile or something; and you’ve 
also added a lot of cost to the maintenance 
of highways, due to the favored trucking and 
everything. 

Now, I’m not currently (and especially 
in this job), I’m not saying anything against 
the trucking industry. They’re our pals, you 
know, because we depend on the trucking 
industry for supplies and for getting rock to 
the railroad or wherever it has to go. But I see 
heavy machinery and things that originate 
right here in the Reno area you know, and 
from Las Vegas that gets shipped clear across 
the United States in competition with the 
railroad. And this just doesn’t make any sense. 

Now, I don’t know that much about traffic 
and how they determine railroad freights and 
all this, but I’ll just betcha that if we were to 
shift the taxes that the railroads pay, over to— 
well, put it on fuel! Put it on energy! You know, 
if we got that kind of a problem, shift the taxes 
to where it does the right thing. But, you can’t 
do it because again there’s the lobbyist, there’s 
the political pressure, and there’s the habit that 
the country’s gotten into; and these habits get 
ingrained and they’re permanent, unless some 
great thing happens to change it [laughs]. 
Well, I think that a lot of people would agree 
with me on that. But immediately—supposing 
you could do it overnight? Wouldn’t there be a 
lotta truckers go broke though? My gosh. And 
wouldn’t the teamsters howl? [Laughs] Well, I 
don’t know how real revolutionary things like 
that will ever come about, but I don’t think 
we’re makin progress with those things. 

And you know in the ‘30s we had a 
railroad freight rate from Pioche to smelters in 
Salt Lake—we shipped to the Tooele smelter 
at that time. All the Bristol ore went to the 
Tooele smelter—and I remember that we had 
an escalated rate from a dollar forty, I think 
was the low rate—a dollar twenty or a dollar 



110 


Paul Gemmill 


forty per ton—for ore under five dollars net 
smelter return, and then escalated on up to 
two and a half, for higher grade ores. And 
naturally, as time went on, the mine costs— 
wages at that time were four dollars a day, 
started out at four dollars a day and drifted 
up to five. Well, the four dollars per day has 
been escalated into an hourly rate now, you 
know. As those rates changed, I never saw 
any change, any readjustment of the railroad 
freight rates; because your ore grade had to 
be a lot higher to pay the wages, and it had 
to be a lot higher to pay all the other costs of 
mining, but that simply kept puttin’ you into 
a higher and higher bracket on freight, so that 
these lower brackets didn’t mean anything any 
more, see. And so maybe the ore shipment 
costs and evolution of those costs is the reason 
that this railroad thing stands out so glaringly 
to me (because I suppose some people don’t 
see it as that important). But I think some of 
the railroads were pulled out, that used to be 
around in Nevada, because of the property 
tax. There’ve certainly been mills torn down 
because of the tax. 

You know, for instance, the Wah-Chang 
Company built a mill out at Tempiute, and 
ran it for a period of time, and when the 
government tungsten purchase program 
terminated, immediately they liquidated the 
whole plant, tore down the powerline that ran 
out there, and now, a few short years later, 
Union Carbide is back in and gonna have to 
rebuild the mill and build that powerline all 
over. Now, if there were some way where they 
could have written of f their investment, and 
left the powerline there. (The mill is different, 
because you know, you’d have to have 
somebody there watching it, and maybe they 
would have figured that it wasn’t worth doing 
that.) But the powerline would’ve been used, 
because the Sand Springs Valley—Penoyer 
Valley—was opened up for desert entries; and 


the big thing that held it back was the high 
cost of pumpin’ water. But with the power out 
there it would’ve been saved, I presume, if they 
could’ve just written the line cost off without 
havin’ to destroy it. So a lot of things like that 
do happen. They bother you when you think 
about ’em. [Laughs] Again, we’ve gotten out 
of the ‘30s. don’t know what—. 

I think that in the ‘30s, we had a very 
strong community spirit, because everybody 
sort of regarded themselves in the same boat, 
you know. And sure, you’d associate with 
people that hadn’t come over the same kind 
of a trail you had, and had different standards, 
altogether different standards. You’d put up 
with their crazy ways, but you didn’t get in 
bed with ’em, you know [laughs]. And you, 
everybody regarded the rough, tough miner— 
you can call ’em rough and tough if you want 
to—with a great degree of respect for what he 
was and what he could do, you know. Heck, 
it was quite an education, I think, in human 
nature, to get acquainted with a cross-section 
of people like that. 

What’d I do for fun?Fun was easy. Well, I 
know I mentioned some of the miners would 
just go out on a bender. Well, obviously that 
isn’t what everybody was doing. There’s a 
tendency, I guess, to think that most of the 
miners were wantin’ to do that. But, really 
most of the people that were working in the 
Bristol mine, for instance, were serious. They 
were there to earn money for their family, 
even if the family wasn’t there. And maybe 
their family’s over in Utah, and they were 
there to accumulate a stake, even if they were 
leasing. And they were serious about it. And 
when the time came where they could take 
some time off, they’d probably go back home; 
or some of ’em, of course, lived in camp and 
had their family in a cabin. Most of the single 
people stayed in bunkhouses, but we had a few 
cabins, and some of the families lived in them. 



Ideas on Society and Culture of the 1930s in Eastern Nevada 


111 


But in the bunkhouses there would be, say, 
half of the people in bunkhouses were married 
and had their family back home. And there 
really wasn’t, in that period, an awful lot of, 
you know, this business of fighting and having 
brawls in the town of Pioche. It wasn’t too bad. 

But, we saw a period later, during the 
war years, when the Army took the cream of 
young fellas, and even had let some out for 
the mines to operate. And you had a crew 
working, a crew on the road going, and a 
crew on the road cornin’ [laughs]. We saw a 
lot of rough business goin’ on, on the streets 
of Pioche on weekends, and Saturday night 
especially. There’d be a dance or somethin’. 
No, I think during the ‘30s there wasn’t much 
roughness. 

People were inclined—if you wanted 
to have a community party it was easy. 
Everybody would attend, and you’d get a tub 
full of weenies, and boil ’em I guess, and buns 
and go have a ballgame. It was somethin’ like 
that see. And pitch one side against the other. 
Maybe the gals against the boys sometimes 
[laughs], in a softball game. And you’d have, 
oh, some of ’em liked to play cards. Oh, I 
remember before I was married, we usually 
had card parties in the boardinghouse. Of 
course, the Pioche Theater was going all 
that time. And you’d go in to see a show 
every once in a while. And they had dances. 
Entertainment wasn’t very much of a problem. 

[Wasn’t there a famous line at Pioche?] 
Oh, yes. There was, but I think that was wiped 
out prior to that time. I think it burned down 
or something. That doesn’t mean that there 
wasn’t some of that goin’ on, you know, just 
around town. You know, there were the rough 
gals. 

And during the Prohibition—. Well, 
you see prior to that [1933] there was 
plenty of liquor available. Judge Nores with 
his Pioche drugstore. And the doctor—. 


(What was his name, prior to Hastings? Doc 
McCall I believe.) Anyway, he’d write these 
prescriptions for plenty of alcohol for the 
drugstore, and the drugstore’d get it in five- 
gallon cans, and mix it with soft drinks, and 
make “Pioche Specials.” [Laughs] And nobody 
had any trouble getting inebriated, you know, 
during that time. But, then of course, the thing 
opened up to free distribution of liquor, and 
then we had, I think, five, was it five bars? 
Let me see. Gus Messaloids, John Valente, 
Mezzano’s, Ernie’s, Silver Club [bars], and, oh 
I can’t think of all the names, but anyway—. 
There were five, I think, different bars in town 
that served liquor. And I don’t know that they 
made very much money doin’ it, but I guess 
they made a living. And they were especially 
prosperous, of course, later on when all 
the mines got going good and strong. That 
would’ve been in ‘42, and after, you know. 

I remember out at the Comet mine we 
had an old timer, Johnny Crow, who had 
lived out there in the area for some time, as a 
prospector. He knew how to make blackberry 
brandy. And he had a barrel under a tree, 
buried. He’d get us to buy cans of blackberries 
and sugar for him, you know. I don’t know 
what all you start it with. Anyway, he’d make 
this up, and finally it’d get ready. It seemed to 
be awfully mild when you’d drink it, but boy, 
it had a wallop [laughs]! 

And then another one. Reed Hall was 
living over at the Pan-American, with his wife. 
(She was a very good cook by the way.) And 
he thought he knew how to make beer. So, we 
got the stuff for him to do that. And he had it 
under the mill floor where water would drip 
through the boards, and it was kinda damp 
under there and cool. And eventually when 
he said it was about ready, why (this was in 
a tub bein’ cooled under there, and it’d sit 
there for quite a while), we went down there 
to test it out, and when you’d pick a bottle 



112 


Paul Gemmill 


up, it was as likely to break as not, it was so 
wild [laughs]. Finally, in order to get a taste 
of it, we had to take the bottle and turn it up 
pointed into a pitcher. You couldn’t take the 
cap off you know, the regular way, because it 
would be all over you. You’d take a nail and 
poke it through, hit it into the cap, and then 
the foam would come out, and you’d fill a big 
pitcher full, and when it finally settled down, 
then you’d drink a little bit, and you’d sure go 
on your ear in a hurry [laughs]. So that was 
his beer. It was a little bit too strong, and not 
very good tasting either. 

But, yeah, I guess Pioche generally has 
got a reputation of having been rather a wild 
camp. And there were a lot of stories when we 
were operating down there generated from 
these Saturday night dances and things like 
that. Even during the ‘30s, I guess, to some 
extent. But there weren’t so many working, 
you see, then. It was when the big crew came 
in. And there was excitement later on in the 
c 40s when we had lots of men. The Ely Valley 
mine was goin’. The Caselton mine was goin’. 
The Prince mine was going, and the Bristol 
was going. All of ’em going. There were at 
least 600 people employed in the mines. So 
of course, with that number, there didn’t have 
to be over a small percentage that was raisin’ 
hell [laughs] to generate a lot of pretty good 
stories. 

One of’em, one of our churn drill helpers 
that later became a churn driller; working I 
think six days a week, but in the Saturday 
and Sunday evenings, why he was hired as 
a bouncer over there. And he had a harelip 
which caused those relating the story to 
mimic. The story on him was kind of amusing. 
The story goes that he was down at Gus 
Messaloid’s place, and the word came that 
there was trouble up at Ernie’s. And he got 
the word, and somebody asked him, “Where 
ya going?” 


“Oh, up at Ernie’s. There’s trouble brewin’ 
up at Ernie’s.” [Laughs] And so he bounced 
out, and some of’em went up to see what it was 
about. They walked up. Well he ran. He went 
into Ernie’s, and before they got in through 
the swinging doors, why here he came out, 
you know, flyin’ through the air, and landed 
in the gutter. And he looked up at this fella 
that saw him, and he says, “I told ya she’s a 
brewin’!” [Laughs] So the trouble threw the 
bouncer out [laughs]. 

You see, Panaca, twelve miles or so south 
of Pioche, was almost a hundred percent 
Mormon community. And I know that way 
back when we went out there in the early ‘20s, 
why there was a great rivalry between Pioche 
and Panaca. And Panaca just didn’t see eye to 
eye with Pioche at all. And Pioche was, you 
know, talkin’ about the Mormons that had 
horns, you know. It was one of those things. 
And I went out there with that impression. 
You know, there was quite a rivalry. 

And I remember while we’re talkin’ ‘bout, 
you know, back there in the ‘20s, there’d 
be these peddlers selling fruit from over in 
southern Utah, and you always knew that they 
put the good fruit on top of the box [laughs]. 
And you’d say, “That’s a typical Mormon 
stunt,” you know. Of course it wasn’t, because 
they were Mormon. I suppose it wouldn’t 
have mattered who they were if they were 
makin’ a meager livin’ out of selling some fruit 
[laughs]. They did the best they could to fool 
ya. And I don’t think there’s any correlation 
with denomination. Because I remember 
a story my father related from way back 
when the folks were livin’ down in southern 
California in the salt grass country— well, 
the Presbyterian minister maybe would be 
accused of cheatin’ on the amount of hay, 
weight of hay or somethin’ else you know. 
[Laughs] So it goes through any place you 
want to look. 



Ideas on Society and Culture of the 1930s in Eastern Nevada 


113 


At any rate, there was that great rivalry 
But I saw that fade rather rapidly And I 
think largely it faded with the southern Utah 
population and young fellas being our greatest 
source of labor; and coming in and getting 
mixed up with everybody else in the mines, 
and around. 

When I went out to Bristol, most of the 
crew was an Italian crew. They turned out 
to be the ones that would be the first to ask 
for a lease, and they were good pick miners. 
They’d been to Bristol years before, and then 
the crew that we built up above that would be 
from boys over in southern Utah. And some 
of the Utah boys would turn out to be pretty 
good leasers after a little experience. So it 
was, apparently there was a lot more division 
in the ‘20s, you see, than there was starting 
in with, well probably with the depression. 
And even the CCC camps, bringin’ people 
in from all around and so forth, contributed 
to mutual acceptance, see. And then we 
eventually saw Panaca not all Mormon any 
more. Other people moved down there. And 
Pioche is very largely Mormon, I guess, today. 
There’s a nice Mormon Church in Pioche, 
and Caliente, too. So it’s gotten pretty well 
integrated in that way. 

And the other thing is too, I think that 
I’ve seen a great deal of respect generated for 
the Mormons in my time. Because they’ve 
hung tightly to the idea of a close knit family. 
They’ve hung closely to the idea of self- 
reliance and being—well, providing your 
own independence. And if somebody’s in 
trouble, why they believe in direct personal 
aid rather than lookin’ to the government 
for aid. They believe in it to the extent 
where they do it even if you could go get the 
government aid. Most communities, I think, 
where they are strong, just prefer to see it 
handled that way. And I can agree with all 
that. I think it’s great. 


And I have a daughter who’s down there 
now at our old Prince house. (Now we’re 
steppin way up to today. But anyway we’re on 
a particular subject there.) And she’s telling 
us on the phone how she is doing—of course, 
she was raised as LDS here in Reno, well from 
Pioche to Salt Lake to here; my wife is LDS. 
But, she’s getting very much interested in this 
idea of getting her own machine—I think 
it costs $500—for grinding wheat for flour; 
and she’s talking about a family down there 
where there’s, oh, I don’t know how many 
kids—ten or something, and they want to 
have more [laughs]. They really don’t have 
any fancy job, but they’re able to take care of 
all these, because they get these whole bags 
of wheat and grind it to make bread; and I 
guess make bread practically everyday for 
the family, right from scratch. And they can 
buy sugar right today, she says, at thirty cents 
a pound, from over in southern Utah. I guess 
it probably comes through LDS channels. 
See the church has farms, and they probably 
raise sugar beets, and when the price of sugar 
goes out of sight, why they’ve got sugar to 
let their own people buy, you know. So they 
have a lot to be said for that whole system. It 
isn’t economics particularly. It enters into the 
philosophy of life, philosophy of self-reliance 
and all that, I think. So, I’m all for it. 

The reason that I’m not LDS isn’t in that 
area at all. It’s simply that I got fixed ideas a 
long time ago that they haven’t persuaded me 
out of—that in order to be LDS, you’ve got 
to believe certain things, and you don’t turn 
around and create a false belief just to get in 
a church, you know! [Laughs] So, I think I’m 
just as religious as they are, in my way. And 
I don’t think that my beliefs would stack up 
on equality with my own church, with the 
Presbyterian church I was baptized in. I think 
they’ve drifted off here in a different direction, 
in many cases. And maybe I’ve drifted in a 



114 


Paul Gemmill 


direction that wouldn’t have been accepted in 
the past either—the time that I was baptized 
even. I don’t know. 

But I think, and one of the strong beliefs 
that I have, is that religion or the belief in 
the supernatural is instinctive. I believe it 
came right to us from back there by our 
Creator. And I think it’s in everybody, and 
I don’t believe there’s any such thing as true 
atheists. I just don’t believe it. People that talk 
that way are, in my belief, just are ignorant! 
[Laughs] I think they’ve got the same instincts 
that I have. They just don’t know themselves 
[laughs]. I don’t know how that stacks up with 
others or whether my own thoughts might 
become altered; to some extent they surely 
will if I live much longer [laughs]. 



10 

Free Enterprise, Labor Incentives 
and the Old Stope Program 


The Caselton mill had been built in 1941, 
and it was in the fall of 1941 that the Prince 
mine became reactivated. So that 1942 was 
the first year that the Prince property had a 
full year of operation based on eight hundred- 
level sulphide ore. But anyway, it was soon 
after Pearl Harbor that we were faced with 
how the mines were to operate under the 
war emergency powers, and the premium 
price plan, which was initiated to encourage 
the production of the base metals, not the 
precious metals. And government policy 
looked unfair to the people that were ready 
to go—were given no credit— while the ones 
that weren’t ready beforehand received extra 
premiums to pay for all the preparation and 
start-up costs. And it was a natural thing, I 
think, on behalf of the government to step 
in and give a lot of extra money to those that 
weren’t ready, to get ’em ready; but if you had 
anticipated the need, you didn’t get any credit 
for that. And if you were already operating, 
why, you had to operate under the minimum 
premium price plan or no premium price 
plan. Then they had three different levels of 


premiums above base that they would pay, 
depending on how much help you needed to 
get goin. Of course, in my particular case, I felt 
kind of put down by this in two respects: that 
the Prince mine already had a shaft sunk and 
already had the ore body opened up (which 
we were interested in), and the other property 
that I was interested in at that time was the, 
previously mentioned, Tecopa mines down in 
the desert country of California. 

And immediately the costs on that Tecopa 
operations rose rapidly because of labor costs 
and not being able to get men, and supplies, 
and everything. So the costs skyrocketed, but 
this was primarily a precious metal mine— 
gold and silver—and it had lead in it, so you 
had to operate to produce lead. But they didn’t 
allow any credit for the precious metal content 
of the ore except for the effect of the precious 
metal in reducing your cost of producing the 
lead, see. So, without going into any detail on 
that, the whole plan certainly did set back the 
value of the ore bodies in these two properties 
versus other properties that I saw operating 
at the same time. 



116 


Paul Gemmill 


Now, that was a little frustrating. Although 
in another sense, it was not considered unfair 
because you’re in war. And I could’ve been 
required to go over there and get shot at, 
too, but I couldn’t do [that] even if I wanted 
to [laughs], ’cause I was there involved in 
the mining operations.Well, it wound up 
that shortly after that, well by 1945, I was 
involved with all three companies, Bristol 
and Prince and Combined Metals, because 
I took the job of geologist in charge of 
engineering for Combined Metals, and I 
was still advising Bristol in some of their 
exploration development, and also, you know, 
consulting at the Prince, where my brother 
was the president of the company and was 
there all the time. 

Well, anyway, coming back then to how 
the operations went during the war years. It 
was really kind of a madhouse, Bristol was 
going as hard as it could go, shipping direct 
smelting ore; and the Prince mine was going; 
and the Ely Valley mine, under John Janney, 
was going. Ely Valley shipped its ore to the 
Caselton mill that was going full blast milling 
the sulphide ores to produce and ship lead and 
zinc concentrates. I would hazard the estimate 
that we had over six hundred employees, 
between these different properties working 
in the country. And, particularly at the 
Caselton mine, the work force was migratory. 
It has frequently been said there was a crew 
working, a crew coming, and a crew going. 
So you know, the turnover was terrific. But 
things really went very well in accomplishing 
planned production. And it was, of course, a 
requirement that we get everything out we 
could, during those years when maximum 
production was required. So we were real 
busy, plenty busy. And I don’t think anybody 
made any great amount of money out of any of 
this, because the costs were very high, and you 
were depleting the ore reserve as fast as you 


could, and getting the minimum amount of 
money out of the sale of the concentrates that 
the government could figure out—tryin’ to 
keep people [laughs] from makin a windfall 
out of mining production, or anything else, I 
guess. And you really couldn’t argue with that, 
during the war years, you see. 

I saw what looked like some unfairness 
in it, but you cannot expect any regulatory 
agency to do everything just right anyway. 
I mean the only basis for efficient and fair 
operations, I think, comes with the good old 
American system of free enterprise and lettin 
the market, th e free market, test what you do 
[laughs]. Well of course, we couldn’t have a 
free market in that time. And it was natural 
that we couldn’t. So I wouldn’t want to leave 
the impression that I had any argument with 
it [laughs]. That’s just the way it was. 

Blacks in Eastern Nevada Mining 
During the 1940s 

And we went through the war years then 
with all kinds of people cornin’ in and goin 
out. One of the experiences relates to the 
beginning of the time when operators were 
supposed to hire the proper proportion of 
blacks. And I don’t know when this push 
came on to assure a balanced employment 
between the blacks and whites. Incidentally, 
only Negroes were considered because it was 
just customary to hire Mexicans or other 
minorities if they came along, so it was the 
Negro that we’re talkin’ about. And there was 
no thought of tryin to get a balance between 
other races and the Anglo-Saxon, but it was 
the Negro. And so part of the government 
directive when the government was releasing 
Army personnel for work in the mines (which 
they did, because the mines were behind 
with manpower, so they released quite a 
few semi-qualified people out of the Army 



Free Enterprise, Labor Incentives, and the Old Stope Program 


117 


with experience that could be applied to this 
production of base metals). So whenever they 
were releasing some of these people, why the 
Army was required to release a proportionate 
number of blacks. 

And an experience I had in that connection 
was when a Negro came in, and I at that time 
was geologist in charge of engineering, and I 
was also second in charge of the Combined 
Metals Nevada operation. It fell to me to meet 
a busload of men and was forewarned there 
might be a problem. I went over and met a bus 
coming in and here was a coal black Negro. We 
didn’t have one on our crew at the time, and 
we had a big government financed employee 
housing project with a bunkhouse, right near 
the boardinghouse that had all been built for 
this war effort, you know, in a great big hurry. 
And so I drove up to this bunkhouse, with my 
black companion and parked in front. There 
were two or three fellas looking through the 
glass door out of the bunkhouse and saw me 
with this black boy, and I told him (I was of 
course friendly with him; he was a nice fella), 
“I’m not sure, now, that there’s room in here. 
I’ve gotta go in and see if there’s a place, if 
there’s room.” And as I walked up to the door, 
I was met just inside the door by two of the 
workmen that saw me with this black boy, and 
said, “Mr. Gemmill, you’re not bringing that 
boy in here.” And I said, “Well, I just came in 
to see if there’s a place and how it would fit.” 
And they said, “Well, doesn’t matter whether 
there’s a place, the rest of us will walk out if 
you do.” [Laughs] So, of course, that had to 
mean there wasn’t a place. So I went out and 
told him there wasn’t a place in there for him. 
And I took him back to town. [Laughs] And 
there was one hotel in town—the oldest hotel 
in town, an old firetrap as a matter of fact— 
that I went up to and walked in, and there 
was a lady, elderly lady, who was running it. 
I’ve forgotten the name of the hotel; it was 


on Main Street, above the present location of 
Lincoln County Telephone building in that 
area. And it’s since been destroyed. But there 
was this lady running it, and she was renting 
rooms at a dollar a night or something like 
that; and I got him in there, and he took the 
bus out the next day. Well, he let me know that 
he had just come over representing a group of 
blacks to see if they would fit here, see. Before 
he took his suitcase, you know—when I put 
him in the hotel, then he and I chatted a little 
bit. And he said that his mission, although 
there’d been several of ’em hired for Pioche, 
you know, why his mission was to see if this 
was a place the group would like. 

Well, as it worked out, then, Anaconda 
had one mine (and I believe it was the 
Victoria mine that has only recently opened 
up), that they were developing at that time 
up in Elko County. And so they put a whole 
crew of blacks, in one place, and that took up 
some blacks. The associated companies of 
Anaconda then, used their share there. And 
as far as the Combined Metals operation and 
other operations affiliated with the Snyder 
interests, the Triumph mine operating up 
in Idaho, near Sun Valley—took a bunch 
of blacks and made an independent camp. 
They had an area that they all lived together 
in. They let them sort of run their own little 
camp, and very well done, and apparently this 
worked out fine. And they had their section 
in the mine, certain stopes that they worked 
in. That sort of reflects the difference between 
then and now doesn’t it? In how the blacks 
are handled. 

And of course, there has been a big 
evolution, tremendous evolution since that 
time. And most people I think today, feel 
comfortable with intelligent and educated 
black people around ’em, or I mean, whether 
they are educated or not, the evolution to 
social blending among all classes has had 



118 


Paul Gemmill 


to be by degrees. My mother was from 
the south, and of course, I believe the 
southerners have always been much more 
receptive to working with the blacks than the 
northerners have. Well, this is an interesting 
thing. Although I have to say (because of my 
family background), through most of my 
years, I suppose I’ve been just as prejudiced 
as anybody else, you know. That’s the way you 
grow up having many prejudices, both good 
and bad. And I very much resented being 
forced to—well, I resented the policy of the 
government telling me how I had to think. In 
other words, I used to say to myself, well, if I 
don’t like a man red hair, or don’t like anything 
else, why I should have the right to work with 
him or not, you know. Well, my ideas changed 
[laughs]. And I think that the evolution in 
this regard has been a necessary thing, and 
it’s probably worked out the only way it could 
work out. So! So much for that subject. 

The Old Stope Program 

Now the war years—our policy was to 
put a very strong incentive in the hands of 
the miner at the face, and the people that 
were working within the stope area, because 
that was where the production started; and 
the companies had a mining contract basis. 
Combined Metals did it on a cubic basis—that 
is, had a crew of engineers that would go 
underground, and measure so many cubic 
feet of ore that had been mined by a work 
crew, a mine contract crew, during a certain 
period, and they got paid by the “cubics” that 
they mined. And the supervisors had to go 
around, of course, and make sure that they 
weren’t mining waste. But it was a bedded 
deposit, and it wasn’t hard to do. You had a 
cut-off place at the top of the ore, and it was 
within stope sets (sort of like square sets) 
where the ore was mined. It wasn’t too hard 


to measure up the cubes. And the Prince mine 
had a different system of payment, and it was 
more based on, how much tonnage came out 
of a given area for a particular crew. 

Bristol had some areas that were under 
lease to the men that were mining there. And 
in the earlier years when I was at the Bristol 
mine, we laid great emphasis on production 
under leases, where they were paid according 
to how the ore ran when it was shipped, 
and it was sort of a split-check deal, except 
for maybe newly found stopes of ore. Well, 
during the war years, a new ore body had been 
found that was mined, and Mr. Byron Hardie, 
during most of that time, was supervising the 
operation. And I think most of their men 
were on day’s pay. The Ely Valley mine again 
was, I think, working on contract footage 
with all of their development. And of course, 
Combined Metals did the same. They’d have 
a contract crew paid by how much advance 
they made. But all the service crews were on 
straight day’s pay, like the trammers, and the 
skip tender, and other service crews. Well, that 
was, of course, justified by the fact that miners 
were the hard people to get. You know once 
you got a good skip tender or once you got a 
good man on your hoists, or locomotive, or 
something like that, well he usually stayed. 
But it was these floaters, taking the harder 
jobs, that were the hardest to get. 

Well, when the Army released men, of 
course, we picked up some excellent help, 
and some of those men stayed with us for 
years afterwards and became well trained in 
all phases of the operation, including maybe 
making an electrician out of somebody that 
had never been one. He starts out as helper 
or something. But good men. And also in the 
mechanical department. 

Well, the war years came to an end. And, 
soon after that metal prices were a factor in 
causing the operation to drift into poor paying 



Free Enterprise, Labor Incentives, and the Old Stope Program 


119 


periods. The company had mills in Nevada 
and Utah, the Caselton mill and the Bauer, 
Utah mill, so at any time there was a lot of 
metal in the pipeline (meaning in concentrate 
and metal awaiting settlement); and a big 
drop in the metal price would occur, due to 
the lagging time factor for payment by the 
smelter and refiner (Anaconda Company). 
Sometimes this pipeline of material that was 
produced while good price quotes prevailed, 
by the time it was paid for at much lower metal 
prices, the whole process of mining, milling 
and shipping came out at a loss. So, the war 
years ended with 1945. And 1945 was really 
the time that I became more involved with 
Combined Metals. 

And things went on from there until 1949, 
when a slump in the metal prices and also 
the depletion of our good sulfide ore at the 
Prince mine caused us to shut that one down 
in ‘49. And I think Bristol was still going. 
But I had less and less to do with Bristol, 
because of being more and more involved 
with Combined Metals, as time went on. 

And after a few more years, I believe in 
about ‘51 or ‘52 (somewhere around there), I 
was the general superintendent down there. 
Because we were rapidly depleting the ore 
reserves in the main Caselton ore channel, the 
company officials decided to get involved in 
a manganese program, and it was primarily 
based on the proposition that they could get 
almost unlimited amount of cheap power, 
in respect to what they needed down at 
Henderson. And the Henderson plant at Basic 
was going begging, and Nevada was anxious to 
use power, which theyd otherwise lose if they 
didn’t use it. But, anyway, between Combined 
Metals and their associates, why, there was 
a chance there to pick up two of the Basic 
Magnesium Plant units at Henderson—if they 
would be used. And this forced a rather urgent 
and rapid decision to go into processing the 


manganese bearing oxidized ores and some of 
the carbonate manganese ores of the district, 
for production of ferro manganese. And 
they had a government contract that was not 
properly drawn up for escalation of prices as 
costs went up, and so forth. At any rate, this 
Pioche Manganese Company was organized, 
and quite a vigorous attempt made that cost 
Combined Metals a lot of money and a lot 
of losses. The Pioche Manganese Company 
itself (not part of Combined Metals), built 
electric furnaces at Henderson to use the 
power. Combined Metals went into a mine 
development program, and got organized for 
production. That phase of it was under my 
direction. The Pioche Manganese built a kiln 
plant for roasting and nodulizing concentrate 
from the mill, and they went into a process 
of trying to get going on ferro manganese 
production. 

Well, this did not work. There were several 
reasons why it didn’t work. But anyway, I 
think the manganese project closed down 
in the early ‘50s, probably about ‘52. And by 
1954, we had gotten back into an old stope 
area (on my suggestion that certain sections of 
the ore bed would not have been mined back 
in the earlier days, because of the fact that they 
weren’t getting very much for even good grade 
ore), Knowing that some of the horizons of 
the bed wouldn’t have been mined, we got 
back into the richest blocks of ore (stoped in 
the 1930s), known as the nine [hundred] sixty 
and eleven hundred area, and found that you 
could really go right through the old area and 
remine it. So we went into what was known 
as the “old stope” program. And we had 
some visitors along about that time, looking 
over the company and its prospects. Among 
other people we had visit us, who we took 
all through the workings, was Dr. Harrison 
Schmitt, the father of the moon geologist- 
astronaut, Harrison Hagan-Schmitt. Anyway, 



120 


Paul Gemmill 


Harrison Schmitt, internationally known 
professional geologist, visited us. And I had a 
very good visit with him, taking him through 
the property, before we had mined very much 
in the “old stope” area. And he confirmed 
my opinion very quickly. He stated that hed 
been through this two or three times—goin’ 
back into old mines that were supposed to 
be mined out, and remining ’em you know 
[laughs], with new technology, or new 
metallurgy, or one thing or another. 

And, sure enough, we got to going pretty 
good in the “old stope” program. And at that 
time, we devised a new system of incentive 
that worked beautifully—a lot better than 
the old incentive system of, you know, strong 
incentive for the man at the face, and all the 
service population havin’ to serve him; and 
cornin’ in with their union meetings every 
little while, and grievances, and you couldn’t 
lay off a man without an objection. After 
we started production in the “old stope” 
area and proved that it could go (but still 
our production was too low to make any 
money—we were only producing maybe 
three thousand tons a month, and we had a 
mill of much higher capacity), we instituted a 
system where everybody was on a bonus. And 
the people in the stope area were on a little 
higher bonus than the service population, 
but everybody had a piece of it. And it was 
a mild one that only was predicated on the 
ore grade based on hoisted assays, not on 
shipment records, but just rough hoisted 
assays multiplied by the tons per man shift, 
which is like multiplying apples times oranges 
or somethin’, but it did create a factor. And 
then we paid a certain amount for anything 
over—say, if it was ten percent combined 
lead-zinc (not counting the silver, ’cause the 
silver went with the lead anyway) , and you 
produced three tons per man shift for the 
period, why you’d have thirty points. Well, 


thirty points was the standard, and anything 
over thirty points went into a bonus package, 
multiplied by, I think it was eighteen cents a 
unit. And that built up a bonus package, and 
you’d distribute it out to the men based on 
whether they were a four-point men, three- 
point men, or two-point men. Points based 
on importance of the activity and degree to 
which the workman’s efforts would influence 
production. 

Well, without going into the details of 
this, why, this immediately put the men into 
a bonus situation, where they got better than 
the Kennecott scale, which we were competing 
with for men—Kennecott up at Ely. And, so, 
I don’t think we drew men from Kennecott, 
but at least the men that were working for 
us knew that they were getting better pay, 
than Kennecott, due to their teamwork and 
cooperation, it wasn’t a matter of doin’ hard 
work, but it was cooperation mostly. And the 
example I like to cite is that when miners were 
on just straight days’ pay, and they’d come out 
to one of these raise hoists—maybe you’re 
hoisting from the level down below up to the 
bedded ore, and you’ve got a hoistman on 
the raise hoist, and he’s gotta hoist a bunch 
of timber up that’s gonna be used in the 
stope area—and a miner comes out there 
and has to go down to get some drill steel or 
somethin’, why, normally he’d sit on a powder 
box waiting for the timber to be unloaded 
off the skip. Well, under the new system (you 
know everybody was cooperating), he’d get 
in there and help to unload the timber, so 
he could go down and get his steel a little 
quicker. But nobody was killin’ themselves. 
Everybody cooperated, even the skip tenders, 
and everybody was in the system—had some 
piece of the action. We didn’t have any more 
union meetings at all. They just didn’t—. You 
know, they were all union members, and they 
paid their union dues, but they didn’t have any 



Free Enterprise, Labor Incentives, and the Old Stope Program 


121 


gripes. And you had to lay somebody off—the 
shift boss saw somebody really layin down on 
the job, or didn’t show up for work enough 
times—laid him off. There wasn’t any meeting 
over it, because the men didn’t want that kind 
of a guy on their crew, see. 

And so, really what you’re talkin’ about is 
putting management in the hands of the men 
at the face, and especially this goes for the 
underground mine. They’re out there in the 
dark. Maybe a boss sees ’em a couple of times 
a shift. You can’t be there tellin them what to 
do. You have to have a system where they’re 
in charge of what they’re doin’. Well, the old 
system of a strong bonus for the miner at the 
face worked at the face, yes. But how about 
all the rest of the crew, see? And cooperation 
of all of the men in the crew really turned out 
to mean more than a strong bonus for the guy 
doing the production at the face. And, I guess 
I was a believer in that from a long time back, 
because of the Bristol experience, where we 
had block leases operating on their own and 
realizing, you know, that people need to have 
an incentive to do what they do. 

And this again, comes right back to the 
fight that the industry is putting on today, 
right up here in 1975, against the bureaucrats 
back in Washington that want to destroy the 
1872 mining law, or the basic principle of the 
1872 mining law, that permits an individual 
to go out, and if he finds somethin’ he can 
acquire ownership. He has right to hold it 
and even to buy and sell, even before he’s got 
title in fee to it, see. That’s the principle of 
the 1872 mining law that we must preserve 
if we expect to continue to find and develop 
properties from the grass roots or from small 
showings into mines. And these bureaucrats 
do not listen, and they don’t realize—you 
can’t tell ’em, and tell ’em, but they don’t 
know. It seems to take direct experience. 
The old saying that history teaches, that 


history teaches nothing, is with us today 
the same as it ever was. And it’s only the 
people that’ve been through the trail, or 
seen it happen repeatedly out here in the 
field, who understand it. But, and I’m gettin 
off the subject maybe a little bit, but it’s the 
right place to say this—that the incentive 
provided by the old 1872 law, causes people 
to go out and spend their time and effort; 
maybe they’ve got a job somewhere, but they 
try to dig it, or try to do something with the 
property. 

Maybe one phase of it is a wild promotion 
in which the promoter didn’t even have any 
intention of makin it go and he falls on his 
face. And somebody else picks it up, and 
maybe it goes through twenty years of people 
off and on tryin’. And finally somebody 
comes up with a strong enough showing so 
that it’s attractive to a real investing-type 
mining company. 

And at this point, it’s a good idea to 
point out that Mr. Howard Edwards of 
Anaconda Company, put in the congressional 
hearings on a mining bill, that of all the 
numerous properties that Anaconda had, 
their geological crew had found only one of 
their properties, and that was the Jackpile 
uranium mine down in New Mexico. And all 
the rest of’em had come through the evolution 
of the small miner, and the small to medium 
sized operations. Acquisitions were properties 
that had been developed to something that 
Anaconda could send their geological experts 
in, and mining experts to examine, and decide 
whether they wanted to buy it or not see. So 
that’s the way the substantial producers are 
built up. And in this mining game, I don’t 
think there’s anything more important for 
me to say, and try and point out to people, 
than this principle. You have to dangle 
this incentive out to everybody, because it 
happens, and happens, and happens, all the 



122 


Paul Gemmill 


time, that something is found where it’s not 
supposed to be [laughs], you know. 

And the last experience I had with 
Combined Metals— now we’re talkin’ a few 
years down the line—but it was after we 
closed down the Pioche operations. That was 
in 1957, when the metal price dropped, cut 
out our profitability, and forced us to leave 
ore reserve in the old stopes that still rests 
there. And nothing has happened that would 
make that profitable until very recently. I 
think it would be profitable now to open 
up the old stopes that still rests there. And 
nothing has happened that would make that 
profitable until very recently. I think it would 
be profitable now to open up the old stope 
ore, after lead, and zinc, and silver prices— 
particularly silver going above that ninety-one 
cents where price rested there for so long. 
And it will be opened up, and that ore’ll be 
mined. But, 1957 is when the mine closed for 
lack of profitability, and here it is when the 
mine closed for lack of profitability, and here 
it is 1975. And that’s known ore that’s sittin 
there and blocked out, see? So, time is such an 
important factor that some of the proposed 
government mining legislation would kick 
you out of the property for no purpose. They 
even propose that when the ore is mined out 
the property should revert to government 
ownership, you know, you’d have to say that 
the Caselton mine was mined out when it 
closed down, because ore is something you 
can mine at a profit. You see? And so it was 
mined out. But, then when the price comes 
up, it’s not mined out any more. But even 
then it’s not ready to operate, because it’s 
gonna take a tremendous effort to get back in, 
rehabilitate adits and tunnels and raises, and 
retimber, get a crew trained and developed— 
when there haven’t been crews developed in 
all these years, and miners are as scarce as 
hen’s teeth today—it’s gonna be a tremendous 


effort to get back in there and mine that ore. 
And yet, you could say, on paper, you can say 
it would be profitable, see? 

These are vital considerations and it’s just 
too bad. And imagine the miner’s dilemma 
when it comes to today’s one man and one 
vote emphasis with the media tellin people 
what to think, and the pollster cornin’ along 
and sayin’ they think it, and the politician 
havin’ to jump at what the people think—that 
is what the pollster says they think—imagine 
tryin to get this kind of information about 
mining in Nevada into the collective mind of 
the masses of people, say in Las Vegas. Can’t 
do it [laughs]. Just can’t do it. 

Unions 

Now, returning to the bonus plan or 
bonus system, and as well as it worked, what 
about the outside union organizers? Well, 
they didn’t need to have any more union 
meetings and grievance procedures and so 
forth. Grievances are still in the hands of your 
local union people. In the hands of your crew. 
They could exercise their will on the outside 
organizer, or the man that’s really over them in 
the union hierarchy. This was the Steelworkers 
Union, is what it was, and their head man for 
that area was in Las Vegas, and he went there 
from Pioche. And he’d come up every once in 
a while. But they didn’t call on him to come 
and do anything, because they were satisfied. 
See, the dues were being paid. He had no kick. 

There had been Mine, Mill and Smelter 
Workers’ Union, and our men kicked Mine- 
Mill out, ’cause they identified them as 
being too radical. And they changed from 
Mine-Mill to the Steelworkers. And, it was at 
Pioche, incidentally, and I participated in the 
process of negotiation and working out the 
method through Mine-Mill that was adopted 
at other properties out West, a process of 



Free Enterprise, Labor Incentives, and the Old Stope Program 


123 


designating different jobs under different job 
classifications by a point system, that related 
to the wage, you see. And it was quite a task 
to do that. And I was right in the middle 
of that. And we had a very tough-minded 
negotiator by the name of Rasmussen. He 
was there to bring West the job classification 
system and he came from steel mills back 
East And it was a very disturbing and very 
difficult time. This was not when I had overall 
charge of the operation. It was before that, 
but I was in on it. I was more in charge at 
the Prince. And we never had any problem 
with bothersome grievances at all there at the 
Prince. Nevertheless, our men were, I guess 
most of ’em, were members of the union. But 
it was a smaller operation, you see. 

However, up at the Caselton, well there 
were a lot of gyrations going there. I noticed 
one thing about it, the union president 
happened to be a hoisting engineer at the 
time, and through all this folderol of working 
out the job class, or points system, it turned 
out a hoisting engineer was really a top point 
man [laughs]. Later on, the same fella turned 
out to be our master mechanic [laughs] - He 
was a pretty good negotiator. And he was 
pretty good at handling men, too. So, you 
know the same man that you might be the 
maddest at for the trouble he causes, if you 
get him on your side, he might be your best 
guy, you know [laughs]. It’s a little education 
in human nature to go through those things, 
I’m tellin you. 

I’ll tell you about this kicking the Mine- 
Mill out of there. Well, I can’t define exactly 
all of the little things that came along. The 
Mine-Mill were inclined to tell the fellas, 
“Well, you haven’t done good enough; you 
gotta make ’em do this, and you gotta make 
’em do that.” And yet we were gettin along 
pretty well with our men. And we never had 
a strike. The company had always been very 


cooperative with the men, the men with the 
company. And although we had quite a few 
union meetings, and grievances, and things 
like that to go through, and it took up quite a 
bit of time, and you’d have difficulty lettin a 
man go if he wasn’t a good man, and all that, 
why nevertheless, it never came to a strike, 
see? It came to some tough bargaining, but 
when that tough bargaining wasn’t good 
enough to please the outsider that came in to 
see what they’d done, why the men just said, 
“Well, to hell with you. We’ll go over here; 
we’ll have our own union.” Well, it turned out, 
instead of them having their own, why, they 
joined the Steelworkers. 

Actually, the local representative was Van 
Englestead. Very nice fella that had been a 
miner and the local union president under 
the Steelworkers there at Pioche. He’s the man 
that went up in the Union to go to Las Vegas 
over a bigger area. We called him Van. And 
he continued to hold that job after that. He 
was a very reasonable sort of a person, he’d 
come up, he knew the men, and they knew 
him. They never had any problem. When they 
were satisfied, he was satisfied see? Now, I 
don’t know how that went in other operations 
with the Steelworkers, but theirs was the only 
union at Pioche from then on. 

Now, we weren’t like say, Kennecott with 
a number of different unions to deal with. We 
just had the one. And we had no problem with 
them. And we didn’t try to keep unions out. 
Some operations do, and succeed in doing 
it. We just worked with ’em. But the secret 
of working with ’em was a matter of havin’ 
them with you on your side of the fence see, 
and recognizing that they were getting fair 
treatment. So that worked out great. 

In 1954, about the end of the Pioche 
Manganese attempt, it was a matter of 
going back and trying to see what we could 
do with the “old stope program,” and we 



124 


Paul Gemmill 


succeeded with that, until 1957. And we got 
our production up then, to about 10,000 tons 
a month; and we were making between the 
mine and the mill about $30,000 a month, just 
mining out of the old stope area, which looked 
pretty good, see. But, right in the middle of 
1957, we had a disastrous drop in the price of 
metals that just closed us down. 

Well, the Bauer operation—by 19561 had 
become general manager of the company. 
They had taken me from Pioche, as the Pioche 
manager, and put me in as the overall manager 
for both the Nevada and Utah operations. 
And we had properties in Nevada other than 
just the mine and mill at Pioche. We had a 
couple of properties where we were in joint 
venture with American Zinc Company. And 
we had assessment work and what not. And 
then up in Utah, we had a mill and mine at 
Bauer Utah, near Tooele in Tooele County, 
and we were custom milling some ore. That 
mill was the original Combined Metals mill 
to which Pioche ore had been shipped in the 
earlier days, before the Caselton mill was 
built. 

Well that mill was running, and the 
Honerine-Muscatine mine was running. This 
is an old property. In fact, the surface workings 
there were first opened up and operated a little 
bit by Army Engineers that explored Utah—I 
guess the first producer in the state of Utah— 
where they dug out lead (lead oxide ore), and 
melted it down for bullets, so I’m told. Well, 
which property you’d call it we don’t know, 
because there were several names: Buestone, 
HonerineMuscatine, so forth. But, that group 
of properties was being operated, and losing 
heavily the two previous years (1954 and 
1955). And it was operated on a basis of just 
hiring people, and very strong unionism. They 
never had a strike, but the men were havin’ 
union meetings. It seemed every time you’d 
open your door why there was something 


happening with the union. Spending half your 
time with that. And yet, the mine was losing 
quite a bit of money. And I went out and lived 
there for a while. We had an apartment in Salt 
Lake (home still being at Prince mine), I lived 
at Bauer for a while. And I knew what had 
to be done, if I was gonna go on. That was in 
‘56—it had to be organized so the men were 
working on your side of the fence, instead of 
tryin to make work for themselves. 

And so with considerable care, I hinted, 
you know, that we oughta get a system 
working there. And I had a young fella that I 
thought I was gonna make into a pretty good 
superintendent out there. Somehow or other, 
he didn’t seem to catch on to the idea. I sent 
him down to Pioche where he did very good 
work as mine engineer. The mine foreman 
(Red Cameron), who had some time prior 
to that been the local union president got 
my ideas pretty fast. And this resulted in our 
posting of a notice the mine would go down, 
which was truthful. But I’d planted the seed 
with Red Cameron— he went around to the 
best men on the crew, and suggested to ’em, 
“All right now, they’re goin’ down with this, 
but before they close down and let the water 
come in, see if we can’t get a lease, a split- 
check lease.” Well, this, you see, was a much 
stronger type of incentive than we used down 
in Pioche. So they came in to negotiate on the 
split-check leasing system. 

Well, at the time, Sam Craig was the 
manager at Bauer. And Sam had been an 
Army man. The Army methods are rather 
Well, you know how the Army works. You 
have cut and dried things on paper, and the 
directive is the way you do it; and if you want 
to find out whether you’re right or not, you 
turn to it and the record and look, and this 
is the way you do it, see. And of course, he’d 
been using his union contract as the written 
code with the men, and if they got out of 



Free Enterprise, Labor Incentives, and the Old Stope Program 


125 


line, “Why, look here fella [points], this is 
where you belong,” see. Well, this was to be 
a different system—one that he hadn’t been 
operating under (and no criticism of Sam; 
hell, he was a hell of a good guy, a very good 
friend of mine). But, that was the rule book 
system they’d been operating under all the 
time. There was also Bill Kelsey, the chief 
engineer, had his mechanical department out 
there, and he was very, very proud of it. And 
that department was entirely separate from 
the rest set up to earn it’s way charging for 
services to mine and mill. And then the mill 
over here, another separate unit, each one 
independent, serving mine and mechanical 
department serving both mine and mill. 

So anyway, Red Cameron went around. 
We got about half of the crew to take a 
split-check lease in the mine. Well first they 
came in and the mechanical department, of 
course, was gonna have to come in the mine 
and maintain the pumps; and when the two- 
mile-long adit needed periodic maintenance 
to prevent cave-ins, there was supposed to be 
somebody go in and do that; and these fellas 
were gonna be the miners. And I scotched that 
right quick, ’cause that wasn’t my idea at all. I 
knew that that crew of picked men had done 
everything— old-timers that’d been in the 
shops, had been in the mill even, and they’d 
done everything. (Of course it didn’t matter 
whether they’d been in the mill, but I knew 
that they could do everything, timbering and 
everything else.) So I said, “No, if we’re gonna 
do anything like this, you fellas that’ve got 
the lease have got to do everything back of 
the portal of this tunnel (adit). If you’ve got a 
pump that wears out, you’ll be the ones that 
takes the pump out, brings it out, and if it has 
to go to the shop, you take it to the shop, and 
the shop’ll fix it. And if you need a new set 
of bowls, why we’ll furnish the repaired set 
of bowls, but you’ll take it back and put it in. 


And the basis of the split will be that.” They 
accepted this. And, that was fine, and it looked 
like it was workin’ pretty good. The leasers 
never made a trip in or out without hauling 
a load of ore. They didn’t have man-trips, 
they had ore-trips [laughs], you know. And 
this was a very difficult situation to operate, 
’cause of the long adit in, and the deep winze, 
then over on another level, and down another 
winze, and it was hot. And a guy had a hard 
time gettin in a full shift of work. In fact, 
nobody could get in a full shift, but they made 
their hours count in efficient performance. 
The first rattle out of the box—we didn’t 
even get started with this mine lease before 
Red Cameron, who had been receptive to the 
leasing idea, started promoting a mill lease. 
So he went—without his talkin’ to me—he 
went around to the fellas that’d been runnin 
the mill, and the lab people that’d been doing 
metallurgic test work, and got them to come 
in to Sam Craig, and propose that they take a 
lease on the mill. Well, it took twenty-one men 
to man every designated job in the mill, under 
the union contract. Well, six men came in and 
asked for the lease on the mill, ’cause they 
worked it out among themselves. The mill 
could actually be run with three men on the 
floor, you see. If the bins were full, and there 
was nothin’ to do but run the ore through the 
mill (and the mill had way more capacity than 
the mine was producing), their thought was, 
they’d let the ore pile up and when there was 
enough ore to run the crushing plant, they’d 
run the crushing plant and get it into the bins. 
And when they had enough ore in the bins to 
run the mill, they’d start up the mill, and run 
the mill ‘round the clock—six men; three men 
on a shift; two, twelve-hour shifts—until they 
got that ore milled out. And then, because 
they had enough capacity, they’d go fishin’ or 
somethin’; and come back and start the cycle 
over again. 



126 


Paul Gemmill 


Well, the mill had been losing a lot of 
money every month, just even maintaining it. 
And we started makin’ five thousand dollars 
a month on the mill [laughs]. And these 
fellas made way too much money. They were 
makin’ a couple of thousand dollars a month 
apiece, which caused the boss Ed Snyder, at 
the time, and the president of the company, 
to just hit the ceiling. “Well, those guys are 
about wearing out the mill or somethin?’ And 
of course, it wasn’t true, everyone of’em was a 
mechanic, and they maintained the mill better 
than it’d been maintained before, because they 
didn’t want any breakdown when they were 
runnin’ the mill. If there was anything lookin’ 
like it was gonna be bad, they had time to get 
in there and fix it before they ran the mill 
next time, see. 

Well, it worked out real good, and we 
actually kept that mine and mill going 
through 1968, even though that property 
had lost about a hundred and twenty to a 
hundred and forty thousand dollars a year 
during the previous two years. We turned it 
around, and the lease crew was able, through 
our cooperation, to develop as much ore as 
they mined out during that period of time. 
They were not robbin’ the mine. That was 
one of the accomplishments I’m quite proud 
to have been a part of. You see, Red Cameron 
got the notion [laughs] on the mill lease see. 

And I might say, at this point, to show 
you that giving the miners a piece of the 
pie isn’t a new thing. In the year 1872, the 
Meadow Valley Company, at Pioche, had 
already built a small mill in Dry Valley, out 
along the Meadow Valley Wash of Meadow 
Valley Creek. This little twenty-five ton mill, 
in 1872, paid six hundred thousand dollars 
in dividends, milling this rich silver ore, you 
know. But the superintendent’s annual report 
for 1872, said this (and you can get it at the 
Library and quote it), he said, “We have had a 


great deal of trouble at our mill with the hard 
ore.” They were mining this high grade silver 
ore out of veins in quartzite, and they were 
getting, of course, a certain amount of very 
hard quartzite waste; hiring men to mine the 
ore, and of course, the men didn’t care if a little 
quartzite got in the ore. The superintendent 
continued, “We soon solved the problem by 
buying the ore from the miners.” Same thing 
wasn’t it? See. And apparently, he didn’t go 
on to explain it in detail—this really oughta 
be looked up and quoted—but what he 
really meant was that the miners in different 
locations in the mine would carefully sort and 
rack up at their work place—ore that they had 
mined. On narrow veins this is commonly 
called chloriding. And sometimes they’d have 
a pretty wide vein of course, and it was not 
much trouble to do it. But they’d rack up their 
ore, and then it’d be sampled, and they’d get 
paid in accordance with how good it was, see. 
So the company was “buying” the ore from the 
miners. I would’ve called it a leasing system 
or somethin’ like that. But it’s all the same 
difference. It puts the incentive [pounding] at 
the right place. And then, they didn’t have this 
hard quarzite waste to impede crushing, rate 
of through-put and excessive wear. [Laughs] 
That was a pretty smart superintendent, see. 
Well, he was just a practical one, I’d say. 



11 


Last Years with 
Combined Metals 


Now we’re starting in about 1954, when 
my residence was still at the old Prince mine 
in the house that we had fixed up—my wife 
and I had—over the years—done quite a bit of 
work fixing up an old house down there. And 
the story of that alone would be an interesting 
story from our own personal viewpoint, but 
certainly not to other people. You know, 
adding a bedroom, adding a second bath, and 
all of this kind of thing. But we fixed a very 
nice place of it for a while. We had a lawn all 
around it. And we could entertain guests. 
And we had a player piano, and we could 
play these old, old rolls, and get people—you 
know, on a celebrating evening like Christmas 
Eve, or New Year’s, or something—we could 
have all the engineers, the young engineers 
and their wives, and everybody, come down 
to our house and I could pump the player 
piano, and play at the fiddle (which I used to 
play in junior college orchestra. I’m no good 
at it, but that doesn’t matter, if everybody’s 
feelin’ good enough, see). And everybody 
gathered around the piano singing, why you 
can play this fiddle; and once in a while you 


hit the right note at the same time that you 
harmonize with the piano, and it sounds all 
right [laughs]. So we had a lot of fun that way. 
We had expanded the living area in the house, 
and added to it, and carpeted it, and draped 
it, and everything, so that we had a place that 
people talked about quite a bit. And my wife 
spent her time—. She never did, you know, 
go get a job or anything. Her job was makin 
a home, and she did a beautiful job of it. And 
I’ve always been proud to show her off—you 
know, show her works off, and her too. So. 
Anyway, we had a lot of fun. Any place we’ve 
been, and we’ve always done this; try and 
improve where we were. So that was a part of 
the experience. 

And well, while I was still out at Bristol, I 
joined the St. John’s Lodge number eighteen 
in 1936, I believe it was. And when I got 
married in 1938 to my wife, Fern Jensen, why, 
right away she went into the Eastern Star and 
became Worthy Matron at the same time that 
I was Master of the Lodge. I worked up to 
Master of the Lodge rather quickly, because 
we had so few people in the Lodge [laughs]. 



128 


Paul Gemmill 


You know, sometimes you’d have a meeting, 
and you wouldn’t have over half a dozen 
people there, and so immediately you had to 
step into the chairs, and go through the chairs, 
and all of that. This is goiri way back, but while 
we were at Bristol, even in the winter time, 
we’d make our trip into Lodge faithfully And 
she had her meetings in the Stars, and we’d 
see that she got there too. And she became 
Worthy Matron right away, in the same way. 
Well, we haven’t since then, followed up on 
our activities in the Masonic Orders, for the 
reason that we just had other things that 
were more important to us. Maybe when we 
get slowed down more in our activities, then 
we might start. I think a lot of people do 
that—take a bigger interest. While I was still 
with CMR company, I entered into the Kerak 
Temple Lodge here at Reno in October 1960. 
Fern has not renewed her interest up here, and 
I can understand because our family business 
has taken up our time. 

But anyway, going back to 1954—. We 
were generating the operation in the old stope 
area, and I think I covered that a little bit 
with you. And the Pioche Manganese thing 
was behind us. They’d gotten in so cheaply in 
purchase and use of a couple of plants down 
in Henderson, that I believe the investments 
in electric furnaces for the Pioche Manganese 
operation was largely recovered just by selling 
one of these plants to the National Lead 
Company. And then, I guess, eventually they 
sold the other plant; and I think the investors 
in Pioche Manganese didn’t do too bad. 
(Millbanks were mainly the investors.) And 
they still had the kiln plant at Pioche sitting 
there without any use; and it’s been sitting 
there ever since. And coming up to almost the 
present time, it is running now (Weatherley & 
Son from McGill), and I’ll tell you about that 
later. But it’s been sitting there all those years. 


Then in 1955, we had the old stope 
program going fairly well. The company 
was in some problems, and the president of 
the company, Mr. E. H. Snyder, was heavily 
involved with putting together the Uranium 
Reduction Company, based on Charlie Steen’s 
Mi Vida mine down in Moab. And so he had 
to spend a lot of time away back in New York 
in putting finances together and everything. 
And he joined in with the American Zinc 
Company; President Howard I. Young and 
Mr. Snyder were very good friends and the 
two companies joined together in building 
the Uranium Reduction Company mill. The 
mill process was based on testing the ore by 
various processes that the government had 
been instrumental in investigating. And 
they settled on a process and built that mill. 
In the meantime, several other ore bodies 
were discovered in the Moab area, so that 
this turned out to be a major uranium mill 
in Moab. As I say, the name “Uranium 
Reduction Company” came from Combined 
Metals Reduction Company, that was part of 
the venture. 

Well, I never did get involved in that phase 
of the company’s activity at all. American Zinc 
assumed responsibility for mill design. And 
I was busy with the “old stope program.” A 
man by the name of S. W. (Sam) Farnsworth 
was injected into the picture about that 
time, by the eastern interests—a man that 
had been an administrator for the Millbank 
interests and had, in other ventures, stepped 
into companies that were in trouble, and 
had to do with pulling them out. They’d find 
a company that was in trouble, and change 
the management, or change their processes, 
or pull in some better advice or whatever to 
make profitable. 

Well, due to the fact that Mr. Snyder 
was away, it seemed to them necessary, I 



Last Years with Combined Metals 


129 


guess, to send somebody in to help. And 
so Mr. Farnsworth came out repeatedly; 
met with those of us that were running the 
different units of the company. There was 
Sam Craig from Bauer, Utah, who was in 
charge of operations at Bauer. There was 
Max Kennard, who had been (and was 
when Mr. Farnsworth first stepped in) the 
manager of Pioche Manganese Company; 
and had formerly been an engineer with 
Combined Metals, and had previously been 
manager out at Bauer, Utah. Mr. Snyder had 
put him in as the general manager of Pioche 
Manganese Company. So he was one of the 
people that Farnsworth would call for group 
conferences. And Mr. Craig from Bauer, and 
myself from Pioche, and Mr. Kelsey W. H. 
Kelsey, who was, you might say a charter 
member of Combined Metals, from the very 
inception of the company, back at the same 
time that Mr. Snyder and my wife’s father, Mr. 
Jensen, had started out with the Bauer, Utah 
mill, and developing the flotation process for 
these very complicated ores. There are other 
names that would go into that, if I could 
think back. Like Johnny Green who was a 
flotation expert that had a lot to do with 
the development of the flotation process for 
these particular ores, and his name should 
be mentioned in connection with Combined 
Metals Production Company.) But anyway, 
Bill Kelsey was one of those that Farnsworth 
would meet with. And E. H. Snyder, Jr., the 
son of Mr. Ed Snyder, was another that would 
be in the conferences. 

And so we had several conferences. 
Usually, Mr. Farnsworth would rent a suite in 
the Hotel Utah, and call us all in there, and have 
lunch served, and he’d listen to everybody’s 
discussion and arguments over what was 
wrong and what was right and everything. 
Well, finally Mr. Farnsworth made the decision 


that I was to be manager and I guess of course, 
with Mr. Snyder’s consent, but he seemed to 
have more or less full authority due to the fact 
Mr. Snyder was way off on the uranium job. 
With the help of American Zinc Company 
President, H. I. Young, they did a very good job 
of that. It was one of the things that saved the 
company at one time, because they were able 
to sell bonds that Combined got out of puttin’ 
that thing together. Anyway, Mr. Farnsworth, 
apparently was basically the one that made the 
decision that he would put me in as general 
manager of the company. So I became general 
manager of the company in 1956. 

In the meantime, our daughter was born, 
who I named “Tamby” No other person goes 
by that name. That’s her nickname. We had 
given her the name Terry Renay [laughs]. And 
so of course, from there on, why she has been 
pampered as the only child—so she’s been the 
biggest project of my wife, and sometimes 
of me, as she grew up. And we’ve gotten a 
tremendous amount of pleasure out of her. And 
I think we’ve gotten enough pleasure out of her 
so we didn’t need a big family [laughs]. So, that, 
as I say, kind of gives you an idea of where the 
family life stood at that time and since. 

And in ‘56, then, with the Utah operation 
also under my direction, why, I started 
spending quite a bit of time up there. And we 
got an apartment. And I lived at Bauer for a 
while. And I believe that I went over that a 
little bit with you, and how we converted the 
operation to a split-check leasing system and 
turned it around so that it made some money 
for a while, until the end of 1958, when it had 
to go down. But the Pioche operation had to 
go down in the summer of 1957. Well, I think 
we’ve come, then, through those periods. 

I might say a little bit about the crew at 
Bauer, because this was a crew that had lived 
there; and most of the crew that remained 



130 


Paul Gemmill 


after we went to this reduced crew, were 
men that had just grown up there, you know 
and that’d been part of the community at 
Tooele and at Stockton (Stockton was near 
the plant) and within the plant, so that, why 
Lord, that crew they had men there that could 
do all the rewinding of motors whenever 
a motord blow up. And you’d send motors 
up from Pioche. And there were crews that 
could just do anything, you know—work 
over old equipment or build cars, float cells, 
etc. And Bill Kelsey was great at going to the 
junk man and buying stuff that the junk man 
didn’t know was good. And he’d buy it, and 
fix it up, and he could always cut corners on 
building things. Bill Kelsey was a real first 
class mechanical and design engineer. 

Fossil Rosin (Resin) 

And at the time I went up there, the 
company had been in the business of 
processing fossil rosin out of coal. There was 
a coal deposit up in Carbon County, Utah, 
that had quite a bit of fossil rosin in it. And 
you know what rosin is? It’s the sap from trees, 
a form of natural resin. But in the formation 
of certain coal beds, there was a lot of this 
fossil rosin in there. And U. S. Fuel Co. had 
been shipping coal sludge down to Bauer, 
Utah, where CMR Co. floated the rosin out 
of the coal, and had developed a process to 
treat the flotation concentrate. They had a 
man by the name of Ernest Klepetko, who 
had been prominent in developing a process 
for extracting the rosin out of the coal 
concentrate with hexane. It is not a process of 
dissolving, it’s a process of more like mixing, 
because in dissolving a salt, you don’t add to 
the volume of the solution. When you add 
the rosin to the hexane that you put on it, it 
increases the volume by the amount of rosin 
that you put in it. So it’s a different thing. It’s 


really dealing with colloids making a pregnant 
liquor of hexane and rosin. So, in order to 
clean up this pregnant liquor, you’d have to 
filter it. This was done in totally enclosed 
leaf filters into which pumps supplied the 
pulp of liquor to be cleaned of remaining 
fine coal and silt. Periodically the operator 
had to open this filter cover in the building 
where this was going on, so you’d have it just 
loaded with hexane in the atmosphere, and a 
very dangerous possibility of explosion and 
fire and all that. And you’d have enclosed 
tanks of hexane in the building. And then to 
get the resin out of the pregnant liquor, after 
you’ve filtered out the dirt, you’d go over to a 
process of driving off the hexane in a heater, 
and having to go to a very high heat in order to 
melt the resin, and have it pour out in drums 
and so forth. 

There’d been a fire, and it destroyed the 
plant. Well, we went through the process 
then, of rebuilding this plant, about the time 
I went up to Salt Lake. Reconstruction of 
the business resulted in U. S. Fuel Company 
building a flotation plant at their mine so 
resin concentrate rather than the raw coal 
dust (“big dust”) was henceforth the product 
sent to Bauer. A lot of the equipment that 
had been in plant was used again. But Mr. 
Kelsey, again, did a bang-up job of rebuilding 
the plant for a minimum amount of money; 
and of course, it was insured; and it got going 
again, and a lot better type of operation than 
it had been before. Well, in spite of the fact 
that my background wasn’t one that would 
relate to this kind of a processing, it was rather 
unique processing anyway, so I just had to get 
involved. I had a good deal to do with how we 
did some of it. So that was a little experience 
in itself. 

And the resin was used largely in inks, 
in fast-drying inks, especially because it 
had what’s known as rapid solvent release. 



Last Years with Combined Metals 


131 


The high temperature melting point meant 
that when you’d use it in an ink, and you’d 
try to print on slick paper, and heat-set the 
ink, why you could drive off the solvent very 
rapidly and not leave it sticky So it could go in 
printing on slick paper. And the competitive 
products were lower grade that would, say, 
be used in newspaper inks and so forth. How 
much of this got into different kinds of ink, I 
don’t know. But anyway, that was the principal 
outlet, and then we got it into 3M [Minnesota 
Mining & Manufacturing Company]. They 
use it on some of their stickum tapes, I guess. 
And the most difficult one was when we got 
it into American Chicle Company, taking 
the place of chicle in gun. For this chicle 
use we’d make a spray dry product that was 
very powdery. In taking it out of the hexane, 
you’d spray dry the pregnant liquor through a 
heating device—steam-heated hearths—and 
you’d come out with a very dusty, fine spray 
dried product, and then in order to deodorize 
it, we made an experiment with a plaster 
mixer—puttin’ steam through it—and that led 
to the putting together of a deodorizing device 
that was primarily my innovation—or I called, 
invention. We didn’t patent it or anything. 
But, it worked pretty good, and was working 
when I left the company later on in ‘62. Taste 
and odor I found out, are the same thing, you 
know. And so in order to test the deodorized 
product, why you’d have smellers, a panel of 
smellers [laughs]. 

But for some reason or other, I guess 
this business of making sure that every 
batch was good, finally led into trouble, and 
American Chicle quit taking it. I don’t think 
the American Chicle account really made very 
much money, because it was so much trouble 
anyway. But, the plant was still with us when 
the company went into receivership later on, 
eventually resin plant—to be sold as a separate 
unit in paying of f creditors. 


Beryllium 

Well anyway, that experience was going 
on, the perlite plant at Pioche was running 
but doing very poorly, because most of the 
companies that we had been shipping perlite 
to, were of f on their own deposits, and you 
know, producing their own product and 
expanding their own perlite after it got to 
their plant. And we didn’t try to expand and 
ship; we just crushed perlite and shipped it to 
the expanders, all over the United States. And 
at one time we were the principal producer, 
I guess, in the country, about five thousand 
tons a month, but that dwindled largely and 
the perlite unit was down to where it wasn’t 
paying very much. 

The company then found itself (when 
both the Bauer operation in ‘58, and the 
Pioche operation in ‘57 went down), with 
principal activities evaporated, ’cause of metal 
prices. So we needed something to use our 
talents and give us a little glamour. But first let 
me tell about a former Pioche leaser that came 
to me with his problem. Lory Free, a young 
Panaca fella that had been, with other family 
members, leasing and working in mining for 
some years, decided he should go and take an 
engineering course. Well, Lory decided then 
to go to BYU University and see if he couldn’t 
get an engineering degree, and I encouraged 
him to—he being L.D.S. And he went up 
there, and the first thing they did was give him 
an examination. And they told him that they 
could make an engineer out of him all right. 
He had a good high school education—and 
they would. But his examination showed that 
he would be a top salesman. And so they told 
him, while he was goin’ to school, he might as 
well earn his living selling insurance for the 
Beneficial Life Company, which is a Mormon 
based, organized insurance company. So Lory 
took their advice; and my gosh, he got to be 



132 


Paul Gemmill 


a top salesman right quick. And a little later 
on, he got top prizes, and I think he got to 
be the top salesman somewhere along the 
line—but still interested in mining. I don’t 
know whether he ever got his degree as a 
mining engineer or not, but he learned quite 
a bit about the engineering anyway, at their 
school on top of his earlier practical mining 
experience. The reason I bring this up is that, 
when we were at the bottom of the barrel, 
and not making any money, and didn’t have 
enough things for our chiefs to do—more 
chiefs than Indians— why, Lory comes into 
my office with an assay of beryllium from 
down at Spor Mountain, Utah. And some 
people that had been producing fluorite 
down there under the government’s fluorite 
purchase program, and had made a lot of 
money— various ones of the farmers had 
gone into the mining of fluorite. (This is a little 
comment might be thrown in here: All it takes 
is a good farmer to be a good miner, because 
they’ve got to know equipment too, you know 
[laughs].) And so they’d mined quite a bit 
of fluorite, under a high government price 
for fluorite, during the war years. Well, the 
high price was gone, but they still went out 
prospecting; and one of these fellas, I believe 
it was Miller, had dug a trench in some clay, 
because it had some fluorite in it, and it was 
sort of a fluorite prospect. 

And the story I got out of this was that 
Miller was over in Ely with some of this clay in 
his pickup, along with some other rocks, at a 
time when Anaconda was working on the Mt. 
Wheeler beryllium deposit. (I could mention 
more about that, and my past connection with 
that previously, during the tungsten program 
when we were in it.) But, at any rate, they 
had a berylometer. And a berylometer is to 
beryllium like a Geiger counter is to uranium. 
That is, it’s a device that you can, on the spot, 
detect the presence, and roughly the quantity, 


of beryllium in a sample. Unlike a Geiger 
counter, you bombard the sample first, and it’s 
the talking back to you, reflecting back from 
the beryllium content that you count like a 
Geiger counter would count. But in doing 
this you’ve got to have an activated source of 
antimony, that’s very dangerous to handle, and 
it has to be handled in a lead shielded device 
that you carry around, and you keep yourself 
from ever being bombarded with it. And you 
set it on a sample, after you’ve taken the lead 
shield off, and count the number of clicks you 
get back on the scale. And then you can tell 
what you’ve got in beryllium. 

Well, Reggie Lee (then the Pioche 
supervisor) and I both, during this slack 
period, had been hunting for a way to get 
off the company’s back. I mean, we were on 
half pay, and the company was in financial 
difficulties. So, when Lory came into my 
office with this sample—this Delta prospector 
had been to Ely, his pickup load of rocks had 
been tested with a berylometer, and the clay 
tested good. So Lory went out, took a sample 
in the trench, had it assayed chemically, and 
it was very good, went a couple of percent 
in BeO. And he came in with this assay, and 
asked me what he oughta do with it, where 
he oughta go. He had a deal on the back of 
an envelope from this fella Miller—that had 
the claim—and Lory asked what ought he 
do with it. Well, I thought of two or three 
things. But finally, I walked in to Ed Snyder, 
who was in the office at the time, told him 
that maybe here was a chance for us to be 
doing something that could lead somewhere, 
you know. At least give the company a little 
glamour, and maybe give us somethin’ to do, 
suggesting perhaps I oughta go down and 
look at it. And I had called Reggie Lee, our 
engineer-supervisor at Pioche and Reggie, in 
thinking about the Mt. Wheeler thing (which 
was attracting attention for beryllium), had 



Last Years with Combined Metals 


133 


gone to Los Angeles all on his own, at his 
own expense, and gotten trained in the use 
of a berylometer. He’s the first, and I guess 
the only one, that ever rented one from the 
people that made it. It was a new device. And 
he had agreed that he would like to rent one, 
but he hadn’t taken it, and the option time was 
about to run out. He had a few months. They 
notified him that his time was about up. So he 
took it. And it had just arrived the day before 
Lory Free walked into my office. So we set up 
an appointment. Lory Free and I went down 
in his pickup, and met Reg from Pioche. Reg 
was in charge of our things down at Pioche at 
the time. And Reg came up to Delta. We went 
out to the place where this sample had been 
taken—with the berylometer— and we went 
all over the area. And we dug in other places 
where there were clay showings; and made a 
decision in one day, due to having that kind of 
an instrument, that this was something CMR 
oughta follow up on. And not only that, but 
the evidence on the ground indicated that 
whenever the clay was all dried out and right 
on the surface, and the sun had exposed it 
and all this, why it didn’t have any kick. But 
when you’d dig down into it a ways, and it got 
moist, and then it would, frequently, test very 
good. So I decided that it must be migrating 
in the clay. Nature has a long, long time to do 
this. And why beryllium would be migrating, 
I don’t know. But anyway, I decided it must 
be migrating, and therefore that it must be 
soluble in something. 

And so I asked Reg to take samples of 
this to Pioche with him, and take it in the lab. 
And Corwin Likens had been the mill man 
at Pioche; and he was working in the lab on 
different experiments that the company was 
still playin’ with. And Corwin took it and 
put acid on it, sulfuric acid and hydrochloric 
acid, and then you’d pour it off and test the 
residue and test the solution, and sure enough, 


the beryllium content was soluble in acid. 
So that was the original discovery showing 
solubility in acid. As it developed, the reason 
it was soluble in acid (you know, these things 
always turn out to be simple after you know 
the answer), was that in the clay was a fair 
amount, maybe two or three percent, fluorite 
(calcium fluoride). And when you put acid on 
fluorite, you generate hydrofluoric acid, and 
the hydrofluoric acid attacked the beryllium 
mineral, which is in microscopic particles 
probably of bertrandite or phenokite. So 
fluoride made the silicate mineral soluble. But 
that solubility made the basic decision why 
the Combined Metals oughta go into this, 
because we pictured this as being a relatively 
simply process to get the beryllium out of 
this clay. 

So in deciding what to do about it, why, a 
venture was set up, where Combined Metals 
had thirty-seven percent; Charlie Steen was 
in on it with money and his drill rigs; and a 
man by the name of Mr. Irving Bennett, who 
had been the salesman for resin, was in on 
it. And then Reg Lee was given a little bit for 
his part in it you know, because he rented the 
berylometer. And Ott Burton, the accountant 
for the company, took a piece of it—put some 
money into it. Ed Snyder, himself, put money 
into it. I was offered a position, and I turned it 
down, because I was gonna be manager of the 
venture. And I didn’t want to be—you know, 
I was gonna have to decide whether the bills 
from the Charlie Steen’s drilling outfit were 
proper and in order. I told Ed Snyder I’d like 
to have a piece, but if I had done a good job 
when it was all over, why, they could look at 
it and give me somethin’ for it. Didn’t happen, 
but anyway, we rented our CMR equipment to 
the venture and devoted staff to exploration 
for the thirty-seven percent interest. (That was 
another thing. I had to be independent.) We 
rented our bulldozers, and what equipment 



134 


Paul Gemmill 


Combined had. And we even put men that 
we were trying to save on the payroll, like 
our shift bosses, and people like that up there, 
workin on the development of this deposit. 
And we picked up about four hundred claims. 

Among other things, we located claims 
down in the valley where nothing but the 
overlying flow rock was exposed, and on 
this theory of beryllium being soluble and 
migrating— I had the theory, and still have it. 
And I don’t know, I don’t think that anybody 
else has the theory, but I do—that the beryllium 
in that clay originates from an overlying eight 
hundred-foot thick, topaz-bearing flow rock. 
In fact, it’s the Topaz Mountains out there. 
And the topaz is a fluorine-bearing mineral, 
and the flow rock also has little particles of 
fluorite. And I believe that it has a minute trace 
of beryllium, and that the weathering, and 
the meteoric waters percolating through the 
overlying flow rock, gathered the beryllium 
and put it into this clay. And the clay was 
generated from a volcanic tuff bed underlying 
that flow rock. And the minute the fluorine 
solutions attacked the tuff bed, it made clay, it 
altered tuff to clay; and trapped the beryllium. 
Now that’s my theory on how that was made. 
And there’s literature written up by USGS 
and everybody on these deposits, but people 
don’t go for that kind of an origin. I still do. I 
think that’s it. 

Anyway, the reason we located claims 
down in the valley, was because of that 
theory—the overlying flow rock. And we 
located quite a few claims down there. The 
major reserves have later proven to be down 
there under that flow rock. And that’s kind 
of a little pat on the back for myself in a way 
[laughs]. But, anyway, we don’t need to put 
that in this paper because—. I’ve always felt 
kind of proud of the fact that even if I’m 
wrong, the thought made it happen [laughs]. 


And, to follow up, at this point, on that, 
it was interest in the beryllium deposit, that 
years later under receivership we sold to 
Anaconda for $475,000. When I was trying to 
do something with the company and save it, 
that cash from Anaconda, buying that interest, 
that we used along with several property sales 
to hold the company together for six years, 
during reorganization and litigation. So 
that’s been a satisfaction; although I probably 
shouldn’t mention it. 

* x * * * 

Anyway, we wound up with the beryllium 
venture then, which was the reason, the 
principal reason I was staying with the 
company, for a period of time there. And 
then this resin business—. I also had a special 
attraction to that. I thought that it had some 
rather large potential, after studying it and 
writing a voluminous report on its potential, 
and processing and market. And along came 
a man by the name of Jack Wilson, from 
Pennsylvania Industrial Chemical Company, 
who was the executive vice president in charge 
of sales. He had run into this product in the 
market place, and was very much interested 
in it, and he thought his company would like 
to acquire it, or at least acquire the major 
output of it. So he came in to see me, and I got 
persuaded that this was a way to go, because 
we weren’t makin any money with the resin 
business. The salesman, Mr. Bennett, who was 
also one of these partners in the beryllium 
thing—he was doing quite well with resin 
sales, in my opinion. But, the company was 
just tradin’ dollars with him doing the bulk 
of sales through his own company. 

So in 1962, after we had made our deal 
with Anaconda, on the beryllium business; 
gotten out all that had been invested in it for 
all the investors. They’d all gotten their money 



Last Years with Combined Metals 


135 


back. And Anaconda issued a million dollar 
revenue bond resting with the venturers, plus 
an interest in the ultimate company Anaconda 
was gonna set up to market beryllium, see. 
Well, it never did happen, because Anaconda 
lost our in their competition for market, but 
they did finally buy the venturers out, as I 
stated above. But at the initial stages with 
Anaconda, they gave everybody their money 
back. That helped Combined Metals a little 
bit, because we’d rented the venture a lot of 
equipment, and we had a lot of salary charges 
against it and incidentals. And gettin’ that 
money back was the next phase that sort of 
helped us along. And the remaining thing we 
had that looked like it could do somethin’ at 
the time, with the market for metals not being 
very good, was this resin business. 

And this fella, Jack Wilson, and his 
proposal, sounded awful good to me—that we 
could enter into an arrangement with them 
for the principal output of our plant. We had 
no contract with Mr. Bennett or any of these 
people that we were selling to, 3M or anybody 
else. So we were perfectly free to deal with this 
outfit. And they were a big enough outfit; and 
I thought this was our opportunity to make 
somethin’ out of that business. 

So I got Mr. Snyder and Mr. Bennett 
together, and I spent a couple of days (I’ve 
even got notes in my diary. I looked it up not 
long ago), arguing with them over what we 
should do. And Mr. Bennett was adamant 
we shouldn’t do it (go with Wilson); and of 
course, he didn’t really have any say if we 
wanted to move. And Mr. Snyder wouldn’t 
move. So within a few days I quit. That’s 
when I quit Combined Metals, in 1962. And, 
I saw no other thing, no other reason why I’d 
stick with the company, at the time. I was on 
half pay. I think I had $17,000 coming at the 
time—back pay. They eventually paid it off, a 
little bit every month after that. And Mr. Ott 


Burton, the chief accountant was very faithful 
about sending my monthly check until it was 
finally paid off. 




12 


Land Development Work 
in Lincoln County 


Here we go back in time to describe how 
land development became initiated. Then I 
went back down to Pioche, and living at our 
old house down there at Prince Camp. In 
1953, I had the mumps. And while I was in 
bed with the mumps, and worrying because 
I had no mining activity like I had had down 
in the desert with the Shoshone Mines, Inc. 
(I made a nice little stake out of that by the 
time we eventually sold out.) But, I wanted 
to have something of my own. So I decided I 
was gonna take up a Desert Entry. 

Well, anyway, I talked to some people. 
Finally I wound up, after discussions, buying 
some property from the Prince Company, 
that the Prince Company had been trying to 
sell. Being a director of the Prince Company, 
I withdrew myself from any decision and 
presented it to the rest of the directors. They 
got an appraiser to look it over; and I bought 
it at the appraised value. And then I went out 
to find it. This was an area that my brother 
thought maybe I could do somethin’ with, if 
I wanted to develop agricultural land as a sort 
of a sideline hobby. 


And so I went out to find the land, and 
found the old 1872 surveys were practically 
all, obliterated. I had to go back and get 
original field notes to find corners. As soon 
as I located where the ground was, I found 
out that two families up in Rose Valley had 
the best land in the valley there, adjacent to 
the Prince ground. The Prince ground had 
been acquired to secure tailings from the old 
Meadow Valley mill that was built in Dry 
Valley way back in the 1870s. And so fee land 
was primarily there because of the mill. But, 
the bottom ground was found to be these two 
parcels owned by people from up in Rose 
Valley. Well, without going into the story of 
the details, I wound up buying that. 

Over a period of several years, spare time 
was spent on surveys and detail mapping of 
Dry Valley leading to applications for desert 
entries in my name and wife’s name, which 
ultimately increased fee land acreage to 
over fourteen hundred acres. My wife, Fern, 
frequently helped on “recon” work, and we 
drilled a well soon after land purchases. The 
well didn’t turn out worth a darn. And we 



138 


Paul Gemmill 


licked our wounds for one year; and drilled 
another well; and it didn’t turn out either. 
This would have been probably in about ‘56, 
‘57, along in there. And the fella that drilled 
the second well, was testing it, said, “Well, 
we could try dry ice in it, you know.” And he 
did. And it turned out to be a beautiful well. 
So, they went back and tested the first one, 
and that turned out good. So, then we had 
two wells, and we raised crops. Crops looked 
good and we sold a couple of hundred acres 
to Chet Oxborrow who is an old hand, old 
time Lincoln County rancher family, but 
had gone off in other places, and wound up 
as a contractor in Las Vegas building houses. 
But he was anxious to get back into Lincoln 
County, and he bought one ranch down 
near Caliente. And when he saw the first 
crops that we raised on the first, a hundred 
and thirty acres or so. Under direction of a 
local farmer, we raised some safflower and 
twenty acres of barley, and sixty acres of 
wheat. And they were bumper crops, but we 
had difficulty with them, ’cause I didn’t have 
harvesting equipment. And I was away when 
the safflower was being grown, and I knew 
nothing about safflower. And the rancher 
that was raising it for me, didn’t either. And 
when he saw all the beautiful flowers all over 
this field, and was afraid that maybe an early 
frost might hit, he took the water off, and 
the safflower all developed without any oil 
in the seeds, because he took the water off at 
the wrong time (we found out later). So we 
invited the Delmues to have their cattle eat the 
safflower of f. But the barley crop produced a 
bumper crop right out of the sagebrush. And 
the wheat did well, except that we wound up 
with a bum piece of equipment harvesting it, 
and before we got around to gettin’ the right 
thing and all that, why, half of the wheat 
landed on the ground. But we got wheat off 


of it anyway, and it’s proved the ground. And 
Chet Oxborrow just had to have this property. 

So, we sold couple of hundred acres to 
Chet, and then we started puttin’ more money, 
later on, back into developing more wells. Due 
to being in the valley, I tried to promote a 
reservoir, fishing reservoir, in the valley. (And, 
I’m gonna go ahead of my story here because 
let’s finish that phase of things, because this is 
when I left Combined. I was out of the mining 
business, and let’s see what I did with it.) So, 
I tried to get a reservoir, you know, through 
community cooperation, in the upper end of 
this valley, because I saw an opportunity there 
for a recreation deal. And I was attending 
the rural development meetings there in the 
county these two years that I was there—not 
doing anything but developing my land and 
taking on the problem of water-well work for 
everybody in the county. I had a lot of fun 
doing that. I learned an awful lot about the 
ranch land in Lincoln County—all through 
the county— out into Pahranagat Valley. 
They were putting in a new water system out 
there and a concrete ditch. And I had to, well, 
apply for water diversion through the state 
engineer’s office as a water right engineer, and 
take care of that for ’em. And I scooted all over 
the county doing water-well work for people, 
while I was doin’ my own job. Didn’t make 
any money doing it. Most of those people 
can’t pay you very much, and you wouldn’t 
think of charging ’em very much. But it was 
a lot of fun. 

Well, you know, it’s awful hard to promote 
somethin’ for yourself. In answer to proposed 
dam in Dry Valley, they came right in with a 
proposal that a dam be built up above Ursine, 
along the same drainage (the Meadow Valley 
drainage stream) stream in Lincoln County 
that runs outside of the state, you know— 
drains down into the Colorado eventually. 



Land Development Work in Lincoln County 


139 


Well, up above Dry Valley where I was, 
the next valley is Rose Valley, and the next 
valley is Eagle Valley And Ursine is in Eagle 
Valley And up above Eagle Valley is what’s 
known as the Eagle Valley Narrows. Well, 
in the November, 1962, Lester Mathews, my 
friend in Panaca—he was very active in the 
rural development group—prevailed on me 
to go up and see if there couldn’t be a dam 
built up above there in the Narrows, because 
they’d been talkin’ about it for some time. 
Well, I said okay. So I went up, and I spent 
about four days making a reconnaissance 
survey through the Narrows up above Ursine. 
And the place that they’d always been talking 
about a dam would have been a high dam, it 
would have had to be a multi-purpose dam, 
and it wouldn’t’ve been any good, because 
it would’ve been built right on a fault. One 
side was steep cliffs against massive lime and 
dolomite with water courses, wouldn’t have 
held water, anyway. And, so I picked out two 
sites further up that were entirely of f the fault 
and in flow rock, and I was sure would hold 
water. And I chose the number tour one, the 
one furthest up, made up a little estimate on 
what it would take to build it. 

It happened that Howard Cannon was 
running for election at the time, and so the 
first reconnaissance report that I made on this 
dam proposal, I sent to Howard Cannon. And 
he used it in his political literature in running 
for election; and, actually made a copy of 
my map and put it in his brochures. And he 
got after federal Fish and Wildlife to supply 
matching funds if Lincoln County could find 
the other matching. 

Clair Christenson had been our county 
agent down there, and I knew him quite well. 
So Clair took a copy of this report; and they’d 
had some pretty good luck around the state 
with the Fleischmann fund helping out on 


things, especially in hospitals and so forth. 
And just how Clair did it, I don’t know. But 
anyway, the other forces took over—people 
that were better at this than I—and got the 
Fleischmann fund involved in providing the 
matching money for the project. 

Well, to make a long story short, the darn 
got built. There were difficulties. I estimated 
it on the basis of using a solid rock spillway, 
but for some crazy reason the Fish and Game 
handed it to some engineers that proposed 
a concrete spillway over the face of the dam 
that ran it way over my estimate. And so it 
was gonna be lost; and so they had me fly 
down from Reno, and we got Bob Wilkin 
(the local contractor that I knew), to come 
in and persuade people that excavation in 
solid rock wasn’t that expensive. And we 
went back to the solid rock, and we got it 
built. But I think, one of the major efforts was 
Clair Christenson himself, ’cause there was 
a lady in Ursine, Mrs. [Maggie] Warren, an 
elderly lady, that had always been very much 
opposed to anybody even putting a log in the 
stream above Ursine, that might, she thought, 
prevent her gettin all her water [laughs]. Well, 
I think it took a couple of years to get a water 
district organized in Eagle Valley. After they 
got the water district organized, and the vast 
majority of the people concerned were all for 
it, why, then they got approval on building 
this structure. 

Here I’m gonna tell you somethin’ else 
that I was kind of proud of. This little quick 
reconnaissance engineering job that I did 
through the Narrows up there, as to the cost 
of this dam and everything, and the size of it, 
and you know, how many surface acres the 
proposed dam would cover. With my stadia 
rod, and without any help, and posting my 
stadia rod in a tree down here, and goin’ up 
half a mile and takin a shot at it, and goin like 



140 


Paul Gemmill 


that, and then a few Brunton shots, I made up 
my reconnaissance report, and came up with 
sixty surface acres behind this dam. The Fish 
and Game people sent engineers up there 
with plane tables, and made rather detailed 
and careful engineering report, which they 
had to do, of course. And Don Osborne, the 
engineer for Nevada’s Fish and Game came 
to me afterward, and he says, “I don’t know 
how you came up with that, you know, in the 
time you spent on it.” He said, “You said it was 
sixty acres, and we come up—.” I think he said 
it was sixty-one. [Laughs] And of course, it 
could have been quite different, because they 
might’ve designed it a little higher or lower or 
somethin’. But anyway, that was kind of fun. 
And the dam got built. 

Later on, to complete the story, after that 
was in, it was attracting a lot of people from 
Las Vegas, up there recreation and fishing 
and everything. A couple of years went by. 
Well, anyway, Clair came to me and said, 
“You know that Eagle Valley Narrows thing’s 
been working out pretty good, and some of 
these people are asking if you would go for 
what you originally talked about over there 
in Dry Valley,” you know. (And by that time 
Clair had been boosted up here to Reno. And 
he was with the Extension Service, serving 
the whole state, on project development, and 
working under Dr. Stein. And I got to know 
Dr. Stein pretty well too. A very good friend 
of mine. That is on account of his connections, 
you know—working together.) 

And I said, “Sure my wife and I will 
give you forty acres to build it on, and I’ll 
show you where to build it, and I’ll do the 
reconnaissance engineering on it.” And I 
did—did a quicky job, proposed it; and well, 
to make a long story short—. By this time, 
Chet Oxborrow was in our valley, and raisin’ 
crops on the acreage I’d sold him down 
below (the proposed Echo Reservoir site), 


and we had been goin on drilling water wells 
for developing the rest of the valley. In the 
meantime, I was up here and wasn’t there to 
attend to things. I did get the reconnaissance 
job done. But from there on, it was Clair 
Christenson, and mainly Chet Oxborrow, 
then raising crops in the valley there, who 
made the thing happen. Fleischmann fund 
wasn’t about to furnish matching funds f or 
another darn, after helping finance one, you 
know. (And I might say that the people down 
there hadn’t been properly appreciative, I 
think, of what Fleischmann fund had done. 
They should’ve put a great big plaque up there, 
and given the public more notice of what 
Fleischmann fund did in building that upper 
dam. I told ’em so. They may have it by now, 
but they had been a little dilatory that way.) 
At any rate, they couldn’t get anything out of 
Fleischmann fund. 

But Chet was pretty well acquainted in 
Las Vegas, and when the Echo dam looked 
like it wasn’t gonna go—. They could get the 
federal money all right, through a different 
agency. It wasn’t the federal Fish and Wildlife. 
It was through Rural Area Development I 
believe. Christenson found it, whatever it was. 
And the county was certainly not gonna be 
bonded for doing it. (And Chet Oxborrow 
was one of the county commissioners 
too, by that time—a double reason why it 
wouldn’t be bonded. He wasn’t gonna see 
the county bonded for anything.) [Laughs] 
But, Chet knew people in Las Vegas pretty 
well. So he went down and saw the county 
commissioners in Clark County, and told ’em 
that they oughta come up there, and furnish 
the matching money for this, because it was 
Clark County people who were enjoying this 
Eagle Valley facility. He says, “You can count 
the cars, and ninety percent of them are from 
Clark County. What’re you gonna do about 
it. This is a helluva good recreation area for 



Land Development Work in Lincoln County 


141 


you.” So they recognized that it was a good 
thing, but they said no. There was no way they 
could put Clark County money into Lincoln 
County. It’s absolutely out of the question. But 
before he got out of the meeting, they told 
him, they said, “Mr. Oxborrow, there’s one 
thing we could do. If building a road for you, 
or something like that would do any good, we 
could just slip that in maybe.” 

He said, “Well, you’ve done it.” 

And so they built and paved eight miles of 
branch road from the Ursine road out to the 
Dry Valley, and to the site of this darn. And 
that, plus the value placed on the forty acres 
that my wife and I gave them, to build this 
structure on— (actually there was another 
forty acres of open federal land above that, 
and then the Narrows above that, that it 
would back up into. So it would make about, 
I think, seventy acres, seventy surface acre 
reservoir). Well anyway, those values of the 
road and the forty acres appraised as a dam 
site furnished together the matching funds 
to build the dam [laughs]. And Echo Dam 
got built. And it’s in. And it’s taking time to 
fill up or stay full, because of seepage. And 
we’ve had some dry years, too. It’s gonna take 
either somebody puttin’ somethin’ in there to 
seal it, or just a matter of time until enough 
mud seals it. But when I was down recently, it 
looked pretty good. People were enjoying all 
of the recreation spots around the dam, and 
it was almost totally filled with campers. Of 
course, it was over fourth of July period, and 
everything was full that year. 

The State Park soon got interested in 
taking over the Eagle Valley dam after it was 
built. And not only that, but the State Park 
went up and were interested in buying a lot 
of land there in Spring Valley. And they didn’t 
want to pay the price, so it didn’t get sold 
to State Park; it got sold to Art Linkletter. 
And then the State Parks turned around and 


bought it from him, after the value had been 
established. So they’ve got, I think it’s about 
eight hundred acres in Spring Valley—the 
State Park has. Now I guess they lease it back 
to cattle people, because it’s important that 
cattle people use it; feed the meadow grass 
and the cattle be on it, ’cause through the use 
of it, it puts feed value into the reservoir as a 
fishing pond, you see. 

And so they got involved first in the 
Eagle Valley thing, and then after—. I think 
even during construction, why, they took 
an interest in the Echo reservoir thing; and 
came to us and wanted to know if they could 
acquire it—the ground around it, above it, 
through the Narrows, which is, you know, 
where the Echo Cliffs are. Actually, it was my 
wife that named this Echo Dam, because of 
the echo you get at that Echo Point. And so 
they finally insisted on buying through the 
Narrows plus eighty acres below the dam— 
some of it pretty good agricultural land. And 
we dickered. We didn’t want to hold ’em up, 
and we didn’t want to get less than whatever 
it would be worth, so we commissioned Reno 
realtor-appraiser, Preston Hale, and had him 
be our representative and work with the State 
Park appraisers. So we finally arrived at a 
value. I think we could have pressed for more, 
but anyway, it was good, because State Parks 
taking it over certainly didn’t hurt the rest of 
the valley, you see. 

So it hasn’t been long since that time, after 
the other well that we’d drilled, and proved up 
on two Desert Entries in the valley, one in my 
name, one in my wife’s name, acquiring that 
other land that I told you about from the Rose 
Valley people, and finding one prime forty- 
acre piece that long since had been deeded 
to the county for taxes. Had ’em put it up for 
sale. And I bought that for eighty dollars, two 
dollars an acre [laughs]. Of course, that was 
way back in the early days lookin’ into the 



142 


Paul Gemmill 


valley when I was learnin’ where the property 
was [laughs]. Maybe you shouldn’t mention 
that [laughs]. But they put it up on the court 
house steps, and we had A1 Scott handle it for 
us, and he put in the bid, and nobody else bid, 
and so we bought it [laughs]. 

Anyway, well, now the windup of this is, 
Chet was in there farming, and Chet finally 
decides that valley is a lot better than his 
lower place. He liked the volume of water 
developed by two deep wells wed had drilled 
and the expanse of good land. We worked up 
a three-way trade, and he traded his lower 
place, which was a complete place—cattle 
ranch place—to us for a large acreage—eight 
hundred acres more or less in Dry Valley. 
And it was already planned that the Apaloosa 
horsegrower, Tom Clay, would buy his lower 
place for his horses. And so in a three-way 
trade, why we came up with what had been 
our objective. We simply had been in there as 
developers, and to prove up the valley. And so 
we had made the original deal with Chet, and 
we made the deal with the State Park people, 
on account of the reservoir. It all started 
with doin’ the Eagle Valley Narrows report 
for community betterment and havin’ them 
come back and want my original proposal 
in Dry Valley Desert Entries and gettin’ it all 
put together in one package, came up with 
a reasonable outcome for myself and wife, 
which makes our retirement really. Of course, 
we did have to have the money that came from 
Tecopa—the original mining deal down near 
Death Valley, California. I’ve never had a job 
that provided any retirement set-up for me, 
including this part time one with the Nevada 
Mining Association. So I’ve always been 
faced with providing retirement in some way. 
And I’ve had a lot of fun doing these outside 
extracurricular things you see [laughs]. 



13 


Mining Legislation and the 
Nevada Mining Association 


The philosophy that needs to be spread, 
and understood by our legislators, and by the 
public at large these days— I think the first 
thing I have to point out is that the mining 
industry has a far more difficult problem in 
public relations than, say, the agriculture 
industry or manufacturing or any of the 
others, I guess, because, first of all, we’ve got 
the image of Appalachia spread across the 
country as though here in Nevada there’d 
been great harm to the earth in digging— 
which there hasn’t been. The worst thing 
that I can point to, out here in Nevada, that 
the mining industry has been responsible 
for, was simply the obedience to the law, in 
digging a hole on every claim no matter how 
many claims you staked out. You had to go 
and dig a bulldozer hole on every claim, or 
excavate so many cubic feet, under the Nevada 
law, which we got changed recently, so that 
the locator doesn’t have to dig a useless hole. 
Unless he’s got mineral that he’s digging on, 
why, there’s no purpose in his digging a hole. 
He simply files a map, and pays a filing fee 
that gets it on the county records. This also 


does the other thing of nailing a claim down 
to where it belongs. Instead of the vague but 
legal notice and certificate of location which 
seldom gave a precise position of the locater’s 
claim, Nevada revised statute requires a map 
and filing fee that provides information and 
pays the county for maintaining current maps 
showing where the claim locations are, while 
eliminating the requirement of location holes 
on each and every prospect claim. 

The old method did not prevent a 
prospector being able to change his location 
post or the notice in it, over a half-mile away 
where the excitement was, and caused a lot of 
confusion. And this has happened. I’ve seen 
it happen, where the vague description of 
where his claim was, and the law saying that 
his claim is where the stakes and markings are 
on the ground, regardless of the description. 
When you get into the excitement of a bunch 
of claim locations, among people like we ran 
into over in Delta (out of Delta, Utah, when 
we were acquiring beryllium ground in 1960, 
‘61), why, you’d go out and find a stake with 
a notice in it, and maybe come back a week 



144 


Paul Gemmill 


later, and the same notice is in a different 
place, a half a mile away, and back dating 
or pre-dating another locater that had his 
stake over there, and so it caused all kinds of 
confusion. 

Utah didn’t have a law where any 
excavation had to be made. And the one 
thing that Nevada did have in the excavation 
requirement was the fact that the excavation 
tended, in some measure, to nail down where 
the claim was. Now, the map does it far better 
and without disturbing the land. 

But the problems in Appalachia especially 
of course, the coal mines, and mine stripping, 
and denuding a lot of surface, and disturbing 
the water table to where pollution comes into 
the streams, and so forth. And I guess there 
have been big problems back there. But the 
tendency when all of Nevada’s problems are 
shipped off to Washington for a solution 
and for Congress to debate and come up 
with solutions, the tendency is to reduce 
everything to the common denominator, and 
make everybody do the same thing regardless 
of need. 

And this reminds me of the problem we 
had in the state legislature when we were 
considering the anti-pollution bills on air 
pollution, water pollution, and so forth. The 
League of Women Voters and Daisy Trevailya 
(who was hangin around there all the time) 
were the lobbyists for the environmental 
movement, we’ll call it; they were adamant 
in their position that the toughest kind of 
legislation should be imposed on everybody 
no matter where they are. In other words, 
the position was that you shouldn’t allow 
somebody because they’re gonna emit 
pollution into the atmosphere, say, to move 
out here into a far away place so that it 
won’t bother anybody, because then you’re 
just giving them a license to pollute. So, 
the thought was, and the position was, that 


whatever this standard is, should be imposed 
anywhere and everywhere, because you’re 
polluting the poor Earth! 

And, of course, my argument was just the 
opposite, that there are certain things in the 
mining industry can’t be conducted without 
having emissions, in some amount. And so I 
got ahold of Daisy one day, and I said, “I want 
to cite an example or two. If you’ve ever been 
down in southern California, in the Imperial 
Valley where they have very large cattle 
feeding lots, and you travel through there 
by car, as fast as you can travel, you’ll go for 
miles holding your nose. No matter how fast 
you go, you’re still gonna be bothered with the 
horrible stench. And yet, people are working 
there that don’t even notice it, because they 
get used to it.” 

I said, “Would you recommend then, a 
law that would be so stringent that you could 
allow a cattle feeding lot on The Strip in Las 
Vegas? Or to put it another way, would you be 
for having the toilet in the kitchen?” And the 
attitude that you get, when you say something 
like that, is that they stick their nose in the 
air and walk away. They don’t answer it, see. 

Another case in point was we had a 
hearing among some students up here at the 
University, called by Sessions Wheeler, and we 
had some of the mining people, and myself. 
And Mr. Serdoz, who’s the staff man on this 
pollution business, air pollution, and water 
pollution so forth, for the state agency, was 
there. And we were talking about this same 
thing of what kind of rules need to be laid 
down and so forth. Mr. Serdoz was asked, 
what about the particulate pollution, and 
what harm does it do? Doesn’t it settle out of 
the air? Lord, if it’s out here where nobody’s 
bothered with it, why do we need such 
stringent regulations? Why do we need any 
real stringent regulations, if the people locally 
around us don’t mind? And his answer was, 



Mining Legislation and the Nevada Mining Association 


145 


“Well, a lot of these fine particulates never 
do settle out of the air, and you’ll eventually 
pollute the earth.” Now, that’s how far out— 
this man who was supposed to be a technical 
expert on the thing, gets, because he figures 
it’s his job to make it just tough as you can. 
That was his answer. And it should’ve been 
knocked down right there, but it wasn’t, 
because you’re bein’ polite and so forth. And 
I’ve wished ever since I had, because I knew 
better. It’s even large molecules that get taken 
out of the air when the storm change and 
when the weather changes. In fact, if it hadn’t 
been, we couldn’t be here. The storms and 
everything. And I remember going down to 
a meeting of the governor’s Advisory Mining 
Board in Tonopah not long ago, on a windy, 
blustery day, and dry day. You could look 
down the valley where the old tailings were, 
down there in the old West End Mill (I think 
they called it), in the valley, where the tailings 
were blowing up the valley something fierce; 
and as I came back to Reno that afternoon 
through this blustery wind, I thought to 
myself, “Well, that really is quite a problem, 
isn’t it?”—seeing those tailings blow. But as 
I went valley after valley, all the way back to 
Reno, I saw very little difference, one valley 
to the other. These ground winds were pickin’ 
up the dust in every valley and tilling it up 
with pollution [laughs]. And more pollution 
in that one storm, I’m sure, than the mining 
industry would emit to the atmosphere in the 
state of Nevada in many, many years. So this 
is how far out this problem gets. 

Well, the public doesn’t want to listen 
to that kind of thing, I think, because when 
you get into the present system— we’re 
talkin’ about a system that was created by 
this tremendous change and been created 
by two things in the very recent years. First, 
the Supreme Court’s decision of “one man, 
one vote” put the power in the hands of the 


masses to make major decisions, providing, 
you know, they get information to base their 
judgment on. Well, the information they get 
to base their judgment on, comes from a new 
thing: the television instrument. And they 
base their judgment—the man comes home 
from work, takes a can of beer, and watches 
the news, and he gets told what to think. And 
then the pollster comes around and says, “he 
thinks it.” And the politician has no way to go 
but to jump in the direction that the pollster 
says the people think. 

So, in my opinion, we haven’t got—well, 
what I’d say we’ve gone into is a—in a sense 
it’s a democracy, and it’s for the first time in 
our history in recent years, we’ve come into 
being a democracy, by having major decisions 
made by the rank and file of people that don’t 
know very much about what they’re doing. 
And yet the country was built, in my humble 
estimation, by the captains of industry that 
came and got special privileges out of the 
government. Look at the lands that were 
given away to the railroads to build railroads 
out west. We’ve evolved from that kind of a 
philosophy into the philosophy that, “Don’t 
ever let anybody have any special privilege. 
Don’t ever dangle out an incentive; hand it 
out by the government, because if you do, 
it’s a sin.” So we’ve taken the incentives out 
of our system, in my opinion. There isn’t any 
hope, I guess, that we could create a dynamic 
railroad system by going the other way, and 
turning over the operation of the railroads 
strictly to private industry to set the rates 
they damn please, and compete with the 
trucking industry? Hell, no. Right now the 
trucking industry has the ball, and they’ve 
got the political strength to prevent it if we 
try. So what’s the talk now? The talk is to 
turn the railroads over to Uncle Sam or to 
“nationalize” the railroads, is what you call it, 
and let the government run the railroads. And 



146 


Paul Gemmill 


I suppose it’ll become more and more like the 
post office, and get less and less efficient all the 
time. Now that’s the difference. 

I think I mentioned before in talking 
about my career in mining, that if I ever had 
any special thing that was injected into my 
experience that made me somebody a little 
bit unusual in running a mine, it was through 
being a part time leaser myself, and later on 
running a mine with a bunch of leasers under 
me, in different sections of the mine— block 
leases—and then going from that to bigger 
operations where you had to create some 
kind of an incentive to get the maximum 
production from the men (and I think I 
covered this pretty well somewhere along the 
line), and that incentive idea is where we’re 
lacking in our whole system. In fact, the big 
mining companies have difficulty creating 
anything like maximizing each person’s 
efforts; you know, big mining companies have 
to create efficiency by simply the application 
of modern engineering practices; and then 
they negotiate with the men under a strong 
unionized system for wages (which are always 
being escalated, they never are held constant 
in any way, for a lot of reasons [chuckles]. 
As long as we have the government behind a 
system of inflating—which we have had for 
many years, since the ‘30s, they’re actually 
supporting a system of inflation—you have 
to go along with giving higher and higher 
wage increases). But, if you want to get the 
maximum output out of a man, you’ve got 
to have him on an incentive plan, where he 
figures that he’s part of the show. It’s not easy 
to do that in the big organizations. Pretty 
damn hard. So, I don’t know. 

Well, what are we doing? We’re supposed 
to be talking about the problems of the 
Mining Association, ’cause we’ve gotten into 
this period of time in 1964, when I came up 
here, at the request of some of the mining 


people, to consider taking the job with the 
Nevada Mining Association as its executive 
secretary. And that was on July 1, 1964, that 
I took the job. And that’s when I first really 
became acquainted, although I’d met, Mrs. 
Foster, who had been with the Association 
many years. Of course, I knew Lou Gordon 
quite well, who was prior executive secretary. 
And he had died several months before, after 
a long illness. So, I was told that, by the then 
board of directors (none of whom are still 
directors), that when I got to age sixty-five, 
I was to submit my resignation, and they’d 
look at it, you know. So, anyway, time went 
on. Maybe I’ve already intimated I think the 
biggest problems of the Association are in 
the political arena, both state and federal, in 
trying to keep things right-side-up, as well as 
serving the Association members. And the 
full memberships or regular memberships are 
memberships to mining companies that are 
operating, represented by their managers. For 
instance, there’s Anaconda, and Kennecott, 
and Flintcote, and Duval, and Carlin Division 
of Newmont, the Cortez Joint Venture, so on. 
I was just mentioning some of the larger ones. 
Well, there are some thirty-five members of 
the Association. Some of ’em are small. They 
all have an equal vote, if it came to a vote. But, 
of course, the contributions are based upon 
the number of people employed, and the 
hours worked and so forth, under a certain 
formula, so that the larger operators are the 
principal supporters of the Association. And 
the membership’s on the basis of associate 
membership, and affiliate membership— 
affiliate membership being usually suppliers 
to the mining industry, companies that supply 
products; and the associate membership, 
any individual who cares to join and get the 
newsletter. 

The regular mining companies are 
provided a wage data booklet, loose-leaf 



Mining Legislation and the Nevada Mining Association 


147 


booklet, that keeps the wage contracts of the 
various mining companies up to date, on a 
basis that is made usable by Mrs. Foster, in 
expressing the terms of the wage agreement 
in a similar manner for the different contracts, 
although the contracts are quite different in 
the way they spell it out. So she has quite a job. 
And she’s done this for all these years. And I 
never touch that side of it, because she does 
a very good job, and everybody’s real happy 
with it. That’s one of the services. 

And then of course, we frequently have an 
operator call and want to know what he’s to 
do about—maybe he’s gonna start a property, 
or something of this or that, as to what you 
have to do. And I advise him to go and see 
the Environmental Protection Agency. And, 
fortunately, this environmental thing in 
Nevada was set up with the help of the lobby 
group, and the governor, so that it was not 
something that some of the environmental 
activists were trying to get, which would’ve 
been a group of people completely unrelated 
to industry. In other words, these people 
would regard an industry person on this 
board as a conflict of interests. And, of course, 
if our whole country had been developed on a 
basis of anybody that is interested in industry 
or in a profit, having a conflict of interest and 
not being allowed to come in and advise how 
to do a thing, we’d have been down the drink 
before we started! 

But, anyway, the governor has been, this 
governor, Governor O’Callaghan has been a 
very helpful person in understanding both 
the politics and the reality of these situations. 
And I think he was wise in establishing this 
Environmental Protection Agency under 
himself, really, because it was the state 
agencies like the state engineer on water, the 
division of health person, and Elmo DeRicco, 
who heads the Department of Conservation 
and Natural Resources, and so on down the 


line. These people were named as the agency. 
And then of course, they have to have a staff, 
and they have to have somebody to go out and 
measure what’s going on, and enforce the law. 
And the law, we had to have a law, because the 
federal people arm-twist the state agencies or 
the states into having a law to comply with the 
federal requirement. 

And there is one air shed in the state of 
Nevada that’s named—I don’t know whether 
there’s another one now or not— but I 
remember back in the earlier days, there 
was one air shed in Las Vegas Valley that 
was named as a critical area. Actually, Clark 
County has a stiffer air pollution standard, 
set of standards, than the federal law would 
require, as I understand it. And there are 
mining operations down there that’ve really 
gone to a lot of expense to comply with the 
Clark County regulations. Nevertheless, 
there isn’t any such thing as operating these 
properties with zero pollution. There’s no 
way. And it would be ridiculous to think 
you’re gonna come up with it, ’cause it is never 
gonna happen [laughs]. You can’t have one 
more person come in to the state of Nevada 
without some more pollution. And on the 
one hand, we’re attracting people trying to get 
more people come to Nevada, and the biggest 
polluter that we have is people. 

You can’t use water. You can’t use water 
to irrigate without it being polluted, because 
you’ve let a certain amount of it be evaporated, 
and the soluble salts build up, and it’s not as 
pure after you’ve irrigated with it, as it was 
before. And, so pollution is somethin’ you 
live with, you don’t eliminate it. So this is 
one of the, I guess, biggest battles the mining 
industry has, is trying to come up with the 
story that you’ve got to allow some pollution 
[chuckles]. 

Then in the Congress, and in the 
administration, we’ve had a constant push 



148 


Paul Gemmill 


by those that don’t know any better, trying 
to convert the 1872 Mining Law into an 
all-leasing system, under which this right 
of ownership in a discovery is virtually 
eliminated. And, we think, you know, that 
maybe a change of administration from 
one party to another might have some 
influence on this; and I think people, maybe, 
are beginning to recognize that that’s not 
true. The same people are there, the sane 
philosophy is there, even if you change the 
top people running an agency. So, we’re gonna 
have to live with the fact that tendency is 
there under one administration after another; 
in spite of the fact that the Public Land Law 
Review Commission came up with strong 
recommendations that the public lands 
remain open to mineral entry, and that the 
philosophy of the right of ownership in a 
discovery be retained. Mineral deposits are 
where nature put them, or where they are, 
and you can’t lock up vast acreages and not be 
eliminating the potential of deposits that are 
yet unknown. So that right now, I think one 
of our greatest arguments is going on in that 
area, of trying to stop the tendency of locking 
up more of the federal lands against mineral 
entry. And I’ve read some statistics that say 
some fifty-five percent of the federal lands are 
already restricted. And that’s a tremendous 
percentage of these lands. It really, when 
we’re also facing a situation in the mineral 
extracting industry, that is similar to the oil 
picture, we’ve got to come back and develop 
our deposits. 

The other thing that the public doesn’t 
know, or doesn’t appreciate—when you talk 
about the extractive mineral industry, you’re 
talking about a wasting asset. Of course, 
immediately that is picked up in some 
quarters as to say: “Well, then you’d better 
set some of these aside for future generations. 
What’re they gonna do when you’ve mined 


out all your wasting assets?” Well, that’s a very 
difficult thing to get over to the public—that 
when you re in a mineral province, there is 
an untold amount of that mineral. Let’s take 
Arizona, with its mineral province in copper. 
It is in a copper mineral province. And the 
more of these you discover, the more you 
recognize that others are to be discovered. 
On the average, because of increased amounts 
being needed, and the evolution of equipment 
and everything, the amount of copper you 
could get, is of course, dependent on the price 
and the trend in mechanization and mining 
methods and everything. But if you take the 
price of copper in the depression years of 
the ‘30s of twelve cents, and look at wages, 
which were then, well, out at Bristol we were 
payin’ four-and-a-half a day, and look at what 
a miner shift costs you today, a man on your 
payroll today, with his fringe benefits and the 
cost of the equipment and everything that you 
supply him with, it runs about forty dollars a 
day. So, if he’s an underground miner, which 
we had out at the Bristol mine at that time, 
he’s gonna cost you thirty dollars just for 
his wages plus incentives that you’ll have to 
dangle out to get him to work underground 
any more. So, if you take four-and-a-half, or 
take five dollars into thirty, that’s six times, 
and six times twelve is seventy-two. So copper 
should be seventy-two cents. The difference 
here is, of course, that copper’s mostly, mined 
by open pit methods. But some of these mines, 
some of the big ones, are now going into 
underground mining with caving methods, 
back to the underground method, because 
there’s a limit to how deep you can dig open 
pit. Well, in other words, the price of copper 
has not escalated in real terms, very much. 

I remember when we were operating 
the Bristol mine and shipping direct to the 
smelter (and some of our ore was pretty good 
in copper), the price of copper drifted up to 



Mining Legislation and the Nevada Mining Association 


149 


about seventeen cents, when Mr. Roosevelt 
came out with a statement that it was too high 
[laughs], and then the price was reduced back 
to about twelve, and we were madder than 
wet hornets [laughs]! Because, you know, our 
operation was on the ragged edge all the time, 
like most underground mines were anyway 

Well, the point I’m making here is 
that the prospects of finding more, of any 
mineral, in a mineral province like— we can 
turn to Nevada. We’re in a precious metal 
province, which history has proven. We 
have, in Nevada, a lot of scattered precious 
metal mines, gold and silver, and some of’em 
combined gold-silver, some of ’em straight 
silver, some straight gold (almost). They’re 
not generally—most of it has not been in base 
metal mines, although Eureka, Nevada, of 
course, was a lead producer. And the Pioche 
area turned out to be a lead-zinc producer. But 
the early production was moderate amount 
of lead with high silver. And, of course, the 
Comstock was gold and silver, silver and 
gold, whichever way you want to put it. And 
then, of course, [gold and silver] Tuscarora 
and Midas; Tonopah straight silver, and so 
on and so forth. 

Well, we are then, in a precious metal 
province, and it’s been shown that when you 
have more or less what you might call a parity 
price for the precious metals, that they’ll be 
produced in that province. But, when the 
lid has been held on them, which, say, as 
everybody knows the price of silver and the 
price of gold went through a long, long period 
of static price because of the amount of silver 
that was already above ground in coinage, and 
with the government’s policy of buying silver 
for years there, with the express purpose of 
helping out the western miner, and then came 
right around a few years later selling it off to 
hold the price line, because other people had 
the ball. The western miner, in the earlier 


years, had his politician goin back fightin 
for him, like Pittman and McCarran, those 
fellas. Later on, we had nobody that took the 
attitude that it was the precious metal part in 
our ores that kept us healthy. 

In fact, the western miner joined up with 
the base metal producers. The people that 
were—in fact, my own boss, for a period of 
time in the late c 40s (not my boss at the time, 
but he was heading the company that I was 
working with, Mr. Snyder) was very closely 
allied with Mr. Howard I. Young, a personal 
friendship and in their efforts to benefit the 
lead-zinc industry. And the point I always 
made is that Mr. Snyder didn’t recognize that 
he was not a zinc producer. He had to have the 
precious metal in his ore, of somewhere near 
a parity value, before he was in the business 
of zinc producing. Whereas, the American 
Zinc Company, back in Tennessee, in those 
mines back there was in business at a price 
that with a constant precious metal price that 
Combined Metals was dead with, you see? 

So, in fact, in 1958, I wrote an article 
(while I was still working for that company, 
and I was, at that time, general manager) 
that I think Mr. Snyder sort of resented, 
but it was the truth, and I’ve got a copy of 
it I’ll let you have, stating this position. In 
fact, Lou Gordon published it in the Nevada 
Mining Association Newsletter, and I was 
quizzed rather intensively I remember, by 
John Kinnear, when I came over to one of the 
meetings of the Governor’s Advisory Mining 
Board. Lou had put this in the newsletter, 
and John Kinnear was trying to see what my 
thoughts really were on this subject. I mean 
he wasn’t critical, but you could tell that he 
wondered if I was right in taking that position. 

Well years ‘ve gone by, and now, after all 
these years (that was in ‘58, and here it is ‘75), 
we’re just now coming around to where the 
precious metal value in our base metal ores 



150 


Paul Gemmill 


of the West are beginning to put ’em back 
into a healthy position in the marketplace. 
And it’s taken that long for the natural 
evolution of events. Instead of the government 
sitting on its silver, which it could’ve made 
a tremendous profit on, by just sittin’ on it, 
it dumped it on the market. And it’s pretty 
much exhausted now. I think some of the 
statistics I saw show that there are probably 
four hundred million ounces of silver in coin, 
and the fact the futures market in coin (bags 
of coin), is, according to some experts, soon 
to be terminated, because there just won’t be 
enough coin to carry on a futures market in 
bags of coin. The answer to this seems to be 
that people that have the coin are holding 
them in their mason jars or wherever [laughs] 
they have ’em, and they’re not cornin’ out with 
them. In other words, there isn’t to be an awful 
lot of coin melted down any more. And that 
is one of the sources. The recent relaxation 
in India of restriction against selling silver is 
now said to be one of the things that’s holding 
price back, because for years there was a 
law in India against exporting silver. And of 
course, I think, as a matter of fact, some of the 
experts say that the law really had very little 
influence, and probably relaxation of the law 
won’t escalate the amount of silver cornin’ out 
of there. But, you have to wait and see. And 
there is, probably, a lot of silver in India, but 
it’s mostly held by small individuals with a 
small amount, and it’s maybe a life savings, 
and so forth. And with inflation like it is 
in those countries, it’s their protection that 
they’re hanging onto pretty tight. 

Well, I guess I’ve talked enough about the 
influence of the precious metal situation in 
our western mines. But, this has been a thing 
that I’ve taken a keen interest in. And one of 
the first things that I did, in coming up here, 
was to take the spare time that I could find and 
write a little article in 1964—the economics of 


price of silver versus wages and production in 
Nevada. I’ll give you a copy of that. 

We’re in the middle of discussing the 
Association activities. And in the Association 
activities, I think the most interesting part 
to me, was my attempt to spread the gospel 
[laughs], you might say, of what I’ve brushed 
with in my experience in the field, all the way 
from doing a little leasing and promoting 
properties on up to running a moderate size 
company, and acquiring properties and things 
like that for the company. And I’ve seen a lot 
of these things first hand that I recognize, if 
I hadn’t been over that trail, I wouldn’t know 
about. And it bothers me really, to think 
that we’ve gone into an era now where all 
important decisions have to be made by these 
people that don’t know anything about it. And 
when they talk about restrictive legislation 
here in the state of Nevada on lobbyists, and 
on people that get elected to public office, not 
having what they call a conflict of interests, 
where’re you gonna get the people that know 
what they’re talkin’ about in these jobs, if you 
don’t have people that, in that sense, couldn’t 
be identified as having conflict of interest? Are 
you gonna go over here and get some young 
fellas that haven’t ever had any experience 
at anything so they don’t have any conflict 
of interest, and then put them in the jobs? I 
dread to think what’d be like. So, this is—I 
think of it as the biggest problem this country 
has, is in that very area. 

And with all the horrible things, that 
came out of this Watergate thing—and I’m 
not excusing what was done there in any 
way, when I say this—but I’ll tell you that I 
do believe that most presidents coming up 
to Mr. Nixon had done things that could’ve 
been spread through the news media in 
the same damn way that that was, and you 
could’ve built a bonfire out of the script on it, 
on many things that’ve happened through the 



Mining Legislation and the Nevada Mining Association 


151 


years. And it bothers me, it bothers the hell 
out of me, to think that—. Well, one of the 
things I like to point out is, the news media, 
under the present philosophy, maintain that 
they’re entitled to keep any secrets from—you 
know, secret information in order to get the 
information, why they should be permitted 
to keep the information secret, their sources 
secret. They can have the secrets, but the 
president of the United States can’t. Well 
now, in what part of the history of the world 
have we ever had such a situation, and gotten 
anywhere? I’m not a defender of Mr. Nixon, 
but I was horrified really at watching how 
tremendous a problem was made out of that 
episode. I just can’t understand how it did 
this country any good. Maybe it was a good 
thing to get him out of office. Maybe we got a 
lot better man now that wasn’t elected. I don’t 
know [laughs]. But, that’s just cold turkey, 
statin’ my feelings about it. And most people 
would be on the other side of the fence from 
me, I’m sure. 

How do I set up a lobbying campaign? 
Well, now, first I want to explain. This is a 
non-profit institution here. It’s incorporated 
as a non-profit institution. We do not spend 
any money on lobbying. And we don’t. 
Nevertheless when they set up the regulations 
out here at the legislature, I had to register as 
a lobbyist, so-called lobbyist, under the rules, 
because I was there representing, presumably, 
the mining industry. But, under the IRS 
definition of lobbying, we are not lobbying; 
we are not spending any money on lobbying. 
But, the way that you try to keep things from 
getting out of hand, in working on a piece of 
legislation, I found (and I wouldn’t be a good 
lobbyist if I tried to be a real lobbyist, this 
wouldn’t be my thing at all. I wouldn’t know 
how to work under cover and do things, so 
forth). But, what I always told them, and 
they always laugh at me, that I just hang 


around there so if anybody wants to ask me 
a question, I’ll have the answer, and try to be 
low key, and just there, quite a bit. And when 
a certain piece of legislation comes up that 
I’m opposed to, show up in the committee 
and say why the Association would oppose 
such a thing, based—not because we’re not 
a profit making institution, but in general 
terms, this is either good or it’s bad for the 
mining industry and why. But then, I found, 
and have found, that the best results that I 
could achieve, in working on these things, 
was to work with the other people who called 
themselves lobbyists. In other words, the 
other industry people And, not only that, 
you don’t withdraw from working with those 
that are against you, generally, because maybe 
sometimes you can convince them. Like the 
League of Women Voters are not as bad as 
they start out sounding, you know, because 
they take a position and then from there on 
maybe they’re trying to defend the original 
position, and so they’re slanted to the degree 
that they already took a position. But, you can 
moderate that position at least, see. Because 
you can come up with—. Just like I was saying 
with Trevillya. She starts out with a position, 
and I don’t have any doubt—in fact, I could 
detect it later on, in later sessions— that 
she was moderated to some degree, you see 
[laughs], because the impossible can’t work, 
you know. So, you work at it that’s all. And you 
appear. Now this last time, I appeared very 
little, because I had a set-back [heart attack], 
you know, right at the beginning of things. 
I didn’t get out there as much as someone 
should. But, anyway, there was somebody 
there handling it. 

But that’s one of the functions, and it, 
of course, only comes every other year for a 
session period of time. That period of time 
seems to be gettin longer [laughs] each time. 
And in between you’re constantly, almost 



152 


Paul Gemmill 


constantly, concerned with all that stack of 
stuff you see around here [waves over desk]. 
About half of it is American Mining Congress. 
And then there’s a lot of stuff coming in here 
all the time from others like the small miner 
group, and the Exploration Geologist group, 
and people. And we have— another function 
of ours is to meet with people who come in 
asking questions, tryin to find answers for 
’em, and so forth. 

And then, I don’t know whether I said 
this, but the job that I took was based on my 
having time for my own consulting practice, 
which I’ve used very beneficially since coming 
here—that is, beneficially to my income 
[laughs]. I had to have something beside, 
because I’ve never worked for any outfit, 
including the present, where there was any 
outfit, including the present, where there 
was any retirement setup, or any basis for 
that. So, I’ve been, and I think fortunately, 
faced with providing my own and enjoy 
doing it [laughs]. So, from the Bristol days, 
this was a relatively small mining company 
that encouraged Jack Buehler and me to have 
somethin’ goin’ on the side. I suppose some 
of the officers of the company were hopeful 
that we’d bring somethin’ in that they’d be 
interested in. When it came down to the test, 
they weren’t interested, so we went ahead and 
got somethin’ goin anyway, which gave me a 
start. I had a little bit of money to play with 
these other things, ever since, and it’s been a 
lot of fun. 

And then in recent times, since 1968 
(that was four years after coming here), the 
company that I’d been with, the Combined 
Metals Reduction Company, in its joint 
venture with Steen, with the Grand Deposit 
Mining Company and Charlie Steen, ran 
into extreme difficulties at the time of the 
copper strike. And they owed quite a bit of 
money at the time. And thinking the copper 


strike would be over, why, they kept on 
mining at the Pan American mine, that they 
had under lease, and milling at the Caselton 
mill, and dug themselves in even deeper 
with creditors. And the copper strike lasted 
eight or nine months, whatever it was. And 
they were in serious trouble. And so some of 
the stockholders and creditors put the thing 
under receivership, and they twisted my arm 
and made me take the job of being the receiver 
for the company, under a plan of some kind 
of reorganization. So right away we had—well 
there’s no use, I guess, reviewing the history 
of this thing, but this was quite an education 
in how these things go in the courts. And I 
had a CPA accountant in Salt Lake, Mr. W. 
La Monte [Monty] Robison, the attorney 
in Salt Lake, Mr. William C. Powler, who 
the court recommended, under the federal 
court in Las Vegas. Mr. Loley, Roger Loley, 
Jr. [Roger T.] recommended Mr. Lowler, and 
so he was appointed. Of course, I didn’t know 
who to get. And I tried around Reno to find 
somebody, and some of’em had been involved 
with the Steen’s operations before, and 
considered themselves disqualified on that 
account. But I got a good recommendation 
when I picked up Jack Berry to be the Nevada 
attorney. And he’s been very good. And so 
I’ve worked with those two attorneys, and 
Monty Robison the accountant. And it was 
eventually transformed into a Chapter Ten 
proceeding, under the Bankruptcy Act, still 
allowing reorganization. 

And, under that procedure, we have gotten 
the Caselton mill (which was regarded as the 
principal asset of the company) activated 
by some Canadian people. And the mill is 
now running, and they’re paying royalties, 
and gradually creditors, obligations of the 
trustee are being paid off. I’m not the trustee 
any more, since getting the mill activated. I 
asked the court to let me out. I’d been with it 



Mining Legislation and the Nevada Mining Association 


153 


for six and a half years. And I figured that that 
was the principal thing I could do, so now the 
accountant, Mr. Robison, is the trustee. But, 
it’s still in the federal court, and there’s a ways 
to go before the creditors are paid off. So I’ve 
been involved in that, and I am now called on 
as a consultant in the matter now and then, 
and spend a little time at that. 

so, at my present age, being born in 1907, 
I’m tryin to unload a little bit, and I’m now 
talking about getting somebody else in this 
position, getting the Association to look at 
this, and I think they will pretty soon. Then 
I’ll step to one side. I’m hopeful that they’ll 
give me a free office here next door where Roy 
Hardy was, or one or the other. In fact, my 
secretary has said, and we—. I’m not supposed 
to talk about her, because she said not to. But 
I’ll say this much—that she told the directors 
when I talked about retirement, after I turned 
sixty-five, that she was not about to break in 
a new executive secretary [laughs]. So they 
haven’t let me quit. So I’ve been tryin’ to find 
a way of not totally quitting, but take social 
security, and take whatever they can pay me, 
without reducing my social security, and then 
step to one side and be—. If they want to call 
on me now and then for some help in breakin 
in somebody, okay. Maybe I’ll put that over, 
I don’t know [laughs]. I don’t think I’m really 
that good. The job is a public relations job, 
primarily, I guess you’d call it. 

However, I’ll say this, in my estimation, 
it’d be difficult to put somebody in that hadn’t 
had a reasonable amount of experience in the 
mining field, you know; and especially for a 
state like Nevada, where the precious metal 
side of this thing is so important. And there 
is a conflict, I think (and I’ve detected this 
right along), between the metallic miners 
and the nonmetallic miners—not a conflict, 
but there isn’t the same understanding about 
the importance of the 1872 Mining Law, 


because a lot of the nonmetallic minerals are 
under a leasing system anyway, and some of 
the others that are in gray line areas, could 
be leased without completely upsetting the 
prospect of makin’ it pay. And of course, 
if the objective of the federal agencies is to 
create more revenue out of the production of 
minerals—who pays for it? The public pays 
for it anyway. It’s just another way of taxing 
the people, and especially now. 

This is a point, too, that people don’t 
generally recognize, that the cost of our 
domestic minerals to us, is determined by the 
cost of supplying it domestically, because with 
the backward countries or the developing 
countries that have richer deposits, especially 
in the metal areas like copper, lead, zinc, 
and gold-silver—of course gold and silver 
are in a different category entirely; but, the 
base metals—those countries are gonna hold 
their price up to what it costs us to produce 
for ourselves. This is already illustrated 
very well by the oil picture, and we’re not 
gonna be out of this reliance on Arab oil 
until we’re able to supply our own. That’s 
pretty doggone evident. And its the same 
thing now in copper we are self sufficient, 
virtually self sufficient. In fact, we’ve got new 
properties on stream that are planned for, 
and being brought into production, ahead 
of our present requirements. But present 
requirements, of course, are in somewhat of a 
depressed situation. And, there’s no question 
but what the additional production is going 
to be required down the road a ways. So, 
it’s absolutely impossible to strike an exact 
balance on any of these things. 

So right now, you find the major copper 
companies are curtailing their production, 
because they build up a supply of copper, 
refined copper, overhanging the market, and 
there’s nothing they can do but stop feeding it; 
and especially when the price has dropped to 



154 


Paul Gemmill 


where some of these operations are marginal, 
you see? But, it’s a difficult thing to come up 
with any balance on it. Nobody’s ever done it, 
and I don’t think it will be [chuckles]. You’re 
escalating up and retreating down, and I think 
it’s gonna be probably even tighter because 
when these backward countries (or the 
“developing countries “ may be a more polite 
phrase; is it?—[laughs]) are so irresponsible 
that you can go in there and spend—an 
American company can go in there and spend 
tremendous amounts of money developing a 
property, and then they expropriate it. They’ve 
got richer copper ore. And they’ve got sort of 
a control on the market in that sense, but, of 
course, they haven’t got the efficiency that our 
American domestic producers have. So we’re 
gonna have to rely on what it’s cost us to get it 
out of our own ground. And that goes, I think, 
for the other base metals. And when that cost 
goes up, well the price goes up. 

And, of course, the cost, you always want 
to remember, looking back at that chart on 
silver*, is a relative thing; cost in dollars is one 
thing, cost in constant dollars is something 
else. If you put the inflation equation into 
the picture, these costs haven’t escalated like 
people talk about, in dollars. They haven’t 
escalated. The cost of copper in terms of a 
man’s day’s pay has stayed virtually constant. 
They’re getting into lower and lower grade 
ore; producing larger and larger quantities. 
And yet they’re holding the line on real cost 
to the consumer. Because the consumer, we 
assume, has got his income escalated, along 
with the rest. Unfortunately, there are a lot 
of people that are not going along with the 
escalating wages. What the answer is there, 
I don’t know. But, we’ve got among the black 
community, I understand, there’s twenty-five 
percent, or something, that are unemployed, 
while in the white community it’s about eight 
or nine, somethin’ like that. 


This gets into an area that I think our whole 
policy has missed the boat on. To say that we 
have abused them is not the right answer. I 
think the right answer would’ve been, and 
still can be, that the black people, through 
some of their leaders that are educated well 
enough to understand this, could take the 
ball and have their own development. Just 
come right into the marketplace and compete 
on building houses and on doing everything 
else, instead of saying, we’re gonna mix you 
up with all the—you know, government 
force a mixup of races just for the purpose of 
mixin’ ’em up. I think if I were a black man, 
I’d go out and promote an organization of 
all black people, and come out and show the 
public what I could do, building houses and 
everything else. That’s the answer. Well, that’s 
my attitude [laughs]. That’s my feeling in the 
matter. I think we’ve kind of missed the boat 
in trying to tell the unions, you’ve got to have 
your percentage of black people. I don’t think 
that makes much sense [laughs]. 

Getting back to the Association things for 
just a couple of minutes here. I mentioned 
Governor O’Callaghan’s attitude on mining 
and environmental protection and so forth, 
and his helpfulness to the Association. What 
about the other governors that I’ve worked 
with? Sawyer was very helpful. Sawyer went 
to considerable pains to, you know, go to 
Washington or do this or that, when there was 
some special problem in the mining industry. 

I think when Laxalt came along, as a 
matter of fact, this was at a time when the 
environmental movement was going great 
guns. And there was a case or two where 
we kind of expected him to take action that 
he didn’t. But, of course, he’s our friend. His 


*See Gemmill Papers, UNR Library 




Mining Legislation and the Nevada Mining Association 


155 


attitude and the things he’s expressing right 
now as the United States senator, sound very 
good to me. He’s very, very outspoken on the 
conservative side of the fence, and that’s where 
the miners belong. And, of course as you 
know, he’s coming out promoting Reagan, and 
we like that. We like Reagan. I think generally, 
you can understand that a miner, especially 
a small miner, is necessarily an extreme 
individualist. Right? Just like a farmer. You 
know, the guy that’s out—actually out there 
raising some crops. 

I’ve got a very good friend down in 
Lincoln County, Chet Oxborrow, who I’ve 
been dealing with for years in that valley 
out there. (He told me, just the day before 
yesterday, the potatoes are up that high [three 
feet, gesture] in that whole thing. You know, 
I made a deal with him, and he’s got a potato 
man from over in southern Utah that planted a 
big part of that valley with potatoes, and using 
the wells that I had drilled and developed and 
so forth. He says it looks awful good.) But 
Chet, he’s not a college man. He’s just a hard 
worker, and boy is he good [laughs]. Good at 
work, and good at thinkin too; and very much 
a conservative. So, I think the farmers, the 
ranchers, the miners, cattlemen, sheepmen, 
are all pretty much in the same frame of mind 
about government and policy, and so forth. 

But, we’re very much in the minority as far 
as the masses of people are concerned, because 
they’re squashed into these population 
centers, and understand very little about what 
goes on out in the wide-open spaces. More 
and more, it’s getting to be a tough problem. 

Congressman Baring always went out of 
his way to speak on behalf of the miner and the 
minerals industry. There was one place where 
he kinda misunderstood a little bit— when 
he was critical of the miners for not taking 
advantage of going into some of these proposed 
wilderness areas, during the time they had 


(until 1987), to develop mineral deposits that 
might be there, when he’d fought to get that 
open access period into the law, you see. But 
he didn’t understand and it had to be pointed 
out to him later (I don’t know that he ever did 
understand) that just to have that deadline 
laying out there and the fact that the area might 
become a wilderness area in itself, was enough 
to discourage ya even if ya had that right. Why 
look there? Go somewhere else and look. And 
that’s what happened! People did what came 
naturally, you know. [Laughs] That was one 
area that he didn’t understand too well. And 
in one of the Mining Congress speeches, he 
got up and made quite a statement out of the 
fact, even though they were allowed to do this, 
they didn’t take advantage of it. Well, I kind of 
chuckled at that, because I could see the other 
side, and saw it all the time. But, he was, as I say, 
easily approached to go after what was needed 
by the miners; and he did sit on committees 
that could hold the lid on bad things. 

One of the things that came up during 
that time was the Great Basin National Park, if 
you recall. It was proposed, and Senator Bible 
was working for it. And the ranchers, and the 
miners over there, myself included, were very 
much opposed to it. And of course, it came 
through Congressman Baring’s lap, and he 
stopped it! As you know, Senator Bible was 
in a position to promote national parks and 
things like that, and recreation areas. And he 
had committed himself on that previously. I’m 
not blaming him. I just say that he thought 
(and in the initial stage, I thought!) that the 
national park was gonna be a good thing 
for the area, until I got to diggin’ in, and the 
ranchers and other people over there got to 
explaining what it would mean, and what 
the restrictions meant and everything else. I 
switched my position. That was before I was 
with the Association however. I was just with 
Combined Metals at the time. I went up and 



156 


Paul Gemmill 


attended some hearings, and worked on that. 
But Baring stopped it cold. 

And then you asked about Howard 
Cannon. Howard Cannon has been good 
at answering letters. He hasn’t been on the 
committees; you know, like our congressman 
usually gets on the more important committees 
where this land problem starts you know what 
I mean? 

So, Towell was cooperative, and came 
out holding hearings on land lockup and 
the Organic Act, as proposed that had some 
bad things in it, from our viewpoint. And we 
gave testimony on that. And so I’d say he was 
cooperative. 

And I think our present congressman, 
Santini, is showing some signs of cooperation. 
There was one thing came up that we were 
opposed to, and that was, as going by the 
position of the American Mining Congress, 
this office—one of the things that we’re 
instructed to do is to weigh it carefully, and 
unless there’s some reason why we shouldn’t, 
in this particular state, we support and go 
along with recommendations of the American 
Mining Congress, the mining industry 
lobbying outfit in Washington. 

Here’s a case in point. The position the 
State Committee on Federal Land Laws, the 
majority of the State Committee (which I 
was a member of during the PLLRC and also 
at the present time—still a member of the 
governor’s new, well it’s a new committee; 
the old committee was terminated with the 
PLLRC report, and a new one was set up 
by O’Callaghan directly reporting to the 
governor, looking at the federal land laws in 
relation to Nevada), and the position of the 
committee was that this state should go after 
the federal help in land planning, vigorously. 
And in the early stages of deliberations, I was 
not personally taking an opposing view to 
that, providing that the state—of course, you 


know these pieces of legislation can have the 
same tag, have the same general objective, and 
when you get down to the detail of it, it can 
be either a good thing or a bad thing. So in 
general, I was not opposed to seeing the state 
go after federal funds in land planning. After 
all it’s eighty-six percent federal land, and if 
the state were able to include the federal land, 
and if the state were able to include the federal 
land in its land planning process, it’d give us a 
bigger, you might say “hold,” or a bigger “say” 
in what’s done with the federal lands under 
the state agencies, which in my opinion, are 
far better for the purpose than having the 
problem shipped to Washington, and having 
them impose Appalachia on us, you see? 

So, I was not opposed to that idea for some 
time, until it got down to actual legislation that 
was being proposed, and being opposed by 
American Mining Congress with some rather 
careful analysis. And so about that point here 
a year or so ago, I turned around and took the 
opposite view, because I was convinced, and 
the Association membership was convinced 
that, you know, American Mining Congress 
position was correct. And, so it’s come down 
to a quite recent thing, where in opposition 
to the passage of the most recent bill on land 
planning, the Congress, or the House, barely 
defeated the bill. And Mr. Santini wound up 
on the side of passing the bill, after we’d written 
him our position and so forth. 

We got a very nice letter back from 
him, just a few days ago, I mean a week or 
two ago, in which he went to considerable 
length in explaining why he voted for the 
bill, and explained that, of course, to begin 
with, Governor O’Callaghan is for it; and a 
lot of the things that were originally most 
objectionable, in the way of the federal arm- 
twisting provisions, had been eliminated, 
and he saw the bill as a good bill. Well, this to 
me, was a good indication: because he took 



Mining Legislation and the Nevada Mining Association 


157 


time out to write a two-page careful letter on 
that particular subject, and I don’t think, for 
Nevada, it’s a critical issue, like some of these 
other things. These other things, I think, we’ll 
have him on our side. I think he’s listening. 
Now, that pile of things* that I gave you there, 
I bundled up a pile of things like that, right 
after he got elected, and sent them to him. 
And I got a nice acknowledgment back, in 
which he said, it was very helpful for him to 
understand more about the mining industry. 
So, I do expect him to be payin’ attention. I 
think he’s shown that he will. And as some of 
the small miners’ groups have told me, they’ve 
met with him, and they were pleased with his 
attitude. So, who else are we talkin’ about? 

Our relationship with Senator Bible, 
in that particular case of the Great Basin 
National Park (I think they called it) was just 
one thing. Other than that, I have to say that 
he was—when you really got a problem and 
brought it up to him, he’d come in and defend 
your position, but you had to really get right 
to him, you know. He was an awful busy man 
in a lot of other areas. And of course, being a 
senator is quite different, I think, than being 
our lone representative in the House, because 
the things that relate to us mostly originate 
and have to get through that House. And the 
Senate is a different kind of a body. I don’t 
know. Their heads are more in the clouds I 
think [laughs]. Well, it’s what Wayne Aspinall 
expressed. He was the chairman of the Land 
Law Review Commission, and he has met 
with the state committee on federal land 
laws a couple of times; and he made the very 
important point, and I can agree with him, 
that the House is the place where the work is 
done, and the Senate is the place where, well, 
they wait for the House to do the work. 


*See Gemmill Papers, UNR Library 





14 

Conclusions 


Philosophical Reflections 

You see I’ve got a notebook here? And 
starting in, oh, a number of years ago, I’d 
once in a while make a little note to myself, 
that otherwise I’d have forgotten, about some 
of my ideas, philosophy, if you will, and once 
in a while something that I thought was a 
little funny And my sense of humor is very 
good for me, but maybe it isn’t very good, 
as far as making an impression on anybody 
else, but I think when a person reveals what 
their sense of humor is like, then they reveal 
something about themselves; and maybe 
a little bit about their experience. Right? 
And so, I’ll start in by being a wag. I am a 
wag, and I’m always buggin’ people with my 
rather poor sense of humor, because I believe 
in mixing up words that—. You know, this 
business of, well, what do c ya call it, puttin’ 
the wrong word in the right place because 
it’s a similar word, or somethin’ like that. So 
here goes. 

First of all, I’ll talk about bein’ a wag 
[laughs]. Then maybe I’ll get into—if it isn’t 


too far out—I might get into a little bit of 
somethin’ serious, you know. 

Now in this notebook which I’ve started, 
“Philosophical Ref lections,” in 1962, there 
are some things that I find go back of that 
time, but they were old notes that I ran 
across somewhere or other, and put into this 
notebook. And, as I say, the notebook was 
started on my fifty-fifth birthday. And one 
of the first things that I put in was a serious 
observation, and it’s rather a roundabout way 
of saying a simple thing but: “Man blinds 
himself with his own handiwork, which 
once created, his ego must hold up to view 
whenever the subject’s brought to mind.” 
And I—that’s a— first thing I put in it then 
was something serious [laughs] But, shortly 
I got to this point: 

“If at first your try goes plop, 
give the thing another prop. 

Then if you cannot win the race, 
why not see if you can place. 

But if a failure you must be, 
remember dogs don’t climb a tree.” 



160 


Paul Gemmill 


The above was composed for Tamby on 
a trip to Arizona— that’s our daughter, who 
was then, in 1962, seven years old. 

Then in the early 1964, on a trip to 
Pahranagat Valley in a Chevrolet wagon, a 
sideswipe of a highway post ensued, when 
composing more and trying to jot it down in a 
small notebook, while driving south through 
Panaca Valley Verses are, [laughs]. (This goes 
on with the same jingle:) 

“Best avoid and not repeat, 

the things in which you met defeat. 

You can avoid those sticky messes, 
by repeating past successes. 

Most men making bad mistakes, 
think they had the worst of breaks, 
and when they see their moneys gone, 
they find someone to blame it on. 

Mow if you think my verse is corn, 
remember dogs are not great poets born.” 

[Chuckles] Is that okay? [Chuckle] 

Now here’s more like a miner’s viewpoint— 
going on with being a wag—and I guess this 
must have been during my sixtieth year. And I 
haven’t jotted anything down in this notebook 
for a long, long time, ’cause when I came to 
this office, and repeated a thing or two that 
I had in my notebook to my secretary, she 
pretty quickly closed me of f. She didn’t want 
me [laughs] goin on bein’—[laughs]. So. 

“When your head longs for 
what body can’t do, 
the young man’s pleasures 
are not for you. 

Now don’t get me wrong, 

for I still feel quite strong, 

though I’m twenty and twenty and twenty. 

But as time passes on, 

while my zip is not gone, 

just a little for me is quite plenty. 


The advice that I am giving to you, 
when you find that your youth is all 
through, 

and a slow down in pleasures must follow; 

just slacken the pace, 

for you can’t win the race, 

but you can be a jolly good fellow. 

Now I say this because 
if the strain gives you pause, 
but if you for pleasures have taste (I 
twisted that) 

you can turn to the things 

that older life brings, 

and savor the good things with grace. 

Okay. Well that’s my extent of tellin you 
that I’ve been a wag [laughs]. And, most of 
my jokes fall flat on people, but they give me 
some pleasure [laughs]. 

However, I think that it would be a 
mistake, cornin’ to this point, if I didn’t 
repeat a few things that I’ve put down in 
this notebook. And I don’t know—. It might 
be that some of this would be better just 
duplicated and handed to you. I could do that. 
But, I think maybe to talk about it as we go 
along a little, and take some of the highlights. 

In June of, it must’ve been ‘55 when I 
started the notebook, one of the things—little 
ideas that came to mind was in respect to 
getting an operation into a smooth-working, 
coordinated plan of operation that worked, 
and that you didn’t have to constantly watch. 
The supervisor or the manager didn’t have 
to go around and do people’s jobs for ’em, 
which means, as I put it here in very brief 
statement: “A lubricated groove is essential to 
an efficient business enterprise. A rut is a worn 
out groove.” Now, by that I mean that you have 
maybe great difficulty when you start a new 
operation or a new plan in a given complex of 
operations; may have great difficulty getting 
the right man in the right place, and you 



Conclusions 


161 


almost invariably have a lot of silly troubles 
that come happening, because you haven’t 
got everybody organized. And finally, you 
do get it organized, and when you do (you 
can look at the largest companies or the 
smallest), then it’s just like a person walking 
and automatically putting one step in front 
of the other, one foot in front of the other to 
walk, and keep the balance while they’re doing 
all kinds of other things, talking or anything 
else. So if that plan that you got this operation 
going with, operates long enough, it’ll be a 
worn-out groove. In other words, there’ll be 
others that have gotten the same kind of an 
operation goin’ much more efficiently down 
the down the line somewhere, see. So you’ve 
gotten the—. Although you’ve gone in smooth 
working groove in a sense, it may be worn- 
out, and inefficient. Okay. So you have to 
constantly watch for some way of turning the 
groove at a different direction, and keeping it 
lubricated. 

“Old age is signaled by the years of the 
man, or the organization. It is signaled by the 
playing of cracked records, goin’ over and over 
the same old trail, in other words.” So we as 
individuals can be in a groove that works fine 
for us, but finally it gets worn out too. 

“Requirement for discovery.” This 
is a thought that I thought was of some 
consequence. “Discovery seldom requires a 
reward, but to follow through to practical 
application does require reward. Put 
differently, one discovers for the sheer 
satisfaction of it. Where the discoverer or 
inventor falls down and fails to capitalize 
on his ideas, is in the follow-through. This 
is largely because his nature tends to detract 
from the importance of the discovery— the 
inventor feeling at the time, ‘There must be 
a better way.’ Naturally, he has this feeling, 
because without this thought he wouldn’t have 
sought the better way in the first place.” I don’t 


know whether that makes sense or not. It was 
a thought any way. 

And then in a little later excursion ride 
through the country somewhere, why, I jotted 
down somethin’ else that I I thought at that 
time was of some consequence: “Man has a 
need to be needed. In this need, he draws 
to him those who need him. Sometimes, 
learners, and sometimes to the exclusion of 
the most independent. This causes him to 
exaggerate the importance of what he has 
learned to do, and to minimize the importance 
of what others know how to do.” I don’t know 
whether that sinks in very easy or not. But I’ve 
seen it happen. 

And a little later, another one: “Self 
preservation, the first law of nature, underlies 
all manner of human action. In plants and 
animals, we see the raw manifestations of 
nature’s law. But even in animals we see 
individual sacrifice for the benefit of the 
colony or of the family. So this is not a 
distinguishing human trait. Yet, the first law is 
manifest in purely human motivation. Indeed, 
the highest form, the greatest of all purely 
human endeavor is surely motivated by the 
first law. And the endeavor is the preservation 
of the inner man. Then the most intense and 
exclusively human struggle, is the exertion of 
each man within himself to be human.” And 
then I changed that a little bit. But anyway 
we’ll go on. “The battle is never won, but never 
lost. For each of us, the measure of our success 
in living, cannot be scored by any other man. 
The terrain, the intelligence, the odds of force, 
the will to fight, and the satisfaction in victory 
are all concealed within each individual 
man.” Then I said something else that was 
supposed to go on the end, and I had it back 
in the other part of this. “Exhibitionism, 
essential to primitive man, has contributed 
uniformly to the social system.” And I also 
said, “The exhibitionism ‘bit’ should probably 



162 


Paul Gemmill 


be removed from where I had it and put at the 
end.” Anyway, that, probably could be dressed 
up a little better. 

“To discover a liar for material gain or for 
its companion, popular acclaim, is to discover 
a man who is unaware of the battle that exists 
of human supremacy over animal instinct.” 
That was all of that one. 

“A wise man does not report for long 
to one who does not promote his growth.” 
That’s a very important one, I think. That’s 
one of the things that I tried to lecture every 
young fella that came under my supervision, 
that and the habit of being a saver. The two 
things are most important to getting ahead in 
this world and to being happy with yourself. 
And very often you see people that have a 
tendency to turn to those that know less than 
they do and associate with them, because it 
seems to—. They think it boosts their ego, I 
guess. But I think it just works to create more 
dissatisfaction in themselves. And if you’ re, if 
you’re attracted by the fella that knows more 
than you db—and there’s always plenty of’em 
that know more than you do—now you don’t 
have to admit that you’re not a “super human 
being at the same time, because there are a lot 
of areas of accomplishment and knowledge 
and everything. So you have to start out by 
admitting you can’t know everything. So you 
can always pick out somebody that knows 
more than you do, in some particular line, at 
least—even if you are an egotistical so-and- 
so [laughs]. Well, I think it’s a very important 
thought, and I think it can contribute to 
progress for the young fella tryin’ to get ahead, 
if he really would swallow it and think about 
it. 

“Confusion results from an inability to 
define objectives and separate the elements 
of an overall problem. Commonly, personal 
drives are at cross purposes with business 
objectives.” And when I was lookin’ at that, I 


was thinking of some particular individuals 
that I knew. 

“The fool never learns by experience.” 
This is from an old notebook that I found 
somewhere back in 1935—a ‘35 diary that 
I started to keep before I kept a permanent 
diary. From about 1937 on, I had something 
down for all the time—usually just connected 
with business, but very seldom that I wrote 
any of this kind of thing in it. But here was one 
that I had in this old diary: “The fool never 
learns by experience. The average man learns 
by his own experience. The wise man learns 
by the experience of others.” 

And another one at the same time: “Make 
gay with your own crowd, else you must be 
immune to insult.” I saw some things happen 
out at the Bristol mine where some of the 
ladies that were really pretty nice ladies were 
present at parties, and some of the rough 
miners were sayin’ things [laughs], and so, 
would you allow that to make a fight or do 
you just blame it on associating with people 
that you shouldn’t be associating with if you 
don’t like it [laughs]? Am I right? 

“Those with the success ahead of them 
must now be looking to the future. They have 
little time to be reflecting on the past?’ I don’t 
know. I think a lot of this is not worth much. 
“For me to go fishing today is urgent, but 
to plan good, clean recreation for boys and 
girls is important. So one might delegate the 
fishing to the boys and girls, then go along to 
keep them company.” I thought that was all 
right [laughs], 

“Everything is accomplished in 
mediocrity.” That is a quote from Mr. Sam 
Farnsworth. And then my addition to it is 
this: “And the thinner you spread yourself, 
the more mediocre you become.” And when 
Sam Farnsworth was saying that, and I threw 
it back at him several years later, he said, 
“I didn’t know I’d ever said that.” [Laughs] 



Conclusions 


163 


“Everything is accomplished with mediocrity.” 
But on analysis, I considered that statement 
quite important, because I found, in my 
experience, that there’s very little difference 
in a practical way, in the mental capacity of 
different people that you run across. I mean 
they’ve all got the same mechanism in their 
head that I’ve got. It’s a matter of how they 
use it. And you can take a fella that’s been a 
complete flop in one area, and if he got set 
on the right trail, and went through the right 
steps, in performing the job you want done, 
and then consented to go ahead and do it; 
he might be a very mediocre person in your 
view, but he might be a top man in that job. 
And I’ve found that very true— that—finally 
after he’d done enough of it, you can learn a 
lot from him [laughs]. That’s right. 

One of the big fallacies in this mining 
game—and I think it shows up in the mining 
game maybe more than in a lot of other 
places—is that advanced education doesn’t 
make a good miner. And, in fact, advanced 
education, I haven’t found necessarily made a 
good manager—of a crew of men, you know. 
In other words, you have to know the different 
phases of the operation and all that, but the 
biggest engineering problem, and particularly 
in running mines in out-of-the-way places 
where you have to do a lot of things like even 
setting up your camp, and all the phases of 
the operation, and then going on to make 
it work and get it into (what we were talkin’ 
about a while ago) a smooth working groove, 
the biggest engineering problem is human 
engineering. In other words, the ability to 
appraise what the other fella can do and put 
him in the right spot is what I call or what 
Mr. Hoover used to call, human engineering. 
And human engineering, I think, is what 
makes an operation go, because a man has 
been around a particular type of operation 
long enough and understands the necessity 


to look for the man that knows—and not 
necessarily your own knowledge that you’re 
applying. You’re applying the knowledge of 
others—a very important thing because I’ve 
seen many, many cases where a man has the 
idea that he’s got to make people think that 
he made all the important decisions, and this 
can be disastrous. It disrupts the whole crew; 
those who had some good ideas and had to 
come in and expose the idea, and then be told 
a few weeks later that the idea came from the 
boss— it doesn’t work very good [laughs]. 

“Frustration is avoided by understanding 
one’s animal instincts of territory” (and 
this is getting pretty long hair, I warn you), 
“by understanding one’s animal instincts 
of territory, status, and sex, while meeting 
the civilization requirements of religion 
(constitution), morals (bylaws), family ties 
and friends (organization). It appears to me 
there is surely an instinct of the supernatural, 
which must be as powerful as any other 
instinct. No people have been found, no 
matter how primitive, who did not have 
something akin to religious belief. Tracing 
this back into the animal world, reliance on a 
power beyond the individual’s experience and 
knowledge is found on every hand.” So that’s 
a brief statement on my feeling about religion 
and I have probably more that I might add 
to that a little later. But then I come to some 
headings here: 

Age 

“In age the flagging memory or flagging 
interest is prone to reject new ideas, since 
habit must replace learning and imagination 
(because of the flagging memory, of course). 
And realization that the end approaches does 
promote dependence on the status quo.” This 
is why, in many cases, it’s necessary to put a 
man out of his job when he gets too old or 



164 


Paul Gemmill 


starts getting where he must depend on the 
status quo, because progress and evolution 
means that things are changing all the time. 

Freedom 

“To become a free man, you must first of 
all, acquire self-reliance. You must recognize 
your weaknesses, yet be the master of them. 
You must not be dominated by any man, yet 
remain the servant of mankind. Freedom 
breeds confidence, not arrogance. Freedom is 
a manner of thinking, and cannot be bestowed 
upon”—and I first put “man,” and then I put 
up above it, “a society” “nor can it be taken 
away except in the physical sense. 

“Freedom is a most elusive attainment for 
it is not licensed, and it cannot be bestowed 
upon anyone. No man knows freedom who 
has not learned to guard first against himself— 
in the final analysis, the only real slave master.” 
When you look around you see most of the 
people on the street are slaves; they’re slaves 
to their job; they’re slaves to somebody that’s 
dictating what they do, and they feel this. They 
feel they’re slaves. I think the young people 
today—one of the biggest problems they have 
is that feeling of frustration because they have 
not been brought up from early youth to take 
on a feeling of responsibility, for themselves. 
Right? And they’ve been allowed to just drift 
and suddenly they get to be men, or women, 
to be grown people, and they haven’t come 
over a trail that gave them any feeling of self- 
reliance, and responsibility. Why shouldn’t 
they be all confused? And I think our whole 
society—and particularly the union and labor 
groups, so-called labor group, the labor group 
leaders—have been very much responsible 
in this area of preventing—in “child labor” 
laws. They’ve prevented a lot of things that 
were taken for granted as people grew up on 
the farms in earlier periods of society. And I 


think it’s disastrous. I don’t know how else to 
call it. I don’t know whatcha can do to turn it 
around either. 

Atheists 

“Those who call themselves atheists are 
made by dogmatic and fanatic religionists 
of narrow belief. The open mind of free men 
must see the whole within their power to 
grasp its meaning.” I’ll repeat that with a little 
different emphasis. “The open mind of free 
man must see the whole within his power to 
grasp its meaning.” 

Religion 

I guess I’d thought what I said before 
wasn’t complete, and I must have done 
quite a bit of thinking about my religion at 
some time or other. And I think I still do. I 
have a—I think I have an open mind in that 
respect. And maybe this reflects kinda what 
I think. And I, I don’t mind exposing it to 
anybody that wants to know about it. 

You cannot deny the truth of an instinct. 
(An instinct is there whether you want to 
say it’s there or not.) Some form of religious 
belief is instinctive in all humans. (I’ve said 
that before.) “No society of man has been 
discovered without religious beliefs; and 
back of man, lies his animal origin within 
instinctive social characteristics that cannot 
be denied and cannot be erased .” (I’d better 
repeat that, because I confused it a little bit. 
I was putting it positive instead of negative, 
and I’d better repeat it like I think it should 
be.) “The least vulnerable (men) argue that 
their god is ruler over all life and all things. 
So by their definition, the laws of nature are 
the laws of God.” 

Most vulnerable—I’ll parenthetically add 
to that here and now—most vulnerable are 



Conclusions 


165 


those who separate God from nature, and 
separate God into a channel over here that’s 
operating under nature, and that heaven 
is off somewhere separate from all these 
other natural places. And there are people 
who hold to that kind of a belief, and read 
it into the Bible. I don’t. I have very broad 
interpretation of the Bible. I used to argue 
with my mother quite a bit, who was much 
more—. Well, she’d read the Bible with great 
conviction you know, the Bible had to be 
right. She didn’t say that she could always 
interpret it right. But, when I tried to argue 
with her at first on evolution, she seemed to 
want to take the position: “Well, after all the 
Lord is all powerful.” She didn’t have her Lord 
partitioned over here in a separate place, by 
any means. But, she said, “He’s all powerful 
and He could make anything appear any way 
He wanted to.” So why shouldn’t we just go 
ahead and believe the Bible that the earth 
was made in seven days. A day to her, was a 
day [laughs]! Okay. 

Now going on with this other statement 
that I wrote down. “As to Christ, at the 
very least”—and I’m not saying that I take 
Christ at the very least, but I do like to put a 
foundation under Christ—”at the very least, 
science must grant that he instinctively knew 
nature’s laws better than any living man 
today.” (That’s my opinion.) “All scientific 
research has not found, and is not likely to 
discover and disseminate, wisdom greater 
than the instinctive wisdom present in each 
of us.” You get that? “But all manner of 
misery is lived by those who countermand 
the dictates of their own conscience.” 

“Atheism, as a belief to be given status, 
should be legally denied. It is a categorical 
untruth to have a belief in the non-existent.” 
Okay? That’s my religion [laughs]. 

And here’s—I guess the latest thing I wrote 
down in here—’’One’s past keeps returning, 


and whether good or bad must be faced 
repeatedly. Some part of every experience 
leaves its mark that cannot be totally erased.” 

That’s about the size of it as far as tryin 
to review my scribblings [laughs]. But, I don’t 
think that any person is exposed without 
getting into some of that kind of thing. Do 
you? I don’t mean that you’re gonna get other 
people to think the same way, but I think that 
some of it comes from experience, and a lot of 
it comes, I think, from an upbringing, the way 
you were brought up from way back there. 
It’s been said many a time, of course, that 
the life style of a person and their thinking is 
largely determined way back there under the 
age of—what is it?—six or ten or something. 
And I think that’s very true. But, I’ll also say, 
and repeat what I said a while ago, that even 
after that time of lit e— and you can do your 
very best with a person up to that time—and 
their associations with others around them, 
and particularly their peers, starts taking over, 
and it can direct them in a disastrous path, 
or it can direct them in a constructive path. 
And I think society today, with our buildup 
of population centers like they’ve been, and 
with all the things that science has brought 
into the picture and everything, has made 
it almost impossible to insulate a growing 
person from all the folderol that’s going on 
around ’em. So I guess you’d be making a 
mistake if you tried. But, now I’m gettin into 
an area that’s way over my head. So [laughs]. 
I don’t know what can be done about it, or 
whether anything ever will be done. 

I must say another thing, looking at things 
as they stack up today, with our high rate 
of inflation at the same time that we have 
a business recession, which certainly is the 
first time that we’ve seen just this kind of a 
situation in the financial community and 
in the country, where even a high rate of 
unemployment doesn’t cure the inflationary 



166 


Paul Gemmill 


trend. I think if this was restricted to the 
united States of America, it’d be, I think, 
cured rather quickly because the world would 
bring us around; the pressure of what’s going 
on elsewhere would bring us around. But, 
apparently this is—all the developed countries 
are in the same boat. And so I don’t see how 
this can be turned around without going into 
a—. (This is a very pessimistic statement I 
guess, and I don’t feel like a pessimist. But I 
just, it’s the way I see it.) I don’t see how this 
thing can get turned around without going 
through the wringer. And if we go through 
the wringer, we’ve got a tremendous number 
of people that aren’t gonna understand it. 
And when they don’t understand it, they’re 
gonna be impossible to deal with. So, there’s 
my pessimistic view. I don’t know. 

Public Lands vs. Mining Lands 

I thought, you know, I came along for 
over many years thinking that our whole 
financial package lay in the financial handling 
of our money supply and things like that. 
But the social end of this thing becomes an 
overriding importance, because now we’ve got 
a new political system. I don’t know whether 
I mentioned this before, but I believe that 
with the Supreme Court decision of “one 
man, one vote,” we put decision making in 
the hands of the masses far more than we 
ever had it before. And then we came along 
with the television, and the news media, that’s 
so centrally governed and controlled, that 
everybody, all these masses of people, get the 
same news release, at the same time, that’s 
put out by the same people all the time—and 
they’re very influential. So when the fella 
comes home from work, takes his beer, and 
sits down drinkin’ his beer and eatin’ his 
cheese and crackers and watching TV, he gets 
the message, the same message that all the 


rest of’em are getting. And they’re influential 
enough so that the majority of them believe 
what they hear. They don’t question it. Well, 
they’re not raised, or they haven’t been trained 
to question what they hear. And the pollster 
comes along and proves that point— that the 
idea went over. And then, under our political 
system, the politician has no way to turn but 
to listen to the pollster. So if you analyze 
that backwards, you say that it isn’t the top 
politicians that are really taking our problems 
and handling them for us. The masses of 
people are trying to handle our problems, 
after listening to somebody tell them what 
to think. 

So a very short way of putting this is that 
we have a new political system, if you want 
to call it that, by putting the word “media” in 
the middle of the word “democracy.” I liked 
to call it “demediacracy” [laughs]. And the 
third political party that we don’t recognize, 
and not about to recognize, is the party I like 
to call the “mediacrats”—those who are being 
told what to think by the media— and think 
it—and express themselves accordingly. And 
the media—it isn’t all their fault. People like 
to hear the far out stuff. They like to hear the 
bad news. They like to hear all the stories they 
can hear on violent things or disasters, and 
that occupies a lot of the news. And so it’s a 
changed system. 

As a matter of fact, now this gets pretty far 
out, but this is a statement that I don’t mind 
making. This country was built as a republic 
more than as a democracy. The incentives for 
building the West (if you look back and look 
at it real hard), the incentives for coming out 
West and building the West were economic, 
and they paid no attention to anything but 
that factor. And the captains of industry did 
the job by going to the leaders of the country 
and getting the incentives out of them, and 
the incentives were very effectual. So that 



Conclusions 


167 


the granting of vast acreages of land, like you 
see across the checkerboard ownership map 
of Nevada of the railroads, things like that 
were the kind of incentives that were dangled 
out to get these things done. There isn’t any 
possibility that we’re gonna have a repetition 
of granting incentives like that. 

But, after the first phases were over, then 
the next phases entered a long period when 
politicians took for granted that the old 
concept of “to the victor belong the spoils” was 
the incentive for them running for a political 
office. Right? I think we have to admit that. 
And so when they got in office, they felt that 
they had prerogatives, just through having 
secured the vote and secured the office. And 
it didn’t take very much twisting in their 
thinking to do a Spiro Agnew. Right? 

But it worked. Now that’s the thing. The 
system worked. And we went through a vast 
period of growth and success in building up 
our economy. And you go back to the mining 
law, and there isn’t a better example can be 
cited than the establishment of a principle out 
West, that if you discover a mineral showing— 
and they didn’t say a marketable mineral 
deposit; they said a mineral showing—that 
a prudent man would dig on, you had a 
discovery, and you had a right of ownership 
as against any other citizen. You had no right 
of ownership against the federal government, 
because the federal government did say you 
had to have that discovery on your claim, and 
you had to show discovery to get patent. And 
then in the early days each mining district 
had its own rules. And finally these mining 
districts were sort of evaporated and it became 
the counties, more or less, and finally the state, 
and the state law took over, in which it evolved 
that you had to have a mineral discovery; 
you had to have—well, mineral discoveries 
required anyway under the federal law, but 
in Nevada you had to have a shaft ten-feet 


deep with mineral in place. But then the thing 
that kind of destroyed this concept was the 
addition of the words that said you had to 
excavate so many cubic feet. And finally the 
bulldozer could do that very easily [laughs]. 

I don’t want to leave this discussion 
without making a very important point of 
the fact that this caused an awful lot of bad 
propaganda against the mining industry, 
although it was a part of the law. And it caused 
miners and cattlemen to be at odds. And we 
worked pretty hard to get rid of the idea of 
having to dig that hole on every claim that 
you locate. Sometimes in the modern day— 
(and I’m gettin’ maybe of F the subject here in 
talkin’ [about] this. It belongs somewhere else, 
maybe in the discussion. But I ye covered this 
other philosophical business so—). 

Anyway, we had a lot of trouble with 
these holes being objected to. And you’d go 
out across the state, and some places where 
they had a hundred or two hundred and fifty 
claims or something, and then these holes 
are a regular pattern all over the country 
there, where somebody put their brand 
out there, because they wanted to start in a 
searching program. They didn’t want anybody 
encroaching closely on them. All of which 
would have been perfectly all right except for 
these darned holes in the ground. And the 
problem in getting rid of that useless diggin’ 
which is not a requirement under the federal 
law—that you do any digging—you just have 
to have the discovery. And of course, you don’t 
have to have the discovery until the federal— 
you haven’t had to have the discovery until the 
federal government had some other reason to 
test the land, and send out an examiner to see 
whether you had a valid claim. And so that, 
for a long period of time, has resulted in the 
habit of thinking that, you know, you don’t pay 
any attention to whether you’ve got somethin’ 
stickin’ out of the ground or got a discovery. 



168 


Paul Gemmill 


You just post up your claim, and unless there’s 
some other reason why somebody wants the 
ground, why you’re not worried about it. So, 
in trying to get rid of that, we went through 
two different sessions of the legislature. And 
finally we have come up with a new Nevada 
statute that requires that you have to identify 
the location of your claim, and file a map, 
and pay a fifteen-dollar fee to locate a lode 
claim, twenty-dollar fee to locate a twenty- 
acre placer claim. 

Of course, all of this is elsewhere to be 
found and all that, but I thought that this might 
be mentioned in this little thing, because I’ve 
had a good deal to do with trying to get this 
thing solved. And it’s been my responsibility 
as an Association person to work with the 
other groups, including the ranchers, and 
the city and county governments, and the 
railroads, and with the various people that’ve 
been on the Land Law committee of the state 
of Nevada. I’ve found that they were all, every 
one of’em, no matter who they represented— 
there was an eleven-man group on the state 
committee on federal land laws established 
by the legislature, in looking over the PLLRC 
(Public Land Law Review Commission) 
material—and I found there was no problem 
in the state of Nevada of working with all 
phases of land use, whether it’s the recreation 
group, or the hunters and fishers [laughs]. All 
of ’em—when they would get into meetings 
and understand the other fella’s problems and 
viewpoint—. 

And it’s, of course, believed nationally, by 
these masses of people that I was talkin’ about 
awhile ago, that mining just goes out here and 
rips up the whole country, and you’ve got to 
put an end to it. And you’ve got to make sure 
that anybody that digs a hole has to restore 
it, and all this; completely ignoring the fact 
that even including all the land in the coal 
fields back in Appalachia (where we have no 


such problem at all in Nevada), including 
that and everything else in the whole united 
States of America, there’s only two-tenths of 
one percent of land that’s ever been disturbed 
by mining. That’s remarkable. And in recent 
years, even back in the coal fields, most of the 
land that gets disturbed, and more than what 
has been disturbed (according to the Bureau 
of Mines statistics) has been reclaimed, and a 
lot of cases in better shape than it was before 
it was mined. But, that doesn’t—. People don’t 
even listen. I mean the people like the Sierra 
Club and the bird watchers and the far-outers 
that’re trying to stop anything that changes 
the environment. 

And we even got a law through Congress— 
just imagine this—that Congress actually 
passed a law that said, no air quality shall be 
degraded or be diminished from what it is at 
the present time. In other words, if you were 
to follow that law, you couldn’t go out here 
and start raisin’ potatoes in a valley that hadn’t 
raised potatoes. Nondegradation of water and 
air? Nondegradation? We can’t do anything. 
You can’t move a person across the country. 
You can’t drive a car across a country road 
without creating dust and so on, you see. So, 
this is how far-out it’s gotten. 

I’ve for a long time been hopeful that the 
impossible can happen. In other words, that 
somewhere along the line, even the masses 
of people would start understanding this. I’m 
very discouraged about it, because even with 
all of our economic problems and everything 
else, we are still faced with that same attitude. 
In the setting up of wilderness areas, mining 
is totally excluded. We’ve got areas to show 
that mining has never destroyed anything, 
and the only thing it’s ever done is created an 
attraction to people who wanted to go and 
see it—say down in Death Valley, California, 
or down in the Bighorn sheep reservation 
down in Clark and Lincoln counties. But, 



Conclusions 


169 


you set up a public hearing—and the public 
hearing is supposed to be designed to bring 
forth evidence of what should be done in 
these areas. So you have these conferences 
that say, well, to solve this we’ll insist that the 
Department of Interior have public hearings, 
or the Forest Service. They have public 
hearings and gather opinions, and research 
the thing at the grass roots and that’ll be part 
of the record, and that’ll help decide what’s 
to be done. 

Well, in truth, I went down to—made 
a special trip down to Clark County when 
they had a hearing on the Bighorn sheep 
reservation to convert it to a wilderness 
area. And I was one of three people in about 
fifty that gave testimony—actual testimony 
before the examiner—only three that even 
spoke for mining. And there were two that 
had prepared statements; myself and a 
man from Phelps-Dodge over in Arizona, 
that took enough interest to come over to 
Nevada to appear at that hearing, in regard 
to the, well, the objection to lockin’ this up 
against anybody even looking for a mineral 
deposit in a million and a half acres. And all 
the rest of the testimony and obviously most 
of the people there were college kids, and 
women, housewives, so forth. And one of the 
housewives got up and she was all for making 
this wilderness. She just loved to go out there 
and enjoy this area with her grandkids and so 
on. And she had one strong objection though, 
that the directive apparently required that you 
couldn’t get off the road with your vehicle, and 
she wanted that amended, but otherwise she 
was all for it being a wilderness area. So you 
see, most of those people that put in their two- 
bits worth didn’t know what they were talkin’ 
about. They hadn’t read what Congress had 
passed, the law or anything else. 

So. And then the booklet comes out that 
was supporting this wilderness, by the federal 


fish and wildlife people, and in that booklet 
if you know the guideline for a wilderness 
area, supposed to be that it has not had any 
development, you know, and that there hasn’t 
been any development— it’s a roadless area 
and all this. So they show in that booklet—I 
could go out there and get it for you—but I’m 
only saying this to illustrate what happens—in 
that booklet they show a road, and a digging 
out there somewhere that has sort of grown 
up with brush since it was used, and this is 
cited to illustrate that the building of roads 
by prospectors some time back, the roads 
were being obliterated rather rapidly so they 
shouldn’t be considered. And, no mention 
at all of the fact that when the test site was 
set up down there, which overlaps two- 
thirds of the so-called Bighorn sheep area 
and the proposed wilderness area, that the 
government had examined eight different 
mining locations, and paid people off to get 
out of there, with the right to go back when 
the test site might be terminated with the idea 
that there was a mineral potential, but they 
avoided any mention of that. I dug it out of 
the file, because Lou Gordon, my predecessor 
that had been an examiner on some of those 
for the—you know, a hired examiner—for the 
party with the showing. So, when you come 
up to something like that, that the public is so 
steamed up over it, and everybody, whether 
they ever went out hiking or anything else, 
are all steamed up over it, if they don’t know 
any better, they’re all favoring the proposal. 
“Oh yes. Preserve it. Done t let these stinkin’ 
people take it over,” see. Apparently, we’re 
fighting ourselves, pretty hard. 

Really, it’s kind of alarming I think. And 
you know that already the percentage of land 
that has been withdrawn from mining entry 
on federally owned public lands, according to 
statistics I’ve been reading, they’ve grown to 
being—I don’t know whether it’s two-thirds 



170 


Paul Gemmill 


of the land—it’s over half anyway, totally 
withdrawn. And the process is going on 
rapidly 

Well, now we’re still on this problem 
that the mining industry has—particularly it 
concerns the environmental aspects, which 
has added a tremendous cost to any new 
operation, just to comply with the air quality, 
water quality, and the bonding that they say 
has to be put up to restore the mine, the 
property, after you mine in it. And they’re 
still going on the assumption that when you 
mine, that the mine is depleted, and should 
be restored to its original—. You know, the 
mineral’s not there any more, so land should 
be restored. Well now, this has some validity 
in mining a particular bed of coal somewhere 
that you can reach with a strip mine. It has a 
lot of validity in that case. But, in the metal 
mines, it’s not true. The mine, the old mine 
is the best place to start lookin’ for the next 
reserve; and if you destroy the evidence of 
the diggings that are already there, you’ve 
destroyed the major part of evidence that 
would be used to find the next ore body. And 
the fact is completely ignored that market 
conditions have—and this is especially true 
here in Nevada—the market conditions, and 
the price of the precious metals is why the 
old mining camps have not received, over 
a period of, well, from thirty-five to forty 
years—haven’t received the attention that they 
would have had on the basis of parity prices in 
relation to the early discovery times. Now we 
have prices coming up to somewhere around 
the parity price area, and these old camps are 
getting a fresh look. And if the mines had 
been, you know, obliterated some way or 
other, and the evidence destroyed, it’d be far 
more complicated to have the fresh look. So 
that’s altogether wrong in the metal mining 
business to require obliteration, calling it 
restoration. But that shows just how public 


pressure becomes misdirected, and it isn’t 
anything but that. It’s just ignorant public 
pressure. 

Well, here for instance. We were talkin’ 
a minute ago about withdrawal of lands— 
“Repeal of National Park Mining Provisions 
Proposed,” and this is in the September 
26, 1975 bulletin from American Mining 
Congress. Senator [Metcalf] Democrat, 
Montana. Here’s Montana, a great big mining 
state that has the “richest hill on earth,” 
[laughs] you know; and Metcalf—. He’s one 
of our prime targets I think [laughs]. I’m not 
close enough to “shoot” him, but I’d like to 
have somethin’ happen to him. “Senator Lee 
Metcalf has introduced a bill, S.2371, that 
would repeal application of mining laws to 
areas of national parks systems.” Now this, 
you know, is outside of wilderness; Congress 
already said, in wilderness areas, you can’t 
mine after a certain date. And all we gotta 
do is say “no access” after a certain date, 
and nobody wants to go in there anyway. 
“Laws apply to areas of national park system, 
including (one) Mt. McKinley National Park, 
(two) Crater Lake National Park, (three) 
Death Valley National Monument, Glacier 
Bay National Monument, Coronado National 
Monument, and Organ Pipe Cactus National 
Monument.” Now Death Valley National 
Monument is one in there that I know a lot 
about, because I’ve, you know, had a good 
deal to do with lookin’ at properties down in 
that area, and it’s just wrong. “In addition to 
prohibiting location of claims in these areas, 
the bill requires the Secretary of Interior to 
determine the validity of existing claims, and 
to submit recommendations to Congress as to 
whether any valid claims should be acquired 
by the United States. The proposed legislation 
also imposes a moratorium on disturbance 
of the surface on any land included within 
a mining claim in any of these areas for 



Conclusions 


171 


three years. The Senate Interior Committee 
will conduct a hearing on this legislation on 
October 7.” And the hope is, of course, that 
maybe some of those things will get modified, 
but it turns out to be a constant fight. 

And we have another thing that’s kinda 
bad. The Supreme Court—and it works 
against us—heard a case a number of years 
ago on manganese, and another case on 
stone, building stone, that finally came to 
a decision in these cases. And the Supreme 
Court came up with the ruling that the test 
of marketability is a reasonable test for the 
Department of Interior to impose upon a 
mining claim, for its validity. Test of validity 
would be marketability of the deposit. And 
a little loophole might’ve been left in that, of 
course, the precious metals and high value 
showings were obviously—I don’t know how 
they put it—but anyway, they were obviously 
worthy of development, or something of the 
kind. But, the attorneys feel, generally, that 
the decision permits the Bureau of Land 
Management, and Forest Service, and the 
agencies that do control this kind of thing, to 
place a test on a claim where you have to prove 
that what you have there is marketable today, 
at the time of the test, or the claim is not valid. 

Now, just imagine the fella that finds a 
good-looking showing of silver or gold in 
1945, and he locates it, and expects to be 
diggin’ on it, and expects the prices to come 
up someday (like I always felt the price 
would), and somebody comes along and tests 
it, and proves that he can’t market it at the 
time, so he hasn’t got anything, and he’s lost 
his effort. Then the answer to that’ll be that 
once they’ve taken it away from him, why 
the Department of Interior-Bureau of Land 
Management can—they’ll be allowed, usually 
in these places, to go in there and put it up for 
public bid, and sell it to somebody, and collect 
a royalty, see. And that of course, is largely 


behind the effort, from their viewpoint. The 
agencies are not to be trusted, when they’re 
dictated to from Washington. Now I have to 
tell you that as far as the local personnel are 
concerned in the state of Nevada, Bureau 
of Land Management people, state director, 
any director, any director I’ve known, and 
their assistants, in general, have been very 
cooperative, and wanted to be cooperative. 
And they wanted to see things developed in 
the area. Of course, they’ve had to be under 
guidance from Washington, D. C., and that’s 
where the rules are made, far from home. 

It’s my view—and I’m gonna say something 
here that I haven’t pushed real hard, because I 
haven’t been able to get associations in other 
states to swallow this line of thinking—but 
it’s my personal view that the only chance of 
backfire against the takeover (the thing that’s 
gonna destroy our ability to develop deposits 
that’ll make the United States self-sufficient 
in these various minerals and metals), is to 
identify those areas that are already known as 
mining districts, like say in the Francis Church 
Lincoln report of 1920 or thereabouts— 
identify the recognized mineral districts. Now, 
I’m talking especially here about the metallic 
minerals, not the non-metallics which are so 
reliant on freight, and they’re usually—well, 
for instance, limestone deposits; a unique 
deposit of limestone is locatable. But the 
limestone deposit that’s sittin’ out here in a 
remote area, far from being economic, may 
suddenly become economic because of a new 
road or something like that, see. And it isn’t a 
matter of discovering the thing and holding 
onto it for years, and finding out where the ore 
body is. That isn’t the problem, see. So that’s 
why I separate non-metallics, generally from 
the metafiles. And there are very few non- 
metallics that would really suffer if they were 
under lease, because the price paid for the 
non-metallic relates to building homes and 



172 


Paul Gemmill 


all, and highways, cement, everything else. If 
a uniform tax is placed on mining limestone 
or any of the non-metallics, the non-metallics 
are produced domestically by and large, so any 
production tax would directly be part of cost 
to the domestic consumer. 

But the identification of a deposit of non- 
metallics that is economical, is not dependent 
on the same kind of exploration effort and 
wildcatting that you have in the metafiles. 
And I want to emphasize that. Then I say, 
that the backfire we can build in this country 
against the prevention of development of our 
own resources in the metallic field, would be 
to identify the mining districts that are known 
to have a potential, and with some liberal 
boundaries of course, similar to the area of 
land identified by Francis Church Lincoln, 
which was less than five percent of the state 
of Nevada. 

Identify those areas, and then make sure 
that the principles of the 1872 Mining Law 
are preserved within those districts; because 
it can be shown that over a period of many 
years, the rediscoveries or the new discoveries 
that you hear about are right smack in the old 
mining districts. And that’s gonna go on, in 
my opinion, for an indefinite period into the 
future—far enough into the future so we don’t 
know what the discovery techniques will be 
a few hundred years from now, or a hundred 
years from now, or even twenty years from 
now. And if we could get Congress, and we 
could first get the mining people themselves 
to see this— and we haven’t been able to; 
partly because of the, I suppose it’s partly 
because most of the highly educated people 
that’ve gone on and taken extra theoretical 
training in mineral exploration and discovery 
and everything like that, come out of school 
believing that they’re gonna use satellites and 
indirect methods to make new discoveries 
where nobody ever thought there was 


anything. And so the minute you bring up 
a proposal like this, oh, my goodness, you’re 
gonna—. Well, I claim, I say that it would 
be a backfire. You’re going to get, definitely 
going to get restrictions that are gonna be 
very burdensome and hard to five with. And 
if we could preserve what we’ve had, within 
those mining districts, it’d be a great, big step 
forward in preserving our ability to maintain 
a reasonable self-sufficiency within the United 
States in the metallic minerals. 

It’s been pointed out and emphasized no 
end by the attorneys in arguing the point 
of preserving the right of discovery and all 
this, and in fighting (which they should be) 
the lockup of large areas against exploitation 
and mining, and arguing against that, they’ve 
made a great point in the Public Land Law 
Review Commission report and elsewhere, 
of the fact that you can’t always tell when a 
block of ground should be classed as mineral. 
And they point out an acreage over in Arizona 
somewhere that was on a playa—or I should 
say a pediment, not a playa—pediment area, 
covered with gravels and wash, that had 
been identified as nonmineral in character. 
And later, it was discovered that there was 
a big copper ore body under this pediment. 
And yet, I don’t think there’s any question if 
you looked at the vast majority of any such 
areas that could be talked about, you’d find 
that they still were within what would’ve 
been classed (if you had a mining district 
identified), it would’ve been classed as within 
the mining district. But you don’t get that kind 
of deposits without somewhere in the exposed 
rocks around it, some kind of evidence of 
mineral. Okay. Well, I think that that concept 
of identifying mining districts as a backfire, 
against blanket adverse regulation, as I said 
before (and here I am probably coming close 
to the end of my observations [chuckles]), I 
think that is the reasonable way to try and get 



Conclusions 


173 


something done. You even work with those 
that are trying to prevent people from going 
out and scratching the earth. Because, if you 
could get that coming from them, saying, 
“All right, now, those areas that have been 
identified as mineral in character—in the 
metallic area— we’ll go along, in order to get 
somethin’ done, we’ll go along with that in 
order to get the revision of the mining laws 
for other areas.” Well, they’ll have a revision 
for those areas too, no doubt! But I mean, 
to preserve the right of discovery, and the 
ownership in a discovery that’s even a rather 
meager discovery, is essential, very essential; 
and you’ve got to hold that as though you’re 
the sole proprietor and you’re able to deal with 
it, you’re able to turn the ownership over to 
different people, and collect money for it, and 
promote it, and everything, over a period of 
years (usually) before this turns into a viable, 
economic operation. And the big flaw in the 
Public Land Law Review Commission report 
lies just there, that they did not lay enough 
emphasis on the fact that most economic, 
metallic deposits evolve from prospects— 
the evidence is known for years—it’s not 
economic, it couldn’t be said to be marketable 
for many years, and usually many attempts at 
doing something with it even follow and tail 
before ultimate success. 

Well, I could cite several cases right here 
in Nevada, along this line, but of course, that 
isn’t necessarily something we want to try and 
cover here. But, one outstanding case that’s 
going on right now, I think maybe would be 
a good example, is Louis Ghibbelini over in 
Eureka, Nevada. Louis found a manganese 
showing and did personal work on it, 
development, way back there in probably 
‘43, 1943 or so. And since that time, he’s had 
at least a dozen different outfits, and most of 
them responsible outfits with plenty of money, 
in there working on that, having options to 


buy, and having to pay Louis enough to live 
on while they worked on it, and then they’d 
give it up for one reason or another. 

It finally evolved into being a deposit 
of vanadium in shale, and occurring over a 
sizable area and very large tonnages. And 
he’s had several of the major companies 
have a look at that, do drilling, and then he’s 
preserved the results. Before he had to do 
the assessment work next time himself, why 
he’d get somebody else [laughs]. And all this 
time, it’s over thirty years since the initial 
discovery that those claims have been there 
and protected, and none of ’em are patented; 
they’re just ordinary locations. And at any 
time in between people that he got interested 
at least, a test of those claims would’ve shown 
’em, under the rule of “marketability,” to be 
invalid. And yet it has taken Louis, holding 
on to these records and promoting them 
repeatedly to keep that thing stirred up— 
and the last ones in there, and the ones in 
there now, and holding, and paying Louis 
substantial money! I think every six months 
he gets a nice check, and he doesn’t have to 
work—he or his family. And right now the 
optionee is Norandex, Noranda Company 
of Canada, their exploration arm. And they 
were very enthusiastic about it for a while. 
And the latest I heard, their enthusiasm is a 
little cooled off, because of some of the costs 
that they’ve run into in trying to process the 
ore, but they’ve done substantial metallurgical 
work on this. Well, one of these days that 
thing’ll get goin. [Laughs] But that’s a typical 
thing. 

And another illustration I might cite is 
to quote Howard Edwards, a vice president 
of the Anaconda Company now, and used 
to be an attorney in Salt Lake City when I 
knew him very well, and dealt with him in 
some matters that Combined Metals was 
working on. Howard Edwards was there when 



174 


Paul Gemmill 


we developed the Spor Mountain beryllium 
deposits that later on Anaconda took over 
from us when I was with Combined Metals. 
And he has put into the Congressional record, 
or into the hearings rather, on testimony on 
mining bills, the fact that all of Anaconda’s 
mines had come through the small miner 
or small mining company route, before 
Anaconda acquired them. There was no 
property initially discovered by the Anaconda 
geological force, or their exploration arm that 
was then operating except one, and that was 
the Jackpile mine down in New Mexico. They 
credited the geological department with a 
discovery. Now their geological department, 
of course, is there to appraise the things 
that come to ’em. And properties must be 
big enough, and far enough exposed and 
developed, for it to be worthwhile for that big 
company to say, “Well, this is something for 
us to pay attention.” They can’t take on a small 
mine, and make it pay, no way—any more 
than the federal government could! 

So, this is a whole piece of evidence (and 
it’s somewhat involved) that completely 
escaped, in my opinion, its importance in 
the Public Land Law Review Commission 
study, on public lands. And it’s a shame. It’s 
a crime. Because it’s a very important factor, 
and the most important factor that we have, 
I think, to put over to the general public. And 
how we’re gonna get that over to the man in 
the street— anybody can tell me that, I don’t 
know. The only way that, I think, we have a 
prayer of getting these people to recognize the 
importance, is to put it on the basis of what’s 
good for them in their own imagination. And 
we haven’t done a good job of emphasizing 
the fact that every citizen of the United States, 
man or woman, has a right to go out there and 
find something and put his name on it, under 
this law. And that’s the incentive that did it; 


that’s the incentive that found these things. So 
that’s where we’re missing the boat. 

And people that are most effective today 
in preserving that right, are not the big 
companies and not the mining associations, 
like this Association; it’s the small miner 
group, and they’re usually almost frowned on 
when you talk to one of’em, because they’re so 
far-out and so violent—a lot of’em are—that 
people kinda hate to hear ’em, see ’em coming 
but the politician listens. So they’re the avenue 
that has—I can tell you that in my opinion, 
without any question, I have no question in 
my mind, that the small miner people, the 
individuals, have prevented us from having a 
very badly designed alteration of our mining 
law. And the responsibility for them doing this 
rests with the politician who doesn’t want to 
be identified as “against the little guy.” 

Well now I think I’ve kind’ve wound up 
the big “if” in the mining business, and of 
where we sit now, and if somethin’ isn’t done 
about that, you could look back years from 
now and wonder why there wasn’t more 
development for domestic resources. By that 
time, it might be too late [laughs]. 

Well, there’re two things then that I’ve 
covered. One is, that in the present atmosphere 
of public opinion, we’ve got to give something 
to get something. And if we could get the 
preservation of all of the essential rights 
of the 1872 law, within recognized mining 
districts—and I can tell you that the BLM has 
identified a lot of areas in the state of Nevada 
with mineral potentials, some of them overlap 
or are outside of those districts identified by 
Lincoln—but if we could get those identified, 
and preserve the rights within those districts, 
instead of the way it is now: you can have 
a viable mining claim that doesn’t have an 
exposure of mineral, you know, opened up— 
it’s invalid. That isn’t right, because there are 



Conclusions 


175 


plenty of places where you should be able to 
project geological inference, and hold the 
ground, and promote it, and develop it, and 
drill it. We don’t have that. So, I say that there 
are things even within the mining districts 
that need to be liberalized under the law. 
They’ve been liberalized by practice, because 
the BLM has not come in to test everybody’s 
ground. But, we need to have a law that 
liberalizes. See. Within those districts. That’s 
number one. 

Number two. What was number two? Oh 
[laughs]. Oh, identification of the mineral 
districts. And I suppose another thought 
was to make sure that we don’t mix up the 
habits of the metallic minerals and what’s 
needed to preserve access to them, with the 
non-metallics in general, the general field of 
non-metallics. 

Oh, and the other thing in number two 
that I was mentioning a minute ago, is getting 
to the rank and tile of the public with the idea 
that every United States citizen has this right. 
It isn’t something that the government’s giving 
away. You know, the big cry is that here we are 
allowing people to have this without payin’ 
for it! Well, my gosh [laughs], before you get 
through with most of these discoveries, a lot 
of people have paid plenty for it [laughs], and 
usually lost, see? 

There’s another factor too, that I’d like to 
point out. And I think the Comstock Lode 
is a very good example of the fact that the 
production of its gold and silver was vital to 
the United States government in preserving its 
monetary viability during the Civil War. And 
yet most of the production was uneconomic 
to the people that produced it. But every 
ounce was just as good when it got to the 
treasury, whether it was profitable or not. The 
big profits were made on the stock exchange, 
not by the operator. There were some of the 


operators made fancy money, but not many. 
And the ones that profited most, were the 
stock manipulators. Is that bad or not? Well, 
you aren’t gonna go out here and prevent it, 
any more than you prevent people from pullin’ 
the handle of a slot machine. So. 

But the point is, we needed the production. 
And when the bullion got produced, the 
ounces of gold and silver went back there, 
nobody had any stamp on ’em, saying this 
ounce paid profits to the guy that produced it. 

I think that pretty well winds up what 
I have to say. I get too damned talkative 
[laughs]. 




Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



178 


Paul Gemmill 


Adair, Bill, 120, 244, 

245 

Agnew, Spiro Ted, 392 
Altadena, California, 17, 
23 

Amalgamated Pioche Mining 
Company, 148 
American Chicle Company, 
312-313 

American Institute of 
Economic Research, 71 
American Mining Congress, 
359, 369, 370 
American Smelting and 
Refining Company, 50, 
182 

American Zinc Company, 

295, 306, 308, 353 
Anaconda Copper Company, 
35, 73, 97, 99, 111, 
185, 204, 279, 28 
315, 322, 345 
Anderson, F. 

116 
Angst, 

Annett , 51 

) 

S., 159 
>, Jim, 254 
>, Tony, 254 
Arizona-Binghamton mine, 
78-79 

Arizona Power Company, 14 
Army Engineers, U.S., 142, 
295 

Ashby, Harve, 49, 51, 77 
Askew, Joe, 7 
Aspinall, Wayne, 372 



Atkins, John T., 53-54 
Atlanta Mine (Nevada), 40 


B 


Baja California, 112 
Baldwin Lake (Califor¬ 
nia) , 19 

Ballerstein, Walter, 63 
Bank holiday, U.S., 

Basic, Incorporated, ^47 , 

Battle Mountaiiw Nevada, 

, 295, 296, 

ngeri, Dominick, 120, 
122, 175 
Beneficial Life Insurance 
Company, 314 

Bernard, Art, 167-168, 248 
Berry, Jack, 360 
Beryllium, 315, 321, 322, 
338 

Bible, Alan H., 368, 371- 
372 

Bixby, Fred E., 55 
Boardman, Horace P. "Jeff," 
55 

Bonamarte, Bob, 117, 119 
Bowles, Mr., 21, 22 
Bowman, Betty, 72 
Boys' Clubs, 156 
Bradshaw Mountains (Ari¬ 
zona) , 8 0 

Brigham Young University 
(Provo, Utah), 314 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


179 


Bristol Silver Mines Com 


Combined Metals Produc- 


pany, 32, 53, 54, 88, 
171, 190, 196, 233, 

264, 274, 283, 350-351 
Brown, Thomas E., 63 
Buehler, Clessen, 120, 244 
Buehler, Freda, 173 
Buehler, Irwin, 92, 129, 
176 


tion Company (cont.), 
159, 161, 171, 172, 
214, 274, 277, 280, 
282, 284, 295, 306, 
307, 368, 411 
Comet mine (Nevada), 88- 
96, 122, 176 
Comstock lode (Nevada), 


Buehler, Jack, 32, 85, 117- 
118, 119, 131, 168, 171, 
172, 173, 176, 179, 183, 
200-201, 359 

Bureau of Land Management, 
U.S. (BLM), 41 
Burgess, John D., 49 
Burton, Ott, 319, 323 


Cahill, Tom, 47 
Calico, California, 18-] 
Callow cells, 13 
Cal Neva Mining 
8 , 22 

Cameron, "Red," 296,>298- 
299, 

Cannon, Howard W., 328-329, 
^^368 

Carlin mine (Nevada), 48 
i, Clifford, 63 
irpenter, Jay A., 45, 56- 
57, 60, 69 


70, 352, 413 
Conservation and Natural 
Resources department, 
Nevada, 347 

Cook, Chet, 136-137, 152 
Cook, Earl F., 190 
Copper, 350-;351, 362-363 
Copren, Billy^p-62 
Cordek Exploration 
^<^3ompany, 47 
/Cortez Joint Venture mining 
company, 345 
fttino, Vic, 97-99 
Craig, Sam, 84, 297, 307 
Crater Lake National Park 
(Oregon) , 401 
Crow, Johnny, 266 
Crown King mine (Arizona), 
12, 13, 79 

Cyprus mines (Cyprus), 49 


Davis, Buford, 183 


Caselton mill (Nevada), 

111, 112, 122, 141, 158, 
159, 273, 282, 290, 293, 
360 

Christenson, Clair, 329, 331 
Christians store (Pioche), 
141-142 

Clark, Walter E., 55 
Clark County, Nevada, 347- 
348 

Clay, Tom, 330 
Cochran, Ken, 171 
Cohen, Joe, 149, 150, 157 
Combined Metals Production 
Company, 32, 54, 81, 84, 
86, 97, 111, 148, 157, 


Death Valley, California, 

336 

Death Valley National Monu¬ 
ment (California) , 445 '1 

Delamar, Nevada, 89, 253 
Delmue ranch (Nevada), 256 
De Longchamps, Fred, 43 
Depression, U.S., 230-234, 
241, 255, 264, 270 
De Ricco, Elmo, 347 
Dixon, Augus t, 51 
Dixon Graphite Company, 21 
Domenici, Narducio, 249-251 
Dry Valley (Nevada), 325, 328 
336 


9 



180 


Paul Gemmill 


Dubravac, Stephen R. "Stub," 
51, 62, 77, 78 
Durk, Robert R. , 54 
Duval Mining Company, 49, 

345 


wjr iii4.uu \ncvuuuy f 

ad, Van, 

, Mexico, 112 
sntal Protection 


Eagle Valley Narrows (Ne¬ 
vada) , 328, 330-331, 

332, 334 

Eastern Star lodge, 304 
Eastman, Frank, 54 
Echo Dam (Nevada), 333- 
334 

Edwards, Howard, 289, 410 
Elsmore, Joe, 128 
Elton, Jim, 32, 87 
Ely, Nevada, 11 
Ely Valley mine (Nevada), 
275, 281 
Englestead, 

Ensenada 
Environmental 

Agency, 3 46^. "34 7 

"Environmentalists," 235- 
232*< £39-342, 346 

120, 130- 

Norman, 51, 63 
Ernie's bar (Pioche), 266, 
268 

Escondido mining district 
(Mexico), 112, 114 
Eugene Jordan and Associ¬ 
ates, 40 

Eureka, Nevada, 351 
Exploration geologists, 359 
Exxon Company, 192 


Farnsworth, S. W. "Sam," 
306-308 



Finley mucker, 204-205 
Fish and Game Commission, 
Nevada state, 330 
Fleischmann Foundation of 
Nevada, 329, 332 
Flincote Company, 345 
Floral spring (Nevada), 
143 

Frank, Jack, 47 
Franklin, Bill, 28-30, 86 
Free, Lory, 314-315, 316 
Free enterprise mining, 
67-72 

Freudenthal, Ed, 107-109 
Frost, Jack*<^?2 
Full 


25< 


r “1U7 

Act, 1946, 


)n, 


L., 47-48 


Gemmill, David Byrd, 4-6, 

8, 9, 13, 18, 20, 22, 

25, 32, 90, 111, 114 
Gemmill, David Lewis, 4, 

6-7, 31, 32, 82, 96, 106, 
165, 166 

Gemmill, Delia, 4, 29 
Gemmill, Elizabeth, 2, 11, 
121 

Gemmill, Fern Jensen, 172, 
177, 179, 185, 303-304, 
325 

Gemmill, Jesse, 5 
Gemmill, John Garrison, 4, 
11, 95, 184 

Gemmill, Mark, 5, 6, 10 
Gemmill, Mary Betty, 4 
Gemmill, Terry Renay 
"Tamby," 308 

Gemmill family, 2-5, 88, 97 
"Gemmill's Gritless Graphite 
Gear Grease," 21-22 
Gem Theater (Pioche), 145- 
146, 158 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


181 


General Electric Company, 36 
Geologic Society of America, 
192 

Geology, eastern Nevada, 187 
194 

Getchell mine (Nevada), 49 
Geyser ranch (Nevada), 8, 9 
Ghibbeline, Louis, 406-409 
Gianella, Vincent, 45, 73 
Gibson, Fred, 48 
Gibson, Jim, 48 
Glacier Bay National Monu¬ 
ment (Alaska), 401 
Godshall, L. D., 170, 178, 
181 

Golden Anchor mine (Idaho), 
183 

Gordon, Louis D., 345, 398 
Grant mine (California), 170 
Grasse, Tom, 174 
Great Basin National Park 
(proposed), 367, 371-37 
Green, Johnny, 307 
Greenwood, Sam, 170, 

181 

Groom mine 
Groundhog miife (New M cico) , 
55 

California), 


Haven, Ira, 161-163 
Heizer, Ott F., 44 
Highland Spring (Ne¬ 
vada) , 143 
Hitler shaft (Cali¬ 
fornia) , 179 
Honerine-Muscatine 
mine (Utah), 295 
Hoover, Herbert C., 

140, 155-156, 215, 
240, 382 
Hoover, Herbert C., Jr., 
214-215 

Hoover Dam (Neve 
258 

Hunt, S. 



, 354 

Industrial Commission, 
Nevada state, 127 
Interior department, U.S., 
41 

International Smelting 
Company, 97, 182 
Iron Dragon mine (Utah), 
200 


Haciempa smelter (Arizona), 
170 

Hagan-Schmitt, Harrison, 284 
Hagen, Clair, 85 
Hale, Preston, 335 
Hall, Reed, 96, 266 
Hannah Mining Corporation, 50 
Hardie, Byron, 281 
Hardy, Byron, 47, 48, 54-55 
Hardy, Royce A., 40, 44, 48- 
49, 361 

Harmon, John, 41, 49 
Harris, Minten E., 51-52 
Haseman, Charles, 57-58, 60 
Hastings, John Henry, 93, 95, 
227 


Jackrabbit, Nevada, 109 
Jackson, Doug, 159 
Jackson Mountain iron mine 
(Nevada), 47 
Janney, John, 164, 275 
Jensen, J. C., 33, 173 
Jones, J. Claude "Geology," 
55 


K 

Kelsey, Bill, 297, 307, 
310, 311 

Kendall, Robert E., 49-50 
Kennametal Corporation, 47 



182 


Paul Gemmill 


Kennard, Max, 307 
Kennecott Copper Corporation, 
286, 294, 345 
Kingdon, George, 183 
Kinnear, John, 353 
Kinnon, William C., 50 
Klepetko, Ernest, 310 
Knight, "Uncle Jesse," 172 
Knight Investment Company, 172 
Krai, Victor, 50 


Masons, 305 

Mathews, Dave, 89, 231-232 
Mathews, Lester, 328 
Meadow Valley Mining Com¬ 
pany, 301, 325 
Messaloids, Gus, 266, 268 
Metcalf, Lee, 401 
Mexico, 6, 31 

Mezzano's bar (Pioche), 266 
Midas, Nevada, 352 
Mighton’s prospect (Nevada) 


Lakenan, C. B., 11 
Land development, 324-336 
Lawlor, Glenn "Jake," 63 
Lawlor, Michael "Mike," 63 
Laxalt, Paul D., 365 
Leach, Raymond, 57 
League of Women Voters, 339, 
358 

Leasing of mines, 243-( 

Lee, Reggie, 316-317, 31^\\ 
Legislature, Nevada .state, 32 
Lemaire, Darrell B., 47 
Lewis, Elizabeth, 2-4 
Likens, Corwin, 318 
Lincoln, Francis Church, 404- 
405 

NLincoln County, Nevada, 8, 
324-336 

Lincoln County Power District 
(Nevada), 31-42, 111, 112 
Link, Jack, 122 
Linkletter, Art, 334 
Livermore, John, 47 
Lobbying, 357 
Lost mines, 105-110 


114-116 

Millbank, Jeremiah, 156-157 
Millbank fami],y 7 156-1^7 , 
305 
Miller, 

Min^^Ji^a^, V^-'lSmelter 

fion, 292-294 
ling, 217-219 
[fety, 237-240 
ling Advisory Board, Ne¬ 
vada state, 343 
Mining equipment, 195-206 
Mining laws, 235, 288-291, 
337, 348 

Mining superstitions, 209- 
217 

Mining terms, 195-206 
Mining tools, 195-206 
Minnesota Mining and Manu¬ 
facturing Company, 312 
Mi Vida mine (Utah), 306 
Moab, Utah, 306 
Mormons, 268-272, 314 
Mount McKinley National 
Park (Alaska), 401 
Moyes, Orville, 52, 63 
Murillo, Santos, 52 


r 


M 

Mackay School of Mines, 73- 
77 

Mahaffe, Stewart, 98-99 
Mascot silver mine (Nevada), 
152 


N 

National Cash Register 
Company, 26 

National Lead Company, 85, 
156, 161, 305 
Negroes, 276-280, 364-365 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


183 


Nevada Mining Association, 337, 
344 

Newmont Mining Company, 47-48 
Nichols, Ernest, 63 
Nixon, Richard M., 356-357 
Noonday mine (California), 

170 

Nores, E. L. "Judge," 76, 163- 
168 


0 


O'Callaghan, Donal N. "Mike," 
347, 365, 369 
O'Dell, Hardy, 61, 63 
Old Stope program, 280-290, 
305, 306 

Orr, Roy, 9, 84, 144, 146- 
148 

Osborne, Don, 330 
Oxborrow, Chester "Chet," 
325-326, 331, 335, 


Jevada), 138 
Ley (Nevada), 


Pahr 
Pahran 

Palm§j^Stanley G., 55-56 
ler, Walter, 44 
'anaca, Nevada, 92, 268 
Park, Charles F., 191-192 
Pasadena City College (Cali¬ 
fornia) , 51 
Peach, A. B., 183 
Pennsylvania Industrial Chemi¬ 
cal Company, 321 
Phelps-Dodge Company, 35, 397 
Phipps, Rod, 88, 93-95, 204 
Pimentel, Victor, 52 
Pioche, Nevada, 11, 103, 135- 
168, 190, 324, 351 
Pioche Managanese Company, 

284, 307 

Piontoni, John, 174 
Pittman, Key, 18 
Pittman Silver Purchase Act, 
18, 19 


Porteous, Fred, 54 
Power District Enabling 
Act, 33 

Prince mine (Nevada); 96- 

105, 116/ 151, 158, 233, 
273-274 

Prince Mining Company, 25, 
53, 78, 324 


Prohibition, 

U.S., 71, 

265- 

267 



Prospecting, 

112-118 


Public Land 

Law Review 

Com- 

mission. 

U.S. ^<349, 

, 395 



98-105, 259- 

olph, Mr., 12, 16 
ay, Clinton, 170, 178, 180, 
181 

Reagan, Ronald, 366 
Red Mountain Mining Company, 
50 

Requa, Larry, 140, 155, 156 
Requa, Mark, 140 
Resin, 310-311, 312, 313 
Richard, Kenyon, 50 
Robison, Monty, 360 
Romig, Woodruff E. "Tex," 44 
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 35, 
230-231, 255, 351 
Rose Valley (Nevada), 325, 
328, 335 

Rotary Club (Reno), 234 
Roumage, Fred, 52 
Rural Area Development Admin¬ 
istration, 332 
Russell, John, 54 
Ruth mine (Nevada), 51 


Saint John's lodge (Masons), 
304 

Santini, James, 369-370, 371 
Sawyer, Grant, 365 



184 


Paul Gemmill 


Schmitt, Harrison, 284 
Schodde mine (California), 218 
Scott, A. L. "Al," 33, 212 
Serdoz, Richard, 236, 340-341 
Sherman, Robert P., 26, 111 
Shirley Basin (Utah), 54 
Shoshone Mines, Incorporated, 
184 

Sierra Club, 396 

Silver Club bar (Pioche), 266 

Smith, Alfred Merritt "Long 


Tom, 

" 44-45 


Smythe, 

William, 

45, 

Snyder, 

E. H., 32 

, 84 

108, 

131, 139, 

140 

149, 

154, 171, 

300 

308 , 

317, 323 



Snyder, E. II., Jr., 308 
Snyder, George, 154-155, 
Snyder, Guy, 154 
Snyder, Neil, 154 
Snyder family, 171 
Society of Economic Geo 
192 

Spor Mountain, U 

Squires, Howard,""W, 

29, 101, 15 

Standard Slag Company, 41, 
State Committee on Federal 
Land r^ws, Nevada, 369 
State Park System, Nevada, 
334, 335, 336 

Steelworkers union, 292-294 
Steen, Charles, 306 
Stever, "Muff," 160 
Stever, Vern, 160-161 
Sundowners (University of 
Nevada), 59-60 
Sunnyside coal mine (Utah), 
151 

Sunshine mine (Idaho), 239- 
240 



Thomas, L. G., 171 
Thompson, Charles, Jr., 

145 

Thompson, J. D., 8, 22, 
145, 146 

Thompson Merchandise Com¬ 
pany, 95 
Thorpe, Al, 118 
Thrust faulting, 192-194 
Tiger mine (Arizona), 79 
Tooele smelter (Utah), 99, 
295 

Trauerman, Mr., 71 
Trevailya, Daisy, 339-340, 
358 

Tschanz, C. Mack, 192 
a, Nevada, 352 


nion Assay office (Salt 
Lake City), 116 
Union Pacific Railroad 
Company, 25, 111, 259 
Unions in mining, 291-294 
United Geophysics Company, 

215 

U. S. Borax Company, 50 
U. S. Fuel Company, 310, 311 
U. S, G. S' Professional 
Paper 171, 189, 190 
U. S. Smelting, Refining, 
and Mining Company, 182 
United Verde Extension mine 
(Arizona), 183 
Uranium Reduction Company, 

306 

Utah Construction Company, 53 
Utah International Mining 
Company, 54 


T 

Taylor Grazing Act, U.S., 231 
Tecopa, California, 169-186, 
274, 336 


V 

Valente, Johnny, 210-214, 266 
Vaughn, Harold, 53, 64 
Victoria mine (Nevada), 279 
Viele, Mr., 14, 16 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


185 


Virginia Louise mine (Nevada) 
22, 98, 101, 116 


W 

Waggenen, Van, 149 
Wah-Chang Company, 262 
Walker, Clem, 139, 154 
Walker, Frank, 135, 151, 153-154 
Walker, Orville "Piute," 135-136 



Y 

Younr, Howard II, 306, 308, 352-353 


Z 


Zero Pass (Nevada), 157 



