Charlotte Hunter Arley 


Interviewee: Chronicler: Charlotte Hunter Arley 
Interviewed: 2000 
Published: 2001 
Interviewer: Victoria Ford 
UNOHP Catalog #188 


Description 

In the year 1947 Reno’s population was a mere 25,000, yet it boasted a total of 175 attorneys, many serving the 
wealthy eastern divorce trade. In this era of dude-ranch divorcees, only two other women besides Charlotte Hunter 
were practicing lawyers, Felice Cohen and Margaret Bailey. Little did the young Massachusetts woman know that, 
while she concentrated on earning a living, she was also paving a path that women by the hundreds and thousands 
would follow in the future. 

Born in Springfield, Massachusetts, Charlotte Hunter Arley grew up with one brother and one sister in a Jewish 
family. She credits her father for her advanced education, for he wanted assurance that all of his children would be 
able to earn their own way in the world. It never occurred to the intelligent girl to do otherwise. Having graduated 
early from Classical High School in Springfield, she entered Northeastern University’s law school at the age of 
sixteen and finished when she was still too young to take the bar exams. She worked for the legal department of 
the Federal Land Bank while the Great Depression spread across the country in the 1930s. She also volunteered at 
the Legal Aid Society. After being admitted to the bar in Massachusetts in 1935, she joined one of Boston’s top law 
firms—Tyler, Eames, Wright & Reynolds—but after experiencing the broken promises that were all too familiar to 
professional women at that time, she headed West to find more opportunities. She stopped briefly in Reno to visit 
her father, then continued her travels and fell in love with Yosemite National Park, staying to work in the gift shop 
before returning to Reno and starting her practice. 

In her oral history, Ms. Arley tells the behind-the-scenes stories of the famous “Petticoat Trial”—so named because 
it was the first time in Reno’s history that two women attorneys were pitted against each other in a courtroom. 
It was also Ms. Arley’s first experience with a jury trial. She comments on cases that were heard in the Nevada 
Supreme Court and set legal precedents still in use today. Motivated by fairness, she always served as the plaintiff’s 
attorney and worked hard to present a strong case for each client. Ms. Arley also remembered the discrimination 
she experienced for being a female attorney and Jewish, discriminatory acts that took her by surprise but never 
daunted her determination or her independence. 

One highlight of her career came in 1949 when she represented Reno at the International Federation of Women 
Lawyers meeting, held in Rome, Italy. She served as secretary to the group that had representatives from forty-one 
countries. While in Europe, she took the opportunity to visit her brother Sam in Florence. 

Ms. Arley left Reno for fifteen years with her husband Jacques Arley to live in Portland but returned following his 
early death in 1971. Once again, she was a woman on her own in a predominantly male profession, but this time 
the women’s liberation movement had changed the legal scene. More and more young women were passing the bar 
and practicing law without experiencing the notoriety of novelty that met Reno’s first two women lawyers as they 
faced off during the Petticoat Trial. Throughout, Ms. Arley’s oral history is sprinkled with names recognizable as 
the who’s who of Reno’s legal society from post-World War II to the current day. 


(Continued on next page.) 


Description (Continued) 


Perhaps the most revealing comment Ms. Arley made when reflecting on her career came after pausing with surprise 
at a question. “If I had known I would be a role model. .. but I was just earning a living.” 

Oral history interviews were conducted with Charlotte Hunter Arley during the summer of 2000 as part of the 
Nevada Legal Oral History Project, a cooperative project among the Nevada Judicial Historical Society, the Ninth 
Judicial Circuit Historical Society, and the University of Nevada Oral History Program. 


Charlotte Hunter Arley 




Charlotte Hunter Arley 




Charlotte Hunter Arley 


From oral history interviews 
conducted by Victoria Ford 

Edited by Kathleen M. Coles 


University of Nevada 
Oral History Program 





Copyright 2001 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp@unr.edu 
http://www.unr.edu/ oralhistory 

Nevada Judicial Historical Society 
Carson City, Nevada 89701 

Ninth Judicial Circuit Historical Society 
Pasadena, California 91105 


All rights reserved. Published 2001. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 

Director: R. T. King 
Assistant Director: Mary Larson 
Production Manager: Kathleen M. Coles 
Text Design: Linda Sommer 
Production Assistant: Kathryn Wright-Ross 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Introduction 
Charlotte Hunter Arley 


Index 


Contents 


ix 

1 


131 




Introduction 


T he year was 1947. Reno's population was a mere 
25,000, yet it boasted a total of 175 attorneys, 
many serving the wealthy eastern divorce trade. 
In this era of dude-ranch divorcees, only two other 
women besides Charlotte Hunter were practicing 
lawyers, Felice Cohen and Margaret Bailey. Little did the 
young Massachusetts woman know that, while she 
concentrated on earning a living, she was also paving a 
path that women by the hundreds and thousands would 
follow in the future. 

Born in Springfield, Massachusetts, Charlotte grew 
up with one brother and one sister in a J ewish family. She 
credits her father for her advanced education, for he 
wanted assurance that all of hischildren would beableto 
earn their own way in the world. It never occurred to the 
intelligent girl to do otherwise. Having graduated early 
from Classical High School in Springfield, she entered 
Northeastern University's law school at the age of sixteen 
and finished when she was still too young to take the bar 



X 


Introduction 


exams. She worked for the legal department of the 
Federal Land Bank while the Great Depression spread 
across the country in the 1930s. She also volunteered at 
the Legal Aid Society. After being admitted to the bar in 
Massachusetts in 1935, she joined one of Boston's top 
law firms—Tyler, Eames, Wright & Reynolds—but after 
experiencing the broken promises that were all too 
familiar to professional women at that time, she headed 
West to find more opportunities. She stopped briefly in 
Reno to visit her father, then continued her travels and 
fell in love with Yosemite National Park, staying to work 
in the gift shop before returningto Reno and starting her 
practice. 

In her oral history, Charlotte tells the behind-the- 
scenes stories ofthefamous"PetticoatTrial"—so named 
because it was the first time in Reno's history that two 
women attorneys were pitted against each other in a 
courtroom. It was also Charlotte'sfirst experience with a 
jury trial. She comments on cases that were heard in the 
Nevada Supreme Court and set legal precedents still in 
use today. Motivated by fairness, she always served as 
the plaintiff's attorney and worked hard to present a 
strong case for each client. Charlotte also remembered 
the discrimination she experienced for being a female 
attorney and Jewish, discriminatory acts that took her 
by surprise but never daunted her determination or her 
independence. 

One highlight of her career came in 1949 when she 
represented Reno at the International Federation of 
Women Lawyers meeting, held in Rome, Italy. She 
served as secretary to the group that had representatives 
from forty-one countries. While in Europe, she took the 
opportunity to visit her brother Sam in Florence. 



Introduction 


XI 


Charlotte left Reno for fifteen years with her husband 
J acques Arley to live in Portland but returned following 
his early death in 1971. Once again, she was a woman on 
her own in a predominantly male profession, but this 
timethe women's liberation movement had changed the 
legal scene. More and more young women were passing 
the bar and practicing law without experiencing the 
notoriety of novelty that met Reno's first two women 
lawyers as they faced off during the Petticoat Trial. 
Throughout, Charlotte's oral history is sprinkled with 
names recognizable as the who's who of Reno's legal 
society from post-World War II to the current day. 

Oral history interviews were conducted with 
Charlotte Hunter Arley during the summer of 2000 as 
part of the Nevada Legal Oral History Project, a 
cooperative project among the Nevada Judicial 
Historical Society, the Ninth Judicial Circuit Historical 
Society, and the University of Nevada Oral History 
Program (UNOHP). Funding was provided by a grant 
from the Dangberg Foundation to the Nevada Judicial 
Historical Society. The UNOHP donated generous 
amounts of time in transcription and production 
services. The Ninth Judicial Circuit Historical Society 
provided professional expertise and administered the 
grant. 

Charlotte and I met at her Reno home where, at the 
age of eighty-eight, shewas still dispensinglegal adviceto 
those in need. We were often interrupted by telephone 
calls and visits from neighbors and members of her 
synagogue, all friends who enjoy her lively conversations 
and companionship. The interviews seldom followed 
exact chronological order, but rather we explored 
subjects as they came to memory. Charlotte quickly 
became a favorite at UNOHP, as one by one, each person 



XII 


Introduction 


helped with transcription and production of her oral 
history. This transcript has been lightly edited for 
readability, butthenatural episodic structurefollowsthe 
interview tapes. Amusement or laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of the sentence; and ellipses 
are used, not to indicate that material has been deleted, 
but to indicate that a statement has been interrupted or 
is incomplete . . . or there is a pause for dramatic effect. 
For readers who are interested in examining the 
unaltered records, copies of the tape-recorded 
interviews are in the archives at the Nevada Supreme 
Court Library at Carson City, Nevada; the Ninth J udicial 
Circuit Historical Society, at Pasadena, California; and 
the UNOHP in Reno. As with all oral history projects, 
Charlotte has recorded her remembered past, and 
memory is never flawless. Readers should exercise the 
same caution used when consultinggovernment records, 
newspaper accounts, diaries, and other primary sources 
of historical information. 

Perhaps the most revealing comment Charlotte made 
when reflecting on her career came after pausing with 
surprise at a question. "If I had known I would be a role 
model ... but I was just earning a living." 

VICTORIA FORD 
Reno, Nevada 
April 2001 



Charlotte Hunter Arley 


1 t ictoria ford: Today is February 4 in the year 
1 M 2000, and my name is Victoria Ford. I'm here 
w with Charlotte Hunter Arley at her home in 
Reno, Nevada. Ms. Arley, I'd like to talk a bout your early 
years. Maybe you can start by talking a little bit about 
your parents. 


charlotte hunter arley: My mother was very 
genteel and literate. Her name was Lottie, translated 
from the Yiddish Zlateh. My father, Morris, had come to 
this country from Russia, probably, about 1909 or 1910, 
and I'm judging that by my own birth and my older 
sister's birth date. Recordsfrom Russia weretoo difficult 
to obtain then. There were some other family members 
here, not closely related, but enough so that at least there 
was a place for my father to come. I think he stayed a 
little while in New York with a man who was not a 
relative. We had relatives in common. 



2 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


That man, whose name was Nathaniel Harvey, was 
one of the first and best lawyers in Springfield, 
Massachusetts, where I grew up. Nathaniel Harvey had a 
thing about women in this way: that women were lesser. 
Nonetheless, when I got into law school, he took great 
pride in that. When I became a member of the bar, it was 
very unusual at that time for young women. I kind of 
understood that Mr. Harvey was really pleased about my 
situation, in spite of his attitude about women kind of 
being down the road a little bit. 

In New England wehaveclam roasts, whereyou diga 
hole and put the corn and the clams in to roast them. 
Well, the bar had a clam roast, and Mr. Harvey took me. 
My goodness! That had quite an effect on me. Those are 
the memories. You have to understand, I think, that it 
wasn't so much my age. I was only twenty when I got out 
oflaw school. I had to wait till I was twenty-one to get my 
certificate. I was very unsophisticated. We, in ourfamily, 
were not prepared to be out of school and be married. We 
just grew up and knew we were goingto school, whatever 
that meant. 

You're talking about beyond high school? 

Oh, yes, but we weren't geared toward, "Now you can 
go get married. Then you'll have a house, and then you 
buy the furniture. Then there'll be a baby," which—in a 
good way I'm saying this—was what was usually 
happening with women, but we weren't put in that 
direction, possibly because of my older cousins, who 
were ahead of th ei r ti me. T here were th ree si sters— as we 
are in my family. They were called the Sherman girls. 
They were into politics. The next couple of generations 
are out West now, too. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


3 


The Sherman girls had a big influence on you? 

Yes, they had a real influence on us, especially the 
eldest one. There was Susan, Minnie, and Rebecca. 

Tell me about your father's influence on you. 

Oh, my father was the dominant parent. My mother 
was a wonderful cook and baker and homemaker. She 



Charlotte and her cousin, Susan Sherman (R), in the 1930s. 





4 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 



"[My] father was the dominant parent." Baby picture of 
Suzanne (left) and Charlotte (center) on a horse, with their 
father holding the reins. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


5 


sewed our clothes. My father had done almost everything 
else, including buying clothes for us—three of a kind in 
different sizes. My sister Suzanne was two years older 
than I, and then I'm a year and a few months older than 
my surviving sister, Anne. Neither sister married. I was 
the one who surely was thought never to be married, not 
they! 

Do you think this expectation of going on to school came 
from your father? 

Oh, yes. My mother was caring, but it just came from 
my father. I'm sure my mother was very happy to follow 
along. The expectation also came from my cousins, who 
themselves were educated. My cousin, Susan, went to 
MissTwitchell's, wherethegirlswere . . . . Shenevergot 
over that, however. She only died a few years ago. She 
was 101. 

Miss Twitchetl's would have been like a finishing 
school? 

It was a finishing school, and only certain people 
could go there, and my cousin Susan became that 
person. She'stheonewhohadthemostinfluence. I think 
she must have helped myfatherwith his E nglish when he 
first came, because he was here at least a couple years 
before my mother came. 

Now, your father and mother were married in Russia 
before they came over here? 



6 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


They were already married. My older sister was 
already born in Russia. We used to call her a foreigner, 
[laughter] 

So then you must have been herein what year? 

Ni neteen twelve. That's a matter of record. I've always 
stayed with it, and I don't understand people that don't. 
April 2, 2000, I'll be eighty-eight, for the record. 

That's wonderful. So your father was giving you the 
expectation—without saying so—that you three girls 
would go on to school? 

Right, and we all did. Later we had a brother, and my 
brother did better than all of us, because he was in a little 
better situation. He is a professor emeritus in art and 
archaeology at Princeton, a published author, and an art 
critic. 

Tell me some of the things that you remember about the 
early days at home when you were a child with your 
family. Do you remember any special holidays or 
traditions? 

Well, we were Jewish, and we lived a Jewish life. I 
think it's interesting that my father never went to what 
we called then a synagogue. Never—so far as I know. I 
remember my mother taking me once early on. 

Do you know why your father didn't go? 

We never talked about it. My mother kept all the 
holidays, had a kosher house. I only have to believe that 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


7 


coming out of Russia, which was a very difficult place for 
them to be, they certainly couldn't exercise their faith, 
other than as they did. 

Quietly in the home? 

Yes. So maybe they carried that here, believing that 
that was the better way, their first thinking to become 
citizens. 

Did you speak English or Russian at home? 

Oh, we didn't speak Russian. That was the language 
my parents used when they didn't want us to understand 
what they were talking about. My paternal grandmother 
is the only grandmother we knew. My father's mother 
came with my mother, and because no one expected her, 
I guess, to pick up very much English right away, we had 
to learn to speak Yiddish, which I can still speak, and I'm 
pleased. The idioms are great. They're really kind of cute 
when you translate them. 

So you learned Yiddish in order to speak to Grandma 
when you were growing up? 

We had to. See, that's how I grew up. That was a must. 
My grandmother needed to have conversation with us, 
and we needed to understand my grandmother, and the 
only way she could understand would be if we spoke her 
tongue. Nobody was putting pressure on her to learn 
English. That's also a good experience for young people 
growing up, to make it easy for a grandmother, out of 
respect. 



8 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


Your father was in charge at home and made 
decisions? 

That was normal in almost any family. Now, first of 
all, myfathercame, andthen hebroughttherestofthem. 



Charlotte at age eight. 





CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


9 


What kind of work did your father do? 

Ultimately, hewasan agentfor Metropolitan Life, and 
they wanted him to go into managership, but he felt he 
didn't have the requisite language. Adding to that, 
although my sister was older and was a commercial high 
school student and ultimately became a CPA, who did 
the record work for my father? I did! That was another 
expectation. In the beginning, the agents used to pick up 
theirown money from thepeoplethey wereinsuring, and 
you had to do the records, but during the Depression, 
they were in the lapses and all that—lapsed meaningthe 
insured had to give up their policies. So I did his 
paperwork early on. [laughter] 

Whatdoyou remember ofgoingtogradeschool and high 
school? 

I remember kindergarten. On the last day, at 
someone's request, I brought my jump rope to school. 
Everyone exceptmewent on to first grade. No one let me 
knowl wastoo young. I reallyfeltso bad about thewhole 
thing, especially having brought my jump rope! 

I remember Miss Parkinson from the second grade. 
My father, by now, had a grocery store, and he would 
send my teacher a little sponge cake. So I became 
accustomed to doingthat kind of thing. I take cookies, et 
cetera to the court clerks! 

When I was in grade school we changed classes in the 
middle of the year, say, from low fourth to high fourth. I 
must have had a sense early on that my mother had all 
shecould do, and I used to launder my own clothes when 
I was in the fourth grade. Then, we didn't have a lot of 
clothes, anyway, so we had to . . . we called it ironing our 



10 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


clothes. I was already doing that for myself. Well, one day 
when we're standing there in class, the teacher says, 
"Pull your little stomachs in." Teacher came up and put 
her hand on my stomach, and my dress was still damp. 
What a dumbbell teacher! I'm saying that now—not 
then. I was so embarrassed. Shesaidsomethingaboutmy 
dress being moist. I don't recall my answer, but, if 
anything, I know how embarrassed I was. That's not very 
good of the teacher. It was damp because of my taking 
care of my clothes myself. 

Oh, but I was a shy youngster. In fifth grade my friend 
sat in front of me in school. We were best friends on the 
street, and, parenthetically, if the teacher really 
understood what she was doing, she would have 
separated us early on, which she did not. She was a 
"nice" teacher. When we would finish our littletests, my 
friend would just turn around and begin to talk with me. 
Sotheteacher sent us out of the room— one of usto what 
we called the lavatory and sink, and the other one to the 
nurse's room. Those were thefirst and only C'sl ever got, 
and when I came home with the report card, I was 
embarrassed. I don't recall that my father said very 
much. Heknewthatl knew. I knewthatl wasnevergoing 
to get another C. Then, when my friend and I came back 
out on the street, I said to Sylvia, "What did your father 
say?" 

She said, "I just told him it was your fault." 

I remember thinking, "How could she have done 
that? Blaming mefor something?" [laughter] One of my 
first of such experiences. "How could you do that?" 

Your father had an expectation of you that you would do 
well? 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


11 



There's no question aboutthat. In my own life, I came 
to know that. It was expected of us, not just me. It was 
expected of us. Wewereall bright. I just have to say that. 
We didn't know that. We did not know that. I didn't even 
know I was considered in that way until I came West. I'll 
tell you why I think that was. I think most of the children 
at that time, or the kids in school, were pretty bright, 
anyway. So we weren't too far apart. So we didn't think 



12 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


we were bright. I 'll tell you where it was. When I was in 
the ninth grade I got called in to see the school 
psychologist, and this is what I was supposed to do, and 
if I was supposed to do it, I would do it. It's amazingto me 
that all those years ago they had a school psychologist. I 
wasn't understanding that in any real sense. So they 
measured me, so to speak. By ninth grade we had to 
decide what high school to go to, whether we'd go to 
commerce or to a classical school. The decision was 
made that I would go to law school. The testing showed 
that if I didn't want to goto law school, I would do well to 
do chemistry, because I also had a good feel to help me 
(measuring weights by hand). You have to understand 
how young I was. I was then to come back while in high 
school and go through this routine again. Looking back, 
I'm amazed that that was happening in the schools. This 
was probably about 1924-1925. Especially, Massachu¬ 
setts had the reputation of wonderful schooling. That has 
stayed well with me. People think I'm a teacher or 
something, because grammatically, I'm almost always 
collect.... Collect, [laughter] 

Collect? 

Very good, [laughter] 

Correct! [laughter] 

I don't have trouble with who and whoms and . . . 
what's the other one? The twos? I just have a good ear. I 
catch it all the time on TV. I'm thinking, "They should 
know better." 

So you had a very good schooling in language? 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


13 


I had a great teacher. I remember her well. I believed 
her when she said, "If you have two people who are 
exactly the same," which could never be, "and one 
drinks and one doesn't, so the one who drinks or smokes 
dies earlier." I've never smoked in my life; you'd have 
never found me drunk, [laughter] At home the teacher 
was always right. 

Oh, really? So if there was any conflict, the parents 
didn't go and back you up? They told you to follow the 
teacher's orders? 

Well, we didn't have many problems. So when my 
eighth grade teacher said that, more that than anything 
else . . . well, I wouldn't have smoked, anyway. I came 
from a family that... I didn't have any problem about 
that. So I've always been aware of what's good for one's 
health. During that period, also, early on, I went to the 
girls' club and things like that. I became a counselor at 
camp. So I lived the kind of life they want us to have at 
thispoint,that they have to makesuch an issueon.That 
was just part of how you grew up. Eating appropriately, 
and the exercise . . . and we didn't call it exercise. You 
went to camp and walked three milesto school. I learned 
to swim. I was camp counselor. 

Did you haveany input into this decision for you to go to 
law school? Or was that decided for you? 

No. It wasn't decided for me, but the input was such 
that I didn't wish to go to the same high school where my 
older sister was. That was just a thing. You know, Susie is 
there. I don't want to be there. I had enough of Susie. 
Something of that sort,you know. So my father just went 



14 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


down the list of things, because we had to make a 
decision, and we ran out of everything until we came 
down to, "Do you want to be a dentist, or would you like 
to be a lawyer?" That was it. I could only seethe dentist 
pulling teeth, and I didn't think I wanted to do that. 

So that's how you decided? 

Yes. So when they call me a pioneer or a leader or a 
this, or it's dramatic—nothing like that. 

Your options were really limited at that point? 

Yes. See, nobody has put it that way. I was in high 
school at thirteen, so, you know, you don't have a lot of 
independent thinkingabout these things, likethisgirl at 
forty. This is how grateful we were. We didn't express our 
appreciation to our parents for what they did for us. I 
believe parents know. 

You wish you'd been able to tell your parents? 

Yes. 

Di d they pass away beforeyou had a chance to do that? 

No. But that... it wasn't.... My father died in 
1961, so that's almost forty years ago. Of course, by that 
time I was an adult, and we had some differences in 
points of view. 

You were going to tell about your parents, that they 
listened to you when you were a child. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


15 


Always. I mean, when we came home, we had 
something to say. 

You told them about your day at school? 

Well, whether we told it that way or whatever. 
Another thing, the meals were always at home. 
Everybody had dinner at the same time. As I look back, 
you know, I recognize how different it is today. 

So a very strong sense of fa mi ly? 

Oh, very. I'll tell you—very. Plus, the .... 

Extended family? 

Right. Exactly right. 

You did not feel differentin any way from the other kids 
at school? 

No, but when I got to high school, I realized there 
were some differences. I didn't know exactly what it was. 
Longmeadow was our better... not better area, but 
people with more means. 

Is that where your family lived? 

Oh, no! [laughter] No! We did not live in 
Longmeadow. I knew there was a difference, not that 
they had more. I knew there was a difference. You could 
sense it, because they sort of had that half of the room. 
They weren't really sitting with us. Again, at this 
moment, I realize that if teachers knew more than they 



16 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


apparently did, they would have mixed us up, but you 
just knew they were kind of what we would call 
standoffish. So we had that sense. I still remember the 
girl's name—Carol. Oneday shecameto school, and she 
and I were wearing the same sweater. That made a real 
impression on me. I had the same sweater as she, but I 
already knew that I could have it, because I knew how to 
shop. My cousin Susan taught us how to shop. We have 
seasons, so you wait till the end of the season, [laughter] 

I have very good memory of that. I don't know what it 
says, but up to now we're even keel. I've got the same 
sweater you have. 

So you were beginning to be aware of di fferences? 

Yes. What they were, I couldn't have told you. 

Then. But now, looking back, you can tell? 

Yes. I will also tell you that in those days, to have a 
black girl was something. I was so aware of that; that was 
high school. The white boys all—today we would use the 
word "lusted"—were after her. She was so—we wouldn't 
have said beautiful—but so attractive and so well put 
together and such a nice person. In those days, I was 
sensitive to that, too. "Oh, look at them!"—the white 
boys—"And she's black!” But it just depended on what 
kind of black you were. So I remember that. 

Were you becoming aware of anybody demonstrating 
prejudice about you being J ewish while you were in 
high school? 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


17 


No, with small exceptions, because I think we lived in 
an area where we were mixed. Up the street we were very 
friendly with a family named Stevenson. In the 
beginning, the mother didn't want her children to play 
with us, but got over it. They were Baptists. I only know 
that, because they went to the Baptist Church. 

However, wewerestoned when I was in kindergarten. 
My father had a grocery store, and one of his employees 
was a Polish person. We lived in a Polish Catholic area or 
street. The other employee was Portuguese. There was a 
large community of Portuguese people. I think that was 
very good for me, also, but the Polish person, who was a 
younger person, used to walk us to school in the primary 
grades, because the Polish kids would throw stones at us 
and call us "J idov," which meant J ew. To this day, I don't 
like to say the word by itself, just "J ew." I like "J ewish," 
because that's my memory—J idov—said in a very 
unpleasant way. 

With stones coming at you? 

The point is, the Polish person protected us against 
those children. So that was even-steven. Anyway, 
supposedly, Jews were supposed to be the least 
prejudiced. Well, I don't know if that's true, but that's 
how I grew up, and I believe myself to be not prejudiced. 

Di d you graduate early out of high school ? 

Well, I was sixteen out of high school. 

Was it unusual to graduate at sixteen? Wereyou ahead 
of your class? 



18 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


Well, I skipped twice. So I skipped a year. I'm not sure 
how great that was, but I did. That just was the way it was. 

I think I was very accepting. I don't look at it in any other 
way. That's how it was. I skipped from low seventh to low 
eighth, as we would say, and then from low eighth to low 
ninth. I said to my father, "I've got all A's after the first 
double." There's more to it than that, but I didn't have all 
A's when they gave me the first double, "So I think I 
should have another one, you know." (Skip another 
grade or "double.") 

I asked my father if he would go and talk to the 
principal. I knew that you had to do that. At that time I 
couldn't be sure why my father wouldn't go, but he said, 
"If that's what you want, you need to go and talk." 

And that's what I look back at now. That was very 
difficult for me. How do you go to the principal and say, 
"I need another double"? But I did go. So there was 
something in me. 

They tried to get me to talk to the secretary, but, no, 

I insisted on talkingtothe principal, and he pointed out, 
"Well, you would miss this, and you would miss that." 

I kept saying, "But my sister can help me with that." 

We finally got to the history, and he said, "Well, your 
sister can't help you with that, because she didn't take 
history." 

So I agreed. I don't know whether it came from me or 
what, but the agreement was that I would go to summer 
school to take history, and I did. I wasn't the kind of kid 
who really wanted to go to summer school, in spite of 
everything, but I would take six weeks of history, and he 
agreed. Well, when I came back to school, they stuck me 
in high eighth. Then what was I supposed to do? I wasn't 
goingto accept that, so I went back. The principal said he 
had no memory about our agreement ever happening, 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


19 


that he had ever said that. I said, "But I want to be in low 
ninth." I needed to do that. Sol reminded him that I went 
to summer school and suggested to him—today I can use 
that language, but not then—that I didn't go to summer 
school because I had failed anything, [laughter] I had 
passed everything. Why would I go to summer school, 
except that he had said that? Today, I think back and 
wonder if he was just testing me. I didn't have that much 
understanding at that time. That was just not right. It was 
a thing of being right and beingfair all my life. That's what 
we said. 

You had that sense of rightness and fairness from an 
early age? 

Yes. See, other peopledon'tspeak likethat. [laughter] 
But you've felt that all your life? 

Oh, very strong. Probably got that from my father. My 
father would go around saying, "I can talk to anybody," 
you know, that kind of thing. "I could even talk to the 
President," my father would say, but he never went to 
talk for me. [laughter] 

Anyway, I did get into the low ninth, and then I lost a 
half year of Latin and started with Latin. When I got to 
high school, I had a little bit of difficulty getting into the 
Latin. But I did. But that was bothersome, and I think, 
had I failed, that would have been a terrible blow for me. 
So sometimes maybe they're not altogether right in what 
they do. But I look back, and I just wonder what their 
thinking was. That's pretty good for a young person. 

To be able to go fight for themselves like that? 



20 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


Right. Right. 

Tell me, then, when you went from high school to law 
school, wastherea big difference in the cl asses that you 
were taking and the way you studied? 

Oh, in a personal way—I'm not using correct 
language—that was a whole different world. I sat in front 
of someone called J ohn O'Malley, and early on I kind of 
felt he was trying to protect me. I feel so silly, but I 
couldn't understand. He was doing shorthand. I never 
knew men did shorthand. I was self-taught in shorthand. 

I took a couple of classes in the summer when I didn't 
have to go to school. 

I was very shy. (Unbelievable, I now say!) I would 
come in as late to class as I could, and I would leave as 
early as I could. There were two other women. There 
were more when we began, but two were left. Alice Moss 
was Catholic. My friend, Arlene Vogt, with whom I 
became best friends, like we used to say, was Protestant. 
There I was—the Jewish one. For whatever reasons, I 
think Arlene took a review course. I couldn't possibly 
have been ableto do that, financially. Whether she failed 
the review course or not, she didn't pass the bar. I don't 
know if Alice took it or not, but I was the only one who 
passed the bar. 

How long did it take you to go through these classes? 

It was four years. 

Was it year-round, or was it like the other schools? 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


21 


Well, I don't think we went to school in the summer. 
At this point I was working in order to go to school. 

So you had a job, too? 

Yes. 

You were working and going to law school? Did you 
ever sleep? It sounds like it was a terribly heavy load. 

I used to stay up till two o'clock abstracting cases. I 
was asked to recite a criminal case on rape. I didn't even 
know what rape was. That was when we had all of us 
women together. That was early on. This was the second 
such time when I was without knowledge of that part of 
life. After that the women said to me, "How come you got 
up in class to recite that case?" 

I said, "I was called on." 

I guess the professor knew very well there isn't any 
sense in calling on me to talk about this rape case, but 
unknowingly I getupthere. I always thought law was like 
geometry—all about the facts and then the application 
and then the consequence. Well, the case said one man 
held this woman, while the other man raped her— 
whatever that was. The law was, if you have a woman 
against her will—I still remember that quote—to have a 
woman against her will is rape. Well, if somebody's 
holding you back while somebody else is doing whatever 
he'sdoing, that's against her will. So I could reciteit. I did 
not know what rape was. 

Then, in addition tonotknowingsomethingsaboutlife, 
you were working long hours and studying long hours? 



22 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


Full hours. It was at night. Northeastern, at night. 

So you took night school and worked in the daytime? 
Yes. 

Then went home and studied until two o'clock in the 
morning? 

And helped my father. 

And helped your father with his books, still? 

Yes. And took piano lessons! Which I wasn't great at. 
You had three jobs! 

I know, but it just seemed that's the way it was, and it 
was without question. 

You were used to hard work at a very young age. 

Well, I didn't know it was hard work. You know, my 
father'swork didn't takeall that much time, I don't think. 

I don't recall. I think my mother got a little unhappy, 
because it was too much. 

The load on you? 

Yes. I didn't feel it as a load. My sister Susie worked, 
though, and went to school, also. She was in the 
commerce and finance class. I was in this other. At that 
time, that's the way it was, I mean, for me. At the 
graduation procession, weweretheonlytwo women, and 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


23 


we were up front. People said, "Why did you look so sad? 
Susie was so happy." I knew the difference. I was sad 
because of my father. Susie was happy because of the 
occasion. 

Your father wasn't there when you graduated? 

He wasn't there. 

So you would have graduated high school in 1928 and 
graduated law school in 1932. So right out of law 
school , what was the first thing you did? 

Well, I couldn't take the bar. I was too young. I didn't 
pass the bar till 1935. 


So what could you do with your law degree if you were 
too young to pass the bar? 



Charlotte at her law school graduation in 1932. 



24 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


Well, I volunteered at what we called legal services. 
Well, then we called it a Community Chest organization. 

I volunteered. The lawyer for legal aid was a top Temple 
University man in private practice, Mr. Talbot, who gave 
his time, and that was a tremendous experience for me. 
He took me to court with him. I was so naive. It was 
something about hot water or cold water, I thought. 
Somebody took a room with or without. Later in my life, 
I realized it had somethingto do with prostitution. There 
was a red-headed lawyer, a good Irish guy, raising his 
voice,and Mr. Talbot was so quiet. Hewastomean older 
man. So quiet in his presentation. I don'tthinkyou know 
what gillie ties are? 

No, I don't know what those are. 

Well, you know, you put a shoe on. Then it has laces; 
then you get it laced; then you lace it up on your leg. My 
cousins had to tell me that young lawyers like me 
shouldn't wear gillie ties or red leather jackets. So that's 
what the style was for young women, but apparently not 
for a young lawyer. Anyway, that was a tremendous 
experience with Mr. Talbot. 

I asked him, "Why was he yelling?" 

He said, "Well, you don't have anything. If you have 
nothing to offer, then you yell around." Not in that 
language, but the essence was, "If you've got the stuff, 
you're goingto makeit, and you don't have to raise your 
voice. You only do that when you know you're going to 
lose, anyway." 

I always wondered what they were talking about. 
What difference does it make if you get hot water or cold 
water? But it dawned on me, this was a question of 
prostitution or something of that sort. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


25 


You didn't know about prostitution then, either? 

Oh, no! If I didn't know about rape, what do I know 
about prostitution? No, we were very much sheltered. I 
guess that was the word. 

Your pa rents expected a lot of you, butalsoshelteredyou 
in some ways, at the same time. 

Oh, yes. Well, that's what I say. We weren't headed for 
marriage or the "boys," primarily. When I came out to 
Reno about 1937,1938,1 still thought I was going back to 
what I call home. That's why I could go around; I could 
get jobs, no matter what they were. It really was a 
tremendous experience. I found prejudices with judges 
against J ewish people, not knowing that I was J ewish. 

At the legal services there was Mrs. Meany; she was a 
lawyer, but that's what she did—she took care of legal 
aid. Mr. Talbot would come in the afternoon, and Mrs. 
Meany would go in and sit with him and his client. This 
one day she wasn't there. I don't think anybody can 
understand, because it's a personal thing. My good 
friend, Margo Piscevich—I don't know what she would 
have been like then—but she'd go in there and bango! I 
was a whole different personality. So I come in, and I 
think, "To think that Mr. Talbot's letting me come in and 
sit in conference like a real lawyer!” 

This was a case of indecent exposure. If I didn't know 
some of the other things, yes, but I was always factual. If 
you would tell me what it was, and it was a fact, you know, 
that was it. So Mr. Talbot kept sayingto the client, "Miss 
Hunter is an unmarried woman." 

I said, "What is it? You don't say why." He finally sent 
me out of the room, [laughter] 



26 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


He was protecting you, too? 

Yes. Protecting me from this case, [laughter] I wish I 
could have gone back and talked to some of these people 
at a later date. 

So you worked as a volunteer at legal services? 

I had three other little jobs. There was a hose and 
underwear shop called Clear Weave. They don't have 
them like that anymore. Because I could walk therefrom 
where I was at legal services, when they got busy, I was 
the first one to be able to get there. Other people had to 
get on a bus or a car. So that's what I would do. I learned 
very early on about suggestive selling. Ifaman camein— 
if we didn't sell him the most expensive hose! We 
were paid, believe it or not, ten cents an hour, plus 
commission. Even though I was part time, I made more 
than the other girls, so they gave me my big check under 
two different names, [laughter] Then theNRA camein— 
this is historical—and an employer had to pay at least 
twenty-five cents an hour. [The National Recovery 
Administration, NRA, was the U.S. administrative 
bureau established under the National Industrial 
Recovery Act, 1933-1936, to encourage industrial 
recovery and combat unemployment.] The rents were 
only thirty-five dollars a month. 

Yes, but at ten cents an hour, it took a long time to earn 
thirty-five dollars a month for rent. 

Yes. Good girl! But with commissions... I've 
forgotten what the commissions were. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


27 


That helped. 

The more costly the product, the better commission 
you would make, but if a man came in, and you didn't sell 
him the best hose and then some ladies' underwear.... 
[laughter] 

That was bad? 

Then I would get my younger sister a job and my 
cousin a job, part time, but if my older sister got a job 
stuffing envelopes and things like that—that was one of 
those things—she'd get the other ones in. I forgot what 
we worked for, but at least we worked. 

You wereoutoflaw school and were not yet able to take 
the bar, and this was the Depression? 

Oh, yes. It was the Depression, and it was still the 
Depression when I gave up jobs because I thought it was 
unfair, you know, if somebody got more money than I. 

So, you worked as a volunteer, and you had three other 
jobs? 

Little jobs. I got to one job at seven o'clock in the 
morning. It was house-to-house selling. You know, they 
havesomeofthatnow,too. I wouldcheckthemoutinthe 
morning and then leave and go over to legal aid. Then 
Clear Weave would call me there at legal aid. 

Sowhen it came time to take the bar, did you havetogo 
back and do some studying in order to pass? 



28 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


I had to do my own studying, because I couldn't afford 
to take a review course. My friend Arlene was in a very 
different situation. She was older. I wastheyoungest. For 
a long time I was the youngest. Now, I've become the 
oldest. Arlene was working for Massachusetts Mutual, 
which is still in existence, I think, in the mortgage 
department. She had a car. She had two fur coats! One 
was skunk, [laughter] But we became very good friends. 

So, you studied for the bar on your own? Youd just go 
back and study through your notes and your books? 

Well, I really don't remember how I did it, but I 
studied. 

You were the only one of the three women who 
graduated and passed? 

Yes. I wastheonly oneofthethreewomen. Oneofthe 
boys fainted and never made it! [laughter] 

So after you passed the bar, wereyou ableto get a job as 
an attorney? 

Oh, yes. I was in the Federal Land Bank before I 
passed the bar. 

What was your job there? 

The legal department. That was during the height of 
the Depression, and there are a lot of farms in upper New 
York State. We were doing a lot of chattel mortgages and 
things of that sort, but then, we also were issuing bonds. 

I don't quite remember that, but they gave me that to do, 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


29 


and the man who had been doing it reported me to Mr. 
Roats, who was the general counsel, because of some¬ 
thing I did, which I did out of my good heart, [laughter] 

I don't recall exactly what this was. I guess people held 
bonds, and then they would send them in to cash them or 
something. Now, this woman lived in Middle America. It 
was a freezing winter. She had no way to get to a notary. 
Based on what she'd written and all, I decided we could 
do that for her, to give her the money and with 
understanding. 

So you weretheonly woman among all male lawyers at 
this job? 

Yes. There were five males and me, because I can 
even name them now, but we don't need to do that. The 
general counsel, Mr. Roats, who was our counsel, as well, 
was counsel for all of the Federal Land Banks and was 
based in Springfield, Massachusetts. He gave me what I 
suppose was a promotion or whatever that was, took that 
away from one of the male lawyers, Chauncey—I still 
remember that name— and gave me the work to do these 
bonds. 

So was it Chau nee/ who reported you, then ? 

Yes. Whether it had to go through him, or how he 
knew, I don't know. So the counsel, Mr. Roats, called me 
in, and I explained to him what I've just said about this 
little, old lady, who couldn't get to town or wherever. 
What a nice man he was! He understood that, and he 
made me understand that not everybody felt about these 
things the same way I did, and possibly even he did, but 
we had to do it this way. He commended me, I think, for 



30 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


my feeling, but he had to talk to me in order to set me 
straight. You know, this was an organization. 

Another young lawyer, Bill Young, at some point 
whilel was there, cametowork. Hecamefrom oneofthe 
other New England states, and I was to be his teacher. At 
some point Roats called me into his office and said to me 
that this was the time when they talked about raises. 
There was a board of directors, and he asked the same 
raise for each of us, forYoungand myself, but they would 
only give me half the raise of what they gave Young. 

So the board made the decision about the raise? 

Well, Mr. Roats asked for the same amount, but they 
wouldn't do that. 

Did you find out why? 

Well, Mr. Roats called me down to talk to me about it. 
So, what a nice man! I said, "Well, I'd like to have some 
days off." 

He said, "What are you going to do?" 

I said, "I want to goto Boston to see if I can get a job." 

He said, "No. Don't do that. You're too young. You just 
have to stay here for about three years. Then you can 
have my job." [laughter] What he meant was, "You have 
to get older." 

He gave me some days off, and that's what happened, 
but before I left, the vice president called me down and 
urged me to stay. 

I said I didn't think it was fair. I taught this guy what 
he knew, and he could get a raise—not in that language. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


31 


So they said, "Well, but he can go out in the field." 
That was the reasoning. As a man, he could go into the 
field. 

I really didn't know what you did out in thefield, but 
my answerwas, "I can go, too." Butthey wouldn't do that. 
They wanted to keep me, but they wouldn't give me the 
same raise they gave Bill Young. So I left. I went to 
Boston. I won't go through all the detail of that, but I 
wonder now how I hadthegutstodoit. I wenttoHaleand 
Dorr to see if I could have a job. Hale and Dorr was a top 
law office and well known. They're connected with 
Northeastern now, and they're the law firm from which 
Mr. Jenkins came. Remember the man that caused all 
that ruckus about communism—McCarthy? Well, they 
had a trial, and Mr. Jenkins from Hale and Dorr was 
representing the army. I believe it was in opposition to 
McCarthy. Everyone remembers what Mr. J enkins said, 
and I'm not sure I can remember it correctly now, but at 
some point McCarthy attacked, as a communist, a young 
lawyer in his firm, Mr. J enkin's firm, Hale and Dorr of 
Boston, which was a prestigious firm. McCarthy accused 
the young man, because he was, or had been, a member 
of the more liberal bar. I can't remember the name of the 
other bar in Boston, but it wasn't the American Bar 
Association. Then that's when Jenkins said, "Sir, have 
you no decency? Have you no decency, at long last?" He 
really took him to task to try to attack somebody, a young 
man in ourfirm about beingacommunist.Thiswasabout 
communism, you know. "Have you no decency? But, 
sir. . . ." I mean, that was such a thing. We all watched 
it on TV. We were all listening to that. It was very 
thrilling. The world watched! It was the way he said it: 
"Sir, have you no decency?" 



32 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


That'stheend oftheroad. Of course, thefirm had no 
openings, but they sent meto the law firm for which I did 
work, Tyler, Eames, and Reynolds. They also sent meto 
Harvard to talk to one of the law professors who was 
doing a book on torts. It was so exciting! However, it was 
a part-time job, and I couldn't afford to do that. 

At Tyler, Eames, and Reynolds there was a staff of 
thirteen secretaries—maybe not thirteen—but each 
lawyer there was a specialist and had his own secretary. 
Again, they told me, "If you go into the secretarial pool, 
well let you come and work with a lawyer, and at the end 
of the year well give you a raise." The man I was assigned 
to was a very nice man, and I learned some stuff, and I 
won't go through the detail. 

You couldn't get a job as an attorney? You had to get the 
job as a secretary to get started? 

To begin with. Yes. 

Did the men have to do that? 

Of course not! [laughter] 

I didn't think so. OK. [laughter] 

But those were the days. I mean, you know. 

That was the only way you could get a foot in the door, 
to get started? 

Yes. There was a woman manager, and I really was 
still kind of a dopey person, but, apparently, she was 
having something to do with the top of the legal staff— 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


33 


you know, the senior member. I wasn't getting it all, but 
I was getting something. It was kind of running by me. 
Anyway, she did hire me. I only saw Mr. Eames twice in 
a year. When I went to see about my raise at the end of 
the year, again, the raise was minimal. I decided to leave 
that job, too. Again, they tried to keep me, which is so 
interesting, when you think about it. It was only a few 
dollars a month or a week, and this was a prestigious 
firm, for God's sake! The lawyers they did hire were the 
top people coming out of Harvard. So for me to be there 
was great. I learned a lot and had good associations. 

So, overall, itwas a good experience, butagain itwasn't 
exactly practicing the law? 

Well, I did some of that when my lawyer got sick, and 
I didn't know what to do, really. You know, I hadn't had 
that experience. It was a probate. So I just found an old 
file and followed it, and he came back and just thought I 
was great. Well, I hadn't had that kind of an experience, 
doing probate, something like that, but all of it is a 
learning experience. 

So again, there was a question of, "Please stay.Thisis 
a good place for you." It'sthe middle of the Depression. I 
guess they never dreamed I would get up and walk! But 
they wouldn't do what they said they weregoingto do. It 
wasn't a very good raise. That's what was the matter with 
it. Then he said, "What are you going to do?" 

I said, "Well, my father is out West, and I want to go 
cross-country." 

So then he tells me how, when he was out of law 
school, he went on a bicycle tour through Europe, but I 
was old enough now to think, "Why are you telling me 
that garbage? You know, I'm in the secretarial pool. I'm 



34 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


not on the same level as you. I'm not going to Europe to 
go around." 

Well, here I was. You know, I had to work as I went 
along, and I did work as I went along. Anyway, so that's 
how I first cameto Reno. I thought, "Well, Depression or 
no Depression, I can get across country. I'll visit with my 
father." Then I had heard of the national parks. So I 
thought they belonged to me, you know. They were 
national parks; they were for all the people. I got myself 
to Yellowstone before coming to Reno. I forgot what it 
cost to get i n, but it was a lot of money at that ti me for me. 
So I thought, "That'ssomethingelse." But I wentthrough 
that. Then I went to San Francisco and got a job with the 
secretary of the bar, and that person knew it was just 
temporary, for however long it would be. I don't even 
remember what I did. I did letters and stuff like that. 

Then I said I had gone to Yellowstone; I would now 
like to go to work in Yosemite. I thought I would write to 
the president of Yosemite, and the secretary of the bar 
dissuaded me. He said, "You're too old. They only take 
college kids." I didn't have the money. You know, I would 
have managed somehow, but I wanted a job. Well, the 
long and short of it is, I wrote to Dr. Tresidder, who 
became president of Stanford during that time. He was 
married to the daughter of the Currys, who started the 
commercial system for the Yosemite National Park. Dr. 
Tresidder sent a wire offering me a job as his secretary, 
but that would have been a permanentjob, which I didn't 
want. I wanted to work in Yosemite, and since I had 
learned that the national parks are not for the 
people.... 

Not open to the people unless they have money? 




CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


ended i 
'der tha, 
lers of n 




36 



Part of the Arley family at Yosemite. L to R, back row: 
Charlotte’s older sister Miriam, her Aunt Helen, Charlotte, and 
her father. Ann, Charlotte’s younger sister, is in front. 






CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


37 


Well, you could camp or whatever, but this was all 
new to me, anyway. Looking back, you know, I did very 
well for myself, but I wasto understand later. At that time 
my goals were to see my father, the national parks, 
Tahiti, and go home to New England. That's what I 
wanted to do. I wanted to get to Tahiti. In those days, oh, 
boy, Tahiti! Before I went to Yosemite I went to Canada 
and on to Alaska on a freighter, which was the only way 
to go then. T h e frei ghter took a few passen gers. T h at was 
another great experience. 

I ended up in the curio shop at Yosemite, and I was a 
little older than most of the kids. That was one of the best 
summers of my life. I came a second summer. After the 
first summer, I just stayed on in the campground for a 
time, never understanding I was subject to being 
attacked. People were in the park, and I was in a tent by 
myself. I wasjust so stupid— not stupid— naive. I loved it. 
We hiked all over that area. This was before the war. It 
was 1936-1937, because I left Boston about 1936-1937.1 
think I was about twenty-six then. 

After I had left San Francisco and Yosemite I went to 
Hawaii. I had planned to go to Tahiti and then return to 
New England, butthewar brokeout. I hadjust come back 
from Hawaii. I had friends in Los Angeles, and I had 
stayed with those friends earlier. The war broke out, so I 
stayed in Los Angeles for a while and did legal work on a 
temporary basis. I had left Hawaii immediately beforethe 
war broke out. I think I was in the last boatload of 
passengers out. I remember the blackouts, and 
everybody put the shades down. 

Did you ever get to Tahiti ? 


No, that was it. 



38 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


You just worked in temporary positions in law offices in 
Los Angeles, then? 

Yes, because I didn't plan to stay there. Then I 
returned to Reno. 

How did you decide to settle in Reno and practice law 
here? 

I had thought that it was because of a cousin who had 
come East, but he also came to Reno, simply because I 
was here. I thought it was because of him, but I was 
looking at some of my notes, and I had done work in the 
law office of Craven and Busey. It was Douglas A. Busey 
for whom I worked, morethan for Mr. Craven. ThomasO. 
Craven became a judge. I was doing research on the 
Sullivan/Fitzgerald extradition case for Mr. Busey. Attwo 
a.m. in the law library I found a very early case in which 
one of the issues was that the "slave" under the law was 
"found" to be a chattel! That had a tremendous effect on 
me. I sat there stunned! I had never really thought of it 
that way. 

It was Mr. Busey who sort of pushed me into taking 
the bar. I was out of law school long enough, and it didn't 
seem like a good idea to try to take the bar without being 
refreshed. So that's what it was. I was promised that I 
would have a place in the office. Unhappily, Busey died. 
In any event, I was all set to take the bar review, 
especially because Mr. Busey thought there'd be no 
question that I would pass. 

Was there a way to do the review? 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


39 


Oh, yes. Witkin. Witkin is known as the father of 
California law. Witkin is not my relative, but we have 
relatives in common, but that's not why I went, 
[laughter] Witkin did the bar review. He has since given 
that up. So that's kind of interesting, too. There were 
classes at night. I would study during the day. I lived at 
one ofthe residences for women. While I was there, I had 
a letter from Mr. Busey—I think they're called "Dear 
J ohn" letters—in which it was indicated that there was 
physically no space for mein the office, but, of course, I 
knew what that was about. It wasn't Mr. Busey; it was 
Thomas Craven, who became J udge Craven. 



'7 twas Mr. Busey who sort of pushed me into taki ng the bar." 
Charlotte, after taking the bar exam, in an office on Center 
Street above what used to be the Bonanza Casino. 




40 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


He didn't want you to come back? 

I was a woman. Of course, they took another person 
who happened to be a male, but I never would have gone 
to take the bar, except that I had a place, and it was lined 
out, the kind of work I would do immediately, and then go 
from there. 

Were there other women practicing law in Nevada at 
that time? 

Well, heretherewas FeliceCohn. Myfriend Margaret 
Bailey was a member of the bar, but she didn't actively 
practice. She took cases involving friends and that kind 
of thing. 

So you got the "Dear J ohn " letter and passed the bar? 

Passed the bar. Then when I came to Reno, we only 
had two district court judges. J udge Maestretti and J udge 
McKnight. J udge Maestretti sent me to see J udge Priest, 
but J udge Priest was not a judge on the bench. He used to 
go to the rural communities or outlying communities. 
Sometimes Judge Maestretti thought that would be a 
good thing, that I would beableto hold down theofficefor 
myself, and he would go on his way, so I did that. 

So, you kind of got passed around until they found a 
pi ace for you, basically? 

Well, when I came back from San Francisco, it was a 
great disappointment. I took space. That's what I did. I 
had space in J udge Priest's office. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


41 


So you were doing your own practice, just using that 
office space? 

Yes, and I would cover for him while he was doing 
something else. 

So was that the only option open to a woman attorney at 
that time, to have your own practice? 

It would seem like it, wouldn't it? [laughter] Well, I 
had substituted earlier in some of the law offices, I mean, 
because there really weren't other women, except for 
Felice Cohn and Margaret Bailey. There's no way of 
judgingthat. It was just that I had to do something about 
myself, and because J udge Maestretti was a good enough 
judge to sort of take me under his wingand arrange this, 
why not, you know? I got my stationery done, and we had 
my name on the window, and I thought I was all set. We 
put the announcement in the paper. That's when I got a 
letter, and that's when the man with a shoe box full of 
make-believe twenty dollar bills showed up. [laughter] 

Did this case come along while you were in J udge 
Priest's office? 

Yes, because I made an announcement in the paper, 
you know, "Charlotte Arley," something . . . opening an 
office. . . whatever. So having seen that, this man wrote 
me a letter. Naturally, I went to see him at the jail. It was 
a criminal matter. He was charged with manufacturing 
money. I felt I owed him the courtesy of coming to see 
him, anyway, and when I told him I would havetoget him 
another lawyer, which I'd be glad to do, because I didn't 



42 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


knowanythingabout criminal law, hesaid, "Don'tworry 
about it. I'll teach you." [laughter] 

Oh. So he was a criminal with a law background? 

Yes! [laughter] J ust about. He made a map of where 
he had planted some gold or something, counterfeit, or 
whatever. Two of my friends went out somewhere in the 
desert south of Los Angeles, and they swear somebody 
got there first, so they left. So he must have passed the 
word. That map is in this album somewhere. 

So you practiced both criminal and civil cases? 

Yes. We were a small town, population about 25,000. 
We did have divorces, but not like now. The big-money 
divorces went to the two firms, primarily. I don't want to 
say it that way, but lawyers would look for the divorces. 
The people would come in onthetrain. I mean, today it's 
different, [laughter] 

Yes, but the divorce business was a good business for 
attorneys? 

Well, depending on what the case was. 

Especially the wealthy? 

Yes. I can tell you another story in referenced J udge 
Priest's office. This was now during the war, or during 
that period, and you couldn't get telephones. So I tied my 
home phone into J udge Priest's office phone line, with 
permission, which meant I could take the calls at home. 
Someonefrom New York was tryingto get ahold ofPriest 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


43 


oneevening. Finally, I said, "You don't need to call again, 
because I'll see that J udge Priest calls you when he gets 
in." This was in the evening, and I got the message to give 
J udge Priest at his home. Anyway, the next day, J udge 
Priest told me I could take my time, but I would have to 
find another place, because his wife ... I'm not goingto 
say, "didn't think it was appropriate." She didn't know 
me. I didn't know her. I'm not going to say any more 
about that. 

But that was the reason ? 

She didn't want a woman in the office. Yes. So out of 
respect to J udge Priest, I had my own view about that 
situation, but, of course, it was very unsettling. I had just 
done my stationery, and that was costly. So I hadn't had 
a chance to settle in. I was so unsettled that I went across 
the street to the theater to see Forever Amber, [laughter] 
Bert Goldwater was in the line just ahead of me, and he 
just sensed somethingwas wrong, but I justdidn'twantto 
talk about things until, finally, I did tell him. So he was 
with J udge Lunsford at that time, and he took me in. I 
used his little office, and he used the judge's office until 
the judge, who was in New York, came back. 

That's when the robbery case came. I remember 
sayi ng to Bert that the youngest of three robbers wanted 
me to represent him. Well, I said, "He told me what he 
did, so how can I represent him?" So I got an early lesson 
from Bert, that it isn't my job to determine his guilt or 
innocence. My job was to represent him in the best way 
I could. I learned very quickly! We got a lot of publicity 
about that case. T wo police officers had come to the hotel 
where three robbers were, but those policemen, 
unhappily, came to the door unarmed. The oldest of the 



44 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


three robbers woke from sleep, and they just shot. They 
killed both police officers. Yes, that was terrible. That was 
a case that was picked upbythethen radio people. There 
was no TV then. They made it into a "drama." 

So it was in thenewsalot—in thenewspaper and on the 
radio? 

Oh, yes. Well, the three young men escaped from 
Walla Walla, Washington and got down here. They stole 
a car. So that was that case. My client was very happy, 
and I haven't read the papers, but the effect of it was how 
well I had done. They all had to go to Carson, but I don't 
recall what the sentence was for the oldest boy, and the 
next boy. To me, they really weren't boys, you know, 
young men. Anyway, I did the best, the paper reported, 
because my client only got forty years. They all were out 
of the Nevada prison later, because they were paroled at 
some point. 

I wanted to talk about some of your other memorable 
cases thatcamealong whileyou were practicing during 
that time. 

Well, from a lawyer's point of view, the Crosby 
case. . . it was Crosby v. NIC, which used to be the state 
insurance for industrial accidents, that type of thing. 
That was a case where the idea of odd lot cases .... We 
had not had something like that in the law in our cases, 
which was introduced in that Crosby case. That went up 
on appeal, and I won it on appeal. 

Unhappily, the black business came in. Crosby was a 
pastor, and he was a big man, and to earn his living, he 
worked at Gray Reid, which was our only large depart- 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


45 


ment store. He and another employee were either going 
up some stairs or down some stairs with a refrigerator, 
and it began to slip. So in order to save the other fellow, 
Crosby, however he was handling it, injured his back 
severely. 

We have to go back for people who didn't live here— 
it's not understandable. We were small. This man was 
really a nice man. He was a pastor, but as I said, that 
didn't bring him any money. The churches paid almost 
nothing, just the collections. So he was allowed to stand 
on the courthouse steps, because people were coming 
here to be married, and anyone who would use his 
services would pay him tips, and that was a way of 
earning some money, and it was accepted. 

NIC (Nevada Industrial Compensation) gave him a 
partial disability rating. The law has changed since that 
case. In that time disability was "disability to earn." Now 
it's for physical disability. Oh, by the way, Paul Laxalt 
was the attorney at that time for NIC. Then Paul Laxalt 
and I were good friends. You know a lot of these people. 

I think that by the time we were through, there were two 
or three other lawyers in this case from NIC. Mythinking 
has to be that compensation was based on the fact that 
NIC held that he was able to work. This odd lot case really 
says, in effect, if you can earn only pennies, that's not 
working. It has to be a marketable skill for which you 
could be hired in the same way as anybody else, not 
because you made a couple of bucks on taking people to 
be married. They couldn't use that as a measure. That 
was one thing. I think Charlie Merrill was on the supreme 
court then. He went to the Ninth Circuit; unhappily, he 
died. Very nice man. That case was just about the same 
time that I was married. I hadtheluxury of beingableto 
work all day in the library if I wanted to. So I dug up a lot 



46 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


of English law. That'sthetimethat Charlie Merrill came 
over to congratulate me. The court lawyers used to lunch 
at The Senator, across the street from the supreme court. 
My husband, J acques, had come to the hearing, and you 
would think my husband had just won Megabucks or 
something. 

So you did win, and there was a lot of publicity on this 
case, also? 

Yes. There was publicity. 

Was that usual for there to be a lot of publicity on the 
court cases at that time, or were these exceptional? 

Maybe. Well, I came back and forth for this case, the 
paper said, seven different times to Reno from Seattle, 
where I was living with my husband. 

Pastor Crosby saw doctors in San Francisco? 

Well, the NIC would send them there. I think they 
were at Stanford. 

And some of them were accusing him of what? 

Malingering. Of course, you know, you can't help but 
think thefact that he was black, especially in those days, 
had something to do with it. Well, how much money 
could hegetfrom NIC, anyway? So the issuewasthat he 
was entitled to total disability, and we got all of that. We 
got back pay and then payments for the rest of his life. 
Unhappily, he died too early. He was a big man. He was 
diabetic. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


47 


Now, how did you come to this case? 

I was just a nice person. I belonged to NAACP early 
on. I'mnotsureifthat'showhecametome. Maybeitwas 
from being at the courthouse. Oh, somewhere I have a 
pictureof Paul Robeson. Itmustbein all thoseclippings. 

Oneofthe things we've been referring to is a scrapbook 
that Kathleen Noneman fixed for you with some 
dippings from early cases, and we’ve been referring to 
some of those. Were there others? I know that a lot has 
been written about the "Petticoat Trial." 

Of which I am vary sick. It has nothing to do with 
petticoats. I like the clothes I used to wear, so I will say 
that, [laughter] 

The whole thing was labeled, the "Petticoat Trial." 
Why? 

Two women trial lawyers. Well, thetruth ispoorNada 
Novakovich is not here, and Gordon Rice is not here, but 
the truth is, this was Gordon's client, the client who 
pushed my client off the bar stool. She was a monied 
woman, but she was an alcoholic—I think that's in that 
piece—which was very unusual. She never appeared. I 
think that's why the doctors were there. I think there 
were six of them. Fred Anderson was one of her doctors 
(also Gordon's and mine). They were concerned what 
her behavior might be. Well, I never met her, never saw 
her. 


The doctors testified instead? 



48 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


That's how Nada came into that case. This is fair to 
say. Most of us were good friends. I remember walking 
into Gordon's office, and he said to me (I hope in good 
English), "Whom are you associating?" 

I said, "No one. Are you?" All due respect to Gordon, 
he had a lot of ego—the idea that he would try a case 
which many of us thought was unworkable. So he 
assigned that to Nada Novakovich. 

To a woman? 

Yes. I did ask him. I said, "Are you associating?"—to 
that effect. "Are you associating someone?" 

He said, "Well, yes." 

I immediately said, "A woman?" 

"Yes." 

Nada was quite new. So duringthe breaks and during 
the lunch periods, the doctors and she would go back to 
consultwith Gordon, [laughter] Well, hebecameajudge, 
but all of us who knew Gordon Rice knew he had a lot of 
ego. On the small chance that I could win against him, 
the fact is, he had someone in his office who should not 
have talked to me about that. This man had served with 
Gordon in the war, and Gordon brought him here for a 
while. He was also from Massachusetts. So I got these 
little tidbits from him. He once said to me very naively, 
"Aren't you afraid to try a case against him?" 

I answered, "Well," I said, "I have the law." You know, 
that's it. Why am I going to be afraid of him? But that's 
how it was. So that was the whole thing. That was not 
Nada's case, initially. 

There was just enough concern about bei ng defeated by 
the woman? That would still have been a big issue, 
then? 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


49 


Oh, yes. For Gordon, anyway. I think some of the 
other lawyers, maybe not. I mean, Paul Laxalt still got on 
to where he went to court, even though I beat him. 
[laughter] 

Didn't slow down his career? 

But again, he came of immigrant parents, and he met 
my husband duringthat time, and that was kind of nice, 
[laughter] So there were other parts of it. 

So it was called the "Petti coat T ri al"just because it was 
two women lawyers? 

That's all. Yes, that's all. I was from New England, and 
so I normally dressed accordingly, you know, in what I 
would call as appropriate, or in good taste, but no one 
really sees me in a suit anymore. I got very tired of 
wearing suits, because that seemed to be appropriate. 
Nada came in—she was very slender—with high heels 
and a slinky dress, cut down the back, with long earrings. 

I thought, "Oh, gee!" You know. My own reaction. I have 
to say this. 

Some of the men came to watch, you know, because 
there weren't the women who could come. So the men 
came. The Dickerson family—one was a governor, and 
the sons were lawyers, that kind of thing—they came. 
Mrs. Dickerson was in charge of the library then, and I 
camein about something. Shesaidto me, "Oh, oneofthe 
men just came in and said what lovely hands you have." 
[laughter] 

You know what I said? "Well, I really was working 
very hard. This is my first jury trial, and all they care 
about is my hands?" [sound of pounding table] Big 
changes. There have been big changes since that time. 



50 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


Oh, the women now! Margo Piscevich is, I think, a 
tremendous lawyer. Of course, it's not like that now. It 
was different. J ust was different. 

You were kind of paving the way for other women ? 

Well, if I were pavingthe way, I would get a little more 
attention now. So I think I was pretty much on my own, 
right? 

It wasn't something you were doing consciously? 

Oh, no. Oh, not at all. You have to remember, I really 
was on my own. 

You needed the income? 

Of course, I did. That was my way of earning my 
income. I was trained for that. Who had time to think 
about "someday?" [laughter] I think I said something 
like, "If I'd known people were going to ask me these 
things, I would have been in good order. I would have 
kept all the things. I would have made a big deal out of it." 
Nada had a wall of awards. 

You know, there was a piece in the paper. Oh! That's 
when Kathleen Noneman wasgoingto do this, and I said, 
"I really don't want to do anything about that case in my 
interview with Kathleen, unless I can talk to Nada 
Novakovich." You'll forgive meforsayingthis. That's how 
I was. Nada wasn't talkingto anybody by then, because of 
her own embarrassment. Then I was able to talk to her. 
At first, she didn't seem to want any of that. 


Notoriety? Attention? 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


51 


Yes. So when I told her what it was really about, she 
changed her mind and said, "No, no," you know, "OK." 
So we did it, and then she called me up and said, "You 
didn't get six thousand. I have the clippings to show that, 
and you better come over." She wasn't seeing a lot of 
people then. 

You started telling me a very interesting story about an 
experience that you had with Soroptimists. 

Yes. Soroptimists is a group, at least at that time, 
where, primarily, business and professional women were 
involved. In those days many of the business women 
were involved in boardinghouses because of our divorce 
laws. We had many out-of-state people coming, and they 
needed a place to be. So, primarily, those were some of 
the business women then. Ted Carville's wife was one of 
themembers, so I can't say it wasjusttheboardinghouse 
ladies. (Ted Carville was an attorney, whose father held 
some high offices, such as senator or governor.) 

Well, let's go back to the beginning. My father had 
some involvement, not financially, with the El Cortez 
Hotel, which then was only our second hotel in Reno. 
One of the secretaries at the El Cortez belonged to 
Soroptimists, and since I had just been admitted to the 
bar, and she knew who I was, she pressured me over a 
period of time to come and join. I normally am not a 
joiner, but ultimately, because of her, I joined 
Soroptimists. Out of respect to the El Cortez, really, 
because of my father, I finally went. Well, it was 
interestingto me, because each of us had to have a little 
slogan, and my slogan was, "I'm going to practice until I 
become perfect." First you sang the song, and then you 
didthat.Then you each put a dime or whatever, andthen 



52 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


you each had to say something that had to do with what 
your background was. So I thought I was very clever. You 
know, "I'm going to practice until I become perfect," 
right? Then we would sing America, and then we would 
have our meeting. Usually we'd have a speaker, and we 
had lunch. I guess the dime was for the lunch, I don't 
recall. In any event, at one of the meetings the speaker 
referred to the University of Nevada as a hotbed of 
communists, and because I had done some work at the 
university as an auditor, I really didn't believe that that 
was the case. I am not claiming I was an "expert." I just 
found that objectionable. So I suggested that perhaps we 
get a speaker with an opposite point of view. That was the 
first incident. (I later substituted in the business law 
classes for Louis Skinner at the University of Nevada.) 

Thenext incident was when Raymond Smith came as 
a speaker. He had started the first gaming casino here, 
Harolds Club, and had notices all across the country- 
somebody in a barrel, [laughter] 

The little "Harolds Club or Bust" signs all across the 
country? 

He came as a speaker, and again there was talk of 
communism. Havingjust come back from Italy, I thought 
it was interesting to make the comment that I learned 
there were more communists in Italy than there were in 
Russia, which was said to be the case. It was because of 
that that finally I was sent a letter asking me to resign 
from the Soroptimists—because of my behavior in 
meetings. 

By suggesting that they listen to alternative view¬ 
points? 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


53 



"Having just come back from Italy, I thought it was 
interesting to make the comment that I learned there 
were more communists in Italy than there were in 
Russia, which was said to be the case.” Charlotte in 
Florence, Italy, sightseeing at the International Women 
Lawyers Conference. 



54 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


Yes, and that I didn't believe there were communists 
up at the university, I guess, which made me a 
communist. Because of that, I learned from somebody 
whocould not withhold tellingmewhat shehad heard on 
the radio, I was being investigated. We had our first little 
radio shows, and a young woman who had come here for 
a divorce and was staying in Charlie Dumbroski's house, 
next to J udge Bartlett's house, for those who care, had 
become friendly with me. Her lawyer was Lougaris, I 
think. We had become friendly, and one day she asked 
me if we could go for a ride and said that she had been 
hearing, because of her tie to the radio station, that I was 
being investigated by the sheriff's office— ultimately, the 
FBI —on the basis of what I'm tel I i ng you. There was talk. 

Because of those comments in public? 

Just those comments. Yes. I feel compelled to add 
something about what the community was like early on 
in my practice, and what, if anything, that had to do with, 
as I put it, beingpainted with that red or pink brush. Very 
early in my practice was Eric Williams, who became the 
first President of Trinidad. His daughter Erica was born 
in Reno, and was baptized in the church of which 
Reverend Warner was minister, and I was named 
her godmother. Erica, now Connel, is her father's 
"historian." 

Eric Williams was a black person and came to me 
independently. He referred another black person to 
me—each of them was a Rhode's Scholar. Neither of 
those two would be served anywhere because of their 
color. Mr. Williams was living in the home of someone I 
knew, and so food wasn't a problem. Not so with the 
person who followed, and for the moment whose name I 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


55 


don't recall. I wasableto place him with Harry Drackert, 
who had a ranch at Pyramid Lake. I remember Harry's 
outrage at learning that this special man would not even 
be served at Woolworth's! I recall that the person from 
Massachusetts, whom I mentioned earlier as being in 
Gordon Rice's office, talked to me about my "walking 
down the street" with the second client. Also, I recall 
going to Big Bill's place, called, I think, "Little Harlem," 
so that we could have lunch there without difficulty. 
Then, of course, for some people, there was Crosby. We, 
meaning Reno, were held to be very conservative, and it 
saddens me to remember that past. Black people were 
not allowed in the casinos until, I believe, an oriental 
person opened a small place on, I think, Lake Street. 
But—we've come a long way, baby! 

Tellmeaboutwhatwashappeningatthistime. I mean, 
were you into the McCarthy era? 

Oh, all of us were, at that time. 

Nineteen fifty? 

Well, I think I told you earlier that when I worked in 
Boston the first firm to which I went was the firm where 
Mr. J enkins was, Hale and Dorr. That's not why I went 
there, but, ultimately, they sent me to theTyler, Eames, 
and Reynolds Law Firm. Later on—and, of course, 
anybody can get the dates on that—I think the army 
sued Joe McCarthy, and that was when McCarthy was 
naming the Un-American Activities Committee and the 
Hollywood Ten. They can look it up if they want to. 
[laughter] 



56 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


Right. But it was all during this time period. 

Yes. Yes. So there was that kind of thing, but, gee 
whiz, I was a young, naive woman—woman! —and, you 
know, to paint me with that brush! 

Oh, about Robeson. Well, I think I said he had first 
come herefor Community Concerts. Later he came, just 
after I was admitted, to support Henry Wallace as a third 
presidential candidate. Paul Robeson was a high-level 
singer, and ultimately was in movies. Community 
Concert is what he came herefor, but he initially went to 
Rutgers. I believe he was an All-American football 
person. I don'thaveall that information. Hestayed at the 
Riverside, but had to enter by the back way, because he 
was a black person. Paul Robeson was known for his 
music, and later for his political views. When, I think 
back, you know, he was a top law student out of 
Columbia, could not get a law job in New York, because 
he was a black man, so he turned to music, which was 
natural to him. Old Man River is tied to him. At some 
point he did goto Russia. This country, I believe, refused 
to allow him to enter the United States for a time. I don't 
have all the facts, because I wasn't that involved at that 
time, other than I knew who hewas, because he came out 
of my part of the country. 

After coming back from Russia, he really tried to get 
the black people to understand their situation here, that 
they needed to go forward, and he began to go around the 
country in that way. So I knew who Robeson was, and 
when he came with Henry Wallace I was at that meeting. 
My friend Elvira Fox, Sidney Fox's wife, and I went, 
among other people. It was a full house. After the 
introduction and the speeches, contributions were 
suggested, and I got up and made a contribution for 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


57 


Wallace. My friend Elvira was pulling on me to sit down, 
[laughter] She was smarter than I. I mean, she was more 
aware. Well, she was at some point the head of the 
Council of Churches, I think, the World Council of 
Churches. She was very well-read, and she was a 
different kind of person, really, very literate. You know, 
I've been fortunate with someof my friends. I think I told 
you the very next day—I was just newly admitted to the 
bar—there was a big piece about what went on at this 
meeting. 

In the newspaper? 

Oh, yes. 

Headlines and everything? 

Well, itwasa bigarticle. It never occurred tometocut 
that out or anything else, but amongfive named people I 
was one. 

For contributing to that? 

Well, the implication was that somehow I was a 
"Red,” or at least a "Pinko," you know. I remember one 
day walking down Virginia Street. Barbara Vucanovich at 
that point was married to a lawyer. I'm coming down the 
street, and he'sstandingoutsidetheoffice, and hesaid to 
me, "If we go to war, I'll get you first." [raps table for 
emphasis] Can you believe that!? Can you jbe//evethat!? 

Well, fortunately I didn't think that was a very 
sensible thing. You know, I didn't feel threatened by it; I 
just felt, fortunately, "What's the matter with you?" Still, 

I understood what that was about. So then, somebody 



58 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


from the FBI came to one of my neighbors. My younger 
sister, Anne, had been working in Washington, D.C., and 
I think, actually, they cameto check her credentials, but 
my neighbor immediately thought they were looking for 
somebody who was a communist. She said, "Oh, not 
Anne. Charlotte!" [laughter, raps table for emphasis] 
This is my friend ! 

You were labeled everywhere you turned. 

Yes. So that was not the best time of my life; it was 
really very difficult. 

What actually took place then when the Soroptimists 
asked you to leave? 

After they sent me the letter asking me to return their 
pin, I wrote them a letter telling them, "You never gave 
me a pin." I asked what my behavior was, that they had 
to spell it out, and when I said we were goingto go by the 
rules, we set up a hearing accordingto the by-laws. I had 
asked Cliff Young Sr., not J unior, if he would come with 
me, because he certainly was without blemish. He was a 
Young Turk, which, if one doesn't know what that is— 
you know, the Young Republican, Leslie Gray. I just 
asked himtocomewith meforthehearing, which hedid. 
(I fixed the best steak dinner for him first!) I asked him 
nottosay anything, justtobethere. Wewenton with that 
until they asked me to drop the whole thing because of 
what it was doing to them. 

So they asked you to drop this hearing, which was 
actually in the by-laws, is that correct? 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


59 


Oh, yes. Yes. J ust forget the whole thing now. 

At that point were they willing to let you remain a 
member? 

I don't really recall that. I wouldn't have remained a 
member. That's one of the things I said to them openly. 
One of the people who was a Soroptimist worked in the 
basement of the courthouse mimeographing, and she 
would come and tell usfunny stories about what went on 
and what she did there, and she would make some of 
those copies for us. I believed that we were friends. I 
would have thought if I embarrassed them in some way, 
or if they thought I didn't have what it took to be a 
member, they would come and say to me, "Charlotte, 
you shouldn't say this. You shouldn't say that." 

I said it makes me think of—and I can't think of her 
name now—of that person, who we know is using 
courthouse time to do these things, which is not 
appropriate. We certainly would say to her—I think her 
first name was Ellen—we would say, "Ellen, this is cute, 
but we think this is not appropriate." We certainly 
wouldn't begin to get her out of the courthouse. 

Well, that just did it. So I got a call from the president, 
or whoever she was, asking me did I realize that 
everybody was so upset and getting so nervous. I said, 
"Well, you can understand, then, how I feel." 

The interesting thing here was there was a Rabbi 
Treiger whose wife was just a wonderful and bright 
woman. In those days we had public debates. I have to 
say our temple started that, and I remember Miles N. 
Pike, an attorney, who was such a wonderful man. I 
believe he went on to our supreme court duringthetime 
that I lived away from Reno. I think the library had an 



60 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


auditorium, or we must have had another place which 
they tore down for other uses, but Mrs. Treiger would 
take part in the community discussions, and she would 
get applause all the time. So I approached her as to what 
was right to do. I talked to my friend Elvira, Sidney Fox's 
wife. I talked to the then wonderful pastor at the church 
on Plumas at the corner of Reno Avenue. He was a 
minister, and I had that feeling about, you know, it's 
touchy, and that was such a nightmare cloud over me, 
the kind of atmosphere. I think his name was Warner, a 
wonderful man, and he just said to me, "You know what 
you have to do," and that did it. That did it. This man 
listened to me, and I told him how I felt. Well, you know, 
that's what he said, "You know what you have to do." 

What do you think he meant by that? 

Oh, just get in there and fight it. Not just say, "Forget 
it." No, no. That's what you've got to do. So I went 
through to the time of where they were going to call a 
meeting, but I just had my own meeting with them, and 
I just resigned. It was such a bad experience. Partly, as I 
say, I think you have to look at the group of people. All 
due respect, but just to tell you they're going to get you 
out without their by-laws and all this. That was not a 
pleasant experience. 

Did you feel isolated in other ways because of this 
experience? 

Not isolated. I'm not goingto name that lawyer out of 
a so-called prestigious firm at this point trying to make 
me admit or deny I was a communist, and made a 
comparison between Nada and myself. I have to tell you 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


61 


about Sam Bull, who has hisown history .... [laughter] 
Sam Bull—I will love him forever. I've learned to talk 
about love in that way since I've become an adult, 
[laughter] When I grew up you didn't say you loved a 
man. You didn't even say you loved a woman, because I 
couldn't say, "My friend Margaret Bailey, I dearly love 
her." But you do say that now. 

We were at one of the bar meetings, and Sam Bull 
came over and heard what was happening, and to his 
credit—as I look back—he just said to me, "I'm taking 
you home." 

That really touched you. 

"You're not going to listen to this crap." [crying] My 
reaction is not about them; it's about him—and he had 
enough trouble of his own. Huh! 

Yet he was willing to go to bat for you? 

Oh, he was involved himself, because of what Sam is 
like. He responded by letter to a client in prison about 
J udge Foley Sr., and the sheriff intercepted that letter, 
opened it, and, you know, said what was almost out. 
[laughter] 

And what was that about? 

Sam Bull had represented this man who went to 
prison, and the prisoner was kind of complaining from 
the prison, and Sam said something about J udge Foley, 
the sentencingjudge, that wasn't altogether complimen¬ 
tary. 



62 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


And the letter was intercepted? 

By one of the sheriffs, you know. So I mean, Sam had 
his own problems. He certainly didn't need to take me 
on, you know. 

Buthewas very good about protecti ng you atthat point? 

Yes. Yes. Well, anyway, after awhile that went away, 
you know, and I really got involved in my law practice. 
That was early on. That was very early on. 

Right after you passed the bar, right? 

Yes, because I had only been admitted shortly before 
Mr. Robeson came here. This wasjust beforethat, so that 
wasn't a very good thing. 

You said you weren't a joiner. Were there other groups 
that you were involved in in Reno? 

No. (Well, I didjoin theACLU in Boston. I do pay dues 
through Reno.) I didn't even become involved in the 
temple. Well, it's either a synagogue or a temple. I didn't 
join that for quite awhile in my own life, I think, because 
my parents during that period had had no religious life, 
or any other life, in Russia. Well, my mother celebrated 
all the holidays and kept what we call a kosher home. 
(Kosher means clean.) My mother, in my memory, went 
to the synagogue on a high holiday once and took me. My 
father never went. So even though I was brought up in a 
Jewish home—and there's no question about my 
J ewishness—I wasn't part of goingto the synagogue until 
I came here. We had the Jewish holidays off in school, 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


63 


and what the kids did, they'd congregate outside the 
synagogue and not go in. 

So, it was through the person who was the employer, 
so to speak, of that Petticoat Trial situation. "Scotty" 
worked for my friend, Edith Friedman, who through me 
attained the patent on the one-armed bandits, 
"Characters" slot machines. There are a few at the 
Liberty Belle. I had a car. In those days women—a lot of 
women—didn't have cars. It was still kind of new. So 
Edith would ask me to dinner at her home, and then I 
would drop her and her children at the synagogue. I 
wasn't understanding it, but what she was doing was 
manipulating me. [laughter] Then she asked me to come 
in. The fact is, I spoke to Mrs. Treiger, and I suggested 
that I questioned many things, and I thought I should talk 
to her about it before I really became a member of the 
congregation, and she made some comment about, 
"That's what your Jewishness is about. You will be a 
great. . . ." [raps the table, laughter] 

So questioning was good, right? 

Yes. Yes. [laughter] I think we're known for that, 
anyway. You know, you grow up that way in your home, 
anyhow. So these are pleasant memories for me, and I've 
gone from there. 

It just seems to me like you had a little bit of a rough 
start in Reno. I mean, you were one of only three women 
who had passed the bar at that time. 

I was the only one in Reno. Emily Wonder and Nelle 
Pricewerefrom LasVegas.They'vemadeadistinction of 
women who have been admitted, but never practiced. I 



64 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


was one of the first three practitioners. People who 
practice law. So there were others who passed the bar. 
They were admitted to the bar, but they didn't actually 
practice. Some left the state right away, or somebody's 
brother or father was a lawyer, but they were not 
practicing attorneys. 

But your livelihood, your income, depended on that? 

At that time. I'm emphasizing, "At that time." 
[laughter] 

You were just starting out, and you had a couple of 
strikes against you with the Soroptimists and some of 
the members of the bar, but were you able to make a 
living with your cases? 

That's where my living came from. My father offered 
some money, but I didn't see how I could pay it back, so 
I didn't take it. [laughter] About the time I was 
admitted—well, during that period and before, of 
course—divorces were the big thing, because a lot of 
people were coming from back East. Today, you know, 
we are getting a lot of California people, and it's a very 
different thing. I was a young woman, which I under¬ 
stood, and I also wasJ ewish—which didn't show. I could 
pass, but / knew I was J ewish. That combination was a 
little different, because there were so few women. One of 
the hotels, the lesser hotels, approached me, because 
people would stay in those smaller hotels, and if I would 
do a kickback, they would send me the clients. Well, if I 
were even goingto think about it, my situation madethat 
impossible. So somebody else was getting the kickbacks, 
and in the bar it was known. So I look back at that, and 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


65 


today the practice is . . . somebody is going to ask me 
about the changes. Now, that's just not there. One, I 
think hisnamewas Davidson. I don'twantto say that, but 
there was a lawyer who had an established practice, and 
he was suspended because, I think, when thetrainscame 
in the train people and cab drivers would send these 
people, and then they'd get a kickback. Yes, because if 
you came from New York, you were good pay. Today is 
different. 

The bar approached me—the bar meaning somebody 
involved with the bar—and offered Mr. Davidson's 
practice to me during the time he was suspended, but 
because of my own feeling about my situation, which I've 
already expressed, I wasn't sure. The bar made it OK, but 
that wasn't enough for me. I still thought if I made some 
little error or something, I'd be tainted, and I passed that 
by, but my friend, C.B. Tapscott, with whom I became 
friendly, took over that practice. That was my thinking. It 
probably would have been my thinking anyway, but it's 
just that I was very much aware, and to this day, I think 
a lot of the attorneys don't even know I'm a Jewish 
person, except I was one of the Golden Girls at the 
temple. So it was my own reaction to my own situation. 

Not only doyou haveyour own ethical guidelines about 
things like kickbacks, but you have a particular 
passion about the I aw. Can you tell me a little bit about 
that? You were talking about a case that you were 
looking at in a newspaper clipping , and it brought to 
mind how much you care about the law. 

I think what I was trying to say is that knowing the 
law—reading the law, doing research—was more 
meaningful to me than anything else, and I was a good 



66 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


researcher. Today, you know, I wouldn't have to make a 
different beginning, because so much is available, but as 
/ grew up in the law, it was the law library. I still have in 
my nostrils the smell of leather-covered law books, [raps 
table three times] My first experience in a law library was 
while I was in law school: the Hampden County Law 
Library in Springfield, Massachusetts. As we would say 
today—an awesome experience! I think I've said that Mr. 
Roats was just out of his class. I mean, here was a man 
who was trying to guide me, because I was a young 
woman, and I was entitled to be treated equally. That's a 
long time ago, but he gave me the law library. I was the 
librarian at the Federal Land Bank, and I just thought it 
was like—if you like chocolate or ice cream—a whole 
tray full. I really thought that. I think one of thethings I 
still have is that love for the law, and so I'm so grateful. 
"Oh, boy! You know what? There I am." Oh, the law 
library! About 1934-1935, I was admitted to the 
Massachusetts bar, while I was at the Federal Land Bank. 

I would have been about twenty-two or twenty-three. Oh, 
my gosh! I had my work to do, but that was such a prize. 
Mr. Roats was a different man for his time, so that 
everybody is not alike. You know that. 

Not everybody was treating you equally at the 
beginning? 

Yes. But Mr. Roats is the man who told me that I was 
getting half the raise of another person who came after 
me. This is, you know, a little bit about life: you don't 
know where you're going, but because of some small 
thing [raps on table] or something that seems not very 
important, your way of life is changed, your "journey," so 
to speak. It's because of your language. On my journey, if 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


67 


hehadn'ttold me about Bill Younggettingtwicethe raise 
I got, I was perfectly happy to get the raise I had. I thought 
that was wonderful, but ifthisother person got morethan 
I, solely because he was a male, not because he was 
brighter than I, I knew enough then to know I was 
brighter than he. You know, that was it. That pushed me 
to get another place, although Mr. Roats said to me, 
"You're too young, [raps on table] You just stay here for 
three years, and then you can go because you're not 
going to . . . ." Looking back, that's amazing for that 
time, because I was very early twenties. So that changed 
my life. The fact that this high-class Boston firm didn't 
keep its word to give me two dollars more a week or a 
month, that made me come to Reno, you know, to come 
see my father. That changed my life. 

It's interesting to me that in both cases it was injustices 
that changed your li fe. 

Yes, and they were to most people a very small 
injustice. It was a very small amount of money. 
Compared to what the cost of living was, it was OK, but 
two dollars then, comparatively, was a very small 
amount. I n both cases it was a small amount to keep me. 
In each case I was urged to stay, but wouldn't do that, 
because that half a raise was solely because I was a 
woman. I just didn'tthinkthatwas fair. [My work at each 
of these places was deep in the Depression, so maybe I 
wasn't so bright after all, giving up good jobs in the 
Depression.] I'm grateful that I didn't grow up to believe 
I was a lesser mentality because I was a girl. And how 
that would happen in a family with that European 
background, a father, with three girls, before my brother 
came along, without lecturing, without whatever—he 



68 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


/war let usfor one minutethink we were lesser. It never 
happened. Wejust knew that we were supposed to be this 
way and that our lives were supposed to go that way. So 
in retrospect—of course, you don't know that early on— 
there was never any question about what we could do. 
There was no comparison, "You're only a girl." 

That emphasis that you wereequal asyou weregrowing 
up really helped you? 

Well, it never was said we were equal. 

Wasn't said, but it was like a part of things? 

Itwas better. Yes. I just have to think that maybe the 
Sherman girls, particularly Susan, may have been helpful 
in that kind of thinking. I don't know. I just don't know. 
They were my cousins. They were here before my people 
came. But wherever it came from, I was the only girl on 
the street who could play pickey with the boys the boys' 
way. Now, how that came about, I don't know. The other 
girls had to do it the girls' way. I don't know where that 
came from. I really don't know. 

What is that game? Let's take a little side trip. 

You shave a piece of wood that's about how long, like 
that? What's that, a few inches? 

Yes, three or four inches. 

Yes. At each end you shave it down to a point. The 
boys would takea stick. Yes, you takea stick, and you hit 
it at this end, and it pops up, and then you hit it I ike that, 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


69 


and the rest of it I don't remember, but the girls would 
have to hold the pickey and do that. 

The boys made it pop up oft the ground and then hit it, 
is that right? 

Yes, but I wastheonly girl on the street who did itthat 
way. I can't tell you how that happened. 

Maybe you could tell me a little bit about how you met 
your husband, and about the period of time that you 
were away from Reno. 

Actually, I met J acques Arley because of my friendly 
disposition. It was the high holidays, and our Temple 
used to be on West Street, the Temple Emanuel, which 
was the conservative temple. It's now off of Lakeside. It 
was normal. We were such a small community. 



"[From my parents] there was never any question about 
what we could do. There was no comparison, You're only 
a girl.'" Charlotte and her brother, Sam. 


70 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


I'm going to get something else into here. There's 
Despena Hatton who is the attorney for the senior 
services. She is law director of senior services. She never 
knew her grandmother, but I knew her grandmother— 
Greek. Despena needs to be Greek. But anyway, the 
grandmother would come with oneoftheother women to 
Temple. She just liked to come. So there was a group of 
us who kind of sat together, and we were a small 
community, again. So at the end of service we'd all just 
greet each other and so forth, and you always shook 
hands with the rabbi as you left, but we always knew 
when there was a stranger. We were that small. 

So at this particular time we went downstairs, and I 
knew this man was not part of the community. He was 
standing aside. We were downstairs. We would just chat 
afterward, and I said to him, "Come and join us." Little 
did I know his background. He was a French European 
named J acques Arley, and he had a lot of ego, I'm telling 
you. I think he lived it down, finally. He thought I was 
making what we call a pass! [laughter] Anyway, he was 
glad to join us, and that's how I met him. J acques was in 
Reno for awhile, but he was a very ambitious man, and 
Reno didn't hold any future for him. He came to this 
country after thewar. Hewasin the underground, bythe 
way. His sister and her family had come to this country. 
Incidentally, this has to do with the times; his brother, 
who is still alive, wears those numbers. 

He was in one of the concentration camps. 

Yes, hewasin theconcentration camp. Hewassentto 
Russia, and the reason he survived, primarily, was that 
hecouldwork. Hisworkwas . . . when they would lineup 
the men and women and shoot them, they would fall into 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


71 


this pit, and it was my brother-in-law's job to cover the 
pit. [long pause] J acques was in the underground, [long 
pause] Anyway, so havingthisso close to the home 
Anyway, he said the war ended in 1945. Well, something 
else happened, because I was admitted to the bar in mid- 
1947, so it couldn't have been 1945. I think the war 
ended in 1945. Well, I remember the parades down the 
street, but I don't remember why that was. The war was 
over. 

So after synagogue services is when you met your 
husband , and you invited him to join in a conversation 
with a group of people? 

Yes. 

And you knew he was from elsewhere, so what 
happened after that? 

Well, Jacques was here for awhile, and, of course, he 
began to see me, and then Reno just wasn't for him. The 
town was a different town. He was a very aggressive top 
salesperson, and he was so funny about so many things, 
to me anyway. 

What was he selling? What was his work? 

He could sell anything. He sold me! 

Anything? 

He once sold a yacht, [laughter] (If it matters, 
primarily he was in the sales of heating appliances, 



72 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


furnaces, at atimewhen air conditioningwasforthefirst 
time joined with the heating unit.) 

We were entirely different personalities, although we 
had a lot in common, of course, especially emotionally. 
Jacques was easily moved. He was a big person, big 
fellow. I had to learn from my lady friends that he was 
very attractive. I had to learn that. 

Because you didn't know he was attractive? 



"[] acques] was made a better offer in Portland, and that’s 
when I moved to Portland ...." Charlotte (L) with friends at 
the Oregon coast. 





CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


73 


By "the ladies" meaning he could have done better. 
So there was some question about why Jacques would 
marry me. You know, that's really cuckoo, but he was 
good at what he did, and so I think he was made an offer 
at Redwood City. We never went there, though. Finally, 
he was made a better offer in Portland, and that's when I 
moved to Portland, and then we moved to Seattle. 
Unhappily, he died in Seattle. 

There was an item about Dr. Anderson [Fred 
Anderson] in the paper the other day. This can be an 
aside, or it could be a warning. I was not yet married to 
Jacques, but he saw Dr. Anderson, and Dr. Anderson 
wanted to do some surgery. I can't think now. What are 
the organs in the back of the body? A bladder, I think. 
Anyway, I couldn't convince him. I wasn't his wife, and I 
didn't know which way that was going to go, anyway. But 
I look back now, and what he died of was colon cancer. 
My memory is that Anderson may have said something 
like that in talking to me, that he really needs to do this. 

My husband was a big man. I remember prior to his 
hospitalization that he was on the x-ray table, having a 
physical at the doctor's office, and they called me and 
said, "He's left the x-ray table." 

I said, even though I was small compared to him, 
"We'll be back tomorrow," when I was now a wife. Men, 
it seems to be the case, are less good about medical 
needs. I'm very good about that. When I saw that item 
about Dr. Anderson, it brought my memory back to that. 
Possibly, that was the end result of not having done that 
surgery earlier. Yes. 

So you were away from Reno for how long? 



74 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


Oh, most of the marriage. Let's say, maybe, fifteen 
years, maybe a little more, but I never gave up my 
residence. When we were in Seattle I was finishing that 
NIC case, and there was some publicity about that, that 
we had come back six or seven times. When court 
adjourned we all went to lunch separately, and Charlie 
Merrill came over to our table. My husband was so 
European in his manners. He had a lot of respect for the 
court. I wish we could say that about some of the lawyers. 
Jacques had such respect for the court, and he 
immediately got up, and Charlie Merrill came over to say 
to me how well I had presented the case, and that was 
pretty nice to hear, but everybody always thought my 
husband was the lawyer, anyway. 

They did because of his demeanor in public? 



Jacques and Charlotte Arley with Charlotte’s mother at the 
Riverside Hotel in Reno in 1959. 




CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


75 


Yes, he did have a demeanor. Yes. Anyway, that part 
of it's nice, so some of that was nice. 

So you kept your practice going when you were away 
from it? 

Well, I was still involved in certain cases. It made it 
easier for me, because my husband was a hard worker, as 
we say, but I was always back home at five o'clock, 
because from then on I never knew when J acques would 
be home. He was an apartment dweller, and the people in 
the apartment house would know what time it was, 
because they would see me coming from the library. 

So did you practice law in other states, too? 

I was admitted to the Massachusetts bar in 1935. 
Based on that admission I appeared in the police court in 
New London, Connecticut, and that made the local 
papers. The judge, or hearing person, was openly 
flattering. 

After we were married, my husband didn't feel a wife 
should work, but these arejust memories, and sometime 
before he died, he said, "I never should have kept you 
from your work." By then I had become accustomed to 
not working, [laughter] Well, I did all of his work, all of 
the detail, which left him free, so I was not without 
enough to do. Also, I had his niece, who was minimally 
retarded. I had her for aschool year. In theschool—again 
women against men—the principal was a male, and his 
assistant was a male, but the teachers just loved Adele. 
One of the women was a vice-principal, and the woman 
who was the teacher had a husband who was a lawyer, 
and they just ganged up with me to protect Adele from 



76 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


being put out, and we won against the guys, [laughter] 
First she and her sister were with us for six weeks after 
their mother died, J acques's sister, but then when Adele 
stayed with us later, my husband was already in the 
hospital. I didn't think he would diethat soon, but it was 
about ten months from the time he first learned he had 
colon cancer. I'm still the best friend of that niece. You 
know, it's not just being a lawyer. It's having a life and 
relationships that are important. 

So after J acques passed away, then you returned to 
Reno? 

Not immediately. No, it was very hard, and the 
treatment of women, / think, no man would stand for 
that. You know, women ought to have a lesson in that. I 
tried to finish up what we had at the bank and this and 
that. There was an account of some sort with one of the 
main stores, and so I came into the bank, and it was a 
woman. My husband had just died, and only because of 
my own lifel could go and say, "Wehaveto finish this, we 
have to finish that," and went to the bank. 

One of them said, "You really don't have to do this," 
meaningl didn't haveto take care of it. I could just ignore 
it. This woman couldn't have cared less that I had just 
lost a husband. 

I thought to myself, "What do these women do who 
don't have my background?" You know, just jumping all 
over you to make sure they're going to get what little 
money on some kind of credit thing. 

That was a terrible lesson, but, of course, I was up to 
it, and I wouldn't let anybody bother me about it during 
that period. I wouldn't anyway, but these are lessons, and 
I suppose I would like to think that it's changed. I don't 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


77 


think I ever reported her. That wasn't what I was, but it 
was such a lesson to me. How can you speak like that to 
somebody who has just lost a spouse? J ust the money. 
"Be sure you pay." 

On the other hand, you know, we had just gotten 
some glasses for my husband, and I waswillingto pay for 
them, even though J acques had never worn them. They 
said, "No, we just take the glasses." So, you know, just 
kindness there, but there are a lot of lessons. I found it 
very difficult, so it took me a year to come back. 

There were also funny experiences—I was in the 
front of the courthouse, the desk, the counter, and 
somebody came from the back. Yes, we had a very 
different set-up. You could go tothefilesand all that. Carl 
Hill—his family had one of the first kind of motels on 
Virginia Street—he comes out, and this is seventeen 
years later, and he said to me, "Gee, where have you 
been? I haven't seen you for awhile." [laughter] So I 
thought, well, you know, I hadn't changed that much in 
seventeen years. I mean, I thought that, you know, on 
funny little things like that. 

So you came back to Reno after a year? Did you set up 
your practice again, immediately? 

No. My mistake was by that time we had some 
property here and some unfinished business. Oh, that's 
one of my lawsuits that I forgot all about—my own 
lawsuit. I had only just returned to Reno when I got 
notice from the state department of transportation 
(NDOT). I owned some property out at Verdi, partially 
along the river. That was known, that piece of property, 
because the wife of the couple who owned it was into 
gardening, and she worked part-time, and we only had 



78 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


oneflower shop, I think, at that time. Itwaslikeagarden. 
By that time my Sannella cousins were in Petaluma or 
somewhere, and I'd go back and forth over the hill. 
Whenever I passed that place I knew I was just about 
home. I think it's ten miles from town. 

It was shortly after we were married that I saw a block 
ad in the newspaper about it beingfor sale. The long and 
short ofitisthiscouplenamed Davies ran acampground 
in the season, Memorial Day to Labor Day, and so they 
lived on the back of a thirteen-acre parcel of land along 
the southern part of the Truckee. They had two little 
rental units and a house on what I called the front of the 
thirteen-acre parcel, bound on the north side by the Old 
Highway 40. In 1953 the state had bought a portion ofthe 
land from the Davies, the owners ofthe whole piece, for 
what we would look at as a ridiculous price at this time. 
The state came off Old Highway 40, across the river a 
little, to relocate that part ofthe highway, because there 
were rocks falling down on the right side ofthe highway 
going west. Since the state had bought about four acres 
through the middle of their thirteen-acre parcel, the 
Davieswereputtingthefrontpieceupforsale. I asked my 
husband if we could go see it. The end result was that we 
bought morethan two acresalongtheroad, Old Highway 
40. Well, the long and short of it, she and I sat there—the 
women who were really in charge [laughter]. It must 
have been J ohn Davies and my husband who were the 
negotiators, anyway, [laughter] The Davies stayed on the 
back portion ofthe property, and we bought the "front" 
two acres, or so. 

11 was j ust after I came back after my h usband's death. 
(J acques died in 1970.) I was greeted with a notice that 
the state had not, after all these years, fifteen or 
seventeen years later, made a move to relocate the 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


79 


highway. Now, they gave up. It was a thirteen-acre piece 
of property, but legally, you know, I had the front, along 
Old Highway 40. The state had the middle portion, and 
the Davies had the back of the property. The state 
(NDOT) was going to sell this middle portion. I think 
Mr. Davies had died, and the Davies finally sold the last 
piece to other people someti me later. The state was goi ng 
to take their piece of property between us and sell it all 
to what I call theback peopleata ridiculousprice—what 
the state had paid for it. The state's position was that if it 
sold me any of its middle piece, I would deny access to 
the "back" people, their theory being that in Davies's 
conveyance to the state no easement (for access to the 
back) was included. I was supported in the law regarding 
"implied easements." 

I brought a lawsuit restraining the state from going 
ahead, a declaratory judgement action, Arley v. NDOT, 
and this is unbelievable. I made some very good contacts 
with the NDOT lawyers, [laughter] One is Shelley 
O'Neale. She ran for some public offices. She's such a 
good person. She was there, and then Joe Colvin was 
NDOT's lawyer, also David Kladney, a very best friend 
over the years. You know, when I look back, this went on 
over a period of almost thirteen years. I don't I ike to put 
names with things that are negative, but let's say the 
district court ruled against me altogether. I appealed 
that, and for changes in the law we never had the 
settlement committee in between, but why it went on so 
long I can't recall. Ultimately the back property changed 
hands, and Mr. Arroyo, who has since died in a very 
unhappy way, was the owner of the back parcel. I filed 
some pretty good briefs (according to J udge Zenoff). 

Recently, I was at a reception for Judge Deborah 
Agosti by her law school on the occasion of her going to 



80 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


the supreme court, and they were, I thought, excep¬ 
tionally nice people. One of them from the Toledo Law 
School was up at the podium, and I was sitting with 
Carolyn Kellogg, fairly close to that, and I'm hearing, "Is 
Mrs. Arley here?" I am so sick of hearing that I'm the 
oldest. I don't mind. I'm glad I'm here, but I'm so sick of 
it. This maybe will dispel some of it. If that's all they can 
say about me! If they would only say the "more senior 
member." I know some of the people thought that wasn't 
anything, but without even thinking, I banged the table 
[pounds the table] where I sat, and I said, "Here we go 
again!” 

Well, J udge Rose from the supreme court, while we 
were leaving—he just was so giggly. He knows how I feel 
about, "She's the oldest." 

He said, "I knew it. I knew it. I knew it." Anyway 

It would be nice to be remembered for something other 
than being the oldest. 

Yes. I'm really sick ofit. Then, a man named Ray Pike, 
executive vice president of IGT and a lawyer, came over 
to me. His name is Pike, but he is not related to the first 
Pikethat I mentioned, MilesPike. Hecameoverand said, 
"I need to shake your hand. I was sitting next to Joe 
Colvin," who had been the lawyer for the state in my own 
action, Arley v. NDOT. 

I said, "Here we go again," you know, "that I'm the 
oldest." 

However, much to his credit, so far as I'm concerned, 
Joe Colvin had said to Ray Pike, "But she's a good 
lawyer." 

I thought that was good, because he wasn't saying, "In 
spite of being old." I was a good lawyer. So at least I heard 
it from that source. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


81 


So then we had another reception, and J udge Agosti 
by now started to say, "She's the longest practicing 
attorney." Well, you know, you're glad to be here, but if 
that's all they can say for you, for your life, that's not so 
hot. [laughter] 

Well, the law meant so much to you. It isn't like it was 
just a passing fancy. 

Oh, no, no, no, no. 

When you talk aboutthelaw you havea real passion for 
the I aw. 

Yes. Yes. Yes. 

You worked very hard on your cases and did a good j ob. 

I did work hard, but, you know, I go to the women 
lawyers' meetings. 

They don T know what you Ve done? 

Nothing. Nobody asks, and nobody cares. Kathleen 
Noneman will take me, you know, and she calls it a 
"horse and pony show," but she never seems to leave 
enough time even for that. It'sjust different. I go because 
I'm a senior member. I went to that hundred-and-one- 
women event or whatever, out of the sense that I'm the 
oldest among them, and that's what I should do. It really 
turned out to be a fund-raiser, and I'm not even 
mentioned in that damn thing. I mean, so I don't have 
that kind of ego, but when you just think of it, it doesn't 
have much to say, but when I get a call from that lady who 
sat at the table, and she remembers me, it means 



82 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


something. This lady lost a family member and had other 
serious problems, and she wrote me a tender note about 
how I (unknowingly) lifted her spirit. I'm very fortunate 
to have the attitudes I have, but I look at it. I think what 
I'm saying is I'm away from myself objectively, and I look 
at that. If I go to the women lawyers' meetings I'm just 
sitting there, but I go. 

Of course, I have a lot of young friends. J ill Griner is 
an attorney, and she was the secretary of the women 
lawyers, and that's one of the very good things for me, to 
have a rapport with so many younger people. We have a 
real association. Jill Griner is on her third baby, but 
we're such good friends, [laughter] I have already held 
Adam, at five weeks. She will call me to tel I me about the 
meetings. I said, "Just call me when it's going to be 
interesting," you know, the speaker. I had to miss Valerie 
Cooke, who just became a magistrate, and I have a very 
good relationship with a lot of them, including Valerie, 
but I just couldn't go, because I was in physical therapy. 
I'm amazed at so many of the younger people who have 
such good rapport with me—an almost equal friendship. 
The young people—the much younger people—I 
become one of them. 

They value what you've done. 

Well, let's see, you're too gracious, [laughter] 

You think? No, I think they do. 

Oh, I think it's because I'm a nice person, [poundsthe 
table] 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


83 



"Of course, I havea lot of young friends.” Charlotte’s eighty- 
eighth birthday (April 1999), celebrated with her friend 
Despena Hatton's son, Nicky. 


Yes. Well, that too. Of course, that too. [laughter] Well, 
this brings up a question: When you returned to Reno 
what kind of changes did you see? Were there more 
women practicing law when you came back after 
J acques died in 1970? 

Oh, I think this will tickle you. I remember coming 
into the law library, and I saw a woman there, and my 
reaction is, "What isshedoinghere?" [laughter] It really 
was my reaction. 

Because you weren't accustomed to seeing other 
women? 





84 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


No! No, and now they're all over the place! Of course, 
the dress is so entirely different. I've been in the 
courthouse— not so much very recently—but they come 
in without socks on, in pants. Of course, I do not go down 
even to file someth ingin pants. That doesn't make it right 
or wrong, but, you know, that's how I grew up, let's say. 

Right, wearing a dress or a suit? 

I don't know ifthey let them come in jeans now or not, 
but I just think court is a serious place. I have that 
attitude. I was in Judge Breen's court, and one of the 
fellows came in an outside jacket. J udge Breen told him, 
"Go home." You know, there's an end to that, I think. I 
think for the people who are before the court this is a very 
serious time. I think the lawyers should dress 
appropriately. 

Whom did I see, all of whom were in suits? Oh, at the 
memorial for Clark Guild Jr. I knew him. I knew his 
father. Let me tell you about the father. There was a 
Christmas party. There was a Lyon'sBuilding, which was 
on Center and Second, which, of course, is no longer 
there. There'sthe pawn shop, [laughter] I think it burned 
partly, and I think they had their offices over there— 
Clark Guild Sr. did. There was a Christmas party, and I 
came. Naturally, I never had afeelingthat I was to be left 
out. That's personal. Somebody asked mesomethingone 
time about being a woman lawyer. They were lawyers; I 
was a lawyer. That was my level. Anyway, we were small, 
and it was good. Nobody was pushing me out of the way; 
nobody was doing an awful lot to help me, but I was one 
of them. If you had a problem .... That's another thing, 
I wasn't a drinker, then nornow. Ifwe would meettohave 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


85 


a discussion, I learned to drink sherry, and I'll never 
drink sherry again in my life. I got so sick of it. 

But you did that to join in? 

Yes. You know, I'm goingto have tea? Yes. [laughter] 
Cokes and things of that sort are in now, but that wasn't 
how it was then, and you just wouldn't do that. Cokes— 
those were fountains for the children. Anyway, Clark 
Guild Sr. came out. Yes. Well, he wasn't the only one. 
Clark Sr., the judge, just pulled me down and sat me on 
his lap, and, you know, you just don't know how to 
handle that. You just don't know how to handle that. I 
didn't stay long, but that would never happen today. It 
would never happen today. 

That probably, as much as anything, talks about what 
a difference there is, with all the emphasis on sex.ua! 
harassment today. 

Yes. I guess that was harassment, but who knew? He 
was a judge. At least I sat on the lap of a judge. Anyway, 
also, there was a lawyer across from the courthouse, 
Scanlan, a much older man, and I used to hate to go 
in there, because he would [lowers her voice] 


Try to grab at you, is that what you're saying? 

Well, it's ... I don't know why they want you to sit in 
their laps. Compared to me he was an older man. Sol just 
had to learn to watch myself. 



86 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


We were talking about changes, and one of them was 
that you were seeing women in the law library. Had the 
law itself changed a great deal in the time that you'd 
been in Portland and Seattle, in that seventeen years? 

Oh, fundamentally I don't thinkthelaw has changed. 
There are new laws and some amendments to laws, but 
the way of research, I think, is entirely different. It's so 
much more simple. We had to track everything down, 
but, of course, / think, in tracking it down that way, one 
learned a lot, you know, the use of the books. The one 
thing I do say about myself is that I was able, I believe, to 
distinguish those little changes that made a difference. I 
could ferret them out, because very often you read the 
law, and you're reading it in order to support the case 
you're trying to make, but not everybody picks up those 
small changes, and I think that I did have that. That's 
why, I think, that theappeals I took were, by and large, so 
effective. 

So when you came back you were working with 
appeals? 

Well, the appeal on my property case, surely, but 
earlier—the Crosby case—I was already married to 
J acques when I was involved in that. Gordon Rice took 
over that case for me for awhile, but that's the case I say 
I used to go to the law library in Portland and Seattle to 
research. That went on for awhile, but that was a good 
win. Unhappily, Crosby died before he could take 
advantage of what we did for him. On appeal from the 
district court we had to go directly to the supreme court. 
We don't have an appellate court. However, now all of 
that has changed. We have a settlement conference. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


87 


That's what happened to my own lawsuit; it finally got 
settled in one of those conferences. We still do not have 
an appellate court, but when we get into the supreme 
court, before we're going to be heard there's a point at 
which one of the judges, who will not be involved in the 
case, sits with both sides and tries to negotiate a 
settlement at that point, before you go to full-blown 
appeal. So that was settled. That was a big thing for me. 

I still have that property. 

What other kinds of cases were you working on when 
you returned to Reno in the 1970s? 

Well, what happened when I returned to Reno, I really 
came back to make some decisions. I had some thoughts 
of probably going back to New England, and I gave that 
up. There was some property here. I think primarily in 
the beginning I came back about that property. When I 
did come back though, Sidney Fox still had his practice, 
and he had a casein the supreme court, and he asked me 
to work on that with him. Also, heasked meif I wouldjust 
cover for him when he was out of the office. He didn't 
have a large practice. So, in a sense, I began to do that. 
Then, because I was very close to Mrs. Fox—she was an 
unusually bright woman—that was a good time for them 
to go to Europe. Oh, she was the one who pushed me to 
get back here. She knew ultimately I would come. She 
just pressed metocome, becausethey weregoingto goto 
Europe for three months or something, and I would take 
over the practice. I think that's how it started. I never 
dreamed my life would come again in this way, or that I 
would have started on my own again. Sothat'showitwas. 
I don't know when Sidney became ill or gave up the 
practice. That's when I just began to practice out of my 



88 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


house. I've never maintained a downtown office since I 
returned to Reno. I don't look back. I just don't look back. 
If I would haveknown how my lifewasgoingtogo ... but 
from where I am today, I'm glad I'm not in a downtown 
office, [laughter] That's just the way it worked. The 
people came to me, anyway. 

Right. You're still practicing, correct? 

Yes, I'm still practicing. I'm doing something for 
somebody who's being deported, which is heart¬ 
breaking, because somebody didn't know the law. It's a 
disaster for a person's life. Then I saved somebody from 
losing their home. One of the things I can say, which it 
should have occurred to me a longtime ago, that some of 
these people for whom I do, I finally realized very 
recently I'm giving up my time, which is economically 
worth more than their time. Just economically. So I 
thought, "You can do something for me: give me time 
back." Butit'shard. It'sjust/iardtofindaway,you know, 
cut the grass or paint thething or clean up my basement. 

I should have thought of that longtime ago, but I didn't. 
The truth is I'm probably better fixed than most of the 
lawyers would think I am. So, you know, in a sense, if 
somebody really isstruggling, it's not their money I need, 
but I thought of it too late. From hereon in, everybody is 
going to give me something back in time. 

I'm not sure that we got all of the cases that we wanted 
to talk about. 

Oh, no, we didn't, because I wrote them down. 

You said to remind you about the Libro case. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


89 


OK.TheLibrocase. Oneof myfriends, Pam Willmore 
was the first female bailiff and law clerk. She worked for 
J udge Gabrielli, and was also the first female director of 
commerce for the state of Nevada. She does mostly 
family law, and family law has become a jb/'gthing. I was 
amazec/when shetold mesheusesthe Libro case. That's 
kind of complimentary. I have a lot of respect for her, but 
she's a great personal friend. The issue in the Libro case 
is, ifthechild isnot yours, ifyou have believed the child 
to be yours and then learn it is not yours, are you 
responsible for supporting that child? That made the 
Family Law Reporter somewhere, because I got a call 
from another state, and we talked, and then I said, "Well, 
how would you know about that case?" 

"Oh, it's in our Family Law Reporter.” 

We went to the supreme court on it. One of the 
supreme court judges gave the other attorney what for, 
you know, but these two people were married. Then 
there was a child, and for ten years, naturally, the 
husband, Mr. Libro, just adored that child. Then oneday 
he took the child into the hospital. It was as simple as 
that, and they gave him the report or something, and he 
got hold of the birth certificate in someway. I mean, that 
just happened. Again, it just happened. 

So the father just happened to see the birth certificate 
when the chi Id was in the hospital. 

Yes. There was some reason for his seeing it, and 
Libro noticed that the child's blood type would have 
made it impossible for him to have fathered the child. 
The lawyer on the other side was Grellman. He just 
hammered away and hammered away and got into what 
is now beginning to become the law. That's how the law 



90 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


develops. If a man marriesawoman and there's/iar child, 
but the man holds himself out to be the father, the child 
believes him to be the father, the law is now progressing 
to make him, in effect, the male parent, and so therefore, 
support psychologically, blah, blah, blah and so on. 
Anyway, that law is just coming into being. So this was 
that kind of a case, and he tried to put forward that, 
because of her own actions, the mother's action in this 
case, was not. . . how shall I put it? 

Being kept a secret? 

Oh, yes, but not only that; there were other matters 
involved. 

The lower court, what was their decision? 

That he was liable for support, but that it went like 
this. Let's see. I think they were being divorced, and it 
was the wife's behavior in a way within the marriage. In 
any event, the court ordered support, because there was 
no paternity action, but having brought that to the 
court's attention, our position was that no support 
should have been ordered until the paternity was 
determined. Very good, Charlotte, [raps on table] That's 
what the court said, "If you can't show paternity so that 
now . . . ." That's what I like for myself. If Grellman 
might have worked on showing that psychological 
paternity, made more of an issue maybe of that, today I 
think that might be different, because the little boy, 
really, what did he know? And what a terrible thing to do 
to a child anyway, but she was divorcing him because of 
other association. So that law has become a thing 
that.... 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


91 


Oh, a standard? Did the supreme court then say, "No 
support until the paternity issue is solved"? 

Right. Right. It tickles me that my own very good 
friend, Pam Wi II more, tells me, "Oh, I use that case all the 
time." 

That's the kind of case where what you did made a 
difference? 

Yes, because then that's how the law grows. 

By being interpreted in that way? 

Yes. Now if you go into a marriage, and there's a child, 
and if you hold yourself out to be the parent, the child 
believes you to be the parent, you're protecting the child. 
You're protecting the child. So that's a development in 
the law, but that's how it goes. People think the law is 
sterile. Not I! 

It's always changing and developing? 

Yes. Well, it's because of cases like that. 

Were there others like that that changed the law for the 
future? 

Well, I had one case, which was my own case, a fire 
loss. I think it was Arle/v. Liberty Mutual. I sued for 
interest on the amount of recovery. The insurance 
company, Liberty Mutual, took the view that it was 
partial loss, because the house didn't burn to the ground, 
so the law there is that it doesn't have to be burned to the 



92 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


ground. It's a total loss if it's more than 50 percent, just 
like with an automobile. It's called a constructive total 
loss, because it'll cost you more to put it together. So I 
think that that was the first case like that, but the other 
issue was that in this case I, being the plaintiff, was not 
entitled to interest on the money the insurance company 
should pay, which is because if the damages are 
unliquidated, you can't get interest, because you don't 
know what the sum is going to be. There's now law on 
pre-judgement interest, on post-judgement interest, so 
that's developed, also. 

Gosh, is that the case I had with the Woodburn firm? 
It was! Some of those things are nice, because I could 
remember his name in a little while, but the attorney on 
the other side of meon that case, I think .... When we 
went to see the new federal building, there was food 
afterward at the Pioneer Bank across the way. I guess I 
was having to sit because of pain in my legs then. I was 
sitting, anyway, and that attorney from the Woodburn 
firm came over, got down on his knees—you know, I love 
that—and said what great fun it was to have a case with 
me. We went to the supreme court on that. I don't know 
if it was that case. It probably was, but in any event, in 
that case the court initially denied me interest on the 
money, because the court held the damages under the 
fire policy were not liquidated. We call it unliquidated 
damages, where you don't have a figure. I really 
researched that well, because we were the only state in 
any of these cases that held to what our court did. Shortly 
afterward, the supreme court had before it another such 
case, where the question was about unliquidated 
damages. They overruled their own opinion in my case 
and said that I would have been entitled. So my husband 
pushed metogo back again. In oneoftheir opinionsthey 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


93 


said, "This is the third time Mrs. Arley has been here." I 
just thought, "I'm not doing that." My husband just 
wanted meto go back, but it was not retroactive, anyway. 
So that was a winner. 

But because of your caseit eventually changed thelaw? 
Yes. Yes. 

Well, you were right, but too late. 

I went back to the court, because my husband pushed 
me to go back again. It wasn't retroactive, but from the 
point of law, that's a pretty good feeling, that the court 
would reverse itself. 

Yes. Based on how well you argued the case? 

Well, I think so. [laughter] The person following me, 
I never really looked at that, I don't think. They may have 
argued well, too. I really ought to look at that case, after 
all these years. (Paradise Homes) This indicates that 
that's where my interests are—in the law itself. I mean, 
making that statement is a natural thing for me. I'll 
probably someday, if I can finish all this other stuff, go 
back and look at that case. I probablydid lookatit, I don't 
know. 

There was one case where my client was charged with 
manslaughter. Did I tell you that one? When Raggio was 
the deputy district attorney? 


I don't think so. 



94 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


That's another good case. My client was charged with 
vehicular manslaughter, and one of the occupants in 
the other car was killed. Their car rolled over the 
embankment. The woman in that car was injured, but 
the man died. My client was insured, and I asked the 
adjuster from the insurance company to go with me to 
check the scene of the accident. The truth isMr.Tapscott 
and I werefriendly in the law, and when I asked him to go 
with me, he knew this person, as well. We both knew the 
person charged. I said, "Will you go with metothesiteof 
the accident?" It was out at Painted Rock, I believe. 

"Oh, no, if you're going. . . ." So this adjuster is 
sayingto meabout it had to do with whether the car was 
on high beam or low beam, and I really didn't know 
anything about that. Then, there was a question of the 
point of impact. My client was westbound; the other car 
was eastbound. The sheriffs had made a determination 
where the point of impact was. Acting on that, they 
charged my client with manslaughter and put her in jail 
over a long holiday weekend. Also, they said the beams 
were not on high. 

So this was a real learning experience for me. I just 
went to where my client's car was being held, and I asked 
them, even though the car was a wreck, could we 
determine whether the beams were on high. "Oh, yes." 
Then the white wire, the red wire, whatever the wires 
were. So we were right on that point, but when I went out 
with the adjuster, I don't know how we came to that 
conclusion. Again, it's research; it's caring. What the 
sheriffs said was the point of impact was actually where 
the other car dug in as it rolled over the embankment. 

That made the difference, and that case was 
dismissed, but when I read the article, I see that Raggio 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


95 


said, in case they got any other evidence, you know, they 
would charge her again, but, of course, they didn't. 

That was my first experience of throwing exhibits on 
the screen. I talked to the army and found they had an 
overhead projector. I don't know how I did it. They were 
going to loan this to me, and I could visualize myself up 
therewith this bigscreen doingthis work, but, of course, 
you can't do that if you have a chance to get the case 
dismissed, [laughter] The overhead projector was new. 
Nobody had it. The army had it. I don't know how I 
learned that, but yes. 

You were going to use it, but you didn't get a chance? 

Yes, with exhibits. Today it's so different. There's so 
many electronic devices, and your voices, and your this 
and your that, but this is the raw stuff. It's like doing your 
own hamburger. Get beyond it. So that was good 
experience. I liked to learn, and I still like to learn, but I 
go the whole way. The big lawyers here will think that's a 
very silly statement to make, but I was a sole practitioner. 

Unhappily, when I came back after my husband died, 

I didn't think I'd get involved in the way I have. So I've 
never had any help. I do all my own work. Now, my friend 
Pam, you know, has a real office, and we've associated on 
a couple of things already. The ones that are small I don't 
have to associate. I just say, "Do it. I don't want to do it," 
because I just do everything by typing. Anyway, that's 
where I am. 

We want to talk now about the Reno law community 
when you first came here and first passed the bar. I'd 
like to have you talk a little bit about what you found 
here. For example, werethereoneor two large firms, or 



96 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


lots of small firms? Were some people more powerful 
than others? 

Well, when I first came here I didn't expect to take the 
bar. For some months I did substitute in the law offices. 
Also, I had suffered some injury in an automobile 
accident in Los Angeles, where I was a visitor, and so I 
went during that period to the University of Nevada, 
Reno and just audited courses in history, political 
science, and philosophy. I think I may have said 
something about that earlier, because I was rather 
astonished to find in philosophy that I already knew that 
I didn't relate philosophy to just daily living, [laughter] 
Of course, I was an older student. I remember my 
reaction to that. I expected political science to be 
something like Latin was in high school, [laughter] I did 
do law, English. I couldn't recall the English teacher's 
name, but he was quite good, particularly with 
Shakespeare, and that was another good time for me. 
There was Mr. Miller, the speech teacher. I remember 
him. So I apparently did more than I thought I did. 

Then I began to substitute in the law offices, so that 
was my introduction to the legal community. One of my 
first memories is always this: I called an office to ask for 
the attorney, and the person answering the phone said, 
"Oh, he's down in the barber shop getting his hair cut." 
As we say, I almost fell off the chair, because I was from 
New England. That would never happen in a so-called 
good office, [laughter] 

Becauseit wouldn't be a professional, courteous way to 
greet them? 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


97 


No! I mean, "He's in the barber shop"?! [laughter] 
Lawyers—it's one of those stories—you don't think 
about lawyers ever having their hair cut. [laughter] You 
know what I'm saying? 

Yes. When you say you substituted in law offices, were 
there several that you worked in or just certain ones? 

No, several, because I think it was primarily during 
the period when the secretaries or clerks would have 
been on vacation, and I just filled in. I think we talked 
about George Springmeyer and his wife Sally. It was 
Springmeyer and Thompson. That was Bruce Thomp¬ 
son, after whom the federal building is named. I was in 
that office. 

Was this a powerful firm at that time? 

Oh, yes. 

Can you describe how you knew that? I mean, by the 
cases? 

Well, the comments that were made by George 
Springmeyer all the time. You know, you don't get a 
certain kind of comment. He belonged to a political 
party, the name of which I don't recall. I think it began 
with a "W." He was very opinionated, and probably most 
of the time would have been right, anyway. Very 
outspoken, but he was highly respected. 

Active in his political party then, or a leader in his 
political party? 



98 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


A bull something, [laughter] Well, his daughter and 
his wife are still living. 

His daughter is a published author; she's an historian. 
His wife Sally, now, was she also practicing law with 
him? 

No. Shedid passthebar. She was admitted tothebar, 
and she went to Stanford, but she did not practice. She 
used to drive him to the outlying communities, and he 
thought it would be less boring for her if she knew 
something about the law, or maybe they both thought 
that, and that's why she went to law school. I don't think 
she had any intention of practicing law. Anyway, about 
that time their child was born. I was in this community 
when she was born. 

When you were substituting at that office for 
Springmeyer and Thompson, you were doing mostly 
clerical kinds of tasks or law clerk types of tasks? 

Well, because offices were smaller, and it was a 
different time, I'm sure I may have done some law work, 
but I'm sure I also did what you're calling clerical work. 

Answering phones? 

Oh, well, I could answer a phone, [laughter] 

Greeting people, taking information, and that kind of 
thing? 

Yes. Since neither George Springmeyer nor Bruce 
Thompson are here, I can say whatever I want. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


99 


That's true, you can. Did you work directly with them? 

Oh, yes. There was no other person in the office. Not 
only that, I remember very often Bruce would have what 
we would call back-and-forth with me. There wasn't the 
kind of pressure that everybody seems to feel now, if you 
want a comparison. They are pushing, and they are 
advertising. You're not as good as us; you've come to us. 

I don't say that there wasn't some desire on the part of 
some to have clients who may have gone elsewhere, but 
it was a different community, not just the legal 
community. We were small enough, and in my own 
view . . . when Kathleen Noneman was talking with me, 
she asked me if I ever felt any discrimination, and of 
course, I did not. I don'tthink I ever would have, anyway, 
but it was mostly because we were a small group. You 
couldn't ignore the rest of us. Oliver Custer, who was 
called "the Colonel," would always say, "Do you know 
how many lawyers we have?! The last count was two 
hundred'." We should learn how many of us there are 
now! 

My friend, Margaret Bailey, whom I'd like to mention 
every time I havethechanceto mention, did not actively 
practice. She took bits and pieces, but that was not her 
real status. We had several cases together, one of which 
made the Yale Law School J ournal, I think, Springer v. 
Federated Church. I was coming in at the beginning, 
possibly, of women coming into fields that had been 
closed to them. There was FeliceCohn, but I don'tthink 
the male lawyers—because everybody else was male 
anyway—would sit down over a drink with Felice. I think 
I may have said earlier that I got very tired of drinking 
sherry, because I wasn't a drinker. It wasn't that. There 
wasn't the camaraderie. We would meet for lunch, or 



100 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


we'd have some kinds of discussions. Cliff Young and I 
had cases together, and there he is, and here I am; we're 
still here. Peter Echeverria was in the most powerful law 
office, McCarran, Foreman, and Woodburn, probably not 
in that order. McCarran was politically powerful. 

And powerful as an attorney, also, or mostly the firm? 

Thefirm. I think at that time McCarran was already in 
the Senate. I remember the immigration bill that 
McCarran sponsored. That was passed. There were those 
who weren't for it. Some were for it. I mean, there was 
always that kind of thing. Of course, he rose to beingthe 
head of the judiciary. 

So, because it was a small office, you were able to visit 
back and forth with Bruce Thompson and George 
Springmeyer? 

They had that firm put a call in to me that Mr. 
Woodburn or Mr. McCarran wished to see me. Well, that 
was really something. I was over in my own little office 
down the street, and I couldn't imagine why he would 
want to see me. 

In those days divorces were handled differently, and 
one of the ways that the lawyers already admitted could 
help a new person would be by giving that person a power 
of attorney. I n the beginningwedidn'thave alI these Iocal 
people being divorced. You didn't have all the California 
people coming. People who could afford to come and take 
advantage of the divorce laws here were mainly from the 
East, people with money, the Rockefellers. I met one of 
Winthrop's wives in that way. We had the dude ranches. 
There was always some man waiting to meet one of these 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


101 


women with money. Some of them did marry some. In 
any event, the person who had come, usually the wife, 
would already have had an attorney, let us say, in New 
York, who associated with someone here. The husband 
could be represented by an attorney here without 
appearing here, by a second attorney or through a power 
of attorney. That attorney would receive a power of 
attorney. That's going to get out of, really, the realm of 
things, but that's the kind of lawyer talk. 

When I was admitted to the bar, the way some of the 
attorneys helped me was to give me some of the cases 
that didn't have any meaning for them and, ultimately, 
had no meaning for me. I often thought if they really 
wanted to help me, why didn't they do that? Give me a 
power of attorney. Oh, they got twenty-five or fifty 
dollars for doing that, but then fifty dollars—boy, that's 
something. 

They didn't giveyou thepower of attorney? 

No. Maybe one or two people, but not everybody had 
the large divorce cases. Anyway, I was asked to go over 
thereto the Woodburn firm, and first thing he said to me 
after the amenities, "Would you like to have a drink?" 

I was still in my New England mode, “Drink in the 
daytime?" That was just my reaction, but I guess it was 
tea or coffee, I don't know. I probably had a Coke or 
something like that. I was such a dope, anyway. So then 
he began to talk to me and told me he had this case where 
he wondered if I would liketo havethe power of attorney. 
Well, I didn't fall off the chair or anything, and I tried to 
behave like a young lawyer, [laughter] "Would I like to 
have it?!'' Mostly, lawyers exchanged with each other. If 



102 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


one lawyer did it for you, you did it for him. That's how it 
went. 

I thought I would get twenty-five dollars, which today 
has no meaning. Possibly fifty? He kind of soft-peddled it 
to say, "Would a hundred dollars be all right?" I mean, 
would I accept that?! Well, anyway, a hundred dollars. 
But we had one problem: my name. He wasn't sure how 
they wouldfeel in New York about a woman, and that was 
another point of resistance for me—not even resistance. 

I could have said Charles, you know, or C. something. 
They had people who had lawyers that were up there, and 
if they didn't feel a woman could represent you .... The 
odd part of this is, the lawyer who had the power of 
attorney, when the case was presented in court, the court 
would ask that attorney representing the opposite party, 
and almost always we would have nothing to add or 
nothingtosay, except thank you to the court. Itwould be 
nothing. You didn't have to do anything, just appear. I 
reallyam happy at this time of my life to think that, when 
my needs were different and meaningful, that there was 
no way I would say I wasn't a female, [laughter] 

Did you get that job? 

Yes, I did. 

In spite of the fact that you were a female? 

Yes. 

Butthatwaspartofthediscussion beforehand, with the 
Wood burn firm? 

Oh, yes. That's why I'm sure he wanted to do this for 
me, which was vary nice. This is what I mean. I think if 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


103 


you really want to do somethingfor somebody, that's how 
you do it. Hehad mecomeover—I'm surehedidn't have 
a lot of things going in his head about it—but he was 
concerned that in tryingto help me he wouldn't be able 
to, because they might not accept it, I'm absolutely sure. 

I was naive and all that, but stupid I wasn't. 

That was part of the issue? 

Yes. That was an issue. Well, money certainly wasn't 
an issue. 

What was your impression of Pat McCarran ? 

I knew of him. You couldn't help but know of them. 
They were the top firm. They represented people in 
cattle and mining, and McCarran was in politics. They 
were well-entrenched—probably the top firm. 

Well, I was pleased to be there, and I certainly was 
pleased that they would do this for me, but I think it was 
Mr. Woodburn Sr. that I spoke with. What kind of 
impression could I have? We were only talking about 
whether or not I would take on such a big case here, 
[laughter] 

Did you ever work with that firm after that? 

No, I thinkthiswasjustagenerositything. Well,they 
didn't ask metojoin thefirm, ifthat's what you're getting 
at. [laughter] 

Which you would have also done, right? 

That I would have done, [laughter] Gordon 
Thompson, a later member of the firm, represented 



104 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


the Federated Church when Margaret Bailey and I 
represented the plaintiff. Also, In Arley v. Liberty 
Mutual, that firm represented Liberty Mutual. In another 
case of mine, Peter Echeverria, as a member of that firm, 
represented the defendant. 

What about Bruce Thompson? What was your first 
impression of him when you were substituting at the 
office? 

Easy, because I don't know where Mr. Springmeyer 
would be from time to time, but I remember our just 
having these chats, just sometimes about family, 
sometimes about law. When he became a judge, he was 
called the "Bulldog" or "Dragon" of whatever street the 
court was located on. I appeared before him later in my 
life, [laughter] My memory of him is clearly a pleasant 
one. 

How was it to appear before Bruce Thompson as a 
judge? 

He was very right down the line, no fooling around. 
You'd better be prepared, or you're going to hear it. He 
was a good judge. Then, of course, I knew his brother, 
Gordon Thompson, who was on our supreme court. 
Gordon was with theWoodburn firm and represented the 
Federated Church in the case I've mentioned, in which I 
was associated with Margaret Bailey. Very happy days 
then. Gordon was a different kind of a personality, much 
easier, not a joker, but easy to talk with on anything. The 
last time I saw him I didn't recognize him. There was a 
good-bye party for Judge John Code Mowbray at the 
courthouse, and as Gordon Thompson passed me—he 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


105 


was using a walker by that time—he greeted me, and then 
we went on in. That was the last time I saw him. 

He died shortly after that. You felt a special closeness to 
him, too? 

I did. I did. 

More so than to Bruce? 

I have no idea of the difference in ages during that 
period, but I think his personality was an easier one than 
Bruce's. Yes, I was more friendly. 

Bruce, it sounds like from what you're describing, in 
person was a friendly person, but on the bench when he 
was a judge, he was very strict, whereas his brother 
Gordon was more easy-going all the time? 

Well, when he was on the supreme court we all 
thought he did very well up there with his opinions. Yes, 
that's a different thing. 

Butjusta differencein personality that camethrough in 
their judicial careers? 

Yes. 

I wanted to ask you about a few other people that you 
may have worked with at that time. You mentioned the 
Young Turks, Cliff Young and Les Gray. Were they 
known as Young Turks then, or is that something that 
came later? 



106 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


No, no, then, because I wouldn't have known what 
thatwas. Wehavetoget backtothepointthat I really was 
very unsophisticated and naive—I really was. Sol would 
not haveheard about theYoungT urks except from them. 

I was now becoming politically interested, and the truth 
is I went to the meetings that were held on the 
Democratic side. 

Did they get this name as part of the political activity? 

Yes. The younger members of the Republican Party 
who wanted to move a little bit away from the right. They 
wanted to be a little more liberal. The Republicans 
wouldn't like to have liberal views—my opinion only— 
but they were a little more to the left. We were friendly, 
anyway. So even if you belonged to different parties, you 
certainly could be very good friends and accept different 
kind of thinkingfrom your own. 

The Young Turks—was that only Cliff Young and Les 
Gray? 

Well, there probably were more, but those were the 
only two I knew. See, that was the closeness. I don't want 
to say it was like a family, because that has so many 
different connotations, but we were people. We had the 
same interests, and mostly it was on the basis of the 
similar background. I knew his brother, Lewellyn Young. 

I wonder if Lewellyn is still alive. I don't remember. He 
practiced outside of Reno, primarily. 

What you're describing is a small, close-knit legal 
community. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


107 


Yes, primarily close-knit. 

And it doesn't appear that way to you today? 

Well, first of all, I'm not active and haven't been active 
in that sense. When I came back there were a lot of 
lawyers who were admitted in my absence with whom I 
had no connection. I did have, after I came back, some 
supreme court cases. I was friendly with George Lohse 
and Leslie Fry, both of those attorneys. LesFry's son may 
still be practicing law. I've tried to be in touch with him, 
but I don't know if he's still living. 

What kind of supreme court cases were you dealing 
with? 

Onewasan industrial workmen's compensation case. 
That was while my husband was still alive, but after I 
came back after he died, I had the Libro case. I 
mentioned that. Of course, Margaret Bailey and I wentto 
supreme court on a couple of cases. Then she had 
another one, which was also like a workmen's 
compensation, and I went up on that with her, also, and 
we won. 

1/1/ere there any people who served as mentors to you 
during that time, who really helped you out on a 
continuing basis or kind of paved the way for you? 
Would you consider anyoftheattorneys that you started 
working with as mentors, like we do today, somebody 
who kind of takes you under their wing and makes sure 
you get going? 

I could say something funny, but I won't, [laughter] 



108 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


You can if you want to. 

No, no, no. When I used to go to the conferences, I 
really was startled. Men who just left their homes, 
because I was a young woman .... I don't need to go on, 
right? 

Oh. 

That was very startling to me. 

So today that would have been called sexual 
harassment? Is that what you're referring to? 

I guess. 

In those days you just had to fend for yourself, right? 

Well, it wasn't hard, [laughter] It really was a 
revelation to me. So if any of these women think that 
there was only one man during these last few years who'd 
fooled around, they're very wrong. That's not a nicething 
to say. 

But that was a surprise to you ? 

Well, I went to more than one conference, and it was 
never different. 

So in terms of being a mentor, you probably had to be a 
little bit careful? 

No, thefellows here are nice people, but I didn't have 
a mentor because ... I could say I was brighter than 
some of them, [laughter] 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


109 


You didn't need one, right? 

It wasn't that I didn't need one. Iftherewasa problem 
you could call one of them. That's how it was. If I wasn't 
sure of myself, then we'd go and have coffee, or we'd go 
and have lunch. 

Your point was that you didn't especially n eed a mentor 
because the community was so close-knit? 

Well, wait. Let's go back a little bit. I worked forBusey 
& Craven. Busey was the one who urged me to take the 
bar, but I already was a member of the bar in 
Massachusetts, which people don't think about. So I was 
out of law school. I worked with the law in one way or 
another before I ever came to Nevada, so that it wasn't as 
though I came here pure. 

/\s a total novice? 

Yes, right. Exactly right. Before I remained in Nevada, 
as I thought I was going to go around the world and go 
back East, I took jobs where I could find them in law 
offices. It wasn't till I got to Hawaii that I had a first 
commercial job for Hawaiian Electric, [laughter] Then 
the war with J apan broke out when I came back. I was 
substituting in L.A. I think I told you the story of one of 
those judges on a work basis. I was a guest at his ranch, 
and that's when there was a lot of this talk about the last 
recent war, "Why did we kill the good English lads when 
there were so many sheenies in New York." So much for 
some judges, [laughter] So it's true. Of course, I also 
spent two wonderful summers in Yosemite without 
thin king about the law. Two of my best years [pounds the 



110 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


table] were in Yosemite. I loved it. No, I was new here, but 
I was not without some background. 

Even before I took the bar I worked with Sidney 
Robinson, who was primarily a real estate lawyer. Lester 
D. Summerfield, who was a very well-known and highly 
respected attorney, and his later partner, Fran Breen, 
hadtheFleischmann Estate, and that's where Fran Breen 
madealot of points, [laughter] I worked temporarily with 
Mr. Summerfield. Mr. Springmeyer took me to Mr. 
Summerfield and made some kind of a cute remark that 
I should be paid well. Fran Breen's still alive, and I see 
him. We're oldies who really are no longer recognized. 
Oldies but goodies, [laughter] 

That was all the group that you were working with? 

Yes. Oh, also, there was Samuel Platt and John 
"Husky" Sinai. I substituted in that office while I was at 
the University of Nevada. Also, the principal partner was 
Bud Loomis. There wasjohn Bartlett, who was with Platt 
and Sinai and then went over to the Vargas firm, a really 
nice guy. I think it was Vargas & Bartlett. George Vargas 
once called me up to compliment me on the result of a 
case I had. I think we talked about that, where my client 
was charged with manslaughter. So we were that small. 

People w ould call each other an d say, "Pretty good job ." 

Well, I don't how many people call these days, but 
they did then. 

Werethere any that you feltthatyou werecloser friends 
with than others, some that you always assumed 
particular friendships with? 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


111 


Well, Cliff and Les. Then there was a young Greek 
lawyer who was shot in the courtroom by the defendant 
in a criminal matter. Security has since been increased 
in courtrooms. God, I want to think of his name. Hiswife 
is still living. I think his name was Mulcahy. I was pretty 
friendly with him and his wife. 

You also mentioned Bert Goldwater. What was your 
relationship with him? 

Well, very early on, I knew Bert before I was admitted, 
and when I left that first law office, it was Bert who took 
mein. Bertwashelpfultomewhen I wasunderthat. I was 
involved in that one major criminal case, and he 
certainly was helpful to me then. Bert also became a 
bankruptcyjudge. It was very easy for meto be with Bert. 
That's not alwaysthe case, even with peopleyou care for, 
or who care for you. I don't need anything from anyone, 
other than in one's personal life, but if I ever need 
anything, I think I could go easily to Bert, [laughter] 

I'm curious about these "Young Turks” again. Did you 
have similar political ideas with them? 

I don't know if the language is that I was politically 
involved, but I did go to the debates. We used to have 
public meetings. There was an auditorium that may have 
been part of the library, or where the Pioneer Theater is 
now. We had public debates, and we were a small enough 
community that we knew who the speakers were. We 
don't have anything like that anymore. 

I always will remember one with Miles N. Pike, and I 
think I've made the distinction it has nothingto do with 
Ray Pike, who is with IGT. I think Miles Pike was on the 



112 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


bench, on our supreme court. He was highly respected. I 
remember once he was on the platform, and one of the 
other people was the Rabbi's wife, who really wiped 
everybody out, [laughter] not including him, maybe, but 
I have a real memory of those public discussion groups. 

Then we had the Great Books, and a lot of us went 
there. That was for people like me who hadn't done a lot 
of the good reading. We were introduced to the earlier 
writers, likeSocratesand down theline. It was sponsored 
by the library. We had our meetings and discussion 
groups in the library. So I was, in a sense, active in that 
part of the community, now that I think about it, but it 
wasn't easy to be involved. You know, not everybody 
would go, but anybody like myself or people in the same 
general circle or whatever, it was easy for us to find 
outlets for our thinking and discussions. That's a pretty 
good sentence. 

It sounds like you fdt very included. 

Oh, I did. 

Do you think that there was, in some ways, less 
discrimination about you bdnga woman herein Reno 
than there might have been in some larger cities at the 
time? 

I don't know anything about that. I think that's a 
personal thing, and I know I was asked that earlier on. 
Now, you know, it's wasteful to even think about being 
discriminated against because you're a woman. Well, I 
think that's a personal matter. Either I didn't understand 
how open I was, or I didn't know enough to know that 
anybody—how shall I put it? I don't want to say I was so 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


113 


busy with myself and had to make my way and all that 
stuff. I didn't think in those terms. The truth is, I didn't 
feel they could economically make a difference in my 
life, if they had the power to do that. Well, now I'm going 
to pull myself together here and say that intellectually I 
may not have had some of the knowledge they had, but 
other than that I didn't have a problem. This is not an ego 
thing. That's how it was. I was respected in my own right. 
I was schooled to be a lawyer. I mean, I went to school. I 
used to have a funny thing when people would ask me a 
question likethat about my beingawoman andalawyer. 
I would say, "My head doesn't understand that I have a 
different body.” You know, that's odd saying. So that was 
never an issue with me. 

So that equality, knowing you were on an equal /eve/ 
intellectually? 

OK, from that level. Yes. Well, I certainly didn't think 
it through, but I think exactly, that's right. Well, I was 
what was considered bright, [laughter] I didn't 
understand that till people began to tell me, but you have 
toshowmethatmaybel waswrongor something. I never 
was involved in feeling I was discriminated against 
becausel wasa woman. Well,J udgeMaestretti used to try 
to help me get placed, [laughter] When I didn't have an 
office, when I lost my little office over there, he tried to 
find a place for me. It was different. Today, what woman, 
who, if she ran into a little trouble about her professional 
life or something, isgoingto start out to be looked after? 
We were small enough, and they would know, and they 
were helpful. 

When I left Bert's office, I took space with Forrest 
Bibb and Harvey Dickerson, who after the war started a 



114 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


personnel business. We covered for each other in the 
Stack Building. 

So this is a point after which I could say something 
about J udge McKnight. There was a case coming into his 
court, and I was going to be associated with that out-of- 
state attorney from California. In order for an out-of- 
state attorney to practice they have to associate with a 
local attorney. The story is that J udge McKnight called 
me into chambers and told me that I ought not to be 
associated with this lawyer. Judge McKnight said this 
lawyer was a communist, and, of course, I always reacted 
inwardly to that, "How could a judge tell me not to do 
that, because this judge thinks he's a communist?” So I 
had a taste of those things right along. 

I know from talking to you that you have a very strong 
sense of fairness. So that would be your guiding rule in 
a case I ike that? 

Yes. Well, not only fairness, but professional 
courtesy. I mean, ifthisman wasgoingtotakemeoutand 
rape me, then if the judge tried to tell me that, that's 
something else, [laughter] 

But just because he has different political beliefs, he 
should not be labeled a communist? 

Well, I didn't think it out. We had high regard, or so I 
thought, between the bench and the bar. When I came 
here, there was a trial in which one of the attorneys went 
tolunch with ajudgewho was hearingthe case. That was 
very startling to me. See, that was the difference, and I 
don't know if we won it, in particular, maybe none of it, 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


115 


but Reno was much more open, even that way. I think 
that probably has changed. I'm sure it has. 

Yes, that wouldn't have happened back in New 
England. I fthejudgewassittingin thecase, hecertainly 
wouldn'thavelunch with either ofthelawyers. 

Yes, openly. I mean, it was accepted. 

You a I so mentioned Paul Laxait, thathewas thedistrict 
attorney at the time? 

When I first knew Paul, he was the attorney for the 
industrial insurance, Nevada Industrial Compensation. 
Oh, that was my Crosby case. That went to the supreme 
court. I won that. Through that we were friendly, and the 
fact is, after I was married, my husband and Paul Laxait 
became friendly, because he was the son of immigrants. 
He came from the Basque country, and my husband 
came from that part of Europe or near there. So those 
are nice associations. I think it was the European 
background in that case. When the Laxalts had the 
Ormsby House, Paul took my husband around, and one 
room was named after his mother. The fact that he would 
have a room named after their mother, that was very 
moving for my husband; family matters of that sort 
touched him. 

You can tell from reading Bob Laxalt's books and from 
listening to his father that both were very strongly 
interested in family. 

I may not remember the name of the book, but when 
they took their father to New York, very touching. Very 



116 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


touching. I can understand that man not wantinga suit— 
a new suit. He had a suit. Oh! 

Did you ever work with J ack Streeter? 

When he was district attorney, and earlier. I think we 
had a case in justice court early on. I did have a matter 
while he was D.A., but because I knew Bill Raggio, who 
then was deputy D.A., I went to Raggio about that case. 
That was that manslaughter case. I've seen J ack lately at 
some of the senior events. They started a senior bar, but 
I haven't heard anymore about it. Coe Swobe—gee whiz, 
I'm going have to call him up and ask him what happened 
to the seniors. We're going down the drain. That's awful, 
[laughter] 

Is there anything else that you wanted to say about that 
time when you werejust starting your law practice here 
in Reno? 

I do know that maybe, except for the larger firms who 
had the better divorce cases—meaning monied—there 
was that feeling about being careful, if a client had gone 
up to a lawyer, not to "steal" a client. There was a little bit 
of that. 

In terms of being ethical with each other about that, or 
not being ethical about it? 

Well, I don't think it was meant to be not ethical; I 
think it was a matter of the source of income. The two big 
firms, did the big class business—the McCarran and 
Woodburn firm and then Vargas and Bartlett. Well, 
there's Tom Cooke. I need to mention Tom Cooke. His 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


117 


two daughters did well. One of them tells the story that 
when they wanted to be lawyers Tom asked them why 
they couldn't just be teachers. I think it's because they 
were "girls.” 

Did you work with Tom, also? 

Yes, and he was very reputable and very warm. You 
know, it was almost as though they were embracingyou. 
You could tell, and you could tell the ones who were not 
so inclined. I'm just recalling knowingTom's father. We 
had bar meetings for meearly on— lunches— and I was so 
amazed at Cooke Sr. H e was so oi/tspo/cen! I marveled at 
that in my earlier days. 

I interviewed Tom Cooke's wife, Patricia. She was one 
of the presidents of the YWCA when I did that book. So 
I was able to meet her. 

How could that YWCA be all owed to fail in a place I ike 
this? 

It’s too bad, isn’t it? 

Too bad? It really says something terrible. 

It does. It's bad. I guess they're having trouble all over 
the United States. 

Early on, beforel wasadmittedtothebar, I applied for 
a job at the YWCA. I saw a notice in the newspaper. The 
local YWCA contacted New York about hiring me, and 
theNewYork headquarters answered backthat I couldn't 



118 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


take the position, because I was J ewish. You had to be a 
Christian. That's just a memory I have. 

I wanttogoon andaskyou aboutsomeofthethingsthat 
happened which were different from the everyday sort 
of thing. You showed me an article on a conference in 
Rome that you attended. Could you tell me what that 
was and describe what happened? 

Well, that was a long time ago, but the women who 
went, I believe, were top-level women. It was 
International Women Lawyers. I was going to say they 
were very good with each other, but the language seems 
not to be appropriate. We were a working group, and we 
were serious, and we did work late into the night and try 
to accomplish what we set out to do, but as I think of it 
now looking back, there was nothing that was 
competitive. Sometimes they talk about women, or did, 
and the way they are different from men. It was a very 
serious, hardworking group. 

What did you setouttodo? What was the pur pose of the 
group? 

Therewasacommitteeon domestic relations, even as 
long ago as that. I was on the penal committee. We 
wanted to do something about the criminal law system, 
and we considered the world as we know it, to be a 
community at large. Here is a quote from an article, 
"Many of the committee sessions went far into the night, 
includingoneon penal law, of which Charlotte Hunter of 
Nevada was secretary, with the famous criminal lawyer, 
Marie Bassinoo as chairman. Miss Hunter's work both in 
Rome and on the domestic relations committee in 
London was uniformly commended." 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


119 


One of the resolutions was to do away with capital 
punishment. That was about 1952. An aside: I brought 
back from Rome two medals blessed by the Pope at the 
Vatican. I presented one to the most senior J udge Foley, 
who was delighted. The other I gave to him for a friend 
whose daughter was ill. J udge Foley told me how grateful 
that family was. She recovered in a good way. 

I remember meeting somebody from Turkey, and for 
awhilewewerein touch with each other. Itwaslikethat. 
It was a large group. In one of those pictures you can see 
the number of women. For awhile we kept in touch with 
each other. It was a very good experience. 

Did you hold an office at that time for that conference? 

I think I was a secretary. 

Did they a/ar meet again, the International Women 
Lawyers? 

We were meeting here, meaning in this country, and 
then in Turkey, but then when I married and went away, 
and when I came back, that was not any longer a part of 
my life. 

Was therefirsta national meeting before you wenttoan 
international one? 

No, it was an international group, but I also belonged 
to the National Women Lawyers. I learned about this 
group from Nelle Price, one of the lawyers who also was 
a member of the California Bar, who was admitted at the 
same time I was to the Nevada Bar in 1947.1 remember 
goingto Boston for a national convention, and I was glad 
to go to Boston. There was a woman detective who was a 




CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


121 


lawyer from L.A. At that time she was one of only two 
women detectives in the country, and, of course, I've 
already said I didn't grow up to be a drinker, but it was ten 
o'clock in the morning, and she wanted to go to the bar 
and get a drink. It doesn't matter about my reactions. 
They wouldn't let us come in. [laughter] In Boston at that 
time, 1953, women—single women, possibly—weren't 
allowed to go into the bars! 

Were there other organizations, associations, honors 
that you would like to talk about in terms of your 
career? Or was it mostly just hard work? 

Ha! Can't do my thing. The women lawyers group 
here honored mein 1989. The bar honors you if you were 
here for fifteen years and if you were here for thirty-five 
years. But they used to do this with some of the men, I 
must say. We would have these roasts, but that stopped. 

I don't remember when it stopped. I don't know if it was 
to raise money. I don't think so. We would all go, and 
there was a fee. I was "roasted" by the United Jewish 
Appeal, UJ A. Ed Reed, a judge on the federal bench, 
wrote me a very kind letter about that. He seemed to 
follow my life in a most gracious manner. 

So you had some involvement with the national and 
international women attorneys groups? 

Well, I belonged to those and the bar here. Early on, 
Cliff Young, Peter Echeverria, and I belonged to NACCA, 
now the American Trial Lawyers. I became personally 
friendly with Larsen on torts and Sam Horowitz on 
Workman'sCompensation personal injury. Sam Horowitz 
was with Boston Legal Aid when I was with Springfield 



122 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 



'The women lawyers group here honored mein 1989. "C har- 
lotte at the recognition celebration held for her. 


Legal Aid, but I didn't know himthen. One of the lawyers 
here indicated to the American Bar that my political 
status wouldn't allow them to accept me as a member. 

Was that part of that wholething with theSor optimists? 

No, but it was at the same time. 

What was it about your political status? 

Well, I was painted ... I was pure lily white, 
[laughter] 






CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


123 


Yes, but that's not how you were viewed? 

I don't know what did it, other than that I was 
outspoken, and I was involved and politically naive. I 
think I said earlier that I was so naive I thought no 
Jewish person could be a communist, [laughter] That's 
absolutely true, so how could you make a communist of 
me? Oh, wait a minute. Wait, wait, wait. Someone loaned 
me some books when I opened my first office to fill in a 
bookcase, and I think one of those books probably 
scratched .... I didn't even know that, [laughter] You 
know, I don't know where that camefrom. I mean, it was 
just the times. I would be OK today, but to think that I 
was just starting my practice. To think that people who 
didn't even know me could question it, and for what 
purpose? So when I look back, you know, that couldn't 
possibly happen to me today. I would sue them all. 
[laughter] 

Did this insinuation that you were a communist 
actually cause you more hardship, in terms of your 
professional reputation, than being a woman? 

I don't think so. Well, but this particular lawyer on 
Second Street, Clel Georgetta, who once sat on the 
bench, represented the ABA and just pushed me and 
pushed me and pushed me to become a member of the 
American Bar Association after this, and I wouldn't do it, 
not until some much later date. The American Bar had 
turned me down on the basis of what a single person 
would say, without ever contacting me, so I really don't 
have a Iot of respect for i nstituti ons of that ki nd, because 
in those days the harm it could have done me was 
tremendous. Even some of the younger members of the 



124 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


barwouldpush me about it, but I was at that pointwhere, 
like the Un-American Activities Committee, I was not 
going to answer. From an association like the American 
Bar, wasn't thattoo much? On the word of one person to 
destroy you? Yet that person at one of our later out-of- 
state conferences wouldn't let anyone dance with me, 
except himself, because I was from Nevada, but I wasn't 
aware he had done this. This has something to do with 
that person. It has nothing to do with me. 

For a long time I wouldn't talk about it, because I 
didn't seem to go to bat, and it was a terrible lesson of 
people not coming to you or talking to you about it. 
That's the thing I have about the Soroptimists, but that 
was a whole different thing. They probably didn't have 
enough of what it takes to sit down and say, "Well, let's 
talk about this." That's what you think friends would do, 
or, professionally, that somebody would do, but there's 
nothing in my life, not one thing, if anybody wants to 
track it, or members of my family. I did have one cousin 
whom I adored, who was very active in that sense, and in 
my later life I personally met Paul Robeson—I think I've 
mentioned that—when Robeson was very acceptable to 
the then highest social level of this town to be 
entertained by them. Well, I'm shaking my head right 
now. [laughter] 

Because that's still not understandable to you, that 
people wouldn't talk to you face to face about their 
suspicions? 

Well, I now understand that people sometimes can't, 
or don't wish to, or think they know more than they think 
they know, but that was a different time. That could have 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


125 


destroyed me. That could have destroyed me. I'm not 
sure it would have. I'm not sure. 

In 1984 you went to Russia for the Soviet-American 
Fiftieth Annual of Commercial, Criminal, and Civil 
Legal Systems of the Soviet Union. You were saying it 
was especially important to go to Russia? 

I was part of an American lawyers group. It was 
especially meaningful to me, first of all, because the cold 
warwas still on, but, primarily, because my parents came 
from there, and I went into an area, which I believed was 
where my parents were born and grew up, because my 
mother used to describe the type of beautiful trees, how 
tall and stately they were. I was so aware in Minsk and 
Kiev. Well, my mother would talk about these beautiful 
trees, and when I came to Minsk, unhappily, I didn't 
know this was exactly from where they had come. I've 
learned that later in someway. I grew up in New England 
where there were birches, but not tall. The tall, slender 
birches—I thought this is so much like that. 

Then in some of the Russian literature there are the 
ponds and the fathers boating with their sons. I would 
walk by myself early mornings, if I was up before our 
meetings, and I wandered onto a path and cameto a lake 
where a father and a son were in a boat, and it was I ike the 
Russian stories, and so I was very much moved. 

Also, in spite ofthefact that the cold war was still on, 
when I went into any of the shops, which were limited to 
foreigners, people really were very gracious, very 
gracious. I didn't know the language. Only I knew the 
sound. The fact is there were very much limitations on 
local people going into hotels and things of that sort. 
George Rudiak from Las Vegas was on that trip. The 



126 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


Rudiaks were detained. He was born in Moscow, but left 
when he was ten. I complained to our leader whose 
comment was a shrug of the shoulders, but they were 
released in timeto leave. Also, in a different way, I had a 
couple of scary moments and much sorrow about the 
cemeteries with houses in Minsk and a graveyard with 
Jewish bodies made into a park. The Christian people on 
that trip insisted that the group should betaken there— 
they understood. 

The sessions were always good, and in spite of what 
I've said about the times, we could have some fun back 
and forth with the Russian people, who were sitting on 
the dais, whatever. Long before we were good about 
women participating in the professions, well, the 
Russians were way ahead of us. They were way ahead of 
us. The Russians had women judges before we did. I was 
in the courts, and that was very interesting—nothing like 
our courts. What was so interesting to me, more recently, 
you know, the Russians came here to the National 
J udicial College and to the courts to see our system of 
laws. So that was interesting. 

Did you gettogoand meet any ofthem at that time, when 
the Russians came here? 

Oh, no. I was aware of it, but there wasn't a time that 
was easy for me, and what would I say, "Oh, hello."? 
[laughter] 

Yes. "I remember when I was there in 1984," right? 


Yes. 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


127 


There was also a trip to China that you went on in 
1986? Was that a similar kind of outing? 

That was China within the East China Law School, a 
Shanghai Symposium. A law group went over. Again, the 
sessions were good. Fortunately for me, though, I 
became friendly with one of the Chinese sort of leaders, 
a younger person, and he was so interested. They always 
wanted to know more about the English language, about 
the Americans. It was good for me, because I could be 
helpful to them, but I learned a lot through them. I used 
to carry my own hotel key with me. I never left it. One 
day, I came back to the hotel, and a lotofthemen lawyers 
were just sitting out in the waiting room, or whatever 
room it was, and that was so unusual. I said, "Is 
something happening here?" 

"Yes, they won't let us in our rooms." [laughter] 

"But I have my key." And I said, "Why not?" They 
wouldn't give them the keys, because the Chinese 
owners of the hotel decided that they had given us too 
good a rate, and until we paid the rest of what we should 
pay, we couldn't go into our rooms, [laughter] So I had a 
talk with this youngfellow and said, "This is how it works 
in America. You wantto . . . ." [laughter] But those men. 
Talk about men and women. The men sitting out there, 
because they wouldn't let them in. So, my person and I — 
we worked that all out about contracts, [laughter] So 
much for men. That was a funny experience. 

I often went off to sightsee. That basket I have over 
there, I always felt bad about it, because I paid so little in 
thetransaction. The basket maker was finishing it on the 
street, and it was a comment I made. This is very 
personal. So when I went back for breakfast I was feeling 
so bad to think I didn't give more money. "What is the 



128 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


matter with you? You gave him what he asked you. That's 
what he wanted. Why would you worry about it?" 

It's like saving food or not saving food. In American 
dollars that was only two dollars—a handmade basket! 
But I didn't think about it, because I didn't have a 
problem about the people. They would show me money. 

I would just put out the Chinese money, and they would 
take it, you know, and give me change. So, I knew that 
was OK, but when I figured it out afterward I thought, 
"Two bucks," you know, "I could do better than that." 
Well, I don't want to be personal, but, you know. 

Maybe we should end up just talking in general about 
your career as an attorney. Now, you still do some 
things for friends and so on? 

Oh, yes, I do. 

What kinds of things are you working on now? 

Well, no, I have to be very limited now, primarily 
because I've allowed myself to put aside my personal 
matters, and I think I've waited a littletoo longfor that, 
but I can't bring myself to say, "I'm retiring, and I won't 
do this for you." However, I'm not encouraging any new 
business. The fact is I have referred them out to other 
attorneys, but mostly in a personal way, because the 
truth is, the kind of practice I now have is very costly for 
me. Well, I get some pay, but it's taking me away from 
personal matters that I need to care for, which become 
costly when I don't, but I'm not willing to say my door is 
closed. 

So you still end up helping friends and neighbors and 
people who contact you? 



CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


129 


Yes. Right. 

Which is a part of why we always had a hard time 
getting together for these interviews, right? 

Yes. 

So, is it hard for you to think about retiring, in terms of 
giving up the law? 

Yes. Oh, well, that's what I'm saying. I don't think 
anybody's going to hear me say, "I'm retired. Well, I'm 
not goingto do it," for thefather of a youngfourteen-year 
old daughter, whothefather isnow becomingconcerned 
about her interest in a young man. I cannot say to this 
father, whom I know you know, and whose daughter I 
know, that this is of greatest concern to him. Still you 
look up the law. You've given them what the law is, but 
still it'stimely, because it's personal, and I have chuckles 
inside myself, since this is the second father who has 
cometomeaboutthesamekind ofthing. [laughter] Well, 
the concern about young daughters, we don't always 
think likethat, and when I wasgrowingup it wasjustthat 
men knew how they were to behave when they were 
young, but when it comes to their own young 
daughters .... [laughter] 

Whole di fferent thing. 

I have helped people more recently keep their house. 
If I had my life to do over again, maybe I would just do 
telephoning. I'm pretty good on the phone, and where 
people don't get through to people, sometimes I can. That 
was the case here, where the banks were ready to 
foreclose and all. They had started that action, as a 



130 


CHARLOTTE HUNTER ARLEY 


matter of fact, and yet I salvaged the house. You know, it's 
very difficult for meto say, "Go find somebody to do this 
for you," especially when you don't have very much 
money, but very often they can find the money for the 
other person, [laughter] 

Right. There comes the problem: you're giving away 
your time > and I also get a sense it's difficult for you to 
say no to someone in need. 

In need. In need, but very often a lot of these people 
aren't that much in need. 

Do you feel I ike we've covered the important highlights? 

I don't know. First of all, you came to me. It would 
never have occurred to meto go through this interview in 
thisway. What I did with CliffYoungwasbad enough that 
Coe Swobe tried it, but it wasn't the same way you were 
doing it. 

I think that we’ve covered some things that were very 
important 


Yes. Yes. 



Index 


A 

Agosti, Deborah, 79, 81 
American Trial Lawyers, 121 
Anderson, Fred M., 47, 73 
Arley, J acques, 46, 69-78, 86, 
92-93, 107, 115 
Arroyo, Mr., 79 


B 

Bailey, Margaret, 40-41, 61, 
99, 104, 107 
Bartlett, J ohn, 110, 116 
Bassinoo, Marie, 118 
Bibb, Forrest, 113 
Breen, Fran, 110 
Breen, Peter, 84 
Bull, Sam, 61-62 
Busey, Douglas A., 38, 109 


C 

Carville, Edward D. "Ted," 51 
Cohn, Felice, 40-41, 99 
Colvin, J oe, 79-80 
Cooke, Patricia, 117 
Cooke, Thomas A., 116-117 
Cooke, Valerie, 82 
Craven and Busey Law Firm, 
38-39 

Craven, Thomas O., 38-39 
Crosby, Pastor, 44-46, 55, 86, 
115 

Custer, Oliver, 99 


D 

Davidson, Mr., 65 
Davies, J ohn, 78-79 
Dickerson, Harvey, 113 
Drackert, Harry, 55 



132 


Index 


E 

Eames, Mr., 33 
Echeverria, Peter, 100, 104, 
121 

El Cortez Hotel (Reno, 
Nevada), 51 


F 

Family Law Reporter, 89 
Foley, Thomas A., 119 
Fox, Elvira, 56-57, 60, 87 
Fox, Sidney, 56, 60, 87 
Friedman, Edith, 63 
Fry, Leslie, 107 


G 

Gabrielli, John E., 89 
Georgetta, Clei, 123 
Goldwater, Bert M., 43, 111, 
113 

Gray, Leslie, 58, 105-106, 
111 

Grellman, Mr., 89-90 
Grey, Reid and Wright 
Department Store, 44 
Griner,Jill, 82 
Guild, Clark J r., 84 
Guild, Clark Sr., 84-85 


H 

Hale and Dorr Law Firm, 31, 
55 

Hampden County Law 
Library (Springfield, 
Massachusetts), 66 


Harolds Club (Reno, Nevada), 
52 

Harvey, Nathaniel, 1-2 
Hatton, Despena, 70, 83 
Hatton, Nicky, 83 
Hill, Carl, 77 
Horowitz, Sam, 121 
Hunter, Anne, 5, 36, 58 
Hunter, Lottie, 1, 3, 5-7, 25, 
62, 74 

Hunter, Morris, 1, 3-10, 13- 
14, 18-19, 22-23, 25, 33, 
37, 51, 64 

Hunter, Suzanne, 4-5, 13, 22- 
23 


International Women 
Lawyers, 118-120 


J 

J enkins, Mr., 31, 55 


K 

Kellogg, Carolyn, 80 
Kladney, David, 79 


L 

Laxalt, Paul D„ 45, 49, 115 
Laxalt, Robert, 115 
Liberty Belle (Reno, Nevada), 
63 

Liberty Mutual Insurance 
Company, 91-92, 104 



Index 


133 


Libro, Mr., 88-91, 107 
Lohse, George, 107 
Loomis, E. Frandsen "Bud," 
110 

Lunsford, Edward F., 43 


M 

McCarran, Patrick A., 100- 
103, 116 

McCarthy, J oseph, 31, 55 
McKnight, William, 40, 114 
Maestretti, AntonioJ., 40-41, 
113 

Meany, Mrs., 25 
Merrill, Charles M., 45-46, 74 
Moss, Alice, 20 
Mowbray, J ohn Code, 104 


N 

National Women Lawyers, 

119 

Nevada Department of 

Transportation, 77, 79-80 
Nevada Industrial Compensa¬ 
tion (NIC), 44-46, 115 
Noneman, Kathleen, 47, 50, 
81, 99 

Novakovich, Nada, 47-51, 60 


O 

O'Malley, J ohn, 20 
O'Neale, Shelly, 79 
Ormsby House (Carson City, 
Nevada), 115 


P 

Petticoat Trial, 47, 49, 63 
Pike, Miles N„ 59, 111-112 
Pike, Ray, 80, 111 
Piscevich, Margo, 25, 50 
Platt, Samuel, 110 
Price, Nelle, 63, 119 
Priest, David Wallace 40-43 


R 

Raggio, William, 93-95, 116 
Reed, Edward C., 121 
Rice, Gordon, 47-49, 55, 86 
Riverside Hotel-Casino 
(Reno, Nevada), 56 
Roats, Mr., 29-30, 66-67 
Robeson, Paul, 47, 56, 62, 
124 

Robinson, Sidney, 110 
Rose, Robert E., 80 
Rudiak, George, 125-126 


S 

Scanlan, Mr., 85 
Sherman, Minnie, 2-3 
Sherman, Rebecca, 2-3 
Sherman, Susan, 2-3, 5, 16, 
24, 68 

Sinai,John "Husky," 110 
Skinner, Louis, 52 
Smith, Raymond I. "Pappy," 
52 

Soroptimists (Reno, Nevada), 
51-54, 58-59, 124 
Springmeyer, George, 97-98, 
100, 104, 110 



134 


Index 


Springmeyer, Sally, 97-98 
Streeter, J ack, 116 
Summerfield, Lester D., 110 
Swobe, Coe, 116, 130 


T 

Talbot, Mr., 24-25 
Tapscott, C.B., 65, 94 
Temple Emanuel (Reno, 
Nevada), 69-70 
Thompson, Bruce R., 97-100, 
104-105 

Thompson, Gordon, 103-105 
Treiger, Baruch, 59 
Treiger, Leah (nee Farber), 
59-60, 63, 112 
Tresidder, Dr., 34 
Tyler, Eames and Reynolds 
Law Firm, 32-33, 55 


U 

University of Nevada, Reno, 
52, 96 


V 

Vargas, George, 110, 116 
Verdi, Nevada, 77 
Vogt, Arlene, 20, 28 
Vucanovich, Barbara, 57 


W 

Wallace, Henry, 56-57 
Warner, Pastor, 54, 60 


Williams, Eric, 54 
Williams, Erica, 54 
Willmore, Pam, 89, 91, 95 
Witkin, Mr., 39 
Wonder, Emily, 63 
Woodburn, William, 92,100- 
103, 116 


Y 

Yosemite National Park, 34- 
37,109-110 
Young, Bill, 30-31, 67 
Young, C. Clifton "Cliff," 58, 
100, 105-106, 111, 121, 
130 

Young, Clarence, 58 
Young, Lewellyn A., 106 
YoungTurks, 58, 105-106, 
111 

Young Women's Christian 
Association (YWCA), 117- 
118 


Z 

Zen off, David, 79 



