Alan Bible: 

Recollections of a Nevada Native Son 

The Law, Politics, the Nevada Attorney General’s Office, 

and the United States Senate 


Description 


Interviewee: Alan Bible 
Interviewed: 1977-1979 
Published: 1982 
Interviewer: Mary Ellen Glass 
UNOHP Catalog #095 


Alan Bible was born in Lovelock, Nevada, in 1909. He has had a long, distinguished career in state and national 
politics. A protege of Senator Patrick McCarran, Bible was successively district attorney of Storey County, deputy 
attorney general of Nevada, attorney general of the state, and United States senator. Overshadowed in Nevada history 
by flashier talents such as those of Pat McCarran and Key Pittman, his career as a United States senator was twenty 
years in duration. It is generally believed that Senator Bible would have been easily re-elected if he had chosen to 
run again in 1974. He was well respected by his Senate colleagues, and by voters of Nevada. 

Senator Bible is a highly likeable, rather self-effacing individual. He slides over issues, and does not speak too 
critically of anyone. This was a matter of policy with him, and it became part of his political style. “If I can’t speak 
well of a person, I will not speak ill of him,” he states in his oral history. There are many examples of this habit of his. 
Typical is the reference to the Civil War as the “misunderstanding” between the states. There were also, he assures 
us, the “misunderstandings” between the Pittman and McCarran wings of the Democratic Party. According to Bible, 
when he was attorney general of Nevada the legislators “were all very nice.” He reminisces about Earl Warren, the 
controversial chief justice as “always with this great big smile on his handsome face.” 

This surface blandness appears to be more a matter of policy than softness. People do not survive, and even prosper, 
in the political thicket as Bible has done without developing sharp powers of observation and an awareness of human 
frailty. There is considerable testimony to Bible’s acuity. His observations of Senator Patrick McCarran, a man he 
knew well, are measured with cool professionalism. Only a perceptive observer could have picked up on some of 
McCarran’s little political devices such as coming into a meeting at just the strategic moment. If there was to be a 
series of speeches, McCarran would insist that the others lead into his. He would arrange to have a small claque 
applaud during and after his speech. Bible notices these little tricks and comments on them. 

There is also a darker, more introspective side to Bible’s character, although he does not always let us see it. After 
his surprising defeat by Thomas Mechling in the 1952 Democratic primary he felt ashamed of himself and even 
thought of leaving the state, which luckily he did not do. Bible accurately believed his defeat resulted from his not 
having worked hard enough, and from having been too confident of victory. He analyzed his mistake, learned from 
it, and never repeated it. 

This oral history is a primer on how to get ahead in Nevada politics. Very important to Bible was doing little favors 
for people. “I always had one guiding rule, which I hope I more or less met, and that was trying to help people.” He 
tells us of other methods for political success—his belief in the value of debate and public speaking in education, 


(Continued on next page.) 


Description (continued) 


how he valued and used his fraternity and university contacts, the importance of friends, the usefulness of his 
association with McCarran, and how he belonged to “practically every lodge in the world.” 

Bibles memoir is particularly valuable for its revealing look into Nevada politics from the 1930s to the 1950s. The 
capstone of his career was his two decades as a United States senator. Yet the senator is more discreet when he 
discusses his activities—a certain veil is drawn over the period. Even here, however, some fascinating things come 
up. It was Lyndon Johnson who changed Alan Bibles mind about running again in 1956. Particularly illuminating 
is his great admiration for Senators Wayne Morse of Oregon and Ernest Gruening of Alaska, the only two men 
in either house of congress to vote against the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution. These two men were totally unlike the 
gentle and team-playing Bible, but there was something about them and their independence that earned his deepest 
respect and regards. Perhaps he wished he had been more like them. 

Alan Bible was on the inside of Nevada politics for forty years. Lie is shown in this oral history to be conscientious, 
wise, and discreet. This work of his fully merits attention and study. 


Alan Bible: 

Recollections of a Nevada Native Son 




Alan Bible: 

Recollections of a Nevada Native Son 

The Law, Politics, the Nevada Attorney General’s Office, 

and the United States Senate 


An Oral History Conducted by Mary Ellen Glass 
March 1977 - May 1979 
Edited by Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1982 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp@unr.edu 
http://www.unr.edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1982. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words maybe quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 


Preface to the Digital Edition 

ix 

Introduction 

xi 

Special Introduction by Professor Jerome E. Edwards 

xiii 

1. Formative Years 

Parents and Family Background 

Education in Lovelock and Fallon 

1 

2. University of Nevada Life 

15 

3. Georgetown University Law School 

First Impressions 

Working in the Capitol 

Nevada's Congressional Delegation in the Thirties 

23 

4. Early Career 

The Law Firm of McCarran, Rice, and Bible 

District Attorney of Storey County 

39 

5. The Nevada State Attorney General's Office, 1938-1950 

The First Years 

Duties, Decisions, and Colleagues 

Judges and District Attorneys 

55 



Alan Bible 


viii 


Some Impressions of State Officials 
Legislatures and Legislators 
The National Association of Attorneys General 
The McCarran Bipartisan Machine 

6. A Brief Sojourn as a Private Citizen 87 

The Law Firm of Bible and McDonald 
The Campaign of 1952 

7. Career as a U.S. Senator 97 

The Election of 1954 

Summary of Legislation in the Fifties 

Committee Assignments 

The Election of 1956 

Office Organization and Personnel 

Legislation and Committee Work 

The Legislative Process 

The 1960’s 


139 


8. Summary and Conclusions 
Original Index: For Reference Only 


143 



Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Alan Bible 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Introduction 


Alan Harvey Bible is a Nevada native, born 
in Lovelock in 1909. He received his education 
in Fallon, Churchill county, and graduated 
from the University of Nevada in 1930. Under 
the patronage of Nevada Senator Patrick 
McCarran, Bible attended Georgetown Law 
School, graduating in 1934. On completion of 
his work there, Bible returned to Nevada to 
practice law. Almost immediately, he became 
interested in politics, a career he would follow 
for more than forty years. 

Mr. Bible became the district attorney 
of Storey County in 1935, deputy attorney 
general of Nevada in 1938, and attorney 
general of Nevada in 1942. As attorney general 
of Nevada, Mr. Bible was responsible for 
important opinions on gambling control and 
for Nevada’s part of the successful completion 
of the Colorado River adjudication case. 

Leaving the attorney general’s office for 
a private career in 1950, Bible again became 
involved in politics in 1952, when he lost 
one of Nevada’s classic primary elections in 
the race for U.S. Senator. He recouped that 
defeat in 1954, when he won the electoral 


decision for U.S. Senator; this began a long 
and exceedingly productive career as Nevada’s 
representative in the national legislature. 

As a U.S. Senator, Bible was responsible 
for some of the nation’s most important 
legislation concerning outdoor recreation 
and public lands. His service in the Senate 
was concurrent with that of other outstanding 
public figures, with whom he associated 
closely. Senator Bible retired from his 
national service in 1974, with a career full 
of honors and achievements. Professor 
Jerome Edwards’s introduction evaluates 
the Senator’s accomplishments and political 
career. 

When he was invited to participate in the 
Oral History Program, Senator Bible accepted 
graciously and readily. He was a pleasant and 
careful chronicler of his life through sixteen 
taping sessions, all held in the Oral History 
office in the University of Nevada-Reno 
Library between March, 1977, and May, 1978. 
Senator Bible’s review of his memoir resulted 
in no substantive changes in either the text or 
the language. 



Alan Bible 


xii 


The Oral History Program of the University 
of Nevada-Reno preserves the past and the 
present for future research by tape recording 
the recollections of people who have been 
important to the development of Nevada and 
the West. Resulting transcripts are deposited 
in the Special Collections departments of the 
University libraries at Reno and Las Vegas. 
Senator Alan Bible has graciously donated 
the literary rights in his oral history to the 
University of Nevada, and has designated the 
memoir as open for research. 

Mary Ellen Glass 
University of Nevada-Reno 
1982 



Special Introduction 


Alan Bible has had a long, distinguished 
career in state and national politics. A 
native son of Nevada, protege of Senator 
Patrick McCarran, he was successively 
district attorney of Storey County, deputy 
attorney general of Nevada, attorney general 
of the state, and United States senator. 
Overshadowed in Nevada history by flashier 
talents such as those of Pat McCarran and Key 
Pittman, his career as a United States senator 
was nonetheless twenty years in duration. It 
is generally believed that Senator Bible would 
have been easily re-elected if he had chosen 
to run again in 1974. He was well respected 
by his Senate colleagues, and by the voters of 
Nevada. 

Senator Bible is a highly likeable 
individual, as well as a rather self-effacing 
one. His tendency in this oral history is 
to slide over issues, and not to speak too 
critically of anyone. This, of course, was a 
matter of policy with him, and it became part 
of his political style. “If I can’t speak well of a 
person, I will not speak ill of him,” he states 
in this oral history. There are many examples 


of this habit of his. Typical is the reference 
to the Civil War as the “misunderstanding” 
between the states. There were also, he assures 
us, the “misunderstandings” between the 
Pittman and McCarran wings of the party. 
According to Bible, when he was attorney 
general of Nevada the legislators “were all 
very nice. He reminisces about Earl Warren, 
the controversial chief justice as “always with 
this great big smile on his handsome face”. 

Yet this surface blandness appears to 
be more a matter of policy than softness. 
People do not survive, and even prosper, in 
the political thicket as Bible has done without 
developing sharp powers of observation 
and an awareness of human frailty. There is 
considerable testimony in this oral history 
to Bible’s acuity. His observations on Senator 
Patrick McCarran, a man he knew well, are 
measured with cool professionalism. Only 
a perceptive observer could have picked up 
on some of McCarran’s little political devices 
such as coming into a meeting at just the 
strategic moment. If there was to be a series 
of speeches, McCarran would insist that the 



XIV 


Alan Bible 


others lead into his. He would arrange to have 
a small claque applaud during and after his 
speech. Little tricks, and Bible notices, and 
comments on them. 

There is also a darker, more introspective 
side to Bible’s character, although he does not 
always let us see it. After his surprising defeat 
by Thomas Mechling in the 1952 Democratic 
primary he felt ashamed of himself (p.206), 
and even thought of leaving the state, which 
luckily he did not do. Bible accurately believed 
his defeat resulted from his not having worked 
hard enough, and from having been too 
confident of victory. He analyzed his mistake, 
learned from it, and never repeated it. 

This oral history is a primer on how to 
get ahead in Nevada politics. Very important 
to Bible was doing little favors for people. “I 
always had one guiding rule, which I hope 
I more or less met, and that was trying to 
help people”. He tells us of other methods 
for political success—his belief in the value 
of debate and public speaking in education, 
how he valued and used his fraternity and 
university contacts, the importance of 
friends, the usefulness of his association 
with McCarran, and how he belonged to 
“practically every lodge in the world” (p.335). 

Senator Bibles oral history is particularly 
valuable, it seems to this observer, for its 
revealing look into Nevada politics from 
the 1930s to the 1950s. The capstone of his 
career, of course, was his two decades as 
a United States senator. Yet the senator is 
more discreet when he discusses his activities 
in this body. A certain veil is drawn over 
the period. Yet even here some fascinating 
things come up. It was Lyndon Johnson who 
changed Alan Bible’s mind about running 
again in 1956. Particularly illuminating is 
his great admiration for Senators Wayne 
Morse of Oregon and Ernest Gruening of 
Alaska, the only two men in either house of 


congress to vote against the Gulf of Tonkin 
Resolution. These two men were totally 
unlike the gentle and team-playing Bible, but 
there was something about them and their 
independence that earned his deepest respect 
and regards. Perhaps he wished he had been 
more like them. 

It is good to have this oral history from a 
public figure who was on the inside of Nevada 
politics for forty years. Bible is shown to be 
conscientious, wise, and discreet. This work 
of his fully merits attention and study. 

Professor Jerome E. Edwards 
Department of History 
University of Nevada-Reno 
1982 



1 


Formative Years 


Parents and Family Background 

I suppose the proper place to start is 
where it all started. And it really all started 
in the little community of Lovelock, Nevada, 
where I was born on November 20, nineteen 
hundred and nine. At that time Lovelock 
was a part of Humboldt County and did not 
become Pershing until oh, I guess, ’12 or 
’13, something like that. And another real 
example of the way we govern ourselves in our 
state and in this nation of ours—the people 
of Lovelock during that period of time felt 
that they had very little to say in their own 
county government because the county seat 
in Humboldt County [was] Winnemucca, 
Nevada. So those that had dealings with 
the county officers had to travel that long 
seventy miles, as it really was in those days, to 
Winnemucca to transact their business. With 
the highways of today it’s a little over an hour’s 
run, and there’s some people who question 
today the advisability of two county structures 
with their more or less parallel governments, 
but that’s a matter for the determination of 


this generation and of the good people of 
Lovelock and of Winnemucca. So officially it 
was Lovelock, Humboldt County, Nevada; it 
was November 20, 1909. 

I was born to Jacob Harvey Bible and his 
wife Isabel Welch Bible. Now my father was 
born in—he first was a merchant, a grocery 
merchant in Lovelock. His store was where 
the Turrillas bar is today on the corner of 
the main thoroughfare through Lovelock. 
He came to Nevada several years earlier 
than that coming back from California, and 
from California from Ohio. He was born in 
Lima, Ohio, and on his death he was seventy 
years of age. Harrison Bible was his father, 
my grandfather; and Harrison Bible was 
born in Rockingham County, Virginia in the 
little German community of Germantown— 
Harrison [burg] Virginia, in July—July 5, 
1835. He in turn was the son of Christian 
and Mary Bible, who were likewise born in 
Virginia. 

When I first went to Washington 
many people inquired about my parental 
background and where they were born, my 



2 


Alan Bible 


genealogy. And frankly up to that time I’d 
paid very little attention to it. My mother and 
dad had never told me too much about it. My 
mother had given me a better background of 
my history than my father had. And she was 
more or less the custodian or the historian, 
probably a combination of both, of our family 
histories and of her own family history. 

My father—developing my father’s 
genealogy as best I know it, and as I’ve pieced 
together and researched it over the years when 
I was queried on it after I had been elected a 
United States senator —out in the West I don’t 
think most of us pay too much attention to 
it except where we know our grandfathers, 
our grandmothers and grew up with them, 
and they stay close to home. This was true of 
my mother’s folks, but it was not true of my 
father’s folks. Therefore, I’ve had to put in the 
pieces of his history together as best I can 
from what I’ve researched after I went back 
to Washington. I went back to Washington 
December 4, nineteen hundred and fifty-four. 
And so it wasn’t until then that columnists 
and researchers and writers and historians all 
started querying me about my genealogy, and 
that’s what prompted me more than any one 
thing to start this research, and I’ve tried to 
develop it over that many years. And I think 
I have a fairly complete background of each, 
my father and my mother, as well. 

As I said, my grandfather, my paternal 
grandfather, was Harrison Bible. He was 
born in Rockingham County, Virginia and in 
Harrisonburg, Virginia, in a little subdivision 
of that town called Germantown in 1835. He 
had resided there ’til he was twenty-two years 
of age, and he then went north into Ohio. And 
the “misunderstanding” between the states 
broke out, and he enlisted in April 1861 in 
Company G of the Sixteenth Ohio Volunteer 
Infantry. And he was discharged from that 
after a short service, then he reenlisted in the 


same year in Company I of the Fifty-first Ohio 
Volunteer Infantry. And he was honorably 
discharged from that in Indianapolis, Indiana 
in the fall of 1864. He later located in Perry 
Township, and he married a Sarah Good with 
whom he lived until her death. In 1866 he 
came to Bath Township, and that was where 
my father was born—just a short ways out of 
the present town of Lima, Ohio. So he was a 
“Buckeye,” as they’re favorably called—that 
name has stayed with those born in Ohio right 
down to the present. 

On the death of his first wife, he remarried 
a Sarah Greer, who was the daughter of Joshua 
Greer, who was a pioneer of that area. By 
this marriage they had six children: namely 
Moses, Joshua, Allen, Prank, and Harvey 
and John, as appears in the history of Allen 
County, Ohio. The name Harvey is my father’s 
name, and he was a twin with John. His given 
name was Jacob Harvey. The history uses him 
simply as Harvey. When he came to Nevada 
he kept the name Jacob and was known all of 
his life as Jake. 

My grandfather and my grandmother 
were members of the Protestant Methodist 
Church, and I grew up as a Methodist. I never 
particularly knew why, but undoubtedly 
my grandparents’ religious preference had 
something to do with the choice that was 
given to me, and I grew up in the Methodist 
church in Lovelock, Nevada. 

One interesting item, one which I have 
commented on because we can look at it rather 
objectively here in the West, I think, and look 
at it a little differently than those who were so 
close to it, is the fact that— (my father told me 
this story; this is a firsthand story). And he 
told me that his own father, my grandfather, 
who had joined up on the Union side during 
the Civil War, the war that I’ve always 
characterized as the “misunderstanding” 
between the states—. (But I used that in a 



Formative Years 


3 


speech at one time in the Washington area, 
and I used it in Alexandria, Virginia. And 
a number of those in the audience, I forget 
what kind of speech it was, but there was a 
goodly audience there probably seventy-five 
or eighty that day A number of them came 
up and said, “You’ve got this completely 
wrong—this wasn’t a misunderstanding 
between the states, it was the attempt of those 
damn Yankees to take over the South, and 
they were the aggressors: we simply had to 
fight for our lives.” The feeling even then— 
this would go back, oh, this would be maybe 
ten years ago, fifteen years ago when I made 
this speech—the feeling at that time was still 
intense; and it even now, well over a hundred 
years after the Civil War, you can find many 
instances if you go into the South, particularly 
into Georgia, of that same intense feeling. 
And of course the motion pictures and the 
“tube” have emphasized the sensational parts 
of the war. And there was much pillage and 
burning and killing, unnecessarily so, that 
comes about out of any war. It’s a pathetic 
and tragic commentary on our history, but 
it’s a simple, true fact of life. And there’s ill 
feeling as of today in 1977 to some degree, but 
thank goodness it’s getting closer and closer 
together, and we all hope and pray that that 
continues. There’s many examples of it.) 

Anyway, my grandfather came out of the 
Confederate side of the “misunderstanding” 
and went north and joined the Union side. 
And my dad told me that he went home on 
one occasion, and that his—he had brothers 
alive and sisters alive—they simply took 
him and turned him around and pointed 
him north and said, “You damn Yankee, you 
Yankee lover, you just go back and don’t stay.” 
He never went back, and the family broke 
up. So that’s an incident that I can take out of 
my own immediate family, which happened 
many, many times through the people—the 


Yankees and the Confederates. Many families 
did break up in similar manners and never 
went back to each other again. And I think 
this is an authentic story and an accurate 
story ’cause it was told to me by my own father 
taken from his own father, so it was pretty 
immediate. 

In any event, my grandfather, according to 
my dad, never returned back to Harrisonburg, 
Virginia where he was born—where his family 
still can be found. I never knew my paternal 
grandfather nor my paternal grandmother. 
I’ve known a couple of my uncles, my father’s 
brothers; and one of them came West and died 
not too long ago in Fallon. But that—see, my 
father just ran away from home, came out into 
California to—he was gonna make his fortune 
in gold and silver, and so he went down there. 
He went into California first, and then he 
drifted back into Lovelock, Nevada. Now the 
first job that he had in Lovelock, Nevada, as 
he has told me, was milking some twenty-six 
cows for a man by the name of Frank Fuss; 
and the Fuss family is extremely well known 
in Lovelock. He worked for Mr. Fuss for a 
good many years. (Mr. Fuss has made many 
contributions to Nevada and to its history, 
and [they are) a very distinguished family. 
And I’ve known most of them personally. I 
did not know the senior Mr. Fuss; he passed 
away, but I knew his oldest son Frank Fuss, 
who was a banker in Lovelock with Charlie 
Jones for many, many years.) But he worked 
for Mr. Fuss for a number of years; then he 
struck out on his own, first looking for gold 
and silver. He was tied into the gold and silver 
days of Rochester and into Vernon, and he 
followed mining his entire life. 

As a matter of fact I still have five mining 
claims of my own in my name. So the gold and 
silver mining still is in my blood; I started out 
in Virginia City which was one of the greatest 
gold camps of all the world. The claims that 



4 


Alan Bible 


I hold are with very distinguished Nevadans, 
and we hold ’em—twenty-five or -four of 
us hold these claims. One of ’em is Furio 
Dondero, who is a very, very colorful Nevada- 
born individual, getting elderly now, still alive 
now, but we’ve always been associated in 
mining together. He has a quarter of interest 
in this—these five mining claims located 
over in the Ruby Hills of Eureka County. 
The other partners are retired General Dale 
Smith, whose father was “Long Tom” Smith, 
a very wonderful individual with whom I 
was associated when he was state engineer 
of the state; and the fourth partner is Hugh 
Shamberger, who also was the state engineer 
of the state for many years. 

The claims we’ve held, as the four 
individuals, have always been very helpful to 
us because they’re patented claims, and we pay 
a small amount of taxes on them each year as 
you do on patented claims in Nevada. And it 
makes a legitimate income tax deduction; so 
that’s been the benefit of our mining claims 
in Nevada. We’ve never made any money on 
them; we sold part of the claims. They were 
first the thirteen—we had thirteen claims, and 
we called ’em the “Lucky Thirteen.” And we 
sold eight of them to a large mining company, 
which went in and explored and attempted to 
develop them (I think it was some Canadian 
company, but ultimately private) in Eureka 
and the Ruby Hill mining district. And of 
course the great problem there was the water 
and the high cost of pumping the water, and 
they were never able to do it, so the mining 
company just had to abandon their project. 
It’s rich, I think—so I’m told—in lead zinc 
particularly and carrying some silver, but the 
economics have never been worked out; it 
might some time in the future. We certainly 
hope so because Eureka has had the fine 
mining past and probably will have another 
one some time in the future. 


So, following my father’s inclination 
toward mining and taking a risk, I’ve always 
held some mining claims. I’ve held ’em all my 
life, and I still have five now. I keep telling 
anybody who keeps talkin’ about mines if 
they’d like to buy a one-fourth interest in a 
mining claim, I can arrange it very reasonably. 
I don’t seem to have either the wealth or the 
wisdom to continue to hold ’em too much 
longer. I think I’ll just give them to my sons, 
and they can handle them and say they own 
mining claims. But the beautiful part about 
it is they’re patented, and everyone knows 
there’s nothing you can do with a patented 
mining claim. It’s the best title you can get. 
And many of them go to sale every year at 
tax sales by various counties, and there’s no 
way that one can acquire or buy a patented 
mining claim without condemning it or 
acquiring it through some type of a court 
order. So they’re—the titles are good, so I had 
an interest in the mining claims on which I 
can guarantee the title without fear. And this 
is always valuable in a state where titles do get 
mixed up in the mining history of our state, 
and a book could be written about it, and a 
story could be told about it. 

So, my father—I want to just pursue my 
father’s history just a little bit further—he 
was a merchant and had a grocery store in 
Lovelock, located, as I’ve indicated earlier, 
in what is now the Turrillas building in 
Lovelock. And he ran that for quite a number 
of years. In the meantime, he thought that 
he could diversify and have a ranch as well, 
so he bought a ranch in the upper Lovelock 
Valley, and he later gave up his grocery store 
and went to farming again. I guess basically 
that was his niche in life was to be a farmer or 
a miner, and—but he had to have a grocery 
store to probably finance both enterprises. 
But he had this ranch in the upper valley in 
the Lairview district. 



Formative Years 


5 


Some of our neighbors at that time were 
the Biddleman’s, as I remember, and the 
Sebbases, and there’re still Sebbases in that 
area. And I don’t know whether there’s still 
Biddlemans or not. There were Loorzes, who 
lived right next to the Fairview school. 

I started out in the lower grades in the 
Lovelock school, and after my dad’s purchase 
of the ranch in the upper Fairview district, I 
went to the Fairview district probably for the 
third or fourth or fifth grades. I know I rode 
a horse about a mile to get to the school from 
where our ranch was. It was, as I remember 
it, a two-room, eight-grade school with the 
first four grades in one room and the next 
four grades in another room. I think we had 
two teachers at that time. And so I went to 
that school until we moved to Fallon, Nevada 
in about nineteen hundred and eighteen, as 
I remember. 

The events that caused our moving to 
Fallon are rather dramatic. We had gone to 
the motion picture show in Lovelock on this 
particular evening. I can’t even remember the 
time of year, but it was a good movie, and we 
enjoyed—. My brother was with us at that 
time. So there were the four of us returning 
in—and my father had an automobile, and 
we were returning in an automobile, and we 
noticed the northern skies were beautifully 
lit up. It was a great display, and this was the 
time of the year when the aurora borealis 
could be seen as far south as Nevada; and we 
thought it was the aurora borealis. The closer 
we came to our home, which was about six 
miles out in the Fairview district—I think 
it would be about six miles from the center 
of Lovelock and from where the show house 
was—it dawned on us that the aurora borealis 
was our home! So it was a great spectacle to 
watch. Obviously there was no fire company 
up in that neck of the woods, and the closer 
we got, the more distressed we all became. 


And I was just a young lad. I guess I was—let’s 
see, T8—I was about nine years old, and I can 
still remember very vividly. And my mother, 
of course, was very distracted; my father was 
getting more so as we got closer to the fire, but 
when we got there, there was nothing there. It 
had been burned to the ground, and we had 
the neighbors around us. They had tried to 
carry some buckets of water from irrigation 
ditches to halt the spread of the fire, which is 
all they could do, but it burned to the ground. 

And I can remember one thing very clearly 
now and have retained a vivid impression of 
it all my life—I was eight or nine years old, 
something like that, at that time. And I guess 
one does remember those things much better 
than we remember things that happened eight 
or nine days ago. So after the fire completely 
was extinguished and put out, I can recall 
how fine the neighbors were. They brought us 
dishes and set us up in a new housekeeping 
setup, and it was the spirit of the times. And 
there wasn’t anybody that didn’t give us 
something to try to set us up. We had the 
clothes on our back, and that was it. 

The particular distressing thing was that 
my mother, who was, as I’ve indicated earlier, 
was the historian in the family, lost all of 
her letters and valuables and the things of 
that kind. And she did lose some very fine 
diamonds that had been given to her by her 
father over the years, and we sifted the coals. 
We had the impression then—and I have it 
now, though I don’t know whether I’m right 
or wrong in it—that diamonds wouldn’t burn 
and they’d withstand any type of heat. But in 
any event we sifted coals for days—I can still 
remember that. My mother was heartbroken 
of course. 

And that was the main thing that led to 
our going to Fallon, Nevada. An offer came up 
from some early farmers in —first the Fernley 
district and in the Fallon district who ran 



6 


Alan Bible 


what they call Peoples Brothers, which was a 
grocery store. And my father, having been a 
groceryman, seized the opportunity of buying 
a store there. That was the real reason for our 
moving to Fallon, Nevada, which we did in 
1918 or 1919. I entered the fifth grade there 
and finished the grammar school in Fallon 
and on into the high school and from there 
up to the University of Nevada. 

On my mothers side of the family, her 
name was Welch, Isabel Welch. She was 
born in Unionville, Nevada. And she lived 
to be seventy-seven years old. Her father, as 
best I’ve been able to trace it, was born in 
Brechin, Scotland, and he was a—I was given 
to understand, at least I thought I was given 
to understand by my mother that he was a 
professor at the University of Edinburgh, 
Scotland. She was of Scotch-Irish ancestry. 
And my wife and I visited Edinburgh several 
years ago. I made it a point to try to trace 
that down, but didn’t have much luck in ever 
finding a Welch—his name was Robert, Robert 
Welch—who was a professor at the at the 
University of Edinburgh. And so whether— 
where I got this impression is beyond me 
because it was my definite impression. 

My mother was born in Unionville, and 
later moved to Lovelock where her father, 
Robert, had a small ranch just outside of 
Lovelock. And she graduated from the 
school system of Lovelock. She came into the 
university of Nevada, and finished two years 
at the University of Nevada. She then became 
a schoolteacher and was a schoolteacher when 
my father married her in nineteen hundred 
and nine. 

And she was one of a family of about six 
or seven. She was the only girl, and as the only 
girl, she was the historian of the family. And 
with the fire—that’s why I mention the fire— 
it wiped out that history. So, much of this is 
just really put together from my memory. 


She had a good accounting of it, but she’s 
passed on; and by the time I got interested in 
this genealogy and history, she had left this 
world and was obviously no longer available 
to me to give me that information. My father 
preceded her in death—oh, some four or five 
years earlier. And so my two main sources 
were gone, and very few other people are 
available to me now to piece it together. So 
that is just kind of a thumbnail sketch of my 
mother and father, not adequate to do them 
justice, which they deserve. 

The name Bible is, number one, a rather 
intriguing name; and I’ve had many questions 
asked about my derivation, where the name 
comes from and my ancestry. The name Bible 
is basically a German name. It is derived, as 
I understand it, from German and originally 
was Biebel, which in German means book or 
the book. And it’s easy to see how that later 
turned out to be called Bible. 

When my father’s people came into this 
country, they were first Biebel, and then later 
on it became Bible, as it has remained over 
the years and as it is now. I’ve often said, and 
this is something within my own memory 
and my own knowledge, is that when I was in 
high school in Fallon, Nevada, I was known 
as “New Testament,” and then later on when 
I came to the University of Nevada and was 
going here as a student, I was named “Old 
Testament.” And I’ve often said in many 
of my political talks and visits with people 
throughout the state of Nevada, that since 
those days of being called Bible and “New 
Testament” and “Old Testament,” I have been 
called practically everything else. [Laughs] 
It’s always been good for a bit of a laugh in 
whatever type of an audience I’m talking in 
front of, and of course the name is frequently 
commented on. 

I’ve asked genealogists to study it, and 
they’ve done this both through the Library 



Formative Years 


7 


of Congress and through the archives and 
through the various more records that are 
available, attempting to piece it together and 
put my background in some type of logical 
perspective. My best letter that I think I have 
ever developed as a result of this study, is 
illustrated in a letter that I wrote to my aunt 
on May 25,1966, which is fairly contemporary 
(still some eleven years ago). And this was 
written to Ethel Welch, who was married 
to my uncle Will Welch who would be my 
mothers brother. She was a lifetime resident 
of Winnemucca, Nevada; she in turn was born 
in Unionville the sane as my own mother was. 
And this, as far as my genealogy is concerned, 
is what the letter said: 


Also, as I told you, I’ve almost 
completely [explored] my father’s 
history and genealogy. I next want to 
do the same thing with my mother’s. 
Mother, of course, lost all of the family 
history and heirlooms when her home 
burned in the upper Lovelock Valley, 
but she would from time to time tell 
me certain parts of the family history. 
I foolishly neglected to reduce it to 
writing, and my memory is very 
hazy on some phases of her family 
history. I knew, of course, that her 
father was Robert Welch. He was 
born in Brechin, Scotland. My best 
source of information insofar as the 
Welch history is concerned is my 
second cousin, Annie Welch, who 
lives at 1227 North Eighth Street in 
Estherville, Iowa. She is supplying me 
with much useful information. I was 
under the impression that my mother’s 
father, Robert, had been a professor 
at the University of Edinburgh, but 
Cousin Annie tells me she has never 
heard of this. My grandfather, Robert 


Welch, was born on October 14, 
1842, and as you know he died in 
Lovelock on October 15, 1912. He 
was married to Agnes Mcllrey (and 
that’s M-c or M-a-c—I’m not clear as 
to which—Ilrey—Mcllrey M-c-I-l-r- 
e-y). Agnes was born on October 26, 
1858, and died on March 16, 1889. 
There were, I believe, six children 
from this marriage. The oldest was 
your husband Will, although I do not 
have his birthdate; the next oldest was 
my mother Isabel, who was born in 
Unionville, Nevada, on the seventh of 
March, 1883. Next was Robert Welch, 
who was born on August 16, 1886, 
and then John Welch, who was born 
in June of 1889. Following John was 
Murray Welch born in October, 1891. 
I believe the youngest was Andrew 
who was born in May of 1893. 

My grandfather, Robert Welch, 
had two brothers. One was James 
Welch, who lived in Ireland, and the 
other was Alexander Welch, who 
was in the nursery and seed business 
in Coldstream, Scotland. I believe 
in addition to these two brothers 
he had several sisters. One was Jane 
Welch, who married George Murray, 
the manager of the British museum. 
Another sister married a Wadsworth, 
and I believe at one time he was the 
editor and the owner of the London 
Gazette. I’m sending you herewith a 
recent letter which my second cousin 
Annie Welch wrote me and which has 
considerable genealogical information 
of interest. I’m indebted to you for 
telling me about Agnes Mcllrey, and 
that her people came from Auckland, 
New Zealand, and that she was born 
while enroute between New Zealand 



8 


Alan Bible 


and Australia. I remember now that 
my mother told me of correspondence 
with some cousins in Auckland, New 
Zealand, but I have neither the name 
nor the addresses. I’ve questioned 
whether they were children of my 
grandmother’s brothers or sisters. 

For your further information, Uncle 
Will passed away in Winnemucca 
although I do not recall the exact date. 

My mother died in Reno, Nevada, on 
April 22, 1959. Robert Welch passed 
away on November 9, 1952. He was 
in Company B-l in World War I. John 
passed away in July of 1914. Murray 
passed away in March of 1907, and 
Andrew died January 24, 1965. 

This accurately reflects the history of my 
mother’s brothers, and I’ve researched this 
very thoroughly, and they all lived in the 
Nevada area, so it was not too hard to check 
that. I’ve not had that much success with the 
history of my father and his brothers, though 
strangely enough on both my father’s side and 
my mother’s side practically all of the children 
were males, and very few girls happened to 
come along to either the Bible family or to 
the Welch family. My mother was the only 
one of a family of six who was a girl, and my 
father was one of six or seven brothers, and 
there were no girls in his immediate family. 
And I think that’s somewhat worthy of note. 

I still have a number of first cousins 
living in Lovelock and Winnemucca, and 
undoubtedly a great number around the 
Ohio area where my father was born and 
grew up. I mentioned one first cousin whose 
name was Leo, and some years ago he sent 
me a very interesting newspaper clipping 
which heralded with great joy the fact that 
his twenty-sixth grandchild was born in 
the Lima general hospital. And he thought 


it set some kind of a nationwide record of 
having twenty-six grandchildren born in 
the same community and delivered in the 
same hospital. So he sent that to me with the 
traditional family pride, and I still have that. 
So I do have first cousins in both Ohio and 
in Nevada. 

Education in Lovelock and Fallon 

I was born in Lovelock, Nevada and 
started out my schooling there. I started 
school in the downtown school in Lovelock 
when I was—I think the earliest age at which 
you could go to school at that time was 
probably six years of age, and I did go to the 
first grade, second, maybe the third grade in 
the downtown Lovelock grammar school. 
I always had a very definite recollection of 
being given a bicycle in—oh, when I was I 
suppose in the second grade, and I was riding 
this down the main street of Lovelock— 
Lovelock wasn’t too big then, it isn’t too big 
now—and I passed my teacher walking on 
the sidewalk and I was riding a bicycle, and 
I thought it would be gallant to tip my hat to 
her. And so I attempted to do that and with 
my clever bikemanship I took a horrific fall 
and spun in and was very embarrassed when 
I was on the ground looking at my teacher. 
She was kind of smiling at me and condoning 
my strange behavior; but it didn’t turn out to 
be too good an exhibition. I never tried to tip 
my hat to a school teacher again while riding 
on a bicycle! 

I made rather good grades, as I recall it, 
and I think because my grades were fairly 
good, they skipped a grade. I think it was in 
the first grade, and then they figured I should 
be advanced a little faster than my years, so 
they put me into the third grade, and then I 
finished the third grade. And about that time 
we moved onto the ranch up in the upper 



Formative Years 


9 


valley in the Fairview district, and I started as 
I best recall it, in the fourth grade of the little 
two-room school of the Fairview district, 
which is oh, four or five miles, something like 
that, north of the city of Lovelock in the area 
where I went for two years until we moved 
to Fallon. I rode a horse to school every 
morning about a mile or a mile and a half, 
and it was in the Fairview district. I think 
there are still some of the ranching names 
that were still there when I grew up in that 
period of time. 

I went to school there for a couple of years, 
and then we moved to Fallon where I entered 
Oats Park grammar school in the fifth grade. 
My first teacher there at Oats Park grammar 
school in Fallon was Erma Bendle, who later 
married Robert Weed. And they are to the 
best of my knowledge still alive. 

And one of the interesting incidents that 
I recall in either the fifth grade or the sixth 
grade, was that I was chosen on a debate 
team to discuss the two earthy questions of 
that particular period of time which would 
be in the 1918 or ’19 range, and one question 
which was frequently debated on that level of 
debate was “Resolved, that Abraham Lincoln 
was a greater man than George Washington.” 
It was a thrilling topic of the day, and I don’t 
recall now which side I was assigned. But 
nevertheless I think that’s probably the roots 
of my public speaking because I’ve been on 
debate teams, have been publicly speaking in 
practically every institution I’ve gone to from 
that time right down to the present really, 
because it has been a background and a very 
helpful background in seeking public life. 
And in discussing and making graduation 
speeches, I’ve always urged people to take 
public speaking; not to make them a politician 
or to lead them into public life—though I’ve 
always urged people to do that—but it gives 
them a little confidence in themselves and 


whatever meeting they go to maybe they’re 
able to stand up and express themselves just a 
little better. I think it’s very valuable training, 
and I hope that the lesson can be left—out of 
this oral history—encouraging most people— 
as many as possible to take public speaking 
and debating. You may make no political use 
of it in the future, but whether you’re going to 
a PTA meeting, or a town meeting, or a county 
commissioners’ meeting, or a city council 
meeting, or wherever your expressions are 
given, I think it will stand you in good stead. 
I found it did me. And that was my first actual 
public baptism in debating back in the fifth 
grade in 1919 or ’18, somewheres in that 
era, and I was in the fifth grade at Oats Park 
grammar school in Fallon, Nevada. 

One of the most colorful of my teachers 
at that time was a very, very famous woman, 
Laura Mills, and Laura Mills was teaching at 
the grammar school there. I think she must 
have held the all-time, all-time record for 
teaching because she spent a career in doing 
it. She was devoted to teaching; and she loved 
the outdoors, had written many fine books. 
And I could identify—as I recall it—she was 
a fairly good artist. I believe she taught me 
painting, which I had barely passed at any 
one time, and also instructed in drawing, 
which I barely passed at any one time. I think 
she taught penmanship, as I recall; and I 
must say that I barely passed that at any one 
time as my handwriting still shows. These 
are early recollections of teachers. I have a 
definite recollection of Erma Bendle. I have a 
very definite recollection of Laura Mills. She 
passed away just a short time ago, and made 
countless contributions not only to the Lallon 
area in Churchill County, but I think to the 
state at large. She was that type of a dedicated 
woman and a brilliant woman. The Mills 
family has played a tremendous part in the 
development of Lallon. 



10 


Alan Bible 


Our principal at that time was E. C. Best 
who was a great educator, who became the 
principal of that school for years and years. 
And one of his sons has followed that same 
profession. I believe he became the principal 
at Yerington and has spent his career almost 
as long as his father in the actual teaching. 
Another one of his daughters Elizabeth, 
married Dr. Sawyer whose brother was 
Grant Sawyer, who was the governor of the 
state for two full terms and one of Nevada’s 
most distinguished citizens. So these are 
early people with whom I was very closely 
acquainted, but I salute Mr. Best. He was 
always a very lean man, never fattened up 
during his entire life. Present-day diets and 
suggestions on how to keep fit would not 
apply to him because he knew how to do it 
in his own right. He raised a great family; 
and he had a great, great teaching record. So, 
I want to pay special tribute to him on the 
educational side of my school life. 

So I went to Oats Park grammar school 
and graduated from that school in nineteen 
hundred and twenty-two. And went from 
there as a freshman to the Churchill County 
High School from which I graduated in 1926. 
There I encountered the greatest teacher 
or instructor that I’ve ever had, whether it 
was in the grammar school level, or in the 
high school level, or the college level, or the 
post graduate level and that was George E. 
McCracken. George E. McCracken was a 
great disciplinarian. I’m sure that he’d be 
shuddering wherever he is today at the way 
the discipline of the system has fallen down. 
He was known as a strict disciplinarian. And 
it’s to him that I think I owe my greatest debt 
of gratitude for instructing in debate and 
public speaking. He was my debate instructor 
for the full four years of high school level. 
And at that time between 1922 and 1926, I 
eagerly sought his advice on many, many of 


the problems that I had during that period 
of time. And he was loved by students who 
knew him best. He was a graduate of the 
University of Michigan at Ann Arbor. He 
came West as a comparatively young man, 
started teaching there in Churchill County 
High School, and it was there that he met 
Olive Culpitts. And they gave birth to two 
daughters. I believe those two daughters are 
still alive. I haven’t seen them in a number 
of years. I used to see Mr. McCracken many, 
many, many times after my graduation, saw 
his wife many times after that. 

Now again as a disciplinarian and as a 
man of great dedication, a man of powerful 
voice himself and a great instructor, he really 
taught me more about public speaking and 
about debating than any man under whom 
I’ve ever studied. And he held the respect 
generally of the community. He didn’t hesitate 
to use his discipline to the fullest extent. 
Sometimes that got him in trouble with the 
fathers and mothers of the community, and 
after a period of time they managed to prevail 
upon the board of trustees to change him and 
not renew his contract as a principal. And I 
think that’s one of the saddest mistakes ever 
made. He tolerated no monkey business. 

I was a classmate of some very interesting 
people over my school years, and among my 
classmates was a young man by the name of 
Pat Sanford who left his imprint not only on 
the Fallon area, but here in Reno where he 
was extremely well known in later life. One 
of the interesting incidents was that during 
our junior-senior dance in about nineteen 
hundred and I would think about twenty-five 
or twenty-six, he thought he would liven up 
the dance a bit by bringing a burro on the 
floor of the gymnasium, which he did and that 
immediately led to a three-day suspension. 
And he was not with us for the next three of 
four days during the period of the suspension. 



Formative Years 


11 


Pat Sanford was a brother of Les Sanford 
who was also a very influential man in the 
life of the Reno community and a very highly 
successful businessman, .a great leader in the 
Masonic lodge; and it was ironic that the two 
brothers met death in an airplane accident 
in the Tonopah area some years later. Pat 
was more or less the reckless, devil-may-care 
individual, much of which he retained all 
of his life. Les was a very conservative and 
proper and very, business-like individual. 
And many people wondered why he would 
have gone on this airplane with his brother 
on that particular day because there were 
some storm warnings, and probably they 
should not have even taken off. But they did. 
And I think there’s one of the brothers still 
alive, Johnny Sanford, who has followed the 
gaming industry for many years and likewise 
had made contributions to this community as 
well as to the Fallon community. 

Among the athletes of the day, there 
was probably none any more famous than 
Jim Bailey who’s one of our great football, 
basketball and track stars of the time, who 
later became the same type of an athletic star 
at the University of Nevada, who has taught 
and held coaching positions and is still here 
in the Reno community. 

I was a contemporary with Lem Allen, 
who served probably the longest time of any 
one man as the postmaster of Fallon; whose 
father before him, Lem Allen, Sr., was a 
great racehorse man, and who raised terrific 
racehorses. And Lem Allen is still alive, and I 
think he’s back with raising racehorses himself 
now that he has retired. 

There were other teachers, too, who made 
their impact in various places. Among the 
others was Earl Wooster. Now I believe I’m 
correct in stating that Earl’s first place of 
teaching after graduating from the University 
of Nevada was in Fallon. There was also 


another fine young woman teacher there 
by the name of Adele Clinton, and later to 
become Mrs. Earl Wooster, and made many— 
many contributions to not only to the Fallon 
area, but to the Reno area for many, many 
times. Wooster High School is named after 
Wooster here in Reno, and he spent a full 
career in teaching and going into special work 
in the education field after he retired as an 
instructor and principal. 

Noble Wait was another of our great 
stars in college days. Later on he came to 
Fallon, married a Fallon girl, Harriman girl, 
and spent a career in teaching young people, 
particularly in athletics. He’s since passed 
on, but he leaves a fine family. These are all 
contemporaries in either the teaching field 
or the student field during the days in Fallon. 

I’ve had the occasion and was lucky 
enough to win the Nevada State Oratorial 
Contest in about 19—I guess it was about 
nineteen hundred and twenty-four, twenty- 
five—and was selected to represent the state 
of Nevada at Eos Angeles. It was a very, very 
interesting experience for me. I shall never 
forget it. I was the lone representative of the 
state of Nevada, the Nevada state oratorial 
winner. And it was a contest that was entered 
into by—the state of California had about 
twenty-five entries, as I remember, and 
Arizona, which had one or two, and Nevada, 
which had one, and I was that one. There were 
a great, great number of judges. There must 
have been ten or twelve judges that judged 
the final contests. And we went to the Los 
Angeles area, and the contest was held in 
one of the high schools there. I think it was 
Hollywood High School. And there were 
about ten—twelve entries, something like 
that and representing many of the schools of 
the area. I don’t know how it was structured; 
I don’t remember how it was structured ’cause 
it has been fifty years ago—but California 



12 


Alan Bible 


probably had about oh, ten or twelve entries, 
Arizona one or two, and the state of Nevada 
I was the sole entry. 

We orated and gave our best, and they 
totaled them up. The contest was won by a 
Gregson Bautzer, Hollywood High School, 
who later went on to USC and became a highly 
successful lawyer. As I’m relating this, to the 
best of my knowledge he’s still alive. He’s been 
one of the primary lawyers representing the 
movie industry of that particular area. Second 
place went to a man by the name of Herb 
Wenig who went on to Stanford and became 
a very distinguished professor there and a 
lawyer—not only a professor at Stanford, but 
a lawyer in that particular area. And the third 
prize went to a little colored girl. This was 
about the first time that I can remember active 
participation by colored people in the debate 
area. I’ve never followed her since that time, 
but she was outstanding as her placement 
shows. I—whatever the number of contestants 
were—whether it was fourteen or fifteen, ten 
or twelve, whatever, I just don’t remember—I 
had the great distinction of coming in dead 
last. And my heart was broken, and I went 
back to Nevada, went to Churchill County 
High School and to Fallon, and here I came 
back as the tail end winner of the oratorical 
contest. And that bothered me for a period of 
time. I think it gave me some much needed 
humility and took some of the cockiness out 
of me—which is a good lesson that you get 
in life. 

Later on as I developed, I became 
acquainted with a Judge Coleman, who was 
Ben Coleman from the South, either Alabama 
or Mississippi. And he was the judge of the 
Nevada State Supreme Court, and I found 
out in getting to know him in later years 
that I received at least one vote for Nevada. 
He voted for me for first place. And so that 
gave me some consolation after carrying the 


wounds of coming in dead last for those many 
years. Carl Dodge followed me several years 
after that, young Carl Dodge—Carl Dodge, Jr. 
—now a state senator, and followed me from 
Fallon some years after that. I don’t remember 
exactly when, and he not only won the Nevada 
contest, but he came in either first or second 
in the contest in Los Angeles. So Nevada 
improved its position as it went along. 

In the Fallon debate days, my debate 
partner for a long time was Mary Kay Morris 
[Mary Katherine Morris Bell]. She went on 
to Stanford, graduated from Stanford with 
high grades and there unfortunately in an 
automobile accident lost one of her eyes and 
had some problem with her eyes for a number 
of years. She overcame that and received her 
law degree and went and married a man by 
the name of Bell. And the two of them joined 
in the practice of law in New York City. Later 
on I think she went into one of the biggest 
and most influential of the New York City 
law offices; and the last word I had from her, 
she was a tax expert—tax lawyer—and had 
done remarkably well, a remarkable woman 
in every sense of the word. 

I think among the political offices that I 
held at Churchill County High School, I was 
the president of the freshman class. I was very 
active on the debate team. I worked with the 
theater there, and they developed some high 
school plays. So that all gave me training 
and background that I much needed in later 
life. So, Fallon bears not only a sentimental 
spot in my heart, but a very realistic lesson 
of some of the problems you run into when 
you get on a platform. So I shall always 
cherish, as I do, the Fallon memories. I later 
on became the student body president of 
Churchill County High School (that would 
be in nineteen hundred and twenty-five), and 
served as the student body president. It was 
a very enjoyable experience and again was 



Formative Years 


13 


movin’ me closer and closer to politics and 
to government, and I suppose something that 
has stayed with me all of my life. 

They’ve had many, many distinguished 
graduates of Churchill County High School as 
well as many, many distinguished instructors 
and professors. I commented on a few. I think 
of all the young men and women with whom I 
went to school, probably the most brilliant of 
all of them was a young man by the name of 
Claude Winder. He was not only a neighbor 
of mine within the limits of the town because 
it wasn’t too big, but we graduated together, 
went all through the University of Nevada 
together. He became a very distinguished 
chemist. He taught for many years at the 
University of Michigan in advanced work 
and became a—I think he was with one 
of the big industrial firms there for awhile 
and has undoubtedly as I think back and 
maybe—maybe there’s some of the period of 
the times—it comes back to remind me that I 
thought he was the most brilliant young man 
I had ever met. His grades I think were never 
less than A-pluses, and you just can’t really 
do better than that. That would be translated 
in today’s grading, as I understand it, into 
probably a straight 4.0 throughout his high 
school. He studied hard; he was a hard worker 
and he carried the same type of grades in the 
University of Nevada where he graduated 
as I did in nineteen hundred and thirty, and 
went on to this spectacular scientific career. 
And he’s made many achievements in the area 
of science. I haven’t seen him in a number 
of years, and I don’t know whether he’s still 
alive or not, but I assume he is. There’s still 
cousins of his in the Fallon area. But he’s one 
that always made a great impression on me. 

Probably the closest friend during all of 
that period of time and a friendship which 
I’ve carried all of my life, was with a Melville 
D. Hancock. His father was C. H. Hancock, 


and they had a ranch in the Harmon district. 
And Mel and I went through the Oats Park 
grammar school together. We went four 
years together in the Churchill County High 
School. We graduated together and came to 
the University of Nevada in nineteen hundred 
and twenty-six. We both joined the same 
fraternity, Lambda Chi Alpha fraternity, 
here in Reno and went through four years 
of university life together. At the end of that 
time we secured an old beaten up jalopy 
and spent about oh, four or five months 
just barnstorming around the United States 
and went to all except a few of the states. It 
was a junket in every sense of the word. We 
earned and saved up enough money to make 
the trip, and back in those days we traveled 
very reasonably, and we always happened to 
have a few relatives in places that we went, 
so we made all except a few of the deep 
southern states. I don’t think we got into 
Florida or to Alabama or to Mississippi or 
into Louisiana. We did get into Oklahoma, 
so we circled the entire United States and 
stayed at our fraternity house and with his 
relatives and my relatives. It was a good, 
broadening experience. After that we each 
went to Washington, D.C., went together, and 
entered Georgetown Law School. We were 
then in the very depths of the Depression, 
and his father had in the meantime moved 
from Fallon to Reno where he became a highly 
successful contractor, building contractor, 
and a business which Mel inherited on the 
death of his father and still maintains it and 
has nurtured it and continued to see it grow. 
He builds as beautiful a home, I think, as 
anyone does in the entire Reno area. 

Anyway, that friendship that started 
out in the fifth grade at Oats Park grammar 
school has maintained and very closely over 
all of these years. And he had one year to 
Georgetown Law, but we were, as I say, in the 



14 


Alan Bible 


depths of the Depression; and at that time his 
dad simply had to have his help back here, 
so he returned as he should to Reno and 
did not follow up and finish his law school 
training. But I don’t think there’s any question 
in the world, but what he did just as well or 
maybe better in the construction business 
and contracting business than he would have 
as a lawyer, though he would have made an 
extremely fine lawyer. 

I graduated from Churchill County 
High School after my Oats Park graduation; 
I early on determined that I wanted to go 
forward. I think I was always smitten with 
the law, primarily because having grown up 
in my dad’s grocery store and having had to 
report to work about six-thirty or seven in 
the morning and finish about six-thirty or 
seven at night, I thought there must be some 
easier way of makin’ a living. [Chuckling] So I 
think that kind of motivated me to be become 
a lawyer. And so, many people have said, 
“Well, where did you first get the idea that 
you wanted to be a lawyer?” And I suppose 
that was a combination of circumstances 
that combined, more or less pointed me in 
the direction of a law career. So, when I left 
Fallon in 1926 and came out to the University 
of Nevada, shortly after that I pretty well 
determined what I wanted to be, and I took 
the courses at the University of Nevada that 
were prelegal in nature. I think my primary 
major was economics and business, but I took 
political science and all the allied courses of 
that time which lead to a background of as 
much law training as you could get at the 
University at that time. So when I left Fallon 
I had a pretty definite feeling, a pretty definite 
determination that I would attempt to become 
a lawyer. 



2 


University of Nevada Life 


Now, picking up my University days—I’d 
always been close to my own mother and 
father and always very close to Fallon and 
never traveled very much up to that time 
in nineteen hundred and twenty-six when 
I graduated from Churchill County High 
School in that year and came up to the 
University of Nevada. I was rather a lonely 
country boy I stayed my first year with Mr. 
and Mrs. C. H. Hancock (mother and father 
of Mel Hancock, a very well known, successful 
Reno citizen who went into the building 
business and has made his mark in that field). 
I stayed with them the first semester on Lake 
Street in their private home. It was just up the 
street from the Phi Sigma Kappa fraternity 
house. 

And during that period of time Harry 
Frost and [Raby] Nig Newton and Buck 
Farnsworth were members. Harry Frost— 
I’ve mentioned his name once, I’ll repeat it 
again, because he was my college idol. He 
was student body president at the time that 
I came here. He was a star on the football 
team. He was a very slightly built man, and 


he captured my imagination. I’ve always been 
a close friend of his since those hero-worship 
days of mine. 

That was the first year at the University, 
and I did not pledge immediately to any 
fraternity house. But finally a man by the 
name of Dr. Fred Anderson took me over to 
the then Kappa Lambda house which was 
on University Terrace then and now, and I 
visited with them there. Seemed to be a little 
more to my liking and maybe to my taste 
and upbringing, and so I pledged to Kappa 
Lambda house and then moved in there as I 
recall in my second semester at the University 
and lived there in the house, 255 University 
Terrace, for the full tenure of my college 
career. 

The social life there was very similar 
to what most of the fraternities had. Of 
course they had a very, very strict sanction 
of “tubbing” which was the vogue of the day. 
And since I lived on Lake Street and just one 
house removed from where the Phi Sigma 
Kappa house was at that time, I used to hear 
some of the cries that came forward when 



16 


Alan Bible 


they were tubbing some fraternity brother, 
or pledge, who had violated some type of rule 
and that convinced me then and there that the 
house was a little too rough for me, and so I 
finally pledged Lambda Chi Alpha. 

Now Mel Hancock who had been always 
a traveling mate of mine through high school 
days, into our college days, did not move 
because his mother and father had moved 
from Fallon to Reno where his dad went into 
the contracting business. And so he lived 
with his folks during those college days, 
but was always to our fraternity affairs and 
was very, very active in the fraternity. There 
were many names that come back to me as I 
think back on those days. In that particular 
class, among the ladies in the class was Enid 
Porter who later became Enid Newell and is 
still in this area. Margaret Baird married one 
of the Lamb boys. I don’t know where she 
is now, frankly. Bill Ligon, one of the most 
successful of the graduates of that era of time 
is one of the leading bankers, citizens in the 
Reno area. He has two sisters who are here, 
so they’ve stayed on. Gretchen Cardinal was 
a classmate of mine. She later went on to 
marry Tip Whitehead, a well-known name 
in Nevada circles, very fine athlete, very 
fine educator. Paul Richards was another 
classmate of mine—Dixie Richards as he was 
known during those periods of time. And 
they’re among the names that come back. 
Tom Wilson was in that era and was a Sigma 
Nu, as I remember—later to have the Wilson’s 
advertising agency—married Ina Winters, 
and they had two wonderful children, one of 
whom happens to be a law partner of mine 
(state senator at the present time) Spike 
Wilson, and very prominently mentioned as 
one of the real possibilities of being the next 
governor of the state of Nevada. 

Grant Bowen was another classmate of 
mine. In fact we took the Nevada bar together 


on—were the only two admitted back in 
April—I think it was April 2, 1934 we were 
admitted as lawyers. He has since been a 
highly successful district judge, a position 
that he still holds with a great deal of honor. 
One of my dearest friends over the years was 
Ed Semenza, a highly successful businessman 
in the Reno area and the real founder of the 
Little Theatre in the Reno area and himself 
a very fine actor. But those friendships have 
ripened over the years. Probably one of my 
dearest friends of that particular group was 
Jake Lawlor, a very dynamic, colorful and 
picturesque coach from the University of 
Nevada, himself a fine athlete within the 
field of football and of basketball. When I 
first went to Virginia City as district attorney, 
Jake Lawlor was the athletic coach for Storey 
County High School, and “colorful” best 
describes him. He could come out fighting on 
the drop of a hat, but he fired his own players 
up to go along with him; and he had some 
great successes. 

Paul Gemmill—in a different light— 
was the distinguished mining engineer, 
later became and still is the secretary of the 
Nevada Mining Association, position which 
he’s held for some years now, and one of the 
most brilliant of the mining men in our state. 
Wally White was another classmate of mine, 
both a classmate and a fraternity brother, and 
he has been in the public eye for many years. 
I think he just recently retired from a very 
responsible position up at North Lake Tahoe. 
Those are a few of the names that came back 
as we reminisce in this oral history. 

Among the professors, the president of the 
University was Walter Clark when I entered. 
One of my professors was Professor Feemster 
who taught me political science, who was one 
of the colorful—again I’m using the word in 
a little different sense than I used it with Jake 
Lawlor—was one of the “colorful” professors 



University of Nevada Life 


17 


and was always known—and probably 
remembered—because he had a goat farm just 
a little north of the University of Nevada. And 
I’ve lost track of him over the years. He was an 
interesting professor. He was one that could 
very easily be sidetracked by questioning 
from the students, and we frequently did 
try to sidetrack him, and most of the time 
successfully, on unrelated subjects when they 
did not have the lesson for the day. 

Jennie Wier taught me history and was 
one of the real pioneers in the teaching of 
this state and an excellent teacher. C. C. 
Smith was one of my professors, and Prof 
Hicks was. Charlie Haseman was another 
and came here as a mathematics professor, 
very distinguished looking gentleman and 
a very, very fine professor. Dean Thompson, 
the father of our very distinguished and really 
outstanding federal judge Bruce Thompson, 
taught me logic and taught me philosophy 
during my college days. And from him I 
learned—one thing was to be accurate and 
to listen and study carefully. I can recall one 
incident when he would finish teaching, and 
he’d ask the class if they understood what he 
was saying. They’d say, “Yes, I do,” and we’d all 
kind of unanimously agree to that and raise 
our hands, those that said they understood. 

And he says, “Well, if you do understand 
it, stand up and tell me what I told you.” And 
that was always the best leveling influence I 
think I’ve ever seen in teaching a class because 
if you did understand what Dean Thompson 
was teaching you, or what any other professor 
was teaching you, you should be able to 
explain it back to him, but half the time it’d 
just be an automatic approval, thinking you’d 
get by with it and then he wouldn’t catch you 
up. But he did; he could read human nature 
extremely well. 

One of the colorful coaches of the day 
right here at the University of Nevada was 


Buck Shaw, and I took physical education 
under Buck Shaw, and he was an easy 
professor because he didn’t make you take 
those five laps around the track as did another 
equally colorful coach, Doc Martie. Doc 
Martie was a real disciplinarian. I was scared 
of him from the time I first met him until I 
got to know him a little better in later years, 
but when he roared out his command to take 
another lap around the track, he just wasn’t 
kidding. And he taught physical education, 
too; I think it was in my second year, and 
we had gymnastics and we had to jump over 
the hurdles and all that. And I was never any 
athlete and so I signed out of that one into 
tennis at the earliest moment. And I took 
considerable ribbing about it, but at least I 
didn’t think I was going to break my neck. 
I signed out to join Chet Scranton who was 
the tennis coach during that particular period 
of time. 

Those are just a few of the professors that 
you encounter in memories and incidents that 
you can recite about them. I thought then and 
I think now that Nevada was very, very well 
staffed in the teaching line and in the coaching 
line. Among the coaches and one who had 
considerable influence on me was Bob Griffin, 
who was the debate coach at the time, and he’d 
come out of either Oregon or Oregon State. 
And I think I studied under him for about 
three years. I made the debate team, and we 
debated up and down the Pacific coast over a 
long period of time. He continued teaching 
at the University of Nevada and developed 
many, many debate teams and debate coaches. 
And he was a fine speaker himself. And one 
of the earlier tricks that we played on him 
as debters in his class was in working up the 
subjects, and we always worked up both sides 
of whatever the debating subject might have 
been or was assigned. You’d always get into 
some stumbling blocks, and you’d go to him. 



18 


Alan Bible 


Once you knew his general makeup and his 
kindness, youd go to him with a plea that 
you couldn’t quite understand the real issues, 
the questions, and you just wondered if he 
could help you a little. And if you approached 
him correctly (and probably the timing had 
something to do with it), he’d end up if not 
completely writing your debate speech, at 
least almost the major portion of it. But he 
was, I think, as fine a debate coach as I’ve ever 
studied under, and he produced many, many 
people under him that later on became highly 
successful lawyers, a profession in which the 
ability to speak means a great deal. So, I want 
to salute him as one of the real strong leaders 
and strong instructors in my life that helped 
me so very much in whatever success I might 
have had in the future years. 

Coming as I did from Fallon, half scared 
of the University and half scared of being away 
from Mother and Dad, I repeatedly went home 
on every weekend or every other weekend to 
visit with them. And that habit prevailed 
until about I suppose my sophomore year 
when I became a little surer of myself, and 
my mother and dad often remarked that I 
wasn’t coming home as frequently as I had. 
And I suppose it’s the development in all 
youth as you move along your educational 
path. And so I suppose I had the same type 
of an experience. Be that as it may, though, I 
might have gone home every week or other 
week during my freshman year; I’m sure that 
lengthened out in my sophomore and junior 
and senior years. 

I seemed to get caught up in many of the 
activities of the University. I was a member of 
the Lambda Chi Alpha fraternity; it was the 
Kappa Lambda at that time, and went national 
during the time I was at the University and 
went into Lambda Chi (which is its present 
title), and has produced many, many men who 
are active in the public life of the state. Among 


my classmates was Charlie Russell who was 
the governor of the state and a congressman 
of the state. Another was Cliff Young who was 
a congressman and state senator, now serving 
as a state senator. I’ve often reminisced over 
the years, it’s rather coincidental that Charlie 
Russell and Cliff Young and myself were 
born in the same block in Lovelock. The 
little community of Lovelock, and all three 
of us had varying degrees of success with a 
political career; and interestingly enough, two 
Republicans, and I was the lone Democrat. 
Pete Echeverria was a Lambda Chi, one of 
Nevada’s finest lawyers and finest orators and 
finest after-dinner speakers. 

I served on the political scene as the 
ASUN treasurer in my senior year—the 
student body treasurer. The president under 
whom I served, president of the student 
body, was Carol Cross from Sparks, whose 
father was very active in politics. And Carol 
has followed a newspaper career with great 
success, and I still see him frequently. He is 
presently stationed in Vallejo and has been the 
editor of the Vallejo newspaper for a number 
of years. 

I was pledged to Blue Key during my 
junior year and as well as to Coffin and 
Keys, both rather well known college service 
organizations and still very active as such on 
the campus level. I was always very active in 
Clionia which was a debating society. And 
among some of the classmates with whom 
I debated I remember [Ernest S.] Ernie 
Brown extremely well: a man whom I ran 
against for my first term for U.S. Senate, 
and a man unfortunately who passed away 
too early in life. But he was a brilliant man, 
a self-made man, and a great inspiration to 
me though we were on opposite political 
sides, but I think it’s illustrative of a fact that 
in Nevada particularly, that no matter what 
one’s politics, when the partisanship of the 



University of Nevada Life 


19 


immediate race is out of the way, you all have 
one overall objective and that’s to try to help 
Nevada. And no one did a better job of that 
than Ernie Brown. I salute him because of 
the achievements he made, and the same is 
certainly true of Cliff Young, who had many 
achievements and who continues to serve the 
public extremely well. 

We debated many people. During my 
University debating career, [Gregson Bautzer] 
was making a tour of the United States as 
a debater from the University of Southern 
California; and they debated right on this 
campus—Gregson Bautzer and his teammate. 
And I debated that debate, I believe, with— 
I’m not sure that it was Lenard Sledge; it could 
have been and it could have been somebody 
else. But in any event we debated successfully, 
and we received a two-to-one decision over 
the very strong and powerful USC, and so I 
had brought some kind of retribution into 
my subjects with Gregson Bautzer.* My very 
dear senatorial friend, U.S. senatorial friend, 
Tom Kuchel of California is now a member of 
Bautzer’s firm, and I’ve suggested to Senator 
Kuchel that we have a luncheon sometime 
in the future so that Gregson Bautzer, his 
partner, and I can kind of reminisce about 
some of the earlier days some thirty-five or 
forty years earlier. There were other incidents 
very similar to that throughout our debating 
careers when we debated almost all of the 
California colleges and all of those of Utah, 
a few in Oregon, and I think one in the state 
of Washington. 

I took rather a minor role as an actor. 

I used to sign up for them, but I think my 
lead was as a sheepherder in the Chester 
Mysteries, and it was no Pulitzer Prize winner. 
It wouldn’t have even won an Oscar. I always 
remember that because—again another life¬ 
long friend—George Vargas, was another 
sheepherder. he was a real actor. He was a 


thespian in the best sense of the word and has 
carved out a spectacular career for himself 
as a lawyer in the state of Nevada. Again it’s 
very interesting that George Vargas came out 
of Winnemucca. We debated against each 
other in high school. We debated with each 
other at the University of Nevada, and in our 
legal careers I don’t think we’ve ever been 
on the same side of the question at any one 
time and remained again fast friends over 
all those periods of time. I’m a tremendous 
admirer of his. He not only could qualify as 
a Hollywood actor on his manner and his 
marvelous looks, but his ability. And again 
his success before the Nevada legislature is 
practically renowned, and he will always be 
known for his going away parties at the end 
of the legislative session which are fabulous. 
There’s just nothing to compare with them, 
whether he gets all what he wants in the way 
of a lobbyist for his various clients (and they’re 
very distinguished clients) he certainly has 
made many friends in the legislature over this 
period of years. 

I took an an active part in newspaper 
work, and again I think that was primarily 
due to Dr. Fred Anderson, my lifelong and 
I suppose the closest friend I have in the 
world. Our friendship goes back better than 
fifty years, and he was one most active in 
pledging me to the same fraternity, but he 
was also very active in getting me into the 
Sagebrush as a newspaperman about which 
I knew absolutely nothing. And I started out 
as one of the assistant editors and became the 
next to the top spot, but never succeeded in 
being the editor of the Sagebrush. 

Well, I studied under Alfred Leslie 
Higginbotham, who really was Mr. Journalism 
of the University for so many, many years and 
who taught me one thing that I’ve always 


*See above 




20 


Alan Bible 


chided the present newspaper writers and 
journalists that they’ve overlooked; he had his 
classroom ringing with little cards that said 
accuracy, accuracy, accuracy And I’ve often 
talked in my later political life to members of 
the Fourth Estate—members of the press— 
and said that they’ve kind of overlooked that 
accuracy thing because they sometimes color 
their “who, why, what, where, and how” with 
a little editorial comment which is not really 
straight newspaper reporting, but it seems to 
be the mode of the day And I would simply 
let them come to their own defense. They have 
on balance treated me very well. 

In view of the fact that I did stand for 
election on several occasions, it might be 
helpful to see how it was working back in 
the period between ’26 and ’30 as contrasted 
to the way it may work now. I know that 
during those periods of time, we usually 
teamed up with other fraternities and other 
sororities and used to come out with a kind 
of combined ticket where we had an SAE 
running for president, a Lambda Chi running 
for treasurer (which was true at the time that I 
was selected as a student body treasurer) and 
wind up with either the Tri-Delts or the Thetas 
or the Gamma Phi Betas for a secretary from 
one of the sororities or a vice-president from 
one of the sororities. And I don’t recall the 
exact sorority lineups of those eras, but they 
would be one of the Gamma Phis possibly for 
secretary and possibly a Tri-Delt for the vice- 
president. And with that team of sororities 
and fraternities running as a team, we thought 
that it strengthened our entire ticket. I don’t 
know whether it did or didn’t, but at least it 
helped us get elected the times that we were 
successful. 

I don’t know, I think the participation at 
that time was probably percentagewise better 
than it is today. Of course during that period 
of time, the University total enrollment was 


probably in the neighborhood between eight 
and nine hundred—possibly a thousand 
students at the most. And today of course it’s 
in the range as I understand it, some eight 
thousand people; so—but I think we had 
more college participation in our politics of 
the day than they have now, which I don’t 
think is surprising because we—with the 
additional increase in population, with the 
many problems they have today—we had 
them then, but I don’t know whether they 
were quite as severe or dramatic as they are 
right now. I think we felt then that we had 
more liberty and latitude than we do today as 
far as other outside activities were concerned. 

I am rather proud of the fact that over 
my own life history my mother went to 
the University of Nevada, I went to the 
University of Nevada, my oldest son went to 
the University of Nevada—was very active in 
politics and was the student body president 
during his senior year. I believe he won the 
student body presidency by not over one or 
two votes as it was very, very narrow: and 
I’ve always chided him as being “Landslide 
Bible” [Paul] just the way President [Lyndon] 
Johnson was known as “Landslide Johnson” 
on his eighty-seven vote victory for U.S. 
senator from the state of Texas. He takes it 
in good graces; I imagine it bothered him 
a bit [chuckling] at the time. Looks to me 
like they should have had a rerun with that 
narrow—but that’s quite a bit in the past. So 
he was active in the University of Nevada 
both in debating and political life of that time. 
My second son, Bill, did not graduate from 
the University of Nevada. He was a Stanford 
graduate, but he did take his master’s from 
Nevada in business, and his wife graduated 
from the Orvis nursing school. My son Paul’s 
wife graduated from the University of Nevada. 
My granddaughter, my daughter’s daughter, 
graduated from the University of Nevada; so 



University of Nevada Life 


21 


that we have a pretty strong tie to this great 
old University and this great state of ours. 
And I’m sure the rest of our grandchildren as 
they come along will—at least a good part of 
them, I hope—will be going to the University 
of Nevada. 

Mary Ellen Glass: Do you want to add anything 
about student traditions of your college years? 

Well, I might add just a bit there. Some of 
them I suppose I could mention. I suppose 
there’s a number of them I should not—that 
would be better left unsaid. [Laughter] I know 
that all universities at various times had a little 
turmoil, a little upsurge or dissatisfaction with 
the governing authority, but I shall never forget 
that, I think it was in my junior year, we were 
very much dissatisfied or thought we were 
dissatisfied with the head of the University, 
Dr. Walter Clark; and there was a group of 
reformers, myself included, who thought he 
should immediately resign because we didn’t 
like the way he was running the University. 
So we made the usual—oh, sarcastic blasts 
in the Sagebrush of the day and demanded 
audiences with him. And at one time I can 
recall because I was a part of the operation, 
I don’t think with any great pride as I look 
back, but I thought at the time it was very, 
very important. We visited upon the good 
doctor after a rather blistering editorial and 
demanding his immediate resignation, and 
we had the story all written up, and we asked 
if we could see him, that we had something 
we were gonna put in the paper. We thought 
in fairness to him that we would give him the 
opportunity to comment on it at the time. 

So, I don’t remember how many were 
absolutely engaged in this. I know a few 
of the names. One of our leaders was 
Danny McKnight, the son of District Judge 
McKnight, who was unfortunately killed in 


an automobile accident; he was one of our 
ring leaders. And Allen Crawford who was a 
fraternity brother of mine, the editor of the 
Sagebrush, was another reformer and he has 
since passed on. 

But we decided that we would in fairness— 
and I thought that was very noble of us—give 
Dr. Clark the opportunity of acceding to 
our wishes that he resign at the end of his 
term; and so we asked if we could see him. 
And he was a diplomat as well as a very 
tine gentleman, and I’m sure was a very fine 
[University] president though he wasn’t doing 
something to our liking, and we thought 
there should be a change. So we visited with 
him, one night late, before the paper was to 
go to bed—be put to bed and printed, and 
we found him at his home which was at that 
time on campus. And he came to the door—I 
don’t remember the exact time—it was ten- 
thirty, eleven o’clock at night, something in 
the range—and appeared in a long nightgown 
and stocking cap and invited us in. So we read 
what we were going to say about him, and he 
handled it very coolly and calmly, and said, 
“Well, if I were you I’d just go right ahead and 
publish it and just shoot your best gun. That’s 
all you can do in life.” He said, “You’re dead 
wrong, but you go ahead and do what you 
think is best.” So being headstrong as a group 
of—I guess we’d be called young radicals or 
revolutionaries or whatever—we went ahead 
and published the editorial. 

And it wasn’t—the earth didn’t shake and 
the University went on more or less regularly 
the next day. And we demanded a legislative 
review, so the Assembly or the Senate or 
I think in a joint committee gave us that 
legislative review, and we learned then that 
we were rather badly prepared. The University 
wasn’t being governed as badly as we thought. 
And the University administration and the 
Board of Regents got a completely clear bill of 



22 


Alan Bible 


health, and we were held up to rather public 
ridicule. And so I’ve always been sympathetic 
I think in the intervening years—this would 
be in 1929—some fifty years later I’ve always 
been rather sympathetic for those people who 
like to try to change the going order, and I 
don’t think that we ever ultimately caused any 
great damage. I think maybe they did change 
a few of their practices and try to correct a few 
things that made the University a better place. 

That’s something that just comes back to 
me just rather piecemeal. It rather discouraged 
me in the future from bein’ a revolutionary or 
a reformer, but at least to respect the views 
of those who might want to reform. We see 
really, I suppose, all too much of that in the 
United States of America in recent years 
that if it isn’t accompanied by violence, if 
it’s simply the hearing out of the—pursuant 
to our Constitutional guarantee of freedom 
of speech that I think it has overall made 
us a stronger nation. I can see him in that 
nightgown now. [Laughter] But—trouble is I’d 
have to refresh my memory by going back to 
some of those early day Sagebrushes and see 
just exactly what it was we were so mad at him 
about. We were mad at him about something 
he wouldn’t do. Well, I just don’t really know 
what it was. I just—my mind’s blank on that. 

And the great thing about going to 
the University of Nevada-Reno is that the 
people that attended at that time—I guess 
we were eight or nine hundred strong—they 
scattered all over the state, and they’ve been 
in many places of prominence. And over my 
life and career, particularly since mine has 
been a political career, I think it served me 
in a good stead because in every community 
then and now, I know people with whom I’ve 
gone to college and kept up rather a close 
acquaintanceship over the years. And they’ve 
been fine friendships, and they persisted over 
the years. 


Social life at that period of time, insofar as 
I was personally concerned, was pretty much 
limited to my fraternity house. They had their 
occasional dances. I was not exposed to the 
forbidden beverage of the day—the alcoholic 
beverage—until probably my junior or senior 
year as a college student. I’ve taken some since 
then and probably had a very bare minimum 
of ’em during that period of time. But as far 
as branching out beyond the confines of the 
University and the confines of the fraternity 
house, I simply didn’t do it. 

Those are a few of the reminiscences that 
come back as I look back on the college days. 
I wouldn’t trade them for anything in the 
world. I certainly wouldn’t—I’ve never had 
a second wish about going somewheres else 
except the University of Nevada. I think it’s 
a great university, and the one thing that you 
get out of the University of Nevada probably 
more than any other—other than your book 
learning and your book education—is the 
friends that you make there last with you 
for an entire lifetime. And again that was 
something that stood me in terrifically 
good stead when I ran for—first as attorney 
general on a statewide basis and then later on 
for four times successfully as a U.S. senator 
because in each and every community in the 
state of Nevada, bar none, you could always 
find someone with whom you’d gone to the 
University of Nevada with. And that was a 
close, warm relationship which came back 
to help you a great deal in later years. I hope 
I’ve been worthy of that; I try to reciprocate 
and try to remember those friendships and 
try to particularly remember and be helpful 
to those communities in which I had so many 
pleasant memories. 



3 


Georgetown University Law School 


First Impressions 

And after I graduated in 1930, Mel 
Hancock and myself made a tour of the 
United States and were gone for a number of 
months. I think we went to about forty-four 
or forty-five different states. I didn’t go to 
school that next year. I had personally saved 
up enough money to buy a second-hand car 
and it saw us around the United States. We 
stayed at the various fraternity houses and 
visited the people that we had known or had 
ties with in our earlier days, either through 
high school or through college. 

Returning to Nevada, I managed my 
fathers store in Fallon. He was the proprietor 
of the Fallon Mercantile which was—at that 
time—was a grocery and meat market and 
hardware store. So I managed that store for 
him for oh, I guess seven or eight months and 
again saved enough money to get on back 
to my law school. I had chosen Georgetown 
Law School, which is a splendid law school, 
located in Washington, D.C. And I think the 
political atmosphere that was there probably 


induced me more than anything else to go to 
Georgetown—a decision which I have never 
regretted. 

We also took a look at (by we I mean 
Mel Hancock and myself) the University of 
Michigan in Ann Arbor, which has always 
been one of the great law schools in the 
country. And we were motivated to take a 
look there because our high school principal 
George E. McCracken was a graduate of that 
school, and then he came West for a very, very 
distinguished educational career. (I paid my 
respects to him before, and it doesn’t hurt to 
repeat ’em again because he was one of the 
most outstanding educators I’ve ever known 
in my career. He was my debate coach in 
my high school days, and then I said earlier 
that Bob Griffin was my debate coach here 
at the University of Nevada campus. So I 
had superior training, as I see it, by these 
two very distinguished debate coaches. Bob 
Griffin was from Oregon, and we likewise 
took a look at those law schools because they 
were in the West, and our debate coach had 
spoken very favorably of them.) But in the 



24 


Alan Bible 


final analysis I think we selected Georgetown 
Law School for two reasons. Number one, 
it was interwoven with the political life of 
the nation’s capital; and secondarily, that it 
offered many opportunities in employment. 
One could secure employment in one of the 
government departments; or working up on 
the Hill, as we called it, on the floor of the 
Senate or the floor of the House and things 
of that kind. 

Mel Hancock went to Georgetown Law 
with me for one year. I think we both did 
moderately well in our grades, but this was 
the depths of the Depression, and his father 
indicated that he better come on home and 
learn a trade and because the condition of the 
time—it was pretty hard to send anybody to 
school. The banks had closed—some of the 
banks had closed, and things really all in all 
were very tough during those years of ’31 and 
’32, and we hadn’t fought our way out of the 
’28, ’29 Depression at that time. So Mel only 
went to Georgetown for the one year and 
returned to become in Reno one of its most 
successful businessmen and builders as [he] 
inherited his father’s building and business 
savvy and know-how and has done extremely 
well for himself. 

The Georgetown Law School was an 
interesting challenge to me. I’d been used 
to going to the University of Nevada, Reno, 
where we had campus life and social life and 
a close acquaintanceship with everyone that 
was here, the school being about eight or nine 
hundred people at that time, total of all the 
departments. And going back to Georgetown 
Law which was completely isolated from the 
Georgetown undergraduate school. It was 
located at Fifth and E Street which was oh, 
many miles from the campus at Georgetown. 
It was within about six or seven blocks of the 
Capitol of the United States. It was located 
there in the early days because of its proximity 


to the Capitol. It was a very austere, four- 
story red brick building, most unimpressive. 
And Washington has, I think, over the years 
developed some of the finest lawyers primarily 
because it is the seat of the government. With 
so many governmental problems, it attracts 
legal talent. Their professors were obviously 
very well-trained and capable men. It was 
almost completely a lecture course with very 
little exchange between the professors and the 
student, partly due to the fact that the classes 
were large. 

But there was no social life of any kind. 
Whatever there was at that time, you made 
for yourself with the classmates that you 
met at Georgetown Law, and over the 
years it has been that way. At that time I 
don’t believe we had any women in the 
classes. Since then it’s—the whole university 
complex has changed, and though even the 
undergraduate part was simply male, now it 
is coeducational and there’s men and women 
in varied proportions. I think really there are 
probably still more men going to both the 
undergraduate at Georgetown and the law 
school at Georgetown. 

But the impression that one first had 
when you went there, that the separation 
really meant business because you only went 
there to study and try to learn law and to 
go on about your business or your work. 
It was for that reason that Georgetown 
[and] I believe the other law schools in the 
metropolitan Washington area, broke their 
classes into both morning classes and night 
classes. In other words, Georgetown then—I 
don’t know whether it’s still true or not—but 
at Georgetown at that time you couldn’t 
work and go to day school. If you wanted 
to work, you had to work and go to night 
school, and it would take you four years to 
get your degree rather than the three years 
which was day school. I didn’t work my first 



Georgetown University Law School 


25 


year at Georgetown, so I enrolled in the day 
school and then when I received employment 
later on in my law school years, I just simply 
didn’t disclose the tact that I was working 
and I went right ahead on the day school and 
managed to graduate as a day school student, 
which obviously put me through law school 
in three years rather than four. That was the 
advantage of it. 

So I continued on the day school, 
graduated there in nineteen hundred and 
thirty-four. I had rather respectable grades I 
think. They’d be about average. They weren’t a 
hundred percent at all, but they’d be in about 
the median or a little better than the median of 
the class. And as I recall we had about ninety 
or ninety-five graduates from law school that 
time. It has since become much larger, and 
there’s a new law school. 

There’s really no particular moments of my 
law school that really stand out in my mind. 
We had some very fine professors and some 
very fine students there, as students who later 
on became involved in the political life of their 
states or of government, federal government 
or some of the secretaryships and things of 
that kind from the national level and federal 
level, such as the Secretary of Navy was Frank 
Nash, who was a classmate, brilliant man, and 
he served a tour of duty as the Secretary of 
the Navy. But it was practically all work and 
study and tending to lessons. There were no 
social events at all except that you worked 
out together with your classmates there. And 
I occasionally hear from some of them now, 
and have kept up a little contact. 

It’s nothing at all like it was at UNR where 
you had all these other complementary things 
going on such as your social life and your 
fraternities, your football and your basketball, 
and all your athletic sports. There was none 
of that existing in law school, and no contact 
with the “hilltop,” as we called it, which was 


many miles away and was the undergraduate 
school. So it was simply a different, and it was 
just truly a professional factory I guess is what 
you would call it. But I think they’re rated well, 
and I think they were good instructors and 
they had a fine percentage of men turning out 
that have gone into politics, which fits into the 
Washington climate or into other successful 
careers in the practice of the law. So those 
are just roughly the impressions I have from 
Georgetown Law School. It was just a different 
type of life that’s all. 

Working in the Capitol 

But with the Depression hitting us as it 
did and likewise having its effect upon my 
father and the banks with whom he banked 
in Nevada, it very quickly became apparent 
if I wanted to continue my law school I’d 
have to secure employment. So at that time 
I went to our congressional members; my 
father was a very close friend of Senator Key 
Pittman’s. As near as I know, he did not know 
Pat McCarran at that time. And he also knew 
Congressman [Samuel S.] Arentz at that time 
very well. He was a good friend of my father’s. 
So I went to each of them and met the—Mr. 
Trenwith was the administrative assistant for 
Key Pittman and had been with him over his 
entire senatorial career which was lengthy 
at that time and I believe ended up being 
the second longest serving U.S. senator of 
any of our Nevada senators. (I think Senator 
Jones probably was number one in years of 
continuous service; and of course Senator 
Stewart was a long time serving senator with 
a broken term, I mean having finished a term 
and then went back into private practice and 
then later on had a run again and successfully. 
And then Key Pittman, I think, is the third 
in the number of years in which he served 
as the U.S. senator’ from Nevada. I became 



26 


Alan Bible 


very friendly with him, got to know him 
very well.) 

But on my visit to the Hill, as we called 
it, to the U.S. Senate building I went to both 
Senator Pittman’s office and to Senator 
McCarran’ s office. At that time and it 
persisted for many years, there was a very 
definite cleavage between the two wings of 
the Nevada [Democratic] party. And one 
wing we pretty well know as the Pittman wing 
of the party and the other was known as the 
McCarran wing of the party. And it didn’t 
make any difference to me which wing they 
belonged to; I wanted employment because I 
wanted to get through law school. So I went 
to each of the senators and talked with Mr. 
Trenwith who was Senator Pittman’s secretary 
or administrative assistant. I don’t know what 
their title was at that time—this would be 
1933—but it was one or the other and their 
duties were roughly the same. 

And I went to Senator McCarran’s office 
by introduction from a Fallon man, Bob 
Douglass, Robert L. Douglass, who later 
became a long term Collector of Internal 
Revenue for Key Pittman. He was a very close 
Key Pittman ally. When I went to Senator 
McCarran’s office, I met his secretary, who 
was Hazel Smith, who was born and raised 
in Carlin, Nevada, and she was very, very 
helpful to me and said she would try to 
secure some type of employment. I think it 
was next day or two days after having gone 
to them and Senator McCarran didn’t even 
have his office moved in when I first saw him, 
and they said they’d do their best to get me 
something. So it was on a Friday of a week 
following, as I remember, Hazel Smith called 
me and told me that they had an elevator job 
for me and if I wanted to take the elevator 
job, I could have it the following day. And 
I said, “Well, I’ll be in immediately and see 
you about it.” 


And she says, “Well, come in on Monday,” 
I think it was. 

And I said, “Fine.” 

And then the following day I received 
a call from Mr. Trenwith, who was Senator 
Pittman’s secretary, and he said, “Now we have 
a job for you and you’ll be running an elevator 
and you come in on Monday or Tuesday and 
we’ll fix you up.” 

So I told him that I had received an earlier 
call from Senator McCarran s office indicating 
that he had employment and I thought in 
fairness to Senator McCarran, since he made 
me the first offer and I’d accepted it, it would 
be poor grace for me to turn that one down 
and take the Pittman offer. So for that one 
circumstance and that difference in twenty- 
four hours of employment, my entire political 
career was probably charted at that time and a 
very definite course set because if I had gone 
to work for Key Pittman, undoubtedly I would 
have come up the Pittman chain of Democrats 
in Nevada whereas I first went to work for Pat 
McCarran, I came up the McCarran wing. So 
for that one difference in receiving an elevator 
job in the Capitol of the United States, I ended 
up as a McCarran protege and came up the 
McCarran line rather than the Pittman line. 

Many others who’ve gone back to 
Washington, ended up with Senator Pittman 
and were always very active in his wing of the 
party where I was always very active in the 
McCarran wing of the party. And over the 
years the feelings between Senator McCarran 
and Senator Pittman was always very cool at 
best. Many times they clashed on a variety 
of problems, but they both always were 
outstanding senators. 

They had a signal in those days as an 
elevator boy that I’m going to relate because 
I think it shows how varying people treat 
you. You’re told when you start working for 
the Congress of the United States, we were 



Georgetown University Law School 


27 


told at that time (and the Architect of the 
Capitol at that time was a man by the name 
of David Lynn. He has since passed away, 
but he befriended me on one occasion when 
I really needed a friend and that’s why I’ve 
always remembered his name). You’re told 
that running an elevator, when you hear one 
buzz on your signal board that that means it’s 
just John Q. Citizen. If you get two buzzes, 
that means that you’ve got a staff member 
working for some senator or a committee and 
then he’s the one that is entitled to buzz it two 
times. But if you hear it three times, that’s the 
command performance and that means that 
there’s a U.S. senator that wants immediate 
attention. And I was told this. And on the 
second or third day of my employment in 
this little, old elevator which is still creaking 
up and down in the Capitol (was when I left) 
and you hear the three signals, that means 
you better drop everything—drop whatever 
you’re holding as a passenger, go down to 
that floor where you received the signal, and 
pick up the senator and take him wherever he 
wants to go. So on this particular occasion, 
it was either the second or third day after I’d 
started becoming an elevator boy, and I was 
carrying one of the colored charmen from 
the basement up to the top floor. And all of a 
sudden I heard the summoning call of three 
bells—one, two, three—rather emphatically 
rung, I might add, by the senator who wanted 
immediate attention. The elevator in which I 
worked was one of the very few open-grilled 
elevators—it was a small elevator—and I 
passed the floor on which the three signals 
came from and he’d summoned and indicated 
he wanted to go down. And so I had this 
colored charman aboard with me, and I 
was taking him up to the top floor. I passed 
this open-grilled floor where a senator, who 
could—who was buzzing the three times, 
I waved at him in what I thought was kind 


of a friendly gesture and said, “I’ll be back 
and get you in just a minute or two.” And 
so I took the charman up to the third floor 
or fourth floor and left him off and turned 
around, went back to get the senator, and by 
that time this senator was irate, angry and 
had up a full head of steam. And he reported 
me that day as being insubordinate and not 
entitled to run an elevator—I didn’t know the 
rules. And it had affronted him, so I received 
a summons the next day when I came in to 
work. And David—Architect Lynn said, “Did 
you do this?” 

I says, “Yes I did.” 

And he said, “Why?” 

I said, “Well, I don’t know. I come from the 
West, and we kind of treat everybody alike.” 

The architect said, “Well, that was Senator 
Hale from Maine. And there have been 
members of the Hale family in the Congress 
of the United States, either as congressman 
or senators, I guess since the founding of 
the Nation.” And he said, “Now he’s lodged a 
complaint against you, and he thinks that you 
should be retired.” 

And I said, “Well, I haven’t really started, 
and I certainly need the job.” 

He says, “Well, I think anybody is entitled 
to another chance.” He said, “I think you made 
an honest mistake. It was a stupid mistake on 
your part, but,” he said, “we’ll overlook it.” But 
he said, “Don’t do it again.” He said, “Anytime 
you hear that three bells,” he said, “you stop 
whatever you’re doin’ and go right back and 
answer it.” 

So I said, “I’ll certainly remember your 
admonition, Mr. Lynn.” And I certainly did. 
And little did I dream then or have any idea 
that someday I night be back there in later 
years as a U.S. senator. 

It turned out that way during all the time 
that I served as a senator, I would never buzz 
three times, except where there was a vote on 



28 


Alan Bible 


the floor and I had to get over there hurried 
in case I missed something. That’s something 
that I shall never forget as long as I live 
because I think it taught me some humility 
and some respect for the other persons rights. 
They don’t use the three bells as much now 
as they did then except when there was an 
honest-to-God emergency. But that’s just one 
little anecdote that comes back to me in my 
own personal experiences on the floor of the 
Senate. 

Then later on [I served] as a messenger 
in—or really a sergeant-of-arms—I was sworn 
in in that capacity as a sergeant-of-arms 
and as such I was detailed to his office and 
spent much time on the floor of the United 
States Senate running errands for the various 
senators. 

Huey Long was one of the main attractions 
as a United States senator from the state of 
Louisiana, and he was always an attraction 
to the general public. At that particular time 
we weren’t tied down with television as we are 
today and that being such an attraction in the 
homes of our people. So when the news got 
out that Huey Long was about to make a talk 
on the floor of the Senate of the United States, 
the galleries were always packed because he 
was a showman of the first order. He was the 
founder of “share the wealth” philosophy, and 
he talked on that at many, many times and 
at length. And any time that Senator Huey 
Long of Louisiana was talking, it would be 
better than any movie or stage play that we 
have today. He was entertaining; he had a 
myriad of stories; he told them extremely 
well. He was a senator that very few other 
senators cared to challenge because he was 
quick and he was sarcastic, and they usually 
had to come in second fiddle when they were 
debating with him. He knew no quarter and 
always gave more than he received in the way 
of exchanges. 


It seems to me that as I wound up my 
career in Washington after some twenty years 
that the exchanges back in those days (and 
this was in the early ’30s, the Depression days, 
the early ’30s), that the debate was much more 
caustic and personal than it is today. Now that 
might just bean imagination of mine because 
of the different viewpoints from which I 
watched the unfolding drama before me in the 
Senate arena. But as a deputy sergeant- [at] - 
arms and running errands and attending law 
school, I probably was more susceptible to the 
words that were exchanged between senators 
than I was some twenty-five or thirty years 
later when I returned in a different capacity 
and as a senator myself. But be that as it may, 
Senator Huey Long was always one of the 
main attractions. 

Nevada’s Congressional Delegation 
in the Thirties 

When I first went back into Washington 
in 1931, the senator from Nevada was, on the 
Republican side, was Tasker L. Oddie who 
was a very distinguished man. And he was 
chairman of the Post Office and Civil Service 
Committee during part of the years that I was 
back there. And of course then he’s the one that 
had run for a number of times unsuccessfully 
(and he was a former governor of Nevada), 
and then later on he ran as U.S. senator, was 
elected, and I think he was in his third term 
when the Depression hit, and Pat McCarran 
ran against him. Oddie was thought to be the 
odd son favorite to win, but it happened to be 
the year in which a distinguished American 
by the name of Franklin Delano Roosevelt 
was running, and he’s one of the presidents, 
maybe one of the few presidents, that had 
long coattails, and he brought many people 
along with him, and included among that 
group were Pat McCarran because he [FDR] 



Georgetown University Law School 


29 


was helpful to Senator McCarran. And the 
state went overwhelmingly Democratic 
in that particular election year. And not 
only Franklin Delano Roosevelt, but also 
Pat McCarran who then started out on a 
spectacular career. I don’t think that you can 
characterize it any other way. He started out 
as a very loyal Democrat, loyal Rooseveltian, 
but it didn’t take long for that to kind of switch 
a little here and there. And so he was always 
an independent man, and they had their 
difference over “court packing” and things 
of that kind. 

This was the day of course of our two 
very fine and distinguished Nevada senators. 
They were pretty much at their peak. One was 
Key Pittman, senior senator from Nevada, 
and the statesman and the “silver orator” 
and the very distinguished lawyer—born in 
Vicksburg, Mississippi and then gone and 
spent early legal days in Alaska and then 
had come down from Alaska into Tonopah 
where he was highly successful as a lawyer. 
And then was elected as—first selected by the 
state legislature before the direct primaries 
and later on elected many, many times, served 
about second or third in years of service of 
any of our U.S. senators. And of course then 
Pat McCarran was just starting out during the 
time that I was working there. It was through 
him that I secured my employment first as 
an elevator operator and then as a sergeant - 
[at] -arms. And Pat McCarran made his mark 
early and improved on it as he served for so 
many years in the United States Senate. He 
was a very famous criminal lawyer, one of the 
finest in the West; and he put his oratorical 
talents to great use on the floor of the Senate 
and was very persuasive, and he came there 
during the election of FDR and served very 
closely with him in the early years and later 
they had falling-outs over various problems, 
various issues that came before them, and 


their friendship was tested many times. They 
were never close pals and buddies, but they 
had been when they first started out, both 
at the same time in the government of the 
United States. 

But Key Pittman was always very close 
to FDR. I think he was mentioned a number 
of times in some of the Roosevelt stories and 
biographies. And of course because of his 
years of service in the United States Senate, 
he was selected as the pro tern of the United 
States Senate, and he served in that capacity 
for many, many years and was particularly 
well-known because of his forewarnings of the 
dangers of international conflict, particularly 
with Japan. And he sounded that warning and 
claimed that we were sending scrap iron and 
sending iron ore to Japan which would later 
come back to us in the form of bullets. And 
this was all too prophetic, and came about as 
Senator Key Pittman had warned. He made 
that warning many times in many speeches, 
so it’s well documented. 

As Chairman of the Foreign Relations 
Committee, he occupied a very strategic, very 
important position in the international affairs 
of our country. He was not an easy man to 
know personally. Maybe I was lookin’ at him 
through different colored glasses because 
I was simply a page in effect (or a deputy 
sergeant- tat] -arms in actual name, but it was 
a page job). And then later viewed him as a law 
student, and then later as a practicing lawyer 
and deputy attorney general of Nevada. And 
over those years I never felt very close to Key 
Pittman. He was much closer to my father. 

Employment was very hard to come 
by. Nevada had suffered bank failures. The 
problem in Nevada was pretty much at a low 
ebb there, as much as a low ebb in Nevada 
ever gets. It seems to survive depressions 
very well, at least in my experience and not 
feel the adversity as other larger and more 



30 


Alan Bible 


populated states do. We seem to ride the crest 
very well and never really feel the real effects 
of a depression. That was a rough depression 
nationwide, but not too badly felt in Nevada, 
though felt to some degree. 

It was during that period of time that I 
for the first time became acquainted with 
Congressman James Scrugham, the third 
member of the congressional team of Pittman 
and McCarran and Scrugham. And I got to 
know him subsequently in later life very, 
very well. He was always extremely helpful 
to me and extremely friendly. His right 
hand man during all of the times that I have 
known him was Orrin Davie, who served as 
his administrative secretary for many years; 
and then later after Jim Scrugham was dead, 
I was in a position where I could give Orrin 
Davie employment, which I did. He ran my 
Reno office for many years. So these were 
the thumbnail sketches of the triumvirate of 
Nevada representation when I first went to 
Washington or shortly after I first went there. 
And I knew all three of those men very well 
in subsequent years, and as my own career 
evolved. 

Jim Scrugham, of course, had one of 
the most distinguished of our Nevada 
careers. He was a professor at the University 
of Nevada. He served at the University of 
Nevada School of Engineering for a number 
of years, and one of the main buildings at 
the Nevada campus is named after him, the 
Scrugham Engineering building. He served 
as state engineer in Nevada. He later became 
the governor of Nevada. He later than that 
became a congressman from Nevada, and 
even later than that he became a U.S. senator 
from Nevada. And I believe I’m correct in 
saying that he is the only man in our Nevada 
history that’s held that many, the top three 
positions in the state of Nevada. He was not 
an impressive speaker, on the contrary was a 


poor speaker, but he had a great faculty and 
knack of making friends. I believe he probably 
knew as many old prospectors and mining 
men and men off the beaten paths of Nevada 
and the rural mining camps as any one man. 

Of course all of us who have served 
Nevada in Washington have tried to meet as 
many people off the beaten path as we can 
because it’s rather an occasion for someone 
from Washington to go into some of these 
out-of-the-way mining camps. And of course 
it’s talked about in the bars and the saloons 
and the courthouse for many months after 
the visit. And they follow their congressional 
leaders very closely as well as their own 
county and state leaders. But each of these 
men, Pittman and McCarran and Scrugham, 
were past masters at getting into the little out- 
of-the-way places. 

And of course the longer they stayed in 
Washington, the more seniority they acquired 
and the less frequent were their visits back 
to their state and to the mining camps. And 
I know they have told me and what I have 
encountered myself: that’s always one of the 
main criticisms of anyone who serves on the 
Washington level is that they haven’t been 
home as often as they should, they’ve forgotten 
the people back here—they’re accused of 
this—they’ve forgotten their people back 
here and now they’ve got high hat and never 
come to their home towns. And of course 
that is an exaggerated criticism. It’s one that’s 
rather normal I guess. It’s awfully hard to meet 
because then if you do go home and come 
home frequently, then some vote comes up 
in Washington and you probably should have 
been in Washington and then you’re accused 
of ducking a vote and being in Nevada when 
you should have been in Washington. 

It’s one of the most complicated problems 
to deal with, and the one thing that has made 
it easier over the years is the advent of the jet 



Georgetown University Law School 


31 


airplane that jets you back and forth across 
the country in a matter of hours so that you 
can pick your spots, to use the vernacular, 
and be home when you should be home 
to county fairs and the graduations and 
commencements and the admission days and 
events that command some attendance, either 
the north or south of the state and likewise 
be in Washington when you have important 
votes. 

I’ve always felt that it was not necessary 
to make a hundred percent record in voting. 
And of course there’s other senators alive and 
working today in Washington, I believe that 
haven’t missed a vote in years. Bill Proxmire’s 
name comes to mind; and the last time I had 
seen his voting record, he had had a perfect 
voting record for a longer period of time 
than anybody else. Margaret Chase Smith, 
able senator from Maine, took great pride in 
never having missed a vote in a great number 
of years. And she held the record for awhile. 
But my philosophy was that I should be in 
Washington voting on the critical issues that 
come up; there’s a tendency today and it seems 
to be increasing, to practically have a roll 
call of every question that comes up, and of 
course the more embarrassing the question, 
the more roll calls you have because they want 
everybody to be counted. And I approve of 
that, but it does require constant attention to 
the issues that are coming up. 

Maybe we’re over-governed. Lots of 
people think we are, and they may be right. 
But by the same token, the population has 
increased so much nationwide and even more 
so in the state of Nevada. When I first got 
into politics I think Nevada had about the 
old saying of “one square person for every 
square mile” or something like a hundred 
and ten thousand people, and today we have 
probably about five tines that many, probably 
about five hundred and fifty thousand people 


in Nevada and growing by leaps and bounds 
particularly in the two pivotal areas of the 
state, Reno and Las Vegas, with Las Vegas out¬ 
distancing Reno by I guess about sixty-forty 
ratio or out-distancing the rest of the state 
really, but a margin of some sixty to forty. I 
think there’s about sixty percent of the people 
in Nevada are in Clark County and balanced 
with forty percent are in the balance of the 
state, and with Reno growing very rapidly, 
but not quite as rapidly as Las Vegas. And that 
has held right to this day, and of course the 
political implications of that are rather clear 
that the balance of political power lies with 
Clark County; if they were to stand together 
and vote together which they never seem to 
do, they could absolutely control the state, but 
they fall apart and have differences of opinion 
just as every other county does; so I guess that 
keeps the balance pretty well evened up. 

But those are developments that one sees 
as they look at Pittman and McCarran and 
Scrugham from the start of my political career 
up to the present day, and the contrast that 
you have with the present day congressional 
team of Cannon and Laxalt and Santini. It’s 
quite a contrast in style and in attention to 
constituent needs. Of course the advent of 
the television has supplanted the earlier day 
methods to a great extent because the wise 
person used television frequently, but not 
to excess in getting his message back to his 
home people. So those are contrasts in style 
and tied very largely to the improvements 
in communications that we have today in 
our media television. It has had as much 
impact on political thinking and political 
campaigning as any one thing. Of course it 
also can be a deathly type of an invention 
because some people project on the tube very 
well and others do not. Some people should 
use television; others are far better of f not to 
use it. So I think that is another thing that has 



32 


Alan Bible 


changed since the days that I mentioned when 
I first became acquainted with the political 
figures of Nevada. 

They were all different stylists in their own 
right. Pittman being very sedate and proper, 
and he had a colorful career. They all had a bit 
of an addiction to a drink now and then which 
seems to be an established course of life and 
particularly among politicians, and they all 
used it to varying degrees, and I assume with 
varying successes or failures as the case might 
be. They were never particularly simpatico 
during the time that I knew them. They always 
had their differences. They probably were too 
much individualists. And they all wanted 
the headlines, but they didn’t particularly 
want to share them, which always seems to 
me there’s plenty of glory for everybody to 
share. And in reverse, if things go bad, there’s 
misery loves company, and there’s always 
someone can share the blame. They were all 
individualists of the first order, and there were 
many disagreements between them. When 
the chips were down, I don’t think there’s any 
doubt but what they all worked for the best of 
their nation as they saw it and the best of their 
state as they saw it. But on individual items 
there were frequent discussions and debates 
and disagreements, and some of the early 
exchanges between the three of them, and 
particularly between Pittman and McCarran, 
I think were rather bitter. 

And as one analyzes political figures and 
attempts to see what makes them tick and 
why they were successful and where their 
problems happened to he, I think it primarily 
stemmed mainly from the people that they 
had around them, the staff people, and the 
people who were sayin’, “Well, McCarran is 
gettin’ the credit for this and you did the job.” 
That was always a common complaint and 
one which all of us in political life have heard 
from time to time. 


I did my best—not trying to brag about it 
at all—but simply for the good of the state to 
have regular congressional meetings and to 
announce things as a team, a congressional 
team. And that works at times and then falls 
apart at times. I think if you can accomplish 
that the average person doesn’t care whether 
it’s A, B or C that gets the job done, as long as 
they get the job done for the state of Nevada, 
for example, or for the communities within 
the state. But they had many disagreements 
on that, and they certainly were never close as 
a team. I don’t know if there’s any particular 
remedy for it. It’s a matter of individuals and a 
matter of each rather looking out for his own 
good because if they don’t nobody else will; so 
it’s rather an imponderable problem. You can 
set the ideal, and your political scientists can 
write about the ideal situation, but in practice, 
particularly I think in a small state where 
so many people get to know you and know 
you on a first name basis, I think it becomes 
increasingly difficult. 

Was there some really basic thing that any of 
them ever told you that had caused this, like the 
1916 struggle between McCarran and Pittman? 

No, I think it was just something that just 
happened to come about because they were 
competitive and they were individuals and 
they each wanted headlines themselves; they 
didn’t want to share them. And I don’t know 
that they ever pinpointed any one particular 
thing. Of course again I think particularly in 
McCarran-Pittman conflicts (and there were 
many of them over their entire careers and 
life) that it was largely kept alive and maybe 
flamed more than it normally would be by 
people in each camp sayin, “Well that so-and- 
so is doing this to you and he doesn’t go up 
in the state and tells people what a great man 
you are or how much you’re helpin’ about it; 



Georgetown University Law School 


33 


all he does is talk about himself and rather 
downplays you.” So that can always be fanned 
by, as I indicated earlier, by the people around 
any particular candidate. I think that’s just a 
fact of life, and I don’t know of any way that 
you particularly prevent it. 

Theirs was rather intense because they 
were two very intense men and two very 
dominating men, and each wanted their full 
share of the glory of Nevada; and I think each 
secured it, very frankly as you look back at it. 
And I don’t know who you’d rate the greatest 
of the two or if you rate the two greater. I 
suppose most people would probably figure 
McCarran was a greater figure than Pittman, 
but a lot of strong Pittman fans would say, 
“Well he was a greater man than McCarran.” 
It’s the age-old discussion—who was greater 
Washington or Lincoln? They were both 
great, and I don’t think you give them a one- 
two classification. I guess it was just the urge 
of being preeminent. It’s a doggone good 
question, but I don’t know the answer to it. 
And Jim Scrugham was a very, very popular 
individual as indicated by his election to so 
many top-notch political positions. But he 
wanted his share of the credit, and somebody 
got it rather than the other individual; then 
there was animosity’s vote there and fired 
again and fanned again by people around him 
saying, “Well, you did the work, but he took 
the credit.” And of course that’s [chuckles] 
always—it’s just a part of the game of politics I 
guess. It’s unfortunate, but it does occur. They 
had many, many tiffs and arguments, but in 
the final analysis they were all for Nevada, 
and I think they worked to the betterment 
of Nevada. 

I think I told you one of the things that 
remained in my mind over many years was 
the talk that Jim Scrugham made in one of 
his campaigns for reelection to the Congress 
when he was in Carson City and told about 


his finding a great use for sagebrush, how 
they could extract from the sagebrush 
something the equivalent of rubber. And he 
visualized the entire state of Nevada being a 
rubber producer and reducing sagebrush to 
automobiles tires. And this talk was made 
in one of the larger halls over in Carson 
City during one of his main campaigns for 
reelection to the Congress, and he had the 
little ball about the size of a ball that you 
bounce I guess in playing jacks or something, 
some such similar size or a large marble. 
And he was bouncing it around on the table, 
and it got away from him and bounced all 
the way across the floor, and here was the 
congressman mumbling away. And I use the 
word mumble advisedly because he rather 
talked with a mumble. He was down on the 
floor crawling around trying to retrieve this 
rubber ball, and I think he got a bigger hand 
on that than probably anything he said. He 
was not a good speaker, but he knew his 
facts and he had vision. And this is one of the 
areas where he had a lot of vision, Of course 
he was very, very strong on creating parks 
and recreation areas throughout the state of 
Nevada. And he was instrumental particularly 
in the southern part of the state and Lincoln 
County and in sponsoring and carrying 
forward the program to develop parks for use 
of people in many, many areas of Nevada. So 
he was very helpful in that. 

And there are many stories I could tell 
about Senator McCarran. I remember that in 
one of his campaigns (I was workin for him 
then, I was still in law school) and we were 
driving around the state, and he would give 
me messages to deliver to the mayor or the 
various leaders and the various communities 
as to what was happening and particularly 
what he wanted them to do. And he always 
had some project in mind about “I want,” for 
example, “Archie Grant elected as governor 



34 


Alan Bible 


of the state because he’s on my team, and I 
want him as the governor.” And I delivered 
that message to many people. Archie Grant 
was a very distinguished citizen in his own 
right, served as regent of the University of 
Nevada for many years, leading citizen of 
Clark County and would have been a splendid 
governor, but he was a university professor in 
that field. But he tried it, I think, several times. 
But those were the type of messages that 
were given to me by Pat McCarran to leading 
citizens of the state and particularly built 
around the so-called “McCarran machine.” 

And if there were any machines in Nevada, 
I think he’s the closest of having had one. I 
know others tried it, but I don’t think with 
the same success. They called the opposition 
camp the Pittman camp, and they called the 
McCarran camp the McCarran camp. And of 
all the politicians that I’ve known in my years 
of service in Nevada, he’s the closest man to 
ever having had a machine. And he did have 
a machine. He made you aware of it, and he 
ruled [with] an iron hand—always, I think, 
with the overriding thought of what was 
good for the state of Nevada, is good for Pat 
McCarran. And he has many monuments to 
indicate where his production was the most 
successful, and his machine was a successful 
machine during his entire life. He had the 
reputation of having made very fast and 
devoted friends and also of having made very 
deep and bitter enemies. And I think that 
would characterize the man. 

It was that very power that led to so many 
projects, not only in the state of Nevada, but 
nationally. He was the father, really, of aviation; 
and just as one example, he was the terror of 
the Justice Department on his immigration 
bill, the McCarran-Walter immigration bill. 
And he was against the court packing, and 
that’s where one of the first real rifts between 
FDR and Pat McCarran arose, was over the 


court packing. He was against packing the 
Court for political purposes and said so and 
fought arm-in-arm with Walter George of 
Georgia and Tydings of Maryland and other 
senators who were similarly minded, and I 
think correctly minded. And they won that 
battle, so he made a reputation in many areas. 

Well, those are just a couple of them that 
occur to me right now. But having been a 
member of his team, and a proud member, 
having gone from law school into his law 
office, I certainly got to know him extremely 
well, and traveled with him day after day on 
many, many occasions. He knew a fabulous 
amount of people in Nevada, and it was 
certainly a great help to me as I went into 
politics myself in later years, because I was 
tabbed as a McCarran boy. And it was also 
through my associations, I became acquainted 
with most of his right-hand people, and it 
stood me in good stead, needless to say, in 
years to come. 

Since you have opened this subject about his 
righthand people, would you like to talk a little 
about Pete Petersen and his work, and about 
Norman Biltz and about Ed Converse and some 
of the others ? This bipartisan situation that has 
always interested the political scientists. 

Yes, Pat McCarran in his early years in 
attempting to reach the senatorship [had] 
been rebuffed a number of times and had been 
unsuccessful in getting on the inside of the 
Democratic party; and earlier than McCarran 
s entry into politics, there had been the very 
distinct cleavage in Nevada where there was 
a group of people who believed pretty much 
in a bipartisan political team. And this was 
particularly true during the early days of 
Oddie and Pittman. Now Oddie and Pittman 
were U.S. senators. One was a Democrat, and 
one was a Republican, and they had pretty 



Georgetown University Law School 


35 


much—though they played the Republican 
party and they also played the Democratic 
party they very much enjoyed a bipartisan 
friendship. And it was always claimed that 
that pretty much stemmed from the law office 
of Woodburn and Thatcher, that they were the 
kingpins in putting together a Republican- 
Democratic, top-level team in the state of 
Nevada, so that they could have control over 
a senator no matter who the president of 
the United States was. If he was a Democrat, 
theyd have the Democratic man, Pittman; 
and if he was a Republican, theyd have the 
Republican man, Tasker Oddie. 

This was the first bipartisan machine in 
Nevada, and existed for many years and was 
really broken up, I think, by the election of 
Pat McCarran who was no—he wasn’t one 
of their favorites. They were on opposite 
sides of the fence, but after Pat McCarran 
was elected and he served and headed up the 
Democratic party and did very well, then he, 
too, I think leaned rather heavily on certain 
people within Nevada who were registered as 
Republicans, but were always—they were Pat 
McCarran Republicans. And one could name 
many people from throughout Nevada that 
would fit into that category, and they were 
always supportin’ him. This was mainly true of 
many of the cattle and sheep men throughout 
the state who were Republican registered, 
but who were also very strong Republican 
for McCarran supporters. That carried on 
through all of his political career, and of 
course that made many of the strong party 
people in the Democratic party a little suspect 
of Senator McCarran and weakened him 
somewhat. But on balance he had so many 
solid friends within the Democratic party 
and so many solid friends in the Republican 
party that he could pretty much have a 
McCarran party, which is what he had. And 
it was made up primarily of Democrats, but 


also of Republicans as well, so they combined 
at times of election to support McCarran and 
some of them did it—most of them actually 
did it openly and without any apology at all. 
They just said, “Well, he’s the best man that 
we have for Nevada and we’re for him.” So he 
profited by that a great deal. 

I think his master politician was Pete 
Petersen, who’d be his contact man in Nevada. 
Pete had a very, very wonderful way of 
handling people and not only handling people, 
but diagnosing political problems, far better I 
think than Senator McCarran himself because 
he could see danger signs, and he was the eyes 
and the ears for Pat McCarran in the state of 
Nevada. Many other people tried to claim that, 
but I think the credit goes to Pete Petersen. And 
he was devoted to McCarran; McCarran could 
almost do no wrong, lie was always on the go. 
He started out as a labor leader and organized 
a little club made up of a few select people in 
this area of the state, who also practically all 
of them were political figures and held various 
jobs. Oak-We-No, as I recall, was the name 
of this little organization; and it was made 
up of such people as Pete Petersen. There’s 
Matt Murphy, and state mining inspector; 
there’s George Allard who was public service 
commissioner. It was made up of people of that 
character with a few businessmen in it. And 
then again, they were just a proliferation or an 
extension of the eyes and ears of Pete Petersen. 
Pete Petersen was really the guiding light of this 
little club, and in the early years we met rather 
regularly and later on it fell into disuse as clubs 
of that kind will. But we had an identifying 
pin that we wore showing we were a member 
of the Oak-We-No club. And it had some 
translatable meaning which I unfortunately 
don’t remember. It meant something—eyes 
and ears for Pat or something like that, and 
was used by him rather effectively through 
campaign periods. 



36 


Alan Bible 


Later on in life he was of assistance to 
Norman Biltz, and primarily through Johnny 
Mueller and Eva Adams. They all became a 
part of the McCarran machine, furnished 
him with the “sinews of war” (which would 
be money), and were consulted more often 
in later years by McCarran I think even than 
maybe Pete Petersen. Pete Petersen was the 
top man for many years, but I think in later 
years he was supplanted by both John Mueller 
and then Norman Blitz. There wasn’t any 
falling out about it—it was just a gradual 
transition, but they took over more and more 
power. And I think as they took over more 
and more power on behalf of McCarran, 
that Pete Petersen had a lesser role, but he 
was postmaster in Reno for many years and 
was an excellent postmaster. And this was 
a great area from which to work because 
he had reports backed by the postmasters 
around the state of how Senator McCarran 
stood or what he’d done right or wrong. 
So it was a very effective organization, and 
then was a great help to him. And then of 
course he—through the cattlemen, and 
the sheepmen, and through the leading 
mining men of the state, all of whom almost 
invariably were Republican-oriented, he 
combined his top-level Republican advisors 
with the Democratic party both through the 
party and outside the party to supplement 
and put together a machine that combined a 
little bit of everything and made him such an 
effective man. 

And they’d attack that time and time 
again and attempting to destroy him. One of 
his opponents in an earlier campaign, I guess 
maybe his second campaign or third, he was 
pictured in ads (and I’ll have to run one of 
these down because I thought it was the best 
political ad I’ve ever seen). It was made up 
of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, and 
had a great big picture of McCarran dressed 


up as Snow White and his Seven Dwarfs. 
I happened to be honored by bein’ one. I 
was called “Dopey” for years as a result of 
it; but among the dwarfs who have come 
back that were his henchmen, one was Pete 
Petersen. [Miles N.] Jack Pike was a member 
of it. Governor Carville was a member of it. I 
happened to be selected as one of the dwarfs. 
It received wide circulation throughout the 
state of Nevada. I always thought it helped 
him more than it hurt him, but he took rather 
a dim view of being set up as “Snow White.” 
And I had many of my close friends tell 
me, “Well, Dopey is just the right word for 
you.” So that was one of the early day parts 
of the campaign. And it was that type of an 
organization at which Pat McCarran was a 
past master. And of course with seniority 
came more power, and he built it well. But 
that was Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. 
Gosh, he got mad. 

And then of course he and Carville, as 
you know, had a very deep and bitter falling 
out. They had a lot of rough campaigns back 
then. They had the Pope over the Capitol 
running the state of Nevada because Carville 
was a very strong Catholic (his wife was far 
stronger I guess), but anyway they spent lots 
of time with the Pope and the Bishop and all 
of them. There’s a strong Masonic influence 
in Nevada, and it was very bitter back then. 
Thank goodness it seems to have vanished. 
People don’t worry about that so much any 
more, but there was a time when it was very 
bitter. (I’m a Mason—been a Mason all my 
life—they even sometimes bring it up in the 
lodge. I’m not a very good lodge member, 
needless to say.) 

Senator McCarran was a man that 
was very accustomed to telling everybody 
exactly what to do and how to do it, and 
then persuading them if he could. And if he 
couldn’t persuade them, he’d demand it. And 



Georgetown University Law School 


37 


he was a man of great sensibilities and great 
pride (and which, I’m sure, considering his 
career as a whole—brilliance—was justified). 
A number of instances come to mind. I can 
remember the occasion when Mayor [C. 
D.] Baker of Las Vegas, who happened to 
be on the other side of the political fence 
from McCarran’ s, came into some event. 
I don’t know whether it was a Democratic 
convention or it was some civic event, and 
Pat McCarran was there, and Baker came in. 
Pat McCarran at that time was feuding with 
Mayor Baker. And as soon as Mayor Baker 
came in, Pat McCarran got up and left. And 
there were incidents like that that always were 
seized upon by the alert newspapermen and 
headlined. 

And another occasion that I shall never 
forget was when the state convention was 
being held in Ely, and McCarran was to have 
some role in it, but he felt slighted. He’d driven 
over there, and he wasn’t given the honors or 
the acclaim or the recognition that he thought 
he should have. And so he drove over one 
day, and he sized up the situation. It looked 
like an unfriendly convention to him. And 
he went into the opening meeting and was 
hardly recognized, so he simply got in his 
car and drove back to Reno and just skipped 
the whole convention. And there were many 
instances like that over his life. Most times he 
was properly recognized and in accordance 
with what he felt was his acclaim. 

He had a habit that always interested me 
because so very few men could do it. But he 
would wait for the strategic moment for an 
entry and never be there on time or ahead 
of time. He’d wait and everybody’d get a little 
impatient wondering when Pat McCarran 
was gonna show. All of a sudden at that magic 
hour, he’d seem to just come into the hall, into 
the occasion; and it was as if it were staged. 
And he had that presence. And that no doubt 


came about from his early day training as a 
marvelous criminal lawyer. He had the sense 
of what attracted the people and why he 
received this recognition. But he did it many, 
many times and quite often to the disgust of 
those who were handling the meeting, but it 
didn’t bother him. 

And he was a great orator, and he could 
command the attention of a crowd and always 
made terrific speeches. But no matter how 
many speakers there were on the program, 
there was only—it all had to be headed toward 
his final grand entry and to his final speech 
which would be the commanding of—the 
greatest speech of all of them. And he did 
that with great finesse and great effect, I might 
say. And he enjoyed that to no end. He was 
always worried about just how big a hand he 
was gonna get. So we always had a few people 
around that might kind of lead the applause 
a bit, though he could get spontaneous 
applause just because of the way he told his 
stories. Like all politicians, he told most of his 
political stories over and over again in various 
places, so as to attempt not to get repetitive. 
But he was a great story teller. He, invariably 
it seemed, got a fine round of applause. You 
never had quite the feeling of the impressive 
man in speaking that he was when television 
came in, because you couldn’t carry a personal 
touch that he had in the television as you 
could in a command performance when he 
was at his very best. 

Of the many men with whom I’ve served 
over the years as a U.S. senator, Pat McCarran 
looked more like a U.S. senator than anybody. 
He was built well. He was stocky, and he had 
a beautiful white mane of hair. And when he 
came into the Senate chambers in Washington 
during his tenure as senator, there was no 
question in the world but at least there was 
one man in the group that was a senator. 
And it certainly would be Pat McCarran. He 



38 


Alan Bible 


looked and he acted like a U.S. senator, and he 
carried that stage presence wherever he went. 
And hed always delay just enough to make it 
effective. That was one of his mannerisms that 
helped him a great deal. 

But he had that faculty as I said earlier 
of making fast friends and bitter enemies. 
And this happened—Governor Carville and 
Senator McCarran were both Catholics. They 
were both lawyers. They were both Nevadans, 
and Pat McCarran I think had more to do 
with making Governor Carville governor 
than any one man in the state of Nevada. 
And that friendship lasted for awhile, but 
Pat McCarran attempted to overdominate, 
I believe, Governor Carville; and Governor 
Carville, being a proud and capable individual 
of his own, resented that. And as the years 
went along there was a widening between the 
two, and they later had a complete political 
fallout which was witnessed pretty much by 
all the state of Nevada. They tried to keep it 
a little undercover, but in a state such as ours 
that just doesn’t work out. I don’t know where 
the straw was that broke the camel’s back, 
but in any event they ended up not on the 
friendliest terms. 

And of course Pat McCarran was insistent 
on the appointment of Governor Carville, who 
was a judge in Elko, being the U.S. attorney. 
And this was much sought after by Bill Boyle, 
who was another fine lawyer from Reno, and 
a great Pittman man. And so neither one for 
a long time would agree upon the other’s 
choice of a U.S. attorney, and an objection by 
any U.S. senator from the man’s own home 
state would be fatal to his appointment even 
though you could make the objection and it 
could be overridden by a vote. It’s an inviolate 
rule of the Senate that if the senator from 
that state objects to the appointment of a U.S. 
attorney, for example, or a federal judge, for 
example, that the appointment will not move 


forward. And so McCarran effectively used 
this, and said, “If you send the name of Bill 
Boyle up, I will object, personally object on 
the grounds that he’s personally objectionable 
to me.” And that was effective in blocking his 
appointment. And so Carville became the U.S. 
attorney. He was associated in the prosecution 
of McKay and Graham, and it was a successful 
prosecution. And that was his start of a fine 
campaign for governor of the state, and he 
was elected as governor of the state. And 
as indicated, they started out very friendly. 
Many McCarran appointments were made 
by Governor Carville. They served extremely 
well. Dick Sheehy is one name that comes to 
mind. He was selected as warden of the state 
penitentiary. He was primarily a McCarran 
man, and his was a recommendation of 
Senator McCarran to Governor Carville, and 
Governor Carville followed it. 

And they were setting out as I see it 
looking back at it, as a beautiful Washington- 
Nevada team; but it came apart at the seams 
ultimately. And they became rather bitter 
enemies actually. So that’s another episode 
that occurs to me. And Governor Carville 
later went on to seek higher office and was 
unsuccessful in doing so primarily because of 
Senator McCarran, who was instrumental in 
getting Berkeley Bunker to run against him, 
and then that was the split in the Democratic 
party that made the election of Molly Malone 
possible. So those are incidents in these early 
day—these earlier day politicians that come 
to me now. And I’m sure that McCarran is the 
one that got Bunker to run. And of course he 
shouldn’t ever have run, but he did, and that 
split it up. At least that’s the way I’ve always felt. 



4 

Early Career 


The Law Firm of McCarran, 

Rice, and Bible 

My graduation in 1934 from Georgetown 
Law School in really in the depth of the 
Depression nationwide (and felt in this state 
to a less limited extent, as I indicated in earlier 
recitals) during that period of time, made it 
very clear to me the first thing I wanted to do 
when I graduated was to secure employment 
as soon as I could. Fortunately for me, Senator 
McCarran wanted me to stay on for a period 
of time until I could find some law firm with 
whom I might associate. He had been having 
some difficulties with some of his partners. 
So it was only a short time after I graduated 
in the spring of nineteen hundred and thirty- 
four that the opportunity came to me to go 
into his law firm and to join with another 
young, aspiring lawyer by the name of Gordon 
Rice. And so from that necessity on Senator 
McCarran s part to try to build up and beef 
up his own law office in Reno, we formed 
the law firm of McCarran, Rice, and Bible. 
We were located at 16 East Second Street in 


Reno, which had been Senator McCarran’s 
old law office for quite a number of years. We 
continued on in that location. 

Gordon Rice was a Sparks boy, born and 
raised there, went to the University of Nevada 
for a while. He had not finished law school, 
but he studied in the correspondence course 
’til he took the Bar in the fall of nineteen 
hundred and thirty-five. I had taken it in 
April of 1935, and was admitted shortly 
thereafter. They graded the exams rather 
quickly. It wasn’t a large class taking it, and I 
do remember that the only two of us who were 
admitted in April of 1935 was Grant Bowen, 
a very distinguished Washoe County jurist 
and a man who has brought distinction to 
himself and to the practice of law and to the 
judiciary because of his very able handling of 
cases in the Reno area. He’s been a judge now 
for a good many years, and I guess is close to 
retirement because we’re in about the same 
age group. And we had known each other 
through high school days and college days, 
and he went to Northwestern, I believe, law 
school, whereas I had gone to Georgetown. 



40 


Alan Bible 


But anyway, we both took the Bar exam in 
April or the spring I should say of nineteen 
hundred and thirty-five. We were the only 
two that were admitted in that spring class. 

The fall class was the one in which Gordon 
Rice had taken the Bar exam, and he was 
also successful and admitted to law in ’35. 
So in that general range of time, we became 
practicing lawyers in Nevada and formed this 
law partnership of McCarran, Rice, and Bible. 
McCarran furnished the political strength, 
and Gordon Rice furnished the material 
strength, and Bible furnished the spiritual 
strength. So we had a combination of those 
three elements in our law firm, those three— 
spiritual and political and the material. 

The law firm as such was pretty run-down 
at the time that we went into it, because Senator 
McCarran as a lawyer was one of the greatest 
and as a jurist was one of the greatest, but it 
was pretty much of an individual attention 
that he gave to the firm that made it so—that 
made the firm whatever—whatever heights it 
might have achieved. But it depended upon 
his own personal attention, his appearing in 
court, and his name. So we had our work cut 
out for us, and we did the best to keep the firm 
going, and I’m sure not in the manner that 
would have occurred if Senator McCarran 
had been active in the firm. He was completely 
inactive because of his duties in Washington, 
D.C., so the burden fell on Gordon Rice and 
on myself, and we did the best we could to 
keep it going and bring in some revenue, at 
least enough revenue to pay the bills and get 
our own individual starts. 

Gordon Rice was one of the ablest young 
men that I’ve ever been associated with. 
Throughout his legal career and his judicial 
career (because he was later a judge on the 
Washoe County bench) he always felt, I think, 
a little inferiority complex because he did 
not hold a law degree from a school. And I 


think that always bothered him a bit, but I’ve 
watched his work, I’ve been associated with 
his work, and I think that he’s as capable a 
lawyer as you can find in the Rena area. He 
had his ups and his downs as probably we all 
do, but he is a top-notch lawyer, great in front 
of a jury, and particularly great in preparing 
briefs and arguing cases on law. He’s a student 
of the law. He follows it very closely and does 
a very, very effective job and has over all the 
years. His ambition was to become a judge 
and once having realized that ambition, 
he—it didn’t have the action and didn’t have 
the challenges that being a lawyer had, so he 
retired from his judgeship just not too, long 
after he was elected. I forget exactly how many 
years he was on the bench, but I don’t think 
it could have been over one term. And he got 
back to the active practice of law. 

I actually associated myself with him— 
was in court with him for some few cases, 
not any great number because it seemed that 
I was leaning more and more to the political 
side of the wall rather than the actual legal 
side. It wasn’t long before I became district 
attorney of Virginia City and under attorney 
general which had some administrative law in 
it, which had some actual law in it, and which 
had a considerable amount of politics in it. So 
I seemed to have started out, I really believe, 
to just be a straight lawyer and be one of the 
best in the world, but I seemed to get more 
and more drawn into the political side and 
ended up of course on the political side. There 
is the old saying about law being a jealous 
mistress and that certainly is true because 
I think you have to make up your mind to 
be one or the other. I don’t think other than 
in your early days of initiation into law that 
you can do much else in the way of politics, 
because you have to devote full time to law, 
keeping up with the decisions and the appeals, 
and the over rulings and the affirming of cases 



Early Career 


41 


so you know exactly what the law is. And it’s 
pretty hard in this complex and complicated 
society in which we live to really know what 
the law is because it is constantly changing. 
It doesn’t stand still, and judges of differing 
ideologies and different philosophies rule 
differently on certain factual setups, and the 
U.S. Supreme Court is as good an example of 
that as anybody. Any group of men assembled 
together to try and interpret the law could say 
what it was. The narrowness of the decisions 
and the many five-four decisions I think are 
indicative of that. 

This was the climate in which we launched 
the law firm of McCarran, Rice, and Bible. It 
must have been in 1935.1 was in the law office 
in Reno for just a short period of time when 
there was a vacancy in Virginia City. And 
the vacancy was created by the resignation of 
Howard Gray, W. Howard Gray, a man about 
ten years older than I am and a very splendid 
lawyer. And there was a vacancy in the deputy 
attorney general’s position in Carson City, so 
he accepted that which created the Virginia 
City vacancy. And then through the good 
offices of Senator McCarran and Bill Boyle, 
who had been an early-day district attorney 
in Virginia City, the job was offered to me; 
and I was successful in getting it. 

As I recall, I went to Virginia City in 
about September of that year 1935. So from 
’34 into ’35, it was a short period of time 
where I actually did very little practicing in 
Reno. The firm carried on under that name 
for some period of time. But the active work 
was carried on by Gordon Rice. Gordon, 
as I say, thought he wanted to become a 
judge, did become a judge, handled himself 
very well as a judge, but wanted to get back 
into the active practice of law. And he has 
carried that on successfully, built himself a 
very fine individual law office. A good deal 
like Pat McCarran, he was sought because 


of his ability in front of jurors and his own 
individual legal expertise and not because he 
was a member of any firm, though he has had 
others in with him from time to time. He’s 
primarily an individual, is selected because 
of the fact that he is such a fine individual 
lawyer and has pretty much practiced in that 
context over all of the years. We’ve always 
been close and dear friends and still are. I’ve 
always considered him a top-notch lawyer, 
would never hesitate for a moment on any 
legal problem that I might have to go to him 
and enlist his aid and hire him as a lawyer, 
such is my confidence in his ability. 

Because of his joining with Pat McCarran, 
as I had joined, we were pretty much 
Democratic-oriented. In fact I might say 
we were entirely Democratic-oriented f 
chuckling] because if we weren’t we probably 
wouldn’t have lasted with Pat McCarran very 
long. But my actual legal experiences during 
the time that—for that short period of time 
in which I was actually in Reno, was rather 
limited. 

District Attorney of Storey County 

The vacancy came about in Virginia 
City because Howard Gray was offered the 
job of deputy attorney general of the state, 
a position which he immediately accepted 
and created the vacancy in Virginia City. My 
main sponsors were Bill Boyle and Senator 
Pat McCarran, and they went to bat for me 
with the county commissioners who held 
the power of appointments. So in September 
of nineteen hundred and thirty-five I found 
myself on the way to Virginia City, and of 
course had very little background in the 
practice of law because I had just been 
admitted in April of that year. 

And I shall never forget the first case that 
I had when I accepted the appointment. It 



42 


Alan Bible 


was the case of the deputy sheriff having been 
locked in his own jail by a young Navy man 
who had gone AWOL. And of course this was 
an affront to the good citizens of Virginia City 
and Storey County that they would treat the 
deputy sheriff in that manner. And so this is 
the first case I had—was to try to wreak justice 
on the Navy boy who had done really nothing 
much, nothing much more than get himself 
drunk; and the deputy sheriff had taken him 
up to the jail to lock him in, found the table 
turned on him and himself locked in. He was 
one of the most lovable men I’ve ever known, 
and of course was very much embarrassed 
by the fact that this had happened to him. 
He was born and raised there, very much 
admired and loved by the people around him; 
and they were great supporters of his. He was 
later on to become sheriff of Virginia City and 
Storey County. And that in itself was quite an 
honor because of the important part that the 
law enforcing officers throughout Virginia 
City and Comstock Lode’s history had always 
maintained. 

We called in the Navy authorities to 
dispose of this case, and they agreed that they 
would have him plead to a lesser charge, a 
practice which is frequently followed in the 
practice of law, maybe over-abused in some 
places. But anyway this seemed to be a just 
sentence, and he received something like 
thirty days because when the people got over 
the shock of the event, they realized that it 
cost the poor, impoverished country so many 
dollars to take care of this lad, so they were 
very happy to have him serve out a limited 
period of time, and then to have him waived 
to the Navy. And the Navy took him, put 
on some additional sentencing. I’ve always 
regretted that I didn’t follow this lad’s history 
after that because it wasn’t a serious crime. The 
seriousness arose in the minds of the people 
of Virginia City, [who] just didn’t think this 


should happen to one of their beloved citizens. 
That was disposed of. That was my first brush 
with actual practicing of law and prosecuting. 
Needless to say there weren’t too many cases 
in Virginia City and in the Comstock at that 
time because the population had gone down 
as the mines had gone down. So there wasn’t 
any great population at that time. 

It was a one-man office, and I was the 
one man. I hired a secretary out of my share 
of the district attorney’s salary. Don’t recall 
the exact salary. But I suppose it was in the 
neighborhood of three or four thousand 
dollars a year. I don’t think it was much 
more than that, and we were permitted to 
take private practice. And of course the main 
private practice involved divorces, because 
many people came to Virginia City to avoid 
publicity. The court was there on Fridays, 
and we could get the divorces normally 
without any great attention being paid to 
them. Later on it became quite a thriving 
business for a number of Reno lawyers who 
brought their clients to Virginia City and to 
Storey County to have them tried there. I 
believe the filing fees were less, and on many 
of these marginal cases they were below the 
prescribed minimum. Every dollar that was 
saved through a fee was an attraction to the 
client who wanted to get the divorce at the 
very most reasonable figure. And so that for 
a period of time attracted quite a number of 
outside people to come to Virginia City, and 
secure their divorces there because of the 
protection they had in publicity. 

There weren’t any great number of 
criminal cases during that period of time. I’ve 
often said that probably the most enjoyable 
period of my life was spent in Virginia City. 
I’ve never known a more hospitable people. 
They were very friendly, and I was at that age 
where life was enjoyable. I lived in the home 
of a Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Locklin who in turn 



Early Career 


43 


were very elderly and who had—Mr. Locklin 
had been employed as an engineer on the— 
one of the early-day mines and knew Mackay 
and Fair and Flood and O’Brien simply as an 
employer, not on the same level, but as an 
employee of theirs on the big Consolidated 
Virginia; Con Virginia I believe was the name 
of the company 

But mining was dying out rapidly there. 
They had run out of productive ore, and 
the costs of getting it from underground 
to surface was becoming more and more 
prohibitive. The Leonards were still operating, 
and the Arizona Comstock was operating. 
And there might have been two or three other 
mines that had some production, but it was 
easy to see that the mining future of Virginia 
City was in its last stages. And of course the 
results in the production of gold and silver 
proved that it was in its—really truly in its last 
stages. There’re still some of them retaining 
great ore bodies at great depths, but the costs 
of whipping the water and of pumping make 
it prohibitive. And whether it will ever open 
again or not, I don’t know; I’m not a mining 
engineer. But people still even today live 
in hope, and there may be a rebirth of the 
Bonanza, which of course was one of the great 
mining producers of the entire world. And the 
gold and silver that was taken out during the 
’60s and the ’70s was a fabulous amount. The 
figure has always been somewhat an dispute, 
but it was into the hundreds of millions of 
dollars even at the price of gold and silver at 
that time which of course [would] be a much 
more productive figure on today’s prices. But 
that’s the mining part of it. 

Most of the work that came in was 
involved with mining understandably, the 
location of claims, attempting to get them to 
patent, and the annual assessment work, and 
things of that kind. And there were not too 
many mining lawyers throughout the state. 


My predecessor in Virginia City, W. Howard 
Gray, was one of the best of the mining lawyers. 

And this particular period of time, mining 
was very inactive. Most of the legal work as 
such was involving the locations of claims and 
the filing of annual labor and things of that 
kind. I don’t believe that there was any real 
controversy over mines during the time I was 
there. A suit involving ownership or whether 
the claim would be correctly founded. Of 
course you understand that in the earlier days 
litigation was manifold and created many, 
many extremely wealthy lawyers during its 
height, during the bonanza, but nothing 
like that was occurring during the time that 
I was there. Most of the problems were the 
problems that are involved in any county, and 
involved primarily the county commissioners 
and their general legal problems which they 
have today as they had then, have always 
had in any county organization around the 
entire United States actually because there 
are legal problems that are coming up from 
time to time. Most of the work of the district 
attorney’s office was involved around the 
county commissioners. 

As I say, I’ve always considered my 
life in Storey County as one of the most 
interesting of my own life. The people were 
true westerners. They were friendly. They had 
the same problems that any mining camp has, 
the growing problems. There were the rustlers 
and the hustlers. There were those that were 
promoting, and there were those that were 
just—sincerely loved [the] camp in which 
they were born, wanted to live out their days 
there. And so it was an amalgam—a cross- 
section of western life. I think it was as typical 
as you could find anywheres in the United 
States at least of a mining camp because it had 
had its glory; it was somewhat dying out, and 
they were still, many of them, living in the 
memory of the past. 



44 


Alan Bible 


The county officers were all very typical 
western people. Agnes Hamilton was a widow 
who was the county clerk and whose life 
revolved around being a county clerk. She 
had lost her husband many, many years ago 
in some mining accident and remained a 
widow. She had one daughter as I recall. The 
county recorder was [P. J.] Paddy Corcoran 
who spoke with a typical Irish brogue, and 
he married an Annie Righini, who is the aunt 
of Father Righini or Monsignor Righini, now 
stationed in Reno and in the Catholic Church. 

But he was number one, a devout Catholic; 
he was number two, a strong Democrat; and 
number three, he was a member of the Eagles 
Lodge. And he rather took me under his wing 
to try to guide me around the vicissitudes of 
being a politician, And I can always recall 
what he said, “Well now, there’s the two 
things that you have to do in Virginia City 
and in Storey County, if you’re going to be 
any success at all as a politician. Number one, 
you’re gonna have to be a Democrat” (and 
there was no other political party except that 
of being a Democrat, in his judgment). He 
said, “That’s the first requirement, and the 
second requirement is that you’re going to 
have to join the Eagles lodge.” So he said, “If 
you’re a Democrat, and if you’re an Eagle, then 
you’ll have a good start in being a successful 
politician.” I followed his advice and did join 
Eagles lodge which at that time was a fairly 
active little lodge on the Comstock Lode, and 
of course that broadened out—that broadened 
my contacts and was valuable in later life in 
politics. 

Paddy Corcoran had come over as a miner, 
and he contracted miner’s consumption, went 
to Weimar in California, later passed away 
because of silicosis of the lungs. But he was a 
fast and dear friend, and we crawled around 
many of his old diggin’s. He lived with eternal 
hope with the next blast of dynamite there 


would be a bonanza unearthed. Unfortunately 
for him there never was. 

After his death his wife went along to 
be county clerk for a number of years. They 
again were typical of the early-day pioneers, 
the stock of which mining camps are made. 
She, I believe, died in the same office that he’d 
held for so many years as auditor and recorder 
of Virginia City, and her people still survive 
her; and then of course she was related to 
Father Righini, one of the native priests who 
has done so extremely well with his mission 
in life in the Catholic Church. 

I was very fortunate during the period 
I was district attorney in Virginia City and 
that was just a little over two years, maybe 
two and a half years, I had some strong men 
as county commissioners. I can certainly 
remember Albert Evans extremely well and 
Otto Tannehill and James Stoddart were the 
first county commissioners when I went there. 
And they were each truly hard-rock miners. 
Jim Stoddart was the oldest of the group, and 
I think he was the Republican of the group. 
Albert Evans and Otto Tannehill were both 
hard-rock miners and were both Democrats. 
They worked as a team, and they were always 
very considerate of me as a young lawyer 
just starting out practice. And of course they 
talked over their legal problems and solicited 
my advice on what they should do on this 
problem or that problem. And of course they 
followed the advice very well. There was very, 
very little discord in whatever opinion and 
finding I arrived at. And of course I had to 
defend my opinion if it involved a case that 
ultimately got to court and had to handle the 
decision of a judge or a jury. But we had a very 
remarkable degree of success, and we kept our 
differences down to a minimum. 

And I sat in on every single county 
commissioner meeting. As I remember it, we 
met on the fifth day of each month or if the 



Early Career 


45 


fifth came on a Sunday, it was the following 
Monday And we tried to clean up all of the 
business of the county within one day which 
normally we could do and did do. And so it 
was just the standard questions that can be 
encountered in everyday life by a governing 
board of a county We had the pensions that 
were to be allowed or the relief that was 
to be allowed and what we did about the 
hospital and who they should hire and how 
many they should hire; of course the usual 
budget questions which are inherent in any 
organization, and they were hard-pressed to 
raise enough money to take care of what the 
constant demands were. They appointed the 
police chief, and then they appointed their road 
commissioner. There weren’t too many road 
problems in Virginia City because it didn’t have 
much chuckling] of a road system being a small 
county and being a small county and being on 
the state system, so that was helpful. And then 
they usually had the JP in there. 

And at the time that I went there, the JP 
was a man by the name of Lou Otten who had 
a very limited education, but had a very keen 
built-in sense of justice. And he and I worked 
very closely together as any district attorney 
does with his justice of peace. He was followed 
by a man by the name of Harry Hunter, 
and I believe Harry served there during the 
balance of the time that I was up there as a 
district attorney. There were always problems 
involving prostitution which has always 
been an on-again-off-again proposition in 
Nevada. There was an open line during the 
time that I was there. I believe it was closed 
up one time because of a death that occurred 
in one of the houses of prostitution, and that 
was about the quickest way to close down an 
open house of any that I know. When I first 
went there nothing was thought of it. They 
kept their own place in the community and 
didn’t surface. They were down on one of the 


lower streets, down below the main street, and 
they caused no undue problems until this one 
death, and of course that led to the outright 
closing, and I don’t know whether they ever 
reopened again or not. 

The county commissioners I think had 
only one change—two, I believe, during 
the time I was there. Ray Peek came on as 
a county commissioner in 1936 I believe. 
And he was a typical hard-rock miner, very 
well-admired and thought of by the people 
of the community and an excellent man as 
a county commissioner. And then later on I 
think the following year Sam [Silvio] Mariani 
came on as a county commissioner. He has 
many relatives and children who survive him. 
Both of these men, in fact all of the county 
commissioners with whom I have served, 
have passed on. 

I mentioned the deputy sheriff in 
indicating my first case there, but his full 
sheriff was T. L. James; and he was sheriff of 
the county and was sheriff of the county I 
think during all the time I was there. I think 
he was followed by Will Cobb, who was a 
state senator from Virginia City. He’s the 
father of Ty Cobb, the splendid newswriter 
and sportswriter for the Nevada State Journal. 
And they were the two sheriffs with whom I 
worked, T. L. James and Will Cobb, who was 
also a state senator prior to—either prior to 
his being elected as sheriff or afterwards. I 
haven’t checked that point out. But he served 
in both capacities, not at the same time. But 
he was either a state senator and then a sheriff, 
or a sheriff and then a state senator. And he 
was—he was very popular. He was registered 
as an Independent, as I remember; and he 
always told the legend about his son being 
named Ty Cobb was after the famous baseball 
player, the “Georgia Peach.” 

During the time of my service as district 
attorney, a Flannery Lewis who had some ties 



46 


Alan Bible 


to the people in Virginia City had written a 
book entitled Suns Go Down. And it was 
published by the Macmillan Publishing 
Company It was rather derogatory of Virginia 
City and said something to the effect that all 
that remained in Virginia City were lizards 
and prostitutes. This upset many of the 
citizens in Virginia City, so they demanded as 
district attorney that I sue them for libel and 
demand a retraction, and the book should be 
prevented from being published in the future. 
I attempted to, with the help and assistance 
of one of the Leonards in New York City, to 
secure some type of a satisfactory retraction 
from MacMillan Company. And they would 
not withdraw their book from publication, 
but they did publish a narrative that was 
written by me to the effect that there was 
also mining there, and Flannery Lewis had 
taken some rather narrow and spectacular 
means of trying to put into his story things 
that were not completely true. I hope that 
the statement that I wrote about Virginia 
City had some overall effect. I never actually 
followed through to see the number of books 
that were sold. My later experience in life 
would probably indicate to me that after I 
wrote the demand and presented my side 
of the case and it was reincorporated in the 
book, they probably sold more books than 
they would have if nothing had been said. 
But anyway, that’s an incident in the life of a 
district attorney of a mining camp that I think 
probably should be mentioned. 

The early day leaders of our Democratic 
party in Virginia City at that time were John 
Kelly, a very close and dear friend of mine, 
bookkeeper for the Arizona Comstock. A 
man that came out of Iowa, who came out 
as a number one, Democrat; a number two, 
Irishman; number three, a man who had very 
little regard for the English and felt in his true 
Irish background they had been mistreated 


for many, many years by the English. He never 
hesitated to say so. He had a myriad of friends 
and was very outspoken in all of his beliefs. 
He believed in the Irish; he believed in being 
a good American; he believed that there was 
nothing except Democrats; and he believed 
that the mining camp was going to come 
back. Such was the character of one of the 
many men in our Democratic organization 
in Virginia City at that time. 

The organization of our state Democratic 
committee from Virginia City and Storey 
County was always very interesting and 
usually was in my office as district attorney. 
And we usually had a total of four or five 
there who nominated each other to attend the 
state convention, and there was never any real 
competition for it primarily because it was 
a nonpaying office, and they just took it for 
granted that it was going to be Democratic, 
and it usually was. And so the Democratic 
convention meetings that we held preparatory 
to going to the state convention wherever 
it might be, Reno or Ely or Las Vegas or 
Lovelock or Winnemucca or wherever, was 
always very mild, very quickly attended to; 
and we would always recess to one of the 
local pubs for an after dinner drink after the 
serious business of selecting our delegates 
was concluded. 

The Democrats came along very strongly 
in the state of Nevada, and there was an 
organization of Young Democrats in the 
state. I was a charter member of their first 
organization. It came about rather naturally 
because of the emergence of Democrats 
everywheres in the nation, headed up by their 
leader FDR, who certainly was one of the 
greatest presidents of our time and certainly 
brought to the people of the United States, 
hope during the—coming out of a very bad 
depression during the latter years of Hoover s 
presidency. And that was felt in the state of 



Early Career 


47 


Nevada. There were quite a number of charter 
members of the Young Democrats. 

I took a very active part in the Democratic 
organization of Storey County, but also 
because of my age, with the Young Democrats 
of Storey County. And there were many there 
with whom I associated during my entire 
career. And some are here and some have 
gone on. And there were the Gallaghers, 
always very active, Merv and Doc and Hugh. 
Merv later became the state mining inspector. 
There was Jim Gladding, who later became 
the postmaster at Virginia City. There was 
Clint Andreason, who was a local bar owner 
and a very, very successful businessman, and 
many others among that younger group that 
were very active in the Young Democrats of 
the state of Nevada. Berkeley Bunker was one 
of the charter members, later to become a 
U.S. senator. Malcolm McEachin, long-time 
secretary of state, was an active Democrat. 
Jerry Donovan, who was a state controller, 
was a very active Young Democrat. Jack 
Halley, whose two sons still practice law in 
Reno, was a very active Democrat, a Young 
Democrat. Bill Woodburn was also a member 
of our group; Virg Wedge, who is presently in 
his firm; Gordon Rice, are other names that 
come immediately to mind. 

It was fairly active during those earlier 
years because I think we had considerable 
success at the polls, and out of that grew 
the opportunity for employment, either 
appointive or in many instances, elective, 
running for the office. There was [Calvin] 
Kelly Banigan, a local constable who is now 
employed in Washington, D.C., but was very 
active in those early and formative days. That 
was spread throughout the state, mainly 
stemming, as most political activity does 
even today, to the two main areas, number 
one, to the Reno environs—Reno and its 
environs, and by that I mean Carson City 


and Virginia City and Reno and Sparks, 
this general western area; secondly the 
south, which would be Clark County, and 
I usually lump Lincoln County with Clark 
County, and White Pine was always strongly 
Democratic and always supplied many 
younger men who were active in the Young 
Democrat organization. And then going up 
the Humboldt River, which is usually the 
situs of the so-called cow counties of the 
state, you had Pershing County which was 
Lovelock, you had Humboldt County which 
was Winnemucca, you had Lander County 
which was Battle Mountain and Austin, and 
you had Eureka County which was Eureka. 
And then going on you had Elko County 
which basically was Elko and Wells and 
Carlin; and White Pine County further to 
the east and somewhat to the south, which 
was primarily Ely and McGill, Riepetown; 
and then dropping down to the county 
immediately south took you to Pioche and 
to Panaca, to Caliente, Alamo, all in Lincoln 
County. And in each of those areas there was 
a certain group of young people, all about 
the same age who were taking an increasing 
interest in governments; some would run for 
county offices, and they served as the nucleus 
for the Young Democrats of Nevada. 

And during that particular period of 
time, I think they were fairly active. And 
they’ve had periods of increased activity; 
they always generate a considerable amount 
of enthusiasm about campaign time. And 
then if their interest lagged understandably, 
if they don’t receive the employment they’re 
looking for or if their—if they get busy on 
other than political missions in life, then 
they lose their interest and there’s a lull and 
a lag in the organization. Young Democrats 
I think have had their ups and downs. I 
suppose they always will but that’s how it 
started. 



48 


Alan Bible 


An attempt to kind of take it away from the 
“moss backs?” 

Well, the “Young Turks,” I’d think you’d 
call ’em, is right. There’s always that in younger 
people. They feel that they can do better than 
the olders, and many cases they couldn’t and 
many cases they can. But it’s an infusion of 
new blood, and I think a very helpful sign 
because it keeps you younger. And sometimes 
the oldsters would resent it, and sometimes 
they wouldn’t pay much attention to it, so it 
works both ways. But that, really, is about 
the history of the Young Democrats. I don’t 
know whether there’s any written history of 
the Young Democrats or not. 

John Cavanaugh was very active; you 
should put his name in there ’cause he was 
very active. He represented the middle 
part of the state; he represented Tonopah, 
and he was active. Ray Germain was very 
active, and Charlie Cavanaugh, who was 
John’s brother—he’s since passed on too—he 
was very active. Bill Maher, who was Alice 
Maher’s husband—later became deputy 
mining inspector and was killed in a mining 
accident—was very active. Swackhamer, Bill 
and Bruce Swackhamer were very active. 
Johnny Hart—I ought to mention him, the 
constable here—he had more energy; he 
kept busier than anybody. The names just 
pop out all over as I, you know, start thinkin’ 
about it. Ken Buck—Dickersons—should 
mention them, Harvey and Denver, George. 
Of course their father was lieutenant governor 
and governor of the state, as you know. Mrs. 
Dickerson was a long-time librarian for the 
Washoe County Law Library. Now names just 
pop out almost all over the place. 

Well, they’re interesting because they became 
the Democratic party. 


Yeah, they did. They kind of emerged 
into it. The young members became the 
olders, and then they kind of took charge 
of it. 

There were in nineteen hundred and 
thirty-six about five or six hundred votes cast. 
In 1936 I had the type of a political contest 
that everyone looks forward to in the political 
world and that was that I was unopposed 
for district attorney, and so I secured that 
position as district attorney for another term 
and would have lived out the full term, had 
I not taken the position of deputy attorney 
general of the state of Nevada. 

I think it’s worthy of mention that Judge 
Guild was district judge for the area during 
my tenure. I always had a very fine working 
relationship with Judge Guild. This was his 
circuit, and this is his district. He held court 
normally on one day of the week in Virginia 
City if there was a calendar that demanded his 
attention. And he was very accommodating 
about coming to Virginia City in hearing 
whatever cases we had. As I’ve indicated 
earlier, most of the cases in those days were 
divorce cases and because of the difference in 
the fee system, I think many were attracted to 
come to Virginia City. Of course that was a 
revenue item for the coffers of Storey County, 
and they did need all the assistance that we 
could get. 

Zeb Kendall was an early day pioneer who 
came from Tonopah and had been in mining 
all of his life, and he was an imposing figure, 
great physical specimen. He must have been 
six-two or -three and weighed two hundred, 
two hundred and twenty-five pounds—had 
done well, had had bonanza and borrasca 
throughout the course of his life. He had 
made great sums of money, and he lost great 
sums of money. He loved to play cards, and 
he won some and he lost some, but he never 



Early Career 


49 


lost, or never appeared to lose his great sense 
of humor. Many stories were told about him, 
and they should very well be recorded. If 
I remember, one—this may have been in 
Tonopah rather than Virginia City—some 
card game he was behind many thousands 
of dollars. He had promised his wife hed be 
home with some meat from the butcher shop 
at a certain hour. When that hour came he 
just said, “Well, got to take this steak home, 
due home at five P.M.; Belle (his wife’s name) 
will be expecting me, and I don’t want to 
disappoint her. And this’ll probably be the 
most expensive steak she’s ever had,” because 
at that time he was running well behind. 
But he was another one of the legendary 
characters of the Comstock. 

Jim Leonard was another, and he had the 
water company. He had a brother, Franklin, 
who was one of the co-founders of the 
American Stock Exchange in New York. 
And they had their ups and their downs in 
the mining world, but they were citizens of 
Virginia City who lived there for so many, 
many years. 

There was a character by the name of John 
Bowie, who must have belonged to the Eagles 
lodge almost forever because he was their 
senior member, as I recall, was honored just 
a short few years ago. I think now has passed 
away, but he was a hard-rock miner. And he 
would not leave the camp for any other place 
in the world because this was where he was 
born and raised and lived, and this is where 
he was gonna die. Many characters flitted 
across the scene then, some of them getting 
along in years, but there was an unusual tie 
between the so-called “hot water plugs.” They 
all had a certain allegiance to each other, and 
they felt that if you were born in Virginia City 
that you had a superior claim, I think, on life 
and maybe even on death over anybody else. 


Even though they might have scrapped among 
themselves now and then, any time anybody 
would come in and say anything that was 
derogatory to those that lived in Virginia City, 
they had a fight on their hands. It was typical 
of the loyalties and again of a Nevada mining 
camp. It wasn’t singular to Virginia City, but 
it was typical as I see it of the closeness or 
a tie that comes about in times of illness or 
misfortune. They were always there to help 
their neighbor. Something that you just don’t 
see today, we saw in those particular days. 
And of course Virginia City has come into 
a different phase of life now. I don’t think it’s 
the same as it was because of tourism and 
commercialism. When I first went there it was 
made up almost entirely of people who were 
actually born there. There were exceptions, 
but by and large it was the “hot water plug” 
of old who was there. 

One incident that comes to mind that 
taught me something in life very early, 
something that I think should always be borne 
in mind by all of us really, and that is that one 
evening when I’d been out with the boys, so 
to speak, coming home there was a wonderful 
little couple staggerin’ on down the main 
street of Virginia City, and they were berating 
each other. And the husband was hitting the 
wife. I was the new promising young district 
attorney, and so I thought it was my duty to 
step between the two and to try to tell them 
to quit fighting and resolve their problems or 
try to help them with whatever their quarrel 
was about. So I stepped between them and 
suggested that they stop—that he stop hitting 
his wife and he shouldn’t be doin’ that, that 
was his wife, and they’d been married a 
number of years. I was ashamed to see him 
doin’ that. So she turned to me and told me, 
“Well, young man, just mind your own damn 
business. This is my husband. If he wants to 



50 


Alan Bible 


hit me, he can. But in any event, it’s no part 
of your life; just cause you’re district attorney, 
you can’t try to tell my husband what he can 
do to me.” So with that I learned the lesson 
that when you get in a family quarrel, you 
better be careful what you’re doing. 

They were typical little couples that got in 
an argument after a wee bit too much of the 
grape, and so I’ve always tried to remember 
that as one lesson. That is, don’t get yourself 
mixed up in a domestic quarrel because if 
you do, you’re about to be the fall guy for 
them and not vice versa. So, one lesson that 
you pick up, and I’ve always remembered 
and afterwards they’d come and ask me for 
legal advice. It didn’t bother them very much 
that I attempted to intervene. And those are 
a few little incidents that come up as we’re 
rambling along and filling in some of the spots 
in the Virginia City life. It was a great life. We 
played lots of cards during that period of time 
because we had some times during the winter 
months when it was almost impossible to get 
out of Virginia City; the roads were being 
improved, but they still couldn’t keep them 
clear of snow when we had a hard winter. And 
I think we had two hard winters during the 
period of time when I was there. So, it was 
a life of a mining camp that was holding on 
with all the spirit that it had at its command 
to try to bring back again the glories of the 
bonanzas of the past. 

The Gallaghers were a very important 
faintly in the life of Virginia City. Merv 
Gallagher was later to become the mining 
inspector, the chief mining inspector of the 
state. He had grown up in the mines; he 
was a hard-rock miner; he had a beautiful 
wife; he had raised a very fine family; he had 
brothers who were active in the school system 
of Virginia City and the Comstock Lode, and 
one still serves as a principal there. They were 
all great athletes. 


Virginia City over the years always had 
one of the best basketball teams in the state 
of Nevada, and there weren’t many people 
there at the high school, Storey County High 
School. During the time I was there—during 
WPA days or PWA days we were successful 
in acquiring new buildings. 

We had a fine board of school trustees, but 
they felt that their principal, Jack Gilmartin, 
and their coach, Jake Lawlor, probably had 
outlived their usefulness in the school system 
of Storey County. So they determined that 
they would not renew their contract. The 
word got out—I think this was the last year 
I was at Virginia City myself—the word got 
out that they were not renewing the contract. 
The students took a dim view of that because 
they very much admired Jake Lawlor and Jack 
Gilmartin, so they decided and voted for a 
strike. They were gonna strike. They weren’t 
gonna go to school. So Jack Gilmartin himself 
called me and said, “Alan, I want you to come 
down and give a talk to these students ’cause 
they’re about to—they’re about to strike. 
And,” he says, “even though it affects me,” he 
says, “I don’t want to question the power of 
the board of school trustees. I wish you’d come 
back and come down and give them a talk.” 

And so being young and vigorous and 
inexperienced, I said, “Sure, I’ll come down, 
maybe I can help you.” So I went down and 
made what I thought was a par excellence 
talk. They gave me a big hand, and we walked 
around to the front of the building—I can 
see it today—with Jack Gilmartin and Jake 
Lawlor, and the students had stayed on in 
their assembly hall for a period of time. And 
then all of a sudden the entire rush came on, 
and the entire student body left right then and 
there and went on a strike! 

So it proved to me that I didn’t have quite 
the influence that I thought I had. And they 
stayed out on strike for two or three days, 



Early Career 


51 


and finally they went back. The board of 
school trustees prevailed. Both Jack Gilmartin 
and Jake Lawlor went on to better teaching 
positions, and both improved themselves 
after this event. But it was another show of 
independence and vigor of a mining camp. 
Maybe the enthusiasm of a group of young 
students who wanted to rebel or seems to 
have been rebellion against leaders in schools, 
all our educational life. And I suppose there 
always will be some type of demonstrations 
either for or against. But this was the first time 
Id ever come abreast of it myself on a personal 
basis. And I think it proved to me that you’ve 
got to have some, some very definite, positive 
reason to back up what you’re attempting to 
do or you simply won’t succeed in it. This 
was certainly true in this instance because it 
might have been all right for me to be down 
there tryin to tell them what to do, just like 
it might have been all right for me to try to 
tell this husband to quit heatin’ his wife, but 
really it wasn’t any part of my business. And I 
think there might have been some resentment, 
and here I was feeling too cocky, trying to 
impress too many people with my importance. 
I think it taught me a very definite lesson 
in humility. And I’ve always felt those were 
two very definite lessons that were taught 
early in life that I hope made me a little more 
understanding of other people’s problems. 
I don’t think the strike was justified, nor do 
I think that it really did any harm because 
it lasted quickly and they settled back and 
everybody was really better off for it. So I think 
maybe that teaches you something in treating 
your public when you’re [in] a public official 
capacity. This was my first public office in the 
state of Nevada. School went on, students 
went on, and they seemed to receive a fine 
education, and they were the better off for it. 

I know one incident that I’ve always rather 
prided myself on that occurred in Virginia 


City. They had no fire department, and they 
asked me if I would try to help them organize 
a volunteer fire department, and I did. And 
so we had a very fine little volunteer fire 
department, and we drew the proper papers. 
And they’d had, earlier fire departments, of 
course, but they had died out. So this was 
a—this was a revival of the Virginia City 
volunteer fire department, and as near as I 
know it’s still in existence today and is a fairly 
effective weapon in fighting fires when they 
get into Virginia City. I don’t know—I think 
maybe they have one or two paid members on 
their fire department now. We didn’t have any 
at that time in nineteen hundred and thirty- 
eight. And so I found myself carrying out 
the role of being a fireman as well as being a 
district attorney. But that is another memory, 
a pleasant one that comes back in action of 
the social life of the community. 

I had something to do with the founding 
of the Business Men’s Association in 
Virginia City. I think that could very well 
be compared to a chamber of commerce. 
And we remained active for a number of 
years. I don’t know whether it has fallen into 
use, active use, whether it’s gone forward 
or not, but of course the obvious aims were 
to improve the conditions of Virginia City, 
improve the transportation, attempt to get 
business activities in that area and things of 
that kind. So it did serve a very worthwhile 
purpose, and again I’m rather proud of the 
fact that I was one of the early leaders in that 
enterprise. 

During the time that I was there, one of 
the most colorful attractions was the V & T 
[Virginia and Truckee] Railroad coming into 
Virginia City and running between Virginia 
City and Reno. And that was a colorful ride. It 
went across the long trestle at Crown Point in 
Gold Hill, and the Leonards had found some 
indication of a good ore body there, so they 



52 


Alan Bible 


undertook to replace the trestle and move it 
from its old location. And the V & T ran for 
a short period of time after that, and it’s just 
too bad as one looks back that that right-of- 
way and the train is not still running. But 
it simply couldn’t break even, and it would 
have been very heavily subsidized. But they 
are attractions; they’re a part of a community, 
they’re a history of a community. And the V 
& T life story is in itself a legend of the money 
that it made, of the holdups it had had, and 
the freight that was charged, the millionaires 
it had produced in its heyday. And so that is 
a story and a part by itself. 

I want to make particular mention as we 
start out, about my long-time and dear friend 
and political and legal ally, W. Howard Gray, 
who passed away yesterday [June 21, 1978] 
in Reno, Nevada, after a long bout with poor 
health. Howard Gray was very—in my life 
was very closely intertwined as I started into 
the practice of law. 

Howard Gray, who kept rather close track 
of me, and we became very fast friends— 
lasted a lifetime—had an opportunity offered 
to him about two or three years after he had 
been deputy attorney general of the state by 
the Kennecott Copper Company to come on 
as their chief counsel, but he would have to 
be stationed in Ely. So he considered it for 
a long period of time, finally accepted, and 
finally gave his resignation to Gray Mashburn, 
who was the attorney general of the state, 
and saying that he was going to accept the 
position as chief counsel of Kennecott Copper 
Company in Nevada, and that he was going 
to Ely to live and that would create a vacancy 
in the attorney general’s office of Nevada. He 
advised me what he was going to do, so I had 
a little advance notice on it. And the position 
then was offered to me by Gray Mashburn on 
Howard Gray’s recommendation. 


And so I had not earlier known Gray 
Mashburn or anyone in his office. It was a 
small attorney general’s office at that time, 
and I think it had—Gray Mashburn was the 
attorney general of the state; Bill Mathews 
was his deputy; and Howard Gray was his 
second deputy. And we had supporting 
secretarial and clerical help. But that was the 
total strength of the attorney general’s office, 
nineteen hundred and thirty-eight it was. 
And I pondered the question of going on into 
Carson City. I was not married at that time, 
and probably Howard Gray in urging me to 
come into Carson City had probably as much 
as any one man to do with my having made a 
decision to follow rather a political, a political 
trend or a political course of action. 

So I accepted the offer that came in, was 
selected as deputy attorney general of Nevada. 
And that was in nineteen hundred and thirty- 
eight. And shortly after that I moved from 
Virginia City to Carson City where I was to 
live for the next thirteen years. Don Richards 
followed me as district attorney of Storey 
County. And he had been formerly a school 
teacher, and I think his last post of duty had 
been in Dayton, but he had gone into Reno, 
become admitted to practice law, and came to 
Virginia City as my successor. In turn I went 
to Carson City as the successor of Howard 
Gray, who had in turn gone to Ely and was to 
remain in Ely for many, many years and later 
to return in a later part of his life as a lawyer 
here in Reno. 

Thereafter, Howard Gray urged me many 
times to join him in Ely as an associate of 
Kennecott Copper Company, and it probably 
is at that juncture of my life that I made a 
decision to stay on as deputy attorney general 
in Nevada and remain in Carson City. Had I 
chosen otherwise and gone to Ely, I probably 
would have followed a strict professional legal 



Early Career 


53 


life rather than becoming involved in politics 
as I was. 

So Howard Gray, as I say, and I shared 
many, many legal experiences. After I was 
elected as the U.S. senator from Nevada 
and he was the chief counsel for Kennecott 
Copper Company, he frequently visited me in 
Washington, D.C. and in Nevada on problems 
involving the mining industry of the state. I 
think it’s in tribute to him that he was one 
of the ablest mining lawyers that I have ever 
known. He was a past master of mining law, 
and he held responsible positions within the 
American Mining Congress in heading up 
their legislative program year after year, and 
they looked on him and leaned upon him 
to make presentations before the Congress 
of the United States, be it on the House side 
or on the Senate side, to present their cause. 
He always did it with great expertise and 
great effectiveness. And his loss has, I think, 
been felt already in the years of his declining 
health by the Mining Congress because I don’t 
know of anyone that has taken his place on 
the national level in presenting the mining 
industry’s position on so many subjects that 
they have. He was a past master at it, and not 
only a great mining lawyer, a great general 
lawyer, but also a wonderful, warm human 
being. 

He was rated, I believe, in the Nevada 
legislature time after time as one of the ablest, 
if not the ablest, lobbyist in the capitol of our 
state. So he had a rich and a full life and had 
many achievements to back it up. 

It was with misgivings and mingled 
emotions that I left Virginia City because it 
gave me so many pleasant moments and so 
many interesting events to remember and 
ponder for a long time. I know that subsequent 
to my leaving there, I was constantly asked to 
come-back and make graduation speeches at 


commencement time, which is an event that 
occurs even now. I don’t know how many total 
speeches I’ve made to the graduating seniors 
of the Comstock high school, Storey County 
High School, but there’s been many; and I’ve 
made talks to the Gold Hill school district. 
And I think that all becomes a part and parcel 
of any district attorney’s activities when he 
becomes active in the community. 




5 

The Nevada State Attorney 
General’s Office, 1938-1950 


The First Years 

The opportunity came to me to go as 
a deputy attorney general to Carson City 
because of Howard Gray moving on to a 
private position with Kennecott Company in 
Ely The opportunity was one that I couldn’t 
turn down, not because I didn’t like my work 
in Storey County, but the future and the range 
of work was far greater. And the opportunity 
was far greater as I moved on into a larger 
area, and namely the deputy attorney general, 
not only a lawyer for one county, but one of 
the lawyers for an entire state. In moving into 
Carson City, I was privileged to become very 
well acquainted at that time and in subsequent 
years with Gray Mashburn, the then attorney 
general of the state of Nevada. 

Gray Mashburn was a native of Arkansas, 
and his people were active in the political 
life of that state. If my memory serves me 
well, one of his brothers had been a lifetime 
state highway engineer or its equivalent in 
the state of Arkansas. Gray Mashburn was 
a very imposing figure; he was a very tall, 


handsome man. He was very, very serious. I 
can always remember him primarily with his 
close connection with the Odd Fellows lodge. 
He was almost the spokesman for the Odd 
Fellows lodge. He was a serious campaigner 
and always ran terrific races, and races that 
over the years materialized in his selection. He 
was a former partner of Pat McCarran, before 
Pat McCarran had gone on to Washington as 
a U.S. senator. And they were close and dear 
friends over many years. 

There’s always one story about Gray 
Mashburn that I like to tell. He was very 
ponderous, and his decisions were probably 
very long. He had a running feud with Jack 
McCloskey, who is the longtime editor of 
the Mineral County Independent. As a matter 
of fact, Jack McCloskey is still one of the 
leading newspaper editors of the state, still 
runs the Mineral County Independent and 
still fights for Mineral County with a passion. 
I’ve always referred to him as the “mayor” 
of Mineral County, though they have no 
city government. He’s as close to a mayor as 
you can imagine. He’s a brilliant writer. He’s 



56 


Alan Bible 


a great historian, and he, I think, fancies 
himself a lawyer. As a matter of fact, I think 
he probably knows as much about the law as 
almost any non-lawyer or lawyer in the state 
of Nevada. And he was constantly critical of 
Gray Mashburn’s opinions, particularly on 
the rights of those stationed at the Hawthorne 
NAD [Naval Ammunition Depot] and the 
military establishment to vote. 

And the Constitution is rather clear 
on the point. I think Gray Mashburn was 
correct, the attorney general was correct, 
but Jack McCloskey, either for provincial 
reasons or because of his sincere conviction 
that the Constitution didn’t mean what it 
said, always took issue with Gray Mashburn. 
And Gray Mashburn made an opinion that 
would be adverse to the interests of Mineral 
County and those who were there on a 
military assignment. And Gray Mashburn 
would constantly answer the editorials of 
Jack McCloskey, and Jack McCloskey would, 
again, in a few short words just answer 
General Mashburn’s editorials. I think this is 
where I first learned and the message sunk in, 
that there’s one thing you couldn’t do, is win a 
battle with a newspaper, because they always 
have the last word. 

Be that as it may, the election of that 
particular year came up, and Lloyd Smith, 
a very prominent lawyer in Reno, Nevada, 
was running on the Republican ticket for the 
attorney general’s position of the state, and 
Gray Mashburn, of course, on the Democratic 
ticket. Gray Mashburn won the attorney 
general’s race very easily, but he lost Mineral 
County which was one of the bastions of the 
Democratic party, actually, very strongly 
registered Democratic. But he could never 
shake that from his feelings about Mineral 
County. And I believe I’m correct in saying 
that from that day on, he never would stop in 
Mineral County. It was always a joke around 


the attorney general’s office, he’d never stop in 
Mineral County to gas up; he gassed up either 
on one side of Mineral County or the other 
side. That probably would have been Fallon on 
the north or Yerington on the north, as you go 
south into Vegas, or Coaldale in Nye County 
on the south. But near as I know, he never 
went back to Mineral County after his loss in 
that particular year. He was getting along in 
years at this time, and I suppose it did hurt 
his pride after all the things that he had done 
or tried to do for Mineral County because he 
was a member of the highway board, as the 
attorney general was by statute. He’d done 
many fine things for Mineral County. 

The attorney general then and the attorney 
general during my time as attorney general 
and the time of Bill Mathews (who were the 
three attorney generals over the number of 
years during that period of time in the late ’30s 
and into the ’40s, who has held the duties of 
the attorney general) has held very closely the 
attorney general’s office; and I note in more 
recent years that the various departments 
have—each have their own individual lawyers 
now. And we fought that move just as a matter 
of policy because we felt that the legal advisors 
for the state should be the attorney general 
because that’s what the law indicated and 
provided for. 

Gray Mashburn had only two deputies to 
cover the entire range of problems that came 
before him. He had one first deputy, who was 
Bill Mathews; and then a second deputy, who 
was Howard Gray for a number of years, and 
then the position to which I held for some 
five years after that. And it remained at about 
that level through my entire tenure with the 
exception of adding special lawyers for bill 
drafting purposes during the legislature. 
But it was a very modest staff, and I think as 
I reflect back on it that it probably needed 
more beefing up than we were able to give it 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


57 


or than the legislature was willing to allow us. 
So we held at that level during that particular 
range of years. 

The population of the state was about oh, 
a hundred and ten or a hundred and twenty 
thousand people during that period of time. 
And since then, and brought to date here in 
1977, has probably proliferated by about five¬ 
fold. I suppose the population overall in the 
state of Nevada is around five hundred and 
fifty thousand, give or take. I think that’s a 
pretty good figure to compute the differences 
in the personnel. But as the state grew, the 
personnel grew, and probably grew even 
more than it should have. There’s always an 
argument about having too many people work 
for government, and I think in many instances 
that point is well taken. It’s one that’s always 
difficult to prove because you don’t know 
exactly how hard or how diligently the public 
employees are working. 

I would say this, and I think it comes 
based upon some forty years of public service 
that by and large and overall, the public 
servant and the public official in whatever 
capacity, is a pretty faithful individual. I 
think he’s loyal to his cause; and I think he 
does work reasonably hard; and I think he’s 
dedicated to the good of his county or his 
state or his nation as the case may be. There 
are exceptions of course as there are in all 
lines of business, but I think a post of public 
duty is an important responsibility. I think 
it’s an important part of your citizenship, and 
over the years in many talks I’ve made before 
graduating classes either on the grammar 
or the high school level, on occasion the 
college level, I’ve always urged the graduates 
among other things, whatever their niche in 
life might be—whether it’s as a housewife 
or as a civil engineer or as a farmer or as a 
merchant or as a professional man—they 
ought to dedicate some part of that life to 


serving on a school board or serving on a 
advisory committee to one of the many, many 
committees that we have throughout the state 
and nation because it’s an eye-opener. I think 
jury duty is another very important obligation 
of citizenship, and I think should be entered 
into freely and voluntarily. I know sometimes 
it is arduous and may cause certain sacrifices 
on the part of the individual, but nevertheless 
it is a part of our American citizenship and a 
duty of our American citizenship. I think the 
more participation we have on every level 
by local citizenry, the stronger a nation we’ll 
have. I’ve constantly suggested that in making 
graduation speeches; and not only that, it’s 
a rewarding experience. And most people 
with whom I have talked who have accepted 
either a position on the school board or on a 
hospital board or on any type of government 
agency in an advisory capacity, come away 
with a little more respect for those people who 
are working in government and attempting 
to keep it on an even keel. This seems to be 
the proper place to indicate that it’s one that 
I feel very keenly. 

The attorney general’s office back in ’38, 
as I indicated, was a three-man office. Gray 
Mashburn of course was the commander-in- 
chief. He made the assignments. In general 
he handled the heavier cases and the heavier 
opinions or the more controversial opinions 
himself. He was inclined to write at length 
on the subjects that were addressed to him. 

His second deputy was Bill Mathews, who 
was an old railroad man who had injured 
his legs in a railroad accident, walked with 
a distinct limp. And he too was a devout 
Odd Fellow and a great member of the 
brotherhoods, and they were great supporters 
of him because he was always on the side of 
the railroad engineer, or the conductor, or the 
brakeman, and he was assigned all those cases 
which involved the car limit cases, the railroad 



58 


Alan Bible 


limit cases. Many, many dollars and many, 
many months of litigation ensued, and finally, 
the limitation on the length of a train was 
held unconstitutional. And Bill Mathews was 
probably not only the leading lawyer in it, but 
he had firsthand knowledge having worked on 
the railroad and been injured on a railroad. 
It was an advantage to him over the other 
characters in the scenario in determining the 
constitutionality of the car limit case. That’s 
one example of cases that were assigned 
properly to a man who had the most savvy 
and most know-how, most expertise in the 
field. And he handled that case. 

But they were my two superior officers 
when I went in. One was, of course, Gray 
Mashburn. The next one was [William T.] 
Bill Mathews, and Bill Mathews was another 
striking specimen of a man. He was tall, he 
was well built, he was a senior deputy, and 
he was an Odd Fellow. And at the first time 
that—or the time that I did run when Gray 
Mashburn retired, Bill Mathews ran and I 
was the second deputy. There were only three 
lawyers in the office, one was Gray Mashburn 
and then Bill Mathews, the senior deputy, 
and I was the junior deputy. That was a time 
when we could handle the legal opinions of 
the entire state with three lawyers. That’s no 
longer true. And of course as government has 
grown (and in many places out of control), it’s 
required more and more lawyers and more 
legal expertise. 

But in this particular race, the race was 
between Bill Mathews and myself in the 
primary. As I lookback, I always did regret a 
little, running against Bill Mathews, but I was 
younger, represented youth, probably thought 
I could reform the world, which I have many 
times since, found out I couldn’t do it. But, 
in any event, I won the primary against Bill 
Mathews. And from that point, I went on to 
run for the general election and was successful 


there, and then was reelected for my second 
term, as I recall it, without opposition. 

Bill Mathews felt very bitter over this for 
a period of time, but time took care of it, and 
I immediately made him my first deputy, and 
he was with me during my entire tour of eight 
years as the attorney general of the state and 
did great work. And then when I retired, he 
ran for attorney general and was elected and 
was an able attorney general and a very fine 
lawyer. He had been hurt in a railroad accident, 
and it did cripple him, and he had a limp. In 
addition to that, he had a hearing problem 
and became very hard of hearing, which, of 
course, is a handicap to all of us as we get older 
and has hit many, many people. But those are 
the people with whom I served actually and 
actively during my early attorney general days. 

By way of parallel, another very fine 
judge had the same type of background and 
that was Clark Guild, who was workin’ on 
the railroad and whose leg was badly injured 
and may have even been amputated; I’m not 
sure—I think it was. And that turned him to 
the practice of law. He became a lawyer and 
then a long-time judge and one of the great 
Nevadans and the actual—the founder, if 
any one person should be credited with the 
founding of an institution, it’s Clark Guild, 
Sr., and his founding of the Nevada Museum, 
which really has become a major attraction 
in the [state’s] capitol in Carson City by the 
acquisition of the old Mint building and its 
building and renovating and improving as 
time went along. And primary credit for that 
should go to Clark Guild. He enlisted the 
aid, of course, of Major Fleischmann, who 
was a close personal friend of his; and Major 
Fleischmann had the wherewithal and the 
money to be of great assistance to the museum 
and to the state of Nevada. 

And of course Major Fleischmann, I’ve 
always paid him tribute in whatever type of 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


59 


talks I’m giving for the very fact that here was 
a man who was a multi-millionaire and at least 
left a great deal of his wealth to the state of 
Nevada. The University of Nevada is one of 
the beneficiaries; the high schools are one of 
the beneficiaries, so many other institutions 
that could be remembered. I think it serves 
as a great lesson to the many wealthy people 
that come to Nevada when they answer that 
final summons, if they’re able to do it, they 
should leave at least a part of their vast wealth 
to a state which made so much of it possible. 

Major Fleischmann, of course, didn’t 
make his wealth in Nevada. He came here 
from California, mainly because that’s one of 
the great things that California did for us [was] 
throw the multi-millionaire into Nevada, and 
his estate is finally to be distributed within the 
next several months. And it’d be interesting 
to see how the trustees—who over the years 
have managed this extremely well—how they 
finally make the disposition of the estate. As 
this inflationary cycle has gone on and values 
have gone up and prices almost out of sight, 
I think his estate is worth considerably more 
now than it was when it was first admitted 
for probate, and I believe that it probably 
appraises at something well over a hundred 
million dollars, which is a terrific amount of 
money to be disposed of. But that thought 
came to my mind because of his many, 
many fine acts of goodwill and appreciation 
during the time that he was alive to the state 
of Nevada. And it, again, I think serves as 
a wonderful lesson to people of immense 
wealth, after they’ve taken care—as they see 
to their families and other benefactors—leave 
something to the state of Nevada which makes 
so much of it possible. 

And, so in everything that I have done in 
the way of speeches, I usually try to pay tribute 
to Major Fleischmann and to people of his 
character who have left some of their wealth 


to the state of Nevada, which made so much 
of it possible. And he certainly is an excellent 
example; the will that he left and the trust that 
he left was one of the best that was ever drawn 
and is just being finally liquidated now. 

But, back to the attorney general’s office 
and a few of the reminiscences of those days, 
as deputy attorney general—. Well, I went 
on to run for the office and was elected, 
defeating Bill Mathews in the primary and 
then winning the general election. In one of 
the general elections my opponent was Jack 
Ross, who was one of the leading Republicans 
and who was a very fine lawyer and later 
became a federal judge. I managed to defeat 
him in the general election and became the 
attorney general of the state after having won 
the nomination over Bill Mathews. 

Duties, Decisions, and Colleagues 

When I became attorney general, as I 
said, I retained Bill Mathews and put him 
in the top spot and put him in charge of the 
Clark County suit. One of the landmark 
cases, which I happened to handle as attorney 
general, involved the determination of how 
much money Clark County should be paid 
because Boulder Dam was built in Clark 
County, and it spanned the Colorado River 
between Arizona and Nevada and was 
located within Nevada in Clark County. The 
position, though, of the Clark County people 
was that that was an “in lieu of tax” payment 
and therefore it should be distributed in the 
same proportion as any other general tax, 
any general state tax. We took the position 
that that was not true—the state took the 
position that that was not true and that it 
was not spelled out in the federal legislation, 
as quite possibly it should have been. Later 
on in the federal statutes of the United States 
in many, many cases, there were “in lieu of 



60 


Alan Bible 


tax” payments, and that’s become a rather 
popular way or an accepted and legal way to 
distribute federal funds where the corpus (or 
the body) has been removed from general 
taxation. And of course the United States 
government could not—did not let a tax suit 
against Boulder Dam, which was its creature, 
nor could Clark County tax it. And this was 
a long running battle over many, many years. 
And it was carried to the highest courts, and 
we sustained the position that it was not an 
“in lieu of tax” payment, and that the only 
people that could make the determination 
would be the state of Nevada because it was 
payable as spelled out in the federal statute 
in specific language: “payable to the state of 
Nevada.” And that’s where the payment of the 
three hundred thousand a year, which came 
from the federal government each and every 
year for fifty years, went. And then every time 
that those payments were made, Clark County 
would protest it to pave the way for a lawsuit. 
And the suits were decided—lawsuits—were 
decided adverse to Clark County’s claim. 
We repeatedly recommended that it was a 
matter for the legislature to determine. And 
finally they did determine it, and they—after 
conference and compromise, give and take, 
as I recall it, they finally provided that out of 
the three hundred thousand that the state of 
Nevada was to receive from the United States 
government and specifically from the Bureau 
of Reclamation because it was their project, 
that the state of Nevada should pay to Clark 
County twenty percent. And I believe that 
percentage has pretty much held over the 
years. 

I think the governing fathers of Clark 
County finally realized, as simply as a fact, 
that the birth of Boulder Dam created the 
largest county in the state because with the 
birth of Boulder Dan it’s supplied recreational 
facilities, Lake Mead or Lake Mead Recreation 


Area; more particularly, provided a firm 
supply of energy. And as you look back at that, 
Nevada had a share of the energy; it appears 
that that is not going to be enough and isn’t 
enough, even now, to take care of all of the 
vast and generally unforeseen growth that 
came to Clark County and to Las Vegas and 
to Boulder City, Henderson and North Las 
Vegas and the other areas in Clark County. 

So, that was one of the major suits which 
we handled during the time that I was 
attorney general and which I think came out 
on balance in fairly good style. As I say, that 
the office was composed of Bill Mathews, 
who was first deputy and later on became 
attorney general of the state succeeding me; 
and he was always a very active and a very 
effective attorney general. The other deputy 
in my staff was first Homer Mooney, who 
was a brilliant lawyer out of George Sanford’s 
office, and he stayed with me until his death. 
He wrote many, many opinions, and he had a 
dry sense of humor which made itself felt not 
only in his everyday life and his conversation, 
but in many of his opinions showed some of 
the idiosyncrasies of people that get into law 
scraps and fights, and picked up humorous 
incidents that happened in everyday life and 
sometimes end up in the court. He was my 
deputy for many years. 

I also had as my deputy during my tenure, 
George Annand. George Annand was a judge 
from Ely and White Pine County. He was a 
brilliant lawyer, but he was even a greater 
singer. He used to play stages in Pennsylvania 
and Maryland and in New York in his younger 
life. He had a tremendous voice with great, 
great qualities, and I have been told—I heard 
him sing many times and I thought he had 
a great voice, though I must confess I’m no 
particular judge of good singers—but he 
appealed to me, and I thought probably what 
they said about him was correct; and that 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


61 


is, if he’d been of greater stature, he could 
have been a singer with the Metropolitan 
Opera, which of course was and I guess still 
is the great operatic or opera company of the 
United States, maybe in the world. But he was 
with me throughout his lifetime. Delightful 
individual. He lost a very close race in White 
Pine County as a city judge, a trial judge and 
a district judge; and it really destroyed his 
belief in the fairness of politics, and I thought 
it would be a great thing to take this man 
who had quality and who was an exemplary 
character and who was a good lawyer and 
take him out of that particular environment 
and bring him with me and give him a new 
life,, which I hope I did, I think I did. And he 
lived in Carson City until his death. He was 
a fine deputy and worked out extremely well. 

Now during that same period of time, I 
reemployed Gray Mashburn, who had chose 
not to run again for attorney general. I hired 
Gray Mashburn and young Dick Waters to 
serve on my staff in recodifying the school 
code. The school code was in terrible shape 
during that earlier period of time, and it 
was jumbled up and they took on— of, the 
monumental task of trying to recodify all 
of the school laws of the state. They finally 
accomplished it; it was submitted to the 
legislature; it was again passed, and I think 
serves as the basis for our present school 
code. Of course, there’s always change in 
law because there’s change in needs and 
requirements, but this served as the basic 
school code for the state of Nevada and with 
some changes is still the school code of the 
state of Nevada. 

Another one of my early deputies was my 
lifetime law partner Bob McDonald, who is 
an interesting study in his own right. And I’ve 
often said that when Bob McDonald was born, 
they threw away the mold. He lived a—and 
is still very much alive—he lived a very novel 


life. He was one of the fine pilots in World War 
II. You have to know him to appreciate what a 
fine pilot he could be because he had no fear, 
and he made many, many records with the Air 
Force. He started out as a second looey, and 
when he finished his service with the United 
States Air Corps, he came out as a lieutenant 
colonel. He’s a skilled flyer; he flew both in 
the Aleutians in Alaska, and he flew P-38s 
in the Pacific Theater. He saw much action, 
received many decorations. He has a great 
sense of humor, a great business sense; and his 
father, Joe McDonald, who was the editor of 
the Nevada State Journal for many, many years 
was one of my chief political sponsors and 
mentors and guided me and gave me advice 
which I believe was of tremendous value to 
me as I carved out a political career in Nevada. 
And the only thing he ever asked me was if I’d 
give Bob McDonald, his son, a job. 

He [Joe McDonald] was well-admired 
by the people in this area, and he and his 
wife were stalwart characters who gave to 
this community two sons, both of whom 
are law~yers and both of whom are very 
active. One was Bob McDonald, one was Joe 
McDonald, and many legends and stories can 
be told about each of them. 

Joe McDonald [Jr.] was picked up and 
made a prisoner of war, spent most of his 
war days in a prison camp, and as a matter 
of fact one of the interesting stories and his 
father may have told it in his relating his 
oral history, but it was reported that he was 
killed and the word got back and the name, 
as I remember it, was exactly the same, Joe F. 
McDonald. And, they had a High Requiem 
Mass—the McDonalds were very strong, 
devout Catholics—and they had a Mass that 
I happened to attend myself since I’ve known 
all of the family so very, very closely, that—. 
And it was a sad funeral at the cathedral, and 
there were many, many people there. And 



62 


Alan Bible 


then a period of time after that, it was reported 
that he wasn’t dead at all, and that they had 
the wrong McDonald; there was a McDonald, 
the same initials and the same spelling of the 
name, from Montana. And so Joe McDonald 
came back very much alive. 

We used to hunt duck together, and 
he never had hip boots or rubber boots 
or anything; he just went into the in the 
Greenhead Hunting Club and swamped 
around and he couldn’t hit a duck if he had to, 
but he still liked to get out there. Said it didn’t 
bother him at all because he’d been living 
in the rice paddies of Japan for many years. 
And many people felt that he would never 
come back because he was a member of our 
Nevada football team at the University and 
he played without a helmet, and most people 
thought maybe he got one too many blows 
on the head. But it never bothered him, and 
he went on not only to come out of the war 
alive and well, but he said, and he told me this 
many times? that he taught them how to play 
American gambling games and he came back 
with more money than they put him in the 
prison camp with. So it would be typical of 
him and people that know Joe McDonald will 
remember that incident, but the unusual thing 
was to have him come back after having been 
given up for dead. And I can always recall one 
little incident—he came back and people that 
knew him so very well said, “Now we bought 
you five dollars worth of flowers, and we want 
you to pay us back, because we shouldn’t have 
bought ’em, but we banked up the cathedral 
with a lot of flowers and now it’s no more than 
fair [that] you give us back our money.” But 
he didn’t take kindly to that suggestion, and 
so the flowers were paid for—they went to a 
funeral that very fortunately never really had 
to occur, and Joe McDonald as of this day is 
alive and well and makin’ money. So that’s a 
little interesting sidelight that comes out of 


my attorney general days. It was his brother 
that I appointed deputy attorney general, a 
young man who has done extremely well in 
the practicing of law. 

I’d never seen Bob McDonald in my life 
and didn’t know him from a bale of hay; but 
he’d finished his military career, had his law 
degree back of him, passed the state bar, and 
came one day to report to work. I was rather 
amazed by his youth, but I had made the 
commitment and was delighted to put him on, 
and he’s been—he and I have been partners 
ever since in a partnership career that never 
had more than a shake of a hand. I maintained 
my partnership with him during my early 
years in the Congress of the United States. 
In later years I abandoned it simply because 
I couldn’t devote any time to it, and found 
early in my senatorial career that I could never 
devote any real time to it. And of course from 
a idealistic standpoint, it’s far better not to 
have that type of a relationship as a practicing 
lawyer or as a lawyer with an interest in a 
partnership of any kind simply because it’s 
impossible to conduct federal business today 
without some legal involvement and you 
can—you always run the risk of encountering 
conflicts of interest; it’s almost inevitable, and 
the only reason I did it is I had to have the 
supplementary money because I was raising 
one daughter and three sons; and money at 
the time that I was in the U.S. Senate, I think 
was in the ten or twelve thousand-dollar 
range, and it just simply wasn’t enough to 
provide me the money I needed to properly 
educate them or educate them as my wife and 
I felt they should be educated. So that was my 
rationale in the staying on, and I was criticized 
for it over my political career. 

I had represented mining companies, and 
then I was on the mining committee of the 
U.S. Senate, and some of the critics of the day, 
Drew Pearson and there’s one other fellow by 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


63 


the name of [Jack] Anderson never hesitated 
to point out that I had a hopeless conflict 
because I represented this wining company and 
that mining company and while I was a U.S. 
senator, and therefore I could not be objective 
and completely fair. And the ideal situation, of 
course, is to be a person of tremendous wealth, 
why you don’t have to do anything else except 
become a senator or a congressman. And the 
work was then and has become increasingly 
hard—difficult, so that about all you can do 
today, no matter whether you’re rich or poor, 
if you’re going to do a creditable job as a U.S. 
senator or as a congressman, is devote your 
full time to that responsibility. There’s plenty to 
keep you busy, and more than you can possibly 
handle as an individual in just attending to 
your political commitments. 

So, that was a partnership that remained 
for many years—many years, particularly 
the earlier years until my children were 
educated. And then in later years, after I 
retired some four years ago, they asked me 
to come back as a consultant, and I’m still 
shown as a consultant of my old law firm, 
one that I really started with Bob McDonald 
and has grown into a much larger firm. And 
my oldest son, who is a lawyer, is now active 
in it; I’m shown as a consultant, and the only 
consulting I have done is to go in and pick up 
my mail and then get out of there as quickly 
as I could before they ask me something! So 
I’ve continued in that particular role right to 
this day, and I shall, I suppose, as long as they 
are kind enough to show me as a consultant 
on the stationery. I do not share in any of 
the proceeds of the law office and have no 
intentions of doing so. But if it’s helpful 
to them, I’m glad to lend my name to that 
particular purpose at that particular law firm. 

I think it might be well to just sketch out 
some of the responsibilities and decisions and 
cases that were handled during my eight years 


as attorney general, and I note in doing my 
“homework” and briefly in my research, that I 
became a deputy on March 1,1938, and then 
I became the full attorney general in nineteen 
hundred and forty-two. Now the first time 
that I became attorney general, we directed 
our reports to Governor Carville, who was 
the then governor of the state. I note in that 
particular time as well as in earlier and later 
time, I constantly made a recommendation 
to be relieved from administrative boards 
and commissions. The constitution and/ 
or the statutes of the state of Nevada have, 
over the history of our state, placed the 
attorney general on a number of committees. 
Some were constitutional boards and some 
are statutory boards. Statutory boards, of 
course, could be very easily changed. The 
constitutional boards are much more difficult. 

But the attorney general was, during 
my period of time, a member of the Board 
of Examiners, and he was a member of the 
Board of Pardons and Paroles. And it was the 
membership on the Board of Pardons and 
Paroles, I think, that disturbed me as much as 
any one membership because here as attorney 
general you were the chief law enforcing officer 
of the state and you handled an appeal to the 
Supreme Court, you are by statute required 
to represent the various district attorneys in 
the state and argue before the supreme court 
of the state. And you were also invested with 
the authority and required by the constitution 
to be on the Pardons and Parole Board. And 
it did seem to me that that would put you in a 
rather conflict of interest role, because here on 
one hand you were prosecuting or defending 
or upholding the hand of the prosecutor and 
then on the other hand, you were asked to 
pardon or parole the convict. That has been 
changed with independent boards, and I think 
that has been a completely satisfactory way of 
resolving very, very difficult conflicts. 



64 


Alan Bible 


You also were a member of the Board 
of Prison Commissioners, and that was the 
board together with the governor, and I 
believe the treasurer or the controller was the 
third member, one of the two, or maybe it was 
the secretary of state was the third member 
of the board. And you were charged with the 
responsibility of providing the prisons and 
seeing that the care—and it was management 
of the prison. There the attorney general 
might have had more of a role, and I don’t 
see too bad a conflict there. But they do have 
many, many problems. 

You were also made, during my period of 
time, a member of the Industrial Commission, 
and you were made a member of the Public 
Service Commission. You were made a 
member of the Highway board, and you were 
made a member of the Trust Fund Board. 
Now I think since you have to make opinions 
based on the law and deciding the law on 
problems that arise in each of those areas, 
that it’s far better—you’re far better off to be 
completely independent of it and serve as a 
lawyer, rather than as an administrator as 
well as a lawyer. And over the years many— 
many changes have been made there, and I 
think all to the improvements of the statutes 
of our state. But memberships are very, very 
interesting; some of the decisions we had are 
very interesting. 

We had a tremendously difficult problem 
and almost a hopeless problem in trying to 
read the school laws of the state. They were 
jumbled up over the years, and they were 
added just willy-nilly and from session to 
session. They’d put on another section of 
the law and then try to interpret it. So, we 
made the plea before the legislature to give 
us money to recodify the laws. And the 
legislature granted us the necessary money, 
and I hired Gray Mashburn, who was the 
former attorney general, with the theory in 


mind that he had great background having 
been attorney general himself, I think for 
eight years; and then I also put on that board 
young Dick Waters, who was a young lawyer, 
later [to] become the district attorney of 
Ormsby County in Carson City and later to 
become the district judge there and a position 
he held until his death. So, we were successful, 
and the school laws were recodified and I 
think corrected many, many of the errors that 
had been in the earlier laws. It’s the present 
basis of the school laws of this state, and of 
course even under that there were requests 
for opinions on sections that even though 
recodified, weren’t completely clear. I think 
that’s true of any effort to try to crystalize laws 
so that they’re easily understandable; you’ve 
taken as many conflicts out of them as you 
could. But that was one contribution that I 
thought was very much worthwhile. 

Gambling was coming to the fore in 
Nevada and becoming more and more a 
national attraction and very obviously it 
did attract some undesirable characters into 
gambling and it became very apparent by 
some of our earlier legislators that they had to 
very strictly control it or that it would get out 
of hand. And they had to be very, very careful 
on that. And as my memory serves me, some 
of the leaders in gambling, I think Phil Tobin 
is correctly credited with being the father of 
bringing in modern day gambling back in 
legally; but beyond that, at that time subject 
to local option. In other words, the county 
commissioners would practically govern who 
got the license and who didn’t get the license. 
It became apparent to a great number of 
people that there had to be a strengthening of 
our gambling laws or had to be more—or had 
to be stricter control or they could very well 
get completely out of hand. I’m sure that Bob 
Cahill, in relating his oral history to you, has 
built in a great deal of that. I know he pointed 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


65 


out the problems we had with the zoo games, 
for example, and finally we managed to get 
them cleaned out of the state, I hope. I really 
believe they have. But gambling got bigger and 
bigger and it became obvious that you had to 
have tighter control on it. 

And as I remember it, the two men that 
came to me during the time that I was attorney 
general and said, “Now we want your assistance 
in legally helping us put the state more and 
more into the gaming control business”—the 
two men were Walter Cox, who is a state 
senator from Lyon County, Yerington, and Ken 
Johnson, who was an active gambler in Carson 
City. They could foresee many problems in the 
connection of that. They enlisted the aid of Bill 
Dressier who was a strong state senator from 
Douglas County to help them, and they came 
into my office, I can almost see them now, 
coming in one time in Carson City during 
the time I was a full attorney general and said, 
“Now we want you to design some type of a 
law that’ll put the state more and more into 
the gambling business.” 

I said, “Well, who do you want to entrust 
it to? Who do you want to put in charge?” 

“Well, use your own judgment.” 

And we finally made the Nevada Tax 
Commission the governing agency. Now 
they were never set up originally to have 
anything in the world to do with gambling, 
but that was the first effort that was made, 
and out of that first effort with amendments 
over the years, we gave more and more power 
to the gaming—and built in the Gaming 
Control Board. And as time went on, various 
perfecting amendments were passed. As 
we had experiences in going to the courts 
and getting court approved decisions, we 
established many guidelines that were built 
into the law, indicating that gambling was not 
a right, it was a privilege; and that was really 
the foundation of their strength because they 


could rule it pretty much with an iron hand, 
which they had to do. And the courts have 
sustained that since then. It’s been tested 
many times, and one could build into the 
report what the court said last about it. As 
a matter of fact, I could build in my opinion 
which held that many, many years ago about 
it being a privilege; in fact it was quoted in 
some recent newspaper article that appeared 
in local press. I saw it—I made note of it at 
the time thinking I might build it in there 
because it did comment on it—that that 
was the place where Nevada gaming kind 
of turned around and became a privilege, 
became strictly controlled, and because it was 
getting out of hand. So, that would be a part 
of the gaming board. 

In examining the opinions over the years, 
I find that there were many gaming opinions. 
I noticed a recent reference in one of the local 
papers to an opinion that was written by me 
putting the state of Nevada into the gambling 
business. It was formerly handled completely 
by the county, and it seemed, apparently, 
to the governing authorities of the various 
counties—I think it arose in Clark County— 
the vulnerability that you had in allowing a 
county to completely judge the fitness of the 
applicants for gaming licenses—. 

A comment was made just very recently 
in an article that was written by William R. 
Eadington and James F. Hattori, and they said 
the legislature looks at gambling, and this was 
an article which they were commissioned to 
write so as to point out the history of gambling 
in the state—now—and how the state got into 
it.* I’m using their language, and it’s very short 
and I think I should probably read it. 


*Eadington and Hattori, “Gambling in 
Nevada: Legislative History and Economic 
Trends” (UNR Bureau of Business and 
Economic Research, 1977). 




66 


Alan Bible 


It said: 

In order to clarify the issues of 
county versus state licenses and the 
Nevada Tax Commissions denial of 
licenses, the Nevada Tax Commission 
asked Attorney General Alan Bible 
questions in these areas. First, the 
Tax Commission asked whether 
they could stipulate that a county 
could issue a gaming license only 
after a licensee had first obtained a 
state license. Attorney General Bible 
stated he thought such a requirement 
was lawful. This prerequisite would 
prevent casino owners from operating 
only with a county license and would 
insure that all licensees would have 
to appear before the Nevada Tax 
Commission.* 

I might bring—just make a comment 
at that point, and that is that much of this 
came about because of—many abuses of 
the county gaming statutes as they existed, 
and it appeared that unless you could keep 
gaming under strict control and with very 
tight licensing provisions, that it could get 
out of hand and bring very, very undesirable 
characters into the state. I think, if I might 
observe, at least I believe, that over the years 
that the gaming has been run on a high level 
and with strict conformity and that you’ve 
kept adverse characters out of the state in a 
very admirable style, and I don’t think it could 
have been done unless you had put the state 
in with very strict licensing and regulatory 
powers. 

The next paragraph in this article written 
historically said: 

Secondly, the Tax Commission 
inquired if they could deny a 
license if in their opinion granting 


the application was not in the 
public interest. Bible stated the Tax 
Commission could deny a license on 
grounds of harm to the public interest. 
Thus, 1949 marked the first attempt 
of the state of Nevada to provide for 
strict state control of gaming.* 

And the article, which I think is a very 
well written article, goes on to point out some 
of the problems in keeping or attempting to 
keep gaming clean in this state. And by and 
large, I think they have been very successful 
in doing that. And I’ve taken pride—I take 
pride in the decision that I made then, and 
if I’m correct I believe it’s been attacked 
a number of times, but it’s always been 
sustained by the courts. And I don’t think 
there’s any doubt but what the decision was 
sound and will remain sound. And I think 
that’s going to do everything possible legally 
to insure the cleanness of those in the gaming 
world because it is—it is a privilege, it’s been 
sustained as a privilege and should be dealt 
with very, very vigorously and very rigidly 
and very strictly. And I think that has been 
the end result of this gaming opinion. 

There were all—there were many, many 
offshoots of that particular opinion, and it 
cropped up in a good many areas. One was the 
attempt over a period of years to—sometime 
to clean up, and that was the appearance of 
the so-called “zoos” in the state. We had a zoo 
operation which was nothing more nor less 
than a bunco game. One of them was operated 
out of Palisade, and it led to Eureka County 
investigations and the Eureka County grand 
jury, finally a trial in the—and the imposition 


*Eadington and Hattori, “Gambling in 
Nevada: Legislative History and Economic 
Trends” (UNR Bureau of Business and 
Economic Research, 1977). 




Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


67 


of a penalty on the sheriff there who was 
directly involved. 

Poor old Sheriff Fine, I think, got 
convinced by a jury trial. I think he did a little 
time in our state institution over in Carson 
City called the state penitentiary. He was a 
kindly old sheriff, you’d never suspect him in 
a million years, but he was in on the fix. And 
Bob Cahill was the first one that analyzed it; 
he says, “You’ve got to open your eyes and take 
a look at that sheriff there ’cause the sheriff is 
knockin’ off,” and he says, “So is Les Moody.” 
And I guess they were. 

That period is so important, especially your 
opinions on the privilege aspect. 

We launched them in the right direction, 
I’m sure. It’s been repeatedly sustained. God 
knows, if they had left the counties just be 
the—have the final word on whether you got 
a gambling license or whether you didn’t, 
there’d been more hanky-panky than you 
can shake a stick at. It’s a tough industry, 
face it; you know that. And, there’s so many 
opportunities to do wrong in that area; it kind 
of puzzles you. 

Over the period of the years, we had many, 
many opinions on fish and game problems 
because it seems like they’re always involved 
in a controversy either with the federal 
government as to who has the control over 
the fish and the game or with sportsmen who 
want to take more advantage of the law than 
the law permitted. 

Many, many requests came from our 
election officials each and every time we had 
an election because that always poses doubts 
as to the legality of the election and how it’s 
being conducted. And of course as I indicated 
a few moments ago, there—the need for 
school law recodification was apparent 
because of the many, many decisions that 


were requested by the school officials of the 
state. 

Another case of course of the first order 
and of, again, of tremendous importance 
was the case of Arizona vs. California. I 
believe that Hugh Shamberger has testified 
in some depth on that particular case. He 
was in it in his capacity as the deputy state 
engineer and then as a full state engineer for 
the state of Nevada. This again involved the 
question as to the division of the waters of 
the Colorado River. It had been hoped that 
it would have been settled by the Santa Fe 
Compact which was entered into many years 
earlier, but it was constantly kept in turmoil 
and uncertainty. And it wasn’t until the 
final decision of the Arizona vs. California 
suit filed in the U.S. Supreme Court that the 
matter was determined, and not too soon in 
any event because civilizations were starting 
to be built around it and use of that water, 
and one had to know as to whether—how 
firm their entitlement was. And so the final 
supreme court decision (after the petitions 
for rehearing and the various appeals had 
been made to upset the decision of the U.S. 
Supreme Court) was finalized; and I firmly 
believe that it has set the final law of the 
case, so that the state of Arizona knows 
exactly what it’ll receive, the state of Nevada 
knows exactly what it’ll receive, state of 
California and its entities know what it will 
receive, because the state of California did 
move quickly, as later turned out rather 
effectively, to state their claim to the waters 
of the Colorado. And the end result, though 
certainly not pleasing to all the parties, 
at least settled something that had been 
uncertain for so many, many years. And that 
was probably one of the most important, it 
not the most important, case that came up 
during my tenure as deputy attorney general 
and as an attorney general of the state. 



68 


Alan Bible 


I was projected rather forcefully into the 
Arizona vs. California suit. Gray Mashburn 
had been handling it personally, and I think 
again doing a great job when he was very 
badly injured in an automobile accident and 
was unable to attend to that case. And it fell 
upon me to carry on in his place. I think 
Bill Mathews was overworked in other areas 
and simply couldn’t take that load. So I was 
projected in my final year as deputy attorney 
general into the Arizona vs. California lawsuit 
and devoted the major part of my time for the 
next several years to that. We had the help of 
some special deputies, and we needed them 
when we went against the batteries of lawyers 
and engineers and experts that were mustered 
by California, which were overwhelming you 
with the number of lawyers they had, and to 
a lesser degree the state of Arizona, who also 
had many, many lawyers. The Upper Basin 
states, the states of Utah, Colorado, New 
Mexico and Wyoming were also involved 
in the suit in a secondary degree, but they 
likewise furnished many lawyers and experts 
in engineering personnel. So at one time it 
must have been one of the biggest lawsuits 
that had ever been filed in front of the U.S. 
Supreme Court in the number of participants 
of record as lawyers representing all the 
various entities involved. 

It would be a matter of many days 
discussion to review all of the phases of 
these cases, but the record would speak for 
itself. It is a voluminous one and is one that 
is a landmark case in water law. But that was 
probably the number one case that came 
before us. 

There was the case of the division of 
the money that came to us from the federal 
government. There was the question of the 
relative jurisdiction of the federal government 
and the state government in the matters 
of federal monies that came to the state of 


Nevada. In that, the federal government 
imposed itself more and more on the state 
and went in to help the state in various 
problems, the more problems that arose as 
to where the jurisdiction of each entity, the 
federal government and the sovereign state 
of Nevada, was involved. This had been a 
constant source of litigation over the years. 
There’s examples in the mining law. There’s 
examples in the Bureau of Land Management, 
which came out as the outgrowth of the Taylor 
Grazing Act; and the division of monies 
insofar as the highway system is concerned; 
and a myriad of federal-state relationships 
which led to many conferences, and attempts 
to work a compromise that was agreeable to 
those involved. 

And in many, many instances, as I 
indicated earlier, ended up in lawsuits 
involving the two sovereignties, the sovereign 
federal government and the sovereign state. 
And one can see as you look back, the 
encroachment more and more of the federal 
government on the state sovereignty, and one 
that has really carried the federal government, 
I believe too far into state affairs. It came about 
in the payments of monies to the various 
entities to assist them with their government 
and their roles in taking care of the people 
within the state. And this revenue act was 
one that I did not favor because I thought 
from experience and based upon history 
that once the federal government put dollars 
into a project, whatever that project was, 
they wanted to retain some control and that 
became larger and larger control, and again 
led to many misunderstandings between the 
federal and the state government. And I think 
it’s still true in the revenue act and the aid 
to the states and the district, if they simply 
give you a flat share of money based upon 
whatever type of a formula was finally worked 
out and then remove the strings, then that 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


69 


would be one matter. But it never works out 
that way in practice; even though they claim 
we’re not going to attempt to tell you what to 
do, they always end up not only attempting to 
tell you what to do, but doing that. And if you 
don’t do it their way, then no money. They’ll 
hold back the funds. 

This is an interesting pattern of study 
over all our federal-state relationships and is 
particularly noticeable in the many clashes 
that there’s been between the southern states 
and the federal government in civil rights 
matters and using through the power of the 
dollar the very strong sanction of closing 
schools and withholding funds and things of 
that kind. It’s very clear in the busing cases 
which are still in a state of flux throughout 
the United States, notwithstanding some 
clarifying opinions from the highest court. So 
these are problems with which we had some 
very early warning of things to come from 
the federal government and matters which I 
encountered when I went into a different role 
on a legislative level as a U.S. senator from 
Nevada. But I should have been—I don’t know 
that I was—forewarned of the pitfalls that 
came about in the acceptance of money. But 
money has such a strong inducement to do 
things that sometimes the states as individuals 
will succumb to the lure of the almighty dollar. 
And I think that has been true in many, many 
instances. And we encountered it in its early 
stages back in nineteen hundred and thirty- 
eight, which was only a short period of time 
after the New Deal that was brought on by 
FDR. 

During that period of time, one of my 
most important opinions and one that caused 
me as much political problem as any, was an 
osteopathic opinion where I wrote an opinion 
at the request of Dr. [Harry W.] Sawyer. Dr. 
Sawyer was a very ardent Democrat politically; 
he was an osteopathic doctor himself from 


Idaho, and he later became a licensed M.D. 
And Fallon, which was my home town, had 
many osteopaths; it was the seat of a lot of 
osteopathic activity as to what an osteopath 
could do and what an osteopath could not 
do. I wrote the opinion myself. It was based 
on a Kansas case of State vs. Gleason, which 
held that they—there’re so many things they 
couldn’t do; they couldn’t substitute their 
skills for that of a physician and surgeon. 
Over the years by passing various laws of 
qualification in the medical laws of the state 
of Nevada, that has been pretty well corrected. 
But at that time, it was a red-hot issue. 

Dr. Sawyer was an interesting individual. 
He was a scrapper and a fighter. He was a 
skilled politician, and he was the father of 
Grant Sawyer, the very fine governor of the 
state of Nevada, a young man who is still 
practicing law in southern Nevada and doing 
extremely well. 

There were, during all of that period of 
time, many—many highway condemnation 
suits because the highways of our state were 
growing. I recall one where we bypassed Verdi; 
and certainly from a political standpoint, this 
is not a happy suit to be associated with. If I 
recall correctly, since we did bypass Verdi, 
right in the general area of where the present 
highway runs, I think the next time I ran, I 
lost every vote in Verdi, because I was the 
attorney general and as such, had to handle 
the highway condemnation suit, and needless 
to say, people, when their communities are 
bypassed, take a very dim view of it. And it’s 
one of the hard rock cases that you have in 
a state such as Nevada. The highways pretty 
much bypass and they will bypass Lovelock 
and Winnemucca, Elko in the future, and 
it does cause some change of location and 
change of activity for various people who 
have built up their livelihoods along the 
highway. And it’s always been—they’ve 



70 


Alan Bible 


always been hard cases to handle, and today 
I don’t believe there will be too much more 
disruption. One of the classic ones was the 
driving of the highway through Reno, where 
there was a bitter fight and many years of 
controversy before the present highway line 
was finally settled. Disruption vanishes after 
the years, but during the period where it is 
being tried and during the period where it’s 
being formulated as to its exact location, it’s 
a very difficult problem, and it was a red- 
hot political issue in Washoe County and 
in Reno for a good many years. To the best 
of my knowledge, it’s almost entirely settled 
at the present time, and probably a few 
little remaining problems that haven’t been 
absolutely settled, but for practical purposes, 
the highway is built, it is being used, and those 
earlier bruises that one encounters in lawsuits 
are just about over with. 

There were many criminal fields during 
the period of time. One of the most famous 
was the Fitzgerald-Sullivan case. Lincoln 
Fitzgerald is still alive; he is the owner of 
Fitzgerald’s in downtown Reno. They were 
being sought by Michigan, the state of 
Michigan because they had violated the 
gambling laws of that state. The district 
attorney of White Pine County, where 
they filed their habeas corpus petitions, 
disqualified himself because he had earlier 
done work for either Fitzgerald or Sullivan, 
possibly both of them. So it fell to me to go to 
Ely on many, many times in order to attempt 
to get their extradition to Michigan for trial in 
that particular jurisdiction. And after many, 
many long distance trips to Ely and to White 
Pine County in front of the judiciary there, 
they finally worked out a settlement where 
Fitzgerald and Sullivan took, a lesser plea and 
finally satisfied the state of Michigan. 

The state of Michigan, interestingly 
enough at that time, had what they called a 


one-man grand jury, and this gave an undue 
amount of power to one man. That man 
was Homer Ferguson, and he was a trial 
judge and he was also the grand jury, and 
he is the one that was responsible for pretty 
much wiping out gambling in the Detroit 
area, where both Fitzgerald and Sullivan had 
previously operated. And it’s interesting to 
note that he later ran on his antigambling 
stance and his anti-gambling record, he was 
elected as a U.S. senator from Michigan, he 
served there for two terms, and then he was 
defeated in Michigan, and he was appointed 
by President Nixon, I believe, on the Court 
of Military Appeals. And the last time that I 
was in Washington, I had occasion to see him 
and of course he’s a man with whom Nevada 
was very intimately acquainted because of 
the position he took on the Fitzgerald and 
Sullivan extradition. 

But we had a number of extradition cases 
and the attorney general usually had some 
part in them, because he assisted the district 
attorneys, and the district attorneys uniformly 
called upon the attorney general for assistance 
in extradition cases. They were always rather 
difficult, not from a legal standpoint, but 
from an emotional standpoint and from just 
a human interest standpoint because of the 
individuals involved. And they still have many 
extraditions from the state, and the governors 
almost unanimously permit extradition— 
occasionally and undoubtedly for good cause 
refuse to extradite. 

Now my final tour of duty as attorney 
general during my second term, took me 
from ’50 to ’52, and I note that in that period 
of time my opinions were numbered 933 
through 972. So during my tenure as attorney 
general, I was responsible for and wrote 
many of—approximately a thousand official 
written opinions, and that doesn’t count the 
ones, of course, that were unofficial or that 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


71 


you just gave orally It’s always a good rule 
in life, I think, in dealing with lawyers (and I 
am a lawyer), to have them put it in writing 
because then they can’t go back on it and say, 
“Well, that isn’t what I meant.” But if you have 
it in writing, it’s pretty hard to contradict the 
writing. And any well-informed, well-advised 
agency always asks for an attorney general’s 
opinion because then that saves them from 
making the mistake; it’s the attorney general, 
then, that is the fall guy for opinions that are 
unpopular, and this is true in many, many 
instances. 

Most of my opinions were I hope 
sustainable by the court. They ran the entire 
gamut of relationships that we have in our 
state day in and day out, and they don’t vary 
too much from one decade to another. I try to 
hold my own personal opinions to be about 
as brief as possible. I’ve always felt that long, 
involved opinions were not the best, though 
in some instances they had to necessarily be 
somewhat long. But one that came right to 
the point and gave a few cogent reasons for 
writing as you did and suggesting a course of 
action was of course always preferred by the 
state officers whom we served. 

The state officers of course being human 
(I’m sure I would have done the same thing 
if I’d have been in a different capacity) were 
always prone when they had what we call 
a “hot potato” come across the plate to say, 
“Well, we’d better pass that hot potato on 
to our good friend the attorney general.” So 
they ended up, so many problems during 
that period of time, and I’m sure it’s equally 
true today, end up in the lap of the attorney 
general to tell ’em what to do and “the buck 
stops there” as that sign so well expresses. 
(I think it was a statement that I think has 
been attributed to Harry Truman over the 
years, “The Buck Stops Here.” And it’s a good 
point to remember.) But the buck stopped at 


the attorney general’s office in many, many 
instances and depending upon the nature 
of the opinion, whether our popularity 
somewhat went up and down because even 
though we felt we had good, sound legal basis; 
people always figure you can decide the case 
their way rather than the other way. And so 
we were in the middle of many a spirited 
controversy during a total of thirteen years. 
Of course, that’s what the attorney general’s 
for; it was a part of our everyday work. But it 
seemed to me that many state officers could 
have made many decisions themselves and 
saved us the burden as well as the agony of 
ruling on contentious problems. 

Is that true of district attorneys too? 

Oh yes, and of course we were the legal 
advisors for district attorneys, and the district 
attorney again following a very normal, honest 
trait of nature said, “Well, we should ask the 
attorney general about this local question that 
we have because it might serve as a precedent 
for district attorneys in other countries who 
have the same kind of a problem.” So we 
became involved not only in the statewide 
problems involving the state officers, but we 
became involved in many of the problems of 
the seventeen district attorneys of the state. 

And of course I think it’s true in 
government that on the local level you’re 
constantly feeling the pressure of public 
opinion more than you are on a larger level 
because it’s further distant. In other words, in 
a small county you pass your district attorney 
practically everyday of the week and you can 
get to him very easily because you live in the 
same smaller community. And this is true 
of everywheres in Nevada with the possible 
exception of Reno and Las Vegas which have 
become population centers, but even there 
it’s fairly easy to reach the district attorney on 



72 


Alan Bible 


some question that you might have of the local 
concern. But, and not only that, in cases where 
the district attorney felt disqualified—in the 
small counties particularly—because of some 
conflict that he had, then he could call on the 
attorney general to come in and handle the 
case for him. So we did, in our capacity in 
the attorney general’s office, many times were 
summoned in to help on really what were 
local problems and appeared before grand 
juries and juries in that particular capacity. 

One case of some interest for several 
years was the so-called “zoo” case, which 
came about in Eureka where it was obviously 
a fraudulent operation and was the old shell 
game, really, and many tourists coming into 
our state would stop by and be robbed in a 
gentle sense of the money they might have in 
betting with the very smart con men who had 
set up the operation, and then they lured the 
passengers to a stop because of a zoo and an 
animal, and then there’d always be a card game 
or a shell game come up which would entice 
the unknowledgeable in trying to make a few 
dollars at the expense of the zoo. And it just 
never turned out that the zoo ever lost. And 
we had many complaints on it and a long time 
was spent in investigating and finally we were 
successful in closing them down and dealing 
with the owners and the operators of the zoos 
and meting out the proper punishment. But 
it was a long, involved process, far too long 
really, but it was stamped out. I don’t think 
it’s ever recurred in Nevada and probably 
because there’s plenty of open gambling 
around everywheres you look, so that if you 
do want to gamble then you can do it. But 
this was headquartered for a long time in the 
small county of Eureka. And the county seat of 
Eureka was quite a ways away from the main 
highway through the state. Emigrant Gap, 
the name comes back, where many tourists 
went on the main highway through Nevada. 


But, that was another problem that comes 
back to mind that ended up in the attorney 
general’s office. I hope that it was ultimately 
and correctly and properly disposed of. 

There seemed to be an awful lot of these rather 
simple kinds of opinion going out to the district 
attorneys. 

Well, I think that’s correct. I think it’s 
mainly because they hit the masses on the 
local level, and with very rare exception the 
district attorneys are very cooperative. And 
I think many of them honestly did feel that 
other district attorneys might have the same 
question, the same problem and that in the 
sake of uniformity they would rather have an 
overall attorney general’s opinion that would 
apply to all district attorneys, rather than 
having one district attorney ruling one way 
and another district attorney ruling another 
way. I believe we were helpful in keeping 
many court cases at a minimum by those 
opinions. I think we were helpful and I haven’t 
attempted to tabulate how many cases we 
were sustained and how many cases we were 
overruled. I believe that our batting average 
was very good. 

Judges and District Attorneys 

During that period of time, I worked 
with a great number of trial judges or district 
judges throughout the state, and I—in order 
to refresh my memory, I went back through 
my own files and find that in District Number 
One, during practically all of the time that 
I was attorney general, Clark J. Guild was 
the judge in District Number One and that 
embraced among other areas, the Ormsby 
County or Carson City. At that time there were 
only two judges in Washoe County. One was a 
very famous Irishman, Barney Moran, and the 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


73 


other was Ben Curler. They were the two trial 
judges and the district judges here in Washoe 
County And as the population has grown, 
of course there’s been an increased need for 
judicial power and there are, of course, many 
more judges than those two at this present 
time, the two that were authorized. 

The judge in Eureka during that period 
of time in Eureka County was Edgar Eather. 
Elko, as I previously mentioned, the trial 
judge was E. P. Carville. He resigned July 1, 
1934, to become the U.S. Attorney for the state 
of Nevada; and he secured great publicity as 
the U.S. Attorney because he was the trial 
lawyer in the case involving Bill Graham and 
Jim McKay. And they were gamblers, and they 
were being indicted; in fact, they were tried 
in New York courts, and they were convicted 
there. But due to that role that Judge Carville 
played in the trial of McKay and Graham, he 
was thought as being a very logical candidate 
for the Democratic nomination for governor 
of the state of Nevada and based partly on 
fame and the notoriety which he received as 
the prosecutor in that case. He was elected as 
governor of the state of Nevada, later went on 
to become a U.S. senator—in later years after 
his tour of duty as governor of the state. 

The judge in Tonopah was J. Emmet 
Walsh, and the judge in Winnemucca was 
L.O. Hawkins of the very famous Hawkins 
family, a group of young men who were out of 
Colorado and who were very skilled lawyers. 
The judge over in Ely at White Pine County at 
that time was H. W Edwards, Judge Edwards, 
and he served there as judge for a number of 
years. When he retired, he came and practiced 
law in Reno. And he had one daughter, 
Virginia Edwards, who in turn married Don 
Richards, who is a present active, practicing 
lawyer in Reno. 

The judge in Lincoln and Clark County, 
which interestingly enough at that period of 


time (this’dbe in the 1931-34 period of time) 
was Judge William Orr. The interesting thing 
is that Clark County was so small back in that 
period of time that it only took one judge to 
handle all the cases out of Lincoln County as 
well as out of Clark County. Judge Orr was 
the—later became the Nevada member on the 
Circuit Court of Appeals—the Ninth Circuit, 
and a very able lawyer and the predecessor 
of the same position that was held by Charlie 
Merrill of this state, and just within the last 
few months, Procter Hug, Jr., who is now— 
holds that same position, really what we 
would call the Nevada position on the Circuit 
Court of Appeals, which covers California and 
Nevada and a part of Arizona or possibly all of 
Arizona. And it’s a high honor to those men 
who have gone on into those higher positions. 

In 1938, looking at the district judges (and 
the attorney worked very closely with them— 
they were—the attorney generals were, to a 
degree, one of the advisors for district judges. I 
don’t think they were made that by statute, but 
they had close association with them because 
they appeared in front of them many times), 
Judge Moran died in nineteen hundred and 
thirty-eight, and Judge [A. J.] Maestretti, who 
was from Austin, Nevada, was appointed in 
his place and held that position for many, 
many years. 

In the Winnemucca area, Tom Salter 
later became a judge. And later on after that, 
Merwyn Brown succeeded him. George 
Annand, whom I have mentioned as one of 
my deputies was appointed as district judge 
in the Ely, White Pine area. And Roger Foley 
was appointed—Roger Foley, Sr. —was 
appointed as a trial judge in Las Vegas on the 
elevation of Judge Orr to the Circuit Court 
and later became a federal judge in the state of 
Nevada. George Marshall was elected as one 
of the early-day judges, during my period of 
time as attorney general, to the trial court in 



74 


Alan Bible 


Clark County, and in effect, was the successor 
to Roger Foley, and Roger Foley in turn was 
the successor to Judge Bill Orr. Judge Eather, 
whom I mentioned as being a judge in Eureka, 
was appointed in about 1945 or ’46 to the 
Nevada Supreme Court and served in that 
capacity for a number of years. 

It might be helpful to take a quick look at 
the district attorneys of the various counties. 
The attorney general—if anyone did have 
supervision over the district attorneys, it 
would be the attorney general. And I know 
during my period of time we always had a 
close relationship. The attorney general’s office 
was compelled by statute to furnish opinions 
to the district attorney when requested. 
And of course that was a godsend to district 
attorneys because in cases that were difficult 
or had lots of local controversy, they were 
always happy to pass a “hot potato,” as you 
might colloquialize it. And so we received 
many requests, most of them were never 
very easy requests, and if there were obvious 
answers that had political implications on 
it, many of the district attorneys were not 
beyond passing it on to the attorney general in 
order to save themselves the embarrassment 
or the criticism and the difficulty that came 
about in making a difficult decision. But, 
the [district attorneys] of the state, I think I 
should build into the record the names of the 
[district attorneys] that were—with whom I 
worked during my years as attorney general. 

The district attorney in Clark County 
was Robert Jones, very able man, a man who 
served there for many years. John [F.] Sexton 
of Eureka, who later became the district judge. 
Peter Breen of Goldfield who was district 
attorney, later became a district judge and 
whose son today serves as a district judge 
in Washoe County. Duffy Priest in Austin, 
Judge Priest came from Austin after serving 
as judge there into Reno and is still active in a 


practice in Reno. Harold Taber still practicing 
in Reno, Nevada, was a district judge in Reno. 
Leo Puccinelli was the district judge in Elko, 
Nevada; he’s since passed on. Bill Crowell 
was the district judge in Tonopah, is still alive 
in the practice in Carson City and has two 
sons associated with him also active in the 
practice. Leonard Blasdell was the district 
attorney in Mineral County, and I believe is 
still practicing there. 

Judge McFadden was the district attorney 
in White Pine County, and he has passed 
on. Jim Johnson was the district attorney in 
Churchill County—Fallon, and later became 
the U.S. Attorney for the state of Nevada and is 
presently active in the practice of law in Reno. 
And Joe Martin was the district attorney in 
Pioche, and frankly I don’t know whether he 
is still alive or not. He was the district attorney 
in Pioche for quite a number of years. Johnson 
Lloyd was the district attorney in Eureka. Jim 
Callahan was a long-time district attorney 
in Winnemucca and today is succeeded by 
Bill McDonald, who is the present district 
attorney in Winnemucca. 

Howard Browne was the long-time 
district attorney in Austin; he is now presently 
practicing in Reno, Nevada. Doc Belanger 
was the district attorney in Lovelock, Nevada, 
Pershing County. Wayne Jepson was a long¬ 
time district attorney in Yerington; he has at 
least one son who is active in the practice of 
law in Reno. Gray Gubler was also a district 
attorney succeeding Bob Jones in Clark 
County during my tenure. Grover Krick was 
the long-time district attorney in Douglas 
County; he has since passed on. E. E. Winters 
was the—one of the early district attorneys in 
Fallon and Churchill County, Nevada, and he’s 
passed on. Sanford Bunce was a later district 
attorney in Lovelock, Pershing County, 
Nevada, and I believe that he has passed on. 
C. A. Eddy was one of the district attorneys 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


75 


in Ely, Nevada and has since that period of 
time been—he has also passed on in Ely. I’ve 
built this into the record thinking it might be 
helpful as some type of an overall digest for 
the district attorneys in the state. 

We met occasionally; there was no—and 
I believe today that that’s been implemented 
and that they have annual meetings and 
conventions and select their own heads of the 
district attorneys of the state. It is something 
that should have been done a long time ago, 
and I am happy to see that it is active now 
because there’s a lot of relationships between 
the various district attorneys and the attorney 
generals; and as one part of a larger family of 
the enforcers of the law, I think they can do 
a lot of good—they can share problems and 
in sharing those problems they can likewise 
come up with suggestions as to how they 
can meet some of the problems of the day. 
And that is rather a quick summary and an 
inadequate summary of my days as attorney 
general and some of the reminiscences and 
events that come to mind. 

How about telling me a little bit about some 
of these people? For example, were the judges 
good judges, industrious judges, lazy judges, 
poor judges? When you mentioned McFadden, 
for example, I remembered that they had tried 
to impeach him in the legislature. 

Well, he liked to take a little nip of the 
wine, but I think the judges of the state were 
on the whole were very industrious and 
hardworking. I think there were exceptions 
among judges just like there are exceptions 
among men; you have the good and bad, 
the hardworking, the ones that don’t work 
so hard, and ones that speak out and are 
outspoken, and ones that are students of the 
law and very quiet. I think you had a blend 
of all judges; I would honestly feel, as I look 


at the entire picture of judges with whom I 
worked, is that they were as learned in the 
law and they were as able and fair as judges as 
you would find in any other state. You’ll find 
those judges who are outstanding, and you’ll 
find the judges who are mediocre, and you’ll 
find judges who are poor; usually if a judge is 
very poor, the voters themselves weed them 
out just as soon as an election comes along. I 
would think that would be my analysis of the 
judges of the state. I wouldn’t pinpoint ’em— 
say Mr. X is good, bad, or indifferent because 
my opinions may be prejudiced, maybe weigh 
in one way or the other, but on balance I think 
they all were hardworking who try—and doin’ 
their dead level best to try to dispense justice 
fairly and impartially. 

And that same question would be about the 
district attorneys. 

Well, and they’d all fit in about that same 
category. Some of them went forward into 
other positions. Running down the district 
attorneys, you’ll see that John Sexton became 
a judge, a controversial judge over in Eureka. 
Peter Breen became a judge in the Goldfield 
area; and Duffy Priest, as district attorney, 
became a judge there. Harold Taber was a 
judge here. Leo Puccinelli died real young—I 
think he died when he was district attorney. 
Bill Crowell did not go forward to be a 
judge, but he did go into private practice. He 
represented the Industrial Commission for 
a number of years and has still a very fine 
practice in Tonopah and still practices there. 
Leonard Blasdell was district attorney; he was 
repeatedly one of the best bridge players in 
Nevada. And Judge McFadden was what you 
said he was. 

Jim Johnson went ahead as I indicated 
to be a U.S. Attorney. Joe Martin, I’ve lost 
track of, and I really can’t give you a reading 



76 


Alan Bible 


on him. Johnson Lloyd is back in Eureka, 
Nevada, still over there as district attorney, if 
I’m correctly advised. Jim Callahan went into 
private practice, still in private practice. Doc 
Belanger spent a career as district attorney 
in Lovelock, and he either is still the district 
attorney or just recently retired. Howard 
Browne in Austin was district attorney for 
many years, then came in to private practice 
here in Reno, and I think is still in private 
practice in Reno. Martin Evanson—I missed 
his name in the first round—is a district 
attorney in Hawthorne, Nevada, and he died 
oh, many years ago at a very young age, so 
his—the district attorney’s position is as far as 
he went. Wayne Jepson was district attorney 
for many years in Yerington, is now retired. 
Gray Gubler of Clark County, Las Vegas, who 
was district attorney for a period of time and 
then went into private practice. Grover Krick 
was, as near as I can remember, was always the 
district attorney in Douglas County; he was 
unbeatable; he was very satisfied just to be the 
district attorney in that county. And of course 
during the great period of his tenure, it wasn’t 
a real active job because Douglas County was 
just a very healthy, conservative cattle area 
with grazing and that sort of thing; since then 
Lake Tahoe has come into the fore and has 
presented a lot of problems, but Grover Krick 
didn’t have most of those. 

E. E. Winters was a kindly old gentleman 
who was perfectly happy to be district 
attorney in Fallon—just forever and ever and 
ever. People just automatically selected him, 
and in both the cases of Douglas County and 
Churchill County back in the earlier days, 
they paid their district attorneys very poorly. 
It wouldn’t attract anybody who had real 
ambitions to be a successful lawyer because 
he could barely live on it; it was kind of a— 
just starvation wage. Over the years they’ve 
gradually built the salaries up in some of these 


smaller counties. Of course, I admit that they 
didn’t have too much to do, but there wasn’t 
too much legal business there in any event. 
But, as they’ve grown and they’ve increased 
their salaries, and of course, as inflation has 
come along they had to increase the salaries 
so they could at least buy bread and butter. So 
that’s about the way those worked. 

And Sanford Bunce was district attorney 
in Lovelock for many years, seemed to be 
completely satisfied to be a district attorney. 
C. A. Eddy was the district attorney in Ely for 
a number of years. His wife, who was Helen 
Eddy, and his wife was one of Harvey Sewell’s 
real stalwart helpers in the Nevada Bank of 
Commerce. And as a matter of fact she’s still 
very much alive and works part time at the 
Valley Bank—very, very wonderful woman. 
Now that kind of winds up your [district 
attorneys], I think. 

Some Impressions of State Officials 

Would you like to do some more character 
sketches of some of the state officers that you 
had particular contact with ? 

Well, I think one of the most complicated 
fields of government is in the field of education, 
and I was privileged to work with a very 
wonderful woman by the name of Mildred 
Bray. Her people were pioneers in the state. 
She was a pioneer herself, and then she 
became the superintendent of education. She 
leaned very heavily on the attorney general’s 
office for guidance, and often we felt I guess 
that she could have just taken the bull by the 
horns in many of those cases and made the 
decision herself. She was very careful, and she 
wanted to be sure that she was legally right in 
the requests that she made. The requests were 
always completely legitimate, but there were 
many of them, probably as many as we got 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


77 


from any other department in the entire state 
government. But I think that’s understandable 
because education takes such a large share 
of our public dollar and involves so many 
people and so many districts that there’re 
bound to be recurring questions. There was 
always the recurring question of nepotism 
in the appointment of school boards where 
there is under the law a prohibition against 
nepotism and a school board member hiring 
someone within a certain degree of affinity 
or consanguinity. And that occurred in 
many counties, particularly in our southern 
counties, particularly in Lincoln County. 
Lincoln County had many questions of that 
kind. 

And likewise there was the question of 
using school property for church purposes. 
In many instances in Nevada in the smaller 
counties again, there were—it was really the 
only public building that was available, and 
now the question was: could that be used 
for church services under the doctrine of 
separation of church and state? And of course 
the law is pretty well—pretty carefully spelled 
out there, but there were always questions 
asked in that direction. Again in the smaller 
counties rather than the larger counties. And 
we meant the use of the school gymnasium 
where many church groups had athletic 
programs of their own. How much could you 
use the school gymnasium for that particular 
purpose? And much of our time was devoted 
in these school areas. 

These all fell primarily under Miss 
Bray during my period of time, as the 
superintendent of public instruction. 
But she had an excellent group of deputy 
superintendents with her, and I think did an 
overall excellent job in advancing solutions 
to the educational needs and requirements 
of the state. I think she did an excellent job 
in that respect. 


When I first went into the attorney 
general’s office, W. G. Greathouse was just 
retiring as secretary of the state, and he was 
to be followed by Malcolm McEachin. And of 
course that was an office that had many, many 
legal questions because of its close contact 
with the lawyers of the state and the filings 
of their corporation papers and the various 
duties that are imposed on the secretary of 
state. The treasurer of the state, the controller, 
likewise had certain questions about the 
placing of money in banks, and we had had 
a very unfortunate political scandal in the 
Cole-Malley affair, and that had led to the 
effection of laws which did guard the treasury 
very well. I don’t think there’s been any 
misappropriation of funds since those days. 
The bonding provisions were strengthened, 
and during my tenure we had Henry Schmidt 
as the state controller. And he’s an interesting 
study in his own, because of, about 1910 or 
thereabouts, he applied for a permit to build 
a dam on the Colorado and received a license 
to build a private dam across the Colorado. 

And that would be just where Boulder 
Dam is now. It was a low level dam, and he 
sought participation. He was unable to raise it 
in the United States which I think is illustrative 
to me that sometimes even the great giants of 
our industry don’t have the perception to see 
the value of a dam. And he did secure some 
French backing from French capital, and he 
was about to build the dam or his supporters 
and financial backers were about to build 
the dam when World War I broke around 
the world and then that delayed that. Then 
it wasn’t until some years afterwards that— 
after World War I that the move for building 
Boulder Dam went forward. 

And of course correctly again, as I see it; 
it was built as a federal project, and Henry 
Schmidt’s permit to build the dam fell by the 
wayside. But this is an interesting phase that 



78 


Alan Bible 


quite often escapes people, and if there had 
not been a World War I, it would probably 
have been built as a private dam because 
the project was on its way All the required 
approvals had been given, and it was delayed 
by the war and later built as a federal project. 
All this is the same Henry Schmidt who 
became the state controller of Nevada for 
so many years. And it was a tribute to his 
foresight that he could see the advantage of 
having a dam at Boulder Dam. Of course I’ve 
said many, many times that the construction, 
the completion of Boulder Dam is what led to 
the tremendous rise in Clark County, because 
it brought people into the county. It gave it 
electricity for the use of its industries and its 
people. And without that, it would probably 
still be the sleepy, little town that it was in 
pre-Boulder Dam days. 

And of course another phase of a very 
interesting story that should be told as an 
independent story, I think, is that actually 
it’s never been too clearly pointed out that 
Clark County actually belonged in Nevada 
rather than Arizona. That’s another problem 
that has arisen a number of times, and I’m 
convinced that Clark County is where it 
belongs and that’s in Nevada. There’s still a 
number of Arizonians that still claim the 
enabling act—all of the Colorado River as it 
flowed through at that time was properly a 
part of Arizona. And Senator Carl Hayden 
who was the long-time senator from the state 
of Arizona frequently chided me about the 
fact that we’d stolen one of the most valuable 
assets. But again repeating, it has been settled 
and passed, and Clark County is part of the 
state of Nevada. The state of Nevada and 
the midstream of the Colorado that flows 
through that area of the state is the dividing 
line between the two states. But these are 
problems that came up in varying form during 
the attorney general’s days. 


Henry Schmidt went on to be a very 
effective state controller; Dan Franks was the 
treasurer at that time, and Dan was born and 
raised in Lincoln County, Nevada. He came 
to the state as the treasurer, was one of the 
longest serving of all of the state treasurers. 
His successor was selected after I had left 
state government, so I dealt with the one 
man there and Henry Schmidt of the state 
controller’s office. Of course John Koontz 
was the successor to Mr. McEachin and served 
for many, many long years as the secretary of 
state. The mining inspector was Matt Murphy 
during that particular period of time and in 
my state career and was later on succeeded by 
Merv Gallagher and then Art Bernard. 

And during this period of time when I was 
first a deputy attorney general and next a full 
attorney general, a period of thirteen years, 
I was privileged to serve with three different 
men as governor of the state of Nevada. The 
first was Richard Kirman, a Reno banker, 
and a very, very fine businessman. This was 
one of his very few adventures into politics, 
and I think most people in Nevada thought 
it refreshing to have a non-politician as the 
governor for a change. And he did, I believe, 
an extremely fine job. He called on the attorney 
general’s office only in moments of real need. 
He decided most of his problems on a business 
basis and on his long-time successful tenure 
as a businessman and as a banker. 

Ted Carville was the next governor, and he 
served for a period of about six years, part of 
which was during my time as deputy attorney 
general, and the balance of the time as the full 
attorney general. So he was number one, a 
member of the same part of the Democratic 
party that I was; he was also a very fine 
lawyer and judge. His requests for opinions 
were not overdone. He called on them only 
when he felt that he couldn’t make a decision 
himself, and he wanted the support or the 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


79 


opinion of another lawyer. But he served very 
well as governor. We had a close personal 
relationship over those years, and then he 
resigned of course to serve out the unexpired 
term of Senator Scrugham. 

And then the third governor under whom 
I served was Vail Pittman, the brother of 
Key Pittman. And he was a nonlawyer; he 
was a newspaper publisher, and he served 
during the time that I was the full attorney 
general, and he frequently called on me for 
legal opinions. And he was an easy man to 
work with. He had good, common sense and 
handled his problems with dispatch. There 
was very little delay, and he met most of the 
issues at that time unhesitatingly and quickly. 

The lieutenant governors of course were 
varied during my time. Maurice Sullivan 
was a long-time lieutenant governor. When 
I came in as deputy attorney general, Morley 
Griswold was the I lieutenant governor] and 
Fred Alward and then Maurice Sullivan, and 
just as I was phasing out, Cliff Jones was 
named as the lieutenant governor of Nevada. 
These are the office holders with whom I 
served during this particular period of time. 

I think any mention of state officers with 
whom I served would be neglected if I didn’t 
mention two men particularly. One would 
be Joe Farnsworth who was the long-time 
superintendent of state printing. I think he 
served from nineteen hundred and eleven 
through nineteen hundred and forty-two, 
some thirty-odd years, thirty-one years to be 
exact, as the state printer. He was absolutely 
unbeatable at the polls, and he ran a good 
shop, as they say in the printing trade. He was 
a “hot water plug” coming from Virginia City, 
Nevada. He was succeeded by John McCarthy 
—or Jack McCarthy as he was affectionately 
known. And he served during my tenure as 
attorney general. He was likewise a working 
printer, had come up from Hawthorne or 


Yerington, somewheres in that area. And 
I’ll never forget the first campaign where we 
campaigned together, he was too bashful to 
make the talk on his own behalf, so I was 
selected to plug for him, which I did willingly. 
And he served as the state printer for I think 
about six or seven terms and did a very 
effective job in that position. 

Then I first came into state government, 
the surveyor-general was elected; and I served 
with two men during that period of time: 
Wayne McLeod, known as “Red” McLeod, 
and then later on, Louis Ferrari. Louis 
Ferrari succeeded Wayne McLeod, and they 
were surveyor-generals of the state. And I’ve 
commented about Mildred Bray and having 
served with her during my tenure as attorney 
general. I think that pretty well covers the state 
officers with whom I have served. 

Legislatures and Legislators 

During the time that I served as attorney 
general, we always looked with mixed 
emotions on those months when the state 
legislature was to be in session. At that 
particular time I was entrusted with the 
responsibility of appointing the bill drafters; 
and the bill drafting requested by the various 
legislatures, the senate and the assembly, was 
always trying because they wanted their bill 
produced and handed back to them almost 
instanter. We tried to encourage them, with 
mixed degrees of success, into requesting our 
drafting services and our bill drafting services 
well in advance of the session; and again, with 
mixed success. Some would do it, some would 
not do it, and then when they all came to 
Carson City the years in which the legislature 
was meeting, and in January, they all almost 
simultaneously wanted instant bill service. 

We attempted to accommodate them by 
having additional lawyers appointed as bill 



80 


Alan Bible 


drafters. In those days they were under my 
direct jurisdiction. I was frequently called 
before various committees of the legislature 
to give my opinion as to the legality or the 
constitutionality of some issue that they were 
working on at that time. We attempted to 
accommodate them to the best of our rather 
small legal force with the very clear caveat that 
we were just one lawyer. An attorney general, 
even if he carries the title as the chief law 
officer of the state, is just as vulnerable before a 
court as any other lawyer. So we tried to make 
it very clear that we couldn’t guarantee the 
constitutionality of it—that’s always the first 
question they ask—we told them whether we 
thought it was constitutional or not and then 
they would act accordingly. 

We were called frequently before them, 
particularly in the years that involved the 
gaming problems and the problems of 
putting the state more and more into an 
overall control of gambling; and I can recall 
one incidence when Senator [William F.] 
Dressier, the powerful republican senator 
from Douglas County, and Walter Cox, the 
other senator from Lyon County at that 
time, and Ken Johnson, the state senator 
from Ormsby at that time, came before me 
and asked me to simply draft a bill that made 
it very clear that the state had control, the 
overall control, of gambling. Before, that had 
been done just more or less by interpretation. 
So, we did draft legislation which led to the 
state gaming law; and again, I think with some 
pride, has held up reasonably well and against 
court attacks over the intervening years and 
gaming becoming stronger and stronger and 
becoming more and more a part of the life of 
Nevada. It’s very important that they had good 
guidelines to follow. So we were called over 
on problems of that kind during the sessions, 
and we always tried to oblige. Normally we’d 
be called before the committee handling the 


particular bill, but on a few occasions, as I 
recall back— called before the full senate 
or the full assembly on some question of 
overriding moment and importance. 

Which ones of these legislators did you find it 
easier or harder to deal with? 

Oh, I don’t have any feeling or opinion 
on that at all; they were all very nice, 
Republic [an] and Democrats; they were all 
equally entitled to opinion. And, no, I think 
our relationships with the legislators over the 
years was very good. They came over not for 
a political opinion or not for our support, 
pro or con on their bills, but simply to get 
legal opinions primarily as to whether we 
thought it would be constitutional; most 
of the questions asked were constitutional 
questions, or occasionally they would ask if 
we had any further suggestions to making the 
bill stronger—had they covered all the points 
that should be covered—things of that kind. 
But I don’t think we ever had any problems 
with any of them. 

We had certain assemblymen and certain 
senators that would ask the question oftener 
than others, but that’s the way any legislative 
body works. Some legislators don’t fancy 
putting in a lot of bills—they like to correct 
the bill after it’s in there; other people like to 
make a record for themselves as to being the 
introducer of the most number of bills. So it 
runs just the same gamut there as it does, I 
think, in any legislative body; the Senate of the 
United States, for example, there were those 
who simply had to be the first in introducing 
a bill on practically as many subjects as they 
could think about. Others didn’t pay a bit of 
attention to introducing bills, but wanted to 
perfect it after it was introduced. So I think 
it follows just a general human pattern, and 
I really believe you’d find that true of any 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


81 


legislative body in—any state legislative body 
in the United States or the Congress of the 
United States. 

The National Association of 
Attorneys General 

Tell me about your activities in the National 
Association of Attorneys General. 

Well, I was always very active in the 
National Association of Attorneys General, 
and as a matter of fact I was elected president 
of the entire association in one of the later 
years of my tour as attorney general of Nevada. 
And it was a very fine experience because 
you find the opinions and the problems 
in one state are very closely allied to the 
problems you have in your own state. And of 
course there was some disparity in problems 
involving extradition. There were problems 
which required uniform laws, and in general 
the attorney generals were the backers of 
making the laws of the various states uniform 
within the states, so that there was no wide 
difference between the law of Nevada and the 
law of New Hampshire. But they were closely 
allied. And we spent much time at working 
those out. We had paid staffs, we made our 
recommendations to the legislature and in 
part based upon what our national association 
recommended as improvements in the laws 
of our state. They were primarily interested 
in uniformity among the states. 

And I found it was a very worthwhile 
experience, made (as you always make in 
life I believe) many fine contacts with other 
attorney generals in other states. I was a very 
close friend, for example, of Pat [Edmund 
G.] Brown of California. That friendship 
remained throughout his career. He was 
attorney general and then later governor of 
the state. When I started out in the attorney 


general’s office, my legal counterpart in 
California was a friend by the name of Earl 
Warren, and that’s a contact that I maintained 
all my life. And when I appeared before him 
in the U.S. Supreme Court when he was chief 
judge, I didn’t appear in a legal capacity—I 
was a senator—and he was the chief judge 
of the United States, but we frequently were 
asked to appear and move the admission of 
our Nevada lawyers who wanted to practice 
in front of the Supreme Court. And I did that 
many times. He always had a saying about 
me, always referred to me as “Dana,” Dana 
Bible. “Well, Dana, how are you?” And he 
did that because one of the famous football 
coaches from Texas was Dana X. Bible. And 
I always said that I always claimed him as a 
relative when he had a winning season, and 
when he—when the team wasn’t doin’ so well, 
I didn’t think we were related, just as a little 
aside story. And until his dying day, even 
after he had retired, Earl Warren always with 
this great big smile on his handsome face 
and he was a great big handsome chief judge, 
and lawyer, and man; he was a controversial 
justice, but he moved into some real tough 
cases, and he wasn’t afraid to call them. And 
he always called me Dana until his dying day, 
and that was a pleasant memory of a contact 
that I made through my National Association 
of Attorneys General. 

There were others. Jack [Jacob) Javits of 
New York was attorney general of New York 
when I was attorney general of Nevada. He 
later became U.S. senator from New York and 
is still U.S. senator from New York. And there 
are others throughout the United States that I 
shared that same relationship with. 

And there’s a lot of satisfaction to it. 
They’re contacts that stay with you all your 
life. Cal [Calvin] Rampton of Utah was a 
very close friend of mine during his attorney 
general days and then served with great 



82 


Alan Bible 


distinction as the governor of Utah, another 
example that comes to mind, and I’m sure 
there are many others around the United 
States if I was to run through the roster. 

The McCarran Bipartisan Machine 

One of the things that you haven’t talked 
about very much in this highly political office 
in a highly political town and so forth is the 
old bipartisan machine; this is the time when 
they’re really in control. 

I don’t agree. I think maybe I should 
mention in developing this history, some 
of the claims and counterclaims about a 
bipartisan machine in Nevada. I guess it 
could well be said that when I was working 
for Senator Pat McCarran for the first time 
(and that would take me back into the 1930s), 
I think there was evidence of a bipartisan 
machine and probably they had an agreement 
between many of the top people in the 
Republican party and the top people in the 
Democratic party to support one particular 
candidate and do it on a bipartisan basis. 

I suppose Tasker Oddie was a product 
of the bipartisan machine. I think he was a 
tremendously able man, and of course the 
story persists even to this day (I don’t know 
the complete veracity of this) that when Pat 
McCarran, who had repeatedly run for U.S. 
senator but unsuccessfully—I forget now 
how many times that he ran for the Senator’s 
position; and of course in the earlier years 
before the direct vote amendment, he was 
unsuccessful because it was selected by the 
legislature. But in nineteen hundred and 
thirty-two, we were still in the depression, 
many people very well aware of it, and 
the story was that the very powerful law 
firm—and they were a powerful law firm of 
Thatcher and Woodburn—decided that this 


was the best time in the world to eliminate Pat 
McCarran because Pat McCarran had decided 
he was going to run against Tasker Oddie, who 
was the incumbent U.S. senator, and I think a 
man with a very fine record and very creditable 
record, was a pleasant individual in person. 

I think they decided well, this is once 
and for all the time we can eliminate Pat 
McCarran, and so they backed, I’m sure, 
though they probably wouldn’t admit it, 
Tasker Oddie against Pat McCarran. But Pat 
McCarran had everything going for him, not 
only his own great ability and his familiarity 
of all the places in Nevada, but he had the 
backlash of a depression and he had as the 
Commander-in-Chief on his ticket a fellow 
by the name of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, 
who I think history will write was one of the 
great presidents of the United States. And 
McCarran in those early years did embrace 
FDR, and FDR embraced him (that was to 
later fall apart), but back in 1932 and in ’33, 
they were buddy-buddy, and McCarran was 
elected. I think that destroyed pretty much in 
Nevada, the bipartisan machine. 

I’ve never thought there was any great 
evidence of any machine because you have 
to define your terms. There was never any 
machines during my period of time in Nevada 
that were comparable to the big city machines, 
the Chicago machine, which was one of the 
greatest and existed right through Daley— 
may still be some remnants of it. There was 
the Philadelphia machine, and there was 
the Pendergast machine, and they were real 
machines because they—political machines— 
because they really controlled the vote. In this 
I can’t remember any period of my time where 
there was that type of machine. I was always 
accused of being a member of the “McCarran 
machine,” and I always answered by sayin’, 
well, if I was a part of it, I was very proud to 
be. He was one of my main sponsors, and I 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


83 


thought he was a great senator, and I worked 
for him and [was] very devoted to him. And 
if there was a McCarran machine, I would 
welcome the help of his friends. I think in 
Nevada if there is a machine, it’s just that the 
friends of one political individual will go to 
somebody that he might look with favor on. 
And I suppose that’s how you define machine. 

I remember in one of my campaigns 
where I was constantly being accused of being 
a member of a machine, I did a lot of walking, 
which is always a good way to try to get 
elected, and handshaking, which is another 
good way to try to get elected. I carried a 
pedometer with me and recorded the amount 
of miles I walked every day. And I said, “The 
charge has been against me that I’m a member 
of a machine, and the only machine that I have 
any knowledge of is this pedometer which 
will measure my mileage.” Now that probably 
overstates the case a little, but in Nevada, 
other than based on friendship, I don’t know 
of anybody that really commands you what 
to do or tells you what not to do. 

I think now maybe that trend may 
change. I would hope it wouldn’t because 
I think people should run as individuals. 
The problem today is the tremendous cost 
of elections. And so in my experience, even 
though people do put up money for you 
and say, “Well, this leaves you completely 
unattached and I’m never gonna bother you,” 
your experience will soon teach you otherwise 
because if somebody puts up five hundred or 
a thousand or ten thousand, if they have a 
problem, they’re going to lean on you to try 
to help them. And I don’t see anything wrong 
in helping people that help you, but it always 
poses a question, particularly in a state which 
has as one of the main parts—maybe it’s the 
main part today—of its economic strength, 
the gaming issue. So, but gamblers being 
what gamblers are, follow something that’s, 


I’m sure industrial companies, manufacturing 
companies, and others follow, and that is, they 
help both sides, so they have a winner either 
way. And that’s not an unusual spectacle, and 
I’m sure it goes on in Nevada many, many 
times; though if questioned I’m sure most of 
them would deny it. 

Well, what did you see in the activities of 
Norman Biltz and John Mueller and Pete 
Petersen? 

I think there were those in Nevada who 
would like to have held themselves out as 
the “kings” or the kingmakers of politicians 
in Nevada simply because of the feeling of 
power that it gave them. And of course they 
supported that very largely by money and by 
raising funds for one candidate and holding 
it back from another, and possibly again 
just repeating what I said earlier, I suppose 
if somebody does help you, you certainly 
look with favor on maybe treating them a 
little better than you would anybody else. 
But I think lots of people fancy themselves 
kingmakers, if that’s the correct phrase, that 
really aren’t. I think it’s kind of handy to have 
on your side, but if they support you and 
support you through money, then if you win, 
they’re very clearly gonna take credit for it 
because they like to be known as being your 
kingmaker. 

I think it’s more a personal thing than 
anything else, and of course I knew Norman 
Biltz very well; I knew Johnny Mueller 
very well, and I knew practically everyone 
of McCarran’s closest friends. They were 
very helpful to him. But believe me, in my 
judgment, there’s only one person who made 
Pat McCarran, and that was Pat McCarran. 
They threw him to the wolves when he first 
started out; he knew it, and he built up some 
friendships over the years and they supported 



84 


Alan Bible 


him. And I’m sure they held themselves out 
as being spokesmen for Pat McCarran. I think 
probably Pete Petersen was the closest as being 
the spokesman for Pat McCarran, but he was 
one of his earlier appointees and he was a very 
close friend. He helped Pat McCarran at a time 
when Pat McCarran apparently didn’t have a 
chance to win, but did win; and he never forgot 
that. And so from my knowledge of the earlier 
problems there, Pete Petersen, I believe, was a 
spokesman for Pat McCarran, but I wouldn’t 
call him a kingmaker. He was a spokesman 
because Pat McCarran wanted him to be a 
spokesman, and he was very happy to take the 
position and get many, many things for Pat 
McCarran, even reports on people that were 
for or against Senator McCarran. 

Senator McCarran was always very 
concerned, particularly about those who 
might be against him, and of course he had 
the reputation, and I think it was probably 
deserved, of making very fast friends and very 
bitter enemies, and I believe that’s true. 
Nobody has ever been any better to me 
than Pat McCarran. I hope I’ve shown my 
appreciation—tried to over the years; but if 
anybody crossed him, by the same token, he 
would try to go out and eliminate them from 
the political scene. You have records of that in 
Nevada, and Carville who owed his political 
life, I’m convinced, without a doubt to Pat 
McCarran, later in life became completely 
opposed to him. And that led to the battle 
between Bunker and Carville. And you had 
many instances of that kind. But I didn’t see 
any great machine evidence there. It was 
always—unless by machine you mean friends 
of a person. I know Pat McCarran used to tell 
me [of] friends of his to go see. And that—if 
that’s machine, then so be it. 

Well, I was thinking about some of these famous 
fights between the machine and the folks 


outside. You mentioned the Bunker-Carville 
thing, and you were in Carson at that time —. 

Correct, correct. I was with Carville; 
Carville was my governor; I was his attorney 
general, and I knew Bunker very, very well, 
but I didn’t think Bunker had any business 
running against Carville. That was my own 
personal opinion. It just so happened that 
Carville didn’t win, but that’s a good example. 
You’re dead right. And Carville and McCarran 
used to be buddy-buddy; he made lots of 
them like that. McCarran and Bill [William 
S.] Boyle used to be great buddies, and then 
they fell apart when Bill Boyle did not get the 
appointment as U.S. attorney, and that’s the 
time that Carville became the U.S. attorney. 
And that was his way up, because he handled 
or associated with the McKay and Graham 
cases and had great publicity and favorable 
publicity. So, they fell out along the way. 

The attorney general tour of this period 
of eight years was a wonderful period of 
time in my life. I can’t honestly recall exactly 
why I didn’t want to run again except I think 
probably I had two things—maybe I had 
higher political ambitions, which I suppose 
I did. I’ve often been queried about it, and 
my memory isn’t that sharp. But it wasn’t the 
best time in the world to really retire and then 
try to get back into the political role I had, 
because I believe once you’ re in politics, if 
you’re going to make that a career you oughta 
stay with it. But anyway, I built in a hiatus 
there by not running for a third term. 

I probably should mention that my second 
term was probably the most gratifying I ever 
had because I believe that for the first and 
only time in the entire history of the state 
of Nevada an attorney general was selected 
without opposition. So I was not opposed, 
and I’ve often told the story that that was 
the easiest race I ever had. And I guess that 



Nevada State Attorney General’s Office 1938 - 1930 


85 


I became a little overconfident and a little 
cocky because the next time out, after having 
run for attorney general and being fortunate 
enough to come out unopposed—I took the 
only political defeat I ever had. A young man 
from out of the East, and as a long shot—I 
suppose he was about the biggest long shot of 
the political history of our state—he defeated 
me. And that taught me a lot of things, which 
have always helped me in the years since then. 
I never blamed anybody in that race except 
myself for not working harder. 

And I was running in that particular race 
against Molly Malone, who was the incumbent 
senator with Pat McCarran at that time. And I 
made the mistake of running against Malone, 
and I’d overlooked a fundamental fact of life: 
that you’ve got to win the primary before you 
get into the general election. So by the time 
I woke up, I had lost by, I think, about tour 
hundred votes, and I don’t know that I ever 
received any more political advice of people 
who told me that they saw me on the corner 
of Second and Virginia on such and such a 
date and warned me about Mechling, and 
I’d see people in Elko that’d tell me they’d 
warned me about Mechling, and people in 
Ely’d say, “Well, you remember what I told 
you.” And to be very honest about it, I think 
most of ’em made it up after they saw me get 
defeated. But in balance, it worked out very, 
very well. I think I had a crossroads decision 
at the time I decided not to run again because 
I either had to stay in politics or get back 
into practicing law. And I opt[ed] to try for 
a political career, which I did, and it finally 
came out very successfully. 

But that was a traumatic experience in 
my life when I ran against Tom Mechling 
causel felt that I had let the people of the state 
down, and I even gave serious thought at that 
time—and this is one of the impressions that 
I can very definitely remember—of leaving 


the state of Nevada. And of course that would 
have been the worst thing in the world—you 
have to learn to take a defeat, as well as a 
victory now and then. It was the one and only 
defeat I’ve ever had in my life, and I feel sure 
that I was totally responsible for it. I didn’t 
work hard enough. And, again, I made such 
a stupid mistake in forgetting that I had to get 
by the primary before I got into the general 
election. I can say this, I’ve never made that 
mistake a second time. And it’s all worked 
out for the best. 

But during the trauma of being defeated, 
you—it’s hard to describe your personal 
experiences, but — or your personal 
impressions as you look back, but I really felt 
ashamed to walk down the street because I felt 
I’d let the people of Nevada down. And then I 
never had so many “I told you so’s” in my life. 
“Ifyou’d’ve done this, you’d’ve been all right,” 
or “you remember tellin me that,” and so— 
and then when they nominated me (which 
is another phase that we will be going into 
very soon) when they nominated me to run 
for Democratic senator when Pat McCarran 
died in September 1954, many people felt that 
because of my Mechling defeat, I shouldn’t 
be the nominee of the Democratic party. But 
that one I won very easily against one of the 
finest men I’ve ever known in my life and a 
fine candidate; and that was Ernie [Ernest S.] 
Brown. And I won that election, and restored 
my faith in humanity, and from that time on 
I’ve never had any difficulty being elected as 
U.S. senator. 

As a matter of fact, when I retired just last 
time, many people wanted me to run again. I 
was cocky enough by that time at the—rather 
the twilight of what I thought was my political 
career—of feeling that I could have won. And 
I came to the conclusion that, and told many 
people—they say, “Well, how come you didn’t 
run again? You scared you’d be defeated?” 



86 


Alan Bible 


And I said, “Not scared Id be defeated; I’m 
scared I’d be elected, and I’m just tired.” And 
I was; I had some medical problems which is 
the real reason for my not making another 
term, plus the fact that I’ve felt over the years, 
and still feel, that there’s nothing wrong with a 
mandatory retirement age for a political figure 
at sixty-five or seventy, and so many stay too 
long. And of course, again, that’s an individual 
problem. You find senators at eighty that are 
really sharp, and you find senators at eighty 
who are wobbling and not as mentally alert 
as they should be. But I’ve always felt that 
past sixty-five, one ought to look into another 
phase of life. That isn’t particularly a popular 
concept right today, and most governing 
bodies have extended it and taken out some 
of the mandatory features. But nevertheless, I 
still believe that’s very sound legislation. 




A Brief Sojourn 
as a Private Citizen 


The Law Firm of Bible and McDonald 

As we move out of the attorney general’s 
office, we then went from Carson City to 
Reno. I started a law office at that particular 
period of time with one of my deputies from 
my attorney general days, Bob McDonald. We 
formed a firm under the name of Bible and 
McDonald; we practiced in the old Gazette 
building on Center Street in Reno, Nevada. 
And it was a partnership which started, really, 
as the outgrowth of our attorney general 
associations and has continued all my life 
up to the present moment; and though I am 
inactive in the practice of law, I still consider 
myself a partner of Bob McDonald. I think 
he feels the same way about me though we’re 
not—though I’m in no way an active partner. 
It’s been a long-ranging, very warm and dear 
friendship between the two of us, growing out 
of my earlier association with his father, the 
long-time editor of the Nevada State Journal, 
and as I’ve previously said, one of my leading 
political advisors and supporters. 


We practiced law together with a variety 
of cases covering the whole gamut which 
could be expected as any two people starting 
out in the practice of law. Of course I carried 
with me a pretty deep association from my 
attorney general days, and probably the 
primary assignment that I had was to continue 
to handle water cases in which I had formed 
some type of an expertise, and I was asked 
to stay on as a representative in that capacity 
and did so in the negotiations of many of the 
contracts that still had not been completely 
resolved at the time of my termination of my 
duties as attorney general—carried those as a 
private lawyer and simply on a retainer basis 
from my attorney general days and my long¬ 
time association with the water problems 
involving and revolving around the Colorado 
River Commission, which I had taken over at 
the time that I first went with Gray Mashburn, 
the attorney general under whom I served 
for a period of time. He was very badly hurt 
in an automobile accident, and at that time 
he asked if I would take over his duties and 



88 


Alan Bible 


this was as my deputy attorney general days; 
they carried on into my attorney general days, 
and then in private practice when we formed 
our law partnership in Reno, Nevada. And 
it continued until such time as I ultimately 
went to Washington, D.C. as a United States 
Senator representing the state. 

It there was one area in which I had 
some expertise, it would be in the field of the 
problems revolving around the Colorado 
River Commission, the division of waters of 
the state and related problems of power and 
water which were so tremendously important 
to the state of Nevada and still are, and will 
continue to be because in a semi-arid state or 
an arid state, as you care to characterize our 
climatic conditions, water is really the life 
blood of the desert, and many have said that 
water is the ingredient which makes the desert 
bloom like a rose. And that actually is true 
and can be seen in many areas of the state of 
Nevada, where without water it would be—it 
would just wither and dry out, but with water 
it can be put into beneficial consumptive 
use and into the civilizations which exist 
throughout the state. That was, of course, 
one of the main ingredients that led to the 
formation of the Newlands Project, so named 
after Senator Newlands, properly recognized 
as the father of the reclamation law and was 
the father of one of the early projects. Many 
people said it was the number one reclamation 
project, the Newlands Project in northern 
Nevada, but whether it was one or two, it 
was certainly one of the earlier ones and is 
the means by which water was dammed and 
preserved and held for use in the Fallon area 
and built a thriving community there, and 
over which there have been continuous legal 
scraps and still are. Right to this day they’re 
scrapping over the amount of water that the 
Newlands Project should receive, and it is 
pending on appeal this many years afterwards 


in the federal court system in the state and 
will be resolved sooner or later and finalized, 
which is what it should be, so that one will 
know exactly how much water goes, for 
example, to Pyramid Lake which is an Indian 
reservation and held under the protectorate or 
trusteeship of the United States government 
and how much will go to the Newlands Project 
which holds firm contracts which were 
required before Lahontan Dam was built. So 
those are all problems that related very closely 
to the work that I had been doing during my 
days as attorney general, carried over under 
a special assignment from the Colorado 
River Commission to do their work in aid 
of the attorney general, whose workload was 
getting increasingly large and difficult. And so 
I carried on in that capacity until I returned 
to political life. 

The observations that I had during my 
years as first a deputy attorney general and an 
attorney general on our state government was 
a very healthy and respectful one regardless 
of the politics involved whether you were a 
Democrat or whether you’re Republican. I 
think over the years that the state of Nevada’s 
governmental organizations have served its 
needs extremely well. And I’m more than 
ever convinced of that as I continue along in 
various capacities in life. And I think here the 
smallness of the state and the fact that you 
are so close to the people and its problems, 
really, if I may use a colloquialism, it keeps 
you on your toes because the people are on 
that same block where you live and they 
don’t hesitate in Nevada, and never have, to 
question whatever you might [have] done and 
what you might have done on one problem or 
another. I think it’s a very healthy situation, 
one that I’m sure you don’t encounter in 
larger states where the people of those states 
very seldom see their elected representatives, 
except possibly through the mediums of 



A Brief Sojourn as a Private Citizen 


89 


television or hear them through the medium 
of radio. In this state it’s far more personal, 
always has been, though we are getting larger 
and you’re getting more removed from the 
people in the state as you do get larger; I still 
think it’s a healthy sign and a healthy situation 
to have you right next to the people because 
they monitor you pretty well. Nevadans 
have never been bashful about expressing 
themselves, if you’re doing something that 
they do not agree with, they’re the first to 
tell you—they tell you emphatically. And I 
think it’s a good moderator for the people in 
public life. Sometimes they complain about 
it, and I have myself over the years in various 
capacities, but I think on balance they’ve been 
very fair, and it has been in the best interests 
of better service from elected representatives 
to their state. I think that’s one message that 
I carry out of my years of service in the state 
government and in county government, and 
then intensified, I think, in my twenty-plus 
years of service in the United States Senate. 

The Campaign of 1952 

The opportunity to get back into politics 
after I had retired as attorney general came 
up very shortly after I retired and moved 
into private life in Reno, because at that time 
the U.S. senatorship was divided between 
Pat McCarran, who was the Democratic 
senator, and George W. “Molly” Malone, 
who was the Republican senator. And so in 
1952, Senator Malone’s term would expire, 
and there were many people that urged me 
to run against him and I suppose I had my 
political determination that must have risen 
within me many years earlier because I was 
prevailed upon to run for the Democratic 
nomination, and I did have a strong nucleus 
of support with the McCarran interests. I was 
always known as a member of the McCarran 


“team,” and Pat McCarran was a strong U.S. 
senator and proved it many, many, times in 
his years of service. 

They urged me to make the race, and 
George W. Malone as a Republican came in 
during the period of the Democratic political 
split and many people felt that he would not 
have been elected as U.S. senator if there had 
not been that Democratic split. Now that can 
be argued both ways, and I don’t presume to 
know where the actual facts he, though many 
people were convinced that if the Democrats 
had been one solid group, which they never 
are—never were and I don’t suppose ever will 
be, that George Malone would not have been 
elected to the U.S. Senate. That is another 
story and has been told many times and with 
varying philosophies of how the two camps 
lined up and why they did what they did. 

There were the devout followers of Key 
Pittman, who had passed on prior to that, 
and the followers who came up from the 
McCarran wing of the party, so-called. And 
of course the split that resulted from that, I 
think, carried on for a number of years. I think 
by and in large it’s completely submerged as 
the death of the principals and time, jointly, 
healed so many of the misunderstandings; 
that’s about what they were when you boiled 
them down—I don’t think there was that 
much substance in their differences. But, they 
felt it very keenly at the time, and as a result, 
lined up almost in two varying camps. 

And Senator McCarran being a very strong 
individual, very commanding individual, was 
determined that there should only be one 
head. He made it simpler because he was 
going to be the head, and for a long period 
of time was, the man who really called the 
shots, so to speak, in the Democratic party. 
He did that practically to his death; and it 
was death alone that took that one strong, 
dominant figure out of our Nevada political 



90 


Alan Bible 


life. There has never since that time been 
another Pat McCarran; I don’t know whether 
there ever will be or not—there may well be. 
Our present governor, Mike O’Callaghan, is 
a man of strong convictions and power and 
being of the same Irish and general ancestry 
that Pat McCarran was, he too liked to pretty 
much dominate the scene and has, and 
very successfully I think both from his own 
personal standpoint, but more particularly in 
the best interests of the state. I think he has 
served in the best interests of the state many, 
many times just as Pat McCarran carved an 
unparalleled record of achievement for his 
state of Nevada. And so I think these men of 
power, as I would choose to call them, did do 
the state of Nevada great service in their two 
different fields, one in the state government 
and one in the federal government. 

But, there were many people that did 
urge me to run for the U.S. Senate because 
of the fact that there would be a Democratic 
vacancy because it was held by a Republican, 
Senator Molly Malone, and many people felt 
that I was strong enough to win the election. 
In any event, I did agree to make the race and 
geared myself up to run. 

I think I can philosophize on some 
of my feelings at that particular period of 
time. I had had a, what I class, and I believe 
pretty generally agreed upon, was a rather 
successful career as attorney general. I have 
no hallucinations at all about the fact that I 
undoubtedly felt that I was the natural man 
to go to Washington. I think I philosophized 
in that way, and there was no great deterrent 
to my making up my mind to run for the U.S. 
Senate at that time. Many people had urged 
me to run for governor; I did give it some 
consideration. Many people urged me to run 
against or to seek the Democratic nomination 
when Vail Pittman was thinking of seeking 
the same nomination. And, I weighed my 


chances, I talked with my supporters. Many of 
them felt that I had made a wrong decision on 
not deciding to run for governor, but that was 
the decision that I made. And I chose, instead, 
to run for the U.S. Senate, really did have the 
choice, I think, in running for one or the other. 
So, I was pretty cocky, without a doubt, and I 
had practically succeeded George W. Malone, 
in my own mind, without the necessity of going 
through a primary or even running for office. 

I learned many lessons in 1952. And 
the main lesson was given to me by a young 
upstart, as I characterized him at that time; 
I’ve learned to characterize him a little 
differently as I look back reflectively, but he 
was a young man out of the East. He married 
a daughter of a very prominent and very 
well-liked Democratic politician, a mayor 
of Wells. He married Margaret DiGrazia. 
And in about January of that year, 1952, 
he announced that he was going to run for 
the Democratic nomination. It was rather 
a startling announcement because, again, I 
think it was generally conceded that I was 
going to be the chief Democratic candidate, 
for the simple reason that I had worked for 
Senator McCarran, I’d been the attorney 
general, I was fairly well-known throughout 
the state of Nevada, and at least had imbued 
myself with the idea that I was a real strong 
candidate. I learned otherwise the hard way, 
and as I shall relate as we go along in the 
development of this historical narrative. 
George W. Malone, though a popular man, I 
don’t think really was the strongest candidate 
the Republicans could have had, but he was 
the incumbent, and he was the incumbent 
by virtue of the fact that the Democrats had 
split into their long-time camps of Pittman 
followers and McCarran followers. And that 
led to a disunited Democratic front. 

Tom Mechling was a shrewd young man 
from the East. He started out with capturing 



A Brief Sojourn as a Private Citizen 


91 


the imagination of the people of the state on 
his repeated statements that he was fighting 
the “McCarran machine,” that it was a one- 
man-controlled state, and Pat McCarran 
was that man, and that he was gonna fight 
the giant. It was rather a David and Goliath 
story, I think, as I look back on it. I don’t 
think I thought it was a David and Goliath 
story at the time that it was happening to 
me, but he started out with very, very clever 
publicity. He was the poor boy fighting the 
money interests and fighting the entrenched 
few; he had only a limited amount of money 
according to his own accounts, repeated time 
and time again, so many people believed it. 
He and his wife started out campaigning the 
state and doing it almost door to door. Of 
all the campaigns I’ve seen run in the state 
of Nevada, I think he came the closest to 
campaigning the state, during this period of 
time—in earlier years some people may have 
campaigned individually more than Tom 
Mechling and Margaret Mechling, his wife. 
But from 1950 on, I don’t believe there was 
anybody that covered the state as thoroughly 
and as expertly on a door by door basis as 
the two Mechlings. And for that they deserve 
great credit. And it reflected in the fact that 
the campaign worked out in his favor; I was 
defeated. I wasn’t supposed to be defeated, and 
it was written up as one of the great political 
upsets in the state of Nevada. 

I guess maybe it was, but I always said and 
I believe now, some twenty-five years later, 
that it was primarily due to oh, two or three 
different factors. Number one, the main factor, 
was that I didn’t work hard enough which is 
usually always true where one loses out in 
an election. And, but I was out-campaigned, 
out-campaigned very soundly, really, because 
of the personal effort that Tom and Margaret 
Mechling put into his campaign on a house 
to house basis. They did it scientifically; they 


made maps of the various communities to 
which they would go, and they went house 
by house in most of the areas. They had 
worked out a very clever design of having Tom 
Mechling campaign part—maybe one side 
of the street, for example, and Margaret, his 
wife, the other. And in those cases where they 
rapped on the door and nobody answered, 
they had a ready card available that they’d 
slip under the door indicating that they 
had been there, they had missed them, and 
they were very sorry and they solicited their 
support. That was very obviously a very clever 
campaigning device; it’s one that I’m sure 
that many have adopted since then, myself 
included. I—sometimes I have to be honest 
and say that I’d kind of wait till I knew the 
person was gone and then I’d go to his house 
and slip the card under the door. But be that 
as it may, it got a personal message across 
to the occupants of these particular houses. 
And they did this in a scientific manner and 
covered, again repeating, as much of the state 
as any two people have ever covered in the 
political life of our state. 

This bore great fruit. They ran almost 
entirely not against me, but against the 
McCarran machine. I was a “tool of the 
McCarran machine.” I was the “hand-picked 
lackey.” Nevada had better look elsewhere 
causethere’d be no independence in our 
senatorial thinking causel would do precisely 
and exactly what Senator McCarran, my 
admitted sponsor, told me to do, so that he 
would have a second vote in his hip pocket 
at all times. He told this story over and over 
again. I must admit that it rather upset me. 
I thought I was rather an independent man; 
I wasn’t a “McCarran lackey” though I was a 
great supporter of his and great admirer of 
his, but I thought I could use independent 
judgment—thought I did. But nevertheless, 
by constant repetition and his own little 



92 


Alan Bible 


team of supporters repeating it over and 
over again, I’m sure it had some effect. And I 
made the very costly mistake of underrating 
Tom Mechling; most people, as I started out, 
indicated to me—in polls indicated that it 
was just kind of a warming-up exercise. And 
it turned out to be exactly that; it warmed me 
up to where I was left at the post, but I wasn’t 
heated up enough to get on to the finish line. 
And as a result, he defeated me, as I recall, by 
some four hundred votes in the primary. It 
was a narrow victory, but nevertheless it was 
a victory. And he went on from there as the 
Democratic flag bearer or standard bearer. 

And undoubtedly, as we look back, he 
could have won the Democratic nomination 
and been the U.S. senator from Nevada— 
having won the Democratic nomination, 
could have been the U.S. senator from Nevada. 
The trend was there, the registration was there. 
But he made—he continued his—his theme 
of talking out very long and loud and clear 
against Pat McCarran and that it would be— 
that Pat McCarran should not have—should 
have somebody who’s independent, and that 
he’d be that man. But he spent half of his 
time crying out against Senator McCarran’s 
philosophies, particularly his beliefs in the 
immigration and naturalization bill, the so- 
called McCarran-Walter act, which brought 
many, many people in opposition to Senator 
McCarran. And he played the tune over and 
over again, continuing to run against Pat 
McCarran in the general election, rather than 
running against Molly Malone, the incumbent 
senator. 

That was one of the main ingredients 
in his ultimate defeat, because his constant 
repetition of this type of an attack upon 
Pat McCarran, who was a good scrapping 
Irishman in his own right, had the fatal 
results to Tom Mechling because it made 
McCarran more and more determined to see 


that this man, though a Democrat, should 
not be elected. And he openly opposed 
Mechling, the Democrat, against Malone, the 
Republican, because of the constant attacks 
which Mechling continued to make upon 
Pat McCarran. Many people believe, and I 
think it’s probably right, that if he had not 
continued his attacks on Pat McCarran after 
the primary, that he could very well have been 
the United States senator from Nevada at that 
time. But these are some of the factors that 
went into rather an unpredictable defeat for 
Tom Mechling, who had the registration in 
his favor, who had won an upset Democratic 
victory. And so in the final results in that race 
of 1952 Molly Malone, Molly—George W.— 
Malone was continued for a second six-year 
term as a U.S. senator from Nevada. That’s 
the way I analyze those two races. I never 
hesitated to admit that the main reason for 
my defeat was nothing other than the fact 
that I was out-campaigned and that I had 
not worked hard enough and that I didn’t 
blame anybody in the world except my own 
individual stupidity in campaigning. 

After the race I had, oh, a myriad of 
people indicate to me that they had previously 
warned me that I was going to lose if I didn’t 
work harder. And I suppose that there were 
certain people that did sense that I wasn’t 
doing too well and told me, but I think they 
were far more limited than those that claimed 
that they had warned me after the result. Be 
that as it may, it made no difference because 
I was defeated. I admit I was defeated. I took 
the full blame for it and profited by that the 
next time I ran for office, because I simply got 
outgunned in the ’52 election with nobody 
to blame except myself. And out of that I 
learned many, many helpful things, and as 
later results proved, I never made the same 
mistake a second time because from then on 
I was elected by the people of the state four 



A Brief Sojourn as a Private Citizen 


93 


times to the U.S. Senate, once for the short 
term, the two-year term, and then for three 
six-year terms for a total of twenty years. And 
I did serve just a little over twenty years in the 
United States Senate. 

But it’s very—very easy to pick up criticism 
and though I felt some of it was unjustified, 
I nevertheless swallowed my pride; it was 
hard to do. I think I felt that maybe I ought 
to leave Nevada, that I had been completely 
discredited, but I took a long rest, and time 
put everything back in the correct perspective. 
So often immediately after a defeat—this is 
the only political defeat I’ve ever had—but 
it was a difficult one because everybody was 
accusin’ me of not doing what I should have 
done the way I should have done it; and 
repeated time and time again, people sayin’, 
“Well it’s nobody’s fault; it’s your own.” I 
[chuckling] always admitted it was my own 
fault, nobody else’s, but nevertheless it did 
hurt at the time and hurt for many months. 
There was a flickering of time, again repeating, 
where I felt, “Well, I’d better take my little 
old family and just move out of Nevada.” 
But I think that’s kind of a natural reaction 
after any type of a political election. Time 
and reflection usually straightens it around, 
puts it in proper perspective. And I think by 
staying on, toughing it out, if it can be called 
toughing it out, it all was righted, and the 
people of Nevada have been very wonderful 
to me in every other election, probably taught 
me a lesson then that I deserved. 

Tell me about the Biltz and Mueller connection 
here, with that election. 

Norman Biltz and Johnny Mueller were, 
of course, very strong individual business 
figures, primarily. But, over and above that, 
they had showed intense interest in politics, 
a desire to be made more and more a part of 


it. And of course their means to becoming 
influential in politics was to select a champion 
and stay with him, and they did that in the 
case of Pat McCarran. They were great and 
strong supporters. They [were] primary 
money raisers for Senator McCarran in his 
campaign, and they did exercise considerable 
influence in the state of Nevada. Johnny 
Mueller was rated for many years—I rather 
imagine it was correct—as the prime—as 
the main lobbyist in the state legislature. He 
had worked for [William] Woodburn and 
[George] Thatcher and George Wingfield 
for many years, was well-trained in political 
ways and was a very, very effective lobbyist. 
He teamed up with Norman Biltz in many 
different adventures, real estate adventures 
and things of that kind. And they became the 
champions of Pat McCarran and helped him 
mainly in the financial area, in financing his 
campaigns. 

They—there was one incident that grew 
out of—they were, I believe, probably 
lukewarm toward me though Johnny Mueller 
was a close personal friend; I feel—I think 
they felt that I wasn’t any Pat McCarran. And 
I wasn’t—never maintained I was. And, I 
think there was only one Pat McCarran and 
probably the way it should have been and was 
and is. But, they felt I wasn’t as powerful and 
as outspoken as Pat McCarran, that maybe I 
wasn’t the logical successor, as many people 
indicated, or the heir apparent or the crown 
prince or whatever you might want to term it 
in the political sense. They gave me lip service 
during the years that Pat McCarran was 
alive, but rather on a lukewarm basis. Once 
Mechling had eliminated me in the primaries, 
they then supported Molly Malone, I’m 
sure, but did it rather cleverly. They engaged 
Tom Mechling in a conversation, which was 
recorded, and proved to be rather detrimental 
to Tom Mechling’s cause because it indicated 



94 


Alan Bible 


some of Mechling’s ties and his financing 
from the East, and indicated for the first time 
that he hadn’t run his campaign on a poor 
man’s shoestring, but that he had help from 
many, many vested money interests in New 
York who very much opposed Pat McCarran, 
and primarily because he was the author and 
the main sponsor of the McCarran-Walter 
Immigration Act, which brought lots of 
criticism from people in the East. 

So, this particular revelation of Tom 
Mechling being masterminded by other 
forces from without came to light during the 
general election of that year as the result of a 
conversation, a recorded conversation, which 
was revealed after the primary As a matter of 
fact, I guess it was recorded after the primary 
and showed some of the plans that Tom 
Mechling had and particularly the fact that 
he was, again, being financed very largely by 
sources completely inimical and unfriendly 
to Pat McCarran. Undoubtedly that had some 
part to play in the ultimate victory by George 
W Malone and most people figured, “Well, we 
don’t know enough about this young knight 
in shining armor from the East and maybe 
we’d better stay with old dependable and 
well-known Molly Malone, because George 
Malone was a highly respected Nevada citizen, 
he was a graduate of the University of Nevada, 
he was a very fine engineer, he had a good 
public record, and so people decided to stay 
with him rather than swing to the Democrats. 
And in that particular year, undoubtedly 
Norman Biltz—particularly Norman Biltz— 
and Johnny Mueller had that part to play in 
upsetting the Democrats for the U.S. Senate. 

I was wondering about their activity in 
supporting you, or whether they had or hadn’t. 

Well, I think the answer to that is, as 
I’ve tried to indicate (I hope I did that) that 


their support—they supported me, but it was 
lukewarm, lukewarm support during the years 
that Pat McCarran was alive. They supported 
me primarily because Pat McCarran indicated 
they should support me, but afterwards they— 
with Pat McCarran being gone —they became 
even more and more lukewarm. Of course, it 
is true that upon Pat McCarran’s death, their 
interest in politics waned tremendously, and 
though they showed some little interest after 
his death, they were never active the way they 
were during his years. In Pat McCarran they 
had a great champion and a man who could 
get things done; probably some of the things 
that were done were to their benefit. But I see 
nothing wrong in that because many people 
adopt political champions that get things done 
that have some rub-off insofar as they are 
individually concerned, and they were very 
powerful during those years, and they loved 
to tell about it; in fact, as you know, there is a 
book written by—about Norman Biltz, I think 
it calls him the “Crown Prince of Nevada,” or 
the “Duke of Nevada.” He relished the title, 
he liked that feeling of power, and he had his 
usual meetings at the Holiday Hotel where 
he would gather his political associates, and 
those closest to him, and they did exercise 
considerable influence. There is no doubt 
about it. And Norman Biltz is entitled to credit 
that comes to a poor boy who had nothing 
and parlayed it into a pretty good chunk of 
money. One way or another. 

I forgot how much of that recording he 
actually revealed, but he recorded, put it 
on tape, and he managed to trap—if that is 
the correct word and I suppose it is—Tom 
Mechling on various questions that he asked 
him. And I don’t know what those questions 
were—my memory is hazy on it; I think it was 
pretty well released by Norman Biltz, to the 
press, either directly or I think several times 
he didn’t release it directly, but I think other 



A Brief Sojourn as a Private Citizen 


95 


times it was released through the campaign 
offices of George Malone, who used it to 
show that this man wasn’t the saint that he 
pretended to be. 

Did you ever have a chance to meet Mechling? 

Oh, many times, many times. 

And talk about the election? 

No, I’ve never gone into the election with 
him. See, he ran again, a second time. I think 
it was two years later, he ran for, I guess it 
was governor. But by that time, the people 
were rather disenchanted with him, and he 
didn’t make a very strong showing. I believe 
he went to California; it seems to me he got 
tied into some type of a problem on books. 
Some type of book problem there—it involved 
the superintendent of public instruction—but 
again I’m pretty hazy on it and I wouldn’t 
comment on it because I don’t know enough 
about it. After all, I had in the meantime 
remedied my poor election ways and gone on 
to be elected, so I had plenty to keep me busy. 
No, he stopped by [to) see me in the office a 
number of times, was always very close to his 
father-in-law—and to his [brother-in-law). 
Margaret DiGrazia had a brother who had a 
very distinguished military career, and we’ve 
been at his house when he entertained his 
father-in-law, or his father—it would be his 
father—and his mother; this was the colonel, 
Colonel DiGrazia. 

He was stationed in Washington on 
several occasions; spent a very illustrious 
career and I don’t know what his rank was 
when he finally came out. I think he came out 
of the service as a full colonel. I don’t think he 
received his one star, but I could be in error on 
that. And we were very friendly, and during 
those periods of time he usually always had 


his sister, who was Tom Mechling’s wife, there 
with Tom. And we reminisced to a degree; I 
didn’t go probing because I—[laughs] for no 
particular reason except other topics came 
up. But I’ve lost track of him in the meantime. 

Occasionally he surfaces in putting some 
type of deal together and as near as I know he’s 
still in the New York area. But I have seen him 
a number of times both in my own office and 
in his brother-in-law’s home in Washington. 
But he apparently abandoned politics. I think 
I remember reading in the newspapers—it 
could be verified—that he came back, oh, 
within the last four or five years; he always 
had very fine relations with the press, and 
he always received good publicity. He was 
good copy. If I was a newspaper reporter I 
would latch onto him and use his color and 
his determination, and things he did in my 
stories because he was that colorful. But, he 
came back into Nevada, not too many years 
ago surveying the political situation, thinking 
that he might again return to Nevada and 
again make another bid for political office. 
But apparently the time had passed him by, 
and maybe the response he received was not 
what he thought he should receive. But in any 
event, as near as I know, he has abandoned 
whatever plans he might have had to run 
again for political office. 

He was, of course, turned back in the 
general election in which I was involved— 
should have been involved—and then he was 
turned back on his next time out, which I 
think was either two or four years after that. 
The political history of the state of Nevada 
would nail it down. He was rather badly 
defeated, ran a poor second or third, and 
then he made this one subsequent survey 
of Nevada, and apparently abandoned all 
political thoughts, at that time and, I would 
assume, probably for the future, I don’t 
know. 



96 


Alan Bible 


One of his shortcomings, obviously, would 
be that you can’t duck in and out of Nevada, 
and just get here at election time and expect 
to have too much permanence. Others have 
tried it, and one of the examples was a man 
by the name of [William] Tyson, who ran and 
I think was elected to the Board of Regents. 
He later on, ran for governor, I believe, and 
was eliminated in the primaries. He made a 
very poor showing. And so occasionally we 
do have people who do come into Nevada and 
do establish residence, which is rather easily 
done, to run for political office. But that’s the 
history of Tom Mechling as I remember. 



7 


Career as a U.S. Senator 


The Election of 1954 

The death of Pat McCarran in Hawthorne, 
Nevada, in September of 1954, opened up 
an unexpected political vista insofar as I was 
personally concerned. I believe that I had just 
about determined, that having returned to 
the private practice of law, I would continue 
in that capacity, and try to become a lawyer 
instead of becoming a political animal. 

However, his death brought a new 
demand on me from many of my long-time 
and faithful supporters to run for his vacancy. 
The governorship of this state at that time was 
under the control of a Republican, Charlie 
Russell. And Charlie Russell, immediately 
upon the death of Senator McCarran, after 
a respectful time, which he observed to 
await his final funeral services, he appointed 
Ernest Brown, who was a dynamic, young 
district attorney from Washoe County and 
Reno, Nevada, and a man who had received 
considerable publicity in the northern part of 
the state, as the district attorney of Washoe 
County. Labor was making certain inroads in 


this county and area at that time. Ernie Brown 
had rather strongly resisted some of their 
moves and some of their efforts to organize. 
He was no darling of labor, it was safe to say, 
and he was a brilliant young lawyer. Ernie 
Brown and I had gone back to the University 
of Nevada days, and I knew him extremely 
well. I was very, very fond of him. We got 
along very well. I had occasion, as attorney 
general of the state, to be helpful to him as 
a district attorney in this county, during the 
period of time that I was attorney general 
of Nevada and he was district attorney of 
Washoe County. 

I really believe that his appointment by 
Charlie Russell was a popular one. I think it 
was well accepted by the Republicans, and 
they were happy to see him appointed as the 
U.S. senatorship. 

It is rather ironic that I had, during my 
term of office as attorney general, personally 
written an opinion saying that the philosophy 
of the constitution was to fill a vacancy at 
the earliest possible moment, by the people 
of the state, rather than by appointment, 



98 


Alan Bible 


where it could be done. Now Pat McCarran’s 
death came at such a time that there was 
ample opportunity—not long opportunity, 
but ample opportunity, to stand for election, 
which was the philosophy of the state. So, 
I was then just getting over my bruises as 
the defeated nominee for the Democratic 
nomination for U.S. Senate, and a number 
of people suggested that I should run. They 
did that either, I suppose, did that largely out 
of sympathy or sorrow or whatever rationale 
they used to try to urge me to get into the race 
for U.S. Senate. 

So, after the appointment, we challenged 
the appointment. I’d better back up for a 
moment and say that once it was tried in 
the newspapers, lawyers came up with their 
opinions as to whether I was eligible to run 
or whether I was not eligible to run, and of 
course the first thing that had to be done was 
that I had to secure the nomination of the 
political party of the state or the executive 
committee of the state. And we put the wheels 
in motion. There were many of my strong 
supporters from my earlier campaign that 
urged me to make the effort and to test it in 
court. 

I took the position I suppose rather 
naively, but rather cockily again, that if I 
could get on the ballot that I could get elected. 
And I guess that was the right philosophy to 
have, but in any event our first battle was to 
try to get the nomination from the political 
committee, the Democratic State Central 
Committee. The statute provided that they 
had the appointing power. So we moved 
quickly. I guess I learned much of this as a 
result of my Mechling campaign—to move 
fast—to move quickly, and I received the 
unanimous vote of the central committee, 
the Democratic Central Committee, to put 
my name on the ballot, following the terms 
of the statute. 


Ernie Brown did the same thing with the 
Republican committee, but he also challenged 
my right to be placed on the ballot. I was first 
nominated by the Democratic party subject, 
of course, to being able to get on the ballot 
for the 1954 election. I filed the suit, basically, 
in Washoe County to enforce my right to get 
on the ballot. The trial judge, as I remember 
it was Judge Maestretti at that time, ruled 
that it was too late for me to be nominated by 
my party central committee, and he denied 
my right to get on the ballot. At that time, 
it then led to an appeal to the state Supreme 
Court, where it was appealed and I had strong 
support from many fine lawyers, needless to 
say, mainly Democratic, who argued the case 
for me. 

I remember Jack Halley was very 
instrumental in my behalf. Bill Forman of 
the firm of Woodburn and Thatcher was very, 
very active on my behalf. My former deputy 
attorney general, Bill Mathews, thought my 
position was correct. And I think he argued—. 
Jack Streeter, young lawyer, just on his way up 
felt that my position was right. 

As I recall it was argued in front of the 
[Nevada] Supreme Court by Jack Streeter. I 
think by Bill Forman—at least if Bill Forman 
didn’t appear personally, he at least was a great 
help to me, in briefing the law. And then my 
former deputy, and full attorney general of 
the state, Bill Mathews, and I’ve always felt 
very grateful to Bill Mathews because I think 
he had every right in the world to feel a little 
chagrined at my earlier temerity in running 
for attorney general when I was a deputy but 
he was senior to me, at that time. Of course, 
those were political misunderstandings that 
time heals, and we did end up as very close 
and fast friends, as I have earlier indicated. 
Anyway, my side of the case was argued by 
Bill Mathews and Jack Streeter—possibly by 
Bill Forman. I believe those were the main 



Career as U.S. Senator 


99 


lawyers who conducted the argument. Lester 
Summerfield represented the Republican 
Central Committee, and presented the main 
argument on behalf of Ernie Brown. 

The Supreme Court came out unanimously 
saying that the contention that I had advanced 
was the correct one and that I should—that 
both names should go on the November 
ballot, and let the people of the state decide. 
There were many side issues to the problem, 
which I won’t particularly burden the record 
with. But one of them, for example, was that 
there wasn’t sufficient time to get out the 
absent voters’ ballots. Now that was disposed 
of by the state Supreme Court, and was not 
appealed higher. They accepted the verdict 
of the state Supreme Court which was a 
unanimous verdict, and I think undoubtedly 
had a great deal to do with the acceptance 
by the opposition, in view of the fact that it 
was a unanimous decision, strengthened the 
contention that we made that it should go to 
the people of the state. So the order was made 
by the state Supreme Court that both names 
go on the ballot. 

One redeeming feature out of this entire 
exercise in political warfare was the fact 
that the amount of time remaining for 
campaigning was very short so—I think both 
from the standpoint of the electorate of the 
state, and both Ernie Brown and myself—it 
was rather a blessing that we didn’t have a 
long, extended campaign. But in any event, 
we covered the state. I made extensive use of 
an airplane—I think we called it the “Victory 
Special,” and we used the many, many rather 
novel campaign gimmicks. I think we used 
the helicopter for the first time—dropped 
into various areas where you couldn’t possibly 
reach, if you had to drive all the way. 

But there was a sight! I can recall one 
incident that I think should probably be 
mentioned, and that is that we were always 


an attraction wherever we went flying around 
in a helicopter. And we were followed by 
practically all the children in the community, 
so we always had a good audience, but maybe 
not too many adults. And it caught the fancy 
of many people and was commented on, 
and as I say, it was a part of our political 
campaigning, and I think a very important 
part, and probably had some effect in my 
ultimate election. 

In that particular race, I think I won by 
something a little over twelve thousand votes 
in this state, which was a very healthy and 
comforting margin to win on the first trial. 
And so it was with that backing that I took 
off for Washington. Ernie Brown had already 
been sworn in on the interim appointment by 
Governor Russell, and he was serving at that 
time. Interestingly enough, the McCarthy 
censure session was already in progress, and 
Ernie Brown had heard practically all of the 
testimony up to the time that I was elected 
and qualified. I think there were only a few 
days left in the session—the special session— 
and, when I was finally certified as being the 
newly elected U.S. senator from Nevada—I 
think there were two or three days left, if 
my memory is right—I took the position 
that since Ernie Brown had heard all of the 
testimony, and it was just like conducting 
a trial, and that it would be unfair for me 
to go in and vote without having heard the 
evidence, or the cross examinations that 
occurred during the censure trial, and as a 
result, I did not vote at that time. 

I think I was qualified either a day or two 
one side or the other of the final submission of 
a censure problem to the senators of the United 
States. Ernie Brown cast a vote—as I recall it, 
he voted against censuring McCarthy. I, of 
course, withheld my vote because I had not 
been qualified. After the vote (and the censure 
did prevail, by a vote, I guess of a good two to 



100 


Alan Bible 


one) I was then sworn in, and Ernie Brown 
stepped aside, gracious in every manner. He 
offered to step aside before the vote; I reasoned 
it was not the right thing to do, and so I did 
not claim it—I think I probably could have 
claimed it—probably could have voted for 
censure or against censure. And of course the 
question then, one of the political questions 
that arose—if I had accepted the opportunity 
to be sworn in and had been entitled to vote, 
as I would have been, would I have voted to 
censure McCarthy or would I not? 

I think in frankness, as I look back and 
refresh my memory and read the record, I 
simply took the position that there was no way 
that I could determine, one way or the other, 
unless I had heard it all or had reexamined 
and carefully examined the entire record. The 
Democrats, I believe, unanimously voted to 
censure McCarthy. The Republicans dividedly 
supported him. 

But, I have never come to firm decision 
on that. And, the matter is—it is a part of 
history that has been written, and there was 
no closeness at all in the censure vote. It was 
a strong two to one to censure Joe McCarthy, 
and I did meet him and became acquainted 
with him when I was sworn in. 

I think it is no more than proper that I 
speak, as I have so many times, of my great 
admiration for Pat McCarran. Strangely 
enough, I never knew Senator McCarran 
until after I went to Washington and started 
to work my way through my law school. Our 
paths had never crossed in Nevada, and I 
knew him, of course, by reputation and the 
terrific reputation that he had made, not only 
as a trial lawyer, which there was none better, 
but his very, very important contributions 
when he became a jurist on the Supreme 
Court of the state. He wrote some landmark 
decisions, some decisions that were quoted 
in many other places. One decision that 


comes to my attention, is the fact that he held 
that it was completely admissible to put the 
palm print of a suspect into evidence. And 
a palm print served a good deal in the same 
way as a fingerprint would in identifying the 
accused, and he was tied to the crime and 
was subsequently convicted of the crime 
of which he was charged. It was armed 
robbery, as I remember it, and there was 
some corroborating evidence, but most of the 
evidence depended upon the palm print of the 
defendant that was found on the mailbag that 
had been taken from the train. And through 
this identification he was convicted and this 
was cited in many, many cases throughout the 
country as proper admissibility of evidence; 
and Senator McCarran, as Justice McCarran, 
Judge McCarran, wrote many other, similar 
opinions that were quoted far and wide. He 
was a very brilliant lawyer. He was also a very, 
very brilliant jurist. And he wrote beautifully; 
he wrote intelligently. I don’t know his 
percentage of reversals, but my impression is 
that he had a very high rate of being sustained 
by the high court when he was appealed. The 
decisions were clear, easily read, and again 
pointed out the law as he saw it, and usually 
sustained by appeals. Such was his work on 
the Supreme Court, and of course one of his 
life’s ambitions was to become a United States 
senator and he made the attempt a number of 
times but rather unsuccessfully. 

When he was nominated the last time and 
the one that led to his successful election as a 
United States senator, I believe it was probably 
in the depth of the Depression, many people 
felt that Tasker Oddie (who incidentally was a 
splendid man, and a very, very fine bearer of 
the Republican standard) was thought to be 
almost unbeatable. I think some of those who 
in earlier years opposed Senator McCarran 
felt, “Well, let’s let him have another chance 
of it; he won’t beat Tasker Oddie, anyway.” 



Career as U.S. Senator 


101 


But he confounded them, and of course 
this was in the depth of the Depression, 
and FDR was just on the rise. And Franklin 
Delano Roosevelt was elected by a landslide 
throughout the United States and there was a 
change and there was a revolt against Herbert 
Hoover, and McCarran rode along on that 
particular tide, and undoubtedly his running 
as a Democrat, running with FDR had a great 
deal to do with election. And he was elected to 
the U.S. Senate—U.S. senatorship, and started 
a career that lasted until he dropped dead of 
a heart attack on stage in Hawthorne on that 
September night in 1954. 

He gave to me a great, great insight into 
the practical side of politics, because in 
traveling with him, driving him, as I did, 
to many places around the state, I saw that 
one of the ingredients that made him such 
a successful politician—and that was—the 
main ingredient, I suppose, was friendliness, 
and his ability to go into any area in the state 
of Nevada, and to call countless people by 
their first names. 

He had been born—in fact he was the 
first Nevadan to be elected to the U.S. Senate 
who was born in Nevada. And he showed 
great recognition of the people of this state, 
very sympathetic with their problems, great 
knowledge of the area’s problems, and an 
intense interest in trying to help Nevada. I 
think that was one of his hallmarks of fame— 
he had many of them. But I think that was 
one of them. 

And he inculcated in me I am sure, 
probably a desire to go on in the field of public 
service, attempting to help people and he 
helped many, many people. There were very 
few who didn’t appreciate it. Occasionally, 
over the course of his career, I’m sure he found 
out, as all of us find out, there are those who 
are grateful and those who are not grateful. 
And I don’t know, but I’ve always felt that 


the saying that the power of appointment 
is no great reward for successful campaign 
or successful candidate because those that 
receive the appointment feel that they 
deserved it anyway, and the others, the others, 
that do not receive it are quite—generally, 
very, very upset about it, and sometimes to the 
extent of going out, and, as I have them say 
about me, and I am sure Senator McCarran 
had said about him, “Well, we’ll get him the 
next time he runs.” 

But, so it’s a divided blessing, but it was a 
power that he had, and that later on, I had, and 
one on which I’ve had mixed feelings about 
its value as a political tool. Generally it’s felt 
to be a very valuable political tool, and we use 
it with that in mind. I’m not sure that that’s 
completely true. 

Senator McCarran made great 
achievements in many, many fields. He was 
the father of the aviation act, and was (during 
this period of time, aviation was just starting 
to grow) undoubtedly responsible for many of 
the early acts that gave to aviation a regulatory 
body and built it on a sound base, and I think 
has grown and prospered since that time. 

He was the co-author of the McCarran- 
Walter Immigration Act, one which almost 
cost him an election at one time. And one 
which he stood firm and which wrote 
far-reaching legislation governing the 
immigration of people from other lands. It 
was said that he was very, very restrictive to 
those from southern Europe, mainly those 
from Italy and those from Greece. And he 
received opposition because of this. But he 
reasoned it out. We had to control and very 
carefully, those we permitted to come to this 
country. He was one of the leaders in that field. 

He wrote much of the legislation 
dealing with the judiciary and of course, he 
ended up, as the chairman of the Judiciary 
Committee and one of the ranking members 



102 


Alan Bible 


of the Appropriations Committee. And in 
the Appropriations Committee, he was the 
chairman of the State Justice Subcommittee, 
and his strong influence and strong hand was 
felt there for many, many years in the money 
he appropriated and the strengthening that 
he gave to the various agencies. 

Over and above all of this, he had the 
Irish temperament, which made him a real 
fighter. At the time that he went into the 
United States Senate, there was a tradition that 
newcomers should listen and not be heard. 
He paid no attention whatever to that. And 
he immediately threw himself into the thick 
of all the various controversial problems that 
came about at that time. 

And there are always controversial 
problems, in the federal legislation, and I am 
sure there probably always will be. One of 
his great fights was on behalf of the veterans, 
where he took the position diametrically 
opposed to that President Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt took and he won. This was about 
the time that Franklin Delano Roosevelt 
conceived the purging of the Senate in order 
to acquire more Supreme Court justices 
and McCarran was one of about five or six 
senators who was marked out for purging, 
and as a matter of fact, Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt did enter into the Nevada political 
scene attempting to purge Pat McCarran, 
but he was unsuccessful. McCarran took the 
challenge and defeated his opposition of that 
day, Albert Hilliard, very, very handily, and 
went on to be elected as United States senator. 

These were hallmarks of a man who was 
a born fighter, who had always been pretty 
much on the outs with the regulars of the 
Democratic party, and who finally lived long 
enough to see his own machine, and I use the 
machine advisedly, because I think he was the 
last of the real senators, or governors, who had 


a machine that you really could call a machine 
where he could call on various people to help 
him during the elections, which he did. 

Of course one of his attributes, or failings, 
whichever one wants to call it, was in the fact 
that he made very, very hard and fast and loyal 
friends, but he also made very bitter enemies, 
so that he came up with that particular kind of 
a mix where there were those who really went 
out and would work against him; on the other 
hand, there were those who were devoted to 
him and would do anything in the world to 
see that he was elected. 

He served Nevada extremely well; he 
loved Nevada just as one would love a family 
member and everything he did in the ultimate 
was pointed toward making Nevada a little 
better place in which to live. He made the 
United States of America a little better place 
to live. And for all of those things he deserves 
a great and lasting tribute and I believe people 
today, even though they all—didn’t always 
recognize it, now know some of the things 
and some of the advances he made for his 
country and for his state. 

Did he discuss these accomplishments with you? 

No, as I remember it, in my conversations 
with Senator McCarran, he didn’t single out 
any of his accomplishments or achievements. 
I think knowing the man, and having traveled 
with him, and having been very close to him, 
that he felt that practically everything he did 
was an accomplishment. I think that when 
you boil it all down he was proudest of all his 
accomplishments in the field of aviation; in his 
accomplishments in establishing, as he did, a 
landing field at practically every crossroads 
in Nevada, where an airplane, in distress 
perchance, could land in an emergency; and 
the state of Nevada was honeycombed and 



Career as U.S. Senator 


103 


still is, with landing strips built in many, many 
different areas of the state. 

The safety devices and the towers, and the 
other equipment that is necessary to make 
aviation safer and safer—I think he took great 
pride in all that. I think he took great pride 
in bringing post offices, new post offices, 
into various areas of the state. Or new federal 
buildings into various areas of the state. These 
are all accomplishments which can be very 
easily pointed to, and accomplishments for 
which he was certainly justly proud. 

So, I think his greatest accomplishment, 
or his greatest sense of accomplishment would 
be in the strengthening of Nevada. Because, 
he did love it, as I say, just as he would a family 
member. 

Did he talk to you about the maintenance of 
his machine? So many people consider you his 
heir apparent, or whatever you want to call it 
in the political field. Did he tell you how to keep 
the thing well oiled? 

I think he showed me, and probably 
through—through showing and telling me 
about his own political success—trying to 
educate me, to take up the mantle, when and 
if he would pass on, which of course would 
be inevitable, I think he did very honestly, 
consider me to be the logical one to follow 
him and I think he evidenced it in a great 
many ways—probably more particularly 
by the assignments that he gave to me, by 
confidences that he shared with me, and 
I think that was his wish and desire that I 
succeed him and at least try to succeed him. 
I know for example, that in my defeat by Tom 
Mechling, he was extremely upset by the 
defeat. He was very much upset by the fact 
that I hadn’t called upon him for more help 
than I did. I, whether rightly or wrongly, as 


we look back at that particular race of mine, 
and in the long run I don’t think it made one 
iota of difference, but at that tine, as I have 
indicated in earlier dictations, I was so badly 
hurt that I was about to leave the state. I 
think he felt that if I had called on him more 
and oftener, that it probably could have been 
avoided. No one will ever be able to know 
that answer. 

I purposely did not call on him as much, 
maybe as I should have and I reasoned that 
out that I wanted to be my own man. I wanted 
to have a sense of independence, and I of 
course was branded as being nothing more 
nor less than a lackey for McCarran, and if 
I were elected at the time of my race with 
Mechling, I would be little more than a vote 
in the hip pocket of McCarran. I always try to 
counter that by saying that [I] thought I was 
my own man. I wanted to be independent, 
and I’d vote with Senator McCarran when 
I thought he was right, but if I thought he 
was wrong, I wouldn’t hesitate to say so and 
oppose him. And that was, I believe, my 
honest conviction, but nevertheless, there 
were many people that felt that I would 
simply be his tool, and be his lackey. And I 
think it is correct to say that he looked upon 
me as (during the time that he was alive and 
moving along in life)—that I’d be very apt to 
be his successor. 

I really believe that. I can’t ever remember 
that he specifically said, “When I pass on 
you’re going to be the guy.” I can’t remember 
him saying that. But the indications of his 
treatment of me and things he did after his 
passage, things that he had prepared to do 
to help me, were evidence, at least to my 
satisfaction, that he honestly did feel that 
I should follow him, if possible. So I really 
believe—I can’t remember that he ever spelled 
it out—one, two, three, four, five for me 



104 


Alan Bible 


because I have a feeling that he felt that I was 
smart enough to at least to be able to figure it 
out myself, which I think would be the correct 
answer to that question. 

* * * * * 

So, having missed the one time; after his 
death, we come into the second opportunity, 
and once I qualified on the ballot, then it 
was up to me to put on a winning campaign, 
which I attempted to do and actually did 
accomplish. It was an interesting race because 
it was a short race. I think that as much as any 
one thing has always proven to me that most 
political races are too long. People get tired 
of them—they get worn out by them, and, 
this—we covered the state rather thoroughly, 
in an airplane expedition. I used, at that time, 
Chet Smith, who was with Senator McCarran, 
as my campaign manager. I used Eva Adams, 
who was his administrative assistant, as 
my administrative assistant, and we started 
from there, and went on to cover the state as 
thoroughly as we could in the limited time 
that we had. 

I don’t think it would have made any 
difference if the campaign had gone longer 
and looking back, and refreshing my memory, 
I see that Ernie Brown did exactly the same. 
We did campaign throughout the state in 
“whirlwind” fashion. And covered the state, 
I believe, about as thoroughly as we could 
have even if it had been much longer. Nobody 
knows what a longer campaign would or 
would not have done. I have a feeling it 
would have come out just about the same, 
and that we really wrung out about all of the 
senatorial votes that we could in the shortened 
campaign. 

Chet Smith was my campaign manager, 
and he stayed with me practically my entire 
political career. Pete Echeverria, a very, very 


prominent Reno lawyer and fraternity brother 
of mine, agreed to help me and the two of us 
campaigned the state together in what we 
called the “Bible Victory Special.” Later on—I 
think I may have commented on this before— 
used helicopters in many areas, and we at least 
attracted crowds, particularly of the younger 
generation who had never seen a helicopter. It 
was a great device to hop up and down within 
the city; we particularly made good use of it 
in the Las Vegas area. It was a novel method 
of campaigning and created attention. There’s 
always gimmickry in every campaign, and this 
one was certainly no exception. 

We came out successfully and I won by 
something like ten thousand votes and it 
was a year in which General Eisenhower was 
running for his second term. He was elected 
in the state of Nevada by some eighteen 
thousand votes, and I was elected by ten 
thousand. One of the upsets was—or least so 
written at that time—was that Charlie Russell 
defeated Vail Pittman. One of the very, very 
few times that he ever lost, Walter Baring, the 
congressman of the state, lost to Cliff Young 
by some six thousand votes. 

And this was the time when Rex Bell, 
the very charming movie star was on his 
way up the political ladder, he was elected 
as lieutenant governor. So—and the right - 
to-work bill was on the ballot at that time, 
and was one of the critical issues that had 
to be faced because the people of the state 
voted for a right-to-work bill, and of course, 
that was contrary to what organized labor 
had wanted. 

I said, upon my successful election (and 
I was about the sole surviving federal or 
state—top state official, who was a Democrat), 
I made a statement as—that I had picked up 
from doing my preparatory work toward this 
oral history, and I said something that I think 
is a truism and I found it was true. I said that 



Career as U.S. Senator 


105 


“1 realize that as far as politics are concerned, 
I’ve become target number one.” And I found 
out it was true, as I moved forward in the 
top political spot, as a Democrat in the state 
of Nevada. All the other top spots were held 
during that period of time by Republicans. 

But this was my advent into the United 
States Senate. And at that time I fully intended 
to serve as long as the people wanted me, 
and I have said this I think repeatedly, and 
brought my family back, composed of a 
daughter and three sons, and they were true 
westerners—they didn’t particularly care or 
like the Washington environment, though I 
thought we were fairly happy there. They kept 
wanting to go back home, and undoubtedly 
had considerable influence the next time 
election got around to be talked about, studied 
and pursued. 

I kept Senator McCarran’ s long-time 
administrative assistant, Eva Adams, as my 
administrative assistant. I knew Eva very well. 
We had gone to the University of Nevada 
together; we both worked on the University of 
Nevada Sagebrush together; and I also knew 
her father, Vein Adams, who was a mining 
man, knew him very well, so I was delighted 
to keep Eva on. She remained with me until I 
had the opportunity of giving her a deserved 
promotion—nominating her as the director 
of the Mint. I had, in my two years, three 
years service during that period of time, I 
had become a very, very close, good friend 
of John F. Kennedy. We were both seated in 
the back row of the United States Senate. He 
was one seat removed from me. It was John F. 
Kennedy, next to him was Mr. Pat McNamara 
of Michigan, and Alan Bible of Nevada. 

Pat McNamara and I were sworn in on 
the same day. In the course of that very close 
contact, I became extremely friendly with 
John F. Kennedy, and he was always more than 
kindly to me. So when the opportunity came 


up for me to give Eva Adams a deserved raise 
and a deserved promotion, I didn’t hesitate a 
minute to speak to the then President John F. 
Kennedy as to her qualifications and my firm 
belief that she could handle the job extremely 
well. She was a most capable woman, and 
did a wonderful job for me. But this seemed 
to me to be the opportunity for her to have 
a promotion which would give her more 
stature, and there was talk during much of 
that time about her returning to Nevada, 
and running for office herself. And I think 
she would have been able, whatever office 
she sought. That never materialized, but the 
directorship did—in fact. I had the occasion 
to recommend her for a second term when 
Lyndon B. Johnson became president of the 
United States. (That will fall into place a little 
bit later on.) 

There is another question that I wanted to 
ask you about — Eva’s appointment to the 
Mint. There is an indication that with her 
appointment at the Mint, there was a division 
of the authority at the Mint with another person 
and that it was because of Eva’s appointment 
that this happened. Do you recall what that 
was? 

There was some division of authority and 
was some—I can’t recall it independently, but 
I can recall by doing just a little research, but 
there was somebody else who really thought 
they should have—they divided the authority. 
In other words, the prior director of the Mint 
had more authority and her responsibility 
was broader than Eva’s. They cut Eva’s down 
and gave somebody else, who I think thought 
she was going to be director of the Mint in 
the place of Eva, gave her some of the other 
responsibility. Now what they were, I just 
don’t know off the top of my head, but again 
I can check it out—because it is correct. 



106 


Alan Bible 


I think that Eva had become somewhat 
controversial. 

I don’t know that she became controversial. 
I never sensed that other than her close tie, 
which was no secret, she had a perfect right; 
she was always thought to be in Nevada, I’m 
sure, the spokesman for Biltz and Cord. I 
think there was no doubt about that, that she 
was extremely close to them, and it may be 
that she became controversial because of that. 
I thought she always had the right to choose 
her own friends, and of course she was close 
to them, and Johnny Mueller, and I’m sure 
she—and originally they weren’t buddy-buddy 
with McCarran, but I think through Eva 
and her influence over McCarran, and her 
closeness to Biltz and to Cord (she was close 
to both of them, no doubt about it), and she 
tried to arrange a marriage between them, in 
effect, and then was very successful. But if that 
made her controversial, that’s what it would 
have been about. 

Well, the remark that I read in your scrapbook 
was that she had become so controversial that 
you couldn’t afford to fire her and that you 
couldn’t keep her, so the promotion into the 
Mint had something to do with that, and that 
the dilution there had something to do with the 
same situation. 

I think her authority was diluted, but she 
had the sole say as the director of the Mint. 
I’m trying to think what else there would 
have been in there that—I think they split it 
up in such a way that the coinage problems— 
that would be a mint problem—I’m just 
trying to think what the problem could have 
been. But you’re dead right. I don’t think— 
she must have spoken out on the minting of 
silver dollars, but I just have to refresh my 
memory. 


Summary of Legislation in the Fifties 

One of the first problems that I faced was 
one with which I had considerable familiarity, 
and was probably fairly well prepared to 
handle, and that was the question of the 
southern Nevada power question, which was 
constantly recurring, and the big problem 
was the division of the power that had been 
allotted to Nevada. And that was carried over 
for a good many years. 

The state of Nevada had a firm allotment 
of power, but it had to exercise that right 
within a certain time limit. And strangely 
enough, as we look at that problem now 
some twenty-five years later, we wonder why 
Nevada took so long, and hesitated so much in 
finally exercising its right to take its full share 
of the dam power from Hoover Darn. But they 
did, at the last minute, exercise that right and 
now have far exceeded that first option which 
they renewed or exercised. So we had many 
problems in that first term of mine with the 
southern Nevada power allotment. 

It was at that time that we started the 
Washoe Project. Senator Molly Malone, who 
was skilled in water problems as the water 
engineer of the state prior to his service in 
Washington, and I joined in a bill to bring 
about the creation of the Washoe Project. And 
that to northern Nevada and western Nevada 
meant a great, great deal because it was very 
obvious that if we did not have upstream 
storage, then much water would escape. And 
so I’ve always looked upon that as a joint 
project, which did a great deal to the building 
of this particular area here in Washoe County. 

I recommended and suggested, on 
election, that we continue the Western bloc 
of senators and that was accomplished and 
we did meet regularly in those earlier years 
to serve—completely apart from partisanship, 
completely apart from whether you were a 



Career as U.S. Senator 


107 


Republican or a Democrat—in the interest of 
the West and advancing and in the increasing 
of aviation, and building service lines and 
feeder lines into the various smaller areas to 
give them better service. 

And this was particularly true, for 
example, in the—it came up during the first 
term of office when we successfully made 
a plea for bringing air service into White 
Pine County This was the first time that had 
ever been accomplished, and it was finally 
accomplished and is still being served by the 
major airlines—part of the major lines, at 
least, as is Elko, Nevada on the United Air 
Lines route. And this was the start of that. 
United Air Lines resisted rather strongly, at 
that time. I think they have always had some 
doubts about it because it was what they 
call a very low passenger load factor. I don’t 
[know if] it’s ever increased to what United 
Air Lines feels is necessary in order to make 
it a good investment. But nevertheless, it was 
a service which an isolated area particularly 
needed, and I think it’s helped White Pine a 
great, great deal. 

That was inaugurated and initiated and 
actually started during my first term of office. 
Another problem, which came up during my 
first term, was the emancipation of Boulder 
City. Boulder City was a federal city at the 
time that I went into the United States Senate, 
and succeeded Senator McCarran. The federal 
people were very desirous of shedding their 
responsibility as the city managers and 
caretakers for a municipality so they asked 
that we introduce legislation, which we did, 
to emancipate Boulder City and make it 
an independent city, governed by the same 
general laws that govern all the cities and 
municipalities in the state of Nevada. 

There was considerable resistance, but 
we continued—had hearings. We heard both 
sides. The bill was finally hammered out and 


over the years, I think has been fairly well 
adopted by the people of Boulder City. The 
main objection was that if it was thrown open 
to public mandate, public vote, that you would 
have gambling, and uncontrolled liquor sales. 
That has not materialized and Boulder City 
is really today one of the finest cities in the 
entire state of Nevada. And, totally, almost, 
through local government. 

But that was one of the bills that came up 
during the first period of time. It is interesting 
to note that in my first term back in 1954 and 
’55, there was a problem that would sound 
familiar to people of Nevada in this year of 
1978, and that is a strict protest against higher 
grazing tees. That was a perennial and one 
on which we had many, many battles. We 
always try to put in under a formula. The 
price of grazing and the price of the product 
of the public domain, which was federally 
owned, should be governed by the price 
of the beef, or of the lamb, which were the 
two main products of grazing in Nevada; 
and we have never been successful in doing 
that. Even today they are trying to tie the 
grazing fees, the charges for the grass on the 
public domain, in accordance with the price 
that they receive—that the rancher and the 
livestockmen—the stockman, the cattleman 
and the sheep man, receive for their product. 

And, so that is one that originated in that 
first year during my period of time and I really 
think it was a fair formula. I’m hoping as they 
keep grappling with the question, year after 
year, over these many years, that they will 
arrive at some satisfactory solution. 

I note that with great pomp and with great 
evidence of superior knowledge, I predicted 
on March 7,1955, which is a little over twenty 
years now, that Nevada would reach the 
population of three hundred thousand by 
1970. As a crystal ball gazer or as a predictor, 
I certainly flunked out very badly, because 



108 


Alan Bible 


they’ve passed three hundred thousand many 
years ago. 

Molly Malone, during that period of time, 
when we were fighting for more power, more 
water—it was a j oint fight, and we j oined forces 
in an attempt to accomplish this—showed the 
audacity, and many, many people challenged 
it, of saying that Nevada, some day, would 
have five hundred thousand people. Now, 
in the period of time of which I am talking, 
some twenty-five years ago that was felt to 
be by many of us, myself included, to be an 
unrealistic figure. We rather scoffed at Senator 
Malone because of his prediction. And of 
course, this is another figure that has fallen 
by the wayside some years ago, and I guess, as 
I reminisce and dictate this oral history, that 
we are well above eight hundred thousand 
now, leave alone the three hundred thousand, 
which I figure was a daring prediction on my 
part; or five hundred thousand, which Molly 
Malone felt was a more correct figure. Both 
of which have been exceeded by—in my case 
at least—by more than doubled. 

So, such was the climate in which we 
worked at that time, and there were two 
other items in that first term on which I 
would comment. One was that—and it was 
something unheard of to me—I didn’t know 
what a gin mill was, as a matter of fact, 
and I thought it had something to do with 
the product that we used when I went to 
college, but I found that I was dead wrong, 
and that it was used in the cotton industry. 
And they had come up with a discovery in 
Pahrump in southern Nevada and more 
primarily in Clark County, and in parts 
of Nye County that they could raise long- 
branch cotton which was a real wonderful 
product, but they needed a gin mill. And 
the gin mill of course, was the mill, in which 
they processed the cotton. So we were able 
to secure the recognition of an allotment 


of cotton for the state of Nevada, and for 
many years it was one of the major crops in 
that particular area of the state. Other areas 
of the state attempted to grow cotton with 
varying degrees of success. But in Pahrump 
it flourished and produced enough cotton to 
support a gin mill. This was the year when we 
jointly made a push for Squaw Valley as the 
Olympic site for the next Winter Olympics. It 
was a long, difficult battle. We enlisted the aid 
of state of Nevada officially and California 
made the equal push, and a result of that, 
we were successful in having the Winter 
Olympics [1960] at Squaw Valley. If I were 
to do it again, I don’t know that I would be 
quite as vigorous in my advocacy of a Winter 
Olympics. It is a great thing publicity-wise, 
but financially, it simply never works out, 
and it cost the state of California a good 
many thousands of dollars. And it cost 
Nevada some amount of money; of course 
that might have been offset by the publicity 
which I believe generally was favorable for 
Squaw Valley and the Winter Olympics. That 
was another item that was before us in that 
opening session. 

I received some comment after my being 
sworn in, of having my door into my office 
always open, and many of them or some of 
the, I should say—some of the newspaper 
reporters, of that area, commented that it 
was a great way to carry on an open door 
policy. I always persisted in that. We always 
had the door open, and people passing by, 
came in, some of real business, others just 
out of curiosity, because inherited from 
McCarran, was a solid bank of Indian 
pictures that covered one wall. They were 
given to him as I understand it, by the Santa 
Fe Railroad, which produced many colorful 
Indian pictures, and I kept them there, and 
upon my retirement I distributed them to 
my friends, and to some of the Indian people 



Career as U.S. Senator 


109 


who over the years had come into my office, 
and said, “I recognized my grandfather or 
great grandfather.” In any event, that became 
quite a topic of conversation among the 
business community, and among the visitors 
that came into the office, both from Nevada 
and elsewhere around the country 

Committee Assignments 

At the time that I went into the U.S. Senate, 
I asked for committee assignment—Pat 
McCarran, who I succeeded, was a member 
of the Judiciary Committee, the chairman of 
the Judiciary Committee, and very high in 
ranking with the Appropriations Committee. 
I requested three committees. I requested the 
same committees he had, namely Judiciary, 
thinking that my years of service as a lawyer, 
and as attorney general, would stand me in 
good stead toward advancing my cause as 
a member of the Judiciary Committee; and 
then on Appropriations Committee, because 
I think I readily recognized the committee 
that controls the purse is the committee that 
gets much done. And I knew from my own 
knowledge of Senator McCarran and his 
workings, particularly on the Appropriations 
Committee, that if he wanted a few extra 
thousand dollars for Nevada, it always helped 
that he was a member of the Appropriations 
Committee. If it wasn’t put in on the floor, 
then he could always ask for it in committee. 
So I made an appeal for both of these 
committees. 

I also made an appeal for the Interior 
Committee because I felt then, felt now, 
and have always felt that this was almost a 
specialized western committee taking care 
of the sixteen, seventeen I guess it is, western 
states that have reclamation and that therefore 
it was a highly important committee from 
the standpoint of reclamation and irrigation, 


and from the standpoint of mining, from 
the standpoint of Indians, and from truly 
western-oriented projects, which are foreign 
to some of the other committees. So I also 
added that. 

Now, I was successful in securing the 
appointment on the Interior and Insular 
Affairs Committee, and I did succeed, in 
lieu of my guest for a place on the Judiciary 
Committee—that is always a very much sought 
after committee—or on the Appropriations 
Committee, which most people, I think, look 
on as the number one committee from the 
standpoint of desirability, for the reason that 
I have stressed, is that controls the money, 
and money is such an important ingredient 
in our government activities, that many others 
seek it; and I was unsuccessful, in becoming a 
member of the Appropriations Committee or 
of the Judiciary Committee. I was successful, 
in lieu thereof, of becoming a member of the 
Interstate and Foreign Commerce Committee, 
a committee that I served on for a number of 
years, until my opportunity came up to become 
a member of the Appropriations Committee. 
And I left the Commerce Committee with a 
great deal of reluctance because I enjoyed the 
work. That too is an important committee for 
this state because it had, among other things, 
the interstate activities, of which we have 
many, particularly in the trucking business, 
and in the railway business; and it is in charge 
of aviation, in which I immediately took up an 
interest, prompted a great deal, I am sure, by 
the fact that Senator McCarran was so active 
in aviation. 

So I was a member of the aviation 
subcommittee and had I stayed on that 
committee I would have been the chairman 
of the full committee, just as my colleague, 
Senator Cannon, who succeeded me, is the 
chairman of that full committee now—a very 
important and very worthwhile committee. 



110 


Alan Bible 


Now, in lieu, or in addition to these two 
major committees, they also appointed me on 
the District of Columbia Committee, which 
I didn’t seek, but which my predecessor Pat 
McCarran had been a member, and I was 
selected for it, though not by choice, but by 
necessity and later then was chairman for 
many, many years of the D.C. Committee, 
which gave me a firsthand working knowledge 
of the government- the government of 
that city And it had its real reward, if there 
were rewards from being on the District 
of Columbia Committee, was the fact that 
through my membership on that committee, 
I controlled considerable patronage, and had 
the opportunity of placing deserving young 
Nevadans on judicial positions, and help them 
along in their education, and even afterwards. 

One excellent example is a Reno boy, Fred 
McIntyre, born raised in Reno, who served 
on the District of Columbia Committee, and 
went from there to a position on the district 
bench as a judge and has served many, many 
years—very fine service—as a district judge, 
equivalent to a trial judge in the district 
court in the state of Nevada. And he still is 
on that bench after a good, good many years. 
So it had that type of reward and I think it 
is necessary to rather give anyone who has 
served on that committee, a few additional 
emoluments because it was arduous duty and 
you were in effect a member of the mayor and 
the city council of the District of Columbia. 
And I have told many of my mayor friends 
throughout the United States, that I have 
always felt that they have one of the most 
difficult of all jobs because they are right 
down where people can get ahold of you, day 
in and day out. 

I found that out, even as a senator, being 
a chairman of a district committee in many 
of my experiences, where people would call 
me up in the middle of the night and raise 


problems about the gathering of garbage, or 
the tact that their street was full of potholes, 
and wanted me to do something about it. 
And so I had a firsthand—and particularly 
in the school area, where people felt that the 
schools weren’t doing everything they could 
or that they needed more teachers, or they 
needed more discipline—the same problems 
that come to any school board. 

So I have the full flavor of that particular 
type of committee assignment. I was also, 
during that period of time, put on the 
Select Committee on Small Business (and a 
committee assignment that I kept throughout 
my senatorial career), and in my latter years 
became chairman of the Small Business 
committee—a very important committee 
because small business really did need 
additional help. 

Those were pretty much the general 
committees of which I have been a member. 
I’ve had the same complaints I think everyone 
else has had, regardless of politics, in going 
to the United States Senate, and [that] is 
they quickly spread you too thin, to where 
you are on so many committees that you 
really couldn’t do justice. You simply had 
so many instances, and all senators and to a 
lesser degree, all congressmen have the same 
problem, and that is they are spread too thin, 
which simply means that, in many instances, 
where you would have two meetings, or three 
meetings, even, of committees of which you 
were a member all scheduled for the same 
time. You quite obviously couldn’t be in two 
or three places at the same time and you 
always resorted on sending one of your staff 
members to that committee to pinch hit for 
you. You simply chose the committee that you 
thought was the most important. And so that 
was a constantly recurring problem to which 
there never has been and I don’t know that 
there ever will be a complete solution. 



Career as U.S. Senator 


111 


It was time consuming, because people 
are entitled to be heard. They come to 
Washington, entitled to have their day before 
the committee, and sometimes the hearings 
last many, many days, and sometimes, many 
many hours during each day And, again, 
simply based upon my observation and own 
knowledge, I simply want to pay tribute to the 
senators and congressmen as a hard-working 
group. I realize that the polls of today show 
that they are held in low public esteem. I think 
that’s unfortunate because I think on balance 
they are among the hardest working group of 
men, and women, who I have ever seen. 

The Election of 1956 

Let’s talk a little about the election of 1956. 
In early November, 1955, there was some 
speculation over whether you were going to 
run, and you said several times that twenty- 
one years was probably long enough in public 
life and that you wanted a law practice, to be 
free of what you called the hokum of politics. 

Did I call it that? Good for me [laughs] 

You said that your family was homesick, 
and late in November you said that you 
were retiring from politics in 1956; and right 
away Harvey Dickerson and Mahlon Brown 
announced that they were going to run. So 
what I’d like to know, then, is what happened 
between November and April. 

What a barn twister! The 1956 election 
was probably one of the most unusual that the 
state of Nevada has ever had, and it certainly 
was the most unusual Alan Bible has ever had. 
I’ve said many, many times—a funny way to 
run a campaign; this ought to be the example 
of how not to run it. After being elected to 
succeed Pat McCarran, in 1954, and having 


moved to Washington, D.C. and started my 
tour as a u.s. senator, I was obviously quite 
disenchanted with the results, and a number 
of factors led to this. It was very difficult on my 
family: we had a nice home, we had friends, 
our children were growing up in Nevada, and 
obviously the move to them wasn’t one that 
they would have done if they had been able 
to make their own choices. We had a very 
fine home in Washington; we sold our home 
here in Nevada, and moved back there, I 
honestly believe as I look back at it, with every 
intention of making it a complete career. But 
somewheres along the way a number of things 
came about that changed that, and I think 
that probably it was primarily due, as I think 
I said at the time I made the announcement 
that I was not going to run again, that I was 
somewhat disillusioned with the experiences 
that I was having within the U.S. Senate. (I 
shouldn’t have felt that way because I had 
worked on the floor of the U.S. Senate.) 

But anyway, this was the statement I made; 
because I was treated very well—I guess I was 
doing reasonably well—but for some reason I 
didn’t seem to be satisfied with the progress, 
or headway that I was making. It certainly 
was true that my family was dissatisfied 
with the move. They were Westerners and 
they had their friends back in the western 
Nevada area, in Carson City and in Reno, 
and they were constantly wondering whether 
we were—constantly anxious to get back to 
Nevada—came home at every opportunity. 

I suppose that all combined and added 
up to dissatisfaction or disillusionment 
with the Washington life and the desire to 
get back to the private practice of law and 
undoubtedly was what led to my decision. 
And I announced it, and I’ve always—it was 
one of the decisions that I’ve always greatly 
regretted for the simple reason that I said I was 
not going to run. Immediately after I made 



112 


Alan Bible 


that announcement other people entered 
the race: Harvey Dickerson announced that 
he was going to run for the U.S. Senate as 
the Democratic nominee; Mahlon Brown, 
of Las Vegas, announced that he was going 
to run; Jay Sourwine, who was working in 
the Judiciary Committee in Washington, 
also announced that he was going to file. 
Those three were the Democrats who said 
they were going to seek my seat, and seek the 
Democratic nomination. 

On the Republican side, the Republicans 
were taking their strongest candidate, who 
was Cliff Young, then congressman from 
the state of Nevada—very able one—as the 
Republican congressman, announced that 
he would seek my seat. So all four of these 
men relied upon my statement that I was not 
going to run, and as I say, this has always been 
one of the decisions—not that I’ve regretted 
it on balance, but regretted the fact that I 
did mislead them, and that they got in and 
ran—had I stayed constant and not changed 
my mind the way I did and they certainly 
would not have been put to the trouble and 
the expense and trial that go with any type of 
election campaign. 

I note in reading the January 1, 1955, 
Nevada State Journal, this item—it read as 
follows: 

Senator Alan Bible’s decision not 
to seek reelection came as a shock 
to a lot of people and particularly 
Democrats who had counted on him 
to win. His decision was a difficult 
one but close friends say they feel 
he was wise for his own health and 
future. His successor will be hard to 
find. 

Now this was a characterization by the 
political writers of the Journal of that time. 


And I think it does state, not only the actual 
facts, but the difficulty of making the decision. 
I don’t believe I really had too much of a 
health problem at that time. Later on in my 
Senate career a health problem did develop. 
But that was just simply because of age more 
than anything else. 

The decision to run—the decision to get 
back in the race was prompted by constant 
pressures brought on from a number of 
sources. Lyndon Johnson, [who] was the 
majority leader of the United States Senate, 
pointed out to me that it was my choice. If 
I wanted to retire from politics, that was 
my business, and he wasn’t going to try to 
influence me. But—oh, he didn’t do it directly 
and positively. I think he ran about as clever 
a campaign in changing my mind as any man 
I have ever seen because, though he didn’t do 
it directly, he had his lieutenants hit me from 
every side. Pointing out, primarily the things 
that made more appeal to me, and which 
finally did cause me to change my mind, was 
the fact that the balance of the Senate was so 
close at that time—it was practically even- 
Steven, forty-eight to forty-seven, forty-eight 
to forty-five, total of ninety-six, was the total 
strength of the Senate during those periods 
of years—that my election would assure the 
Democratic control of the Senate. An election 
by the Republicans would assure the control of 
the Senate for the Republicans. And obviously, 
Lyndon Johnson (and I think he was acting 
in all sincerity and honesty)—he had a pretty 
large stake in that himself because he was 
majority leader, and with my not running, I 
think without being immodest about it, the 
chances of the Republicans winning would 
be better than if I was making a race of it. 
And this is particularly true because this is 
the year in which General Eisenhower was 
a very strong figure, a popular president; he 
was conceded to be the favorite, and he was 



Career as U.S. Senator 


113 


expected to carry the Republican senatorial 
nominee with him. 

This later proved out to be pretty much 
true because in my own case, in the state 
of Nevada, the president of the United 
States, General Eisenhower, won the state by 
something like eighteen to twenty thousand 
votes. I was fortunate to run ahead of Cliff 
Young by almost five thousand votes. In other 
words, the Republicans won the presidency 
but they lost the U.S. Senate. And if I had not 
been persuaded to run for the office again, then 
control of the Senate—I honestly believe— 
would have switched to the Republicans. So 
there has never been any regrets; after having 
made the choice the only regret I have, one that 
I just repeat now, is that I did mislead the other 
men and I wouldn’t ever begrudge them in 
feeling rather badly about it. I don’t think any 
of them held it against me for too long, though 
I’d be frank to say that I can’t imagine that they 
feel that I was any particular hero, and so I did 
win the primary by a very sizable majority 
over both Denver [Harvey] Dickerson and 
Mahlon Brown, and Jay Sourwine, so they 
really had no great complaint. I think if 
anybody would have a real complaint it would 
be Cliff Young, because he already had a fine 
position, was doing a fine job, as congressman 
from Nevada, as the Republican. He was the 
two-term congressman and had I not changed 
my mind, he would have been reelected. That 
conjecture, it’s iffy, and I don’t know it that’s 
the way it would have worked out or not. It is 
ironic that Cliff Young and I were both born 
in Lovelock; we were both fraternity brothers; 
we’ve always been the best of friends. His 
mother and his father and my mother were 
schoolmates in Lovelock, so there is kind of a 
close relationship in that respect. So—but over 
the years he’s never evidenced any outward 
feeling; inwardly if he does feel a little upset 
with me—even it it’s stronger than that—I 


wouldn’t blame him at all. I did very honestly 
change my mind, and I got back in and that 
was the main reason that I got back in. There 
were terrific pressures put on—then once I had 
said I was going to run, then they supported 
me very handsomely, financially, and with 
their own support. 

Lyndon Johnson, for example, came 
out to Ely, Nevada. Made a speech on my 
behalf, and actually used his Texas charm 
and Texas manner of campaigning, to pass 
his great big, white cowboy hat among the 
people who attended, and raised I think two 
hundred and fifty to three hundred dollars 
which he turned over to me. He embarrassed 
me to no end but nevertheless, in spite of 
my embarrassment, I kept the money, and 
used it in the campaign. In addition to that, 
Paul Butler, who was the national chairman, 
came on out and made speeches for me. They 
sent Bob Kerr, who was a powerhouse in 
the Senate, at that time—Democratic power 
house, had once run for president of the 
United States him self—came out and made 
an appearance for me in Lovelock, and they 
really exerted more pressure, raised more 
money than normally would have been true 
because of the balance of the Senate at that 
time. 

Senator Symington came to the state as 
well, and finally I made a statement, saying 
that because of all of these things, I would 
accept the draft. And they went to work, 
and circulated petitions all over the state of 
Nevada, and far more enough to draft me to 
get ray name on the ballot. And with that I 
said I would run again, and that if I did win 
this time, I would stay as long as the people 
wanted me, and I kept that latter pledge 
pretty well until I finally retired, primarily 
because of health problems that I had, and 
that’s the history of the 1956 election. I won 
the election, just repeating—by something 



114 


Alan Bible 


like five thousand votes, in the election 
where Eisenhower carried the state on his 
second term, by something like eighteen 
thousand. 

Tell me some of the activities of Nevada 
Democrats, too, in exerting this pressure. 

Well, I think as far as the—I don’t quite 
know what you mean by that because in ‘56 
I think those—some of them would like to 
have me run, others—. 

The Democratic state convention apparently 
was a big fight. You were expected to head the 
delegation to the national convention. Farrel 
Seevers was elected, and this was analyzed as 
a sign of weakness on your part and ofMahlon 
Brown s strength. 

Oh, this was before the primary? 

Yes. The campaign was said to be financed that 
year by Biltz and Cord and Howard Hughes. 

Well, [laughs] I never got any money from 
Biltz and Cord and Hughes. I got money from 
Howard Hughes later on in my Senatorial 
career. Near as I know, I never received any 
money from Biltz and Cord. I may have. If Eva 
Adams was still with me, during that period 
of time, was she still with me? 

Yes. 

Well, she was still with me. She probably 
got some Cord money, and Biltz money, so I 
wouldn’t doubt that that was right. 

After the primary, which you mentioned, 
Emery Graunke said that there ought to be 
a Senate investigation, that you had spent so 


much money that it was really an abuse of the 
process. 

Yeah, he was an old college crony of mine. 
He passed on. It was too bad, he was a nice 
guy. I suppose he did say it—sounds like a 
correct political charge. But, I’m not going to 
dignify it by—. 

There were some others who came to the 
state: Kennedy, and Johnson, and Kefauver all 
were here, and Kefauver was running for vice 
president that year. 

Oh, oh. That’s right. He ran with Adlai 
Stevenson, didn’t he? He sure came here, 
and he was scared to death to come into 
Nevada because it was a gambling state. He 
was fighting gambling vigorously at that time, 
and he didn’t want to be pictured around any 
gambling machines. Oh, he had a great time 
keeping away from it. I’d forgotten which 
campaign it was. But that’s absolutely true. 
And Kennedy did come. I think he spoke at 
the Century Club. And that was on October 
25, 1956. 

I just wanted to explore the election fight itself 
a little bit, if you feel like it. 

As it came out, I mean I ran—if you have 
your political history, it would show you, it 
would show how much I won in the primary, 
and it was overwhelming. Surprised me. 
I don’t think I deserved that much after 
having said I wasn’t going to run, and I 
think it really shocked both Mahlon Brown 
and Harvey Dickerson and Jay Sourwine. 
Of course, again repeating, I just felt very 
badly about that because they acted upon 
my assurance that I wasn’t going to run, and 
then I got my arm twisted, by these various 



Career as U.S. Senator 


115 


emissaries, particularly of LB J, and got back 
in the race. 

But over the years, it didn’t have much 
effect. Maybe, by way of guilty feelings, 
or something, I put Mahlon Brown, Jr. on 
my patronage. His father and Lucille, his 
mother, asked me if I would give him a job 
in Washington, and I said I would be glad to 
help him. And I was of the impression that 
he had finished UNR, and I didn’t check it 
out closely enough. He was with me eight 
years, and under that fine patronage job, 
but his grades here at UNR—he’s a present 
U.S. Attorney, you know—they weren’t high 
enough to qualify him for law school in 
Washington. He finally came out going to 
Howard, which is the colored law school, 
and a very fine one. But he went to that, 
went to the undergraduate there, and he 
was with me for eight years, and Bill Morris, 
who is “Wildcat,” and I think he was in the 
second spot, I think he was with me for 
seven years. I know the Browns got over 
the defeat. Harvey Dickerson I’m sure did. 
But he was perennially a candidate. He was 
always running, and his brother was with 
me for years—Denver. Denver was on my 
payroll for a good many years. 

Jay Sourwine—I insisted with Jim Eastland 
that they keep him on Judiciary Committee, 
and he said he would. He came around and 
said, “Well, this is the fella who ran against 
you; if you want me to, I’ll fire him.” I said, 
“Nah, don’t fire him. After all it was my fault 
that he quit the judiciary spot.” 

He’s back in Reno now. He’s a brilliant 
lawyer, brilliant lawyer. But he was no political 
figure. He just didn’t have the personality; he 
kept him on my insistence in the Judiciary 
Committee. I know the three Democratic 
nominees—I have no problem with them. 
I’m sure that way down Cliff Young thinks, 


“Well, that so and so.” I don’t blame him. Life 
turns out that way. 

What about election issues? I noticed in your 
campaign material that there was a lot of 
emphasis on the Tungsten Purchase Act that 
later became quite important. 

Well, I had a good record on that because 
we were able to get some money to keep it 
going, and I used that as one of the issues. No, 
I don’t think I’ll develop these. I think people 
will have forgotten that by now. I don’t believe 
it was a big issue. 

Like so many campaigns in Nevada, in 
these election campaigns even down to the 
date, it’s just kind of a choice of personalities 
and not some hard and fast clash of, of 
political philosophies. In other words, Cliff 
Young would have been just as much for 
tungsten as I was because it support ed miners 
and helped the economy. 

I think about the only thing I would 
say about the 1956 election that I won by 
about five thousand votes, a little less—and 
I thought it was very gratifying because 
General Eisenhower won by eighteen—one 
a Republican and one a Democrat. I wouldn’t 
carry it—I don’t see any value in going into 
what Cliff Young may have said about me or 
I said about him, because I think we pretty 
much were in an agreement that after all 
in Nevada, he’d be for tungsten, I’d be for 
tungsten; he’d be for the development of 
natural resources, in the state; I was for 
development of natural resources; and we 
are all for developing more water, and he 
would be for the Washoe Project. So he was 
for it, and he carried the ball on the House 
side, and so I don’t think there was any great 
conflict in the issues there. I really don’t think 
there was. 



116 


Alan Bible 


During my change of heart and the final 
decision that I was going to run for the U.S. 
Senatorship from Nevada (notwithstanding 
the fact that I had indicated that I was not 
going to run, which has always been a sorely 
distressing decision; I’ve thought about it 
many, many times over the years), the great 
pressures that came on me from national 
Democratic leaders was primarily headed 
up by the majority leader, Lyndon Baines 
Johnson. We had become fast friends. He 
came out during my first campaign, back 
in 1954, and he spoke on my behalf. And of 
course, he was a dynamic man, a dynamic 
maj ority leader. I think he is generally credited 
with being the finest majority leader that 
this nation has ever had—at least, in this 
century. His record as president wasn’t quite 
as outstanding because he got caught in the 
Vietnam problem, but that was another issue, 
and a different role. But as majority leader he 
had no equal. 

But he was kind enough to me to come 
to the state to speak, first in the 1954 election 
in Las Vegas, and then in my 1956 campaign 
he came to Ely and made a speech on my 
behalf—not only made the speech, but went 
out and rallied support from the people who 
were there. It so happened that there was a 
very good crowd the time he was there. He 
attracted the crowd, I’m sure, and they had 
a good picture and a good exhibition of how 
a Texan politicks because he took out his 
cowboy hat, as I have previously said, and 
solicited money—I don’t know the amount, 
two hundred and fifty or three hundred 
dollars. He got a rousing hand; he was a 
tall, rangy Texan. I was devoted to him. He 
was a man who, once he’d set his goal to get 
certain things done, he didn’t rest until he had 
reached that goal. 

He had a hard, driving personality. He 
had always been pictured as having gotten 


into the U.S. Senate, I think they called him 
old “Landslide” Johnson, because I think he 
won by eighty-seven or eighty-nine votes. 
Something like that anyway, the first time 
that he ran for office from that state. But, he 
went on to reach tremendous heights as the 
leader of the U.S. Senate, and that leadership 
came about because of his great ability to 
capsulize the issues of the day—to dramatize 
them in his statements on the floor. H e 
was never classified, or felt as a great orator, 
but he was a fine man-to-man operator in 
coming across in talking to you individually 
and urging you to take this position or that 
position. 

Then he had a wife of tremendous skill 
and tremendous charm. A woman who as 
of this writing is still very active, and who 
makes friends wherever she goes, but there 
are so many stories that can be told about 
Lyndon Johnson. He was a man who came 
to Nevada, and I’m sure the reading of the 
papers of his appearances, either in the ’54 
election or the ’56 (he was not then the 
President of the United States—in a lesser 
capacity in the congress of the United States, 
though an important role), would indicate 
that he was dynamic right from the word go. 
He looked and acted like we all kind of think 
a Texan should look and act. So that is the 
way I’ve always pictured him. We became fast, 
personal friends, in addition to the political 
rapport that we had. 

Bob Kerr was another man, self-made 
man, who became a very devout, religious 
man, and he didn’t drink, and he didn’t smoke, 
and he was a driver. A powerful man, and a 
very close confidant of Lyndon Johnson’s. 
I suppose he was about as close to him as 
anybody on the Senatorial level, with the 
exception of Dick Russell from Georgia, who 
I would classify or characterize as the number 
one confidant of Lyndon Johnson. 



Career as U.S. Senator 


117 


Estes Kefauver was a politically ambitious 
man from the state of Tennessee. He came 
out to the state; I believe he was running for 
[vice] president, at that time, and he was well 
received, with a little skepticism probably 
because he was conducting an investigation 
against gaming and gambling. He had 
problems with it, and it was particularly 
difficult for him to come into Nevada because 
wherever he went there were practically some 
evidence of a gaming establishment, and he 
wanted to avoid that as much as he could, 
because of his campaign for vice president, 
and I know, among other things, we asked 
him if he would make a statement about his 
feelings about gambling and he did. I don’t 
know how far it was disseminated because 
there was a lot of criticism about bringing 
him into Nevada because they figured he 
was so—he’d spoken out against gambling, 
but he did make a states rights speech, which 
was very helpful. And he said that if the 
state of Nevada wanted to have gambling it 
was a state problem and they should speak 
out on it, if they wanted it, even though he 
had his own personal feelings. He wouldn’t 
object to what the state of Nevada did, and so 
that somewhat softened the blow that many 
people feared. And he was very well received. 
He wasn’t a dynamic speaker, but he was 
an interesting speaker, and course he had 
nationwide publicity, and this was the time 
when he was very famous for his coonskin 
cap. And I remember he ran the Las Vegas 
circuit; I had the privilege of introducing him. 
He made a fine talk and got a big hand, and 
he didn’t put gambling out of business—he 
left [the] subject alone. He was out speaking 
for himself as vice president and putting in 
a plug for me. 

The other man who came into the state 
and was a tremendous help then was John F. 
Kennedy, And I am rather proud of the fact 


that I was chosen to introduce him to the Reno 
audience, which I did. On October 23, 1956, 
the paper says, “Kennedy was introduced by 
Senator Bible, who told the Democrats that 
he believed that the Massachusetts Senator 
would someday be president or vice president 
of the United States.” And that was rather 
a prophetic prediction on my part. It was 
obvious that—of his popularity, particularly 
in this state, and at later it came true, and 
I’ve always felt proud of that. I had a close 
personal relationship with JFK. We were both 
seated in the back row of the U.S. Senate, one 
removed by Pat McNamara of Michigan, who 
sat between the two of us. So during those 
years of service with him, in the U.S. Senate, 
I became very well acquainted with him, and 
became a great admirer. We had a warm, 
warm friendship. 

What’s your favorite Lyndon Johnson story ? 
People who knew him well talk about his earthy 
humor. 

[Laughs] That is a little on the rugged 
side—it is usually a stag humor. I think the 
favorite expression at least that I remember 
Lyndon Johnson so well for was his statement 
the, “Come let us reason together.” It he used 
that statement once, he used it five or six times 
every day. “Come let us reason together.” 
He was a great man to try to take opposite, 
different viewpoints, and by persuasion and 
by compromise, wheeled out a final product. 
In other words, many times he couldn’t take 
everything that he wanted, but when he couldn’t 
get the whole loaf, he would take the half loaf. 
But, “Come let us reason together” I think would 
be the favorite expression that I remember from 
him. I know he had many stories about some of 
his earlier campaigns. Most of his stories were 
punctuated with rather strong language, which 
I would hesitate to repeat. 



118 


Alan Bible 


What is your favorite story about Kennedy 
in the same way ? He also had an interesting 
sense of humor and a kind of earthy way of 
expressing it. 

I can’t remember a story on Kennedy. In 
fact, I don’t remember any ABC stories from 
Lyndon Johnson; in fact most of the stories I 
remember are from the southern storytellers, 
like Alben Barkley, and some people like 
that. I don’t remember a story from JFK. 
I remember one of his inaugural speeches 
where he captured the headlines by saying, 
“Don’t ask what the country can do for you, 
but ask what you can do for your country.” 
That was always a very, very famous byline of 
JFK’s, just as the great byline in my judgment 
of FDR, who was one of the great speakers of 
our time, was that “You have nothing to fear 
except fear itself.” Those are two statements—. 
I heard that when it was given in March 1933 
or ’4—’33, I guess, when he had just been 
inaugurated as the President of the United 
States, and we were in a depression, banks 
were failing, and it was a cold, dreary March 
day in Washington, and he captured the 
audience simply by those few words, “You 
have nothing to fear except fear itself.” At that 
time it seemed to me that the nation through 
many of the acts of the first hundred days of 
FDR’s first term, turned around and people 
did have more confidence and we regained a 
great deal of our economic stability. 

Office Organization and Personnel 

How about now if we talk about the organization 
of the office? 

After my reelection in 1956, and after a 
declaration I had made I would serve then 
as long as the people in the state of Nevada 
desired, my health permitting, I settled down 


to be more of Nevada senator than I had in 
that short interim two years, which I had just 
completed. 

I had a comparatively small staff, and it 
maintained comparatively small throughout 
my senatorial career. The immediate person 
under me was my administrative assistant, 
and during my entire senatorial I only 
had two. I was fortunate to have had the 
benefit of the vast experience, know-how 
and expertise of Senator Pat McCarran’s 
administrative assistant, Eva Adams. Eva and 
I were classmates at the University of Nevada, 
so she was no stranger to me. As a matter of 
fact, we worked together on the University of 
Nevada Sagebrush during my college days. She 
was truly a very brilliant woman. She worked 
for many years for Pat McCarran—was with 
him when he served his last term of office 
before [he] dropped dead of a heart attack at 
Hawthorne, Nevada. 

I retained her as my administrative 
assistant, and she was the top person in 
my office. Immediately under her I had a 
legislative assistant, and then I also always 
had a public relations man who was always, 
during my tenure, at least, a newspaper man 
and from Nevada. When I first started out, 
and shortly after my reelection in 1956, 
I persuaded Jack Carpenter, who was a 
co-partner with Walter Cox in Yerington, 
Nevada, to come forth with me as a public 
relations man and as a newspaper man. And 
he came with me in nineteen hundred and 
fifty-six. His responsibilities were public 
relations and developing news stories, and 
later on as it was more and more useful media 
to project yourself back to your people, wrote 
my script, helped write my script, at least, for 
radio and TV, of which we made rather broad 
and increasing use. 

Jack told me that he was only wanting to 
stay one term with me and after that he would 



Career as U.S. Senator 


119 


leave. He was with me—ended up being 
with me eighteen years and still remained 
in Washington, D.C.; he is still there. First, 
when I retired voluntarily, pursuant to my 
suggestion to our newly elected congressman, 
James Santini, he went to James Santini and 
served as his right-hand man and as the 
administrative assistant for the congressman. 
He stayed with Congressman Santini for the 
full two years, then told him he wanted to 
retire and started to retire when the American 
Mining Congress, knowing his abilities, and 
having had many dealings with him, offered 
him a very, very attractive job as a lobbyist for 
the American Mining Congress. 

So Jack Carpenter, who vowed to stay 
there just a short four or five or six years, is 
still in Washington, D.C. really stricken with 
what we named over the years, the “Potomac 
fever,” and I think that he has such a bad case 
of it now that he will run out his remaining 
days right in Washington, D.C. He’s a born 
newspaper man, a man with great ability, and 
the American Mining Congress recognized 
that, and kept him on, giving him a very 
attractive salary; he has served them very 
well—is still serving them, and I’m sure he will 
continue to do so, and for many years to come. 

That was the public relations and 
newspaper person, and in addition to that I 
always had a legislative assistant who assisted 
me in the looking up of the law, on briefing 
the cases that were on the floor, and the bills 
that were on the floor, and for many, many 
years, that man was Owen Malone, a graduate 
of Georgetown Law School, as I was, and be 
served me very well in that particular capacity. 
Under him he had an assistant, and then we 
had the usual fine secretarial help. The total 
number of people varied somewhere between 
ten and fourteen, including secretarial help. 

After my election in 1956,1 guess, as part 
of my recognition of the growing power of 


Clark County, I indicated that I was going 
to open a full-time office in Las Vegas. 
Recognizing (I think I had to recognize) their 
growing political influence, and without Clark 
County some of my elections would have been 
a lot closer, and maybe I wouldn’t have been 
elected, for they have always supported me 
very heavily in southern Nevada and Clark 
County. So in recognition of that factor, I 
opened the Las Vegas office to supplement 
the office that I normally had in Reno. It 
was a one-man office in each event, in each 
case, in Reno, and in Las Vegas. And that 
was figured in my total complement of, as I 
say, somewheres between ten and fourteen 
assistants. 

I always thought that was sufficient to take 
care of my needs, the needs of the people in the 
state Nevada, and in order to enable me to be a 
good United States Senator, had really no need 
for additional help because the committees of 
which I was a member already had adequate 
staff support, and at that time when we moved 
in ’56 my committees were the Commerce 
Committee; the Interior Committee; the 
District of Columbia Committee, which is a 
story in itself; a Small Business Committee, 
which I later became chairman; and the Aging 
Committee. So that was my full complement 
of committees, and I held two of those most 
of the years, except in nineteen hundred and 
fifty-eight, I believe it was, when early in my 
senatorial career, the opportunity came to 
me to leave the Commerce Committee (and 
I was a member of the aviation subcommittee 
of the Commerce Committee), and go to the 
Appropriations Committee. 

That was always my first wish as a 
committee assignment because I reasoned 
that if you were on the committee that had 
the money, you could always get a few extra 
dollars for your own state, which was simply 
good politics, plus the fact it assisted your 



120 


Alan Bible 


state a great deal. So I think it was in 1958 
that I gave up the Commerce Committee and 
went on the Appropriations Committee. I was 
a member of the aviation subcommittee. If I 
had stayed on that committee, I would have 
been the chairman, but as I say I went to the 
money committee. 

In the meantime, my long-time colleague, 
Howard Cannon, was elected to the United 
States Senate, and he succeeded to my former 
place on the [Commerce] Committee. 
He was immediately put on the aviation 
subcommittee, as I was, and he took my place 
on that committee. He was well equipped to 
serve in my place because he was a skilled 
jet pilot in his own right, and he went from 
committee member to chairmanship of 
that committee, and then just very recently 
became the chairman of the full committee, 
which is a very, very powerful and very 
important committee. 

So it gave us a fine balance in the United 
States Senate, as I saw it. With Senator Cannon 
on the Commerce Committee, and I was on the 
Interior Committee and on the Appropriations 
Committee. Senator Cannon, likewise, was 
on the Armed Services Committee and 
the Commerce Committee. In both posts, 
which he served with great distinction, [he] 
was well qualified. He had a very brilliant 
military career, and a very fine record as a 
pilot and a flyer during World War II. So, that 
complemented our Senatorial committees, and 
I thought, balanced them out very well. 

I always made it a practice to secure the 
very best assistants I could, and I always 
paid the top salaries. When I first started the 
salaries weren’t anything particularly to write 
home about, but they graded them up, and 
later they became very attractive. Of course, 
I suppose with inflation and all of the rest of 
the complications of living in a world full of 
high prices, maybe our earlier salaries went 


even further than the salaries that we finally 
ended up with, even though they were very 
high. I think the top people were being paid 
something around fifty or sixty thousand 
dollars when I left, and that does sound like a 
terrific sum of money to be paid, but I believe 
other than Reno and Las Vegas, Washington, 
D.C. is the highest cost area in the entire 
United States. You can’t save any money on 
those figures, as strange as it seems. 

By the time you’ve paid your income tax, 
and your other required expenses, there’s 
never very much left. And, of course, that is 
really unfortunate, because I think you have 
to have the most capable people you can get, 
and it’s very difficult to obtain top-notch 
people, even though you pay them very well; 
at fifty or fifty-five thousand dollars, private 
industry is so, so geared that it can—it isn’t 
prohibited, doesn’t have limitations on, as 
they do in the public sector, and so sometimes 
they come out with the superior people. Many 
people are dedicated to public service, and 
they’re the ones who have made the greatest 
contributions. So, that’s the organizational 
setup, as I saw it, and I practiced it. 

Now, recognizing, as I said, the increasing 
importance of Clark County, we gave them, 
or attempted to give them increased service 
by establishing an office there, and I think 
it served a dual purpose just as the Reno 
office served a dual purpose. Primarily, it 
was there to be of help and assistance to your 
constituents, and to the people who lived in 
the area, but it also was a wonderful listening 
post for yourself, because if people were either 
praising you or finding fault with you, you got 
a rather instantaneous—a rather quick report 
from your field people, of what they were 
saying about in Reno and Las Vegas, and in 
the general areas. 

Now many people queried me as to why 
we didn’t have additional offices in Elko, for 



Career as U.S. Senator 


121 


example, or Ely, or maybe in Tonopah, in the 
central part of the state, and of course, the 
real answer was that there just weren’t the 
problems cropping up there that there were 
in the two major population centers. And 
when you consider that, I believe as of today, 
eighty-six, or eighty-seven, or eighty-eight 
percent of the population of Nevada is in the 
two counties, in Clark and in Washoe, and in 
their two largest cities, Reno and Las Vegas, 
then that gives you the maximum coverage. So 
that was the manner in which we set up our 
organizational setup for the state of Nevada. 
And that over the years, I think, worked out 
rather well. 

Legislation and Committee Work 

During that period immediately after 
1956, among the most important bills that 
I saw, some with nationwide importance, 
some with just local importance, I classified 
the assessment suspension bill on mining 
as one of tremendous importance, not only 
to Nevada but to all mining states. That was 
brought about, more or less, as the aftermath 
of our war efforts growing out of the Second 
World War. The difficulty of getting labor and 
of the difficulty of the mining industry in large 
was having, particularly the small miners’ 
inability to meet the rather strict financial 
requirements doing assessment work year 
after year. So that, to the mining industry, it 
was one bill of tremendous importance. 

Now in 1958 we eliminated taxes on 
amusements, because that was a “war baby” 
tax and again, Nevada being the tourist 
state that it is, a state that has prospered by 
having gambling, and by having many tourist 
attractions, I thought it was of tremendous 
importance. It was in that same period of time, 
because of my membership on the aviation 
subcommittee of the Commerce Committee, 


we managed to secure certification of the 
so-called local service carriers, and that was 
of tremendous importance to our largest 
local service carrier, Bonanza Airlines. They 
performed as pioneers one of the great 
services in this state in providing air service 
between Las Vegas and Reno. 

President of Bonanza Airlines was a man 
by the name of Ed Converse. If my memory is 
correct, before he became involved in Nevada, 
he was formerly with Styles Bridges, who is 
one of the leading Republicans, of the state 
of New Hampshire, and a minority leader, 
I think at one time, in the Congress of the 
United States; and Ed Converse had worked 
with him; and was one of his assistants, and I 
believe his top man for a long time. 

He came into the state of Nevada and 
organized the Bonanza Airlines, and he was 
their president, and I guess their principal 
owner. So I got to know him extremely well. 
He was a very strong Republican. I was a 
Democrat. He served, I believe as national 
committeeman of the Republican party for 
a number of years, and of course, I had no 
doubt of how he stood politically. I tried my 
best to dismiss that from my mind, and give 
him and his airline the type of service that 
they were entitled to. It was to my interest 
frankly, to do it that way, because it was of 
great benefit to Nevada. 

It was a service line that opened up the 
Reno-Las Vegas area, as no other means 
of transportation would do, and over the 
years he performed very, very fine service. 
Undoubtedly he profited by it, but I think he 
was entitled to that. 

My personal relations with him were 
always very good. I have no doubt that he 
had other candidates besides me, but I didn’t 
let that interfere with my attempting to help 
him do something that in the long run was 
a great and ultimate benefit to the state of 



122 


Alan Bible 


Nevada. Frankly, I inquired not too long ago 
as to Ed Converse, because one of the areas 
in which I had a violent disagreement with 
him, was when he transferred and ordered 
all of his employees to leave Las Vegas and 
go to Phoenix where he made his base of 
operations for the Bonanza Airline. I thought 
after all Nevada had done for him, all that 
the congressional group—and I wasn’t alone 
in that, others supported him as well—that 
the least he could have done was stay on in 
Las Vegas, for a period of time, or maybe as 
long as he had an airline that based out of 
Las Vegas. 

His operation grew, and his airline grew; 
of course it was ultimately taken over by 
Hughes, and there were court problems in 
connection with it. On balance, I thought he 
did an excellent job for the state of Nevada. 
I think he was wrong in moving from Las 
Vegas. I’ll always think that. But I suppose he 
thinks otherwise. I’ve had no contact with him 
whatever in recent years, but in earlier years, I 
had many, many contacts. And whatever our 
political differences, and we were politically 
different, I hope I didn’t let it interfere with my 
trying to be of help to him in giving Nevada 
a needed service. 

And of course that’s always a problem. 
There are many other problems where people 
whom I know or are politically for me, or were 
not attuned in that direction, ask for help 
and I’ve always tried to develop the practice 
of kinda turning the other cheek and trying 
to help them—if it’s for their, not only their 
benefit, but for the benefit of others who 
operate the state of Nevada. I must admit that’s 
sometimes a little difficult to, [chuckles] but I 
think that’s your duty, and I’ve tried to follow 
it. I suppose there are instances where I haven’t 
followed it, but I developed a creed a long, long 
time ago that I picked up in my earliest days 
in Virginia City when I first started practicing 


law, and I joined a lodge, which had as its 
motto, “If I can’t speak well of a person, I will 
not speak ill of him.” In other words, if I can’t 
say a good thing about a person, I’ll keep my 
mouth closed. I’ve always tried to follow that 
rule. It’s just like, “Do unto others as you’d have 
them do unto you.” It has always served as my 
guiding light. I suppose there’s times when I 
haven’t followed it, but most of the time, I’ve 
tried at least to overlook some of the political 
problems that arise out of any campaign. 
Because campaigns can be very bitter. 

In the earlier days, at the start, they 
[Bonanza Airlines] also served Hawthorne, 
Tonopah, arid then on into Las Vegas. After 
being established, and the line not being used 
as much [as] they hoped it would be, had to 
be, in order to make it economically sound 
investment, they abandoned some of the 
intermediate lines; but from the time they 
were certificated, back in nineteen hundred 
and fifty-seven or fifty-eight, they had given 
daily service, and sometimes increased their 
service, between Las Vegas and Reno, and are 
still in active service. So I felt that was a real 
plus, and an accomplishment of which I have 
always been extremely proud. 

I took a leading role in attempting to bring 
Alaska into the sisterhood of states. Alaska 
and Nevada were not totally unalike in their 
entry into the Union. Nevada was admitted 
into the Union in 1864 as a state with a very 
meager population and a population that 
didn’t quality under most of the standards that 
had been previously set for admission to the 
Union. It was admitted, really, for two primary 
purposes, I think, for two primary reasons: one 
was that gold and silver from the Comstock 
Lode and its tremendous mineral resources; 
and secondly, that Abraham Lincoln was 
very anxious to have two friendly Senators 
from a state that was for the Thirteenth, 
fourteenth, and fifteenth amendments. 



Career as U.S. Senator 


123 


This was accomplished, and those reasons 
were very strong in bringing Nevada into the 
Union. Alaska was the smallest territory in the 
complex. It was one that many people felt did 
not have the number of people that should 
have been present when you’re admitted into 
sisterhood of states, but I felt it was entitled to 
statehood. It had been a territory. I thought it 
was entitled to more recognition and took a 
rather strong and leading part in the fight to 
bring it in to the sisterhood of states. And it 
was admitted on July 1, 1958. At least the bill 
was passed [in] the Senate, I should clarify 
that, on that day and it later was enacted into 
law and became our forty-ninth state, to be 
followed subsequently by the state of Hawaii, 
which was also a territory. 

But, that was as I say, in repetition, a 
situation that closely paralleled our own 
admission into the Union, even though a 
hundred years apart. So that I would class as 
one of the real achievements in those early 
Senatorial days. 

Likewise, during that period of time, I 
took a leading role, because I was on the 
District of Columbia Committee, in bringing 
home rule to the District of Columbia. 
The District of Columbia had more than 
enough people to qualify for being brought 
in as a state actually, but it was set up as a 
federal city, under the Constitution, and 
remained that way until, right until today, 
but it did—and people were reluctant to 
even give them limited home rule. But the 
city of Washington today does have limited 
home rule, not complete home rule, because 
there is always such a strong federal interest 
that it is very difficult to found it as anything 
more than a federal city. But home rule was 
enacted, and since I was on the District of 
Columbia Committee, I took a leading role, 
and one of which I’ve always been proud. It’s 
always been a controversial issue. Today I 


think they have proven their ability to govern 
themselves. 

Of course, the real problem in the District 
of Columbia was the fact that it was so 
heavily Black. The colored population of the 
South, the Negroes from the South came into 
Washington, D.C. in ever growing numbers, 
and there were many of the early settlers 
there, the early founders, the early pioneers, 
that feared that if there were too many Black 
people, they would lose control. They have 
had the benefit of, of a Black mayor, Mayor 
Washington, who was a Black man, one of 
the ablest men I’ve ever worked with, and 
he served long and well as the mayor of the 
District of Columbia. And I think made great 
strides in breaking down that feeling. It’s still 
there; one cannot deny that. But I think it has 
been lessened, ameliorated, and has worked 
out there as it has in other of the great cities 
of the United States where colored mayors are 
becoming more and more popular because of 
the great number of colored people who live 
in the cities. Los Angeles has Mayor Bradley, 
as of today, is another good example, and 
I think he’s proven himself as a very able 
mayor. I think the same thing as the District 
of Columbia. 

One of the recurring problems during 
these early years of my service to the state, in 
federal level, was the flood control problems. 
We had that, we had it in Las Vegas, we had 
[it] in Reno, we had it, believe it or not, in Ely, 
and legislation was passed to take care of so 
many problems. We passed what I thought 
was an excellent flood control bill for Clark 
County, and for Las Vegas. It became subject 
to ratification by the people of the area. 
Unfortunately, at that time, and I don’t think 
even today, it’s been ratified so as to bring flood 
control that was needed. And subdivisions 
have been built where subdivisions shouldn’t 
have been built. And there were flood control 



124 


Alan Bible 


problems on recurring periods of time, and I 
think that is something that people of Clark 
County should have ratified and I hope that 
would materialize, even at this late date. 
As much as Clark County has grown and 
prospered and spread out all over that county, 
flood control is a big preventative from the 
tremendous damages that are incurred when 
raging waters come sweeping through many 
of the canyons. I would hope that would be 
enacted, even though it is at a later date. 

During this particular period of time, one 
of the great concerns was to attempt to create 
a national park in White Pine County and 
in the Great Basin area. I think a case can be 
made now, and I think a case could be made 
then, that the Great Basin area and Wheeler 
Peak were of enough national significance to 
be typical of that particular law of the Great 
Basin area of America, and we were successful 
in passing a bill through the United States 
Senate on two different occasions. There was 
opposition from mining interests and from 
livestock interests. My long-time and good 
friend, who has since passed on to his reward, 
Walter Baring, congressman from Nevada, was 
charged with the responsibility in the House 
side, and he took the view, that instead of 
having a national park, it should be developed 
by the Forest Service. And so we were never 
successful during the period of time that I was 
there in creating a national park. 

But I must say, as I’ve looked at the area 
after the Forest Service has developed it more 
and more under theory of multiple use that 
they’ve done a reasonably good job of it. It 
was my thought that it always tied in with 
the Lehman Caves which are very close to 
Wheeler Peak, not too far out of Ely, Nevada, 
that the two complemented each other, and 
here is an area of some great caves, that really 
rival Carlsbad, rival the Mammoth, in my 
judgment, and they’ve been developed by 


the Park Service and have had increasing 
visitation. 

It’s true that the area is somewhat isolated, 
several miles from Ely, which really is its 
closest city, but as time goes along, people 
have more leisure and they do like to look for 
park areas, recreation areas, and I think both 
Lehman and Wheeler Peak met that criteria. 
But this is an area that was just never enacted 
into law as a national park. And whether it 
will be in the future or not remains to be seen. 

It was during these early years, that it 
was called to my attention that Lake Mead 
was a great, great national attraction. There 
our success was a good deal greater, and we 
carved out Lake Mead National Recreation 
Area, which embraces all of Lake Mead, a 
good part of the Colorado River down as far 
as Glen Canyon, and up the Grand Canyon 
to the north. At that time, as I recall it, we 
made a strong case that the annual visitation 
was something in the neighborhood of three 
or three and one half million; today it ranges 
somewheres in the neighborhood of seven to 
eight million people per year visiting the Lake 
Mead Recreation Area. 

It’s a great area. It’s a beautiful, naturally 
man-made lake back of Boulder Dam (in 
Hoover Dam, more properly) and for water 
skiers, fishermen, and people who like to 
swim, or just plain relaxing, and hiking; it is 
great, it’s as beautiful an area as one would 
ever find. I personally never have tired of 
fishing for—primarily for bass above the dam, 
primarily for trout below the dam. It is one 
of our great and attractive areas. And that is 
a national monument today and one that has 
proven its worth as the years have gone by. 

Another one of the projects which I was 
greatly interested in in those earlier years, 
and remain interested in actually right up 
to date, during all my Senatorial career, and 
my present private life, and that was cloud 



Career as U.S. Senator 


125 


seeding. I took a great interest in that, and here 
in the drought-stricken West, and certainly in 
certain areas of Nevada, it appeared to me that 
it had great possibilities. The Desert Research 
Institute has done much work on it, and it has 
in general proven up very, very well. 

Another project worthy of comment was 
the desalinization project, which was simply 
a project to take the salt of the ocean, and 
by various processes, develop it into usable, 
potable water. And I spent much time on that, 
and hoping to create, to increase our source 
of water for the state of Nevada. That has had 
its ups and downs, but I still think it has some 
great promise. 

Another project in which I took great 
interest, and it was primarily called to my 
attention by one of my closest and dearest 
friends, and a man whom I’ve always called 
my political sponsor (that was Joe McDonald, 
Sr., a long-time Nevadan, graduated from the 
University of Nevada, long-time editor of 
Nevada State Journal), and it was hope and 
desire and wish that there be a Coast Guard 
Station at Lake Tahoe, and those people who 
knew Joe McDonald, knew that once he had 
an idea, and if he believed it had merit, that 
he never let it go until it was accomplished. 
And this was certainly true in his long-time 
fight for Coast Guard at Lake Tahoe. And I 
am happy to say I introduced the legislation, 
and secured the appropriated funds to create 
that, and there is a Coast Guard Station at 
Lake Tahoe today, and I think it’s proven that 
Joe McDonald’s dreams and his desires were 
of the highest order, and he was correct and 
right in pushing for that Coast Guard Station. 
It’s really a memorial to him, and I don’t even 
know, frankly, what its name is today, but if 
it ever is up to be properly named, it should 
be named Joe McDonald, Sr. Coast Guard 
Station at Lake Tahoe. I don’t know, frankly, 
whether it has a name on it or not. I should 


know; I guess I should ask one of his sons, I 
don’t know. 

There were the other usual problems 
that come up and during my period of time, 
Nevada growing as it was, it did, the need 
was very apparent that we needed a second 
federal judge. Legislation was introduced and 
today there is a second full-time federal judge, 
and probably even a crying need for maybe 
more judicial manpower. I was happy to be 
instrumental in the nomination and later 
confirmation of Judge Bruce Thompson, who 
served with such able and great distinction 
over many years and has just very recently 
retired. Also of Roger [T.] Foley, Jr., who is 
the present sitting judge in the Federal Court 
in Las Vegas. So those judgeships were nailed 
down. 

I was active in advancing the name of 
Judge William Orr who was a supreme court 
justice, to be on the Circuit Court of Appeals, 
and he served long and well. He was followed 
by Charlie Merrill, a Reno lawyer who gave 
Nevada representation on the U.S. Circuit of 
Appeals. And I was likewise happy to be able 
to sponsor Charlie Merrill, an outstanding 
lawyer and proved of great assistance in his 
Court of Appeals work. He also has since 
retired, and just recently, though it was after 
my time in Washington, they nominated 
and confirmed Proc Hug [Procter Hug, Jr.], 
a tremendously able Reno lawyer, as judge 
on the Circuit Court Appeals. So that that 
tradition of keeping a Nevadan on the Circuit 
Court of Appeals has persisted, and has been 
recognized, and is in existence today. 

Would you like to discuss the Wild and Scenic 
Rivers Act, which we haven t gone into at all? 

The Wild and Scenic Rivers Act came 
forward under the Interior Committee and 
was an attempt to save sections of some very, 



126 


Alan Bible 


very beautiful rivers before they tell victim 
of complete subdivision and development, 
and to factories and things of that kind. I 
spent much time on that. I think we’ve made 
some headway on it. There were certain rivers 
that—the Connecticut River, for example; and 
the eastern part of that state had just been so 
developed that it was just impossible to create 
a scenic river in that particular area. There 
were areas, for example in the Ozarks—there 
was the Green River, through some beautiful 
country that had not been overdeveloped. 
And so we were able to save that. And it was, 
I think, an effort very well taken. 

The Golden Eagle program was a program 
that gave to the —primarily it was designed to 
give to those in the elderly group who wanted 
to tour and go into the various parks—it gave 
them the opportunity of going in and visiting 
parks at a very minimal charge, which as a 
matter of fact, maybe today it is without any 
charge as long as they qualify by way of age. I 
think we started out at sixty-five, and I think 
it is now sixty-two; I’m not positive on a lot of 
these things because legislation does change 
and is amended. But it was originally designed 
to take care of our citizenry over sixty-five 
years of age. A very, very popular bill. 

There were various tax reforms. A bill that 
came up primarily in wiping out the nuisance 
taxes, the wartime taxes. In this state to work 
out a rebate of taxes on slot machines for 
example, which gave to the state of Nevada 
additional monies that were pledged primarily 
to educational purposes. We have a long—an 
almost continuing fight over the silver dollar: 
first to try to retain it; then it immediately 
became apparent that silver had far greater 
uses in the trades and in photography, in the 
industries, and in just plain old silverware— 
and I don’t say that disparagingly because 
every young bride likes a set of silverware, and 
we always encounter opposition from New 


England merchants who are the manufacturers 
of silverware. But that has been a somewhat 
losing fight over the years because first we 
managed to retain the silver dollar; then it was 
weakened; then it was further weakened; and 
then it finally came out you wouldn’t recognize 
the so-called silver dollar today, because I don’t 
know what percentage of silver, if any that it 
has in it, but it has very little. 

So all of that has changed and the 
“cartwheel” used to be Nevada’s symbol, and 
we retained it for as long as we could, but 
greater uses, but greater demands, as I say, 
from industry and the arts and the crafts 
soon made its use as a coin almost extinct. 
And today the paper dollars have taken place 
of the silver dollars, and I doubt if they will 
return. 

I was a pioneer and a leader in the 
eighteen-year-old vote for Washington, D.C. 
I felt the eighteen-year-olds were qualified to 
vote. It is often said that if you are old enough 
to fight, you are old enough to vote. I don’t 
know—it’s an arbitrary figure. There were 
many states that served as precedent that did 
permit their electorate to vote at the age of 
eighteen. I was happy to, not only sponsor 
that bill, but to take a lead in having it passed 
in the Congress of the United States. 

So those are just a few of the bills of 
legislation in which I took a considerable 
pride. I was always interested in solar energy; 
introduced the first bill many years ago and 
it has since been re-introduced and finally 
with the energy crunch of today, I think it is 
receiving attention that it should receive. 

Another activity from which I had great 
satisfaction was being appointed on many 
different phases of the military academies of 
the United States. I secured that not because 
of any great expertise on my own on military 
affairs, but because I was a member of the 
Appropriations Committee. And of course, 



Career as U.S. Senator 


127 


the men in the Navy and the men in the 
Army and the men in the Air Force, always 
paid particular attention to members of 
the Appropriations Committee for the very 
obvious reason that they knew that if they 
could prove their case, their need for more 
weapons and research in the proving of their 
methods of warfare, that they had to do it 
through the Appropriations Committee. So, 
simply because of my membership there, I 
served at various periods of time as a member 
of the Board of Visitors at the Air Force 
Academy in Colorado. 

It was always a tremendous experience 
because the military strength of our nation, it 
seemed to me, was something that always had 
to be the first requirement of our government, 
and I always supported a strong military. I 
voted regularly for it. There certainly were 
others who felt that we spent too much money 
on the military, but the world in which we 
lived during my period of twenty years in 
Washington made me feel we had to keep 
strong at all periods of time, and I hope that 
will never die. The situation is just around the 
corner where we’ll soon have the SALT treaty 
up for ratification, or rejection, as the case 
may be, and USSR I feel is one that we always 
have to view with alarm, and govern yourself 
accordingly, keeping yourself just as strong 
[as] you can, and so my period of service 
during that period of time was of great interest. 

Another area in which I took great pride, 
which is highly controversial right today, 
was the use of the atom. The many hundreds 
of millions of dollars that were spent in the 
isolated areas of Mercury and Jackass flats 
on testing the first of the atmospheric testing 
of atom bombs, and then the underground 
testing. And the problem and the concern is 
raging today over the fallout areas particularly 
as it drifted east, and fell, undoubtedly on St. 
George. And so I spent many years on the 


Atomic Energy Commission, spent much 
time in Nevada in viewing the tests. We were 
always assured that they were safe. Dr. Teller, 
who is very much in the news today, was one 
of the scientists who felt that they were safe. 
And of course, you are dealing with an awful 
lot of the unknown. 

This will be a raging controversy and 
subject for many, many years down the 
road. The appalling, the alarming problem 
about all of the atom testing is the fact that 
you just don’t know that there is any way to 
completely determine that until some future 
date. But there will be much more heard about 
this; there is law suits being filed, and I don’t 
know how authoritative and how finalized 
this can be made. It is just the very nature 
of the problem, but in repetition, until those 
future years come about, you don’t know what 
ultimate effects some of this fallout may have 
had. 

But I spent many years—I relied, because 
I didn’t have the expertise or the knowledge 
to know exactly what might happen in the 
future, relied on scientists and men of I’m 
sure good will, and men well-intentioned— 
the ultimate effects. But that was something 
that came about, and came about primarily 
because we had determined to study this as 
carefully as we could, and the Atomic Energy 
Commission, of which I was a later member— 
not the Commission, devoted much time and 
effort and used the best testimony they could 
get to resolve the problem. 

It is interesting to me that at one time, 
this was classed as the most powerful of all of 
the Senatorial committees—the Joint Atomic 
Energy Committee—for the simple reason 
that it was composed of an equal number 
of congressmen and an equal number of 
Senators, who met jointly and who had the 
power, given to them by statute, to write laws 
governing the atomic energy. And in writing 



128 


Alan Bible 


those laws, they wrote them almost with 
unanimity of that committee. 

As to developing the atomic energy power, 
first for the wartime uses, because that is how 
it came into being, and we all remember the 
effects in World War II that came about on 
the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki by 
President Harry Truman’s orders, and the 
devastation that caused—loss in money and 
lives, that that cost. It’s almost impossible to 
realize the devastating effect of the explosion 
of the atomic bomb. But we also concede that 
it had many, many great peacetime uses, and 
this is shown in the generation of electric 
power, which again, right at this very time is 
in much debate. The explosion at Harrisburg, 
Pennsylvania brings it into focus, and all 
nuclear power, even for peacetime uses, is on 
trial right at this period. I’ve supported nuclear 
power. I think it is one of the great sources of 
creating power, but there are many skeptics 
and doubters. And there will be many, many 
thousands of words of testimony given both 
pro and con before this is finally resolved. 

I assume that those whom I had my 
contacts, those who testified year after year 
before the joint committee as to its safety were 
correct. I hope that my assumption was right, 
and that again, will be discussed for many, 
many days to come. To me it was of some 
interest (this has happened since I retired)— 
the U.S. Senate just very recently—within 
the last year—abolished the Joint Committee 
on Atomic Energy, and broke it into three 
different parts, and gave it to three different 
individual Senate and House committees. 

Now this is never the way that it was 
originally set up. And whether that is a wise 
move or not a wise move, again, time alone will 
tell. But it is something that occurs to me as one 
of the things that happened during that period 
of time when I served in Washington, D.C. 


The Legislative Process 

I was wondering if you might talk a little 
bit more about the legislative process, not 
the debates on the floor, but the cloakroom 
conversation, the subcommittee meetings that 
are never open —. 

Well, so much of that has changed just 
in the last couple of years, actually, because 
of the—practically every committee now is 
open, even for mark-ups. Mark-ups are 
really where the actual work of putting a bill 
together is done, and it used to be done in an 
executive session, and until about—oh, I don’t 
know the exact year—but in the later parts of 
my senatorial career, which went over twenty 
years, I would say in about my sixteenth, 
seventeenth, or eighteenth years of service 
in the Interior Committee, for example, the 
executive sessions were open to everybody, 
and when that was first announced, there was 
some fear, some consternation that we would 
just be flooded by everybody coming in seeing 
how we mark-upped a bill. 

But, at first the mark-ups were extremely 
well-attended; everybody was in there out of 
curiosity, I think, and then after a while the 
only people who showed were a few lobbyists. 

But we mark-upped right to the last 
dotted i and crossed t, right out in front of 
God and everybody. Even during the period 
of time that I was there. 

Now that’s taken away a tremendous 
lot of this back-room planning, conniving, 
whatever you want to call it, because in the 
final analysis, when they mark-up a bill, 
which goes to the floor, that has been done 
in front of everybody. Now of course, that is 
not to say that when you get over on the floor, 
somebody might come in and say, “Well, 
Bible, how about putting this in for me?” Or 



Career as U.S. Senator 


129 


you go to somebody, and ask them to put 
something in for you by way of amendment. 
But even that is out in the open, so today 
you’ve taken away practically all of that 
feeling of somebody always slipping a little 
something in when you weren’t looking, see. 
It really changed it, and of course, I think, oh, 
probably it could still be done to a limited 
degree, but I’m very happy to run down just 
a little of what happens to a bill, and how we 
dealt with it. 

[Revision and extension’s] a great 
congressional gimmick, particularly in the 
House of Representatives. They extend their 
remarks and that’s when they really edit it up 
you know, and over on our side they always 
let you see what you’ve done and what you’ve 
said on the floor before they reproduce it in 
the Congressional Record. And of course, the 
press has been very critical of that because 
it doesn’t honestly reflect what happens 
down on that floor. But, you can get some 
of those Senators (I never had that failing 
because I think it is a failing, of getting mad 
and standing up and “that dirty so and so”), 
particularly in the cool of the evening, they 
get a little additional support from the few 
drinks they had and then they will come 
a-storming on that floor; something will hit 
them or touch them off and boy, away they 
go: And they say a lot of things that nobody 
should ever say, and then they get their 
legislative assistant to go over and get—and 
the reporters, God love ’em, they write it the 
way you say it. Sure. And then the of tending 
Senator will go over and have the legislative 
assistant edit it, and clean it up, as they call 
it, clean it up and boy, oh boy, there is no 
resemblance at all to what they’ve said on the 
floor And you get lots of examples of that. 
That’s one thing that they’re going to run into 


now that they’ve—that they’re—Tip O’Neill 
said the other day that now they’re opening 
up all sessions to television, the House of 
Representatives—always. Oh, it will be a 
nightmare; you just wait and see—there will 
be four hundred and thirty-five congressmen 
talking all over the lot. 

Well, the things that are not on the record, are 
the things that are of interest to historians. 
I’m thinking about the informal kinds of 
conversations that you’re likely to have on a bill 
that is of particular interest to you or to your 
constituents, and how you go about planning 
it and getting it through. 

Over the years I’ve maybe—[I] didn’t 
follow the practice of this in the first part of 
my career, but I certainly did after a year or 
two or three years experience. The bill—and 
I won’t go through the actual mechanical 
part, but I think they are very well known, 
and it’s pretty well disseminated in various 
studies made of the legislative process, but 
sometimes there are things that aren’t written 
up, and as a matter of record. Now, one of 
the areas that was always of great concern to 
me and one on which I developed a policy 
is that a bill was introduced and everybody 
was given the opportunity to be heard. One 
thing that I required and did almost without 
fail, particularly in later years I followed very 
faithfully, is that I just refused to sit down 
and talk to people about a bill in which they 
had an interest, because I always said, “Well, 
you’ve had your day in court, you can come 
in there and tell your story. 

“Yeah, but we don’t want to do it that 
way. We want to come in and give you our 
version of it, and tell you why we think this 
particular bill should be abandoned, or should 
be passed, or should be killed.” 



130 


Alan Bible 


I said, “Well you’re going to say that in 
front of everybody” 

Now, probably the worst offender that I 
ran into on my years of conducting many, 
many hearings and in the various committees 
in which I served, was the government 
witnesses themselves. They would... cone 
in and after they had made their case in, on 
record, and in a regular hearing, they would 
say, “Well, now we testified to this, or that or 
the other thing, but we would like to tell you 
this and confidentially; we’re doing this only 
because we’re required to do so by the order 
of that has come down from the department. 

Now, every once in a while you’d run into 
that type of a problem, and so I just developed 
a complete policy that I refused to hear them 
except in open hearings where what they said 
was of record and there was no variance. And I 
followed that very religiously. I suppose I have 
not followed it in earlier parts of my career, 
but it seemed to me that it was the only fair 
way to do it. But I would be misleading people 
if I were to tell them that you didn’t have pleas 
made to you, if you didn’t have representations 
made to you by either government witnesses 
or private witnesses, mainly by government 
witnesses, to do certain things. And so I finally 
developed the policy of just having them all 
on the full open hearing. 

Now that is a development that has come 
about in recent years. A development with 
which I completely agree, and of course I 
think we’ve made progress in that particular 
field. There are still those who would want 
to talk with me confidentially, and tell you 
privately something that they wouldn’t dare 
put on the record. And I am sure that will 
happen as long as there is man. 

I had occasion to make a speech just a few 
nights ago and I recalled an incident about my 
name. It is a story I’ve told many times, I’ve 
always taken a kind of fancy to it, and I told 


the story the other night, that President Harry 
Truman campaigned through Nevada, oh, 
forget which—I think he was running for the 
presidency, in his second term. This occurred, 
as I remember at Imlay, Nevada, which was 
then a division point for the railroad, and a 
group of us went out to pay our respects to 
the president, and I was introduced to Harry 
Truman by my sponsor, and long-time friend, 
Pat McCarran, and he says, he called him by 
first name because he served with him in the 
U.S. Senate, and he said, “Harry, I want you 
to meet one of my proteges, a young lad who 
worked for me on the floor of the Senate, and 
his name is Alan Bible (B-i-b-l-e).” 

Harry Truman looked at me, and never 
flinched one bit, and said, “Bible, Bible—.” 
He says, “You know, that’s the best damn 
political name I ever heard.” And I think 
that’s probably true. That is a good political 
name. 

I can recall another incidence, since 
I’ve started on this trend of thought, that 
somewhat illustrates that. In Las Vegas, 
which always gave me a terrific vote (with one 
exception, and I’ve commented on that, they 
always gave me terrific vote), and of course, 
in Las Vegas and even more distinctive at 
this particular time in my campaign, there is 
a Westside in Las Vegas, which is the colored 
area, and they have many, many churches 
there, and very many fine Black ministers, 
and I was always invited to come by and 
make an address. They always expected you to 
recognize that they had to put on new steeples, 
or maybe repair the roof; you were expected 
to give them a contribution, which I always 
did rather regularly. And on my own I was, I 
think, a middle-of-the-roader in general over 
my senatorial career, and I certainly wasn’t a 
liberal, and my record on some civil rights 
issues probably wasn’t what they thought it 
should be, but being—again illustrating my 



Career as U.S. Senator 


131 


good fortune that I had, and through no fault 
of my own, nor merit of my own, having the 
name Bible always helped, and the colored 
minister, colored bishop, would always say, 
“And now we want to introduce to you, Alan 
Bible,” and when he used the word Bible, 
the entire audience would say, “Aaamen! 
Hallelujah!” And I knew right then and there, 
that the response that came, not because of 
me, but because of my name that I would 
never have too much trouble in Westside 
Vegas, and I never did. 

Even though some of them may have 
questioned my vote on some of the issues that 
came up; nevertheless, I’m sure the name that 
I bore with pride, did try to bear it with pride, 
was of great help to me securing their vote. I 
tell that simply because it’s a true story, and 
it’s one that illustrates some of the factors that 
go into being a success at the polls. 

The 1960s 

Nineteen sixty-three was a particularly 
interesting as well as historic year in the 
united States Senate. The Pest Site was moving 
forward at an increased pace of activity, with 
more and more nuclear tests which are subject 
to discussion as of this moment. 

Probably the outstanding event of that 
year was President JFK came to Las Vegas, and 
spoke before what the papers estimated was a 
crowd of some eight thousand people in the 
convention center in Las Vegas. It was just a 
short time after that, I don’t remember exactly 
how long, but probably within a month, he 
was in Dallas, Texas and was assassinated. So 
there in a period of less than—about a month, 
he had been visiting the state of Nevada, of 
which he was tremendously fond. He spent 
many, many months in the way of total time, 
in the state of Nevada over his entire life. It 
was just ironic that here the man who had 


been supported rather wholeheartedly by 
the voters of the state of Nevada was in the 
state just a month before he met the assassin 
s bullet. It was one of the tragic events of this 
century, actually. There had been too many 
assassinations, and this one here was no 
exception to the pall of gloom, and doubt, and 
worry that it cast over the nation. 

I was in the Senate chambers when the 
word came in over the teletype about his being 
shot by the assassin, and work, needless to say, 
just came to a complete standstill, and there 
was silent prayers, and oral prayers for his 
recovery by all of our members. There was no 
political partisanship at that particular time, 
and of course, he died shortly afterwards, and 
then there was the flight back to Washington, 
the funeral, which was as somber and as 
heartrending as any service I’ve ever attended 
in my entire life. 

One little footnote on it that is of some 
interest. The Shah was there, with all of his 
regalia. I remarked many, many times I 
have never seen a man with such a military 
bearing stand as erect as he did without 
moving through the entire and lengthy 
service in the rotunda of the Capitol. Now, 
here in 1979 he is a discredited Shah, 
probably being sought after by his people, 
where at the time he was supreme and was 
greatly admired; today apparently is being 
sought for trial and if caught, and tried, 
will probably—eventual death, if that is the 
pattern. If it follows the pattern that has 
already been set in that terror-stricken part 
of the world. It is almost impossible for us 
here in America to realize the extent that the 
Iranians have gone in trying to purge their 
former leaders. And that does include, of 
course, the Shah. I don’t know if they know 
where he is now or not, but I have said many 
times that my great impression of him (I have 
met him—I don’t know him, never knew 



132 


Alan Bible 


him, actually, but I did observe him), and 
again, a man of great military bearing, and a 
very impressive person that you would note 
no matter where you were. And in 1979, it 
is ironic that his fortunes have completely 
turned around, and such is the history of 
the rulers of most of the European nations. 
I doubt that many people had any inkling of 
the serious trouble that he was to face in the 
future in Iran. 

The inauguration of LBJ was another 
somber occasion, and I saw him sworn into 
the presidency of the United States. A very 
dear personal friend. A man with whom I had 
worked very closely and intimately during 
the time that he was the majority leader of 
United States Senate. I have often said that 
I believe history would write him one of, if 
not the greatest majority leader of the united 
States Senate that this nation has ever had. 
His tour and his tenure as president of the 
united States didn’t match his performance as 
majority leader, probably, due to the fact that 
he inherited the Vietnam War. He followed 
a strict line of—he followed the military 
recommendations and suggestions of how 
it should be fought, and of course, that was 
one of the tragic mistakes that this nation 
has made, and many of us in following the 
presidents lead in that area, probably made 
in retrospect. 

Two of the men I have always admired 
the most were Wayne Morse of Oregon, “the 
tiger of the Senate,” aptly called, and Ernest 
Gruening of Alaska, because they were the 
only two United States Senators who voted 
against the [Gulf of] Tonkin resolution, 
which is generally conceded by historians 
and military people alike, as the resolution 
that really projected the United States into 
the Vietnam War. Because that is what it was. 
There was never a declaration of war. It was a 
war nevertheless. 


As the years progressed and as the 
casualty list grew larger and larger, and the 
loss of lives, the tremendous expense, more 
and more people joined with the two early 
Senators who had said that this was a wrong 
thing for the United States to do. They, at 
that time, they certainly were almost a cry 
in the wilderness. And it wasn’t until we had 
progressed into the war, with its tremendous 
cost, that others of us realized what an error 
we had made. 

I’m frank to say that I was one who 
supported the president, and supported his 
philosophy and theories of Vietnam, and it’s a 
vote obviously that I have very much regretted 
in subsequent years. But that is behind us 
now, and a tremendous loss of prestige to the 
United States as well as the cost in manpower 
and in dollars, and I simply mention that by 
way of trying to pay a deserved tribute to two 
very fine United States Senators who voted 
their convictions. 

Ernest Gruening was a study in himself. 
He was a doctor. He was graduated from 
Harvard Medical School. He didn’t follow 
medicine. He had a great desire to go West, 
and he went early in life, went to Alaska 
to become its delegate—one of the leaders 
in the fight for Alaska statehood; then was 
subsequently rewarded by being elected as 
a United States Senator. He was a gracious 
man. A very, very intelligent man. A man 
who I was very proud to class as one of my 
very dear friends. 

Likewise, Wayne Morse, who was really 
the “tiger of the Senate,” and has been 
variously pictured, probably the only United 
States Senator who started out as a Republican, 
left the Republican party to form his own 
party—the Independent party, and left the 
Independent party, to join Democrats at the 
urging of majority leader, Lyndon Johnson, 
who needed his vote in the close margin that 



Career as U.S. Senator 


133 


President Johnson had in his early years, as 
the majority leader of the U.S. Senate. 

And of course, Wayne Morse, many 
stories have been told about him. He was 
always a gentleman on the floor. He was a 
ruthless and difficult and hard debater. He 
held the filibuster record of the United States 
Senate for many years, and I think that was 
something in the neighborhood of something 
like twenty-two or twenty-three hours, 
uninterrupted. It was later on broken Strom 
Thurmond, the U.S. Senator from South 
Carolina, who I think had one interruption 
during the entire time he spoke. 

If I recall correctly my historical facts and 
my own knowledge, I was at the filibuster 
conducted by Strom Thurmond; I was not 
there for the filibuster by which Wayne Morse 
set his record. But they were the two filibuster 
champs, in modern times of the United 
States Senate. I knew both of them very well, 
considered them both very close friends. 

Wayne Morse, as I said earlier was a 
gentleman, and he always gave you warning 
when he was about to make a long talk. He 
always wore a red rose in the lapel of his coat, 
and that was a signal that he was going to talk 
at length. He usually used this on weekends, 
or coming into a weekend, on a Thursday or 
Friday, because, actually if he could get what 
we called a unanimous consent agreement, 
then they would recess over until a Monday. 
That was really to accommodate him so that 
he could go back to Oregon and do some 
campaigning. He used that time and time 
again. And they tested him several times, 
and when they tested him, he just kept 
talking. Once he was recognized they simply 
couldn’t do anything, except adjourn. And 
finally they learned when that red rose was 
there, he meant what he was saying, and 
that he would talk and prevent transaction 
of any business. 


His primary purpose, on many occasions, 
not all occasions but on many occasions, 
was to work out an accommodation with 
the leadership so that he could go back to 
Oregon and be sure that no business would 
be transacted on the floor of the Senate. 
And having learned that he meant what he 
said, the leadership got so they respected it. 
And when the red rose was in evidence on 
a Thursday or a Friday, or late in the week, 
the leadership would simply bow to his 
request and would recess over those days. 
There was considerable criticism of this, but 
as a practical matter, once he obtained the 
floor, there wasn’t a way in the world that 
you could take him off his feet, other than 
by staying there until he finished his speech. 
So it worked time and time again. 

He had relatives in the state of Nevada. 
His wife’s sister was a lady connected with 
the Department of Education of Carson City, 
a Mrs. Eif—very active in lodge work. She 
was the sister of Mrs. Wayne Morse, and the 
Senator’s wife, as well as the Senator himself, 
made frequent visits to the state of Nevada. 

So, he was controversial, he was bombastic 
but he was a brilliant man, and he had great 
foresight, as I said earlier, on the Vietnam 
situation. 

I think while I’m mentioning Strom 
Thurmond, I also ought to pay tribute to 
him in a different direction. Senator Strom 
Thurmond and I went into the United States 
Senate at the same time. He was married to a 
very beautiful young lady, who had previously 
served as his personal secretary while he was 
governor of South Carolina. Unfortunately, 
she contracted cancer and died at a very 
young age. He was sixty-eight when again 
married, and he married the Miss America, 
or Miss South Carolina of that particular time. 
When he married he was sixty-eight years 
of age. She was twenty-four or twenty-five, 



134 


Alan Bible 


something of that range, and it has been a 
marvel for those of us who are approaching 
the sixty-eight, sixty-nine, and seventy period 
of life, to salute this man from South Carolina, 
because he didn’t marry until he was sixty- 
eight and he is still alive and going strong and 
has had four children. 

And so, this we consider one of the marvels 
of the day. He was a great physical culturist. 
I’ve forgotten the number of pushups and 
pullups, and the various exercises he takes. 
He’s a teetotaler. He’s in about as perfect 
physical condition as any man I’ve ever 
seen, and on several occasions, he would be 
challenged by someone who wanted to test his 
physical strength, and they usually lost out. 

One instance comes to mind, is the 
Senator from Texas, Ralph Yarborough, who 
was the junior Senator when Lyndon Johnson 
was the senior Senator from that state, became 
engaged in some kind of a misunderstanding, 
or difference of opinion, and so Senator 
Yarborough challenged Strom Thurmond 
to rassle it out. Strom Thurmond accepted it 
and rather reluctantly; he didn’t want to do 
it, but Ralph Yarborough, [who) was a much 
larger, a much younger man, persisted, so 
Strom Thurmond accepted the challenge. It 
was only just a matter of a few seconds that 
Strom Thurmond pinned Senator Yarborough 
on the floor. 

I don’t know if that received much 
publicity. They tried to hush it up pretty 
well. It was not a thing that two dignified 
U.S. Senators would brag about very much, 
but it actually occurred, and occurred in a 
committee hearing in the new Senate office 
building. So I just relate that as some of the 
personal incidents that you can run into with 
some of your colleagues. 

Returning now to 1966. With a new 
president, the legislation that I was primarily 
interested in during that period of time was 


my geothermal legislation. I had pioneered 
this in the United States Senate, thinking 
that this was a great source of power, and 
there should be laws written and enacted that 
would permit those who were interested in 
producing electric energy to go in and make 
claims to the geothermal steam, particularly 
in the vast public domains that we have in the 
West. And it was rather an uphill fight. There 
wasn’t too much interest at that time, but 
finally enacted into law, and I think it serves 
a good purpose in giving to an energy-starved 
nation, another potential source, an actual 
proven source, of electric energy. 

One of the best examples, one that 
increased my interest in the entire subject, 
may be found in the geysers in northern 
California, in the area not too far away 
from Geyserville; there has been developed 
geothermal steam that is developed privately, 
and in turn sold to Pacific Gas and Electric. 
It has proven a continuous source of steam 
necessary to turn the turbines that in turn 
generate electric energy, and supply a fair 
percentage of the power that is generated in 
that particular section of the country. And it 
is fed into the vast Pacific Gas and Electric 
system, to help them meet their power 
demands. I think it still has some great, great 
possibilities. 

It was in 1968 that I announced that 
young Mike Sloan was going to head up my 
Las Vegas office, and I had said earlier that I 
recognized that Las Vegas and Clark County 
deserved more congressional assistance. 
Among the many proteges that I’ve had 
work with me during some twenty years in 
Washington, D.C., Mike Sloan has made a 
great name for himself. First, under a city 
election, he was elected to office there, in 
that particular capacity, I think it was the 
city attorney, and then more recently, he 
has been, was elected as state senator, and is 



Career as U.S. Senator 


135 


now serving in the state legislation in that 
capacity. 

I mention his name because he’s typical 
of one of the many, many people that worked 
either directly in my office or under my 
patronage during some twenty years. And 
I have been told by my staff that over that 
twenty years, we were able to help one hundred 
Nevada boys and girls secure largely legal 
degrees, not exclusively that way; we had some 
that were dentists and some that were doctors, 
but primarily lawyers who came back into the 
state and are scattered throughout the state 
in various legal capacities either as district 
attorneys or as judges or as practicing lawyers. 

I rather followed my predecessor’s 
footsteps in that regard, because Pat McCarran 
was my sponsor and I worked under him 
when I worked my way through law school. 
In turn, I tried to carry on that tradition, and 
it’s one of the elements of pride that you have 
in trying to help people secure the education 
that sometimes became very difficult to 
acquire because of the finances involved. And 
they worked and they did a good job of their 
work, but they also had the opportunity of 
studying part time. It was a rewarding part of 
a Senator’s life, and I took great pride in that 
and am very proud of the people who have 
been produced through that means. 

It was during that period of time that 
crime, which seems to be with us forever, 
was very prominent. I was on the D.C. 
committee that perfected the first model of 
what we thought would be the first model 
of crime bill. It was designed to help stamp 
out crime. Obviously it didn’t accomplish 
that. We always chose to think that it made 
it a little more difficult on the criminal and 
a little easier for the courts and the juries to 
convict. It was used as a model in many places 
around the nation, and it was a contribution, 
albeit too weak to have completely stamped 


out the crime problem, which today, to me, 
seems to be growing rather than receding. 
But the legislation is there, it is a never ending 
problem, and no one has the perfect solution. 

By way of a sideline, back in 1968 as a 
member of the Appropriations Committee 
on labor, health, education and welfare (it’s in 
my scrapbooks), I had my picture taken with 
a Dr. Barnard who has just performed his first 
heart transplant, and since then has attained 
worldwide fame. He was appearing before 
our appropriations committee that dealt with 
diseases, and dealt with cancer, and dealt 
with heart problems, dealt with transplants 
and things of that kind. I simply note that 
because of the subsequent fame and medical 
recognition that he has received. 

It was always a particular pleasure to 
welcome various groups to the Congress 
of the United States, and we were annually 
visited, not myself alone, but all of the 
congressional group, by our Masonic leaders 
and by our Catholic leaders, by our various 
fraternal groups; and during the time that I 
was in the U.S. Senate and became the senior 
Senator, I always tried to work out a close 
working relationship with my colleague, 
Howard Cannon, and with our congressman, 
Walter Baring, so we tried, as a trio, to be 
a team representing Nevada. There were 
differences among us, obviously. I think there 
always will be differences where you have 
men and legislators involved. But, certainly 
in attempting to make visiting Nevadans feel 
at home when they came into the nation’s 
capital, there was no difference in opinion 
between any of us, and we did give many, 
many luncheons designed to make the 
person from Wabuska, or Tonopah, or Elko, 
or anywhere around the state, feel more and 
more at home. That is a practice that we 
followed very carefully and very thoroughly. 
And it was a rewarding experience. Obviously, 



136 


Alan Bible 


it was very good politics, and obviously, it was 
of interest to us as individual representatives 
from the state of Nevada. 

I mention that simply because I believe 
Nevadans have always looked forward to 
those visits. One of the legends of the U.S. 
Senate was the famous bean soup, which 
you could secure in the Senate dining room, 
and which became so popular at the turn 
of the century that it was the subject of a 
congressional resolution. Something to the 
effect that as long as there was a U.S. Senate, 
there will always be a Senate bean soup. I 
believe that resolution was passed in 1908 or 
’9, or something in that neighborhood, and 
it has been on the menu ever Since that date. 
So most people, if they have any taste at all for 
bean soup, usually try that out, to go home, 
to go back to tell people that they had a bowl 
of bean soup. Just a little sidelight that occurs 
to me as we are rambling along. 

And we have always have arranged 
tours. Someone in the office always has been 
designated to give them a tour of the capitol. 
Of course they have the regular guided tours. 
We thought that this needed a little additional, 
personal attention, and it was always number 
one; you’re always happy to see people from 
back home, even though you can’t spend as 
much time with them as you would like, and 
as they would like. But in addition, and again 
repeating, just plain good politics, because 
you might see them back home when you 
are on the campaign trail, and generally they 
will be for you. So it’s an advantage that an 
incumbent has had. The incumbent Senators 
and congressmen from our state, as well as 
other states have a distinctive advantage, 
because of opportunities like that that are 
available to everybody. 

So that is one thing I make comment on. 
Another tool that was always very helpful to 
me was the newsletter, because we came out 


with newsletters, as I recall it, four times a 
year, and with very broad mailing list that 
went to voters in the state of Nevada. This gave 
you not only a means of communicating your 
own philosophy and your own thoughts, but 
establishing a rapport with people back home. 

It was amazing for me to find out in my 
early years of using a newsletter, and shortly 
after I went back there in 1954, that back on 
the campaign trail I’d find many, many people 
who would tell me that was just about the only 
letter they received was the newsletter. And 
again, this established a fine relationship with 
your constituency. Certainly is true that when 
you reveal your program and how you voted 
on this subject or that subject, everybody 
doesn’t agree with you, and so sometimes the 
newsletter might expose you to negative votes; 
it’s simply because you told people how you’re 
going to vote and it might disagree with their 
philosophy and the way they would vote. But 
nevertheless, on balance, even though you 
are in disagreement, they are happy to hear 
from you. So that is another tool that is used 
and a very effective means of building and 
strengthening your fences, as they say in the 
trade, for future political encounters. 

How about the election of ’68? 

Well, I think I won that one pretty handily, 
too. That was about as difficult an election— 
Ed Fike was a very fine opponent, and a very 
interesting young man, but I had had the 
benefit of considerable seniority and just ran 
on my record, which I always tried to do. I 
always attempted, in political campaigns, just 
to ignore my opponent and just point out what 
I had done. In the Ed Fike campaign (which 
I guess was my last campaign, wasn’t it?), we 
had a good record to take to the people, and 
we just stood on that record. 



Summary and Conclusions 


137 


I think that was the campaign where we 
adopted as our motto (I don’t know who 
thought it up; I know I didn’t), but “Nevada 
is stronger with Bible,” and we ran a series of 
ads that pointed out what I had done in each 
of the various counties. I think that was the 
most effective campaigning I ever did, and the 
results showed that it has its effect, because I 
did win by a rather large margin. 




8 


Summary and Conclusions 


Over the course of my career, both in 
the state and in the United States Senate, 
there were a number of awards made, and I 
mention them simply to make a record of it 
and not trying to toot my own horn, which I 
have always been somewhat reluctant to do, 
but I did receive the [Charles] Chuck Richey 
Memorial Award. 

Chuck Richey was the dynamic 
superintendent of the Lake Mead National 
Recreation Area. He was a career National 
Park Service man. One of the closest and 
dearest friends I ever had. He was the 
pioneer that gave us the inspiration and 
the guidance to create Lake Mead National 
Recreation Area. Prior to his interest in it 
and his interesting others in it, it was run by 
the Bureau of Reclamation, which had the 
responsibility of operation Hoover Dam. So 
the park part of it was a rather a secondary 
interest and it needed independence, and 
it needed increased staffing, and it needed 
increased dollars to build harbors and piers 
and roads and means of making the entire 
area more and more accessible to the public. 


Chuck Richey recognized this early, and 
kept working and laboring on it day after day 
during his entire career, and so in honor of 
him and the great contributions he made, the 
people of Boulder and the people of Clark 
County created a memorial award, in honor 
of Chuck Richey, who unfortunately has been 
dead for many years, and I happened to be the 
first recipient of that award. And I think it was 
given to me just because I followed Chuck 
Richey’s lead and secured the legislation, 
had it enacted into law, secured the dollars to 
implement it, and today it is the outstanding 
recreation area in the entire United States 
with probably the second or third highest 
visitation—I think it’s the gateway west, which 
is area around San Francisco and the Bay 
Area, I think is about the only truly recreation 
area which surpasses the Lake Mead area. So 
I was very, very happy to have a part in that 
and greatly appreciated the award. 

I was named Senator of the Year by the 
National Federation of Independent Business 
and that came to me because of my work on 
the Small Business Committee, of which I 



140 


Alan Bible 


was the chairman, and where we did write 
some worthwhile legislation; where we had 
some investigations that revealed some of the 
abuses in the area of small business. 

I received honorary doctorates from my 
own alma mater of the University of Nevada; 
from Georgetown Law, where I graduated; 
from Rider College, which is a New Jersey 
college, and it was in recognition of my work 
in the small business field. 

The Distinguished Service in 
Conservation, from the National Wildlife 
Federation, was on which I prized a great deal 
because it was given to me by the National 
Wildlife Federation, and the award was a 
handsome statuette of a whooping crane, and 
of course the whooping crane came perilously 
close to extinction and is now, by correct 
conservation moves, is now gaining strength 
and is coming back in its own right. 

The Medal of Achievement, which I 
received from the American Scenic and 
Historic Preservation Society, was an award 
given to me for the work which I had done 
and by virtue of being the chairman of the 
National Parks and Recreation Committee 
and all of the allied problems it had. 

The National Education Association 
Distinguished Service Award was for word 
which I had done in the field of education and 
in support of many of their goals. These are 
awards of which I am proud and ones which 
I display with great pleasure. 

In civic and fraternal affairs, my civic life 
was very much tied with my political life. My 
fraternal affairs—at one time or another I 
think I belonged to practically every lodge in 
the world; I started out as a Mason and took all 
of their advanced degrees, with the exception 
of the Knight Templars. I am a Shriner; I 
joined the Eagles lodge in Virginia City some 
forty to forty-five years ago—always enjoyed 
my work in that lodge. At various times, in 


and out, I was a member of the Elks; I was a 
member of the Moose; and if there are other 
fraternal organizations, I may very well have 
been a member of them, too. I was never a 
member of the Odd Fellows. My father was, 
and my mother was a Rebekah, which is the 
women’s auxiliary to that, but I did not join 
the Odd Fellows, or the Rebekahs, though I 
am a great admirer of their lodge—and have 
had many, many wonderful and close friends 
who are members. And now that I’ve retired, 
I’m pulling back from lodges that I used to 
belong to, primarily because I think the dues 
are getting higher and have become somewhat 
of a burden. 

My fraternal life was tied up pretty much 
with Lambda Chi Alpha, a social fraternity, 
a national here at the University of Nevada, 
preceded by a local called Kappa Lambda. 
And I was very active in that, during my 
undergraduate days, and have since tried to 
be of help to the fraternity, and I think it is a 
very fine fraternity. 

* * * * * 

Anyone in political life must, of necessity, 
have a great helpmate. And I had that in my 
wife, and I am glad to note that this year we 
will be celebrating our fortieth anniversary. 
We have four children and six grandchildren; 
and I felt so tremendously pleased, back in 
1962 the U.S. Navy saw fit to recognize her 
and to christen one of their naval ships the 
U.S.S. Goldsborough, which had a tremendous 
record of combat duty. It was one of the lesser 
members of the naval fleet of the United 
States, and they christened it and honored 
her by asking her to make her name a part 
of that ship, and this was done in 1962. She 
donated a tea service, or something of that 
kind to the ship, and the ship will always 
bear her name, as a part of that ship, after 



Summary and Conclusions 


141 


the christening. And this was an honor that 
she very well deserved. And raising four 
children and telling their children how to 
raise their children was all part of a strong 
and helpful helpmate, and I am sure that my 
success, whatever it may have been, would 
not have been possible without her strong and 
continuing influence of her help. 

During campaign time, that was even 
increased. Many times she went door-to- 
door as people in Nevada used to demand. 
Maybe they still demand it, but it is a little 
harder to, and she did that for rue in many 
areas, and I am sure she got more votes for 
me than any one person, and I salute her in 
this little tribute. 

* * * * * 

I think I would say that I seemed to 
have been destined or predestined, or 
whatever for a political career. My first 
encounter with it was in debating back in 
fifth grade in grammar school on two very, 
very momentous questions of the day that 
were discussed by fifth graders in the Oats 
Park grammar school at Fallon, Nevada. The 
first question that we had and discussed and 
debated was whether Abraham Lincoln was a 
greater man than George Washington, which 
I am sure was earth rending, and was of great 
importance and I am sure has never been 
resolved, nor ever will be resolved. As fifth 
graders, we thought it could be. 

The next question, and an equally 
momentous one, was whether a dog is a 
greater friend of man than a horse, and which 
was the more valuable. So I suppose in—my 
actual debate started even in the fifth grade 
in grammar, and there was something that 
indicated that I might follow that through. 
Suffice it to say that during my days in 
Churchill County High School, from nineteen 


hundred twenty-two to nineteen hundred 
twenty-six, I was on the debate team, coached 
by one of the greatest professors I’ve ever 
had, George E. McCracken, and we there 
debated other high schools in the state, and 
on probably more earthly questions. I was 
president of one of the classes during that 
period of time, and I was the student body 
president at Churchill County High School 
in nineteen hundred and twenty-six. 

I suppose all of this rather pointed me 
down a political path, and then I worked 
in Washington—worked first as an elevator 
operator in the Capitol and was promoted to 
work on the floor of the United States Capitol. 
I worked on the floor of the Capitol with 
such giants as Bill Borah; George Norris of 
Nebraska; Walter George of Georgia; Arthur 
Vandenburg of Michigan; Senators from their 
respective states. And one of the greatest of 
all the men that I heard during that period 
of time was one of the most famous and that 
was Huey Long of Louisiana, and he was a 
tremendous orator. And he was, and this is 
absolutely true, this antedated television, and’ 
as the word got that Huey Long was about 
to make a speech, the gallery seats were at 
a premium because he was better than any 
show, any entertainment that you could get 
anywheres that I know of, and so I grew up 
in that environment. And I came west and 
ran Senator McCarran’s law office for several 
years; then the vacancy opened up in Virginia 
City, and I became district attorney; and 
then from there, I became deputy attorney 
general; and it was during my deputy attorney 
general days that I made up my mind to run 
for attorney general, and I ran for attorney 
general against Bill Mathews, who was the 
senior deputy in my office. And I managed 
to win the primary and win the attorney 
general’s race and I think there I “crossed 
the Rubicon,” as they say because I was so 



142 


Alan Bible 


involved in politics, there wasn’t much other 
way I could turn. 

Though during my days as deputy 
attorney general, Howard Gray, who preceded 
me in that office, was hired by Kennecott and 
went to Ely, where he established a very 
thriving law practice. For many years until 
his death, he was chief lawyer for Kennecott 
Copper Company, and he urged me to join 
him—leave the attorney general’s office and 
come to Ely and practice law there with him. 
Now had I made that choice, undoubtedly I 
would have continued in the private practice 
of law and have severed my connections with 
politics, but I didn’t do it that way. I went on, 
ran for attorney general, was elected twice, 
and then I was defeated by Tom Mechling. 
I licked my wounds; two years later Senator 
McCarran died, another opportunity came 
up and I ran for that, and for better or worse 
I was elected to the United States Senate, 
had many misgivings and after two years, 
said I’d return to private life. Again I was 
persuaded to get back into the political world, 
and acceded to those demands, and was in 
the political world for some twenty years. 
So I guess, as I say, if my predestination or 
destination, or whatever, it was my lot in life 
to become a politician and to be of service to 
people in the state. 

I always had one guiding rule, which I 
hope I more or less met, and that was trying 
to help people. And that was the greatest 
satisfaction I ever had was trying to help 
people, whether it was to secure employment, 
whether it was to get to law school, whether 
it was to help a community in improving 
its position, I always took great pleasure in 
that—a very sincere and honest pleasure, so 
whatever reward I have in life, it’s one purely 
and simply in trying to help people make for 
themselves a little better their lot in life. If I 
have accomplished that in a few little places 


here and there, my choice in going into 
politics was well worthwhile. 

I have always made a reasonable amount 
of money. Money was never my main goal in 
life, wasn’t then, it isn’t now, and of course, 
from here on out, it never will be, but I was 
just satisfied to get the big reward out of 
having people drop you a note and saying 
“thank you” for something you tried to do 
for them. 

And that was true of communities and I 
think I could document the various things 
I’ve done for many areas in the state of 
Nevada. And then of course, as my larger 
responsibilities came about, particularly 
in the fields of parks and recreation areas, 
development of our natural resources, I can 
look all around the United States and see some 
evidence where I may have left a little imprint. 
If so, then my choice to become a politician 
is one of which I’m proud. 

How well have you adjusted, and how do you 
like teaching at the University? 

I like it very much. I’ve always enjoyed 
working with young people—always had 
young people around me. And there is 
no substitute for some real intelligent and 
sharp young men and women querying you 
about why did you do this or why did you 
do that. How did you vote on this and how 
did you vote on that? I find that immensely 
stimulating, and I really do enjoy it. 



Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



144 


Alan Bible 


Adams, Eva B., 83, 248, 
251, 252-254, 284-285 
Alaska, 295-296 
Allard, George, 82 
Allen, Lem S., 24 
American Scenic and His¬ 
toric Preservation Soci 
ety, 335 

Anderson, Fred M., 33- 
34, 44 

Anderson, Jack, 148 
Andreason, Clint, 110 
Annand, George, 142-143 
175 

Arentz, Samuel S., 57 

Arizona vs. California , 

159-161 

Atomic energy, 307-310 



Bailey, James C., 24 
Baker, C. D., 85- 
Banigan, Calvin^a^eiiy 
111 

Baring , Walti&i s • ^ 299, 
329 ^( 

Bautzer, Gregson, 26, 42 
lelanger, Roland W. "Doc," 
78, 181 

Mary Katherine Morris, 
27-28 
Best, E. C., 21 
Bible, Allen, 4 
Bible, Christian, 2 
Bible, Dana X., 195-196 
Bible, Frank, 4 
Bible, Harrison, 2, 3-4 
Bible, Isabel Welch, 1-3, 
12-13, 17 

Bible, Jacob Harvey "Jake," 
1-3, 4, 6-7, 9, 12, 13, 

17, 57 

Bible, John, 4 


Bible, Joshua, 4 
Bible, Loucile J., 336- 
337 

Bible, Mary, 2 
Bible, Moses, 4 
Bible, -Paul, 46 
Bible, Sarah Greer, 4 
Bible, William, 46-47 
Biltz, Norman, 83, 201, 
223-227, 253, 274 
Blasdell, Leonard, 177, 
180-181 

Bonanza Airlines, 292-294, 
295 

Boulder City, Nevada, 250r 
257 

Boulder Dam 
141, 18£r: 

Bowen. 


, Mildred N., 183-185 
ireen, Peter, 177, 180 
Brown, B. Mahlon, 268 
Brown, Edmund G. "Pat," 

195 

Brown, Ernest S., 41-42, 
206, 231-237 

Brown, Merwyn H., 175 
Browne, Howard, 178, 181 
Buck, Kenneth, 113 
Bunce, Sanford, 178, 182 
Bunker, Berkeley L., 90, 
110-111, 202, 203 
Business Men's Association, 
Virginia City, 122-123 


Cahill, Robbins E., 158 
Callahan, James, 177-178, 
181 

Cannon, Howard, 263, 288, 
329 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


145 


Carpenter, Jack, 285-286 
Carville, Edward P. "Ted," 
84, 85, 88-89, 90, 173- 
174, 188-189, 202, 203 
Catholics, 85, 103 
Cavanaugh, Charles, 113 
Cavanaugh, John, 113 
Churchill County High 
School (Fallon), 21-25, 
26-29 

Civil War, U.S., 3, 4-6 


Dickerson, Ona, 113-114 
Dodge, Carl, 27 
Dondero, Furio, 7 
Donovan, Jerry P., Ill 
Douglass, Robert L., 59 
Dressier, William F., 
153-154, 192 



D 

Davie, Orrin, 68-69 
Democrats, 58, 60, 65- 
66, 96, 103, 104, 108- 
114, 213, 214, 217, 272- 
273 

See also: Various indi¬ 
vidual politicians 
Dickerson, Denver, 113 
Dickerson, George, 113 
Dickerson, Harvey, 113, 

268 


Feemster, Silas, 36-37 
Ferguson, Homer, 166-167 
Ferrari, Louis, 190 
Fike, M. Edward "Ed," 331- 
332 

Fine, Stanley, 158 
Fitzgerald, Lincoln, 166- 
167 

Fleischmann, Max C., 

139 

Foley, Roger, 175-176 
Foley, Roger T., 303 


137 - 



146 


Alan Bible 


Forman, William, 234- 
235 

Frost, Harry, 33 
Fuss, Frank, 6-7 


G 

Gallagher, "Doc," 110 
Gallagher, Hugh, 110 
Gallagher, Mervin, 110 
119 


Hart, John, 113 
Hawkins, L. 0., 174 
Hayden, Carl, 187 
Higginbotham, Alfred 
Leslie, 44 
Hoover Dam 

See: Boulder Dam 

Hug, Procter R., Jr., 
174-175, 303 
Hughes,’ Howard R., 274 
Hunter, Harry, 106 


Gambling control, 152- 
158, 171-172 
Gemmill, Paul, 36 
George, Walter, 79 
Georgetown law school, 
52-65, 91, 334 
Geothermal energy, 325- 
326 

Germain, Ray, 113 
Gilmartin, Jack, 119- 
120 

Gladding, James, 110 

Goldsborough 3 USS, 33 
337 

Graham, William 
Grant, Arch^ 

Graunke, 

Gray, ..W^''Hpward > ^ >5, 97, 

' W. G. , 185 
Robert S., 39-40 , 

Griswold, Morley, 189 
Gruening, Ernest, 320-321 
Gubler, Gray, 178, 181 
Guild, Clark J., 114, 136- 
137, 173 


H 


Hale, Frederick, 62 
Halley, John S., Ill, 

234 

Hamilton, Agnes, 102 
Hancock, C. H., 29-30, 

33 

Hancock, Melville D., 29- 
31, 34, 53-54 


Iran, Shah, 
Irish, 109 



L., 107 
ts, Jacob, 196 
epson, Wayne, 178, 181 
Johnson, James W., Jr., 
177, 181 

Johnson, Kenneth F., 153- 
154, 192 

Johnson, Lyndon B., 46, 
270, 272-273, 278-280, 
282-283, 319-320 
Jones, Clifford A., 189 
Jones, Robert, 177 


K 


Kappa Lambda fraternity 

See: Lambda Chi Alpha 
Kefauver, Estes, 275, 280- 
281 

Kelly, John, 108-109 
Kendall, Zeb, 115 
Kennedy, John F., 251-252, 
282, 283-284, 317-318 
Kerr, Robert S., 280 
Kirman, Richard, 188 
Krick, Grover, 178, 181- 
182 

Kuchel, Thomas, 42 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


147 


L 

Lake Mead Recreation Area, 
300-301, 333 

Lamb, Margaret Baird, 35 
Lambda Chi Alpha frater¬ 
nity, 34, 40 
Las Vegas, Nevada, 316, 

317 

See also: Clark 
County 

Lawlor, Glenn J. "Jake," 


McDonald, William, 178 
McEachin, Malcolm, 111, 

185 

McFadden, C. J., 177, 179, 
181 


McIntyre, Fred, 264 
McKay, James, 173 
McKnight, Danny, 48 
McLeod, Wayne "Red," 190 
McNamara, Patrick V. "Pat," 
251-252 


36, 119-120 

Lehman Cave (Nevada), 299- 
300 

Leonard, Franklin, 116 
Leonard, James, 116 
Lewis, Flannery, 107-108 
Ligon, Bill A., 35 
Lloyd, Johnson, 177, 181 
Locklin, J. W., 100 
Long, Huey, 64-65 
Lovelock, Nevada, 1-2, 

6, 9-12, 17-18, 41 
Lynn, David, 60-61, 6 
63 



rick A., 57 , 
65-67, 74, 
i—90, 91, 93, 95, 
r; 97, 197-199, 201- 
203, 213, 214, 217, 219, 
221, 223-225, 226, 231, 
238-248, 261-262 

McCarthy, John, 190 

McCarthy, Joseph, 236-238 

McCloskey, John R., 129- 
130 

McCracken, George E., 22- 
23, 53 

McCracken, Olive Culpitts, 
22 

McDonald, Joseph F., 144, 
301-302 

McDonald, Joseph F., Jr., 
145-146 

McDonald, Robert L., 144- 
145 


Maestretti, Anti 
175, 234 
Maher, WJ 

W. "Molly," 
217, 221, 225, 
55, 258-259 
, Owen, 286 
riani, Silvio "Sam," 

107 

Marshall, George, 175 
Martie, John E. "Doc," 38 
Martin, Joe, 177, 181 
Mashburn, Gray, 124, 128- 
132, 134, 143, 151-152, 

160 

Masons, 85 

Mathews, William T., 131, 
134-136, 141-142, 160, 

234 

Mechling, Margaret DiGrazia, 
216, 217-218 

Mechling, Thomas B., 204- 
206, 216-230 

Merrill, Charles M., 174, 

303 

Methodists, 4 
Michigan, 166-167 
Mills, Laura, 20-21 
Mineral County, Nevada, 129- 
131 

Moody, Lester, 158 
Mooney, Homer, 142 
Moran, Thomas F. "Barney," 
173, 175 



148 


Alan Bible 


Morse, Wayne, 320-323 
Mueller, John V., 83, 
201, 223-226 
Murphy, Matt, 82 


Pittman, Vail, 189 
Priest, Duffy W., 177, 180 
Proxmire, William, 71 
Puccinelli, Leo, 177, 180 


N 


Nash, Frank, 56 
National Education Associa¬ 
tion, 335 

National Wildlife Feder¬ 
ation, 334-335 
Negroes, 61-62, 297-298, 

316 

Newell, Enid Porter, 34- 
35 

Newlands Reclamation Project 
(Nevada), 210-211 
Newton, Herold "Nig," 33 


Oak-We-No, 82-84 
Oats Park school 
19-20 

O'Callaghan 
214-21 
Odd 
0 



ike," 


129 

65, 197- 


il Contest, Nevada 
:ate, 25-27 
Orr, William, 174, 176, 303 
Otten, Lou, 106 


Pahrump, Nevada, 259-260 
Pearson, Drew, 148 
Peek, Ray, 106 
Petersen, Pete C., 82, 

83, 84, 201-202 
Phi Sigma Kappa fraternity, 
34 

Pike, Miles N. "Jack," 84 
Pittman, Key, 57, 58, 59, 
60, 66, 67-68, 73, 74, 76 


Rampton, Calvin, 196 
Republicans, 271 

See also: Various 
individual politicians 
Rice, Gordon, 91-94, 96, 

111 

Richards, Don, 125, 174 
Richards, Paul "Dixie," 35 
Richards, Virginia Edwards, 
174 

Richey, Charles, 333-334 
Rooseve^:,JFranklin D., 65- 
66, 67T: 283-284 


, John R., 139 
11, Charles H. 
41, 231 


40- 


Sagebrush , 44, 47-49 
Salter, Thomas J. D., 175 
Sanford, Harold "Pat," 

23 

Sanford, Johnny, 24 
Sanford, Leslie, 23 
Santini, James, 285-286 
Sawyer, Elizabeth Best, 21 
Sawyer, Harry W., 164 
Sawyer, Harry W., Jr., 21 
Schmidt, Henry, 185-188 
Scrugham, James G., 68- 
69, 76, 77-78 
Semenza, Edwin, 35-36 
Sexton, John F., 177 
Shamberger, Hugh A., 7, 

159 

Shaw, Lawrence T. "Buck," 
38 

Sheehy, Richard, 89-90 
Sledge, Lenard, 42 
Sloan, Mike, 326-327 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


149 


Smith, Chester "Chet," 

248, 249 

Smith, Dale O., 7 
Smith, Hazel, 59 
Smith, Lloyd V., 130 
Smith, Margaret Chase, 

71 

Sourwine, Julien "Jay," 
268, 276-277 
Stoddart, James, 104 
Storey County {Nevada), 
97-108 

See also: Virginia 
City 

Storey County High School 
(Virginia City), 119-122 
Streeter, Jack, 234-235 
Sullivan, Maurice, 189 
Summerfield, Lester D., 

235 

Suns Go Down, 107-108 
Swackhamer, Bruce, 113 
Swackhamer, William, 113 


, 104 
Nevada 


Taber, Haro 
180 

Taho . , v ,. . 

Tannehi^., Otto 
Tax Commission, 
state, 154 
npson, Bruce, 302- 
303 

Thompson, Reuben C., 37-38 
Thurmond, Strom, 322, 324- 
325 

Tobin, Phil, 152 
Trenwith, Edward J., 58, 
59-60 

Truman, Harry S, 315 
Tydings, Millard, 79 


U 


Unionville, Nevada, 13, 

15 

United Air Lines, 256 
University of Nevada, 33- 
51, 334 


V 


Vargas, George, 43 
Verdi, Nevada, 165 
Vietnam War, 320-321 
Virginia City, Nevada, 

94, 97, 98-99, 103, 
107-108, 114-115, 116- 
117, 122-123, 127 
See also: Storey 
County 

Virginia and Truckee rail¬ 
road, 123 


Wait, 


174 
195-196 
(Nevada), 



ers, Richard L., Jr., 

143, 152 
Wedge, Virgil, 111 
Weed, Erma Bendle, 19 
Welch, Ethel, 15 
Welch, Robert, 13 
Welch, Will, 15 
Wenig, Herb, 26 
Wheeler Peak (Nevada) , 
299-300 

White, W. Wallace, 36>. 
Whitehead, Edwin "Tip," 

35 

Whitehead, Gretchen Car¬ 
dinal, 35 

Wier, Jeanne Elizabeth, 

37 

Wild and Scenic Rivers 
Act, U.S., 303-304 
Wilson, Ina Winters, 35 
Wilson, Thomas Cave, 35 
Wilson, Thomas R. C. "Soike, 
35 

Winder, Claude, 29 
Winter Olympics (1960), 

260 

Winters, E. E., 178, 182 
Woodburn, William, Jr., 

Ill 



Adele Clinton 


Wooster, 

24-25 

Wooster, Earl, 24-25 


Y 

Yarborough, Ralph, 324- 
325 

Young, C. Clifton "Cliff," 
40-41, 42, 269, 271- 
272, 277-278 

Young Democrats, 110-114 




