Clarence J. Thornton: 
Entrepreneur 

Agriculture, Business, Politics 


Interviewee: Clarence J. Thornton 
Interviewed: 1982 
Published: 1983 
Interviewer: Mary Ellen Glass 
UNOHP Catalog #105 


Description 

Since World War I Clarence J. Thornton has been a participant and spectator in the life of northwestern Nevada. Born 
in 1898 in San Francisco, he eventually became involved in Nevada ranch work through his fathers employment 
by the Pyramid Land and Livestock Company. His work on ranches near Gerlach, Nevada, and the Spanish ranch 
north of Elko gave him intimate knowledge of Nevada ranch enterprises by the early 1920s. 

His graduation from the University of Nevada’s school of agriculture in 1925 brought him an appointment as 
assistant county agricultural agent for Washoe County. In this capacity he worked closely with the Farm Bureau 
and 4-H Clubs in the county. His duties continued until 1947 when it became apparent that the state fair’s future 
success depended upon its move from Fallon to a larger city such as Reno. In 1953, Thornton became manager of 
the Washoe County Agricultural and Industrial Fair in Reno, active there until his retirement in 1969. After 1953, 
the fair once again assumed the name of Nevada State Fair and has remained in Reno since. 

Mr. Thornton also played a role with the first efforts by the federal government to provide relief programs during 
the early years of the Great Depression. These early tasks were handled through his agricultural extension office at 
the university. They were quickly replaced by more formal New Deal agencies, which he asserts were often under 
the direct political control of the Democratic Party. 

During the Depression Thornton entered the poultry business in Reno through the purchase of the Western 
Hatchery and also participated in a poultry cooperative. In the 1930s, he was also an instructor in the agricultural 
college, an extension worker, and a relief administrator. Thornton was a leader in northern Nevada by the 1950s, 
and in 1963 he was asked to join a reform ticket to run for the Reno City Council along with Claude Hunter, Hugo 
Quilici, and John Chism. 

In his oral history, Clarence Thornton offers important insights about Reno, Washoe County, and the state of 
Nevada between the wars and describes the phenomenal growth period after World War II. He explains the many 
decisions made in reference to state fair locations, the Reno Rodeo origins, and the construction of many public 
service buildings such as the Coliseum (now called the Reno-Sparks Convention Center), city hall, and the Pioneer 
Theater Auditorium in downtown Reno. 



Clarence J. Thornton: 
Entrepreneur 




Clarence J. Thornton: 
Entrepreneur 

Agriculture, Business, Politics 


An Oral History Conducted by Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1983 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1983. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Introduction xi 

Special Introduction by Professor William Rowley xiii 

1. Background and Introduction 1 

2. Early Career and College Days 9 

3. Ranch Life in Northern Nevada and Eastern California 19 

Union Land and Cattle Company 
The Spanish Ranch 
Men’s Work on the Ranch 

4. Work as an Agricultural Extension Agent 39 

Boca Dam and Reservoir 
4-H Clubs 

5. Western Nevada Depression Relief 45 

The Federal Land Bank 


6. The Western Hatchery and the Nevada Poultry Producers 


61 



Clarence J. Thornton 


viii 


7. Fairs, Rodeos, and Races 67 

Origins of the State Fair: The Fallon Years 
The State Fair Moves to Reno 
Races and Rodeos 
A Look Backward 

8. Civic Affairs and Political Service 91 

Early Political Interests 
The “Young Turks” 

Two Terms on the Reno City Council 

9. Summary, With Some Notes About My Family 111 

Original Index: For Reference Only 117 



Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Clarence J. Thornton 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Introduction 


Clarence Joyce Thornton is a California 
native, born in 1898. Working on ranches in 
northern Nevada to finance his education at 
the University of Nevada, he graduated in 
1926. He continued his career in the field of 
agriculture as an agricultural extension agent, 
an instructor at the University’s College of 
Agriculture, in charge of Depression relief 
(at one time part of the Extension Services 
activities), the owner of a poultry hatchery, 
and worker in a poultry cooperative. He was 
also involved in various civic affairs and in 
politics. He served two terms on the Reno 
City Council. 

Mr. Thornton’s most interesting and 
longest-lasting activities, however, were 
in the organizing and holding of state and 
county fairs. Every fair-goer in western 
Nevada for more than twenty years was the 
beneficiary of Clarence Thornton’s work, 
diligence, and expertise. 

Dr. William Rowley’s introduction to this 
oral history memoir expands and evaluates 


some of Mr. Thornton’s roles in Nevada 
agribusiness and agriculture’s celebrations. 

When invited to participate in the 
Oral History Program, Clarence Thornton 
accepted readily. He was a generous, involved, 
hospitable chronicler of his many activities 
in eleven taping sessions between January 
and March, 1982, all at his Reno home. Mr. 
Thornton’s review of his memoir resulted in 
only a few minor deletions and clarifications, 
without significant changes in language. 
A generous donation of manuscripts and 
memorabilia supplements the oral history 
at the University of Nevada Reno Library. 

The Oral History Program of the 
University of Nevada Reno Library preserves 
the past and the present for future research 
by tape recording the recollections of people 
who have been important to the development 
of Nevada and the West. Resulting transcripts 
and supporting materials are deposited in 
the Special Collections departments of the 
University Libraries at Reno and Las Vegas. 



Clarence J. Thornton 


xii 


Clarence Thornton has generously donated 
the literary rights in his oral history to the 
University of Nevada and has designated the 
volume as open for research. 

Mary Ellen Glass 
University of Nevada Reno 
1983 



Special Introduction 


Since World War I Clarence J. Thornton 
was a participant and spectator in the life of 
northwestern Nevada. Born in 1898 in San 
Francisco, he eventually became involved 
in Nevada ranch work through his fathers 
employment by the Pyramid Land and 
Livestock Company His work on ranches 
near Gerlach, Nevada and the Spanish ranch 
north of Elko gave him intimate knowledge 
of Nevada ranch enterprises by the early 
1920s. His graduation from the university 
of Nevada’s school of agriculture in 1925 
brought him an appointment as assistant 
county agricultural agent for Washoe County. 
In this capacity he worked closely with the 
Farm Bureau and 4-H Clubs in the county. 
These connections made him a good choice 
to manage the Nevada State Fair in Fallon 
beginning in 1927. His duties continued until 
1947 when it became apparent that the fair’s 
future success depended upon its move to a 
larger city such as Reno. In 1953, Thornton 
became manager of the Washoe County 
Agricultural and Industrial Fair in Reno, 
active there until his retirement in 1969. After 


1953, the fair once again assumed the name 
of Nevada State Fair and remained in Reno. 

Mr. Thornton in addition to being 
prominent in fair and agricultural circles 
played a role with the first efforts by the 
federal government to provide relief programs 
during the early years of the Great Depression. 
These early tasks were handled through his 
agricultural extension office at the university. 
They were quickly replaced by more formal 
New Deal agencies, which he asserts were 
oftentimes under the direct political control of 
the Democratic party. During the Depression 
Thornton entered the poultry business in 
Reno through the purchase of the Western 
Hatchery and also participated in a poultry 
cooperative. At one time in the 1930s, 
Thornton’s multifaceted abilities made him 
an instructor in the agricultural college, an 
extension worker, a relief administrator, 
owner of a poultry business, and director of a 
poultry cooperative. This was, needless to say, 
a busy life that made him a leader in northern 
Nevada by the 1950s. In 1963 he was asked to 
join a reform ticket to run for the Reno City 



XIV 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Council along with Claude Hunter, Hugo 
Quilici, and John Chism. 

Clarence Thornton’s observations on Reno 
and Washoe County and the state of Nevada 
between the wars and of the phenomenal 
growth period after World War II offer 
important insights about these years of growth 
and change. He was a businessman, a public 
employee, and community volunteer. Like 
any active and alert American in a far western 
state he was also atuned to the political events 
and opportunities presented to him. His 
remarks in this oral history serve to guide 
local historians through the many decisions 
made in reference to state fair locations, the 
Reno Rodeo origins, and the construction 
of many of the public service buildings such 
as the Coliseum, city hall, and the Pioneer 
Theater Auditorium in downtown Reno. The 
Oral History Program at the University of 
Nevada Reno can be proud to add this volume 
to its extensive collection. 

William D. Rowley 
Associate Professor of History 
1983 



1 


Background and Introduction 


I, Clarence J. Thornton, was born on 
March 12, 1898, in the city of San Francisco, 
California. 

Michael Thornton, my grandfather, 
was born in County Cork, Ireland, in 1839, 
and died in Merced, California, in nineteen 
hundred and twenty-four. He came to the 
area about one year before the end of the Civil 
War, and was conscripted into the Army—no 
questions were asked, but he was not a citizen 
of the United States at that time. 

My grandmother was Ellen Hamlon 
Thornton, born in Ireland, 1848, died in 1900, 
Merced, California. 

My father, Michael Thornton, was born 
in Merced County, California, August, 1869, 
and he died in Reno, Nevada in 1932, at the 
age of sixty-three years. He was a livestock 
foreman for large cattle companies most of 
his life in Nevada. He came to Nevada from 
Merced in 1906. 

My father married Miss Margaret Joyce, 
my mother, in 1897. She came from Ireland, 
and was born on the high seas. She died in San 
Francisco, California in 1900, when I was two 


years old. I was an only child. Apparently, the 
Joyce family settled in Massachusetts before 
movin’ to the West. 

My grandfather and grandmother settled 
in Merced County, California. He was a grain 
farmer, and the family consisted of ten boys 
and three girls. 

My grandfather’s brother, John William 
Thornton, came on the same boat as Michael 
Thornton from Ireland, at the same time. 
He also settled in Merced County and was a 
grain farmer. He and his wife raised twelve 
children. William Thornton also died in 
Merced County, California. 

He was also conscripted into the Northern 
Army, before he was a citizen of the United 
States. I can remember him tellin’ about, 
he walked off the gang plank, off the ship, 
down here at the Bay Area, and right at the 
end of the ship they had this table and the 
conscription outfit, and you were in the Army, 
right there. He served about a year before the 
Civil War was over. They didn’t know there 
was a civil war going on. But they were in 
the service. [Chuckling] I can mention, when 



2 


Clarence J. Thornton 


my wife tried to, years later, tried to get their 
military record for that time that they were in 
the service, that there’s no records available. 
We could never find any, in the deal. 

After my mother’s death, I lived with my 
grandmother Joyce, at 1020 Oak Street, in 
San Francisco, California, and then moved 
to my father’s sister’s, on a ranch in Merced 
County, California. This ranch was about five 
miles southeast of Merced, near a settlement 
known as Geneva, now known as Planada, 
California. At that time, this section was all 
dry grain farming, dependent entirely upon 
rain. Years later, when they built a Merced 
Irrigation District and diverted water from 
the Merced river, and it became one of the 
most important parts of California fruit, 
especially Planada figs. 

I went to the first grade in school in 
Geneva, and then to the third grade at a school 
near Merced Lake, for part of a year and then 
to grammar school in Richmond, California 
[laughs], and then to grammar school in 
Stockton, California. By this time, I was in the 
fifth grade, going to school in Merced, from 
which I graduated in 1915. 

The great San Francisco earthquake of 
April, [1906] At that time I was going to 
grammar school in Geneva, or Planada. 
The morning of the earthquake at breakfast, 
my grandfather was complaining, when he 
milked the cow, she kicked over the milk 
bucket, and he gave the cow a good whack 
with the milk stool. My Aunt Kate, and Aunt 
Maggie were sleeping in the bed on the ranch 
at the same time, and Aunt Kate, the youngest 
one, accused Maggie, her older sister, of 
kicking her out of bed onto the floor. 

Now the distance from Merced to 
San Francisco is about 100 miles, with no 
communication at that time. The trains did 
not run, for a week the sky was very cloudy, 
and it was a week before we knew what had 


happened to San Francisco, causing the milk 
pail to tip over, and my aunt to fall out of bed. 
[Chuckling] She was really mad. [Laughs] Her 
sister kicking her out of bed. 

I went from Merced, California, May, 
1914, to Constantia, California, which is 
located about seven miles south of Doyle, 
California, on the Western Pacific Railroad. I 
worked in the hayfields from May till August, 
at two dollars per day, before returnin’ to 
Merced, California. Also, the Mt. Lassen 
volcano, near Susanville, erupted that year, 
and there was considerable worry at the 
ranch, which was about forty miles from the 
volcano, that there’d be fire from the ashes out 
there. It’s never erupted since, I don’t think. 
Over the hayfields, it was hot ashes, all right, 
cornin’ down there. 

Mary Ellen Glass: What do you remember 
about that? 

Well, I remember we were very concerned 
about fires—you could see it, of course, but 
we were, oh, seventy miles away, maybe fifty 
instead of seventy. And all of the people in that 
country were concerned about fire from the 
ashes in those fields—in those hayfields—in 
the summertime. But nothing caught on fire 
in that area. 

My father was ranch foreman of the ranch 
at Constantia, which was part of the Pyramid 
Land and Livestock Company. This company 
was put together by Pat [Patrick L.] Flanigan, 
of Reno, Nevada, and later taken over by 
the Reno National Bank. Pat Flanigan also 
built what is in Reno today as the Flanigan 
Warehouse, and the livestock yards down 
there, that were located on the northwest 
corner of Wells and Fourth Street. 

The Pyramid Land and Livestock Company 
had the main office at Constantia, California. 
The company also owned the Winnemucca 



Background and Introduction 


3 


ranch, the Milk ranch, Hardscrabble ranch, 
the Big Canyon ranch, the Cottonwood ranch, 
Paiute ranch, and the Fish Springs ranch. 

The Fish Springs ranch, during the flu 
epidemic in World War I, was used by the 
company as a sanitorium or hospital. They 
had a large number of Basques working for 
them who got flu on the range, and theyd 
bring ’em into Fish Springs ranch. And they 
had registered nurses there, and the doctor 
came occasionally to check up; it was a 
hospital, I guess. It was quarantine for the 
rest of us there. 

All of the ranches were close to Fort Sage 
mountain and Tule mountain. The company 
had about 30,000 head of sheep, 1,800 head 
of cattle. Part of the cattle wintered on a range 
where Herlong is now located, the ammunition 
depot. They owned or leased range land all the 
way from Weber Lake, California and Quincy, 
to the lava beds in Jungo, Nevada, which was 
on the Western Pacific Railroad between 
Gerlach and Winnemucca, Nevada. 

Robert C. Turritin was general manager 
of the Pyramid Land and Livestock Company. 
He had been a banker in Reno, and also 
previously mayor of Reno, Nevada. My father, 
Michael, was superintendent of the ranches, 
and the company was broken up after World 
War I, about 1920, due to the poor price of 
sheep and cattle. 

I returned to Constantia, in the spring of 
1915, working on the Constantia ranch until 
November, 1915. In November of 1915, my 
friend, Robert Nance, of Merced, California 
and I left and went to the Panama Pacific 
International Exposition in San Francisco. I 
never returned to Merced. 

In January, 1916, I went to work for an 
automobile mechanic [chuckle] in Stockton, 
California, at no salary, wanted to be an 
automobile mechanic at that time, I thought. 
In April, 1916, I gave up on the automobile 


business and returned to work on the 
Constantia ranch. 

In January, 1917, I entered Heald’s 
Business College in Reno, Nevada, located 
on the southeast corner of East Second Street 
and Center Street at that time. 

In May of 1917,1 returned to Constantia 
and went to work in the main office in charge 
of the company’s commissary under Frank 
“Bud” Bartlett, the head bookkeeper. I stayed 
on this work until I was voluntarily drafted. 
That’s what they—they were nice to us, you 
know, they told us, “voluntarily drafted.” They 
just drafted you. To a certain extent it was 
voluntary because at that particular time, they 
weren’t equipped to take in a lot of soldiers, 
and even though some of us might have gone 
early, they wouldn’t take us, till they got their 
building and military equipment ready. That 
would be in October, 1918. 

The war was over on [November] 11,1918, 
and we were honorably discharged just before 
Christmas. After about sixty days of service— 
this service was all in Lincoln Hall [chuckling] 
and the wooden barracks at the University 
of Nevada, which were located directly 
behind Lincoln Hall. It was divided into two 
sections—it was called the SATC—Student 
Army Training Corps—there was section A 
and section B. Section A was supposedly the 
ones with high school education and goin’ to 
the University, and section B was the rest of us, 
that was just workin’. Do you remember those 
old barracks? They were back there—only tore 
’em down a few years ago. 

Because I was able to type, I was put to 
work typing Army discharges, including my 
own, which, under the question “Character,” 
I gave myself an “excellent” character rating 
[laughs]. 

After leaving the Army, I returned to 
my job at the commissary at Constantia. In 
World War I, I and any person drafted into 



4 


Clarence J. Thornton 


the Army and discharged, when discharged, 
were promised their old jobs back. There was 
no question, you just went back to where you 
were. 

A flu epidemic was on at that time. We 
had to wear face masks practically the whole 
sixty days we were in service. And where 
Nye Hall is now located, was a cemetery, and 
every night after midnight there was burials 
over there. We never knew who they were 
buryin’ (we could see ’em). The room in the 
basement of the Frandsen building (which is 
the Frandsen building now), in the northwest 
corner in the basement, was a hospital. And 
as these men in the service got the flu or one 
thing or another, we took them over there to 
that hospital, what it was. Sometimes they 
came back and sometimes they didn’t. It was 
all set up over there, down there. Afterwards, 
I made ice cream down in there (Frandsen 
Humanities), when in college. 

In 1917, a group of people financed by the 
First National Bank of San Francisco, formed 
the company known as the Nevada-California 
Land and Livestock Company, and purchased 
the Smoke Creek operations from John Poco, 
Pete Poco, and Johnny Duke, for $750,000. 
This increased the sheep operations when it 
was combined with the Pyramid Land and 
Livestock Company, to about 65,000 head of 
sheep. No cattle were involved in the Smoke 
Creek deal. 

This purchase included the lower Smoke 
Creek ranch, and the Upper Smoke Creek 
ranch; as a headquarters, it was Shinn ranch, 
Painter’s Flat, Clark’s Valley, and rangeland 
as far north as Madeline, California. Robert 
C. Turritin, former banker and mayor of 
Reno, was the general manager of the two 
companies, and the main office of both 
companies were at Constantia, California. 

In the summer of 1917 and 1918,1 went 
along as a shepherd of sheep to market. The 


first train of lambs we loaded near Quincy, 
California and Portola, and we sold when 
we unloaded at Salt Lake. The second train 
consisted of fifty double-deck cars, 290 lambs 
per car. This train loaded near Quincy, Spring 
Garden, Portola, and Wendell, California. It 
went on to Kirkland, Illinois, about sixty miles 
west of Chicago, Illinois. 

I stayed in Kirkland till the sheep were 
all sold, in the Chicago stockyards. Then I 
went into Chicago and stayed at the Kaiserhof 
Hotel. The name of this hotel was changed 
either durin’ World War I, or right after 
the War was ended. The boarding house 
in Kirkland is the only place I’ve ever been 
served my dessert first with the meal. Pie, 
and cake, you know, was first. I never had it 
again—your pie, your cake, your pudding— 
was first. It was kind of a livestockman’s 
boarding house, you know. 

* * * * * 

Well, maybe that’s a good place to go back and 
talk a little bit more about your early life. You 
didn’t tell me anything about your schools. 
What teachers you liked, and how you made 
friends with the other kids —. 

Oh, gosh, I don’t know. You see, bein’ a 
loner, only child, livin’ with an aunt, I just, I 
guess you might say, I just kinda wandered 
through school, [chuckles] through grammar 
school, in the deal. 

One time I was afraid I wasn’t goin’ to 
graduate—I got the measles [laughs] my 
senior year. Today measles are not that serious, 
but at that time, you lost a lot of school. But 
the schools I went to, like in Planada, I don’t 
remember who the teachers were there, or 
Geneva (whichever you want to call it). 

Then I went from there to that Lake 
school, Merced Lake, and I don’t remember 



Background and Introduction 


5 


who the teachers were there, at all. And then I 
went from there to Richmond, and Richmond 
at that time, was just becomin’ a city. It was 
founded by the Standard Oil. I had an aunt 
there, and they were just startin’ to put the 
place together and sell lots. In fact, my father 
bought a lot down there in Richmond when 
they were sellin them, and you paid down 
five dollars a month on it, the lot. After he’d 
had it a year or two and made his payments, 
went down there and located the lot, it was 
out in the ocean. [Chuckling] Well, they were 
buildin’ a town, that was what they—. 

From there I went to Merced, and I don’t 
have any good feelings or any bad feelings or 
anything about those teachers there, I just got 
through school in the deal. If I ever had any 
good feelin about any teacher, it was Miss 
Zimmerman who taught English. And when 
you took English from Miss Zimmerman, you 
learned English [chuckling], pure English. 
You was really learnin’ English. 

You mentioned the San Francisco earthquake — 
you were just eight years old then. Do you have 
any other vivid memories about it, besides this 
fight between your aunts? 

Well, of course, I remember the area, in 
Planada area, which was about 100 miles 
away. And there was no trains runnin’, 
there was no news at that time, the sky was 
completely cloudy for a week before we ever 
heard that there’d been an earthquake in San 
Francisco, California. 

What about the other young people around 
there? 

Oh, I was out on a ranch, that was it. With 
my two aunts. One of ’em got kicked out of 
bed, my grandfather was milkin’ the cow Now 
this actually happened. It happened over 100 


miles away, it tipped over a milk bucket. That 
was quite a shake, I’ll tell you. 

You see, you didn’t have—there was no 
conversation, nothin’. You didn’t know what 
happened. Just quiet, no trains, no more— 
clouds and all— ‘course the clouds were 
smoke, but we didn’t know that. 

What an isolated place to be. 

Yeah, on this ranch, you didn’t have any 
radio or any TV, or any telephone, and you 
didn’t get any mail because there was no 
trains. That’s just the way it was. 

Well, I was very interested in the Flanigan 
livestock operation too. Pat Flanigan was really 
one of our leading livestock people. 

Yeah, he was, yes, that’s right. 

I’d be interested in having you tell me what he 
was like. 

I never knew him. 

What did your father say about him? 

Aw, nothing. [Laughs] I’d actually never 
heard much about Pat Flanigan, as well as I 
knew his son Paul, and his brother—I was 
tryin’ to think of his brother’s name the 
other day, I think it was John. He lived up 
till just a few years ago. And then they had a 
sister which you’re probably aware of, Helen 
Flanigan. 

But he was quite a key to the city of Reno, 
Pat Flanigan was, at one time. He was in 
business, and in politics—. See, that Pyramid 
Land and Livestock Company was quite a 
good company, but Pat, I guess, was a little 
reckless in his expansion, or whatever you call 
it, or whatever happened to him. 



6 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Your father was so busy in these livestock 
operations —what sort of a man was he? 

He was about the size of Bill, my son, 
about six foot. I’m the short one [chuckles; 
well, my grandfather was short too. He was 
about five-foot-two, a little Irishman. 

On the other side, my father of course, 
was a livestock man, rode horses and all that. 
Along 1917, Bob Turritin had him come into 
town and bought him a Model T pickup, 
Ford pickup, just before Christmas. And of 
course, he didn’t know how to drive a car, 
but—we knew nothing about it. But about 
two weeks after Christmas, Turritin went to 
San Francisco on his vacation—Christmas 
vacation—and he came in to the bookkeeper 
and he says, “Where’s Mike?” 

And the bookkeeper said, “Well, I don’t 
know. He went to town with you before 
Christmas, we haven’t seen him since.” 

So he bought him this truck. And he 
started out of Reno, and it was snowin’, and 
he went out by Pyramid Lake, out by the 
Winnemucca ranch, and got stuck—the 
bearings burned out in the car. And he was 
also, besides the ranch foreman, a blacksmith. 
So they took the engine apart and overhauled 
it. And they got goin’. Then they went around 
to Big Canyon ranch, which is up there where 
Joe Capurro is now. There was a lot of ice and 
snow on the ground, and as he was goin down 
to the shed to put the car in—you had three 
pedals on those Fords you know; one was 
a brake, reverse, and the gear. He was goin’ 
down there, and he made a mistake and put 
his foot on the low instead of the brake, and 
he hit a post and knocked the radiator off the 
car. It was red hot, you know, just exploded 
like a locomotive. So they put that together. 
He had a cowboy with him by the name of 
Edward Hardy. 


Then they went on from there, and they 
got out in Herlong area, and there was quite 
a few settlers out there, and they got stuck in 
a mudhole, out there. So he went over to one 
of the homesteaders to get a team to pull him 
out. The guy came over with a team, and they 
put a chain on the Ford, and they pulled it 
out—it was gettin’ dark. So my dad thought 
he’d help the situation out by turnin’ the lights 
on in the Ford, and the team ran away with 
the Ford. With him in it. [Chuckle] 

He was twenty-one days from Reno to 
Constantia—it took him three weeks on that 
trip. [Laughs] Turritin just about had a fit. 
You know, three weeks—nobody sees my dad. 
They had no idea where he was. 

The old days of get out and get under. Well, he 
was really a resourceful person then, wasn’t he? 

Well, he had been a blacksmith too. He 
was a mechanic too, you know. 

Three weeks! What does it take now, an hour 
and a half? 

To go to Constantia? About an hour. 
Well, he went around, you see-why, in the 
wintertime, there was deep snow around 
by Pyramid Lake, I don’t know if you know 
where Big Canyon is or not, do you? It’s in 
the north end of—northeast end of Tule 
mountain if you know where Tule mountain 
is, that’s the big mountain out by Pyramid. It’s 
over there. And the company owned those 
ranches along in there, but he was twenty-one 
days [chuckling] out at the—. Now, anything 
else I can tell you? 

Well, I just wondered about what sort of person 
he was. 



Background and Introduction 


7 


Well, without any discredit to him, he—which 
is no discredit, it was a kind of a credit— 
his normal procedure in getting up in the 
mornin’ and goin to work—course at that 
time, those livestock men all wore the long, 
heavy, underwear. Get up, put his feet on the 
floor, reach over and get a bottle of whiskey 
and take a big swallow of whiskey, and then 
reach over and get his pipe, put tobacco in it, 
light his pipe, and then dress. Then go in for 
breakfast. That was a morning routine. Yeah, 
that was livestock people. 

Well, it was habits, some, you know. He 
originally, at one time in his livestock career, 
decided to go into business for himself, at a 
place that you call Midas now, but it was Gold 
Circle then. It was when Gold Circle first was 
discovered, which is out of Golconda. So he 
quit the livestock business and went up there 
and opened a bar, at Midas. I wasn’t in this 
country at that time, but it didn’t last too 
long. The people that knew him said he was 
too generous. [Chuckle] He gave his business 
away out there. 

Tell me about this automobile mechanic that 
you were going to learn about cars from. That 
was a really pioneering effort. 

Oh, yeah, that’s quite the—. His name 
was Patton, Charlie Patton, and he had a 
shop in Stockton. At that time, you had these 
automobile road races that ran from Los 
Angeles to San Francisco over the Tehachipis 
and all that, and he was one of the people that 
would enter into those races, and I had met 
him in Merced. 

And of course, at that time automobiles 
were the thing like aviation is now, or 
something else, but I decided I wanted to learn 
to drive a car, how to fix a car, and I went and 
talked to him, and I worked there about four 


months, just whatever they gave me to do. He 
never paid me anything—he didn’t have that 
big a business. That was in Stockton, and then 
I went back to Constantia after that. That took 
care of the automobile. I found it interesting 
to see what made ’em run, in the deal. 




2 

Early Career and College Days 


The Nevada-California Land and 
Livestock Company, Smoke Creek, which it 
was commonly known as, went out of business 
at about the same time as the Pyramid Land 
and Livestock, and for the same reasons— 
poor livestock prices. 

After gettin out of the Army in World War 
I, I worked at the Pyramid Land and Livestock 
commissary until the spring of 1919. During 
the fall of 1918, a young man by the name of 
Everett W. Sweezy, came to Constantia to live. 
His father was the junior vice president of the 
First National Bank of New York, which was 
a bank that did practically nothing but large, 
international loans. It was owned, I guess, 
practically all by a man by the name of George 
Baker in there at that time. Everett and I became 
very good friends in that spring of 1919. 

A veteran of World War I came to 
Constantia, his name was Paul Eaton. Paul 
Eaton was from Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
and had been a student at the University 
of Michigan, before going into the military 
service. He became a member in aviation 
of the Yale Escalon, one of the first aviation 


divisions to go to France, along with President 
[Theodore] Teddy Roosevelts youngest son, 
Quentin Roosevelt. 

Quentin was a little more reckless than 
the rest of ’em, according to Paul, and they 
had been out one day on their regular flight, 
and when they came back, the commander 
discharged the unit, but Quentin went Out 
on his own, and he was shot down by the 
Germans and killed. And even at that, the 
Germans, while they were at war with us, they 
thought so much of Teddy Roosevelt, that 
they gave his son a military funeral, behind 
the lines. 

Paul Eaton also was shot down, but 
not killed. He was shot on landing with a 
pistol. The bullet lodged in his back, and the 
Germans were short of anesthetic, so they just 
left the bullet in his back till it festered. He had 
a picture of himself sittin’ on the table, with 
the doctors removin’ the bullet. He was held 
a prisoner of World War I for about a year— 
showed us that picture sittin’ there— they 
were out of anesthetic, it was just—. 



10 


Clarence J. Thornton 


For example, one day we drove ten hours, 
and got from Columbus, Nebraska, to Kearny, 
Nebraska, a distance of fifty miles. The roads 
were a solid mass of mud. 

From Omaha, I came home on a train. 
Paul Eaton went on a train—I have never seen 
Paul Eaton since that time. We did exchange 
one letter about ten years ago. Everett Sweezy 
shipped the Buick by train to New York. (I’ll 
have more about Sweezy later, because I went 
to work for him later.) 

I returned to Constantia and worked 
in the hayfields until the fall of 1919, when 
I entered the College of Agriculture at the 
University of Nevada. 

* * * * * 

I had never been to high school, so I had 
to enter at the age of twenty-one, as a special 
student, which required havin’ three character 
letters of recommendation from prominent 
people. The University of Nevada had about 
250 students then, and some of them were 
just gettin’ started after World [War] I, or 
had come back from the War to finish their 
education. So my age fit into this group very 
well. 

Special students could only attend for a 
two-year period, and with no degree, and 
then you had to drop out, but could come 
back in one year, if their attendance had been 
satisfactory, which I did. 

I would have to give credit to a person by 
the name of George “Molly” Malone, who I 
met while we both worked at Constantia for 
the Pyramid Land and Livestock. He was a 
surveyor, and responsible for me even goin’ 
to college. He was in college at that time, and 
in later years, became one of our United States 
Senators from Nevada. (Later on in years, 
when he ran for the United States Senate 
the first time against Key Pittman, he didn’t 


win the election. The second time he ran, I 
handled his campaign—I was his campaign 
manager in northern Nevada—and he lost 
that election to Pat [Patrick A.] McCarran. 
The third time he ran, [chuckling] due to the 
Carville-McCarran situation, he got elected.) 

Oh, that guy could fight—he would have 
been a champion boxer. One day, gettin’ 
back to—a man named Jack Dempsey, who 
was barnstorming at that time and hadn’t 
become as popular, had signed up to put on an 
exhibition fight down here on Evans Avenue 
and Commercial Row. And whoever was gonna 
fight, backed out, and the promoters were goin 
up to the University to find somebody to fight 
Dempsey, this man Dempsey. And they ran 
into Malone, and he was on his way down 
to fight Dempsey. On the way down, he ran 
into the football coach, and told the football 
coach where he was agoin, and he said, “No, 
you’re not goin’ down there— you’ll lose all 
your eligibility.” He was a football player, and 
a baseball player, too. So he never did—he 
told me years later, that he and Dempsey used 
to always talk about what’d’ve happened, if 
they’d had that fight. He had a funny theory 
on fightin—not funny—. He said, “If you’re 
gonna go down, go down where you are. Don’t 
go down backin’ up. You just stand there,” he 
said, “take it or go ahead, but don’t go back.” 
[Chuckle] Yeah, he was quite a fighter. 

I liked Malone very much, and I think he 
was a very good senator. He had one terrific 
weakness, and his wife also inherited—that 
was money. [Chuckle] He never believed that 
money was a necessity he just thought it was 
something to use for a purpose. He never 
believed in acquiring any. We didn’t win the 
second election, but we won the third one. 
[Chuckling] 

Well, I think if I’m gonna talk about the 
college career, I just as well start talking on 



Early Career and College Days 


11 


how I got to college. [Chuckle] Not having 
any high school education, and working on 
ranches at a dollar a day, it was a little difficult 
to accumulate enough money to get to college. 
However, as a sideline, I was invited to take 
part in a poker and crap game. [Chuckling] 
And this added into my salary for the first 
year, in this gambling situation (which was 
ranch gambling—wasn’t legalized gambling 
at all)—generally done with a candle on the 
top of a tomato can with a wooden table with 
a blanket over the top of it, and primarily 
consisted of poker games, in which I was very 
fortunate in the first year and wound up with 
about twelve hundred dollars. 

The man who helped me out, told me 
when I started, he says, “You’ll probably win 
for the first year.” He had been a professional 
gambler in Reno. Gambling was closed at that 
time. And he says, “You go out and your luck 
will probably change,” and that’s about the 
way it turned out. 

I saved that twelve hundred dollars 
with my thirty dollars a month, and went to 
the University. I had no difficulty with the 
agriculture classes [at the] University outside 
the first six weeks. Being a special student, I 
was allowed to pick the courses I wanted to 
take, and I registered for fifteen hours. 

The first report on my grades for the 
first six weeks, I was delinquent in twelve of 
the fifteen hours to start with, having never 
had to study for four or five years. And 
that’s the last delinquency I ever had in my 
college career. It was the first six weeks. The 
agriculture situation, as I say, I had worked 
on ranches, and was acquainted with the 
ranching situation. The technical part of it I 
had to learn from scratch. 

I majored primarily in animal husbandry, 
and Professor [Frederick] Wilson was the 
animal husbandry professor at that time. 
Charles Knight was the dean of the College 


of Agriculture my first two years that I went 
to the University, and Verner E. Scott was in 
charge of the dairy. The actual dairy classes we 
took for laboratory were conducted where the 
present College of Agriculture is now located. 
That was their agricultural farm, right down 
at the bottom of Evans Avenue. 

The first semester, I lived in the Butler 
Apartments on North Center Street, which 
are still there at this time; and then the second 
semester, I started out livin in Lincoln Hall. 
I believe, at that time, you paid about forty- 
five dollars a month for board and room. As I 
recall it, twenty-seven dollars and fifty cents a 
month was for the dining room, and the rest 
was for the room in the hall over there. Then 
I joined a fraternity during that semester, and 
moved in there, and the board and room there 
was forty-five dollars a month. At that time, 
it included your member ship. 

I had no particular problems with the 
College of Agriculture, after—as stated 
above—my first six weeks. At the end of two 
years, which was the expiration of a “special 
student,” in which I classified, I left the College 
of Agriculture and went to the Spanish ranch 
in northern Elko County to work. 

You really did want your education a lot, didn’t 
you ? 

Well, I did, yes. It was tough, too. The 
roughest things I got into in the education was 
the courses I picked, not knowin what I would 
get into. I signed myself up in trigonometry, 
because I needed a three-hour course at a 
certain time and that was just right. And you 
ask your fraternity brothers about this course, 
“Oh, yeah, that’s a dandy course—.’’Three 
hours, and it was just the right time. So I 
found myself takin’ trigonometry with no 
background. [Laughing] I managed to get 
through it all right. 



12 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Some of the courses were a little outside of 
the College of Agriculture, in the deal. Wound 
up with chemistry, for instance. You found 
yourself takin the same chemistry that the 
doctors took for three years, [whether] you 
were gonna be a fireman or you were gonna 
be a doctor. 

The professors at the University of Nevada 
were all fine; if you wanted to get through 
school, they would help you day and night, 
and it was up to you. If you found out you 
really wanted to get an education, and you 
had a problem, you could go talk to ’em. And 
I never had one of ’em ever turn me down, or 
act like he was disgusted with me for askin’ 
him questions, or—. I did get tangled up 
with Dr. Hartman in physics, Dr. Frandsen 
in zoology. They were complicated courses, 
and they spent a lot of time helpin’ me get 
[chuckling] through college. 

Well, those two particularly helped just an 
awful lot to get through college. 

Oh yes. I don’t recall that they ever, you 
know, showed like maybe they want to go 
home to eat or [laughing]—. Gosh, you have 
to ask a lot of questions, when you have no 
background. 

I managed to do pretty well in all my 
courses that time, until I signed up in a course 
in Spanish. And I anticipated no problem, 
of course, in Spanish, because I had a rough 
background in the Basque language, and had 
more or less made my living with it for a couple 
years at Constantia, signing up the Basques 
who came from the Pyrenees, both French or 
Spanish, and also register them for the draft in 
World War I. However, when I took my course 
in Spanish, I got a failing grade in the finals. 
[Chuckle] And I went up and talked to the 
professor—incidentally, the professor who was 
teaching Spanish at that time was mainly—his 


main interest in life was bees; he had beehives 
all over the valley. And I talked to him about 
my background in the thing, and he said, “Well, 
the problem is that you can talk the Basque 
language as a language—you don’t talk the real 
(what did he call it?), the Castillian Spanish.” 
So he gave me another examination, and he 
and I came to an understanding [chuckling], 
and he gave me a passing grade in it. 

In my first time at the University, I 
think it’s worthwhile mentioning that the 
athletic department at that time, as far as 
I can recall, consisted of one man, and his 
name was Courtwright, and he was the 
football coach. He coached football, and he 
coached basketball, and he was the physical 
trainer also. And one of the athletes that I 
had happened to help along at that time was 
a man named Bradshaw. He was one of the 
famous—. Well, he was new here at that time, 
but he was one of my patients that I took care 
of, his rubdown and stuff like that, in the deal. 

When I came back to school the second 
time, of course, they had a more complicated 
athletic department. The previous coach, 
Courtwright, had left here by that time, 
and the new coach under which the athletic 
department football was run, was Charlie Erb, 
who had been a quarterback of the famous 
California “wonder team” of the twenties, in 
there. He never used to refer to himself as a “ 
wonder quarterback,” he always used to just 
tell me, “All I did was call the signals and get 
out of the way.” [Chuckle] 

One of the good acquaintances I made 
durin his career there, and I followed through 
life after, was a man named [Harold] “Brick” 
Muller. Brick Muller was a famous football 
player at the University of California, and he 
was also an end on that “wonder” football 
team in the 1920s and eventually a famous 
doctor down in California. He and I became 



Early Career and College Days 


13 


quite well acquainted over the years—he’s 
dead now but—my roommate and he were 
quite pals, a fellow named Bill Martin. Of 
course, Bill was goin’ to the University of 
Nevada and lives in San Jose, California now 

I got interested in the athletic department 
and all stages of it. By that time, [John E.] 
“Doc” Martie was here coachin’ basketball, 
J. E. Martie. He had previously been coach 
at Elko of the basketball team. And he came 
here, I believe, as basketball coach and head of 
the physical education department, and also 
became quite successful as a basketball coach. 

And the first time that I was here in 
school, the University of Nevada football 
team was the first team to go to the Hawaiian 
Islands from the States to play football. And 
my roommate was Bill Martin. He was quite 
a popular player on the team, and he had the 
job of doin’ the janitor work at the chemistry 
building at the University. And he turned 
that job over to me while he was gone on this 
football tour over at the Islands, and playin’ 
there. And when he came back, I just kept on 
doin’ that work, and I became the part-time 
janitor at the chemistry building at that time, 
and what is now the Mackay School of Mines. 

I kept an interest up in the athletics, and 
eventually became athletic manager, which 
paid me about the same salary as the janitor 
work—around twenty-five to thirty dollars 
a month. 

The man who was ahead of me on the 
athletic department at that time was a man 
named Barney Keaten, and he was runnin’ the 
athletic department and takin’ engineering, 
and he was an honor student, too. He got too 
much of a burden, and I wound up as the 
graduate athletic manager, which was run 
and financed at that time, by the student body. 
The University paid a salary of twenty-five 
dollars a month, and you got to make all the 
football trips. 


The third year I was here, Charlie Erb was 
no longer the coach. The new coach was a 
man named “Buck” Shaw. Lawrence T. “Buck” 
Shaw of Notre Dame came in here. And I 
started out my career under him as athletic 
manager till I graduated. 

I didn’t actually go to school over five 
years—I was there seven—but the first two 
as a special student. Two years out, then two 
years back, as a special student, where I didn’t 
graduate because I was short—not in hours to 
graduate. I had more than 148 hours, but I was 
short one of these courses that was required. 
And that year, I paid my registration fees in 
school, but never went to class. The class was 
under Dr. Frandsen, and he never required 
me to attend class in the deal. 

In the summer of 1925, when I was in 
school, I took a contract at Emerald Bay. The 
California highway department were building 
a retaining wall at Emerald Bay, and they had 
a Greek crew of stonemasons. The highway 
department had to arrange for the sleeping 
space for the men, and their eating; and on 
my contract was to feed ’em. The stone wall 
that those Greeks built, Greek crews, in 1925, 
is still there today. It is located just above 
Emerald Bay campgrounds at Eagle Falls. 

Well, at the time I did that, the camp was 
at Eagle Falls. And Eagle Falls is near Emerald 
Bay, and you come up from that Mrs. Knight’s 
property down there—you come up that trail. 
If you walk up that canyon, you come out 
at Eagle Falls parking lot, right there. There 
used to be a drinking fountain there on the 
highway, and that’s where the camp was. 

So I fed this construction crew that 
summer and all durin’ the summer, I was 
buyin’ a lot of groceries in Reno, and a lot of 
my groceries were bought through the Nevada 
Packing Company—especially meat—and the 
bill got pretty big. And one day the secretary 



14 


Clarence J. Thornton 


of the Nevada Pack got to lookin’ at this bill 
for this meat at Eagle Falls, to me, and found 
out I was a college student. So he got [chuckle] 
real excited, and came up to see how he was 
gonna get his money. Actually, the way we got 
our groceries at that time, they came by boat; 
came from Reno to Truckee on the train, and 
then from Truckee to Tahoe City, and then 
from Tahoe City, they came to the resort of 
Emerald Bay by boat; we picked our groceries 
and supplies up there. 

But what concerned him was this college 
student runnin’ a big boarding house like 
this on credit, and nobody knew this person, 
so he came up to see who was up there. And 
it happened, at the same time he arrived, a 
meat man from Minden who was interested 
in business, came up to see what business he 
could get. And they both arrived at my camp at 
the same time. So when the man from Nevada 
Pack inquired about his bill, the other man was 
over there waitin’ to sell me meat. As a result, I 
had no trouble with my credit [laughs]. In fact, 
they couldn’t lose anyhow, because I couldn’t 
get any of my money that I contracted till it 
had been advertised by the California state 
highway department for thirty days after the 
contract was over. [Laughing] 

One of the reasons I wanted to talk about 
it, because this is 1982, and Emerald Bay road 
is practically closed every winter since that 
time. The California state highway department 
had a contract to build a retaining wall at what 
was known at that time as Eagle Falls—it was 
a public campgrounds. And the contract went 
to a Greek contractor, stonemasons. My only 
part in the operation was to supply the food for 
them under a contract with the state highway 
department— state of California. And at this 
time, that retaining wall that was built in 
1925, is still there, and the road is still closed 


in the wintertime. [Chuckle] That, of course, 
is what revolved around the continual battle 
the people of Emerald Bay and the State of 
California puttin’ a bridge across Emerald Bay, 
which the public, I guess, has had their way, 
and they’ve stopped the construction of that 
bridge goin across the bay there—Emerald 
Bay—so you still go around the head of it. 

Just previous to openin’ that boarding 
house at Emerald Bay, I worked for a short 
time for the Hobart Lumber Company, and 
that job consisted of measurin’ wood that was 
cut by Italian contractors. The Hobart Lumber 
Company had a contract with the Reno Press 
Brick Company, and the main contractor in 
there was a man by the name of Maffi (he 
has two sons here in Reno at this time—Ben 
Maffi and Joe Maffi). In fact, Joe Maffi is, at 
the present time, one of the directors of the 
First Federal Savings and Loan here. 

This was in the bootleggin’ days, and 
most of the animals they used were mules, 
and most of the Italians were drinking wine. 
In fact, the cook slept with a butcher knife 
under his pillow, and most of the contractors 
had guns and they worked as partners and 
when you went out to measure the wood, 
lots of times you wound up in a shooting 
match, between the two Italians who were 
actually cuttin’ the wood— they were cuttin’ 
around the contracts, so much a cord, it was 
my job to measure the wood. I only stayed 
there about ten days; [laughing] I was just 
out of place. 

Then I came back, after two years, after 
I’d stayed out two years and worked on the 
Spanish ranch. You gotta make some money. 

I registered again as a special student, 
which was the procedure when I had left 
school. But in the meantime, the regents 
had made a rule that if you had been in the 
service and could pass your courses, you 
could graduate. If you weren’t able to pass 



Early Career and College Days 


15 


the course, of course, you had to go back and 
take the preliminary in it. I had registered as 
a special student. Well, I ran into President 
[Walter E.] Clark, who I knew very well, and 
talked about why I was back there and he—. 
I had just finished registerin’—I went in as a 
special student. And he said, “Well, you can 
graduate.” And he told me how it was done, 
and I went back in and changed my whole 
procedure, and I did graduate. It took me a 
little longer than most students. 

The fifth year that I was there, it was a 
mistake on the part of myself and maybe the 
dean of the College of Agriculture, because 
there was a special course that the legislature 
had passed—it was required, you had to take 
[it]. And I went to Dean Stewart along there, 
the year before that, and talked to him about 
that course. And he told me—in fact he wrote 
a letter—he told me that I graduated under the 
catalog on which I entered school, and that 
course wasn’t in there. 

But when it came down to graduation, 
the faculty didn’t uphold it. So I had to go. I 
never went to school the fifth year, as a class. 
The course I had to take was under Professor 
Frandsen, and I’d taken so many courses 
under him— zoology, botany, and everything 
else—I went and talked to him and he said, 
“Well, go ahead and register, and come up in 
December and I’ll give you the examination, 
and again in May, and you won’t have to come 
to class.” 

So I never actually went to class a fifth 
year, in the deal. I’d had all these courses and 
things under him, so I got out of that. While 
I was there five years, I Just—. In that fifth 
year, I was the agricultural extension agent 
in Washoe County. 

Before your graduation, you said that you 
joined a fraternity, and I was wondering if 
you wouldn’t like to talk a little bit about 


the fraternity, and some of your fraternity 
activities. 

Oh, I was the house manager at one time— 
it was SAEs. And it was not a novelty to me 
or anything at all because I had lived on these 
ranches and lived in bunkhouses, and livin’ in 
a fraternity house was just about the same. I 
was kinda a natural in there. The fraternity life 
probably was one of the things that gave me 
a lot of confidence in myself. You come off a 
ranch, and you work in these places, and you’re 
not so sure of your social background and so 
forth and so on, and you soon find you’re just 
as equal as the rest of ’em in there. And at one 
time I was house manager of the SAEs. At that 
time, the house was on Virginia Street. 

Durin the time I was in the SAEs, I was 
fortunate enough to meet a man by the name 
of [William C.] Billy Levere. He was an official 
of the national SAE fraternity, but recognized 
by all fraternities as a real fraternity man who 
protected all their interests. They still have a 
large memorial in remembrance in Evanston, 
Illinois today, to his memory. 

Another person I met while I was in the 
fraternity was a man named Key Pittman. 
Key Pittman was an SAE from Tennessee, I 
believe, and he was United States Senator from 
Nevada at that time. Not bein’ an athlete, I 
didn’t have too much to do with athletics in the 
fraternity—I was active in the house itself and 
the operation, and as I said previously, manager 
of the operation of the house for one year. (I 
think that’s about all I want to say about it.) 

What did Senator Pittman do, Just drop by, or 
did he have anything to do with the University 
at that time? 

No, Senator Key Pittman came by 
every four years when it was election year 
[chuckling] and went to the football games, 



16 


Clarence J. Thornton 


and visited the SAE house. He was quite a 
powerful senator. 

Yeah, he was in better shape in those years than 
he was later, wasn’t he? 

Well, I knew him very well later on, 
because durin the years when I was mixed 
up in the construction of Boca Darn, which 
involved this large lawsuit that’s still bein’ 
contested, the Orr Ditch decree, I would talk 
to Key Pittman— senator—he was a United 
States Senator—off the record simply because, 
when the United States federal government 
built the Lahontan Darn in Fallon, and put it 
into operation, they didn’t have enough water 
to cover the area that they were interested 
in. So they filed suit in Nevada against the 
Truckee Meadows here, to get additional 
water from Lake Tahoe. 

And my point in talking with Senator 
Pittman was that, the fact that when they 
filed suit against Nevada properties, the 
government, they also filed suit against 
California, to take water out of the Little 
Truckee, in the State of California; they 
advised the federal government to get out, that 
they had no authority or power over water in 
the state of California. And they did. 

When I would talk to Senator Pittman 
two or three times, and without quotin’ him, 
but almost direct, he always contended that 
the constitution under which Nevada joined 
the Union, never mentioned the word “water” 
and if you don’t mention anything, why, you 
retain possession. The federal government 
had no jurisdiction over the water here. It 
didn’t seem to make much difference; the 
lawsuit went on. And this lawsuit started in 
what, 1913, and it’s still bein’ contested—well, 
partially contested today on the thing, on the 
deal. But of course, he wasn’t practicin’ law 
then, he was a senator, in the deal. 


You were talking about the SAEs, and I was 
going to ask you about some of the other 
social organizations on campus. You spent a 
lot of time working hard for the athletics, and 
you worked for—as house manager for the 
SAEs—what did you do for fun? Did you have 
a girlfriend? 

Sure. Not very often—two or three of ’em, 
at different times [laughing]. Went to dances 
on the weekends. You ask me what we did for 
fun. To cite the year of ’23-’24, when myself 
and another SAE were carryin twenty hours 
of studyin, and a lot of it was lab work, we went 
to school from breakfast till midnight five days 
a week. And Saturday morning, we started 
in catchin up on our schoolwork (talk about 
Hartman and those people), doin’ your lab 
work, and writin it up. We’d get done about six 
o’clock on Saturday night, get caught up. Then 
we’d eat and [chuckling] go downtown—you 
wanted to know what we’d do—. And the dance 
halls were downtown, where you saw the girls 
and the boys. And we would be stone sober and 
in good shape, and we eventually found some 
girl and get something to eat, [laughing] and 
took some girl home for somebody that didn’t 
get home. And that went on, I would guess, 
from August that year till the following May, 
and we didn’t average five hours a night sleep, 
at that time. We just didn’t have time—you just 
didn’t look up. That was a—[laughing]. I’ll tell 
you, some of the girls we took home, some of 
’em are still around here [laughs] with their 
boyfriends. I think that’s about the extent of 
my activity in the fraternity—I took part in 
everything that they did. 

You were in the Block N, too. 

Well, the politics, that was a situation 
where I not bein’ an athlete but bein’ athletic 
manager; the members of the Block N got 



Early Career and College Days 


17 


in a big hassle amongst themselves, of who 
should be president of the Block N Society. 
And they couldn’t agree, and I wasn’t even at 
the meeting, when they advised me that I had 
been elected president. I served one semester 
as president of the Block N Society [chuckle]. 
And, in a way, even among the factions who 
couldn’t agree, they could agree on runnin it 
as long as they had me in there to settle their 
difficulty about probably somebody wantin’ 
to be president that they didn’t want; I never 
knew. They just walked up one day and said, 
“Would ya like to be president of Block N?” 

And then I found myself as a member of 
Coffin and Keys, which at that time, I thought, 
was a very good organization and very sound. 
Doc Martie and Professor Claude Jones were 
both advisors of Coffin and Keys at that 
time. Even at that time, there was a certain 
controversy about Coffin and Keys, by those 
members who were out, who never got in. 

And you know, it’s a funny thing, in the 
year of 1926, if you’re lookin at the ’25-’26 
Artemisia, when I wasn’t even at school—I 
was registered—they appointed me on a lot of 
committees I never did serve on. I never knew 
it till a few years ago, I got to lookin’ through 
there, you know, and I found I was on this 
committee and that committee [laughing]. 
They wanted to fill out their membership or 
something, I guess. 

I served as secretary of the agriculture— 
Aggie Club— for several years, and it was 
quite an interestin’ deal. We were always broke 
[laughing] and never had any money, but they 
had membership in the situation there. I guess 
that’s about it. 

Maybe you could tell me a little bit about Reno 
in the 1920s. Just what was it like as the small 
town it was then? This is the period that Walter 
Clark wrote about as “The City of Trembling 
Leaves.” 


Talking about Walter [E.] Clark, the 
president of the University, for some reason 
or other, he used to like to talk to me. And he 
talked to me about his son who was Walter 
[Van Tilburg] Clark, who was in school at 
that time, and he hadn’t graduated from high 
school. And Walter Clark always apparently 
believed that his children should go out and 
work a year before they went on to college, 
after they got through with their high school. 
And that is what Walter Clark, Jr. did. He 
worked I think as a blacksmith in that time. 

But President Clark, you see, hadn’t been 
here too long when I came to school in 1919. 
They brought him here from— what’s that 
big university in New York—City College or 
something? Yeah, that’s where he came from. 

Walter Clark, I would say this generally, 
on the city of Reno, which I’ve always 
believed: and it didn’t pertain to the twenties, 
but years later, after I’d been here for several 
years, one morning I was eating in the 
Grand Cafe, and the man sitting next to me 
was a man named Jacobs, and he was a very 
successful businessman. He also had a brother 
here, who was not quite so successful. And I 
asked this man (which you realize, of course, 
he was Jewish), I said, “Why is Reno such a 
good town?” 

And I’ve never forgotten what he told me. 
He said, “The reason that Reno’s a good town 
is because the inventory is money here.” 

And I said, “Well, what is the difference 
between you and your brother?” 

And he said, “The difference between me 
and my brother is he raised a family, and I 
didn’t.” 

But I never—that’s so true—it’s still true 
practically. The inventory is still money, in 
the deal. And that came to light so much 
when they had the Depression—the banks 
were closed—the inventory was still money 
in the deal. But the town itself, now of course, 



18 


Clarence J. Thornton 


I always liked Reno, or I wouldn’t’ve stayed 
here. I didn’t have to stay here; and it was a 
town of about twenty to twenty-five thousand 
people. Your downtown area was stores, 
clothing stores, hardware stores, different 
types of stores, restaurants, eating places, 
dance halls, that type of thing there. The 
politics was practically all run by a famous 
man—Roberts, Ed [Edwin E.l Roberts—he 
was a big man as the mayor of the city of Reno. 

One of the big things we used to do, was to 
go to Tony Pecetti’s dance, on Saturday night 
on the outdoor dance hail, on the northwest 
corner of Center and Fourth Street, where the 
Ford garage is today. I knew him very well. But 
that— you know, I stayed here because I liked 
it. See, there was Prohibition in effect then, 
and you weren’t supposed to get any drinks, 
but you could see the policeman—he knew 
where to send you. And gambling was out— 
there was no gambling at that time. Oh, there 
was selective gambling—optional gambling, 
poker primarily, in some of the places. 

Dr. Church, who afterwards became 
famous in his snow survey fields of the United 
States and other countries, I knew very well 
personally, and he talked one time about his 
original introduction to Reno. He got off the 
train back in the eighties, and came here to 
teach, and was walking down Commercial 
Row, where’s there’s a lot of bars along in 
there, and they threw a dead man out in the 
street, right in front of him. And he said he 
come pretty near gettin’ back to the depot and 
gettin’ back on the train and leavin’, after that. 
That was his introduction to Reno. 

Reno has always had kind of a reputation as a 
tough place, and that was one of the reasons I 
asked you the question of Reno in the twenties. 

Before the twenties, downtown in Reno 
when I was pretty young—and like the year 


when I was in business college here, and other 
times in town—and my dad was runnin the 
ranches at Constantia, when he needed help— 
laborers—he would call me and send me down 
Commercial Row. And I would go in these bars 
and places and find these men, and I’d kick ’em 
on the heels and wake ’em up, and sober ’em 
up, and take ’em over the next morning, and 
load ’em on the NC and 0 Railroad, down there. 
Pay a fee of five dollars and send ’em out to the 
ranch. That’s the way he hired his help. But I 
wasn’t old enough to be in those bars, I never 
had any trouble at all, that time. 

At that time I was livin’ with the Ninnises, 
up on Stevenson Street—board and room 
there, goin to business college. Shorty Ninnis 
just died a while back—I don’t know whether 
you ever knew him or not. Vivian Ninnis, he 
always resented that “Vivian.” 

I just thought whatever you would like to say 
about Reno, and living here as a college kid, 
and —. 

Well, the problem with me, is I wouldn’t 
have anything bad about it. To me, it was 
another town. 

Walter Clarks novel is so dreamy and wonderful; 
it isn’t bad. It says Reno was a really good place. 

I never saw Walter Van Tilburg Clark in 
my life downtown. [Laughs] I saw him in 
Virginia City, [laughing] but I never saw—I 
don’t mean he wasn’t downtown. But there 
was nothin’—it was just a town you grow 
up in. You went to dances, went to prize 
fights, went to rodeos, went to the shows, 
took in the fairs, went hunting, went fishing, 
played golf, went to athletic games, football, 
basketball, track meets—I just—I wouldn’t 
know anything to say about it— whether it 
be good or bad. To me, it was a good town. 



3 


Ranch Life in Northern Nevada 
and Eastern California 


At Constantia, during the years that I 
was there, mainly between 1915 and 1921, 
practically all of the people who worked on 
the ranches were single men. Occasionally, 
you would have a woman cook working, and 
if they did, why, her husband either helped 
with the cookin’ or worked on the ranch in 
addition. 

The usual salary of everybody—practically 
everybody— was a dollar a day, a sum total of 
thirty dollars a month. It included board and 
room, which was also credited at a dollar a day. 
The working hours were usually from sunup to 
sundown, six days a week. Very little regards 
were made to holidays it was just another 
working day. In the summertime, the people 
who worked in the hayfields generally got two 
dollars a day, but they only got paid for the 
days they actually worked during that time. 
Now, where do you want to go from there? 

What did you do for fun? 

Recreation, if there [chuckling) ever was 
any, would generally consist of going hunting, 


or horseback riding. Occasionally, you would 
take a break and go to town—take a week off, 
and that was generally your recreation. A 
lot of the men had local interests in mining: 
on their weekdays, or days off, they would 
go out in the hills and work on their mine. 
But recreation, as such, apparently was not 
much of an item [chuckle], because of the 
hours you worked from sunup to sundown, 
six days a week. By the time Sunday come, 
you were ready to sit down. [Chuckle] Do 
your laundry, and take care of your personal 
things on Sunday. That about took care of 
your recreation. 

Union Land and Cattle Company 

In my relationship with the Union Land 
and Cattle Company, I’ll first start with the 
Humphrey family, so the people in the future 
won’t get confused. Herb Humphrey and Bill 
Moffat (W. H. Moffat) were always known 
as the owners and operators of the Union 
Land and Cattle Company. And when I first 
came to Reno in 1914, one of the first men I 



20 


Clarence J. Thornton 


ever met was Bill Moffat. Father at that time 
was ranch foreman at Constantia, which 
had nothing to do with the Union Land and 
Cattle Company at that time, but it did later. 

There was a James Humphrey, who 
owned and operated what was known as the 
McKissick Land and Cattle Company, with 
headquarters at Milford, California. And 
their operations was primarily in the Honey 
Lake Valley, and Secret Valley, which was on 
the road to Alturas, and their rangeland in 
that same general area. 

His brothers, two of his brothers, Frank 
Humphrey, and Jake Humphrey, had a 
separate operation known as the United 
Land and Cattle Company. Their offices 
were in the Clay-Peters building in Reno, 
but their operations were primarily in the 
Hawthorne-Mina-Tonopah area. They ran 
cattle. In the late twenties, they discontinued 
that operation with their cattle down there, 
and operated out of the Clay-Peters building 
in Reno. 

They also, Jake Humphrey and Frank 
Humphrey, were the owners of the Humphrey 
Supply, which was a meat-supply company 
located on Elm Street, the corner of Elm and 
Sierra Street in Reno. 

And there was another brother, John 
Humphrey, of which I know very little about, 
except I’ve been told at one time, he owned 
what is known in this area as the Mayberry 
ranch. They were all cattle people, and I’ve 
been told they all came from Sierra Valley 
[California], and that area up there. 

The Union Land and Cattle Company 
was a very large operation. In fact, the 
newspapers one time wrote a story in which 
they claimed the Union Land and Cattle 
Company owned or controlled one-fifth of 
the state of Nevada. And most of that would 
have been north of the Southern Pacific 
railroad tracks. 


They had three divisions that I’m 
acquainted with. The Spanish ranch division, 
which was located in Tuscarora/Independence 
Valley area included the Spanish ranch and 
ran as far west to north of Winnemucca, to the 
Godchaux ranch. In between was the Winters 
ranch, and the I-L ranch that they operated. 
And then of course in Independence Valley, 
they had the Powers Meadow, the River ranch, 
the Brewery, and the Young Brothers ranch. 

The superintendent of operations there at 
my time was a man named George Calligan, 
who was a native of Reno, and had been for 
years a cattle buyer. 

East of the Spanish ranch was what was 
called the Deeth division. The superintendent 
of that division was [James] Russell, whose 
son, in later years (Charlie Russell) became 
governor of the state of Nevada, in the late 
forties and early fifties. 

And they also had a third division called 
Antelope Valley division, which was on U.S. 
Highway 395 south, and included the post 
offices of Topaz and Coleville. It was Antelope 
Valley, a very beautiful valley—they owned 
over half of the valley. 

When they got into financial problems, 
the acreage in that valley was offered for sale 
in the thirties for a dollar and twenty-five 
cents an acre by the real estate concern out of 
Los Angeles, and it didn’t sell. That was in the 
early thirties out there. Now look at it. 

The superintendent of that division was 
a man by the name of Cunningham—I don’t 
recall his first name. After the company closed 
down, he became owner of what is known as 
Topaz Lodge in that area. 

The Union Land and Cattle Company— 
the first president, I think, was W. H. Moffat, 
and he was an experienced cattle man. And 
as the years went on, they replaced him with 
Herb Humphrey as president. Humphrey 
was also experienced, but he was different 



Ranch Life in Northern Nevada and Eastern California 


21 


type. Moffat was a conservative operator and 
Humphrey was a promoter, and in the process 
of all these holdings, about the time of World 
War I he decided to go into the wool business. 

And they formed a company, Union Wool 
Company of Boston, Massachusetts, and were 
financed by banks in Boston. The head man 
that they transferred back there to run it was 
Fred Kleppe, who was not too old a person; 
he was one of the natives of Reno here—the 
Kleppe family. 

Herb Humphrey decided to corner the 
wool market of the world, and this was just 
before or- durin’ World War I. And they 
bought wool, and kept raisin the price, and 
price, they got it very high. And they had a 
large volume of wool either bought or under 
control. Well, the manufacturin’ people in 
the East decided that maybe wool was too 
heavy—that people should wear cotton for 
a while. And at that particular time, Herb 
Humphrey was on a trip to Europe on a boat, 
and they had no communications. And they 
called the loans with—. The Union Land and 
Cattle Company apparently was their main 
security—it was not part of the Union Wool 
of Boston, but it was security on the notes. 

And Mr. Calligan told me that one day 
the phone rang; it was a man from Boston, 
the Old Colony Trust Company of Boston, 
and told Mr. Calligan what his name was, and 
he was in Elko—he’d like to come out to the 
ranch. So Calligan sent a car in to pick him 
up. When he came out to the ranch, he served 
papers on Mr. Calligan, that they had taken 
over the Union Land and Cattle Company. 
Especially that’s—each division, at that time, 
he said there was four or five men came from 
Boston. Each one got off at different places, 
went to the ranch, and took over the ranch as 
additional security. 

Lots of people think the Union Land 
and Cattle Company itself was in trouble 


financially, but I doubt if they ever were. It was 
just additional security. Previous to that time, 
the Pyramid Land and [Live]stock Company 
was not part of the Union Land and Cattle 
Company, but for some reason, it had become 
part of the security, and the same situation 
occurred—a man showed up and took over 
the Pyramid Land and Stock Company, of 
which Mr. Turritin was the general manager. 

The federal courts appointed a receiver, 
and the receiver was a man by the name of 
W. T. Smith of Elko, Nevada. And he ran the 
Union Land and Cattle Company for some 
four to six years, till it was disposed of in 
there. Durin the time it was in receivership, 
I asked Mr. Moffat, who I knew well, one 
day, if he would ever buy back the Spanish 
ranch division (and he was back operatin’ 
it privately at that time), simply because 
when the other owners of the Union Land 
and Cattle Company declared receivership, 
he wouldn’t declare bankruptcy. He left his 
name liable to pay off the debts of the Union 
Land and Cattle Company, which he did, one 
day, in the amount of about approximately 
$700,000, some four or five years later. But 
in conversation with him it was still in 
receivership. I asked him if the Union Land 
and Cattle Company Spanish ranch division 
was ever sold, how much he thought it would 
sell for, and he said, “Oh, between two dollars 
and two dollars and a half an acre. 

And I asked him if he was gonna be 
a bidder, and he said, “No.” He had other 
operations. 

In 1925, when of course, they had a sale 
and sold the Spanish ranch division to the 
Ellison Ranching Company, and John G. 
Taylor, it was sold for two dollars and twenty- 
five cents an acre. And incidentally, Mr. Taylor 
of course, is dead, but the Ellison Ranching 
Company, who were the purchasers of the 
ranch itself in 1925, still own and operate it 



22 


Clarence J. Thornton 


at this time [1982]. I think that should give 
enough detail of the Union Land and Cattle 
Company, and where it was. 

It was a good outfit. Mr. Moffat himself, 
of course, after he paid off his creditors, 
which he could’ve done anyhow because he 
didn’t declare bankruptcy (he wanted to keep 
his name clear), went into business in the 
same area in different ranches up there, and 
of course, became one of the biggest cattle 
operators west of the Mississippi river. Swiff 
and Armour and those people did very little 
business in the western United States without 
knowing what Moffat was doin’ in the cattle 
business at that time. He was that big. And 
he operated, as far as I ever knew, alone, with 
two sisters there. 

His final operation from about 1925 on 
was under the name of H. Moffat Company. 
H. Moffat was his sister, Henrietta Moffat. He 
was so big that they operated without a bank 
account as you and I have, they operated with 
drafts. And the drafts were written on the H. 
Moffat Company and the Wells Fargo bank of 
San Francisco, which meant that you had to 
keep sufficient money in the bank to honor 
the draffs as they came in. 

And in one particular case which I’m 
aware of, durin’ that period, he bought a 
ranch that the government had for sale in 
Lakeview, Oregon for a million dollars. I 
asked his bookkeeper how he handled the 
draff and he said he called before he bought 
the ranch, and said he’d be a bidder on this 
ranch, and it’d probably be around a million 
dollars, he was makin’ a draff—one of his 
draffs on it— and he probably wouldn’t be 
in for two or three months to San Francisco. 
And he said the draft came through for 
something over a million dollars, the bank 
honored it, and two or three months later he 
came in and gave ’em a note. It was that type 
of operation. 


His Sisters, they tell me, were such heavy 
owners in the bank, that durin’ that time, 
when they got dividends or something from 
the bank, they just bought more bank stock 
[Chuckle] 

Most people in this area—some of the 
older people in this area—will remember the 
old Sparks mansion on South Virginia Road. 
And that big house was built by Governor 
Sparks, when he was governor of the state of 
Nevada. And then followin’ his ownership, far 
as I know, it became the home and operation 
of Mr. Moffat till his death—approximately 
just before his death he sold it out there. You 
don’t see those kind of people any more. That 
big residence out there, you know, the house? 
It’s gone now. 

Somebody’s putting it back together out in 
Pleasant Valley. 

Oh, I don’t know whether they are or not 
[chuckle], I think it broke ’em. 

Mr. Moffat himself, where he operated in 
Nevada—it sounds a little absurd to say—he 
could practically operate without money. He 
had bought hay and cattle and pastures from 
the third generation of a family, and very few 
of’em ever asked for the money at the time the 
deal was completed. He bought practically all 
the cattle and hay and pasture, “market price, 
date of delivery,” and they could go up and get 
their draff, or wait till they needed the money. 

In the Elko country, where he was such 
a heavy operator, the banks were never very 
reluctant to tell the cattleman, “Yes, this other 
man offered you the higher price, but you’d 
better sell to Mr. Moffat. His draffs are good 
in the deal.” That’s the way they operated. 
Now, that’s it. 

Look at that Miller and Lux deal. I tell 
you, that was Something! I don’t want to 



Ranch Life in Northern Nevada and Eastern California 


23 


say anything about it, but—. One thing I say 
about Miller and Lux, was that Millers name 
was never Miller. Did you realize that? The 
Miller that got the passport in Germany and 
come to the United States— when he got the 
passport, he didn’t have the money This man 
whose name was what, I don’t know, changed 
his name to Miller, picked up the passport, 
and came here. And became Henry Miller. 

Oh, well, lookit. He promoted that San 
Francisco exposition of 1915. He died before 
they had it, but his holdings in California were 
so extensive—and Nevada and Oregon—and 
then, as years went on, of course, the holdings 
were all turned into oil fields and oil wells. 
And I believe his estate probably’s still in 
court today, as far as I know. Portions of it, 
very small portions of it. His big holdings of 
Nevada, of course, were out in Yerington and 
Winnemucca country, and up into Oregon 
from there. I didn’t know him ; I knew Moffat 
[chuckle]. 

The reason I talk about Moffat is because 
he’s the one that got me to college. Yeah, five, 
six, seven years later after come through all 
this, he came [and] hunted me up [chuckling]. 

He was a very fine-looking man. I’d say 
he was about six-foot-four or five—just as 
straight as a stick—he stood just as straight. 
Always dressed very nicely in there, and never 
wore an overcoat [chuckle] in the deal. Now, 
where do we go from there? 

The Spanish Ranch 

Can I ask you about the Spanish ranch and 
your work there? 

Well, the Spanish ranch was part of one 
of the divisions of the Union Land and Cattle 
Company, which had divisions at Topaz, 
Deeth, and Tuscarora. According to the 
newspapers back in there, at that time, they 


owned or controlled one-fifth of the northern 
part of the state of Nevada because they 
ranged the cattle and all that, that they had. 

When I went there in 1921, it was in 
receivership: the Union Land and Cattle 
Company was bankrupt. The receiver was 
W. T. Smith, of Elko, Nevada. And the ranch 
itself, they always said, consisted of 100,000 
acres—just the ranch, with no range at all in 
there—they worked as high as 500 men durin 
the summertime; and hayin’—you didn’t buy 
one mowin’ machine, you bought fifty. Yeah, 
I bought fifty mowin’ machines at one time, 
and twenty-five hay rakes, at one time. 

They started hayin’ generally in the first 
of July, and they hayed till the snowfall in 
October, November. This was all with horses 
at that time, there was no tractors at all in 
there. 

Most of the help there on the ranches 
were Basques—not all of them. When I went 
there on May the first of 1921, when they 
counted the cattle all over the field, they had 
21,000 head of cattle in the field. Twenty-one 
thousand head\ —in the fields [chuckles] at 
that time. 

I went there as a bookkeeper, actually, 
and before I left, I did everything. I was a 
buckarooin, and I became kind of a personal 
aide to the superintendent, who was a man 
named George Calligan. Six-foot-seven, 350 
pounds. [Chuckle] And he had been with 
Moffat for years. And Bill Moffat personally 
told me one day, he was the best cattle buyer he 
ever had. He was a terrific cattle buyer. He was 
also— (without puttin’ him—) he drank a little 
along the way. And Moffat would give him a 
big salary; at the end of the year, he’d always 
be overdrawn. When he was overdrawn, why 
they’d give him a Christmas present, and start 
him on January the first, all over again. 

I went with him one time over to Jordan 
Valley, Idaho, and he bought practically all 



24 


Clarence J. Thornton 


the cattle in Jordan Valley, and delivered them 
to Godchaux ranch, which is about twenty 
miles north of Winnemucca. And the next 
spring, they sold off the cows and calves and 
other stock, and we took out of there 625 
head of two-year-old steers, and didn’t cost 
Moffat a cent—not a penny Trailed them 
across that Owyhee Desert out there, the 
Little Humboldt. That was a pretty fair profit 
[chuckling] if you know anything about cattle. 
Two-year-old steers, 625, and Moffat didn’t 
have a penny out. He got all his money out—. 
They bought cows and calves at that time for 
fifteen dollars a head, in there. Weaner calves 
and cows. 

The Spanish ranch, you know, was run 
with the I-L ranch—it didn’t run alone—and 
the Winters ranch and the Brewery ranch, 
which was by Tuscarora, and the Godchaux 
ranch, which was north of Winnemucca— 
that was the division, the ranch divisions in 
there, of those ranches. 

That’s another Basque name, isn’t it?] 

[Laughs] Frankly, all the ranch-hand help, 
when I went there in 1921, were Basques on 
the ranch. They were doin’ the ranch work 
and out on the cattle range., It was so big, that 
they ran three divisions of cowboys—fifteen 
cowboys in a division—at that time. One 
bunch would work the range, one bunch 
would work the fields when they brought 
them in, and the third bunch would trail ’em 
to Elko to ship. Forty-five cowboys there. 
Horseback [chuckles]. 

Well, Altube was apparently the previous 
owner, I guess, and who was the other 
person—? I know there was two of them on 
that gate, Altube, and—. 

I mentioned the Garat ranch, but that’s up the 
other way. 


Well, no, the Garat ranch was a—it was 
the Twenty-Five. But the Garats you see, 
were Basques. I knew them very well and 
they had that Twenty-Five—Y-P is what 
it’s called—Y-P; it adjoined—some of the 
range overlapped in there. So there was four 
of those Garat boys, four brothers, and they 
ran that ranch down there—it was a big 
operation. As far as I know, I guess they’re 
all dead. I think the last one was George 
Garat. And there was George, and Charlie, 
and Henry—what the heck was the other 
ones name? Johnnie. They were very fine 
neighbors. 

But Calligan would never buy their cattle. 
He bought ’em one time, and he found out— 
see, he always bought, Calligan bought the 
cattle by guess, no scales—guess the weight. 
And he found out that they had a scales 
down the road, [chuckling] and had weighed 
the cattle before he bought ’em. So he never 
bought ’em again. [Laughs] 

I often see young Chan Griswold. I 
think about him because Calligan bought 
the cattle from Chan Griswold, who was his 
grandfather (of the Griswold-Henderson 
Land and Livestock), along the river there 
in Elko, from old Chan Griswold, who was 
quite a character—. And after he bought 
em, why, Griswold got a better offer and 
sold them to somebody else. Calligan never 
said a word. He went back the next year, and 
they went out and looked at them, all those, 
and bought ’em, and he gave him a check 
right there, [laughs] for the cattle. This is big 
money, gee whiz—. 

See, Moffat was the largest individual 
livestock operator west of the Mississippi 
river. Swift or Armour and those people 
never did a thing in the cattle business 
without knowing what Moffat was doing. 
And he was it. He was like Fitzgerald and 



Ranch Life in Northern Nevada and Eastern California 


25 


the Nevada Club. He was it—there was no 
partner, and well—he had a partner, H. 
Moffat, who was his sister, Henrietta. 

You know, he came back after the Union 
Land and Cattle Company went broke, and 
the rest of ’em pleaded bankruptcy when 
it went broke, and Moffat wouldn’t plead 
bankruptcy— he didn’t want to—he wanted 
to keep his name clear. He stayed clear, and 
in 1924,1 guess, you’ll find some—but if you 
ever looked it up in the newspapers—he 
went to Carson City and paid his creditors off 
$675,000 in full one day. They came out with 
headlines in the paper like that. He just didn’t 
wanna plead bankruptcy. That $675,000 was a 
lot of money at that time. And he went on, you 
know, went back to Elko and became—well, 
very wealthy. Very, extremely wealthy. He was 
a good operator. 

All these Basques on the ranch and so forth, as 
bookkeeper, you probably paid them and that 
kind of thing. What were they doing in those 
days?Nowadays, you know, the Basques are so 
interested in their old-country culture and their 
language and their contests and so forth —. 

They just worked, they earned a dollar a 
day, and some of the good ones got forty-five 
dollars a month. They did ranch work— 
hayin’, irrigation, fence-building, stackin’ hay, 
whatever there was to do, just the regular 
ranch work. Very few of ’em ever went into 
the cattle business. ’Course, they did go into 
sheep business, but the cattle business seemed 
to be out of their category, but they did ranch 
work on the deal. And then all this Basque 
thing that’s come up in the last few years—. 

You see, I had to learn the Basque 
language, I skipped that earlier, didn’t I? I 
had to learn enough of it to talk to ’em. They 
had the Basques because the company’s— 
Pyramid Land and Livestock Company— 


the other livestock company— would get 
these immigrant Basques from Spain or 
France over there, and they generally came 
through—a man down here in Reno that had 
the Commercial Hotel, about where Harrah’s 
is now—John Etchebarren, or the owner of 
the Toscano, Joe Elcano. 

When they came to this country, they 
would come direct from the Pyrenees, and 
to Constantia, then they’d send them out to 
the ranch. Well, somebody had to be able 
to talk to ’em—find out how old they were, 
what province they came from, what their 
name was, what clothes they needed—. So 
the company assigned a Spaniard to teach 
me because the Basque language itself is just 
a lingo; it’s not a language. And he taught 
me that so I could receive them and find out 
who they were and where they came from, 
and so forth. 

Then, during World War I, the government 
decided that all these sheepherders should be 
registered for the draft, and they sent me out 
in the hills to find ’em, and register them— 
how old they were, and all that you know, 
and their names, and register ’em for the 
draft. Well, it happened, at just at that time, 
there was a Basque commander in charge 
of the armies in Europe, so they were very 
enthusiastic about the War itself. I always 
remember two brothers I knew very well, Joe 
Mocho, and Raymond Mocho, his brother. 
Well, when I went to register them for the 
draft, and I wrote their name Mocho, they 
gave me the card back, and they said, “That’s 
not our name.” 

I said, “What is your name?” 

He wrote his name out, and his name 
was Hourcourigary. That was his name, I 
never forgot that. [Chuckles] Mocho wasn’t 
his name [laughing]. But you see, the names 
they gave you, usually represented a province 
or the city or the area where they came from. 



26 


Clarence J. Thornton 


You know, Bilbao, Navarra, and Viscaya—it’s 
in those towns or something, and they’re right 
in there. I was really shocked ’cause I knew ’em 
well— played poker with ’em and everything 
[laughs] else, but that wasn’t his name. 

Pete Poco, you know, was the one that 
built that big house on the southeast corner 
of Arlington and California. Remember that 
nice brick house that was there years ago? 
Where the bank is now? There was a nice brick 
house there, right across the street from the 
apartments. And he built that with the money 
that he got off of this Nevada-California Land 
and Livestock Company, up there, that he 
sold, and then, you know, later on, I think 
he committed suicide. And his wife was a 
Padere, if you ever knew any Paderes. If you 
ever went to [Dr.] Louis [E.] Lombardi, you 
knew the Paderes. His nurse was a Padere. In 
fact, she’s still here. She ran Louis’ place, kind 
of, [chuckling] for years. 

Might be a little interestin’ too—on 
the sale, the Nevada-California Land and 
Livestock, when they sold it for $750,00, 
John Poco and Pete Poco took their $250,000 
each. Johnny Duke, the third partner, decided 
to stay in the company rather than take 
the money as a partner, and he lost all his 
money ’cause the company went broke. Up 
in Madeline. 

They worked two crews of people there as 
a rule. The Basques generally had their own 
setup, their own bunkhouse, but they ate in a 
regular dining room. And the Basques’ work 
consisted primarily of just straight ranch 
work— irrigatin’, hayin’, and so forth. 

I went there as a bookkeeper and made 
$125 a month with board and room. And 
Mr. Calligan and I got into a little discussion 
after I’d been there about a month, and I 
quit. And so he raised my salary to $150 
a month [chuckle] and I stayed with him 
and we became pretty good friends. And 


he hired another bookkeeper, and then I’d 
travel with him when he bought cattle and 
bought hay and bought pastures and that 
type of thing. 

It was quite an unusual situation; we got 
along very well after I quit. He was a man 
that—oh, he had two or three peculiarities. If 
he lost anything, you stopped everything and 
went lookin’ for it, there. He smoked cigarettes 
quite heavily; he’d have four or five plastic 
cigarette holders. If he lost one of 'em, you 
stopped everything and went lookin’ for that 
one, even though there was a store where there 
was a whole supply. And he always reasoned 
while you were tryin’ to find that thing, you’d 
find something else— [chuckling]. 

And he also had spells where he liked to 
fire people on the ranch. He would go down in 
the fields and the ranches and fire everybody 
he saw. Just had one of those days. And in his 
urgency one day, he fired the dairyman. The 
dairyman —there weren’t many dairyman 
on a cattle ranch. And the dairyman packed 
up and left—went to Elko. And it came five 
o’clock that evening, or four o’clock, and 
there was nobody to milk the cows. And Mr. 
Calligan, with his large stomach, was trying to 
milk those cows off a milk stool. [Chuckling] 
At seven or eight o’clock at night, he got in his 
car, and drove to Elko, found the dairyman, 
and hired him again, [laughing] and brought 
him back, and the dairyman went out and 
milked the cows that night. I know—. This 
all happened. [Laughing] 

He had a butcher—on this ranch they 
killed all their own beef. They had a butcher, 
an old German by the name of Jim Scherberg, 
and he—. While Mr. Calligan was a wonderful 
buyer of cattle and could guess live weights, 
the butcher continually was agitatin’ Mr. 
Calligan to guess dressed weights with his 
beef when they killed it. And he had won so 



Ranch Life in Northern Nevada and Eastern California 


27 


many hats from Mr. Calligan [laughing], that 
Calligan wouldn’t even bet with him any more 
on dressed cattle weights at all. 

The ranch itself, worked in the 
summertime, between two and three hundred 
men, and in the hayin’ time, which generally 
started about the Fourth of July, and we kept 
hayin’ until it snowed in the fall—along about 
October, as a rule, before they quit hayin’. And 
he had crews—he had a lot of the men who 
worked there were Indians from the Duck 
Lake Indian reservation at Owyhee. And he 
had Indian crews that worked together—all 
Indians—and he had Basque crews that 
worked together—all Basques—and then he 
had just the white men he picked up. And he 
used them in competition with one another, to 
get work out of’em [chuckling]; he was pretty 
clever along that line. 

I stayed there, that first time in 1921, 
from May till December, and I worked there 
as part of that time as a bookkeeper, and 
part of the time I was with him, traveling, 
buyin’ cattle and workin’ on the ranch work. 
Then I left there and went to Cuyama Valley, 
which lays west of Taft, California, and went 
to work for Cuyama Valley Land and Cattle 
Company, which was located twenty-five or 
thirty miles west of Taft. And it was a cattle 
company that was owned by two brothers— 
Cebrian brothers, they were Spanish—as a 
bookkeeper. 

The following spring, I came back to 
Nevada (I was there about four months), and 
went back to Elko, and had trouble finding a 
job there, and I had no money—I was broke 
[chuckling]. And I went to work for Calligan 
again, at the Spanish ranch, for a dollar a day, 
as a cowboy. 

After I’d been there about a month or two 
as a cowboy, one day, he and Harvey Sewell 
of Sewell grocery company, came and talked 
to me about buyin’ a big freight truck that the 


Sewells had. The Spanish ranch itself, hauled 
its own supplies from Elko to the Spanish 
ranch, and they generally started haulin’ in 
May, and hauled till the snow, continually. Just 
food, and equipment, and gasoline, and all the 
things that they would need for the winter, 
because when winter came in November, 
December, you were practically isolated out 
there, till spring came again. 

And the Sewell brothers grocery store had 
a truck for sale. And I bought the truck, with 
an agreement with Mr. Calligan that I would 
get a freight contract with the Spanish ranch, 
which I did. And that contract consisted of 
fifteen dollars a ton, for all the merchandise I 
hauled from Elko to the Spanish ranch. 

And also, at that time, these truck men, 
like myself, hired the help for the ranch out 
there, so we picked up the other men in Elko, 
that they wanted for hayin’ and so forth, and 
they would pay us five dollars a man to deliver 
them at the ranch. If they registered to work, 
And the reason I say that, over at the office 
where they registered for work, was a sign that 
said—notified all of them that there would be 
a two-dollar deduction for poll tax from their 
salaries, for the time they worked there. Poll 
tax was in effect that time. And lots and lots 
of men would walk in, and all ready to go to 
work, and read that sign, and not take the 
job. They would go out to some other place 
and go to work for some other rancher that 
didn’t have an office and didn’t take the two 
dollars out. 

If the man quit—if we hauled him back to 
Elko—he had to pay us individually. Anybody 
they fired, we would haul back to Elko and 
the company paid for that. I ran that truck for 
about three months, then I sold it to a man 
by the name of Kirk Cornwell, who had an 
additional truck. 

Then I became manager of Sewell’s 
grocery store, at the Spanish ranch, at a salary 



28 


Clarence J. Thornton 


of $200 a month. And the grocery Store, I 
ran that till about November. And because 
I wanted to come back to the University the 
next year, I thought Id better get out of these 
better-payin’ jobs, so I quit the grocery store, 
and went back on the ranch, workin’ for 
the Spanish ranch at a dollar a day. Then in 
December, the store caught on fire and burned 
to the ground completely. 

Incidentally, the store was a building that 
[the] Sewells had in Tuscarora, the town of 
Tuscarora, for years. And when they decided 
to move to the Spanish ranch, I had the 
contract of haulin’ it down there on my truck. 
They cut it up in sections—it was a galvanized 
building. Before I was manager, it was run by a 
man by the name of Robert F. Caudill—Doby 
Doc—he was the first manager of the store at 
that time. 

I stayed with the Spanish ranch till April, 
as a cowboy that year, 1923, and then I left 
there and we came down through the Owyhee 
Desert—Humboldt House country, on a 
truck. I eventually wound up at Gerlach Land 
and Livestock, at Gerlach, Nevada. 

Then I went to work for the Gerlach Land 
and Livestock as a cowboy, till hayin’ started. 
Then when the hayin’ season came on, I went 
to work in the hayfields. And from there, I 
came back to the University in the fall of 1923. 
Now I think that takes care of that part. 

Returnin’ again to Gerlach Land and 
Livestock, which was located about 100 
miles north and east of Reno, and owned and 
operated as far as I know, by Mr. Fred Gerlach 
of Stockton, California, who started buyin the 
area—different sections— along about the 
turn of the century, 1900. And I think his first 
purchase was a ranch called the Deep Hole 
ranch out there. And then he acquired other 
ranches—Granite ranch, and Clear Creek. 

The town of Gerlach, of course, was 
named after him. He had his ranches there 


before the railroad was there, in that area. 
And he acquired all this property without 
ever seem’ it, and he decided to come up 
one time to see it (and this is a true story 
as far as I know), and got out there in the 
summer of 1905 or ’06 or about then, and 
they had a tick fever scare out in this country 
at that time. (You probably read this, but 
this is supposed to be a true story.) And he 
got bitten by a tick out there, and there’s no 
railroads, or no way to get to Reno, except 
that time it was stages. And they rushed him 
to Reno to the doctor, with this tick bite, and 
it turned out to be just a regular sheep tick, 
not a fever tick. 

He kept this Gerlach Land and Livestock 
until his death in the twenties, and he never 
returned to the ranch in that time. He would 
come to the Overland Hotel in Reno, and he 
had a very fine manager by the name of Jim 
Razor, who ran it just like he owned it all those 
years. After his death, the Gerlach Land and 
Livestock was broken up and sold to a man 
by the name of Ed Waltz. 

Jim Razor himself, was a very fine 
livestock man, and a miner. He was the man 
that developed the present gypsum site, out 
there at Empire, Nevada. He didn’t develop, 
he discovered it. On his time off, he would go 
mining. And must have sold that to Portland 
Cement, out there, and then they developed 
it startin’ in 1923, when they started to build 
the Empire cement plant. 

The Gerlach Land and Livestock Company 
itself was probably one of the best-financed 
and the best-managed cattle outfits in western 
Nevada. This was entirely cattle, no sheep, and 
it was very well run—had their own purebred 
herds of cattle, purebred horses. 

Mr. Gerlach never returned to the ranch. 
He had a son-in-law by the name of Nichols, 
who was married to Mr. Gerlach’s daughter, 
who was there for years as a bookkeeper and 



Ranch Life in Northern Nevada and Eastern California 


29 


commisonary man. And also, Mr. Gerlach’s 
son, Fred Gerlach, Jr. lived out in that area 
and homesteaded what is known as the Fly 
ranch. He lived there for years and stayed 
there after his father died for a while. But 
the man himself, Mr. Gerlach, Senior, never 
came back. He owned real estate in Stockton, 
California. 

My uncle, Tom Thornton, went to work 
for Mr. Gerlach— he came from Stockton, 
California in 1902 and worked at Gerlach for 
years. And he used to come to town once a 
year to help drive the cattle in and ship ’em. 
That was the time they come to town. No 
railroads, no stages, just dirt roads. 

A very isolated area, and it still is. That’s 
where I want ’em to build the county jail. I 
reasoned, you know, that if anybody breaks 
out of jail, they’d never walk anywhere out 
there. 

The [Spanish] ranch itself was supposed 
to consist of 100,000 acres, and in the 
summertime, we worked about 200 or 300 
men there. The fields were so big, that when 
some of the fields—when the men would 
go out to mow in the fields the first time in 
the morning, on a new field, they’d take a 
lunch with ’em. You know, mowin’ the fields 
at that time was all done with horses, and 
mowin’ machines. No gasoline equipment 
of any kind at all. And the men would take a 
lunch, because they wouldn’t get back [until] 
evening, to make the first cut around the field. 

You know, the Spanish ranch was also 
joined by Powers Meadows, to the south; 
and the River ranch, which was called the 
River ranch because it was situated on the 
Owyhee River. Incidentally, the Owyhee River 
originates in Independence Valley, in which 
the Spanish ranch was located, it’s supposed 
to be the only river in the state of Nevada 
that flows to the Pacific Ocean, indirectly, by 
flowing into the Snake River, and the Snake 


River flowing into the Columbia River and 
the Columbia River ends up with the Pacific 
Ocean. 

And also, an additional ranch was called 
the Brewery ranch. In my time, there was no 
brewery there, but I suppose there had been 
a brewery there at one time. And the Young 
brothers ranch. These ranches were all located 
in Independence Valley. They were considered 
as part of the Spanish ranch. 

I believe I said before, that when I 
went there in May of 1921, that spring they 
turned 21,000 head of cattle out of the fields. 
When the cattle were in such weak physical 
condition that you didn’t drive them out of the 
fields, when spring came, you merely opened 
the gate and let them drift themselves out of 
the fields—they were very thin. It would take 
them maybe two or three weeks to get away 
from the ranch. They’d eventually work out of 
the field, day by day, a little farther out there 
on the spring grass. 

And they worked as high as forty-five 
cowboys there at one time—three crews— 
they had a crew that worked the fields, of 
fifteen men. They had another crew of fifteen 
men who worked the ranges, and they had 
another crew of fifteen cowboys who merely 
trailed the cattle from the ranch to Elko, the 
shipping point. 

All supplies went for the Spanish ranch, 
because of its location and the types of 
winter—the winter before I was there in ’21, 
1920, apparently the temperature had been 
below sixty [degrees] below zero, and they 
hadn’t seen the ground for several months. 
I worked there in 1922, and the second time 
around in 1923—and we started feedin’ cattle 
on horses and sleds on Thanksgiving Day, 
and I left there on the fifteenth of May of that 
year, and we were still feeding with sleds and 
horses; and I never seen any bare ground since 
early December. 



30 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Now I’m goin to my friend Doby Doc— 
Robert F. Caudill. And I’ll just make my 
statements as I knew him, and from the 
newspapers. He apparently was from a 
banking family in Texas, the Caudills, and was 
a lawyer by education. He apparently came 
to Nevada when he was discharged from the 
Army right at the end of World War I. 

And the first I ever heard of him was 
when there was a federal suit filed in 
Carson City against Robert F. Caudill and 
others for runnin’ what the government felt 
was a business of acquirin’ unpurchased 
merchandise in boxcars on the railroads and 
sellin it. The government filed in the federal 
courts a suit against him for possession of 
illegal merchandise. This was all taken from 
the newspapers. They had, accordin’ to the 
paper, thirty-five federal jury men, and they 
held three trials at the federal court in Carson 
City, and each time he was turned free. I 
believe the last article in the paper about 
him was that they never even fined him. The 
only fine he got out of this problem with 
the federal government didn’t involve the 
federal government, but it involved his wife. 
He was charged at the end of the third trial 
for mistreatin’ his wife at the Golden Hotel 
in Reno, and I believe his total fine for that 
charge was thirty-five dollars. 

Following that, when I went to the Spanish 
ranch as a bookkeeper in ’21, Doby Doc, or 
Robert F. Caudill (the same person), had been 
a bookkeeper there, just previous to my time, 
and had gotten into some kind of trouble 
with the Union Land and Cattle Company, 
where they accused him in the papers of 
misappropriating some of their money. And 
Ray Frazier, accountant for the Union Land 
and Cattle Company, and another unnamed 
person went to the Spanish ranch and checked 
the books. In their work they found two sets 
of books: one you could read and balance; the 


other set of books was in a backhand writing 
which you couldn’t read. As a result, they 
couldn’t come to any charges, and the case 
was dropped. 

When I went to work at the Spanish 
ranch, under the bed—mattress—which 
Doc had been using, was several copies of 
San Francisco papers, accusin’ Doby Doc of 
running a meat company—one or more— 
in the Los Angeles area with government 
meats; he was a commissary man apparently 
in the World War I Army. The federal courts 
had a complaint sworn against him for his 
arrest. Accordin’ to the papers, there was 
two men came to Elko, where Doby Doc 
by that time was out on the Owyhee Desert 
where he acquired his name of Doby Doc 
from buildin’ a house out of adobe out there. 
The two men had the papers sworn out for 
his arrest, and went out to arrest him on 
the desert which was over a hundred miles 
from Elko. 

When they got out there and found his 
house (he was in his house), they approached 
him at the door and told him who they were 
and the papers they had. And bein’ a lawyer, 
he looked at the papers and said, “Well, you 
have the wrong papers. You can’t come in the 
house. You’ll have to go back to Elko and get 
the right papers. When you come back, I’ll be 
here.” Which they did—they served him, took 
him to San Francisco. The newspapers came 
out there and said that he’d been indicted, 
and had retained a famous criminal lawyer 
in San Francisco at that time by the name of 
McNabney for a fee of five thousand dollars. 
The next papers come out and said that Doby 
Doc or Robert F. Caudill, however you want 
to write it, had named eighteen high-ranking 
Army officers who were partners with him 
in the meat operation in the Army. The next 
paper came out the next day and says, “Doby 
Doc is released, no indictment.” 



Ranch Life in Northern Nevada and Eastern California 


31 


I talked to him about it after I found the 
papers, and he said at that time he had five 
thousand dollars in cash. And he gave all of 
it to McNabney, the lawyer, and came home. 

Following that time, and after he was no 
longer working with the Union Land and 
Cattle Company, he became pretty heavily 
involved in bootlegging. I sold him lots of 
corn and copper plates and things to make 
whiskey from the Sewell store. And for a 
certain amount of time he operated on a 
wholesale basis on the desert. Later on he 
moved to Elko, acquired an old building, 
and decided to make it two stories. When he 
put the scaffolding up for the second story, at 
the top of the scaffolding, there was always a 
gallon jug of bootleg whiskey. 

The sheriff in Elko, Mr. Harris, was of 
course under heavy pressure, as Doby Doc 
had made the Indians with wheelbarrows go 
up the ramp with the construction material, 
and at the top they had this gallon of whiskey 
all the time. So the sheriff decided on a 
scheme. He had one of his men go up that 
ramp and get the gallon of whiskey off there, 
and then he himself waited over at the railroad 
track, accordin’ to history, for that gallon of 
whiskey to come over, so he could arrest Doby 
Doc. Between the two of’em, they fumbled the 
jar and dropped the whiskey and broke it on 
the railroad track. So this is all fact, according 
to the Elko paper. 

However, the sheriff arrested him, and 
he was put in the Elko County jail. But Doby 
Doc was a tremendous cook, a very fine cook. 
And by the end of two weeks, according to the 
Elko paper, there were so many of the Elko 
businessmen cornin’ up to the jail for lunch 
that they actually turned him out because he 
turned out to be too much of a problem to 
put in jail 

Generally, following that area, he picked 
up some of the old Palisade railroad cars, a 


few antiques. And I believe one of the things 
he bought was the old Austin jail and had a 
kind of a museum in Elko until such time as 
Las Vegas— El Rancho—came into existence. 
Then he took his antiques and moved down to 
Vegas. Then following that, he opened kind of 
a museum out at Boulder City (just before you 
enter Boulder City), and had some llamas, and 
his antiques and the old things he’d gathered 
along the way. 

And then when the war came on, he 
bought a piece of land out in the desert near 
Las Vegas and started to dig a hole in the 
ground, a big one, for an air-raid shelter. And 
the sheriff never bothered him till about the 
time he had it completed. Doby Doc told me 
himself that the sheriff came out and made 
him fill the hole. He was afraid that he’d 
have women and whiskey and gambling and 
everything, so they just made him fill in the 
hole—he told me this himself personally. 

I think the final thing of that is when I 
used to tell my wife about Doby Doc before 
she met him, she thought of Doby Doc as 
kind of a myth until she actually met him. 
And one morning when we were up early in 
Las Vegas goin to breakfast, and I saw Doby 
Doc coming down the street—. Incidentally, 
previous to that time, he always dressed more 
or less like a railroad man with an old pair 
of striped bib overalls and a white shirt and 
a black shoestring for a tie. But this mornin 
he was really dressed up in his tuxedo and his 
little black tie. I introduced him to my wife, 
and he always called me “Charlie” for some 
reason, havin’ known him in Elko so long. He 
made such a fuss over my wife—”My dear, 
how are you? You’re lookin’ wonderful! I never 
saw you look so good!” He’d never seen her 
before in his life! 

We visited. And after we left, my wife said, 
“Did you see those Woolworth diamonds he 
was wearin’?” 



32 


Clarence J. Thornton 


And I told her, “Doby Doc don’t wear 
Woolworth diamonds. Those diamonds he 
was wearin were real diamonds!” 

Following that, the Horseshoe Club in 
Las Vegas became involved in an income 
tax lawsuit regardin’ the Horseshoe Club. 
And the owner, Benny Binion, was finally 
indicted and sentenced to prison, at which 
time he put his friend Doby Doc in charge of 
his Horseshoe Club operation while he was 
in prison with the warnin’, “Please don’t steal 
too much. Don’t steal more than $100 a day 
from me now.” 

It was always quite a shock to the people 
in Vegas when he put Doby Doc in charge, 
because he had a son that was pretty well 
acquainted with the gaming business. But 
Doby Doc ran it durin’ Binion’s time in the 
prison. 

Doby Doc later settled in Pahrump, and I 
believe had moved from Pahrump back into 
Las Vegas when he passed away. Now that is 
my recollection of what I knew about Doby 
Doc. 

Men’s Work on the Ranch 

Well, I was gonna talk a little bit about a 
day’s work; I had in mind on these ranches 
what a day’s work consisted of. You generally 
got up about 5:00 a.m. in the morning 
year-round. ’Course, in the wintertime you 
wandered around in the dark with a kerosene 
lantern. You went to the barns— workin’ 
horses—fed your horses hay and grain, 
cleaned the stalls out, and generally had a 
workin team of two to eight horses, accordin’ 
to what you were doing. 

They generally ate breakfast at about 6:00 
a.m. And I thought I’d put this in because I 
remember a town girl who came to breakfast 
one morning. And it consisted of generally 
hot mush, eggs, hot biscuits, potatoes, 


coffee, hotcakes, ham or bacon or steak. This 
assortment of breakfast foods on the table just 
about floored her! She’d never seen a breakfast 
like that! 

You were generally on the way to the fields 
to do your day’s work by seven o’clock in the 
morning, with plowing, disking, seeding, 
harrowing, whatever it was. Generally stay out 
in the field and work till about eleven-thirty, 
and you came back in, had to feed and water 
your horses. Noontime, you had your lunch, 
which at that time was called a dinner instead 
of lunch. You had about an hour off for your 
break there. By one o’clock you were back to 
the fields for the afternoon’s work. 

Generally, you worked till about five or 
5:30, and back to barn, unharness the horses, 
feed and water. Six o’clock in the evening you 
had dinner, and noontime was dinner, too, 
in those days. You were generally in bed by 
seven or eight o’clock, because after a day like 
that, you were very tired of the physical work. 

Worked six days a week. You were paid a 
dollar a day. And durin the hay time they paid 
two dollars a day. All the work in those years 
was done with horses and mules; there was 
no tractors or power equipment of any kind. 

Sundays we spent most of the morning 
taking our weekly bath. We had no hot 
water, showers at that time. You had to warm 
your water over an open stove, and then 
generally wash up and wash our clothes. 
By the afternoon, you were ready for a little 
recreation, which might consist of playin’ 
horseshoes or huntin’ a little bit. Some of 
the ranch hands were amateur miners, 
prospecting in the hills around the area. 
If you worked as a cowboy, it was a little 
different, inasmuch as there was no Sunday as 
a holiday for the cowboys. In fact, there were 
no holidays on the ranches, but you did have 
Sundays off. With workin on the range, you 
just worked straight through. 



Ranch Life in Northern Nevada and Eastern California 


33 


I worked at the Nevada-California Land 
and Livestock Company at Smoke Creek, and 
Gerlach Land and Cattle Company at Gerlach, 
and the Spanish ranch at Tuscarora, Nevada. 

Incidentally, all of these places provided 
very good food and plenty of it. But the 
problem I’ll mention is the difference in good 
food and good cooks. When you had good 
food and good cooks, you really ate well. 
When you still had good food with a poor 
cook, you didn’t eat very well. It wasn’t the 
food that made the difference, it was the cook 

Sometimes the crews at Constantia 
consisted of as high as 325 men. There’d be 125 
men to a breakfast sometimes because it was 
kind of a holding spot for the Smoke Creek 
and Constantia Company, and then they 
would move from there to the other ranches. 

While I was still a kid in Reno, I was 
hiring men. My dad would call up—he was 
superintendent—and want some men, and I 
was on Commercial Row, when I was sixteen 
or seventeen years old, in the bars, huntin’ 
for some of the men who had come in for a 
vacation, and tryin’ to find new men to go out 
to work. Generally you had to wake and sober 
them up—they’d had a little celebration—you 
generally had to make sure they got on a train. 
And we paid their fare back to Constantia; it 
generally cost five dollars apiece to get ’em 
back there. And when they got back to the 
ranch, they were generally good for a year 
before they’d come back to town again—work 
straight through, do very well. 

At Gerlach, Nevada, hiring men was a very 
interesting deal, especially for the hayfields. 
The Western Pacific Railroad at that time 
was what was called a “red card” railroad. In 
other words, if you were an IWW, Industrial 
Worker of the World, you could travel on the 
boxcars and so forth with[out] paying any 
transportation. Lots of the conductors and 
brakemen were “red card” men. 


Incidentally, one day talkin’ to Joe 
McDonald, who was a newspaperman of 
some importance years later, back in those 
days he told me that as a journalist, he had to 
carry a “red card” also. I was quite surprised! 

But at Gerlach, they had a setup at their 
livestock yards, and they had a business 
agent—the IWWs. And when he’d see you in 
town, he’d come up and talk to you; you’d tell 
him how many men you needed and what you 
were payin’ (he knew that the Gerlach Land 
and Livestock was a good outfit). 

Incidentally, we always got very good men. 
However, we did have one riot in the hayfield 
with the men. It turned out that one of the 
men he gave us was a booster or somethin’ 
for the IWW, and the others were opposed 
to him. And one day when we were stackin’ 
hay in the morning, they practically went on 
a strike, and they went to the house—went 
in an old shed there and had a big meeting 
amongst themselves. Even the cook that we 
had at this operation was an IWW. And after 
one o’clock, when we went back to the field 
to work, everybody went back to work except 
this one man. How they settled their problems 
amongst themselves I don’t know. But he left 
and was gone from there. 

The Miller and Lux people at that same 
time were operatin’ out of Gerlach for Soldier 
Meadows. And they’ve also hired help in 
Gerlach under the same conditions. But 
they had a little bad reputation of pay and 
working conditions and poor food. So we 
always thought we got the best men with our 
operation. 

This next thing I’m gonna talk about 
is a day when I left the Spanish ranch in 
December, 1921, just before Christmas. The 
country was snowed in at that time, and 
we had been feeding cattle with horses and 
sleds for a month or more. The day I left, the 



34 


Clarence J. Thornton 


company took myself and another person to 
what was called the Taylor Canyon ranch, 
with sleighs, at the head of this Independence 
Valley where the Spanish ranch was located. 
They took us up on sleighs and horses. The 
next day we were gonna go to Elko. When we 
got to the Taylor Canyon ranch— they kept 
a man and his wife there, and they had small 
children and a lot of cattle, and everybody was 
in bed. And to this day, I don’t know why we 
guessed what was wrong with them; they were 
very ill and very weak. And we decided they 
had ptomaine poisoning. And at that time, 
as far as we knew, the big main treatment 
for ptomaine poisoning was mustard and 
hot water. Regular household mustard. And 
we fixed them up a dose of mustard and hot 
water, and we fed the cattle that night, and 
the next morning they were all back in good 
shape and they were cured. How we ever 
decided ptomaine poisoning was what had 
happened—. 

Anyhow, inasmuch as the stage line ran 
every day from Tuscarora to Elko and vice 
versa, and the Taylor Canyon ranch was 
about ten miles east of Tuscarora, we called 
the stage man and said that we were gonna 
walk up to the next station, which was the 
Meadows on the way to Elko, and we’d leave 
our luggage out by the mailbox on the road, 
if he’d pick it up. And then we’d walk up 
there and go with him. And so we started 
walkin’ up there in the snow. And the farther 
we walked, the deeper the snow got; it was 
uphill. But we finally made it. But when we 
got there, the man who was tendin’ that 
station for the stage line was sick in bed. We 
never did know what was wrong with him. 
But we took care of the horses and got the 
horses ready for the stage man when he came 
along with the mail and so forth. And we all 
got up on the snow sled and started for Elko. 
’Course, the distance from where we were to 


Elko was about seventy miles. And the snow 
was real deep. 

The regular driver had a new driver with 
him. And about halfway between Taylor 
Canyon and Dinner Station, they discussed 
the team of four horses on the sled, and 
decided that they would try to put one of 
the lead horses on the wheel and see how it 
worked. There was actually four of us on the 
sled: the driver and his helper, the two of us. 
But the man unhitched the lead horse before 
he brought him back and put him on the 
wheel—just unhitched him and left him loose, 
and went over to unhitch the wheel horse. 
The lead horse ran away with the harness and 
everything, and left us with three horses and 
a big sled. 

But we were lucky. There was one of the 
coyote trappers in that country out that day 
lookin’ for his traps under the snow, and he 
happened to find this horse with a harness on 
it, and he brought the horse back. 

The snow at this time was from two to 
four feet deep practically everywhere, and the 
temperature was down below zero—at about 
zero. We got the horse back on and that— 
from there we were able to get to Dinner 
Station, which was about twenty miles north 
of Elko, where we had lunch. 

While we were there at the Dinner Station 
eatin’, George Carat from the Y-P had decided 
to take two or three of his people to Elko in a 
car. And when he went by the Dinner Station 
on top of that snow, he was practically flyin’. 

After we ate, we started for Elko. And 
we got about halfway there, and we found 
George Garat and his men stuck in the snow. 
It was gettin’ dark. And we didn’t go by ’em; 
we hooked onto their car and tried to pull 
it back where they might get going. But in 
the darkness, the sled tipped over with the 
mail and everything on it. We didn’t get the 
car back on the road, but we got it up—the 



Ranch Life in Northern Nevada and Eastern California 


35 


mail and the freight we had, we got it back 
on the sled. His men got on the sled with us. 

And we went down the road about a mile 
or two, and finally George Garat says, “Well, 
wait a minute, I’m short a man.” And he 
counted his men, and we went back, and one 
of his men that he had with him had—when 
the sled tipped over, had got buried in the 
snow. And we went back and then were lucky 
enough to find him. 

Well, we went on, headed for Elko, and 
we got down near what was called Eight Mile, 
where we changed horses again. To someone 
I said, “Boy, we’re sittin’ on somethin’ cold!” 
We were at zero temperature. 

And the driver said, “Oh no, no, we’re 
sittin’ on a canvas.” And we got to lookin’ 
around, and we were sittin’ on a frozen beef! 

We got into Elko that night after dark, 
after being out there all day, and went and 
stayed at the Mayer Hotel. Now, the Mayer 
Hotel at that time was heated by steam, hot 
water radiators. And in the old-time radiators, 
they had a piece of tin on the top, which you’ve 
seen. We could sit on that tin and not even 
feel the heat. 

We finally got somethin’ to eat. And 
I went to bed and filled up a tub with hot 
water and thawed myself out. But I’ve always 
thought to this day, if we’d’ve had anybody 
with us that day who was not acclimated 
and out in those conditions, they would have 
froze to death. 

Incidentally, the first time I ever left from 
Elko to Tuscarora and the Spanish ranch, we 
started out at Elko with the mail contract, 
which was the stage line. And we traveled the 
first eight miles in a truck. We traveled the 
next fifty miles on sleds, with horses. Then we 
came to the Meadows, and there was a creek 
that ran down the canyon there. And we left 
the sled there; we got a buckboard and put the 
mail sacks in the buckboard, and we drove 


from the Meadows down to Taylor Canyon 
and into Tuscarora. 

Sewell brothers of Elko, who had a grocery 
store, had the contract for the mail delivery 
from Elko to Tuscarora. Their driver was a 
man by the name of Mr. Love, who was quite 
a teamster at that time. I think that’s all I’ll say 
on that. Where do we go from there? That’s 
enough, do you think? 

In the wild horse problem, which has been 
discussed so much locally and nationally in 
the past few years, at two occasions in my 
life I was involved with running horses from 
the range. At that time they were known as 
generally unbranded work horses that the 
ranchers turned out in the wintertime to 
rustle for their own feed, so they wouldn’t 
have to feed ’em. And then you had just the 
unbranded horses, lots of times, there was 
a question of who owned them at different 
times. But to actually say that they were “wild 
horses,” I would have to question that, and 
I’d have to have somebody point out to me, 
what is a mustang? I have seen some of these 
smaller horses; we always considered ’em, 
just inbred horses on the ranges that wouldn’t 
support ’em, and so forth. But to actually say 
that this is a mustang, I would have to have 
somebody point out what makes a mustang. 

For instance, on the Spanish ranch, 
and the Gerlach Land and Livestock and 
Constantia, all operated the same. In the fall 
of the year, they turned their work horses that 
they didn’t need for winter operation out on 
the range to winter for themselves on what 
feed they could find. Come spring, you’d go 
out and run horses in. 

One of the places where we ran horses was 
on top of Donnelly Mountain, which is north 
of Gerlach. It has a government elevation 
stake of eleven thousand feet up there. And 
come the spring of the year, we would go up 
and get those horses we had turned out in the 



36 


Clarence J. Thornton 


winter and fall—the work horses—we had 
trouble with our own horses and ourselves 
because of thin air. We couldn’t hardly catch 
the work horses! But they were not wild 
horses; they were work horses. 

We had the same situation at the Spanish 
ranch on the mountains to the south and west 
of the Spanish ranch. At Constantia they ran 
most of their horses in the wintertime up on 
top of Tule Mountain, which is a mountain 
layin’ to the west of Pyramid Lake. That’s 
exactly how I felt about it. 

It was somethin’ to run the horses, 
through, because when you went out to run 
wild horses or these work horses to get ’em 
back in, you generally took a group of gentle 
horses along—twenty-five, thirty, forty—and 
would put them in a canyon or somewhere 
where you were gonna head the other horses 
to. Sometimes you had corrals, but most of 
the time you just had a bunch of work horses, 
gentle horses. And then you would position 
your riders along the trail. The group that was 
gonna start ’em would go up the mountain, 
to the top, and get ’em together, started down 
this canyon. And then they’d have us hidden 
behind the rocks or somethin’ along the trail 
to keep ’em in that canyon. As they went by, 
why, the man who was runnin’ ’em in would 
drop out, and you’d pick ’em up, and we’d run 
’em to the bottom of the canyon. We ran this 
group of wild horses into the group of tame 
horses, and they generally would stop right 
there. There was occasions where there were 
corrals, but corrals were a little dangerous 
because the wild horses were inclined to go 
right on through the corrals that you had built. 

How many horses would you see in these 
bunches that you rounded up? 

Well, when we ran horses, we generally 
ran horses about two or three weeks. And 


the number of horses you would have would 
depend if you were at Constantia, which was a 
smaller outfit; Gerlach, which was bigger than 
Constantia; and the Spanish ranch. And you 
probably rounded up around three hundred 
horses every spring, besides the horses you 
had on the ranch who had been workin’ all 
winter. And then, as I said before, all your 
work was done at that time with horses and 
mules, and they’d put ’em back in the hay 
fields to work. 

’Course, they didn’t quiet down too 
easily. The Spanish ranch, particularly, they 
kept two men or three men in the field all 
the time on horseback with lariats to rope 
the runaways. With horses that hadn’t been 
workin’ all winter and sometimes men who 
didn’t know too much about ridin’ or drivin’ 
horses, you would have lots of runaways, and 
these cowboys would be out there with saddle 
horse and lariat to rope the runaways when 
they ran away with the rake or the mower, 
whatever it was, get her back together. 

And that was the way they handled work 
horses. Now on the horse they used for cattle 
work, especially on the Spanish ranch, where 
they worked so many cowboys, they kept two 
or three men breakin’ horses year-round on 
the ranch, and generally had two men breakin 
saddle horses and one man breakin’ work 
horses. 

In most cases, except the Spanish ranch, 
when they broke horses for work horses, they 
generally worked ’em on a cart, broke ’em for 
work. At the Spanish ranch, they had a unique 
system. They had a big cart with a long tongue 
on it and one seat on the back of the cart. And 
they had a gentle horse that they hooked on one 
side of the cart. And they’d take these unbroken 
horses and hook ’em up to the gentle horse on 
the other side, and make no effort to control ’em 
at all— get in the cart and get a whip. They’d 
head ’em down the country at full speed. And 



Ranch Life in Northern Nevada and Eastern California 


37 


the gentle horse was runnin along with them. 
And as the unbroken horse got tired, why, you 
hit it some more with the whip. By the time you 
got back, you had a pretty gentle horse. That was 
the way it was done. 

The saddle horses, of course, were broken 
different ways accordin’ to the cowboys you 
had to break the saddle horses. Some of ’em 
sacked ’em—about what you see today—shake 
a sack on ’em to make ’em gentle. The other 
cowboys’d just saddle ’em up and get on ’em 
and let ’em buck themselves out. 

The cowboys that worked on the Spanish 
ranch generally had a string of ten horses 
each. And if there was fifteen of us workin’ 
cattle in the field there’d be a hundred and 
fifty horses, but we’d only ride one horse a 
day, and it keeps changin’. And then every 
two or three months they would take all those 
gentle horses away from you. They’d give you 
unbroken—or horses that had been broken 
not to buck, had been put in the snaffle bit, 
hackamore, and the spade bit, in which you 
had rodeo about every three months on the 
ranch when they took the gentle horses away 
which you had been riding, and given these 
newly-broken ones. Talk about rodeos. 

They usually had two men breakin’ the 
saddle horses, but one day at the Spanish 
ranch, both the men breakin the horses for 
saddle purposes quit. They got extra pay 
for that type of work. They paid generally 
seventy-five dollars a month to the men 
who were riding these horses. And the 
superintendent, George Calligan, asked for 
volunteers if anybody wanted to take the job 
of breakin the saddle horses. 

A man there, Henry Tomkins, who had 
worked on the ranch for a long time said, 
yeah, he’d take the job. Nobody knew he 
could ride at all! And then Calligan asked 
him who he wanted as a helper, and he said 
nobody; he’d do it himself. He took the job, 


and he had no problems at all. He could really 
ride those horses. We found out afterwards, 
he had worked for Dick Magee out of Battle 
Mountain up on the side of the mountain 
when Dick Magee did nothin’ but break polo 
horses. 

Dick Magee’s father, of course, was an 
early days famous banker in the San Francisco 
area—very wealthy people. And Dick was 
just a polo player and trained polo horses on 
that particular ranch that he had out of Battle 
Mountain. Years later, he went to the Grass 
Valley ranch, which was north of Austin to 
the Grass Valley Land and Cattle Company. 

Dick Magee was a single person, a real 
westerner, a cowboy with generally a broken- 
down old car of some kind. They claim that 
his aunts bought the Grass Valley Land and 
Cattle Company for him, which was a very 
fine ranch north of Austin, Nevada. And he 
used to come to Reno all the time in this old 
car, and he’d have to stop every few miles 
and fill the radiator with water; it leaked. 
But he came by the ranch down the canyon, 
the Williams ranch, which the Sierra Pacific 
Power Company owns now. And it was 
owned at that time by Mr. and Mrs. Beverly 
Blackmer. MV wife’s father, Bill Stevenson, 
was superintendent for them. He and Dick 
became quite friendly. 

As far as I know at the present time, Dick 
Magee is still playin’ polo and breakin polo 
horses at Oakdale, California. And Molly 
Flagg remarried; she’s now Mrs. Knudtsen. 





Work as an Agricultural 
Extension Agent 


I came back to Reno from the contract at 
Eagle Falls, and had been in town a few days 
when I received a call from Cecil [W.] Creel, 
who was director of Agricultural Extension 
for the state of Nevada. And he offered me 
a job as assistant county agriculture agent 
in Washoe County The actual agent at that 
time was a man by the name of Thomas [R] 
Buckman. That was in the fall of 1925, about 
August, I believe. Mr. Buckman was busy with 
the state fair at Fallon, so I became pretty 
active as agricultural extension agent while 
he worked at the fair at Fallon. 

Boca Dam and Reservoir 

In the extension work, I stayed there from 
1925 till January the first, 1929 [when] I left 
Reno and went to Alliance, Ohio. And I would 
guess that my big, main project all those years 
was Boca Dam. While I didn’t complete the 
petitions for elections for Boca Dam, I had 
to do all the preliminary work, and put the 
thing together for the petitions, so an election 
could be held. 


The election was held in the spring, 
apparently, of 1930, and Boca Dam was 
soon constructed after that. However, to get 
the funds, we had to send a committee to 
Washington, D.C. for federal appropriations. 
That committee consisted of Art Peckham, 
Herb Nichols, and Mr. [Arthur W.] Kleppe. 
This was Ernest Kleppes father. Ernest Kleppe 
afterwards was county commissioner for 
several years here. 

They went back to Washington, with the 
purpose of seem Senator Tasker [L.] Oddie, 
who was United States Senator, Republican 
senator, at that time, but by chance, they 
ran into Senator Key Pittman when they got 
back there, on the street apparently. And Mr. 
Peckham told me that Pittman asked them 
what they were back for, and they told ’em 
they were back to see if they could get money 
for construction for Boca Dam. 

The next morning they received a call 
from Senator Pittman, and they went to his 
office, and he had arranged overnight for 
that commitment to build a dam. But for a 
peculiarity in the commitment, which I never 



40 


Clarence J. Thornton 


understood— Mr. Peckham told me—that 
Pittman said there was to be no publicity that 
he got the money for the construction of the 
dam, because he was a Democrat at that time, 
and the president of the United States was 
Herbert Hoover. Just what his reason was, I 
never knew. 

’Course Boca Dam was constructed 
and finished, I believe, by 1935, as a flood 
control dam, in connection with the Fallon 
reclamation project. 

What did you do as you were making the plans 
for the dam? Did you work on the surveys, or 
did you go out to the survey areas? 

No, no, my job was gettin’ the state 
irrigation district act in such a position it 
could be used to conduct the petition and 
formulation of the Washoe County irrigation 
district, and arrange for the taxes. Even 
though the money was provided by the 
federal government, the irrigation district was 
bonded to repay that money to the federal 
government, which has, at the present time of 
1981, has all been done, except a few bonds 
that are out that they’re unable to locate the 
people who have ’em. 

The site of Boca Dam in the 1910s and 
1920s and thirties was owned by the Union Ice 
Company. And in the wintertime, the railroad 
company contracted the Union Ice Company 
for all their ice for the refrigeration on their 
railroad trains. It made quite a nice break for 
the college students in this area in the winter 
vacation, because the ice cutting generally 
came about the same time as vacation—they 
had jobs cutting ice durin’ that time. 

But about 1928, one day a man came 
into my office in the Agricultural Extension 
Service, and introduced himself as the 
president of the Union Ice Company, and 


said they were building an artificial ice plant 
in Sparks, and he would like to give the Boca 
Dam site to the farmers of Washoe County. 
They had no use for it. 

As an agricultural extension agent, I called 
a meeting of the farmers, and we talked about 
whether we’d accept that plant—or the ice 
ponds, which they actually were—that the 
Union Ice Company had offered to give ’em 
at no charge. They didn’t expect to use ’em 
anymore. And believe it or not, the farmers 
decided not to accept the gift. 

Within a few short years, they bought the 
Boca Dam site, to build a dam, after turnin’ it 
down when it was free. 

Why did they turn it down? 

I have no idea. They didn’t accept it. I 
can find the president’s name for you, in the 
Union Ice, because the man that’s here in 
town that ran the Union Ice later, I see him 
occasionally, and he knows who that president 
was. I never made any note of the name even, 
but [chuckle] it was a little peculiar, but that’s 
what happened. 

Did they debate this or anything? 

Oh yes, they discussed it very thoroughly— 
no rushin’ — but just talked it over and 
everything, and they decided not to accept 
the ponds which they could’ve had, as a 
gift, simply because the man wanted to do 
something for the area where he got most 
of his help when he was cuttin’ ice in the 
wintertime. 

And they, the farmers of course, gettin’ 
back to Boca Dam, which would probably 
just have something to do with why they 
didn’t accept it—for years and years before 
Boca Dam was built, there was a continual 
difference of opinion in the area about where 



Work as an Agricultural Extension Agent 


41 


that dam should be built. Different groups of 
individuals and different farm people and the 
different companies that owned sites up there, 
had an idea where the dam should be built, 
and Boca Dam was just one group, Stampede 
was another group. 

In fact, one time, the actual site of the 
reservoir or dam came pref near to bein’ built 
in our Spanish Springs Valley, out of Reno. 
That was considered very, very seriously as 
a location where the dam should be. They 
talked about puttin’ the dam in the river, but 
of course, that’d’ve been below the agriculture 
area, and dropped that. But Spanish Springs 
was quite a prominent place for a dam at 
one time. They finally, in 1929, after years 
of squabblin’, and no damsite—as I’ve said 
before, one night at midnight in the old 
YMCA—they got together and decided that 
they would concentrate at Boca Dam, and try 
to get it built there, after years of in-fighting, 
I guess you’d call it—political fighting. 

In fact, they went so far one time as 
to bring the former president of Stanford 
University to Reno to discuss the damsites. 
His name was Mr. [Ray Lyman] Wilbur. He 
was afterwards quite prominent in the Hoover 
administration. He had two or three meetings 
in Reno on the locations of the damsite. 

And I imagine this has a lot to do with 
why they didn’t accept the offer from the 
president of the Union Ice Company, cause 
of the location. 

Now, where do we go from there? 

You were going to talk about the intricacies of 
circulating those petitions after it was decided 
to —. 

Well, of course, I think as I’ve said before 
when they designated me to try to get the 
Boca Dam site financed and built, that I was 
not to have any contact with any lawyers or 


engineers. Every little group of farmers had 
a lawyer representin’ ’em, and an engineer. 

To start with, I naturally went to the state 
engineer’s office to get a copy of the irrigation 
act. And I discovered the act was so old that 
it had to be rewritten. And in my contact in 
gettin it rewritten, I wound up with me. My 
main first contact was district attorney in 
Reno and Washoe County, Lester Sumerfield. 
But for various reasons, he didn’t offer to help 
any. Probably for legal reasons, thinkin it was 
business for other lawyers. 

So I undertook to rewrite the irrigation 
act, and I imagine, without lookin’ it up, it 
probably is still about as I rewrote it. Not 
havin’ any background, I naturally wrote it 
to fit our situation in here. 

The actual circulation of the petition 
wasn’t done by me, it was done by the farm 
people—the Farm Bureau people. And as I 
said before, after the petition was circulated 
and they had a vote and decided to build a 
dam, they sent their three representatives to 
Washington, D.C to get the dam financed, 
which they were very successful in doing. 

The dam itself was really built because 
the government overestimated the amount 
of water they had for the Fallon reclamation 
project, when they built the dam, Lahontan 
Dam. I believe at that time when they built 
the darn, they figured they had sufficient 
water for about approximately 120,000 acres 
of land. When it actually got in operation, 
they couldn’t supply that, and they had to 
drop large areas out that they had put in the 
reclamation district. For instance, Soda Lake 
area was completely dropped. 

The first thing they did before they 
more or less forced this area into the dam 
situation, was to hire an engineer by the name 
of Osgood, quietly. The farmers in this area 
were not aware that Mr. Osgood was workin 
for them, and he surveyed all the water in the 



42 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Reno areas at nighttime. Any extra water ran 
down the road or any off of the farms, he made 
a note of. And then they cut down the size of 
the irrigation district to around 70,000 acres. 

And that brought on a lawsuit, which was, 
and probably is still in the court, of the Orr 
Ditch decree. However, it was in the court 
before the actual water rights in this area 
were cleared up; for a sum total of forty-three 
years, before they decided about the allotment 
of the water. And of course today, you still 
occasionally have the same problem, which 
is in the federal courts right at the present 
time, because the Indians at Pyramid Lake 
took no part in the Washoe County Water 
Conservation District formation—they were 
asked to, but they refused to, sayin that Uncle 
Sam would take care of ’em. 

Now, some fifty years later, they’re of 
course, tryin’ to claim water rights on the 
basis of a reservation, which apparently is not 
a reservation. It apparently just was signed 
by President Grant as a fish hatchery, not as 
a reclamation project. 

However, the dam has served a very 
valuable purpose in flood controls. And 
of course, since that time, there’s been— 
Stampede Dam’s been built and there’s 
another dam up there, what’s the name of it? 
Prosser Creek. 

Back in the 1930s, after the dam was 
fairly well underway, a group of farmers and 
an attorney by the name of William Kearney 
in Reno, tried to get the operation stopped 
entirely because of the tax on the thing. I think 
that’s all I want to say on that, on Boca Dam. 

In regards to Mr. Kearney, William 
Kearney, and a situation not havin’ any 
connection with Boca Dam: in the canyon 
below Reno, with two different families 
runnin’ sheep, one of the families was an 
Italian family by the name of Peri, and the 
other person—I can’t recall his name—he was 


Basque. They got into a quarrel over the range, 
and the Basque retained Bill Kearney as his 
lawyer to go down and arbitrate the situation. 

Well, Mr. Kearney happened to choose 
a Saturday afternoon to go down and talk to 
the Peris about his client’s problem. And they 
immediately kidnapped Mr. Kearney. He was 
out of Washoe County, he had no jurisdiction, 
he was in Storey County. And the county seat of 
Storey County, of course, was Virginia City, and 
they put him in the car and took him through 
Reno and up to Virginia City, and had him 
arrested for trespassing. And he couldn’t get 
out till Monday, because it was Saturday. So he 
was in jail up there Saturday and Sunday night, 
because of his effort to represent his client. 

4-H Clubs 

At that time, in the extension service, one 
of the big projects in the area was the alfalfa 
weevil, which was destroying the alfalfa crops. 
We worked on that for a considerable time, 
until they came up with a spray that pretty 
much took care of that, and also the University 
at that time, was developing a type of alfalfa 
that was resistant to the weevil. 

In the extension service, I did something 
besides the Boca Dam, of course, in the 
three and a half years I was there. I was very 
interested in 4-H club work, and I had some 
very good livestock-judging teams that won 
several first places in it. 

The 4-H itself was kinda struggling along 
with finances and conducted a little dance 
about once every three or four weeks to raise 
a little money. Sometimes they raised forty 
or fifty dollars. Then I came up with the idea 
of having an annual event called the Harvest 
Ball, once a year. In order to make it go, I 
had to talk to the local musicians, because 
they were disturbed with these little 4-H 
club dances every few months; it interfered 



Work as an Agricultural Extension Agent 


43 


with their Saturday night dances. So we put 
the first Harvest Ball on, and wound up with 
about two thousand dollars in profit off of the 
ball. However, we had an agreement with the 
musicians in Reno, that we would just have 
the one event for the 4-H once a year, which 
was satisfactory to both of us. 

The Harvest Ball was held for several 
years, and then finally dropped because 
somebody, apparently, didn’t want to do the 
work in the thing. And that was in the 4-H 
department. 

You were quite well known for the success of 
your 4-H groups at that time. 

Yeah, but it’s, as time goes on, what you 
did. 

Well, you might tell me about some of your 
leaders, and what some of the kids did. You 
had to recruit leaders for those groups. 

At that time, you didn’t have—in the 
men’s 4-H—you didn’t have any leaders. The 
agricultural extension agent was the 4-H 
club leader, and the extension agent. You just 
carried on your 4-H projects as part of your 
regular work. 

Now, in the girls’ 4-H, in which I wasn’t 
involved, they had these homemaker clubs, 
and had women—local women—who acted 
as leaders in there, but not in the boys’ 
department. 

Was that Hazel Zimmerman? 

Hazel Zimmerman was the home 
demonstration agent, as they called those at 
that time, and all the time I was in there. 
How about some of the young fellows that you 
made into good cattle raisers? You must have 
some that you’re really proud of. 


Well, I guess the [shows pictures] — 
that’s the picture over there, of some of ‘em, 
includin’ myself.* I don’t know where she got 
these [pictures]. 

4-H projects at that time, generally 
consisted of dairy projects, which was diary 
clubs and poultry clubs. And you had your 
clubs that were interested in farm crops, 
grains, and potatoes, and alfalfa. They had 
their annual 4-H camp every year, and it was 
held at the University farm on South Virginia, 
which later was, for a good many years, part 
of the Redfield estate. 

Afterwards, the 4-H camp was moved to 
Lake Tahoe, through the purchase of property 
from the Parks—Wallace Parks up in the 
Gardnerville country. That’s where the present 
camp is now. 

I don’t recall, many of the people we ever 
had in 4-H, that went through and followed 
on those projects afterwards. As they grew up, 
they went into various other fields. I think I 
just have to leave it at that. 

We came back again into 4-H work when 
I ran the state fair, both in Fallon and here. 
When we started the Washoe County Fair, 
which is now the Nevada State Fair, I think the 
4-H membership in Washoe County at that 
time, was around 150 students. By the time we 
left there in 1970, it was up to around twelve 
or thirteen hundred. But the big change that 
come there, is when the Extension Service 
decided to do 4-H club work in the towns, as 
well as in the county. 

At the time I was in the 4-H, you were 
limited to agriculture, memberships didn’t 
do the town 4-H at all. You’re probably aware 
now, that the girls in town, and the boys, have 


*See Thornton papers, University of 
Nevada-Reno Library. 




44 


Clarence J. Thornton 


their dog clubs, and their horse clubs, and the 
various different types of clubs. 

One of our big projects, too, wasn’t 
particularly in the 4-H, was the “Dairy Day” 
we held at the Model Dairy on Peckham 
Lane. That turned out to be quite an annual 
project. People came and we had a dairy day, 
and dairy-cattle dairy judging, and a big dairy 
lunch. I guess that’s about it on the extension 
agency. 

I know you’re interested in my 4-H club 
work. We carried it along, of course, and it was 
part of the extension program. A man and a 
woman—myself and Miss Zimmerman— 
were two agents, and she had her home 
demonstration work, along with the 4-H girls’ 
work, and I had the regular farm extension 
work, along with the 4-H boys’ work, in there. 
And it was limited at that time to farms only. 
They didn’t invade the city with their 4-H club 
work, they stayed out in the county. 

I just thought you might like to say some more 
about that. You are kind of famous for all of the 
work that you have done with young people. 
Not just then, but later, in the fairs and so forth. 

Well, we did a lot of work. Well, ‘course, 
in the fair work, although maybe I was a little 
mercenary with the 4-H to a certain extent, 
because I believed in 4-H work and I always 
promoted it in all my fairs. And I had a little 
mercenary racket in the thing, because I 
figured if you had good 4-H club work in 
the fairs, and give ’em passes and everything, 
that they would have twelve months a year 
advertising for the fair, as the year went on. 

Most of the kids got their first checks out 
of these fair, 4-H board programs, and lots 
of times they kept their checks at home and 
framed ’em, and they’d never come through 
the bank. You’d call up their folks and say, 
“Where’s Johnny’s check?” 


“Oh, he’s got it pinned up in the bedroom. 
It’s the first check he’s ever got.” Things like 
that. 

We had some 4-H judging teams, both 
Miss Zimmerman and myself, that attended 
these 4-H contests, and boys and girls. 
’Course, the boys’ projects were mostly beef, 
cattle, and livestock judging. We attended the 
Pacific International Exposition in Portland, 
several times, and did fairly well up there. 



5 


Western Nevada Depression Relief 


I wanted to get ahold of the name of this 
company when I went to—the Suburban Light 
and Power Company. It was in January, 1929, 
my wife and I left Reno and went to Alliance, 
Ohio, and went to work for a public utility 
company as an agriculture representative, 
contactin’ the farm people back there. We 
were back there about six months, when the 
Depression came on, and the utility company 
we were with—well, it was quite large. 
Actually, at that particular time, it owned all 
the public utilities in the Hawaiian Islands, 
besides some in North Carolina, but they were 
operatin’ off the stock market, and as the stock 
market collapsed there, the utility company 
also went into receivership, I guess you’d say, 
not into bankruptcy, back there. 

We became pretty well acquainted with I 
guess what you’d call the southeastern part of 
Ohio, where most of the utilities were. ’Round 
Canton, Ohio, and Youngstown, and Lima. 
One of the interesting things that happened 
in that, the utilities had had a big telephone 
service in an area surrounding Hinkley, Ohio, 
which is the home of the Buzzards [chuckle]. 


And for some reason, some of those farmers 
out there got mad at the telephone company; 
had all the phones taken out, a big area. And 
I was assigned to a project to contact those 
farmers, and see if they could get ’em to put 
their phones back in, at which I had no luck. 
They all told me the same thing, “No more 
telephones. All our wives do is talk on the 
phone all day, and we don’t want any more 
phones.” I had no luck at all. Never got a one 
of ’em to put their phone back in. 

What caused the uproar in the first place? 

Oh, they got mad about—I don’t know 
what—they had ’em take ’em out. They 
believed it, and they were out. You couldn’t 
talk to ’em at all. “No, we don’t want any 
telephones. The women would spend too 
much time visiting (gossip),” they said. 

We left Ohio and came back to Reno 
by train, and arrived here, I believe, on the 
mornin’ of July 4, 1929. And for some reason 
or other, we walked downtown in Reno, 
and walked over by the corner of Second 



46 


Clarence J. Thornton 


and Virginia Street, and on the southwest 
corner, which was the location of the Washoe 
County bank, was a big sign, “Closed.” The 
Washoe County bank, held a large number 
of big livestock loans in this area, includin’ 
the Holcomb estate and the Wheeler estate. 

The head man of the Washoe County bank 
was Charles [W.] Mapes, Sr. There were other 
stockholders, but it was pretty much known 
as the Mapes bank—the Washoe County 
bank. As a result of that bank closing, a lot 
of the large livestock companies went out of 
business, too, at the same time. 

Following that bank closure, the owners 
and other people organized a corporation 
which they called the Realization Corporation. 
They issued stock to the depositors, on the 
basis of the money they had on deposit on 
the bank at that time. The stock itself, was 
accepted in the trade area by some merchants; 
other people wouldn’t accept it. Whatever 
became of the stock, I have no idea. It just 
finally, eventually faded out of the picture. 

In 1925,1 joined the Rotary Club of Reno, 
and in 1927, I joined the Masonic Lodge 
Number 35. And durin those years, I served 
as post adjutant for the American Legion 
Darrel Dunkle Post Number 1. And I still 
belong to all the organizations yet. 

I went to work for the Realization 
Corporation at that time, but I only worked 
about two months with ’em, because their 
operation was foreclosing on people that had 
mortgages, bank mortgages, and I just wasn’t 
the right temperament, I guess, to go out and 
repossess people’s property. You called on ’em, 
and visited with ’em, and you had the papers 
in your pocket to take their property over. 
You’d count their sheep and their cattle and 
measured the hay, and when you got all done, 
you just take the papers out of your pocket 
and say, “Well, the bank’s foreclosing.” And 
you took charge of it right there, set up a man 


in charge of the operation and went to the next 
place. And after two or three of those, I quit. 

For a short time I was unemployed, and 
then I eventually bought what was known 
as the Western Hatchery located on 835837 
West Fifth Street in Reno. The property is now 
occupied by Pay’n’Pak electric concern. I was 
about one city block west of Fifth and Vine, 
consisting of between three—five or four 
acres. It was owned by a man by the name 
of A. F. Scanavino, who was quite a wealthy 
person. 

And to show you what happened in 
the Depression, when I went there in 1930 
with Scanavino, he was worth about four or 
five million dollars. Five years later, he had 
$47,500 left. Just as a matter of interest to 
these people, his large holdings were Bank of 
America stock, and when I went there, it was 
$ 125 a share. Four or five years later, it was two 
dollars and ten cents a share. But he had all his 
stock paid for. He hung onto it, and eventually 
became a millionaire again, because the Bank 
of America came back. 

I was married at that time, and besides 
runnin’ the Western Hatchery, I went to work 
for Washoe County, as assistant probation 
officer. And that job turned out to be handling 
welfare. At the time we left Ohio in June of 
1929, the Depression was already on back in 
Ohio, but it didn’t get here for two or three 
years later, so the welfare was a very minor 
thing when I went to work for Washoe County 
in 1930. 

But while I was called assistant probation 
officer, I handled strictly welfare. And it was 
handled on a pretty informal basis. There 
was very little hardship, and as people came 
in, you would discuss with them their issues, 
and generally give fifteen dollars, or twenty- 
five, or forty, or all the rent. And I’d go across 
to the courthouse with a claim, and get the 
money from the county treasurer, and give ’em 



Western Nevada Depression Relief 


47 


the money. But that was the beginning of the 
welfare problem for Washoe County It went 
along in that basis, and we had no trainin’ in 
welfare. I say “we,” but I mean my secretary 
and I. And we set up our own system in there 
with the county money, and some state money. 

Out of that system, the Salvation Army 
was our agent for handling all transients. And 
the transients at that time, consisted of the 
unemployed who rode the freight trains free. 
The Salvation Army operated a soup kitchen at 
1415 East Fourth Street in Reno. The building 
belonged to A. Bevilacqua. The unemployed, 
or transients, whichever you want to call ’em, 
were entitled to three meals and one night’s 
sleep, and then they had to move on. (Actually, 
the building is still down there. I went down 
there the other day and took a look at it. 
It’s a auto parts place now.) They handled 
thousands of people on the transient scale and, 
lookin’ back over history, I don’t recall we ever 
had a complaint from those transient people. 

The Red Cross was set up to handle the 
veterans—both local and transients-and it was 
located between the old city hall and the Reno 
Printing Cornoany on Center Street. There 
was a woman who was the head of the Red 
Cross at that time, and with all due respect to 
women, this type of problem was something 
that she couldn’t handle. It was too emotional. 
Previous to that time, they had had them on 
straight relief, so we had to replace her with 
a man. And also, we suddenly became aware 
that the Red Cross at that time, and maybe 
today, consisted of a lot of chiefs and very few 
Indians. There was always supervisors or area 
directors or somebody cornin’ in, and checking 
the Red Cross. We handled our own office, the 
local problems, and the local people. 

The actual financing at that time was 
kinda scattered with state money, and federal 
money, and county money. When the federal 
government took over, which was in October 


1932, that was about the time that the banks 
were closing. 

Under our relief program, if you needed 
help, you came in and filled out a card and 
gave us your name and address, and your 
problems—what you needed—wood, or coal, 
or groceries, and we didn’t ask any questions 
at first. We merely gave you pretty much what 
you asked for. Then we inspected your place 
and called on your home to see if you actually 
needed it, and if you did, why, we continued. 

However, if you were a carpenter or a 
mason or an automobile mechanic, and a job 
came up, we would call you, and ask you to 
go to work as a painter—or whatever it was. 
And if you didn’t go to work—if you had no 
good reason—we discontinued relief. 

But when the federal government took 
over, a man by the name of Schaffer was 
appointed, apparently in Washington, and he 
was from the University of Chicago. He had 
been appointed on the welfare department, 
which at that time, didn’t exist. All this 
federal help at the time was handled under 
the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, 
which was set up primarily to handle large 
banks and corporations and so forth that 
failed. But the federal government had no 
welfare program, so they placed that in charge 
of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation. 
And the man in charge of the Reconstruction 
Finance for the United States, was [Charles B.] 
Charlie Henderson, who had been a former 
United States Senator from Elko, Nevada, and 
was a member of the Henderson banking firm 
or Elko, Nevada. 

Mr. Schaffer and I started talkin’ at three 
o’clock in the afternoon, and we never stopped 
till three o’clock the next morning. He had 
had no experience in welfare at all— I had 
had a couple years—and I tried to convince 
him that our program of givin’ you help and 
then checkin on you, and then continue it or 



48 


Clarence J. Thornton 


discontinue it, was sound. For some unknown 
reason, they wanted to keep these people on 
welfare so they could study the cases. They 
had to just find out what was causin’ this 
situation. 

I, of course, lost the argument, and up 
till that time, welfare—we think we handled 
in a very correct manner. We didn’t ask your 
politics, your religion, or anything. A few 
days after he was here, I got a call from the 
governor (who was Governor Balzar at that 
time, Fred [B.] Balzar), tellin’ me that I had to 
give welfare to a certain man. Now, I said to 
the governor, “Why, this man is a veteran of 
the Spanish-American War. Tie’s a labor union 
leader, and he’s gettin a Veteran’s pension.” 

And the governor said, “Well, Roosevelt’s 
in office and things have changed, and he’s a 
Democrat, and you have to put him on the 
welfare roll.” 

I believe durin’ that welfare period that 
I was there, we expended somewhere in 
the neighborhood of six million dollars of 
federal money, which was a lot of money in 
the thirties. And one day I had a discussion 
with one of our welfare cases, that I had sent 
to Wisconsin to get him out of the area, and 
after he’d taken the trip at our expense, he 
was back and told me he just wanted to visit 
his family. But talkin’ to him, he said, “Who 
audits this money that you handle?” 

As I was not too old at that time, I hadn’t 
thought about that responsibility. And I 
thought to myself, “When I get back to the 
office, I better have somebody make an 
audit.” So I called Mr. Creel, and he had an 
auditor by the name of Bill Stark, William 
Stark. And they audited our books for those 
years that we’d been operatin’ under federal 
funds. And of course, we feel pretty good, 
because the audits show that there was no 
question about the handling of the funds, 
and out of every hundred dollars that they 


had given to the office, ninety-seven dollars 
had gone directly for relief, and three dollars 
for administration. 

This administration of the relief at that 
time was pretty much ahead of the work 
programs that developed afterwards, like 
the Public Works and things like that—they 
came later. We did have some work projects, 
largely at the University of Nevada, painting 
and carpentering, and work at the quad over 
at the University. We had a large crew who 
worked one whole winter. They took out 
every other tree in that quad over there, and 
all we provided was the salary; the University 
provided the sledgehammers, saws and the 
wedges. 

President Clark, who was president of the 
University— when we first made the offer to 
his superintendent of buildings, Joe Tynch, 
the president was a little skeptical about the 
program, so he appeared in my office one day 
to find out if this was all true; that we would 
pay all the salaries if they just provided the 
axes and saws and that part of the thing. And 
then we got into a lot of maintenance at the 
University in the buildings, besides painting 
and plastering and roofing and that type 
of thing. Mainly our other work was snow 
removal and that type—there was no big snow 
shovels, just hand shovels—hand shovels and 
wheelbarrows. 

I might mention that I handled all this 
money and was never under bond. My 
secretary was Margaret Regan [Nichols], and 
I got tired of signin’ checks, so one day I took 
her down to the bank and made her signature 
good, and she was never under bond. And 
my salary was a sum total of $ 150 a month 
for handling that money. 

I finally decided to go to another job; 
they raised my salary to $175 a month. I 
left anyway. The man who took my job was 
Gilbert Ross, a Democrat. Before I left, the 



Western Nevada Depression Relief 


49 


man who was gonna take my job came into 
the office, which was in the old State Building 
where Powning Park is downtown, and when 
I came back one day, Miss Regan said, “Well, 
Mr. Ross was in, and he contacted all the help 
in here.” 

And most of the help, at that time in that 
office, was young people who were going to 
the University and who had graduated from 
the university—graduated and couldn’t find 
a job, and we put ’em to work in there. And I 
said, “What did he want?” 

And she said, “Well, he was primarily 
interested in their politics.” 

I had never thought of that; we’d never 
asked them. I said, “Well, what are their 
politics?” 

And she said, “Well, he was kinda surprised 
most of ’em weren’t old enough to vote.” 

But talking to Mr. Ross on the bridge of 
the river about three weeks afterwards, I said, 
“Well, how ya doin’ on the new job?” 

And he said, “Well, I’ve never been up 
there yet—they won’t let me in till I get a 
bond.” 

But he was the one that went on; his name 
was Gilbert Ross—he had previously been a 
state bank examiner, and was a very strong 
Democrat. And in his career, of course, they 
went into these work projects, PWA and WPA 
and those things along there. 

I’ve probably skipped one stage in this 
relief work, and that was the organization 
that handled the CCC camps, which came 
under our jurisdiction. The original man that 
came to Reno to start the CCC camps was an 
old-time U.S. Army colonel. And he arrived 
in Reno in a boxcar with his big dog, and the 
field equipment that colonels would have in 
war, and no place to stay. And he contacted 
me, and I didn’t know what to do with him so 
I put him underneath the grandstand at the 
racetrack, with all his equipment and his help 


was with him, and that was probably the start 
of the CCC camps in Nevada. 

From there, of course, they got into the 
construction of the different camps, and our 
job was to supply the young people who went 
to the camps, and they came from this area 
and the other areas; in fact, one big group we 
sent out came directly from New York. We 
sent them out to down below Portola, and 
that was quite a shock to ’em after bein’ off 
the streets of New York to wind up out in the 
forest out there. 

CCC camps, of course, aid cleanup work 
in the forest and that type of work, and 
restoration—it was a very good thing. They 
got board and room and a dollar a day. And 
I believe it was one of the best projects the 
government ever had in this area. Besides 
keepin’ those young people busy, they did 
constructive work, and it was healthy type of 
work. Lots of’em are in Reno yet today; they’d 
sign up, they’d come to me and want to go out 
to the camps. 

That was one of the good ones—one of 
the good projects. They established camps at 
Truckee, and Elko, out in Lamoille area, and 
then we had a camp down below Dayton, 
where the bridge crosses the river there, and 
a camp below Portola. And to my knowledge, 
they did good work, and we never heard any 
complaints about ’em at all. 

Were you connected with the ones in southern 
Nevada that did the work on the state parks? 

No, I don’t recall what the situation was 
in Vegas at that time. Well, Director Creel 
of the Extension Service was in charge of all 
this relief work, simply because the federal 
government at that time didn’t have any office 
at every state in the Union, except in the 
Agricultural Extension Service. So they put 
the directors of the Agricultural Extension 



50 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Service in charge of the relief work, the 
welfare. We didn’t have any HEW at all—it 
was just an additional job for Mr. Creel. We 
did get—and it wasn’t in CCC work—we got 
into some welfare at Tonopah. 

Who was the colonel that you—? 

I can’t think of his name. He had a big dog, 
a great big dog, you know, not a St. Bernard, 
but a smooth-haired dog of some kind. And 
he had the Army camping equipment, you 
know, all that. That’s what they sent him here 
in, with his crew, and as I said awhile ago, we 
had no place to put him and no money to pay 
him. He had his campin’ outfit, so we set him 
up underneath the old wooden grandstand 
down at the fairgrounds. He got along all right 
there—oh, he got along, but not all right. But it 
was quite an adventure, you know; the Army 
men hadn’t been doing much at that time. 

One of the camps that always interested 
me very much, was the group that we set up 
out at Mohawk, California, which was located 
in Feather River Canyon below Portola and 
above Quincy. That entire camp was boys off 
the streets of New York, and Brooklyn; they 
had never been in the West before. 

One of the things that happened, physically, 
in this thing—as they went through their 
physical examination which was conducted 
by the Army and Navy doctors (they sent ’em 
up from Sacramento), they would examine 
’em. And whenever they found a boy with a 
bad tooth, primarily, they didn’t fix the tooth 
because as they did their examining, they 
went to camp— they merely sent ’em down 
to a dentist, and the dentist pulled the tooth 
for the full sum of five dollars a tooth. And 
the dentist we were sendin’ ’em to was a local 
man by the name of Dr. Rhodes. And one 
afternoon, about three o’clock, he called up 
and told us not to send any more boys down, 


that his arm was sore from pullin’ teeth. And 
he got five dollars for every tooth he pulled. 

Another camp that we had was up north 
of Truckee, up in the mountains. That camp 
was primarily all local boys. They worked in 
the Forest Service. And of course, we had a 
very fine camp at Famoille, Nevada; that was 
mainly Nevada boys and primarily most of 
’em were from Reno, that went out to Famoille 
and worked. And then we had another camp 
down the river below Dayton, which cleaned 
up the river and worked that area. 

I think it was one of the best projects that 
the government ever had. These young boys 
were generally eighteen, nineteen, twenty, 
some of ’em as high as twenty-five years of 
age, and no work, couldn’t find a job at home. 
Fots of’em had to go out and find something 
to do, and this took care of it for a short time. 
Both the physical work and their health, and 
their mental attitude—and it was a very good 
thing. 

What exactly were you doing with these camps? 

To actually put it into perspective what 
we did, we’ll take the camp at Topaz. Topaz, 
of course, is located between Minden and 
Gardnerville and Coleville. And just for 
instance, what we did—we would assign the 
boys to a camp, and for a particular instance, 
the forest supervisor, who worked very closely 
with these CCC camps, was Mr. Atcheson. 
And when we were assigning the boys, he 
wanted his son to go, and his son was one 
of the people we sent to that camp. And his 
name was Merle Atcheson, who afterwards 
turned out to be one of the officials of the local 
power company. I just put that in as the type 
of people we picked. 

Our job was locating the people to go, 
the background, checkin’ ’em out, registerin’ 
’em, and as I said before, the Army and Navy 



Western Nevada Depression Relief 


51 


provided the physical examinations and 
cleared them physically. 

Did you have any contact with the federal 
officials, or regional-federal types? 

Not in this particular angle, no. Our only 
contact was through the Forest Service, and 
originally establishin’ the camps, and assignin’ 
the boys. They applied through our office to 
go to the camps. 

Vein [Vernon C.] Durkee was one of the 
people we sent to a camp. He had a job sellin’ 
tickets at the Wigwam theatre downtown, 
and had a skin problem, and he wanted to go 
out to a camp. Of course, his father was state 
of Nevada highway engineer at that time. We 
sent him to Lamoille. 

The Forest Service took care of that 
[work], and they were very well equipped to 
do it, and they needed the help, they could 
use them. They did some very fine work in 
the forest, cleanin’ up. No, we didn’t get into 
the actual operation of feeding or buying or 
selling, or building the camps— they did that 
in the Forest Service operation. 

As I said before, Director Creel was the 
agricultural extension director for Nevada; he 
wasn’t a welfare man at all, but found himself 
with this welfare problem. And as much as I’d 
worked in the Agricultural Extension Service, 
he knew me, and I was handling the welfare 
indirectly for Washoe County in there. And 
he just automatically took me on as a welfare 
man, and I knew very little about it. In fact, I 
quit, because I realized as time went on, with 
the change, and the political change, where 
you no longer did it on a hit and run basis, you 
had to know their religion and their politics 
and things like that. 

One of the big projects we had at that 
time, we were given the job of furnishing 
all the men who rebuilt the Purdy highway, 


which is U.S. 395 North now. The contractors 
who did that job, had to get their help from 
the offices of myself and a man by the name 
of Archie Cross who was then (let me see if 
I can find his title here). Archie Cross was a 
former railroad man, retired, and a staunch 
Democrat. 

Most of the welfare at that time was 
handled by an agency called the Central 
Relief Committee, which was handled, as I 
said previously, by the county. 

I also forgot to mention that in handling 
the relief with the Red Cross and the Salvation 
Army and ourselves, that the YWCA was very 
active and cooperated in helpin’ us at that 
time. They were located in a basement of the 
city hall, and they took an active part in the 
welfare situation. 

Inasmuch as we were assigned to supply 
the labor, all the men who were looking for 
jobs registered in our office, and that turned 
out to be quite a problem. The contract was 
let and the work started, after the men had 
filled out cards and given us their names and 
ages and addresses. 

Very shortly after the work started, the 
federal government decided to pay a pension 
to the men of a certain age— I believe it was 
sixty-five years of age, or something. And to 
our surprise, here came back the same help 
that had signed up for us for work on the road 
of fifty-five and fifty-seven, wantin’ their cards 
back, because they couldn’t qualify for their 
pension. They’d underestimated their age at 
the time they were lookin for jobs, and now 
they would rather qualify for the pension, so 
we had quite a problem on our hands, getting 
all those cards out and tryin to determine 
what their age was. They kinda got caught in 
the squeeze on the thing. 

As an unusual feature back in the thirties, 
there was a newspaper reporter in town by 



52 


Clarence J. Thornton 


the name of Carol Cross, who was with the 
national capers. He was aware of the fact that 
Barbara Woolworth [Hutton] was cornin’ 
to Reno, to get a divorce or get married—I 
don’t recall which. And her lawyers were 
Woodburn and Thatcher, who had offices 
in the First National Bank on the corner of 
Second and Virginia Street. So Carol located 
himself in front of the bank, knowing who the 
lawyer was and makin’ sure that he’d contact 
him for the national papers when she came 
to town. 

And in the process, why, she came 
through on a train, went to Verdi and got 
off, got married or divorced—I don’t recall 
which—and left town while Carol was still 
standing in front of the First National Bank 
building. 

It’s rambling, but apparently that’s—, The 
relief program which was fairly miss and hit 
here, because we weren’t qualified—the relief 
workers—when it changed from the local 
level to the federal level, which happened 
about November 1932, here, the money 
was sent us from Washington, but it had to 
be handled by the controller of the state of 
Nevada. And when we got the money and 
had to take it to the controller, I had told Mr. 
Creel that the state couldn’t accept this type 
of money. 

In my operation of the fairs, I’d found 
out that the state had no legal method of 
accepting federal funds. They could take 
state funds, State taxes, fines, but not federal 
funds. And he didn’t think that I was correct, 
so we went to Carson with the money and 
talked to the State controller, who was Mr. 
[Edward C.] Peterson at that time. And he 
told us that he had no authority to receive 
federal funds of any kind. And here we had 
the federal money to run the welfare and no 
place to put it. 


So we went in and talked to Governor 
[Fred] Balzar about our problem, and 
Governor Balzar convinced Mr. Peterson he 
should accept it as an off-record fund, which 
he actually wasn’t responsible for, but take 
it. And he accepted the money, and then as 
we expended it, we were required to present 
receipts to Mr. Peterson for the money we 
spent, which we did. As we had a set limit of 
five thousand dollars—we could expend up 
to five thousand dollars—then we’d have to 
take the receipts, the payrolls and so forth and 
go to Carson and give them to Mr. Peterson, 
and he’d reimburse us. And that was the way 
the original federal funds were handled here 
at that time. 

That’s really interesting. 

It was interesting to Mr. Creel, tool See, I 
had had a problem with the fair, runnin the 
fair—state fair, in Fallon at that time—and had 
run into this problem that they couldn’t accept 
federal funds. So I happened to know that this 
was the problem, and Mr. Creel wasn’t aware of 
it till we got to Carson. And that was an actual 
situation. I think now, with the federal funds, 
there’s no problem; they can accept ’em now. 

You have not talked about your actual teaching 
at the University. 

To put the teaching at the University into 
perspective, the University was in financial 
problems at that time in the thirties, and they 
were cutting down on their faculty and in their 
departments. In fact, it got down one time to 
where the College of Agriculture had just the 
one person as far as I know, it was the dean of 
the College of Agriculture. 

But in ’30 or ’31, both myself and Ernest 
Brooks, whose folks had the Model Dairy here 
in Reno, were asked to teach on a part-time 



Western Nevada Depression Relief 


53 


basis. We never became professors, we were 
Just merely instructors and had two or three 
classes each. I carried two classes most of 
the time, and three sometime, and they paid 
me forty dollars a month, and I think Ernest 
Brooks taught there and got about the same 
thing—around forty dollars a month. 

It was an interestin’ experience, and it 
was something you had to keep ahead of, 
because about that time, the vocational—high 
school vocational [education] was cornin’ into 
existence here, and a lot of the students you got 
had had high school vocational [education], 
so you had to prepare yourself into different 
levels. My courses were—one course was 
in “poultry production,” and one in “turkey 
production.” 

And then for two or three years, I had a 
course in “land values,” which was appraisals 
of the farmlands. And one of our very fine 
laboratory areas was the Rancho San Rafael. 
That was the ranch we used for the students 
to do the lab work on. 

Mr. Herman who was the owner— 
“Doctor” Herman, I guess he was known as, 
wasn’t he?—’’Doctor Herman,” yeah, who was 
the owner of the ranch, was very cooperative 
and interested in the students and their work 
at the University. 

For some reason or other, they dropped 
the course after three or four years; I didn’t 
understand why. The interest in it was very, 
very good. I taught the kids how to appraise 
property, identify properties and so forth, but 
by that time, of course, the University was 
startin’ to come back again. 

I never understood exactly what happened 
to the College of Agriculture. It seemed 
like when they needed additional classes or 
additional money, in other sections of the 
school, why, they would drop things in the 
College of Agriculture and merely transfer the 
classes to other departments. 


The College of Agriculture carried the rest of 
the University for a long time. 

That’s right, yes they did, they did. Well, 
they had that Experiment Station fund, the 
Hatch Act, you know, and of course the 
Experiment Station stayed pretty much within 
itself. They did conduct some open classes, 
with Dr. Vawter in veterinary science, which 
were very fine classes. 

There was considerable conflict in the 
College of Agriculture at that time, and it went 
on for years between the dean of the College 
of Agriculture, the director of the Experiment 
Station, and the director of the Agricultural 
Extension Service. They were all operating as 
separate units, and it led to a lot of confusion. 

In fact, one of the peculiarities of the thing 
was when we started to college, the agriculture 
college had a truck that the International 
Harvester Company gave to them. They only 
had one other car on the campus at that time, 
and it was always a continual hassle about who 
was gonna get to use the truck for whenever 
they wanted it—just small things that went 
on amongst the different people. 

In later years, the Agriculture Advisory 
Committee, in which I was involved, we 
recommended that the three departments 
be combined under one head, and that 
one head not be anybody presently in the 
University—be brought from the outside— 
and that they dispose of the farm on South 
Virginia Street, which they had acquired 
through a political deal which was not too 
good for the University. The farm itself was 
a very poor farm and was indirectly dumped 
by some large land owners, because it had 
practically no water right, and the University 
couldn’t do very much with it. The things we 
recommended got done, but the people who 
were on the committee didn’t get reappointed 
to the committee. 



54 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Is that when they brought Hutchinson in then? 

Yes, that’s when Hutchinson came up. And 
it was peculiar— it was just different. Nothing 
against [S. B.] Doten; Doten was a very fine 
man, but he was there so many years that he 
assumed that the Experiment Station was part 
of his family. 

Dean Stewart had come in followin’ the 
first dean of the college—or I shouldn’t say 
the first dean—the first dean of the College of 
Agriculture, I guess, was Gordon True as far 
as I know, who afterwards went to Davis with 
the University of California. Then Charlie 
Knight became dean, and he went to San 
Francisco later, and then he was followed by 
Dean Stewart. I believe Dean Stewart came 
from Utah—he was primarily an agronomist 
in his field. 

Cecil Creel, who was director of the 
Agricultural Extension Service, I believe, was 
pretty much a Nevada man. He was the second 
director of the Agricultural Extension Service, 
the first one bein’ Mr. [C. A.] Norcross. [In 
Jim Hulse’s history], he’s got his information 
pretty straight. 

Incidentally, one of the students I had 
when I was teachin’ at the University of 
Nevada was not a College of Agriculture 
student. He was a journalism student by the 
name of Robert Miller. Robert Miller came 
to the University from Pittsburgh, California 
to take journalism. And one semester when 
we were signin’ up classes, he showed up in 
the College of Agriculture, to take a course 
in poultry. And it turned out, at his home 
in Pittsburgh, California, they had a few 
chickens, his father and mother and so forth, 
and he was kind of an ambitious person, as 
his future history will tell you, and he thought 
sometime in the future, he might want to write 
something on agriculture, so he came over to 
the College of Agriculture and took this class 


in poultry. And he and I became very good 
friends by that, and he, of course, afterwards, 
became a world-famous correspondent 
through the World War [II]. I don’t know just 
where he is now. 

Last I heard of him, he was over in Hawaii 
fillin’ in for somebody in the newspaper 
racket. He became quite a world-roamin’ 
correspondent. He just went anywhere he 
wanted; he picked his place and went at their 
expense. He was one of the first men into Paris 
[during World War II], on the handlebars of a 
bicycle, and he got shot in the shoulder. Oh! 
he was also one of the first correspondents on 
that island out in the Pacific that we invaded— 
what in the heck was the name of it? When 
we took it from the Japs? Okinawa. And I 
don’t think he got injured there again, but 
then he wanted to go to the atomic blast, the 
first one they had. And because of the places 
he’d been and things that’d happened to him, 
they wouldn’t let him go. And he was pretty 
upset about that. 

Let’s go on with the relief situation. I did 
talk some about it, and there’ll probably be 
some duplication. 

Just briefly, I got involved in the relief 
situation, after bein’ appointed the assistant 
probation officer in Washoe County. And 
about that time, the Depression was appearin’ 
in the West. At first, it was a very small thing, 
it was an occasional person or something 
who needed their rent paid, or a few groceries 
or something like that, and we merely 
handled it through the county office over 
there, get the money, and give ‘em the cash. 
But as time went on, it then became a bigger 
operation, and was located primarily in the 
three different places. 

The start was in the basement of the old 
State Building, and from there, we moved to 
15 East Second Street, which is part of the 



Western Nevada Depression Relief 


55 


First National Bank at the present time, in 
an office which was given to the relief board 
free of charge by George Wingfield. And that 
became too small, and during the summer 
of ’32, we operated from the College of 
Agriculture at the University of Nevada—the 
college was closed down all that summer. By 
that time, of course, it had started taking on 
a statewide and national situation. 

At first it was a welfare, strictly a welfare 
situation. You came and applied for help, and 
we gave you help usually, what we thought 
you had to have, groceries and wood and coal, 
till we checked your need. Then we checked 
your need, and you generally had to get two 
or three local people to sign for you on your 
card, and if you were in need, we took care of 
you. I kept on handling welfare till President 
Roosevelt was elected, and it was a short 
time after that, it became a relief problem all 
right, handled by the Reconstruction Finance 
Corporation. 

We had some very, very fine projects 
out of that thing; I think I said once before, 
one of them was that deal on the quad at the 
University, where we took out every other 
tree. And all that cement rockwork that you 
see along here down at the bottom of the hill 
was done by those people. And the rockwork 
over there on University Terrace. And built 
swimming pools and ball parks. Idlewild Park 
was pretty much built. The park out there in 
southwest Reno that’s there now, was one 
of those welfare projects too, Virginia Lake. 
Actually, Virginia Lake was never meant to be 
a park. It was a public works project built as 
a reservoir for the irrigation ditches; before, 
the irrigation ditches ran from the Truckee 
River right straight out into the farm area. 
But on this program, they used the area of 
Virginia Lake as a reservoir. Primarily, that’s 
what it was built for, and then, of course, later 
became a city park. 


One of the reasons I mentioned Mr. 
Schaffer and his program of keepin people on 
welfare—while I was just the head of the local 
area here, I was very opposed to the federal 
government gettin’ involved in relief work. I 
just didn’t think it was the place for them. We 
knew what we were doin’, we knew the people 
who came in, and we were able to find out. 
And part of my discussion with him that night 
was that Washington was just too far away to 
handle these things because even at that time, 
there was so much apparent racket in relief 
work; when it was still small, you were aware 
of the fact that it was going to be difficult to 
handle it from a distance. 

The different angles that people use to get 
on the welfare—. I think I mentioned once 
before on the Purdy highway out here, when 
the men who signed up for that work didn’t 
use the right age, and then got entrapped 
when the government put a pension plan into 
effect, that they had to come back and reapply, 
having previously incorrectly stated their age. 

I think one of the problems that occurred 
to me in relief work—just so people will 
understand what’ll happen in there— was 
a Greek woman who came to our office for 
help; she was gonna have a baby. And the 
county physician at that time was Dr. Bath, 
Dr. Clarence Bath. So we sent her to the 
county physician, and he okayed the thing 
that she was gonna have a baby, and we sent 
her to a home. You didn’t have rest homes at 
that time, you just had a few women around 
town that would take these types of cases. And 
the woman took her into the home and fixed 
her all up and put her in bed, and we never 
heard any more about the case till about six 
weeks later, and I said to my secretary one day, 
“Whatever happened to that Greek woman 
that was gonna have the baby?” 

And she said, “I don’t know.” She said, 
“I’ll find out.” So she called Dr. Bath, and Dr. 



56 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Bath had forgotten about the case, too. So 
he called the woman that was taking care of 
her, and she said, “Well, she’s still here, she’s 
in bed, she won’t get out of bed—we’ve been 
takin’ care of her.” 

So Dr. Bath went over and made an 
examination, and he came back and he said, 
“She’s not going to have any baby. That’s just 
a tumor.” And she wouldn’t get out of bed. 
We had to finally get the officials to get her 
out of bed and take her stuff out of the house. 
And I point this out because of rackets they 
were usin’ —she was experienced. She’d been 
around the country and knew what she was 
doin’. People don’t understand this relief work 
at all if they haven’t been in it. It is a business. 

I’m not sayin’ that all the people who 
apply for welfare are not justified, but a certain 
percentage of ’em at that time, were pretty 
professional, and today, the percentage of 
these professionals in welfare is a lot bigger. 

We had another actual case of a seventy- 
six-year-old woman who came into the 
office and applied for welfare. And in the 
conversation, of course, we asked her if she 
was married, and she said “No.” And the girl 
who worked in our office as secretary sold 
tickets at the Wigwam theatre at night, and 
after the woman went out, she said, “Well, that 
woman’s married.” She said, “She has a young 
husband that’s about twenty-six or twenty- 
seven years old, and every night they pander 
the streets downtown—he on one side, and 
her on the other. And on Saturday night, she 
comes to the Wigwam theatre in her fur coat, 
and they don’t just buy regular tickets, they 
have a box seat and go to the show.” 

And so, the woman came back in a few 
days for help; I said, “Well, where’s your 
husband? You’re married. Send him in. I 
want to talk to him.” And he came in and he 
turned out to be about twenty-five or twenty- 
six years old. And he told me the story. I said, 


“How in the world did you happen to marry 
this woman?” 

“Well,” he said, “I wanted to go back to 
Kansas (or the Midwest somewhere) and see 
my family. So I went and bought a seventy- 
five-dollar car, married this woman, and 
put her in the back of the car and wrapped 
her up in blankets and pillows, and we went 
back to Iowa and had a family reunion, and 
it never cost a cent. Every place I went, this 
was my mother. She’d been away and gonna 
die, and she wanted to get home to see her 
family before she passed away.’ And he said, 
“We made the entire trip back there and all 
the way back and never spent a cent.” That’s 
welfare. (I can tell true stories all day long, 
but I’m not gonna, different ones and things 
that they do to you. The cryin women and 
borrowed children.) 

The Federal Land Bank 

The Depression, of course, when the banks 
closed, just previous the banks closed, caused 
considerable problem in the livestock and 
agricultural-farm part of the state, because 
they were practically all large borrowers from 
the banks. And there was no particular agency 
to refinance them, so it fell to the Federal 
Land Bank, which was located in Berkeley, 
California. And they naturally had a heavy 
load of refinancing and had to have appraisals 
on each application. 

The farmers or livestock men—and not so 
much the livestock men in Nevada, because 
the Federal Land Bank had a maximum 
loaning capacity of $50,000 at that time, which 
in most cases, wouldn’t do much good to the 
large livestock operations, so the laws were 
primarily for smaller units of livestock and 
the ranches. 

And they also had two types of loans. The 
Federal Land Bank loan, up to $50,000; and 



Western Nevada Depression Relief 


57 


then they had another emergency-type loan, 
which had a maximum of $7,500 on it, which 
was just quietly made to small operators, to 
keep them on the farm with their family, 
rather than have them leave the family and 
move to town and become welfare cases. You 
didn’t tell ’em that, but that was the way you 
appraised on the $7,500 deal. 

Havin’ been an agricultural extension 
agent, and taught in school, I was offered a 
job as an appraiser and went to work for the 
Land Bank in 1932. In that next four years, 
I appraised probably five hundred ranches, 
mostly in Nevada, some in the Susanville 
area, and some over in Woodland area, in 
California. 

For the actual operations, we’ll take a 
ranch in Winnemucca, which was a good- 
sized ranch; it had a $325,000 bank loan on it 
when the banks foreclosed the loan. And the 
ranch, of course, was broke. You appraised on 
the basis of normal process of 1910 to 1914; 
that was your base, because, as unusual as it 
seems, that’s the closest base the Land Bank 
could find, where there was no wars going 
on in the world, and other conditions that 
affected prices. 

The owner of the ranch would apply to 
the Land Bank, then the application would 
come back to the appraiser, and you acted 
practically as a banker yourself; you had the 
appraisal and the application. This was a type 
of ranch where the bank had a loan on it, 
and had foreclosed on the people who had 
the loan, but turned it over—the bank—to 
another operator, who happened to be a sheep 
man in this case, on just strictly a note, that 
he would have the ranch. And there’s a little 
subterfuge in there: he wasn’t told he didn’t 
own it, but he ran it just like he owned it, and 
the banks of course, through receivership, 
financed it. And, as strange as it seems, I 
appraised the ranch for $15,000 for loan value, 


with that heavy mortgage on it. And without 
mentioning any names, when we got down to 
the actual ownership of the ranch, the person 
who held the deed of ownership on that ranch 
wasn’t the bank; it was the president of the 
bank, personally. He had the deed in his safe- 
deposit box! 

In those appraisals, you contacted the 
bankers, merchants, to find out what was 
owed on the ranch, because if the loan was 
approved, then those who were listed as 
creditors would be paid in proportion to the 
total that they had. A good example—not on 
this particular ranch, but in Lovelock—when 
I went in there first to make an appraisal 
and contacted the local banker about the 
appraisals I had to make, he informed me that 
they didn’t owe him any money then, which 
was all right. 

However, I went across the street to the 
Lovelock Mercantile and talked to Mr. Roberts 
who was manager of Lovelock Mercantile. 
And of course, he had claims, or bills I guess, 
probably each of them one I had. And he very 
nicely gave them to me, because they didn’t 
know till I got near the bottom, I said, “Well, 
when I was over talkin’ to the banker over 
there, he told me that these people didn’t owe 
him any money.” And I said, “I was surprised 
because if you don’t file your claim and the 
man gets the loan, you don’t get paid.” 

And he said, “What did you say?” 

And I told him. 

He said, “Just a minute,” and he went and 
called up the banker and told him what the 
situation was, and the banker invited me back. 
Before we got done, I had an office in the bank 
with a key to it, when he found out if he didn’t 
list his claims, he wasn’t gonna get paid. 

It was interesting work, and of course, lots 
of these ranches at that time owed George 
Wingfield’s banks, which were Reno National 
and so forth, and the Churchill County bank, 



58 


Clarence J. Thornton 


money. But in all the time that I was appraisin’ 
I had never heard any of those people ever say 
anything nice about the Reno National Bank, 
or the Wingfield banks, even though the loans 
showed that the banks had carried them for 
four or five years, adding the interest that was 
due on the loans that they couldn’t pay, and 
paying the tax of the property. They would 
have nothin’ nice to say about the banker. 

You take right here in this local area, when 
the Washoe County bank closed, some of the 
large owners in this area— which happen to 
be some of my wife’s relatives, the Holcomb 
estate and the Wheeler estate—local people 
blamed those families indirectly for the fact 
that the banks closed, and they lost their 
money. 

I guess one of the best ranches I ever 
appraised—in picking out ranches—was a 
large ranch, the Grass Valley ranch, north of 
Austin Nevada. It had been owned originally 
by the Saval brothers, as far as I know, and 
then they apparently had gotten into financial 
difficulty, and the Wingfield banks had it as a 
trust account. And they in turn, had sold it to 
a man by the name of George Watt. He was 
from Utah. I say that because, previous to he 
ownin’ it, another George Watt of the same 
name, who was afterwards state surveyor for 
the state of Nevada, owned the ranch, and 
there was no relationship between the two. 

The Land Bank had made a loan to Mr. 
George Watt of Utah, in which he had failed 
his payments, and the Land Bank had to 
repossess it, and have it fall to my appraisal 
work to make a recommendation on it. The 
Land Bank loans hadn’t been paid for a few 
years, and the interest hadn’t been paid, and 
the whole thing amounted to about $25,000 
on the ranch, which was later purchased from 
the Land Bank for about, $20,000 to $25,000, 
by a man by the name of Dick Magee. And 
when Dick Magee went to get the ranch, he 


wanted the deed to the ranch, which he didn’t 
get when he bought it from the Land Bank— 
the original deed—and he got that from Mr. 
Watt. But he had to pay Mr. Watt $1,500 to 
get it—the deed, just a piece of paper. 

It’s a very fine ranch, and I think it’s 
probably a lot better ranch today than when 
I appraised it, simply because at that time, 
it was away out in the country—there was 
no trucks. Livestock were not being trucked 
then, and to move their livestock, they had 
to generally trail it to Fallon, Nevada to get 
to a railroad to ship them. 

Today, of course, that’s all changed. The 
big trucks drive into the ranch, load up, and 
move out. And that ranch today is owned by 
Molly Flagg Magee Knudtsen. 

The Land Bank itself was a very fine 
concern to work for. They never questioned 
your time that you worked. You were out 
there by yourself, and no boss, and they paid 
you the time that you turned in, and your 
automobile mileage. 

Their head man was Mr. Ellis of Salt Lake 
City, for this district. At one of our meetings, 
when one of the appraisers asked about an 
expense account—I don’t know whether the 
appraiser was a little conscious or not—Mr. 
Ellis came up with an answer that I’ve often 
thought on that occasion of usin’ a few times 
in my life. He just told the appraiser, very 
simply, “When we hired you, we thought 
you were honest. When we don’t think so, 
we’ll fire you.” And that was the answer to 
how you handle expense accounts. He was 
an appointee of—Ellis was an appointee 
of—Senator Smoot of Utah. A little politics 
in there. 

I worked for them about three and a half 
years. By that time, conditions were returnin’ 
somewhat to normal in the agriculture 
field—maybe not the rest of the world, but 
in there—and durin’ the last year, year and 



Western Nevada Depression Relief 


59 


a half, I was supervisin’ appraiser for the 
northern part of the state. 

Havin’ been caught up on my work, and 
not using temporary appraisers, they offered 
me the position of permanent appraiser in 
Nevada, and I turned it down, because I 
had to work for them in full, or get rid of 
my hatchery. And I decided to stay in my 
little field. 

The Land Bank operated during those 
years out of Marysville, California; that was 
our headquarters, while the headquarters 
for the bank were still at Berkeley. They 
had these divisions and we had to check 
in at Marysville every so often, take some 
additional lessons. 

One of the appraisers who worked for me, 
or with me, was from Red Bluff, California. 
He was a good deal older than I was, had 
been in livestock. One time in Marysville, 
they decided to call us in, and get us a short 
course on making maps, which were quite 
important in appraisal work. We went to 
Marysville, and were takin’ this course on 
making maps, and the second day, one of the 
men from the main office walked in and saw 
this older man takin’ the course, and they 
had a great reunion. And this man turned out 
to be a graduate of Stanford in engineering, 
who was quietly takin’ the course and sayin’ 
nothin’. The operators of the course were a 
little embarrassed. 

However, this the same man, as a 
sideline, was a college pal of Herbert Hoover, 
later president of the United States. And 
Herbert Hoover, when this man was in 
college, was his laundry boy. Herbert Hoover 
had a laundry route in this building—picked 
up their laundry each week. His name was 
[Winn Lyon]. 

Was that typical of what Land Bank appraisers 
did? 


They would occasionally have what I 
guess you’d call today, a clinic, and have us 
come to a different area and bring us up to 
date on their policies and on their prices and 
things like that—the prices of land and stock 
and things like that that you had to work on. 

On the actual appraisal, you appraised 
their land. If they had any buildings, you 
didn’t contact the insurance companies at all 
because, at that time, there was a tendency 
of some ranchers to burn buildings down 
to collect the insurance. And you just put a 
value on the buildings of a minimum value 
of what they might be worth. So they would 
have you in on that, and they’d have you in 
on land values. Also, people probably won’t 
believe this but the appraising at that time 
for cows and calves, if you were in that cattle 
business, were around fifteen dollars a head 
for the cows with weaner calves on ’em. 

I particularly remember an instance in 
Fallon where I was appraisin’ some ranches— 
had some dairy cattle and hay down there, 
and Kent Company was a big buyer of hay 
down in there, at that time. So I went to Kent 
Company to find out how much hay was 
sellin for, and they said, “Five dollars a ton 
for alfalfa hay, but don’t bring any in, we’re 
not buying.” Dairy cattle, you could buy ’em 
for twenty dollars a head in there, but there 
was no buyers for them either. 

So that was the types of things that we 
had to work, and as I said before, you based 
your market values and your land values on 
the—1910-1913 periods. 




6 


The Western Hatchery and the 
Nevada Poultry Producers 


What’ll we talk about now? I figure you’re 
gonna straighten all this out. 

You were going to talk a little bit about the 
Western Hatchery. 

In these Depression years, you did 
whatever work you could to make a living, 
and of course, things are going to lap over in 
this history We bought the Western Hatchery, 
and I was in charge of relief work for Washoe 
County, was teaching at the University of 
Nevada, running the Nevada State Fair, and 
was secretary/treasure of the Nevada Poultry 
Producers. 

There was a lot of people who were doing 
the same thing that I was—trying to make a 
living, you had to have more than one job. 
University paid me forty dollars a month; the 
probation office paid $125 a month. 

My wife and I purchased the Western 
Hatchery on a very Loose type of arrangement 
for $5000—no money down, but a Promise to 
pay. No inventory, and no notes of any kind, 


in 1929. As I said before, it was located about 
200 feet west of the end of West Fifth Street 
in Reno, between Fifth Street and Vine Street, 
and was owned and operated at that time by a 
man by the name Angelo Scanavino. 

He had, for years, had the Western Feed 
and Grain there, and was retiring, and wanted 
to move to California. So he sold his business, 
with nothing down and a half share of profits, 
with a promise that we’d pay for it. We kept the 
hatchery for about twenty-three years while 
we were doin’ these other jobs and gettin’ out 
of the Depression and raisin’ a family. 

It turned out to be a very good investment. 
At one time, we were hatching as high as 
150,000 baby chicks a year, several thousand 
turkeys, hatching chukars and pheasants and 
partridge for the state of Nevada. But it was a 
type of business in the Depression years when 
people were staying at home, and taking care 
of things like dairy cattle and poultry, which 
was a tedious job. And as the people came 
out of the Depression, the market got pretty 
narrow. In fact, when the school board bought 
the site of the present Reno High School up 



62 


Clarence J. Thornton 


there, it involved one of our sales of 30,000 
baby chicks a year. I told my wife at that time, 
“It looks like the hatchery business is gonna 
go.” But we did well with it, and we stayed 
there till 1953, ’54, and sold the property. 

It was an ideal place to live; it was off the 
street, about three-and-a-half or four acres 
of ground; we had our own gardens, our own 
orchard, was quiet too. 

It now is occupied by Pay’n’Pak—most 
of it’s occupied by Pay’n’Pak. We originally 
sold it to a party whose name I don’t recall 
at this time. He eventually sold it to Safeway 
Stores—I suppose they still own it probably 
and rent it to Pay’n’Pak. As far as I know, it 
was the only hatchery in western Nevada that 
hatched baby chicks as a business. 

Durin the War years, it became quite a 
problem to handle it, because you couldn’t 
get any help. And the help you did get was 
the older people who were retired, and 
they wouldn’t stay. So we found ourselves 
sometimes workin sixteen-hour days, year 
’round. There was no break in there. It was a 
good business. 

What was a typical day at the hatchery like?] 

Oh, a typical day at the hatchery. Well, 
you got up in the morning, and of course, we 
always kept about three or four hundred layin 
hens there. And you got up in the mornin 
and ordinarily, the first thing you did was 
check your incubators for the temperature 
and actually turned the eggs with a long 
crank from one end of the incubators. After 
you found out the incubators were runnin all 
right, why, you checked your chicken houses. 
If it was a warm day, you turned the chickens 
out. Then of course, you came back to your 
breakfast and did your actual work in the 
hatchery, which was a pretty detailed thing 
of checkin’ the eggs for fertility in there. And 


then for a while, we only had one hatch a 
week. In the later years, I bought some more 
modern incubators, and we hatched twice a 
week. You’d book your orders for baby chicks 
in there, make your deliveries, clean up the 
hatchery, take care of your acreage that you 
had for other things besides the hatchery to 
go along with it. It was just physical work, and 
a lot of it. I would do it again, though, if I had 
to. I was my own boss. 

But, of course, some of that time there, 
I was teachin at the University; some of the 
time I worked in the probation office. We 
didn’t have the Nevada Poultry Producers— 
it was an association at 338 Evans Avenue. 
We formed that in 1932, and sold it in 1949. 
I served as secretary/treasurer of it for the 
entire years it was in operation, from start to 
finish, and finally wound up selling it for the 
owners. We had a business for about a quarter 
of a million dollars a year in eggs there, and 
supplied Safeway Stores with practically all the 
eggs they used for about eighteen years. And 
besides handling eggs, we handled poultry, 
and during the holiday season, we handled 
turkeys—Christmas and Thanksgiving. I think 
we were probably the first one in the city of 
Reno that ever ran a full-page ad on a regular 
basis in the local papers. We ran full-page ads 
on the Silver White eggs, our top product. 

It covered memberships from Washoe 
County, and Ormsby County, and Douglas 
County, Lyon County, and Churchill County, 
and at one time, some membership from 
Pershing County. It was a real co-op, owned 
by the members. As they shipped their eggs 
in to the co-op, there was a percentage taken 
off each dozen to finance the operation of the 
business. 

I may ask you some questions about that later, 
about the problems of running a co-op and 
about the final break-up of the whole thing. 



The Western Hatchery and the Nevada Poultry Producers 


63 


Well, I can tell you about the break-up 
of the thing very easily I said before, in the 
Depression years, people raised poultry 
and had chickens and stayed at home. As 
World War II came on, and they got more 
prosperous; they dropped the poultry end of it 
which was too confining. And we got down to 
a point where we had very few local eggs, but 
we were practically supporting the California 
Poultry Producers to run our business. The 
co-op people looked it over and decided there 
just wasn’t a need for it any more, and there 
weren’t the people in the poultry business to 
keep it goin. So we just closed it down and 
sold it out. Safeway felt very bad we were their 
main source of eggs. 

We had our problems, yes. The first seven 
years we were in business, we lost $37,500. 
Before we got straightened around. 

We financed it through the First National 
Bank and the Federal Co-op Bank of Berkeley, 
California. It turned out to be very profitable 
for the people that handled it because the 
building we bought at 338 Evans Avenue 
cost us $2,000 for the land and $7,000 for the 
building in 1930, and we sold it in 1948, the 
building and land for $25,000. And of course, 
this bein’ a co-op, the members all shared in 
that sale price. 

In 1930, a group of poultry people, 
includin’ myself who was owner of the 
Western Hatchery, decided to organize a 
cooperative marketing association for the 
poultrymen in western Nevada. This came 
about because there was no standard price 
for eggs to the poultry producers and no 
standing market. 

We started with nothing. Our first 
manager was a former county agent of 
Humboldt County, Paul Maloney. He served 
a short time, then he was followed by Roger 
Teglia, who served seven years. And he was 
followed by Art Champagne, who served 


about another seven years. And the last 
manager we had was a man by the name of 
Glen Guinan. 

As I said before, we started down on Sage 
Street in Reno, Nevada—ran there a short 
time, and then bought property at 338 Evans 
Avenue in Reno, for which we paid a sum 
total of approximately $7,000 for the lot and 
building. 

The president of the Nevada Poultry was 
a man by the name of A. F. Scanavino, who 
was a semi-retired person and had had a feed 
business here for years. 

The actual co-op, to belong to it, you 
had to be a poultry producer, and sell your 
eggs into the association. We had trucks that 
went around and picked up the eggs from 
the producers. And you’d pay a percentage of 
your market price per dozen for the services. 
This percentage we took off the eggs was kept 
in the organization to operate it and never 
became your money until the association was 
dissolved. 

We hired a CPA to audit our books and 
provide us with an audit each year. The reason 
I mention that is because for several years, the 
deductions we made from the producers was 
just set aside in the association, and we’d never 
report it on income tax, because it belonged to 
the producers and was eventually paid back. 

However, one day one of the Internal 
Revenue men— auditors—came and visited 
the association and decided that that 
withholding we had made was subject to tax 
like the rest of our revenue. And his argument 
was that the Nevada Poultry Producers was 
a person, a thing. It had a name; it wrote 
checks. He and I had quite a discussion. And 
I opposed his interpretation, and told him we 
always made honest returns and had the CPA 
audit our books. And we naturally felt we were 
in the clear. But with the CPAs, I suddenly 
found out they had very little responsibility. 



64 


Clarence J. Thornton 


They didn’t assume any responsibility; they 
just worked for you and made the audit. But 
when it came down to responsibility, they 
didn’t assume any 

The final outcome of it was that I agreed—I 
say 7—I represented the Nevada Poultry—that 
we would pay the tax under protest. As it 
turned out, we didn’t have much option. He 
said, “Well, you can either pay the tax under 
protest, or we’ll revalue your operations and 
make the whole thing subject to tax. 

We had a financial problem along 
about that same time, as we had to borrow 
considerable money from the banks to handle 
our storage of eggs. We stored eggs—started 
in March and generally ran through May. If 
we had a heavy storage, it took on quite a 
capital. We were operating through the local 
banks with no problem, when the Bank for 
Cooperatives of Berkeley was formed by the 
federal government to finance coops. The 
directors wanted to do business through that 
bank because of the low interest rate. Myself 
and Mr. Scanavino opposed that change in 
our operation from the local bank. 

As time went on, for some reason or 
other, the Berkeley Bank for Co-ops decided 
they were no longer interested in financing 
Nevada Poultry Producers, Inc. However, they 
made us a small offer of $5,000 advance to our 
operation. And we had to go back to the local 
banks and talk to them, whom we’d left. And 
it was quite a job to convince them that they 
should come back in the picture and finance 
the Nevada Poultry Producers. But the First 
National Bank of Nevada finally decided that 
they would refinance it like we had before, and 
they carried us through there. Sometimes we 
had to borrow as high as seventy-five to one 
hundred thousand dollars a year for a short 
period to finance storage of eggs. And as a 
sideline we handled turkeys, too—dressed 
turkeys. And to finance those two operations. 


We operated from 1930 to 1948, and then 
we decided to discontinue because of two 
reasons. During the Depression years and 
the War years, people were in the poultry 
business, which was a tedious business; you 
had to be home all the time to take care of it. 
And the other reason was that with such a 
drop in local egg production, we were buying 
large volumes of eggs from the California 
Poultry Producers at Sacramento to serve 
our customers. 

One of our biggest customers during the 
eighteen years we were in operation was the 
Safeway Stores. We didn’t provide them with 
the hundred percent of their eggs during that 
time, but we figured that ninety, ninety-five 
percent of their eggs came from us. And 
they were quite upset when we went out of 
business. 

After we closed it out and sold the 
property, we refunded the cash on hand and 
the profit to the members who had financed 
the thing during the years. 

Did you have any particular problems with 
getting the people to give you all their eggs, or 
did they sell on the side for a little higher price, 
or something like that? 

Some of our members who had other 
customers before we started, or who had— 
especially in the Reno area—customers who 
came and bought eggs right at their place— 
buy a dozen or something like that. And these 
people continued to serve those accounts. If it 
was a case account, why, they served it. And if 
it was just a dozen, or people, drop-in trade, 
they served that, too. 

One of the things we did in those years, we 
found out, we set the price for eggs in western 
Nevada. And when we started in, we didn’t know 
how to determine the price of eggs. As we went 
along, we found out that the market price was 



The Western Hatchery and the Nevada Poultry Producers 


65 


established in San Francisco. At that time it was 
established by five older men who met once a day 
in the morning. They had no eggs, no poultry, 
were not poultrymen, but they met in a little 
office in San Francisco. They bought and sold 
a case of eggs or two amongst themselves, and 
that established the price that we had for eggs. 

And because of establishing that price, 
several of the poultry producers in the Reno 
area who didn’t belong to the association 
would come by our plant every day to find 
out what they should get for eggs. They 
weren’t actually members, but they were good 
supporters, and they kept their price up to 
where it should be. 

It was interesting, when you think of the 
people who were settin’ the price—had no 
association with poultry in any way, but they 
agreed amongst themselves—”I’ll buy a case 
of these eggs, and you buy a case of these eggs, 
and this is the price.” Arid that’s the way it 
was set. I suppose it’s still set that way today, 
probably. 

It’d be interestin’, this — Safeway 
operation—while we serviced all their stores 
in the Reno area, we practically had no 
contact with the store managers. We were 
authorized by their main office in Sacramento 
to keep our inventory in their stores up. And 
the manager of the store was not aware of 
what the eggs would cost at all. The general 
manager in Sacramento, who bought the eggs, 
he knew what the price was, and he set the 
retail price for the manager. So the manager 
had nothin’ to do with the local retail price on 
eggs, which was interesting to us. 

I was just wondering if there was anything 
you’re especially proud of in that co-op 
movement. I think you have reason to be. 

Well, I think one of the things that—it’s 
hard to believe it happened—we put out a 


special egg we called a “Silver White” egg. And 
we sold it at a dollar a dozen. Now this was 
right in the Depression years. And here was 
a first-class, top egg; and even though people 
were in the Depression and very cautious 
about what they’d buy, we were never in our 
eighteen years, able to produce enough of 
that type of egg. We were short at all times— 
even at a dollar a dozen, when eggs would 
sell around thirty, thirty-five cents. It always 
interested us—if we could get to a store with 
those eggs, they were out right practically 
before you got ’em there. 

Did you sell to manufacturing plants, bakeries, 
egg driers? 

No. You didn’t have that at that time. 
There was practically no eggs dried at that 
time. There wasn’t enough eggs, I guess; there 
was nobody around here. No, our trade was 
the stores and the army, and the marines at 
Hawthorne and the big mining companies in 
the Lovelock, Winnemucca, Tonopah areas— 
we shipped to them. 

How did you manage to divide your time 
between the Nevada Poultry Producers and 
the Western Hatchery? 

Well, it was [a very busy operation] at 
the last. You see, before World War II started 
(on the Western Hatchery, I think I told you) 
at that time there was no income tax. Unless 
you made over $5,000, you didn’t have to file 
income tax. Mr. Scanavino was a wealthy man, 
and he didn’t want to file the income tax. I 
was just makin’ a living, so when we got up to 
about a hundred days, we generally had about 
$5,000 each, and we’d shut down for the year. 

When the war years started, after I had 
bought Mr. Scanavino out (he had left here 
entirely; he’d gone to California), then the 



66 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Hatchery ran practically twelve months of the 
year. And it didn’t matter how tired you got; 
you just kept workin, because you couldn’t get 
any help that was dependable, and that was 
also the case at Nevada Poultry Producers. 

Actually, Nevada Poultry, durin’ the war 
years, while we financed it, the help practically 
owned it, because you didn’t say to the help— 
if they should leave, you couldn’t replace ’em. 
You went into the business that you owned 
with your membership, but you were pretty 
cautious about your help, and what you said 
to them. 

I think that the main thing that happened 
to us there was probably being financed, 
because we started with nothing. Before 
we got done, we were runnin’ the business 
sometimes up at a half a million dollars a 
year. And we were being financed by the 
local banks. Then the government in the 
Roosevelt administration formed this farm 
cooperative— Berkeley Bank for Co-ops. And 
they were very anxious to handle our business, 
because they were a co-op with bank—we 
were a co-op. But for some reason, which I 
always thought was political, they suddenly 
decided that they were not interested in 
financin’ Nevada Poultry Producers any more. 

As the Berkeley Bank came into existence, 
my boss, who was Cecil Creel, called me on 
the phone one day and said that there was a 
man cornin’ from Washington to hire help 
for a co-op bank that they were gonna form 
at Berkeley, and did I know of anybody that 
they might contact? And well, I said yes I 
did. I suggested a young person by the name 
of Carroll Heffernan, who was with the local 
banks here at that time. The man hired him, 
and Carroll went to Berkeley and worked 
with them for years and became one of their 
head men. 

But somewhere along the line when we 
had a little financial difficulty—not of our 


own makin’; we don’t know why (maybe some 
politics involved)—they suddenly decided 
that we couldn’t run the business and made 
us just a token offer of $5,000, which was just 
a nice way of sayin, “We’re not interested.” 

Another additional thing that happened 
between two government agencies, the 
Berkeley Bank for Co-ops and the Internal 
Revenue, was over the tax situation that I 
mentioned previously, where the Internal 
Revenue said, “You have to pay tax on this 
withholding that you’re makin’.” And the 
Berkeley Bank for Co-ops said, “You don’t 
have to pay it.” 

And finally one of the members one night 
said, “Well, just have the Berkeley Bank for 
Co-ops write and tell us we don’t have to pay 
that!” 

And they would never do it. They would 
talk on the phone—they’d talk to you about it, 
but they never would put it in writing and sign 
a letter that they were opposed to the Internal 
Revenue tryin to collect that tax. So as I said 
previously, we paid it under protest, which 
was just a gesture. We just kept on payin’ it. 
That was probably one of our first ventures 
back in those days of two government 
agencies opposin’ one another—two different 
sides of the same question. 



7 

Fairs, Rodeo, and Races 


Origins of the State Fair: 

The Fallon Years 

In 1927, ’26 or ’27, the Washoe County 
Farm Bureau decided to put on a potato- 
apple show, and it was held in the old World 
War I army barracks in back of Lincoln Hall 
at the University of Nevada. It was a free 
admission show, financed by local people, and 
most of the prizes were provided by the local 
merchants, who sold equipment, like plows, 
and things like that, to the farmers, and they 
provided the prize. 

The area, at that time, was a heavy potato 
producing area. The exhibits were probably 
about ninety percent potatoes, but different 
grades and shapes and size and so forth, and 
some apples. Lyon County also participated to 
a small part in the show itself. Besides bein’ a 
miniature type of fair, it became the meeting 
place of alumni who came to Reno for the 
Homecoming football games. 

The potato-and-apple show itself, I believe 
started one year after the University of Nevada 
Homecoming parade, which was to be held 


on the Homecoming Day football game. So 
between the potato-and-apple show and the 
Homecoming parade, and the alumni usin’ it 
as a kind of a reception center, it drew a good 
crowd, and of course, it was also free—that 
helped. 

But the main beneficiaries of it, indirectly, 
was the Aggie Club, who put on their annual 
Aggie Club dance, at that particular time. And 
it became so popular—such a moneymaker 
for the Aggie Club itself—that the student 
body eventually bought it from the Aggie 
Club for a certain amount of cash, which 
financed the 4-H clubs’ judging teams, that 
participated in the 4-H Club Exposition at 
Portland, Oregon. I mentioned that because 
that was apparently my introduction as a fair 
operation man—that potato-and-apple show. 

Accordin’ to records, as far as I can tell, 
apparently the first attempt to hold a state 
fair in Washoe County was held in 1885. The 
locations of this first attempt to have a fair, 
which was mainly a race meeting, was located 
about where Cazazza Drive, at the present 
day, joins South Virginia Street (U.S. 395). 



68 


Clarence J. Thornton 


This attempt at a fair only lasted 1885 and 
1886. In 1887, the state and the county and 
the people purchased the present location of 
the state fairgrounds, which is north of Ninth 
Street in Reno, west of Sutro Street, and east 
of what is now Wells Avenue, but at that time 
the price was apparently $ 14,000 for the eighty 
acres, from a Mr. Bradley and (let’s see here) 
and a man named Russell that owned the 
eighty acres. 

Is that the same Russell and Bradley from Elko 
County? 

It doesn’t show that, it doesn’t show who 
the Mr. Bradley and Mr. Russell was. There 
was an additional purchase with it, apparently 
some buildings and so forth, of about $7,000 
at that time. 

The property then was turned over to the 
state of Nevada and was run from 1867 till 
1913 by the State Agriculture Society. Fairs 
were held there, and race meets during most 
of those years. 

In 1913, the legislature awarded the state 
fair to Fallon, Nevada. And that was in a 
political deal, which has been mentioned 
numerous times, where Washoe County 
had a one-year divorce law, and they wanted 
a six-months divorce law, and Fallon had 
wanted the state fair. And they got together, 
and Fallon had the deciding votes, so the 
legislature awarded the State fair to Fallon in 
1913. There’s no record of a fair in 1914. In 
1915, accordin’ to records, the first fair was 
held at Fallon, and they had no building but 
they constructed a temporary building out of 
alfalfa and called it an “Alfalfa Palace.” 

There’s nothin’ in the records to support 
this next statement, but, from general 
conversation with people who were in the 
legislature at that time years ago, the legislative 
act transferrin the fair from Reno to Fallon 


was supposed to be just for a two-year period. 
However, the bill that transferred it has never 
been located and the fair was held at Fallon 
from 1915 until 1950, except on occasional 
war years—there was no fair held. 

The fair itself, being moved to Fallon, 
became a political situation, which was usual 
at that time. For instance, the present state 
penitentiary was originally all set to be built 
where the Reno state Highway Department 
license bureau is today. For years and years, 
that ground had a fence around it, about 
three feet high; land was given to different 
state areas for political purposes, the same 
as Sparks was given the state asylum, which 
is now called the state hospital—at that time 
it was “asylum.” And [Caliente] was given 
the girls’ school as a political award. And the 
boys’ youth correctional center at Elko was 
awarded to Elko. 

The people in those areas who got these 
types of political pork-barrel gifts, I guess 
you would call ’em, just assumed that they 
were theirs and given to them for political 
rewards. This was very prominent thinking 
in Fallon area, with the state fair. The people 
just thought that the fair was put in Fallon for 
their particular purposes, and any money that 
was spent on the fair—appropriated—was to 
be spent in their area. They didn’t actually 
take too much interest in the fair itself, other 
than the local money it might bring in from 
the state appropriation. 

I became connected with the state fair 
in Fallon, in 1929, through a political hassle 
where the state Agricultural Society had 
appointed a local person in Fallon to run the 
fair for 1929, and for some reason or other, 
the state Farm Bureau became interested 
in that appointment and was very unhappy 
with it. So they went to the governor and 
complained about the person put in charge. 
The Agricultural Society had appointed this 



Fairs, Rodeos, and Races 


69 


man, so of course, they wouldn’t cancel the 
appointment. My appointment in 1929 was 
made by the governor— the Farm Bureau 
had no authority to appoint anybody—so 
I became the manager of the fair premium 
lists, and the premium interests and the 
livestock entries. And that portion of the fair, 
the previous man who’d been appointed by 
the State Agricultural Society was in charge 
of all the money—gate receipts—and the 
entertainment part of the fair. 

It’s hard to believe the animosity that 
was in the air at that time between Washoe 
County and Churchill County. I went down 
as manager appointed to run the fair, by 
the governor, and my reception wasn’t very 
cordial, because they had already appointed 
somebody else, So I had to start from quite a 
handicap on that fair. 

This time, they had a fair building down 
there. The grounds were so small, in the 
neighborhood of four, four-and-a-half acres, 
you couldn’t put on any large fair of any kind, 
and the appropriation was only $5,000 from 
the state to run the fair. But we did the best we 
could. I believe that first fair, our attendance 
was less than a thousand people, and between 
six and seven hundred of them were political 
passes, even though it was only a fifty-cent 
admissions for the fair. 

After the fair was over, myself, the 
president of the Fair Board (who was Tom 
Dolf at that time), weren’t able to find the 
manager the society had appointed. He 
had collected the admissions and was no 
longer around. So we met and met and met 
for months, to try and figure out some way 
to pay the bills. I would go down to Fallon 
every month or two to meet with them. They 
had the office uptown in the old Williams 
building, which was right on Maine Street. 
And [on] the table, there was bills all stacked 
up on it—no money. I couldn’t get my salary, 


so I eventually, about Thanksgivin’ time, I 
made ’em an offer to run the next year’s fair, 
get my salary out of the two fairs, for the next 
year. Of course, they accepted that. That’s how 
I got into the fair business. 

That was a really brave offer. 

Well, where else could you turn? They had 
no money and—. 

How did you get the appointment from 
Governor Balzar? Did he just know you? 

Yes, as a Washoe County Agricultural 
Extension Agent. The Nevada Farm Bureau 
recommended me. I knew Balzar; he and 
I became personal friends, because later 
on in life, when he was still governor and I 
was handling the federal welfare in Washoe 
County, we were acquainted on a first-name 
basis. Lots of the people that I refused to 
give welfare to would go to the governor in 
Carson and plead with the governor, and we 
would talkback and forth. (And then, gettin 
off the subject of the fair—all our original 
federal relief money came through the state 
of Nevada, was on deposit with the— state 
controller—at the governor s request. The 
state itself could not legally accept that money. 
I think I’ve told you that once before. But 
he got the state controller to accept it, and 
disburse it as a courtesy.) 

Then from there on, I ran the fairs to and 
including 1947 at Fallon. You had considerable 
difficulty because of the minimal reaction 
with the people in Fallon. I don’t mean all the 
people, I mean the more prominent people in 
politics, who had this attitude of “it’s a pork- 
barrel deal, and we won’t do much about it.” 

It might be interesting how I handled the 
passes of the first year or the second year. 
Well, around seven hundred of ’em were 



70 


Clarence J. Thornton 


political passes, and we didn’t make any great 
change, we just didn’t send any passes out 
the second year. We wrote each one of those 
people who had the pass in 1929, a nice letter 
complimenting them on attendin’ the fair the 
year before and hopin’ they would attend the 
fair in 1930, and we had discontinued the 
method of sending out passes for the 1930 
fair. They would merely report to a table— 
we’d have a table with a secretary at the front 
gate—and give the secretary their name and 
they would get their pass for that fair. And 
you know how many people showed up at 
that table to get a pass? None. 

Why? 

It was only fifty cents for the fair. 

Ihey figured they were looking too cheap to 
do that? 

I think so. We separated it. Put the 
secretary over to the side, you see. “Passes 
only,” We gave out a few passes, but not to 
those people. 

The fairs, as I have said here, from that 
time we did the best we could with ’em. It’s 
not too good to criticize Fallon too much, but 
it was just a condition at that time, that the 
fair itself had to be on a very limited budget, 
and there was only one place in the town of 
Fallon where people could come to the fair 
and go into a restaurant and eat and take 
their children. The rest of ’em were bars and 
that types of casino. So people cornin’ to the 
fair from out of town had to come down that 
same day and leave the same day. And on top 
of that, the sleepin accommodations were very 
limited in Fallon, and by the time you got the 
regular exhibitors there for the fair, they had 
occupied practically all the motel and hotel 
rooms in the area. That became a problem also. 


And then the second year, I convinced 
the Society to gamble on building a rodeo 
arena to go with the fair, which was a pretty 
small situation, but I believe it cost the sum of 
$1,700 to build that seating; that arrangement 
can seat about 700 or 800 people. The board 
was very skeptical, ’cause they were all 
conservative people, and spendin’ that kind 
of money, but it more than paid out—we had 
no problem with the rodeo. But the problem 
with the rodeo became political. The people 
who were interested in the rodeo didn’t think 
that they should have to go to the fair to see 
the rodeo, and there was no reason for the 
rodeo to be there if there wasn’t a fair. So every 
year, we would have that hassle with the local 
political people—the rodeo people—about 
the fair and the rodeo, and why couldn’t they 
go to the rodeo and not go to the fair? And 
we finally worked out a compromise, where 
they gave us twenty-five cents on every ticket 
they sold at the rodeo, whether they went 
through the fair or not, they didn’t have to 
go through. But that never, never finished as 
long as I ran the fair. Every year you’d have 
the same thing—they didn’t want any fair, 
they just wanted the rodeo—why should they 
have to pay to go to the fair, when they didn’t 
want to go to it? 

Most of those years, Tom Dolf of Fallon 
was president. I believe in the first years 
of 1929, ’30, and ’31, Carl Dodge Sr. was 
president. Later years, Carl Dodge Jr. was 
president. And then followin’ him was George 
Ernst served as president. They always wanted 
a big fair. And every year the Society would 
tell them the same thing: “Well, you put up the 
money.” We only had $5,000 at that time from 
the state legislative appropriation for the fair, 
and the Churchill County used to appropriate 
$2,500. And we had the exhibit-space money, 
and the gate admission to run the fair on. But 
they wanted a big fair, the figure they kept 



Fairs, Rodeos, and Races 


71 


wanting was $25,000—back in the thirties and 
forties. And our answer was always the same, 
“You get the $25,000; we’ll run a $25,000 fair.” 

So after they changed managers and when 
I left there in 1947, my last year, in 1948 and 
’49, they ran a fair somewhat similar to the 
ones we had been running all those years, and 
then 1950, they went big. They brought in a 
Hollywood show, and it cost ’em $25,000. And 
[they] had a fair, and nothin’ happened till 
one day in November, some man was cornin’ 
back from the Lake—his girl had been up to 
the Lake, she was a 4-H club member, and as 
they came through Carson, she mentioned 
she’d never received her premium award from 
the state fair in September. For some reason or 
other, the man said, “Well, we’ll just stop and 
see the governor.” So they went and saw the 
governor. And he got interested in the thing, 
and started an investigation, and the fair was 
broke. They didn’t have any money, and they 
had paid nobody, including the press, who 
were very silent. They hadn’t got their money 
either, but they hadn’t said nothing about the 
fair bein’ defunct. 

So then we started the meetings to get 
ready to raise money to pay the bills, and the 
people in Fallon—or the more prominent 
people—asked for time to raise the money 
locally to pay off the bills. And we granted 
them that time, and they couldn’t raise any 
money to pay the bills off, so we talked to 
the state officials and they suggested we well 
the property. (That’s the state Agricultural 
Society—I’ll just say “we.”) It was owned by 
the state and was sold to Churchill County 
for the amount of the bills, which were about 
$11,000 in 1950. 

During that time, the Agricultural Society 
was also operating the previous fairgrounds 
in Reno. It had become pretty much of a 
racetrack, and it was run by the Silver State 
Jockey Club for trainin’ racehorses. And there 


were several important horse races held here. 
In fact, they were held here till about 1931 
or ’32. California had a law against horse 
racing, and the man running the races here, 
William Kyne, he tried to get legislation in 
California to allow horse racing. The first 
time the legislature put it on the ballot, the 
people voted it down on horse racin’. As horse 
racing stands in California today, the people 
have never voted on horse racin’ in California 
as far as I know. All the fairs are run under 
a bill which was passed by the California 
legislature “to improve the breeding of horses” 
in California, with a promise by the race horse 
people that a good portion of the money from 
the racetrack betting would go into the junior 
colleges and the state fair. The state fair in 
California was having financial problems, and 
so the people in California voted favorably 
on that bill. 

However, that’s not unusual. With gaming 
in Nevada, the people in Nevada have 
never voted on gaming, except through the 
legislature. And there was a period in the 
thirties and forties when, if the people had 
voted on gaming in Nevada, it wouldn’t have 
been here. So, they’ve got it tied to the school 
systems now and so forth. 

In fact, when you go to the state fair 
meetings in California today, you’re competing 
with the junior colleges and the state fair for 
the money. You’ll find—particularly one 
man I remember because he was president 
of the University of Nevada, President 
Love—attended the state fair meetings in 
California lobbying for money, just like the 
state fair manager was lobbying for money, 
to run the junior colleges on. (That’s a little 
off the subject, but it’s still what the situation 
is, I guess.) 

In 1948, Governor Vail Pittman appointed 
me to the state Agricultural Society, and 
I was reappointed by Governor Charlie 



72 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Russell, in May of 1956. Durin’ those years, 
of course, from 1951-52, there was no state 
fair anywhere. I had charge of the grounds to 
represent the state Agricultural Society, and 
had to have somebody in charge because the 
insurance people required it. 

How about going back now to the Fallon years 
and talk about your contacts with the various 
exhibitors. 

I’ll give you a good example of goin back 
to the Fallon fair—state fair in Fallon—I don’t 
recall just what fair it was, but this is on the 
humorous side. Somewhere along in there, 
Maytag decided to send a little Jewish boy from 
New York, about twenty-two years old, out to 
the Nevada state fair in Fallon. He had never 
been out of New York. He had no more idea 
where Fallon was! And he got there late, and we 
didn’t have any exhibit space left, and I found a 
little platform about three feet wide and about 
ten feet long, open. And he didn’t have any 
money, he needed some place to sleep. And 
he was selling Maytag washers. I fixed him up, 
and I never saw him again till the fair was over. 

When the fair was over, I went and talked 
to him. And this happened to be the year that 
Maytag washers put a gasoline engine on 
those washing machines, instead of doing it by 
hand. And he sold so many washing machines 
in Fallon, and he didn’t have any time to 
bother me, and he thought Fallon, Nevada 
was the greatest place in the world! I think he 
sold about every woman in Churchill County 
a Maytag washer with a gasoline engine on it! 

I never saw him again or since. But the 
way he started out, you know, winding up 
here from New York, and no money and no 
exhibit space, knew nobody—and the way it 
turned out when the fair was over. 

The particular exhibits that you were 
talking about, yes, we had the regular farm 


exhibits of farm crops and vegetables. Fallon 
was quite a vegetable area at that time. And 
I think we got the best exhibit of everything 
in that area, because, the fair being close 
there, the different ones that were gonna 
make entries would come in and take a look 
at what their neighbor had entered, and then 
they would go home and try to get something 
better. 

Mr. dine, L. E. dine, was the county 
agricultural extension agent down there, and 
he was in charge of that particular part of the 
exhibits. And being quite a politician and 
wanting to make friends with everybody, you 
would look at him, and about half the time, 
he was takin’ some exhibits out and putting 
somethin’ else in, because somebody had 
brought him in something that was bigger or 
better in the deal. 

The counties had booths there—primarily 
Washoe County, Douglas County, Lyon 
County, and of course, Churchill with the 
biggest exhibit, and Pershing County, and 
Elko. 

Elko was a little reluctant to come in 
because it happened at that time that they 
had a fair out in Elko County, in which the 
dates conflicted to a certain point. And at that 
time, Elko used to get a $2,500 appropriation 
each year for the Elko County Livestock Show, 
and we were after a $7,500 appropriation at 
the same time. And Elko always liked to run 
theirs over Labor Day, and we did too, so 
we compromised, and they agreed to finally 
send an exhibit in and took part later on in 
the fair. But because of dissatisfaction on the 
Elko board with the appropriation they were 
gettin’ from the state and certain politics 
that they had to stand by to get their $2,500, 
Elko County themselves, asked that their 
appropriation be discontinued. And they 
appointed their own fair board to run the 
Elko fair. 



Fairs, Rodeos, and Races 


73 


But the actual exhibits themselves at 
Fallon, were good. As I said before, the 
accommodations were limited for people and 
entries, too. 

And on the humorous side again, one 
year in the honey exhibit, A1 Reed was the 
extension agent at Lovelock, and they had 
a very fine honey exhibit. And his brother, 
Ed Reed, was the county extension agent of 
Washoe County, and they had a very fine honey 
exhibit. And the judge in the honey exhibit 
was George Schweiss. And he started judging 
the honey early one morning—liquid honeys, 
and the combed honey—and that evening, at 
six o’clock, he was still walking around with 
two jars of honey in his hand, tryin’ to figure 
out which one was the best. And it turned out 
that Ed Reed, I think, forgot to bring his liquid- 
honey exhibit. His brother, Al, gave him part 
of his honey exhibit, and the judge was tryin’ 
to determine which jar of honey was the best 
honey at that time. They finally confessed it 
was the same honey from Lovelock. 

Well, you talked about the political problems 
out there, but you must have overcome that 
in getting the support of the local people out 
there, because, if the political problem hadn’t 
finally evaporated, you wouldn’t have had any 
fair there. 

Well, to be frank with you, I tried to get 
out of runnin’ that fair for ten years. I’d just 
had enough of it, and while you didn’t have 
any resentment from the normal, regular 
population of Churchill County, you still had 
it from the political persons, particularly from 
Senator Ralph Lattin. Being a politician, he 
couldn’t understand why—or he didn’t want 
to understand why—the Nevada state fair 
had to have a state fair manager from Washoe 
County, rather than Churchill County, and 
that kept the thing alive. 


One day, Governor Vail Pittman 
practically had the police take him out of his 
office because he was well, a little out of line. 

In fact, at one time in that period, they 
even ran ads in the papers over the state for 
a fair manager, because I did want to get out. 
And young Carl Dodge happened to be—Carl 
Dodge Jr., young Carl Dodge—happened to 
be president that year. And I was gonna stay 
out of it, except—there’s way back in my story, 
as I’ve told you about, was a man named Bill 
Moffat who was responsible for me goin to 
college. He was on the state fair board. And 
he finally sent his man down to a meeting 
in Fallon, Mr. [Charles A.] Brown, who was 
his office secretary, to ask me to stay on for 
him. They were havin’ such a terrible time on 
things, so I stayed on at that particular time, 
and for a few years later, but that accounts for 
my stayin’ there. And of course, young Carl 
Dodge, I wouldn’t’ve abandoned him either. 
The job only paid $500 a year total—you 
stood your own expenses, and I’d handle it 
in my hatchery business, and other business, 
generally spend about two weeks down there, 
board and room, and other expenses, mileage, 
all came out of the whole thing. 

And a lot more than $500 worth of headaches. 

Oh boy! A person shouldn’t be critical 
of the state fair that was held in Fallon from 
1915 till 1950, other than it was just the actual 
conditions that existed. Churchill County 
and that area with the state fair in Fallon, 
regardless of how you handled the fair, or how 
you advertised it, or what event you had, you 
couldn’t draw over 7,500 people for three or 
four days—it just wasn’t there. Plus, the road 
conditions and the room accommodations 
and the meal accommodations—no place for 
the children to eat—it was just a poor political 
move, as far as I can guess. 



74 


Clarence J. Thornton 


I had the feeling from the people that I’ve 
interviewed from Fallon that they were really 
proud of their fair and their own participation 
in it, and that you had a considerable amount 
to do with their pride in the fair 

They were proud of their fair. The 
Agricultural Society, in those years, regardless 
of everything else that went on, gave me a 
thousand percent support in there. They were 
very satisfied as far as I ever knew, never had 
any complaints of any kind from my activities 
with the fairs, how it was handled. But the 
resentment came, not because of a person by 
the name of Thornton, but because he didn’t 
live in Churchill County and run the state fair 
down there. 

There was a poor man down there that 
had a ranch by the name of Ed Thornton—no 
relative—and because I lived in Reno and 
wasn’t available to phone and his name was 
in the phone book, he got phone calls year 
’round on the fair. Each year he would come 
to the fair, he and I would have a talk. And he’d 
say, “Well, so-and-so woke me up at midnight 
the other night and wanted to know about that 
poultry entry,” you know, or “the sheep entry.” 

And, it’s just one of those things that can 
happen to anybody in that line. And I have 
no prejudice against anybody, I had nothin’ 
against Ralph Lattin—he was a politician. He 
was a—”my folk;” they were all his “folk” in 
there, and gettin votes. 

The 4-H kids, of course, both there and 
here, practically had their run of the show. I 
always thought that they were the big thing 
about a fair because of growin’ up in the 
agricultural areas in the fair, and they’re 
young, and never caused any troubles. 
Anything that we could give to them, we gave 
within the money, both in the 4-H and the 
high school vocational department—Future 
Farmers of America. 


But there, the people runnin those two 
events had some little unhappiness because 
they were such an important part of the fair, 
and we just didn’t have the money to put all 
we should into that particular part. I knew 
that, and they did too. And they would like 
to do this and that, and I would too, but with 
a limited finance, you just couldn’t do it, in 
their situation. 

You know, I still see kids who was at the 
fair, you know, and the folks—they were 
proud of their fair. Probably ninety percent 
of the people that you talk about, never knew 
any of ’em to start with, except by name; you 
know, you don’t particularly see those people. 
And a lot of them grown up now. I can still 
remember the name maybe. And I remember 
the fairs that were held there. 

One of the big items of the Nevada state 
fair in Fallon when I took over, besides the 
complimentary passes which I previously 
mentioned, was what they called a “family 
ticket.” They had been sellin the family tickets 
for I don’t know how many years in Fallon. 
And if you bought a family ticket—me being 
a neophyte in the fair business, thought that 
meant a family man, wife and children. But 
the first year I ran it— the fair—I found out 
a “family” had very few limitations, with 
aunts and uncles and friends, and the tickets 
were negotiable so you could just pass them 
around. And we immediately got rid of that 
the second year. They sold for two dollars a 
ticket for the whole fair. That was the cost of 
the ticket. It was really a bargain! 

It seems peculiar at this time to mention, 
but about the time I took charge of the fair 
in the late twenties and early thirties, radio 
was just coming into operation. The present 
station, which is the Reno KOH, which was 
owned by the Sacramento Bee at that time, 
was pretty heavy on agriculture broadcasting 
in California. So they came to the fair at 



Fairs, Rodeos, and Races 


75 


Fallon with their broadcasters and their 
microphones, and they had quite a time. Most 
of the people in the Fallon area were scared 
of the microphones. They didn’t know what 
this machine was; they couldn’t get ’em to talk 
on it. They’d see the broadcaster coming, and 
they’d get away from him! And then, when 
they finally got them fairly well used to that, 
they jumped to a remote-control radio, where 
they stood off in a corner holdin a switch or 
somethin’, and the radio’s way off there. And 
that did really upset the people who had just 
become aware that maybe it wasn’t a trap that 
they were talkin’ to, and this remote control 
was somethin’ else. 

Well, the second year they had remote- 
control there, the remote-control radio people 
ran into a problem. Every time they turned 
on the radio in the remote-control, they’d 
get nothin’ but buzzes; it just wouldn’t work. 
And they couldn’t figure out what was wrong. 
Well, it happened about that time in our food 
concession, the women had found an electric 
fly killer to take care of the fly problem, 
instead of the fly paper. And about the third 
day every time a fly’d hit the electric fly killer, 
the remote-controlled radios would go out 
of business! They sure had a time with that! 

There was another peculiarity in this 
food concession where they sold hamburgers 
and sandwiches and so forth. It was run by 
the Women’s Christian Temperance Union 
of Fallon. In the first year or two, the rodeo 
handled their beer concession themselves, 
but along about the third or fourth year, they 
decided the WCTU would also have the beer 
with their sandwiches. And Mrs. Carl Dodge, 
the mother of Carl Dodge, Sr., was in charge 
of it. And she came out, and we had the booth 
all set up for them, where they would handle 
hot dogs and sandwiches, soft drinks and beer. 
And they went on a strike; they weren’t gonna 
handle the beer. So we had to build another 


booth. They wouldn’t handle the beer; they 
would take the money in for it, but it couldn’t 
be in their booth! So we had to build another 
booth adjacent to theirs. And if you wanted 
a bottle of beer, you paid them, but you went 
over to the other booth and got your beer. This 
actually happened! The money was all right, 
but the beer was something else! 

And along a different line, there was a 
very active man in the Fallon area in Boy 
Scouts by the name of Homer Bowers, who 
you probably know. And he was quite active 
in the Fallon community, and in Boy Scout 
work. And he came to me and wanted to put 
on a dog show in the arena at the fair with 
those Boy Scouts in there. And I told him, I 
said, “All right, if you handle it entirely, you 
go ahead.” 

And we turned the arena over to him to 
have his dog show. And he got the Boy Scouts 
and maybe other kids with dogs to come 
out with big dogs, little dogs. And of course, 
the boys who didn’t belong to Boy Scouts 
heard about it. And when he got ready to 
go to his dog shows and all the parents were 
there, and they had all these dogs out there 
in the arena, some of these nonmember kids 
showed up with three or four sacks full of 
cats, and turned the cats loose in the arena! 
I hadn’t seen Homer since eight o’clock that 
morning—he was out in the arena; I saw him 
that night. By eight o’clock, I didn’t hardly 
recognize him, ’cause of that arena ground—it 
was just dirt. And when the cats come out of 
the sacks and the dogs took after the cats and 
the parents took after the dogs, it was some 
doing, I guess, that he never wanted to put 
another dog show on! 

And I think we followed that up not too 
many years later with a very popular show 
at that time; it was a Shirley Temple baby 
show, when the parents dressed their babies 
as Shirley Temples and brought them to the 



76 


Clarence J. Thornton 


show. And I don’t recall who we had forjudges 
for that. When we put on the Shirley Temple 
baby show, it was goin’ fine—no problems at 
all till it ended, and the results became known. 
Well, the judges were smarter than we were. 
The judges had left the fairgrounds by then. 
By the time the parents and—primarily the 
“ parents ” were grandparents and aunts and 
uncles—some fathers and mothers, but not 
too many. And they were really upset. And 
they actually went looking for the judge, but 
the judges were gone! That was the last Shirley 
Temple baby show we ever put on! 

We also put on—in a serious vein—a 
rabbit show, I think one of the first rabbit 
shows in the state. Rabbits at that time were 
quite an industry in the Fallon area. In fact, 
it was a very fine rabbit show. We brought an 
outside judge to actually handle that. And 
then we put on a flower show. As far as I know, 
these were the first shows put on down in that 
area of that type. Especially the rabbit show. 
Flower shows might have been held in Reno 
before that, but we didn’t know about ’em. 
And then we put on an art show and brought 
in judges to handle that. 

As I stated before, the second or third 
year of the fair we built a small grandstand 
to handle a rodeo. We put the rodeo on in 
connection with the fair. And it was just a 
hardrock rodeo; they just went out and got the 
livestock everywhere they could find them. 
We had no microphone, and our announcer 
was a big man by the name of Jim Law, who 
wore a pair of striped railroad overalls, rode a 
little white horse, and had a big megaphone off 
of the old-type phonographs, and announced 
the events in the arena. 

One of the managers I had way a man by 
the name of Pat Sanford, who was managing 
the rodeo for me. And the events got a little 
slow, so he offered the cowboys two dollars 
and a half to ride a calf, or a cow, each one, you 


know. And I didn’t know it, but the cowboys 
were as smart as he was; they would ride three 
or four jumps on a calf or a cow, and then 
jump off and get their two and a half. 

And that night when I got uptown to the 
Sagebrush Cafe where Pat Sanford was payin’ 
off in cash (we provided the cash), as I walked 
in the door, he had the silver—mostly silver 
and paper—money on top of a glass counter, 
and a fight started. And they tipped that 
thing over on the floor in the Sagebrush—all 
the money belongs to the fair. And the big 
argument was of whether or not they had 
really ridden the animal or not, and how many 
two-and-a-halfs they were tryin to collect! 
His idea of what a ride was and their idea 
of what a ride was, was entirely different! So 
immediately, we all got busy gatherin’ up the 
money off the floor. 

(Now this is jumpin’ again.) The Indians— 
and this they’ll probably question—but it’s 
a peculiar thing to say that the state fair at 
Fallon revised the Indian dances in western 
Nevada. We hired what was supposed to be 
Indian dancers from Nixon to put on Indian 
dances in front of the grandstand. They didn’t 
tell us that they had lost the art of their dances. 

We also brought in a couple of big—and 
I mean big—Dutch women from Oakland 
to put on a doll show. And they were really 
Dutch women from the old country, and they 
had made these beautiful little dolls. So when 
the Indian dances started, they were in the 
grandstand, and they realized right away that 
the Indians didn’t know what they were doing. 
So two gals got out in that alkali which was 
about ankle deep, and started to show these 
Indians how to do their dust dances, which 
was apparently the original Indian dance, as 
far as we know. And they taught the Indians 
how to do their Indian dances. 

Years later, to make sure I was correct in 
my thinkin’ on this, there was a minister at 



Fairs, Rodeos, and Races 


77 


Nixon at the church, who was there and saw 
the Indian dances and what had happened. 
And years later, when I went to a League of 
Cities meeting in Las Vegas, I heard that this 
minister was then with the church at Boulder 
City and had been there when this dancing 
came up. And I got a person to drive me out 
to Boulder, and we got the minister out of bed 
at midnight, at Boulder City—and told him 
who I was, and wanted to verify what had 
happened at the Nevada State fair back in the 
thirties on the Indian dances. 

And he said, “Yes, that’s right.” He said the 
Indians had lost their art of dances. No doubt 
they reinstated them, as the Indian dances you 
see today, as far as I know, were reinstated or 
restarted by these two Dutch women. Now, 
he verified that. I just wanted to be sure that 
he was there, and he knew the Indians; he 
knew ’em in Nixon—he was in their church. 
He was there that night. Well, this was forty 
years later. He and I sat there and talked till 
three o’clock in the morning about the Indian 
dances and the Indian bands! 

’Course, when you had these Indian 
dances, you generally got the Indian band 
from Nixon. And you learned right away, 
the first time you did this, that you would 
have trouble the day the Indian band was 
gonna play. Come somewhere near time for 
the Indian dances and the band, and you 
had the dances with no band, and became 
really upset. So you were walkin’ around the 
fairgrounds looking for your Indian band 
when somebody said, “Oh, they’re in jail. 
They all got drunk. Maybe you better see the 
county sheriff,” So, you know—I shouldn’t 
say all, but some of’em, enough of’em, so that 
you didn’t have a band. And the sheriff was 
very cooperative; after we put up a hundred 
dollars or so and bailed ’em out, why, we had 
an Indian band for the Indian dancers! 


But this went on year after year, in there! 
It was one of the headaches of—. I don’t know 
if you want to run it or not, but—. I don’t 
want to infer that the Indians were all drunk 
or anything like that, so—but they were all, 
in the kettle—that’s where you found part of 
your Indian band. 

The State Fair Moves to Reno 

After the fair moved to Reno, it got so much 
more sophisticated, with the carnival aspect, 
and so forth—you must have had some really 
interesting experiences. 

In 1953, a group of businessmen in Reno 
decided to have a fair. The state fair having 
closed in Fallon, there was no opposition from 
there, as there had been before. The leading 
man in gettin’ that fair underway was Pappy 
Smith of Harolds Club. 

While he was in gaming here, he had 
come out of some of those northeastern states 
back there, New England states, where county 
fairs and state fairs were quite common, and 
he wanted to see a fair held in this area and 
he put up the original five thousand dollars 
in cash to have a fair. I was contacted by a 
man by the name of George Stetson to run 
the fair. And it was called the Washoe County 
Agricultural and Industrial Fair, Incorporated 
at that time. And it ran from 1953 until 1969, 
when practically the same group of people 
got the legislature to authorize the use of the 
name, Nevada State Fair, from 1969 on. 

The first fair itself, in 1953, was a hassle. 
We put it all in the south portion of the 
fairgrounds, which was rented out to a man 
by the name of Fred Oliva. (He lives right up 
here, maybe you know him.) And he had an 
alfalfa crop in there, and not knowin’ whether 
there’d ever be another fair, gettin’ a pretty 
good rent from him, I didn’t want to disturb 



78 


Clarence J. Thornton 


the alfalfa crop, so we just got him to cut the 
alfalfa crop and leave the ditches there in the 
alfalfa field. [We] put up a tent that was sixty 
feet wide and 390 feet long over the alfalfa 
stubble. 

Just before we opened the fair, one of our 
directors who was an insurance man, came 
into the office all excited and tellin’ me that 
there was gonna be people killed up there, 
fall in the ditches and break their ankles, 
wed have nothin’ but lawsuits, those stakes 
those ropes and that tent—.And we just took 
a chance and went ahead and put the fair on 
that way. And believe it or not, we never had 
a complaint or a lawsuit over that operation 
of stumblin’ around in those ditches in there, 
and the ropes and the tent stakes—. 

We never knew how many people we 
had. They came in under the fence, and over 
the fence and around the fence, cut the fence 
down, walked across the irrigation ditch with 
water in it. And the only problem we had, 
after the fair was over with, we had quite a 
time shuttin it down the first night. Mr. Smith 
came out about ten o’clock that night himself, 
personally, to see how it was goin’, and when 
he saw what was gain’ on, and the people 
cornin’, he just told me, “Don’t worry about 
it, I’ll see that the fair’s paid for.” 

And then he’d go back to the Harolds 
Club, and as the shift got off duty, he’d send 
them out to the fair. One or two o’clock in the 
morning, I had as one of my gate men, Mr. 
Richards, who was mayor of Sparks. He came 
to me about one o’clock at night and wanted 
to go home. He said, “Bout every time I get 
ready to close up here, here comes another 
stream of people to see the fair.” 

We estimated we had some twenty-five 
thousand or thirty thousand people in there. 
And, I believe, that first fair, we paid back 
about forty percent of the expense, I think. 
The fair was set up and run without any tax 


money of any kind, or any state tax, county 
tax, or any other tax, just financed by the local 
people, the local merchants, who contributed 
approximately thirty-thousand dollars to the 
first fair to run it. 

From that time on, the fair, of course, has 
grown. I stayed with it for seventeen years. 
The last year I was there, we had an attendance 
of over fifty thousand people, but we never 
counted passes. We never counted any passes. 
That was fifty thousand paid admissions. 

Just as a thought, when we started that 
first fair, I think that Archie Albright was 
the county agricultural agent in charge of 
the 4-H part of the fair, which was their 
achievement day for the year. And his request 
to us was for about 125 passes for 4-H club 
members that year. By the 1970s, which was 
my last year, we were givin’ him—the new 
extension agent who was Louie Gardella at 
that time—1,200 to 1,400 passes a year for 
the 4-H club department. And we never had 
any question about how many passes we gave 
the 4-H. I never said very much to any people 
about it, but actually what I was doin’ was, I 
was usin’ the 4-H for my advertising—walking 
advertising—twelve months a year. 

Lots of those 4-H people who got their 
passes, also got their first check they’d ever 
had in their life, or the first ribbon they’d 
ever won. And when we went to figure out 
the finances on the fair, you’d have a lot of 
4-H checks outstanding, that had never been 
cashed. And you’d call their parents and “Well, 
oh yeah, she’s got that check,” or “he’s had it, 
but it’s pasted on the wall of their bedroom, 
or pinned to the wall. That’s the first check 
(or first ribbon) they ever got.” So we just 
automatically crossed off those 4-H checks 
that had never been cashed. 

Isn’t that neat to be able to give the kids that 
experience ? 



Fairs, Rodeos, and Races 


79 


Oh yeah, that’s right [laughs]. We just 
cleared the bank balance. The auditors were 
very considerate; [chuckle] they accepted 
our statement there were 4-H checks pinned 
to the wall somewhere, or pasted to the wall. 
They never cleared, they never came in. 

The fair itself was something I always 
thought that the people wanted. Their 
reaction to the fair was a big one. It’s hard 
to believe what they went through that first 
fair. We had practically no ground lights at 
all, it was about semi-dark, and the exhibits 
were all in the tents, but particularly that one 
long tent. And the people just swarmed over 
the place, and never uttered a complaint that 
I ever heard of. They might have talked to 
somebody else. 

They apparently had wanted a fair for 
a good many years or something, and they 
always, durin’ my own particular operation, 
featured the fair as a family event. I always 
argue that if the man gets up in the morning 
and says, “I’m goin to the fair,” everybody else 
says, “I’m going, too.” If he said, “I’m going to 
a prize fight,” or something other than that or 
some way—you don’t get that reaction. And 
the fifty-cent admission. You got so many 
people that call you, “How much is it?” 

“Fifty cents,” you know. 

“How much for children?” 

“Twenty-five cents for children under 
twelve years of age. 

And the usual answer would be from the 
woman, “Oh, I’ve got five dollars. We will be 
down pretty soon.” 

And you’d get the five dollars, admission, 
and hot dogs, and soda pop, and the carnival, 
and you had the whole five dollars. Parking was 
a little problem. In fact, this is 1980, and the 
same man that handled the parking for us in 
1953 is still handling it for the fair; that would 
be Jerry Monaghan. Do you know Jerry? Yeah, 
he’s still handling the parking [chuckle]. 


One of the main things that we had 
on the first fair, and the papers backed us 
on, too, was to have no politics in it of any 
kind—no political persons involved. And 
the papers who had that experience with the 
Fallon fair that went broke, and knew some 
of the problems we had had because of the 
political situation of a state fair, were very 
much in favor of that type of operation. All 
the board members agreed—none of’em were 
in politics. 

And it was run all those seventeen years 
that way; I ran it at fifty cents admission, 
and without bragging when I left there, they 
had put over thirty thousand dollars into the 
fairgrounds—cash—and had approximately 
the same amount left, as cash on hand, with 
a fifty-cent admission. 

In Fallon, the fairgrounds were so small, 
that we couldn’t even have the fair on the 
fairgrounds. We had to have the carnival 
we brought in for the fair uptown, on lots 
uptown. There just wasn’t any room for it out 
at the fairgrounds. 

Now, actually, gettin’ back to Churchill 
County and Fallon, that your cooperation 
here was so much different. We didn’t make 
much effort the first year in gathering that 
thirty thousand dollars up; we just sent out 
letters and contacted a few people. And you 
had no trouble with exhibit space at all. In 
fact, they were practically fightin over exhibit 
space to get out there. And here, which was 
so much different from down there—you just 
had a few exhibits down there, but you didn’t 
have any place to put ’em, and you couldn’t 
draw the people to justify it in their situation. 

It was just a wrong move for the fair, or 
the society; just happened to be, I think, in 
the wrong area. The roads were terrible, as 
I said before, and their accommodations 
were terrible, and the political situation was 
entirely against you all the way. Here, there 



80 


Clarence J. Thornton 


was no politicians involved at all. And in this 
particular fair here, we set it up so nobody 
could serve over three years—no director— 
three years on the board, and then they had 
to be replaced by other directors. 

And this particular fair here, with their 
thirty directors—we had thirty directors—we 
met once a month, year ’round. And we’d meet 
at four o’clock and adjourn at five o’clock. In 
the seventeen years, we had a majority every 
time we had a meeting, every month. The 
businessmen took an interest in the thing, 
it was a success. They were glad to advertise 
the fair, that they were associated with it; you 
still see it today. 

And they knew that you met and made a 
point of meetin’ at four o’clock and adjourned 
at five—period. So they would shut up their 
businesses, give ’em an hour to relax to come 
over there where they didn’t have to worry 
about money, where they’d been runnin’ the 
store—all the different stores and so forth— 
they sit there for an hour and go through the 
fair business. At five o’clock, they’d go home. 
So when you met the next month, that’s the 
way they operated. 

And all those years after the first and 
second year, we just had a mailing list of 
underwriters. We’d send a letter out in April, 
and you were on their list of contributors for 
that year in their budget already, so you get 
your thirty, thirty-five thousand dollars and 
not even leave the office. In fact, they’d get 
other people for you, or new concerns cornin’ 
to town that would want to know how to 
contact to get in, to come in—we didn’t take 
anything less than $100. And except two or 
three year, they got back all the money they 
put in. If they put $100 in we sent them a 
check back in November for $100. In fact, 
you lost very few underwriters; you generally 
picked up some in there—some new outfit 
come to town, they’d want to come in. 


I always think of fairs as one of the places 
that new merchants or new appliances is the 
ideal place for ’em to test, whether or not, 
whether the public are gonna be interested 
in. And the other thing that I always worked 
on was that “a fair is a family affair.” Keep 
your admissions low, and have things that the 
younger people like—the older people, too—. 

People come to a fair, I found out for one 
reason, and one main reason, is to visit. Yeah, 
they come there and then see somebody they 
haven’t seen all year or some thin and they 
start right in talking. 

And also another thing I found out, one 
of the poorest exhibit spaces in the fair was 
right inside the front door. No exhibitor wants 
that space. People come in that front door and 
see somebody they know, and that’s it—they 
don’t look at the exhibits. 

I had a little exhibitor with the carrot 
peeler and that thing, you know, came in one 
year and boy, I gave ’em an ideal space right 
by the front door. He came out of Sacramento. 
And he didn’t have a microphone, all those 
people in that tin building. Next year came 
along, and he sent in his card for his exhibit 
space, and he put himself way back in the 
corner. I wrote to him; I said, “Well, you can 
have that same space.” 

And he said, “I don’t want it. I don’t want 
to be where people come in [chuckle], I want 
to be over in the back area. He sold out in 
a couple of days. Over there, people paid 
attention to him that time. 

You must have a whole lot of little memories 
or tips like that on exhibits. 

Well, one of the other things I consistently 
did with the fair—now that I’m out of it—I 
used to change the admission system every 
year—how people got into the fairgrounds. 
I’d set up the way I wanted people cornin’ 



Fairs, Rodeos, and Races 


81 


to the fairgrounds, where they’d park and 
where they’d pay their admission, and hope 
it’d work, and very seldom it did. When the 
people got there, or started cornin’, except for 
the exhibitors, I generally got out of the way I 
figured it was their show, and I’d let them run 
it and watch and see what they did. And they’d 
fix you— admissions and parkin’—so we just 
take notes of everything they did, and the next 
year, we’d revise it that way, and the next year 
when they got the fair, they revised it again. 

We had a terrible time with the high 
school kids cornin’ in over the board fence 
which was on the Sutro Street side of the 
fairgrounds. And I got a security man, it was 
a Reno policeman and put him in just a plain 
pickup truck. He put on his regular street 
clothes, except his cap, which he had on the 
seat beside him. And he drove around to the 
east side of the fairgrounds, over there in the 
dark. And as the kids would come over the 
fence, he’d pick ’em up; you know, they didn’t 
know who he was. “Can I take you in?” 

So they’d pile in, and he’d take ’em to 
the admission booth [chuckle], reach over 
and get his cap and put it back on. And you 
know, those kids never got mad. [Laughs] 
They’d been took\ That was all there was to 
it. They’d scream and holler and go pay their 
admission—their reaction was something, 
you know. [Laughs] A nice ride in, and then 
you get a police cap on over at the admission 
booth. 

Then they got rid of the board fence 
over there, put in a heavy wire fence, and we 
fastened it down. Of course, there’s no boards 
to crawl over, and we thought we were fixed 
—we didn’t put any security out there that 
year, but the first thing we knew, there were 
kids walking in, cornin’ across the field from 
the east side to the west side where the fair 
was, just about as heavy as before. So we got 
to watchin’ what they were doin’, and some of 


these football players from the high school 
teams, would just back off twenty-five or 
fifty feet out there in the street, and hit that 
fence and they’d come up on the other side! 
[Laughs] The fence would give, you see, and 
there they’d be, they’d be in, and the other kids 
learned from them. 

Admission gates at fairs are always a 
problem, I don’t know whether I had any 
solution or not, other than to revise it every 
year to try to accommodate the people where 
they came in the next year and the way 
they’d handled it, and then watch and see 
what happened to the fair. Which something 
always did. 

Thirty-five fairs in forty years I’ve 
handled—eighteen in Fallon, seventeen here. 
I’m glad I got out of the fair business—course 
I was fairly well up in years. But the fair itself 
has to stay young. You have to keep up with 
changing times in fairs. The exhibitors will 
make you do it—you get new exhibitors every 
year with new articles, new things to sell. 
You just automatically progress with them, 
because that’s what they’re introducin’ this 
year and what they’re doin’, they want to show 
you, you have to follow along with that. 

We had a disastrous portion of a state fair. 
And I don’t recall just which fair it was, but 
we booked an ice show at the time that ice 
shows were very popular here in the West, 
and people were goin’ to San Francisco to 
see the ice shows. And the person we booked 
the show with decided he could squeeze in 
an extra show in Salt Lake City before he got 
here. As a result, he arrived late, and of course, 
the ice machine wouldn’t make ice. And we 
had a grandstand of some five thousand 
people, sold out completely. They worked all 
one day and all one night and all the next 
day—had all the ice experts in the area from 
the ice companies and the ice cream people— 
and they couldn’t get ice made. 



82 


Clarence J. Thornton 


The people were in the grandstand, we 
had a very fine orchestra, but as I said before, 
no ice. It was really a disaster. I would say to 
anybody who ever has a situation equal to this, 
and has their grandstand sold out and can’t 
produce a show, that one thing we learned: 
don’t honor the tickets that were sold to the 
people that had come to the show —cancel 
those tickets and arrange for a replacement 
ticket as the people leave the show. This 
one little item cost us about a year of work, 
replacin’ tickets. In fact, one Indian man and 
his wife from Fernley came in the next year 
to the fair, and presented us with a ticket that 
they had bought at the ice show. She said he 
hadn’t worn his suit since the ice show the year 
before, and when they sent it to the cleaner 
before cornin’ to this show, why they found 
the ticket [chuckle] for the ice show for the 
year before. But we of course, didn’t honor 
that, that was a little too far away [chuckle]. 

Gettin back to the fair business, both in 
Fallon and in Reno, my secretary with most 
of the fairs in Fallon (not all of ’em) was a 
woman by the name of Margaret Regan, who 
had been secretary for the dean of the College 
of Agriculture. Years later, she married and 
became Margaret Regan Nichols-married a 
Forest Service man, and I think they still live 
in Forest Hill, which is over in the Auburn 
area. 

After she got married, then my secretary 
became Frances Baker, who was from Sparks 
and had worked for the Home Owners Loan 
Association here in Reno and also had served 
as secretary of the military draft board for 
Washoe County. She later married a man by 
the name of Sigg—Ernest Sigg. And she lives 
in Reno at the present time. 

These two women carried practically 
all my secretary work for the entire period, 
except one year, when I had a girl by the name 
of Charlotte Towle, who filled in. She was 


from the Fallon country. I suppose, like most 
business people, I think I probably had the 
best secretaries [chuckles]! In all of it, I don’t 
recall of any difficulties or any arguments over 
hours or pay or errors or anything like that. 

Races and Rodeos 

I mentioned the use of the fairgrounds 
durin’ 1913 to ’53, and I’d like to add to that, 
that the hardtop races, auto races, were a 
heavy user for the several years in there at that 
time. Also the Aggie Club of the University of 
Nevada carried on a horse show each spring. 
And the Nevada Hereford Cattle Association 
were continual users. In fact, the original 
lease that was written between the state and 
Washoe County included the Aggie Club 
horse show, Nevada Hereford Association, 
and the Nevada state fair—or Washoe County 
fair, as it was originally called—as preferred 
users. In other words, their dates couldn’t be 
dropped or absorbed by somebody else. 

We ran both quarterhorse races and 
thoroughbred races durin the original part 
of the Washoe county fair. And we probably 
should have scheduled prize fights, as well, 
with ’em, because when you went to settle up 
with the horse-race people, you could only let 
one of ’em in the office at a time, as we found 
out after the first night. You’d be surprised 
who owns the race horse, when you get down 
to pay off the purse! And while you’re tryin to 
decide in the office, they’re outside, not talkin’ 
about fightin’, but in some cases actually 
fightin’. And then in the case of who’s gonna 
run which race and where, and so forth, if it’s 
a quarterhorse or a thoroughbred, and how 
it’s gonna be run or what the purses are, that’s 
somethin’ else. 

However, they’re not alone in that. There’s 
not too much difference between them— 
except the physical aspect—and the flower 



Fairs, Rodeos, and Races 


83 


show people! Or the artists’ association! 
[Laughs] They all have their preferences. They 
all have their likes and dislikes and ideas. It’s 
not that I never felt there was any personal— 
it’s just the things in life that they’re interested 
in, whether it’s a flower or a picture, whatever 
it happens to be, or what type of horse they’re 
interested in. 

They had an automobile race there—a 
big one—in the twenties. And my friend was 
one of the inspectors of the automobile race; 
it was the big races. I saw the race from sittin 
in the middle of a haystack in the middle of a 
field. [Laughing] I definitely wanted to get in! 
We went down early, and he was gonna be a 
judge in the corner. And there was a haystack 
right out in the middle of the field. And I went 
out and crawled up in the haystack. Before 
I got down, the haystack was covered with 
businessmen from Reno, not only college 
students! [Laughing] But I was really surprised! 
I looked down, and here comes some real 
businessman, climbing up [laughing] on the 
haystack to watch the automobile races! 

Do you want to talk about the Reno Rodeo 
a little bit? Since you were on that board of 
directors for so many years and Reno was the 
big town the Fourth of July—every year, the 
Fourth of July Rodeo. And then they changed it. 

I can talk very authentic on that, havin’ 
been a acquaintance, or maybe you’d call it 
a friend, of George Wingfield, Sr. and also 
his [son] George Wingfield, Jr. When this 
change of date from the Fourth of July was 
brought up, the original discussion was that 
there wasn’t sufficient rooms in Reno at the 
Fourth of July if people came in and filled up 
the hotels and motels, and so there was no 
room for the people to come to the rodeo. 

Havin’ been on the rodeo board and 
having talked personally to George Wingfield, 


Sr., who owned the Riverside Hotel and 
the Golden at that time—he just said this 
assumption was not a fact. His son was on the 
other side, promotin’ the change to the dates. 

It was a very bad mistake, I think, 
personally, because they changed it from the 
Fourth of July, which was a natural date for 
rodeos, to earlier in June. And the minute 
that they got off that date, other rodeo towns 
picked up the Fourth of July. And at that time, 
the American Rodeo Association, cowboys’ 
rodeo association, wasn’t organized as they 
are today. So you had cowboys tryin’ to 
participate in every rodeo that they could get 
to, either by car or airplane. You weren’t sure 
what kind of contestants you had, or whether 
they’d be there. And they would be in Reno 
in the afternoon and Klamath Falls at night; 
then maybe Elko, somewhere else, at a time. 
And when this happens in the show business 
and you lose a date at the present time (in 
those years, too), there was always plenty of 
people to pick up those good dates, and you 
can’t get ’em back. 

Just an instance, the Tulare County fair 
in California had the Foley-Burke carnival 
for thirty or forty years. And then, they 
decided they wanted to change the carnival, 
so they dropped them on the same date that 
the Nevada state fair wanted the Foley-Burke 
carnival. And we got the Foley-Burke carnival 
on their date. But the next year the Tulare fair 
decided they wanted it back, and they were 
out of luck. They just stayed at the Nevada 
State fair. In fact, they’re still there today, 
directly or indirectly, after all these years. 

But that rodeo thing was a—I never did 
know who had enough power to move that 
rodeo off those dates, ’cause it wasn’t George 
Wingfield, Sr., I know that. Why his son was 
involved on the other side, I have no idea 
either, because Mr. Wingfield owned both the 
hotels at that time, and he had no shortage of 



84 


Clarence J. Thornton 


rooms, which was the reason the rodeo dates 
was supposedly moved. 

It has always seemed like kind of an exercise 
in greed. 

He just was sure that rooms situation 
didn’t exist. 

They wouldn’t be able to get back on the 
Fourth of July again today; it’s just gone. The 
RCA—Rodeo Cowboy Association, who 
practically run rodeos today anyhow, and the 
rodeos today are entirely different. See, in my 
memory, the first rodeo at the Washoe County 
fairgrounds, or state fairgrounds, if you want 
to call it, was held in 1919, or 1920. At that 
time, the Mapes family was heavily involved 
in it, and you had a different type of rodeo. 
You just went out to these ranches and picked 
up bucking horses when you could get ’em, 
and tried ’em out, and used them. I believe it 
ran for a few years, and didn’t continue; they 
dropped it. The present rodeo was started in 
1935 by this other group of people. 

But the rodeos—they were entirely a 
different situation from the rodeo you see 
today. Probably the horse that you see the man 
riding—a bucking horse or the bulldogging 
steer—has been carefully selected by the RCA, 
and the same cowboys pretty much follow the 
rodeos from early in the spring through the 
fall. Probably in lots of cases, they’re better 
acquainted with the horses and bulls and so 
forth than they are with their own family, by 
that time. Today you can buy a canned rodeo. 
I call ’em “canned” because you can call up a 
rodeo man with livestock, and he’ll put you 
on a rodeo within a week, all set to go. In 
the old days you didn’t; you spent months 
gatherin’ up the horses and the riders and the 
contestants. If the cowboys came to town, they 
stayed. Today they don’t. They get done in the 
afternoon and they’re gone to the next rodeo. 


Just as an off-subject thing, runnin the 
fairgrounds, they have to work rodeo, and 
having the Brahma bulls left in the corrals 
down there at the fairgrounds, some people 
wanted to put on a rodeo, and they were long 
on contestants but short on Brahma bulls. In 
their drawings they decided they would run 
the same Brahma bull through the rodeo 
bucking chutes in the afternoon and again at 
night. And that sounded fine till the owner 
of the livestock showed up, and he informed 
them that you can’t run those Brahma bulls 
through that rodeo chute twice a day. 

I said, “What do you mean?” 

He said, “They can only go once. They 
won’t go twice a day.” He said, “You can run 
’em the next day but not twice a day.” [Laughs] 
That was interesting to me; that was a fact! I 
thought he was kiddin me, but it was a fact. 
Once a day was all they’d go through the 
bucking chutes. [Laughs] If you wanted ’em to 
buck twice a day, and there was nothin’ doin’! 
[Chuckles] Maybe the bulls belong to a union. 

Who were some of the other people that served 
a long time on that rodeo board, and who—? 

Charles Sadlier was the first president of 
the rodeo in 1935. Harry Frost is still on it, 
[chuckling] from the start! Ray Peterson was 
on it, Howard Doyle was on it, Ray Jefferson 
was on it, Lester Hilp was on it, Eddie Questa 
was on it, Glen Meyers was on it. And just 
offhand, I can’t think of all of ’em, but, that’s 
some that served on it at that time. 

How did they feel about—did they split on the 
Fourth of July issue? 

Somewhere back in there this thing got 
lost, and I’ve never been able to figure out how 
[laughing] it got changed! It got some politics 
mixed up in there somewhere. And why they 



Fairs, Rodeos, and Races 


85 


ever changed the dates, I don’t know. They 
had the argument of rooms. When the rodeo 
was first started in ’35, Reno was pretty dead 
town on the Fourth of July; there wasn’t much 
to do. And they started the rodeo to bring 
people in. And then the gambling and floor 
shows developed; there was plenty of people 
who came to Reno to fill up the rooms and 
so forth, but not too many would go to the 
rodeo. A large number of those people who 
came to Reno at that time never even knew 
there was a rodeo on, because there were so 
many rodeos in California that you could 
go to one practically every weekend over 
there. And most of those people cornin’ in 
here were from California. And you’d have 
banners across the street and so forth and so 
on to advertise the Reno Rodeo. And my wife 
and I one time got patriotic and opened up a 
room or two to some of these people who had 
supposedly come to see the rodeo here—to 
take care of the crowd. And we never talked 
to any of ’em who knew there was a rodeo 
in town! They came over to gamble, not to 
the rodeo! They just asked, “What rodeo?” 
[Laughing] “Where is it?” Now, I don’t know 
how you could get a more direct answer than 
that. 

Today, of course, the Reno Rodeo 
operation is different. They—I wouldn’t want 
to say it to them; they’d probably get mad— 
but they practically copied the Nevada state 
fair’s operation of meeting every month and 
makin real arrangements. 

You were here a long time; you recall if 
you watched the rodeo parade back years 
ago; half the time the parade got lost. And 
you’d find ’em goin different streets and up 
different ways. 

We started out with the rodeo parade 
in ’35, and we used to hire the Indian band. 
And they had a real band at Nixon at that 
time—cowboy outfits and so forth. And 


used to pay ’em five dollars apiece to come 
in and take part in the rodeo— play in the 
parade. And we used ’em for several years till 
the musicians’ unions [chuckling] decided 
that they would take the Nixon Indian band 
into their jurisdiction, and that became so 
expensive that we could no longer afford to 
use them. That was one of the good features 
of that rodeo, I thought, was that real Indian 
band. And they were real Indians. But the 
union extended their area and made ‘em raise 
their rates. 

As far as I know right now, the rodeo 
itself is in very good shape financially. They’ve 
had some very good years. Of course, the 
big grandstand was there for years—burned 
down. On the grandstand itself—it burned to 
the ground, that old wooden grandstand—I 
was told by people who actually knew about 
it that it was a duplicate of the grandstand 
at Churchill Downs in Louisville, Kentucky. 
Both the race track, which was mile race track, 
and the grandstand, I believe, were duplicates 
of Churchill Downs. The race horse people 
use the fairgrounds Pretty heavy from 1913 
till, oh, 1944, ’45—trained horses There. 

I believe that Wingfield had a horse 
trained there that on the Kentucky Derby. 
And to the best of my memory, the horse’s 
name was Thatcher—General Thatcher. 
George Thatcher, of course, was one of 
Wingfield’s attorneys. 

And Nevada’s had more real race horses than 
people generally know about. 

Oh yes, I think we talked on that race 
situation the other day, which I talked about 
how the horse races were moved from Nevada 
to California. 

I was thinking about the Allen family in Fallon, 
and all of their fancy horses. 



86 


Clarence J. Thornton 


While you’re bringing that up, we had a 
horse show down at the fair in Fallon, and 
one of the professors at the University was the 
judge. And of course, when you take place in 
those horse shows, you’re supposed to have 
registered horses, all registered and so forth. 
And he judged the horses—Dodge brothers 
had some horses at that time, and Allens 
had horses— and he judged the horses and 
placed a certain horse in a certain position. 
And immediately somebody showed up at 
the office, that this horse wasn’t registered. 
And again as in the baby show and the other 
things, the judge had [laughing] — had left the 
area, and wasn’t available to judge it! Nothing 
against judges, but they know; they’re pretty 
well-educated [laughing] in what’s happened! 

While I was a director of the Reno Rodeo, 
I was also in charge of the state fairgrounds 
for the state Agricultural Society. And it was 
really an uncomfortable position because it’s 
hard to believe that the animosities of 1913 
and ’15 state fair goin’ from Reno to Fallon 
were still being carried on to a certain extent 
by the prominent people of Washoe County 
and Churchill County. The Agricultural 
Society was in charge of the fairgrounds, 
and the executive committee mainly lived in 
Fallon. They were very reluctant to spend any 
money to help the Reno Rodeo Association 
because of the bad feelings, and also because 
they didn’t have very much state appropriation 
to carry on. So you had a conflict continually. 
The Rodeo Association was a very loosely- 
organized association at that Time. It was 
started in 1935, this particular rodeo, and the 
first president was Charlie Sadlier, who was 
manager of the Riverside Hotel for George 
Wingfield. 

They had rodeos continuously practically 
up till World War II, and then it was 
discontinued durin’ the War. And then it 
started again after World War [II], 


Bein’ a director of the [chuckling] 
Reno Rodeo Association and livin’ in Reno 
and bein’ on the executive committee, 
with this background feeling, was quite a 
problem. While the executive committee 
of the Agricultural Society remained fairly 
permanent, your directors for the rodeo 
changed from year to year, and they didn’t 
understand that the Rodeo Association didn’t 
own the fairgrounds. And they wanted certain 
things, and they couldn’t get ’em, and they 
couldn’t understand why; it was state property 
and so forth. 

The Rodeo Association was run pretty 
much by the county and the city of Reno; the 
physical equipment came from there. And each 
year about a month or two before the rodeo, the 
Rodeo Association would meet and become 
very active, and conduct the rodeo to the best 
of their ability. And after it was over, they would 
practically abandon it for another year, and 
didn’t want to pay any of the bills or do any of 
the upkeep, and discussions about the insurance 
on the grounds and the rodeo equipment and 
who owned it. Eventually, that situation cleared 
up by the state Agricultural Society leasing the 
fairgrounds to Washoe County. 

Besides bein’ a member of the Reno 
Rodeo Association and Masonic lodge, 
which I mentioned, and post adjutant of 
Darrell Dunkle Post Number One, I’ve been 
a member of the Reno Rotary Club for forty- 
two years, and the Western Fairs Association 
durin’ the seventeen years I operated the 
Washoe County or Nevada state fair. 

The Western Fairs Association was not in 
existence durin the years of the Fallon state 
fair. It was formed after World War II and 
became a clearinghouse for the fairs here in 
the West, which was a very good thing. It 
gave all the fairs in the West a chance once a 
year to meet and arrange their dates so they 
didn’t have a group of fairs on the same time. 



Fairs, Rodeos, and Races 


87 


They gave the suppliers, or people who were 
connected with the fair operations, such as 
carnivals and so forth, a chance to clear their 
dates, and also provided the fair managers 
with a reference on the type of people you 
were dealin’ with—made them a little more 
responsible. 

In the old days, the carnivals used to jump 
from town to town, and land in a vacant lot 
wherever they could clear up with the city 
or the county, run their fair, and leave town 
before anybody could settle up with them. 
Under the Western Fairs these things ended. 
You knew who the fair people were, the 
amusement people, entertainment shows and 
so forth—who you would deal with. And they 
also knew who they were dealin with. 

Probably improved the caliber of people, too, 
on both sides. 

Oh, it improved its caliber. Oh, well, it 
did, yes. Like your carnivals in the old days— 
when a carnival came to town, everybody 
got their shotgun out to see what was gonna 
happen. Under the Western Fairs they were 
responsible. And then also at that same time 
the Internal Revenue got involved in carnivals 
and shows. So they had to file income tax. And 
then the insurance people became heavily 
involved because of the types of accidents; 
they had—it made ’em carry heavy insurance, 
and good equipment, which, of course, also 
cleaned up the type of employees these shows 
had—more responsible people, in the deal. 

A Look Backward 

Did you ever have a fair that just simply 
flopped? 

I have never bragged on this, but to put 
it right, the fairs were good to me, as I have 


seen ’em. I can look back over thirty-five 
fairs, and outside of that problem we had 
on the first one, which I wasn’t actually the 
full manager—maybe not that it made any 
difference—and maybe I was just lucky in 
putting on fairs where people were kind of 
hungry for fairs, somethin’ different that 
the whole family could go to—. Even under 
handicapped conditions, I can’t lookback and 
think of any real serious complaints in there. 
I think the first one we put on in Fallon, or 
second, the roof leaked. And at that particular 
time back in the twenties, you had a lot of 
[homemakers] taking part, homemakers, and 
their lacework and things like that. And we 
come out in the mornin, and the roof leaked 
and it had been rained on. 

And then when the fair was down here 
at the fairgrounds, we had one that ran four 
days, and it rained practically the whole four 
days, and there was mud holes all over the 
place. We got to where sand was used and 
when the sand wouldn’t take up the water; 
we were actually usin’ bales of straw to try to 
keep the people out of the water. And we had 
planks across to the ticket booths where they 
could pay their fifty cents. 

And the carnival man came in in the 
afternoon, and he says, “What’s the matter with 
these people over here? It’s rainin’ out there; it’s 
been rainin’ for days, and they’re still coming.” 
He looked down the road, he said, “In California 
they’d be goin home! There’ re women cornin’ 
in fur coats, and they wipe off the seat with their 
handkerchiefs! Our rides are shorting out— 
[laughing] electricity!” No complaint! 

Of course, I think one of the big reasons 
for that was that the admission was fifty cents 
[chuckles], and twenty-five cents for kids, and 
little kids free, so that might have had a lot to 
do with—! 

Which is the one that you’re the proudest of? 



88 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Oh, I think that actually the one that 
was really a fair that really had the backing 
of the people was the Nevada state fair here. 
The one in Fallon—it was nothin’ against the 
people in Fallon—as I said before, had come 
through a political gimmick in the area, that 
by the state puttin’ a fair in the area would 
get a certain amount of state money from it. 
And that never seemed to disappear. Even the 
merchants seemed to think, well, here comes 
the fair; here’s our chance to get some state 
money. And this fair here in Reno, which you 
realize had no state money, was run strictly 
privately with no tax money of any kind. As 
far as I know, there’s only one other fair in the 
West that runs that way—up in Washington— 
with no tax money of any kind. The local 
merchants put up their underwriting money 
every year, to finance the fair and that plus 
your entry fees, and your gate admissions, 
and exhibitor space have paid the cost of the 
fair and generally returned all their money to 
’em; except maybe the first four or five, they 
get their money back every year, and then 
start over the next year. 

The rodeo had that same situation, but 
they acquired a cash balance of a pretty good 
size over the years, and they dropped their 
underwriters, we call it, where they didn’t 
ask the local people to underwrite it. And 
that turned out to be a bad mistake, because 
the people no longer had their money in the 
rodeo. And they eventually went back to 
underwriting it again for the rodeo on the 
same basis. 

But this fair down here, and ‘course, 
havin’ been the first fair manager—. It went 
from attendance, as far as we could count 
that first fair (I don’t know how many people 
we had or didn’t have), it ran practically all 
night—we guessed it around twenty-five 
thousand. Seventeen years later when I left, it 
was running over fifty thousand people. But 


you’ve got to admit, too, the people increased 
in the area also, and such, which added to 
your attendance, and as I said before, low 
admissions; and something of a family event 
that they could go to. If you run it and keep it 
in order and clean and not have rackets goin’ 
on, fightin, and all that, why, people can send 
their kids down there and leave ’em—”Go to 
the fair, and pick them up”—they’ll do it. 

Is there some year that really stands out? 

No, the fairs were pretty uniform; we ran 
’em, as I said once before, to suit the people, 
and they seemed to accept ’em, from the basis 
of attendance and the lack of complaints. And 
you find about the same number of people 
go to a fair. For instance, one year I think it 
rained the first two days of the fair, Thursday 
and Friday. We had practically no attendance. 
And then it came Saturday and Sunday, we 
got our attendance. Fact, on one Saturday, we 
got over thirty thousand people, because they 
hadn’t been able to come as far as I know— 
Thursday and Friday. They’re fair people, they 
go to the fair. 

Well, it sounds unusual, I would think, for 
a person that has run this number of fairs to be 
lucky enough to look back and say, well, this 
one went haywire, or that one went haywire, 
or the people didn’t come, or things like that. 

One year in Fallon, myself and the 
newspapers got at odds. And I probably got 
a little stubborn, figuring I could run a fair 
without the newspapers anyhow. So I gave it 
a try. And I didn’t give ’em any news; put the 
fair together, and we got out posters, which we 
used at that time to advertise. You didn’t have 
radio or TV; you just depended on the posters 
and the 4-H and that type of thing—and the 
Homemakers. And I happened to guess right: 
I figured about a week or ten days before the 
fair, people would start callin’ the newspapers, 



Fairs, Rodeos, and Races 


89 


wantin’ to know about the fair. And that’s the 
way it turned out. And then the newspaper 
people started lookin’ for me to get news on 
the fair, and we got along, got it straightened 
out. But that was just one of those situations 
for one fair. 

I always thought my biggest advertisement 
of the fairs was the 4-H and the Future 
Farmers. We always tried to really go a little 
on that side too—those checks that I told 
you about and those ribbons that they got 
hangin’ in their room advertise the fair. There’s 
no better advertisement than the backyard 
advertising, whether it’s the fair or any show. 
“How was the show?” People in the backyard 
hangin’ up their clothes, talkin’ about it— 
you’re on. If they talk against it, you’re out! 




8 


Civic Affairs and Political Service 


In the late twenties, I was post adjutant 
of American Legion Post Darrell Dunkle 
Number 1. This was the Number 1 post in 
the state of Nevada. (Briefly, I might mention 
how the name Darrell Dunkle evolved. He was 
the son of Dan Dunkle, who was the county 
treasurer of Washoe County for a good many 
years, and supposedly was the first Washoe 
County soldier killed in Europe in World 
War I. So when the American Legion was 
organized, they chose his name for the post.) 
In my position of adjutant for the post durin’ 
the late twenties, my office was downtown 
in the YMCA—the Agricultural Extension 
office—which was adjacent to the present 
Mapes Hotel. And I also, with my wife, lived 
in a house where the present Ponderosa Hotel 
is located. 

The reason I mention this is because at that 
particular time in the history of the country, 
there was a drought area in the Midwest, and 
lots of the soldiers who had returned from 
World War I by that time had acquired a 
wife, some children, and generally a Model 
T Ford. With the poor conditions of livin’ in 


the Midwest, most of ’em had relatives who 
had left there durin’ World War I, or previous, 
and moved to Southern California. And this 
gave them an excuse to come west and hunt 
up their aunts and uncles and relatives who 
supposedly were livin’ a life of leisure in the 
Southern California country. 

But my position as adjutant in the Legion, 
was kind of a welfare organization to most 
of these travelin’ Legionnaires. And they 
would arrive in Reno, unfortunately for me, 
generally on a Saturday or Sunday, with their 
wife, their children, their broken-down car, 
and needed help. ’Course, the American 
Legion didn’t meet on Saturday or Sunday, 
and I found myself pretty much as a sole 
relief agency! Of course, you always had the 
insurance that when the Legion met, you’d 
get your money back. But the Legion was 
as poor as the Legionnaires. So when you’d 
bring it up at the meeting, it was generally a 
very brief conversation, and you just forgot it. 
So you were runnin’ a one-man relief agency 
[laughing] for the Legionnaires to a certain 
extent! 



92 


Clarence J. Thornton 


It points out the condition of the 
Legionnaires and the position they found 
themselves in after World War I, when you 
had a drought condition. And ‘course, this 
was just previous to the start of the general 
Depression in the Midwest, also. 

Regardin’ the Legion, I’ve been a member 
of the American Legion Post Darrell Dunkle 
Number 1 since 1927, and still am a member 
at this time. I also in my lifetime have been 
a member of the Masonic Lodge Washoe 
County Number 35 for fifty-five years at 
this time. Served as a director of the Reno 
Rodeo Association for seven years, following 
World War II. 

Early Political Interests 

In the political field—I think I probably 
heard my first political speech and became 
interested in politics, in my freshman year 
at the University, when the famous William 
Jennings Bryan came to Reno and made a 
talk before the student body, at the Mackay 
Stadium. I don’t know whether he was 
campaigning for any particular office at that 
time, or just tourin’ the country, but he made 
quite an impressive speech of which I only 
remember his famous statement, he’d rather 
be right and in the minority, than wrong 
and in the majority. Should I mention the 
monkey trial just as a finish to this? 

Oh, sure. 

Well, ‘course, he was quite a famous 
politician and campaigner and “silver- 
toned” speaker. A few years later, he and 
Clarence Darrow became involved in the 
Scopes monkey trial in Tennessee, where 
Jennings Bryan based his argument on the 
side of the Bible—evolution—and Clarence 
Darrow took the side of Darwin theory. At 
the end of that trial, if my memory is correct, 


just about the time the trial was over, Bryan 
died. 

Now gettin’ back to politics, I’ve been 
a life-long Republican. My first vote for 
President of the United States was for Warren 
G. Harding in 1920, and I voted in a little 
ranch precinct in the Spanish ranch area, 
north of Tuscarora, Nevada. 

Following that, I didn’t have much to 
do with politics until 1926 when I was in 
the Agricultural Extension Service. At that 
time, a man by the name of John Sinai, a 
Reno attorney, was chairman of the Washoe 
County Republican party. And one day he 
called me at my office, and wanted to know if 
I could suggest anybody to run on the ticket 
as an assemblyman —as a candidate—and 
also for Washoe County commissioner as a 
candidate. Because bein’ in the farm work, 
I knew the farm people; I suggested Ernest 
Kleppe as a possible candidate for assembly, 
and for Washoe County commissioner, 
I suggested a man by the name of James 
Peckham. 

Actually, I shouldn’t have suggested 
anybody, because I was in the federal 
employment and not in a position to 
recommend candidates. However, both these 
men ran for office; Mr. Kleppe was elected to 
the assembly and later on was elected Washoe 
County commissioner. James Peckham was 
elected to the Washoe County Commission 
and served twenty-five years. Finally, he did 
not file for reelection. 

I guess my next election activity involved 
Senator Oddie, and later on, Senator Pat 
McCarran, who was elected in 1932. Pat 
McCarran did very little campaignin’. In fact, 
I had a friend in the state Democratic office, 
who told me that they did practically nothin’ 
to help him. And he was elected, very much 
as a surprise, along with the landslide for 
President Roosevelt. And of course, he served 



Civic Affairs and Political Service 


93 


a good many years—was a good senator—and 
died in office years later. 

In the 1934 election, I helped George 
“Molly” Malone. He ran on the Republican 
ticket for U.S. Senator against Key Pittman 
and was badly beaten. He ran again against 
Pat McCarran in 1944 and was defeated. I 
was his northern Nevada campaign manager. 
After that election, his supporters and some 
of his opponents came to me and suggested 
that he never run for office again. After we 
left that meeting, he and I walked down to 
the corner where the old city hall used to be 
on First and Center Street. The first thing he 
said, “I’m gonna run the next election.” He 
said, “You know, Key Pittman ran three times 
before he was elected.” 

So I never mentioned what his friends 
and opponents thought about him on the 
third time. Of course, he was elected when 
he ran the next time [1946], through a 
conflict amongst the Democrats between 
previous [ly] Governor Carville, who had 
appointed Berkeley Bunker to fill in, and then 
Bunker filed against Carville for Senate, and 
beat Carville in the primaries. Pat McCarran 
became involved and threw all his support 
to Malone, who was elected, as he said, after 
runnin’ a third time. 

Then, after that election, in 1952, he 
ran against the famous Thomas Mechling 
[chuckle], whose closest connection, I guess, 
with Nevada, was the fact that his wife was 
from Wells, Nevada. He really defeated 
Alan Bible in the primaries, and Malone 
was elected through that deal. Then he was 
defeated in 1958 by Senator Cannon. 

On my thinking of Malone, I believe, in 
the story that I’ve told about him, I kind of left 
out his main living here. He and a man by the 
name of Tom King had the King and Malone 
engineering firm, in between political rounds. 
And that firm is still in existence, Number 


One East First Street, and is run by [Peter 
Guisti]. He still operates the engineering firm 
of King and Malone, while both Malone and 
King have been dead for several years. Talkin’ 
to him, he said it was just kind of an easier 
thing for him to do to carry on the firm under 
that name. 

I wondered if you wouldn’t talk a little more 
about George Malone, and how you ran his 
campaign. What you thought his strengths 
were, what his weaknesses were. 

George Wilson Malone—usually known 
as “Molly” Malone— and I first met at 
Constantia, California. He was goin’ to the 
University of Nevada at that time, and had 
been retained by the Pyramid Land and 
Stock Company to do surveyin’ work for the 
company. He had a group of two or three 
other University boys with him, workin’ on 
a surveyin’ team. This was after World War 
I. He was very active in the formin’ of the 
American Legion, especially Darrell Dunkle 
Post Number 1. Also, I think, another fact 
that people don’t know, Malone was the first 
person that brought the Boy Scouts into 
Nevada. 

They didn’t have much of a setup at that 
time. The first real Boy Scout worker he 
brought into here was a man by the name of 
[Alva L.] Russell; in fact, he lived right down 
the street here, both he and his wife. The 
Scouts didn’t have much money, and both 
Mrs. [Janie] Russell and himself worked as 
Scout leaders. 

About that time, Malone didn’t go to 
the University again. He never graduated. 
He was an engineerin’ student, of course. 
While he was workin’ at Constantia, he was 
also a water engineer for the Walker River 
irrigation district at Yerington, where he met 
his wife—the woman he later married— Ruth 



94 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Mosslander, which you probably already 
knew. She had been working in a bank at 
Yerington. 

Followin’ that time, Malone went into 
politics, and was appointed state engineer, in 
which he practically carried the whole load 
of lobbyin for Boulder Canyon. The section 
of Boulder Canyon Act, in which Nevada 
received certain rights, can be practically 
contributed to this one man. He lobbied 
so heavy the first two years and spent so 
much state money, that the senate finance 
committee, I believe, got an act passed and 
made it an offense of some kind to exceed 
your budget with federal funds. But they did 
pick up the money that he had spent over 
the budget. However, this didn’t deter him 
the second time around; he got the things 
that Nevada has today. He spent all the 
budget money, and mortgaged his home on 
California Avenue, and spent that and lost 
that too, because he had to get the act through 
and get it completed. And while they never 
censured him, there was quite a lot in the 
papers about it. However, they did pick up 
his over-expenditure of his budget. 

Malone came to Nevada from Kansas, I 
believe—Kansas or Iowa, I’m not exactly sure 
just which. He left there after a boxing match 
between himself and another neighbor boy, 
where the farm people stirred up a boxing 
match to decide whether Malone or this other 
person was the best boxer. 

This next part of the story was not told 
me by Malone but was told me by [Harry 
Reppert] a man who later became a state 
engineer. He was there at this boxing match; 
it was held on a ranch. Accordin’ to him, they 
were boxin’ or fightin’—whatever you want 
to call it—and Malone hit this other young 
man, and knocked him down. The fight 
was right in the barn, right along a railroad 
track. And he knocked him down. There 


was a doctor in the crowd, and the doctor 
assumed the other young man wasn’t gonna 
live—but he did live. And accordin’ to [Mr. 
Reppert], Malone went out the back door 
of the barn, and there was a freight train 
going by. And [Reppert], who told me the 
story, said he never saw Malone again for a 
few years. [Harry Reppert] became a federal 
land surveyor for the federal government 
here in Nevada and was surveyin’ for the 
federal government in Lovelock area. He 
went into town to hire a man to work on the 
survey crew, and he looked down the Street, 
and Malone was walkin’ up the Street (some 
few years later). I don’t know whether that’s 
interestin’ or not. I knew Malone so well, he 
never mentioned this background at all. 

From then when he was in the state 
engineer’s office, he became pretty interested 
in politics again and then finally he ran for 
United States Senator against Key Pittman. He 
and I talked it over before he ran; he came up 
to my house and told me he was gonna run 
against Key Pittman. Malone had a theory 
on money that most people don’t have. He 
didn’t have any money, and he kinda dealt 
with money like you deal with water —it’s 
just something you use. And I said, “Well, 
you don’t have much money, and Pittman’s a 
pretty strong man.” 

And he said, “Well, I never did have 
any, and they’ll probably bury me in a 
pauper’s grave. I probably won’t ever have 
any [money].” 

We went out electioneering, and he didn’t 
do too good, because Pittman was so strong at 
that time. Following that, he was in surveyin’ 
work, and did a lot of surveyin’ right after 
World War I in Tonopah country, on those 
mines down in there, when they were arguin’ 
about whether the vein was on your property 
or on somebody else’s property—he had those 
maps, and did that work. 



Civic Affairs and Political Service 


95 


I’ve never heard anybody say he wasn’t a good 
engineer, only that he wasn’t such a big success 
in politics. They said he had a good mind. 

He was very much of an individual. He 
wasn’t subject to pressure by anybody that 
I ever knew of, and as well as I knew him 
[chuckles]—. I never knew anybody could 
pressure him into doin’ something that he 
didn’t think was all right. I think he was very 
honest, a little lax with his credit charges 
around the area, but money wasn’t his life—it 
was something he used. 

One of the times he ran against McCarran 
for senator, before he was elected, he was in 
arrears with the Internal Revenue. And as I 
walked down the street one day, I ran into a 
man by the name of Bert Cohen, who was 
workin’ for the Internal Revenue. And he 
stopped me on the Virginia Street bridge and 
he said, “Where can I find Molly Malone?” 

And I said, “He’s up in his office.” And I 
said, “Why, Bert?” 

“Well,” he said, “the Internal Revenue 
director told me to go see him about his 
Internal Revenue taxes and so forth and so on. 

And I said, “What are you talkin’ to me 
for?” 

And he said, “I’m not about to go see a 
man that’s runnin’ for United States Senator 
about his Internal Revenue tax, because he 
might get elected.” [Laughing] This actually 
happened! So he didn’t go see him. I cite this 
just as an example of how he regarded money. 

His wife could take care of any excess 
money that might be available [chuckling]. 
She was loyal to Molly, of course. They’d lived 
in the Riverside Hotel for a week, and they 
had a twelve hundred-dollar bill. Malone was 
goin’ out in the state to campaign. I told him 
we just didn’t have the finances to handle that, 
and I’d have to control Ruth some way. So he 
moved her from the Riverside Hotel to the 


Overland Hotel, and apparently, as far as I 
knew, he gave her instructions to stay in that 
room till he got back. And about the end of the 
week when he was cornin’ back, she contacted 
me (I was gonna go down to Fallon to meet 
him) and asked me if she could go along with 
me to Fallon. 

There was a little peculiar situation, him 
cornin’ to Fallon, too, at that time. Life magazine 
called me long distance from somewhere and 
wanted a picture of Malone as a candidate, and 
Pat McCarran, for their Life magazine, which 
was quite popular at that time. And we had 
him come in from Wells, Nevada, hired a car 
and driver, and drove all night to get to Fallon, 
so he could be there for the photographer of 
Life magazine and have his picture taken. They 
took the picture. And out of this whole thing, 
they took a picture of Pat McCarran gettin’ a 
shave in Virginia City. And after all our expense 
and trouble, the only picture that was ever run, 
was a picture of Pat McCarran gettin a shave 
in Virginia City [laughs]. 

I realize, like everybody else in this world, 
not only Malone—he had friends and enemies, 
both—but they can say what they want about 
him. One of the things he talked about when 
he was senator, which they should’ve listened 
to, was “funny money.” Probably other people 
used that term, too, but he was the first one I 
ever heard use the factor of gettin into “funny 
money,” and we’re certainly headed for funny 
money. He became a great friend of Happy 
Chandler, and he had Malone doin’ a lot of 
field work for him out in the bushes over in 
the Orient and that country durin’ the start 
of World War II. Chandler after that became 
national Baseball Commissioner. 

He also wrote a book on the assets and 
liabilities of the western United States, which 
was published, a big, heavy book. It has been 
used from the engineer’s point of view and 
that part of things, Industrial West. 



96 


Clarence J. Thornton 


In runnin’ his campaign, I had very little 
to do with raisin’ of the money when he ran 
for senator the term before he was elected. 
And the people, organizations, he got money 
from, I never heard—a lot of’em I never heard 
of, but he had some very fine contacts in there. 

Of course, as a prize fighter, a fighter, I 
don’t know what his possibilities were, but he 
decided [laughing] to be an engineer! Malone, 
personally, was one of the most physically fit 
people that I was ever associated with. He 
never seemed to tire, his weight was around 
160-170 pounds, and he required very little 
sleep; in fact, if he came over to your house 
to visit you, and you happened to slack in the 
conversation for fifteen minutes, he might go 
to sleep. Wait for a half hour and get up and 
be ready to go. He just seemed to have an 
unlimited amount of energy. 

He came from nowhere, you might say, 
into this state. He was quite an athlete, in 
practically all stages of the game. And while 
lots of people—there’s still some people very 
critical of him, I have a standard answer to 
most of ’em: “He became a United States 
Senator, and you didn’t. And he didn’t get 
there easy. 

He just fought his way right up. I remember 
one of the people I contacted for him was 
Fleischmann, Major Fleischmann. Major 
Fleischmann at that time was living at Lake 
Tahoe, and Molly thought he might be a good 
source of political funds. Of course, he was, if 
he wanted to give. I called Major Fleischmann 
for him at Lake Tahoe, and told him what I 
was doin’, and he advised me that he didn’t 
make contributions to local people, politics, 
that he made his contributions direct to the 
national parties. And he was a Republican, 
he had sent his contribution to the national 
Republican party. 

And you’ve got to admit, he was elected 
senator by two unusual situations. The first 


time he was elected was the controversy 
between McCarran and Carville and Bunker, 
in which Bunker defeated Carville, and Pat 
McCarran threw his weight to Malone. That 
elected Malone for the first time for a four- 
year term to the United States Senate. And 
the second time was when Mechling defeated 
Bible in the primary—Alan Bible— and 
Mechling bein’ practically unknown in the 
state, people voted for Malone. He got in for a 
second time and by that time, they’d changed 
the term to six years from the four-year term. 
And the next time he ran, of course, he ran 
against Howard Cannon, who defeated him 
and is still United States Senator. 

So he had McCarraris support twice? 

To some extent, yes. 

Well, he had McCarran’s support against 
Mechling. 

Indirectly. No against Carville and 
Bunker. Carville and Bunker and McCarran, 
they got into a hassle of some kind. 

He got McCarran s support in that one, and 
then he also got McCarran s support against 
Mechling. 

Oh, yeah, in Mechling’s, yeah. See, but the 
It wasn’t well-known, was it? 

No, no. Well, it didn’t—the actually, 
the Bunker-Carville-McCarran deal was 
publicized. That was a battle. I don’t know 
what happened there in that thing. I didn’t 
run that campaign, but the background was 
that Carville, as governor, had appointed 
Bunker to the senate, and then when Carville 
ran for the senate, Bunker filed against him, 
you remember? Bunker beat Carville in the 



Civic Affairs and Political Service 


97 


primary—and then McCarran threw his 
weight to Malone after that. 

And of course, as a lot of people are aware 
of, Pat McCarran got quite a lot of his support 
after he was elected, from Republicans; strict, 
right out, they just supported McCarran. I 
don’t think he could have been elected as 
many times as he was without that Republican 
support. 

McCarran was—and I knew McCarran 
and I wouldn’t know this personally—was 
not too popular in the Democratic party the 
first time he was elected. He’d had problems, 
I guess, when he’d been to the state supreme 
court or something— they had differed along 
the way. In fact, they had practically cast him 
aside, from what you read, by the time he 
got elected to the United States Senate. He 
wasn’t considered a good, loyal Democrat 
or something, and he filed, and as we talked 
before, went in on Roosevelt’s coattail. 

Tell me about the participation of the political 
higher-ups in the machine, like Biltz and 
Mueller, in these campaigns. 

Oh, I guess you’d actually start further 
back than that, with Wingfield, actually. 
Wingfield, of course, built the party up with 
his finances and his friends, and as we’ve 
said before, and that was part of it; the whole 
thing came out of Tonopah and Goldfield 
which is just practically abandoned places 
today. 

And then, Wingfield was instrumental in 
bringin Noble Getchell into the political party 
as national committeeman, and Getchell, I 
believe, was senator at that time from what, 
Lander County. And he carried the load for 
several years, and eventually decided not to 
run—I believe he was followed from that 
area by the name of—Senator [Lemaire], 
I think, was elected from there. Getchell 


became national committeeman and stayed 
on for years and years, which had a lot to do 
with these “Young Turks” becomin active, 
the continual operation, and the fact as I said 
before, there was always a feeling that we 
were heatin’ the bushes for Republicans and 
electin’ Democrats, through the combination 
of the two parties in the same building, with 
an open door between ’em. 

In between there, came a man who 
people remember him more —Dud Day. 
He had the Buick agency on the corner 
downtown, where Patterson’s store is located 
now. There was no bridge across the river 
there, at that time. But he didn’t become 
active for too long—one or two years—in 
the Republican party. 

Well, John Mueller, of course, was a James 
Scrugham Democrat protege, and Scrugham, 
of course, was governor, later congressman, 
later senator. As far as I know, in the year 
when Scrugham had difficulty in the state 
because of Malley and Cole absconding with 
funds, and a strong movement to replace 
Scrugham as governor, all of a sudden, one 
morning, John Mueller became Republican, 
and a Balzar man— Fred Balzar, who was 
later elected governor of the state. And that 
was handled indirectly through Getchell and 
Wingfield, of course. Mueller guessed right, 
Scrugham wasn’t gonna get elected again 
as governor, and he became a Republican 
through there. And a Wingfield agent, I guess 
you’d call him. He was a lobbyist, and a very 
good lobbyist. He also became a great friend 
of Mr. Cord’s, when E. L. Cord got appointed 
senator from Esmeralda County. 

Norman Biltz came into the picture and 
became active in politics. He became very 
active when Charlie Russell was running 
for governor. He appears some on the front, 
but mostly through the other people who 
represented his thinking, and the money that 



98 


Clarence J. Thornton 


was able to raise. I never knew whether they 
were really interested in Charlie Russell, or 
in that chemical plant at Henderson, which 
was government property, cornin’ up for 
sale at that time. But they assumed, if they 
elected Charlie Russell governor, they could 
practically move into his office, and the 
chemical plant in southern Nevada became 
an issue, of which they hoped to have the 
inside track, because of their electin’ Russell. 
Charlie Russell, for some reason, decided 
that the chemical plant should be sold at 
public sale. As a street politician said, “Biltz 
moved out of the state capitol, governor’s 
office at that time.” Which is about what 
happened. 

And he was so disgusted with politics, he 
practically retired—actively, from politics. 
He still gave some money, but didn’t take 
much of an active part after that. He found 
out, maybe like I did, it had two sides to it. 

We were talking about Mr. Biltz and his 
strength in the Republican party. 

Yeah, in the Republican party, and his 
discouragement with politics. Not that 
he had anything to do with it, but that all 
has been on my unhappiness with politics, 
of which I’ve passed on to my son; I’ve 
encouraged him not to take too much serious 
interest in it, because, quotin’ some politician 
who did, he always had an answer which 
I thought was right with politics, “It’s just 
like an empty pocket. There’s nothin’ in it.” 
You just work and work, and when you’re 
done and when they’re done, you’re out, and 
that’s it. And I think that was Norman Biltz’s 
reaction to it finally. 

That Johnny Mueller story we were 
talkin’ about was quite a story, ’cause he was 
so close to Governor Scrugham, a Democrat. 
All of a sudden, he’s a Republican. 


The “Young Turks” 

At that time, a group of people who were 
dissatisfied— some of us were young, and 
some of us weren’t young—acquired the name 
of the “Young Turks.” I don’t know where the 
name came from or why it was used. And we 
decided that we would try to make a change 
in the state Republican setup. A lot of ’em, 
includin’ myself, had worked for years very 
hard on the Republican party, but we never 
elected any primary candidates. The situation 
was pretty much handled [at] that time in Reno 
for the Republican side. In fact, I attended 
meetings in the old Golden Hotel, where they 
had rooms provided by George Wingfield for 
the Republicans, and the adjoining rooms 
were provided by George Wingfield for the 
Democrats. Just a door —you could walk 
from one room into the other one—from the 
Republicans’ to the Democrats’ party. 

That turned out to be quite a campaign. 
We started at the precinct level in Reno, and 
had our precinct meetings, and elected our 
own chairman, and, when we went to the 
Republican state convention in Tonopah, 
Nevada, I believe there was 104 or 105 
delegate votes from Washoe County. At 
that convention, we elected our own state 
chairman, Marvin Humphrey of Reno, and 
the national committeeman we elected was 
Bill Wright of Elko County. Wright of Elko 
County, of course, replaced Noble Getchell. 

I had several conversations with George 
Wingfield, Sr. over this change of campaignin’, 
callin’ to his attention to the fact that we 
had seemed to be quite successful in electin’ 
Democrats to the United States Senate, and 
we wanted to make a change. Of which, he 
was not too opposed, or he didn’t show that 
he was opposed. However his son, George, Jr., 
was quite upset over the thing, and became 
a little difficult to talk to or do anything with 



Civic Affairs and Political Service 


99 


at all. Getchell, of course, was a partner, or 
in partners with George Wingfield at the 
Getchell mine in Humboldt County and 
Lander County and had been on the board 
for years. 

At the same time, we elected Mrs. 
Ken Johnson of Carson City national 
committeewoman. There had been a woman 
in Tonopah (and I haven’t been able to think 
of her name) [Oline Stewart], who had been 
holdin’ that post for a good many years 
—hadn’t been particularly active, but she 
was part of the Wingfield group. It’s hard to 
realize today that Tonopah played such an 
important part in the politics at that time. 
Washoe County, of course, wasn’t a big county, 
but it was the Republican headquarters, and 
Tonopah was a carry-over from the mining 
days. In fact, Tasker Oddie was elected out of 
Tonopah, back in his term, and a lot of the 
other people. 

The peculiarity of the election of Mrs. Ken 
Johnson—Ken Johnson was a state senator for 
Nevada, and quite active in the Republican 
party, and he lived in Carson, and he wasn’t 
aware of our activities here in Washoe County. 
And when the first vote came up in Tonopah, 
was something where you voted as counties, 
when they had the roll call, out of 105 votes, 
there was 102 that went in one bloc. And Ken 
Johnson, who was campaignin’ for his wife, 
was not aware that this bloc existed at all. 
So, the vote was held just before lunch, and 
[chuckle] it’s a little odd to say, but of course, 
bein’ human beings, we practically all went to 
the restroom right after the vote, and we pret’ 
near did not get out of the restroom, because 
Ken was so shook up with his candidate being 
faced with these conditions, that he practically 
locked the door to the restroom [laughing], 
and kept pryin’ us to get the information of 
what was goin’ on in Washoe County with 102 
votes in one bloc [laughs]. 


I think the two or three votes against us, 
and that negative one was Forest Lovelock—I 
remember he was of course, quite friendly 
with the Wingfield people—and then George 
Wingfield, Jr. of course, and Noble Getchell. 
I think of the 105 votes, they were the three 
opposing votes. 

Before the state meeting in Tonopah, I had 
been elected to represent Precinct Number 
Two here in Washoe County at the county 
convention. 

Another peculiar [thing] of the election 
was contentions of George Wingfield, Jr. Of 
course, the big hotel at that time in Tonopah 
was the Mizpah. It was an old hotel; they had 
a limited number of rooms that had baths. So 
when the women in our delegation started to 
call Tonopah for rooms, they were unable to 
obtain any rooms with baths. Bein’ women, 
they ran that down, and they contributed the 
thing to George Wingfield, Jr.; he’d tied up all 
the rooms in the hotel with baths! But they 
took after him, and they got some rooms with 
baths before the convention [laughs]. 

This is the 1952 convention? 

Yeah, 1952 was when Marvin Humphrey 
was elected, and Mrs. Johnson was elected as 
the national committeewoman when we got 
out of the menus room [laughs] and—. She 
replaced [Mrs. Stewart] the woman whom 
I said I didn’t know the woman’s name, and 
then Bill Wright of Elko became national 
committeeman replacin’ Noble Getchell there. 

I was thinking there had been some of this 
Young Turk organization in the late forties.] 

Well, it came along in the late forties, 
but it took a couple of years to put the thing 
together to get it straightened around. I didn’t 
mind—I told George Wingfield, Sr. that I 
liked Key Pittman, but I’d been votin’ for 



100 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Key Pittman my whole life. You would get 
right up to election, or a couple weeks before 
election, and Key Pittman, of course, and 
Pat McCarran both, were Wingfield people 
at that time, and with the strength they had, 
the setup they had, they would find things 
that would make it impossible to elect—; 
Sam Platt ran against Key Pittman back then 
one year—in fact, Sam Platt ran against Key 
Pittman three times, I think, but every time 
just before election, they would delve out 
some particular thing against Sam Platt that 
he couldn’t—never beat Key Pittman. 

Was it because he was a Jew ? 

Platt? No. Without mentionin’ names, one 
of the things they used, I think—the last time 
when Sam Platt ran against Key Pittman, he 
was practically gonna win the election. And I 
was involved in the contact with them because 
of my work and so forth as to how Sam was 
running—and it was gettin right down there to 
election. And somebody in the Republican state 
party got a letter out to the livestock people in 
the state that Sam Platt was gonna do such-and- 
such to the cattle people if he was elected. And 
to make the letter authentic, they put the letter 
out and signed Bill Moffat’s name to the letter, 
who was a big cattle operator. And I was told 
that Bill Moffat had never seen the letter at all 
before it went out. And Platt lost that election 
by a very few votes. That was the type of things 
that had happened back over the years. 

I had been told that there was some anti- 
Semitism within the Republican party, and that 
some of the things that they did to Platt were 
just because of his religion. 

Well, that might be, but this actual instance 
I know about—I know it actually happened, 
and I know that Sam Platt, in my book, was 


gonna probably win that election, the way it 
looked at that time, within two weeks, when 
this letter came out. And of course, it made 
the papers and everything, what Sam Platt’s 
standing was on the cattle business and so 
forth and so on. And Sam was defeated. 

Lots of people are not aware (but we’re 
gettin off the subject here) that Key Pittman 
didn’t get elected the first time around into 
office. Accordin’ to the records, he ran three 
times before he was elected. 

In my own political career, I ran for 
Washoe County commissioner in 1952 against 
Raymond Capurro. And I was defeated by 
about 217 votes. Just too many Italians for 
an Irishman to be elected in Washoe County 
at that time! 

Les Gray was one of the leaders, and 
Ken Dillon was another leader in the thing. 
In fact, these Young Turks are the ones that 
were responsible to a certain extent, for me 
filing for Washoe County commissioner. And 
they were really workin’ on my campaign, 
about halfway through it, until they suddenly 
decided they’d like to elect a man to Congress. 
While they still supported me, they put their 
efforts into electin’ Cliff Young into Congress, 
against Walter Baring. And I realized as 
soon as they split up their efforts, that my 
possibilities of gettin elected were pretty well 
gone, because they decided that they wanted 
to elect Cliff Young, and they elected Cliff 
Young to Congress for one time. 

There was some very spirited meetings in 
there, and as I say, Les Gray was one of the main 
leaders, and Ken Dillon. In the organization, I 
think it went about two years, and the precinct 
meetings were well attended [chuckle] and well 
set up. From the women’s side, as I recall it, Mrs. 
Alleta Gray was one of the leaders, and Marshall 
Guisti’s wife, Mrs. [Eleanor] Halloway. Those 
were the three women most interested in Young 
Turk, on the women’s side. Mrs. Halloway, 



Civic Affairs and Political Service 


101 


before she was married, was the secretary for 
the dean of the College of Agriculture. 

How did you get people so interested and 
excited in the Young Turks? 

Just because of what I said there, the 
previous years. While some of these people 
were fairly young and new at it, some of us 
were older and had been through the political 
campaigns several times and were really aware 
that we weren’t electin’ anybody, but we were 
doin’ a lot of work. But, cornin’ up with the 
wrong people when election was finally over, 
as far as we were concerned. We had no 
animosity against people who elected their 
men like Pat McCarran and Pittman and those 
people—we realized that they were doin’ it for 
their good and the good of the state- -they 
were both powerful senators. Then naturally, 
when we went to the state convention, we 
had just really reached a point of—and as I 
said, I told Mr. Wingfield that we were gettin’ 
tired of electin’ Democrats [chuckle], when 
we worked so hard in the Republican party. 

Ken Dillon, I think, made the county 
convention speech [chuckles]—he used the 
theme of, “Little men with wooden guns.” 
That was the title of his speech as I remember 
it. I guess that referred to the Young Turks. 
We were little men, we had been doin’ a lot 
of work, but we just had wooden guns when 
it came to election. 

We just did a lot of work, that’s all, and 
had it well set up, and of course, we got the 
people to the state convention that were gonna 
vote in the direction we’d been workin’ on for 
two years. 

Two Terms on the Reno City Council 

Followin’ that election, when that was 
over and we’d elected our people, I started 


then and became manager of what was 
called the Washoe County Agricultural and 
Industrial Fair —it was later changed to the 
Nevada State Fair. In the next event on the 
politics, which sounds a little unusual: I was a 
ground superintendent for the Hereford cattle 
show at the Nevada state fairgrounds, and the 
phone rang one day, and it was Si Ross—Silas 
Ross—sayin’ that the Republican party, or the 
group of fifty as you know ’em—had decided 
they’d like to have me run for city council. 
[Chuckle] I told Mr. Ross I was very busy 
runnin’ a bull sale, which was actually the 
truth—I was—and I wasn’t interested. But 
they kept talking and finally convinced me 
to run. I guess you could say— people say we 
were drafted. But certainly myself and Claude 
Hunter and Hugo Quilici, John Chism, were 
drafted, through this Committee of Fifty, 
which held closed meetings in the old El 
Cortez Hotel, and set up the election for the 
council. And the papers or somebody gave ’em 
the name of the “Committee of Fifty. 

It was not a secret committee. In fact, Earl 
Wooster acted as chairman of the committee. 
I never saw fifty people at any meeting, of 
these businessmen, and outside of Earl bein’ a 
consistent chairman, the crowd of fifty or less 
varied at practically every meeting. And they 
had a lot of meetings and a lot of talk, till it 
finally came down to electioneering and the 
raisin’ the money. 

And when they got down there, where 
they were gonna go, or stop, they just made 
a motion that they solicit the money, and 
no gambling halls be contacted for money 
because of their previous contact in there. 
And Bill Ligon, who is now chairman of the 
Security National Bank, I believe, was the first 
one that offered to give money. We had to do 
no campaignin’, raisin’ of money at all—they 
raised all the money for us that we needed. As 
we spent it, we would turn our bills in each 



102 


Clarence J. Thornton 


week, and they would give us a check for it. 
A man [Bob Robertson] whose name I forgot 
was head of the home-builders’ association 
here, served as treasurer for the Committee 
of Fifty. And when we turned our bills in each 
time, he would give us a check for our bills. 
And we had no idea where the money came 
from, or who had put it up. 

I don’t know—I can’t speak for the 
others—but when I went into office and 
anybody appeared before us at the [city 
council] as a contributor, was unknown to 
me. And it was certainly a nice way to be 
elected; you were not obligated or committed 
to anyone. 

And believe it or not, after we were in 
office, I only had one call from a contributor, 
from a person who said, “I had given money 
to your campaign,” in one of those certain 
things, and to me that—maybe he did, maybe 
he didn’t, I don’t know. Something came up 
and he wanted it, and I had no commitment 
and voted against it. 

From my personal view, we had a very 
good personal relationship as city councilmen. 
I felt we were all pretty good friends, and I 
think we still are today. When we had our own 
opinions, we went our own way. Sometimes 
we won as an individual, sometimes we lost, 
but nobody was vicious about it all. 

What was it really that made you decide to run? 

The thing that brought that Committee 
of Fifty together was the fact that the city 
council was doin’ nothin’ but fightin amongst 
themselves and were not too responsible 
people, because the city hadn’t made the effort 
to select anybody, people would file, and they 
continually argued. 

I think one of the big things that came up 
was the selection of the Centennial Coliseum 
site, in which the chairman of the city council, 


who became a member of the Centennial site 
selection, claimed he had two votes. He voted 
as a chairman, and he voted as a member of 
the committee. And it was just one thing after 
another. 

Then there was personal fights—actually 
fights amongst ’em. In fact, I can truthfully say 
that one city councilman threatened to throw 
another city councilman out the window at 
one meeting. That’s accordin’ to the papers, 
and I don’t doubt but what it happened in 
there. 

And the city was just goin’ downhill. 
One of the city managers selected had hardly 
gotten in office before the papers found out he 
was in violation of a hundred or two hundred 
parking tickets, as a city manager, and he had 
to be replaced. 

Then even after they did agree on Joe 
Lattimore to become city manager, they still 
wouldn’t let him operate like a city manager; 
they still had different councilmen that 
wanted to be city manager or do this and do 
that. 

In fact, one of the peculiarities when I got 
in office was the city band, which was a pretty 
small item. You couldn’t get the city band to 
play anywhere, unless you saw Councilman 
[Charles Cowan], 

He carried the band schedule in his pocket 
as a political gimmick, and if you wanted the 
city band to perform anywhere, why you had 
to find Mr. Cowan, and he would make the 
selection. And to complicate things farther, 
Glen Smoot was a traffic manager in Reno at 
that time, but he only was part-time on that; 
he was a personal chauffeur for Mr. Cowan, 
especially when the bands were performin’. 

It was just that the community had [lost] 
confidence in the city council. One of the big 
things at that time was the widening of South 
Virginia Street, down through the south side of 
town, and that involved, of course, the federal 



Civic Affairs and Political Service 


103 


bureau of roads, with South Virginia Street 
also bein’ U.S. 395, federal. And we couldn’t 
make any progress on that because the Bureau 
of Public Roads had just lost confidence in the 
people they were dealin with. 

We got into office and took the problem 
over, and the first problem we ran into was the 
fact that the bureau of roads was suspicious of 
what we were talkin’ about—they just didn’t put 
any confidence in our commitments. In fact, 
they called a special off-the-record meeting for 
us in Carson City, with the Bureau of Public 
Roads, at the restaurant to discuss what we 
were proposin’ and what we were doin’ and 
whether we’d do it. And while they didn’t 
proceed to the extent that the Reno Chamber 
of Commerce did later, they didn’t request us 
to sign an oath that we would do this. But later 
on, the Chamber of Commerce was so upset 
when we proposed to build the Centennial 
Coliseum, and said we would build the Pioneer 
Theatre downtown, they presented us with a 
petition to sign that we would proceed with 
that. They’d just lost confidence in the people 
who were on the council—not this one, but the 
previous council. That was the whole thing; it 
was quite a hassle, I’ll tell you [chuckling]. 

What did you think of Bud Baker as mayor? 

Bud was involved with ’em, of course, at 
that time, too. 

Do you think he was really the key to the loss 
of confidence? 

No. He partially was it, but he didn’t 
have control of that group of people. There 
were individual people and fought amongst 
themselves and with everybody else, and 
spent a lot of time on their own personal 
projects and their own personal businesses 
type. 


What about George Carr? 

Well, George Carr is the one that voted 
twice or claimed he had two votes in the thing. 

Not that we were any heroes, but we were 
responsible people; that particular council 
didn’t turn up with any real responsible key 
men, I think, except a man by the name of 
Dick Dimond, who was the Dodge auto 
agency in this area at that time. 

It was just a group of people, and people 
who didn’t have time to run for office, and 
other people did, and they ran for it and got 
elected and didn’t represent the community 
in the right way in the situation. 

Oh, without mentionin’ names, when the 
employees’ insurance policies that the city 
buys for the city employees was put out for 
bid, which it was to the insurance companies 
and didn’t run out until after we came into 
office, the agent of the insurance company 
who held that insurance at that time, when he 
made his offer to the new council, included 
a fee of three hundred dollars a month to a 
certain councilman—as, as—I guess you’d 
call it a bribe or whatever you want to call 
it—to get the business. And when he was 
turned down, when we told him he didn’t 
have to bid that way, he was quite shook up. 
And, well, the newspapers were there at that 
meeting when that happened. I said to the 
public newspapers afterwards, “Why didn’t 
you publicize that at all?” 

And they explained to me that they 
couldn’t, because they would have to name 
people if they published it, and then they 
would have to prove it. And probably about 
all they’d ever get would be a big lawsuit 
against the papers for chargin’ them with this 
particular policy, which actually happened, 
but they were in no position to name it. 

And we had lots of people who showed 
up after we were in office, who had zoning 



104 


Clarence J. Thornton 


changes to make, who had been holdin’ ’em 
for one to two years because they were afraid 
of approachin the old council, thinkin’ they 
might be caught in the trap of what they 
called an additional “walk around” fee, in 
other words, money, to get their zoning. So 
as a result, a lot of work was held back. And 
that’s about as far as—that’s exactly what went 
on—they just didn’t have any confidence, and 
they didn’t want to get caught in it. 

But I don’t know whether you would 
blame the people who were on the council. 
They did file for the council, and they got 
elected, where a lot of responsible people 
wouldn’t file—just didn’t want to be bothered 
with their own city. This is exactly what 
happened. 

This particular council, which I was a part 
of, served pretty much intact for eight years. 
I don’t know whether I named all of them, 
did I? Let’s see, I named I didn’t name Roy 
Bankofier. 

Roy Bankofier was a member of that 
committee. And of course, Hugo Quilici was 
mayor. And then there was Ed Spoon, who 
was a member of that committee. Served 
only two years, then he left the area and went 
to Vegas; he was replaced by Ralph Tyler. 
Then the followin’ election after that, Frank 
Baccigalupi was elected. And Roy Bankofier 
then was elected mayor. 

I served two terms—eight years in there. 
From my own personal view, I think that (and 
when you talk about your own personal view, 
you don’t do things by yourself there, but you 
get things done certain ways) one of the big 
things that we as a council got done, which 
probably sounds a little small today, was the 
purchase of Slide Mountain for the Junior 
Youth Ski Program. 

That area was owned by two brothers 
who were cattlemen from the Marysville 
area; they had acquired the ski area through 


a mortgage. They were not interested in snow 
activities, but the city had an arrangement 
with ’em—on weekends we paid ’em, I believe, 
five thousand dollars for the season s use, on 
Saturdays for the Junior Ski Program. They got 
discouraged because there were so many junior 
ski programs on Saturday, it was interferin’ 
with their regular adult trade. And apparently 
a lot of the adult people had complained about 
the children—or kids, whichever you want to 
call ’em—bein’ in the way on those days. They 
decided they wanted to get out of that thing, 
and they offered it to the city of Reno. And 
we finally arranged to buy it. Washoe County 
came in with the city of Reno, for a short time, 
then of course, the Fleischmann Foundation 
rehabilitated the building and built the ski lifts. 
We bought the ground and what was there. 
And it’s become a very popular program. 

I wonder if one of the clauses we put in 
there when we purchased it is still there. That 
was a clause that, because of the low price we 
paid for it, if the city should ever decide to sell 
it, that these people or their heirs would have 
the first right of refusal if they wished to buy it. 

And that program, of course, is still in 
existence today. I don’t know, I guess you have 
to get used to changin’ times, but the original 
intent was that any boy or girl who wanted to 
ski would be taken care of through the service 
clubs or some way. But at that time, the fee 
was very low, and I doubt if that portion of 
the program is still there today because of the 
cost of skim’, with the charges at that time. 
We used school buses, which they still use, 
but they pay a lot more for ’em. Well, that’s 
one of the things I always have pride I had 
something to do with. 

Then in my own area, Taylor Park was 
one of the projects that was in the works at 
the time we went in, and through the support 
of the council we got that completed. Then 
Paradise Park, which I said at that time would 



Civic Affairs and Political Service 


105 


probably be the last fifty-acre park this area 
would ever buy (but I turned out wrong when 
this Rancho San Rafael became a county 
park). 

However, Paradise Park became an issue. 
We bought the park from Roger Teglia for 
three hundred thousand dollars— fifteen 
thousand dollars a year for twenty years, and 
no interest. But we didn’t buy it for a park. 
When the developers of that Silverado area 
down there developed those houses in that 
area, some of the developers had an interest 
in a gas company outside of the Sierra Pacific 
Power. And they got into a feud over it, and 
wanted to serve their houses with their own 
gas company, and were ruled out. And as far 
as we know, in retaliation for the fact that they 
didn’t get the gas customers in there, they sold 
the drainage rights of the Paradise ponds to 
Roger Teglia who owned the Paradise ponds. 

When the subdivision was built, the first 
thing that happened, we started gettin’ floods, 
because we didn’t have any drainage out of 
that area. The natural drain had been closed 
off. Then we went to the engineers, and they 
quoted us five hundred thousand dollars to 
drain Paradise ponds across to the Truckee 
River. And every time there was a thunder 
storm, we had drainage problems, so with this 
chance of buyin’ a park and getting fifty acres 
and gettin’ fifty inches of water, and gettin’ a 
drainage area back, which belonged to the 
North Truckee Drain, we made the purchase. 

And the people remember at that time, it 
was just a pile of rocks. It was the whole idea 
of a park; we hoped to be a park. But that’s 
how Paradise Park happens to be there. We 
had to get drainage some way out of that area, 
for those people settled in that area. And it’s 
turned out to be a good investment. In fact, 
I think the purchase time is about up on it. 

Dunn’ the time I was there, durin’ the 
eight years, of course, we built the Centennial 


Coliseum, which had been a hassle for some 
time, as to the location. Different research 
institutions brought in, and architects and so 
forth. But by the time we got in office, they 
had purchased the land out there, so our part 
in it was the building, lettin’ the contract an’ 
selectin’ the architects, and so forth. 

One of the things that happened there 
that’s interestin’ to me today, was energy. 
When we built the Centennial Coliseum, the 
Sierra Pacific Power Company was bringing 
gas from the gas companies into this area for 
heating purposes. And we were outside the 
city, out in the county, and they suggested 
that we put gas in to heat the Centennial 
Coliseum, instead of oil, which we did. 
But we also put in oil services at the same 
time, which turned out later on to be a big 
advantage, because when the gas prices and 
gas became short and such an expense, the 
public buildings were generally the first ones 
they cut off of the gas. 

The building of that Centennial Coliseum 
was a two-year j ob, and we met frequently on it. 
There was a certain amount of dissatisfaction, 
but we built it. And we got down to the final 
bid the night before we went to bid, and were 
a million dollars short, on their estimate. 
Previous to that time, there had been a 
motion, somewhere along the line which had 
set aside a million dollars for construction 
of a building downtown, which we named 
Pioneer Theatre. At two o’clock in the mornin’, 
we voted to cancel that arrangement and took 
the million dollars and signed the contract 
to build the Centennial Coliseum. Which is 
also of interest, because the first even in there 
was the [chuckling] Nevada state basketball 
tournament, and for the first night it was held, 
it was too small. [Chuckles] 

The state basketball tournament was on 
and pretty well sold out. And Fallon had a 



106 


Clarence J. Thornton 


basketball team, which was not rated up in 
the winners, but they did win, enough that 
it brought practically all the people from 
Churchill County [chuckles] up to see Fallon 
play that night, and the place was full of 
people without them. We finally got some of 
the people to leave, and the other people from 
Fallon could come in and see their team play 
That was opening night. 

Because we opened it before the contractor 
had turned it over to us, you’re probably 
aware—when you let a contract on a building 
like that, you no longer own it—those 
contractors and architects own it, until they 
turn it back to you as completed in the deal. 
Because of our usin’ it ahead of their contract, 
I think it cost us about thirty thousand 
dollars for change orders and so forth that 
they claimed had to be made to use it ahead 
of time. That was my first experience with an 
uncompleted contract; I didn’t realize that 
you didn’t own a building till they turned it 
back to you. 

And in all the time—when we were in 
there that eight years, we built the new City 
Hall, replacin’ the old one downtown on the 
northwest corner of First and Center Street. 

We donated the property for the Washoe 
County Library, where it stands today. I 
think most people get confused; they think 
that’s the Reno city library, but it isn’t; it 
belongs to Washoe County. The Fleischmann 
Foundation provided the money for the 
building of the library in the county, and the 
city provides the land on which it’s built. 

We completed a new sewer plant. The 
property had been purchased previously, 
but we let the contract for the sewer plant 
while we were there. And also completed a 
bridge over the Truckee River—two or three 
bridges—Keystone, East First Street, and the 
Wells Avenue overpass, which I shouldn’t say 
much about. 


I was hoping that you would say something 
about that. 

Well, I don’t mind talking about the Wells 
Avenue overpass. The same people built the 
Wells overpass had built scores of bridges for 
the state highway department and the state 
contractors, and maybe today are still biddin’ 
and buildin’ ’em. We followed all the regular 
rules and regulations, everything, had the site 
inspectors, thought we had good contractors, 
probably did have good contractors, but for 
some reason, the Wells overpass—. Whether 
it went disastrous or not, I don’t know, simply 
because it’s not smooth to go over. 

But I have watched the highway 
departments in Nevada and California when 
they build bridges like that, and I’ve never 
seen one that hasn’t had problems. Practically 
every time you go from Reno to Sacramento, 
they’re buildin’ a bridge, or rebuildin’ a 
bridge. But I spent a lot of time on it, the city 
engineer who was in charge of it was very 
capable; he took me down and showed me 
what the faults were of it, when they had it 
apart, when they replaced it and remodeled 
it. Just what went wrong and nobody ever 
seems to know, maybe, except politics, and 
what part of politics. I don’t think there was 
any subterfuge, any payoffs, any rackets, just 
one of those things that happened. 

As I said previously, I served as city of 
Reno’s representative on the Washoe County 
Fair and Recreation Board, which is now the 
Reno/Sparks Convention Bureau, for eight 
years. 

We spent many hours on that building. 
And not complaining, received—at the 
end of eight years, I received one paycheck 
for thirty-five dollars. And that became 
possible because when Las Vegas built their 
convention bureau, they put a clause in the 
state law that the members of the convention 



Civic Affairs and Political Service 


107 


board shouldn’t receive any pay, until the 
city exceeds a hundred thousand population, 
which Vegas did. But Reno never qualified 
for over a hundred thousand till that census 
when we were servin’ the end of eight years. 
Not only myself, but the rest of ’em, I think, 
received a paycheck for thirty-five dollars 
[chuckling], through a state law that was 
written for another area. 

The Centennial Coliseum was a semi¬ 
private agency, in which the county sold bonds 
for the construction, and therefore the county, 
of course, is responsible for any indebtedness 
or any bills that the Centennial Coliseum 
incurs, and pays the bonds in the issue. 

Now the Pioneer Theatre downtown 
is not a county obligation. And as a result, 
when we sold the bonds for building that, we 
paid a good deal higher interest to the bond 
holders. There was never any doubt in our 
mind or anybody else’s that the county would 
assume responsibility, if it ever became an 
obligation, but actually it is not an obligation 
of the taxpayers. 

The bond issues itself, were quite a 
problem. We sold the bonds on that Centennial 
Coliseum at a reasonable price. Then—to go 
back in history—there was quite a surge in 
bond issues at that time, and the bonding 
companies came up with redeeming-type of 
bonds, where you would replace the bonds 
that you had sold by bonds that they would 
reissue, and you would put the original bonds 
in trust and sell to another company if you 
got a better sale. And to deal with three or 
four or five bonding companies—. And 
believe it or not, we had to let each one of 
those bonding companies into the meeting 
by themselves—not when the other was there. 
We met all night, one at a time, they explained 
the advantage. 

So we decided to replace the original 
bonds with a much better bond, a much 


better rate of interest. But as it turned out, 
when you sold these bonds, they have to go 
on the bond market at the date that’s set for 
them to sell, and you get the rate of interest 
on your bonds that are prevailing that day. 
And we were unfortunate to not sell on a 
good day. So actually, after all our work to 
replace these bonds and sell the new bonds, 
we accomplished very little. But doin’ that, if 
you can think back far enough, the bonding 
companies were, around that time, trying to 
get a lot of cities and a lot of school boards to 
replace their bonds because of the different 
rate of interest. It may have worked in some 
cases, but I don’t know of any where that type 
of financin’ was superb, at all. 

In the construction of the Pioneer Theatre, 
the architects who designed the Centennial 
Coliseum, before we came on the council, had 
inserted a clause in there, that if we should 
ever build another building downtown, 
they would be the preferred bidders. And of 
course, as it turned out, we decided to build a 
dome-type building downtown. And the local 
architects were not qualified for that type of 
structure at all, but they insisted on holdin us 
to that clause, till the chairman, Bill Gravelle, 
after several cursory approaches, Just advised 
’em that we were gonna take this situation to 
the newspapers if they didn’t relinquish that 
clause which had been made away ahead of 
where we were. And they finally wrote us a 
letter, withdrawing from that, and we went 
ahead with the bid for the dome-type, which 
is down there now. 

There’s no particular problem with the 
dome-type, except people today probably 
don’t know somethin’ we didn’t know either, 
we weren’t [chuckle] —especially the artist and 
the musician—. Those people, they wanted 
it built bigger with more seats in it. And the 
minute we brought that up, why, the architects 
pointed out to us that, the type of building 



108 


Clarence J. Thornton 


we were building, for the purpose we were 
building it, even in places like New York, are 
not built that big, because it’s impossible to 
get a seating arrangement where the people 
will be involved in the show that’s goin on, 
and also, the big fact that everybody doesn’t 
go to the same show on the same night. That 
is the reason that you have shows runnin’ for 
a year some places, in a place like New York, 
and six months somewhere else. And after 
the architects explained it to us, when we 
explained it to the leaders of the art dealers 
and so forth, we didn’t hear very much more 
about that particular size, more seats. It just 
seems funny we wouldn’t have thought of 
that ourselves. 

I’m going to start on another point. I 
talked about that political campaign in 1963, 
when several of us were drafted for office, 
and I mentioned the fact we had to raise very 
little money; it was raised by the Committee 
of Fifty, and given to a man by the name of 
Robert Robertson. He was the secretary of 
the Reno Builders Association, and he in turn 
distributed the money to the candidates that 
they had selected. 

Of course, we got some people who 
approached us, and gave us money direct. 
And even though I’d been around politics 
for quite a while, I was quite surprised, “who 
you are before you get elected” and “who 
you are the next day after you get elected.” 
In most cases, you became a dirty, crooked 
politician the next day before you even had 
voted. And I think by that I mean people who 
had hunted you up and made contributions 
to your campaign, you would hear ’em talkin’ 
at a social party or somewhere later on, about 
the dirty, crooked politicians that were in 
office. In my particular case, I did very little 
solicitation, and I was quite surprised how 
my character had changed from [chuckling] 


campaigning to elected, when I voted on 
issues. 

And of course, another thing that maybe 
surprised me, maybe it didn’t because I was 
a little older, was the fact that if people had 
some particular action they wanted, and 
it happened to be something you could do 
for ’em, and do legitimate, you would do it. 
They very seldom ever thanked you for what 
you had achieved, but it wouldn’t be too 
long, boy, they would want something else, 
and sometimes you could get it for em and 
sometimes you couldn’t. It was accordin’ to 
the type of request they made. 

I mentioned the gambling casinos before, 
and how the Committee of Fifty would not— 
and said they did not—accept any gambling 
clubs’ money for this campaign. And I’ll 
mention again the established fact, that most 
people say that the “gamblers” ran Reno. Well, 
from 1963 to ’71, I can tell you they didn’t 
run Ward Number Four, because all the big 
gaming casinos that were in Ward Number 
Four—and that happened to be my ward—and 
I always thought they were very considerate; 
they would approach you with a request they 
had, before any council meeting, to see what 
the rest of the council might have felt about 
it—whether it was possible or there was some 
problems about it. And I’ll be frank with you, 
we gave the casinos, not anything big, but a 
lot of little things that they wanted because, 
without bringing them up at a council table, 
they would just stir up controversy. And an 
example would be, where they could park their 
luggage on the street in front of their hotel 
while people were waitin’ for their airplane 
or their bus. And if you’da brought it up at 
a council, you’da probably had newspaper 
stories and controversy; it was just a courtesy 
that didn’t create that maximum problem. 

And there was several other things that 
they wanted, but they would question you first 



Civic Affairs and Political Service 


109 


and see what the feeling was with the other 
members. And we had a pretty good council; 
we could talk about things and decide a lot of 
it ahead of time, not behind the scenes or the 
papers, but it just weren’t things that’d come 
up on the table. 

One of our biggest problems wasn’t the 
gaming casinos, as people would think. 
Our bigger problems were the small bars or 
saloons—one- or two-man operations. They 
were continually harassin’ customers, and 
changin’ ownership, changin’ partners, and 
for a long time, tried to pressure the council 
into limitin’ the number of small bars in 
town. I didn’t blame them too much for this 
thinking, because it really put them in the 
driver’s seat. Another thing that the previous 
council had done: bar licenses at that time 
could be issued to anyone that they wanted 
to issue it to, with no date of use, or a location 
on it, and they could put it in their pocket and 
carry it in their pocket and carry it around 
with ’em as long as they wanted to. And if they 
finally found a location and they wanted to 
open a bar, there was no question, they just 
had their license. It happened on West Fourth 
Street very definitely, in a location where the 
people wanted a bar couldn’t get a license, but 
a councilman walked out of the council office 
that was defeated, with a bar license in his 
pocket and opened up a bar. We eliminated 
that. We put a restriction on it, where there 
was no bar license issued to any individual 
who didn’t have a location to use it. 

But they created a lot of issues, if people 
will look back, they can remember that the 
chief of police had had so much trouble with 
small bars havin’ these license, and cancelin’ 
their licenses out, that he was very cautious 
when he came before this council, of takin’ 
a license away from some of the small bars 
who had created an offense, until we finally 
got a little harsh with the chief of police 


when he came in and complained about 
certain bartenders at certain places. And lots 
of cases, he had issued the license, and he 
wanted to cancel the license, but he was wary 
of doin’ it because what had happened to him 
previously. When we started condemning him 
for his own problem, he started yankin’ these 
licenses away from these type of operators, 
and the trouble practically ended overnight. 

This was Briscoe? 

Yes. He couldn’t believe his good luck 
[laughs], 

* * * * * 

In the political field in the state, I’ve been 
involved in the city level, the county level, 
the State level, and was campaign manager 
for United States Senator at the federal level. 
Politics has changed considerable over the 
years that I’ve been involved. It used to be a 
rather seasonal occupation. You ran for office 
every two years or four years— whatever 
it was—and in between you were in office, 
and you carried out your duties. But today, it 
seems to have become a business, and they’re 
continually campaigning in practically all 
branches, whether it’s city, county, or the state, 
federal. And of course, the sources of money 
have changed considerable over those years 
where you used to get your money direct, 
personal contact at different levels. Today, it’s 
handled by political “managers,” [chuckles] 
somewhat on a personal level, but mostly 
on groups and TV and radio, and personal 
request through letters and cards and that 
type of operation. 

I also think there’s been a change in the 
political field in the type of candidates that 
are takin’ part. There’s somewhat a reluctance 
in maybe successful or prominent business 



110 


Clarence J. Thornton 


people gettin into political offices, because 
of the background, that once they get elected, 
how their personality and character changes, 
with nothing they can do about it. You 
approach certain prominent people today 
about filin’ for political office, and watch it if 
they don’t just walk off and leave you standing 
there [chuckling]. They don’t even consider—. 
It’s a bad thing that’s happened, I believe. It’s 
affected the type of people in office so much. 




Summary, with Some Notes 
About My Family 


In my marriage and family life—which I 
never had a home actually, of any permanence, 
until I married. Previous to that I had lived 
with my aunt, Margaret Gibbons in Merced, 
California. And in the ranch work you lived 
in the various bunkhouses on the various 
ranches you were workin’ on. And in college I 
spent my career in fraternity houses, and after 
graduation I lived with Herb Foster’s parents, 
paid board and room, until I was married. 

Jeanne Thornton, my wife, was a daughter 
of William J. and Myrtle Holcomb Stevenson. 
She was born in 1909 in Verdi, Nevada, and 
we met at the Stevenson ranch in the Truckee 
Meadows, which is now under consideration 
for development for family houses, located 
about ten miles south of Reno, adjoining the 
Double Diamond ranch to the south. 

We were married May 24, 1928 by 
Reverend Brewster Adams, minister of the 
Baptist church. Our first home, we purchased 
from Robert and Peggy Farrar; they were 
cousins of Jeanne, my wife. The address is no 
longer there, but it’s now part of the present 
Ponderosa Hotel on South Virginia Street. 


In the end of that year, 1928, we left Reno 
and moved to Alliance, Ohio. We were there 
about six months when the big Depression hit 
in the East, previous to its movin’ west. And 
we traveled a lot in the state of Ohio. I was 
with a public utility company [the Suburban 
Light and Power Company of Alliance, Ohio] 
as an agricultural representative. 

Because of the Depression, we moved 
back to Reno in the last days of June of 1929. 
A short time after that, we purchased the 
Western Hatchery, where we were for twenty- 
three years. It was located at 829-837 West 
Fifth Street. At the present time, it’s the home 
of Pay’n’Pak. Previous to that, it had been sold 
to the Safeway Stores. 

Our daughter was born on May 21,1931— 
Joyce. And a son [William] was born on 
February 24,1933. Durin’ our lifetime, Jeanne 
was president of the Babcock Kindergarten 
school; Mary S. Doten PTA; Northside 
Junior High School [chuckles], which you 
probably remember; and Cub Scout Den 
Mother; Mother Advisor of the Order of 
Rainbow for Girls; member of Adah Chapter 



112 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Number Four, Order of Eastern Star; and the 
Federated Church; also a member and past 
president of Brown-Huffaker Homemakers 
Club; and past president of the Reno United 
Parent-Teachers Association (that’s before 
they went national). She’s been a member of 
the Reno Republican Women’s Club; member 
of the American Legion, Darrell Dunkle 
Post Auxiliary, the child welfare chairman 
for three years. She’s a member and past 
president of John C. Fremont Chapter, DAR 
Carson City; honorary past regent of Nevada 
State Society; a member of the Nevada State 
Historical Society; member of the Nevada 
Genealogy Society [chuckling]. Past president 
of the Nevada State Button Club; chairman 
of the National Button Show, 1964; past 
president of Minerva Club SAE fraternity; 
past president and Mother of the Year, Sigma 
Nu fraternity Mother’s Club (and you can see 
what happened—I was the SAE, and she was 
active in that, and when Bill got to college, he 
became a Sigma Nu); she is a member of the 
Las Vegas chapter of Daughters of American 
Colonists, and a state recording secretary in 
1979-1994. And then she was State Regent of 
the DAR—[1972-74]. And just recently, she 
was one of the organizers and president of the 
Thomas Holcomb chapter of Colonial Dames 
of the Seventeenth Century, in Reno. That took 
about two years to organize it. 1981-93. The 
chapter was named for her colonial ancestor, 
Thomas Holcomb, who emigrated to America 
in 1630, settled in Massachusetts, helped 
colonize Massachusetts and Connecticut, 
and drafted the Constitution of Connecticut. 

She’s had two major operations on her 
hips. One at Mayo’s Clinic, 1949, and the 
last one in Reno, in 1977. Both these hip 
operations have been very successful. 

In other activities, or connected activities, 
while I was on the Reno City Council, 
they appointed me to go to a meeting of 


the Municipal Cities in Washington, D.C. 
Jeanne went with me, and we traveled 
by train. The train stopped at Laramie, 
Wyoming, we received a telegram statin’ 
that President Eisenhower had passed away, 
and the meeting in Washington had been 
canceled. However, we proceeded to go on 
to Washington and attended the memorial 
services in Washington, D.C., watched the 
processional with the body in state in the 
Capitol Rotunda. President Eisenhower’s 
wife, Mamie Eisenhower, and family, were 
stayin’ on the same floor in the same hotel, 
the Washington Hilton Hotel. It was a rather 
unusual experience, because I don’t know of 
anybody else who was on that particular floor, 
but every time I went up to the floor after his 
death, when you came out of the elevator, to 
your right, the hallways were shut off, and 
there was just a couple of fellas sittin there 
readin books, and you realize who they were, 
[Secret Service]. You weren’t about to go down 
that hall. 

I attended the funeral procession; it was a 
lesson in security, I guess you’d say. Every few 
feet, they had an Army or Navy man, along 
the parade, and those men were standing, 
facing in, towards the audience, not towards 
the parade. A particular man, I remember one 
colored man, who decided to take his overcoat 
off, and before he could get his overcoat off, 
there was a half a dozen police there, to see 
what he was doin’, you know. That’s all he 
wanted to do, was just remove his overcoat. 

In that processional, of Eisenhower’s 
funeral, they had, of course, a large number 
of the old retired Army generals and so 
forth, and for people who never attended 
one of these inaugurals, or burials, they travel 
practically at no speed, one-step-at-a-time, 
that whole distance from the church. I felt 
sorry for a lot of the old retired officers there, 
because it was extremely cold, and that whole 



Summary, with Some Notes About My Family 


113 


thing was about four or five miles, in that 
processional. 

Oh yes, and then Jeanne said she wants to 
be sure and tell you, she had bean soup in the 
Senate dining room [chuckling]; everybody 
has that, I guess. 

In April 15, 1972, Jeanne went to 
Washington to be installed as the Nevada 
state representative of DAR, which they had 
back there. She had a wonderful tour of the 
city of Washington and was a guest at Senator 
Cannon’s and his wife’s, at his home. 

My daughter, Margaret Joyce Thornton 
McCarty now, was born May the twenty-first, 
’31, and referred to as a “Depression baby” She 
attended Reno schools, and the Depression 
was really on at that time, and somewhere in 
my work, I had acquired a hundred dollars 
cash, and I went down to Dr. [S. K.] Morrison 
who was Jeanne’s doctor, and paid him a 
hundred dollars in cash, before the baby was 
born, which really shook him up. [Chuckle] 
Doctors at that time weren’t gettin’ paid like 
they are today. 

She married Vaughn McCarty May 21, 
1950, and worked as a bookkeeper at the 
First National Bank in Reno. She was about 
twenty years old, and this was a time when 
the bank was havin’ continual trouble gettin 
good reliable help that they knew. And one 
day, Harold Gorman, who was the man in 
charge, made her the head bookkeeper of 
the bank—which is hard to realize today— 
with the statement he was makin’ her head 
bookkeeper because he knew her, she was 
about the only person in the office who could 
find the papers when he wanted them. That’s 
what she said; she was practically in tears, 
because of the older people in there. 

After her marriage, her husband was 
called up in the Nevada Air National Guard, 
in 1951. He was transferred to various air 
bases. They finally located him in Victorville, 


California, and he stayed there till he was 
out of the service, and worked for the Cal 
Interstate Telephone Company, which is now 
the Continental Telephone Company. He was 
transferred from there to Barstow, California. 
They had a pretty rough time because of 
the housing accommodations and lack of 
housing, and living in a desert area, and just 
gettin started in life. But they made the best 
of it, and then later on he left the telephone 
company and came back to Reno. 

They had three boys—three sons—and 
one girl. It was very unfortunate, the second 
son, Gregory, became ill with cancer when 
he was nineteen years old, and passed away 
in about nineteen months. It was a great loss 
to all of us. 

She is the mother of Mike McCarty, Susan 
McCarty, and the youngest son, Vaughn James 
McCarty. She’s the grandmother of Matthew 
McCarty and Michael and Mindy Clapp. She 
has a full-time bookkeeping job now, for 
brother Bill, at the Reno Recreation Center. 
Third generation native Nevadan, and proud 
of her ancestry. Member of John C. Fremont 
Chapter DAR, and Eastern Star. 

My son, William Clarence Thornton, 
was born February 24, 1934 at home, on 
West Fifth Street, before we could get to the 
hospital. Bill’s a doer, like his mother, and in 
schools, he’s taken part in all school activities 
from kindergarten through Mary S. Doten, 
Northside Junior High, Rena High, and the 
University of Nevada. He was a Cub Scout 
and a Boy Scout; member of Reno High Ski 
Club in 1950, ’51, ’52; member of Silver State 
Skiers; American Legion sponsored Western 
State Junior championship at Sun Valley, 
Idaho in ’52; played end on the Reno High 
School football team in 1951-52, which shared 
a co-championship with the Las Vegas high 
school. He joined the Sigma Nu fraternity at 
the University of Nevada in October 1952; 



114 


Clarence J. Thornton 


skied on the Nevada Wolf Pack ski team 
’53 and ’57; member of Coffin and Keys in 
1956; class manager in 1956; Junior Class 
president; Who’s Who in College of 1958; 
Young Republican; and member of the Block 
N Society He graduated at the University 
on June 1, 1958, in the College of Arts and 
Science and went to University Of Arizona 
Law School for one year in 1958-59. He then 
enlisted in Nevada Air Guard January sixth, 
’54, under the Nevada Air National Guard 
aviation cadet program—had three months 
of flight training at Lackland Air Force Base 
and was assigned to Graham Air Force Base 
in Marianna, Florida, then was assigned 
to five months training at Bryan Air Force 
Base, Bryan, Texas. He graduated on April 
15, 1955, commissioned a second lieutenant, 
and awarded his wings. 

He returned to Reno with civilian status, 
and then he flew with the 192nd Fighter 
Bomber Air Squadron in Reno. They flew 
for that unit durin’ his final three years in the 
University. At that time, they were flyin’ the 
West Coast alert system, and they were flyin’ 
it day and night too— possible invasion in 
there. And this all took place—practically all 
his flyin took place—right when the Air Force 
was going from propeller planes to jet planes; 
they were just makin’ the switch. 

He had the chance of bein’ a commercial 
jet pilot, bein’ young and just out of the Air 
Force of jets, but decided not to do this for a 
livin’; he’d rather be a lawyer. He liked to fly, 
but not for a livin’. 

He also served two years as alumni 
president, 1964-65, the University of Nevada; 
and durin his term, the association and the 
Friends of the Library raised seventy-five 
thousand dollars of matching funds, for the 
purchase of books —you’re probably aware 
of that. He started the annual alumni support 
program; served as Homecoming chairman 


for 1963-64; joined the Democratic party in 
1958 [chuckling]— see what families will 
do? He was campaign manager for Senator 
Howard Cannon’s campaign in 1964; was 
president of the Washoe County Young 
Democrats in ’63. He married Barbara 
Cavanaugh June 14, 1959. He received his 
law degree at George Washington University 
in Washington in 1961, passing that, a Bar 
examination the same year. In his activities in 
the University, he and his wife Barbara have 
established the Thornton Peace Prize, which 
I believe, is still given at the University each 
year. He’s the father of two boys, Brett and 
Dan Thornton, and a very devoted husband 
and father. 

In the inaugural parade when John 
F. Kennedy was installed as President of 
the United States, Bill was chosen as the 
representative of John F. Kennedy—was 
in the inaugural float, and represented the 
incoming President as a student of Yale 
University, which Bill was on the float. He 
had a big sweater on with a big “Y” on it, that 
was then Yale. 

Having come to Nevada almost as 
an orphan in 1914, although my father 
was here as a livestock superintendent at 
Constantia, and personally, without any great 
background education other than graduated 
from grammar school, I’ve always felt that 
the state of Nevada has been very good to 
me, and especially Reno. I was able to go to 
Heald’s Business College temporarily, served a 
short time in the Army, was admitted [to] the 
University of Nevada without any high school 
background, from which I graduated, and 
have taken part in a good many changes in 
Reno-Washoe County area, from the twenties 
on, especially in the agriculture area, and in 
handling the welfare in Washoe County and 
Reno durin’ the Depression of the thirties, 



Summary, with Some Notes About My Family 


115 


previous to the years of it bein’ operated by the 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation. I was 
fortunate enough to appraise approximately 
five hundred farms in the state for the Federal 
Land Bank of Berkeley over a period of about 
four years, have taken part in politics at the 
city, county, and state level durin’ those years. 
I met and married my wife in 1928, and we’re 
still married [chuck— les]; we have two fine 
children, which we talked about previously, 
Joyce Thornton McCarty, and William 
Clarence Thornton. 

In 1978, the College of Agriculture, 
University of Nevada, Reno, presented me 
with the Distinguished Alumnus plaque. 
On April 25, 1982, the Rotary Club of Reno 
Board of Directors chose me to become a Paul 
Harris Fellow. The Paul Harris Fellow Medal 
was presented for devotion to Rotary and its 
goals, at a district conference held in Reno. 

On May 22, 1982, the Board of Regents 
of the University of Nevada, Reno, approved 
and conferred upon me the Medal of 
Distinguished Nevadan, in recognition of 
significant achievement contributing to the 
advancement of our state and nation and 
for exceptional service to the well-being of 
mankind. 




Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



118 


Clarence J. Thornton 


A 

Aggie Club (University of 
Nevada), 159, 197 
Agriculture Society, Nevada 
state, 160, 161-162, 165- 
166, 168, 169, 175, 206 
Albright, Archie, 186-187 
Alliance, Ohio, 105-106 
262-263 


Boulder Canyon Act, U.S., 
220-221 

Bowers, Homer, 179 
Boy Scouts of America, 179 
220 

Briscoe, Elmer, 260 
Brooks Ernest, 124 
Brown, Charles A., 174 
Bryan, William Jennings, 
216 


American Legion, 107, 214, 
215-216 

American Red Cross (Reno), 
109-110 

American Rodeo Association, 
200 

Antelope Valley (Califor¬ 
nia) , 46 

Atcheson, Merle, 119 


Buckman, Thomas P., 91 
Bunker, Berkeley L., 218, 
227, 228 

Bureau of Public Roc 
U.S., 243 



Baccigalupi, Frank, 2 
Baker, Bud, 244 
Balzar, Fred B^ 

163-164, 

Bank of 

Bank for cooperatives, 

, 147- 
155-157 
Jankofier, Roy, 246 

:lett, Frank "Bud," 6 
Basques, 5, 25, 54, 55-56, 
58-61, 63 

Bath, Clarence K. , 132 
Bevilacqua, A., 109 
Bible, Alan H., 219 
Biltz, Norman H., 230, 231 
Binion, Lester Ben "Benny," 
75-76 

Block N Society (Univer¬ 
sity of Nevada), 37 
Boca dam (California), 35, 
91-98 


, 46, 48, 
56-57, 61-64, 89 
George, 244 

rville, Edward P. "Ted," 
218, 227, 228 
Caudill, Robert F. "Doby 
Doc," 66, 70-76 
Centennial Coliseum (Reno), 
244, 249-251, 254-255 
Central Relief Committee, 
120 

See also: Probation 
office, Washoe County 
Chamber of Commerce, Reno, 
243-244 

Champagne, Art, 148 
Chandler, Albert Benjamin 
"Happy," 225 
Chism, John, 240 
Church, James Edward, 40- 
41 

Churchill County 
See: Fallon 

Civilian Conservation Corps 
(CCC), 115-120 
Civil War, U.S., 1, 2 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


119 


Clapp, Michael, 267 
Clapp, Mindy, 267 
Clapp, Susan McCarty, 267 
Clark, Walter E., 32, 38, 
39, 113 

Clark, Walter Van Tilburg, 
38, 42 

Cline, L. E., 171 
Coffin and Keys society 
(University of Nevada), 


DoIf, Tom, 163, 166 
Doten, Samuel B., 127 
Doyle, Howard, 203 
Duke, Johnny, 61 
Dunkle, Darrell, 214 
Durkee, Vernon, 119-120 
Dutch, 182-183 


E 


37 

Cohen, Bert, 223-224 
Committee of Fifty (Reno), 
239-241, 257, 258 
Constantia, California, 4- 
6, 7, 9, 43, 44 
Controller, Nevada state, 
122-123 

Cord, Errett L., 230 
Cornwell, Kirk, 65 
Courtwright, Raymond O. 
"Corky," 26 

Cowan, Charles, 242-243 
Creel, Cecil W., 91, 

113, 116-117, 120, 

124, 127, 155 
Cross, Archie, 

Cross, Cai 

Cunningham, Mr.V>4"6-47 
Cuyama Valley Land and 
Cattle Company (Califor¬ 
nia) , 63 


D 


Day, Dudley, 229 
Democrats, 218, 232, 239 
Dempsey, Jack, 20-21 
Depression relief 

See: Probation Office, 

Washoe County 
Dillon, Kenneth, 237, 238, 
239 

Dimond, Dick, 244 
Dodge, Buena Reed, 178 
Dodge, Carl, 166 
Dodge, Carl, Jr., 166, 

173, 174 



Eaton, Paul, 17-19 
Eisenhower, Dwight D. 

265 

Eisenhower, Mami^ 

Elcano, Joe, 59 
Elko, Nevada, 73-74^ 
171-172 

Ellis, Mr ., 139-140 

fon Ranching Company, 

Emerald Bay, Lake Tahoe, 
California, 28-31 
Erb, Charles, 26, 28 
Ernst, George, 166 
Etchebarren, John, 59 


Fair, Nevada state, 102, 
158-197, 204, 209-213, 
239 

Fair, Washoe County, 102 
See also: Fair, Neva¬ 
da state 

Fallon, Nevada, 160-163, 
164-168, 170-175, 176- 
184, 189, 190, 195, 196, 
206, 210, 211, 213, 224, 
251 

Farm Bureau, Nevada state, 
162, 163 

First National Bank of 
Nevada, 150-151 

Fish Springs ranch (North¬ 
ern Nevada), 5 

Flanigan, Patrick L., 4, 

12 



120 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Fleischmann, Max C., 226- 
227 


H 


Fleischmann Foundation of 
Nevada, 247, 252 
Foley-Burke carnival, 200 
Forest Service, U.S., 119 
120 

4-H Clubs, 99-104, 159, 
175-176, 187-188, 213 
Frandsen, Peter "Bugs," 


Halloway, Eleanor, 238 
Hardy, Edward, 14 
Harris, J. C., 73-74 
Hartman, Leon W., 24-25 
Heald's Business College 
(Reno), 6 

Heffernan, Carroll, 155- 
156 


24-25, 28, 33 
Frazier, Ray, 71 
Frost, Harry, 203 


Garat, George, 83 
Garat family (Elko County), 
56-57 

Gardella, Louie A., 187 
Geneva, California 
Seer Planada 
Gerlach, Fred, 66-67, 
Gerlach, Nevada, 

80 

Gerlach Land and Live >ck 
Company 
Germs 

Ge ieli£ Noble, 229, 232, 

)dchaux ranch (northern 
levada) , 55 
Gold Circle 



Henderson, Charles B., 111 
Herman, Raphael, 125 
Highway department, Cali¬ 
fornia, 28-31 
Hilp, Lester B., 203 
Hobart Lumber Company, 31 
Hoover, Herbert (^-, 141 
Horses, raising, 85-90 
Hourdburigary, Joe Mocho, 

fprigary, Raymond 
o, 59-60 

iphrey, Frank, 44-4 5 
Humphrey, Herbert, 44, 47 
Humphrey, Jacob B. "Jake," 
45 

Humphrey, James, 44 
Humphrey, John, 45 
Humphrey, Marvin, 232, 235 
Hunter, Claude, 240 
Hutchinson, Claude B., 127 
Hutton, Barbara Woolworth, 
122 


See: Midas 

Gorman, Harold, 266-267 
Grass Valley ranch (Lander 
County), 138-139 
Gravelle, William, 255-256 
Gray, Alieta Day, 238 
Gray, Leslie B., 237, 238 
Greeks, 29, 30, 131-132 
Griswold, Chan, 57 
Guinan, Glen, 148 
Guisti, Marvel, 238 
Guisti, Peter, 219 


I 

Indians, 63, 182-184, 204- 
205 

Industrial Workers of the 
World (IWW), 79-80 
Influenza epidemic, 1917- 
1918, 7-8 

Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS), 149-150, 156 
Irish, 1, 3, 13 
Irrigation District Act, 
Nevada, 91, 92-93, 96-97 
Italians, 31, 98-99 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


121 


Me 


Jefferson, Ray, 203 
Johnson, Kay, 233-234, 235 
Johnson, Kenneth F., 233- 
234 

Jones, J. Claude "Geology,' 
37 

Junior Ski Program (Reno), 
247-248 


K 


Kearney, William, 98-99 
Keaten, Barney, 28 
King and Malone engineering 
firm, 219 

Kirkland, Illinois, 9 
Kleppe, Arthur W. , 92 
Kleppe, Ernest, 217 
Kleppe, Fred, 47 
Knight, Charles S., 22-23 
Knudtsen, Molly Flagg 
Magee, 139 
KOH radio, 177-1 
Kyne, William 



(Nevada) 


Land Bank, U.S., 134-142 
Lassen, Mt., 4 
Lattimore, Joe, 242 
Lattin, Ralph, 173, 175 
Law, Jim, 181 

Levere, William C. "Billy, 
34 

Life magazine, 224-225 
Ligon, William "Bill," 240 
Lovelock, Nevada, 136-137 
Lynch, Joe, 113 
Lyon, Winn, 141 


McCarran, Patrick A., 217- 
218, 225, 227-228, 235 
McCarty, Gregory, 267 
McCarty, Margaret Joyce 
Thornton, 263, 266-268 
McCarty, Matthew, 267 
McCarty, Michael, 267 
McCarty, Vaughn, 266, 267 
McCarty, Vaughn James, 267 
McDonald, Joseph F. , 79 
McKissick Land and Cattle 
Company, 44 
McNabney, Mr., 


"Dick," 90, 
George W. "Molly," 
224 


21, 218-229 
lone, Ruth M., 220, 
Maloney, Paul, 148 
Mapes, Charles W., 106 
Martie, John E. "Doc," 27, 
37 

Martin, William "Bill," 
26-27 

Masons, 107, 216 
Mayer Hotel (Elko), 

Maytag company, 170 
Mechling, Thomas B. , 

227 

Merced, California, 

3, 6, 10-11 
Meyers, Glen, 203 
Midas, Nevada, 15-16 
Miller, Henry, 52-53 
Miller, Robert, 128-129 
Miller and Lux ranching 
company, 52, 80 
Moffat, Henrietta, 50, 
Moffat William H., 44, 
49-52, 53, 54, 57-58, 
173-174, 236 
Monaghan, Jerry, 189 
Morrison, Sidney King, 266 


219, 
, 2 , 


57 

47, 



122 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Mueller, John V. , 230, 231 
Muller, Harold "Brick,” 26 
Musicians union, 204-205 


N 

Nevada-California Land and 
Livestock Company, 8-9, 
17, 60-61 

Nevada Hereford Association 
197 


Pittman, Vail, 169, 173 
Planada, California, 2-3, 
11 

Platt, Samuel, 236-237 
Poco, John, 60 
Poco, Pete, 60 
Probation office, Washoe 
County, 108-111, 112- 
115, 129-134 

Prohibition, U.S., 31, 40 
Pyramid Land and Live¬ 
stock Company, 4-6, 


Nevada Packing Company, 
29-30 

Nevada Poultry Producers, 
146-154, 155-157 
Nichols, Herbert, 92 
Nichols, Margaret Regan, 
114, 196 

Ninnis, Vivian "Shorty," 
41 


8, 17, 48, 58-59, 
219-220 


. "Eddie," 

ugo, 240, 246 



Oliva, Fred, 185 
Orr Ditch de 
See: 


Paradise park (Reno), 


Rancho San Rafael, 125 
Razor, Jim, 67 
Realization Corporation, 
107 

Reed, Albert J. "Al," 
172-173 

Reed, Edward C., 172-173 
Reno, Nevada, 36, 39-42, 
106, 108-111, 122, 168, 
184-208, 210, 211, 239- 
260 


248-249 

Patton, Charlie, 16 
Peckham, Arthur, 91-92 
Peckham, James, 217 
Peri family (Washoe County) 
98-99 

Peterson, Edward C., 123 
Peterson, Ray, 203 
Pioneer Theatre Auditorium 
(Reno), 244, 250, 254, 
255-256 

Pittman, Key, 34-36, 92, 
218, 222, 235, 236, 237 


Reno Rodeo, 199-201, 203- 
205, 206-208 
Reppert, Harry, 221-222 
Republicans, 217, 218, 
227, 228, 229, 230, 

231, 232-239 
Rhodes, Carlton E., 118 
Richards, Charles E., 186 
Richmond, California, 10 
Roberts, Edwin E., 40 
Roberts, T. O., 136-137 
Robertson, Robert "Bob," 
240-241, 257 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


123 


Rodeo Cowboys Association 
(RCA), 201-202 
Roosevelt, Quentin, 17-18 
Ross, Gilbert, 114-115 
Ross, Silas E., 239 
Rotary Club (Reno), 107 
Russell, Alva L. , 220 
Russell, Charles H., 169, 
230-231 

Russell, James, 46 
Russell, Janie, 220 


Sadlier, Charles, 203, 207 
Safeway Stores company, 
146, 147, 153 

Salvation Army (Reno), 109 
Sanford, Harold "Pat," 181 
San Francisco earthquake 
(1906), 3, 11 
Scanavino, Angelo F 
143-144, 148, 154 
Schaffer, Mr., Ill 
Scherberg, Jim, 

Schweiss, George, 172 
Scott, Verhd0E., 2: 
Scrugham, James G., 230 
Sewell, Harvey, 64 
Sewell grocery company, 

64, 65-66, 85 
Shaw, Lawrence T. 

28 

Sheep raising, 5,. 8-9 
Sigg, Frances Baker, 196- 
197 

Sigma Alpha Epsilon 
fraternity, 33-34, 36 
Silver State Jockey Club 
(Reno), 168 

Silver White eggs, 146, 
153-154 

See also: Nevada 
Poultry Producers 
Sinai, John, 217 
Slide Mountain ski area, 
247-248 



"Buck," 


Smith, Raymond I. "Pappy, 
184, 185-186 
Smith, W. T., 48-49 
Smoke Creek ranch (Ne- 
vada-California), 8-9 
Smoot, Glen, 243 
Spanish ranch (Elko 
County), 45-46, 49, 
53-66, 68-70, 71-72, 
80-81 

Spanish Springs Valley 
(Nevada), 95 
Sparks, John, 51 
Spoon, Ed, 246 
Stark, William, 113 
Stetson, George, 184 
Stevenson, Myrtle Holcomb 

Stevenson, %ii'Iiam J. , 90 

tfart, Oline, 233, 235 
.rt, Robert E., 32, 
127 

Stockton, California, 6, 
16 

Student Army Training 
Corps, 7 

Sweezy, Everett, 17-19 


Taylor, John G., 49 
Taylor Canyon ranch, 81 
Teglia, Roger, 148, 248, 
249 

Thornton, Barbara Cav¬ 
anaugh, 270 
Thornton, Brett, 270 
Thornton, Dan, 270 
Thornton, Ed, 175 
Thornton, Ellen Hamlon, 1 
Thornton, Jeanne Steven¬ 
son, 75, 262, 263-264, 
266 

Thornton, John William, 2 
Thornton, Margaret Joyce, 
1 



124 


Clarence J. Thornton 


Thornton, Michael, 1, 13 
Thornton, Michael Jr., 1, 
5-6, 12-16, 44 
Thornton, Tom, 68 
Thornton, William C., 263, 
264, 267, 268-270 
Tomkins, Henry, 89-90 
Towle, Charlotte, 197 
Turritin, Robert C., 5, 
8-9, 13, 14, 48 
Tuscarora, Nevada, 65 
Tyler, Ralph, 246 


U 


Union Ice Company, 93-95 
Union Land and Cattle 
Company, 44-53, 71-72 
See also: Spanish 
ranch, W. H. Moffat 
Union Wool Company (Boston, 
Massachusetts), 47-48 
United Land and Cattl< 
Company, 45 
United States 
Ditah Com 
97-98 

Univers; y of Nevada (Reno), 
7-8. ] -28, 32-34, 36-39, 
.24-129, 130, 158- 
L9, 220, 271 


V 


Vawter, Lyman, 126 
Virginia Lake park (Reno), 
130-131 



Washoe County library, 

252 

Watt, George (Nevada), 

138 

Watt, George (Utah), 138- 

139 

Western Fairs Association, 
208-209 

Western Hatchery (Reno), 
108, 143-146, 154-155 
Western Pacific railroad, 
79 

Wilbur, Ray Lyman, 95 
Wilson, Frederick Weston, 
22 

Wingfield, George, 129, 
137, 199, 200-201, 205, 
229, 232, 234, 235 

"ieldi>George Jr., 

200, 233, 234-235 
ca, Nevada, 135- 

men's Christian Temper¬ 
ance Union (WCTU), 178- 
179 

Wooster, Earl, 240 
Wright, William, 232 


XYZ 

Young, C. Clifton "Cliff," 
237 

YWCA, 121 

Zimmerman, Miss, 11 
Zimmerman, Hazel, 101, 

103, 104 


W 


Waltz, Ed, 67 

Washoe County bank (Reno), 
106-107 




