Comstock  Memories:  1920S-1960S 

Oral  Histories  with: 

Tyrus  R.  Cobb,  Edward  S.  Colletti, 
John  A.  Zalac  and  Mildred  B.  Giuffra 


Interviewees:  Ty  Cobb,  Edward  Colletti,  John  Zalac,  Mildred  Giuffra 

Interviewed:  1986 
Published:  1988 

Interviewer:  Kathryn  M.  Totton 
UNOHP  Catalog  #145 


Description 

Following  the  discovery  of  the  Comstock  Lode  in  1869,  miners  and  speculators  rushed  into  the  previously  unsettled 
area,  and  three  new  towns  quickly  sprang  up:  Gold  Hill,  Silver  City,  and  Virginia  City.  Virginia  City  was  formed 
around  the  numerous  mine  shafts  sunk  into  the  eastern  slope  of  Mt.  Davidson  at  the  northern  end  of  the  lode,  and 
its  population  soon  exceeded  that  of  the  other  two  communities  combined.  The  town  boomed  from  1860  through 
the  1870s,  becoming  the  largest  city  west  of  the  Rocky  Mountains  before  the  ore  gave  out  around  1880.  During  that 
period,  about  $300  million  worth  of  precious  metal  was  taken  from  the  ground. 

With  the  depletion  of  the  Comstock  Lode,  Virginia  City  slowly  lost  most  of  its  population,  which  numbered  perhaps 
20,000  in  1875.  After  the  turn  of  the  century,  the  profitability  of  gold  and  silver  mining  rose  periodically,  because 
of  significant  improvements  in  methods  for  recovering  and  refining  ore.  As  a  consequence,  the  population  of  the 
area  intermittently  surged  and  receded.  However,  in  most  years  between  1925  and  1975,  Virginia  City  claimed 
fewer  than  a  thousand  citizens. 

During  the  Bonanza  years  from  1860  to  1880,  Comstock  miners  were  the  highest  paid  in  the  world.  Their  prosperity, 
and  that  of  the  owners,  often  found  expression  through  Gilded  Age  excesses.  Many  of  these  were  reported  by  Mark 
Twain,  who  wrote  for  the  Territorial  Enterprise,  the  local  newspaper.  Virginia  City’s  renown  as  a  town  that  knew 
no  limits  spread  and  survived  long  after  the  reality  had  faded.  Today  that  image  is  cultivated  by  local  commercial 
interests  capitalizing  on  the  area’s  colorful  past  to  attract  tourists. 

The  town’s  economic  and  social  bases  began  to  evolve  away  from  their  exclusive  mining  orientation  as  early  as  the 
1930s.  During  the  Second  World  War,  precious  metal  mining  was  halted  by  an  act  of  Congress.  A  growing  emphasis 
on  tourism,  arts  and  crafts,  casino  gambling  and  legalized  prostitution  was  nurtured  by  the  patronage  of  GIs  from 
training  centers  in  adjacent  Washoe  and  Churchill  counties.  Following  the  war,  the  development  of  tourism  and 
entertainment-related  enterprises  received  further  impetus  when  Lucius  Beebe  moved  to  Virginia  City,  purchased 
the  Territorial  Enterprise,  and  set  about  shamelessly  promoting  both  the  town  and  himself.  Today  mining  remains 
cyclically  important  in  the  community’s  economy,  but  Virginia  City’s  principal  identity  is  that  of  a  rough-edged 
tourist  attraction. 

This  volume  of  oral  histories  contains  firsthand  accounts  from  people  who  were  born  and  grew  up  on  the  Comstock 
in  the  early  part  of  this  century,  and  whose  parents  and  grandparents  lived  and  worked  in  Virginia  City,  Gold  Hill, 
or  Silver  City.  The  underlying  theme  of  Comstock  Memories  is  successful  adaptation,  both  economic  and  social. 


(Continued  on  next  page.) 


Description  (continued) 


While  other  Nevada  mining  communities  with  similar  nineteenth  century  experiences  became  virtual  ghost  towns, 
Virginia  City  not  only  clung  to  life,  it  also  managed  to  retain  a  strong  sense  of  community 

Contributors  Ty  Cobb,  Edward  Colletti  and  John  Zalac  grew  up  in  established  Comstock  families  before  the  Second 
World  War.  Mildred  Giuffra  arrived  in  1945;  hers  is  the  perspective  of  a  newcomer  who  evolved  into  an  old-timer. 
Each  of  the  contributors  was  a  good  observer  of  what  had  been  going  on  in  the  community,  and  all  demonstrated 
excellent  powers  of  recall.  In  these  pages  they  provide  firsthand  information  about  mining  and  mine  technology, 
elementary  and  secondary  education  in  the  1920s  and  1930s,  Lucius  Beebe  and  the  Territorial  Enterprise,  the 
impact  of  war  on  the  community,  the  growth  of  tourism,  local  politics,  the  elimination  of  prostitution  in  Virginia 
City,  and  numerous  other  subjects. 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


Comstock  Memories:  1920S-1960S 

Oral  Histories  with: 

Tyrus  R.  Cobb,  Edward  S.  Colletti, 
John  A.  Zalac  and  Mildred  B.  Giuffra 


An  Oral  History  Conducted  by  Kathryn  M.  Totton 
Edited  by  Cindy  Bassett,  Shelley  Chase,  Linda  Sommer  and  Kay  Stone 


University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program 


Copyright  1988 

University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program 
Mail  Stop  0324 
Reno,  Nevada  89557 
unohp@unr.edu 
http:  /  /  www. unr.edu/  oralhistory 


All  rights  reserved.  Published  1988. 
Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


Publication  Staff: 

Director:  R.T.  King 
Program  Coordinators:  Cindy  Bassett, 
Helen  Blue  and  Shelley  Chase 
Text  Production:  Linda  Sommer  and  Kay  Stone 


University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program  Use  Policy 

All  UNOHP  interviews  are  copyrighted  materials.  They  may  be  downloaded  and/or 
printed  for  personal  reference  and  educational  use,  but  not  republished  or  sold.  Under 
“fair  use”  standards,  excerpts  of  up  to  1000  words  may  be  quoted  for  publication  without 
UNOHP  permission  as  long  as  the  use  is  non-commercial  and  materials  are  properly 
cited.  The  citation  should  include  the  title  of  the  work,  the  name  of  the  person  or 
people  interviewed,  the  date  of  publication  or  production,  and  the  fact  that  the  work 
was  published  or  produced  by  the  University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program  (and 
collaborating  institutions,  when  applicable).  Requests  for  permission  to  quote  for  other 
publication,  or  to  use  any  photos  found  within  the  transcripts,  should  be  addressed 
to  the  UNOHP,  Mail  Stop  0324,  University  of  Nevada,  Reno,  Reno,  NV  89557-0324. 
Original  recordings  of  most  UNOHP  interviews  are  available  for  research  purposes 
upon  request. 


Contents 


Preface  to  the  Digital  Edition  ix 

Original  Preface  xi 

Acknowledgments  xiii 

Introduction  xv 

1 .  Tyrus  R.  Cobb  1 

The  Cobb  Family  on  the  Comstock,  1860s- 1960s 
Growing  Up  in  Virginia  City,  19 15- 1930s 
Work  in  Mining  and  Journalism  in  Virginia  City,  1930s- 1940s 
The  Emergence  of  Tourism  in  Virginia  City,  1930s- 1980s 

2.  Edward  S.  Colletti  29 

Reminiscences  of  Life  in  Virginia  City,  1920s- 1950s 

3.  John  A.  Zalac  39 

Memories  of  Family  and  Life  in  Virginia  City,  1920s 
Miners  on  the  Comstock  in  the  1930s 
Mining  and  Milling,  1930s- 1940s 
Life  in  Virginia  City  in  the  1930s 

School  Days,  Figures  from  the  1930s,  and  Work  in  Virginia  City 
Virginia  City  Personalities 
Postwar  Changes 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


viii 


4.  Mildred  E.  Giuffra 

73 

Memories  of  Virginia  City  in  the  1940s 

Lucius  Beebe  and  the  Territorial  Enterprise 

Tourism  Changes  Virginia  City 

Photographs 

89 

Original  Index:  For  Reference  Only 

95 

Preface  to  the  Digital  Edition 


Established  in  1964,  the  University  of 
Nevada  Oral  History  Program  (UNOHP) 
explores  the  remembered  past  through 
rigorous  oral  history  interviewing,  creating  a 
record  for  present  and  future  researchers.  The 
programs  collection  of  primary  source  oral 
histories  is  an  important  body  of  information 
about  significant  events,  people,  places, 
and  activities  in  twentieth  and  twenty-first 
century  Nevada  and  the  West. 

The  UNOHP  wishes  to  make  the 
information  in  its  oral  histories  accessible 
to  a  broad  range  of  patrons.  To  achieve 
this  goal,  its  transcripts  must  speak  with 
an  intelligible  voice.  However,  no  type  font 
contains  symbols  for  physical  gestures  and 
vocal  modulations  which  are  integral  parts 
of  verbal  communication.  When  human 
speech  is  represented  in  print,  stripped  of 
these  signals,  the  result  can  be  a  morass  of 
seemingly  tangled  syntax  and  incomplete 
sentences — totally  verbatim  transcripts 
sometimes  verge  on  incoherence.  Therefore, 
this  transcript  has  been  lightly  edited. 


While  taking  great  pains  not  to  alter 
meaning  in  any  way,  the  editor  may  have 
removed  false  starts,  redundancies,  and  the 
“uhs,”  “ahs,”  and  other  noises  with  which 
speech  is  often  liberally  sprinkled;  compressed 
some  passages  which,  in  unaltered  form, 
misrepresent  the  chroniclers  meaning;  and 
relocated  some  material  to  place  information 
in  its  intended  context.  Laughter  is  represented 
with  [laughter]  at  the  end  of  a  sentence  in 
which  it  occurs,  and  ellipses  are  used  to 
indicate  that  a  statement  has  been  interrupted 
or  is  incomplete. .  .or  that  there  is  a  pause  for 
dramatic  effect. 

As  with  all  of  our  oral  histories,  while 
we  can  vouch  for  the  authenticity  of  the 
interviews  in  the  UNOHP  collection,  we 
advise  readers  to  keep  in  mind  that  these  are 
remembered  pasts,  and  we  do  not  claim  that 
the  recollections  are  entirely  free  of  error. 
We  can  state,  however,  that  the  transcripts 
accurately  reflect  the  oral  history  recordings 
on  which  they  were  based.  Accordingly,  each 
transcript  should  be  approached  with  the 


X 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


same  prudence  that  the  intelligent  reader 
exercises  when  consulting  government 
records,  newspaper  accounts,  diaries,  and 
other  sources  of  historical  information. 
All  statements  made  here  constitute  the 
remembrance  or  opinions  of  the  individuals 
who  were  interviewed,  and  not  the  opinions 
of  the  UNOHP. 

In  order  to  standardize  the  design  of  all 
UNOHP  transcripts  for  the  online  database, 
most  have  been  reformatted,  a  process  that 
was  completed  in  2012.  This  document  may 
therefore  differ  in  appearance  and  pagination 
from  earlier  printed  versions.  Rather  than 
compile  entirely  new  indexes  for  each  volume, 
the  UNOHP  has  made  each  transcript  fully 
searchable  electronically.  If  a  previous  version 
of  this  volume  existed,  its  original  index  has 
been  appended  to  this  document  for  reference 
only.  A  link  to  the  entire  catalog  can  be  found 
online  at  http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For  more  information  on  the  UNOHP 
or  any  of  its  publications,  please  contact  the 
University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program  at 
Mail  Stop  0324,  University  of  Nevada,  Reno, 
NV,  89557-0324  or  by  calling  775/784-6932. 

Alicia  Barber 
Director,  UNOHP 
July  2012 


Original  Preface 


The  University  of  Nevada  Oral  History 
Program  (UNOHP)  engages  in  systematic 
interviewing  of  persons  who  can  provide 
firsthand  accounts  or  descriptions  of  events, 
people  and  places  that  are  the  raw  material  of 
Nevada  history  The  products  of  this  research 
are  the  tapes  of  the  interviews  and  their 
transcriptions. 

In  themselves,  oral  history  interviews 
are  not  history;  however,  they  often  contain 
valuable  primary  source  material,  as  useful  in 
the  process  of  historiography  as  the  written 
records  with  which  historians  customarily 
work.  While  the  properly  conducted  oral 
history  is  a  reliable  source,  verifying  the 
accuracy  of  all  of  the  statements  made  in 
the  course  of  an  interview  would  require 
more  time  and  money  than  the  UNOHP’s 
operating  budget  permits.  The  program  can 
vouch  that  the  statements  were  made,  but 
it  does  not  assert  that  they  are  all  entirely 
free  of  error.  Accordingly,  oral  histories 
should  be  approached  with  the  same  caution 
that  the  reader  exercises  when  consulting 
government  records,  newspaper  accounts, 


diaries  and  other  sources  of  historical 
information. 

When  human  speech  is  captured  in 
print,  the  result  can  be  a  morass  of  tangled 
syntax,  false  starts  and  incomplete  sentences, 
sometimes  verging  on  incoherence.  No  type 
font  contains  symbols  for  the  physical  gestures 
and  diverse  vocal  modulations  which  are 
integral  parts  of  communication  through 
speech.  Experience  shows  that,  in  the  absence 
of  any  orthography  for  such  non-verbal 
communication,  totally  verbatim  transcripts 
are  often  largely  unreadable  and  subsequently 
a  waste  of  the  resources  expended  in  their 
production.  Therefore,  in  the  interest  of 
facilitating  their  use,  it  is  the  policy  of  the 
UNOHP  to  produce  finished  oral  histories 
that  are  substantially  refined  versions  of  the 
direct  transcriptions  from  which  they  derive. 

Editors  are  instructed  to  keep  before  them 
the  ideal  of  a  verbatim  narrative,  but  they  will, 
in  preparing  a  text: 

a.  generally  delete  false  starts,  redundancies 
and  the  uhs,  ahs  and  other  noises  with  which 
speech  is  often  liberally  sprinkled; 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


xii 


b.  occasionally  compress  language  that 
would  be  confusing  to  the  reader  in  unaltered 
form; 

c.  often  shift  portions  of  a  transcript 
to  place  them  in  their  proper  topical  or 
chronological  context; 

d.  for  clarity,  insert  words  that  can  be 
clearly  inferred  but  were  not  spoken;  and 

e.  enclose  in  [brackets]  explanatory 
information  or  words  that  were  neither 
uttered  nor  implied,  but  have  been  added  by 
the  editor  to  render  the  text  intelligible. 

Each  edited  oral  history  is  reviewed  for 
accuracy  by  the  interviewee  before  a  final 
master  copy  is  produced.  Nonetheless,  the 
UNOHP  realizes  that  there  will  be  some 
researchers  who  prefer  to  take  their  oral 
history  straight,  without  even  the  limited 
editing  that  occurred  in  the  production  of  this 
text;  they  are  directed  to  the  tape  recording. 
Copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  and  the 
tape  recording  from  which  it  is  derived  are 
available  from: 

The  University  of  Nevada 
Oral  History  Program 
Mailstop  0324 

University  of  Nevada,  Reno  89557 
(775)  784-6932 


Acknowledgements 


This  oral  history  was  made  possible  in  part  by  a  grant  from  the  Gannett  Foundation. 

Special  thanks  to  Carolyn  Beaupre',  archivist  for  St.  Mary's  in  the  Mountains  Church  in  Virginia 
City  for  her  invaluable  assistance  in  the  production  of  this  work. 


Introduction 


Following  the  discovery  of  the  Comstock 
Lode  in  1869,  miners  and  speculators  rushed 
into  the  previously  unsettled  area,  and  three 
new  towns  quickly  sprang  up:  Gold  Hill, 
Silver  city,  and  Virginia  City  Virginia  City 
was  formed  around  the  numerous  mine 
shafts  sunk  into  the  eastern  slope  of  Mt. 
Davidson  at  the  northern  end  of  the  lode, 
and  its  population  soon  exceeded  that  of 
the  other  two  communities  combined.  The 
town  boomed  from  1860  through  the  1870s, 
becoming  the  largest  city  west  of  the  Rocky 
Mountains  before  the  ore  gave  out  around 
1880.  During  that  period,  about  $300  million 
worth  of  precious  metal  was  taken  from  the 
ground. 

With  the  depletion  of  the  Comstock 
Lode,  Virginia  City  slowly  lost  most  of  its 
population,  which  numbered  perhaps  20,000 
in  1875.  Since  the  turn  of  the  century,  prices  of 
gold  and  silver  had  risen  periodically,  because 
of  significant  improvements  in  methods  for 
recovering  and  refining  ore.  As  a  consequence, 
the  population  of  the  area  intermittently 
surged  and  receded.  However,  in  most  years 


between  1925  and  1975,  Virginia  City  claimed 
fewer  than  a  thousand  citizens. 

During  the  Bonanza  years  from  1860  to 
1880,  Comstock  miners  were  the  highest  paid 
in  the  world.  Their  prosperity,  and  that  of 
the  owners,  often  found  expression  through 
Gilded  Age  excesses.  Many  of  these  were 
reported  by  Mark  Twain,  who  wrote  for  the 
Territorial  Enterprise,  the  local  newspaper. 
Virginia  City’s  renown  as  a  town  that  knew 
no  limits  spread  and  survived  long  after 
the  reality  had  faded.  Today  that  image  is 
cultivated  by  local  commercial  interests 
capitalizing  on  the  area’s  colorful  past  to 
attract  tourists. 

The  town’s  economic  and  social  bases 
began  to  evolve  away  from  their  exclusive 
mining  orientation  as  early  as  the  1930s. 
During  the  Second  World  War,  precious  metal 
mining  was  halted  by  an  act  of  Congress.  A 
growing  emphasis  on  tourism,  arts  and  crafts, 
casino  gambling  and  legalized  prostitution 
was  nurtured  by  the  patronage  of  GIs  from 
training  centers  in  adjacent  Washoe  and 


XVI 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


Churchill  counties.  Following  the  war,  the 
development  of  tourism  and  entertainment- 
related  enterprises  received  further  impetus 
when  Lucius  Beebe  moved  to  Virginia  City, 
purchased  the  Territorial  Enterprise,  and  set 
about  shamelessly  promoting  both  the  town 
and  himself.  Today  mining  remains  cyclically 
important  in  the  community’s  economy,  but 
Virginia  City’s  principal  identity  is  that  of  a 
rough-edged  tourist  attraction. 

Much  has  been  written  about  the  two 
decades  that  comprised  the  Bonanza  years  on 
the  Comstock.  However,  little  documentation 
exists  of  what  has  happened  in  the  intervening 
century.  In  1984,  the  University  of  Nevada 
Oral  History  Program  (UNOHP)  began 
research  that  was  intended  to  develop  a 
picture  of  life  on  the  Comstock  during 
that  lengthy  period  when  mining  was  fitful 
and  there  were  no  tour  busses  disgorging 
hundreds  of  people  daily  into  the  streets  of 
Virginia  City.  We  sought  firsthand  accounts 
from  people  who  were  born  and  grew  up  on 
the  Comstock  in  the  early  part  of  this  century, 
and  whose  parents  and  grandparents  before 
them  lived  and  worked  in  Virginia  City,  Gold 
Hill,  or  Silver  City.  Twelve  oral  histories  were 
completed  in  1984  and  1985,  and  with  a  grant 
from  the  Gannett  Foundation  in  1986,  the 
UNOHP  was  able  to  continue  its  work  and 
produce  the  oral  histories  in  this  volume. 

The  underlying  theme  of  Comstock 
Memories  is  successful  adaptation,  both 
economic  and  social.  While  other  Nevada 
mining  communities  with  similar  nineteenth 
century  experiences  became  virtual  ghost 
towns,  Virginia  City  not  only  clung  to  life, 
but  it  managed  to  retain  a  strong  sense 
of  community.  In  these  pages  the  reader 
will  encounter  a  variety  of  imaginative 
solutions  to  problems  that  are  attendant  to 
economic  uncertainty.  Contributors  Ty  Cobb, 
Edward  Colletti  and  John  Zalac  come  from 


established  Comstock  families,  and  they 
grew  to  adulthood  in  Virginia  City  before  the 
Second  World  War.  Mildred  Giuffra  arrived 
in  1945;  hers  is  the  perspective  of  a  newcomer 
who  evolved  into  an  old-timer.  Each  of  the 
contributors  was  a  good  observer  of  what  had 
been  going  on  in  the  community,  and  they 
demonstrated  excellent  powers  of  recall.  Here 
can  be  found  firsthand  information  about 
mining  and  mine  technology,  elementary  and 
secondary  education  in  the  1920s  and  1930s, 
Lucius  Beebe  and  the  Territorial  Enterprise, 
the  impact  of  war  on  the  community, 
the  growth  of  tourism,  local  politics,  the 
elimination  of  prostitution  in  Virginia  City, 
and  numerous  other  subjects.  For  additional 
sources  of  oral  history  information  about 
the  Comstock,  the  reader  should  consult  the 
most  recent  issues  of  the  UNOHP  Collection 
Catalog  and  Master  Index. 

R.  T.  King 
UNOHP  Director 
March  7,  1988 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 
1987 


Edward  S.  Colletti 
1987 


John  Zalac 
1987 


Mildred  Giuffra 
1987 


1 

Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


The  Cobb  Family  on  the  Comstock, 
1860S-1960S 

Tyrus  Cobb:  My  father  was  Will  Cobb. 
He  never  went  by  William — just  Will.M  y 
mother  was  Eva  Harris  Cobb.  Their  families 
date  back  to  the  early  days  of  the  Comstock 
Lode.  My  great-grandparents  on  my  mother’s 
side  were  named  Simpson.  In  1852,  George 
Simpson  married  Catherine  Forbes  in 
Edinburgh,  Scotland.  I  have  the  copy  of  the 
banns — the  marriage  license  that  they  posted 
in  the  city  hall  a  week  before  their  marriage. 

They  then  took  a  sailing  ship  from 
Scotland — I  presume  around  Cape  Horn, 
because  it  took  several  months.  They 
went  to  Australia  briefly,  and  then  to  San 
Francisco,  and  then  to  Virginia  City.  My 
great-grandmother  had  twins  on  the  ship, 
but  they  died.  Their  daughter,  Jeanette,  my 
grandmother,  was  born  in  Virginia  City  in 
1865,  so  I  presume  that  the  Simpsons  came 
there  around  1863.  This  probably  makes  us 
one  of  the  oldest,  if  not  the  oldest,  surviving 
Comstock  families. 


My  grandmother,  Jeanette,  grew  up  in 
Virginia  City.  She  married  Richard  Harris, 
who  was  from  Cornwall,  England,  where  most 
of  the  miners  came  from.  In  Cornwall  the 
miners’  skills  date  back  several  centuries.  They 
mined  tin  back  in  the  days  of  the  Phoenicians, 
Romans  and  other  conquerors  of  Britain. 

Richard  Harris  and  his  brother,  Mike, 
came  over  as  young  men  and  lived  in  Gold 
Hill.  Richard  Harris  worked  in  several  mines: 
the  Savage  mine,  of  which  George  Hearst  was 
the  main  owner,  and  the  Yellow  Jacket  mine, 
a  big  one  in  Gold  Hill.  He  was  on  the  shift 
that  just  had  left  that  mine  and  was  being 
relieved  by  the  new  bunch  when  the  most 
disastrous  mine  fire  in  Nevada  history  broke 
out.  Something  like  47  men  lost  their  lives, 
and  he  just  missed  that.  I  guess  I  wouldn’t 
have  been  here  if  it  hadn’t  reversed.  [On  7 
April  1869  a  fire  of  an  unknown  cause  started 
in  the  800-foot  level  of  the  Yellow  Jacket  mine 
and  took  the  lives  of  37  miners. — Ed.] 

Richard  Harris  and  Jeanette  Simpson 
were  married  in  Gold  Hill.  They  had  eight 
children — five  girls,  three  men.  They  were  all 


2 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


raised  in  the  family  home  in  the  very  lower 
part  of  Virginia  City — half  a  mile  below  the 
Fourth  Ward  School,  just  below  the  mine 
dumps  of  the  Hale  &  Norcross  mine,  which 
is  a  tunnel,  not  a  shaft.  When  my  mother, 
Eva,  married  Will  Cobb,  they  lived  in  a  house 
only  about  200  yards  from  the  Harris  family 
She  didn’t  get  very  far  in  her  homes  from  her 
birthplace.  Almost  everyone  up  there  was 
born  at  home,  not  in  a  hospital.  I  guess  they 
didn’t  have  cars  to  get  people  to  the  hospitals, 
and  they  couldn’t  afford  it  anyway. 

My  mother’s  three  brothers  were  George, 
Will  and  Arthur  Harris.  George  stayed  in 
Virginia  City  and  ran  a  garage  until  his  death 
in  a  fire.  He  was  fighting  a  fire  out  on  the  Ophir 
Grade.  Everybody  volunteered  to  go  out  and 
fight  fires,  and  he  lost  his  life.  It  was  a  brushfire, 
such  as  we  have  all  the  time  in  Nevada,  and 
he  was  caught  trying  to  get  his  truck  out  when 
the  wind  changed.  The  youngest  brother,  W. 
S.  “Will”  Harris,  was  an  insurance  man  in 
Reno  and  an  amateur  airplane  pilot  in  the 
19208.  He  later  became  assistant  warden  of 
the  Nevada  State  Prison. 

The  other  brother,  Arthur,  traveled  a  lot 
in  the  West.  He  worked  as  an  engineer  in 
an  American-owned  mine  in  Mexico.  His 
greatest  adventure  was  spending  a  weekend 
as  a  guest  of  Pancho  Villa.  Pancho  Villa  was 
the  noted  bandit,  rebel,  patriot,  whatever  you 
think  of  him,  but  he  was  a  notorious  bandit 
at  the  time.  He  even  raided  American  homes 
and  a  town  across  the  border.  The  word  got 
out  that  he  was  going  to  raid  this  mining 
community  where  my  Uncle  Arthur  was 
working,  and  the  superintendent  said  to  him, 
“Arthur,  would  you  like  to  take  a  weekend  trip 
with  me  and  see  Pancho  Villa’” 

He  said,  “Not  particularly,”  but  they  had 
to  do  it.  They  had  a  mule  train.  They  packed 
a  lot  of  gifts — pots  and  pans,  medical  supplies 
and  some  kind  of  food — and  loaded  them  all. 


They  then  went  through  desolate  mountain 
country.  As  they  looked  up  through  these 
canyons  they  could  see  the  soldiers  standing 
with  their  huge  sombreros,  bandoliers  with 
cartridges  on  their  chests,  and  rifles.  The 
soldiers  would  wave  them  on.  They  finally 
got  to  the  stronghold,  the  fortress  of  Pancho 
Villa,  who  greeted  them  very  profusely  with, 
“Oh,  my  friends,  you  brought  me  presents! 
You  didn’t  have  to  do  this!” 

They  thought,  “Not  much,  we  didn’t.” 

However,  they  stayed  overnight  under 
guard  and  left  the  next  day.  Fortunately,  the 
gifts  took  effect  and  their  mine  was  spared. 
Pancho  Villa  had  raided  others,  killed  most 
of  the  people  and  destroyed  their  property. 

My  mother  had  four  sisters.  One  of 
them,  my  Aunt  Ethel,  was  educated  at  the 
University  of  Nevada  normal  school  [a 
school  for  training  teachers — Ed.].  So  now 
my  granddaughters  are  fourth  generation  at 
the  University  of  Nevada-Reno.  Ethel  was  a 
schoolteacher  in  Washoe  City  and  in  Sutro, 
when  there  were  towns  there.  She  spent  the 
rest  of  her  life  in  San  Francisco.  She  was  a 
clerk  with  Nathan  and  Doorman  when  it  was 
that  outstanding..,  it  had  fancy  glasses,  dishes 
and  stuff  there. 

Another  sister,  Sophia,  or  “Sophie,”  lived 
in  San  Francisco.  Her  husband  was  with  the 
Immigration  Service  on  Angel  Island.  He 
was  killed  in  a  hunting/boating  accident. 
They  were  out  shooting  ducks,  and  he  was 
accidentally  shot  and  drowned.  She  spent 
much  of  her  life  as  a  caterer  and  a  dietician 
for  the  Clift  Hotel  and  later  for  San  Francisco 
State  College. 

The  oldest  sister  was  Mary — known  as 
May — who  was  raised  in  Virginia  City  and 
became  a  widow  at  an  early  age.  She  had 
one  very  prominent,  surviving  son  who  died 
there  in  January  of  1988 — Delbert  Benner,  a 
retired  sheriff  and  highway  supervisor.  Her 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


3 


husband,  George  Benner,  was  killed  in  the 
Union  mine.  The  big  mine  dump  is  still  there 
by  the  cemetery  and  very  visible  from  Geiger 
Grade  as  you  come  in.  He  and  two  other 
men.. .or  one  other,  I  guess.. .were  in  the  cage — 
that’s  the  elevator  of  the  mine — when  some 
mishap  released  it,  and  they  were  dashed  to 
the  bottom  and  killed.  Rescue  attempts  were 
difficult  because  the  cage  had  broken.  One 
fellow  was  lowered  down,  and  another  fellow 
named  James  Doolittle  and  my  father  went 
down,  too — lowered  on  a  cable. 

Kathryn  Totton:  When  you  say  lowered  by  cable, 
do  you  mean  just  hanging  onto  the  cable  itself  ? 

They  made  a  bight — a  loop — in  the  cable. 
They  sat  in  that  and  they  lowered  them  down 
because  the  elevator — the  cage — was  broken. 

James  Doolittle  was  a  mining  student 
from  Cal  Berkeley,  and  he  was  there  for  the 
summer,  studying  mining  as  part  of  his  career. 
He  also  did  some  amateur  boxing.  He  later 
became  an  air  force  general  and  was  the  man 
who  bombed  Tokyo  for  the  first  time  in  World 
War  II. ..General  Jimmy  Doolittle,  [laughter] 
My  cousin  has  a  letter  from  General  Doolittle 
dated  back  about  three  or  four  years.  When 
they’d  asked  him  about  that  rescue  attempt 
from  the  mine,  he  recalled  it  and  filled  in 
details.  The  men  were  instantly  killed.  They 
went  down  to  see  if  they  could  do  anything 
for  them.  They  were  all  dashed  down  about 
300  feet  or  more.  Both  of  them  are  buried  in 
the  Virginia  City  cemetery.  That  was  1915. 
George  Benner  was  killed  a  couple  of  months 
before  Delbert  Benner  was  born. 

What  did  May  do  to  support  herself  after  he 
was  killed ? 

She  worked  as  a  maid  in  the  hotels  up 
there  and  got  a  modest  pension.  She  kept  a 


couple  of  boarders  and  supported  her  and  her 
son.  The  county  had  something  like  a  $20  a 
month  widow’s  pension.  They  took  care  of  all 
the  widows  and  sometimes  the  elderly  people. 
That  was  before  Social  Security,  of  course. 

Delbert  worked  a  lot  when  he  was  in 
school.  I  remember  in  high  school,  he  had 
a  paper  route  and  was  a  handyman  for  Mrs. 
Minnie  Davis,  an  elderly  woman  who  kept 
the  telephone  exchange,  stationery  store, 
newspapers  and  magazines  all  in  one  building 
on  C  Street.  Incidentally,  her  daughter  was 
Susi  Davis,  the  famous  blind  telephone 
operator. 

I  used  to  marvel  at  Susi.  The  switchboard 
in  front  of  her  consisted  of  little  holes  with  a 
little  flap  of  metal.  When  someone  would  call 
in,  that  would  flip  down  and  leave  the  hole 
open.  She  would  then  insert  a  plug  with  a 
wire  in  that  hole  opening  with  the  other  party 
and  connect  them  up.  You  see,  the  phones  up 
there  were  not  dial  tone  in  those  days.  We  had 
a  wall  phone:  you  stood  up,  turned  the  crank 
several  times  and  woke  up  the  operator,  and 
she  would  then  connect  you. 

Susi  Davis  was  a  marvel.  Although 
completely  blind,  she  knew  where  every 
plug  and  every  hole  was  connected.  She  very 
seldom  ever  got  a  wrong  number.  I  watched 
her  many  times.  She  knew  people’s  voices, 
even  from  childhood  to  adult  age;  she  knew 
everybody.  Sometimes  she  even  recognized 
footsteps  coming  down  the  wooden  sidewalk. 

The  operators  were  very  helpful. 
Sometimes  they’d  listen  into  your  conversation 
and  would  even  correct  a  person,  [laughter] 
Usually  if  you  called  for  someone,  she  would 
say,  “I  think  they  went  to  Reno  today  or  to 
Carson,  but  they  should  be  back  by  3:00.”  It 
seemed  like  a  family  affair.  Everybody  in  town 
knew  each  other. 

I’ve  got  another  aunt;  she’s  still  surviving. 
The  youngest  one  is  Ruth  Isabel  Harris 


4 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


Fields.  Then  my  grandfather — her  father, 
Richard  Harris — retired,  they  all  moved  to 
San  Francisco.  She  went  with  them,  and  my 
grandmother  kept  house.  Ruth  worked  as  a 
telephone  operator.  She  worked  50  years  and 
became  a  supervisor  for  the  company  in  San 
Francisco  or  Oakland.  She  met  a  streetcar 
conductor,  and  they  fell  in  love.  She  married 
Clyde  Fields.  He’s  been  dead  a  long  time. 
She  now  lives  in  a  retirement  apartment  and 
travels  almost  continuously.  She’s  very  active 
at  85.  She  was  the  head  of  her  lodge,  the 
matron  of  the  Eastern  Star,  and  so  on.  She’s 
very  active. 

Now,  on  my  father’s  side,  my  grandfather, 
George  Cobb,  came  from  Blount  County, 
Tennessee,  up  in  the  Great  Smoky  Mountains. 
At  the  age  of  16,  he  left  his  mother’s  farm 
without  her  permission  and  went  to  Knoxville, 
where  he  enlisted  in  the  Union  Army  during 
the  Civil  War.  Tennessee  was  a  divided  state — 
half  Confederate  and  half  Union.  He  had  an 
adventurous,  but  brief,  army  career.  He  was 
in  the  cavalry — they  called  it  the  mounted 
infantry  for  some  strange  reason,  but  they 
rode  horses.  In  a  battle  he  was  wounded  and 
captured  by  the  Confederates.  In  two  months 
he  had  escaped  from  the  Confederate  prison. 
I  can’t  track  his  life  much  further  than  that 
until  he  appeared  in  Dayton,  Nevada,  which 
was  a  thriving  community  around  the  1870s. 
He  was  a  laborer  and  a  miner.  I  still  have  his 
charter  as  a  member  of  the  Laborers’  Union 
of  Dayton. 

My  grandfather  married  Mary  Mahony, 
a  native  of  Wales  but  of  Irish  descent. 
Apparently,  her  family  went  to  Wales  during 
the  potato  famine,  when  all  the  Irish  had 
to  get  out — they  were  starving.  So  she  was 
half  Welsh  and  half  Irish,  I  believe.  She 
tried  to  head  for  the  United  States  and  was 
in  a  shipwreck  in  the  Irish  sea.  She  floated 
around  on  a  raft  for  several  days,  apparently, 


before  she  was  rescued  and  tried  it  again.  I 
don’t  know  how  she  got  to  the  Comstock  or 
to  Dayton,  but  she  married  Mr.  Cobb  there. 
They  had  three  small  sons. 

George  Cobb  died  at  an  early  age;  I  think 
he  was  only  in  his  thirties  when  he  died.  Mary 
was  left  with  three  little  boys.  She  worked  as  a 
maid  in  the  hotels  in  Virginia  City.  They  tell 
the  story  that  she  had  just  finished  mopping 
up  the  lobby  of  this  hotel,  and  some  lout  came 
in  with  big,  muddy  boots  and  tramped  right 
across  her  clean  floor.  She  hauled  off,  whacked 
him  with  the  mop,  hit  him  on  the  head  and 
knocked  him  flat,  [laughter]  Lost  her  job. 

The  boys  were  raised  partly  in  the  [Nevada 
state)  orphans’  home  in  Carson  City  and 
partly  in  a  convent  in  Grass  Valley,  California, 
where  the  nuns  took  care  of  children.  A  lot  of 
the  Virginia  City  people  had  close  connections 
with  Grass  Valley,  chiefly  through  Cousin 
Jacks — the  Cornish  connections.  You  can  go 
to  Grass  Valley  now  and  still  find  families  that 
date  back  to  the  early  days  when  they  all  lived 
in  Cornwall. 

Do  you  think  your  grandmother  had  relatives 
there ? 

No,  she  had  no  relatives.  Just  in  Wales. 

In  later  years  her  half-brother  came  over 
to  visit  her.  He  had  been  a  prizefighter  in 
Wales,  and  he  had  a  lot  of  fights,  see.  Lought 
in  carnivals,  took  on  all  comers  and  so  forth. 
They  had  a  champion  of  Nevada  or  the  West 
or  something  who  lived  in  Virginia  City.  They 
were  trying  to  get  a  fight  for  him,  so  they  asked 
this  Sinclair — I  never  knew  his  first  name. 
He  didn’t  speak  too  good  of  English — see, 
he  spoke  mostly  the  Welsh  dialects — but  he 
said  sure,  he’d  fight  him.  He  went  around  and 
borrowed  all  he  could  get  from  the  Welsh  and 
the  Cornish  people  around  Virginia  City  and 
bet  on  himself,  won  the  fight,  gave  his  sister 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


5 


some  money  and  went  back  to  Wales.  That’s 
the  last  we  heard  of  him!  [laughter] 

My  grandmother’s  other  two  sons,  other 
than  my  father — George  and  Sam — they’re 
all  buried  together  in  the  Dayton  cemetery 
George  was  a  prospector.  George  never 
married,  and  neither  did  Sam.  Sam  was  killed 
in  an  explosion.  He  was  a  dynamite  expert, 
but  there  was  a  mishap  in  Dayton  and  it  blew 
him  and  another  fellow  up.  So  a  lot  of  them 
had  violent  deaths. 

Sam  lived  most  of  the  time  in  Dayton. 
Through  him,  I’ve  got  pictures  of  my 
grandparents — the  only  ones  we  have.  Then  he 
would  go  out  on  a  prospecting  trip,  he  would 
go  to  some  friends  of  the  family  and  leave  his 
prized  possessions  with  them  for  safekeeping. 
Many  years  afterwards — in  fact,  only  within 
this  last  10  years — a  Reno  man,  whose  family 
had  lived  in  Dayton,  called  me  and  said  he  had 
a  picture  of  my  grandparents.  I  got  to  see  my 
grandfather.  He  had  a  little  mustache  and  a 
goatee  of  the  Civil  War  style.  My  grandmother 
was  slim  and  had  real  flashing  black  eyes  and 
black  eyebrows.  So  I  got  a  good  look  at  her, 
too — I  have  that  picture. 

Did  you  know  your  grandparents  well ? 

No.  Mr.  Cobb  died  at  an  early  age  before 
I  was  born.  His  widow,  Mary  Mahony  Cobb 
Pound,  married  a  man  named  Pound  after 
Cobb  died.  She  died  during  my  infancy.  On  the 
other  hand,  I  knew  the  Harris  people.  I  knew 
Jeanette  Simpson  Harris,  my  grandmother, 
into  my  teenage  years.  As  a  small  child  I  knew 
her  husband,  Richard  Harris.  Incidentally, 
his  middle  name,  was  Ellery.  The  name  runs 
through  the  family  back  in  Cornwall,  England. 
There’s  an  Ellery  who  became  the  state 
treasurer  in  Arizona.  We  don’t  know  if  he  was 
in  that  branch  of  the  family  or  not.  There  was 
also  an  Ellery  in  the  Revolutionary  days,  who 


lived  in  Newport,  Rhode  Island  and  signed 
the  Constitution  and  I  think  the  Declaration 
of  Independence.  He  was  harassed  by  the 
British — they  burned  his  store.  He  was  chased 
out  of  the  state  and  joined  the  Revolutionary 
troops.  Later  on  he  became  a  customs  officer 
in  Rhode  Island.  This  was  when  we  were 
established  as  a  country.  We  don’t  claim  him 
or  the  other  one.  We  have  no  way  of  finding 
out  if  they  are  related  or  not.  But  Ellery  is  a 
name  that  runs  back.  The  Harrises  married 
the  Ellerys  a  long  time  ago. 

Did  your  grandparents  talk  to  you  about  their 
experiences  in  Nevada  early  on? 

My  grandmother  did — Jeanette  Simpson 
Harris.  She  told  me  about  seeing  the  first  new 
water  system.  As  a  small  child,  her  parents 
took  her  up  to  the  Divide  reservoir  and  they 
watched  the  water  come  in.  It  spouted  up 
from  a  pipe  in  the  middle  of  the  reservoir.  She 
said  it  was  all  mud  and  sand,  and  they  were 
disappointed  in  it.  Of  course,  that  came  from 
Marlette  Lake  and  through  that  giant  siphon 
through  Washoe  Valley. 

My  Aunt  Ruth,  the  last  of  her  generation, 
knew  more  about  the  Simpsons’  coming  on 
that  sailing  ship  from  Scotland.  But  I  had  only 
brief  contact  with  my  Grandmother  Harris. 

My  father  usually  talked  about  when  he 
and  his  brothers  were  raised  in  the  orphans’ 
home.  He  said  they  didn’t  have  much  over 
there.  They  made  their  own  baseballs  out  of 
rags  which  they  rolled  and  tied  in  wire,  and 
made  their  own  bats. 

When  my  father  came  back  to  Virginia 
City,  I  think  he  stayed  with  his  mother,  but  he 
worked.  He  left  school  before  the  fifth  or  sixth 
grade.  He  delivered  the  Territorial  Enterprise; 
that’s  the  way  he  supported  himself.  At  3:30  in 
the  morning  he  would  go  up,  take  the  paper 
off  the  press  and  deliver  it  to  the  homes. 


6 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


He  was  very  small  in  stature  and  had 
trouble  getting  a  job  in  the  mines  because  he 
was  small.  He  wound  up  in  the  gold  rush  in 
Tonopah  and  Goldfield.  He  did  some  mining, 
and  he  washed  dishes  in  the  Chinese  cafe.  I 
think  he  was  probably  about  16  or  17.  He 
worked  in  Virginia  City;  then  he  married  my 
mother,  Eva  Harris.  They  lived  in  that  house 
near  the  old  Harris  family  home.  This  was 
right  next  to  the  mine  dump  of  the  Hale  & 
Norcross  mine. 

One  of  my  father’s  jobs  in  Virginia  City 
was  working  on  a  tramway.  When  you  get 
into  Virginia  City  and  look  down  the  Six- 
Mile  Canyon,  you  can  see  a  small  mountain 
sticking  up  like  a  thumb;  that’s  called 
Sugarloaf  Mountain.  It’s  very  visible  from 
up  in  the  town.  At  the  base  of  that  they  built 
a  huge  mill  called  the  Butters  plant;  a  man 
named  Butters  built  it.  It  carried  ore  from 
Virginia  City  from  right  near  where  our 
home  was,  and  they  called  it  the  tramway.  My 
dad  used  to  go  to  work  and  ride  in  those  cars. 
The  tramway  supported  cable  cars  carrying 
ore  from  Virginia  City.  They’d  carry  them 
down  the  Six-Mile  Canyon  to  the  Butters 
plant.  Many  times  in  the  winter,  when  the 
snow  was  too  deep  to  travel  on,  he  would 
ride  one  of  those  cars  and  leap  off  just  before 
it  got  there. 

He  also  did  work  in  some  of  the  deep 
mines.  Then  in  the  early  1920s  he  operated 
a  stage — a  bus  between  Virginia  City  and 
Dayton.  He  would  haul  mail,  freight  and 
a  couple  of  passengers  back  and  forth  to 
his  hometown  of  Dayton.  Then  he  got  a 
job  driving  a  bus.  The  V  &  T  [Virginia  and 
Truckee]  Railroad  also  operated  an  autobus, 
a  motorbus,  between  Reno  and  Virginia  City, 
and  he  became  the  driver  of  that.  They  had  a 
lot  of  action  in  that  one — a  lot  of  passengers 
every  day.  Sometimes  he’d  make  two,  three  or 
even  four  round  trips  at  one  time.  There  were 


a  lot  of  people  moving  back  and  forth,  and  he 
had  the  freight,  too. 

Was  the  V  &  T  still  running  to  Virginia  City 
then? 

Yes.  But  this  supplemented  it.  The  train 
would  come  only  once  a  day  and  haul  the 
heavy  freight  and  sometimes  passengers.  My 
father  drove  the  V  &  T  bus  in  the  1930s  and 
1940s.  He  often  extended  his  route  to  Lake 
Tahoe.  He  went  from  Virginia  City  to  Reno 
to  Carson,  up  the  hill  to  Glenbrook,  and  then 
over  to  Zephyr  Cove.  He  would  deliver  the 
mail  and  freight.  Then  he  went  to  Stateline, 
Bijou,  A1  Tahoe,  as  far  as  Camp  Richardson — 
which  is  not  too  far  from  Emerald  Bay — then 
all  the  way  back,  and  back  up  to  Virginia 
City.  He  had  a  long  day.  That  was  just  a  single 
round  trip,  and  he  would  get  home  late  at 
night.  That’s  why  I  never  got  to  see  much  of 
him,  really. 

Who  were  the  passengers?  What  were  they 
doing? 

Well,  there  were  just  a  lot  of  people 
between  Reno  and  Virginia  City.  The  miners 
would  come  to  Reno  to  go  shopping  and 
come  back  on  the  night  bus.  A  lot  of  peopled 
come  down  to  see  doctors  or  conduct  other 
business.  Salesmen  would  go  from  Reno.  That 
was  the  old  Geiger  Grade.  It  wasn’t  the  paved 
one  which  we  travel  now;  it  was  a  narrow, 
dirt  road,  and  it  was  precarious  driving  it.  In 
the  wintertime  it  was  very  difficult.  At  that 
time  the  state  didn’t  have  many  snowplows, 
especially  the  rotary  kind  they  have  now.  They 
just  had  a  big  V-shaped  plow.  Sometimes  they 
were  a  little  slow  in  rescuing  Virginia  City, 
which’d  be  snowbound  for  two  or  three  days. 
At  times  there  were  some  big  drifts  out  on 
the  grade.  My  father  would  get  his  bus,  and 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


7 


quite  a  number  of  the  men  of  the  town  would 
gather  with  their  shovels  and  ride  with  him. 
He  would  ram  right  through  the  snow  drifts 
like  a  homemade  plow  If  they  got  stuck,  then 
theyd  all  get  out  and  shovel  it  clean. 

What  was  the  make  of  this  bus ? 

It  was  called  a  Moreland.  It  was  a  long, 
box-looking  thing.  It  was  not  too  big  around, 
but  it  was  long,  like  a  big  rectangle,  like  a 
cheese  box.  It  was  powerful,  though,  and 
when  they’d  get  going,  they’d  ram  right 
through  the  big  drifts.  A  lot  of  people  say  they 
still  remember  waiting  for  Will  Cobb  to  get 
the  stage  out  and  break  the  way  to  Reno  for 
them,  [laughter]  He  did  have  a  lot  of  difficulty 
getting  out  of  there.  My  folks  remembered 
the  snow  was  so  bad  that  only  way  they  got 
any  food  into  town  was  through  the  Sutro 
Tunnel.  They  would  ship  it  from  Sutro  and 
take  it  right  through  on  the  mule  trains  or 
whatever  they  had. 

Then  my  father  would  take  a  leave  to  get 
into  politics.  At  one  time  he  was  sheriff.  They 
had  combined  the  job  of  sheriff  and  assessor, 
which  is  a  strange  combination,  but  that  was 
an  economy  move.  He  spent  more  time  in  the 
legislature.  He  was  elected  two  or  three  times 
to  the  assembly  and  then  to  the  senate.  He 
was  pretty  witty,  and  a  lot  of  his  quotes  were 
used  in  the  newspapers.  He  was  good  copy 
for  the  papers. 

At  one  time,  when  Nevada  was  competing 
with  other  states  for  the  divorce  trade,  my 
father  had  a  spurious  bill  called  the  Super 
Quick  Divorces.  From  a  year,  they  cut  it  to 
six  months  residence,  then  to  three  months 
and  finally  to  six  weeks.  So  he  introduced 
a  tongue-in-cheek  bill  whereby  a  divorcee 
coming  from  the  East  would  enter  the  state 
and  sign  the  papers  at  Elko.  By  the  time  she 
got  to  Reno,  they’d  have  the  divorce  waiting 


for  her.  [laughter]  We  still  have  a  Time 
magazine  somewhere  which  has  a  feature  of 
that  little  story. 

He  was  really  active  in  social  legislation: 
old-age  pensions,  widows’  pensions, 
women’s  minimum  wage — he  established 
that  for  Nevada — and  quite  a  bit  of  social 
legislation.  He  also  created  the  Nevada  Boxing 
Commission.  I  was  starting  in  as  sports  writer, 
and  I  proposed  that  Nevada  get  a  boxing 
commission  because  of  abuses.  I  gathered  the 
information  on  it,  and  he  put  together  a  bill.  It 
passed  and  created  what  is  now  probably  the 
most  active  boxing  commission  in  the  United 
States..,  chiefly  in  Las  Vegas,  where  they  have 
many  big  fights. 

In  his  last  years,  my  dad  worked  on  the 
highway  department,  and  he  was  a  county 
commissioner.  So  he  did  serve  Storey  County 
pretty  well. 

He  certainly  did.  What  was  his  motivation ? 

I  don’t  know.  He  was  pretty  kind  to 
unfortunate  people.  The  legislation  he 
proposed  and  things  he  did  up  there  for  old- 
timers  and  widows  just  took  care  of  a  lot  of 
people.  He’s  well  remembered  by  the  people 
up  there. 

Aside  from  his  tongue-in-cheek  bill  about  the 
divorce  act,  what  were  his  feelings  on  legalized 
gambling  and  divorce ? 

He  voted  against  legalized  gambling 
because  he  thought  they  couldn’t  regulate 
it  and  police  it.  And  they  have  had  some 
problems  with  that.  He  was  right  there.  He 
also  was  the  first.. .maybe  not  the  first. ..to 
propose  a  lottery  for  Nevada  to  support  old- 
age  pensions.  But  it  failed.  The  rumor  was 
that  the  big  gambling  casinos  were  against 
it  and  influenced  opposition  to  it.  Anyway, 


8 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


it  didn’t  pass,  and  now  50  years  later  they’re 
still  bringing  up  the  lottery  because  they’ve 
been  so  successful  in  California,  Ohio,  New 
Hampshire  and  Oregon.  So  Will  Cobb  will 
be  remembered  for  a  lot  of  things.  If  they 
ever  pass  a  lottery,  why,  he’ll  be  vindicated, 
[laughter] 

Was  your  mother  born  in  Virginia  City ? 

Yes.  She  was  born  in  the  house  down 
where  the  abandoned  Hale  &  Norcross  mine 
and  mill  are  now.  Her  mother  was  born  about 
the  same  place,  too.  So  we  do  have  a  few  roots 
up  there. 

Which  school  in  Virginia  City  did  your  mother 
go  to? 

She  went  to  the  Fourth  Ward  School. 
I  think  she  dropped  out  of  school  to  get 
married,  so  I  don’t  think  she  ever  got  her 
diploma.  She  lived  her  last  years  in  Reno.  Will 
died  about  10  years  before  her. 

Then  did  they  leave  Virginia  City? 

In  the  late  1960s. 

Did  your  mother  ever  work  outside  the  home? 

Yes.  She  worked  in  a  bakery  in  Virginia 
City,  helping  cook.  I  don’t  know  the  name  of 
the  bakery.  It  was  in  the  middle  of  the  main 
block  of  the  town,  a  few  doors  from  what  is 
now  the  Delta,  which  is  the  biggest  bar  up 
there — a  tourist  attraction. 

I  used  to  help  my  mother  as  a  small  child 
folding  boxes — those  cardboard  boxes  that 
you  put  pies  and  cakes  in.  I  can  remember 
sitting  down  by  the  big  oven  and  reading 
books  by  the  light  of  a  single  lamp.  I  read  The 
Life  of  Muhammad  when  I  was  a  little  kid. 


That’s  about  the  only  book  they  had  available 
there.  I  think  the  book  belonged  to  the  baker. 
So  while  I  was  waiting  for  my  mother,  I  would 
read  that  book.  I  don’t  know  what  the  baker 
looked  like  or  anything  any  more,  it  was  so 
long  ago.  I  was  only  seven  or  eight  years  old. 

But  she  worked  mostly  there.  In  her  later 
years,  after  my  father  was  out  of  the  legislature, 
she  often  worked  at  the  state  legislature  as 
an  attache  in  the  mailing  room  during  the 
legislative  sessions.  She  was  appointed  by 
Senator  Jim  Slattery  of  Storey  County.  Each  of 
the  legislators  had  the  privilege  of  appointing 
a  few  people  to  the  legislative  jobs  during  the 
session. 

My  mother,  Eva,  was  a  very  beautiful 
woman.  She  was  active  in  the  Women’s  Relief 
Corps.  I  think  that  was  organized  in  World 
War  I.  She  was  president  of  that.  But  she  was 
more  famous  as  a  cook.  She  made  some  of 
the  recipes  which  her  family  brought  over 
from  Scotland  and  from  Cornwall,  including 
pasties.  It’s  sort  of  like  a  meat  pie,  and  it  dates 
back  centuries  in  Cornwall.  They  were  round 
and  covered  with  dough — crust — and  in  them 
were  carefully  chopped  or  diced  sirloin  meat 
and  potatoes  and  sometimes  little  pieces 
of  vegetables.  This  was  baked.  They  were 
rounded  to  fit  into  the  miners’  lunch  pails. 
In  the  old  days,  instead  of  buckets  they  had 
pails  that  the  men  took  to  work. 

My  mother  also  made  saffron  cake.  Saffron 
is  very  rare.  She  had  some  in  strings,  which  is 
very  difficult  to  get  now.  And  she  made  very 
delicious  dandelion  wine.  Lucius  Beebe,  a 
gourmet  expert,  could  tell  the  age  of  a  wine 
and  where  it  came  from  in  France.  He  said 
that  hers  was  also  equal  to  the  greatest  wines 
of  France!  [laughter]  I  just  can’t  describe  all 
the  dishes  that  she  was  famous  for.  She  cooked 
three  big,  heavy  meals  a  day.  My  children  and 
some  of  my  grandchildren  always  enjoyed 
going  up  there  because  of  her  famous  meals. 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


9 


She  and  her  sister,  May  Benner,  were  known 
as  some  of  the  best  cooks  in  the  West. 

How  many  children  did  your  mother  have? 

Just  me.  I  have  three  cousins,  all 
descendants  of  the  Harris  family,  including 
Delbert  Benner.  There’s  a  cousin  named  Glen 
Harris,  who’s  now  living  down  by  Jackson, 
California  or  Sutter  Creek.  He  operated  the 
garage  when  his  father,  George  Harris,  died 
in  that  fire.  There’s  another  cousin,  Kramer, 
in  Santa  Rosa — a  retired  San  Francisco  police 
captain. 

Growing  Up  in  Virginia  City,  1915- 
1930s 

I  was  born  in  Virginia  City  on  September 
21,  1915.  I  was  born  at  home  like  all  the  rest 
of  us — in  that  house  down  by  the  Hale  & 
Norcross  mine  dumps.  Incidentally,  19  years 
later  I  was  working  in  a  mill  which  was  built 
on  that  same  site  [Arizona-Comstock  mill] 
and  also  on  a  tailings  pond  below  the  mill 
that  was  built  where  the  Harris  home  was.  It 
was  old  home  week  for  me,  working  where  I 
was  born  and  my  mother  was  born,  [laughter] 

When  I  was  born,  Dr.  [F.  W.]  Hodgins 
came  down.  He  was  the  one-man  medical 
corps  of  Virginia  City.  We  had  a  doctor  and 
a  dentist  in  Virginia  City. 

The  dentist,  Will  Lawson,  had  his  office  on 
the  main  street  right  next  to  my  uncle’s  garage, 
which  is  now  a  casino.  He  was  a  legend. 
He  was  a  typical  New  Englander,  I  guess.  I 
remember  that  he  would  never  give  shots.  If 
he  treated  people  he’d  give  them  chloroform, 
but  he  was  an  advocate  of  a  shot  of  whiskey — 
no  matter  what  your  age — before  he  pulled  a 
tooth  or  drilled,  [laughter] 

Will  Lawson  had  a  brother,  Jim  Lawson, 
in  Silver  City,  who  was  quite  a  character,  a 


joker.  He  had  an  everything  type  store.  He 
had  everything  from  miners’  boots  to  aspirin 
tablets  in  his  place — everything — just  stacks 
of  them.  He  also  had  the  only  telephone 
exchange.  He  was  the  operator  for  the  city. 
He  was  the  agent  for  several  defunct  mines, 
for  the  water  company  and  many  other  things 
down  there. 

There  are  things  about  being  a  kid  in 
Virginia  City  which  were  unique  to  that 
area,  I’m  sure.  The  place  was  full  of  deserted 
mine  workings.  We  used  to  get  in  and  climb 
all  around  them.  We  would  go  by  empty  or 
open  mine  shafts — they  never  covered  them 
or  fenced  them  in  in  those  days — and  we’d 
just  drop  rocks  or  things  down  to  hear  when 
they  would  hit  bottom.  It  took  quite  a  while 
to....  We  would  also  drop  square  nails  down 
the  mine  shafts.  In  the  old  days  all  the  houses 
used  handmade  square  nails.  They  were 
hammered  out  by  the  blacksmiths,  not  by 
machines.  If  you  threw  them  down  a  certain 
way,  they  would  make  a  whistling,  humming 
noise.  We  spent  hours  throwing  them  like  you 
would  a  football.  We  dropped  them  down  the 
old  shafts,  and  we’d  climb  around  these  mine 
workings.  If  our  parents  knew  it,  they  would 
have  been  horrified,  but  I  don’t  think  there 
were  any  real  accidents  at  that  time. 

We  did  improvise  a  lot.  There  was  a 
playground  dating  back  from  the  old  days. 
It’s  down  near  where  the  high  school  and 
the  tennis  courts  are  now.  The  playground 
was  made  out  of  massive  wood.  The  slide,  of 
course,  was  lined  with  metal.  The  teeter-totter 
and  the  merry-go-round  were  wood  and 
metal.  The  playground  was  very  dilapidated 
when  I  was  in  high  school,  and  nobody  used 
it. 

We  had  a  homemade  football  team. 
We  didn’t  have  a  coach  or  anything,  but  we 
had  our  own  team.  We  asked  the  county 
commissioners  if  we  could  have  that  field 


10 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


for  games,  and  they  said,  “Well,  not  as  long 
as  the  playground  is  standing.”  As  long  as 
it’s  standing — they  emphasized  that.  So  the 
next  day  it  wasn’t  standing.  We  had  torn  it 
all  down,  and  then  we  threw  it  over  the  mine 
dump.  They  said,  “Well,  you  might  as  well 
make  your  field,”  and  they  loaned  us  a  grader. 
We  played  there. 

We  also  were  about  the  third  generation  to 
play  baseball  on  what  they  called  the  pan  mill 
field.  That  was  an  area  where  [John]  Mackay 
and  [James]  Fair  and  the  Bonanza  kings 
had  a  mill.  They  used  big  pans  of  chemical 
mixtures  to  handle  some  of  their  prize  ore. 
When  that  was  abandoned  and  the  mill  was 
gone,  the  field  was  used  to  work  the  ore  with 
mules  dragging  big  scoops  back  and  forth, 
like  plows.  Then  that  was  abandoned,  and 
they  made  a  homemade  baseball  field  out  of 
it.  My  father  played  there  on  that  field.  And  so 
it  dated  back  to  the  early  days  of  this  century, 
as  a  baseball  field.  The  right  field  and  first  base 
areas  were  mine  dumps.  The  left  side  dropped 
off  about  10,  15  feet,  so  the  third  basemen 
had  to  watch  themselves.  If  a  foul  ball  went 
over  the  backstop,  it  rolled  down  the  Six-Mile 
Canyon. 

So  we  played  there.  We  would  rake  it,  and 
in  a  short  time  pieces  of  quartz  would  work 
their  way  up  through  the  playing  surface. 
The  balls  would  take  some  terrible  bounces. 
Everybody  had  bruises  all  the  time  from  that. 

We  also  had  a  homemade  swimming  pool. 
Now  they  have  a  beautifully  well-operated  and 
constructed  pool  up  there.  Our  homemade 
one  was  higher  on  the  mountain  at  a  place 
called  Byrne’s  Ravine.  See,  there  were  several 
canyons  coming  down  Mount  Davidson.  At 
Byrne’s  Ravine,  the  kids  formed  a  dam.  They 
made  their  own  dam  shoveling  dirt  into  the 
lower  end,  and  they  filled  up  the  upper  end 
with  water  running  down  from  the  flume.  The 
town  was  serviced  by  the  water  company  with 


a  wooden  flume,  and  somehow  mysterious 
holes  would  appear  in  that  area  of  the  flume. 
The  water  would  run  down  and  get  into  our 
Byrne’s  pond.  Actually,  it  was  more  like  a  mud 
wallow  from  Africa,  I  think.  But  it  was  five  feet 
deep  in  some  places.  Sometimes  there  was  a 
lot  of  junk  in  there.  Then  the  county  would 
send  up  some  workmen,  and  they  would  blast 
our  dam  and  repair  the  holes  in  the  flume. 
We  would  be  quiet  for  a  little  while,  but  like 
beavers  we  would  repair  and  do  it  over  again. 
There  were  about  two  generations  that  used 
Byrne’s  pond.  A  lot  of  us  learned  how  to  swim 
there,  or  to  at  least  paddle  around. 

*  *  *  *  * 

No  account  of  a  kid  on  the  Comstock 
would  be  complete  without  a  mention  of 
coasting,  both  on  snow  and  on  dirt.  In 
numerous  abandoned  or  shut-up  sheds  were 
vehicles  left  over  from  the  horse-drawn  days. 
If  we  youngsters  could  obtain  one,  we  used 
just  the  frames  and  wheels,  et  cetera,  stripping 
off  the  tongues,  seats  and  other  items.  Steering 
with  ropes,  these  speedsters  really  whizzed 
down  the  sloping  streets  of  Mount  Davidson. 
The  trouble  was  that  they  didn’t  steer  very  well 
and  were  difficult  to  stop. 

The  most  famous  adventure  was  that 
of  the  three  cousins — Glen  Harris,  Delbert 
Benner  and  me.  Starting  on  Howard  Street,  a 
block  above  Piper’s  Opera  House,  we  whizzed 
with  unexpected  speed  down,  across  C  Street, 
through  a  group  of  Indians  playing  cards  on  a 
blanket  at  D  Street,  frightening  the  horses  of 
Audie  Dick’s  dray  that  used  to  haul  baggage 
and  mail  uptown.  Eventually,  near  the  power 
station  well  below  the  town,  we  attempted  a 
turn  near  the  Chinese  “joss  house”  [a  Chinese 
temple  or  shrine — Ed.]  and  overturned.  The 
town  constable  later  issued  an  order  against 
such  coasting. 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


11 


Snow  rides  were  different.  It  seemed  that 
there  was  always  more  snow  at  Virginia  City 
than  nowadays.  That,  and  the  streets,  made 
for  great  sleigh  riding.  Taylor  Street,  past  the 
churches  and  the  present-day  school,  was  a 
good  route,  and  we  could  veer  over  one  block 
onto  Washington  Street.  This  would  take  us 
nearly  a  mile  below  the  business  streets,  and 
if  one  could  negotiate  a  turn  at  the  bottom, 
it  took  you  past  the  old  hospital.  Another 
favorite  route  was  at  the  North  End,  down 
Carson  Street.  If  one  chose,  he  could  go  all  the 
way  down  Six-Mile  Canyon.  The  only  trouble 
was  getting  back:  it  was  a  long  hike  pulling  a 
sled  back  up  the  mountain.  Another  popular 
ride  was  from  the  Divide  down  Gold  Hill, 
which,  however,  was  more  dangerous  because 
there  was  more  traffic.  On  quiet  days,  a  kid 
could  coast  all  the  way  to  Silver  City.  Once 
I,  with  a  couple  of  friends,  went  all  the  way 
down  Geiger  Grade.  We  rode  up  on  my  dad’s 
bus  and  zoomed  down  the  grade,  which  was 
a  dirt  road  in  those  days. 

Most  of  us  had  store-bought  sleighs, 
which  could  be  steered  with  the  crossbar 
handles.  However,  there  were  homemade 
sleds,  with  solid  wood  sides  and  mounted  on 
iron  runners.  These  were  called  “leg  breakers” 
or  “belly  busters”  with  good  reason.  They  were 
uncomfortable  and  hard  to  steer.  Sometimes  a 
couple  of  these  were  converted  into  bobsleds 
held  together  with  a  long  plank.  Some  of  the 
blacksmith  shops  in  the  mines  constructed 
these  bobs  for  the  bigger  kids.  They  traveled 
like  lightning,  but  were  awful  heavy  to  pull 
back  up.  Sometimes  we  could  hitch  a  ride 
behind  an  up-climbing  automobile,  truck  or 
horse  team. 

Virginia  City  got  its  water  supply  from 
Marlette  Lake  above  Lake  Tahoe.  The  water 
ran  from  a  stream  or  a  ditch  from  Marlette 
Lake  to  the  top  of  a  pipe — this  was  at  an 
altitude  of  about  7,000  feet.  The  water  would 


go  down  that  pipe  at  such  high  velocity  that  it 
would  cross  Washoe  Valley  by  Washoe  Hill,  by 
Washoe  Lake.  It  went  with  such  power  that  it 
would  go  across  the  Washoe  Lake  area  and  up 
a  hill  to  the  level  of  Virginia  City.  It  formed  a 
siphon.  It  was  an  engineering  feat,  one  of  the 
wonders  of  the  engineering  world,  at  the  time. 
The  water  would  empty  into  a  reservoir  about 
five  miles  from  Virginia  City,  from  there  it 
would  go  by  this  wooden  flume,  which  was 
about  a  foot  and  a  half  wide  and  about  a  foot 
deep.  The  water  ran  very  swiftly.  We  always 
thought  it  was  the  purest  water  in  the  world, 
although  at  times  lizards,  bugs  and  rabbits 
would  fall  into  it.  A  skunk  fell  into  it  one  time. 
So  the  water  wasn’t  the  purest,  but  we  loved  it. 

This  flume  had  boards  across  the  top  of 
it  which  sometimes  would  break  open.  We 
would  walk  on  that,  too.  It  was  about  half  a 
mile  above  Virginia  City,  and  you  could  walk 
on  that  for  miles.  And  in  the  summer  water 
would  be  drained  off  into  big  tanks  which 
supplied  the  water  to  the  town  for  drinking 
and  also  for  fighting  fires.  The  fact  that  they 
were  so  high  and  the  gravity  was  so  strong 
made  the  fire  hoses  very  difficult  to  handle.  In 
those  days  they  just  had  one  sort  of  a  nozzle, 
and  it  took  two  or  three  men  to  handle  one 
hose.  Otherwise  the  hose  would  flop  around 
with  great  force  and  knock  people  down.  So 
we  had  a  lot  of  adventures  with  the  flumes. 

Were  there  problems  during  the  winter  with 
the  water  system ? 

There  sure  were.  It  froze  up.  The  water 
tanks  were  frozen  also.  The  water  pipes  to 
the  houses  and  buildings  would  freeze  up, 
and  the  poor  fellow  working  for  the  water 
company  would  have  to  go  around  and  try  to 
thaw  them  out.  So  the  only  water  we  still  had 
was  in  the  fire  mains.  There  was  one  at  the 
Connors  house  next  door  to  our  house.  In  the 


12 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


mornings  the  Connors  boys  would  come  over, 
and  we’d  get  big  boilers,  washtubs  and  pans 
and  fill  them.  Then  we  would  carry  them  into 
our  respective  homes  for  daily  use.  We  used 
that  water  for  drinking,  washing  and  running 
the  toilets.  Sometimes  the  pipes  never  worked 
for  many  days. 

How  did  they  thaw  the  pipes  out? 

With  electricity.  They  had  gadgets  that 
they  would  stick.... Sometimes  people  would 
thaw  them  at  home  with  gasoline  torches  and 
such  which  caused  many  fires. 

A  house  next  door  to  our  house  on  A 
Street  later  on  became  the  property  of  Lucius 
Beebe — the  famous  author  and  sophisticated 
writer  from  Boston  and  New  York  City.  Before 
him  was  an  elderly  gentleman  named  Dan 
Connors.  He  owned  the  Piper’s  Opera  House 
for  many  years.  I  think  he  might  have  been 
related  by  marriage  to  the  Piper  family.  He 
brought  Nevada’s  first  movies — first  one  in 
the  state  of  Nevada — in  the  days  of  the  silent 
motion  pictures,  and  he  provided  his  own 
sound  effects.  His  son  told  me  that  if  there 
was  going  to  be  a  train  wreck  on  the  movie,  his 
dad  would  get  a  bunch  of  tin  and  boxes  and 
have  some  boys  in  back,  and  he’d  give  them 
the  signal  when  the  trains  were  going  to  crash, 
and  they’d  bang  everything  together.  He  had 
a  comedy  where  somebody  was  going  to  steal 
some  chickens.  He  got  some  kids  there  with  a 
crate  full  of  chickens — hens — and  when  the 
time  came,  they  would  shake  the  box,  and  the 
chickens  would  gabble!  [laughter] 

The  opera  house  was  very  busy  up  until 
the  1930s.  They  had  a  roller  skating  rink; 
traveling  theatrical  groups  came  there;  town 
meetings,  political  meetings,  basketball 
games.. .there  was  something  all  the  time.  Mr. 
Connors  then  became  a  sort  of  recluse. 

He  locked  the  opera  house  up,  and  he  didn’t 


want  to  operate  it  any  more.  He  wouldn’t  let 
anybody  go  in  there;  he  was  afraid  of  fire.  His 
sons  were  about  my  age.  One  of  his  sons  and 
I  used  to  have  a  secret  passage  for  getting  in 
there.  We’d  go  in  there  and  roller  skate.  We 
had  to  crawl  underneath  some  rickety  old 
side  stairs  through  a  tunnel  and  into  the  opera 
house. 

One  day  I  was  going  home,  and  a  couple 
of  men  stopped  me  and  said,  “Do  you  know 
how  we  can  get  into  this  opera  house?”  I  said 
yes,  and  he  introduced  himself — Will  Rogers, 
the  famous  comedian,  actor  and  entertainer. 
He  was  with  another  ex-movie  star  named 
Fred  Stone — an  old  silent  movies  guy.  so  I 
took  them  through  our  secret  tunnel. 

They  got  all  dirty  with  cobwebs.  Will 
Rogers  found  a  poster  dating  back  to  the  old 
days  under  this  old  stage.  I’ve  forgotten  who 
all  the  actors  were,  but  there  were  some  great 
ones  there  that  he  knew  about.  He  came  up 
with  this  poster,  and  he  had  cobwebs  all  over. 
His  wife  gave  him  the  devil  for  getting  dirty. 
And  he  said,  “I  don’t  care.. .look  what  I  got,” 
and  he  gave  me  a  dollar,  [laughter] 

Mr.  Connors,  who  wouldn’t  answer  the 
door  for  Will  Rogers,  had  come  out  here  in 
1 897.  He  had  been  a  bare-knuckle  prizefighter 
around  Philadelphia  in  the  old  days  before 
they  wore  gloves.  He  told  me  at  one  time 
when  he  fought,  it  was  illegal.  He  and  his 
opponent  had  fought  for  many  rounds  when 
the  police  came  with  a  big  raid.  They  arrested 
the  promoter  and  some  of  the  attaches  there, 
the  seconds  and  the  referee.  The  fighters 
escaped  and  were  rowed  in  a  rowboat  across 
that  river  in  Philadelphia.  In  the  outhouse  of 
a  farm  by  the  light  of  a  lantern,  some  doctor 
sewed  them  up.  They  were  both  pretty  well 
cut  up.  The  two  fighters  sat  there  on  the  john 
while  they  got  sewed  up. 

Dan  Connors  was  hired  by  the  big 
newspapers  to  be  a  reporter  and  a  commentator 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


13 


at  the  big  fights  like  the  James  J.  Corbett 
and  John  L.  Sullivan  fight  in  New  Orleans. 
He  came  out  to  Carson  City  in  1897  when 
Bob  Fitzsimmons  beat  James  J.  Corbett — 
Pompadour  Jim — in,  I  think,  13  rounds.  He 
stayed  on,  or  he  returned  to  Nevada;  he  liked  it 
so  much  here.  He  married,  began  operating  the 
opera  house  and  brought  in  the  first  movies. 

When  I  used  to  go  over  and  visit  Mr. 
Connors  quite  a  bit,  when  I  lived  next  door  as 
a  teenager,  he  would  tell  me  about  the  Corbett 
and  Fitzsimmons  fight.  He  was  showing  me 
what  a  good  left  jab  Corbett  had,  and  he  hit  me 
right  in  the  jaw.  I  still  feel  that  blow!  [laughter] 

And  he  went  on.  He  had  rows  of  knuckles 
from  broken  bones  in  his  hands,  and  he  had 
big  scar  tissue  over  his  eyes.  But  he  lived  to  be 
well  past  85. 1  can  still  see  him  out  there  with 
Indian  clubs — they’re  big  things  for  exercise. 
You  swing  them  around  like  they’re  bowling 
pins.  One  of  his  frequent  visitors,  when  he 
was  around,  was  Max  Baer,  the  colorful 
heavyweight  champion  of  the  world,  who 
came  to  see  him  two  or  three  times,  enjoyed 
his  company  and  gave  him  a  big  autographed 
picture.  I  can  remember  the  signature:  “To 
Dan  Connors,  who  fought  them  all  before 
they  wore  pillows.”  [laughter] 

One  of  my  best  memories  is  the  V  &  T 
Railroad  coming  into  a  barren  place  down 
on  E  Street  in  Virginia  City.  It’s  where  they 
have  the  camel  races  now.  It  had  an  elegant 
depot  at  one  time — a  passenger  depot.  The  V 
&  T  was  painted  yellow  and  had  those  fancy 
chairs  in  front  where  people  sat.  It  had  several 
tracks — they  would  switch  back  and  forth, 
and  the  freight  depot  was  behind. 

The  V  &  T  came  through  a  tunnel  into  that 
depot  area.  The  tunnel  is  now  blocked;  they 
filled  it  in  because  they  thought  it  might  be 
dangerous  after  they  abandoned  the  railroad. 
The  tunnel  was  close  to  half  a  mile  long  and 
went  right  in  front  of  where  St.  Mary’s  in  the 


Mountains  Church  is  now  and  under  where 
the  school  is  now.  As  kids  we  used  to  walk 
through  there.  We  were  told  not  to  do  it,  but 
naturally  it  was  a  challenge  to  go  through  it. 
The  smell  of  that  train  smoke  hung  to  the 
wood.  It  was  an  unforgettable  smell.  If  the 
train  would  come  through,  we’d  cling  to  the 
sides  of  the  tunnel.  Everybody  said,  “You’re 
going  to  get  sucked  out  by  the  air  from  the 
train  and  get  run  over,”  but  we  never  did. 

The  train  men  would  give  us  rides — take 
us  down  to  Gold  Hill  if  we  wanted  to  go,  and 
no  charge — just  let  us  ride  on  the  train.  On 
the  south  end  of  town  was  a  big  shed  with  a 
turntable,  where  they  kept  the  extra  engines 
sometimes  at  night.  The  engine  itself  had  to 
back  all  the  way  up  to  the  turntable.  They 
would  run  the  train  right  out  on  this  turntable, 
and  two  men  could  turn  that  huge  locomotive 
clean  around. 

I  can  remember  when  they  brought  back 
the  bodies  of  a  couple  of  fellows  who  were 
killed  in  World  War  I.  I  was  just  a  small 
child.  Everybody  went  down,  and  the  train 
came  in  decorated  in  American  flags,  bunting 
and  ribbons.  They  had  two  coffins  there.  I 
didn’t  know  what  coffins  were,  and  I  thought 
they  were  going  to  carry  the  dead  men  out 
physically. 

We  used  to  travel  always  by  the  Gold  Hill 
route,  which  was  a  dirt  road  used  before  the 
main  Highway  17  was  constructed.  About 
halfway  up  Gold  Hill  was  a  watering  trough, 
which  was  a  big,  old,  rectangular-shaped  iron 
tub.  Water  was  flowing  into  it — beautifully 
clear  water.  Everyone  would  have  difficulty 
with  their  cars  getting  up  Gold  Hill.  They 
always  got  to  the  watering  trough.  Then  they 
would  put  more  water  in  their  cars,  which 
were  boiling  over.  And  we  drank  the  water.  In 
previous  years,  the  horses  always  got  a  drink 
there,  too.  It  wasn’t  till  15  years  ago,  when  the 
house  which  the  trough  was  in  front  of  was 


14 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


torn  down,  that  they  found  that  the  water 
from  that  beautiful  spring  actually  came  from 
a  leak  in  the  water  flume.  And  it  was  just 
piped  into  the  trough.  I  can  remember  the 
cars  trying  to  get  up  Gold  Hill.  They  would 
steam  and  puff,  and  they  always  liked  to  stop 
at  the  watering  trough. 

Particularly  in  the  summertime,  I  imagine. 

Yes.  Of  course,  it  was  difficult  driving  up 
that  road  in  the  snow,  too.  Everybody  had  to 
put  on  chains  by  the  watering  trough  to  get 
to  the  top. 

Was  there  quite  a  bit  of  automobile  traffic  back 
and  forth? 

Yes,  there  was.  I  can  remember  the  people 
all  had  flivvers — Model  T  Fords — touring 
cars  and  different  styles.  Very  few  people  got 
anything  else  but  a  touring  car  or  Model  T. 
Those  were  the  kind  that  you  operated  with 
your  foot  pedal,  and  the  gas  and  spark  levers 
were  on  the  wheel.  We  had  a  touring  car.  It 
had  side  flaps  of  cloth  and  isinglass.  This  was 
before  plastic  windows.  Instead  of  glass  it 
was  called  isinglass,  which  was  some  kind  of 
transparent  fabric. 

When  wed  go  to  San  Francisco,  it  was  a 
great  expedition,  [laughter]  It’d  take  maybe 
10,  12  hours.  The  big  thing  was  to  go  to  San 
Francisco  or  Reno  and  go  to  Woolworth’s. 
And  it’s  true — there  was  nothing  over  1 5  cents 
at  Woolworth’s!  So  we  loved  to  go  there. 

Did  you  get  an  allowance  that  you  spent  there? 

Yes.  We  didn’t  have  much.  We  would  sell 
bottles  run  errands  for  people,  and  pick  up 
dimes  here  and  there. 

How  often  did  you  go  to  Reno? 


About  once  a  month  or  maybe  every  two 
months.  It  was  quite  a  trip.  Geiger  Grade  was 
not  a  great  pleasure.  It  was  an  old  dirt  road, 
and  very  steep  and  narrow — difficult  in  the 
wintertime.  That’s  the  road  where  my  father 
drove  the  bus  almost  all  the  time. 

Was  that  road  rebuilt  by  the  WPA  [Works 
Progress  Administration]  in  the  1930s? 

The  new  road  was  built  then.  Maybe  they 
did,  but  I  don’t  think  the  state  built  it,  because 
it’s  paved  and  a  good  road  now.  I  think  it  was 
in  the  late  1930s....  Yes,  it  could  be  the  WPA 
got  in  on  it.  They  built  the  Virginia  Fake  in 
Reno,  and  the  Washoe  Golf  Course  and  a  few 
of  them. 

As  a  kid,  I  was  fortunate — I  think  my 
lifetime  spans  several  eras  of  Virginia  City. 
They  still  call  it  a  mining  camp  or  a  ghost 
town,  but  it’s  neither  one  now.  A  mining  camp 
is  the  kind  that  comes  and  goes  throughout 
Nevada,  but  this  was  a  city.  At  one  time  it  had 
at  least  30,000  residents,  and  the  buildings 
were  permanent.  After  the  big  fire  of  1875 
most  of  the  buildings  were  constructed  of 
brick  and  stone.  I’ve  seen  several  four  and 
five  floors  high.  When  I  was  a  small  child,  all 
those  big  buildings  were  still  intact,  and  Gold 
Hill,  in  particular,  was  very  impressive.  There 
were  a  lot  of  large  buildings  there.  They’re  all 
gone  now.  They  were  cannibalized  and  torn 
down  for  their  bricks  and  stone  during  the 
Depression. 

That  Frederick  building  was  either  burned 
down  or  torn  down  and  was  succeeded  by 
something  called  the  Sky  Deck — I  don’t 
know  what  they  call  it  now.  It  was  a  large, 
picturesque  building.  Another  one  I  recall 
very  well  was  where  the  Delta  now  has  a  big 
parking  lot.  That  was  called  the  Black  building. 
It  was  a  grocery  store  before  my  time,  but  it 
was  still  standing.  And,  of  course,  it  burned 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


15 


down.  It  was  a  huge  building.  Up  the  street 
was  called  the  National  Guard  Hall.  To  me 
that  was  the  center  of  the  world,  when  I  was 
a  kid.  I  went  to  movies  there.  They  had  Cole’s 
Theater.  It  was  a  stone  building  about  three 
stories  high  in  front  and  four  or  five  in  back 
on  D  Street.  Until  about  1938,  the  National 
Guard  Hall  was  still  in  use  as  the  basketball.... 
It  had  a  huge... like  an  arena  on  the  mezzanine 
part.. .or  the  main  floor,  and  it  was  mounted 
on  railroad  car  springs.  You  could  dance  all 
night  or  play  basketball  all  night.  It  didn’t 
seem  to  tire  anybody  out.  When  the  Piper’s 
Opera  House  was  closed,  the  National  Guard 
Hall  became  the  civic  and  cultural  center  of 
the  town.  Basketball  games,  graduations, 
political  meetings,  rallies — many  activities 
were  held  there.  It  had  a  large  balcony,  a  stage 
and  seats  around.  Upstairs  was  the  town’s  only 
newspaper  office;  that’s  the  last  of  the  hand-set 
newspapers  around. 

There  was  a  great  big  firehouse  near  the 
Castle,  which  is  a  tourist  attraction — an  old 
mansion.  A  hundred  yards  from  the  Castle  at 
the  top  of  a  hill  was  the  old  firehouse  called  the 
Corporation  House.  It  was  about  three  stories 
high,  wooden  and  had  a  big  balcony  out  on 
the  top  where  the  firemen  used  to  scan  the  city 
for  traces  of  fires  and  alarms.  It  had  a  big  fire 
bell,  and  they  had  horses  at  the  alert,  ready 
all  the  time.  The  horses  stayed  in  position, 
side  by  side,  with  the  harness  hanging  above 
them.  When  there  was  an  alarm,  one  of  the 
firemen  would  jerk  a  leather  rope  there,  and 
the  harness  would  fall  on  the  horses.  In  a 
few  seconds  the  men  would  buckle  them  up 
and  take  off  in  the  cart.  I  remember  this  well, 
because  it  was  well  into  the  early  1940s,  I 
believe,  before  they  got  fire  trucks.  I  can  still 
see  Dave  Tweedie  driving  the  horses  around 
for  exercise  every  day.  There  are  two  hills 
leading  away  from  that,  and  the  horses  went 
tearing  down  there. 


They  tore  the  firehouse  down  as  a  fire 
hazard  [in  1948].  Everybody’s  sorry  now. 
Somebody  must  have  been  impetuous  and 
said,  “Well,  we  better  tear  down  all  these 
old  buildings.  They’re  fire  hazards.”  Many 
picturesque,  historic  buildings  were  torn 
down.  It  was  really  a  sight  to  see  that.  I  have 
pictures  of  it  yet.  I  can  remember  going 
into  the  firehouse  as  a  child  and  visiting  the 
firemen.  They  had  pictures  on  the  walls  of  the 
old  prizefighters  like  John  L.  Sullivan.  And  at 
least  one  or  two  of  them  would  sleep  there  at 
night.  They  had  a  bed  for  the  firemen  and  this 
lookout  balcony. 

Fire  was  always — and  still  is — the  bugaboo 
of  the  Comstock.  They  had  disastrous  fires  in 
the  middle  of  the  last  century.  The  worst  was 
in  1875  when  two-thirds  or  three-fourths 
of  the  city  was  destroyed.  The  churches,  the 
mine  workings,  the  surface  workings  and 
all  the  business  buildings  on  the  north  side 
of  Taylor  Street  were  destroyed.  With  them 
were  destroyed  many  of  the  only  copies  of 
the  Territorial  Enterprise  of  the  Mark  Twain 
era.  [Mark  Twain  served  as  a  reporter  on  the 
original  Territorial  Enterprise  during  the  early 
1860s.— Ed.] 

There’s  a  fine  book  called  Red  Shirts 
and  Leather  Helmets  by  Steve  Frady.  I  really 
recommend  that  for  a  good  description  of 
the  old  fires.  I  would  also  recommend  the 
Firemen’s  Museum  to  anyone  interested  in 
Virginia  City.  It  is  excellent.  They  have  very 
carefully  restored  the  hand-drawn  carts,  the 
old  pumper  which  took  about  eight  men, 
four  on  each  side,  pumping  levers  up  and 
down  to  get  the  water  going.  They’ve  got 
many  helmets,  fire  axes,  trumpets,  and  great 
pictures.  It’s  right  on  the  corner  of  C  Street 
and  Taylor. 

There  was  a  grocery  store  in  Virginia 
City — the  N.  C.  Prater  store — which  used 


16 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


horses  for  delivery  well  into  the  forties  also.  It 
was  operated  by  a  man  named  George  Wilson, 
who  was  a  horse  bug — he  really  loved  horses. 
He  had  a  livery  stable  on  the  south  end  of  C 
Street,  about  a  block  south  of  the  Presbyterian 
church — a  number  of  residences  have  been 
built  since  then  on  that  side.  He  didn’t  rent 
horses;  he  just  kept  his  own  horses  there  and 
would  shoe  them  himself.  He  had  a  couple 
of  helpers.  He  also  had  the  Prater  grocery 
store.  He  was  the  last  of  the  home  delivery. 
People  would  send  word  by  phone  what  they 
wanted  at  the  store,  and  he’d  have  it  delivered 
to  their  homes  by  his  horse-drawn  wagon  or  a 
single  horse  with  saddlebags.  A  little  friend  of 
mine,  a  classmate  named  Norman  “Peewee” 
Harris,  would  ride  this  horse  with  saddlebags 
delivering  the  groceries.  Until  his  death, 
George  Wilson  refused  to  have  a  delivery 
truck  or  anything  automotive. 

I  remember  there  was  a  store  in  the 
bottom  of  what  they  called  the  Frederick 
building,  which  was  about  three  stories  in 
front  and  four  or  five  in  back  on  Union  Street 
and  C  and  D  streets.  In  the  basement,  facing 
D  Street,  was  an  old  Chinese  named  Chung 
Kee — a  very  kindly  old  man.  He  had  the  little 
goatee  that  the  old  Chinese  affected,  and  he 
had  a  general  store.  The  shelves  reached  to 
the  ceiling  and  were  just  piled  with  garments, 
knickknacks  and  whiskey.  Two  shots  of 
whiskey  for  25  cents,  I  believe,  for  the  miners 
who  would  come  off  work  at  the  C  &  C 
[Consolidated  Virginia  and  California  shaft] 
and  stop  at  Chung  Kee’s  to  get  a  belt  or  two! 
[laughter] 

There  were  a  number  of  Chinese  up  there. 
Another  one,  Charlie  Ching,  had  a  restaurant 
next  door  to  what’s  now  the  Delta.  It  was  very 
popular,  and  he  was  a  very  kindly  man.  He 
grubstaked  a  lot  of  out-of-work,  penniless 
prospectors.  I  don’t  know  if  he  ever  got  any 
return  on  what  he  advanced  them,  but  he 


carried  a  lot  of  people  who  were  out  of  work 
during  the  Depression  and  never  collected 
from  them.  Then  there  was  a  fellow  named 
Charlie  Wah  who  had  a  Chinese  laundry  or 
a  restaurant.  And  Hughie  Wong.  Those  were 
the  only  Chinese  that  I  knew  personally  or 
vaguely. 

Did  they  have  wives  and  families  there  in 
Virginia  City ? 

No.  I  think  only  Charlie  Ching  did;  I  think 
his  wife  was  Caucasian.  They  had  a  Chinese 
temple  down  at  the  lower  part  of  town,  way 
down  by  the  power  company.  It  was  a  weather¬ 
beaten,  old  building.  Inside  there  were  a  few 
statues,  and  things  like  banners  or  pennants 
hung  up  on  the  walls.  Charlie  Ching  would 
consult  some  sticks.  They  had  Chinese  sticks 
in  a  little  container,  and  the  way  you  pulled 
them  out  would  determine  some  fortunes.  He 
always  told  my  father  he  prayed  for  him,  and 
then  he  consulted  these  little  sticks  to  see  how 
he’d  do  in  the  elections!  [laughter] 

Were  there  any  Indian  families? 

Yes,  there  were  a  number  of  Indians.  They 
were  very  poor.  Some  of  them  lived  down  the 
Six-Mile  Canyon  right  near  the  old  brewery 
and  across  the  street  from  it.  They  lived  in 
little  hovels  shaped  like  a  beehive  that  they 
made  out  of  tin,  cardboard  and  paper.  They 
still  were  standing  the  last  I  knew  about  them. 

I  think  the  old  brewery  was  taken  over  by 
a  religious  sect.  I  don’t  know  their  name,  but 
they  did  a  lot  of  meditation.  They  would  use 
these  old,  abandoned,  Indian  beehive-shaped 
places  for  meditation.  They’d  sit  there  all 
night,  [chuckles]  This  wasn’t  too  long  ago — 
maybe  20  years  ago.  They  just  laid  on  layers 
of  tin,  scraps,  paper  and  cardboard  and  made 
these  little  houses  or  huts  out  of  them. 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


17 


There  were  a  few  other  Indian  families. 
There  was  a  family — their  last  name  was  Bob. 
Tony  Bob  is  the  boy  I  recall.  And  a  big  family 
whose  last  name  was  Jack.  They  were  busier... 
they  got  into  athletics  a  little  bit  up  there  and 
worked.  A  woman  named  Josie  Jack  helped 
my  mother  with  the  washing  once  a  week. 
They  worked  out  in  the  yard  with  the  great  big 
washtubs  and  did  the  washing.  We  had  one 
Indian,  Raymond  David,  that  played  football 
with  us  in  our  sandlot  on  Sunday.  I  believe  he 
is  still  living  in  Reno  now. 

Did  any  of  the  children  go  to  school  with  you  ? 

Not  in  my  class.  There  were  a  couple... 
Raymond  David  was  about  five  years  behind 
me  in  school.  I  think  he  was  about  the  same 
age  as  Bill  Marks  and  Hugh  Gallagher. 

One  memory  I  have,  which  they  don’t 
have  any  more  up  there,  was  seeing  the 
steam  come  out  of  the  Combination  mine. 
Now,  the  mine  dump  is  still  there  on  the 
southeast  part  of  town — a  hill — and  there’s 
just  the  wreckage,  the  remnants  of  the 
surface  workings.  Many  publications  about 
the  state  or  about  ghost  towns  always  show 
that  gallows  frame,  the  big  wheel  and  a  few 
stone  blocks. 

The  Combination  mine  was  a  combination 
of  four  different  mines  that  went  in  together 
and  built  this  shaft  to  service  their  different 
mines  from  different  directions.  At  one  time 
it  was  the  deepest  shaft  in  the  world.  I  don’t 
know  whether  they  say  it  was  a  half  mile  deep 
or  a  mile  deep;  anyway  it  was  very  deep.  [The 
Combination  shaft  was  3,250  feet  deep. — 
Ed.]  They  ran  into  boiling  hot  water  like  most 
of  the  very  deep  mines  up  there,  and  they 
pumped  it  into  the  Sutro  Tunnel.  Long  after  it 
was  abandoned,  in  the  wintertime  you  could 
see  huge  clouds  of  steam  billowing  up  from 
that.  We  could  see  it  from  our  school. 


I  also  remember  the  C  &  C  mine,  which 
John  Mackay  and  his  other  Bonanza  kings 
operated.  The  Big  Bonanza  was  discovered 
there.  [The  Big  Bonanza  was  the  name  given 
to  the  rich  ore  body  which  was  discovered  in 
1873  by  the  so-called  Bonanza  firm — John 
W.  Mackay,  James  G.  Fair,  James  C.  Flood 
and  William  S.  O’Brien — and  was  located 
in  the  Consolidated  Virginia  and  California 
mines. — Ed.]  I  can  remember  the  smell  of  the 
shaft  of  the  C  &  C.  The  steam  would  come 
up  from  down  below,  carrying  these  mineral 
odors — it  was  very  intriguing.  The  hoisting 
engineer  was  Hugh  Gallagher.  He  was  a 
graduate  of  UNR,  probably  around  1909, 
in  that  era.  He  was  a  very  fine  engineer.  He 
died  fairly  early,  but  his  wife  died  first.  A  lot 
of  people  died  up  there  from  the  influenza 
epidemics  of  the  late  teens  and  early  twenties. 

The  Gallaghers  lived  about  a  block  from 
us  on  A  Street.  Hugh  Gallagher’s  oldest 
son,  Mervin,  became  the  state  inspector  of 
mines.  His  second  son,  Neil,  operated  the  N. 
C.  Prater  store  after  the  horseman  George 
Wilson  died.  The  younger  brother  was  Hugh 
II,  and  he  became  a  teacher,  coach  and  school 
superintendent.  There’s  a  Hugh  Gallagher  III. 
He  is  in  business  in  Reno.  He  holds  the  record 
at  UNR  for  free  throws  in  basketball.  I  can 
just  remember  Mr.  Gallagher — a  very  kindly 
man.  He  gave  us  a  little  ride  on  the  cage,  the 
elevator.  I  can  remember  that  very  well. 

Didn’t  Mr.  Gallagher  go  to  Tonopah  or 
Goldfield  to  work  for  a  while? 

Probably. 

Was  that  a  fairly  common  practice  for  people 
up  there? 

Yes.  Virginia  City  was  in  the  down  stage. 
You  know  how  things  were  up  and  down 


18 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


with  the  mining?  A  lot  of  people  left  to  go 
to  Goldfield  and  Tonopah  during  the  early 
part  of  this  century  I  think  from  1901  to 
about  1910  it  was  very  lively  down  there. 
My  father  went  down  there  to  look  for  work 
when  he  was  a  youngster.  He  wound  up 
washing  dishes  in  a  Chinese  restaurant.  Then 
he  got  a  job  in  mining.  People  drifted  back 
and  forth  between  Tonopah,  Virginia  City 
and,  of  course,  the  other  camps,  too,  like 
Eureka...  even  down  to  Belmont  and  over  to 
Grass  Valley  in  California.  A  lot  of  the  old 
Cornish  people  and  the  Cousin  Jacks  or  their 
descendants  still  live  in  Grass  Valley.  They 
were  experienced  miners.  They  were  very 
skillful  miners  in  timbering  and  handling 
their  underground  work,  because  mining 
dates  back  in  Cornwall  for  many  centuries. 

I  went  to  the  Fourth  Ward  School  from 
the  first  through  the  fifth  grade.  Then  my  folks 
moved  to  Reno  on  account  of  the  change  of 
[my  dad’s]  bus  schedule,  and  we  lived  here 
five  years — 1925  to  1930. 

In  Reno  I  went  to  the  Southside  School 
annex.  The  school  is  now  the  Reno  City  Hall, 
and  the  annex  is  now  the  Washoe  County 
Library.  Then  I  went  to  junior  high  school  in 
Northside,  which  is  now  a  big  parking  lot  for 
the  casinos  on  Fourth  Street — Fourth,  Lake 
and  Center  streets.  It  was  a  beautiful  school, 
but  it  was  very  noisy.  Fourth  Street  had  a  lot 
of  traffic,  so  they  tore  it  down. 

Then  my  family  moved  back  to  Virginia 
City  I  think  because  they  changed  the  bus 
schedule  again.  We  purchased  a  big,  white 
house  on  A  Street  at  the  top  of  Union — two 
blocks  off  the  main  drag — right  behind  the 
courthouse.  It  was  next  door  to  Mr.  Connors’s 
house  which  became  Lucius  Beebe’s  property. 
Our  house  was  a  great  big,  two-story  house, 
which  was  built  in  1876.  We  lived  there  from 
1930...  I  think  my  parents  lived  there  about  40 
years.  Of  course,  I  went  away  to  the  university 


and  then  moved  to  Reno.  I’ve  lived  in  Reno 
ever  since. 

Our  house  on  A  Street  is  still  standing. 
People  call  it  the  Cobb  mansion,  but  it 
wasn’t  a  mansion...!  [laughter]  It’s  been 
renovated — restored — and  has  had  several 
owners  since  then.  It  was  restored  by  a  more 
recent  occupant,  David  Seaton,  who  I  think 
is  now  in  the  Dominican  Republic  studying 
to  be  a  doctor.  He  restored  it  beautifully. 
His  former  father-in-law  had  bought  what 
they  call  the  Cole  mansion  on  B  Street.  It’s  a 
beautiful  house  now — one  of  the  showplaces 
of  the  town.  They  worked  months.. .maybe  a 
couple  of  years  restoring  it.  I  don’t  know  if 
Cole  was  a  doctor  or  a  mine  fellow,  but  they 
had  Cole’s  alley,  which  was  a  covered,  wooden 
passageway  from  one  street  to  the  other,  right 
in  front  of  that  house.  As  kids,  we  always  ran 
through  it  because  we  were  scared  to  stop;  it 
was  so  spooky. 

In  Virginia  City  all  the  schools  were 
combined  in  one  building,  which  still 
survives — the  Fourth  Ward  School.  That’s 
the  last  of  the  old-time  schools.  It  was  a 
three-story  building.  Well,  it’s  four  in  back 
on  account  of  being  built  on  a  hill.  It  was  put 
into  service  in  1876,  and  it  served  into  the  late 
1930s.  I  was  not  in  the  last  class,  though — 
people  think  I  was,  but  there  were  three  or 
four  years  after  me  before  they  built  the  new 
school  that  they  have  now. 

The  very  bottom  basement — which  is 
only  on  the  D  Street  side,  the  downhill  side, 
because  of  the  slope  of  the  hill — was  for  the 
first,  second  and  third  grades.  There  was  no 
kindergarten  in  those  days.  The  middle  part, 
the  main  floor,  was  for  the  middle  grades — 
fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  seventh  and  eighth.  The 
upper  floor  was  for  the  high  school.  Then 
there  was  an  attic.  At  one  time  they  taught 
printing,  hand-set  printing,  and  had  a  little 
gymnasium.  They  abandoned  those  during 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


19 


the  Depression.  So  the  first  grade  through 
high  school  was  all  in  one  old  building. 

It  was  a  very  unusual  lifestyle  in  the 
Depression.  I  was  a  teenager  going  to  school, 
and  they  had  cut  out  many  services  at  the 
school.  For  instance,  the  girls’  home  economics 
was  abandoned.  The  boys’  woodcraft  and  shop 
was  dropped.  They  dropped  the  high  school 
yearbook.  They  only  had  three  teachers  in 
the  high  school.  The  principal  doubled  as 
a  teacher  and  administrator  for  the  whole 
school.  The  coach  taught  classes  and  coached 
boys’  basketball  and  sometimes  football.  Then 
the  woman  teacher  taught  drama,  languages, 
typing,  shorthand  and  also  coached  girls’ 
basketball. 

My  first  principal  up  there,  Clarence 
B.  Tapscott,  is  still  in  Reno;  he’s  an  active 
attorney.  I  think  he’s  the  second  oldest 
attorney  in  Reno  now.  I  had  him  for  two  years 
at  high  school.  Then  the  last  year  was  John 
Gilmartin,  who  is  deceased  now.  He  was  the 
coach  when  I  was  there. 

My  last  coach  and  teacher  was  Jake 
Lawlor,  whose  name  goes  on  forever  at  the 
Lawlor  Events  Center.  That  was  his  first  job  as 
a  teacher  and  a  coach.  I  thought  he  was  a  fine 
teacher — a  little  bit  violent  and  vigorous,  but 
a  good  coach.  He  was  a  very  inspirational  and 
scrappy  coach.  Lawlor  taught  English  and,  I 
think,  what  they  called  physical  geography — 
that’s  sciences  of  the  earth.  He  was  a  very  good 
English  teacher.  He  remained  there  for  several 
years  and  had  some  fine  basketball  teams. 

Virginia  City  for  many  years  only  had 
about  35  students  in  high  school — about 
17  boys.  And  out  of  those  they  had  to  pick 
their  basketball  team.  I  was  number  1 1  on  an 
11 -man  squad!  [laughter]  I  never  made  the 
tournaments;  I  was  always  lopped  off.  I  just 
filled  in  when  they  were  way  ahead  or  way 
behind  at  the  end  of  the  game.  I  got  in  for  a  little 
bit.  But  under  Jake  Lawlor,  his  team  went  to  the 


state  finals  two  years  in  a  row.  That’s  when  there 
were  no  AAA,  AA  or  A  divisions  by  size.  They 
were  open  tournaments,  wide  open.  The  little 
schools  like  Virginia  City  and  Dayton  had  to 
play  Reno,  Las  Vegas  and  all  those. 

Jake  did  very  well  with  his  teams.  Some 
of  his  players  are  still  around  Virginia  City. 
One  of  them  is  Hugh  Gallagher,  who  just 
retired  as  principal  of  the  schools.  The  new 
grammar  school  is  named  after  him.  Another 
is  Bill  Marks,  who  owns  the  famous  Crystal 
Bar.  His  father  had  it,  and  even  before  him.... 
In  fact,  they  had  a  signature  book  for  visitors 
signed  by  U.  S.  Grant —  General  Grant  who 
became  president.  He  was  president  of  the 
United  States  when  he  visited  the  big  mines. 
He  signed  it.  Herbert  Hoover  signed  it,  too. 
And  many  others. 

Did  your  family  belong  to  a  church  in  Virginia 
City ? 

Yes,  on  my  mother’s  side  we  have  actually 
five  generations  who  have  been  baptized  in 
the  St.  Paul’s  Episcopal  Church.  However, 
it  was  not  the  same  building  all  the  time, 
because  it’s  been  destroyed  twice  by  fire. 

My  father  was  an  altar  boy  in  his  childhood 
in  the  Catholic  church — St.  Mary’s  in  the 
Mountains  Church.  He  left  that,  I  think  to 
go  to  work.  That  was  during  the  era  of  Father 
Tubman.  Father  (Patrick]  Manogue  was  the 
original  outstanding  priest  up  there.  Then 
Father  Tubman  later  came  to  Reno  and  built 
St.  Thomas  Aquinas  Cathedral  here.  Then  I 
went  to  Sunday  schoolin  the  Presbyterian 
church  because  that  was  nearby  and  the 
only  one  that  had  a  Sunday  school.  The 
other  churches  didn’t  have  Sunday  schools. 
The  Episcopal  church  was  kind  of  hit  and 
miss;  they  had  active  services  for  a  while. 
They  never  did,  I  don’t  think,  have  a  Sunday 
school — the  kind  the  other  people  did. 


20 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


Were  the  churches  involved  in  the  community 
to  the  extent  that  they  sponsored  activities ? 

The  Presbyterian  church  has  been  restored 
a  few  times  and  seemed  to  be  very  popular  for 
public  affairs — plays,  concerts  and  that.  It’s 
right  on  the  main  street,  on  the  outskirts  of 
the  business  section.  They  have  services  there 
quite  often. 

When  you  were  a  child,  besides  the  Sunday 
school,  were  there  other  activities? 

That’s  all.  I  guess  there  were,  but  I  was 
very  small  when  I  went  over  there.  It  was 
only  a  block  away,  so  I  walked  over  there  for 
a  couple  of  years.  But  I  didn’t  know  what  the 
adults  were  doing. 

Work  in  Mining  and  Journalism  in 
Virginia  City,  1930S-1940S 

What  was  your  first  job? 

In  Reno,  when  I  was  a  youngster,  I 
delivered  papers.  When  I  went  back  to 
Virginia  City  in  1930,  jobs  were  very  scarce. 
All  through  the  thirties  was  the  Depression, 
and  it  was  very  difficult  to  find  even  part-time 
work.  As  a  teenager,  I  finally  got  a  job  down  at 
that  mill  [Arizona-Comstock]  where  the  old 
Hale  &  Norcross  mine  dump  had  been  and 
also  on  a  tailings  pond  below  the  mill. 

Incidentally,  the  word  tailings  has  been 
misused  quite  a  bit.  A  lot  of  people  have  the 
impression  that  those  mine  dumps  that  you 
see  in  Virginia  City,  Sutro  and  around  are 
called  tailings,  but  they’re  not.  They’re  waste 
rock.  Tailings  are  the  residue  that  come  out  of 
a  ball  mill.  They  had  built  a  mill,  and  there’s  a 
rock  crusher;  then  big  steel  balls  of  iron  roll 
around  inside  and  crush  the  ore.  Then  it  runs 
through  a  process  of  separating  the  gold  and 


silver  from  the  dirt.  What  comes  out  of  the 
mill  that’s  not  immediately  used — the  valuable 
stuff — is  kind  of  a  waste,  but  they  collected  it 
for  later  use.  They  call  that  the  tailings. 

The  tailings  pond  where  I  worked  was 
built  by  deposits  of  sand.  A  trough  was  run 
from  the  mill  down  to  the  pond  and  was 
carried  around  on  the  elevated  boards.  My  job 
was  to  pull  out  plugs,  let  holes  and  let  the  stuff 
run  through  from  the  trough.  It  would  drop 
down  on  the  banks,  deposit  the  sand  and  run 
off  as  muddy  water.  My  job  was  to  shovel — we 
called  it  mucking;  a  shovel  is  called  a  muck 
stick  up  there — building  up  the  banks  by 
shoveling  up  and  tamping  it.  The  banks  were 
about  20,  30  feet  high  when  I  went  to  work 
there.  We  kept  building  up  the  sides.  Then, 
when  it  all  dried  off,  they  would  haul  it  away 
and  have  it  processed  in  the  smelter. 

Was  that  done  around  Virginia  City,  or  would 
they  haul  it  somewhere  else? 

They’d  haul  it  away.  The  real  good  stuff 
from  the  mill,  the  real  good  tailings,  were 
called  concentrates.  They  were  put  on  big, 
semicircular  tanks  or  troughs  with  a  fire 
underneath  them.  That  would  dry  them  out. 
That,  in  turn,  would  be  ground  up  again 
into  powder  or  dust  and  put  into  sacks  and 
shipped  to  the  smelters.  I  used  to  have  to  help 
stoke  the  fires.  I’d  carry  these  logs  and  throw 
them  under  the  big  ovens.  We  would  wheel 
the  wheelbarrows — they’re  constructed 
to  look  like  tanks,  not  little  wheelbarrows 
like  gardeners  have — and  we  poured  the 
mud  into  the  semicircular  troughs  where  it 
would  be  dried  out,  scraped  it  up  again  and 
put  it  in  a  regular  barrel.  It  was  then  run 
through  what  we  called  the  coffee  grinder — a 
miniature  grinding  mill — and  it  would  come 
out  as  dust. 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


21 


I  can  remember  one  time  when  I  was 
getting  a  wheelbarrow  of  this  to  put  into 
a  sack  for  the  shipment  to  the  smelter,  the 
dust  was  blinding  when  I  came  down,  and 
I  was  choking.  I  hit  a  knothole  and  tipped 
the  barrel  over.  A  couple  of  thousand  dollars 
worth  of  gold  dust  shot  all  over  the  floor.  The 
other  guys  I  was  working  with... we  all  rushed 
over,  swept  it  up  as  fast  as  we  could  and  put 
it  back  in  the  wheelbarrow  or  into  the  sacks. 
Just  as  we  finished,  the  superintendent  came 
to  work,  as  we  worked  on  the  graveyard  shift. 
“Well,”  he  said,  “boys,  you’re  sweeping  up,  I 
see. 

We  said,  “Yes,  Mr.  McFarland,  we  like  a 
nice,  clean  place  to  work.” 

He  says,  “Keep  up  the  good  work.” 

I  had  also  worked  various  jobs  around 
that  mill,  including  one  at  what  we  called  the 
grizzly.  [A  grizzly  is  a  device  to  keep  oversized 
rocks  out  of  the  rock  crusher.  It  is  usually  set 
at  the  head  of  the  crusher,  at  an  angle  so  that 
all  oversized  material  will  roll  off. — Ed.]  They 
hauled  the  dirt  in  trucks  from  a  huge  hole,  a 
huge  excavation,  which  can  still  be  seen  across 
the  street  from  the  Fourth  Ward  School.  It’s 
called  the  Loring  Cut  after  one  of  the  owners. 
The  trucks  would  haul  that  down  and  dump  it 
off  onto  a  grating  made  of  railroad  rails.  The 
man  who  worked  on  that  in  the  grizzly  had 
to  make  little  rocks  out  of  big  rocks.  With  a 
12-pound  sledgehammer  he  would  whack  the 
rocks  and  break  them  up.  They’d  fall  through 
the  grating  and  then  into  the  rock  crusher. 
That  was  quite  a  strenuous  job. 

I  was  in  good  shape.  I  was  going  to  college, 
and  I  worked  all  summer  up  there  in  that.  Jobs 
were  very  scarce,  I’ll  tell  you  that,  and  I  was 
glad  to  get  it.  Four  dollars  a  day,  eight-hour 
shift,  no  days  off.  I  started  at  graveyard,  which 
is  1 1:30  at  night,  and  worked  all  night  there.  I 
also  worked  for  the  highway  department  out 
in  the  desert  by  Yerington. 


I  find  it  very  interesting  your  saying  how  scarce 
jobs  were  on  the  Comstock  during  the  1930s, 
because  statistics  seem  to  indicate  that  mining 
was  picking  up  during  the  thirties,  particularly 
after  1933,  1934. 

They  would  revive  skeleton  crews  here 
and  there.  The  biggest  operation  was  the 
Foring  pit — that  huge  open  pit  across  from  the 
Fourth  Ward  School.  They  dug  that  out  with 
steam  shovels  and  trucks,  which,  incidentally, 
sometimes  uncovered  or  intersected  tunnels 
from  the  old  mines  in  the  old  days.  Then 
they  built  that  mill  where  I  worked,  down  at 
the  entrance  to  the  old  Norcross  mine,  and  a 
tunnel  where  the  Hale  &  Norcross  had  been. 
This  was  this  big  mountain  way  up  above 
the  mountain;  they  had  open  pit  mining. 
And  the  trucks  would  haul  the  ore  down  and 
dump  it  in  the  mill.  It’d  be  processed  in  that 
Arizona-Comstock  mill — we  always  called 
it  the  Norcross  no  matter  what  names  they 
put  on  it. 

One  summer  I  worked  at  tearing  down 
the  famous  Crown  Point  trestle.  On  either 
side  of  the  canyon  were  the  remnants  of  a 
couple  of  great  mines — the  Yellow  Jacket 
and  the  Crown  Point.  (Incidentally,  the  land 
between  them  at  the  bottom  of  the  canyon 
was  where  Sandy  Bowers,  who  built  Bowers 
Mansion,  had  one  of  the  earliest  mines.  His 
wife  was  Eilley  Orrum,  the  mystic  person  who 
used  to  predict  a  lot  of  things.)  Spanning  that 
canyon  was  this  giant  trestle.  Pictures  of  it  are 
still  around.  It  was  about  90  feet  high  at  the 
deepest  part,  and  it  supported  the  V  &  T.  The 
Virginia-Truckee  trains  would  come  across 
it.  Sometimes  as  many  as  40  trains  a  day  ran 
up  and  down  there  carrying  ore,  passengers 
and  freight. 

In  1936, 1  believe  it  was,  there  was  some 
renewed  mining  activity  in  the  Crown  Point. 
They  would  blast,  and  big  clouds  of  blasting 


22 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


smoke  and  dust  would  go  under  the  trestle.  The 
trestle  began  to  wobble  a  bit.  So  the  mining 
people  made  a  deal  with  the  V  &  they  would 
tear  down  the  trestle  and  move  the  track  up  the 
canyon  a  ways  across  a  fill,  which  was  not  quite 
as  spectacular  a  view,  but  it  was  effective.  The 
V  &  T  wanted  to  preserve  as  much  of  the  wood 
and  the  ironwork  on  the  bridge  for  resale,  so  I 
worked  with  the  V  &  T  crew  and  helped  tear 
it  down.  I  got  pretty  good  pay  for  those  days, 
because  I  could  work  at  heights. 

I  pretty  near  fell  off  one  time;  I  lost  my 
interest  in  heights  then.  Some  of  the  section 
hands  working  there  were  carrying  out  some 
of  the  big  timbers.  I  stood  beside  them  to  let 
them  get  by,  and  they  accidentally  bumped 
me.  I  just  maneuvered  my  sledgehammer, 
kept  my  balance  and  finally  worked  my  way 
back  to  an  upright  position.  Otherwise,  I 
would  have  gone  down  to  Sandy  Bowers’s 
mine,  I  guess. 

It  was  a  spectacular  job.  We  lowered  these 
great  big  sections  of  the  trestle  by  rope  so 
that  nothing  was  smashed.  I  still  have  some 
souvenirs.  The  bolts  that  anchored  the  wood 
together  were  huge.  They  were  over  two  to 
three  feet  long  and  more  than  an  inch  or  two 
thick.  The  washers  were  as  big  as  salad  plates. 
The  nuts  were  bigger  than  a  man’s  fist — that’s 
how  thick  they  were.  Everything  was  on  a 
huge,  mammoth  scale.  That  was  built  on  the 
1870s.  Now  it’s  all  gone.  There’s  nothing  left 
there.  The  recent  Houston  Oil  Company, 
Mining  Company  activities  have  torn  up 
all  that  area  there.  I  have  some  pictures  left. 
They  were  published  in  Stan  Paher’s  Nevada 
centennial  book  that  came  out.  [Stanley  W. 
Paher,  ed.,  Nevada:  Official  Bicentennial 
Book  (Las  Vegas:  Nevada  Publications,  1976) 
.-Ed.] 

How  long  did  it  take  you  to  tear  the  trestle 
down ? 


About  two  or  three  months.  We  did  it  very 
carefully.  My  job  and  another  fellow’s  job  was 
what  we  called  drift.  It’s  hard  to  explain,  but 
you  hold  one  bolt  against  another  and  hit  it, 
and  it’ll  force  it  out.  See,  over  almost  a  century 
or  three  quarters  of  a  century,  the  wood  had 
tightened  so  tight  around  the  bolts  that  they 
were  impossible  to  move  out  by  ordinary 
wrenches  or  pulleys,  so  we  had  to  hammer 
them  out.  We  would  call  that  drifting  them 
out.  It’s  something  like  they  liked  to  do  in 
the  mines,  before  they  had  the  pneumatic  or 
big  electric  drills.  Miners  used  to  hammer  a 
chisel  or  a  big  bolt  into  the  wall  of  the  mine 
and  pound  a  hole  in  with  a  little  hammer — an 
eight-pounder.  Then  they  put  the  dynamite 
sticks  into  those  holes  for  blasting.  So  it  was 
similar  to  that.  One  of  us  would  hold  another 
bolt,  and  then  the  other  fellow  would  hit  it 
with  a  sledgehammer.  I  still  have  scars  where 
my  companion  hit  me  a  few  times.  We  had 
to  trust  each  other  pretty  good.  Then  you  get 
nervous  and  whack  them  a  little  more,  but  we 
did  get  paid  better  than  the  other  fellows  did, 
because  we  worked  up  high. 

We  got  to  be  pretty  strong  and  nimble  with 
those  sledgehammers.  They’re  bigger  than 
what  miners  use.  They  have  these  contests — 
double  jack  and  single  jack.  A  double  jack  is  a 
big  sledgehammer — full  length.  A  single  jack 
is  a  small  one  held  in  one  hand.  The  miners 
still  have  those  contests.  A  descendant  of  one 
of  the  old  families  up  there,  Fred  Andreasen, 
is  still  the  state  champion. 

Did  they  have  those  kinds  of  contests  as 
amusement  when  you  were  growing  up  in 
Virginia  City ? 

Yes.  Like  for  the  Labor  Day  celebration, 
they’d  have  a  purse,  and  men  would  come  in 
from  Bishop,  Eureka  and  other  places  and 
compete  in  that.  It  was  very  colorful,  and 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


23 


they  still  do  it.  It’s  a  great  tradition.  I’m  glad 
they  maintain  it,  and  I  wish  they’d  do  it  at  the 
state  fair. 

I  did  a  few  odd  stints  in  the  mines.  We 
did  what  we  called  rustlinwe  would  either 
walk  down  to  Silver  City  or  hitch  a  ride  with 
anybody  coming  down,  and  then  walk  back 
up  to  Virginia  City,  going  from  mine  to  mine 
up  through  Gold  Canyon  to  see  if  they  had 
anything  in  the  way  of  work.  I  did  get  on  a 
little  while  at  a  mine  called  the  Justice,  which 
is  at  the  lower  part  of  Gold  Hill,  almost  to 
Silver  City.  I  put  in  a  little  time  underground 
there. 

By  coincidence,  the  Justice  was  the  only 
cold  mine  that  I  ever  heard  of  up  there.  It  was 
very  dry  and  very  cold  underground.  Most 
of  them  were  hot,  steamy  and  moist.  There’s 
nothing  left  of  the  Justice  now  except  maybe 
remnants  of  the  gallows  frame.  Little  rocks 
kept  falling  on  your  head... tinkle  along.  They 
didn’t  have  hardhats  then  that  everybody 
wears  now  in  mining  construction. 

What  did  you  do  when  you  worked  underground 
there? 

Oh,  shoveling — we  called  it  mucking — 
ore  or  waste  dirt  into  a  mine  car  and  pushing 
it — they  call  it  tramming — to  the  hoist,  the 
cage.  I  wasn’t  very  skillful  at  it,  but  they  only 
had  a  small  crew  down  there.  I  didn’t  get 
much  time  underground,  which  was  all  right 
with  me. 

How  much  did  they  pay  you  for  that? 

I  think  it  was  $4  a  day.  Then  I  worked  in 
the  mill,  I  got  $4  a  day  and  no  days  off.  We’d 
work  different  shifts.  It’d  be  about  two  weeks 
on  the  graveyard  shift  from  11:30  at  night 
until  morning.  Then  the  day  shift  would 
come  on.  Then  what  they  called  the  night 


shift  would  come  on  about  5:30  until  11:30. 
Pay  wasn’t  too  good.  Actually,  in  the  old  days, 
the  miners  got  better  pay.  But  back  in  the  days 
of  Mackay  and  his  partners  it  was  $5  a  day. 

The  workers  had  a  very  strong  Miners’ 
Union.  The  mine  owners  never  had  labor 
trouble  with  the  union,  but  the  union  got 
miners  good  working  conditions  and  good 
pay.  The  conditions  were  some  of  the  best  in 
the  county. 

Were  the  unions  active  in  the  1920s  and  1930s? 

No.  They  had  petered  out  during  the 
twenties  and  the  Depression,  I  think.. .in 
fact,  around  the  turn  of  the  century.  But 
the  Miners’  Union  had  a  nice  building  on  B 
Street  not  far  from  the  opera  house,  and  they 
had  a  good  public  library  in  there.  It  was  a 
convenient  place  for  people  to  visit.  I  don’t 
know  if  the  Miners’  Union  building  is  still 
standing.  I  think  it  might  be.  It  was  a  nice 
little  place  there.  The  name  miners’  union 
was  pretty  common.  They  had  a  butcher  shop 
called  Miners’  Union  Butcher  Shop. 

After  your  experiences  working  in  the  mill  and 
the  mines,  what  did  you  plan  to  be  when  you 
grew  up? 

The  newspaper  fascinated  me,  when  I 
had  one  little  taste  of  it  in  high  school  with 
the  Virginia  City  News,  the  little  weekly 
paper  there.  The  editor  was  a  man  named 
Vincent  Nevin.  His  father  was  the  postmaster 
when  I  was  a  child.  Mr.  Nevin  was  a  veteran 
of  World  War  I,  and  he  had  some  problems 
dealing  with  combat  service.  He  put  out 
that  paper  with  hand-set  type  and  a  press 
that...I  don’t  know  if  it  was  hand  operated 
or  electrically  operated,  but  it  was  very  old 
and  primitive.  My  first  published  stories  were 
in  his  paper. 


24 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


During  the  Depression  the  school  had 
dropped  everything  but  basketball,  so  we  had 
our  own  baseball  and  football  teams,  which 
we  coached  ourselves  and  played  games.  And 
we  asked  Mr.  Nevin  to  put  in  a  little  story 
about  a  game  we  were  going  to  have.  He  said, 
“Well,  I  will  if  you  write  it  up  and  then  cover  it 
for  me.”  So  I  gave  him  a  couple  of  paragraphs 
about  the  outcome  of  our  game,  and  he  asked 
me  if  I  would  start  writing  a  weekly  column 
about  the  high  school  news,  which  I  did. 
Those  were  my  first  published  stories. 

I  once  got  some  special  instruction  in 
journalism  from  a  prison  inmate.  My  uncle, 
Will  Harris,  was  the  assistant  warden  at  the 
Nevada  State  Prison,  and  his  assistant,  Jack 
Meredith,  was  a  trusty,  and  they  talked  about 
me.  I  don’t  know  his  [Merediths]  background, 
but  he  was  editor  of  the  prison  magazine, 
which  was  a  slick  paper  magazine — a  very 
good  one — called  the  Rainbow.  So  several 
times  I  went  by  there,  and  I  was  impressed 
by  him.  He  was  a  very  smooth,  personable 
person. 

The  Rainbow  magazine  contained  well- 
written  stories  about  different  sections  of  the 
prison  and  their  sports.  It  was  very  interesting. 
They  published  my  first  real  story  outside  of 
the  local  newspaper.  I  wrote  a  story  on  the 
life  of  Dan  De  Quille — Mark  Twain’s  friend 
on  the  Enterprise.  They  published  that  in  full 
around  1936  or  1937  and  gave  it  quite  a  play. 

Later  on  this  man  who  was  the  magazine’s 
editor  escaped  [chuckles]  and  led  a  fantastic 
cruise  across  the  country  signing  my  uncle’s 
name  to  all  kinds  of  vouchers.  He  would  go 
to  a  big  factory  or  something  and  represent 
himself  as  W.  S.  Harris;  he  could  imitate  the 
handwriting.  He  bought  cell  blocks,  hundreds 
of  shoes,  football  suits  and  many  other  things 
for  the  prison.  Every  place  he  went  they  were 
anxious  to  get  his  trade,  so  they  would  give 
him  an  advance.  He  didn’t  have  to  run  out 


of  cash,  so  they  would  give  him  advances. 
They  finally  captured  him  in  New  Jersey,  I 
think.  That  ended  my  personal  instruction  in 
journalism.  But  I  had  entered  the  University 
of  Nevada  then. 

Did  you  always  expect  to  go  to  the  university 
and  study  ? 

I  had  hoped  to.  I’m  still  very  grateful 
to  my  father  and  his  reliable  salary  as  a  bus 
driver.  He  worked  long  hours  and  pretty 
strenuously.  I  worked  part-time  whenever 
I  could.  I  was  campus  correspondent  for 
the  Reno  Gazette  in  my  last  years.  I  got  $20 
a  month.  We  would  do  odd  jobs  around 
Reno — work  for  the  power  company,  clean 
the  ice  out  of  the  flumes  and  stuff  like  that. 
And  our  summer  work... I  struggled  through, 
although  salaries  were  meager,  but  the  prices 
were  low.  When  I  went  to  the  university,  I 
stayed  at  the  most  expensive  fraternity — a 
few  dollars  a  month  more  than  the  other 
ones — and  I  paid  room,  board  and  dues  for 
$37  a  month,  [laughter] 

When  you  left  Virginia  City  to  go  to  college,  did 
you  intend  to  return? 

I  didn’t  know  what  was  ahead.  I  returned 
almost  every  weekend,  because  my  father 
and  I  were  sort  of  the  correspondents  for 
the  Reno  Gazette.  In  those  days  the  Gazette 
was  the  largest  paper  in  the  state.  They  built 
themselves  up  by  huge  columns  of  personal 
items  from  country  correspondents — Virginia 
City,  Carson,  Genoa,  Fallon — big,  long  strings 
of  newsy  notes  from  Yerington  or  so  on,  the 
comings  and  goings  of  people  and  accidents 
and  any  kind  of  news.  They  built  a  real  big 
circulation  on  the  basis  of  these.  And  they 
paid  pretty  well — I  don’t  know  whether  it  was 
10  cents  or  20  cents  a  published  inch.  That 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


25 


helped  me  through  college.  I  would  go  home 
weekends  and  write  up  the  stuff  my  father  and 
mother  had  gathered  during  the  week.  That 
helped  me  get  through  college. 

Early  in  my  career  on  the  newspaper,  I  had 
to  go  up  to  Virginia  City  to  cover  a  major  fire. 
Even  though  there  was  a  firehouse  there  at 
the  time,  this  fire  in  1942  destroyed  about  30 
homes  on  a  ridge  called  the  Divide  between 
Gold  Hill  and  Virginia  City.  It’s  never  been 
the  same.  There  were  a  few  scattered  buildings 
left  there,  including  the  old  firehouse.  They 
rescued  the  hand-drawn  carts  out  of  there, 
which  are  now  preserved  in  the  Firemen’s 
Museum  up  there. 

I  remember  going  up  there  that  night 
with  some  photographer  from  our  paper.  I 
went  to  my  home.  My  father  had  evacuated 
some  of  his  neighbors  in  his  bus  and  took 
them  out  on  the  Geiger  Grade.  I  went  in  and 
was  phoning  an  account  of  the  fire  when  a  big 
billow  of  smoke  burst  right  into  the  house;  the 
wind  was  terribly  strong.  I  thought,  “Uh-oh,” 
so  I  signed  off.  [laughter]  Luckily,  the  wind 
suddenly  shifted,  and  the  fire  went  back  on 
itself  and  burned  out  before  it  could  hit  the 
main  part  of  the  city. 

The  Emergence  of  Tourism  in  Virginia 
City,  1930S-1980S 

Although  you  were  only  in  high  school,  did 
you  notice  any  effect  on  Virginia  City  when 
gambling  was  relegalized  in  1931  and  the 
divorce  residency  period  was  dropped? 

No.  A  few  of  the  saloons  had  card  games, 
but  not  with  a  house  dealer.  Guys  would 
just  sit  down  and  play  poker  or  those  kinds 
of  games.  They  didn’t  have  much  of  that;  it 
wasn’t  until  more  recently  that  they’ve  had 
more  gambling  clubs,  Of  course,  there  were 
slot  machines  at  an  early  stage,  but  not  like 


Reno  with  casino  gambling.  There  was  very 
little  effect  up  there,  I’m  sure. 

Did  people  have  feelings  about  the  law  one  way 
or  the  other? 

I  don’t  think  so.  Not  up  there.  If  I  recall 
right,  they  had  those  card  games  going  long 
before  it  was  legalized.  But  it  wasn’t  the  kind 
of  gambling  that  the  house  would  have  their 
own  dealers  there  and  the  games  set  up.  It 
was  just  a  place  where  guys  would  come,  play 
cards  at  night  and  maybe  have  a  few  drinks. 

But  that  was  during  Prohibition. 

[laughter]  Everybody  had  a  sort  of  secret 
way  of  learning  when  the  “Prohis”  were 
coming.  Those  were  the  Prohibition  agents. 
They  would  quickly  eradicate  traces  of  their 
bars — hide  the  booze  and  just  have  soft  drinks 
[laughter]  like  all  places. 

Even  though  I’ve  read  that  by  the  1920s  or  so, 
the  red  light  district  had  vanished  from  Virginia 
City,  people  have  told  me  otherwise.  Were  there 
still  houses  around  even  in  the  1950s? 

I  think  they  have  been  up  for  a  long  time. 
There  was  a  big  section  in  the  real  old  days  on 
D  Street  between  Union  and  I  think  Sutton 
Avenue.  There  are  remnants  of  these  houses. 
There  were  about  two  houses,  anyway,  all  the 
time.  But  that  was  all  they  had  left  of  it.  I  guess 
at  one  time  the  whole  street  there  for  about 
two  blocks  was  a  solid... but  most  of  those  little 
houses  had  gone  by  the  time  I  was  in  school. 
I  think  there  were  still  two  there.  We  weren’t 
allowed  to  go  near  them,  [laughter]  But  I  think 
there  were  two  almost  continuously,  or  at  least 
one  old  gal  for  years  and  decades  probably! 

Did  you  know  Lucius  Beebe? 


26 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


Yes,  but  not  very  well,  because  I  moved 
away.  I  just  met  him  casually  off  and  on. 
During  journalistic  affairs  I  would  run  into 
him.  My  father  didn’t  care  much  for  him,  but 
they  tolerated  him!  [laughter]  He  was  quite 
a  dude,  and  the  old-timers  were  resentful 
of  him — I  don’t  know  why.  He  did  help  to 
stimulate  the  tourist  trade  with  his  colorful 
Territorial  Enterprise. 

I  think  Charles  H.  Clegg  was  Beebe’s 
collaborator;  they  lived  in  the  same  house. 
Clegg  was  a  photographer.  They  put  out  a  lot 
of  railroad  books  and  illustrated  many  of  them 
with  Clegg’s  photos  of  the  old  trains.  They  got 
really  interested  in  the  V  &  T  Railroad,  and 
they  put  out  a  complete  and  very  good  book 
on  the  V  &  T  Railroad.  Clegg,  after  Beebe’s 
death,  put  out  a  book  called  The  Best  of  Beebe. 
He  collected  Beebe’s  columns  and....  Clegg  has 
since  died,  too.  He  moved  to  California  and 
died  down  there. 

Why  did  they  go  to  Virginia  City  in  the  first 
place ? 

I’m  not  quite  sure,  but  I  think  because 
of  Beebe’s  interest  in  railroads.  He  wrote 
several  good  studies  of  the  Twentieth  Century 
Limited  and  all  those  big  trains.  He  was  really 
a  train  buff;  he  knew  a  lot  about  locomotives. 
And  he  wrote  his  books  while  he  was  up  there. 

Then  Beebe  got  the  idea  of  reviving  the 
Territorial  Enterprise.  [Lucius  Beebe  and 
Charles  Clegg  purchased  the  defunct  Virginia 
City  News  in  1951  and  revived  the  old 
Territorial  Enterprise  by  renaming  their  paper 
the  Territorial  Enterprise  and  Virginia  City 

News  in  1952.  Beebe  sold  the  newspaper  in 
1960. — Ed.]  He  put  it  out — it  was  very  colorful 
the  way  he  did  it.  He  was  a  little  lenient  on  the 
truth  of  things,  but  it  made  him  very  colorful. 
The  typography  of  his  paper  was  interesting. 
He  had  some  old-time  type  that  he  ran  across 


somewhere.  They  used  that  for  their  headlines 
and  for  advertising  illustrations. 

Lucius  Beebe  was  quite  a  picturesque 
character  himself.  He  affected  what  they 
call  broadcloth  coats — these  long-tailed 
swallowtail... not  swallowtail,  but  gentlemen’s 
coats,  fancy  vests,  big,  broad-brimmed  hats. 
So,  as  I  said,  some  of  the  old-timers  thought 
he  was  pretty  snooty  and  snobby,  but  he 
did  do  a  lot  of  good  in  stimulating  national 
interest  in  Virginia  City.  People  that  took  over 
the  Enterprise  off  and  on  in  the  years  since 
have  never  matched  him,  although  they  tried 
hard.  They  press  too  hard  on  the  Mark  Twain 
stuff  which  has  been  used  over  and  over  again. 
Local  people  say  they’re  tired  of  being  Mark 
Twained  to  death!  [laughter] 

When  did  Virginia  City  start  becoming  a 
tourist  destination ? 

In  the  late  1930s.. .yes,  around  the  mid¬ 
thirties  they  started  coming  in.  There’s  a 
man  named  Paul  Smith,  a  chubby  little  fellow 
that  got  a  little  store  that  would  sell  curios 
and  souvenirs.  It’s  now  where  the  Bucket  of 
Blood  is.  I  forget  the  name  of  his  little  place, 
but  he  would  really  hustle  and  get  out.  He 
put  flyers  on  cars,  and  people  started  coming 
up.  He  would  do  that  in  Los  Angeles.  They 
regard  him  as  the  first  real  tourist  stimulator. 
And  then,  of  course,  Lucius  Beebe  started  up 
nationwide.  I  think  the  “Bonanza”  TV  series 
did  some  help  to  it,  too.  Can  you  remember 
the  Cartwrights  and  their  mythical  ranch, 
which  was  supposed  to  be  right  next  to 
Virginia  city?  [laughter]  They  helped.  I  know 
a  lot  of  people  used  to  come  up  and  ask  the 
Virginia  City  people  where  the  Ponderosa 
Ranch  was.  It  got  so  they  would  direct  them 
down  the  Six-Mile  Canyon  [laughs]  where 
they  would  wind  up  out  in  the  desert  by  the 
Carson  River — couldn’t  find  the  Ponderosa! 


Tyrus  R.  Cobb 


27 


Some  of  the  real  locals — the  older  ones 
whod  been  in  Virginia  City  a  long  time — 
resent  some  of  these  new  people  in  the 
businesses  up  there.  They  don’t  like  their 
lack  of  knowledge,  the  fantastic  stories  they 
tell  with  great  authority  or  a  sign  on  a  store 
saying  Established  1867,  when  it  was  only 
built  two  or  three  years  ago.  They  resent  those 
things,  but  it’s  always  that  way  between  the 
home  guards  and  the  Johnny-come-latelies. 
[laughter] 


Edward  S.  Colletti 


Reminiscences  of  Life  in  Virginia  City, 
1920S-1950S 

Edward  Colletti:  My  father,  Joseph 
Domenic  Colletti,  was  born  in  Turin,  Italy, 
in  1874.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1887  or 
1888.  There  was  six  brothers  all  come  over 
about  the  same  time.  They  had  an  uncle  in 
Casper,  Wyoming.  I  guess  it’s  coal  they  mine 
in  Casper.  They  all  come  over  to  go  to  work 
at  the  coal  mine. 

Then  my  dad  came  into  Nevada  in  about 
1900  to  Virginia  City.  He  was  just  a  kid  then;  I 
guess  he  was  the  youngest  of  the  six.  He  stayed 
here  in  Virginia  City  until  he  died  in  1940. 

He  came  to  Virginia  City  to  go  to  work 
in  the  mines.  He  worked  in  the  Yellow  Jacket, 
Crown  Point,  the  Union  and  Consolidated 
Virginia.  He  always  told  us  the  Yellow  Jacket 
in  Gold  Hill  was  the  hottest  and  the  richest 
mine  he  ever  worked  in.  It  was  hot  down 
there.  And  he  got  better  wages  in  there.. .1 
think  he  was  making  $5  a  day  then,  but  most 
of  the  mines  were  paying  $4,  $4.50. 


My  dad  worked  in  the  Yellow  Jacket  mine 
until  he  lost  an  eye  about  1910.  They  were 
drilling,  and  a  piece  of  the  drill  chipped  off, 
bounced  up  and  put  his  eye  out.  Then  he 
didn’t  work  for,  oh,  three  or  four  years,  and 
then  he  went  back  to  work  over  around  the 
mills  doing  work  in  refining  the  ore.  After 
that  he  retired  in  about  1925  or  1926.  He  had 
a  little  pension  coming  in  from  losing  his  eye. 
Then  he  did  a  little  work  around  prospecting 
in  Virginia  City  and  different  mines  around 
and  making  shipments.  He  was  pretty  good  at 
spotting  the  ore.  He  might  have  done  a  little 
high  grading  between!  [laughter]  That’s  taking 
a  little  off  the  top,  like  most  of  the  miners 
used  to  do.  They  knew  a  high-grade  streak, 
and  they’d  pocket  some  of  the  high  grade. 
Then  they’d  take  it  to  somebody  that’d  buy 
it,  who  would  know  it  and  give  them  about 
half  of  what  it  was  worth.  Then  they’d  sell  it 
to  the  mint. 

Kathryn  Totton:  What  kind  of  work  did  your 
father  do  in  the  mines ? 


30 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


Well,  the  miners  did  all  the  work — hed 
drill,  put  in  the  rounds,  did  blasting,  used  a 
hand  muck  to  muck  it  out,  put  timber  in,  lay 
the  rail  for  the  cars. 

It  wasn’t  particularly  specialized ? 

No,  they  did  everything. 

How  did  the  family  get  along  during  those  years 
that  he  was  laid  off  after  he  lost  his  eye? 

Well,  the  state  industrial  commission  was 
paying  Dad  support.  They  paid  out  a  little  bit 
on  it,  you  know.  Then  hed  saved  a  little  bit. 

Did  your  father  belong  to  the  union  all  those 
years  he  was  mining? 

No,  he  didn’t.  I  don’t  think  there  was  a 
union  around  here  at  that  time.  There 
might  have  been  one,  but  most  of  the  miners 
up  here  didn’t  belong  to  it.  There  was  a  Miners’ 
Union  in  the  early  days,  but  he  didn’t  belong 
to  it. ..not  that  I  can  remember.  He  was  a  life 
member  of  the  Odd  Fellows  Lodge,  though. 
They  used  to  have  Christmas  parties....  They 
still  have  a  lodge  here,  but  I  think  there’s  only 
a  few  members  left  in  it.  They  still  have  the 
building  down  there. 

What  about  your  mother?  Where  was  she  born? 

She  was  born  in  Turin,  Italy — same  town. 
Her  name  was  Marguerita  Vivenza.  She  and 
my  dad  come  over  about...  well,  after  he  got 
settled  here  he  sent  for  her,  and  she  came 
over.  Both  of  them  had  big  ranches  over  there 
in  Italy.  They  come  here  just  before  World 
War  I,  and  the  government  took  the  ranches 
away  from  them  over  there  at  about  the  time 
World  War  I  started.  So  they  got  paid  off  and 
then  came  over.  The  ranch  my  dad  farmed 


was  over  600  acres.  They  built  a  big  airport 
there  during  World  War  I — one  of  the  main 
airports  in  Turin,  after  the  government  took 
it  over. 

After  your  father  was  settled  in  Nevada,  when 
he  sent  for  your  mother,  did  she  come  directly 
to  Virginia  City? 

Right  to  Virginia  City,  yes.  They  had  a  guy 
here  by  the  name  of  Charlie  Noce;  he  had  a  big 
store  and  more  or  less  a  hotel  out  the  north 
end,  and  he  helped  a  lot  of  people  settle  down 
here  in  Virginia  City.  He  sold  all  the  groceries 
to  them — they  were  all  working — so  he  made 
himself  a  little  bit  of  money,  too.  He  would 
rent  them  a  room  or  rent  them  a  little  shack 
or  some  kind. 

Did  Charlie  Noce  have  anything  to  do  with 
encouraging  people  to  come  from  Italy? 

I  think  he  may  have.  But  my  dad  was  here 
already.  I  guess  that’s  probably  one  of  the 
reasons  why  they  all  come  over,  and  they  all 
settled  in  Wyoming... Colorado.  My  dad  and 
one  of  his  brothers  were  the  only  two  out  of 
the  six  that  come  to  Virginia  City. 

Is  the  building  that  Charlie  Noce  had  still 
standing? 

No.  It’s  nothing  but  a  big  lot  there  now. 
There’s  a  little  odd-looking  house  out  there  as 
you  go  out  of  town  on  the  left-hand  side  that 
they’re  fixing  up  now — that  used  to  be  where 
Charlie  Noce  lived. 

Did  you  know  him? 

No,  I  didn’t. 

Did  your  mother  speak  English  when  she  came? 


Edward  S.  Colletti 


31 


Oh,  yes,  she  did.  She  spoke  pretty  good.  I 
remember  when  we  all  were  going  to  school — 
her  and  a  couple  of  other  Italian  women  used 
to  go  to  school  with  us,  and  shed  pick  it  up  just 
like  that.  She  learned  a  lot  about  the  English 
language  from  dropping  in  to  school  once 
in  a  while,  just  to  see  how  we  were  doing! 
[laughter]  More  or  less  she  could  speak  it  and 
understand  it. 

Mothers  used  to  visit  school  more  often 
than  they  do  now,  I  guess.  I  don’t  think  I’ve 
been.. .when  my  boy  went  to  school  I  think 
I  probably  went  to  school  about  three  or 
four  times  all  the  time  he  was  going  through 
school. 

Well,  you  didn’t  need  to  learn  English,  though! 
What  did  your  mother  do?  Did  she  work 
outside  the  home  at  all? 

No,  no.  She  raised  six  kids — six  of  us.  That 
kept  her  pretty  busy.  Then  when  we  all  grew 
up  she  relaxed  and  had  fun.  She’d  take  trips 
around.  She’d  go  to  San  Francisco,  around 
there.  .  .  just  travel  around.  A  couple  of  the 
other  women  who  were  free  like  her  after 
they’d  raised  their  families,  they’d  get  together 
and  have  parties  and  do  a  little  traveling. 

When  were  you  born? 

Nineteen  seventeen.  I  was  born  in  Virginia 
City  at  St.  Mary’s  Hospital  right  down  here. 

A  lot  of  people  I’ve  talked  to  were  born  right 
at  home. 

Yes.  Well,  my  other  two  brothers  were 
born  at  home.  At  the  time  I  was  born,  I  guess 
my  mother  was  kind  of  sick,  so  she  had  to 
go  in  the  hospital.  [F.  W.]  Hodgins  was  the 
doctor.  He  put  her  in  the  hospital  a  couple 
days  before  I  was  born  just  to  keep  an  eye 


on  her.  Then  Bill  Marks’s  aunt,  Mrs.  Hattie 
Bradshaw,  was  at  the  hospital  at  the  time,  and 
she  was  more  or  less  the  midwife. 

And  you  had  four  brothers? 

Yes,  four  brothers  and  one  sister.  I  was  the 
fourth.  There  was  two  younger  brothers — a 
brother  and  a  sister,  another  brother,  and  I 
was  the  fourth. 

There’s  still  four  of  us  alive — three  boys 
and  the  girl.  I  got  a  brother  in  Hawthorne, 
Nevada,  a  brother  in  Reno  and  my  sister  in 
San  Francisco.  They  didn’t  go  too  far.  And  we 
were  all  together  here;  we  had  more  or  less  of  a 
reunion  about  three  weeks  ago,  when  they  had 
the  high  school  reunion  up  here.  They  were  all 
here.  My  brother  in  Reno. .  .we  see  each  other 
quite  often,  and  my  brother  in  Hawthorne 
comes  in  quite  often.  Well,  they’re  all  retired 
now — sitting  around  doing  nothing,  relaxing. 

Why  didn’t  they  stay  in  Virginia  City? 

Oh,  I  don’t  know.  Just  had  to  get  out  and 
do  something  different.  My  brother  in  Reno 
[Michael  Colletti]  worked  quite  a  few  years 
at  the  highway  department;  he  was  a  division 
engineer  for  32  years.  When  he  settled  down, 
he  bought  a  home  in  Reno  because  that’s 
where  his  headquarters  were — down  at  the 
Coney  Island  Restaurant.  He  bought  a  home 
down  in  Reno  30  years  ago,  and  he  decided  to 
stay  there,  and  he  went  to  school  down  there. 

Where  was  your  family  home  in  Virginia  City? 

It  was  up  on  A  Street  out  on  the  north 
end,  between  Mill  and  Sutton  streets.  There’s 
a  big  glory  hole  there  now  and  one  house  left 
alongside  of  it — the  Berrys  live  in  it  now.  All 
there  is  now  is  an  entrance  to  a  big  open  pit.  A 
lot  of  gold  and  silver  came  out  of  the  open  pit 


32 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


that  is  left  up  there  now.  They  took  out  maybe 
$400,000  or  $500,000  up  in  there,  when  the 
pit  started  in  1942. 

Did  your  family  home  have  electricity? 

Oh,  yes.  It  didn’t  have,  I  guess,  when  my 
folks  first  moved  in,  but  they  had  it  put  in.  In 
fact,  one  of  my  brothers  rewired  the  house 
when  he  was  still  in  high  school;  he  rewired 
the  whole  thing.  He  was  a  good  electrician,  a 
good  mechanic. 

And  we  had  hot  and  cold  water.  The  hot 
water  was  in  the  stove  in  the  kitchen;  it  was 
heated  by  coils  in  the  stove.  That’s  the  only 
way  they  used  to  get  their  hot  water.  Some 
of  those  stoves  had  built-in  hot  water  tables, 
you  know — sections  of  the  stove  where  you 
put  the  fire  box  right  alongside.. .get  a  little 
hot  water  that  way.  We  had  the  regular  big 
hot  water  tank,  which  was  connected  with 
the  stove  here  to  use  the  heat. 

There  did  the  water  come  from? 

From  the  regular  flume  line  that  comes  in 
here.  We  had  regular  pipelines  down  there. 
We  get  the  same  water  that  we  had  years  and 
years  ago — same  flume  line  and  everything — 
from  Marlette  Lake. 

Yes.  But  now  you  have  water  year-round.  I’ve 
heard  that  it  used  to  be  you  didn’t  have  water 
in  the  winter. 

Some  winters  we’d  have  it. ..well,  the 
flumes’d  all  freeze  up;  a  pipeline  would  burst 
or  something.  Yes,  a  lot  of  times  we  used  to 
go  up  there — all  us  kids  in  high  school,  you 
know — nothing  to  do — and  we’d  have  to  go 
up  on  the  pipeline  and  flume  line  and  muck 
out  the  flumes.  We’d  take  all  that  ice  and  stuff 
out  to  get  the  water  coming  in.  There’s  been 


times  it  was  two  and  three  months  before  the 
water  could  run.  An  early  freeze  would  come 
along  about  December,  and  then  sometimes 
you  wouldn’t  get  that  water  running  until  the 
middle  of  March! 

That  did  you  do  in  the  meantime? 

Oh,  we  hauled  water  in.  And  we’d  use  it 
very  sparingly.  A  lot  of  people  would  go  to 
Carson  or  Reno,  somewhere,  to  one  of  those 
swimming  pools  like  Carson  Hot  Springs  and 
go  swimming.  Then  they’d  wash  their  clothes 
out  at  the  laundry.  In  the  early  days  they  never 
had  a  lot  of  hot  water  in  the  house  or.,  .most 
of  them  had  outhouses  back  in  the  early  days. 
Of  course,  we  used  a  lot  of  perfumes  and  stuff, 
[laughter] 

Did  your  parents  speak  Italian  at  home  when 
you  were  growing  up? 

Oh,  yes.  Yes,  they  did.  I  could  speak  Italian 
until  I  got  about  in  the  eighth  grade,  and  then 
I  forgot  all  about....  Well,  I  could  understand 
it  and  speak  a  little  bit,  but  not  like  I  should 
have.  My  mother  learned  to  speak  English 
fairly  good,  and  she  would  always  talk  to  us 
in  English  instead  of  Italian,  you  know?  So  we 
just  got  away  from  it. 

Were  there  many  other  Italian  families  in 
Virginia  City? 

Oh,  there  was  a  lot  of  them.  I’d  say  about 
a  fourth  of  the  population  were  Italian.  In 
September  or  October  all  the  Italians  got 
to  making  wine.  They’d  have  about  five  big 
carloads  of  grapes  come  in,  and  all  the  Italian 
families  would  buy  two  or  three  tons  of  grapes. 
Everybody  was  making  wine!  Yes,  they’d  have 
three  or  four  boxcars  of  grapes  come  in.  They 
would  make  wine  in  the  cellars  of  their  houses. 


Edward  S.  Colletti 


33 


The  Rossos,  Antunoviches,  Gavazzis — all  of 
them — used  to  make  wine.  Ito  [Italo]  Gavazzi’s 
dad  lived  here  for  years,  and  he  used  to  make  a 
lot  of  wine.  Martin  Rossos  dad,  Paul  Giraudo... 
all  of  them  made  wine.  You  could  make  a 
couple  hundred  gallons  of  wine  at  that  time. 
But  they  didn’t  stop  at  a  couple  hundred;  they’d 
go  for  500  or  600.  They’d  have  a  wine  party 
once  in  a  while — get  a  bunch  of  guys  together 
and  have  salami  and  cheese  and  French  bread 
and  drink  that  wine  like  it  was  going  out  of 
style,  [laughter] 

There  did  they  get  the  grapes ? 

They  imported  them  from,  I  guess,  Napa 
Valley.  That’s  when  the  railroad 
[Virginia  and  Truckee]  used  to  come  in 
through  here.  They’d  get  the  carloads  of  grapes 
on  the  railroad. 

How  did  they  go  about  making  the  wine ? 

Well,  they’d  crush  them  up.  My  dad 
used  to  wear  those  rubber  boots;  he’d  say. 
“I’m  a  mixer.”  But  then  all  the  kids  in  the 
neighborhood  would  like  to  come  over  and 
put  on  those  boots  and  crush  that  wine!  That’s 
a  fact!  [laughter]  That  used  to  be  fun — eating 
grapes  and  smashing  the  grapes  for  wine. 

How  long  did  that  wine  making  go  on? 

Up  until  about  six  or  seven  years  ago  they 
used  to  make  wine.  A  lot  of  those  old-timers 
are  gone  now.  They  all  passed  away.  And  the 
kids  don’t  mess  around  with  it.  I  doubt  if 
there’s  anybody  now  making  wine. 

Was  the  wine  any  good? 

Oh,  it  was  good  stuff.. .oh,  yes!  It  was  good. 
Once  in  a  while  my  dad  let  a  gallon  go.  If  a  real 


good  friend  would  come  in  from  Carson  City 
or  Reno,  he’d  always  give  them  a  gallon.  But 
we  drank  most  of  it.  Well,  he  didn’t  want  us  to. 
. .  he  had  a  barrel  there  that  he  watered  down 
half  and  half — half  wine  and  half  water.  That 
was  the  stuff  that  we  were  supposed  to  drink. 
But  we  used  to  get  in  the  real  good  stuff,  too. 

Did  you  have  it  with  meals? 

Oh,  yes,  any  time.  We  used  to  get  a  gallon 
or  two,  hide  it  out  and  bring  it  over  to  the 
North  End  Gang’s  cabin.  All  the  kids  in  the 
north  end  would  have  a  nip  or  two  of  that 
wine.,  .you  know,  sit  there  and  play  cards. 
We  used  to  play  poker,  bridge,  pedro  and 
pinochle.  We  used  to  have  a  lot  of  fun  playing 
cards. 

Did  your  folks  belong  to  Italian  social 
organizations?  Were  there  things  like  that  in 
Virginia  City? 

No,  there  wasn’t.  My  mother  used  to  go 
to  church  a  lot.  In  fact,  she  made  us  all  go  to 
church.  My  dad  never  went  to  church.  He 
didn’t  care  whether  we  went  to  church  or  not. 
But  my  mother  was  the  one  that  was  making 
sure  that  we  went  to  church.  All  of  us  had  to 
go  through  the  altar;  we  were  all  altar  boys.  I 
hated  that!  Get  all  dressed  up  to  go  to  church. 
I  could  hardly  wait  to  get  home  to  take  all  our 
Sunday-go-to-meeting  clothes  off  and  get  out 
and  tear  into  things  again! 

Who  were  the  priests  here  when  you  were 
growing  up? 

Father  Phil  O’Riley  was  one.  Father 
O’Riley  was  the  best.  Before  him  it  was  Father 
Daniel  Murphy.  Father  Murphy’s  the  one  that 
used  to  clobber  us  all  every  now  and  then.  We 
were  altar  boys,  and  when  we  did  something 


34 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


wrong,  boy,  he’d  come  down  and  cuff  us.  But 
old  Father  O’Riley,  he’d  say,  “Boys,  boys,  take 
it  easy”  He  was  a  goodhearted  soul.  It’d  be 
raining  and  snowing,  and  he’d  say,  “Lovely 
day.”  [laughter)  Murphy  was  here  for  about 
maybe  15, 16  years.  O’Riley  was  here  probably 
that  long,  too.  That’s  the  only  two  I  knew  while 
I  was  up  here.  But  then  there’s  been  a  lot  of 
them  since  then. 

Were  they  involved  in  the  community? 

Well,  yes,  and  just  like  they  are  now, 
because  they  have  church  functions  and  stuff 
like  that. 

What  about  charity  activities? 

They  used  to  have  card  parties  and  stuff 
like  that — raffles  and  bingo  games.  That’s 
about  all.  The  Odd  Fellows  and  the  Rebekahs 
used  to  have  parties,  too.. .social  events. 

When  we  were  kids  we  used  to  stay  in 
the  north  end,  more  or  less.  There  were  the 
North  End  Gang  and  the  South  End  Gang, 
and  when  a  couple  of  us  would  stray  into  the 
South  End  Gang,  the  South  End  boys  would 
put  the  run  on  us.  So  we  stayed  out  at  the 
north  end  mostly. 

We  built  ourselves  a  couple  of  cabins  out 
there.  We  used  to  have  parties  in  the  cabins, 
go  sleigh  riding  down  the  Six-Mile  Canyon, 
and  just  generally  have  fun..  .  snowballing 
each  other  and  having  parties.  We  had  a  pond 
up  in  Byrne’s  Ravine — dug  out  a  little  pond 
there — and  we  got  the  water  from  the  flume 
that  went  out  past  up  above  the  pond.  We’d 
drill  a  hole  in  the  wooden  flume  to  get  some 
water  down  in  the  pond.  The  water  used  to 
run  out  the  end  of  town  and  way  down...  they 
let  it  run  loose  anyway,  so  we  might  as  well 
have  a  little  bit  down  for  our  pond.  And  most 
of  us  kids,  at  that  time,  learned  to  swim  up 


there.  We  used  to  have  fun  swimming  in  the 
summertime. 

Were  you  the  North  End  Gang  just  because 
you  all  happened  to  live  on  that  part  of  town? 

We  lived  on  the  north  end,  yes.  We 
wouldn’t  dare  go  past  the  dividing  line.  Then 
it  became  the  south  end  up  to  Divide.  I  guess 
Gold  Hill  had  their  own  [gang]. 

Us  kids  used  to  climb  around  on  those 
hills  a  lot  of  times  in  the  summertime — go 
down  the  canyon  or  up  on  top  of  Mount 
Davidson,  wander  around  in  the  hills  quite 
a  bit.  We  would  hardly  ever  come  into  town, 
downtown,  up  the  main  street,  until  later 
on  when  we  got  to  be  in  high  school — 13, 
14  years  old,  I  think.  But  outside  of  that  we 
were  always  doing  something  out  off  the  main 
street.  We  got  by,  and  we  had  our  own  fun. 

Well,  once  in  a  while  we’d  take  a  run 
into  Reno.  A  guy  up  there  by  the  name  of  A1 
Evans — Evans  brothers — had  an  old  Chase 
car.  We’d  pile  about  10  or  12  of  us  kids  on 
it  and  take  a  trip  into  Reno  to  see  a  show  or 
something.  Had  to  push  it  halfway  back  up 
Geiger  Grade  or  go  down  the  Carson  River.  It 
was  all  right  going  down,  but  on  the  way  back, 
we’d  all  have  to  get  out  and  walk  up  the  hill. 

As  kids,  we  always  had  a  little  money. 
Most  of  us  did  little  odds  and  ends.  We’d  go 
rake  somebody’s  yard,  mow  a  lawn  or  sell 
bottles  to  the  bootleggers. 

There  were  a  few  of  those  around? 

Oh,  yes,  there  was  quite  a  few.  Well,  during 
Prohibition,  you  know,  all  these  places  were 
open,  but  they  weren’t  selling  soda  water. 
Every  now  and  then  they’d  come  in  and  they’d 
get  a  shot  of  whiskey  or  beer.  The  “Prohis” 
[Prohibition  officers]  used  to  come  up,  check 
the  town  out,  but  the  guy  that  was  the  head  of 


Edward  S.  Colletti 


35 


the  deal  was  born  and  raised  in  Virginia  City, 
and  when  hed  come  into  town  hed  always 
call  the  sheriff  and  say,  well,  he  had  to  make 
a  visit,  and  the  sheriff  would  go  around  and 
notify  everybody. day  low.  [laughter]  That 
was  Benny  James;  he  was  the  sheriff  here  for 
years.  He  was  born  and  raised  here,  too.  He 
had  a  saloon  before  he  went  in  to  be  sheriff. 
A  regular  guy. 

Which  places  were  open  then? 

Oh,  a  lot  of  places  were  open — the  Crystal 
Bar,  the  Delta,  Pastime  Club,  Sawdust  Corner, 
Bucket  of  Blood,  Union  Brewery,  Virginia 
Hotel,  Silver  Queen — well,  they  called  it  “The 
Cap”  instead  of  the  Silver  Queen  [because 
it  used  to  be  called  the  Capitol  Saloon]  — 
Virginia  Club,  and  a  few  more.  It  was  quite  a 
few.  They  had  a  lot  of  good  drinkers  in  this 
town.  A  lot  of  those  miners  used  to  love  to 
get  into  a  bar  and  have  a  little  nip  now  and 
then,  [laughter]  They  still  do,  but  there’s  no 
miners  here.  All  the  people  that  worked  for 
the  county  or  around  to....  odds  and  ends, 
they  always  slipped  in  and  had  a  beer  or  two. 

In  the  1920s  I  imagine  there  must  have 
been  maybe  5,000  or  6,000  people  living  in 
Virginia  City.. .easy  that.  Yes,  the  town  has 
changed  quite  a  bit. 

Have  you  ever  seen  any  pictures  of 
Chinatown  in  Virginia  City?  That  was  quite 
a  spot  down  there.  This  was  when  we  were 
kids  back  in  the  1920s,  or  before  that.  I  can 
remember  there  must  have  been  a  couple  of 
hundred  Chinamen  living  there.  They  had 
regular  stores  and  everything  down  there. 

They  had  three  or  four  Chinese  laundries — 
one  up  alongside  the  courthouse  on  B  Street, 
two  or  three  on  the  north  end  of  town  out 
there  where  the  old  assay  office  is  now,  and 
another  one  out  there  just  the  other  side  of 
Sutton  Avenue.  There  used  to  be  quite  a  few 


Chinamen.  Up  on  B  Street  they  had  a  big 
three-story  building  where  a  lot  of  Chinese 
were  living.  They  used  to  work  around  town 
here.  A  lot  of  them  worked  in  gardening, 
and  a  lot  of  them  worked....  Where  the 
Delta  gift  shop  is,  that  used  to  be  a  Chinese 
restaurant,  and  there  was  a  Chinese  restaurant 
alongside  of  the  Bucket  of  Blood.  There  was 
another  Chinese  restaurant  down  at  the 
Silver  Queen — one  on  each  side  of  the  Silver 
Queen  there.  They  had  five  or  six  Chinese 
restaurants. 

They  had  a  big  Chinese  store  underneath 
where  Julia  Bulette’s  Saloon  is  now.  And  a 
big  dry  goods  store  and  general  store  down 
there  on  D  Street  called  Chung  Kee’s.  Charlie 
Sam...  he  had  a  business.  Wally  Chinghi  had 
the  Owl  Cafe  over  there,  alongside  the  Bucket 
of  Blood,  where  the  extension  of  the  Bucket 
of  Blood  is  now. 

Yes,  there  was  quite  a  few  Chinamen  here. 
They  had  a  regular  Chinese  church.  They  used 
to  leave  it  open,  and  some  of  us  kids  used  to 
go  in  there  and  steal  the  firecrackers  and  steal 
the  candy — Chinese  candy  they  used  to  put 
on  the  altar.  They  had  the  figurines  in  there. 
They  had  a  regular,  beautiful  Chinese  church. 
Then  they  locked  it  up. 

Finally  the  Chinamen  all  disappeared. 
A  lot  of  the  old  ones  went  back  to  China  for 
some  reason  or  another — back  to  China  to 
die,  I  guess.  Then  that  town  just  fell  apart.  But 
as  far  as  kids... I  only  remember  about  four  or 
five  young  Chinese  kids  that  grew  up  around 
here  when  we  were  kids — not  more  than  four 
or  five  at  the  most. 

Did  you  associate  with  the  Chinese  kids  at  all? 

Oh,  yes,  sure.  Went  to  school  with  them. 
In  fact,  I  saw  this  Raymond  Chinghi  here  last 
year.  He’s  a  dentist  down  out  of  Fresno.  He 
went  to  school  here. 


36 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


There  was  a  few  Indian  kids  going  to 
school  here,  too.  In  fact,  they  had  two  or  three 
different  Indian  camps  in  town  when  we  were 
kids — one  down  by  the  Six-Mile  Canyon 
across  the  street  from  the  old  brewery  down 
there,  and  one  right  over  here  where  you  turn 
down  that  truck  route. 

I  think  I  graduated  with  a  couple  of  Indian 
kids  from  the  First  Ward  School — an  Indian 
girl  and  an  Indian  boy.  The  first  three  grades 
went  to  the  First  Ward  School,  which  was  the 
old  school  that  was  out  here,  out  by  the  freight 
station.  Then  after  the  third  grade  we  all  went 
to  fourth  grade  at  the  Fourth  Ward.  I  think 
they  discontinued  the  First  Ward  School  out 
there  in  about  1927  or  1928, 1  guess,  maybe  a 
little  bit  later  than  that. 

Did  the  Indian  boy  and  girl  go  on  to  the  Fourth 
Ward  School  with  you ? 

Oh,  yes.  Yes,  one  of  them  graduated,  but 
the  girl  left,  I  guess,  when  she  was  in  about 
the  seventh  grade.  A  lot  of  them  took  of  C 
about  that  time. 

The  girl’s  name  was  June  Cooper,  and  the 
boy’s  name  was  Edmund  Jack.  He  had  another 
brother  by  the  name  of  Raymond  Jack.  Then 
there  was  Raymond  David.  There  were  only 
four  that  I  can  remember  now. 

Do  you  know  to  what  tribe  they  belonged ? 

I  guess  they  must  have  been  Paiutes. 
-  .Washo  or  Paiutes.  They  were  here  quite 
awhile. 

What  did  their  parents  do? 

They  more  or  less  did  a  lot  of  the  laundry 
around  here  or  housework — cleaned — when 
I  was  a  kid.  They’d  go  from  place  to  place  to 
do  a  little  housework.  That’s  about  it. 


Do  you  have  any  idea  what  became  of  their 
parents? 

Well,  they,  as  I  remember,  died  right  here 
around  town.  And  the  children  grew  up  and 
left  ...went  to  the  Indian  school.  I  guess  if  their 
mother  and  father  died  or  something,  they’d 
go  down  to  Stewart  Indian  School.  I  don’t 
know  what  happened  after  that.  I  guess  they 
were  pretty  much  out  on  their  own. 

My  first  job  out  of  high  school  was  for 
Zeb  Kendall,  who  was  president  of  the  Con. 
Virginia  mine.  [Zeb  Kendall  bought  the  Con. 
Virginia  mine  in  1919. — Ed.]  I  worked  in  a 
little  mill  which  the  Con.  Virginia  had  built 
down  by  the  open  pit  where  our  house  on  A 
Street  used  to  be.  Zeb  Kendall  milled  a  lot  of 
property  up  there. 

Zeb  Kendall  was  quite  a  character.  He 
loved  to  gamble.  He  wasn’t  much  of  a  drinking 
man,  but  he  sure  loved  to  gamble.  He’d  stay 
up  night  and  day  to  gamble.  When  we  had 
the  Delta  Saloon  after  World  War  II,  he  used 
to  come  down  and  sit  around  there,  and 
with  anybody  who  would  come  in  he’d  play 
pinochle,  cribbage,  poker.  He’d  gamble  at 
anything.  He  was  getting  pretty  well  crippled 
up,  getting  pretty  old  then.  All  his  kids  were 
gone,  and  his  wife..,  she  took  pretty  good  care 
of  him.  She’d  come  down  and  pick  him  up 
whenever  he’d  want  to  come  home — bring 
him  downtown  and  pick  him  up  whenever  he 
was  ready  to  go  home.  Sometimes  it’d  be  two 
or  three  days  later,  but  he’d  sit  there  and  play. 

Yes,  I  guess  he  went  through  a  few  million 
dollars  in  his  life — made  it,  lost  it,  made  it,  lost 
it.  He  lost  it  mostly  in  the  Con.  Virginia  mine 
down  there.  He  sold  a  lot  of  stock,  and  he  built 
it  up;  then  he’d  do  a  little  more  work  and  lose 
that.  Then  he’d  go  back  and  raise  some  more 
money.  He  had  a  lot  of  friends  in. ..spent  a  lot 
of  time  around  San  Francisco.  I  guess  that’s 


Edward  S.  Colletti 


37 


where  he  picked  up  a  lot  of  his  loot.. .put  it 
into  the  mine. 

He  hired  local  people  to  work  there? 

Yes,  he’d  give  jobs  to  everybody  that  he 
knew  around  here.  In  fact,  when  I  got  out  of 
high  school  and  he  had  the  mill  going  there, 
first  thing  he  did  was  give  me  a  job,  put  me 
to  work.  We  were  almost  neighbors — we  lived 
about  a  block  apart.  Yes,  I  worked  for  him 
around  the  mill  for  about  three  years. 

They  had  a  mill  that  was  extracting  the 
gold  and  silver  from  the  ore.  The  trucks’d 
come  in  loaded  with  rock,  and  they’d  dump 
it  on  a  flat  plate — what  they  called  a  grizzly 
[a  device  to  keep  oversized  rocks  out  of  the 
crusher — Ed.].  Then  the  rocks  would  go 
down  to  another  bin,  and  from  that  bin  they’d 
go  into  a  crushing  plant,  then  into  another 
bin  that  would  feed  the  mill.  They’d  run  the 
ore  through  a  crusher,  and  then  they’d  run 
it  through  a  ball  mill.  Then  the  fines’d  go 
through  these  tanks —  they’d  put  cyanide 
in  them,  and  the  gold  would  all  settle  to  the 
bottom.  The  cyanide  was  in  layers,  and  they’d 
empty  out  a  tank  and  scrape  the  layers.  Then 
they’d  retort  it,  get  the  gold  and  silver  in  the 
bars  and  send  it  to  the  mint. 

And  as  a  kid  just  out  of  high  school,  what 
exactly  did  you  do  in  that  process? 

Well,  I’d  run  the  crusher — grind  it  up,  you 
know.  And  when  the  ore  would  go  through 
the  ball  mill,  I  used  to  feed  the  water  to  it.  It 
was  automatic.  After  you  once  get  it  set,  it 
would  just  grind  out  and  go  through  these 
tanks,  settle  in  the  tanks,  and  go  through  the 
float  cells,  and  that  was  it.  So  much  water  and 
so  much  feed — so  much  dirt — went  into  it  to 
have  a  regular  mixture.  After  you  once  get  that 
set,  then  as  long  as  the  water  was  still  running 


and  the  dirt  was  going  in  there,  it  would  just 
keep  going.  Once  in  a  while  you  might  have  to 
reset  it  a  little  ways,  add  a  little  lime  or  a  little 
cyanide  to  it.  That  was  just  routine.  So  all  you 
had  to  do  was  stand  there  and  make  sure  that 
the  rocks  would  go  right  into  the  crusher  and 
it  wouldn’t  hang  up  and  stuff  like  that. 

What  did  you  have  to  do  if  the  rocks  did  hang 
up? 

Well,  you’d  set  the  crusher  off  and  then 
have  to  dig  them  out  and  pry  them  out.  It 
wasn’t  bad. 

How  long  did  you  work  at  that? 

Oh,  I  worked  there... I  worked  around  two 
or  three  different  mills  up  until  about  1941, 
1942.  Then  I  went  to  San  Francisco.  I  went 
into  the  navy  in  1943.  When  I  got  out  of  the 
navy,  I  come  back  here,  and  John  Zalac  and  I 
opened  up  the  Delta  Saloon.  We  run  that  up 
until  1959.  Him  and  I  went  to  school  together. 
And  Joe  Viani  owned  the  place  and  then 
Dominic  Petrini.  And  they  gave  us  a  lease  on 
it.  We  were  in  there  14  years. 

Then  I  run  for  J.P.  [Justice  of  the  Peace], 
and  I  was  in  the  J.P.  office  for  24  years.  So  now 
I’m  just  sitting  back  spending  my  money.., 
having  fun!  [laughter] 

What  made  you  decide  to  lease  the  Delta  and 
go  into  that  line  of  work? 

Oh,  I  don’t  know.  There  was  nothing  else 
to  do.  They  come  and  asked  us  it.,  .because 
I  used  to  hang  out  in  there  once  in  a  while 
before  the  war,  you  know.  When  the  war  come 
along,  it  shut  down.  John  and  I  knew  the  guys 
pretty  well.  We  knew  Joe  Viani  and  Dominic 
Petrini  real  good.  We  used  to  run  around  and 


38 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


do  favors  for  them  when  they  were  in  the  bar 
and  once  in  a  while  even  work  for  them.  So 
we  decided  to  go  in  there.  Got  a  good  business 
going,  did  real  good. 

Then  when  Angelo  Petrini  [Dominic’s 
son]  was  old  enough  to  go  into  the  bar 
business — he  had  to  do  something — and  our 
lease  had  expired,  he  took  it  over.  I  worked  for 
him  for  one  year,  and  then  I  filed  for  J.P.  and 
happened  to  get  the  job,  and  I  just  kept  it  up. 
It  was  good  experience  working  in  a  bar.  You 
get  to  know  everybody  that  comes  around. 
When  a  stranger  walks  in,  you  can  almost  tell 
by  the  way  he  acts  what  he’s  going  to  do,  even 
before  he  sits  down  at  the  bar.  You  get  to  know 
people.  It  was  good  education.  I  had  a  lot  of 
fun,  too.  Did  a  lot  of  drinking,  of  course — 
maybe  too  much  at  times.  You  would  sample 
that  merchandise  to  know  what  you’re  selling. 

What  was  the  Delta  like  when  you  took  it  over ? 

Oh,  it  wasn’t  dolled  up  like  it  is  now.  It 
was  just  more  or  less  a  home  bar,  and  about 
the  same  amount  of  people  would  come  in 
every  day — the  same  patrons  that  come  along. 
And  we  built  it  up  where  we  had  a  few  people 
coming  up  from  Carson  and  Reno  just,  you 
know,  to  say  hello  once  in  a  while. 

But  it  was  mostly  local  people  at  that  time 
coming  in? 

Yes.  And  there  was  only.. .well,  there  was 
about  10  or  12  bars  open  then.  And  everybody 
knew  Johnny  Zalac  and  me. 


3 

John  A.  Zalac 


Memories  of  Family  and  Life  in 
Virginia  City,  1920s 

John  Zalac:  I’m  not  too  sure  about  what 
year  my  father  came  to  the  United  States, 
but  my  mother,  Mary  Gudal  Zalac,  came 
here  in  1902  from  Yugoslavia — a  little  town 
called  Metlika.  It’s  about  30  miles  south  of 
Ljubliana  in  northern  Yugoslavia.  She  came 
to  Ellis  Island.  She  talked  about  that  and  the 
Statue  of  Liberty  quite  a  bit.  She  was,  I  think, 
14  years  old  when  she  came  with  her  sister, 
who  was  two  years  older.  They  traveled  by 
themselves  to  Pueblo,  Colorado.  Their  father 
was  there.  He  was  divorced  from  his  wife.  He 
left  Yugoslavia  at  an  early  age — I  don’t  know 
when — but  he  sent  for  them.  He  was  a  miner 
in  Pueblo,  and  worked  in  the  mines  there 
around  Leadville  and  Silverton.  That’s  where 
my  mother  met  my  father.  She  was  15  or  16 
years  old,  I  guess,  when  they  got  married. 

Mother  had  a  family  and  moved  to 
Murray,  Utah.  In  1906  my  oldest  sister  was 
born  in  Murray.  (I  think  it  was  Murray — I’m 
not  sure.)  [laughter]  My  other  sister,  Helen, 


was  born  in  1908.  My  brother  George  and 
sister  Helen  were  born  in  Midvale,  Utah. 
George  was  born  in  1910.  Helen  has  the 
Grand  Cafe  in  Susanville,  California.  She’s 
been  in  the  same  location  for  50  years.  The 
cafe  was  in  the  paper;  she  had  a  little  write¬ 
up.  Later  the  family  moved  from  Midvale  to 
Tooele,  Utah,  where  my  brother  Eddy, 
sister  Rose,  and  myself  were  all  born. 

Mother  and  Father  moved  to  McGill, 
Nevada,  in  1922.  My  father  worked  in  the 
smelter.  He  knew  quite  a  bit  about  stone 
masonry,  and  they  built  the  brick  furnaces  for 
the  smelter  in  1922.  I  don’t  know  how  many 
times  they  might  have  revamped  the  smelter 
down  there  in  McGill.  My  parents  were  there 
one  year,  and  then  they  moved  back  to  Utah 
to  a  little  town  called  Scofield.  They  had  coal 
mines  there.  I  think  they  were  underground 
coal  mines.  I  was  six  years  old,  and  I  don’t 
remember  too  much  of  that.  That’s  when  my 
mother  and  father  separated. 

My  mother  and  us  children  moved  back 
to  Ruth,  Nevada.  My  oldest  sister  got  married. 
Mother  then  ran  a  little  boardinghouse 


40 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


for  miners.  She  did  their  laundry,  cooked 
and  gave  them  room  and  board — $30  with 
laundry;  three  square  meals  a  day  She  worked 
hard  and  raised  the  kids. 

In  1926  Mother  and  us  children  moved 
to  Virginia  City.  There  was  more  activity  in 
mining  at  that  time  in  Virginia  City  than 
there  was  in  Ruth,  and  a  lot  of  the  miners 
who  were  her  boarders  in  Ruth  had  moved 
to  Virginia  City.  They  were  making  more  pay 
than  they  were  working  in  the  open  pit  mines 
in  Ruth  and  Copper  Flat,  where  the  pay  scale 
was  pretty  low.  Virginia  City  had  deep  shaft 
mines.  All  the  deep  mines  were  working,  and 
it  was  hot — bad  working  conditions.  But  all 
the  miners  came  over  to  Virginia  City  to  go 
to  work.  So  my  mother  came  over  here. 

Mother  bought  a  house  on  the  Divide  in 
1926.  Mining  companies  or  mining  at  that 
time  was  pretty  unpredictable,  and  towards 
the  end  of  the  year  the  deep  mines  shut  down. 
So  we  went  back  to  Ruth.  In  September  of 
1927  we  were  back  there  to  start  school,  but 
my  sister  Helen — next  to  the  oldest — stayed 
an  extra  year  and  graduated  from  the  Fourth 
Ward  School  in  Virginia  City,  class  of  1927. 1 
think  there  were  eight  or  nine  students  in  her 
graduating  class. 

We  lived  in  Ruth  until  1929.  The 
Depression  was  starting  to  hit,  and  we  moved 
to  Butte,  Montana.  My  mother  had  remarried, 
and  her  husband  was  a  miner.  We  went  to 
Butte,  and  he  worked  in  the  mines  up  there. 
They  were  working  two  weeks  on  and  a  week 
off,  as  they  tried  to  keep  everybody  working 
up  there.  That  was  during  the  Depression 
years. 

My  mother  wanted  to  come  back  to 
Nevada.  She  liked  Nevada.  In  1933  my  mother 
and  my  stepfather  sold  their  little  home  in 
Butte,  and  we  came  back  to  Virginia  City.  My 
mother  and  stepfather  [divorced]  in  a  couple 
of  years.  Then  she  finished  raising  her  family 


by  herself  and  ran  her  boardinghouse — never 
remarried  again. 

Kathryn  Totton:  Had  she  held  onto  the 
boardinghouse  that  she  bought  back  in  1926? 

Yes,  we  still  had  that  home.  So  we  come 
back  to  that. 

How  many  boarders  on  an  average  did  you 
have  in  your  boardinghouse? 

Shed  have  maybe  six  or  seven  boarders, 
and  they  paid  $30  a  month  each.  That 
included  their  laundry,  and  three  meals  a 
day — you  know,  breakfast  and  dinner.  They 
all  worked  different  shifts  at  the  mines,  so 
she  had  to  prepare  a  lunch  for  them.  Some 
were  on  graveyard  shift — go  to  work  at  1 1:00 
at  night,  get  off  at  7:00  in  the  morning.  Some 
were  on  the  swing  shift — go  to  work  at  3:00 
p.m.,  get  off  at  1 1:00  p.m.  Day  shift  started  at 
7:00  in  the  morning  and  got  off  at  3:00  in  the 
afternoon.  None  of  them  were  ever  on  the 
same  shifts.  It  was  kind  of  a  rugged  working 
life  for  her.  Mother  stayed  in  Virginia  City 
until  she  died  at  the  age  of  94  in  1982. 

What  was  the  nationality  of  the  miners  who 
stayed  at  your  mother’s  boardinghouse? 

Most  of  them  were  Yugoslavs.  People 
stayed  with  their  nationalities,  mostly.  You 
had  the  Italians  staying  at  a  little  hotel  called 
the  Tahoe  House,  where  the  Virginia  City 
Museum  is  now.  The  Tahoe  House  had  a 
rooming  house  upstairs — you  know,  rooms 
like  a  hotel — and  they  served  food.  Most  of 
your  Italians  would  stay  there,  and  those  from 
lower  in  the  boot — Sicilians  and  that. 

The  Varischetti  Rooming  House  was  run 
by  a  woman  in  town.  It’s  where  the  Fredericks 


John  A.  Zalac 


41 


House  building  was  and  where  the  Julia  Bulette 
Museum  is  now  It’s  on  the  corner  of  Union  and 
C  streets — next  to  the  Bucket  of  Blood,  just  on 
the  other  side  of  the  street.  Mrs.  Varischetti  had 
her  hotel  there  and  had  boarders.  She  came 
from  Grass  Valley,  California.  She  has  some 
sons  around  here  yet.  She  had  a  boardinghouse 
which  housed  everybody. 

The  Silver  Dollar  Hotel  was  a 
boardinghouse.  A  lot  of  the  miners  would 
stay  there.  At  some  of  the  restaurants  in  town 
you  could  get  a  meal  ticket  for  $13  a  week.  It’d 
last  you  a  week.  A  lot  of  people  would  eat  in 
the  cafes  in  town  and  stay  in  the  hotel.  The 
Virginia  Hotel  burned  down,  I  think,  in  1937. 
It  was  run  by  a  Yugoslav.  They  called  him  Pop 
Tarich.  He  had  maybe  20  rooms,  and  miners 
stayed  there.  He  served  food  also.  He  was 
quite  a  character. 

In  those  days,  they  didn’t  have 
refrigeration.  We  had  a  little  cooler.  We  had 
a  pantry  window  on  the  outside  of  the  pantry, 
and  we  had  a  box  built  out  there  with  shelves 
in  it  and  burlap  sacks  on  the  outside.  You’d  buy 
three  or  four  tons  of  coal  in  the  wintertime.. .a 
cord  of  wood,  maybe,  for  kindling  to  start  the 
fire.  Then  it  was  mostly  coal — three  or  four 
tons  of  coal  to  get  you  through  the  winter. 
Mother  had  her  own  smokehouse  and  used  to 
buy  a  hog  from  the  farmers  in  Dayton.  They 
used  to  come  around  with  wagons  and  sell 
vegetables,  butter  and  that.  She’d  buy  a  hog 
and  smoke  her  own  hams  and  bacon.  She’d 
put  it  up  for  the  winter.  You’d  have  to  smoke 
it  so  it  would  keep;  that  was  the  best  way  you 
could  preserve  it.  Times  were  tough,  but  she 
got  along  pretty  well,  [laughter]  Everybody 
was  healthy. 

Did  she  have  any  help  at  all ? 

No.  When  Helen,  my  sister,  was  home 
she’d  naturally  help  her  some,  setting  tables 


and  waiting  on  tables;  they  helped  that  way, 
but  otherwise  she  did  it  all  herself.  She’d  be  up 
at  4:00  in  the  morning  and  maybe  go  to  bed 
by  10:00  or  1 1:00.  They  had  it  tough.  At  that 
time  there  were  no  washing  machines.  They 
had  scrub  boards — you  know,  washboards. 
They  had  their  washtub  and  a  colander, 
they  called  it — one  of  those  oblong,  copper- 
bottomed  tubs  they’d  heat  water  in.  They’d 
put  that  on  the  stove  and  heat  their  water.  She 
made  her  own  bread;  always  bought  the  flour 
by  a  100-pound  bag.  They  didn’t  have  Crisco 
and  stuff  like  that  in  them  days;  they  used 
lard!  [laughter]  But  I  guess  it  was  all  good. 
Everybody  thought  Mazola  oil  at  that  time 
was  terrible,  and  now  it  turns  out  it  was  the 
best  you  could  be  using  all  the  time!  [laughter] 

There  was  no  fancy  food — just  good 
basic  food  that  would  allow  you  to  put  in  an 
eight-hour  shift  working  in  the  mine.  It  was 
always  good.  Basically,  there  was  always  meat, 
potatoes  and  bread,  salads  and  vegetables.  We 
never  sat  down  that  you  didn’t  have  meat  and 
potatoes,  it  seemed  like.  No  matter  what  meal 
it  was  during  the  day,  you’d  have  some.  We 
always  had  ham  and  eggs  or  bacon  and  eggs 
for  breakfast  or  stuff  like  that. 

Mother  used  to  buy  her  eggs  by  the  crate. 
She  had  a  double-compartment  crate,  and  it 
had  12  dozen  on  each  side.  Cliff’s  ranch  down 
here  used  to  deliver.  He’d  come  up  there  in  an 
old  Model  T  Ford  truck  and  deliver  butter 
and  eggs  and  stuff  like  that.  Cliff’s  ranch  was 
near  Franktown  on  the  old  highway  going  to 
Reno.  It  was  right  close  to  where  Walter  Clark 
lived  when  he  wrote  the  book,  Track  of  the 
Cat;  he  was  living  there  in  Washoe  Valley.  He 
later  moved  to  Virginia  City,  too.  At  that  time, 
too,  the  Indians  from  Pyramid  Lake  used  to 
come  with  their  pickup  loads  of  trout  and  sell 
fresh  trout.  They  used  to  come  up  here  and 
you  could  buy  a  30-pound  trout.  The  Indian 
men  would  go  door  to  door  selling  them;  a 


42 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


lot  of  times  the  women  would  sell  the  fish, 
too.  There  might  be  a  man  and  wife.  Theyd 
have  their  little  truck.  Of  course,  by  this  time 
you  were  able  to  buy  ice.  Theyd  pack  it  in  ice 
and  come.,  .till  the  ice  melted.  Then  when 
they  were  getting  panicky,  you  got  bargains! 
[laughter] 

The  farmers  from  Dayton  used  to  come 
up  all  the  time  and  sell  their  produce  from 
their  truck  gardens.  One  guy  was  Homer 
Quiriconi.  He’s  Italian.  There  was  a  kid,  Joe 
Richie,  that  went  to  school  when  I  did.  He 
was  the  county  commissioner  from  Dayton 
in  Lyon  County  for  quite  a  few  years.  He 
served  for  several  years,  I  think.  His  family 
had  a  ranch  right  on  the  river  as  you  go  into 
town,  on  the  right.  His  family  used  to  come 
up  with  produce,  too,  and  my  mother  used 
to  buy  pigs  from  Richie. 

Cliff  would  come  up  from  Franktown, 
from  his  ranch,  and  he’d  bring  the  butter  and 
eggs  and  stuff  like  that.  They’d  make  a  trip 
once  a  week,  anyway.  He  had  a  regular  route 
that  he’d  go  to — steady  customers,  where 
they’d  buy  so  much  butter  and  so  many  dozens 
of  eggs.  He’d  save  for  them  and  just  come 
every  week.  Even  in  the  wintertime,  they’d 
try  to  make  it  through  the  snow. 

At  that  time,  they  didn’t  have  the  snow 
plows.  Geiger  Grade’d  be  closed  all  winter 
until  the  fellow  that  had  the  grocery  store  up 
there — George  Wilson — would  get  a  bunch 
of  the  school  kids  in  the  spring  and  take 
them  out.  There’s  one  bad  spot,  Alexander’s 
on  Geiger  Grade,  where  they’d  go  out  there 
and  there’d  be  huge  drifts.  With  shovels  they’d 
shovel  it  out  and  open  up  the  road.  When 
the  deep  mines  were  working,  a  lot  of  times 
they’d  bring  supplies  up  through  the  mines. 
They’d  come  through  the  Sutro  Tunnel  to  the 
1,700  foot-level  of  the  Combination  shaft. 
They  supplied  the  town  with  groceries,  coal 
and  stuff  like  that.  A  lot  of  it  would  come 


up  through  the  mines.  The  mine  owners 
cooperated  with  the  townspeople  when  it  was 
a  bad  winter,  and  they  couldn’t  get  out  on  the 
old  Geiger  Grade,  a  dirt  road. 

The  present  Geiger  Grade  was  started 
in  1933.  That  was  one  of  the  WPA  [Works 
Progress  Administration]  projects.  I  have 
pictures  of  the  guys  working  with  pick  and 
shovel  on  that  road — pictures  of  a  whole  crew. 
Might  be  30,  40  men  working  on  just  one 
bend,  so  you  can  imagine  how  many  years  it 
took  them  to  build  the  road.  They  used  Geiger 
Grade  then.  There’s  one  bad  turn  they  called 
the  Devil’s  Point,  Devil’s  Curve.  There’s  a  big 
bend  right  below  it  called  White  House  Bend. 
There  used  to  be  springs  there.  That’s  where 
they  used  to  stop  and  rest  their  horses.  They 
had  a  watering  trough  there. 

They  used  to  make  it  to  the  springs  with 
their  Model  T’s  and  Model  A’s — let  them 
cool  off,  get  water.  A  lot  of  the  Model  T’s 
had  to  back  up  the  grade.  They  couldn’t  pull 
going  up,  because  the  gas  tank  sat  above 
the  dashboard  and  it  was  just  gravity  flow, 
so  they’d  have  to  back  up  so  the  gas’d  get  to 
the  engine,  [laughter]  They  used  to  burn  the 
clutch  bands  up.  The  same  in  Gold  Hill,  you 
know.  The  old  Model  T  always  carried  an 
extra  set  of  bands.  They  would  get  hot  and 
burn,  I  guess.  They  were  belts  that  would 
work  around  a  pulley  or  something.  Then 
they’d  get  hot  and  burn — you’d  have  to  put 
new  ones  on. 

Fixing  a  flat  tire  in  those  days  was 
something.  Everybody’d  have  to  take  the  tire 
off  of  those  big  old  rims.  You  had  to  fight  them 
and  get  them  apart,  put  them  back,  pump 
them  by  hand,  and  patch  the  leak  in  the  inner 
tube.  Boy,  it  was  something.  It  was  an  all-day 
trip  just  to  go  to  Reno  and  back. 

Did  you  travel  to  Reno  very  often? 


John  A.  Zalac 


43 


Well,  we  didn’t.  Few  had  cars  in  those  days, 
but  whoever  did...  like  George  Wilson  that 
had  the  store,  he’d  have  to  go  and  get  supplies. 
I  remember  when  we  came  back  from  Ruth 
and  when  we  went  back,  it  took  us  two  days. 
We  rented  a  big  truck  to  haul  our  furniture 
and  that.  It  was  a  graveled  road  all  the  way.  You 
might  have  five  or  six  flat  tires.  It’s  325  miles.  If 
you  made  it  to  Austin — that’s  halfway — in  one 
day,  120  miles,  you  did  great,  and  that’s  driving 
from  daylight  until  dark. 

It’s  hard  to  imagine  how  much  progress 
they’ve  made  in  the  highways.  Earl  Games’s 
horses  were  used  to  pull  the  scrapers  and 
Fresnos  on  the  dirt  roads.  They’d  wet  the 
roads  down  to  level  them  and  to  take  all  of 
the  corduroys  and  the  bumps  out.  It’d  be  like  a 
washboard.  You  just  chattered  along.  They  used 
those  to  level  and  regrade  the  roads.  We  didn’t 
have  an  oiled  road  into  Virginia  City  until  1934, 
1935,  something  like  that  when  they  started 
oiling  the  truck  route,  and  Geiger  Grade  was 
completed  around  1938. 

Those  new  roads  weren’t  even  paved ? 

No.  I  can  remember  when  we  were  in 
Virginia  City,  to  go  to  Bowers  Mansion  was  a 
big  treat  for  everybody.  They’d  have  a  picnic 
down  there  once  a  year,  or  they’d  go  down  to 
Lake  Tahoe.  Sometimes  you’d  load  up  one  of 
the  flatcars  and  go  on  the  Virginia  &  Truckee 
then.  You’d  put  everybody  on;  they’d  have  a 
railing  around.  Take  all  the  kids  and  then  go 
to  Bowers  for  a  picnic.  The  road  from  Bowers 
to  Reno  was  concrete  at  that  time — 1926.  It 
was  so  narrow  barely  two  cars  could  pass  on 
it,  but  they  poured  concrete,  so  that  was  built 
before  they  had  the  oil.  And  they  lasted.  Now 
they’re  going  back  to  concrete,  but  it’s  so  damn 
expensive.  But  there  was  a  stretch  in  there 
where  it  was  concrete.  And,  of  course,  Reno 
had  streetcars. 


Do  you  remember  riding  on  the  streetcars? 

At  one  time,  yes.  They  just  had  it  to  go  out 
to  the  ball  park — Threlkel’s  Ball  Park.  It  went 
that  far  to  Sparks.  Then  the  streetcar  would 
go  out  to  Moana  Hot  Springs.  That  was  quite 
a  ways  out  of  town  then.  When  I  was  a  kid, 
Mount  Rose  Street  was  the  city  limits,  coming 
out.  That’s  the  heart  of  town  now.  When 
you  crossed  Fourth  Street,  why,  you  were 
practically  out  of  the  city  limits  going  north. 

Threlkel’s  Hall  Park  had  a  semi-pro 
baseball  team.  Most  of  those  players  worked 
at  the  Reno  Garage.  It  was  about  halfway  out 
to  Sparks  before  you  would  make  the  turn  on 
B  Street — it  was  just  in  that  area  there  on  East 
Fourth  Street  [located  in  area  of  what  is  now 
the  600  block  of  East  4th  Street — Ed.]. 

Was  there  a  large  community  of  Virginia  city 
people  in  Butte  when  you  were  there? 

Well,  there  were  a  lot  of  people  that  were 
from  Virginia  City.  Matter  of  fact,  when  I 
went  to  Butte,  I  was  in  the  sixth  grade.  The 
schoolteacher  that  I  had — her  name  was 
Fitzgerald — was  originally  a  Hinch  from  Gold 
Hill.  She  taught  in  Gold  Hill.  Miss  Fitzgerald 
was  an  aunt  of  Alice  Byrne.  She  was  from  the 
Flinch  family,  and  there  were  Flinches  in  Butte, 
too.  But  they’re  all  associated  with  Virginia 
City.  I  think  Marcus  Daley,  who  discovered 
Butte,  went  up  there  from  Virginia  City, 
originally.  So  the  two  towns  are  pretty  well 
tied  together  through  the  mining. 

I’m  interested  in  the  way  that  people  seemed  to 
come  back  to  Virginia  City. 

The  miners  were  always  on  the  go.  They 
would  hit  one  place;  they’d  stay  six  months  or  a 
year.  Then  they’d  go  on  to  Grass  Valley,  Jackson, 


44 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


Amador  or  Nevada  City.  Theyd  work  down 
there  for  six  months  or  something.  Theyd  get 
disgusted.  Theyd  either  get  fired  or  something 
else  would  happen  and  theyd  leave.  They  might 
go  to  another  town  that  would  be  starting  to 
boom.  So  they  were  kind  of  drifters.  Theyd 
go  from  one  place  to  another.  Eventually,  they 
had  a  regular  circuit;  theyd  just  be  all  around. 
It  might  take  them  two  or  three  years,  but  they 
made  the  loop!  [laughter]  And  then  after  five 
or  six  years,  theyd  come  back  again  to  work  in 
Virginia  City.  They  were  on  the  go  a  lot.  They 
would  be  here  for  six  weeks,  a  couple  of  months 
or  maybe  just  long  enough  to  make  a  bankroll 
to  get  someplace  else,  and  then  theyd  take  off. 

In  the  early  days,  if  you  worked  in  the  deep 
mines  in  Virginia  City,  you  were  called  a  “hot 
water  plug.”  The  deep  mines  in  Butte  were 
awful  hot,  too.  If  you  were  hunting  for  work, 
like  during  the  Depression,  when  we  went  to 
Butte,  all  you  had  to  do  was  tell  them  that  you 
were  a  hot  water  plug.  If  you  told  them  that 
you  worked  in  the  mines  in  Virginia  City,  you 
went  right  to  work  up  there.  If  you  were  able 
to  cut  it  in  Virginia  City,  that  was  the  kind  of 
miners  they  wanted  up  there.  They  put  them 
right  to  work. 

Miners  on  the  Comstock  in  the  1930s 

The  miners  used  to  take  white  rats  and 
mice  down  in  the  deep  mines,  where  they 
used  them  to  indicate  when  the  air  was  bad. 
The  mice  and  rats  would  also  leave  the  area 
if  the  mine  was  in  danger  of  a  cave-in.  So 
it  was  a  safety  feature  for  the  miners  when 
they  were  underground.  I  can  remember  rats 
coming  up  through  the  sewer  and  coming 
up  from  under  the  wooden  sidewalk.  It  was 
nothing  to  see  a  white  rat  pop  up  from  under 
the  sidewalk!  [laughter]  But  theyd  come  up 
from  the  mines,  and  this  was  after  the  mines 
had  shut  down,  so  naturally  they  were  hunting 


for  food  where  the  miners  used  to  feed  them. 
What  the  miners  didn’t  eat  in  their  lunch, 
they  would  throw  to  the  rats  and  the  mice 
underground.  If  the  air  was  getting  bad,  you’d 
see  the  rats  leaving.  If  there  was  danger  of  a 
cave-in,  they  could  sense  it.  They  could  sense 
the  ground  moving  way  before  a  human  being 
could  ever  realize  it. 

You  would  hear  of  water  in  the  mine  shafts 
being  so  hot  that  you  could  take  fresh  eggs 
down,  put  them  in  the  water  and  have  soft- 
or  hard-boiled  eggs.  That’s  how  hot  it  was. 
Originally,  the  reason  they  used  the  ice  in  the 
early  days  was  for  the  miners  underground. 
They  used  to  pack  their  boots,  it  was  so  hot. 
They  had  rubber  boots  and  maybe  just  shorts 
or  a  pair  of  short  Levis  or  something  they 
worked  in,  because  it  was  so  warm.  But  they’d 
pack  these  rubber  boots  in  ice.  They’d  go  in, 
and  they  used  to  work  20  minutes  running  a 
drift.  Then  they’d  come  to  the  station  where 
it’s  cooler  and  spend  20  minutes,  and  the 
partner’d  be  in  there.  They’d  keep  changing 
off — there  might  be  two  miners  in  there 
working  and  two  out  at  the  station  all  the  time. 
They  used  to  take  maybe  a  ton  of  ice  down  to 
each  station  in  the  mine  for  every  shift.  It  was 
so  hot,  it  was  unbearable. 

Most  of  the  old  miners  who  hung  around 
were  characters — there  were  a  lot  of  them. 
They  were  all  different  nationalities.  Every 
one  of  them  was  a  character  in  his  own  right! 
[laughter]  For  instance,  one  little  Finn  worked 
in  the  mines  there.  Until  he  had  a  drink,  you 
couldn’t  get  him  to  smile  or  say  boo.  If  he  said 
hello,  it  was  damn  near  under  his  breath,  he 
was  so  shy.  As  soon  as  he  had  a  few  drinks 
every  payday,  he’d  go  home,  and  he’d  get  these 
little  jingle  bells  they  used  to  put  on  horses 
around  Christmastime.  He  had  a  little  string 
of  those  bells,  and  he’d  wrap  them  around  his 
body  under  his  shirt.  He  had  to  have  a  few 
drinks,  and  he’d  get  out  and  start  dancing, 


John  A.  Zalac 


45 


and  then  you  couldn’t  get  him  to  shut  up.  His 
name  was  Kibby,  but  he’d  call  himself  Kibby, 
King  of  the  Finns.  He’d  sing  and  dance  up  a 
storm!  [laughter]  So  you’d  know  when  it  was 
payday,  if  you  walked  in! 

Little  Johnny,  the  Giant,  was  a  black 
Swede — real  black  hair  and  dark  complected, 
but  from  Sweden.  His  name  was  Johnny 
Martin.  They  called  him  Johnny,  the  Giant. 
He  was  about  5  foot  tall,  but  he  was  built  like 
a  fireplug — very  husky.  All  those  miners  still 
had  the  dialect  from  their  native  countries; 
most  of  them  came  from  Europe.  They  came 
over  here  because  of  land  opportunity.  Johnny 
came  here,  and  here  he  was  a  boss  in  the 
mines.  Half  of  those  bosses  couldn’t  even  read 
or  write.  They’d  have  somebody  else  fill  out 
their  time  cards  and  that.  But  they  were  good 
miners,  and  they  had  a  way  with  miners;  they 
were  liked.  So  they  made  bosses  out  of  these 
guys.  The  bosses  could  get  quite  a  bit  of  work 
out  of  the  miners. 

Another  Finn,  Johnny  Hoppola,  was 
the  overman  working  underground  in  Con. 
Chollar  [Consolidated  Chollar,  Gould  & 
Curry,  and  Savage  Mining  Company)  in 
Gold  Hill.  Originally  the  mine  was  called 
Overman.  Later  in  the  1930s  it  was  changed 
to  the  Con.  Chollar.  Johnny  Hoppola  had 
a  real  deep  voice.  They  had  a  telephone  on 
each  level  where  you  could  call  the  engineer’s 
room  that  ran  the  hoist  and  talk  to  him.  If  you 
needed  something  sent  down  or  if  you  had 
to  contact  the  office,  they  could  contact  the 
engineer  on  top,  who  could  get  ahold  of  the 
office  or  whatever  was  needed.  Hoppola’d  get 
on  the  phone,  and  no  matter  who  was  there, 
he’d  say,  “Hey,  kid,  come  here!  My  voice  not 
good  for  the  phone.  Here,  you  answer  it!” 
[laughter]  He  was  the  boss,  but  you’d  have  to 
do  his  communicating  for  him.  But  he  was 
another  good  miner,  [laughter]  There  have 
been  some  fine  men. 


An  old  miner  that  came  from  Butte  must 
have  been  in  his  seventies  when  I  was  just 
a  kid.  I  was  helping  him  in  the  mines,  and 
nobody  could  get  along  with  him — cranky 
old  son-of-a-gun.  His  name  was  Charlie 
Boyle.  He  didn’t  have  any  teeth,  and  he  always 
smoked  one  of  those  Italian  cigars.  If  you’ve 
ever  smelled  one  of  those,  you  know  it  could 
knock  you  out.  Imagine  being  underground 
with  poor  ventilation!  He’d  have  one  of  those 
cigars  going  all  the  time.  Not  too  many  men 
could  handle  smoking  them,  but  he  smoked 
one  all  the  time.  He  was  always  a  hard-boiled, 
tough  old  man,  you  know.  He  used  to  get  in 
a  lot  of  fights. 

Huey  O’Donnell  was  another  old-timer. 
He  was  an  old  Irishman.  He’d  work  in  the 
mines  up  there  for  like  a  year;  save  every 
paycheck....  He  would  live  off  of  one  till  it  was 
gone  and  never  cash  the  others.  The  mining 
company’d  get  on  him  to  cash  the  checks,  but 
he’d  save  a  bankroll. 

In  those  days,  in  Reno,  they  had  a  red 
light  district  down  there  on  the  river.  They 
must’ve  had  50  women  working  all  the  time. 
It  was  where  the  police  station  on  East  Second 
and  High  streets  is  now.  It  was  right  behind 
there,  right  along  the  river.  This  place  had  a 
big,  high  fence  around  it.  When  you  walked 
in  there  it  was  like  going  into  another  town. 
They  had  all  these  little  cribs  where  all  the 
girls  would  work.  Huey’d  save  until  he  had  a 
bankroll;  then  he’d  go  to  town.  He’d  get  drunk 
and  go  down  there,  and  they’d  roll  Huey.  He 
might  go  in  with  $200  or  $300  or  something 
like  that.  Two  or  three  days  later  he’d  come 
back  to  Virginia  City  broke. 

Huey  gave  up  his  job,  and  now  he’s  busted. 
He  walked  up  to  Charlie  Boyle  and  said,  “Charlie, 
could  you  loan  me  ten?  Dixie  told  me  he’d  put 
me  to  work  in  a  couple  of  days.”  [laughter]  And 
now  he’s  bumming  tough  Charlie  Boyle  for  $10. 
Boyle  loaned  him  the  $10. 


46 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


Later  they’re  at  the  bar  and  Charlie  felt 
sorry  for  Huey  It  was  payday,  so  he  said, 
“Come  on,  Huey.  I’ll  buy  you  a  drink.” 
They  had  two  or  three  drinks.  After  about 
the  fourth  drink,  Huey  O’Donnell  was 
feeling  pretty  good,  so  he  put  the  ten  up! 
[laughter)  Now,  he’s  supposed  to  live  on  this, 
and  he  started  to  buy  drinks  from  the  ten! 
Old  Boyle  got  mad  and  took  a  swing  at  him, 
cussed  him  out.  He’d  given  him  $  1 0  to  live  on, 
not  to....  And  here  after  three,  four  drinks  he 
was  ready  to  spend  it. 

Huey  was  down  a- wrestling  for  a  job  at 
the  mine.  He  was  down  there,  and  the  boss 
was  there.  He  was  telling  the  foremen,  Dixie 
Randall,  “Dixie,  have  you  heard  the  latest? 
Boyle  swung  on  me  last  night.”  [laughter]  So 
he  started  to  tell  Dixie  what  happened.  But  he 
said,  “You  know,  the  Boyles  never  could  defeat 
the  O’Donnells.”  They  were  characters  like 
that — just  so  funny.  It  was  nice  to  know  these 
old  people  out  there.  They  were  old  men, 
and  they  still  carried  on  like  that,  [laughter] 

This  one  Yugoslav — they  called  him 
Crybaby  Tony  [Tony  Stosic] — was  a  big, 
powerful  man,  maybe  6  foot  4  or  5.  He  was 
the  strongest  man  I  think  I’ve  ever  seen  in  my 
life.  He  could  take  a  50  cent  coin  and  bend  it 
in  his  fingers.  He  could  take  a  dime,  put  it  in 
his  teeth  and  bend  it  by  clamping  down  with 
his  fingers. 

Tony  was  such  a  good-natured  man.  He 
was  strong  son-of-a-gun.  His  family  were,  I 
think,  from  around  McGill  or  Ely.  His  wife 
was  with  him.  He  had  several  children,  and 
they  were  all  born  in  this  country.  But  it  was 
always  everybody’s  dream  to  go  back  home 
where  they  were  born  and  get  back  on  their 
farm  and  live  the  life  of  Riley.  Then,  after  five 
or  six  years  their  bankroll’d  be  gone  they’d 
be  busting  their  buns  and  not  getting  any 
place..  .  just  surviving.  So  Tony  had  enough 
money  to  get  a  ticket,  enough  to  get  back  to 


the  United  States.  He  went  back  to  the  mines, 
but  he  couldn’t  save  anything  without  his  wife. 
Then  you  get  $75  every  two  weeks  working  in 
the  mines  and  you  had  to  pay  your  board  and 
room  and  everything  out  of  it,  it  was  pretty 
hard  to  save  enough  money  to  send  for  your 
family.  It  would  cost  maybe  a  couple  thousand 
dollars,  at  that  time,  to  get  them  over — maybe 
fifteen  hundred.  It’s  hard  to  save  that  much. 
He  finally  got  one  son  over  here.  I  think  the 
rest  of  the  family  is  still  over  there,  and  he  had 
six  or  seven  children. 

Another  high  school  kid  that  I  went  to 
school  with  weighed  about  150  pounds;  I 
weighed  about  140.  Every  payday  Tony’d  go 
to  town  and  get  drunk  like  damn  near  all  the 
miners  did.  Just  nothing  to  do;  no  recreation, 
but  go  to  the  bars.  We’d  meet  him  on  the 
street.  He’d  bend  down — he  had  enormous 
hands — and  we’d  each  stand  in  one,  and  then 
he’d  stand  up.  He’s  6  foot  5,  and  he  could  just 
pick  us  up  like  that!  [laughter]  Powerful!  They 
later  came  out  with  this  song,  “Big  Bad  John.” 
That  fit  this  man  to  a  tee,  that  song  did. 

In  those  days,  every  grocery  store  seemed 
to  be  run  by  Italians,  and  a  lot  of  the  bars  were 
Italian.  They  always  had  those  big  calendars 
with  a  pretty  Italian  girl  with  a  rose  in  her 
hair  or  something  on  them.  These  guys  would 
start  singing,  and  Tony  would  sing,  too.  He’d 
be  drinking  a  glass  of  wine  and  trying  to  give 
the  calendar  girl  a  sip  of  the  wine.  He’d  be 
reminiscing  a  lot  about  his  life,  and  he  cried 
a  lot.  He  always  wore  a  tie,  and  when  he  got 
drunk,  he’d  throw  it  over  his  shoulder.  He 
could  flex  his  arm  muscle  and  rip  a  brand- 
new  shirt.  Most  of  them  were  linen  then.  He 
was  just  that  strong  a  man.  When  they  wrote 
that  song,  “Big  Bad  John,”  it  reminded  me  of 
this  guy — kind  of  fit  him,  you  know?  He  was 
such  a  good-natured  guy,  it  was  unbelievable. 

Tony  worked  in  the  mine  up  there  for 
the  Con.  Virginia  [Consolidated  Virginia] 


John  A.  Zalac 


47 


Company  in  the  central  tunnel.  They  were 
drifting  old  workings,  putting  this  drift  in.  It’s 
all  loose  ground  above  them  and  below  them. 
Old-timers  left  pillars  of  ore  to  help  support 
the  area  that  was  being  mined.  They  were 
going  in  to  rob  these  pillars.  This  was  in  the  late 
1930s,  and  it  was  really  dangerous.  You  could 
hear  the  ground  moving;  it’d  started  trickling. 
Most  of  the  miners  wouldn’t  work,  but  Tony 
wanted  to  work.  He,  another  fellow — a  miner 
by  the  name  of  Claus  Martens — and  the  shift 
boss,  William  Randolph,  were  in  there.  It 
caved  from  below  them — sucked  them  down. 
When  it  dropped,  the  concussion  kicked  the 
shift  boss  into  the  front  of  the  tunnel  where 
it  was  safe.  The  other  two  guys  went  down. 
Tony  was  killed.  He  had  a  4-by-6  piling  go 
right  through  his  stomach.  Claus  Martens 
had  one  leg  crushed.  They  couldn’t  get  him 
out  it  was  so  dangerous.  They  had  to  get  a 
court’s  permit  to  amputate  Martens’s  leg,  and 
they  left  it  there  so  they  could  get  the  body 
out.  [The  30  September  1940,  edition  of  the 
Virginia  City  News  states  that  both  Stosic  and 
Martens  were  killed  in  the  mining  accident  of 
16  September  1940. — Ed.] 

They  gave  a  contract  to  some  miners  to 
get  Tony’s  body.  You’re  supposed  to  get  the 
body  out,  and  they  couldn’t  get  it  out.. ..I 
worked  at  the  Dayton  mine  then.  They  had  a 
motor  that  they  hauled  ore  cars  with.  These 
motors  were  operated  by  batteries,  and  they 
weighed  about  a  ton.  We  had  a  chain  jack, 
and  we  jacked  these  motors  off  of  these  cars. 
We  put  them  on  the  bench  where  they  were 
put  on  chargers,  so  they  charged  them.  They 
had  two  of  them — one  was  charging,  and  one 
was  in  use  all  the  time....  These  miners  came 
down  and  borrowed  that  chain  jack,  and  they 
tried  to  get  this  big  man  out.  They  were  afraid 
to  go  down  there;  it  was  too  dangerous.  They 
put  the  chain  jack  around  his  body  and  just 
pulled  him  apart — brought  about  half  of  him 


out.  Nobody  knows  that,  because  that  would 
be  against  the  law.  They’d  have  to  get  a  permit 
to  do  that.  But  these  guys  had  a  contract  to 
get  him  out,  so....  I  know,  because  I  was  a 
pallbearer  for  Tony  when  he  was  buried.  This 
man  weighed  about  270  pounds,  but  it  was 
a  very  light  coffin  that  we  were  carrying.  He 
was  a  big  man.  So  I  know  that’s  what  they  did. 
You  could  have  lost  somebody  else’s  life,  too, 
if  they  tried  to  get  the  body  out.  But,  it  was 
one  of  those  things  you  couldn’t  do — abandon 
them. 

There  were  a  lot  of  people  like  that.  All 
these  miners  had  something  about  them 
that  you  liked  and  respected.  They  had 
good  morals,  most  of  them.  If  they  told  you 
something,  why,  you  could  bet  on  that;  they 
would  do  it.  Of  course,  you  had  a  few  bad  ones, 
but  90  percent  of  them  were  very  honest  and 
honorable.  If  they  couldn’t  meet  it,  they’d  let 
you  know  before,  whatever  it  was.  They  were 
pretty  honest  people.  A  lot  of  times  they’d  have 
to  get  enough  money  to  leave  one  camp  and  go 
to  another,  and  you  might  not  hear  from  them 
for  two  or  three  years.  Then  all  of  a  sudden, 
bang — they’d  repayyou,  a  little  interest,  maybe, 
and  feel  bad  because  they  couldn’t  do  it  sooner. 
They  were  good  people  to  know. 

The  miners  had  their  rivalries.  There 
were  the  Cornish  and  the  Cousin  Jacks,  as 
they  called  them — they  were  the  English; 
they  all  hung  together.  The  Italians  kind  of 
hung  together.  The  Irishmen  hung  together. 
There  would  be  a  bar  that  was  run  by  one 
of  their  countrymen,  and  that  would  be 
like  their  headquarters.  They’d  all  mingle; 
most  of  them  got  along  pretty  good,  but  the 
Cousin  Jacks  and  the  Irish  never  got  along. 
The  Cornish  hung  out  at  the  Senate  Bar, 
which  was  later  changed  to  the  Bucket  of 
Blood.  Every  payday  the  Irish’d  have  to  go 
over  to  the  Senate  to  whip  the  bloody  Cousin 
Jacks,  [laughter]  Then  the  war’d  be  on!  The 


48 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


bartender’d  come  out,  and  hed  have  a  pick 
handle  and  start  whaling  on  those  Irishmen. 
The  miners  referred  to  the  bar  as  the  “bloody 
bucket.”  Then  after  payday  when  theyd  get 
down  to  the  mine,  they’d  say,  “Well,  the 
bloody  bucket  had  it  last  night  again.”  Later 
on,  when  the  tourists  started,  the  Senate 
wasn’t  too  attractive  a  name  to  the  tourists,  so 
they  called  it  the  Bucket  of  Blood.  That’s  how 
it  got  the  name,  but  it  was  called  the  Senate 
prior  to  that. 

Mining  and  Milling,  1930S-1940S 

I  was  working  in  the  mine  when  the 
dust  bowl  hit  in  Oklahoma  in  the  late  1930s. 
Everybody  was  migrating  with  whatever 
they  had.  All  those  people  were  losing  their 
farms.  Those  people  were  really  up  against 
it.  They’d  come  hunting  for  a  job.  We  were 
making  $4.25  a  day;  they  offered  to  work  for 
$3.25  a  day.  They  would  work  for  anything. 
They  wanted  to  put  some  bread  on  the  table. 
They  were  hungry. 

Were  they  hired? 

They  didn’t  know  anything  about  mining, 
or  they  would  have  been.  It  wasn’t  like  going 
out,  taking  care  of  crops,  tending  cows  or 
something  with  a  dairy.  The  underground  was 
kind  of  dangerous,  and  you  could  jeopardize 
whoever  you  were  working  with  if  you  didn’t 
know  about  mining.  You  had  to  be  trained. 
You  had  to  learn  how  to  go  along  before  they 
could  turn  you  loose.  But  they  wanted  work. 

Then  the  old  boss,  Alec  Chism,  would 
come  down.  He  had  a  nickname.  They  called 
him  “The  Fish.”  I  don’t  know  why.  But  he  was 
always  something.  He  was  quite  a  diplomat. 
He  always  tried  to  build  up  a  little  competition 
between  your  shift  and  the  other  shift.  He 
would  tell  you  what  they’d  done.  He  tried  to 


get  more  out  of  you.  He  was  very  clever  the 
way  he  did  it. 

I  was  down  there  working.  I  was  either 
tramming  or  mucking  in  the  stope;  it’s  just 
labor  work.  These  guys’d  be  rustling  for  a 
job  up  there.  I  remember  buying  a  car.  I  had 
a  1938  Chevy  Master  Deluxe,  and  I  think  it 
cost  $995. 1  needed  that  job,  and  the  boss  said, 
“Kid,  do  you  like  this  job?” 

I  said,  “Yes.” 

“Well,”  he  said,  “you  know,  you  better  keep 
your  head  down  and  your  butt  up  because 
them  guys  up  there,  they’re  offering  to  work 
for  a  dollar  a  day  less.”  [laughter]  We  were 
contracting  all  the  time,  because  there  were 
so  many  people  hunting  for  a  job. 

Which  mine  was  this? 

The  Con.  Chollar  in  Gold  Hill.  In  those 
days  they  called  it  the  Overman.  Later  they 
called  it  the  Con.  Chollar.  The  Dayton  mine 
down  there  was  the  same.  But  these  all  came 
on  later.  They  weren’t  the  deep  mines.  These 
were  all  in  Silver  City  or  Gold  Hill. 

I  worked  in  the  New  York.  That’s  the  mine 
that  has  the  gallows  frame.  Then  I  worked  in 
the  Yellow  Jacket,  and  that’s  where  they  had 
the  big  tire  underground  in  the  early  days.  We 
were  working  in  the  old  workings  where  the 
old-timers  already  worked.  We  were  going 
back,  because  they  quit  when  their  mill  heads 
were  probably  $4  to  $6.  They  quit  when  they 
couldn’t  make  it  with  $6  ore.  We  were  going 
back  after  that,  because  they  improved  the 
methods  of  ore  processing  a  little  bit.  They 
could  make  a  little  money  on  $6  ore.  We  were 
robbing  what  the  old-timers  had  left.  The 
company  then  could  make  a  little  money  on 
what  they  considered  a  waste. 

What  was  the  difference  in  the  new  and  old 
ways  of  processing  the  ore? 


John  A.  Zalac 


49 


It  was  in  the  milling  processes.  They  were 
getting  better  recovery  It  used  to  be  that  they 
probably  got  70  percent  of  the  silver  and 
maybe  only  80  percent  of  the  gold.  This  time 
around  they  might  be  getting  92  percent  of 
the  gold  and  maybe  80  percent  of  the  silver. 
They  had  methods  of  getting  a  little  better 
production,  of  getting  more  through  the 
mill.  They  could  probably  mill  more  in  24 
hours  than  in  the  earlier  days  and  get  better 
recovery.  So  they  could  make  a  little  money 
on  what  the  old-timers  left. 

They  used  to  leave  pillars  to  give  strength 
to  the  area  where  they  were  working.  Theyd 
always  leave  one  solid  pillar,  and  theyd  work 
around  it.  Well,  now  we’re  going  after  those 
pillars,  because  a  lot  of  them  had  good  ore 
in  them.  That’s  what  the  Houston  Company, 
which  wanted  to  move  the  highway,  were  after. 
That’s  why  they  wanted  to  move  the  road, 
because  in  the  Imperial  where  they  wanted  to 
go,  they  left  all  these  pillars  near  the  surface 
to  give  support  to  the  ground  so  it  wouldn’t 
settle.  There  they’ve  got  the  pillars,  the  road 
has  now  settled.  It  has  settled  some  all  the 
time.  If  they  could  have  moved  the  road, 
some  of  those  pillars  would  have  been  like 
the  original  discovery — really  a  lot  of  value 
in  them.  So  it  would  have  been  worth  a  lot  if 
they  could  have  moved  the  road.  I  think  they 
could  have  done  a  lot  of  good  for  the  town,  but 
people  don’t  want  to  see  mining  any  more.  It 
could’ve  done  good  for  the  tax  base. 

The  Storey  County  authorities  wouldn’t 
let  American  Flat  put  trailers  in  because  of 
historic  preservation.  That’s  for  the  birds 
when  that’s  the  greatest  mining  area  in  the 
world.  And  to  have  somebody  dictate  that  you 
can’t  do  this  or  you  can’t  do  that,  somebody 
that’s  never  been  around....  There  wouldn’t 
be  a  Virginia  City  if  we  hadn’t  had  mining.  It 
bothers  me  to  have  a  few  people  that  dictate 


the  future  of  Virginia  City.  I  think  Virginia 
City’s  too  big  to  have  somebody  dictate  what 
should  be  done  to  them.  That’s  the  way  I  look 
at  it.  None  of  us’d  be  here  if  it  hadn’t  been  for 
our  pioneers.  They  came  out  and  settled  and 
had  to  do  a  lot  of  things. 

I  don’t  know  if  anybody  brought  it  up  to 
you  or  not — when  Zeb  Kendall  came  here 
and  bought  the  Con.  Virginia  in  1919,  all  the 
deep  mines  were  still  working  then.  And  they 
formed  what  they  called  a  merger  company. 
That’s  when  they  all  merged  together;  they 
built  the  haulage  tunnel,  built  the  American 
Flat  mill. 

Now,  in  the  old  days  they  used  to  haul 
ore  to  the  mills  down  on  the  Carson  River. 
Then  there  was  a  couple  of  mills  that  they 
tried  afterward  that  they  built  up  there,  but 
they  weren’t  modern  enough.  Well,  when 
Kendall  come  they  connected  all  of  the  deep 
mines,  I  think  on  the  1,200  foot  level — that 
would  be  the  Sierra  Nevada,  the  Union,  the 
Ophir,  the  Con.  Virginia,  the  Savage,  the 
Hale  &  Norcross,  Chollar,  the  Combination, 
the  Imperial  in  Gold  Hill,  Yellow  Jacket,  the 
Overman,  and  I  think  the  New  York.  And  the 
haulage  tunnel  went  to  the  American  Flat  mill 
at  American  Flat.  They  built  that  big  mill  down 
there,  and  it  cost  $3  or  $4  million  at  that  time, 
which  was  an  enormous  amount  of  money. 
But  they  didn’t  build  it  in  segments  that  could 
be  operated  individually.  They  built  it  so  that 
when  you  turn  the  power  on  the  whole  mill 
had  to  start  working.  It  was  a  big  plant. 

All  the  mines,  all  the  different  companies 
that  merged  together  to  build  this  haulage 
tunnel,  the  mill. ..well,  they’d  all  shipped 
whatever  ore  they  had  down  there,  and  the  mill 
was  going  24  hours  a  day.  Now  the  Depression 
hit  and  the  mines  have  got  to  shut  down. 

In  the  early  1930s  there  were  a  lot  of 
leasers  up  there  in  Virginia  City.  They  were 
making  money  leasing,  where  the  companies’d 


50 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


lease  out  a  certain  level  in  a  mine  where  they 
could  work,  or  they  worked  all  over  town  on 
different  mining  projects.  They  could  have 
sent  their  ore  down  there  to  the  American 
Flat  mill,  but  the  mill  couldn’t  operate  on  a 
small  scale.  They  couldn’t  operate  the  crusher 
by  itself.  If  they  crushed  the  ore  and  they  had 
it  through  the  ball  mill,  and  they  wanted  to 
start  milling  it  and  put  it  through  the  tanks 
in  the  cyanide.. .well,  then,  the  crusher  would 
still  have  to  keep  working,  see?  It  wasn’t  built 
in  segments,  so  it  couldn’t  be  used  for  the 
leasers,  for  the  small  mines. 

Then  in  the  1930s  everybody  started 
building  mills.  Sierra  Nevada  built  a  mill; 
Con.  Virginia  had  to  build  another;  Arizona 
Comstock,  they  had  to  build  another  mill. 
They  built  the  Crown  Point  mill  where  the 
Savage  is,  where  the  Imperial  was.  They  built 
the  Con.  Chollar  mill.  They  put  a  mill  in 
Dayton  for  the  Dayton  Company,  the  New 
York — all  that  property.  William  Donovan 
put  up  his  mill  down  there  at  Silver  City.  All 
of  these  mills  were  built  because  American 
Flat  was  standing  down  there — the  big  mill. 
It  couldn’t  be  operated  because  they  couldn’t 
have  the  tonnage  to  make  it  feasible. 

The  owners  of  the  American  Flat  mill 
would  have  kept  it  intact  for  later  on.  They 
went  to  the  county  commissioners  in  1932 
or  1933  and  asked  them  to  cut  down  on  the 
taxes.  The  commissioners  refused  them,  and 
they  have  since  just  refused.  They  said  they 
had  too  much  invested,  they  couldn’t  walk 
away  from  it.  The  owners  told  them,  “If  you 
don’t  lower  taxes  we’re  going  to  have  to  junk 
the  mill.”  They  couldn’t  afford  the  taxes.  Well, 
the  commissioners  were  kind  of  stupid,  and 
they  wouldn’t  play  ball  with  them.  So  they 
sold  the  mill  for  junk.  They  salvaged  whatever 
they  could  and  closed.. .they  got  rid  of  it.  And 
if  the  mill  had  been  feasible  where  they  could 
rewire  it  and  have  it  operating  in  different 


segments  as  they  needed  them,  they  wouldn’t 
have  needed  all  those  other  mills.  The  Crown 
Point  mill — they  got  a  loan  from  the  federal 
government  to  build  it,  I  think  through  the 
WPA  or  something,  [laughter]  Hey,  it’s  really 
something! 

Now  they  built  that  big  mill  down  there, 
but  it’s  an  entirely  different  system  that  they 
now  use  than  what  they  were  using  at  that 
period.  They  were  using  cyanide  tanks.  They 
still  use  the  cyanide,  but  it’s  all  a  leaching 
process  now,  where  they  built  the  big  ponds 
and  they  put  the  ore  out  there,  and  they  had 
a  big  lake,  you  know.  All  of  the  solutions  were 
in  this  lake,  and  everything’s  submerged.  It 
just  leaches  out  the  gold  and  silver,  and  then 
it’s  picked  up  later  as  it’s  coming  out.  They’ve 
been  doing  that  for  years  with  copper.  They 
would  put  metal — tin  or  anything — in  this 
copper  water,  and  the  copper  would  eat  up 
the  tin  and  that,  but  it  would  replace  it  with 
copper.  And  this  works  similar  to  that. 

In  older  times  they  had  the  mills  and  they 
had  the  agitators.  They  had  great  big  huge 
tanks,  and  these  agitators  would  be  in  there. 
You’d  have  your  cyanide  solution  in  there,  and 
it  was  more  or  less  working  the  same  way,  but 
it  wasn’t  as  efficient  as  what  they’re  doing.... 
What  they’re  doing  now  might  take  a  little 
longer,  but  it’s  more  efficient,  and  they  get 
a  better  recovery.  If  it  was  sulfite  form  they 
would  use  the  cyanide  in  the  cyanide  plants. 
And  if  it  was  free  gold,  then  they  could  use  the 
flotation  system.  It  was  all  tanks  and  agitators, 
and  then  they  had  to  have  traps  where  they 
would  pick  the  gold  up  as  it  run  out  through 
chutes  up  there.  The  gold  is  heavy,  and  it 
would  settle,  and  then,  they’d  pick  it  up  later.  I 
never  have  worked  in  a  mill,  but  I  think  that’s 
the  general  idea  of  the  way  they  worked. 

Now,  recovery  is  all  by  leach  plants.  It’s  in 
ponds  outside  that  they  do  it.  I  haven’t  been 


John  A.  Zalac 


51 


around  them  myself  now;  it’s  something  new. 
In  the  old  days,  like  the  1930s  and  1940s,  they 
might  get  70  percent  recovery  of  the  value  of 
silver  in  a  ton  of  ore.  And  on  gold  they  might 
get  80  to  88  percent.  Then  some  of  the  mills 
later  on  were  getting  like  90, 92  percent,  which 
is  very  good.  But  now  they  get  like  98  and  99 
percent  recovery. 

If  ore  didn’t  go  $6  a  ton,  they  couldn’t 
make  anything  on  it.  But  now  with  the  big 
production  they  got,  and  the  equipment  to 
move  it,  hell,  they  can  put  through  maybe 
a  thousand  tons  a  day,  where  most  of  those 
little  mines  in  the  past,  if  they  averaged  50 
tons  a  day  it  was  pretty  good.  So  it’s  just  big 
production.  That’s  why  they’re  all  going  to  the 
open  pit,  and  that’s  why  Virginia  City  let  go 
and  mined  all  of  the  dumps  in  there.  You  don’t 
have  the  timber  and  the  high  cost — pumping 
water,  hoisting  all  your  ore  and  that.  With 
this  big  equipment  they  can  just  open  pit  it 
and  take  these  big  trucks.  They  can  get  up  to 
50  tons  a  load,  and  it  takes  them  five  minutes 
to  get  it,  where  the  old  mines  might  have  40 
men  working  and  only  get  maybe  125  tons  a 
day.  So  you  got  a  crew  of  50,  plus  the  cost  of 
hoisting,  pumping  water,  timbering....  Timber 
is  so  expensive  now.  You  know,  you  can’t 
afford  it  now.  If  they  want  a  dollar  a  foot  for 
six-by-eights  or  something....  it’s  just  grim. 

There  was  still,  you  said,  some  mining  going 
on  in  the  1940s. 

Well,  there  was  quite  a  bit.  Before  the  war, 
all  the  mines  were  working.  The  goldmines 
in  Gold  Hill  and  Silver  City  were  working 
up  till  1942,  when  we  got  into  the  Second 
World  War.  The  miners  were  forced  to  leave 
when  the  gold  mines  and  silver  mines  were 
closed  by  President  Roosevelt,  because  all  of 
the  material  they  were  getting  was  needed 
somewhere  else,  in  strategic  minerals  like 


lead,  zinc,  copper,  and  tungsten — stuff  that 
contributed  to  the  war  effort.  They  forced 
the  miners  to  go  into  that  kind  of  work.  [In 
October,  1942,  the  War  Production  Board 
issued  Limitation  Order  L-208,  effectively 
closing  the  nation’s  gold  mines.  However, 
restrictions  on  gold  mining  had  begun  almost 
immediately  following  Pearl  Harbor. — Ed.] 
So  they  forced  these  gold  mines  to  close,  but 
these  companies  still  maintained;  they  kept 
the  same  taxes  they  were  paying.  They  got  the 
mills  and  they  got  all  that  equipment  there. 
They  kept  it  all  intact.  All  the  years  that  they 
were  forced  to  be  closed,  they  were  paying 
taxes.  They  were  the  ones  that  kept  the  county 
alive  and  kept  it  going — they  were  paying  the 
bills. 

After  the  war  the  gold  and  silver  prices 
got  to  where  these  companies  could  operate 
again,  but  they  could  not  afford  to  buy  the 
timber  to  mine  underground  like  they  used 
to.  When  they  mined  underground,  timber 
was  cheap.  You  could  buy  a  thousand  feet 
of  eight-by-eights  for  maybe  $10  or  $15  a 
thousand.  Now  it  costs  you  $500  or  $1,000 
for  a  thousand  feet.  It’s  just  prohibitive.  But 
these  companies  hung  together  hoping  to 
go  back  and  mine  again.  When  they  got  a 
chance  to  go  back  in  and  make  a  little  profit 
for  what  they  spent  all  those  years,  somebody 
had  moved  in  and  said,  “Now,  we  don’t  want 
it.”  Some  environmentalist  said,  “No,  it’s 
going  to  spoil  my  air...  [laughter]  It’s  going  to 
hurt  my  eardrums,  or  it’s  going  to  create  too 
much  dust.”  They  had  kept  the  country  alive 
all  those  years. 

The  mining  companies  had  the  power  of 
condemnation.  If  you  had  a  patented  mining 
claim,  you  gave  somebody  surface  rights  just 
to  give  them  a  place  to  live  on.  He  didn’t  own 
the  ground.  You  sold  him  a  place  to  build  a 
house.  You  deeded  it  to  him;  he’s  got  10  feet 
of  surface  rights.  You  did  it  so  that  you  could 


52 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


build  up  a  labor  supply  for  yourself.  People 
had  to  live.  But  now  it’s  reversed,  [laughter] 
Now  that  10  feet  dictates  what  goes  on  at  all 
and  it  doesn’t  seem  right. 

Are  there  any  remaining  mines  which  held  on 
during  this  time ? 

There  were,  but  finally  they  were  forced 
out.  Zeb  Kendall,  who  had  the  Con.  Virginia, 
paid  taxes  all  the  time.  He  bought  the  Con. 
Virginia  and  the  Ophir — the  biggest  deep 
mines  up  there.  I  don’t  know,  but  he  paid 
like  a  million  dollars  in  1919.  That  was  an 
awful  lot  of  money  at  that  time.  He  kept  it 
going.  When  I  was  the  county  commissioner 
up  there  in  1949,  he  was  delinquent  in  his 
taxes  for  something  like  two  years.  Property 
reverted  to  the  county  if  you  couldn’t  pick  up 
your  back  taxes,  the  advertising  penalties  and 
stuff.  He  owed  $4,000  or  $5,000  in  taxes.  Now 
here  he’s  kind  of  busted. 

Just  prior  to  that,  the  highway  department 
came  and  built  C  Street.  It’s  part  of  the 
highway  system;  the  highway  department 
maintains  it.  They  raised  the  street  up  to 
meet  the  government  specifications.  The  bill 
with  Taylor  Street  on  it  is  much  steeper.  They 
added  a  lot  of  fill  in  there,  made  the  street  a 
little  bit  wider.  The  sewers  are  down  there  12 
or  14  feet  in  fill.  They  were  wooden  boxes, 
see,  and  then  they  started  replacing  them  with 
concrete  pipes.  At  this  time  some  of  these  here 
boxes  collapsed.  Now,  to  repair  that,  it’s  going 
to  cost  a  fortune,  because  you  would  have  to 
breast  board  all  of  that  ground  to  trench  down 
there  and  dig  down  12  or  15  feet.  You  know, 
you’d  have  to  do  just  like  you  work  in  a  mine. 
It  would  cost  you  a  fortune. 

The  mining  company  that  owned  the  Con. 
Virginia  before  Mr.  Kendall  was  going  to  try  to 
siphon  water  out  of  the  mine  with  an  inverted 
siphon,  like  they  used  to  bring  the  water  from 


Marlette  Lake  to  Virginia  City.  Marlette  Lake 
is  higher  than  Virginia  City,  so  it’s  brought  in 
a  wooden  flume,  and  when  it  comes  through 
Washoe  Valley  at  Lakeview  Hill  it’s  all  steel 
pipe.  All  right,  so  it  was  two  16-inch  lines,  the 
water  line,  and  it  went  through  Lakeview.  The 
pipe’s  maybe  half  an  inch,  three-quarters  of  an 
inch  thick — pressure  pipe.  The  water  coming 
down  from  Nanette  dropped  2,500  feet  to 
Lakeview,  where  it  was  kicked  2,000  feet  up 
to  Virginia  City,  and  it  was  gravity  fed  all  the 
way  to  Virginia  City.  It  cost  so  much  money  in 
the  mines  to  pump  the  water  from  the  lower 
levels,  the  mining  companies  thought,  “Well, 
now,  why  can’t  we  use  this  inverted  system 
and  drop  the  water  from  the  flume  down  in 
the  Con.  Virginia  mine  and  use  that  to  pump 
the  water?”  They  put  in  a  16-inch  line  from 
the  flume  down  the  Con.  Virginia  shaft,  and 
it  went  right  down  Taylor  Street.  They  tried 
it,  and  it  didn’t  work. 

Now,  when  the  county  was  in  such  a  bind, 
sewers  stopped  up — they  had  no  disposal  for 
sewage  until  just  recently  they  got  a  sewage 
plant  up  there  and  a  disposal  system;  Gold 
Hill  sewage  still  runs  down  the  Imperial 
shaft — Zeb  Kendall  said,  “I  will  trade  you 
that  pipeline.  I’ll  give  you  that,  and  you  can 
cut  your  sewage  into  there  and  call  my  taxes 
paid.” 

So  the  county  hooked  up  the  sewer  lines 
to  the  pressure  pipe  that  went  down  the  Con. 
Virginia  Mining  Company  shaft.  I  don’t 
know  if  we  gave  him  a  couple  more  years  or 
something  on  his  taxes,  but....  See,  now,  he 
tried  to  survive  all  those  years.  Then  when 
you  get  a  chance  to  really  do  some  mining, 
why,  somebody  says,  “No  mining.”  You  know, 
I  don’t  think  it’s  right. 

So  are  you  saying,  then,  that  as  early  as  the 
1940s  people  were  objecting  to  reopening  the 
mines? 


John  A.  Zalac 


53 


No,  they  weren’t  objecting.  But  at  that 
time  the  demand  for  the  gold  and  silver  wasn’t 
there.  The  government  closed  the  mines 
during  World  War  II  and  the  miners  were 
gone.  The  cost  to  start  over  again  deep-mining 
after  the  war  was  too  prohibitive.  It  cost  too 
much  at  that  time  to  go  deep,  so  the  modern 
method  is  open  pit.  See,  that’s  cheaper,  and 
this  is  what  they’re  opposed  to. 

I  don’t  think  it’s  fair  to  the  mining  people 
that  carried... it  wasn’t  only  Kendall,  but  all  the 
other  companies  up  there  that  stayed  intact 
for  years  and  years  and  years.  Then,  finally, 
somebody’d  buy  them  up  because  the  price  of 
gold  has  gone  up.  They  think,  “Well,  we  can  go 
in  and  we  can  do  something.”  And  then  they 
get  all  this  opposition;  they  won’t  let  them 
operate.  They  make  it  prohibitive  for  them.  I 
don’t  think  it’s  fair,  really.  That’s  my  opinion. 
Of  course,  if  it  hadn’t  been  for  the  mines,  I 
wouldn’t  be  here,  so  I  can  see  their  side  of  it. 

It  seemed  there  wasn’t  much  mining  going  on 
in  the  1950s  and  the  1960s. 

Well,  there  was  some  in  Silver  City  and 
Gold  Hill.  Oh,  I’ve  got  some  great  pictures  I 
could  show  you  of  Gold  Hill — the  open  pit 
down  there,  where  they  were  blasting  when 
the  pits  were  working,  see,  they  all  worked 
open  pits  in  the  1940s  and  1950s.  Nobody 
said  anything  about  them.  It  was  just  part  of 
the  mining  process,  and  everybody  accepted 
them.  Nobody  bitched. 

Donovan  had  an  open  pit  down  there; 
he  wanted  to  open  pit  where  his  mine  was. 
He  moved  the  road  that  goes  through  Gold 
Hill — it  used  to  run  over  along  the  hill.  You 
can  see  where  Donovan’s  pit  is  down  there 
now — the  big  hole  on  the  right  before  you  hit 
Silver  City,  going  down.  The  highway  used  to 
be  over  there,  and  he  built  it  over  here.  He  had 
permission  from  the  highway  department  and 


from  the  county  to  move  it.  They  built  it  on 
that  side,  and  it  spares  the  location  so  he  could 
open  pit.  That  was  done  in  the  1950s.  Nobody 
objected.  They  accepted  whatever  the  mining 
companies  done;  it  was  part  of  their  lifestyle. 

All  of  this  here  bitching  and  that,  it’s  come 
since  we  got  environmentalists  and  all  that. 
Never  had  them  before,  see.  You  know,  that’s 
been  in  the  last  generation,  last  20  years,  we 
get  all  that.  If  we  need  the  minerals,  they 
should  have  a  right  to  be  able  to  get  them. 
We  shouldn’t  have  to  be  buying  them  from 
some  foreign  country,  not  if  we’ve  got  them. 
We  were  very  independent,  and  it  was  still 
free  enterprise. 

Heck,  I  can  remember  when  every  time 
they  were  going  to  shoot  off  one  of  those 
atomic  bombs  down  out  of  Las  Vegas  there 
at  Indian  Springs,  we’d  get  out  and  watch  the 
big  mushroom  cloud.  We  could  see  it  from 
Virginia  City  just  as  clear  as  could  be.  That 
big  cloud’d  form.  Yes,  we  used  to  get  out,  and 
nobody  thought  anything  about  it.  It  was 
contributing  to  the  war  effort.  Oh  sure!  You 
ask  any  of  the  old-timers  who  lived  up  there. 
Yes,  we  used  to  go  out  every  time  they  were 
going  to  set  one  off... and  that’s  when  they  were 
shooting  them,  you  know,  above  ground.  You 
could  see  that  mushroom.  There’d  be  a  big 
flash  in  the  sky  and  you  would  see  this  big 
red  thing  forming  up  there  like  a  mushroom, 
you  know?  We  used  to  watch  it.  They  used  to 
set  them  off  like  at  4:00,  5:00  in  the  morning. 
That’s  probably  when  there  was  the  least  wind 
and  stuff. 

Everything  was  fine,  then;  see,  even  at 
that  period,  everything  was  fine.  And  this  is 
way  after  the  war;  this  is  getting  up  around 
1950.  It  was  after  that,  then,  they  started  the 
sit-ins  and  all  that  where  they  bitched  about 
everything.  You  can’t  even  smoke  a  cigarette 
any  more. 


54 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


Life  in  Virginia  City  in  the  1930s 

Virginia  City  was  a  good  town  to  raise 
kids  in,  for  we  didn’t  have  problems  like  we  do 
today!  The  kids  were  all  trained  at  home  really 
good.  They  all  had  pretty  good  upbringings. 
They  had  a  lot  of  values,  a  lot  of  respect  for 
everybody  else.  You  don’t  find  that  much  any 
more,  I  don’t  think.  Not  in  the  average.  There 
are  too  many  things  happening  up  there,  like 
too  many  narcotics  and  everything.  They’d 
never  heard  of  narcotics  in  those  days. 

They  had  a  Chinatown  down  where 
the  mines  are  today.  The  Chinese  had  their 
opium,  but  it  was  always  kept  to  themselves. 
You  didn’t  see  it  around. 

On  D  Street  there  was  a  bar  on  that  level 
run  by  a  Chinaman  named  Chung  Kee.  The 
miners  coming  from  the  Con.  Virginia  mine 
would  be  sopping  wet  when  they  came  out  of 
the  shaft.  They  walked  like  through  a  tunnel. 
They  had  it  all  enclosed — a  building  or  shed 
over  it — where  you  could  walk  to  the  change 
room,  because  you’d  perspire  so  much  when 
you  came  out.  The  wintertimes’d  be  really 
cold.  So  you’d  get  to  the  change  room — they 
were  all  enclosed — and  go  in,  get  your  hot 
bath  and  change  clothes.  The  miners  who 
worked  at  Con.  Virginia  would  come  out,  and 
then  they’d  stop  at  Chung  Kee’s  on  D  Street. 

Normally  the  miners’d  get  off  shift  and 
go  to  their  favorite  bar.  They’d  buy  a  glass  of 
beer,  and  they  always  got  a  shot  of  whiskey  for 
an  “aftershiffer”  when  they’d  get  off  of  shift. 
Combined  with  a  beer  and  fatigue,  you’re  off 
to  the  races  more  or  less.  [laughter]  But 
this  Chinaman  made  his  own  wine.  Instead 
of  beer,  he  gave  them  a  glass  of  his  wine.  They 
called  it  a  “Chung  Kee  liner.”  It  was  a  glass  of 
wine  with  a  shot  of  Chinese  whiskey  with  it 
instead  of  the  American  whiskey.  Well,  after 
two  or  three  of  those,  it’d  just  about  frappe 
you.  They  were  really  something! 


A  lot  of  miners  walked  from  Virginia  City 
to  Silver  City  to  work.  They’d  put  in  a  shift  and 
then  walk  back  when  they  got  off.  That’s  three 
miles.  But  everybody  walked;  nobody  had 
cars.  If  you  got  around  during  the  wintertime, 
it  was  on  a  horse.  Some  people  had  horses  if 
they  were  fortunate  and  could  afford  to  feed 
them. 

It  was  really  something  when  all  the 
deep  mines  were  working.  They  all  had 
steam  hoists;  they  were  run  by  steam  then. 
Everyone’d  blow  a  steam  whistle  when  the 
shifts  changed.  They’d  blow  a  whistle  at  7:00 
in  the  morning,  at  noon,  maybe  at  6:00  at 
night.  That  sounded  pretty  good  to  hear  the 
whistles  go  off  in  town.  When  the  V  &  T 
used  to  come  up  through  Gold  Hill,  before  it 
would  cross  the  Gold  Hill  trestle,  it’d  always 
blow  the  whistle. 

There  was  a  kid  in  Gold  Hill,  Melvin  Fell, 
who  was  about  13,  14  years  old.  H  e 
could  imitate  that  whistle,  and  his  voice 
carried.  Somehow  it’d  just  carry  up  those 
canyons!  [laughter]  A  lot  of  times  you  could 
hear  it,  and  we’d  think,  “Well,  what  the  hell  is 
the  V  &  T  coming  to  town  for  now?”  It  was  not 
on  their  schedule.  This  kid’d  be  down  there 
mimicking  the  whistle.  He  was  really  good. 
He  was  like  Boxcar  Willie.  He  was  fantastic. 

There  were  only  a  few  Indians  up  in 
Virginia  City.  There  was  an  old  gentleman 
they  called  Jasper.  Then  there  was  Andy 
Antunovich — he  was  a  Yugoslav,  but  he  was 
married  to  an  Indian  woman.  There  were 
several  families.  There  are  a  few  that  are  still 
around,  but  not  too  many.  Tony  Bob  had  a 
little  Indian  settlement.  There’s  one  on  the 
“new  road”  or  truck  route  going  out  of  town. 
It  has  to  be  below  the  Chollar  Mansion.  It’s 
maybe  a  quarter  of  a  mile  down  the  road  up 
there.  There  were  several  little  shacks  down 
there  that  were  where  the  Indians  lived.  By 
the  cemetery,  right  below  Ophir  dumps  down 


John  A.  Zalac 


55 


there,  there  was  a  little  Indian  community. 
It’s  right  across  from  where  the  brewery  was 
down  there  on  Six-Mile  Canyon.  The  monks 
or  somebody  took  over  what  used  to  be  the 
brewery.  They  were  teaching  down  there.  They 
had  some  of  these  huts  they  made  where  they 
would  go  and  meditate  and  stuff  like  that.  But 
this  was  in  later  years.  There  used  to  be  quite  a 
few  little  tepees  or  those  Indian-made  places 
there  when  I  was  a  kid.  There  were  several 
spots  around  town  where  they  had  them,  but 
they  were  always  on  the  outskirts  somewhere. 
There  might  be  three,  four  or  five  families  in 
each  little  spot.  Not  too  many. 

There  was  Raymond  David.  His  stepfather 
was  a  Castilian — born  in  Spain.  We  used  to 
tease  him,  say  something  Mexican  to  him.  Oh, 
man,  would  he  ever  hit  the  ceiling!  [laughter] 
“I’m  Castilian!”  They’re  very  serious  about  it. 
There  was  no  Indian  blood  in  his  veins,  and 
not  really  much  of  anything. 

People  don’t  think  about  how  tough  it  was 
in  the  wintertime  up  there.  A  lot  of  times  the 
water’d  freeze.  We  had  wooden  flumes  coming 
into  town.  They  were  all  on  the  surface  of  the 
ground,  and  they  leaked.  If  there  was  a  good 
snow  cover  over  it  they  wouldn’t  freeze.  If 
not,  it  would  form  ice  in  there  and  break  the 
flume.  Then  you’d  have  to  take  the  miners 
out  of  the  mine,  go  up  there  and  work  on  it. 
Sometimes  it  would  take  four  or  five  days  to 
get  water  back  again.  People  used  to  have  to 
fill  up  buckets  and  everything,  so  they  could 
flush  their  bathrooms,  wash  their  dishes  and 
stuff.  They’d  go  out  and  melt  snow.  The  winters 
were  rough!  Everything  was  heated  with  coal 
and  wood. 

The  coal  yard  sat  just  over  the  hill  right 
below  the  new  elementary  grammar  school  on 
D  Street.  They  had  a  siding  in  there  where  the 
V  &  T  came  in.  There  was  a  tunnel  that  went 


underneath  the  street  in  front  of  the  Catholic 
church.  The  tunnel  went  through  there  down 
to  where  the  depot  is.  They  had  a  siding  over 
there,  and  the  coal  yard  sat  just  below  where 
Hugh  Gallagher  Elementary  School  is.  The 
railroad  siding  is  on  the  street  below  where 
the  Mackay  mansion  is  on  E  Street.  They  had 
a  little  siding  in  there  where  they  could  put 
the  railroad  cars  loaded  with  coal  and  leave 
them  till  they’d  get  them  unloaded. 

Little  Joe  Castilho  worked  for  the  coal 
yard  that  Louie  Roth  had  up  there  then.  Joe 
Castilho  and  a  couple  of  other  guys  unloaded 
and  shoveled  all  of  that  coal  out  of  the  cars. 
There  might  be  65  or  70  tons  in  a  car.  They  had 
aluminum  or  steel  buckets  like  bushel  baskets 
that  held  about  50  pounds.  They  would  carry 
coal  by  the  ton.  In  those  days  everybody  had 
coal  in  the  winter.  From  B  Street  up  to  the 
Castle,  they  had  to  carry  that  coal  on  their 
shoulders,  up  those  stairs.  Sometimes  coming 
down  was  just  as  bad.  Can  you  imagine 
delivering  coal  in  the  wintertime?  Little  Joe 
wasn’t  5  foot  4  or  5.  The  muscles  and  that  on 
his  back  would  build  up  like  a  callus.  And 
where  that  tub’d  sit,  the  muscle  would  be  an 
inch  high  on  each  shoulder.  It  would  just 
build  up  that  muscle  and  it’d  form  like  a  callus 
there — a  big  hump — where  that  bucket’d  rest. 
For  years  they  did  that.  Can  you  imagine  what 
kind  of  little  guys  these  were?  [laughter]  They 
were  just  unbelievable! 

Paul  Giraudo,  who  used  to  have  a  grocery 
store  in  the  north  end  of  town,  had  a  little 
coal  and  wood  yard.  It’s  where  you  go  down 
Six-Mile  Canyon.  It’s  on  the  left,  right  on  C 
Street.  A  little  bar,  the  North  End  Rest,  used 
to  be  there.  There’s  a  laundromat  in  it  now. 
Paul  Giraudo  had  the  coal  yard,  too.  He  had 
an  ice  business,  and  he  used  to  deliver  milk. 
When  I  got  out  of  high  school,  I  worked  for 
him  one  summer  there.  I  used  to  deliver 
groceries,  and  I  had  a  milk  route.  I  would  haul 


56 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


bottles — everything  was  bottled — and  leave 
milk  on  everybody’s  doorstep. 

Giraudo  also  had  an  ice  route.  He’d  go 
around  twice  a  week  or  once  a  week  delivering 
ice  all  over  town.  Business  places  would  take 
50  or  75  pounds  of  ice,  and  little  homes  would 
take  5,  10,  25  pounds,  mostly.  They’d  put  up 
ice  either  in  the  reservoir  in  Virginia  City  or 
Five  Mile  Reservoir,  where  our  water  supply 
is.  Anyhow,  that  would  freeze  over,  and  they 
might  get  a  foot  thick  in  the  wintertime.  So 
then  they’d  give  the  school  kids  and  everybody 
that  was  out  of  work  a  job.  They’d  go  out  and 
cut  ice  around  the  Divide  up  there  where  the 
Jeep  Posse  has  their  headquarters  now.  That 
building  used  to  be  the  ice  house.  They  stored 
their  ice  in  there,  and  they’d  pack  it  in  sawdust. 

We’d  go  up  there  and  get  ice.  The  ice 
came  in  125pound  blocks.  Then  you’d  learn 
how  to  cut  and  deliver  ice.  When  they  didn’t 
have  bad  winters  to  put  up  the  ice,  we’d  go  to 
Reno  to  Crystal  Ice  Springs  down  there  right 
where  Shoshone  Bottling  Company  used  to 
be — where  Center  Street  would  come  into 
Virginia  Street — and  we’d  get  a  truckload  of 
ice  there  every  week. 

About  1934  to  1936,  they  started  getting 
oil  and  oil  stoves  into  Virginia  City.  They 
started  to  get  oil  stoves  to  heat  with.  They 
were  like  space  heaters,  like  a  console.  Then 
you’d  have  to  get  50-  or  55-gallon  drums  of  oil. 
You  had  to  get  so  you  could  load  and  unload 
them.  You’d  take  them  out,  put  it  on  a  stand 
and  take  the  empty  off  by  yourself.  You  just 
had  to  learn  how  to  handle  it.  It’s  a  pretty  good 
knack;  it’s  just  a  sense  of  balancing.  If  you 
had  to  lift  the  drums  high,  you  used  two-by- 
twelves  or  something  where  you  could  roll  it 
most  of  the  time. 

Louis  Roth,  the  fellow  that  had  the  coal 
yard  prior  to  Paul  Giraudo,  committed 
suicide.  I  don’t  know  why,  but  he  was  a  nice 
little  Jewish  guy.  His  wife,  Flora  Roth,  was  a 


wonderful  person.  I  don’t  know  whether  he 
had  an  illness  or  something,  but  he  did  away 
with  himself. 

Flora  and  Vada  Greenhalgh  were  about 
the  same  age.  Fine  people,  you  know.  Vada’s 
father  was  with  the  water  company  for  years, 
and  I  think  she  was  born  out  here  on  Lakeview 
Hill  over  Washoe  Lake.  Their  family  moved  to 
Virginia  City,  where  her  father  was  in  charge 
of  the  water  system — the  maintenance,  the 
distribution,  and  fixing  the  broken  pipes  up 
there.  In  the  early  days,  everything  was  in 
wooden  flumes.  They  didn’t  have  pipes.  They 
started  putting  concrete  pipes  and  stuff  like 
that  in  for  their  sewers  in  the  1930s.  Prior  to 
that,  the  town  was  just  full  of  wooden  boxes 
for  the  sewers. 

School  Days,  Figures  from  the  1930s, 
and  Work  in  Virginia  City 

We  just  had  the  50-year  reunion  of  the 
Fourth  Ward  School  class  of  1936.  There  was 
about  50  people  there  or  more,  and  a  lot  of 
them  I  hadn’t  seen  for  30  years.  It  was  sure 
good  to  see  them! 

I  remember  once  we  went  out  on  strike 
from  school.  They  were  going  to  fire  our  coach 
and  one  of  the  best  teachers  and  principal — 
they  were  going  to  clean  house.  All  the  kids 
went  out  on  a  strike.  We  went  and  visited 
each  one  of  the  members  of  the  school  board 
and  said,  “By  God,  you  get  rid  of  them,  and 
we  won’t  go  back  to  school.”  And  they  kept 
them  on. 

What  teachers ? 

Well,  mainly  Jake  Lawlor.  They  were  going 
to  fire  him  for  getting  drunk  and  fighting, 
raising  hell.  He  went  on  the  wagon  and  stayed. 
Matter  of  fact,  I  think  we  kind  of  changed  his 
career  and  changed  his  direction.  That  was  in 


John  A.  Zalac 


57 


1935, 1936.  He  stayed  on,  and  I  thinkhe  left  in 
1938.  Then  he  went  some  place  in  California, 
got  a  little  better  spot  down  there.  And  he 
married  a  local  girl  from  up  there;  she  passed 
away.  She  helped  straighten  him  out,  too,  but 
the  kids  had  a  lot  to  do  with  it. 

S  Was  it  the  whole  school  that  went  out 
on  strike? 

Yes.  Just  all  of  them.  Well,  there  was  maybe 
only  30  kids  in  high  school,  but  we  all  went! 
[laughter]  But  now  wasn’t  that  something? 

John  Gilmartin  was  our  principal,  and 
what  a  fine  guy.  But  he  liked  to  nip  a  little 
bit,  too.  [laughter]  Poor  John....  He  went  to 
Gerlach  when  he  left  up  there.  He  has  since 
passed  away.  His  grandson  is  on  the  college 
golf  team,  I  think — Mark  Gilmartin,  quite  a 
golfer.  I  think  John  Gilmartin  had  the  high 
jump  record  at  the  University  of  Nevada 
for  years.  He  was  quite  an  athlete.  Fine,  fine 
person. 

Jake  Lawlor  was  quite  an  athlete  himself 
at  the  university,  you  know.  He  came  here 
from  Iowa  to  the  university.  In  the  summers 
when  we  lived  in  Ruth,  I  remember  when 
he  played  baseball  for  McGill.  Kennecott 
Copper  would  give  good  athletes  a  job  in  the 
summertime,  and  they  played  football  or  they 
played  baseball.  It  was  to  create  recreation  for 
the  locals.  There  was  nothing  doing  out  there, 
you  know.  Ely’s  325  miles  from  Salt  Lake  and 
the  same  from  Reno — it’s  out  in  the  boonies. 
And  all  those  miners  in  Ruth  and  McGill  had 
nothing  to  do.  So  every  Sunday  they  had  Ruth 
play  McGill  in  baseball.  One  Sunday  they 
played  in  McGill;  the  next  Sunday  they  played 
in  Ruth.  And  then  on  the  Fourth  of  July  and 
Labor  Day  they  played  in  Ely.  So  it  helped  all 
three  towns. 

Jake  Lawlor  was  a  catcher  for  McGill,  and 
his  brother,  Mike  Lawlor,  played  shortstop 


for  Ruth.  I  think  there  was  2  other  brother 
teams  like  that  split  up.  And  man,  the  wars 
they  used  to  get  into!  [laughter]  You  know, 
they  got  pretty  competitive.  They  were  all 
good  ball  players,  but  it  was  terrific.  And  those 
miners’d  be  out  there  betting  their  paychecks 
and  hollering — it  was  really  something.  They 
created  quite  a  deal.  Then  when  Jake  got  out 
of  college,  he  started  teaching  in  Virginia 
City — he  and  Gilmartin  both.  They  were  very 
good  athletes. 

How  were  they  as  teachers? 

Good.  Gilmartin  was  good  in  math. 
Lawlor  taught  history,  and  he  was  a  good 
teacher,  too.  They  got  a  lot  of  respect  from  the 
kids,  you  know.  There  was  no  fooling  around 
with  them,  and  they  knew  how  to  handle 
the  kids;  they  were  well  liked  by  all  the  kids. 
They  were  very  stern;  they  were  tough,  but 
still  they  were  fair  and  good.  Of  course,  like 
everybody  else,  once  in  a  while  they  let  their 
hair  down.  You  know,  they’re  human  beings, 
too,  so  [laughter]  they  get  in  trouble.  But  they 
expect  too  much  out  of  a  teacher.  You  know, 
you’ve  got  to  be  a  role  model,  and  you  have  to 
stand  up  to  a  lot  of  standards,  and  you  can’t 
be  yourself  a  lot  of  times.  It  was  kind  of  tough 
for  them. 

At  that  time  they  didn’t  have  any  divisions 
like  A,  AA  and  AAA  in  high  school  sports. 
Everybody  played  any  other  school.  We 
had  14  boys  in  high  school,  and  that’s  when 
Lawlor  made  a  basketball  team  out  of  it.  We 
played  Reno,  Sparks  and  Carson,  Lovelock, 
Fallon  and  Yerington.  We  played  for  the  state 
championship  in  1936.  Carson  beat  us  in  the 
state  championship.  Isn’t  that  something? 
That  little  school  up  there!  And  at  that  time 
Sparks  had  a  record — I  think  they  went 
three  years  without  being  beaten.  They  had  a 
terrific  team,  and  a  lot  of  good  players  on  it. 


58 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


But  they  finally  got  beat.  But  that  year,  1936, 
Carson  beat  us  for  the  state  championship. 
They  had  teams  prior  to  that  that  would  be 
undefeated,  and  then  theyd  get  eliminated  in 
the  first  game  in  the  state  tournament.  And 
that  happened  to  us  several  times.  But  now, 
since  they  have  the  leagues,  why,  Virginia  City 
has  something.. .probably  nobody’ll  ever  beat 
their  record. 

Hughie  Gallagher  was  in  high  school  with 
us.  He  was  a  couple  of  years  behind  me,  but 
he  played  basketball,  and  he  was  a  good  ball 
player.  Hughie  became  a  principal. 

They  had  a  big  surprise  party  for  Jake 
Tawlor  when  he  was  retiring,  I  guess.  And 
they  had  it  at  the  Elks  Club,  and  everybody 
was  up  there  giving  speeches  about  Jake 
and  everything.  Funny  thinthey  didn’t  even 
mention  the  Virginia  Citybasketball  team,  his 
first  championship  team,  and  all  the  players 
were  there.  Isn’t  that  something?  Georgie 
Drysdale  came  up  from  Oakland;  he  lived  in 
Oakland.  The  only  one  that  wasn’t  there  from 
the  first  team  was  Charlie  Bogel,  but  he  is  back 
East.  But  Bill  Marks  was  there,  and  I  was  there, 
and  Norman  Harris — he  was  on  the  team — he 
was  there.  Edward  Colletti  was  there. 

Was  Ty  Cobb  on  that  team? 

No.  Ty  was  ahead  of  us.  I  don’t  know  if  Ty 
played  basketball.  His  cousin  Delbert  Benner 
did.  He  was  with  us;  he  got  out  of  here  before 
I  did.  Ty  got  out  a  year  before  that;  I  think  he 
got  out  in  1932. 

I  started  working  in  the  mines  when  I 
got  out  of  high  school  in  1936.  I  worked  in 
the  mine  in  1937  for  a  short  time,  about  two 
months,  but  you  were  supposed  to  be  21 
to  work  underground  then.  I  couldn’t  get  a 
social  security  card  because  I  was  too  young, 
so  I  went  to  work  for  my  sister,  Helen,  up  in 


Susanville,  got  a  social  security  card,  come 
back  and  went  to  work  in  the  mine  again. 

I  worked  in  the  Dayton  mine  in  Silver 
City,  and  I  worked  in  the  Keystone;  that’s 
where  I  first  went  to  work.  That’s  the  one  with 
the  little  red  wooden  gallows  frame — the  New 
York — is  on  the  left.  The  next  one  right  below 
it  is  the  Keystone.  I  worked  in  there  when  they 
were  sinking  the  shaft  and  putting  in  the  drifts 
in  there.  And  that  was  on  the  180-foot  level. 
That’s  when  I  got  out  of  high  school.  They 
were  running  three  drifts. 

Later,  then,  I  worked  in  the  Dayton, 
underground  down  there.  I  worked  in  the 
New  York;  I  worked  for  a  little  bit  with  a  leaser 
in  William  Donovan’s — that’s  where  the  open 
pit  is.  Then  the  old  road  used  to  go  around 
a  hill,  and  Donovan  moved  the  road  so  he 
could  open  a  pit  in  there.  They  done  that  in 
the  1940s.  He  built  the  road  and  moved  it. 
The  authorities  allowed  him  to  do  it  then,  and 
he  open-pitted  in  there. 

Then  I  worked  in  the  Yellow  Jacket,  and 
I  worked  in  the  Con.  Chollar.  That  was  all 
underground,  and  it  was  all  in  old  workings. 
Then  I  was  drafted  in  the  army,  I  was  working 
in  the  Yellow  Jacket,  and  we  were  in  a  tunnel... 
drove  a  tunnel  back.  We  were  in  old-timers’ 
workings.  Then  I  was  drafted  in  August  of 
1942,  that’s  when  they  released  guys  out  of 
the  army  to  go  work  in  the  mines — shortage 
of  miners,  see.  That’s  where  they’re  forcing 
everybody  from  gold  and  silver  mining  to  go 
to  some  strategic  work,  see. 

During  that  time  the  copper,  tungsten, 
lead  and  zinc  mines  needed  miners.  There 
was  a  shortage  of  miners,  because  when  they 
forced  the  gold  miners  to  shut  down,  a  lot  of 
them  miners  went  to  the  shipyards  to  work 
where  they  were  making  more  money.  They 
went  where  they  could  get  the  best  pay  and 
not  be  drafted.  If  you  were  in  the  shipyards, 
you  didn’t  get  drafted.  They  were  building  up 


John  A.  Zalac 


59 


these  merchant  ships  then.  It  was  all  necessary 
to  the  war  effort,  so  they  got  preference;  they 
weren’t  drafted  out  of  there. 

They  used  to  have  a  1 7-week  boot  training 
period  in  the  service,  and  then  they  changed 
it  to  six  weeks.  I  was  one  of  the  first  in  that 
six-week  deal,  and  in  six  weeks,  why,  then 
the  shortage  of  miners  was  evident  and  they 
furloughed  me  to  go  to  work  in  the  mines. 
In  1942  I  went  to  work  in  the  copper  mines 
in  Ruth  over  there  for  Kennecott  Copper. 
Worked  two  and  a  half  years.  Then  they 
called  me  back  in  1945  to  go  back  to  the 
army.  I  took  boot  training  again,  and  I  was 
getting  longevity  pay.  The  instructors  couldn’t 
figure  out  why  I  should  be  getting  longevity 
pay!  [laughter]  And  here  I  was  taking  boot 
training.  It  didn’t  make  sense. 

Then  in  about  October  of  1945  I  was 
sent  to  school;  I  was  put  in  the  Counter 
Intelligence  Corps.  They  were  trying  to  teach 
me  Russian.  I  can’t  even  pronounce  the  words, 
let  alone  learn  anything!  [laughter]  And  by 
this  time,  December  1945,  I  had  enough 
points  to  get  out. 

I  come  back  and  started  work  in  the  mines 
again.  In  1946  a  friend,  Joe  Viani,  come  and 
said  something  about  opening  up  a  bar.  He 
told  me,  “Get  yourself  a  partner.” 

And  I  said,  “If  Eddie  Colletti’ll  go  with 
me,”  because  we  went  through  high  school 
together,  “If  he’ll  go,  all  right.” 

So,  I  talked  to  him,  and  he  was  going  to 
run  for  sheriff,  and  I  said,  “Well,  run  for  sheriff 
anyway.  If  you  get  it,  fine;  if  you  don’t,  why, 
let’s  try  it.”  So  we  tried  it,  and  neither  one  of 
us  knew  how  to  mix  a  drink.  But  we  learned, 
you  know,  the  hard  way.  We  opened  up  a  bar 
called  the  Smokery  Club  at  the  present  site  of 
the  Delta.  We  was  there  until  1958.  We  made 
a  lot  of  changes  in  it. 

I  was  the  one  that  was  instrumental  in 
changing  the  name  from  the  Smokery  to  the 


Delta.  Dominic  Petrini  and  Joe  Viani  owned 
adjacent  pieces  of  property,  and  this  part  was 
the  restaurant;  then  it  used  to  be  the  original 
Delta  Saloon.  Next  to  it  was  the  Smokery 
Club,  and  that  was  just  a  big  bar,  you  know — a 
saloon  for  miners.  So  I  got  Dominic  and  Joe  to 
move  the  front  out  of  the  Delta  up  to  where  its 
present  site  is.  Joe  used  to  be  in  Hawthorne;  he 
passed  away.  Dominic  Petrini’s  son,  Angelo, 
now  runs  the  Delta. 

I  was  partners  with  Dominic,  Joe  and 
Eddie  Colletti.  Colletti  used  to  be  the  justice 
of  the  peace.  Joe  and  Dominic  owned  the 
property  together,  and  they  had  a  third  of  the 
business.  Eddie  and  I  each  had  a  third  of  the 
business.  We  were  in  there  13  years,  and  then 
we  sold  out  to  Dominic.  In  the  meantime  I 
bought  the  bank  building  up  on  C  and  Taylor 
streets — the  Agency  Bank  of  California  used 
to  be  that  building — bought  it  from  the 
Kendall  family  after  Hr.  Kendall  died,  and  I 
put  the  Sharon  House  in  upstairs  in  1956.  [See 
note  later  in  text.]  I  left  there  in  1964  and  got 
the  old  golf  course  in  Carson  City  and  ran 
that  for  eight  years,  and  haven’t  done  nothing 
since!  [laughter]  Since  1972  I’ve  been  loafing. 
I’ve  been  lucky,  I  guess — fortunate. 

Why  did  you  decide  to  get  out  of  the  Delta ? 

Eddie  and  I  sold  that  to  Dominic  Petrini, 
Angelo’s  father.  He  wasn’t  doing  anything, 
and  he  and  Joe  Viani  owned  the  property, 
see.  And  at  that  time,  I  think,  Eddie  and  I 
were  kind  of  burned  out — we’d  been  in  there 
so  long.  And  you  know,  just  little  things.. .1 
guess  we  were  putting  in  too  many  hours. 
You  put  in  7  days  a  week,  you  work  12,  16 
hours  a  day;  why,  after  12  years,  I  guess  we 
were  entitled  to  let  up  a  little  bit.  [laughter] 
You  get  a  little  edgy,  and  a  lot  of  little  things 
bother  you  that  normally  wouldn’t,  so  we 
decided  the  best  thing  to  do  is  get  out  while 


60 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


we  were  still  good  friends,  which  we  are.  And 
so  that  took  care  of  that. 

Then  in  1972  I  sold  the  golf  course.  I  had 
two  partners;  we  sold  that.  And  I  haven’t  done 
anything  since.  I  learned  to  be  a  nurse,  I  guess. 
My  mother  got  ill,  and  I  helped  take  care  of 
her  for  a  long  time  while  she  was  still  around. 
And  then  my  wife  got  ill,  and  so  I’m  still  doing 
the  same  thing.,  .just  one  of  those  things. 

You  owned  quite  a  bit  of  property  in 
Virginia  City  at  one  time  or  another,  didn’t  you? 

Oh,  I  had  my  house  and  the  building 
there,  a  little  place  in  Gold  Hill  and  a  few 
mining  claims.  Sold  some  of  them.  I  had  I 
think  seven... they  were  pretty  good  claims. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  James  Fair  was  owner  of 
this  mine  at  one  time.  And  it  had  one  stope 
down  there  that  they  took  out  a  million 
dollars  in  it — the  Million  Dollar  Stope,  they 
call  it.  He  took  everybody  down  there  and 
threw  a  big  party  underground.  That  was  in 
the  Occidental  mine,  and  I  used  to  have  that 
one,  too.  I  got  it  in  the  late  1960s.  A  friend 
of  mine’s  father  owned  it.  He  was  going  to 
lose  it,  and  they  were  putting  it  up  for  sale 
for  taxes  for  the  county.  It  reverted  to  the 
county,  and  I  put  in  a  bid  on  it,  and  I  got 
it — quite  a  fortune. 

I  was  on  the  county  commission  in  1947 
and  1948.  Two  years,  one  term;  that  was 
enough!  [laughter] 

Why  did  you  decide  to  run  for  county 
commission? 

Well,  I  was  talked  into  it.  Come  out  of  the 
service,  and  the  old-timers  were  getting  tired 
of  being  up  there;  thought  it  was  time  to  let 
the  young  guys  in,  I  guess.  I  tried.  Wasn’t  too 
successful,  [laughter] 


I  done  it  the  way  I  thought  it  was  supposed 
to  be  done.  I  was  instrumental  in  closing 
down  prostitution  in  the  county,  and  that 
didn’t  go  over  too  good.  I  voted  against  it.  We 
shut  it  down.  It  was  legal,  and  then  they  had 
some  bad  incidents,  a  couple  of  murders,  and 
so  we  abolished  it.  But  then  there  was  a  lot  of 
underhanded  stuff  known.  That’s  when  Joe 
Conforte  built  the  place  out  on  the  river.  If 
I  had  been  there  he’d  never  have  got  it  done. 
There  was  nothing  like  that. 

The  chief  of  police  once  told  me,  “You  can 
make  a  few  bucks  if  you  want  to  go  along  and 
vote  this  way  for  prostitution.” 

I  says,  “No,  I’ll  stay  the  way  I  am.” 

And  he  says,  “Well,  I  knew  that.” 

At  that  time  our  D.A.,  who  was  Bobby 
Berry,  was  supposed  to  draw  up  an  ordinance 
abolishing  prostitution  in  the  county.  It  was 
the  request  of  the  grand  jury,  and  that’s  what 
the  commissioners  requested.  Well,  that’s 
when  we  went  out  of  office,  and  I  don’t  think 
he  ever  drew  up  the  ordinance  to  abolish  it. 
So  it  never  actually  was  abolished.  That’s  when 
Conforte  got  a  toehold,  and  evidently  he  must 
have  reached  some  people,  I  think. 

That  is  interesting,  because  I  have  read  in  a 
couple  of  places  that  by  the  1920s,  when  the 
town  really  started  going  downhill,  all  the 
houses  of  prostitution  had  disappeared. 

Oh,  no.  See,  on  D  Street  there  must  have 
been  five  or  six  houses  right  behind  what  they 
call  now  the  Julia  Bulette  Saloon.  All  the  way 
down  that  block,  there  was  six  or  seven  little 
houses  there,  and  there  are  still  three  or  four 
of  them  left.  Gordon  Lane  owns  one  of  them, 
I  think.  And  a  couple  of  them,  they  turned 
into  homes.  But  they’re  still  there. 

During  the  war,  in  1942  or  1943,  the  federal 
government  issued  the  directive  that  closed 


John  A.  Zalac 


61 


all  the  houses  of  prostitution  in  Reno  and 
anywhere  that  was  within  50  miles  of  a  military 
base.  Did  that  affect  Virginia  City ? 

Yes.  I  think  they  were  closed  at  that  time, 
too.  Then  when  we  came  back  after  the  war, 
they  reopened,  because  then  it  was  up  to 
the  counties.  [There  is  conflicting  testimony 
about  whether  or  not  prostitution  continued 
in  Virginia  City  during  World  War  II. — Ed.] 
Now,  Reno,  their  red  light  district  was  still 
closed.  Carson  City  used  to  have  a  red  light 
district,  too.  I  think  theirs  opened  after  the 
war,  too.  But  it  was  strictly  up  to  the  counties. 

As  long  as  prostitution  was  open,  we  were 
the  first  ones  at  that  time  to  license  the  houses, 
because  we  felt  we  could  control  them  better. 
They  couldn’t  have  any  men  affiliated  with 
them,  and  we  could  pull  their  license  any 
time  we  wanted.  And  it  was  a  means  where 
the  women  had  to  be  inspected  all  the  time. 
They  had  to  have  their  tests  taken.  It  was  just 
a  matter  of  keeping  control  on  it. 

In  the  1920s  it  was  rare  that  you  would  see 
a  woman  in  a  bar.  Then  they  started  coming 
in  the  1930s  after  Prohibition  and  during  that 
time.  There  are  some  ordinances  up  there,  I 
think,  still  on  the  books — I  don’t  think  they’ve 
ever  been  removed — where  a  woman  wasn’t 
allowed  in  a  bar.  The  only  ones  that  were 
allowed  in  the  bars  were  the  prostitutes,  and 
that  had  to  be  after  midnight. 

In  1947  this  one  guy,  Tony  Harvey,  had 
some  girls  up  there.  He  didn’t  live  there,  but 
he  had  a  home  up  there,  see?  And  a  young 
woman,  I  think  from  Stockton,  was  supposed 
to  have  come  up  here  with  him.  A  woman 
called  the  sheriff  and  reported  her  daughter 
missing.  Tony  and  this  girl  came  up  here 
together;  they  were  supposed  to  get  married, 
and  I  guess  he  had  turned  her  out  and  nobody 
knew  it,  see.  And  then  when  they  had  a  falling 
out,  he  killed  her  and  buried  her  in  this 


basement  in  the  house.  He  claimed  that  she 
took  off  with  somebody  and  went  to  Mexico. 
That’s  the  story  the  sheriff  and  her  mother  got. 

All  right,  there’s  a  guy  who  still  lives 
there — I  hate  to  mention  his  name  because 
he’s  still  up  there — but  he  started  going  down 
to  the  red  light  district.  By  then  Tony  Harvey 
evidently  was  married  to  one  of  the  women 
that  was  working  down  there.  This  guy  was 
going  down  there  to  Harvey’s  and  he  was 
seeing  Harvey’s  wife  while  Harvey ’d  go  to 
Stockton — that’s  where  he  was  from.  Harvey 
caught  him  once,  and  he  warned  him  to  stay 
away  from  his  wife.  She  used  to  be  on  the 
line.. .was  one  of  the  working  girls. 

Harvey  went  to  Stockton  and  called  his 
wife.  He  told  her  he  wouldn’t  be  home  for  a 
couple  of  days.  Harvey  then  got  into  his  car 
and  returned  to  Virginia  City.  Returning  to 
his  home,  he  found  the  guy  he  had  warned 
to  stay  away,  lying  on  the  couch.  Harvey 
pulled  his  gun  and  shot  the  man  through 
the  stomach. 

Kay,  Harvey’s  wife,  ran  out  of  the  front 
door.  The  man  that  was  shot  got  out  the  back 
door  and  into  the  brush.  Harvey,  thinking 
he  killed  the  man,  returned  to  the  house.  He 
thought  his  wife  went  after  the  sheriff.  Harvey 
went  down  into  the  basement  and  hanged 
himself.  When  they  cut  down  the  body  they 
found  a  grave  in  the  basement  that  contained 
a  woman’s  body.  It  was  the  missing  girl  from 
Stockton. 

A  grand  jury  was  called  and  recommended 
abolishing  prostitution.  Two  commissioners 
voted  to  abolish  and  one  refrained  from 
voting.  We  recommended  that  the  D.A.  draft 
an  ordinance  abolishing  prostitution  in  Storey 
County.  It  should  have  been  followed  through. 
But,  I  don’t  think  they  ever  did  follow  through 
on  it,  because  within  the  next  two  years  Joe 
Conforte  was  operating  down  there  at  the 
Mustang  Ranch.  That’s  how  it  got  going. 


62 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


After  I  voted  to  abolish  it,  I  wasn’t  too  well 
liked  by  a  lot  of  people  in  town,  and  I  never 
had  an  enemy  prior  to  that.  After  I  voted  to 
abolish  prostitution  there  was  quite  a  few  of 
them  that  took  shots  at  me — never  to  my  face, 
but  it  always  comes  back.  That’s  why  I  didn’t 
want  to  run  again,  and  then  they  talked  me 
into  it,  and  I  got  beat  by  13  votes. 

Was  prostitution  making  much  of  an  economic 
contribution  to  the  town ? 

Oh,  no.  It  was  more  of  a  headache  than 
anything.  But  the  way  Conforte  operated,  he 
made  a  big  business  out  of  it  so  close  to  Reno. 
And  he  was  making  payoffs  to  Storey  County 
officials,  I’m  sure,  in  order  for  him  to  be  able 
to  operate.  I  couldn’t  prove  it,  but  otherwise 
I  can’t  see  how  he  got  it  going.  They’ve  had 
several  grand  juries  since  then,  and  abolishing 
prostitution  has  always  been  brought  up,  but 
it’s  never  really  been  pushed. 

Virginia  City  Personalities 

Duncan  Emrich,  who  later  became 
curator  of  folklore  at  the  Tibrary  of  Congress, 
and  his  wife  used  to  come  to  Virginia  City 
in  the  late  1930s,  early  1940s.  Then  he  got 
a  divorce,  and  I  guess  he  got  his  divorce  up 
there.  He  married  his  second  wife  in  Virginia 
City.  Every  time  they  had  a  vacation,  they’d 
come  to  Virginia  City.  Sometimes  he’d  go 
back  to  work,  and  his  wife  might  stay  there 
for  two  or  three  months — loved  it.  They  were 
pretty  good  drinkers.  He  liked  the  straight  Old 
Crow,  100  proof.  A  lot  of  people  of  them  days 
drank  the  100  proof  stuff.  We  used  to  love  to 
have  it  behind  the  bar  all  the  time,  and  now 
you  never  hear  of  anybody  calling  for  a  shot 
of  100  proof  whiskey. 

Lucius  Beebe  drank  Jack  Daniels. ..the 
black  label.  That’s  ah  he  wanted  to  drink. 


Clegg,  he  was  a  scotch  man.  They  all  had  their 
different  tastes,  I  guess. 

Well,  Duncan  Emrich  was  planning  on 
getting  the  Territorial  Enterprise,  and  he 
wanted  to  be  like  Mark  Twain.  He  wanted  to 
sit  at  a  poker  table  in  the  back  of  the  Delta, 
put  his  typewriter  back  there  and  put  out  the 
Territorial  Enterprise.  That  was  his  dream.  He 
loved  Mark  Twain,  and  he  wanted  to  do  stories 
about  Mark  Twain.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Emrich 
wrote  a  hoax  story  like  Mark  Twain  used  to 
about  a  local  there  that  had  a  bar;  his  name  was 
Frank  “Bronco”  Lazzeri.  He  wrote  a  hoax  story 
about  Bronco  being  killed.  You  know,  he  had 
diabetes  or  something,  crawled  into  a  door  for 
help,  and  a  deer  head  fell  off  the  wall,  and  he 
was  pierced  by  the  tines  and  killed.  So  he  put 
the  paper  out  with  this  here  hoax  story,  and 
there  was  calls  from  all  over  the  United  States, 
because  a  lot  of  people  knew  Bronco,  and  they 
loved  him.  But  it  was  just  a  hoax,  see.  At  the 
end  of  the  story  he  indicated  it  was  a  hoax  story, 
but  everybody  took  it  for  serious.  And  finally, 
when  Bronco  did  die,  he  died  from  diabetes. 

Now,  Lucius  Beebe  and  Charles  Clegg  had 
moved  to  Carson  City  at  that  time.  Beebe  was 
coming  into  a  huge  inheritance  and  Nevada 
didn’t  have  an  inheritance  tax,  so  he  came  for 
that  reason — to  establish  residence.  They  were 
living  in  Carson,  but  they  used  to  come  up  to 
Virginia  City  all  the  time;  that’s  where  they 
spent  the  most  time.  And  we  were  talking 
and  he  was  laughing  at  Duncan  Emrich  then. 
Duncan  was  telling  about  how  he’d  like  to  get 
the  Territorial  Enterprise. 

At  first  Beebe  thought  Duncan  was  being 
kind  of  childish  about  it  or  something  like 
that.  Then  I  got  talking  to  him  and  I  showed 
him  the  growth  figures  that  I’d  seen  for  the 
last  three  or  four  years  that  Jack  Greenhaigh 
had  given  me. 

Greenhaigh  worked  for  the  highway 
department.  He  used  to  bring  us  a  road  count 


John  A.  Zalac 


63 


of  cars  coming  from  Gold  Hill  up  through 
Silver  City,  that  way  They’d  get  a  road  count 
there  every  year,  and  they’d  get  one  up  the 
Geiger  Grade  every  year.  And  for  several  years 
they  showed  me  the  increase  in  tourist  traffic, 
because  the  town  was  dependent  on  tourists 
then;  that’s  all  there  was  up  there.  A  little 
mining,  but  not  too  much.  So  he’d  bring  me 
the  breakdown,  the  highway  count  and  that, 
every  year.  The  increase  every  year  from  Reno 
was  between  5  and  10  percent  in  the  traffic 
count.  It  was  increasing  that  much.  And  from 
the  Silver  City  side  it  was  like  maybe  4  to  7 
percent  coming  from  Route  50. 

After  Beebe  saw  the  statistics,  right  away 
he  and  Clegg  bought  the  paper.  At  that  time 
it  was  called  the  Virginia  City  News.  They 
bought  it  and  I  think  it  was  being  printed  in 
Sparks.  He  bought  the  Virginia  City  News, 
and  then  they  bought  the  building  over  there, 
named  it  the  Territorial  Enterprise. 

Everybody  says  that  Beebe  was 
instrumental  in  the  rebirth  of  the  Comstock 
Lode.  It  was  coming  by  itself;  he  might  have 
speeded  it  up  a  little  bit.  But  actually  they 
didn’t  buy  the  Enterprise  to  help  Virginia 
City.  He  bought  it  to  promote  himself,  see, 
and  that’d  give  him  a  secured  residence.  He 
had  bought  the  home  up  there;  they  bought 
the  business — they  established  the  business. 
Now,  that  secured  his  residence  from  New 
York,  so  he  wouldn’t  have  to  have  a  probate 
there  in  New  York,  which  amounted  to  a  lot 
of  money.  I  heard  one  time  that  he  would 
have  had  the  interest  in  oil  stock  in  Texas,  and 
he  had  already  gotten  $45,000  in  dividends 
from  his  interest  in  it,  and  he  was  talking  to 
the  broker,  and  he  says,  “My  God,  don’t  send 
me  any  more  money!  I  can’t  stand  that!”  You 
know,  now  that’s  a  tough  position  to  be  in. 

Did  Beebe  and  Clegg  make  the  Delta  their 
headquarters? 


At  first  there  was  the  Brass  Rail.  Then 
they  went  to  the  Bucket  of  Blood.  Beebe 
got  into  an  argument  with  the  owner  of  the 
Bucket  of  Blood.  Then  they  came  to  the  Delta, 
and  they  made  that  their  headquarters,  their 
drinking  spot,  from  that  time  on;  especially 
Beebe.  Of  course,  Clegg,  he’d  go  all  over  town, 
but  Beebe,  he  brought  the  whole  crew  from 
the  Enterprise  at  5:00  every  night.  They’d  all 
come  to  the  Delta  and  have  their  cocktails  for 
two  or  three  hours,  or  whatever  time.  He  was 
something. 

Clegg  had  a  Jaguar  roadster.  And  Beebe, 
about  6  foot  4,  6  foot  5 — a  big  man  who 
weighed  260-270  pounds — always  wore  a 
Stetson  with  a  flat  top,  one  of  those  cowboy 
hats.  You’d  see  him  coming  down  Geiger 
Grade  sometimes.  He  always  had  the  dog  with 
him — T-Bone  Towser,  a  St.  Bernard.  He’d  be 
in  the  seat,  and  the  dog’s  head  was  above  the 
windshield  in  the  convertible!  [laughter]  The 
only  time  Beebe’d  get  in  it  was  when  the  top 
was  down  in  the  summertime,  and  then  his 
head  was  always  above  the  windshield,  too! 

Then  Beebe  bought  the  railroad  car, 
renamed  it  the  Julia  Bulette.  He  had  it 
refurbished  like  the  old  railroad  tycoons  did 
their  own  private  railroad  cars.  He  would  go 
on  trips  all  over  the  United  States.  I’m  not 
positive,  but  I  think  just  to  put  it  on  the  rails 
and  go  on  a  trip,  he  had  to  pay  like  a  $445 
first-class  fare  just  to  have  the  car  move,  all 
the  passengers  they  had.  They  still  had  to  pay 
like  first-class  fare  for  the  railroad  cars,  and 
that  would  be  each  one  wherever  they  went. 
He  took  one  trip  all  the  way  to  New  Orleans 
in  it.  They  were  gone  for  six  weeks  or  two 
months,  I  think.  But  he  refurbished  it,  and  it 
was  a  beautiful  car.  They  tried  to  do  it  original, 
and  a  lot  of  stuff  in  it  came  from  Europe. 

Beebe  bought  the  old  Piper  home  in 
Virginia  City.  The  owners  of  the  Piper’s  Opera 
House  bought  the  home  from  the  Connors 


64 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


family.  Mr.  Connors  used  to  take  care  of 
the  opera  house.  I  think  he  was  related  to 
a  Zimmerman,  who  was  part  of  the  Pipers’ 
descendants  or  something. 

When  we  were  kids  in  school  up  there, 
they  didn’t  have  a  gym  at  that  time.  They  used 
the  Piper’s  opera  House  for  their  basketball 
games.  And  then  in  the  summertime  they’d 
have  roller  skating  inside.  They  used  to  have 
prize  fights  every  week  in  the  late  1920s  and 
1930s.  Dan  Connors  was  custodian  of  the 
opera  house  then,  and  he  owned  the  home 
up  there.  Well,  he  passed  away,  and  his  sons, 
I  think,  sold  the  house  there  or  maybe  Millie 
Byrne...  she  was  the  daughter  of  Dan  Connors. 
I  think  they  sold  the  property  to  Beebe  and 
Clegg.  That’s  when  they  remodeled  and  fixed 
it  up  pretty  nice. 

The  main  reason  for  Beebe’s  acquisitions 
in  Virginia  City  was  self-promotion.  I  could 
see  what  it  was,  because  every  little  thing  that 
he’d  done  you  could  see  what  he  was  doing.  He 
wanted  the  paper  to  promote  himself,  to  keep 
himself  in  the  public  eye  after  leaving  the  New 
York  Herald,  you  see.  After  his  inheritance,  it 
didn’t  take  them  long  to  move.  They  went  to 
Hillsborough  or  Burlingame,  or  whatever  it 
was,  down  in  California  about  1960,  and  they 
sold  the  paper.  Bob  Richards  ran  it  for  a  while, 
after  they’d  left.  He  was  a  very  good  writer.  He 
could  copy  Beebe’s  style  to  a  tee.  Couldn’t  tell 
who  wrote  the  editorials. 

Beebe  was  always  critical  about  everything, 
and  he  loved  to  stir  up  a  lot  of  stuff— he  was 
good  at  it.  But  Richards  was  just  as  good.  One 
time  they  was  going  to  fire  Richards — Clegg 
was.  Richards  couldn’t  sell  advertising.  He  was 
the  manager  of  the  paper,  and  when  Beebe 
was  gone  or  couldn’t  be  around,  he’d  write 
the  editorials.  But  he  was  supposed  to  sell 
advertising.  And  Richards  wasn’t  the  type  of 
guy  that  could  put  the  pressure  on  you  and 


try  to  sell  you  something.  He  asked  you  once, 
and  if  you  weren’t  interested,  he  didn’t  ask  you 
a  second  time.  He  was  that  way,  and  nothing 
was  going  to  change  him.  Clegg  come  in  one 
day,  and  he  said,  “I’m  going  to  have  to  fire 
Richards.” 

I  said,  “Why?  He’s  the  best  guy  you’ve  got 
on  there.” 

They  tried  a  lot  of  different  editors  that 
Clegg  said  they  were  going  to  hire.  (I  don’t 
know  if  they  call  them  editors — assistants  or 
whatever.)  First  thing  they  done,  they  take 
them  out  and  go  to  a  bar,  see  how  they  stood 
up  after  drinking,  and  how  they  functioned 
the  next  day.  When  Beebe  and  Clegg  left  the 
Enterprise  at  5:00,  they  went  to  a  bar  and 
they  started  having  their  cocktail  hour.  And 
if  their  new  people  couldn’t  stand  up  to  their 
standards,  why,  they  got  rid  of  them;  they 
didn’t  last  long.  And  there  were  quite  a  few. 

Richards  was  the  only  one  to  meet  what 
they  wanted,  but  he  could  not  sell  advertising. 
So  then  Clegg  said,  “Well,  I’m  going  to  fire 
him.  He  can’t  sell  advertising;  we  have  to  have 
somebody.. .that’s  what  the  paper  survives 
on — advertising,  and  he’s  not  performing.  I 
hate  to  lose  him.” 

I  says,  “Well,  why  don’t  you  hire  Bob’s 
wife,  Liz?  Put  her  on  the  payroll.. .let  her  do 
the  selling  of  the  advertising.” 

“My  God,  I  never  thought  of  that,”  Clegg 
says.  “You’re  right.”  Because  she  could  do  it; 
she  was  kind  of  forward.  She  was  outgoing; 
she  would  say  anything,  and  she  was  pretty 
sharp.  And  by  God,  they  put  her  to  work  in 
the  office,  and  it  was  her  job  to  sell  advertising. 
He  says,  “I’ll  cut  Bob’s  pay,  and  what  I  cut  him, 
I’ll  give  to  her.” 

Bob  Richards  ran  the  paper  himself  for  a 
while.  He  had  a  lot  of  talent.  He  was  a  good 
painter  also — Richards  was.  He  painted  all 
those  paintings  in  the  Sharon  House  for 
me  of  Sharon,  Stewart  and  Sutro,  Graves 


John  A.  Zalac 


65 


from  the  Graves  castle  and  of  Zeb  Kendall 
smoking  a  cigar.  Richards  painted  all  of 
those  for  me  just  from  photographs.  He  was 
a  pretty  nice  guy. 

I  heard  in  an  interview  that  Jack  Curran 
did  with  Liz  Richards  years  ago,  before  she 
died,  and  in  it  she  said  that  Beebe  never  liked 
Virginia  City. 

Well,  he  wasn’t  liked,  so  that’d  be 
understandable  that  he  didn’t  like  it.  The 
natives  are  very  independent.  They  don’t  care 
who  you  are  or  what  you  are,  but  they  weren’t 
used  to  having  some  of  the  gay  population 
around  then.  They  were  the  first  ones  that  way 
up  there,  and  the  natives  resented  that. 

And,  I  don’t  know....  Beebe  and  Clegg 
liked  to  control  things — not  so  much  Beebe; 
Clegg  was  worse.  Like  on  the  highway  they  put 
up  signs  all  over — Territorial  Enterprise,  you 
know?  They  cut  down  trees,  and  a  lot  of  the 
people  there  didn’t  like  those  trees  cut.  They 
could  put  signs  in  between  them,  but  if  a  tree 
was  in  the  way,  they’d  cut  down  two  or  three 
trees  and  put  up  a  sign,  and  they  never  asked 
anybody.  A  lot  of  the  people  resented  Beebe, 
and  they  didn’t  care  how  much  money  he  had 
or  who  he  was;  they  just  never  did  accept  him. 

Beebe  was  always  a  gentleman  around 
town.  He  was  always  nice;  he  was  courteous 
to  everybody.  He’d  come  into  the  Delta  and 
he  was  polite  to  the  women;  he  was  polite  to 
everybody.  Strangely,  he  didn’t  like  children. 
I  heard  him  make  remarks — ’’You  ought  to 
take  your  little  bastards  out  and  kill  them.” 
[laughter]  He  thought  more  of  his  dog, 
T-Bone  Towser,  than  he  did  children.  And 
our  bartender  had  four  little  boys.  They  used 
to  come  in  there,  and  they’d  get  crying  and 
screaming  or  something,  and  they’d  come  into 
the  bar  and  see  Dad,  be  there  a  few  minutes, 
and  Beebe’d  say,  “I  ought  to  kill  the  little 


bastards!”  [laughter]  But  that  was  the  worst 
you’d  ever  see  him. 

Every  time  Beebe  would  leave,  he  would 
tip  his  hat  and  say  good  night  to  everybody 
when  he  left  the  bar.  He’d  get  to  the  door,  and 
he’d  turn  around.  He  didn’t  know  half  the 
people  in  there,  but  he  knew  the  bartenders 
and  knew  the  gentleman  that  ran  the  games 
there — Len  Haffey — and  he’d  turn  around  and 
say  good  night  to  all  of  us,  and  be  very  nice. 

Clegg  was  a  little  bit  different.  Clegg 
roamed  around  town  at  night  after  they’d  gone 
home.  And  so  I  think  most  of  the  dislike  was 
more  for  Clegg  than  Beebe,  actually. 

Then  another  who  came  up  there  was 
Doug  Moore.  He  was  from  the  DuPont 
clan.  The  woman  he  was  going  to  marry 
was  there,  and  she  came  for  a  divorce,  and 
they  established  residence.  They  lived  at  the 
Bonanza  Inn.  It  was  up  on  the  top  of  the  hill 
up  there,  and  there  was  several  people  that 
were  like  boarders — roomers  there.  It  was 
during  the  time  that  the  divorce  proceedings 
were  going  on,  and  Doug  used  to  tend  bar  in 
there  once  in  a  while  when  it  was  a  dinner 
house.  Well,  the  woman  he  was  going  to 
marry  fell  for  somebody  else  by  the  time  her 
divorce  was  over,  and  she  married  this  other 
guy.  Doug  was  rejected,  and  he  felt  bad, 
and  he  gave  up  all  women  and  joined  Beebe 
and  Clegg!  [laughter]  So  that’s  strange,  isn’t 
it? 

Doug  used  to  gamble  an  awful  lot.  Once 
I  remember  he  lost  $17,000  over  a  weekend 
playing  the  wheel  down  there  at  the  old  Bank 
Club  in  Reno.  And  Monday  morning,  when 
the  banks  opened  in  Wilmington,  Delaware, 
there  was  an  employee  of  the  Bank  Club  there 
with  the  checks  to  put  them  through  the  bank. 
Before  the  president  of  the  bank  honored  the 
checks,  he  got  on  the  phone  and  got  ahold  of 
Doug,  and  he  asked  him  what  the  hell  he  was 
doing  because  they  were  having  to  sell  the 


66 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


stock,  and  he  was  to  the  point  where  he  was 
standing  there  blowing  controlling  interest 
for  the  DuPonts.  His  mother  was  a  DuPont. 

So  then  the  family  got  on  him.  He  had 
a  chance  to  go  to  Florida  and  manage  one 
of  the  DuPont  plants  down  there.  He  had 
to  leave  Nevada — he  had  a  choice — or  he 
was  going  to  be  cut  off.  So  then  he  went  to 
Hillsborough,  too.. .or  Burlingame,  wherever 
Beebe  and  them  went.  He  never  came  back 
to  Nevada  much  any  more.  He  had  to  stay 
out,  or  he  would  have  lost  his  allowance,  and 
he  wouldn’t  go  to  work.  He  was  very  well 
educated,  but  he  wouldn’t  go  to  work.  I  don’t 
know  if  he’s  still  alive  or  not. 

Were  there  any  others  that  you  know  of 
that  came  to  establish  residency  and  avoid 
inheritance  taxes ? 

Beebe’s  the  only  one  that  I  could  put  my 
finger  on  that  really  done  that.  We  had  a  lot  of 
people  that  came  up  there  and  bought  homes 
and  that,  but  they  still  maintained  their  main 
residence  someplace  else.  There  was  people 
from  Carmel,  California,  came  up  and  had 
homes  up  there.  In  the  summertime  they’d 
come  to  Virginia  City  and  spend  two  or  three 
months  up  there.  There  was  several  groups 
like  that  came  up,  but  it  was  more  because 
of  Beebe.  See,  now,  he  brought  people  like 
that — people  with  means,  people  that 
were  something.  He  did  bring  a  lot  of  people 
to  town. 

There  was  a  lot  of  people  come  just  to  see 
Beebe,  you  know?  He  was  quite  an  impressive- 
looking  guy.  They  didn’t  come  for  autographs 
or  anything,  but  they  just  wanted  to  see  Beebe 
and  look  at  him.  They  read  about  him  and 
heard  about  him  and  what  kind  of  a  person  he 
was.  He  had  two  sides.  A  lot  of  people  loved 
his  writing  because  he  was  very  competent; 
he  was  really  good.  But  then  others  would 


come  and  see  an  oddball  because  [laughter] 
we  weren’t  used  to  that  type  of  people  at  that 
time.  It  was  unheard  of;  they  weren’t  around. 
Matter  of  fact,  when  the  mines  were  going, 
they  wouldn’t’ve  lasted  long  in  a  town  like 
Virginia  City.  So  if  you  had  those  tendencies, 
you  kept  it  behind  closed  doors  and  nobody 
knew  about  it,  because  if  it  became  known 
people  would  be  run  out  of  town.  They  just 
didn’t  go  for  stuff  like  that  then,  like  it  is  today. 
It’s  a  lot  of  changes,  I’ll  tell  you.  It’s  something 
else. 

The  people  like  those  who  came  up  from  Carmel 
and  so  on... did  they  buy  places  that  were 
already  there  and  restore  them? 

Oh,  yes.  There  was  one  home  on  B  Street 
called  the  Blake  house.  This  guy’s  name  was 
Deacon  Blake;  he  had  three  or  four  brothers, 
but  Deacon,  I  think,  was  the  last  one.  And 
he  used  to  be  a  printer  for  the  Virginia  City 
News  up  there.  Worked  for  the  newspaper 
for  years — he  was  an  old-timer,  could  drink 
straight  whiskey  and  stay  up  48  hours  and  play 
poker,  and  go  to  work  and  come  back  and  do 
the  same.  Tough  old  man,  you  couldn’t  believe 
it.  Always  wore  a  black  suit,  black  string  tie, 
black  hat,  and  was  just  a  real  character.  And 
three  women  from  Cannel  that  lived  together 
down  there,  they  came  up  and  they  bought 
this  Blake  house. 

Now,  one  of  the  women  was  like  a 
chauffeur.  Her  name  was  Helen  Heavey. 
She’d  done  the  electrical  work  in  the  house, 
carpenter  work,  put  in  a  fence  made  out 
of  bricks  with  a  post  coming  up  where  the 
gates  were — wrought  iron  on  top.  she  laid  all 
the  brick,  done  all  the  mortar  work...  really 
something.  They  loved  to  come  up  there,  and 
had  a  beautiful  garden.  There  was  another 
woman  that  came  with  them.  Her  family 
were  from  Colorado  and  made  a  fortune  in 


John  A.  Zalac 


67 


mining,  and  she  was  wealthy.  Her  name  was 
Virginia  Jones.  And  the  other  one  was  Frances 
Hudgins,  and  she  was  very  wealthy. 

Virginia  Jones  always  wore  Levis  and  a 
plaid  jacket  or  something  and  cowboy  boots. 
And  Helen  Heavey  always  dressed  that  way, 
also — the  one  that  was  the  chauffeur.  And  this 
Frances  Hudgins  always  wore  a  dress.  They 
were  such  polite,  real  nice  people,  but  they 
were  the  odd  characters  together,  you  know! 
[laughter]  And  they  were  old;  that  time  they 
had  to  be  in  their  sixties. 

Another  fellow  that  came  there  and  his 
wife,  they’re  still  up  there  now.  Real  nice 
people.  They  came,  bought  a  home  up  there. 
I  think  she  came  from  New  York,  and  her 
husband  was  with  Powers  Cosmetics.  They 
called  him  Old  Fitzgerald.  They  put  on 
makeup  shows  all  over  the  country  and  had 
these  Powers  models  that  went  around  with 
them.  Remember  his  beautiful  women?  He 
was  the  Powers  representative,  I  think,  for  the 
Pacific  Coast  and  Hawaii.  He  had  a  great  job, 
but  he  was  always  gone.  But  his  wife  always 
stayed  up  there.  They  bought  the  big  pink 
house  in  Gold  Hill  that  sits  up  on  the  hill. 

Postwar  Changes 

They  claim,  now,  the  tourists  spend 
$10  million  a  year  or  something  in  Storey 
County  or  Virginia  City.  How  much  of  that 
$10  million  goes  to  help  the  tax  base  for 
the  county  or  the  city?  That  $10  million  is 
spent  in  a  few  business  places  and  a  few 
commercialized,  phony  business  operations. 
There’ve  been  some  bad  ones  up  there.  Like 
this  one  museum:  you  enter  the  museum 
here;  out  here  you  exit  into  another  building. 
It  turns  out  to  be  another  museum  that’s  part 
of  this  one;  you’ve  got  to  pay  to  get  out. 

Virginia  City  increased  the  police  force, 
they  increased  the  fire  department.  Now, 


they’ve  got  three,  four  trucks  down  there;  it 
used  to  be  they  had  one  truck  and  one  guy 
that  stayed  on  duty — he  slept  there  24  hours 
a  day.  Now  they’ve  got  three  shifts,  three 
or  four  trucks.  I  don’t  know  how  many  on 
a  shift — maybe  one.  Host  of  it’s  volunteer 
fire  department.  But  they  need  this  new 
equipment  because  of  all  the  people  coming 
in  there.  None  of  what  the  people  spend  goes 
to  help  this.  This  is  the  poor  taxpayer  who 
lives  on  the  back  streets  that  has  to  provide 
for  that. ..or  the  mining  companies.  They 
need  school  buses  now.  They  let  them  build 
Mark  Twain  Estates  up  there,  Stagecoach; 
they  let  them  go  up  to  the  Virginia  Highlands 
out  there — they’ve  got  people  all  over.  Now, 
they’re  going  to  want  police  protection,  fire 
protection.  Where  does  the  money  come 
from? 

Now  they  won’t  let  the  mining  companies 
operate.  They  say,  “Oh,  we  don’t  want  the 
money  that  a  payroll  has  generated.  That’s 
scum — the  miners  are  roughnecks.”  They’re 
ridiculous;  that’s  the  city  payroll.  Every 
month!  They  could’ve  had  a  supermarket 
up  there  instead  of  people  going  to  Reno  or 
Carson  to  shop.  They  could’ve  had  a  nice  little 
mall  maybe  somewhere.  They  could’ve  had 
American  Flat;  they  could’ve  let  them  bring 
trailers  in.  People  live  in  trailers.  Now,  what’s 
wrong  with  a  trailer?  They  still  pay  taxes.  And 
the  people  would  spend  their  money  there.  If 
the  kids  are  going  to  school  there,  and  if  you 
give  them  a  chance  to  buy  what  they  need, 
they  would  do  it  there.  But  they  don’t  want 
to.  Whatever  payroll  they  had — those  people 
were  making  $400  or  $500  a  week  working 
down  in  that  pit — they’re  making  them  spend 
their  money  in  Carson  or  Reno. 

The  mining  interests  build  new  water 
tanks  for  their  community;  they  offered  to 
help  with  the  school.  Houston  Company  was 
going  to  help  in  more  ways  than  one.  But, 


68 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


no,  they’d  rather  have  the  $10  million  from 
the  tourists  instead  of  maybe  a  million  or 
$2  million  a  year  from  a  tax  base  that  would 
benefit  everybody  in  the  county,  if  they 
cooperated  with  the  mining. 

And  already  the  damage  is  done  in  those 
mines.  They  did  what  they  called  “glory- 
holing”  in  the  old  days — that’s  when  they 
caved  in  the  ore  bodies,  took  ore  out  through 
the  surface  and  left  a  large  hole.  The  start  of 
the  pit  across  from  the  Fourth  Ward  School 
was  all  caused  from  glory-holing;  that  was  all 
done  from  previous  mining.  They  caved  it  in, 
and  they  drew  the  ore  from  underneath,  see, 
right  to  the  surface  in  that  area.  So  you  already 
had  a  hole  there.  Same  in  Gold  Hill.  So  now 
that  the  pit  mining  operation  comes  in  and 
makes  it  a  little  bit  bigger... what  the  hell?  The 
damage  has  already  been  done. 

The  glory  holes  were  created  from  the 
workings  of  the  old-timers.  See,  when  the 
shaft  mines  got  close  to  the  surface  where 
it  was  good,  well,  then,  they  just  caved  the 
ground  from  the  surface  and  let  it  cave  in.  It 
left  a  gaping  hole  on  the  surface.  But  when 
you  go  in  from  the  top  with  a  shovel  and 
your  trucks  and  that,  that’s  what  they  call  the 
open  pit. 

When  they  caved  it,  then  you  were  getting 
your  waste  and  keeping  your  ore.  Now,  it’d 
work  great  in  something  like  over  in  Ely  and 
Ruth  where  they  have  the  big  ore  bodies. 
Copper  lies  in  huge  bodies  maybe  a  mile 
square,  a  mile  deep — who  knows  how  deep 
it  can  run?  It’s  a  big  body,  so  you  can  cave 
everything  and  still  keep  up  the  grade  of  your 
ore,  where  in  these  small  mines  up  here  the 
veins  might  run  up  to  30  feet  wide,  but  they 
might  be  down  to  five  feet.  If  you’re  caving 
a  50-foot  area,  then  you  dilute  the  good  ore 
with  the  bad.  That  wasn’t  feasible  in  this  area. 

With  the  open  pitting  you  can  strip  off 
your  waste  and  keep  your  ore.  You  know,  you 


can  strip  of  f  the  waste  right  up  to  it.  Get  in 
with  your  shovels  and  equipment  and  move 
it  fast,  and  it’s  volume.  That’s  what  they  make 
their  money  on.  You  have  a  high  volume  and 
do  it  pretty  reasonable.  The  biggest  cost  now 
is  in  their  equipment.  All  those  big  Euclid 
trucks,  they  run  $100, 000  to  $150, 000a  truck 
or  more  than  that,  and  they  might  have  20  or 
30  of  them.  And  same  way  with  their  shovels 
and  their  skip  loaders  and  their  loaders  and 
all  of  that,  you  know. 

All  that  equipment  is  so  expensive,  but 
that’s  why  your  tax  based  be  so  high.  A  1  1 
that  rolling  stock  that  these  companies  have, 
and  the  high  cost  of  the  taxes.  It  would  just 
be  a  boon  to  somebody  like  Storey  County,  a 
small  county  like  that.  And  you  get  $1  million 
maybe,  or  $500,000  in  taxes  every  year  just 
from  one  mining  company.  Can  you  imagine 
how  many  people  in  business  in  Virginia  City 
don’t  pay  anything  like  that?  They’re  lucky 
if  they  get  a  couple  hundred  thousand  from 
everybody  in  town.  But  one  mining  company 
could  be  $500,000  or  $1  million  a  year,  and 
they  don’t  want  them  because  it’s  going  to 
spoil  the  appearance  of  the  mountains — going 
to  spoil  our  mountains.  Like  somebody  says, 
“If  you  don’t  like  it,  you  could  live  somewhere 
else,”  because  the  country  still  has  to  have 
those  minerals. 

You  just  stop  and  think  about  it.  It  would 
help  them  both  ways.  It  could  have  helped  the 
school  system;  it  could  have  helped  the  police 
department;  it  could  have  helped  everything. 
And  for  every  piece  of  equipment  they  have — 
rolling  equipment  or  those  motors  and  those 
mills  and  that — you  know,  that’s  on  a  tax  roll. 
Each  piece  is  on  there.  You  get  taxed  for  all 
your  personal  property;  they  do,  too — just  so 
much  more. 

Plus,  that  Greiners  Bend  there,  the  old 
road  to  Gold  Hill,  it’s  settling.  It’s  bad,  and 


John  A.  Zalac 


69 


the  county  can’t  maintain  it — they’ve  got 
to  depend  on  the  highway  department  to 
maintain  it  in  the  wintertime.  Houston  would 
have  put  in  a  new  road  for  them  where  it 
would  have  been  easier  to  maintain.  The  sun 
would  have  hit  it  more  in  the  wintertime.  You 
wouldn’t  have  to  fight  that  snow  so  much; 
Mother  Nature  would  have  taken  care  of  it. 

They  could  do  so  much  to  help  the  whole 
community  by  permitting  mining  to  resume; 
plus  kind  of  say  thanks  to  these  old  mining 
companies  that  kept  the  town  together,  kept 
it  surviving.  It  could  have  really  been  a  ghost 
town  if  it  hadn’t  been  for  those  companies. 
The  tourism  didn’t  start  until  after  the  war, 
and  they  built  all  those  places  up  there  that  are 
all  phony — all  those  beautiful  chandeliers — 
how  long  would  that  last  in  a  bar  in  a  mining 
camp?  You  know,  that’s  ridiculous.  They’re  just 
making  a  tourist  trap  out  of  it.  People  expect 
to  see  something,  so  they  give  them  what  they 
want.  Tourists  don’t  know  what  they  want.  But 
they  all  like  antiques,  so  they  give  them... why, 
hell,  there  was  nothing  like  that  in  a  mining 
camp,  [laughter]  That’s  ridiculous! 

In  the  1930s  those  bars  were  just  places 
for  a  miner  to  go  in  and  sit  and  relax — you 
know,  someplace  to  relax  and  eat.  They’d  have 
some  card  games;  they  would  play  pan  or  play 
pinochle  or  pool.  They  were  all  single  men.  If 
they  had  a  bar,  they  could  have  a  few  drinks 
or  whatever  they  wanted.  So  they  spent  their 
time  in  the  bars.  And  there  was  no  bars  with 
all  those  beautiful  chandeliers,  all  the  pictures 
and  all  that.  There  was  none  of  that.  Heck,  a 
good  Saturday  night,  and  all  that’d  be  wiped 
out!  [laughter]  You  know,  miners  worked 
hard,  they  lived  hard — they’re  like  pioneers. 
You  take  construction  workers — same  thing. 
If  you’re  building  a  highway,  well,  you’re  sure 
going  to  have  some  rowdyism.  But  most  of 
the  time  they’re  pretty  good  people.  They  pay 
their  bills,  and  they  work  hard,  and  they  play. 


You  know,  if  they  get  drunk,  what  the  heck? 
In  them  days,  there  was  no  transportation; 
they  couldn’t  go  any  place.  You’re  stuck  there 
all  year.  So  what  do  you  do?  You’ve  got 

to  have  a  little  relaxation  somewhere. 

Virginia  City  picked  up  after  the  war. 
People  started  traveling.  They  had  money, 
and  they  all  were  antique  bugs;  everybody 
was  hunting  for  antiques  and  stuff.  That’s  why 
all  the  bars  up  there  put  in  all  those  hanging 
lamps  and  whatever  antiques  they  could  get. 
They’d  want  people  to  come  in,  and  they 
thought  that  was  the  West,  but  that  wasn’t.  You 
know,  the  West  was  strictly  bare  bar.  They’d 
have  chairs  for  the  miners  to  sit  around  in  and 
a  big  potbellied  stove  where  they  could  keep 
warm.  Then  came  a  couple  of  pool  tables,  pan 
table,  poker  table — tables  like  this  [pounding 
table]  would  be  in  there,  and  payday  nights 
they’d  play  cards.  They’d  play  pan  or  poker, 
pinochle;  a  lot  of  them  played  cribbage. 

Tourists  would  walk  in  to  an  authentic 
bar  and  say,  “Oh,  just  a  saloon,  just  a  bar,” 
and  they’d  keep  right  on  going.  That’s  the  way 
the  Smokery  was  when  we  got  it.  So  then  we 
moved  the  Delta  front  from  next  door  into  the 
Smokery  Club,  put  the  Delta  front  in,  changed 
the  name  to  the  Delta,  put  the  hanging  lights 
in  there,  like  it  is  now,  and  got  antiques  from 
all  over.  Then  the  people  used  to  come  in  and 
spend  an  hour  walking  around  looking  at  it, 
where  prior  to  that  they  thought  it  was  just 
another  saloon;  they’d  keep  going.  When  it 
was  original,  they  didn’t  want  to  see  it.  When 
we  put  all  that  stuff  in  for  them  to  look  at, 
that’s  what  people  wanted  to  see.  They  didn’t 
want  to  see  an  authentic  mining  camp.  They 
had  different  ideas.  So  that’s  why  Virginia  City 
is  a  tourist  trap. 

Same  as  the  program  “Bonanza,”  see? 
They  never  filmed  one  segment  up  there  of 
the  big  “Bonanza”  television  series.  And  there 
never  was  a  Ponderosa  Ranch  at  Lake  Tahoe. 


70 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


That’s  the  most  ridiculous  thing  that  anybody 
ever  heard  of — to  have  the  Ponderosa  Ranch 
up  in  those  mountains  at  Lake  Tahoe.  There 
never  was  one.  And  the  scenes  that  they  had 
at  Virginia  City  were  ridiculous.  They  never 
showed  one  mine  up  there  that  was  like  the 
Con.  Virginia  or  any  of  them  mines  with  the 
big  gallows  frame  shaft  or  nothing  like  that. 
In  all  of  the  series  they  had,  it  was  always  the 
Ponderosa  Ranch,  and  it  always  took  them 
half  an  hour  to  ride  from  the  Ponderosa 
Ranch  to  Virginia  City.  And  on  horseback 
that’s  a  good  day’s  ride! 

But  that  series  helped  Virginia  City 
a  lot.  It  brought  a  lot  of  people  up  there. 
People  from  back  East,  from  the  Midwest, 
a  lot  of  them  have  never  seen  the  Rocky 
Mountains  or  anything,  and  don’t  know  what 
a  mountain  is  like.  They  think  that’s  just  the 
movies.  If  you  come  out  of  the  flat  lands, 
it’s  hard  to  imagine  mountains  like  we  have 
unless  you’d  seen  them,  you  know.  We  went 
back  to  Wisconsin  for  a  short  time  when  I 
was  a  kid.  And  we’d  go  to  a  movie,  it  would 
show  the  mountains;  I’d  say,  “Well,  that’s  the 
way  it  looks  where  I  live.” 

“Oh!”  They  couldn’t  believe  it;  they  said, 
“No.  There’s  nothing  like  that.  They  just 
have  those  things  for  movies.”  They  couldn’t 
visualize  them  like  that,  and  there’s  quite  a  few 
of  them  felt  that  way.  Our  country  is  pretty 
beautiful. 

I  saw  in  the  newspapers  mentions  of  movie 
companies  that  were  filming  in  Virginia  City 
in  the  1940s. 

Well,  there  was  a  couple  that  did.  They 
done  one  television  program  in  the  1950s.  A 
lot  of  it  was  shot  in  the  Delta,  and  it  was  for 
the  series  they  called  “The  Odyssey.”  It  was 
different  places  all  over  the  country,  but  they 
had  one  program  in  Virginia  City.  Charles 


Collingwood  narrated  the  thing.  It  was  an 
hour  show. 

At  that  time  we  had  quite  a  few  acting 
clubs  that  came  up  there — acting  schools — 
and  they  done  shows.  They  put  on  one  at  the 
Opera  House  they  called  “The  Romance  in 
the  Scarlet  Gulch.”  It  was  like  the  old  westerns, 
where  they  had  the  villain  and  all  that.  And 
those  kids  were  learning  to  act.  One  of  them 
was  pretty  good,  had  a  good  voice,  good- 
looking  kid.  Later  I  seen  him  with  Mae  West 
and  her  bodybuilders.  She  had  five  or  six  guys 
in  her  act  with  her  then,  all  well  built  and  that 
could  sing,  had  a  lot  of  talent. 

Why  did  those  movie  companies  come  to 
Virginia  City  ?  Do  you  think  someone  was  out 
there  promoting  the  town ? 

I  don’t  know.  Well,  this  “Odyssey,”  I  think 
it  came  just  because  of  the  history  of  Virginia 
City.  They  may  have  mentioned  him,  because 
he  was  there  at  the  time.  But,  I  think  it  was 
the  history  of  the  town  that  they  were  more 
interested  in.  They  showed  what  it  was  and 
what  it  developed  to  at  the  present  time.  It 
was  quite  a  show.  And  then  “Bonanza” — I 
don’t  know  what  got  that  going.  Maybe  Don 
McBride  [owner  of  Bucket  of  Blood  Saloon — 
Ed.]  had  something  to  do  with  that;  I  don’t 
know.  It  was  just  a  good  name  for  them,  I 
guess.  They  sell  their  name. 

It  looks  like  there  was  a  lot  of  effort  to  start 
promoting  the  town  right  around  1946.  The 
Chamber  of  Commerce  formed.... 

Well,  they  were  starting  a  lot  of  things 
before  the  Chamber  of  Commerce.  It  never 
did  click.  A  group  of  local  residents  and 
artists  started  a  restoration  program;  it  never 
did  click.  They  done  that  two  or  three  times. 
I  don’t  know.  I  think  Virginia  City  kind  of 


John  A.  Zalac 


71 


hated  to  see  change  coming,  see  what  was 
happening  to  the  town.  That’s  when  the 
old-timers  were  still  around.  Now  all  the 
oldtimers  are  gone.  Now  it  changes  so  fast 
you  can’t  believe  it.  I  don’t  know  anybody  up 
there  unless  I  meet  a  few  of  the  old-timers. 
And  it’s  altogether  different — a  different  town 
completely.  It’s  not  the  great  old  mining  camp 
that  it  used  to  be. 

I  think  there’s  quite  a  few  who  feel  the 
way  I  do  about  it,  but  there’s  a  lot  of  them  that 
have  changed,  you  know.  That  surprised  me — 
that  their  families,  and  even  some  my  age, 
are  opposed  to  mining.  They  grew  up;  they 
worked  in  the  mills  and  that  themselves,  and 
that  was  their  only  livelihood.  But  now  they’ve 
taken  on  this  new  idea  that  everybody  has. 
They’re  forgetting  about  the  past;  everything 
is  “now.”  They  forget  where  they  came  from, 
what  things  were  like.  I’ve  got  several  friends 
that  I  grew  up  with  who  are  opposed  to  the 
mining,  and  I  never  could  understand  it.  And 
still  if  I  talk  to  them,  why,  they  would  kind  of 
agree  with  me. 

I  think  that  there’s  not  many  old-timers 
left.  I  would  kind  of  consider  myself  one  of 
them,  but  there’s  not  too  many  left  up  there. 
Of  all  of  the  people  that  I  grew  up  with, 
there  might  not  be  50  in  a  town,  out  of  600. 
They’re  pretty  much  in  the  minority.  I  know 
the  people  who  have  the  Bucket  of  Blood, 
the  Delta,  Crystal  Bar,  the  Ponderosa — that’s 
about  it  that  I  know.  Everybody  else  is  new 
to  the  town.  Well,  I’ll  tell  you  somethinmy 
granddaughter  graduated,  and  I  only  know 
one  other  boy  that  graduated  with  her  out  of 
a  class  of  16.  I  didn’t  know  anybody  else,  so, 
it’s  just  changing,  that’s  all.  Modern  times  are 
catching  up  with  a  beautiful,  old  town!  Note 
to  p.  105:  Upon  review  of  the  final  script,  Mr. 
Zalac  added  the  following  clarification  about 
his  ownership  of  the  Sharon  House: 


I  bought  the  bank  building  in  1954. 1  put  the 
Sharon  House  restaurant  in  it  in  1956  and 
then  leased  it  to  Clint  Andreasen  and  Iola 
Hart.  In  1959  I  took  over  the  Sharon  House 
myself.  I  leased  the  food  part  to  Lynn  Leong, 
but  I  kept  the  bar.  In  1964  I  leased  the  bar 
and  restaurant  to  Mr.  Leong,  who  still  runs 
the  Sharon  House. 


4 

Mildred  E.  Giuffra 


Memories  of  Virginia  City  in  the  1940s 

Mildred  Giuffra:  I  first  came  to  Virginia 
City  in  1945,  because  I  married  a  man  who 
was  from  Virginia  City  My  first  husband,  Jack 
Murry,  was  in  the  army  in  southern  California 
and  I  met  him  down  there.  We  were  married 
and  moved  to  Virginia  City 

Jack’s  mother,  Agnes  Carey,  was  born  in 
Virginia  City  She  was  the  type  of  person  that 
would  have  enjoyed  herself  regardless  where 
she  lived.  She  went  to  school  here,  but  I  don’t 
think  she  graduated  from  high  school.  Her 
parents  wanted  to  take  her  out  of  school  and 
put  her  in  a  school  someplace  in  California — 
Grass  Valley  sounds  right.  I  think  it  was  a 
Catholic  school  and  she  was  a  music  student. 
She  used  to  play  the  organ.  Agnes  married 
John  Murry,  and  they  had  seven  children.  She 
really  didn’t  have  an  easy  life  after  she  married. 
He  drank  himself  to  death. 

Kathryn  Totton:  Do  you  know  how  she 
supported  the  children  after  he  died ? 


Some  of  the  older  boys  were  working, 
and  that’s  how  they  got  by.  When  they  grew 
up  they  all  went  to  work  here  in  town.  Jack 
worked  in  George  Wilson’s  grocery  store,  and 
his  brothers  Leonard  and  Jim  did  odd  jobs.  I 
never  knew  them  to  work  very  steady.  They 
never  did  have  much.  They  didn’t  do  too 
well,  I  guess.  It  was  such  a  large  family;  they 
struggled  quite  a  bit. 

What  did  you  think  of  Virginia  City  when  you 
first  arrived? 

Oh,  honey,  don’t  ask  that!  Before  I  even 
got  here  I  was  ready  to  turn  around  and  go 
back.  When  you  see  Virginia  City  from  out 
there  that  was  it.  I  came  by  automobile  up  the 
Geiger  Grade  road.  I  thought  that  was  pretty... 
till  you  got  to  see  that  wretched  town  right  out 
in  front  of  you.  That  was  pretty  scary.  It  was 
pretty  much  of  a  shock,  because  I  was  used  to 
a  city — not  like  New  York  or  Chicago,  but  a 
city  nevertheless,  where  you  didn’t  have  open 
sewers  and  your  water  didn’t  freeze.  It  was  a 


74 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


ghost  town  then — too  rural  for  me;  one  like 
you  never  even  saw  in  the  movies  because 
this  is  for  real,  and  it’s  unbelievable.  It  was 
shocking.  Oh,  my  God  I  can’t... my  description 
fails  me.  I  can’t  even  think  of  adjectives  that 
would  describe  my  feelings.  Desolation. 

Well,  this  was  my  view  from  out  there. 
Jack  said,  “Do  you  want  to  take  a  run  around 
town?” 

I  said,  “No,  thank  you  very  much.  I  don’t 
want  to  see  any  more  of  this.  That’s  it.  I’ve  had 
it.  Let’s  go  back.”  Well,  we  didn’t  go  back. 

When  you  came  in  1945,  what  were  most 
people  doing  for  a  living ? 

Nothing.  There  wasn’t  anything  going  on 
here.  A  lot  of  people  went  to  Hawthorne,  and 
a  whole  lot  from  Virginia  City  went  down  to 
California  and  worked  in  the  airplane  factory 
during  World  War  II.  Most  of  the  boys  John’s 
age  went  into  the  service.  So,  Virginia  City 
was  depleted.  It  was  in  pretty  bad  shape,  pretty 
bad  shape. 

There  was  a  grocery  store  and  a  post  office 
and  a  couple  of  bars  and  a  restaurant.  During 
World  War  II  there  was  only  about  half  a 
dozen  people  working  in  this  town.  There 
were  people  at  the  courthouse;  the  courthouse 
and  the  post  office  always  stayed  open.  They 
didn’t  have  a  gas  station  until  the  boys  came 
back  from  the  war.  All  these  old  buildings 
were  covered  with  dust  and  cobwebs.  A  lot  of 
them  had  the  iron  doors  still  shut.  You  could 
have  bought  any  building  in  town  for  $500, 
and  the  smart  people  did.  [laughter]  Some  of 
the  buildings  went  for  taxes. 

With  whom  did  you  live  when  you  first  came 
to  Virginia  City ? 

Next  door  with  Jack’s  mother,  Aggie,  for 
about  two  months  until  we  bought  this  house 


for  $37  in  taxes.  The  people  moved  back  to 
New  England,  where  they  came  from,  when 
the  war  closed  mining  down.  Then  I  bought 
this  lot  on  the  north  side  of  the  house  for  $35. 
It  did  not  look  like  this,  but  that’s  what  we  paid 
for  it  in  October,  1945.  You  could  buy  a  large 
lot  for  $35.  Virginia  City  was  really  run  down. 

What  was  this  house  like ? 

Well,  that’s  unbelievable,  too.  Jack’s 
brothers  bought  this  house  to  tear  it  down  for 
firewood,  so  it  wasn’t  much.  It  was  practically 
25  by  25  feet.  We’ve  done  much  renovation. 
At  three  different  times  we’ve  done  a  lot  of 
construction  work,  [laughter]  There  wasn’t 
any  electricity  or  indoor  plumbing.  It  was 
just  walls,  and  the  outside  walls  were  boxcars. 
There  was  as  much  as  a  4-inch  difference  in 
the  siding  at  many  places.  That’s  why  the 
stucco  is  on  it — the  only  thing  you  could  put 
on  it  that  would  make  it  even.  But  it’s  a  good 
insulation.  It  worked  fine.  Oh,  things  weren’t 
that  bad.  We  had  a  gas  furnace  in  there  and 
we  had  that  cute  little  stove  there,  where  the 
bricks  are,  a  little  wood  and  coal  stove. 

Our  water  never  froze.  Of  course, 
sometimes  the  water  that  comes  into  town 
would  freeze.  I  mean  if  you  take  care  of  things 
it  doesn’t  matter  how  you  do  it.  Newspapers 
are  a  great  insulator.  I  had  little  plastic  shunts 
running  across  the  kitchen  and  all  the  way 
down  into  the  sink  for  when  the  roof  leaked. 
No  sweat.  You  can  do  a  lot  of  stuff  when  you 
want  to. 

There  did  you  do  your  shopping ?  There  did  you 
buy  your  groceries? 

Then  I  first  came  here  there  was  a  grocery 
store;  there  still  is.  There  always  has  been 
a  grocery  store,  so  you  could  get  what  you 
wanted. 


Mildred  E.  Giuffra 


75 


Was  it  common  to  go  into  Reno  or  to  Carson 
City  to  get  things  then ? 

We  didn’t  go  that  often,  but  if  you  had 
to  you  could  go.  It’s  not  that  far.  But  I  don’t 
remember  making  weekly  trips  like  I  do  now. 
We  do  all  our  shopping  in  Carson  City  now. 
The  Virginia  City  grocery  stores  now  do  not 
carry  enough  food  for  us  to  live  here,  to  cook 
what  we  want  to  cook.  They  just  don’t  stock 
that  kind  of  thing,  and  they  cater  more  to  the 
tourists.  It’s  a  sandwich  trade  and  that  type  of 
thing.  They  have  boxed  things  and  dog  food 
and  toilet  paper  and  Kleenex  and  nuts,  bolts, 
screws  and  oil,  but  not  mostly  the  things  that 
you  would  want  to  cook  a  meal  with.  It’s  just 
not  a  well- stocked  store.  And  then  they  charge 
you  three  prices.  If  you  paid  15  cents  for  an 
orange  in  Carson  it’ll  be  35  cents  up  here. 

That  did  your  first  husband  do  when  you  came 
back  to  Virginia  City ?  That  was  his  occupation ? 

We  went  into  gold  mining,  [laughter] 
Big  deal. 

Was  there  a  name  for  this  gold  mining 
operation ? 

Yes.  The  Lizard  mine.  Somebody  had 
mined  in  there  before;  Jack  leased  it.  They 
got  the  stamp  mill  running,  but  it  needed 
much  repair.  He  had  a  good  helper  who  built 
the  stamps.  This  smart,  capable  guy  could 
do  anything.  That’s  the  kind  of  guy  you  need 
when  you’re  in  the  mining  business,  because 
he  got  those  stamps  working.  I’ll  never  forget 
the  thrill  of  the  first  day  I  spent  listening  to 
how  hard  it  would  bang.  Oh,  it  was  wonderful, 
[laughter] 

How  long  did  it  take  you  to  get  the  Lizard  mine 
into  operation ? 


Oh,  it  must  have  been  about  three  or  four 
months.  I  think  the  stamp  mill  was  good,  but 
it  wasn’t  running  and  there  were  many,  many 
parts  that  were  missing.  I  know  there  was 
this  big  Fairbanks  Morse  steam  engine,  and 
we  had  to  send  back  East  to  get  parts  for  that 
engine.  Sometimes  the  parts  would  come  and 
they  weren’t  just  right,  so  you’d  hone  them 
down  to  get  a  fit. 

The  men  worked  like  mules,  but  they  were 
really  good  to  me.  They  appreciated  their 
good  food.  We  had  a  great  big  metal  barrel 
outside  the  kitchen  window  they’d  put  water 
in  and  put  the  pipe  on  it.  It  ran  through  the 
kitchen  window,  and  I  had  running  water! 
[laughter]  We  had  a  two-holer  outhouse  out  in 
back,  and  the  very  end  was  channeled  all  the 
way  out  there.  We  used  it  at  least  six  months, 
because  it  got  too  cold  and  what  water  you 
had  would  freeze;  you  had  to  have  water  to 
run  the  shaker  tables. 

When  the  stamps  crush  the  ore  in  the  mill, 
then  it  comes  out  down  at  the  bottom  and  it 
runs  on  a  table  that  they  call  a  shaker  table. 
It  vibrates  and  it’s  huge,  and  it  has  what  they 
call  “riffles”  along  the  sides.  You  have  a  long 
piece,  like  a  piece  of  molding,  and  then  the 
next  piece  would  be  a  little  bit  shorter  and  as 
you  go  across  they  get  shorter.  There’s  running 
water  through  here,  and  these  things  shake 
back  and  forth.  When  you  get  to  the  bottom  of 
the  table,  you  have  less  than  what  you  started 
out  with!  And  then  you  took  this  gritty  stuff 
and  sent  it  to  the  assayer  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
then  they  sent  it  back. 

For  a  long  time  I  had  lots  of  fairly  decent 
nuggets — BB  size  and  a  little  bigger,  the  top  of 
a  match  head.  I  don’t  have  any  anymore.  But 
most  of  this  stuff  is  invisible — so  fine  that  you 
don’t  see  it.  It’s  called  fines.  You  don’t  have  any 
idea  what’s  there  until  it’s  assayed.  In  those 
days  if  gold  ran  $25,  $30  a  ton,  which  this  did, 
it  was  pretty  doggone  good,  because  they  were 


76 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


only  paying  $5.  Now  at  $340  or  $350,  it  would 
make  a  difference. 

Today  people  are  coming  in  and  picking 
up  a  lot  of  the  tailings,  because  if  they  are 
smart  and  good  enough  and  know  what 
they’re  doing,  they  can  probably  make  some 
money  But  they  haven’t  yet.  They  haven’t 
proved  to  me  that  they  make  any  money. 
They  put  up  some  pretty  fancy  mills  and  they 
haven’t  been  able  to  keep  them  going  here. 

I’ve  read  that  in  the  1940s  and  the  1950s  they 
had  gone  from  shaft  mining  to  open-pit  mining 
in  Virginia  City.  How  did  people  feel  about  it 
then? 

There  weren’t  as  many  new  people  here. 
There  were  old-timers  who  still  more  or  less 
had  an  idea;  if  they  mine  they  mine,  and  most 
of  them  worked  in  mining,  and  so  we  didn’t 
bellow  too  much.  But  it’s  different  now — a 
lot  different.  The  old-timers  are  very  few.  The 
open  pit  miners  come  in  and  they  dig  a  great 
big  hole  and  then  they  go  off  and  leave.  It’s  a 
lot  different  than  the  tunnels  and  shafts,  which 
weren’t  an  eyesore. 

And  you  worked  in  mining,  too? 

Yes.  I  guess  that  just  about  everybody  that 
could  work  worked  in  mining. 

I  read  in  the  newspapers  that  around  1946 
they  were  lamenting  the  fact  that  they  couldn’t 
get  any  miners  in  Virginia  City.  They  weren’t 
coming  back  from  the  war. 

Yes.  During  World  War  II  Bill  Donovan 
was  forced  out  of  running  the  mill  because 
the  government  banned  any  mining.  That’s 
the  mill  south  of  Silver  City  on  the  left-hand 
side.  But  then  after  Donovan  reopened  the 
mine,  with  the  prices  and  the  wages  and  those 


sort  of  things,  he  just  couldn’t  keep  it  going. 
But  he  really  did  try.  They  just  couldn’t  grind 
the  rock  and  they  really  did  try,  because  they 
had  the  little  stamp  mill  inside  there  too.  Now 
that  was  a  little  stamp  mill;  it  wasn’t  just  the 
little  stamps,  but  there  was  a  battery  of  them. 
Ours  were  big  stamps.  I  would  say  they  were  8 
or  10  stamps,  but  Gladdie  and  Bill  Donovan’s 
mill  had  only  8  or  10  stamps  in  each  battery. 

Did  you  say  you  were  mining  six  months— just 
the  one  time? 

Yes,  we  spent  all  our  available  money, 
[laughter]  And  then  we  had  to  go  to  work. 

Did  you  make  a  profit  from  the  mining? 

No!  We  never  sold  one  ounce  of  gold.  All 
the  stuff  that  looked  good,  we  kept  just  for 
friends.  We  didn’t  make  a  dime.  Not  that  I 
know  of. 

That  did  you  do  with  the  claim,  the  equipment 
and  the  house? 

Oh,  it  just  sat  there  and  every  year  we’d 
have  to  do  assessment  work  and  write  down 
at  the  courthouse  what  we  did.  We  always 
went  out  and  did  that.  And  then  after  Jack 
died,  I  guess  we  didn’t  do  it.  Then  somebody 
can  come  in  and  take  over  the  claim  when 
you  don’t  do  the  assessment  work.  But  it  was 
exciting  while  it  lasted — different. 

It  was  hard  for  a  city  girl  out  in  the 
boonies — oh,  my  God.  I  was  not  a  boonie  girl, 
but  I  learned  how.  I  learned  to  cook  and  bake 
on  my  great  big,  old  wood  and  coal  range. 
That  wasn’t  here  though.  We  had  to  go  down 
the  Six-Mile  Canyon  and  across  the  desert 
flats  about  15  miles  and  pick  up  Highway  50 
that  way  and  then  out  through  Dayton.  It  must 
have  been  five  miles  back  off  of  Highway  50, 


Mildred  E.  Giuffra 


77 


southeast  of  Dayton.  It  seemed  like  it  was  100 
miles  away. 

The  house  I  lived  in  was  a  beauty  compared 
with  this.  That  was  a  two-story  lovely  house 
with  great  big  glass  windows,  and  we  had  oil 
heat.  We  had  rugs  on  the  floor.  W  e 
had  a  Victrola  that  you  wound  up  and  played 
records  on.  Oh,  we  had  all  the  comforts  of 
home.  It  was  kind  of  fun  after  you  got  used 
to  it. 

Jack  and  I  had  horses,  and  we  used  to 
ride  quite  a  bit.  Most  of  them  were  mustangs 
that  they  caught  up  north.  There’s  a  corral 
maybe  half  a  mile  from  here  also  down  Six- 
Mile  Canyon.  He  had  a  large  corral,  barn  and 
pasture. 

Then  I  came  here  there  were  lots  of  wild 
horses  that  came  right  into  our  yard,  and 
they  had  done  that  for  years  before  we  came. 
George  Wilson  and  Doc  [F.  W.  Hodgins)  and 
anybody  else  that  had  a  horse  just  let  them  run 
loose.  That  was  great.  They  always  came  back 
if  they  knew  where  the  hay  was.  But  a  lot  of 
them  would  stay  out  in  the  range  for  months 
and  months  and  then  you’d  go  out  if  you  had 
like  8  or  10  that  were  in  a  group;  they  would 
mostly  stay  together  when  they  knew  each 
other.  And  then  they  had  what  they  called 
a  “bell  mare.”  One  of  the  mares  would  have 
a  bell  on  it,  and  the  horses  would  stay  with 
that  sound. 

Would  they  go  out  and  round  them  up  every 
now  and  then? 

Yes,  they  did!  Especially  the  young  ones, 
and  then  they’d  brand  them. 

Did  you  have  to  help  with  that? 

Yes.  You’d  get  them  halter  broke  so  that 
when  you’d  walk  up  to  them  the  next  time 
they  wouldn’t  be  so  spooky.  I  had  ridden  a 


few  horses  in  my  time,  but  not  enough  to  brag 
about!  [laughter]  But  I  never  rode  a  western 
saddle  and  I  never  rode  these  cowboy  ponies, 
but  you  learn  all  that  stuff.  It  was  fun.  I  was 
just  a  kid.  I  was  only  about  30  years  old.  I 
enjoyed  most  of  it,  I  really  did,  after  I  got  over 
the  shock  of  the  town. 

Jack  and  I  bought  the  old  Virginia  & 
Truckee  freight  depot  on  E  Street  in  the  early 
1950s.  We  planned  to  have  a  museum  and  to 
probably  use  some  of  the  carts  with  horses  for 
rides.  There  was  a  stagecoach,  too.  We  were 
going  to  have  rides  and  then  have  the  depot 
as  a  museum. 

There  were  old  surreys;  there  were  shays; 
there  were  sleighs  and  buggies.  There  were 
breaking  carts — that’s  the  little  two-wheeled 
cart  that  they  use  when  they  harness  a  horse 
that  has  never  been  driven  before.  It’s  a  heavy, 
heavy  cart,  that  if  the  horses  kick  back,  they 
can’t  hurt  it  or  themselves.  There  were  tons 
and  tons  of  tack;  we  had  specimens,  and  lots 
of  wagon  wheels,  and  we  had  a  bunch  of  those 
little  metal  spikes  that  the  miners  used  to  poke 
in  the  walls  and  put  a  candle  in.  We  had  old 
tools  and  a  complete  blacksmith  outfit.  We 
had  many  of  those  tools;  they  were  quite  a 
collection.  It  would  have  worked,  I  think,  if 
Jack  and  I  had  planned  to  stay  with  it.  But  Jack 
got  sick  and  died  in  1959. 

What  did  you  do  with  the  equipment? 

Nothing  until  John  Giuffra  and  I  were 
married  in  the  1960s.  The  only  thing  I  sold 
right  after  Jack’s  death  was  the  stock  and  the 
big  truck. 

What  about  the  depot  itself? 

No.  John  and  I  sold  the  whole  thing  in  one 
great  big  lot.  Somebody  from  California  came 
in  and  bought  the  whole  thing.  In  front  of  the 


78 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


depot  there  used  to  be  a  passenger  depot,  a 
smaller  building  and  a  big  car  shed,  but  that’s 
all  gone.  They  destroyed  so  many  buildings  for 
salvage.  The  passenger  depot  was  a  beautiful 
building.  It  must  have  been  torn  down  in  1938 
or  1939  when  they  took  the  V  &  T  Railroad 
line  out  of  here,  I  think.  When  they  disbanded 
this  part  of  the  V  &  T,  they  no  longer  came  up 
here,  but  they  still  had  their  run  from  Minden 
to  Reno,  and  they  kept  that  until  after  I  came. 

Yes.  The  last  run  to  Reno  was  made  in  1948. 

Oh,  I  think  that  one  of  the  first  things 
that  ever  happened  to  me  when  I  moved  here 
and  I  always  thought  was  funny  concerned 
Robert  Berry,  a  Virginia  City  boy  who  was 
district  attorney.  One  morning  I’m  walking  up 
D  street  and  there  was  prostitutes  just  about 
a  block  up  the  street  and  Hr.  Berry  stopped 
me  and  said,  “Do  you  know  where  you  are?” 

I  said,  “Yes.  I  know  where  I  am.” 

“Do  you  know  who  lives  over  there?” 

I  said,  “Yes.  They’re  not  going  to  hurt  me!” 
He  was  real  shocked  at  that  smart  aleck  lady 
and  said,  “I’m  not  letting  my  wife  walk  up  D 
Street!”  [laughter] 

I  have  read  that  by  the  1920s  the  houses  of 
prostitution  in  Virginia  City  were  gone. 

No.  There  was  one  right  up  here  on  the 
corner  when  I  moved  here.  Well,  Lucius 
Beebe’s  books  wrote  about  the  girls  that  were 
up  here.  During  Lucius’s  career,  after  World 
War  II,  they  were  having  a  big  argument  about 
just  where  they  were  going  to  build  this  new 
school,  because  it  was  too  close  to  the  girls. 
So  Lucius  said,  “Move  the  school.”  [laughter] 
So  they  were  there. 

There  was  a  black  madam,  Gertha  Jamar. 
The  prostitutes  were  friendly,  nice  girls.  They 


never  hurt  anybody,  for  Pete’s  sake.  Of  course, 
I’m  broad-minded.  It  didn’t  bother  me. 

How  many  houses  were  there? 

There  were  two  houses  when  I  came  in 
1945.  Now  there  aren’t  any  girls  here  at  all. 
They  are  all  down  at  Mustang — they’re  all 
gone.  The  houses  were  small  and  they  had  to 
have  a  living  room,  and  all  those  little  houses 
only  had  two  bedrooms,  so  there  couldn’t 
have  been  more  than  two  or  three  girls  in  each 
house.  But  Gertha  was  the  madam  and  a  very 
nice  lady.  If  you  got  in  trouble,  she’d  help  you 
out.  You  could  always  go  to  Gertha  for  a  buck. 

You  accepted  her  and  you  say  you  knew  her 
well,  but  how  did  the  rest  of  the  community  feel 
about  that?  Do  you  have  any  idea? 

I  don’t  know.  The  prostitutes  never  went 
up  town.  They  just  stayed  right  there  on  that 
street.  They  didn’t  mingle.  There  isn’t  another 
side  of  D  Street  when  you  get  in  that  area,  so 
they  weren’t  really  around  anybody  else.  On 
this  side  of  the  street  where  that  was  there 
was  a  great  big  coal  yard,  and  there  wasn’t 
anybody  there.  But  nobody  could  come  up 
there,  nobody  could  see,  and  they  even  had  a 
fence  there.  There’s  a  great  big  embankment 
there,  and  there  weren’t  any  houses  north  of 
them;  there  weren’t  any  houses  east  or  south 
of  them.  Then  this  way  north  there  was  the 
big  coal  yard,  so  they  weren’t  really  exposed  to 
other  people.  They  would  have  had  to  go  out 
of  their  way  to  get  in  contact  with  us.  I  never 
saw  them  at  this  end  of  town  ever. 

Sometimes  people  would  knock  on  the 
door.  We  had  lots  of  knocks  on  the  door.  One 
time  I  thought  it  would  be  fun  to  have  a  red 
light  out  there  for  a  porch  light.  Jack  almost 
died,  [laughter]  You  didn’t  even  turn  on  your 


Mildred  E.  Giuffra 


79 


porch  light.  It  didn’t  matter  what  the  hour  was. 
[laughter]  That’s  funny. 

Is  Gertha  still  living ? 

I  don’t  know.  She  was  older  than  we 
were — she  was  older  than  Jack.  She  was  50, 
and  I’ve  been  here  40  years,  so  she  would  be 
90. 1  doubt  very  much. 

When  did  Gertha  leave  Virginia  City,  do  you 
know? 

I  imagine  it  was  a  couple  years  after  those 
prostitution  ordinances  came  in — maybe 
1946, 1947,  or  1948.  I’m  not  sure,  but  it  wasn’t 
too  long  after  I  came  that  the  county  moved 
the  prostitutes,  or  they  moved  themselves 
with  the  county  ordinance.  [Gertha  Jamar 
is  listed  as  a  registered  voter  in  Storey  County 
as  of  October  1948. — Ed.]  At  that  time  if  the 
counties  wanted  prostitution  they  could  have 
it.  I  think  they  voted  that  they  could  be  at  this 
certain  place  near  the  Washoe  County/ Storey 
County  line,  and  that’s  where  they  still  are.  I 
don’t  think  they  were  ever  at  any  other  place 
in  Virginia  City  except  there.  Even  early  they 
had  that  same  address. 

Oh,  yes,  back  to  the  1860s. 

I  went  to  work  for  Dr.  Fred  Anderson  in 
Reno  in  the  early  1950s.  Of  course,  back  in 
those  days  he  was  the  up-and-coming  surgeon 
in  Reno — the  big  shot,  a  wonderful  man,  just 
wonderful.  He  was  a  very  intelligent  man — a 
Rhodes  scholar,  and  he  was  an  excellent 
surgeon. 

Jack  went  to  work  as  a  guard  at  the  Nevada 
State  Prison  in  Carson  City.  Then  we  got 
rich  fast  with  both  of  us  working,  [laughter] 
That’s  when  we  put  the  addition  on  the  house. 


How  did  you  commute  daily? 

With  an  automobile.  I  had  a  car.  No 
trouble. 

How  long  did  that  take  you? 

About  as  long  as  it  took  you  to  come 
here!  [laughter]  Leaving  here  and  to  get  my 
car  parked,  I  probably  gave  myself  maybe  45 
minutes,  unless  it  was  wintertime.  In  1951  and 
1952  it  snowed  so  hard  out  here  on  Geiger 
Grade  there  were  three  days  nobody  got  out 
of  Virginia  City,  and  then  they  opened  the 
way  first  and  I  went  by  way  of  Dayton  and  to 
Fernley  and  Sparks  into  work.  Dr.  Anderson 
said,  “Boy,  you  really  wanted  to  come  to  work 
bad,  didn’t  you?”  [laughter]  And  then  I 
stayed  in  Reno  until  they  got  the  road  dug 
out.  They  didn’t  have  the  equipment  to  keep 
the  roads  open;  when  you  get  a  blizzard  up 
here  in  Virginia  City  you  can  move  10  feet  and 
turn  around  and  the  10  feet  where  you  hauled 
out  the  snow,  it’s  back  already.  It’s  really  bad. 
Now  with  the  big  snow  blowers,  why,  they  can 
clear  that  in  nothing  flat.  They  make  such  a 
big  swath  through  there  that  the  snow  can’t 
fill  in  by  the  time  the  blowers  get  back.  It  can 
be  a  real  bugger,  but  most  of  the  time  Geiger 
Grade  is  easier  to  go  through  than  Washoe 
Valley,  where  the  snow  really  blows  across 
there  like  crazy  and  you  can’t  see. 

Who  were  some  of  the  people  who  came  to 
Virginia  City  from  the  1940s  to  the  1960s? 

Dick  Walton,  the  artist,  and  Florence 
Edwards  who  owned  the  Silver  Dollar 
Hotel  came.  Florence  was  a  character  if 
there  ever  was  one — a  smart  lady.  She  was  a 
cruise  director  for  years,  and  she  had  been 
everyplace.  She  knew  everybody  and  had  a 


80 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


very  pronounced  Boston  accent.  She  was  just 
a  little  squirt,  kind  of  tubby  Shed  stand  up  to 
anybody  6  to  8  feet  tall — it  didn’t  matter  to 
Florence — and  tell  them  off.  [laughter]  But  if 
she  liked  you  you  were  in!  Florence  Edwards 
came  in  1945. 1  think  she  retired  from  her  job, 
and  she  was  looking  for  something  to  do.  She 
came  for  a  visit,  the  Silver  Dollar  Hotel  caught 
her  eye,  and  she  bought  it. 

I  understand  that  there  were  artists  coming  to 
Virginia  City  during  the  1940s.  I  found 

a  reference  to  someone  who  wanted  to  start  an 
artist’s  colony  in  the  old  Black  building. 

Cal  and  Mae  Bromund  were  in  the  Black 
building.  He  was  doing  watchmaking  and 
working  with  jewelry.  They  did  come  in  here 
at  that  time  and  they  had  their  little  shop  up 
for  maybe  a  year,  a  year  and  a  half.  Cal  painted 
in  his  home,  and  then  people  caught  onto 
Cal’s  beautiful  works  and  he  started  doing 
pretty  good  and  he  gave  up  the  watchmaking 
business  and  just  stuck  to  painting.  I  have  one 
of  his  originals,  and  he  did  beautiful  work. 
Cal  Bromund  made  a  living.  The  rest  of  them 
didn’t, 

Dick  Walton  came  about  that  time.  He’s 
the  artist  who’s  done  the  big  artwork  down  in 
the  Federal  Building  in  Reno. 

Why  did  they  choose  Virginia  City? 

Cheap!  They  could  get  a  good  place  to  live 
cheap.  There  were  a  lot  of  good  houses  here. 
There  weren’t  anybody  living  in  them.  They 
could  rent  the  Black  building  for  probably  $20 
a  month,  [laughter] 

There  has  always  been  some  artsy-craftsy 
people  in  the  old  California  bank  building. 
There’s  people  in  there  right  now.  But  most  of 
the  time  that’s  been  occupied  by  artists.  It’s  not 
generally  working  artists;  it’s  just  artists  who 


show  and  people  whose  artwork  is  for  sale. 
I’ve  never  run  into  anybody  down  there  that 
painted.  Maybe  some  of  them  do. 

They  have  this  summer  thing  for  artists 
at  the  old  hospital.  You  see  them  around 
town  doing  different  things.  That  has  hung 
on  longer  than  anything  else.  That’s  been 
going  on  since  before  Father  Meinecke  came 
in  1963,  and  they  had  just  started  fixing  up 
that  old  building  to  make  it  livable  enough 
to  have  somebody  stay  there.  They  stay  about 
two  weeks,  and  then  another  group  comes  in. 
They’ll  have  people  come  in  for  oils,  acrylics, 
watercolors  or  charcoals.  They  stay  right  in  the 
hospital  building;  they  pay  so  much  money  for 
a  room,  and  they  can  do  their  own  cooking 
there,  and  a  lot  of  them  do  that.  A  lot  of  them 
have  been  coming  to  the  Senior  Center,  too, 
so  that’s  been  successful.  Louise  Curran  has 
a  gallery  in  the  basement  of  the  Episcopal 
church.  During  the  summer  they  have  art  on 
display  from  all  over  the  state.  It’s  impressive. 

I  heard  that  during  the  1960s  there  was  also  a 
Yoga  colony  in  the  canyon. 

Yes,  that  burned  down.  That  was  in  the 
brewery  that  was  over  a  hundred  years  old 
when  it  burned  down. 

Tell  me  about  the  pasture  you  sold  to  the  Yoga 
colony. 

That’s  a  small  canyon  maybe  a  quarter  of 
a  mile  wide,  and  there’s  a  whole  line  of  trees 
on  the  right-hand  side  that  the  Yogis  planted. 
Then  they  bought  the  land  across  from  them, 
which  was  our  pasture,  and  they  put  up  a  little 
metal-frame  canvas-covered  meditation  tents. 
They’d  sit  in  there  and  meditate;  that’s  why 
they’re  so  calm  and  lovely,  [laughter] 

They  were  here  at  least  10  years.  They 
invited  us  down,  and  they  did  so  much  work 


Mildred  E.  Giuffra 


81 


to  that  old  brewery — just  beautiful  work,  and 
they  had  a  school  down  there  with  lovely, 
velvet  furniture  and  beautiful  Oriental  rugs. 
I  mean  it  was  gorgeous.  Those  people  have 
all  kinds  of  money,  you  know.  And  darling 
men — so  sincere,  sweet,  quiet  and  Christ- 
like.  They  belonged  to  a  Hawaii-based  group, 
because  that’s  where  they  went  when  they  left 
here. 

Why  did  they  leave? 

I  think  there  were  some  people  in  town 
who  gave  them  a  bad  time.  They  really  weren’t 
accepted  in  town,  and  they  may  have  felt  that. 
They  weren’t  the  type  of  people  you  saw  every 
day.  So  I  don’t  really  know.  But  I  know  a  lot 
of  people  harassed  them,  which  is  kind  of  a 
shame. 

Lucius  Beebe  and  the  Territorial 
Enterprise 

Lucius  Beebe  and  Charles  Clegg  came  to 
Carson  City  around  1948.  Why  did  they  locate 
up  here  in  Virginia  City? 

They  bought  the  newspaper,  the  Territorial 
Enterprise,  in  1 950,  and  they  moved  out  about 
1960.  They  decided  it  would  be  fun  to  have  a 
daily  paper.  They  were  interested  in  history. 
Lucius  was  a  historian,  and  he  was  just  plain 
interested  in  the  whole  area.  They  got  stuck 
here  because  they  could  put  their  private  train 
down  in  Carson  City,  and  if  you’re  going  to 
live  there  for  a  year,  you  might  as  well  have 
rent  that’s  not  exorbitant.  Even  though  you’re 
a  millionaire  you  still  watch  your  pennies.  In 
the  time  that  they  lived  there,  they  came  up 
here  frequently,  and  they  were  just  charmed 
by  Virginia  City.  They  knew  about  Mark 
Twain,  and  they  thought  it  would  be  fun 


to  revive  the  Territorial  Enterprise,  so  they 
started  looking  for  a  building,  they  contacted 
Roy  Shetler,  and  it  all  fell  in  place.  Their 
interest  piqued  the  town.  They  didn’t  live  here 
right  in  the  beginning,  either,  until  they  really 
decided  what  they  wanted  to  do — start  that 
newspaper.  That’s  really  all  it  was  was  fun,  and 
they  didn’t  ever  start  that  to  make  any  money, 
because  any  money  that  they  ever  made  they 
split  up  between  all  the  people  that  worked 
there  at  the  end  of  the  year. 

Beebe’s  house  is  up  there  above  Piper’s 
Opera  House.  That  house  was  all  run  down 
and  they  had  to  stay  down  in  Carson  City 
until  Vic  Maxwell  got  it  so  they  could  at  least 
live  in  it.  He  worked  on  it  the  whole  time  they 
ever  lived  here. 

Vic  Maxwell  also  helped  build  the 
Territorial  Enterprise,  that  annex  where  the 
print  shop  was — it’s  a  cement  block  building 
in  the  back.  It’s  on  D  Street,  but  it’s  attached 
to  the  building  on  C  Street. 

I  heard  that  part  of  the  reason  Beebe  came 
to  Nevada  was  because  of  the  favorable  tax 
situation. 

I  had  never  heard  it,  but  I  wouldn’t  be 
surprised.  They  had  money,  but  why  throw  it 
away?  I  mean  if  he  were  going  to  throw  money 
away,  he’d  have  rather  thrown  it  in  the  slot 
machines.  He  loved  those  slot  machines.  He 
had  a  big  black  and  white  checkered  jacket. 
The  checks  were  at  least  an  inch  in  size,  and 
it  came  up  in  the  back  and  hung  way  down 
to  his  knees  in  front,  because  he  had  all  these 
silver  dollars  in  these  pockets,  and  his  pockets 
came  clear  down  to  his  knees  from  all  that 
weight.  He  always  wore  the  black  and  white 
jacket  and  a  big  hat. 

Lucius  Beebe  worked  on  the  New  York 
Times,  was  thrown  out  of  Harvard  and 


82 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


finished  at  Yale  because  he  was  Peck’s  Bad 
Boy  [a  reference  to  a  mischievous  character 
created  for  a  newspaper  series  by  Milwaukee 
newsman  George  Dick  in  the  late  1800s.  The 
series,  which  appeared  in  the  Milwaukee  Sun, 
was  later  made  into  a  popular  play — Ed.] .  He 
told  us:  “Don’t  ask  me  to  screw  in  a  screw, 
because  I’ll  tell  you  a  story  now  My  father  told 
me  this  when  I  was  a  little  kid.  He  looked  out 
the  upstairs  window  and  yelled,  “Lucius,  put 
that  wheelbarrow  down!  You  know  you’re  not 
mechanical.’”  [laughter] 

Chuck  Clegg  was  really  better  at  making 
the  paper  work  than  Lucius  was. 

He  always  seems  to  be  in  the  background. 

Yes,  he  was,  but  he  was  just  a  whole  lot 
better  at  a  lot  of  angles  that  Lucius  wasn’t. 
Lucius  was  the  writer  and  would  maybe  think 
up  these  things,  but  he  couldn’t  really  get 
them  in  motion.  It  was  Chuck  who  got  the 
building  together  and  who  knew  how  to  set 
up  the  circulation  department.  Now  he  went 
into  all  that  stuff  before  they  came  up  here. 
He  went  to  other  newspapers  and  found  out 
how  to  do  this,  and  your  card  indexes  and 
then  your  reminder  envelopes  and  supplies. 
You  had  your  boxes  of  subscribers,  and  if 
your  subscription  would  expire  at  a  certain 
month  you  had  a  color  for  each  month,  and 
so  all  you  had  to  do  was  look  at  it  and  pull  out 
the  right  color.  You  still  had  to  do  the  work, 
but  it  was  very  well  planned.  He  knew  what 
he  was  doing. 

Now  Lucius  could  have  never  done  that 
part  of  it,  and  Chuck  was  about  halfway 
mechanical,  too.  He  knew  a  little  bit  about 
setting  up  a  steam  room,  which  they  built  in 
their  Virginia  City  house.  He  read  books  and 
looked  at  steam  rooms.  He  couldn’t  go  in  and 
put  the  pipes  in,  but  he  had  an  idea  where  they 


came  from  and  how  it  should  look  when  it  was 
finished.  He  could  watch  a  workman  and  he 
knew  whether  or  not  that  guy  knew  what  he 
was  doing.  But  that’s  where  his  mind  was:  much 
more  technical.  He  was  a  good  photographer, 
too.  He  thought  he  could  write  a  little  bit,  but 
he  really  wasn’t  very  good,  [laughter] 

Lucius  Beebe  was  such  an  entertainer. 
God,  he  was  funny!  He  could  write — how  he 
could  write!  He  wrote  so  beautifully.  But  that’s 
what  came  out  of  him.  He  could  sit  down  and 
write  you  a  500-word  essay  in  10  minutes 
with  the  same  beautiful  speech.  Oh,  God,  I 
remember  that.  He  was  funny.  He  would  let 
you  have  it.  He  really  tried  to  emulate  Hark 
Twain.  And  he  did!  He  brought  up  lots  of 
crazy  things  that  really  didn’t  happen.  The 
readers  really  got  a  kick  out  of  that  newspaper. 
Some  of  the  letters  that  they’d  write  were 
hysterical — really  funny.  He  didn’t  care  what 
he  said  either.  Most  people  took  Lucius 
seriously  if  they  didn’t  know  him,  and  that’s 
why  most  of  the  people  in  town  were  mad 
at  him  nine-tenths  of  the  time,  because  they 
didn’t  understand  him.  [laughter] 

Lucius  Beebe  and  Charles  Clegg  were 
really  something  else.  They  were  friendly  and 
had  lots  of  parties  at  their  house,  but  God, 
you  had  to  get  out  early  or  you’d  never  make 
it  home.  Oh!  And  T-Bone  Towser,  their  big 
Saint  Bernard  dog,  was  fed  out  of  these  great 
big  bowl  and  pitcher  sets.  Towser’s  dish  was 
an  antique — nothing  cheap.  He  went  first 
class.  T-Bone  would  come  in  their  living 
room.  They  had  this  small  living  room  with 
two  chaises,  a  sofa  and  a  coffee  table.  That’s 
all  you  could  get  in  there,  and  T-Bone  would 
come  in  and  be  so  glad  to  see  you  he’d  wag 
his  tail,  and  everything  that  was  on  the  coffee 
table  would  be  on  the  floor!  [laughter]  He’d 
just  back  right  up  and  sit  on  the  couch.  That’s 
where  I  got  Lucius’s  idea:  “Well,  the  dog  sheds 


Mildred  E.  Giuffra 


83 


so  you  buy  dog-colored  clothes  in  beige,  in 
light  cream — dog-colored  clothes.” 

Lucius  got  stopped  once  and  he  didn’t 
have  a  drivers  license  in  Nevada,  so  he  had 
to  go  down  and  take  a  test.  We  all  told  him, 
“You  better  read  the  book.” 

“I  don’t  have  to  read  the  book.  I  graduated 
from  college!  What  do  I  need  to  read  a  book 
for?” 

So  he  goes  down.  Of  course,  he  didn’t  pass 
the  test!  [laughter]  So  he  came  home  and  read 
the  book  and  went  down  the  next  day  and 
passed  his  test,  [laughter] 

How  many  people  were  working  for  the 
Territorial  Enterprise? 

There  were  two  of  us  upstairs:  Cece 
Andrews  was  the  office  manager.  I  know  why 
Cece  Andrews  came.  She  had  read  Lucius’s 
writing  when  she  lived  in  New  York,  and 
when  she  knew  he  came  out  here,  she  came 
to  Virginia  City  and  went  to  work  on  his 
newspaper. 

Jim  Turney  worked  there,  and  Ralph 
Pitzer  ran  the  linotype.  I  was  circulation 
manager  and  office  nurse,  [laughter]  I  had 
worked  in  an  emergency  room  back  in 
Harrisburg,  Pennsylvania  in  the  1930s. 

Were  Beebe  and  Clegg  advertising  for  a 
position? 

No.  Vic  Maxwell,  who  worked  for  them 
many  years,  was  a  friend  of  ours.  Right 
about  that  time  he  was  out  here  looking  for 
somebody,  because  they  started  out  small,  and 
they  only  had  one  person  in  the  office.  It  just 
got  too  big  for  somebody  to  handle  the  billing 
and  the  circulation  and  everything  that  was 
involved.  They  needed  another  person.  Vic 
told  the  boys  that  he  had  a  friend  who  worked 


for  Dr.  Fred  Anderson  in  Reno.  That’s  what 
really  did  it,  the  fact  that  they  had  an  office 
nurse.  God,  that’s  great.  On  the  masthead: 
Office  Nurse! 

Then  these  people  would  come  in  from 
big  cities  and  ask,  “What  in  the  hell  do  you 
need  with  an  office  nurse?” 

“Well,  she  takes  care  of  my  hangovers, 
dummy!”  [laughter] 

We  got  lots  of  medical  calls  up  there,  and 
I  was  free  to  go  at  any  time  if  somebody  got 
in  trouble  up  town  or  around  town.  They 
knew  where  I  worked,  and  we  nurses  in  this 
town  in  the  early  days  were  on  call  24  hours 
a  day!  [laughter]  There  were  only  a  couple  of 
nurses  here,  so  we  did  the  best  we  could  and 
that  was  it.  It  most  of  the  people  were  really 
in  trouble,  you  got  them  down  to  Carson 
City,  but  it  wasn’t  that  far  away.  You  had  a  lot 
faster  transport  than  you  do  in  a  lot  of  big 
cities.  With  traffic  conditions  and  the  traffic 
lights  we  can  get  people  down  to  Carson  City 
in  15  minutes,  no  sweat.  They  have  a  good 
ambulance  service  here  today.  We  also  have 
excellent  first-aid  people.  They  keep  up  on 
what  they’re  supposed  to  know,  and  they  take 
refresher  courses  all  the  time.  They  are  good. 
I  would  rather  have  some  of  those  guys  up 
there  that  are  good  than  some  dumb  doctors 
that  I’ve  seen. 

But  in  the  1940s  and  1950s  you  were  the  only 
nurse  in  Virginia  City? 

There  were  other  girls  in  town — Margaret 
Marks;  Georgie  Hiddle  was  here  when  I  first 
came.  We  never  had  a  doctor  from  the  time  I 
was  here.  They’ve  had  a  few  physician’s  helpers 
in  the  last  maybe  10  years,  but  no  doctors. 

The  two  Katies  [Katherine  Hillyer  and 
Katherine  Best]  were  really  characters  in 
Virginia  City,  and  they  worked  for  the 


84 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


Territorial  Enterprise,  too.  They  were 
bright  girls.  They  both  had  fine  educations, 
and  the  one  came  from  a  good  family  in 
Washington,  D.  C.;  I  don’t  know  the  other 
girl’s  background,  but  they  weren’t  just 
scum.  They  drank  too  much,  which  is  a 
downfall  in  about  90  percent  of  the  people  in 
Virginia  City.  But  they  were  clever;  they  were 
intelligent;  they  were  good  writers.  They 
wrote  a  cooking  column  in  the  Territorial 
Enterprise  called  “Vignettes,”  and  they 
wrote  a  cookbook.  [The  Virginia  City  Cook 
Book  written  in  1953  by  Helen  Evan  Brown, 
Philip  S.  Brown,  Katherine  Hillyer  and 
Katherine  Best,  with  an  introduction  by 
Lucius  Beebe — Ed.]  They  were  bright  girls 
and  funny  people — hysterical.  They  could 
keep  up  with  Lucius  with  all  his  jokes  and 
stuff  coming,  and  they’d  just  banter  back  and 
forth.  I  mean,  it  was  like  they  were  on  stage. 

I  think  they  had  the  taste  of  booze  before 
they  came  here,  but  I  don’t  think  that  they 
drank  to  the  extent  that  they  did  here.  They’d 
go  on  picnics  at  the  drop  of  the  hat.  They 
were  good  cooks.  Anyplace,  I  mean,  it  didn’t 
matter,  somebody’s  backyard  or  down  at  the 
lookout  and  down  Six-Mile  Canyon.  Good 
grief!  But  the  first  thing  that  went  in  the  picnic 
basket  was  the  bottle  of  booze.  That  was  their 
downfall.  I  think  they  both  died  of  what  do 
you  call  that  liver  disease...  cirrhosis?  But 
why  the  Katies  came  here,  I  don’t  know.  You 
couldn’t  help  but  like  them. 

Did  the  Territorial  Enterprise  do  offset  printing? 

When  you  do  offset  printing,  that  needs 
photography,  and  you  have  to  do  “paste-up.” 
You  take  a  piece  of  paper  and  you  take  a 
typewriter  and  you  write  a  column  and  you 
just  paste  it  on  a  blank  newspaper-size  sheet. 
Then  they  take  a  picture  of  this  whole  thing 
and  then  run  it  through  the  press  and  it  comes 


out  in  printed  form.  All  our  newspapers  are 
offset,  and  they’re  all  paste-ups. 

The  print  shop  was  in  the  back.  There  was 
a  printer,  a  typesetter  and  a  linotype  operator. 
They  would  run  an  old  Meallie  press,  which 
is  one  of  the  early  presses — a  big,  noisy  thing. 
They  hand  set  everything  and  put  it  in  a  galley. 
They  finally  sent  the  paper  over  to  Sparks  and 
had  it  offset  printed  with  the  photography 
presses. 

Lucius  and  Chuck  ran  the  newspaper 
operation,  and  there  were  two  divisions:  the 
mechanical  division  where  the  actual  printing 
of  the  newspaper  was  done,  and  Lucius  wrote 
the  editorials  in  the  other  part.  Once  a  week, 
the  day  the  paper  came  out,  we’d  have  high 
school  kids  working  for  us,  and  we  from 
upstairs  would  go  down  to  help.  We’d 
have  about  six  to  eight  kids  and  three  adults, 
and  you’d  have  an  addressing  machine,  you 
had  the  mail  bags,  and  you  had  the  kids  taking 
the  papers  off  the  press  and  folding  them  in 
quarters.  Then  they  would  be  fed  from  down 
here.  The  address  machine  was  upstairs,  and 
the  papers  were  fed  from  down  below.  They 
would  stack  the  papers  up  on  the  floor,  and 
we’d  reach  over  and  stick  them  in  the  address 
machine.  The  kids  would  come  in  the  day 
before  after  school  and  fold  papers,  and  then 
the  day  of  the  mailing  after  school.  We  had 
extra  help  just  then.  We’d  sell  3,000  copies 
uptown  in  one  day.  That  printing  you  wouldn’t 
believe.  It  was  a  tourist  newspaper. 

Lucius  and  Chuck  would  get  on  their  train 
and  take  a  cross-country  trip,  and  we  had 
ads  from  the  biggest  restaurants  and  hotels 
in  the  United  States.  The  Sheraton  hotels  in 
New  York,  San  Lrancisco,  New  Orleans  and 
Chicago  and  other  companies  advertised 
in  the  Territorial  Enterprise.  The  booze 
ads  would  kill  you.  Banks  ran  ads,  because 
Beebe  had  first-hand  friendships  with  these 
people.  They  couldn’t  turn  him  down.  Sure, 


Mildred  E.  Giuffra 


85 


what’s  a  couple  thousand  more  bucks  in  our 
advertising?  That  would  be  fun  to  have  that  in 
the  Enterprise.  The  paper  went  to  every  state 
in  the  Union  and  a  lot  of  foreign  countries. 

The  Territorial  Enterprise  was  audited  by 
the  Audit  Bureau  of  Circulations  (ABC)  out 
of  Chicago.  They’d  send  auditors  around  to 
newspapers,  and  you’d  have  to  prove  every 
paper  that  you  said  you  had  a  subscription 
for,  and  you  had  to  prove  your  advertising. 
Any  ABC-audited  newspaper  very  proudly 
displays  “ABC-audited”  on  the  masthead  or 
somewhere  in  the  paper.  That  means  a  whole 
lot.  Big  newspapers  are  audited.  Nobody  ever 
heard  of  a  little  tiny  paper  like  the  Territorial 
Enterprise  being  ABC-audited.  They’re  big 
shots,  and  it  impressed  the  big  newspapers 
and  big  advertisers.  Antoine’s  and  all  those 
fancy  places  in  New  Orleans  and  the  big 
hotels  and  restaurants  in  New  York,  Chicago, 
San  Francisco,  you  mention  it,  advertised  in 
the  paper.  They  had  Rolls-Royce  ads  in  the 
Territorial  Enterprise.  They  made  a  lot  of 
money  from  these  ads. 

We  employees  all  got  pretty  good  bonuses, 
and  Lucius  and  Chuck  never  wanted  money. 
All  they  would  have  had  to  do  is  to  pay  it  to 
Uncle  Sam  anyhow,  so  it  was  more  fun  doing 
it  the  other  way.  We’d  have  a  big  party,  and 
everybody  got  a  chunk! 

How  was  Beebe  to  work  for? 

Wonderful!  I  never  saw  the  man  really  teed 
off  in  my  life  until  they  sold  the  business — 
when  he  got  teed  of  f  at  Roy  Shetler.  And 
Lucius  just  said,  “You  can  have  it.  You  can 
keep  it.  I’m  getting  out  of  this  town.  Goodbye! 
Why  fight  about  it?  Just  go.  That’s  it.  I’ve  had 
it.” 

But  I  never  saw  him  upset.  Chuck  would 
get  mad.  He  would  get  madder  than  hell  at 
Cece  Andrews,  Ralph  Pfizer,  Jimmy  Turney 


and  all  the  hired  help.  He  never  got  mad  at 
me.  Chuck  and  I  were  born  on  the  same  day. 
He  wouldn’t  dare!  [laughter]  The  whole  thing 
was  fun.  It  was  fun.  I’ve  never  had  such  a  fun 
job  in  my  whole  life;  I  adored  it. 

Lucius  Beebe  had  leased  the  newspaper 
building  from  Roy  Shetler,  and  Shetler  said, 
“Oh,  you  can’t  do  that.  If  you  leave,  that’s 
mine.” 

They  had  a  big  beef  about  that.  That’s 
the  one  time  Lucius  was  mad,  but,  by  God, 
Roy  was  right.  It  was  right  in  his  lease,  that  if 
Lucius  left  the  newspaper,  it  was  his.  I  think 
Lucius  had  been  thinking  of  leaving,  but  what 
he  wanted  to  do  was  more  or  less  still  have 
the  paper  under  his  tutelage  and  hire  who  he 
wanted  to  hire. 

I’ve  read  that  Beebe  and  Clegg  had  a  feud  going 
with  the  Bucket  of  Blood  Saloon. 

Yes.  It  was  a  whole  bunch  of  crud  they  dug 
up.  How  much  truth  there  is  in  it,  I  don’t  even 
know.  They  laid  it  on  the  line.  Sometimes  that 
type  of  thing  was  uncalled  for,  because  some 
of  us  who  worked  for  them  were  friends  with 
these  people  and  it  was  a  little  bit  hard  to  take. 
It’s  too  bad  I  didn’t  keep  a  diary,  because  that’d 
be  so  funny.  Everything  was  funny.  There 
wasn’t  any  serious  stuff. 

It  seems  as  though  some  of  the  people  around 
here  took  it  very  seriously. 

Lucius  and  Chuck  really  weren’t  that  well 
liked  in  the  town  as  a  whole;  that’s  the  truth. 
Gays  were  not  accepted  like  they  are  now. 
That  was  against  them  right  there,  and  the  fact 
that  they  had  money  was  two  counts  against 
them,  [laughter] 

Did  you  stay  in  touch  with  Beebe  and  Clegg 
after  they  left? 


86 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


Yes,  on  birthdays  and  Christmas.  One 
time  Liz  Richards  and  I  went  to  San  Francisco 
for  Liz’s  birthday  coming  up  on  the  weekend, 
and  I  had  told  Chuck  about  it.  He  said,  “Well, 
now,  you  go  to  the  Palace  Hotel  for  lunch  on 
Saturday.”  So  we  did,  and  they  had  set  this 
whole  thing  up  in  the  Palm  Room.  Here  we 
are,  and  the  guys  come  back  with  all  these 
damn  carts  with  flaming  stuff  and  the  steaks 
Diane.  You  name  it,  we  had  it.  And  then  at 
the  end  of  the  meal  comes  the  waiter  with 
the  little  cake  with  the  candles  on  it  singing 
“Happy  Birthday,”  and  there  was  a  present  for 
Liz.  We  were  in  hysterics,  and  everybody  said, 
“Look  at  that!  Who  are  these  people  getting 
all  of  this  attention?”  [laughter]  It’s  stuff  like 
that  that  was  just  right  down  their  alley,  if  they 
could  surprise  somebody  and  pull  something 
big.  All  they  had  to  do  was  lift  up  the  phone 
and  it  was  so!  They  always  stayed  at  the 
Sheraton  Palace. 

They  had  a  beautiful  home  in  Hillsborough, 
California,  and  we  went  to  visit  them  there. 
That’s  where  Lucius  and  Chuck  died.  Sad. 
Lucius  only  had  one  kidney  when  he  came  to 
Virginia  City.  For  an  intelligent  man  he  really 
shouldn’t  have  acted  that  way.  Some  dumbbell 
you  could  have  forgiven,  but  he  really  killed 
himself  with  drinking. 

When  Roy  Shetler  took  over  we  no  longer 
had  typesetters  or  linotypes,  the  press  or 
anything  else.  Then  Roy  Shetler  brought  in 
some  Jewish  man  from  California,  and  he  was 
going  to  run  this  newspaper.  We  all  hated  his 
guts  and  quit.  It  only  took  me  10  minutes  to 
find  out  that  I  didn’t  like  him  and  I  could  stay 
with  that  jackass.  Bob  Richards  quit  right  on 
the  spot,  and  I  walked  out  after  him.  That  was 
in  September,  1962,  I  think.  That  was  a  sad 
day.  Then  they  tried  to  keep  it  going  after  that. 
I  think  that  after  we  all  quit  the  little  Jewish 
man  didn’t  last  more  than  a  week.  We  weren’t 
going  to  sit  still  for  that.  It  just  didn’t  work. 


Oh,  what  we  did!  [laughter]  What  Bob  did 
is  we  stole  the  mailing  list.  I  did,  I  guess,  or 
Bob  did — one  of  us.  We  just  simply  stole  the 
big  rolls  of  mailing  lists  and  we  went  up  to  his 
house  and  we  took  the  run  of  the  newspaper 
out  of  his  house.  That’s  when  we  were  getting 
it  printed  over  in  Sparks;  we  did  that  for  about 
a  year,  I  guess. 

Then  Bob  Richards  came  in  and  took 
over  the  editorial  part  of  the  paper  when 
Lucius  and  Chuck  moved  to  Hillsborough, 
California,  after  they  left  the  paper.  Bob 
emulated  both  Lucius  Beebe  and  Mark 
Twain.  People  thought  it  was  Lucius  writing. 
Now,  Bob  Richards  was  a  smart  boy.  He 
wasn’t  a  college  graduate,  just  smart.  He 
was  a  sailor,  and  when  he  was  on  his  sailing 
trips,  before  he  left  he’d  go  to  a  library  and 
get  a  whole  set  of  books  on  a  subject.  By  the 
time  he  came  back,  he  knew  what  that  was  all 
about.  But  it  was  all  right  there:  a  wonderful 
retentive  brain.  But  there  again,  he  was  a 
drunk,  which  is  a  pity,  because  this  town 
will  ruin  people. 

How  did  Bob  Richards  wind  up  in  Virginia 
City ? 

I  think  Bob  had  been  here  before,  but 
one  of  his  children  had  asthma  and  he  and 
his  family  were  told  to  get  out  of  southern 
California,  and  having  been  here  for  a 
while,  he  thought  he’d  give  it  a  whirl,  and  so 
he  did.  But  he  didn’t  work  for  the  newspaper. 
He  lived  here  for  maybe  four  or  five  years.  I 
think  he  did  art  work,  ad  work  and  sign  work. 
He  was  good  with  signs,  make  up  work,  but 
it  was  strictly  on  his  own.  He  never  worked 
for  any  company  that  I  know  of.  I  think  he 
and  his  wife,  Liz,  made  a  few  bucks  on  their 
house  that  they  sold  down  south;  then  his  wife 
had  some  money  of  her  own.  They  had  three 
beautiful  daughters. 


Mildred  E.  Giuffra 


87 


What  did  Liz  Richards  have  to  do  with  the 
paper ? 

Liz  came  in  when  they  fired  Cece  Andrews 
and  took  over  her  job.  It  was  mostly  billing, 
because  we  had  lots  of  ads. 

Bob  Richards  is  the  one  that  started  the 
camel  races,  and  that  was  just  strictly  a  fun 
thing.  The  camel  races  started  as  a  hoax. 
Richards  said  it  would  be  fun  if  we  did  this  and 
brought  back  a  whole  bunch  of  camels.  Well, 
people  read  this  and  then  he  got  kickbacks, 
letters  and  telephone  calls.  Are  you  really? 
Why  not?  Yes,  let’s  do  it!  The  first  year  we 
had  only  two  camels  and  they  were  up  in 
Jack  Flanagans  front  yard  on  the  corner  of 
A  and  Taylor  Street.  They  rode  these  camels 
just  for  the  pure  hell  of  staying  on  them  the 
first  couple  of  years!  [laughter]  They  didn’t 
get  anything  out  of  it!  [laughter]  It  grew  from 
there,  and  now  it’s  out  of  hand.  I  wouldn’t 
care  if  I  never  saw  another  camel.  The  first 
couple  of  years  they  were  fun,  but  it  wasn’t 
so  commercialized  as  it  is  when  you  get  a 
whole  lot  of  money  involved;  then  it  isn’t  fun 
anymore. 

Tourism  Changes  Virginia  City 

Paul  Smith  is  the  one  that  brought 
tourists  to  Virginia  City,  and  if  anybody 
else  tells  you  it  was  somebody  else,  they’re 
lying  to  you.  He  used  to  have  a  little  card 
shop  with  souvenirs  and  stuff  up  in  the  old 
building  next  to  the  Bucket  of  Blood  Saloon. 
He  was  the  first  person  that  got  people  to 
come  in  here,  and  he  advertised  the  town 
a  little  bit  by  word  of  mouth.  A  lot  of  these 
guys  that  went  into  the  navy  and  the  army 
told  all  their  buddies  about  Virginia  City,  so 
they  all  came  to  see  what  the  heck  it  was  like. 
That’s  when  the  tourist  season  started — after 
the  war.  This  is  my  feeling  how  the  whole 


tourist  trade  in  the  United  States  got  started; 
of  course,  Niagara  Falls  always  had  tourists, 
but  no  one  ever  heard  of  little  bitty  places 
like  Virginia  City. 

Tourism  is  what  brought  Virginia  City 
back  after  the  war.  It  wasn’t  anything  else. 
The  Delta  Bar  and  the  Bucket  of  Blood  were 
always  there.  The  Crystal  Bar,  the  ’62  and 
“Bronco”  Lazerri’s  bar  were  there — there 
were  about  six  or  seven  bars  after  the  war. 
Now  there’s  more  than  20  bars.  There  used 
to  be  one  person  in  all  the  offices  up  at  the 
courthouse.  There  was  a  clerk,  and  there  was 
a  recorder,  a  sheriff,  and  that  was  it.  They  did 
everything.  Now  there’s  five  or  six  people  in 
all  of  the  offices;  they  really  have  grown. 

I  think  Lucius  Beebe  and  Chuck  Clegg 
were  probably  the  big  movers  after  Paul 
Smith  came.  Roy  Shetler  also  came  in  the 
early  1950s.  He  made  a  fortune  in  a  hurry, 
because  he  was  smart  enough  to  latch  onto 
a  couple  of  those  old  buildings  up  there.  He’s 
the  one  that  started  the  trash — he  trashed 
our  town  with  the  rotten,  gimmicky  stuff  and 
many  of  those  off-color  souvenirs  and  stuff. 
Many  years  ago  that  was  definitely  frowned 
on.  It  was  just  crud.  There  are  beautiful 
shops,  of  course,  and  that  saves  the  town.  But 
he  made  a  million  bucks  on  it.  He  couldn’t 
keep  those  little  boxes  coming  fast  enough. 
Roy  Shetler  owned  the  Enterprise  building 
and  the  one  across  the  street  where  the  Roos 
Brothers  were  in  the  early  days. 

I  learned  to  really  love  Virginia  City,  but 
I  don’t  like  it  anymore.  I  don’t  like  uptown 
anymore — what  they’ve  done  to  it.  We  don’t 
enjoy  going  uptown.  We  like  to  live  here!  The 
uptown  doesn’t  bother  us  here.  I  don’t  go  up 
there,  and  most  people  like  John  and  myself 
feel  the  same  way — we  old-timers  don’t  like 
what  some  places  sell.  Maybe  the  old-timers 
that  are  making  $17,000  bucks  a  day  might 
like  it,  but  I  don’t. 


88 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


[laughter]  You  got  to  Virginia  City  just  about 
the  time  that  the  town  was  starting  to  change. 
Did  you  ever  think  about  moving  down  out  of 
Virginia  City ? 

No,  not  after  I  went  through  all  this  stuff. 
Neither  one  of  my  husbands  wanted  to  live 
anyplace  but  Virginia  City.  For  the  past  few 
years,  at  least  twice  a  week,  I  tell  John  I’m 
moving,  and  I  haven’t  moved  yet.  But  last 
time  John  said,  “OK,  I’ll  help  you  pack.”  And 
he  had  never  said  that  before. 

I  ran  across  a  quote  somewhere  that  said 
Virginia  City  in  the  1950s  had  a  lot  more  class. 
Now  how  does  that  strike  you ? 

I  never  saw  it.  I  wonder  what  kind  of  class 
they  were  talking  about?  They  didn’t  say  first- 
class,  did  they?  [laughter] 

No.  They  just  said  it  had  a  lot  more  class. 

Not  that  I  know  of.  I  have  no  idea  what 
they  had  in  mind.  We  used  to  have  a  movie 
house  here.  Isn’t  that  what  they  call  classy? 
[laughter] . 


Photographs 


View  of  Crown  Point  Trestle  and  the  Virginia  and  Truckee  train  crossing  the  ravine  at 
Gold  Hill,  ca.  1870s.  (Courtesy  of  Special  Collections,  University  of  Nevada,  Reno  Library) 


90 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


“Sporting  Row,”  the  red  light  district  on  West  D  Street,  Virginia  City,  1924. 
(Courtesy  of  Special  Collections,  University  of  Nevada,  Reno  Library) 


Arizona-Comstock  mill,  adjacent  to  the  dump  from  the  adandoned  Hale  &  Norcross  mine, 
Virginia  City,  ca.  1930.  (Courtesy  of  Nevada  State  Historical  Society) 


Photographs 


91 


Open  pit  mining  operations  on  South  C  Street,  with  Fourth  Ward  School  in  background, 
Virginia  City,  ca.  1934.  (Courtesy  of  Nevada  State  Historical  Society) 


92 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


Looking  north  up  C  Street,  Virginia  City,  ca.  1940. 
(Courtesy  of  Special  Collections,  University  of  Nevada,  Reno  Library) 


Photographs 


93 


Charles  Clegg  (1),  and  Lucius  Beebe  (r), 
who  revived  the  Territorial  Enterprise  in  1952, 
shown  with  Beebe’s  dog,  T-Bone  Towser,  ca.  1950s. 
(Courtesy  of  Nevada  State  Historical  Society) 


Original  Index: 
For  Reference  Only 


In  order  to  standardize  the  design  of  all  UNOHP  transcripts  for  the  online  database,  they  have 
been  reformatted,  a  process  that  was  completed  in  early  2012.  This  document  may  therefore  differ 
in  appearance  and  pagination  from  earlier  printed  versions.  Rather  than  compile  entirely  new 
indexes  for  each  volume,  the  UNOHP  has  made  each  transcript  fully  searchable  electronically.  If 
a  previous  version  of  this  volume  existed,  its  original  index  has  been  appended  to  this  document 
for  reference  only.  A  link  to  the  entire  catalog  can  be  found  online  at  http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 


96 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


American  Flat  mill,  86-88 
Anderson,  Fred  M. ,  139-140 
Arizona-Comstock  mill,  36, 
37-38,  39 

Arts,  the,  141-142 


B 


Beebe,  Lucius,  46-48,  111, 
112-114,  115,  116,  117- 
118,  143-146,  149-150, 
151,  152 

Benner,  Delbert,  4,  5,  15 
Benner  family.  See  Cobb, 
Tyrus  R.  "Ty" :  ances¬ 
tors/family 
Berry,  Robert  " Bobby," 

107,  137-138 
Best,  Katherine,  148 
Blake,  Deacon,  118 
"Bonanza"  (TV  series) , 
124-125 

Boyle,  Charlie,  7 
Bromund,  Cal 

59,  63^  i04-' 

>arding- 
69-70;  brew- 
142;  butcher 
42;  coal  yards, 
>7-98;  general  stores, 
28,  60;  grocery  stores, 
28,  51,  60;  hotels,  51; 
ice  industry,  98-99; 
laundries,  59;  livery 
stable,  28;  medical  ser¬ 
vices,  15,  147-148; 
newspapers ,  47,  112, 

132,  143,  151,  152-153; 
restaurants,  29,  59-60, 
105,  127;  sewers,  91, 


92,  99;  water  supply, 
19-20,  54,  97 
Butter's  mill,  10 


C  &  C  mine,  31 
Carey,  Agnes,  129 
Castillio,  Joe  "Little 
Joe,"  97-98 

Chinese,  28-29,  59-60,  94- 
95 

Ching,  Charlie,  29 
Chism,  Alec  "The  Fist 
Churches/clergy , 

56-57 

Clegg,  Cj  f/  +a.j., 

112,  JA  16,  143- 

150,  151- 


(nee  Harris),  l. 


,  Tyrus  R.  "Ty, " 

1-48;  ancestors/family, 
1-5,  6-15;  education/ 
teachers,  32,  33-35,  43- 
44;  employment,  36-43, 
44-45;  youth/recreation, 
13-14,  15-27,  28-31,  32- 
36,  57-58 

Cobb,  Will,  1,  9-13,  32, 

44 

Cole  mansion,  33 

Colletti,  Edward  S.,  49- 
65,  104,  105;  ances¬ 
tors/family,  49-53;  edu¬ 
cation,  60-61;  employ¬ 
ment,  61,  62,  63-65; 
youth/recreation,  52, 

54,  56-58,  59-61 

Colletti,  Joseph  Domenic, 
49-50 

Colletti,  Marguerita  (nee 
Vivenza) ,  50-52 


Original  Index:  For  Reference  Only 


97 


Combination  mine,  30-31 
Conforte,  Joe,  107,  109- 
110 

Connors,  Dan,  21,  22-23, 
113 

Con.  Virginia  mine,  81, 

91,  92 

Cornish,  32,  83 
Corporation  House  (fire 
house) ,  26-27 

Crown  Point  trestle,  39-40 


Geiger  Grade,  72-73,  74 
Gilmartin,  John,  34,  100, 
101 

Giraudo,  Paul,  98 
Giuffra,  John,  137,  155 
Giuffra,  Mildred,  129-156; 
employment,  139-140, 
146-148 

Greenhalgh  family,  99,  111 


H 


Harris  family.  See  Cobb, 


Pell,  Melvin,  96 
Fires,  27-28;  Divide  fire, 
45;  Yellow  Jacket  mine 
fire,  2 

Fourth  Ward  School,  33-34 


Gallagher,  Hugh,  Sr.,  31 
Gallagher,  Hugh  J.,  31, 
102 

Gallagher  family,  31,  102 
Gambling,  45-46 


Jack  family,  30,  61 
Jamar,  Gertha,  138,  139 
James,  Benny,  58 
Jones,  Virginia,  119 


K 


Kee,  Chung,  28-29,  95 
Kendall,  Zeb,  61-62,  86, 
91,  92 


Lawlor,  Jake,  34,  35,  100, 
101,  102 


98 


Comstock  Memories:  1920s  -  1960s 


Lawson,  Jim,  15-16 
Lawson,  Will,  15 
Lazzeri,  Frank  "Bronco," 
110-111,  154 
Lizard  mine,  132-133 


M 


P 

Petrini,  Dominic,  64,  105 
Piper's  Opera  House,  21, 
113 

Prohibition,  46,  58-59 
Prostitution,  46,  79,  106 
108,  109-110,  137-139 


Marlette  Lake,  9,  19-20 
Martens,  Claus,  81-82 
Martin,  Johnny  "Little 
Johnny  the  Giant,"  77 
Maxwell,  Vic,  144 
Medical  services,  15,  147- 
148 

Meredith,  Jack,  43-44 
Mills  and  milling,  10,  85, 
86-89,  134 

Mines  and  mining,  30-31, 
36-42,  49-50,  62-63,  75- 
77,  83-93,  95,  120-122, 
132-135;  accidents  and 
hazards,  1-2,  4,  49,  8] 
82;  Depression,  im^ 
of,  87-88;  laboi 
tions,  42;  mj 
83,  84,  95;  op« 

<  92, 
^position 
120-121; 
36-37,  133- 
13>f^wages,  38,  83; 
V-World  War  II,  impact  of, 
89-90,  92,  103-104,  134 
Miners'  Union,  42 
Moore,  Doug,  116-117 
Motion  pictures,  21,  126 
Murry,  Jack,  129,  132, 

136,  137 


Rainbow  magazine,  43 
Religion/philosophy;  Chj^A 
nese,  18,  60;  churches/ 
clergy,  35-36,  56-57; 
Yoga  colony,  29-30,  142- 
143 

Reno  Evening  Gazette ,  4  4 
Riel: 


,,  153 

jfers,  Will,  21-2  2 
loth,  Louie,  99 


Sharon  House,  105,  127 
Shetler,  Roy,  151,  152, 

155 

Simpson  family.  See  Cobb, 
Tyrus,  R.  "Ty":  ances¬ 
tors/  family 
Smith,  Paul,  48,  154 
Smokery  Club,  104-105 
Southside  School  (Reno) , 

32 

Storey  County  Commission, 


N 

Nevin,  Vincent,  42-43 
Noce,  Charlie,  51 
Nuclear  testing,  94 


0 


106-108,  109 
Stosic,  Tony  "Crybaby 
Tony,"  80-82 

Structures,  21,  23,  26-27, 
28,  29-30,  32,  33-34, 

35,  36,  39-40,  42,  46, 
53,  59-60,  69-70,  97, 
105,  107,  113,  118-119, 
124,  131,  136-137,  138- 
139,  141,  142,  144 
Sutro  Tunnel,  11,  30-31 


O'Donnell,  Huey,  78-79 
Ophir  mine,  91 


Original  Index:  For  Reference  Only 


99 


T 

Tapscott,  Clarence  B. ,  34 
Territorial  Enterprise. 

27,  47-48,  110-112,  114- 
115,  143-144,  148-150. 
See  also  Virginia  City 


teachers,  75,  100,  101- 
102;  employment,  84-85, 
98,  103-105,  106;  mili¬ 
tary  service,  103-104; 
as  Storey  County  Commis¬ 
sioner,  106-108,  109; 
youth/recreation,  68, 


News  69,  70-75,  100-102,  113 

Threlkel's  Ball  Park 
(Sparks),  74-75 
Tourism,  48,  119-121,  123- 
125,  154-156 

Transportation,  10-11,  23- 


Water  supply,  9,  19-20, 
54,  91-92,  97,  133 
World  War  XI,  89-90,  103- 

104,  130-131,  134 


Y 

Yellow  Jacket  mine,  1-2 


Z 


Zalac,  John,  63,  67-127; 
ancestors/ family,  67-69, 
70-71;  education/ 


