Bud Beasley: 

Nevada Educator, Coach, and Athlete 


Interviewee: Bud Beasley 
Interviewed: 2001 
Published: 2004 
Interviewer: Dwayne Kling 
UNOHP Catalog #198 


Description 

Bud Beasleys career as an educator in Reno spanned seventyyears. Born in New Mexico in 1910, Beasley soon moved 
to California, where he graduated from Santa Cruz High School. He came to Reno in 1930 where he enrolled in the 
University of Nevada on a football scholarship and participated in other sports both on and off campus. When he 
first decided that he wanted to be a coach, he was surprised to learn that he also had to be a teacher. That proved to 
be a blessing for him and for his students as he soon learned to love teaching as much as coaching. 

Bud’s first teaching assignment was in Battle Mountain, Nevada. One year later he returned to Reno, and for forty 
years—from 1936 to 1976—he was coach and teacher at Reno High School. Bud’s sense of humor, dedication, 
sincerity, concern for all people, and his intensity—both in the classroom and on the athletic fields—made him the 
legend that he is today. 

After retiring from Reno High School, he began teaching at Washoe High School and continued teaching and 
inspiring students till he was past the age of ninety. He is believed to be one of the longest serving teachers in the 
United States. His former students include judges, attorneys, doctors, business executives, and educators. He was 
proud of them all but was especially proud of his many former students who became educators. 

Several schools in Washoe County are named after those who had been taught by Bud, and, of course, Bud himself 
had a school named after him—Bud Beasley Elementary School. Bud spent many happy hours visiting with the 
students and faculty of “his” school, and there is a large trophy case in the lobby displaying many of his awards and 
baseball memorabilia. 

Coaching and teaching always came first for Bud Beasley; however, he had an impressive baseball record, both 
as an amateur in Reno and as a professional player with the Sacramento and Seattle teams of the Pacific Coast 
League, one of the best minor leagues in the United States at that time. Bud played with and against many of the 
top professional ball players of his era. 

Bud Beasley passed away in July 2004 at the age of ninety-three. People will remember him for many different 
things, but perhaps his greatest legacy is his former students, who will pass on to future generations the beliefs and 
philosophies they learned from him. Readers are sure to enjoy this memoir of an educator, a coach, and above all, 
a wonderful human being who truly made a difference. 








Bud Beasley 







Bud Beasley 

Nevada Educator, Coach, and Athlete 

From oral history interviews 
conducted by Dwayne Kling 

Edited by Richard Hoadley 


University of Nevada 
Oral History Program 






Publication of Bud Beasley: Nevada Educator, Coach, and Athlete 
was made possible in part by a gift from Pete Cladianos Jr. 


Copyright 2004 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 2004. 
Printed in the United States of America 


All photographs courtesy of Bud and Nellie Beasley. 


Publication Staff: 

Director: R. T. King 
Assistant Director: Mary A. Larson 
Production Manager: Kathleen M. Coles 

Production Assistants: Pedro J. Oiarzabal, Linda Sommer, and Kathryn Wright-Ross 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface vii 

Introduction ix 

1 Beginnings 1 

2 Outstanding Reno Athletes 27 

3 Baseball in Reno 31 

4 Bud’s Pitching Style 74 

5 Eleven Old Men 91 

6 The Coast League 95 

7 Western International League 137 


8 Stockton Old-Timers 


147 



VI 


CONTENTS 


9 Philosophy of Teaching 

153 

Index 

195 



PREFACE 


Since 1965 the University of Nevada Oral History Pro¬ 
gram (UNOHP) has been collecting eyewitness accounts of 
Nevada’s remembered past. While there is no standard chronicler 
profile nor rigid approach to interviewing, each oral history plumbs 
human memory to gain a better understanding of the past. Fol¬ 
lowing the precedent established by Allan Nevins at Columbia 
University in 1948 (and perpetuated since by academic programs 
such as ours throughout the English-speaking world), these manu¬ 
scripts are called oral histories. Some confusion surrounds the 
meaning of the term. To the extent that these “oral” histories can 
be read, they are not oral, and while they are useful historical 
sources, they are not themselves history. Still, custom is a power¬ 
ful force. Historical and cultural records that originate in tape- 
recorded interviews are almost uniformly labeled “oral histories,” 
and our program follows that usage. 

The transcripts that resulted from Dwayne Kling’s inter¬ 
views of Bud Beasley have been slightly edited for readability, but 
the natural episodic structure follows the interview tapes. Amuse¬ 
ment or laughter is represented with [laughter] at the end of the 



PREFACE 


viii 


sentence; and ellipses are used not to indicate that material has 
been deleted, but rather to indicate that a statement has been 
interrupted or is incomplete ... or there is a pause for dramatic 
effect. For readers who are interested in examining the unaltered 
records, copies of the tape-recorded interviews are available at the 
UNOHP’s reading room on the University of Nevada, Reno cam¬ 
pus. While the program can vouch that the statements in this 
volume were made by Bud Beasley and that he has reviewed and 
approved the transcript, it does not assert that all statements are 
entirely free of error. As with all oral history projects, Mr. Beasley 
has recorded his remembered past, and memory is never flawless. 
Readers should exercise the same caution used when consulting 
government records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and other pri¬ 
mary sources of historical information. 

UNOHP 
Reno, Nevada 



INTRODUCTION 


When I first met Bud Beasley, I told him that dozens of his 
former students had told me how he had influenced them more than 
anyone they had ever met. Bud’s face lit up, and he said, “That’s my 
pay. That’s why I keep teaching. I enjoy what I am doing, and if I can 
continue to have that influence on my students now, hey, that’s what 
it’s all about.” 

Bud Beasley was born in New Mexico in 1910 but soon 
moved to California, where he graduated from Santa Cruz High 
School. He came to Reno in 1930 where he enrolled in what was 
then known as the University of Nevada (now the University of Ne¬ 
vada, Reno). He had been awarded a football scholarship, but he also 
participated in other sports both on and off campus. When he first 
decided that he wanted to be a coach, he was surprised to learn that 
in order to coach at the high school level he also had to be a teacher. 
That proved to be a blessing, for him and for his students, as he soon 
learned to love teaching as much as coaching. 

After graduation Bud’s first teaching assignment was in Batde 
Mountain, Nevada. One year later he returned to Reno, and for forty 
years—from 1936 to 1976—he was a coach and a teacher at Reno 



X 


INTRODUCTION 


High School. Bud’s sense of humor, his dedication, his sincerity, his 
concern for all people, and his intensity—both in the classroom and 
on the athletic fields—made him the legend that he is today. 

After retiring from Reno High School, he began teaching at 
Washoe High School and was still teaching there when he was over 
ninety years of age. He is believed to be one of the longest serving 
teachers in the United States. His former students include judges, 
attorneys, doctors, business executives, and educators. He is proud of 
them all but is especially proud of his many former students who 
became educators. In the year 2000, over one hundred of his former 
pupils were working in the Washoe County School District. 

Several schools in Washoe County are named after those who 
have been taught by Bud, and, of course, Bud himself has a school 
named after him—Bud Beasley Elementary School. Bud has spent 
many happy hours visiting with the students and faculty of “his” 
school, and there is a large trophy case in the lobby displaying many 
of his awards and baseball memorabilia. 

No discussion of Bud would be complete without a men¬ 
tion of his baseball skills. Coaching and teaching always came first; 
however, Bud had an impressive baseball record, both as an amateur 
in Reno and as a professional player with the Sacramento and Seatde 
teams of the Pacific Coast League. The Pacific Coast League at that 
time was one of the best minor leagues in the United States, and Bud 
played with and against many of the top professional ball players of 
his era. 

People will remember him for many different things, but 
perhaps his greatest legacy is his former students, who will pass on to 
future generations the beliefs and philosophies they learned from 
Bud. Readers are sure to enjoy this memoir of an educator, a coach, 
and above all, a wonderful human being who truly has made a differ¬ 
ence. 

Dwayne Kt. tng 
Reno, Nevada 



1 

BEGINNINGS 


Dwayne Kling: Good morning, it’s February 20, 2001. My name is 
Dwayne Kling, and I am with Bud Beasley at his home on Fairview 
Drive in Reno, Nevada. Bud, Fll start out by asking you when and 
where you were born. 

Bud Beasley: I was born in Melrose, New Mexico, Decem¬ 
ber 8, 1910. 

Are you currently married ? 

Yes, I am. My wife Nellie Beasley and I, we’ve been married 
forty years or more. 

Do you have any children? 

No children of our own, but we have taken into our home 
and raised seventeen foster children. 

So over a period of years, you didn’t have them all at once? 



2 


BUD BEASLEY 


No, thank God! [laughter] No, from time to time. Some of 
them for a short time, and some of them quite a while. 

So you must have a lot of foster grandchildren? 

That we have, [laughter] And they are scattered all over: Wash¬ 
ington, Modesto, Sacramento, scattered all over the country. We 
still have pretty close contact with about twelve of them, and we 
get together for Christmas dinners and Thanksgiving and that 
sort of thing. 

Well, that’s really nice. You say you were born in New Mexico. When 
did you come to Nevada? 

Well, to tell you the truth, I left New Mexico when I was 
about two years old and went to Texas, and I was in Texas up until 
about age eight, and around eight or ten, I came from Texas to 
California and went to grammar school and high school in Santa 
Cruz. 

So when did you come to Nevada then? 

After I got out of high school. In high school I played foot¬ 
ball, basketball, baseball, and one of my coaches was the famous 
Rabbit Bradshaw that became the All American at Nevada. Rab¬ 
bit Bradshaw was my coach in high school, and he kept talking, 
“Nevada, Nevada.” So in 1930 I came to the University of Ne¬ 
vada on a football scholarship and played football at the univer¬ 
sity from 1930 to 1934.1 was a halfback and a quarterback on the 
football team at the University of Nevada. 

Did your parents come with you then, or did they stay? 

No, I was on my own, totally on my own. 



Beginnings 


3 


You mentioned to me that you’d 
met Pappy Smith of Harolds Club 
at Santa Cruz at some time. Was 
that before you went to the Uni¬ 
versity of Nevada? 

Yes, I was still in high school, 
and I was working on the board¬ 
walk at Santa Cruz, and Pappy 
Smith had a concession on the 
boardwalk there, and I had a soft- 
drink concession and spieled for 
some of the other events on the 
boardwalk. Once in a while we 
worked state fairs and carnivals, 
and I got to know Pappy Smith 
long before he was coming to 
Reno, [laughter] 

So the carnivals had a route that 
they went to, and you’d see him at 
different places? 

Right. 

You mentioned the sports that you played in college, mainly football. 
Did you play baseball and basketball? 

I played freshman basketball at the University of Nevada, and 
our football coach at that time was Philbrook out of Notre Dame, 
and Philbrook was also the freshman basketball coach. So I played 
freshman basketball for Philbrook. Doc Martie was the varsity 
coach, of course—the very colorful Dr. Martie—and one of the 
players that I played against as a freshman was Jake Lawlor. Then, 


“In high school I played foot¬ 
ball, basketball, and base¬ 
ball . ...” In football gear at 
Santa Cruz High School. 




4 


BUD BEASLEY 


at the university at that time they had no organized baseball, but 
they had a very strong and fast inter-fraternity league, and we 
played there on the university campus on a very, very poor field, 
dirt field, under very poor conditions, [laughter] It was located 
somewhat where the economics buildings are located now. Then, 
during the time that I was going to the University of Nevada, I 
was also playing baseball for Jack Threlkel, who had a very fast 
semi-pro team. 

So this would be in early 1930? 

That’s right—early 1930s, 1933, 1934, particularly. 

So you mentioned the inter-fraternity teams. If you weren’t in a fra¬ 
ternity you coiddn’tplay baseball, then? Or did they have some inde¬ 
pendents? 

Well, you played inter-fraternity ball, and then you played 
summer ball with Jack Threlkel and Lovelock and Fallon and teams 
like that. Well, we had a very fast Sagebrush League, then. 

Wait a minute. In that fraternity baseball, about how many teams 
woidd there be? Woidd every fraternity have a team? 

Just about. Yes. There were about eight teams in there, and it 
was a good, fast fraternity league. Quite a few of the fellows in it 
played summer baseball when school was out. 

Who organized the team, then? Did each fraternity have their own 
manager? Did you manage one? 

Right, each fraternity had their own manager, and it was sort 
of like an inter-scholastic league, but all fraternities were involved 



Beginnings 


5 


in it, and Jake Lawlor and Tommy Hill and Oscar Freitag and the 
Peccoles. They played in that league. 

Oh, they were all at the university at the same time? 

Yes, all at the university at that time. 

So how about basketball ? Were there any basketball teams there, then? 

Basketball was very popular on campus. The coach was Doc 
Martie, and he was a good one. He produced some of the finest 
college teams, for a small school. He was playing St. Mary’s and 
Santa Clara and San Jose, Fresno, San Francisco. And they were 
playing in the Old Gym, which was classic, because the Old Gym 
was very, very small and the bleachers came right up to the edge 
of the court, [laughter] And dark, and Jake Lawlor played in the 
league then, and Bob O’Shaughnessy was playing for the univer¬ 
sity, that later played baseball. But the university was, for a small 
school, very active. And another thing that I think is history that 
on the university football schedule, at that time, we had Cal on 
our schedule every year, and St. Mary’s on our schedule. And at 
that time St. Mary’s was better then Cal and Stanford. 

We also played Stanford one year, and our easy games at that 
time were Cal-Davis and Fresno and San Jose. Provo, Utah, was 
on our schedule. But every year we played independently, and we 
did it primarily to get the guarantee. We got a good guarantee 
from St. Mary’s and Cal, and we played our games in the Bay area 
in the old Kezar Stadium. 

So, who was the football coach? 

Philbrook was the first one. Brick Mitchell was second. Chet 
Scranton was the assistant coach, and Doc Martie was the trainer 
for football. 



6 


BUD BEASLEY 


What position did yon play in football ? 

Halfback and quarterback. I was halfback on the football team 
and all the way back in my studies, [laughter] By the way, our 
football teams were recruited from outside Nevada, pretty much. 
They came from all over, from Tennessee, from Indiana, out of 
the Los Angeles area, and most of our athletes came from the 
outside, but Jack Hill of Sparks was very good. And Jake Lawlor, 
of course, came out from Iowa to play. But for a small school . . . 
I imagine the university at that time was only five or six thou¬ 
sand. 

Five or six hundred, yon mean? 

Well, no, we had more than five or six hundred. We were in 
the thousands. 

Thousands at that time? 

Yes, but probably not. President Clark was president of the 
university. But for a small school, they did very well. 

So they had a good recruiting system some way or other. Maybe the 
alumni, like Bradshaw, helped you. 

The alumni did most of the recruiting. Harry Frost of Reno 
Print was a big recruiter for the university and a big booster for the 
university. And Ty Cobb one year was our football manager who 
later became the sportswriter, you know, [laughter] It was a great 
little school to go to, though. I enjoyed it. Academically, in my junior 
and senior year I became very interested in teaching, and my first 
year of teaching at the University of Nevada was practice teaching at 
Mary S. Doten. I taught fifth grade at Mary S. Doten in 1933. In 



Beginnings 


7 


1934, my senior year, I did my practice teaching at the old Northside 
School, and that should get some history. 

Let’s talk about that Northside School for a little bit. Where was it 
located ? 

It was located in the worst possible place. On one side was 
Fourth Street, and Fourth Street at that time was Highway 40, 
and all the trucks through Reno came down Highway 40 right in 
front of the school, [laughter] And in back of the school were the 
railroad tracks. So it was located down there pretty much where 
the bowling stadium is now. To conduct class in there with the 
trains on one side and the highway on the other was something 
else. But I did my practice teaching there in 1934. 

That was a junior high school? 

Yes, a junior high school. Darrell Swope was the principal, 
and he had been the coach there. I did my practice teaching there, 
and at that time—this is something I think noteworthy—it was 
impossible to graduate from the university and teach in the Reno- 
Sparks area. Everybody had to go out and serve one year out in 
the state and then come back. No one was hired off campus; ev¬ 
erybody had to go out to some town in the state and serve the 
apprenticeship and then come back to the system. 

So my first year out of college, I went to Battle Mountain and 
taught at Battle Mountain and coached at Battle Mountain that 
one year 1934-1935. Then, back into Reno, now as a coach and 
teacher at the old Northside Junior High. We only had two jun¬ 
ior highs at the time, Billinghurst and Northside. Only one high 
school, Reno High, where the Sundowner Hotel is now located 
at West and Fifth Street. That was the old Reno High, with a 
student body of three or four hundred students. 



BUD BEASLEY 


Where was Billinghurst located ? 

Billinghurst was located out where the old recreation area is 
on Plumas now. And that old gym out there was the old 
Billinghurst gym. Billinghurst was the superintendent of schools, 
and it was Billinghurst that first hired me when I came in from 
Battle Mountain. E. Otis Vaughn was the principal of Reno High. 

I taught and coached at Northside Junior High during 1935 
and 1936. Then, the next year I went to Reno High as an assis¬ 
tant coach to the late and great Herb Foster. I was the assistant 
coach and history teacher, 1936, at Reno High. 

Why did you select Battle Mountain, or were you appointed to go 
there? Did you have a choice of places? 

Well, I applied different places, and Battle Mountain hired 
me. I had a very enjoyable and eventful year at Battle Mountain. 
So much so that in a way I hated to leave, but everybody wanted 
to get back into Reno. 

So Billinghurst hired me. Billinghurst was a great baseball 
fan, by the way. He attended a lot of the Threlkel games. And in 
college I was playing for Threlkel, so I had a good in with 
Billinghurst. So when I finished my apprenticeship in Battle 
Mountain, Billinghurst brought me back in to Northside. Then 
the next year he moved me to the high school as an assistant to 
Herb Foster. I coached baseball and assisted Herb in football. And 
some of the greats of that era were Frank Peterson, later of Santa 
Clara, A1 Solari, UCLA. Fred Forson, Ed Whiting were the great 
athletes of the 1930s at Reno High. 

And you were always Herb Foster’s assistant at Reno? 

Right. I was the line coach, and he was the head coach. Then 
I coached baseball in the spring; he coached track. He coached 
varsity basketball, and I coached junior varsity basketball. 



Beginnings 


9 


So you had a great relationship with Herb Foster. 

Oh, yes. And Reno High hadn’t played baseball up until then, 
so I brought baseball back to Reno High, and we played under 
very adverse conditions. We had no baseball field; we’d practice at 
Powning Park; we’d practice at Billinghurst, we’d practice in 
Idlewild. [laughter] We’d practice at Jack Threlkel’s and played 
most of our games at Jack Threlkel’s Park. 

Oh, you did ? 


Right. The football field was located over on East Ninth Street 
where Central Administration now is, and the kids would have to 
walk from West Fifth over to Ninth Street with their shoes tied 
around their neck, walk over in their civilian shoes, take their 


shoes off. Each kid had to pick up a bucket and go out on the dirt 
field and pick up a bucket of rocks and dump it out to the side. 

[laughter] And then they’d put 



their helmets on and practice 
football. At the end of practice, 
they’d walk back over to West 
Fifth and take their shower, 
[laughter] 

They got a good workout just go- 



Coach Beasley at Reno High School 
in the 1930s. 


ing back and forth to practice. 

Right. And no face mask in 
those days, and old, ribbed, 
leather helmets. The coach 
would take the practice jerseys 
home and wash them for the 
games, [laughter] It was really 
something. 


10 


BUD BEASLEY 


So they never had a football field until they went to their new loca¬ 
tion? 

Right. 

How about some of the other teams you played against? 

You can’t believe the teams we played against in our league 
then, and all the little farming towns like Yerington and Stewart 
and Fallon—they were tough, because they had those farm kids, 
you know, and if they played against everybody the way they played 
against Reno, boy, they’d win all the time, because they had these 
rough, tough farm kids, and Stewart had the Indian kids. All the 
fields were dirt, though, no turf fields at all. Played under some 
very miserable conditions. 

Well, you guys were the city slickers. Everybody was shooting at you. 

Oh, yes. We were the biggies, and our big rival was Sparks. 
Tip Whitehead was coaching at Sparks at the time, and they were 
our big rivals, and every year that was the “Big Game.” Then we 
also played for the state championship in Las Vegas. One year 
down in Las Vegas; the next year we’d play here. We played a state 
tournament in basketball then, too, and the state tournament was 
held at the university, and all teams could come in and enter the 
state tournament, so that was a big time. 

When you were with Reno High, you say you played one year in 
Vegas, and one year in Reno, so how is it determined who played, 
whether it was Reno, Sparks, or Yerington? Did you have a league 
that you had to win to play? 



Beginnings 


11 


Right. We had to win our division. They had to win their divi¬ 
sion, and there were only two or three schools in Vegas, and Reno 
and Sparks up here, primarily. 

Well, did the littler schools like Fallon or Lovelock ever get into the 
state championship? 

They did in basketball, but not football. 

Well, some of them may not have had eleven-man football. Were there 
eight-man football leagties, then, or six-man? 

No, no six-man football, then, at all. Everybody was eleven. 

Did Reno High ever play for the championship when you and Foster 
were there? 

Oh, yes, several years we played the state. All state-champion¬ 
ship games were played at the university, and all state basketball 
games were played at the university. 

So, how long did you coach at Reno High, then? 

At Reno High? I was there from 1936 to 1976, which, by the 
way, was the longest coaching record of anyone in the state of 
Nevada. No one had coached that long. During my coaching, all 
those years, there were only two coaches that I know of. Bill Ire¬ 
land, who’s still going strong in Las Vegas—the two of us had 
state champions in football, basketball, and baseball. And I don’t 
think any other coach has won a championship in all three sports. 

Well, was that when Ireland was coaching at Fernley? 



12 


BUD BEASLEY 


Yes, he coached at Fern ley. He coached all over the state. Bill 
was a gypsy coach, [laughter] He moved around. 

So, he won his championships at different places? 

Right. 

So he was kind of your competitor there for awhile. 

Oh, yes, but we were very close. He’s a great guy. We’ve al¬ 
ways been very good friends. 


Well, when you were coaching there you were also teaching, is that 
correct? 


Right. I was teaching his¬ 
tory, teaching physical educa¬ 
tion, teaching gymnastics, 
fencing, boxing, baseball, spon¬ 
soring over half a dozen differ¬ 
ent things: the yearbook, the 
Huskiettes, the Three Arts, the 
cheerleaders, Block R, putting 
out the yearbook. Those days 
you were a one man band. You 
had to be, because they didn’t 
have a coach for everything. 
And as a matter of fact, one 
thing that bothers me a little 
bit now, in baseball for in¬ 
stance, I had forty kids out for 
baseball, and I was the only 
coach. Now they have sixteen 



Coach Beasley at Reno High in the 
1940s. 


Beginnings 


13 


or twenty kids and four coaches, [laughter] And the fields and 
bats, balls, everything—so much different. It’s apples and oranges 
to compare. 

But I did have some great players. Fred Dallimore, who later 
became the head baseball coach at Las Vegas, the University of 
Las Vegas, and scout for the Orioles, and the pitching coach for 
the Orioles. Fred Dallimore was one of mine. Dan Heilman, one 
of mine. Orin Snyder, who played in the Willy [Western Interna¬ 
tional] League with us, was one of mine, and quite a few of my 
players went on to play pro ball, or very fast semi-pro ball. So 
they were some great years. Thoroughly enjoyed my coaching. I 
coached gymnastics and brought gymnastics back to Reno High, 
also. 

Our baseball league, at first, there weren’t enough high schools 
playing. We’d play Fallon and Sparks and Carson, Stewart Indian 
School, but we’d also play some of those university fraternities, 
and every year we would go over and play the prison. And that 



“I was teaching. . . and sponsoring over half a dozen different things. . . . 


Bud and Nellie Beasley chaperoning a Reno High School dance in the 
1940s. 





14 


BUD BEASLEY 


was quite a treat going over and playing the prison. You got a 
good meal, and every year the prison had a baseball team. The 
only thing was, the warden wouldn’t let them travel, [laughter] 

No road games? 

No road games, [laughter] 

To go back to when yon were going to the university, I know you 
played ball there in the summer, but did you have other jobs since you 
had to earn a living? 

Yes, as a matter of fact, the football coach got most of us jobs 
to help pay for our tuition and so forth. So at one time I had the 
job with the laundry. I’d collect all the football suits after every 
game and take them to the laundry to be cleaned. So I worked 
there. I bused dishes and waited tables at the Elks Club and the 
Twentieth Century Club. You name it, all kinds of part-time jobs 
while I was going to college, even though I was on a scholarship. 

Yes. What did a scholarship entail in those days? Part of your tuition 
and board and room, or books? 

You got tuition and books and that sort of thing. We didn’t 
get board and room then, but we did get our tuition paid. And 
that’s rather rare, too. To get around that tuition business, we all 
had to register from some Nevada town, [laughter] 

Oh. So you were all in-state students? 

To get out of paying the tuition. And the coach would call us 
all in and assign us a town. And he assigned me to Battle Moun¬ 
tain. So I ended up teaching in Battle Mountain, and it was the 
first time I had ever seen the town, [laughter] 



Beginnings 


15 


First time you bad ever been to your hometown? 

Yes. [laughter] 

So all the athletes, most of them had some kind of job there in the 
summer? 

Yes, we all worked jobs during the summer. When Brick 
Mitchell was coaching he got me a job at Westwood in the lum¬ 
ber mill up there, so the coaches would get us jobs around differ¬ 
ent places. Quite a few of the players had jobs at the Reno Ga¬ 
rage, because they played during the summer, so almost all of the 
help at the Reno Garage were college ballplayers. 

What year did you graduate from the university, then? 

Graduated 1934. 

Then, as you said earlier, you went to Battle Mountain in 1935. 

Battle Mountain for one year and came back into Northside, 
then into Reno High. All the time I was coaching and teaching at 
Reno High. I was doing summer-school work and night classes— 
post-graduate work at the university—and did that for ten years 
or so, and at the same time I was teaching and coaching at Reno 
High. I was doing post-graduate work at Columbia, and later on 
at Stanford. 

Columbia in New York? 

Yes, New York. 

Did you go to New York to do that? 



16 


BUD BEASLEY 


Yes, and then I did post-graduate work at the University of 
Washington, at Stanford, and at the University of Nevada. 

When you did all the post-graduate work, Bud, was that during the 
summertimes? 

At Stanford, it was the summertime. At the University of 
Washington, when I was playing for Seattle, I was going to school 
and playing ball for Seattle. The other post-graduate work was at 
the University of Nevada. 

And Columbia? 

Columbia—I took the time off to go there. 

Did you take a year of sabbatical leave? 

No. I did it in the summer. 

Oh, just a summer. How did you happen to pick Columbia? Did they 
have a special field that you were interested in? 

I think it was recommended by the University of Nevada, 
because I wanted a course in social science, and the university 
didn’t have it, so they recommended it. 

What year do you think that was you went to Columbia? Was that 
after the war? 

No, before the war. It was around the late 1930s. 

Well, all these post-graduate courses you took were pertaining to edu¬ 
cation in one way or another. 



Beginnings 


17 


Right, everything pertaining to education. 

So did you get some advanced degrees, then? 

Yes, a master’s in history, a master’s in physical education, and 
then I have a doctor’s degree from the University of Nevada. [The 
University of Nevada, Reno, awarded Mr. Beasley an honorary 
doctorate in 1989.] 

Is that in education, also, the doctor’s degree? 

No. That was in humanities. Then, during the 1940s, when I 
was coaching and teaching at Reno High, I was also coaching a 
girl’s softball team, and in coaching this girl’s softball team during 
the summer, I met my wife Nellie, and I married her. 


Was she playing on the softball team? 



Bud Beasley receiving an honorary doctorate at UNR, 1989. 




18 


BUD BEASLEY 


She was playing on the softball team, right, and they had a 
very, very strong girls softball team. They toured the whole West¬ 
ern United States and Canada and beat most of the teams that 
they were playing. The year that Alameda won the world’s cham¬ 
pionship, Reno lost to them by a score of two to one. And she 
also was quite a bowler. She’s in the bowling hall of fame and still 
teaches and coaches bowling. She teaches the league bowlers and 
the Washoe High bowlers and became quite famous in bowling— 
in the Women’s Bowling Hall of Fame. But she was a great soft- 
ball player. 

Who sponsored that softball team? Who paid for everybody to travel 
around ? 


Chism’s was one of the sponsors, and then the various gam¬ 
ing clubs sponsored them when they traveled. 



“She’s in the bowling hall of fame and still teaches and coaches bowling. ” Nellie 
Beasley, second from right, on a bowling team in 1949. 



Beginnings 


19 


Like Harolds and Harrab’s? 

Right, and they traveled all up through the Northwest and 
had a very, very strong girls team. 

What was the team called ? 

Reno Athletics, I believe. 

So you were the coach? You made all these trips, too, then, or some of 
them? 

Well, no. By that time I played semi-pro ball, [laughter] 

But that’s where you met Nellie? 

Yes. That’s how I met her. 

How much longer after you met her did you get married? 

About two years. We’d gone together about two years, I think. 
So what year did you get married, then? 

About 1941. 

To get back to the university, we’ve mentioned most of the coaches that 
were there when you were there. Were there any special educators or 
teachers, professors? 

I feel I owe a great deal to Dr. Traner who was head of the 
education department, and Dr. Traner did a lot of my supervising 
as a student teacher, and he was a real inspiration. He sold me on 
teaching. I was already sold on coaching. All my life, from clear 



20 


BUD BEASLEY 


back in high school, I wanted to coach. Teaching—I didn’t want 
to teach, no way, but I did want to coach. Dr. Traner got me 
deeply involved in education, and it came as a total surprise to me 
in my senior year that, in order to coach, you had to teach some 
subject. And this was devastating, because I just wanted to coach, 
not teach. But Dr. Traner sort of won me over to the teaching side 
of it. And what a difference that is today. You can coach high 
school and not even teach or be on the staff at all, and I don’t 
know whether that’s good or bad. In the case of Pete Savage I 
think it’s probably good, because he’s so dedicated and just can’t 
afford to give up his business and teach. 

Pete Savage is the coach of Reno High School. 

Right. I consider Pete a very good coach, but in those days 
you had to teach and coach. Now, what am I going to teach? 
Traner got me interested in history, so my first teaching experi¬ 
ence in college was practice teaching at Mary S. Doten, and I 
enjoyed it so much. One reason, I think, that helped me in my 
teaching goal was I was playing football at the university at the 
same time. So these little fifth graders now had a college football 
player as their teacher, and this gave me fabulous control over the 
class and discipline and otherwise, and now I began to enjoy it, 
because those little fifth graders were so aware of it. [laughter] So 
I began to enjoy my teaching, and now I accepted the fact of 
teaching and coaching. OK. I went for that. 

This Mr. Traner yon mentioned, is that the gentleman that Traner 
Middle School is named after? 

Right. Traner Middle School. He was quite an inspiration to 
me—I would say, the number one person at the university who kept 
me on the teaching side. And now I am becoming more interested in 



Beginnings 


21 


academics. I don’t want to just be a football jock. I am taking all 
different kinds of courses and am really interested in academics. 

And you were leaning towards history, you say? 

Right. 

What in particular, American history or ancient? 

Well, when I was first teaching history at Reno High I was 
teaching ancient history, and one of the things that my graduates 
always remember is making maps. Boy, every kid had to make 
maps, and they’ve never forgotten that. They still remind me of 
mapmaking. While teaching at Reno High, I think I should men¬ 
tion a few . . . and this is always dangerous. It’s just like if I asked 
you who were the greatest ballplayers you ever played against. 
You are going to leave out somebody, see. But among my out¬ 
standing former students .... 

How about former teachers? Let’s do the teachers first. 

There was Bob Scott, who was superintendent of schools in 
Carson City; Roger Trounday and Buddy Garfinkle, who were 
vice principals at Hug; and then Buddy Garfinkle became princi¬ 
pal at Hug. And Lou Mendive, after whom the Mendive School 
is named, is one of my former students. Over one hundred em¬ 
ployees of the Washoe County School District now—teachers, 
principals, and staff support—are my former students. Over one 
hundred of them out there now. 

That’s impressive. 

One of my most famous former students and players is Ed 
Reed, after whom Reed High School is named, a federal judge. 



22 


BUD BEASLEY 


Bill Raggio, Senator Bill Raggio, was one of my former students. 
Judges Gabrielli andTorvinen and Salcedo—my former students. 
Businessmen, like you mentioned: Pete Cladianos, Roger 
Trounday, executive vice president, John Ascuaga’s Nugget; Don 
Carano of the Eldorado; Greg Carano of the Eldorado; Ben Akert, 
Akert Liquors; Harker and Harker; the Casazzas of Casazza Ar¬ 
chitects—all my former students. So I have had doctors and law¬ 
yers and legislators. Ted Short, former head of the county com¬ 
mission, my former student. And I’m proud of those guys out 
there. 

You should be. Well, you have sent many leaders out into the commu¬ 
nity. 


Definitely. 

And to get back to the university, besides Mr. Traner, who helped put 
you out there to teach these kids? 

Dr. Traner is number one. Harold Brown, Dr. Harold Brown 
was a big factor. I enjoyed my history teachers, by the names of 
Smith and Feemster. And Dr. Peter Frandsen, who turned out a 
lot of the local doctors here, was quite an influence on me, too. 
Another one, Dr. Church, was quite an influence. He felt a per¬ 
sonal interest in me. And Dr. Thompson, Dean Thompson, I 
had his kids in school later on—Gordon Thompson. But those 
professors I particularly enjoyed, because I felt they took a per¬ 
sonal interest in me. And incidentally, that had quite an influence 
on me. Because of them, today I take a personal interest in my 
students. They are more than just a student, and in my teaching 
today, I start by putting the kid as the most important, the sub¬ 
ject matter second. But that kid to me is the most important, and 
unless I establish a rapport with him, you’re not going to get 



Beginnings 


23 


through to him on whatever the subject. So, because these par¬ 
ticular instructors did that for me, I now pass it on. 

You’re carrying their legacy forward? And, hopefidly, someone is car¬ 
rying yours forward, from this group of people. 

Right. In addition to this famous coach, Rabbit Bradshaw, a 
high school teacher by the name of Doc Fellowman was a teacher 
and coach, and he had considerable influence on me. He started 
an alumni association at Santa Cruz High School, of which I am 
a member, still. And due to his influence I started the now fa¬ 
mous Reno High School Alumni Association, presently located 
on the Reno High campus. And sometime we must talk about 
that particular side of my life, because it still takes a great deal of 
my time and energy and love. And thanks again to one of my 
former students and famous businessman, Link Piazzo of Chet 
and Link Piazzo’s Sportsman. Link gave a goodly portion of the 
money to open that building. The building was my dream, and 
Link supplied the money, and we were off and running. 

I’m very proud of it. It’s a museum where all the old memora¬ 
bilia of Reno High is stored and collected, and a record of all our 
graduates. It’s open on Fridays from two to five, and on Saturdays 
ten to two, and it’s open to the public. It’s a museum type of 
thing, plus, it’s where all the records are stored of all our graduates 
that ever went through Reno High. 

So it is not just athletics? 

Oh, no. It’s everything. 

Academics and athletics. 

Everything, right. But my old high school coach and teacher 
did this sort of thing at Santa Cruz, and I borrowed it, because I 



24 


BUD BEASLEY 


just hated to see all this memorabilia going to pot. Yearbooks 
were being thrown out, trophies being thrown out, and that broke 
my heart. So I started collecting it and had it all here at home, 
which didn’t please my wife too much, [laughter] 

She was glad to see the museum? 

Right. So now, I’m looking for a building in which to house 
it. I’ve got the dream, the idea, but no money. And my former 
students, like Earl Avansino and A1 Solari and Link Piazzo, came 
forth with the money, and here we are; we’re in business. 

Does it have a name on it? 

Yes, it’s the Reno High Alumni Link Piazzo Building, with 
the name out in front, and it’s really, really swank. It’s on the 
Reno High campus on the northeast corner, right across from the 
federal building. 

So, volunteers man it during those hours that it’s open? 

Right. We have a board of directors and a president. The 
present president, Joe Granata, Len Crocker, the past president, 
and a board of directors run and operate it—no salaries, but I 
would say it’s probably the best organized alumni building in the 
United States. I don’t know of any other high school that will 
match it. There are other alumni associations and this sort of thing. 
Sparks is starting one up now, but I doubt if there’s another in the 
United States that will match this one. 

Well, that’s quite an accomplishment, another legacy. 



_2 

OUTSTANDING RENO ATHLETES 


Let me ask you again about some of your other students, and/or stu¬ 
dent athletes at Reno High that went on to great glory. 

Well, you’re going to overlook some, but you can’t possibly 
leave out Charlie Springer, former chief justice of the supreme 
court, a track and football man. Don Carano was a track and 
football man, and basketball. Jimmy Melarkey, who played for 
the university, made quite a record at the university, in basketball 
in particular. Danny Heilman, who is a security officer at the 
Holiday now, was an outstanding pitcher, played pro ball in the 
Brooklyn chain, but due to injury, football injuries, it cut short 
his baseball career. But believe it or not, when the Silver Sox, a 
professional team, were playing at Moana, to get a crowd, they 
challenged the Reno High School team, and primarily just to get 
a crowd and promote it. In no way was it supposed to be a close 
game. Believe it or not, with Dan Heilman pitching, we lost the 
game in the tenth inning. It went extra innings. We lost the game 
by one run in the tenth inning with Heilman pitching. 



26 


BUD BEASLEY 


They probably wanted to sign him right there. 

Right. He was so good that a good part of the time I couldn’t 
pitch him against the average high school, because nobody got to 
field the ball. He’d strike out eighteen, twenty guys a game, [laugh¬ 
ter] He had a very good move to first base. One game we were 
playing, there was no one on first base, and we were in about the 
seventh inning. He calls time out, comes over, and says, “Coach, 
is it all right if I walk this guy, so I could practice my move to 
first?” [laughter] 

I said, “Walk him.” He walks the guy and picks him off of 
first—he was that good, [laughter] 

Then of course Fred Dallimore, outstanding. Neunswander, 
another pitcher, outstanding. Jensen, Fred Bossieux. 

What Jensen was that? 

Perry Jensen. Not the Jensen that played for the Giants, but 
all of these players were good enough. And Orin Snyder, of course, 
who played in the Willy Loop with us. But all of these players 
were good enough that they played varsity for the university, when 
the university had a varsity team, and dozens and dozens of them 
played for Jack Threlkel when he had his very strong semi pro¬ 
team. Of course, you can’t mention athletes without mentioning 
A1 Solari who played for UCLA and Frank Peterson for Santa 
Clara. So these kids have gone on to do a great job. 

Yon mentioned a lot of baseball players, but not too many football 
players. Of course you had Solari and Peterson. 

Solari, Peterson, Harvey, Morrison were very good. And Jerry 
Lazzari, very good. In basketball you have to go with Melarkey, 
and some of those that later played for the University of Nevada. 
Track, of course, you can’t leave out Charlie Springer, Gene 



Outstanding Reno Athletes 


27 


Mendiola, Marv Byars of Byars Construction. They were out¬ 
standing athletes in high school. Roger Trounday, outstanding. 
And also in education, as the principal of the school. Ken Fujii, 
outstanding. 

And all these fellows played for you at one time or another? 

Right, and also Lou Mendive of Mendive Middle School. Ed 
Reed, of course, played for me, and coached one year under me at 
Reno High. And he one time asked me, “I’m interested in law; 
I’m interested in coaching; I enjoy coaching. What do you think?” 

And I said, “I’d love to have you as my assistant coach here 
forever, but you’re too smart. Go into law,” which he did and is 
now a federal judge. Also, I think that Clinton Wooster, in ski¬ 
ing, and the Ramsey brothers in skiing, and Dodie Post, skiing 
on the American Women’s Olympic Team. The Poulsons—all great 
skiers. 

And they were all your students, alsol 

Right. And, of course, Clinton Wooster is in law today. And 
Frankovich, both an athlete and an attorney today. John 
Frankovich and Sam Frankovich—they were all mine. So I’m 
proud of those kids out there that have really have gone places 
and done things. 

Well, you’ve lefi a mark on lots of people. 

Yes, true. At least, I hope that I have. The other day I gave a 
speech at one of the banquets here, in which mostly my former 
students out there, such as Don Manoukian, for instance, a world 
champion wrestler, and with the Forty-Niners . . . 


And the Raiders. 



28 


BUD BEASLEY 


. . . and the Raiders, and Ed Pine, with the Forty-Niners, great 
athlete in high school. Greg Morrison, great athlete in high school. 
But also, when I gave the speech the other day, with a number of 
my former students there, I congratulated them and said, “You 
people became a success in spite of me.” [laughter] 

Yes. You can say that, but it’s not true. 

[laughter] 



_3 

BASEBALL IN RENO 


There was a gentleman here in town, and you’ve mentioned his name 
a few times here while we’ve been talking. His name was Jake or Jack 
Threlkel, and you played for him. He owned a Reno garage, is that 
right? 

Right, he owned the Reno Garage. 

Which was located where? 

Located just across the street from the Majestic Theater, on 
the corner of First and Center Street. The old Reno City Hall was 
on one corner, the Majestic Theater on the other corner, and the 
Reno Garage on this corner. 

Now, the Reno Garage, did they repair automobiles? Was it a parking 
garage? 

It was parking primarily, but they also repaired. And Jack hired 
practically all his team to work for him, or he got them jobs around 
other places in town. 



30 


BUD BEASLEY 


So that was his source of revenue, the Reno Garage? 

Right, that was his main source of revenue. And the town 
and baseball owe a great deal to JackThrelkel, because he had, by 
far, the best baseball park around here. The playing field itself was 
as good as anything in the Coast League. That playing field was 
great. Although, in the right field corner there was a chicken and 
turkey pen, and every now and then you’d hit a home run into 
the chicken fence, [laughter] 

The stands were wooden, but there were good crowds. He 
drew good crowds, and he brought in the cream of the crop to 
play against him. The House of David appeared in here. The 
Kansas City Monarchs appeared here. Satchel Paige appeared here. 
And he brought in the top teams off the coast, such as the S.P. 
Stores, Moffat Manteca, and teams out of Sacramento, out of the 
San Joaquin Valley, out of Oakland and San Francisco. The best 
they had in that winter league played here. And he later put in 
lights. I think he was one of the first teams to put in lights. He 
was an eccentric old cuss and a very controversial character, but 
he did a great deal for baseball and did a great deal toward giving 
university players a chance to play. I think I mentioned some of 
those university players, such as Oscar Freitag, Bob O’Shaughnessy, 
the Cassinellis, and Jack Hill, Jake Lawlor, myself, Darrel Reynolds. 
A lot of university players and athletes played on Jack Threlkel’s 
team. And he played independent ball, but he also had a team in 
the old Sagebrush League. And the town owes a great deal to Jack 
Threlkel. He was a tough, old character, not always the easiest to 
get along with, but nevertheless, he did a great deal for baseball 
locally. 

Do you know when he started in baseball ? How he got to Reno, and 
when his first teams were? 



Baseball in Reno 


31 



The 1940 Reno Garage team. Standing, left to right: Bud Beasley, uni¬ 
dentified, Tony Gomez, Fran Cassinelli, Bill Cassinelli, Stan Lloyd, Fran 
Menante. Seated, left to right: Unidentified, Pop Snyder, Wally Westlake, 
JackThrelkel (owner/manager), Lefty Mayer, Geo Sargent, Bob Snyder, 
Chas Eastland. 


He started in the late 1920’s and all through the early 1930s. 
Then, in the 1940s, due to his age, he began to not take so much 
an active part in it as manager, but he leased his park out to the 
Reno Larks. 

To go back to the earlier days, did you call him Jack or Jake? 

Jack. 

Did some people call him Jake, or nol 

Not that I know of. I never heard him called that name. He was a 
very prominent member of the Rotary Club. And the Rotarians 





32 


BUD BEASLEY 


always called him Jack. He was a very controversial character. He 
lived over there on Cheney Street, but he really developed that 
park, and that park was located just east of where the Wells Cargo 
is located now. 

So it was on Fourth Street? 

On Fourth Street, right, and about half way between Reno 
and Sparks, and a very popular park on Fridays and Saturdays and 
Sundays. He not only played there, but he was generous to this 
degree. He let the university use his park. He let the American 
Legion use his park and was very generous in that respect, and he 
kept that park in perfect condition. That playing field was excel¬ 
lent. 

And he had grass on the infield ? 

Right, had grass, and he ran the concessions and this sort of 
thing. 

Did he charge ... 3 

He charged admission. I don’t remember what admission was. 
I think fifty cents or a dollar at that time. And the players weren’t 
paid, but they were given jobs. Then all the gate receipts went 
into a bucket, and at the end of the season the players split the 
gate receipts. So they’d come out with two or three hundred dol¬ 
lars, which was good money in those days. 

Well, when he brought in the teams from the Bay area or from Cali¬ 
fornia, he’d have to guarantee them so much money? 

Yes, he’d guarantee so much, and they’d stay overnight in the 
local hotels, and so forth, and through his connection with Ro- 



Baseball in Reno 


33 


tary, he’d get them a break on their overnight stay. And usually 
they’d come up and play a game Saturday night and Sunday. Sat¬ 
urday night under the lights, and then a Sunday afternoon game. 
He drew very well, drew good crowds. 

What would very well be, like five hundred people? 

Yes, he’d draw five hundred people. Then they played an ex¬ 
hibition game. I like to remember this one. One of his players, 
Mike India, came down with tuberculosis and eventually passed 
away, but Jack played a benefit game that drew over a thousand 
people, around fifteen hundred people for the Mike India Ben¬ 
efit Game. And in that game JackThrelkel played against an All- 
Star team of all the teams around here from northern California, 
Fallon, Lovelock, and they brought in the cream of the crop of 
that Sierra Nevada League, from northern California, and those 
were all college players that each of those teams had out of Saint 
Mary’s and Cal, Santa Clara. All those were good teams, and Jack 
Threlkel played them, and I pitched against them. 

You pitched against them? 

I pitched against them. 

You were on the All-Star team? 

The best of the cream of the crop, now. 

You pitched for Threlkel or for the All-Star? 

I pitched for Threlkel. And I went seven innings with no hits. 
Seven innings, a no-hitter. Struck out thirteen. And Lou Barkley 
came to bat, and I got three strikes on him, and the umpire called 
the third strike a ball. And even Lou threw down his bat and 



34 


BUD BEASLEY 


started to walk away, [laughter] The umpire called it a ball, and 
Lou came back up again and got a base hit. [laughing] And there 
went my no-hitter, [laughter] But that raised a lot of money for 
Mike India, who was in the hospital down in California, and it 
was a fund raiser to raise money for that event. 

What year do you think that was? 

That was probably 1940. 

Did Threlkel ever play himself when he was a young man? 

No. Never did. But the first years, like the early 1930s, he 
coached and hit batting . . . 

Infield? 

. . . infield, yes. He did that. I understand that as a player 
himself, he was a very good player in his day. 

Oh, he did play when he was young? 

Yes, but that had to go back to the 1920s and so forth. 

Was he the field manager then? Did he make the line-ups up and 
everything? 

He made the line-up and sat out on a chair out in front of the 
dugout and gave the signals from there, [laughter] He enjoyed it; 
that was his life. And when it came time to replace a light bulb, 
Jack would climb the light pole and put the lights in. [laughter] 
He did everything. But that ballpark was his baby. That was his 
whole life. 



Baseball in Reno 


35 


So you played for him for several years, then? 

Oh, yes. I played for him when I was in college. Then after I 
came back from Battle Mountain I played for him. Oh, I played 
for him through the early 1940s, and then he leased the park to 
the Reno Larks. The Reno Larks was run by Norrie DeLorenzi 
and Bob Peccole, and they worked at the Palace Club, and the 
Palace Club and Norrie DeLorenzi and Peccole—they financed 
the team, new uniforms, and the Larks carried on in playing in 
the Sagebrush League, and bringing in these top teams from Cali¬ 
fornia. 

So Threlkelgave up baseball, then? 

He gave it up, leased the park, and he was out of it. 

But didn’t he come back again into baseball, then? 

No, that was the end, as far as Threlkel was concerned. He 
was getting old. He’d come out to the games, but he didn’t sit in 
the dugout or have anything to do with that. And about that 
same time, the army out at the Stead Air Base was using his field, 
also. And some of the Lark players were from the Stead Air Base. 
So the team at that time consisted of college players, semi-pro 
players, and Stead Air Base players. They had a good ball club. 
They brought in some good teams. 

Were you on that team? 

Yes, I was on that team. And now we are in the early 1940s, and 
it was from that team that I went to the Coast League in 1944. 

What was the Threlkel’s team called ? Was it called the Threlkel’s Cubs, 
or the Threlkel’s Reno Garage? 



36 


BUD BEASLEY 


Reno Garage. Yes. 

Do you ever remember that name, the Cubs, Threlkel’s Cubs? 

Yes, it does ring a bell. 

Did he ever sponsor a team of younger kids, like an American Legion 
team? 

Yes, he did. And they always used his park. And they had 
some very strong Legion teams in, too. At one time I coached 
some of the Legion teams. And on that Legion team was Fran 
Cassinelli and Orin Snyder and Link Piazzo. Oh, four or five 
years I coached the Legion and the high school. A lot of them 
were the same players. See, we’d finish our high school season, 
then they’d play Legion during the summer. Buddy Garfinkle 
played on that, Ken Fujii and the Elcanos. 

The Reno Larks played in 1941, 1942, 1943, 1944, and Threlkel 
had nothing to do with them? 

No. 

Would it be possible that maybe after the war he started a team again? 

I am almost sure he did. Yes, I believe he did. And you’ve 
brought back some memories now. I know while I was playing in 
the Coast League, Threlkel’s park was going strong. I don’t know 
who was running it, or what the situation was, but I know it was 
going strong. 

And this would have been in 1944, 1945, 1946, 19471 



Baseball in Reno 


37 


Right. And when I was playing in the Coast League, a lot of 
those guys that had played against Threlkel, they’d heckle me from 
the dugout, “Hey, you didn’t play like that for Threlkel!” [laugh¬ 
ter] “Does Jack still run a team up there?” And they’d give you 
that, see. And another humorous thing when I was playing in the 
Coast League is Lefty O’Doul was great at trying to break your 
concentration out there when you were pitching. He’d coach at 
third, and he’d talk to you, ask you all kinds of questions, so you’d 
forget about your job, see. [laughter] 

He’d say, “Hey, Bud, you still teaching school up there?” 

I’d say, “I’ll check with you after the game, Lefty.” But he’d 
try to get me in a conversation, [laughter] And he was very good 
at it. The other pitchers on our staff, he could do it. He could get 
them completely forgetting about the batter, and they’d carry on 
a conversation with him. [laughter] 

Well, you never played for Lefty O’Doul, though? You played against 
him? 

I only played for him for one game. We played Folsom Prison, 
and we combined the Sacramento Solons and the Seals, com¬ 
bined the teams and played the Folsom Prison. It was a charity 
event of some kind. And Lefty O’Doul managed that game. So 
that was the only time. 

Well, let’s stay with the Reno semi-pro for awhile. You played baseball 
for the fraternity leagues at the University of Nevada, and then you 
played semi-pro for Threlkel. 

On Sundays, right. We played in the inter-fraternity league 
during the week. And then five or six of those inter-fraternity 
guys would play for Jack on Sunday, see, like Jack Hill and Dan 



38 


BUD BEASLEY 


Ronnow and Jake Lawlor and Oscar Freitag and the Peccoles. 
Then we’d play in the inter-fraternity league during the week, 
play for Jack on Sundays. 

Did you play for any other semi-pro team? 

Yes. At the same time, [laughter] At about the same time I 
was also playing softball in a very good softball league that we had 
in Idlewild Park. Jack wouldn’t let his players play softball and 
hardball, so we’d play under an assumed name in softball, and we 
thought we were really fooling Jack, [laughter] One time I played 
softball on Monday and Tuesday night, maybe, and when he an¬ 
nounced the line-up in Sunday’s game, he gave my softball name, 
[laughter] 

Fictitious name? 

“Blake” was playing first base today, see. [laughter] For Jack I 
played first base and pitched. The first two or three years, played 
just first base. And then I think how I started pitching for him 
was the pitcher got thrown out of the game, and he brought me 
in from first base to pitch. From then on I was pitching instead of 
playing first base. 

So in the fraternity leagues you played first base? 

Pitched and played first base. 

Pitched and played first base. Were there any other teams that you 
played fori 

Oh, yes. Now, what all of us were doing, though, was we’d go 
play one game, like for Susanville. We’d go play, maybe, one game 
for Fallon, and they’d hire us and pay us twenty-five or thirty 



Baseball in Reno 


39 


dollars just to pitch that one game for them. And even the prison 
wanted me to pitch one game for them, and the warden wouldn’t 
let me. He said, “No, you have to be a prisoner in here to play on 
this team.” But then I went up to Susanville and played a couple 
of games up there, and I went to Fallon one time and played for 
them at Moana a couple of games. They’d hire you for just that 
one game. 

Did they hire others? 

Yes, they did that with quite a few of the players. 

Not just pitchers? 

Darrel Reynolds—he played for everybody at some time or 
other. 

And he was a pitcher? 

No, he was an outfielder. And Frank Archuleta did that, too. 
He’d play for different teams at different times. So we all did it. 
They’d hire you for just one game. Like, maybe, Fallon wanted to 
be sure they beat Lovelock. And a lot of betting on the games, 
too. 

Oh. Did you play under an assumed name there? 

No. 

Or did everybody know you, anyhow? 

No, because they didn’t care. So those games I played against 
Yakima. Yakima, an all-colored team from Washington, were go¬ 
ing to play Susanville, Fourth of July or something, and they 



40 


BUD BEASLEY 


wanted more. They wanted to beat them. So they hired Smiley 
Clayton, a black catcher, and myself to go up and pitch that one 
game. I think I got forty or fifty bucks for that one. 

Oh. Did you beat them ? 

Beat them, yes. Beat them. 

Did you ever have any double or nothing? We'll give you twenty-five 
if you lose, and fifiy if you win? 

Yes, you’d get those, too. I got one of those in Fallon one 
time, [laughing] I’ll never forget one game I played in Fallon, and 
I was pitching for Lovelock against Fallon, and Lovelock hadn’t 
beaten Fallon, and they wanted to be sure they beat Fallon this 
day. And the umpire ... I don’t remember who it was. Seems to 
me like it was Danny Evans. But the umpire told me before the 
game, he said, “There’s no way you’re going to win today.” Fie 
said, “Fallon has to win.” 

A guy would be out at first, and he’d call him safe. Three 
strikes on the batter—they’re calling them balls, you know. At 
first, I’m moaning about it, and then he called me to one side. Fie 
said, “Fiey, this thing’s fixed. There’s a lot of money bet on it, and 
there’s no way you are going to win. So you might as well just 
relax and enjoy it.” [laughter] 

So I did. I’d just throw it in there, let them hit, see. And 
Fallon is pouring it on me. And finally I went back into the stands. 
I was at bat, but I turned around and went back to the stands and 
said, “Boo me all you want to, I don’t care. You guys paid to get in 
here, and I’m getting part of the money.” So I don’t care who 
wins, [laughter] A lot of stuff like that happened, even at Jack 
Threlkel’s. Fie hired the umpires, you know, so he’s tough to beat 
when he hires the umpires, [laughter] 



Baseball in Reno 


41 


Oh, he got a little edge! Who were some of the famous ballplayers that 
came here to Reno, then? 

Satchel Paige pitched at Moana, and Jackie Robinson came, 
and to draw a crowd they had Jackie Robinson race a horse there 
from home plate to right field. 

Oh, he raced a horse? 

Yes, he raced a horse, and the horse darn near ran over him, 
but he beat the horse to first base, but from first base on, the 
horse beat him. [laughter] 

That was at Moana or at ThrelkeTs? 

That was at Moana, and Satchel Paige was at Moana. Cookie 
Lavagetto played up here, and the House of David, of course, 
played both at Moana and Jack Threlkel’s. 

Did any major league team ever play here, that yon recall ? 

No. So far as I know, no major league team ever played here. 
But the Sacramento Solons came up and played a game at Moana. 
They played the Silver Sox, though. And both Bob Snyder and I 
were home. We were out of the Western International, though, 
and we pitched against the Sacramento Solons for the Reno Sil¬ 
ver Sox and beat them, [laughter] That brought down the house. 
Of course, as well you know, frequently, when a major league 
team, or a Coast League team played, they didn’t always play the 
cream of the crop, the best players. 

When I was playing for Sacramento and we were on our way 
up to play Seattle, they stopped at Wenatchee to play, because it 
was a farm club of Sacramento. We stopped at Wenatchee to play 



42 


BUD BEASLEY 


an exhibition game just to draw a crowd for Wenatchee. And we 
played our players all over different positions. Outfielders pitched, 
and pitchers played the outfield, [laughter] But they thought they 
were playing the Sacramento Solons. Even one of our stockhold¬ 
ers got in uniform to play first base, [laughter] But they thought 
they were playing the real McCoy. And I was pitching that game, 
and I’m burnt up, because I don’t want to get beat by Wenatchee, 
[laughing] And here our guys are just having fun and playing 
different positions, and we’re not scoring any runs, [laughter] 

Having a good time, but you’re not scoring any runs. 

About the third or fourth inning the score is nothing to noth¬ 
ing. [laughter] And I’m, “Hey, come on, guys, get some runs for 
me.” And they’re laughing. They think this is funny, [laughter] 
And I don’t want to get beat by Wenatchee. 

We talked about semi-professional baseball, and some of the guys would 
get paid for certain games. 

Right. 

Weren’t there a lot of players that didn’t get any money at all ? 

Yes, that’s true, particularly, if you were in a home town. Like 
Darrell Reynolds, up from Saint Mary’s, he’d get paid, where, 
maybe, the local Lovelock guy didn’t get paid, [laughter] So, there 
was a certain friction there. And you have to remember, too, if 
you got ten bucks, hey, that wasn’t bad, for that particular time. 

So a lot of the smaller towns, especially, like Lovelock, they might 
have seven or eight guys, or six or seven guys that didn’t get paid, just 
played for the fun of it. 



Baseball in Reno 


43 


Right. Or frequently, they’d have a big feed after the game 
that the town would sponsor. Or they got some benefits, over, 
above, and beyond. And jobs. The local kids would get jobs with 
those teams. 

So you had big dinners, or sometimes you’d get free beer and stuff, or 
dinners after ball games? 

Right, and Threlkel would do that, too. At the end of the 
season he’d throw a big banquet, maybe a bean feed or a spaghetti 
feed or something. 

Where wotdd he hold it? 

At his house. Once in awhile, maybe at a downtown club. 
Like at the Columbo Hotel. 

Toscanos? 

Toscanos or something like that. Yes. 

You mentioned once that you went to Susanville with ... 3 
Smiley Clayton, the catcher. 

Yes. He was African American? 

Yes. And a very good catcher, smart—could hit—good arm, 
very good. 

So you went up to Susanville, and you won the game. Then did you 
have a dinner or something after the game? 



44 


BUD BEASLEY 


Right. And then Scott Motors had a team that played at the 
old Moana Ball Park, when they didn’t have lights yet—the Old 
Moana Ball Park. And they had two Afro-American players: Scott, 
a black pitcher, and Smiley Clayton, the catcher. But Scott Mo¬ 
tors had a very good team, and Threlkel wasn’t too anxious to 
play them, either. 

What was the name of their pitcher? 

Scott. I don’t remember his first name. 

So Scott played for Scott Motors? 

Yes. 

Because there weren’t too many blacks around Reno. 

Right, very few. 

I don’t remember any. 

I don’t think Jack Threlkel ever had any, but some of the other 
semi-pro teams around had them. 

I guess there just weren’t that many living in the area. It wasn’t any 
prejudice or anything. 

True. Even at the University of Nevada, there were none on 
football or basketball teams. Marion Motley was among the first. 
They had a problem with housing. When the University of Ne¬ 
vada would play some teams, they wouldn’t house the Nevada 
team, because they had a black player. 


Well, there just weren’t that many living in the area at the time. 



Baseball in Reno 


45 


Right. 

You mentioned earlier that Threlkel stopped baseball for some reason 
in 1941, 1942, 1943, in that area, and there was a team called the 
Reno Larks that played. 

Right. They probably gave him a pretty good price to lease 
the park, and then he was getting a little older, so he leased the 
park to them. They were a well-financed team, because the Palace 
Club was financing it, also. 

Did any of the other bars or casinos sponsor teams during that time 
frame? 

Mostly softball. Harolds Club had a very strong softball team. 
They brought in Lefty Creech, and I can’t remember the other 
one. But Harolds had probably one of the top softball teams in 
the nation. They brought guys in from the outside, of course. But 
the Hollister Cowboys were Worlds Champions, and they played 
here. And Harolds probably had one of the strongest softball teams 
in the nation. They played at Idlewild Park—and night lights— 
and softball was very popular in the 1930s in the Reno area. 

And into the 1940s. 

Yes, right. 

Did the Harolds softball team tour around the different towns? 

Yes, they traveled, also. Back to Moana—the first Moana Park 
faced just the opposite. WTere third base is now was home plate 
in the first Moana Park. Then, they tore that park down and built 
the present ... or not the present Moana Park, but now they put 
in lights. 



46 


BUD BEASLEY 


Is this the third Moana Park, then, or the second ? 

Yes, this is at least the third. But strong semi-pro teams were 
using it. The Sagebrush League used it; the university used it; the 
American Legion used it; and it now became a challenge to 
Threlkel’s Park. It had lights and so forth. 

Didn’t Moana Park, one of them, burn down, one time? 

I think it did. I’m not sure, but I think it did. 

I think it was later, maybe. 

Bill Berrum, who was a former player and student of mine, 
now treasurer, his folks owned the Moana Ball Park, and he was 
the bat boy for a lot of these teams. So he could give you a lot of 
information on the old Moana Park. 

So the Berrums owned it? And they’d charge? 

Right. I think another thing that got Threlkel out of baseball 
was when the California State League started and the first pro 
team was in here. Now, people began to turn to Moana and sort 
of desert Threlkel. I think that’s another reason Threlkel could 
see the handwriting on the wall. And that first California State 
League team that came in, they all had major league sponsors, 
and that may be where you got the idea that the major leagues 
were moving in here. They moved into the California State League, 
and Stockton and Fresno and Reno all had major league furnish¬ 
ing them ballplayers. They supposedly trained, too, for ballplayers 
that were going to the majors, and that began to happen. A lot of 
these local players now began to move on up to the major leagues. 

And then there was another league, right? What was that called? 



Baseball in Reno 


47 


Sunset League. Doomed almost from day one, because the 
travel was just way out. They’d play in Mexicali, Mexico, and 
Klamath Falls, Oregon, and some team in Washington. They didn’t 
have a natural drawing area, and that team folded in a hurry, fi¬ 
nancially. They just couldn’t make it. One of my old catchers 
managed the team in there. 

They played at Moana. Lilio Marcucci was managing the team, 
and they had gone to Mexicali to play, and when they got to 
Mexicali the team had folded, [laughter] So now there’s nobody 
to play. So their next game was at Salinas, though, so they’re on 
their way from Mexicali to Salinas, and I think the Salinas team 
folded. And for two or three days the team was lost. Nobody 
knew where they were, [laughing] 

They didn’t have any money? 

They were somewhere between Mexicali and Salinas, [laugh¬ 
ter] Lilio Marcucci was the manager of the team, and the Giants 
were sponsoring that team. It was the Reno team playing at Moana, 
and they did their spring training in El Centro, California. The 
Giants bigwigs came there to El Centro, and I went down, be¬ 
cause Marcucci, my catcher, was the manager. 

He catight you or Sacramento? 

Yes. I went down to watch his team play down there then. 
Dutch Reuther was representing the Giants, and he was there 
and doing nothing but drinking, [laughter] But they had another 
coach from the Giants that was there coaching the team, but I’ll 
never forget that Dutch Reuther. All he did .... 

Was drink? 


Yes, drink up the Giants’ money, [laughter] 



48 


BUD BEASLEY 


There was a gentleman named Frank Rudy, who leased the Moana 
ballpark in the 1940s. 

I knew of him, but I didn’t know him personally. 

You mention Oscar Freitag. Oscar Freitag was a University of Ne¬ 
vada boy? 

Yes. 

What happened to him? 

He came up from California, from the Berkeley area, and 
played at the university. Brought up there primarily for basket¬ 
ball, but he played in that inter-fraternity league. Then he played 
for Jack Threlkel and went into business here in Reno, passed 
away several years ago, but the Freitag that was the city attorney 
for Sparks is Oscar Freitag’s son. Oscar was a very prominent name 
in semi-ball here and came up from the Bay area to play basket¬ 
ball for Doc Martie at the university. 

A lot of these people that came up here as athletes, including yourself 
and myself, wound tip staying in the Reno area. 

Oh, yes. My first six months in Reno I didn’t like it. Boy, 
these barren hills! When I came from out of the redwoods and 
the ocean, you know . . . this got to me. [laughter] But it grows 
on you. This area grows on you. There’s something about it that I 
really like, and I’ve been very happy here. The town has been very 
good to me. 

And vice versa. 


Yes. [laughter] Well, I hope. 



Baseball in Reno 


49 


OK. How about Tommy Hill ? Was he a local boy? 

Yes. Tommy Hill originated in Tonopah but came to Sparks 
High School and was a star athlete at Sparks High School, a star 
at the University of Nevada in football, baseball, track. Outstand¬ 
ing. He is in the Nevada Hall of Fame, and a great competitor, as 
was Jake Lawlor. 

Jake Lawlor—did he come from out of state? 

Yes, he came from Iowa and came out here to play football 
and baseball and basketball. Great athlete at the University of 
Nevada, but a mean guy, a win-at-any-cost type of guy. [laughter] 
He didn’t care how he won, so long as he won. 

In college Jake was rough and tough and won at any cost. He 
didn’t keep training and went on eventually to play in the Coast 
League. He played with Hollywood in the Coast League for awhile, 
and then he got in trouble down there; he was in a fight with 
somebody all the time. Got in trouble down there and came back 
to Reno. 

Then, he was a highly successful coach in California in high 
school, a highly successful coach. Came back to Nevada, also a 
highly successful coach in Virginia City, but a real rounder, a real 
rebel. Then, when he coached basketball at the University of Ne¬ 
vada, he was a highly successful basketball coach, and a mean, 
rough, tough guy. Challenged his players and really rode them, 
but they had a healthy respect for him. In his latter years, though, 
he began to mellow. He changed quite a bit; he was going to 
church and had a son and got to be a rather nice guy. [laughter] 
An entirely different guy than his past. 

And he was my catcher, also, with Threlkel. I had half a dozen 
catchers for Threlkel, though, at different times. But Jake caught 
that game that I told you about, the Mike India game. And Jake 
told me, too, that Barkley had struck out. And the odd part about 



50 


BUD BEASLEY 


it, Barkley even threw his bat down and started toward the dug- 
out. [laughter] Then came back and got the base hit. But Jake was 
an entirely different guy the last ten years of his life, than he was 
the first twenty years of his life, [laughter] But I developed a healthy 
respect for him, and the guy was a fabulous coach. 

We should mention, for those that don’t know, that Lawlor Events 
Center, of course, is named afier Jake Lawlor. 

Right, and a justly deserved award. He deserved it. I have 
another story on Jake Lawlor. I’m tagged up at third base, and 
Jake is catching, and they hit a long fly ball to the outfield, and I 
tag up, and I’m coming home, and Jake now has the ball, though, 
but when he took to throw from the outfield, it pulled him off of 
home plate, about eight or ten feet. So he is eight or ten feet 
down the third base line, and I’m coming in, and knowing Jake as 
I do, said, “Hey, I’m not going to get home plate!” So Jake’s got 
the ball down on the ground, ten feet down the third base line, 
and I fake the slide, and dive over him and land on home plate, 
and he hasn’t touched me yet! I get up, and I’m dusting the dust 
off and walking toward the dugout, and he takes the ball and hits 
me in the back—just throws it at me. [laughter] So that’s the kind 
of guy Jake Lawlor was. Very competitive. 

We mentioned Frank Archideta a couple of times. Was he a local boy? 

Yes, he was local. I think he was born and raised here, and I 
don’t remember where he went to high school, but he was very 
good in American Legion ball, and very good playing for Threlkel, 
and then he played in that Sagebrush League for a half a dozen 
different teams. But he was a competitor, and very good. 


How about Mike Salanesian? 



Baseball in Reno 


51 


Mike Salanesian was formerly in the New York Yankee chain. 
He was working a job here, working for the Reno Garage, and 
playing first base and pitching for the Reno Garage, in the 1930s. 
And then later, Mike Salanesian was on the local police force; he 
was a policeman here for years and years after he quit playing ball. 

So he’s another guy that stayed in town? 

Right. And at one time, he played in the Yankee chain. 

I think Mike is still living here in Reno, isn’t he, or have you heard ? 

I tried to find out about Mike. If he’s here, he’s got to be in 
his late nineties, because he was quite a bit older than I was, and 
I’m not sure he’s still alive. 

How about Dan Ronnow? 

Dan Ronnow, a Nevada boy, but not a Reno boy. He came 
from someplace like Pioche or like that, came to the university to 
play basketball with Doc Martie. He played basketball for the 
university, played in that inter-fraternity league, then played for 
Jack Threlkel, and then he too played for Lovelock, Fallon, dif¬ 
ferent teams in that Sagebrush League. Great competitor. 

Well, how about a guy named Charlie Eastland ? 

Charlie Eastland played with the Larks and played with Jack 
Threlkel. First baseman, good hitter, and very congenial, an ami¬ 
able guy. To my way of thinking, definitely a pro ballplayer. He 
could have played in the Coast League, and as well you know, a 
lot of times it’s getting the right break at the right time, and you 
go, or you don’t go, but Charlie Eastland was very good, as was 



52 


BUD BEASLEY 


Stan Lloyd. Fran Cassinelli, who you mentioned earlier, was a 
center fielder. As far as their fielding was concerned, they were 
pro ballplayers. 

How about Alf Sorensen? 

Alf Sorensen—I’m glad you brought his name up. The Alf 
Sorensen Recreation Center in Sparks is named after him, and 
I’m the one that got the Sparks City Council to name the Alf 
Sorensen Center. Fantastic athlete—football, basketball, baseball, 
boxing, track—he could do it all and was outstanding. And some¬ 
time in our interview you must bring up the subject of Eleven 
Old Men, the football team that played here in the Reno area— 
all former college players—and Alf Sorensen played on that team. 
Just a fantastic guy and a fantastic athlete, and his life cut short, 
of course, by an automobile accident. Fie also officiated sports 
long after he gave up athletics himself. 

Was he a local boy? 

Local boy, Sparks Fiigh School, and Sparks resident, but very, 
very prominent, both on the university campus, and then after 
college he contributed to this semi-pro league, and the Eleven 
Old Men football team, and later officiating. 

Was he killed in an automobile accident attending a sports event? 

Well, he was injured in the accident and never fully recovered 
from that, but he made many, many friends—friends with his 
teammates and the teams he played against. Everybody had a 
healthy respect for Alf Sorensen. I played with and against him, 
and admire him, and consider him one of the finest athletes I 
ever played with or against. 



Baseball in Reno 


53 


Is that right? That’s quite a compliment. 

Well, he was such an all-the-way-around ... he did it all, 
and it never went to his head. He was a down-to-earth guy. 

How about Al lansdon? 

A1 Lansdon? Yes, I played with and against Al Lansdon. He, I 
would say, was a good, all-the-way-around athlete, but his great¬ 
est contribution was his interest in youth activities after he fin¬ 
ished his own career. He did a lot for Little League baseball and 
spent a lot of time and money on Little League programs. And 
then his son—also a great athlete, particularly in gymnastics— 
for a long while coached the Reno Gymnastic Team here. 

And his first name is what? Is it Dale? 

I know it backwards and forwards. Seems to me like it was, 
but he made a great contribution to gymnastics, was very good 
himself, and a local boy, Reno High, but his contribution was 
primarily in gymnastics. 

Al lansdon’s son? 

Al Lansdon’s son. 

And Al was strongest in little league, youth baseball? 

Right. 

He was a UNR graduate too, wasn’t he? 

Yes, he played for the University of Nevada, played football 
and basketball and played in that inter-fraternity league. 



54 


BUD BEASLEY 


How about Buddy Garfmkle? 

Buddy Garfmkle? Ah, I know him well. He played American 
Legion ball for me, played football and basketball for me at Reno 
High, played for Jack Threlkel, played in that Strong Industrial 
League, became a principal of one of the grammar schools, first at 
Peavine, then principal of Hug High, and is now retired, living at 
Lake Tahoe. 

How about Joe and Paid Elcano? 

Both graduates of Reno High, both deeply involved in ath¬ 
letics at Reno High. Paul is a retired attorney, Joe, a retired busi¬ 
nessman. Joe is on the board of directors of the Alumni Associa¬ 
tion. And both very prominent. 

Good semi-pro baseball players? 

Right. Mostly semi-pro baseball—and, incidentally, both fairly 
good golfers, too. And Paul was an outstanding golfer and an 
outstanding softball player. 

Do you recall a little bit further back, Andy Marcinko? 

Andy Marcinko? Yes, I’ll never forget Andy. Important in the 
gaming industry at Harrah’s for many, many years, and Univer¬ 
sity of Nevada football and baseball, and very, very prominent in 
this semi-pro league. He played for Threlkel as an outfielder, great 
hitter—fairly good fielder, but great hitter. In a twelve-inning 
game one time, we had a tied score, twelfth inning, and a hot, 
summer, Sunday day for Jack Threlkel. I’m pitching, and, hey, 
I’m running out of gas out there, and when I came in, in our half 
of the inning, I said, “Hey, somebody, get a run! I don’t know 
whether I’m going back there again, or not.” 



Baseball in Reno 


55 


Andy said, “I’ll take care of it.” He comes to bat and hits one 
out of the park. We win the game. 

That sounds just like Andy, “I’ll take care of it. ” 

That’s Andy. Great sense of humor, and a great guy when he 
was working for Harrah’s. He was a great guy for free meals. Boy! 
[laughter] 

He gave them away? 

I never paid for a meal when Andy was in charge there, [laugh¬ 
ter] Neither did anyone else. 

He was a big spender of Bill Harrah’s money? 

Oh, he was a big spender of Bill Harrah’s money, [laughing] 
Right. And another guy like that was Buster McClure. He played 
football, of course, for the University of Nevada, and then he 
played in that Industrial League. 

Sofiball or baseball? 

Baseball. And noted for football more than anything else. His 
two sons played for me at Reno High. 

Would that be Willy or... ? 

Tom and Bob Jr. But then Buster was a catcher, also, and 
Buster was heavily connected with the Holiday Hotel, downtown 
Holiday. And he was very good at spending their money, [laugh¬ 
ter] Took care of all the athletes that came up here. 

There’s another one of an earlier era, Lou Barkley. 



56 


BUD BEASLEY 


Yes. Lou, a graduate of Reno High, played for me, played 
Legion ball for me, played with and against me, and a great guy. 
Went into business, was deeply involved with McDonalds for 
awhile. And, by the way, that reminds me, too, of Luther Mack, 
the present owner of about seven McDonalds, and the boxing 
commissioner for the state of Nevada. He’s a Reno High graduate 
and one of my boys. But back to Lou Barkley. Lou Barkley had a 
sister, too. I can’t remember her name offhand. 

Llewellyn? 

I think so, yes. She was a great track star out of the Sacra¬ 
mento area. So the Barkley family, they made their name in ath¬ 
letics, as well as business. 

Let’s talk about Mike Scbon. 

Mike Schon, graduate of Reno High, local boy, raised here in 
Reno, played baseball at Reno High, played American Legion 
ball. Played for Threlkel, one time, I think, played pro ball, was 
in the Dodger organization at one time. At present he is the tour 
guide at the Opera House at Virginia City. 

Ls that right? 

He has written several stories and poems, so he’s an author 
and an ex-baseball player and now quite knowledgeable on the 
history of Virginia City. 

Let’s talk about Bob Snyder of the Snyder family. 

Oh yes, the Snyder family. The Snyder family, the whole fam¬ 
ily ballplayers. Pop Snyder, a catcher. 



Baseball in Reno 


57 


His name was Bob, right? 

Bob Snyder. Yes. Well, we called him Pop. I never did know 
what his first name was, but he played in the 3-1 League, moved 
out to Nevada here, played for every team in that Industrial League. 
Played for every team in there and was my catcher at one time, 
and his son, Bob Snyder, played here locally in the semi-pro league, 
played for Threlkel, also. He played in the Western International 
with two or three teams up there, but I knew him as a teammate 
of mine with Vancouver. And then Orin Snyder, the youngest of 
the Snyders, played for Reno High, played American Legion, 
played for Threlkel, played in this Industrial League. He played 
for the Larks at one time, played for Vancouver in the Western 
International and was an outfielder up there, and is living here 
locally now. He was employed as a pit boss in one of the clubs. I 
think the club out north of town was his last job. 

The Bonanza. 

Yes. But he’s still living here locally, goes to the university 
games, and I see him frequently. He played football, basketball, 
and baseball at Reno High and was an outstanding athlete. Yes. 

Ernie Kleppe? 

Yes. Let’s talk about the Kleppe brothers. There were three 
brothers, I think, that all played basketball. A local family, played 
at Sparks High mostly. Ernie became a county commissioner and 
a rancher and played a lot of baseball locally in that semi-pro 
league and in the Sagebrush League. Then, I am more familiar 
with his son, though, John Kleppe, who played baseball for me 
and played American Legion ball, and I think he played for Jack 
Threlkel at one time, and is now Dr. John Kleppe, of the engi¬ 
neering department at the University of Nevada. 



58 


BUD BEASLEY 


There’s a Kleppe Lane in Sparks. 

Yes, that’s named after the Kleppe family. And that ranch was 
located down where the sewer plant is now located, and they had 
a big ranch down there. 

I remember a fellow named Wimpy Rupp, as an umpire. I guess he 
was a player, also. 

Yes, by all means, we must talk about Wimpy Rupp. Wimpy 
Rupp, a local boy who played some basketball, city league basket¬ 
ball. Then he also played baseball in this semi-pro league and 
ended his career umpiring and refereeing. He was famous for his 
umpiring, and he umpired both softball and baseball and was one 
of the outstanding officials here. 

How about the Riordan brothers, Lefty and Bill Riordan? Did you 
ever play with them? 

I played against them. Not with them, but I played against 
them, and they were both extremely good in semi-pro ball. They 
were on the All-Star team every year, and both outstanding semi- 
pro ballplayers. And they are two others that I consider definitely 
professional baseball players, had they gotten the break and gone 
into it. And seems to me like they did have try-outs at different 
times with pro teams, but they definitely should be mentioned, if 
baseball is mentioned. 

How about the Peccole brothers? 

The Peccoles first connected with the University of Nevada. 
I’m not sure whether Bob graduated, but he attended and played 
baseball up there. Bill played football, basketball, and baseball. 
His outstanding sport was baseball, however. He graduated from 



Baseball in Reno 


59 


the university, was a very good player, outstanding player in that 
inter-fraternity league. Then, both played for Jack Threlkel; both 
played in that Western International League. And Bob, of course, 
along with Norrie DeLorenzi, was a sponsor and manager of the 
Reno Larks. Bob went into business, at one time was connected 
with gaming at the McCarran House. And Bill moved to Las Ve¬ 
gas, went into real estate and insurance, made a fortune, and he is 
the one that gave the baseball program at the University of Ne¬ 
vada their big jump by donating that field. 

So that’s who Peccole field is named afiter, Bill Peccole. 

Right. And he donated at least a quarter of a million dollars 
toward that program. Passed away just a year or so ago in Las 
Vegas. 

Do you remember a fellow named Lee DeLauer? 

Yes, I do. I first met Lee when he was attending the Univer¬ 
sity of Nevada, and he was extremely active in baseball at the 
university. Then he did a lot of playing in that old Sagebrush 
League and semi-pro baseball around Reno. He must have played 
for half a dozen different teams. Lee considered himself, and rightly 
so, an authority on baseball. To this day he swears that he knows 
the game as well as anyone, and he probably does. At least, he had 
a lot of playing experience. Great guy with a great personality, al¬ 
ways a big smile. And after baseball, golf became his game, but, I 
remember, a real sportsman, and a real competitor. If you were 
pitching against him, which I have, he was tough. 

What position did he play? 

He played everything. He was an outfielder and an infielder, 
never a pitcher or catcher that I know of, but in order to get in the 
game, he’d play anything. 



60 


BUD BEASLEY 


How about a fellow named Pat Francellini? He later shortened his 
name to France? 

Yes. Pat played at the university and played a lot of semi-pro. 
Then he was very active in baseball at Lake Tahoe and was a great 
promoter when he was at Lake Tahoe with Harrah’s, I believe. He 
was a great promoter of golf. Between Lee and Pat they set up the 
original celebrity sports tournament up there. And in those days, 
though, instead of bringing in the pro-golfers and that sort of 
thing, they brought in the coaches in Nevada and outstanding 
athletes in Nevada, and matched them with the entertainment at 
the lake. I remember in one of those tournaments we played up 
there, Link Piazzo was in that, also, and Jake Lawlor, and Jim 
Olivas was in there, and quite a few of the coaches. The high 
school coaches and college coaches here were always in that tour¬ 
nament. We were in there one time with Rollie Fingers, and we 
were in there with Nat “King” Cole, and in those days it was a 
tournament of the entertainers and the outstanding athletes in 
northern Nevada here. But that was a tournament that we always 
looked forward to. We’d play the tournament and then have din¬ 
ner that night at Harrah’s expense, thanks to Pat and to Lee 
DeLauer. It was something we enjoyed year after year. 

What position did Pat play when he played ball ? 

He played infield and outfield. I don’t recall his ever pitching 
or catching, but like Lee, he was a good player. 

And a good hitter. 

Yes, a great competitor. The thing I remember most about 
him, though, was his promotion of baseball. He did a lot for 
baseball in the high school up there. 

And Little League? 



Baseball in Reno 


61 


And Litde League, right. Very active in that. Baseball owes a 
lot to guys like that. He was quite a guy. 

I don’t know if we mentioned Al Lansdon or not. 

Yes. We talked about Al. Al was particularly active in Little 
League. I would say, along with Dick Taylor, they did more to 
promote Little League ball than anyone I know of in this area. 
They kept it alive back in those days, and out of that Little League 
that they had came a lot of high school and American Legion 
players and college players. They got their start in that Little League 
with Al. 

Go back a few more years to a fellow named Syl Gregory. I believe you 
played with him. 

Yes, I played with Syl with the Reno Garage, and Syl was 
definitely a pro ballplayer. I don’t know how they missed, but I 
played with a lot of shortstops in the Coast League that couldn’t 
carry Syl’s glove. The last I heard of him, he was in Las Vegas and 
very active in baseball down there, but in his years with Threlkel, 
one of the best shortstops that we ever had. 

What year did he play? 

He was with Threlkel in the 1940s. He was there a little after 
Freitag, I believe, but an outstanding shortstop with a great arm. 
When I was playing first base for Jack Threlkel, boy, those throws 
really got over there. And a good hitter. He could hit, run, field, 
had all the tools for a major league ballplayer, and why he didn’t 
go, I’ll never know. 

Was he a local fellow, then? 



62 


BUD BEASLEY 


No, he wasn’t. Threlkel brought him in, as Threlkel’s custom 
was to bring in ballplayers. Threlkel’s going to win no matter 
what it costs, and no matter how. [laughter] 

You had another short stop named Tony Gomez? 

Oh, yes. 

Did he play before or after Gregory? 

I’m glad you brought Tony up. Tony played before Freitag 
and before Gregory. Tony was brought up from San Francisco. 
Fie played in that very fast, semi-pro league in Oakland in the 
Bay area, in general, and they brought him up from there. And he 
was a great friend of the Menante family. I think he boarded and 
roomed with the Menante’s. They sort of took care of him. The 
last time I saw Tony was when I was playing with the Stockton 
Old-Timers. We played against the San Francisco Old-Timers. 
And Tony was playing with them then—silver white hair and just 
a great guy, great personality. Another pro ballplayer, I think he 
had a shot with the San Francisco Seals during O’Doul’s day. 
Whether he made it, or whether his job was more important than 
baseball, I don’t know, but I would certainly say that Gomez was 
a class ballplayer. 

Well, during that time frame, of course, World War IIstarted in 1941, 
so a lot of those fellows maybe went into the service, and that altered 
their career. 

Right. Definitely. 

By the time you got out, you were too old to play, sometimes. 


Right. 



Baseball in Reno 


63 


Who were some of the managers of the teams, and how was it deter¬ 
mined who was going to be a manager? I know Threlkel, of course, 
was manager of the Reno Garage. Who was the manager when you 
played with the Reno Larks, for example? 

With the Reno Larks it was Norrie DeLorenzi who was con¬ 
nected with the Palace Club. He was one of the bosses, I think, of 
the Palace Club. And Bob Peccole of the famous Peccole brothers 
and the Peccole Field at the university. Bob Peccole was a dealer 
at the Palace Club, and they put their money into the Reno Larks. 
They leased the park from Threlkel and bought all new uniforms 
and had a very strong team that played independently and also 
played in that Sagebrush League. 

Did they plan to make money off of that team, or was it just a chance 
to play ball ? 

No, I don’t believe. It was just like Threlkel; it was just their 
interest in baseball. It wasn’t a money-making thing for them. I 
think they figured if they broke even, great. And Threlkel, the 
same way. It wasn’t a business as far as Threlkel was concerned, 
although, he used it to advertise his business. But I think baseball 
owes a great deal to Norrie DeLorenzi and Bob Peccole and to 
Jack Threlkel. Eccentric character that he was, he was really a 
promoter and spent a lot of money out of his own pocket to 
promote baseball. 

Threlkel had his enemies, and he had his friends. I’ll never 
forget Threlkel saying on one occasion, when I’d pointed out that 
they’d written an article against him in the paper, he said, “I don’t 
care what they write.” I thought it would upset him, but he said, 
“I don’t care what they write, so long as they keep putting me in 
the paper.” [laughter] So he was that type of guy. 



64 


BUD BEASLEY 


Why did they call the team the Reno Larks? Do yon know who the 
Larks came from? 

No, I don’t. I think they just wanted to divorce themselves 
from the Threlkel Garage name, because that had been so promi¬ 
nent that I think they wanted to get a new name and let every¬ 
body know, “This is our team, it’s not Jack Threlkel’s team,” even 
though they’re playing in his park, [laughter] And that may have 
been it, I don’t know. 

Because it’s kind of an unusual name for an athletic team, the Larks. 

Right, [laughter] 

So, a team from like, Lovelock, for example—and other towns did 
this too, of course—used to bring in ballplayers from Saint Marys — 
Wes Bailey, a pitcher, and Darrel Reynolds, a shortstop, Lefty Creech, 
a pitcher. How did they get paid ? Do you have any idea? 

Yes, they were paid by the merchants and by the gate receipt, 
and sometimes they were paid by the game, and sometimes it 
went into a pot, and at the end of the season they split the pot, 
paying off expenses, of course, and then, whatever was left, over 
and above expenses, went into the pot. That’s definitely the way 
Threlkel operated. 

And probably Lovelock, too. 

Right. And the merchants heavily supported it. I’m glad you 
brought that up, because here’s something that’s difficult for us to 
realize today, that little towns like Susanville and Portola and 
Graeagle and Lovelock and Fallon—they had very, very good base¬ 
ball players. Those guys were pros, actually, or the cream of the 
crop out of colleges, because baseball was so alive and so impor- 



Baseball in Reno 


65 


tant in those days that they made it a point to bring in the cream 
of the crop out of Cal and Saint Mary’s and Santa Clara. And as 
well you know, back in those days Saint Mary’s was practically a 
pro-ball club. A lot of those Saint Mary’s ballplayers went into 
pro ball. So it’s difficult today to realize that a town like Fallon or 
Portola or Lovelock could have that good a team. But today as I 
look back on it, any of those teams could have played in the Cali¬ 
fornia State League. 

We called them semi-pro, because they weren’t under actual 
contract, but they were all getting paid. Technically, they were 
pros, which made a lot of them ineligible going back to college. 
But because everybody was doing it, nobody said anything, you 
know, [laughter] 

Well, the only difference, probably, with the professional team was 
there wasn’t a pitching depth. Usually, each team only got one or two 
good pitchers. 

Right. That’s true. I’m glad you brought that up, because they 
didn’t have the depth that those pro teams had, and you weren’t 
signing an actual contract, necessarily. 

And you weren’t playing six, seven days a week. 

That’s a good point to mention. They were playing mostly 
weekends. Few teams had lights, so it was primarily Friday, Satur¬ 
day, Sunday league, or a daytime league, anyway. But I think it’s 
worthy of mentioning how good those teams really were. 

All these local teams like Fallon, and Portola and Susanville—who 
were some of their managers? Were they playing managers? 

Sometimes, both ways. Some years it would be a playing man¬ 
ager, like Goldy Holmes at Lovelock. I remember him well. And 



66 


BUD BEASLEY 


then, the Archuletas at one time at Fallon. Evans, the pitcher at 
Fallon, was the pitcher and manager. And Jack Threlkel, of course, 
in Reno, and Bob Peccole of the Larks managed that team. 

Al Lansdon managed the Harrah’s team. 

A1 Lansdon, also, both played and managed. Then, finally he 
quit playing but did a lot of managing on different teams. Al 
Lansdon floated over the league. Fie probably played for every 
team in the league, other than Jack Threlkel. And then, I think, 
you mentioned once before that he came back to manage Threlkel’s 
at one time, and that was probably after the war years that he did 
that, I’m not sure. But he had a deep interest in baseball, prob¬ 
ably spent money out of his own pocket, as most of the managers 
did. But I would say the majority of the managers were not play¬ 
ing managers. They just had a deep interest. Banks out at 
Winnemucca was first a player, then a manager, and he was very 
good. And much credit should be given those guys, because in all 
cases they were spending money out of their own pocket, too, for 
the love of baseball. That was their baby. 

So, there were a lot of players on the team that weren’t getting paid 
anything at all, just like local people. 

True. 

Then there were some that came from colleges? 

Right. 

And they got jobs and/or a little bit of money. 

Most of it, I believe, was a job situation. There at Lovelock, 
for instance, and Fallon, too, they got them jobs. I know several 



Baseball in Reno 


67 


of them worked at the warehouse, Morkham’s Warehouse, in 
Fallon. In Lovelock some of them were on ranches, some of them 
in service stations. So they were eking out a living, and all of 
them in the hopes that this would open the door to pro ball for 
them. That was every kid’s dream, of course. 

I think once before we talked about Charlie Spina. Charlie 
Spina played baseball in high school, and basketball—very good 
at basketball—but he played baseball in high school, on to Saint 
Mary’s, until Saint Mary’s dropped baseball. Then he went into 
pro ball in the California State League, and he was playing for 
Visalia, or some team in southern Cal. But Spina was a strong 
family oriented kid. Fie had a family that was a very tight and 
very close-knit family. Rocco Spina [his father] was interested in 
athletics. 

Also, Charlie was in love about the time he went into pro 
ball, and his love probably outweighed his love of the game. So he 
was on his way back. Fie was homesick and didn’t like that bus 
travel around that we all went through at sometime or another. 
So Charlie was heading back home, and I got him a shot with 
Modesto on his way back. Fie would have made the Modesto ball 
club and stayed in pro ball, but he was in love, and being very 
close to his family, he didn’t like the travel and being away from 
home and living out of a suitcase, [laughter] So Charlie gave up 
his baseball career and came back to teach and coach here in Reno. 

Well, he made a great career for himself in coaching and teaching. 

Yes, he did. Very good. 

I believe he was principal at Wooster High for awhile. 

Fie was hired. I don’t know whether he was ever principal. 
Maybe vice-principal. 



68 


BUD BEASLEY 


Or athletic director, something like that. I know he was very 
instrumental in coaching there and was a good coach. He had a 
good career in coaching. 

Well, to get back to these college ballplayers, I think you brushed on it 
lightly. Yon feel a lot of them came up here to get experience while 
they were still in college. 

That’s right. Then the good ballplayers in college, their chief 
incentive was that they were getting recognition, they were get¬ 
ting free board and room and an education and that scholarship. 
They were having a tough time, financially, but every college 
ballplayer, his dream is to someday make pro, and this was the 
stepping stone to get there. This was the open door, because more 
and more now the majors are beginning to pick up college play¬ 
ers. Back in the Babe Ruth days, and Lou Gehrig, they were tak¬ 
ing sandlot ballplayers. And back in those early 1920s there were 
darn few college players. I think that’s one reason that Lou Gehrig 
got so much publicity, that, “Hey! There’s a college guy playing 
in the majors.” And very few of those major league players had 
come up from college, unlike today. Practically every major league 
ballplayer today is a college graduate or came up through the col¬ 
lege ranks, and then the farm system. You move from college to 
the farm system and then on up to the majors, you hope, [laugh¬ 
ter] 

There tisedto be a national semi-pro baseball tournament in Wichita, 
Kansas where all the states woidd send in their championship teams. 
Do you remember any teams from Nevada going to that national 
tournament? 

Yes. I don’t remember the name of the team, but it was the 
team that Jim Pace played on. Bruce Pace’s son played on that 



Baseball in Reno 


69 


team. And Bruce Pace, locally, a contractor today—he went back 
to Wichita with that team, and they did very well back there. I’m 
not sure whether they won or not, but they placed very high in 
that tournament. 

About what time frame would that be, what year? 

Oh, that would have to be, probably, in the late 1950s. But 
that was a very good ball club that they sent back there. I don’t 
recall the name of the team, but they picked up a few from over 
the league before they went, too, but I recall their going, and I 
recall scouting a couple of those players. I figured they had some 
high pro potential on that ball club, because that Wichita tourna¬ 
ment was a fantastic tournament. The majors scouted that heavily. 

There’s a fellow that we haven’t talked about that played semi-pro 
baseball in the state of Nevada named Jim Eardley. Are you familiar 
with Jim ? 

Yes, I know Jim well. Jim grew up in Ely, in the Ely-Ruth- 
McGill area, and played baseball out there. He brought a team in 
here when he was coaching one of the Ely teams, and I don’t 
know whether it was American Legion or the high school team or 
a town team. But he brought his team in here, and they did very 
well in the local tournament that we have. Then Jim came in to 
Reno at the university, and then he went from there to coaching 
at Reno High, and Jim was my assistant baseball coach at Reno 
High. After coaching at Reno High for two or three years, he 
wanted to quit and move on to someplace else. I liked him so 
well, and he was doing such a good job, that I discouraged that, 
and I said, “Well, Jim, you got a job here the rest of your life. 
What more do you want?” And we were discussing this at the end 
of the football season, and our job was to put the tarp up over the 



70 


BUD BEASLEY 


football scoreboard for the winter. And Jim and I were out there, 
and I’m up on the ladder putting the tarp on, and Jim is steady¬ 
ing the ladder. And when I asked him, “Why don’t you stay?” 

He said, “I’ll never get anyplace here. All the jobs are taken.” 

I said, “Well, Jim, what job would you like?” 

And he said, “Your job.” 

I came down off of that ladder, and he wants my job! “I’ll 
steady the ladder, and you get up there.” [laughter] But I’m very 
proud of what Jim has accomplished, because he went from there 
on to community college and became President ofTruckee Mead¬ 
ows Community College and on the Board of Regents, and he 
really went places that he really wanted to go. So I have great 
admiration for him, hated to lose him. He was an excellent assis¬ 
tant coach, and I really hated to lose him. 

But to wind tip on the Board of Regents is quite an accomplishment. 

Right, [laughter] So Jim has really gone places. And I’m proud 
of what he’s done; I’m proud of what he’s accomplished. Jokingly, 
when I see him, though, I’ll say, “Hey, now you were on my staff 
at Reno High, but when you got to be President ofTruckee Mead¬ 
ows, you didn’t take me up on your staff. How come?” [laughter] 



4 

BUD’S PITCHING STYLE 


I’ve read and heard it said that you had a unique windup and deliv¬ 
ery when you were pitching. Cotdd you describe it in words in any 
way? And how did you happen to develop such a style? 

I’m glad you brought that up. [laughter] I’ve been asked that 
question a dozen times. I don’t know where I came up with the 
philosophy, whether it was from Doc Martie or Jake Lawlor, but 
I came up with the philosophy back in college that to be a good 
hitter you have to concentrate. Concentrate on that ball; concen¬ 
trate on what you’re doing. Dig your feet in; get your stance on 
balance. Somehow or other it came to me that I have to destroy 
that confidence. I have to attack that rhythm; I have to get your 
attention off of your hitting. So even when I was pitching for 
Threlkel, I did everything I could—a thousand different things— 
some that I have kept a secret up till now even. One is that I 
throw to first base, frequently, not to get the guy, but just to make 
the batter wait. And, also, I would change my delivery. One time 
I’d go through a fast pitching motion and deliver a change up. 
The next time I’d go through a slow motion and deliver a fast 



72 


BUD BEASLEY 


ball. I got the idea that I had to beat you with my head, that some 
way or other I had to get your attention off of hitting. And it 
didn’t make too much difference what you thought about me, so 
long as I’d distract your attention and your concentration. 

I think the real thing came from Lefty O’Doul. I was a great 
admire of Lefty O’Doul. A fabulous knowledge of baseball. I used 
to listen to O’Doul as he was coaching the hitters, and I listened 
to everything he said. He was coaching them on how to be a good 
hitter, and one of the things he stressed was concentration. He 
said, “You’re dancing with that pitcher out there. Get in rhythm 
with him; get in timing. Every move he makes, follow that move 
just like you’re dancing with him, and you’ll be a great hitter.” 
And he used these words, “Ninety percent of hitting is in your 
head.” 

So I got thinking, “If ninety is in your head, I’ve got to do 
something to break your concentration.” 

My motive was not to let you get in rhythm with me, to break 
your concentration. Get you thinking that, “Hey! That pitcher is 
out of his mind out there.” Or, “What’s he doing?” or, “This guy’s 
crazy!” They’re mad at me, or they’re laughing at me, but they’re 
not thinking about their hitting. 

Then, there’s another fantastic thing that I discovered by ac¬ 
cident. Being an old ballplayer yourself, you will know what the 
pepper league is, how a batter stands there with two or three field¬ 
ers, and in practice you will have that little pepper game. We were 
playing a pepper game in Sacramento when I was with the Solons, 
and here’s big husky ballplayers there, fielding this pepper game, 
and the batter hits one over our head. The bat boy, a little kid in 
back of us, picks up the ball, and he’s standing ten feet from us, 
and he goes to throw it to us, and you know how awkward little 
kids are in their delivery, and here are these big, husky ballplayers, 
they don’t know when he’s going to throw, because of his awk¬ 
ward motion, and I’m thinking, “Hey, look at us. We’re shaken 
up by this kid’s awkward motion.” 



Bud’s Pitching Style 


73 


It’s upsetting your timing, then. 

Right. So, I think, “Hey, why not use this?” So I used awk¬ 
ward motions. I’d windup with both hands over both shoulders. 
I’d bat the glove down here a half a dozen times. And here’s an¬ 
other one—and how I got away with this, I don’t know—but I’d 
even put talcum powder in the glove and punch holes in the fin¬ 
gers, and I’d pat that together. Lay down the smoke screen, [laugh¬ 
ter] And I got away with it. But I did everything I could think of 
to break your concentration. And frequently other managers— 
like Bucky Harris and Oscar Vitt—they’d tried to get a balk called 
on me for some of these motions that I had. So I knew I was not 
only bothering the manager . . . and some catchers, they didn’t 
want to catch me. A lot of my catchers in the Coast League— 
they didn’t want to catch me. They just got too nervous waiting 
for the pitch, see. [laughter] And one of the catchers, Marcucci, 
though, said to the manager, “If it’s bothering a catcher that much, 
imagine what it’s doing to the batter, see.” 

I definitely could break their concentration. I remember one 
time in a game against Los Angeles in Wrigley Field, I took a nail 
out of my pocket with a little red ribbon on it and walked about 
halfway down to the mound and stuck it in the ground out there 
and walked from home plate out to that nail, and all the time the 
batter is waiting. Now, note that I couldn’t get away with it today, 
because you got twenty seconds to get it up there, [laughter] But 
I’d stuck it in the ground and walked in a curve back to the plate, 
and the batter is saying, “Hey, he’s going to try to throw a curve 
over that nail.” [laughter] But note, he’s thinking about some¬ 
thing besides hitting. 

This is a good one: Frankie Hawkins was playing. Now, you 
wouldn’t get away with this today, either, because the umpire would 
call time. But Frankie Hawkins comes to the plate, playing for 
Oakland. And we’d just read in the paper that morning where his 
wife divorced him. So when he comes to the plate, the catcher 



74 


BUD BEASLEY 


says to him, “Hey, Frankie! Who’s doing the dishes at your place 
now?” And I knew this, because I’d kept a book on all these. I 
knew he was temperamental, that if you throw at him, which we 
did, he’s apt to charge the mound, [laughter] So we knew he was 
very temperamental when my catcher said, “Frankie, who’s doing 
the dishes at your place now?” Frankie turns around and starts 
talking to the catcher. Three times while he’s talking to the catcher, 
I pitched. Strike one, strike two. He hasn’t even seen the pitch 
yet, and they call him out. [laughter] 

So, then I had players that I played against in the Coast League 
that later became teammates. We’d buy them, you know. And 
they’d tell me that, “You didn’t have the greatest curve in the world, 
you didn’t have the fastest ball, but we hated to bat against you. 
We’d get nervous, or you’d make us wait so long.” 

Oh, another trick I learned in this league, too, that I’d wait 
and wait, and if the batter just takes a bat and stands there, the 
strength goes out of your arms, see. So I’d make you wait, [laugh¬ 
ter] Or you’d take a swing to make that circulation. The minute 
you took your swing I’d throw the fast ball without a windup or 
anything, see. [laughter] So that’s the reason I went through all 
these crazy windups. My original thought was to break your con¬ 
centration, not let you get in rhythm with me. But the fans began 
to go bananas over this—they loved it. And this was drawing fans 
in. So, now I’m doing it for two reasons, to entertain, and also to 
break the concentration, [laughter] And frequently in Sacramento, 
if we got seven or eight runs behind, and people start to go home 
in the seventh inning, they’d bring me in from the bullpen to put 
on my act, see. [laughter] So they’d then stay there and buy beer 
and hotdogs. So I’m parlaying this crazy windup now into addi¬ 
tional years in the Coast League and in the Willy Loop. 


So you got this idea, maybe, when you were at the university, or maybe 
in 1935? 



Bud’s Pitching Style 


75 


I got the idea of breaking your concentration. I used it in 
football, even. By the way, at the same time I was taking a lot of 
courses in psychology at the university, and I used psychology all 
through my pitching. I did a lot of things psychologically, to break 
your concentration, to break your rhythm, to get you thinking 
about something else. And I used it against Casey Stengel. It didn’t 
work too well against O’Doul, because he knew what I was do¬ 
ing. [laughter] And he’d tell his players, and players that had played 
for him that later were teammates of mine, they’d say that he’d 
tell them in the dugout, “Forget about what he’s doing out there. 
Just think about, sooner or later, he has to pitch. So just wait till 
he pitches.” See? 

Well, O’Doul was a very smart baseball man, especially in hitting, 
don’t you think? 

I consider him one of the greatest. Casey Stengel, I loved the 
guy and enjoyed him, and he would mimic me and try to get me 
in a conversation, always good-naturedly. So was O’Doul. Some 
of the other managers were not so, though. But O’Doul was al¬ 
ways a gentleman, as was Casey. But O’Doul was by far the smarter 
of the two. Casey was a loveable guy, but, actually, you’re not 
going to learn too much baseball from Casey. 

But O’Doid, you could ? 

Right. 

And O’Doid was a good hitting instructor. 

Right. Absolutely. One of the best. As a matter of a fact, I 
credit [him for] Joe Dimaggio—Lefty O’Doul made him. Be¬ 
cause I’d played against him in that winter league down there, 
and Joe was good. He could run, he could throw, and he was a 



76 


BUD BEASLEY 


fair hitter. But when O’Doul got him, made a fantastic hitter out 
of him. Took an ordinary hitter and made a great hitter out of 
him. And O’Doul was great for that. I have a great and healthy 
respect for O’Doul. 

But with your baseball psychology, when you first started out, you 
had less moves, or less distractions. 

Right. When I was playing for Threlkel I had a few. 

A few, and you built on them over the years. 

Right. I had this idea of waiting for you to take that swing, 
and frequently, with a man on first, it worked beautifully. Keep 
watching the guy on first, but I’m watching the batter out of the 
corner of my eye, and the minute he took that free swing forward 
I let go of my pitch, and always a fast ball, and always a strike. 
See, to be sure it’s a strike, because nine times out of ten, he’d 
never get the bat around, [laughter] So I’d want to be sure it was 
a strike. 

We shotdd mention that you’re a lefi-handed pitcher, of course. If 
everybody doesn’t know. 

Right. That’s how I developed that. And I used it a lot, psy¬ 
chologically. 

Were you a fairly fast pitcher? Did you have a pretty good fast ball ? 

Now, I’m glad you raised the question, because when I was 
pitching for Threlkel I had a ninety-mile-an-hour fast ball. Jake 
Lawlor would tell you that. The night game that I pitched against 
the League All-Stars, I know I was throwing in the nineties that 
night, because when they had those old-fashioned catcher’s gloves, 



Bud’s Pitching Style 


77 


you know, boy, I tell you, it was popping. I could hear it pop. 
And when Jake came in his hand was red, and Jake told me that 
night . . . and Jake, normally, is not too complimentary. He’s 
cussing you out instead of complimenting. But Jake told me that 
that was the fastest pitching he’d ever caught. 

When I went into the Coast League I had a sneaky fast ball. It 
was faster than it looked. So there’s something about that, that 
when I went out of the Coast League, it was gone. I didn’t have 
the fast ball. I went in with a fairly good curve ball. When I came 
out, a very ordinary curve ball. So, as I began to lose the fast ball, 
and as I began to lose my stuff, I had to do something else. And I 
did it with control and with an exaggerated study of batters. I 
knew their foul, every player in the league. I had a book on them. 
I watched all of them in batting practice. When I got out there 
early, and when they’re taking batting practice, I’m in the stands, 
or in our dugout, and I’m making notes on everything they did. I 
had a very unusual knowledge of the batters, of every batter in 
the league. And I used that to be sure I’d keep the ball out of your 
strength, out of your power. Incidentally, that probably wouldn’t 
work today, because of the pitching machines and batting cages. 
If a batter has a weakness, let’s say, the low-and-away pitch, he’ll 
set that machine, and he’ll practice by hours for that low-and- 
away pitch, [laughter] So it’s amazing today, when you watch TV, 
how they’ll hit that bad pitch out of the park. 

Today I wouldn’t get away with a lot of this stuff that I got 
away with. By the way, braggadociously, I’d like to mention that 
there’s a rule in the rule book today that they put in just to stop 
me, in pro ball, [laughter] And that rule is: today you’re limited 
on the number of pumps. Two pumps, and that’s it. 

So you oftentimes would pump three, four, five times. 

Oh, I’d pump five, six. Matter of fact, Hollywood complained 
that, hey, I’m just wasting time out there. So the president of the 



78 


BUD BEASLEY 


league came to the next game and put the stop watch on me, and 
the next day in the paper he said, “I timed every pitch, and he’d 
go to nineteen seconds, but he’d never go to twenty. So he’s within 
the limit.” And I did have a phenomenal count. I knew when the 
twenty seconds was up, but frequently I went the entire nineteen. 

So sometimes you’d pump three times, and sometimes once? 

And sometimes not at all. See, sometimes I’d just throw with 
no windup or anything, [laughter] The next time I’d give you a 
nineteen-second windup. I’d even come clear down to the ground 
and cross my arms here. And even though I was left handed, I 
would windup right handed, and throw left and windup left 
handed and back over to the right or back to the left. I’d changed 
the ball back and forth, even, in the windup, [laughter] And some¬ 
times, you’d get a couple of fast balls to look at, and then I’d come 
clear down to my shoes with the windup and throw underhanded 
to you. [laughter] So you’re not going to get the same pitch twice. 

I’d go through some motion, and according to the rule book, 
any motion that is designed to deceive the batter, could be a balk. 
And the umpires used to say to the manager over there, “Hey! He 
never winds-up the same way twice. How can you call it differ¬ 
ently?” See? 

Did any umpires ever call a balk on you? 

Only once in my entire Coast League career was I called for a 
balk. We were playing San Francisco at the time, and I went to 
pick the guy off of third, and O’Doul claimed I balked. The 
umpires said I didn’t. But O’Doul protested it and took it to the 
League for arbitration. They forced us to play that last inning of 
the game over in San Francisco the next time we played. We came 
out and had to play one inning with the same pitcher, the same 
line-up. 



Bud’s Pitching Style 


79 


Same guy on third base? 

The same situation. And we lost it, we lost the game. But 
that’s the only time I was ever called for a balk. 

Do you notice any difference in the strike zone? 

I’m glad you brought that up, too, because I think that’s wor¬ 
thy of mentioning. Back when I first started in semi-pro ball, in 
high school ball, and coaching, the strike-zone was knees to shoul¬ 
ders. Then it got from letters to knees. And then it came from 
belt to knees, and the strike zone now pretty much in college and 
in pro ball is belt to knees. I have a strong feeling that the rules 
today are prejudiced against the pitcher, because they are limiting 
his movements, they are limiting his wind-up, they’ve taken the 
strike zone away from him. And the strike zone today is entirely 
different than it was in Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig’s time. I can 
remember, particularly, in semi-pro and college ball, that you al¬ 
ways got that strike zone through the letters, anyway. You got 
that all the time. Today, not so. Today, they’ve got that thing down 
pretty much belt to knees. 

Which really is a tremendous advantage to the hitter. 

Oh, definitely. Another thing that I think has really hurt the 
pitchers today is that batting cage and that pitching machine. 
See, a batter today can correct his weakness easily. Let’s say his 
weakness is the curve ball. They could set that pitching machine 
to throw curves. And hey, if you stand up there a thousand times 
against a curve ball, they’re going to make a good curve-ball hitter 
out of you. They do study hitters today much more. This bothers 
me, too. College games in particular, the catcher’s got his head in 
the dugout on every pitch. All the calls are coming out of the 
dugout. I don’t see how a catcher can ever learn to catch if all the 



80 


BUD BEASLEY 


decisions are made in there. Another thing, as you know, having 
played the game, that today maybe you’ve got a good curve ball, 
but today the thing just isn’t working for some unknown reason. 
Maybe it’s the wind, but today your curve ball isn’t your best pitch. 
Yet, the dugout’s telling you, “Throw the curve ball.” And you 
know better than anyone else what you can do today and what 
you can’t do. And jokingly I have said—as I did at the university 
game the other day—the catcher looks over, gets the pitch from 
the coach, gives the pitch to the pitcher. The pitcher throws a hit, 
a home run. If I had been the pitcher, I’d have walked over to the 
dugout and said, “Coach, you called the wrong pitch.” [laughter] 
Because I’m not sure that’s good. 

I don’t know why they don’t eliminate the middle man. Just let the 
coach give the pitcher the signal in the dtigout. 

Right, [laughter] 

Well, what do yon think about all this videotaping people? Batters 
are studying their swing and everything with a video tape. Has that 
made a big difference in baseball ? 

Big difference. Ted Williams used to be criticized, because he 
had mirrors down in the basement of his home, and he’d stand 
there by the hour and swing and watch the mirrors, and he had a 
lot of tapes made of his hitting. The sports media interpreted 
this: “Hey, he likes to see himself in the mirror. He’s a cocky, self- 
conceited guy.” But he was a student of hitting, and he made this 
a study of hitting, and, man, this guy was great. With all that, 
though, I could never figure out how come Ted Williams never 
hit to the opposite field. It would have doubled his hitting ability, 
because, as you know, they used that Williams shift, and they all 
went over there. But he was so good, he could still hit those line 
shots by them, [laughter] 



Bud’s Pitching Style 


81 


But today the favor is with the batter; the pitcher is handi¬ 
capped in so many ways today. And true, back in those old days 
we cheated a lot. Something else I think we should kick around 
that’s worthy of history is, back in your day and my day, we threw 
at the batters a lot, particularly, when the batter came up there 
and really dug in and got himself all set. We threw at him. And 
the intent wasn’t to hit them, or to hurt them, but, again, to 
break their concentration. If you’re thinking about getting hit in 
the head, you’re not thinking about hitting—you’re hanging loose, 
[laughter] So they threw at the batters a lot. And as you’d prob¬ 
ably know, too, having played the game, if you got a home run, 
the next time up you could expect to be knocked down, [laugh¬ 
ter] 

And if you weren’t knocked down, the pitcher caught hell from the 
manager. 

Right. I’ve been fined for not throwing at the hitter, particu¬ 
larly, if the hitter was a former teammate of mine or friend of 
mine. Matter of fact, this guy we talked about once before, Dick 
Bartell, gave the order to knock the guy down, and I went to the 
plate under the pretense of getting the ball from the umpire, and 
I warned the batter, “Hey, John! Hang loose,” and turned around, 
and went back. So he knew I was going to throw at him, but the 
catcher told Bartell, and I got fined for warning him that I’m 
going to throw at him. Back in those days, the batter knew you 
were going to throw at him half the time. 

Was Bartell managing the team in the Coast League? 

Yes, he was managing Sacramento. Now never have I thrown 
at a batter with the intent of actually hitting him. But I do want 
to shake him up. I do want him to hang loose. I do want him to 
think, “Hey! I better think about getting hit, rather than hitting.” 



82 


BUD BEASLEY 


See? So I’d throw at them just to get them out of there. If they’d 
crowd the plate, I’d throw at them. And another little psychologi¬ 
cal trick I would pull, as batters do today, they will walk out of 
the box. Back in our day, if I’m in my motion and you walk out, 
you’re gambling. If it’s a strike, it’s a strike. Today, if they walk 
out, even if I’m in my motion, the umpire calls time immediately. 

Calls time right away. 

Well, if you walked out on me, I’d wait till you got back in 
there, then I’d walk out and pick up the resin bag or fool around. 
I’d have this happen, particularly against Oakland, with Brooks 
Holder and Dario Lodigiani and some of those guys—they’d walk 
out. I’d walk out. They’d walk out. I’d walk out. [laughter] Until 
finally the umpires would call time and say, “Come on you guys! 
Let’s just play ball.” [laughter] So there you were. 

And even in those days with all that, yon still hadfast games. You still 
had games under two hours. 

Yes. Right. 

Now, they go three hours. 

Then you probably remember, too, that we had a time, in 
order to speed up the game, that you’d just motion towards first, 
and they’d send the batter to first. When you’re walking him in¬ 
tentionally, you didn’t make the four pitches. You know, if you 
pointed to first, they’d put him on, to speed up the game. And 
incidentally that’s one reason they stopped me, under the pre¬ 
tense they wanted to speed up the game, and I’m slowing it down, 
[laughter] 



_ 5 

ELEVEN OLD MEN 


Let’s go back to Reno for a few minutes here. This is off the topic of 
baseball, but there was a football team called the Eleven Old Men? 

Oh, yes. Yes, indeed. We have to talk about the Eleven Old 
Men. Very little has been published about the Eleven Old Men, 
but the Eleven Old Men originated in the late 1930s—1936, 1937, 
1938, 1939. And I don’t know whose idea it was. Ty Cobb, the 
sportswriter, was a big promoter of this, and he wrote it up big in 
the papers, and Ty Cobb traveled with the team, but somebody 
got the idea that football’s all over when you finish college. Why 
can’t we get together and still play somebody? So out of former 
college players and some high school players that had graduated 
from high school, we formed the Eleven Old Men. We had a 
team; Sacramento had a team; San Francisco had a team. 

Were the other teams called Eleven Old Men, too? 

No! They weren’t. We were the only ones. Quite a few Saint 
Mary’s guys played in this, incidentally, former Saint Mary’s play- 



84 


BUD BEASLEY 


ers. And all of this started out before pro football was coming in, 
so there’s no place for the former college player to play. So we got 
together a group here, and other towns did the same thing. We 
played some of the service teams. The navy brought up a team. 
We’d play on the old Reno High School field over on Ninth Street. 
We borrowed the high school uniforms and got together the Eleven 
Old Men. [laughter] Then we had a sportswriter by the name of 
Bill Nash, who had lettered at Illinois, I think. Illinois or Penn 
State. 

Maybe Pennsylvania, Penn or Penn State. 

Yes, Penn State, I think. He was a sportswriter, and he joined 
us. And one reason I remember him is because he was a sports¬ 
writer who was sort of anti. He wrote against the university, wrote 
against the teams around here. So a lot of them didn’t like him, 
and when he came out they challenged him. “Hey! If you’re so 
good and you know so much about this game,” and he wore his 
letter sweater, “come out and play.” He came out and lived up to 
the reputation. Matter of fact, I was playing quarterback in this 
one game—I don’t remember who we were playing—but I threw 
and completed a fifty yard pass to him for a touchdown. So, hey, 
this guy lived up to his reputation, see. [laughter] But he played 
with us all the time. 

Did he play end, then? 

He was an end. But Alf Sorensen played with us. A1 Lansdon 
played with us. Lee DeLauer played with us. Marcinko. A lot of 
ex-high school players played with us, and Sunday games prima¬ 
rily, on the old high-school field. This team even went to Mon¬ 
tana, played as far away as Montana. And the head cheerleader at the 
university was Elsie and her famous knees. And Elsie was our cheer¬ 
leader. She’d travel with us, too. So we had a cheerleading section. 



Eleven Old Men 


85 


So, you acttially, of course, had more than eleven men on the team? 

Right. Right. But also, about this time wasn’t Roosevelt try¬ 
ing to increase the Supreme Court? 

Yes. 


I think that’s how they developed that name. 

The Eleven Old Men, did they play all during World War II, then, 
and up until the 1950s? 

Oh, yes. 

How long did it last? 

That team was in existence for probably ten years, and, of 
course, the rules were a lot different then, too. You wouldn’t get 
away with this today, but we were playing Sacramento, and Sac¬ 
ramento was loaded with former Saint Mary’s players, and they 
were tough. So we’re playing Sacramento, and we’re one point 
ahead, I think—seven to six, or something like that—and a couple 
of minutes left. Sacramento has the ball, though, and I call time¬ 
out, call the guys together, and I said, “Be offside on every play.” 

“We’ll get penalized!” 

And I said, “Don’t matter. They can’t penalize us across the 
goal line if we get clear down there, which will be only half the 
distance to the goal, and we’ll burn up the two minutes or what¬ 
ever we have left.” 

So, “All right.” 

We went in. We were offside. They penalized us. We were 
offside again. The third time our end, Joe Cleary, was so far offside 
that he got the ball from center, [laughter] He was clear in the 
backfield, and he got the ball from center. Of course, they penal- 



86 


BUD BEASLEY 


ized us, probably, from the twenty-yard line here clear down to 
the other twenty, and then the gun went off, and the game was 
over, but, of course, in those days there weren’t all those time¬ 
outs. So we saved the game that way. 

The last game that I played with them was a Thanksgiving 
Day game in Ely, and we were going out to Ely to play with the 
agreement that after they pay expenses, we got half the gate. And 
we figured Thanksgiving—nothing else going on in Ely—that, 
man, we’ll get at least a thousand people, and we should make 
fifty bucks apiece out of this game. And Louis Spitz, who was 
later with the police department, was one of our players, too. So 
out we go to Ely, and we go out the night before the game, and 
we’re in the restaurant eating, and in comes six guys with their 
letters from the University of Nevada. They’d just finished the 
season. “Hey, you guys! What are you doing here?” 

“We got a game.” 

“You must be mistaken. We have the game tomorrow.” 

What Ely did is out of the gate receipts that they’re going to 
get, they bring these six guys that had just finished the season at 
the university, [laughter] We’d all been out of college eight, ten 
years. So we really got beat. I was the quarterback. I got sacked 
eleven times, [laughter] Ended up with a broken hand, a dislo¬ 
cated shoulder, and black and blue all over. I got sacked eleven 
times in that game, because here the university .... [laughter] 

Kids are ten years younger than you, at least. 

And got all of their expenses. They got more money than we 
got out of it. [laughter] And Quilici, who passed away several 
years ago, but the family is still here, was playing with us, and in 
college he was a rough, tough player. 


Was that Hugo Qtiilici? 



Eleven Old Men 


87 


Yes. Well, we called him Bull Quilici, and he was the fullback, 
and a good one, but we didn’t get any of the gate receipts at all, 
because they’d hired these guys from the university to come, [laugh¬ 
ter] 

They didn’t have any money left? 

And, by the way, it was eight degrees below zero, and half the 
field was covered with ice, and if you could get off the ice on to 
the turf.... [laughter] 

You were doing a lot of slipping and sliding? 

Right, [laughter] But if you ran from the turf onto the ice, 
then you were dead the minute you hit the ice. 

But anyway, we lost the game, and now we have to eat that 
night and eat breakfast the next morning, and everybody’s broke. 
So I wrote the checks to get the team back to Reno, [laughter] 
And, oh, just before he passed away, Quilici, laughingly, because 
I’d had to finance all of them, he sent me a five-dollar bill, which 
I have, and they took up a collection. We had a reunion banquet 
for quite awhile after the Eleven Old Men. We’d get together and 
lie to each other, like baseball banquets. And they’d take up a 
collection—Ty Cobb passed the plate—to reimburse me for what 
the Ely trip cost me, and I think I got a dollar sixty-nine cents 
back at this dinner, [laughter] 

They really all chipped in. 

Oh, yes. 

Did you have a coach then? Ty Cobb was your coach, or he was your 
manager? 



88 


BUD BEASLEY 


No, Ty was our manager. And everybody coached. I coached 
part of it myself, the same time I was coaching Reno High. And 
all of our equipment came from Reno High, [laughter] 

Because you were coaching? 

The pads and the helmets and everything. 

Well, how many guys were on the team, actually, on the traveling 
squad? About fifteen or twenty? 

About twenty or so, yes. And that changed from time to time. 
There must have been a hundred guys that played on that Eleven 
Old Men team over a period of ten years, and Ty always saw that 
we got heavy publicity. He took care of that. 



6 

THE COAST LEAGUE 


We know you signed professionally with the Sacramento team. What 
year would you have first played pro ball ? 

Nineteen forty-four was my first year. 

How did you get contactedl Who contacted you? 

A former Saint Mary’s player by the name of Bell. He had 
played baseball for Saint Mary’s, and he was doing the score keep¬ 
ing for JackThrelkel. He kept track of me when I was playing for 
Threlkel and when I was playing for the Larks, and he was a good 
friend of Earl Sheely’s, having played for Sheely at Saint Mary’s. 
So he got Sheely up here to take a look at me, and Sheely came up 
and saw me pitch game one game and invited me down. 

For a try-out? 

Yes, for a try-out. So I went down for a try-out, and they 
signed me, but I told them, “I have to go back to school.” I’m 



90 


BUD BEASLEY 


surprised that they kept me under those conditions, but they kept 
me, and when school was out I reported. I was with them the day 
they opened the season, but then I left them and came back to 
school. Then, when school was out I went down and reported 
and had just an average year, and I’ll long remember the first 
game that I went in. We were losing, and I went in with one out 
and the bases loaded. I came in from the bull pen, and about the 
sixth inning, I think, Sheely came out and he knew that I’d be a 
little nervous my first game and so forth. So he said, “Now look 
at it as just a country ball game. That batter up there is just an¬ 
other uniform, just another face.” And my catcher, who was Ben 
Steiner, had just come down from the Boston Red Sox. And Steiner 
was bitter, because he came down from the majors, and now he 
has to play with this bunch of Coast League ballplayers. He was 
disgruntled, anyway, dissatisfied, and a mean, tough guy. Sheely 
had just said, “Now, that batter is just another uniform, just an¬ 
other face.” 

When Sheely turned to walk away, Steiner said, “Yes, that’s 
Frenchy Uhalt. He led the Coast League two years ago in hitting, 
and you’d better watch out what you throw, or he’ll hit it out of 
the park.” Now that’s great encouragement from my catcher, see. 

But Sheely told me, “Make them hit the ball on the ground.” 
Double play, bases loaded, be sure they hit the ball on the ground. 
Well, I knew enough about pitching to keep the pitch low, and 
I’ll probably get out of this. So, I wasn’t as nervous as Sheely 
thought I was, but, hey, first chance here, and I didn’t know the 
batters the way I would another year or two. But I know I have to 
make this guy hit the ball on the ground. So, I throw a low pitch, 
and, sure enough, it comes off the bat, and it’s on the ground, 
and it’s going toward the third base and the shortstop. We’re go¬ 
ing to get a double play and get out of the inning on one pitch. I 
look around. The ball is dead center between the third baseman 
and the shortstop for a single, [laughter] So they score a run. 
They score a run, and it didn’t work. The next guy, though, the 



91 


The Coast League 


bases are still loaded. I’ve got to make him hit the ball on the 
ground. And, sure enough, again, I throw the pitch I want. They 
hit the ball on the ground. It’s going toward first. Were going to 
get a double play, and were out of the inning with only one run 
scored. The ball is dead center between first and second, another 
safe hit. [laughter] And Sheely comes out to get me. That was all. 

They only gave you two batters? 

Yes. And he came out to get me, but he wasn’t burnt up. He 
didn’t say anything. And I’m out of there. Hey, here’s my big 
chance, and I’ve blown it. They scored two runs off of me, and 
I’m out of there. And I think, “Hey. I’ll probably be released. I 
had my shot.” 

If Sheely had just said to me in the locker room, “Hey. You 
did everything right, it just didn’t turn out that way,” I’d have 
been all right.” But I think he’s unhappy with me. My teammates 
are probably unhappy with me. And I came back to Reno after 
the game, and I’m even debating whether to go back or not. No 
one has said anything one way or the other, but I went back, and 
I’m not even called to the bullpen now for at least two weeks. I’m 
not even down in the bullpen, and I think, “Hey, I’ve had it. I’ve 
blown it. The end of the season I’ll probably be released.” We’re 
playing San Diego. The bases are loaded again, and I think this 
time we’re one run ahead, identically the same situation. Three of 
us are in the bullpen now, and he waves me in. And I come in. I 
know I have to make them hit the ball on the ground. Same situ¬ 
ation. I get out with a double play, and we’re out of the inning. 
From then on I’m in. 

And then he tells me, “Hey! I knew you lost your confidence. 
I knew what you were thinking.” Then he said, “I had to wait till 
I got you in the same situation.” 

And I thought, “How nice. But why didn’t you mention it at 
first?” 



92 


BUD BEASLEY 


But I love Sheely. He was like a dad to me, just a great guy, 
although, I didn’t learn too much from him. Herm Pillette, by 
the way, was our pitching coach, and Herm was a nice guy, but I 
actually didn’t learn too much about pitching that first year in the 
Coast League. Everything I picked up I’d either brought with me 
or learned from game experience, you know. But from then on, I 
got my regular turn in the bullpen, but I was never a starter that 
first year. My second year I was a starter, and from then on I was 
a starter and a reliever. 

When school was going on, how did yon work your pitching? 

Before I reported every year, I would go to spring training 
with them, though, and practice during spring training. 

You’d get a week or so off from school ? 

Right. Easter vacation. I always worked with them Easter va¬ 
cation. Then I’d come back to school. When school was out I’d 
join them and play until school started. Then I’d leave them. Now, 
that was very unusual. 

But, say, during April and May, did you pitch one or two games a 
week? 

I’d practice here, and in April I’d practice down in the old 
gym at Reno High, and Lino Del Grande, who’s still around now, 
would catch for me. I would practice indoors during the bad 
weather, and outdoors I’d practice, but not with Threlkel or any 
of the ball clubs. But all the time I’m coaching baseball, so I’m 
practicing and working out with my own team. That got me in 
trouble one time, because I was used to having my high school 
catchers throw to second base, and you’d step to one side, and 
they’d rainbow it to second. The first time that I pitched in the 




Coast League, and the catcher threw to second, and I didn’t know 
he was throwing to second, because the ball is coming right at 
me. [laughter] So I stick out my glove and catch it, and he comes 
charging the mound, [laughter] “Hey, I had the guy thrown out. 
What are you doing?” [laughter] But I did practice. Got in a lot 
of practice with my own high school team, and I’d pitch against 
them in practice. 

But did you pitch any games for Sacramento, like on Wednesday or 
Sunday? 

No. Not at first. Later on, I did, but at first I’d just go down 
when school was out. Then the last years I’d go down before and 
go down after I got back here. And even one year when we were 
in the playoffs, they flew me down for just one game and back. So 
I worked it out that way. 


Did you have regular days, or regular nights, that you pitched when 
school was going on? Like did you go down on a Wednesday or a 
Sunday? 


The last part of my playing in the Coast League, when I was 
still with Sacramento, yes, I had a regular schedule. My schedule 
was Wednesdays. I’d pitch Wednesday night and then go down 
and pitch on Sundays while I was going to school. Frequently, 
though, when I was out of school for the summer I’d pitch three 
games a week, but once school started, it would be on Wednes¬ 
day, Wednesday night, or a Sunday double header. I’d always pitch 
one of those double headers on Sunday, and I looked forward to 
that. At that time I was drawing a good crowd. They always had a 
better crowd on the nights I pitched and the games that I pitched. 
So I was beginning to attract a crowd over and above the norm. 
And they’d have their biggest crowd on those days. 



94 


BUD BEASLEY 


Did a lot of people from Reno come down? 

Yes, they did. I was going to mention that. Frequently they 
would get a phone call from Reno asking when I was pitching. 
They’d ask, “Will he be pitching Sunday?” And then, on Sunday 
they’d run a bus down, or quite a contingent of fans would come 
down from Reno. And Frank Menante and Doc Hund and J.R 
Morgan and quite a few high school teachers would come down 
for the games on Sundays. I always worried about those games, 
because, note, they’re seeing you just once. They’re reading about 
you, and if you have a bad game, “Hey! How come we read about 
this guy, and we saw him, and we didn’t think he was that hot.” 
And that always worried me. 

But I was very fortunate, every time the Reno crowd came 
down, except once, I think I lost one game in extra innings, and 
Threlkel was there. Threlkel comes in the clubhouse, and I lost it 
on an error, by the way, and the guy that made the error’s locker is 
right next to me, and Threlkel comes in, “You should have won, 
but that donkey kicked the ball!” [laughter] And the guy is sitting 
right next to me—very embarrassing. But two or three times I 
beat San Diego. I beat Oakland. Beat Portland. One game, in 
particular, that I really enjoyed, a good part of the faculty came 
down from Reno. My principal was there, and I was just hoping 
I’d have a good day that day, and I beat Portland five to one that 
day. And the one was an error, so there were no earned runs. I had 
an exceptionally good game. This really impressed my faculty and 
my principal, because, by now, I’ve got a fan club of little kids, 
and when I went out in the bullpen to warm up, here all the kids 
ran down to the bullpen. Incidentally, this presented a problem, 
because the kids would all come down and want an autograph, 
and, hey, you have ten, fifteen minutes to warm up to pitch a 
game, [laughter] If you sign one or two, there’s a hundred that 
you didn’t sign. But that impressed my principal that all these 
kids ran down to the bullpen when I went to warm up. 



95 


The Coast League 


Who was your principal then, do you remember? 

Roger Corbett was the principal. That really impressed him, 
what a fan club I had. I had a great fan club in Sacramento. They’d 
bring cakes and cookies and grapes and whatever. Sacramento 
was really good to me, really good. I got a lot of favorable public¬ 
ity, made a lot of friends. The only bad year that I had at Sacra¬ 
mento was the year under Dick Bartell. We didn’t get along, at 
all. And, of course, I think as we talked before that in batting 
practice I threw the grapefruit, painted white. I threw the grape¬ 
fruit to him in batting practice, and the juice went all over him, 
and that didn’t set too well. Then he’d order me to hit batters, and 
I wouldn’t do it, or I’d go in and warn them. Another time, a 
former teammate of mine had just been sold to Seattle, and now 
we’re playing Seattle. He was sold to them just two days before. 
And he comes to bat against me, and we are ahead five or six runs. 
So this was his first game with Seattle. 

What was his name? Do you remember? 

King. Art King was his name. And I want to make him look 
good, since he’s getting his chance. I throw it right down the 
heart, but I think, “Hey, he’ll hit a long fly ball out there. We’ll 
catch it. What’s the difference? But don’t strike him out. Make 
him look good.” So I throw it right down the line—he hits it out 
of the park, [laughter] Bartell knew that, too. And then, to make 
matters worse, when he rounds third base, is coming to home, I 
congratulate him. [laughter] Bartell was a blood-and-guts player. 
Boy, he didn’t want any fraternization like that. So, boy, this up¬ 
set him. Everything I did upset him, but the straw that broke the 

camel’s back. I don’t know whether we talked about 

Novikoff? 

No, we didn’t. 




96 


BUD BEASLEY 


Well, Lou Novikoff was a great hitter down from the Chicago 
Cubs and playing in the Coast League and hitting home runs 
against everybody. And this is burning Bartell up. He’s beat us 
two games already with home runs. So Bartell gets all the pitchers 
in the clubhouse before the game, and he tells them, “Now, I’ve 
pleaded with you. I’ve asked you. I’ve told you how to pitch him, 
and you pay no attention to me. Anybody that throws a pitch 
above his belt—it’s going to cost you a hundred dollars. And that’s 
it. No pitch above his belt.” All right. We go out to play the game 
now. Guy Fletcher starts, and I’m in the bullpen along with two 
or three other guys. Novikoff, first time up, Fletcher gets a pitch 
a little high, and Novikoff hits it out of the park. Bartell comes 
charging the mound. Fletcher’s out of there, cost him a hundred 
bucks. Beasley comes in from the bullpen. And I get by for a 
couple of innings. Novikoff comes up again. Bartell gets up from 
his seat, and he’s on the steps of the dugout already and motions, 
“Down, down, down, keep the ball down.” So all right. I wind up 
and roll it on the ground all the way to the plate, [laughing] Bartell 
comes charging out of the dug-out, “What the hell you doing?” 
The crowd is laughing. They are cracking up, see. [laughter] And 
Novikoff is laughing. The umpires are laughing. Everybody’s laugh¬ 
ing but Bartell, and he comes out, “What the hell you doing?” 

And I said, “Protecting my hundred dollars.” [laughter] 

The next day I’m sold to Seattle. So that’s how I got to Se¬ 
attle. [laughter] I learned later that Bartell, a month before, was 
trying desperately to sell me, but the stockholders and the busi¬ 
ness manager didn’t want to sell me, because I’m drawing the 
crowds, see. But Bartell doesn’t care about the crowd or the money. 
“Get rid of this guy.” [laughter] 

It’s a wonder that they let him sell you. 

Well, as I understand it, he said, “It’s either Beasley or me.” 



97 


The Coast League 


Naturally, it bad to be. 

Yes. So, hey. But that was his last year. At the end of the year 
they fired him, also. And this, I think, is worthy of mentioning, 
because along with me he sold three other players: Ramsey, Mann, 
Beasley, and Fletcher. That year that was the biggest trade in pro 
ball. Four guys being sold or traded to Seattle, for four of their 
players. The four players that they got from Seattle—one was 
jailed and didn’t finish the season, and two quit on Bartell. [laugh¬ 
ter] They quit and went home. And the very next week, Bartell 
and the Solons came up to play Seattle. All four of the guys that 
he had sold or traded—all four beat him. Three of us were pitch¬ 
ers. All three of us won our game against him. And Ramsey beat 
him with the bat. They all beat him. [laughter] So, the guys that 
he traded all beat him in his next series against Seattle. And, boy, 
did we pour it on him, too. [laughter] 

When you were at Sacramento, was there a fellow namedJohn Pintar, 
a pitcher from Ely, Nevada, on the team at that time? 

Yes. I know John well. As a matter of fact, John finished his 
schooling. Fie left Ely and came in to Reno. I had him as a stu¬ 
dent at Reno High, and then he graduated from Reno Fiigh and 
went to the Solons and became a very successful pitcher with the 
Solons. Fie was there when Pepper Martin was there. And Pepper 
Martin’s last year there, they won the league. To win the league 
they had to beat Los Angeles in three games. They were battling 
with Los Angeles for the league leadership, but Los Angeles was 
two games ahead of them, I think. They beat Los Angeles all three 
games and won the pennant, and that was when Pepper Martin 
was managing. But John Pintar was one of the winning pitchers 
in that series, and he did very well in the Coast League. Fie was 
highly successful with Sacramento. 



98 


BUD BEASLEY 


Did he ever go to the major leagues? 

No, he didn’t. He is still in Sacramento, still alive. And now 
he is an outstanding golfer in Sacramento. I would say that if you 
picked the ten best golfers in Sacramento today, John would be 
one of the ten. 

When you played in the Coast League, what was the average salary of 
a ballplayer? 

The average salary at that time, I would say, was around five 
or six hundred dollars. 

A month? 

Right. Which in those days that wasn’t too bad. It would go 
as high as fifteen hundred, two thousand. Eddie Fitzgerald, our 
catcher, Bill Ramsey—they were getting that at the time. Clem 
Dreisewerd, Jerry Staley—though, when he went to the St. Louis 
Cardinals, was only getting, I think, five, six hundred. And meal 
money, we might mention that. Meal money was around five 
dollars then. And that’s up around fifteen and twenty now, twenty- 
five. 

So, you got five dollars a day to eat on, just when you’re on the road. 

Yes, when we’re on the road. We did get a break, though. 
They, as a rule, housed us in low-cost housing. Some of us lived 
in homes, or three or four of us would rent a house, and we’d get 
a break on that, or if we stayed in the hotel, the hotel would give 
us a break. When I first went into the Coast League we’d travel by 


tram. 



99 


The Coast League 


Let me interrupt you for a minute. Maybe we should say what teams 
were in the Coast Leagtie and what the classification was in the prox¬ 
imity to the major leagues? 

Right. Good question, let’s kick that one around. We were 
Triple-A, and Triple-A was the next step below the majors. And 
they didn’t have the expansion then that they have in the majors 
now. Had they had the expansion then, every team in the Coast 
League would have been in the majors. All of them would have 
been. But in our league then, down south we had San Diego, 
Hollywood, and Los Angeles. In the Bay area we had the San 
Francisco Seals and the Oakland Oaks, and we had Sacramento 
there, of course, in that area. Up north, Seattle and Portland. And 
that was it. That was the Coast League at the time. Prior to that, 
though, Denver for several years was in the Coast League. But 
when I was playing, all the time in the Coast League, there was 
San Diego, Hollywood, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Oakland, 
Sacramento. And in the north, the Portland Beavers and the Se¬ 
attle Rainiers. And that was the Coast League. As a rule, we’d 
travel and play five-to-seven-game series every place we went— 
five to seven games—and then move on to the next one. At first, 
the travel was by train. Then, the last years, travel was by plane. 
Everything by plane. 

So in the Coast League you were jtist a step away from the major 
leagues? 

Yes, right. A lot of our players went to the majors. And a lot 
of major league ballplayers came down to us. I would say that 
three-quarters of the Coast League players were down from the 
majors. And some still should have been there, like Steve Mesner. 
Cincinnati had three third basemen. And when we bought Mesner 



100 


BUD BEASLEY 


from Cincinnati, we could have had any one of the three. They 
said, “We have three third basemen. Take your pick.” And Herm 
Pillette and Sheely were back there, and they picked Mesner, be¬ 
cause he had the fewest strike outs of any of the third basemen. 
He wasn’t a particularly good fielder, but we could have had any 
one of the three. So, note, any one of the three is coming down to 
the Coast League, even though they’re major league ballplayers. 
And a strange one, Mickey Grasso, was a favorite of mine and one 
of my catchers, although he hated to catch me, because he had to 
wait too long for the pitch, [laughter] But Mickey Grasso was a 
catcher for the Giants when they were back East, and he was in a 
love affair with the owner’s daughter, and the mother and owner 
didn’t want their daughter marrying Mickey Grasso, and they got 
him as far out of New York as they could get him. [laughter] He’s 
the first-string catcher, and they sent him to Sacramento to get 
rid of him. [laughter] But, there again, he was a major league ball 
player. And, of course, we had Marvin Owen down from the 
Detroit Tigers that had played in the World Series. He got a bet¬ 
ter salary at Portland than he got for Detroit, because he was the 
manager and player. But we had Luke Easter down from the ma¬ 
jors, and Dario Lodigiani, and Frenchy Uhalt, and Brooks Holder. 

Lou Novikoffi 

Lou Novikoff, and Bill “The Clown” Schuster. They were all 
up in the majors at one time. And the Sacramento ball club, we 
were loaded with ex-major-league ballplayers, and most of them 
disgruntled. They are down now, and it’s tough for them to take, 
that they’re coming down. 

The conditions weren’t quite as good, either. 

Oh. Conditions—quite a bit of difference, right. I’ll just throw 
this in. Vancouver was the richest ball club in the Willy Loop. I 



101 


The Coast League 


found playing for Vancouver, 
our conditions and salary were 
as good as or better than in the 
Coast League. 

And in those days that was a class 
B league. And it later went to a 
class A league. 

Right. Weren’t we class A, 
though, when I was playing in 
there? 

It was class B when you started, 
but it was class A when you ended. 

That’s right. But all the ball 
parks were pretty good. San Di¬ 
ego was a little dark, and they 
had a short center-field fence. 
And every now and then in San Diego an outfielder, going back 
for a fly in center field, would catch the ball and fall over the 
fence, [laughter] The nicest ball park was Los Angeles, Wrigley 
Field, but a brick wall. And one of our outfielders, Ramsey, broke 
his arm running into that brick wall. 

Did it have vines on it? 

Yes. Vines on it. And Seal Stadium was a good one, a big one. 
It was the biggest ball park. Oakland was very small, and the right- 
field fence was less than three hundred feet, [laughter] And pitch¬ 
ers hated to pitch in Oakland, but for some unknown reason I 
had exceptionally good luck in Oakland. In one week I beat Oak¬ 
land three times, and it was the last week of the series. And Fletcher 




-» 



“Mickey Grasso was a catcher for the 
Giants when they were back 
East.. .. ” Bud Beasley with Mickey 
Grasso, Seattle Rainiers, 1950. 



102 


BUD BEASLEY 


had nineteen games in his contract. He’d asked for more money 
at the beginning of the season. He’d won twenty games the year 
before and wanted more money, and they said, “Well, how do 
you know you will have as good a year again?” 

And he said—he was a very cocky guy—“Hey, I’ll win twenty 
games against anybody.” 

So they said, “All right. If you win twenty games, we’ll give 
you a five-thousand-dollar bonus.” So, all right, that was the con¬ 
dition. We get to the last week in the series, and he has nineteen 
games. And Sheely, being a ball player’s manager, versus the stock¬ 
holders, was going to give Fletcher three chances at winning that 
twenty games. So he’s going to pitch him Monday, Wednesday, 
and Sunday, I think, or Tuesday, Wednesday, and Sunday, to give 
him the chance to win the twenty games. The first game Fletcher 
is behind, and he’s not winning, and it doesn’t look like he’s going 
to win. We are three or four runs behind. So Sheely figures, “I’ll 
take him out and give him two more shots again. He’s not going 
to win this one.” So, they take Fletcher out and bring me in from 
the bullpen. Lo and behold, by the time we get to the ninth in¬ 
ning we’re ahead, and I win the game, [laughter] The second game 
Fletcher gets thrown out! [laughter] He’s ahead, and he gets thrown 
out of the game. Again, I come in from the bullpen. They catch 
up. I think we’re one run ahead. They catch up. Then we finally 
go ahead to win it, and I get credit for my second win. The third 
game, Sunday, Fletcher gets thrown out again, and I come in from 
the bullpen and we win it. So I win three games in one week, and 
Fletcher loses all three and his bonus, [laughter] 

You played in the Coast League from 1944, when you signed with 
Sacramento, until 1950. Some of those years that you played in the 
Coast Leagtie, World War II was going on. 


Very true. 



103 


The Coast League 


Were there any travel restrictions? Did you have a hard time getting a 
train? Or did they play night games? 

We played both day and night games, but there was no prob¬ 
lem with transportation. We started out traveling by train and 
ended up flying. Particularly, we were doing flying when I was 
playing with Seattle, but I think a good part of the time—in Sac¬ 
ramento—we were traveling by train, and we had a special car. 
The whole team occupied a special car. And compared to the 
travel today, it wasn’t first cabin, but it was adequate. 

A lot of the trips were overnighters, I guess, like from the Bay area to 
the Los Angeles area on an overnight. 

Oh, yes. In our traveling, as a rule, when we went south, we’d 
play San Diego and Hollywood. And maybe the next trip south 
we’d play Los Angeles. Up north it was Portland and Seattle. And 
in the Bay area it was Oakland, San Francisco. 

Did you take the train from Sacramento to the Bay area? 

Yes, most of the time it was by train. 

How long were the road trips? How long woidd you be out on the 
road? 

Oh, as I recall, we never had to spend overnight on the train, 
though. We always took the train south to Los Angeles, San Di¬ 
ego, and then we’d stay in a hotel there. 

What were some of the hotels you stayed in? 

I think in San Diego it was the Grant, and in Los Angeles it 
was the Rosalyn. I’ll long remember that. It was sort of an old, 



104 


BUD BEASLEY 


outdated hotel, but nice, and it was adequate. The only thing, it 
was located in sort of a cruddy part of town, and there was a bar 
about two blocks away from the hotel, and the music was so loud 
we could hear it all night long in the hotel, [laughter] 

Did you stay at a different hotel in Hollywood, then, or did yon stay 
in the samel 

We stayed at the Hollywood Plaza in Hollywood, very nice 
hotel, and most of the accommodations in the hotel, they were 
good. We took our meals in the hotel, although, with meal money 
you could eat any place you wanted to, so we’d go out for Chinese 
dinners and things like that. As a rule, we’d go in groups. A group 
of five or six of your teammates would select a place to eat that 
night. And one funny story I recall was when Pepper Martin was 
managing the team, and when Pepper Martin was also managing, 
I think, San Diego a couple of years. And Pepper was a very reli¬ 
gious guy—a rough, tough, rock-and-sock ballplayer, but a very 
religious guy. After a game, we were walking back to the hotel, 
and Pepper stopped us, because he heard a Salvation Army band 
playing about a block over. And if Pepper said, “Go to the Salva¬ 
tion Army,” you went or fought him. So we all went over, and he 
got the songbooks and passed them out, and we all had to stay 
and sing, [laughter] You either had a choice of staying and sing¬ 
ing with Pepper, or fighting him, and, boy, he’d fight at the drop 
of a hat. [laughter] He had, “Praise the Lord,” and really carried 
on. 


Yes, you don’t picture him as that type of person. 

No, you really don’t. And I think another funny one—he 
tells this story on himself—was when he was playing with the St. 
Louis Cardinals,. They were just getting ready to play for the World 



105 


The Coast League 


Series, and the sportswriters asked a question of Pepper, “If you 
could have anything you wanted, what would you take?” 

And they figured he’d say, “Championship of the World Se- 
• » 
ries. 

But he said, “I want to go to Heaven.” And because they 
laughed at him for saying that, boy, he took off his coat and was 
ready to fight them, [laughter] He was very serious about it. And 
it just seemed so out of place, when this guy would fight at the 
drop of a hat, and yet, was so religious, on the other hand. 

I never beard that side of him. 

Yes. And it was very serious. He wasn’t putting on an act. He 
was very serious about it. 

How many years did he manage at Sacramento when you were there? 

Actually, before I got there he was managing. I think it was 
1942 that they won the pennant. They had to win the last three 
games, all three games against Los Angeles, in order to win the 
pennant. And he was deep into the music, too. He played the 
violin, and the story went around that if you wanted to make a 
team that Pepper Martin managed, you had to be able to play the 
accordion, or something, whether you could play baseball or not. 
He didn’t want to break up this quartet, [laughter] So he was very 
musical along with it. 

Well, do you remember that group he had with the Saint Louis Car¬ 
dinal'si It was called the Mississippi Mud Cats. 

Yes. That was the Gas House Gang, also. They had a collec¬ 
tion of musicians that played the kazoo and different things like 
that, [laughter] A great little character he was. 



106 


BUD BEASLEY 


Was he a playing manager when you were there? 

Yes. He was a playing manager. He managed the team from 
the north, when in those days at the end of the season you had an 
All-Star North Team and an All-Star South Team. They picked 
the cream of the crop from Portland and Seattle and San Fran¬ 
cisco, Oakland, and Sacramento. And they played against San 
Diego, Hollywood, and Los Angeles in a North-South Pacific 
Coast League All-Star game. 

Just one game? 

One game. And I played in that game in 1945,1 think it was, 
1945 or 1946, because at that time I was leading the Coast League 
in pitching. So, I think Guy Fletcher, Red Mann, and myself 
were picked from Sacramento to play in that All-Star game. We 
played in the old Wrigley Field. A humorous incident that I’ll 
never forget, and Red Adams will never forget: it had rained all 
day, but they’d cleared the field, and it was muddy, and the game 
went on, and it stopped raining, but the field was very muddy, 
and I was pitching, had a lot of mud in my cleats. Red Adams was 
at bat, and I went in to get a ball from the umpire, and while I 
was in there, I borrowed Red’s bat to knock the mud out of my 
cleats, but in doing it, I broke his bat and just handed him back 
about one foot of it. And the crowd and the sports writers totally 
misinterpreted. They thought that I went in, got his bat, and 
broke it, just so he couldn’t hit against me, see. [laughter] So they 
totally misinterpreted. And Red Adams, by the way, is scouting 
today. I don’t know who he’s scouting for, but I saw him up here 
this past summer, and he was telling that story to a couple of the 
other scouts when I walked up. [laughter] So we relived that inci¬ 
dent. 


He has to be eighty-five years old. 



107 


The Coast League 


Oh, yes. At least, but he looked good. He looked in great 
shape. 

What position did Pepper Martin play ? 

Second base a good part of the time, yes. And he was a good 
one. 

Was he a good manager, tool 
Very. 

Did he handle people well? 

Yes. He seemed to get along with the players very well. 

Good strategy? 

Yes. And his strategy ... he knew baseball. Although, I don’t 
think any manager knew baseball as well as Lefty O’Doul. He 
was really a scholar of the game, and a very good one. Bucky 
Harris was supposed to be a brain, also, although I’d never played 
for him, but did play against him. 

Who was he managing? 

He was managing Hollywood, I think, at the time. And Os¬ 
car Vitt also managed Hollywood for awhile. And then, I can’t 
remember, maybe you can, the sportswriter at Hollywood, who 
later became the manager, a little short guy, and then later went 
from sportswriter to managing Hollywood to the major leagues. 
And he managed there. Do you happen to recall his name? 

In much later years there was a fellow named Jerry Coleman. 



108 


BUD BEASLEY 


No, it wasn’t Coleman. I knew Coleman. But highly success¬ 
ful as a sportswriter and announcer. Imagine coming out of the 
announcing booth to manage Hollywood. And I think he was 
managing there in the late 1950s, because I visited Gene Handley, 
a former teammate of mine who was playing for Hollywood at 
the time, and I went in the clubhouse to see Gene, and this par¬ 
ticular guy greeted me just with open arms. He was glad to see 
me. I know from appearance, he was the most unlikely manager 
you could possibly pick. 

But he must have been knowledgeable. He wound up going to the 
major leagties, you said. 

Very, and he was very successful managing in the majors. I 
think he managed Pittsburgh, but I’m not sure. 

Getting back to the hotels again, do you remember what hotel you 
stayed in San Francisco or Oakland ? 

In San Francisco, I think, we stayed at the California Hotel. 
In Oakland we stayed at . . . what was the name of it? It was 
located back up in the hills. 

Oh, the Claremont? 

The Claremont, right. We stayed there. Most of the hotel 
accommodations, though, were pretty good. We were well taken 
care of. 

Yes. You were a top-flight minor league, so you got good treatment. 

Right. I think the league at that time demanded that the travel 
was good, the hotels were good. I think those were league regula¬ 


tions. 



109 


The Coast League 


When you went away on a road trip, like when you went to southern 
California, how long were you gone? A week, or two weeks? 

Always at least a week, and most of the time we’d be on the 
road fourteen days and home fourteen days. Then to the north— 
fourteen days and home fourteen days. 

During the war weren’t there any restrictions as far as black-outs, 
because early in the war it seemed like there seemed like there were 
black-outs in California? 

That’s strange that you should bring that up, because that is 
true. You couldn’t even drive along the coast with the lights on in 
your car, but yet the lights were on in all the ball parks. There was 
a strange feeling during those war years, and I think it’s worthy of 
mention. There was a strong feeling that the public in general 
needed a lift. They needed something to get their minds off of... . 

Build their morale. 

Right. And they figured it was a great morale builder. And all 
these Coast League games were broadcast to the troops overseas, 
and the ships on the high seas. All these games were broadcast, 
because when a ship would come into port, we got a goodly crowd 
from the ships and the army bases. The army bases all had teams, 
and all the Coast League teams would play army bases, and that 
was a great morale builder, too. So there was a strong feeling that 
baseball did a great deal towards supporting the war effort, and 
frequently at the games they would sell war bonds and war stamps 
at the games, and that was a big help. 

When you traveled on the trains, you had your own car, you say? 


Yes. 



110 


BUD BEASLEY 


Were there troop trains involved, or did yon ever get pidled off to the 
side while a troop train went by? 

No. That never happened. 

So most of the players, of course, either physically didn’t qualify to go 
into the service, or they had wives and families? 

Right. Now and then, someone would be drafted out of the 
Coast League, though. Every now and then, they would pick up 
somebody from the Coast League. And also, we had veterans com¬ 
ing back into the Coast League, particularly after the war. We had 
veterans coming back and re-entering the Coast League. 

Yon played, of course, during the war years, and you played afier the 
war years. Was there a noticeable difference in the caliber of the 
ballplayer? 

I didn’t notice any great difference. We got some good players 
back from the war, but, actually, the caliber of play, I think, was 
pretty much the same. All the years that I was in there, I always 
felt that we were in a good league with a lot of good players, and 
every team was loaded with major leaguers that had come down, 
and every team was loaded with prospective, young guys on their 
way up, too. We had a kid out of San Francisco with us, Penrose, 
who made the All-Legion Team in the Bay area and had gradu¬ 
ated as an All-Star player in the San Francisco League, and Lou 
Penrose was with us at Sacramento. Teddy Greenhall, fresh out of 
high school, was with us at Sacramento and lived in Folsom. And 
Richie Meyers, fresh out of high school, but a great prospect—he 
was with us at Sacramento. Richie later went on up to the majors, 
and he is living in Sacramento today and attends a lot of those 
baseball banquets. 



Ill 


The Coast League 


I remember Richie, in particular, because when Richie was 
quite a star at Sacramento, I was pitching for Seattle, and Seattle 
played Sacramento, and they were pitching a veteran, Beasley, 
against the young kid coming up for Sacramento, and I beat him 
that day, and that night the ball park burned down. So Richie 
and I get together every winter at those baseball banquets, and 
the Sacramento papers did quite a story on it last year—of the 
burning of the ball park. And they interviewed both Richie and 
myself. 

Pitched the last game. 

Yes, concerning that last game in there before it burned down. 
Do you have another story, Bud ? 

Yes. I think my first few years at Sacramento we had as our 
trainer, Jack Downey, the old prize fighter, and he wasn’t the great¬ 
est of trainers, but, evidently, he had quite a career in the late 
1930s and 1940s as a prizefighter. As a matter of fact, he at one 
time fought Jack Dempsey and lost to Dempsey, of course, and 
he tells the story on himself that—and he was very proud of the 
fact—that he lasted six rounds with Dempsey. He said that sixth 
round, it was scheduled for a ten-round fight, and he went six 
rounds against Dempsey, which was quite a feat in itself, but he 
said in the sixth round Dempsey met him in the middle of the 
ring to shake hands, and it was scheduled for a ten-round fight, 
[laughter] And he said to Dempsey, “Hey, Jack, this isn’t the last 
round.” 

Dempsey said, “As far as you’re concerned, it is.” [laughter] 

And he said, “Sure enough, I got knocked out in the sixth 
round.” [laughter] But the story went around, and it’s a true story, 
because I actually saw it happen. 



112 


BUD BEASLEY 


As a trainer, he liked to tell stories about his prizefighting 
days, and he’d get so involved in the story that he’d be taping 
someone up on the table, and when he’d turn around to get an¬ 
other piece of tape, the guy would take that ankle off and put the 
other one up, and Jack never knew the difference, [laughter] And 
they even pulled this on him one time, and I saw this happen. He 
was taping Tony Freitas, I think, and when he turned around to 
get the tape, all the time talking about his prizefighting days, when 
he turned around Freitas jumped off the table and Jack Calley got 
up there, [laughter] Jack didn’t notice a difference. He put his 
tape around him. [laughter] So he was extremely absentminded, 
but a loveable, old guy, and bald headed. He had one of those 
bald heads that it would shine, and I’ll never forget one night, 
Marcucci was batting and got hit with the pitch, and he’s laying 
out there rolling in the dirt, and they’re calling for the trainer to 
come out and take care of him, and he didn’t want to go out with 
his bald head, [laughter] No one would loan him a cap. And he 
keeps saying, “Come on, Marc, get up. You’re not hurt.” [laugh¬ 
ter] But he wouldn’t go out to take care of him. [laughter] And as 
well you know, an injury back in those days .... 

By the way, that’s quite another difference in baseball today 
and baseball of bygone years. A lot of the players chew tobacco, 
and you weren’t considered a ballplayer in the old days unless you 
were a tobacco chewer, and they were chewing tobacco and spit¬ 
ting all the time. Well, thank God, we did get away from that. I 
never participated in it myself, but played with a lot of ballplayers 
that were tobacco chewers. And today there’s sunflower-seed chew- 
ers or bubble-gum chewers. [laughter] But a common saying in 
baseball then—if you were hit by a pitch or something—they’d 
say, “Oh, spit a little tobacco juice on it, and get back in the ball 
game.” 

They were a rough, tough bunch, and you didn’t come out of 
the ball game for a slight injury, the way you do today. You hung 



113 


The Coast League 


in there. And another chief difference, I think, back in those days 
all the pitchers were supposed to go nine innings. 

Today, if you go five, they’re very happy with you. “Hey! You 
went five. You did a good job.” [laughter] In comes a long relief 
and then the short relief. 

And then the middle relief. 

Yes. And seldom ever does a pitcher go the nine innings. And 
another chief difference I see today is they count the pitches. Each 
pitcher, the manager knows and the statistician knows from keep¬ 
ing statistics on you, that you’re an eighty-pitch pitcher, or you’re 
a hundred-and-twenty pitcher, and seldom ever do they go more 
than a hundred and twenty pitches, even the University of Ne¬ 
vada. If he gets in a hundred pitches, they start watching him 
now. “Hey. He’s good for maybe twenty more pitches, and that’s 
it.” And in those days nobody kept track of the pitches. They did 
have the gun on you, though, and they could tell if you began to 
slow down. Then they got a little worried. If you’re slowing down 
and getting away with it, all right, they’d leave you. But with that 
gun on you, if they saw you weren’t throwing ninety anymore, 
they became concerned. If you weren’t throwing ninety, and they 
started hitting you, the bull pen is warming up. 

Now they have people that just count the pitches, that’s all. 

Yes, right. They count those pitches, and the gun is on you, 
and in the major leagues every pitch they’re flashing the speed of 
that pitch up there on the screen, and that’s a relatively new thing. 
We never had any of that, of course. Television was just begin¬ 
ning to come into the Coast League. In the late 1940s, they were 
beginning to televise, and that was a rather novel thing. 



114 


BUD BEASLEY 


That brings up another point. Today, even in college baseball they’ll 
have a manager or a coach, and three or four or five assistants. How 
many assistants did Pepper Martin or Dick Bartell have when they 
were managing.? 

One. One assistant. And frequently the assistant would hit 
infield practice. My first year at Sacramento, Sheely would hit 
infield practice, but in my last years there he didn’t. They’d have 
one of the assistants do that. 

Did they call them coaches or assistants? 

Assistant coaches. Herman Pillette was the pitching coach. 
Sheely was the overall manager and so forth. 

Did they have a hitting coach, too, or an infield coach? 

In the last part of it they did, but now, I can’t imagine Lefty 
O’Doul having a hitting coach, because he was so good at it him¬ 
self. But he had assistants that would hit infield practice. 

And maybe coach the bases? 

Right. Coach the bases. Lefty always coached at third. And 
another big difference today is the assistant coaches are coaching 
the bases. I’ve never seen a manager out there coaching the bases. 
He never gets out of the dugout. But he must be in uniform. And 
in those days the manager had to be in uniform, as did the assis¬ 
tant coaches, but the assistant did the base coaching. Frequently, 
I got to coach first base, though, at Sacramento and at Seattle, 
and in the Willy Loop I spent a good deal of time working with 
pitchers and coaching first base, and spent a lot of time in the 
Willy Loop as a base coach, as well as working with the pitchers 
and that type of thing. 



115 


The Coast League 


But you were carried on the roster as an active player? 

Right. And a relief pitcher. But I was over the hill then. 

Well, we’ll stay when you’re still on the hill. We’ll stay in the Coast 
Leagtie for a little bit. [laughter] 

Right, [laughter] 

Do you remember when they started wearing batting helmets? 

First year in the Coast League they didn’t wear batting hel¬ 
mets. 

So that would be 1944? 

Right. And by the way, that was borrowed from Little League 
baseball. The Little Leaguers, they wanted to protect those kids, 
and those kids weren’t too quick at getting out of there on a pitch, 
and that sort of thing. So the Little League actually came up with 
the first batting helmets that I ever witnessed. But in the Coast 
League, finally, in the late 1940s and 1950s, of course, they went 
to batting helmets, and they began to go to batting gloves, also. 
You saw few of them, like Joe Brovia, Ferris Fain. Some of those 
guys would wear batting gloves. But at first, we didn’t have bat¬ 
ting gloves in there. 

And by the way, there’s another thing. In the first years, the 
1940s, in the Coast League, we didn’t have designated hitters. All 
pitchers hit for themselves. And frequently, the only day that you 
got to take batting practice was the day you were going to pitch, 
[laughter] The rest of the time there was no batting practice. 

Yes, that’s for sure. The designated hitter didn’t come in till much 
later. 



116 


BUD BEASLEY 


Right. 

You know another thing was that in the old days, players woidd leave 
their gloves on the field. Do you recall that? 

Yes. [laughter] That was common practice. When the side 
was retired, you just threw your glove out there and came on in. 

It’s really amazing when you look back on it, why you threw your 
glove out in the field ? You just left your glove on the field. 

Right. 

Why didn’t they always carry it back to the dug out? Because you’d 
look out there on the infield or the ou field, and there’d be six, seven 
gloves laying out there. 

Another fabulous difference is in the catcher’s glove. The 
catcher’s glove today is like a first baseman’s mitt. That old catcher’s 
glove, as you will remember, was that hard leather deal, and it was 
common practice to soak the glove in a bucket of water, [laugh¬ 
ter] 

To sofien it. 

Yes, to soften it up. So there’s quite a difference there. Well, 
today’s baseball game is, actually, apples and oranges, the com¬ 
parison. There are so many things different. The gloves are larger. 
The batting cage, by the way . . . there’s something else. The bat¬ 
ting cages today are so different, so much more sophisticated. 
And a lot of the teams—I didn’t see it in the Coast League, but in 
the Willy Loop—they’d roll the batting cage off to the side, and it 
would be out in foul territory there someplace, [laughter] 



117 


The Coast League 


And how about pitching machines? 

The pitching machine is really making it tough on the pitch¬ 
ers today, because a batter can spend hours in there with that 
pitching machine and work on his weakness. So they’ve taken a 
lot away from the pitchers there. 

Here’s a rather interesting thing. Along in the 1940s, they 
started protecting the batting practice pitcher during batting prac¬ 
tice. One of your own teammates was out there pitching against 
you, and at first we didn’t have a screen or anything to protect us. 
And Ernie Lombardi, I believe, is the one credited with putting 
that protective screen up for the batting practice pitcher, because 
he was such a fabulous hitter, or a hard line-drive hitter that you 
took your life in your hands when you pitched to Lombardi. I 
pitched against him as a teammate, and I’ll tell you, you really 
were very careful out there. He’s hit line shots back to the box 
that, definitely, had they been at me, they would have taken me 
into center field. 

So they started protecting the pitchers then, throwing bat¬ 
ting practice. I never did like the screens. I’ve used them, but I 
never did like them, because there was an iron pipe across there 
and matting in front of you, but I was always leery that a ball 
would come and hit an iron pipe and glance off and hit you. And 
there’s no way you’re going to protect yourself against it. 

Well, you played for Sacramento for how many year si 

Nineteen forty-four, 1945, 1946. Sold to Seattle in 1947. 

So, were you sold otitright, or were you involved in a trade? 

It was a trade, a four-man trade. Red Mann, Guy Lletcher, 
Ramsey, and Beasley were sent to Seattle. And Seattle sent four 
players to Sacramento. That was the largest trade in pro ball that 



118 


BUD BEASLEY 


year. So it got a lot of publicity in the St. Louis Sporting News and 
every place, because of the size of the trade. And Bartell was the 
manager, so we were all very happy to go. 

Bartell managed Sacramento? 

Right. 

Who was managing Seattle, then, when you were there? 

Jo-Jo White was the field manager, and Earl Sheely, the busi¬ 
ness manager. Earl Sheely never came on the field, but he was in 
charge of the office. 

So Bartell wasn’t a popidar person to play fori 

[laughter] Really tough to play for. He’d just come down from 
the majors and wasn’t too happy with coming down, took the job 
of managing, and, boy, he demanded perfection. I remember one 
time when they were going to pull a suicide squeeze, and the 
batter missed the bunt in the suicide squeeze. He called us all 
back out on the field after the crowd had left, and we had bunting 
practice for an hour out there, and you didn’t get to go back to 
the shower until you laid down ten perfect bunts. He was a very 
demanding type of guy and fined you for everything, and a mean 
guy. One time he gave the order. He was in some argument with 
the third baseman when he was coaching at third, and he called 
time out and told the runner on second to come in with the spikes 
flying at the third baseman. And if you were pitching, you would 
get orders at least five times to deck the batter, to throw at him. 
So he was that kind of a ballplayer. 

Well, I don’t recall him managing for many years. Was he successful? 



119 


The Coast League 


One year, I think, was it. [laughter] 

Anywhere? 

Yes. That’s right. One year at Sacramento, and that was it. He 
didn’t get along with the front office, either. There was a constant 
beef with the front office, with the stockholders. It’s unfortunate, 
because he was a great competitor, but he just had this streak in 
him and wasn’t at all popular with any of the players. 

Well, was that one of the reasons you were traded is you didn’t get 
along with Bartell ? 

That was the reason I think I was traded, because we didn’t 
see eye to eye on a lot of things, and then, he couldn’t stand my 
fooling around on the mound. He couldn’t stand this wind up; 
he couldn’t stand all the things that I did out there, that the fans 
loved. But he didn’t care about the fans. He was, “Win at any 
cost,” you know. 

So he didn’t like the other fellows that got traded either, like Fletcher? 

Well, I don’t think he liked any of us. [laughter] And when 
you get a guy like Joe Marty, and Tony Freitas, who pleaded with 
us when we were traded, “Hey, get me up there, too.” They wanted 
to come with us, you know, and pleaded with us to put in a word 
for them. Tony Freitas is as nice a guy as you’d ever want to meet, 
and when you can’t get along with a guy like Tony Freitas, you 
can’t get along with anybody. 

Plus, he was talented. How many games did he win in the Coast 
League? He won hundreds of games in the Coast Leagtie, didn’t he? 

Right, [laughter] 



120 


BUD BEASLEY 


Isn’t he one of the winningest pitchers ever in the Coast League? 

Yes, he was. Another one was Bob Joyce. Twenty-game win¬ 
ner every year, and even a thirty-game winner, and one year a 
thirty-one-game winner. The year that Joyce and I battled it out 
for the league leadership, he won thirty-one games. I won, I think, 
fifteen or sixteen, [laughter] But I had a higher percentage then 
he had. But thirty-one games, how are you going to beat that? 

That’s the kind of guy that the manager wants to get along with. 

Oh, you better believe it. You better believe it. I think some 
mention should be made of perhaps one of the best shortstops in 
the league, Roy Nicely. He played for Lefty O’Doul and the Seals 
and was probably the worst hitter in the league. His batting aver¬ 
age was about .121, but he was a great fielder. And there again, as 
I understand it, Roy Nicely was an average ballplayer, but Lefty 
O’Doul had that knack of getting the most out of you. Nicely 
was a fabulous fielder, but no hits, and I personally always hated 
to pitch against him, because, what if the guy accidentally gets a 
single off of you? You could tell by the way he swings, you hope, 
that he’s not going to hit you, but what if he accidentally gets a 
hit off of you? [laughter] It was a disgrace. It was a total disgrace if 
Roy Nicely hits you. Luke Easter and Jack Graham and Joe Marty 
and those guys, if they got a hit off of you, hey, so what. Joe 
Brovia—he hit everybody. And Ted Williams—he hit everybody, 
[laughter] But actually, I don’t know why, but I had a fear of those 
poor hitters. Hey, sooner or later, they are going to get a hit. [laugh¬ 
ter] If they hit you, there goes your reputation. 

Who were some of the others? Well, before we talked about like Lou 
Novikoff, a great hitter with the Los Angeles Angels team. 

Well, Graham was very good. 



121 


The Coast League 


Was that Jack Graham? 

Yes. And A1 Wright. I think he played for San Diego and for 
Hollywood. They were great hitters. Joe Brovia, great hitter. Joe 
Marty, of course, a great hitter. 

Was Dino Restelli in the league? 

Yes. Great hitter. And there was Earl Rapp, a long-ball hitter. 
But believe it or not, the great hitters, they’d hit me, but I didn’t 
have as much trouble with them as I did those punch hitters, 
those single hitters, you know. Like Gene Handley. And Schuster 
was very good at that, too. Schuster is not likely to hit a home run 
off of you, but you’re not going to get him out, that’s for sure. 
He’s going to hit the ball. And Handley and Jo-Jo White—there’s 
no way that you’re going to strike them out, and they were tough, 
really tough. One of the things that made them tough is they hit 
where you were pitching. If you pitched the outside, they’d hit to 
the opposite field. And if you pitched it on their hands, those 
guys would manage some way to get hit with a pitch. They’d stick 
their arm out or something else, [laughter] They were just tough 
to get out of there. 

When you went to Seattle, was Jo-Jo White still a playing manager? 

Yes. He was a playing manager, then, and he was a good one, 
knew his baseball, great strategy. One of my catchers was Rollie 
Hemsley, that had just come down from being Bob Feller’s catcher, 
and Rollie Hemsley and Joe didn’t get along too well. Hemsley 
was constantly second guessing him as the manager. And Jo-Jo 
really was second guessing him. So they didn’t get along real well. 

Wasn’t Hemsley kind of a party guy? 



122 


BUD BEASLEY 


Yes, he was, and then Hemsley always resented that he got 
sent down. He thought he should still be up there. I liked pitch¬ 
ing to him. He was good. A very strange thing about Hemsley, he 
had a fabulous ability to detect whether a foul ball was foul when 
he was catching. If he flipped that mask and started back to the 
screen, that ball’s in the park. And if that ball isn’t in the park, if 
he didn’t flip the mask and turn, that thing would come down a 
foot outside, [laughter] But he had a fabulous knack at knowing 
that. And then he had a very strange throw to first base. It wasn’t 
a quick throw, but he got it away so quick that he’d pick guys off 
of first base, not with the quickness of the throw, but he knew 
exactly when to pick them off, and that made a difference, too. 

He was a little older when he came down? 

Yes, he was long in youth when he came down. 

Because he had some good years in the majors, like you say, especially 
with Bob Feller and Cleveland. 

Yes, he did. He sure did. Incidently, he was another catcher 
that all my movement out there didn’t bother him too much. It 
bothered him some. One who loved to catch me and my style 
didn’t bother him a bit was Lilio Marcucci. He went right along 
with it. So Marc liked to catch and was also a good hitter. An¬ 
other strange thing, while we’re still on baseball, but believe it or 
not, Marcucci could stand on the fifty yard line of a football field; 
he’d have a half a dozen footballs and not place kick, but drop 
kick them. On the fifty yard line he’d drop kick that goal, turn 
around, and drop kick the next one. And he was one of the few 
football players, pro or anybody, that I’ll ever see do that. 

And when he left the Coast League he coached football one 
year at Christian Brothers, there in Sacramento. And then, he 



123 


The Coast League 


began to manage in the California State League, later on. But he 
was just a good, solid baseball player. 

Didn’t he eventually settle down in Reno? 

Yes. Well, he lived here and worked at the clubs down there. 

As a food and beverage managed 

Yes. As a matter of fact, at one time he worked at what is now 
Baldini’s [then the Shy Clown]. And then, I think he worked for 
Harrah’s, also, food and beverage. Then he went back to Sacra¬ 
mento and was in the pizza business down there. 

Is he still alive? 

No, he passed away just about two years ago, and I had a card 
from his wife just the other day, because she knew we were such 
great friends. But I really enjoyed the playing years with him, 
because we were roommates frequently on the road. 

You had your best years in the Coast Leagtie, then, when you were 
with Sacramento, is that right? Or did you have some good years at 
Seattle, also? 

Well, actually, I was over the hill when I went to Seattle, even, 
and they knew that, too, so they used me in relief, mostly. Al¬ 
though, when we’d play Sacramento, I’d always get a starting job 
against Sacramento—on the road and in Seattle, [laughter] And 
I’d get the starting job in Sacramento, because it drew the crowd. 
I learned later that the board of directors in Sacramento always 
requested that I pitch when we’d come to Sacramento. But I was 
actually over the hill when I went to Seattle. 



124 


BUD BEASLEY 


Those were two top towns there in the Coast League, Seattle and 
Sacramento. Were there any similarities between the two teams? Were 
yon treated the same, or was the salary better at one? Were the travel¬ 
ing conditions better? 

Good question. The salaries were better in Seattle, and the 
team was better at Seattle. I figured I was with a tougher team. 
They got runs for you. If you were pitching, you could count on 
Seattle giving you five or six runs. You couldn’t always do that at 
Sacramento. Then, of course, my relationship with Jo-Jo White 
and Earl Sheely was a very strong, compatible relationship, and I 
thoroughly enjoyed playing for Earl Sheely and Jo-Jo White. The 
treatment was great, the living conditions better, the food better, 
the travel better, and a better league. I felt that I was with a better 
team in the league at Seattle. You had a better chance of making 
the play-offs. 

Did you have the same arrangement with them, where you wouldn’t 
start the season until you were done with school? 

Yes. Although, it wasn’t as convenient as Sacramento, because 
I could drive down to Sacramento, whereas, Seattle I couldn’t. So 
I was more limited then, but I wasn’t used as a starter as much in 
Seattle as I was in Sacramento. In Sacramento, before Dick Bartell 
came along, I was working three games a week pretty much 
through the whole season, and even when I was back in school, 
I’d go down and pitch in the middle of the week. In Seattle, that 
began to ease up quite a bit, and I wasn’t used as a starter in Se¬ 
attle as much. Against certain teams that I’d had good luck 
against—San Diego, for instance, and Oakland—I’d get to start, 
but most of the time at Seattle I was used in relief. 

During the summer you did move up to Seattle and live in Seattle all 
summer? 



125 


The Coast League 


Right, always. And the town was very good to me up there, 
also. I enjoyed playing for them. I had a good relationship with 
the town people. I’d go to service clubs up there. I belonged to 
Kiwanis, and, incidentally, being a member of Kiwanis was a big 
factor all the time in the Coast League, because every town I played 
in I’d be a guest speaker of the Kiwanis Club in those towns. So 
I’d make those luncheons in Hollywood and Los Angeles, San 
Diego, Seattle. Every place where there was a Kiwanis Club, some¬ 
how they knew that I was a Kiwanian, and I believe it was my 
second year when I was with Sacramento, my second year I was 
elected president of the Reno Kiwanis Club. Well, that word got 
around, too, that hey, here’s the president of the club playing in 
the Coast League, [laughter] So, naturally, I spoke. I had a lun¬ 
cheon engagement continually, and that helped out in the meal 
money, too, because you were getting free lunches every place, 
[laughter] 

When yon went up to Seattle and lived there for the summer, did 
your wife Nellie go with you? 

No, she didn’t. 

Oh, she always stayed home? 

Yes, right. The wives didn’t travel with the team a great deal, 
then, just once in a while, and not too many of them lived in the 
town with the players. There wasn’t a family deal. 

So all summer you’d be without your wife, then? 

Yes. Right. 

And a lot of the ballplayers did that? 



126 


BUD BEASLEY 


Yes. I’d say most of them. But she was deeply involved in 
softball at the time and deeply involved in bowling, which she 
still is. She just finished coaching the league bowling team, and 
she worked yesterday with the Washoe High Bowling Team. So 
she’s still very active in bowling and was even more so back there 
then, plus playing softball herself. 

She had to stay home, anyhow. 

Yes, she had to stay home anyhow, [laughter] 

So, you consider the Seattle years some of your better years, as far as 
not playing ball ? 

Yes. I enjoyed it immensely. I liked the town—beautiful 
town—and was treated very well by the fans. 

They had a nice stadium, too? 

Very nice. One of the better ball parks in the league. 

What was it called ? 

Rainier Park, located out on Rainier Avenue. 

Is there a connection with Rainier Beer? 

Rainier Beer was our sponsor. They owned the ball club, and, 
therefore, we were well financed, too. One of the interesting things, 
though, in the years at Sacramento .... They lost baseball at Sac¬ 
ramento, I think, for a year or two. Then they brought it back, 
and when they brought it back, they sold stock to the people. So 
everybody in Sacramento owned a piece of that ball club. The 
taxi drivers, the laundry workers, the waitresses—they all owned 



127 


The Coast League 


a piece of the ball club, maybe twenty-five or a hundred dollars a 
share. 

So they could all tell you what to do? 

And they all felt that, “Hey! That’s my team.” Those first two 
years, there was a fabulous camaraderie with the whole town, be¬ 
cause everybody in town owned a piece of the ball club. And that 
wasn’t true at Seattle. The brewery owned and ran it. Wasn’t that 
also true at Portland? I think a brewery owned that. What was the 
name of that brewery? But the brewery owned Portland, too. 

See Portland and Seattle were the big rivals up there. With 
Sacramento, it was Sacramento and San Francisco, Sacramento 
and Oakland. That was the rivalry. But when Seattle and Port¬ 
land played each other, there was a packed house. So, when I was 
playing with Seattle, that big rivalry then was with Portland, and 
it was a little tough to get used to that, a new opponent there, but 
the playing conditions were great, the field was great, and I en¬ 
joyed that immensely. 

We’ve talked aboutfields there earlier, and we didn’t finish. You men¬ 
tioned that you and Richie Meyers pitched the last game before the 
stadium burnt down in Sacramento. Was that Edmonds Field? 

No, Edmonds Field was the new one. This was Moring, I 
think, a very old ball park. It was a very old field. I don’t know 
how old it was, but it had a wooden structure and all of this. 

What year did it burn down? 

It was my first year at Seattle, so it must have been 1948. 

So, when they built the new stadium, they built it in a different 
location? 



128 


BUD BEASLEY 


No, same location. But now they used cement, steel, and so 
forth—a good ball park. That old one must have been at least 
fifty years old. It was at Riverside and Broadway. Oddly enough, 
because it was a wooden structure, and because all the hot dog 
papers and cigarettes dropped down between the bleachers, every 
Sunday there was a fire, [laughter] but they had fire extinguishers 
under there, and every so often they’d have an attendant go under 
there and put out a little fire. Of course, rumor has it—and it 
may be more than just rumor [laughter]—that about that time, 
the ball club was beginning to lose money. I like to think one 
reason they were losing money is I wasn’t putting on the show, 
[laughter] But that is very conceited. But anyway they started 
losing money. So, rumor has it that it wasn’t an accident that 
burnt the ball park down. 

All the Sacramento ball players had suits of clothes in their 
lockers when they turned in their losses, [laughter] Suits of clothes, 
shotguns, fishing gear, saxophones, that they all wrote in the re¬ 
port that they had in their lockers, [laughter] Even the insurance 
sensed that there was no locker in there that could have held all 
the equipment that the ballplayers claim they lost, [laughter] 

Well, it was named Edmond’s Fieldl The new stadium was named 
Edmond’s Field ? 

After the sportswriter—Dick Edmonds, I think, a great sports- 
writer—so they named the field after him. He was very good, a 
great sportswriter. 




WESTERN INTERNATIONAL LEAGUE 


What year did you leave Seattle, and how did yon happen to leave? 
They released yon? 

No, they didn’t release me, but they wanted me to go into the 
Willy Loop, and they were talking about my managing . . . . What 
was that team from Montana that was in the Willy Loop? 

Lewiston? Oh, no, that’s in Idaho. 

Yes. They also had a working agreement with Vancouver, and 
what they wanted me to do is go from Seattle into the Willy 
Loop, either to Vancouver or to Montana, but they wanted me to 
go into the Willy Loop as a drawing card, again, because they 
were having some attendance problems. So, they thought, “Hey, 
let’s send this guy up there. He’s got a year or two left.” Definitely 
over the hill, though. 


You’re over forty by this time? 



130 


BUD BEASLEY 


Oh, yes. Definitely. So, I didn’t get out and out released, but 
when they said, “Go into the Willy Loop,” no, that was it. I 
couldn’t handle that. 

And as I think I may have told you once before, that seeing 
Babe Ruth and Dizzy Dean and those guys come down, where 
they weren’t really helping the club, I had my mind made up 
already that once I got out of the Coast League, that’s going to be 
it. At the same time as I was over the hill—it was in, I think, 
Mexicali and that group in there—but the Reno pro team was 
wanting me to come home and manage here or pitch here. And 
no, I couldn’t see that. That was just more then I wanted to handle. 
So, I made up my mind that, “No, I’m not going into the Willy 
Loop.” 

So, instead, I went to Stanford and worked on my degree and 
kept getting letters from Brown up there, “Hey! Come to 
Vancouver.” So, the next year I decided, “All right. I’ll go.” The 
salaries were great. The salaries then were better than the Coast 
League salaries, and the playing conditions were good, except I 
was back riding the bus that first year in the Willy Loop, and that 
was a little tough to handle, but Brown was a good guy to play 
for. 

Who was Brown? Was he the manager? 

He was the manager and owner, but financed by Seattle. 

So Brown was in Vancouver? 

Yes. Vancouver. And the salary was good. Bad field. That first 
Vancouver Park was really a bad one, and it wouldn’t compare 
with Threlkel’s out there. So a bad park, bad locker rooms, and 
travel by bus, and that was tough to take. 

Yes. They were long trips. 



Western International League 


131 


Oh, really long. But the sala¬ 
ries kept getting better. The sta¬ 
diums kept getting better. We 
built a new ball park, and I liked 
that. I enjoyed that beautiful 
country up there, too, so that 
was a big factor. I began to like 
the Willy Loop. I was getting 
a good vacation, that, hey, 
somebody was paying for, you 
know, [laughter] 

You had to work in the summer¬ 
time, anyhow. 

Right. So, I enjoyed those 
years. Although, there again, 
over the hill, but they did have me work with some of the young 
pitchers. When Schuster was there, I even got to make some deci¬ 
sions, some of the strategy. We’d be at a tough ball game, maybe 
two runs behind, and Schuster would come down and say, “Get 
me a couple of runs.” 

And I’d say, “OK. All right.” So, maybe I’d put in a pinch 
hitter or a pinch runner, lay down a bunt, or use a lot of hit-and- 
run plays. I started more and more doing that sort of thing. 

Was Billie Schuster the field manager, then? 

Well, that’s strange, [laughter] He was the field manager, but 
the shots were still coming from Brown up in the front office. 
And I looked upon him as the field manager, but then a couple of 
times, when I didn’t think I was going to pitch . . . and when I 
wasn’t pitching I was running in the outfield, because I wanted to 
be in better shape than the rest of the guys, or I’m not going to 



Bud Beasley (left) and Sandy 
Robinson with the Vancouver 
Capilanos, 1955. 



132 


BUD BEASLEY 


stay in this league too long, see. [laughter] So a couple of times 
I’m out there running, doing my laps, because I’m not going to 
pitch tonight, and Schuster would say, “Hey, I’ve had orders you’re 
pitching.” They’d give him the orders that I’m pitching tonight, 
see. So I knew that they were second guessing him all the time, 
but he didn’t care. He was having fun and getting paid, [laughter] 
So he didn’t care. 

You said the money was pretty good in the Western International 
League. What was pretty good money? 

Well, when I was turning down, I just didn’t want to go. They 
sent a telegram, and I’ll never forget the telegram had said, “Re¬ 
gards to salary, you name it.” 

So I said, “Fifteen hundred.” And I thought, “Hey, fifteen 
hundred that’s it.” That was just for signing, [laughter] Then the 
salary was on top of that, you know. So, the salary at that time 
was around five to eight hundred, five to a thousand dollars. 

Per month? 

Yes. It was good. 

Was Seattle paying part of that salary? 

I think so. Yes. Because Bill . . . what was the guy’s name that 
owned Seattle at the time? I should never forget that. Skip, I think 
it was. 

Emil Sick? 

Emil Sick. Emil Sick was the owner, and I was sitting in on a 
stockholders meeting one night, and he wrote them a check for a 
million dollars, and he said, “Try to make this last for the rest of 



Western International League 


133 


the year,” you know. But he wrote a check that night for a million 
dollars. So I know he was heavily backing it. 

Well wasn’t he the owner of Rainier Brewing Company? 

Yes. And by the way, I had a good job when I was playing for 
Seattle, that I got paid for. One of my jobs was to go around to 
the high schools and go around to service clubs and give talks and 
recite Casey At The Bat. And public relations—I was doing public 
relations for the brewery, and I will never forget going into Lin¬ 
coln High School, I think it was, that was near the ball park, and 
here I’m doing public relations for a brewery in a high school, 
[laughter] 

But most of it was the ball club connection, and then they 
used me to put on baseball clinics for the high school coaches. So 
I’d do that, too. I was being used a lot in public relations when I 
was with Seattle, and relief pitching now and then, and if there 
was some big charity for milk for the little kids or something, I’d 
get to pitch that night, [laughter] 

Did yon do some PR work with Vancouver, also, or was thatjust with 
Seattle? 

Yes. I did that also with Vancouver, and I enjoyed doing it, 
because since it was service club related, it worked right in. It just 
was a natural for me. 

We mentioned that the bus trips were pretty long. Who were some of 
the other teams in the Willy League? 

In the Willy Loop at that time, we had Salem. Salem was in 
there, and Eugene was in there, and Calgary at one time, and 
Edmonton and Vancouver, Victoria, Tacoma, Spokane. They were 
all in that league. 



134 


BUD BEASLEY 


Wenatchee? 

Wenatchee, right, and Tri-City. We liked to go to Tri-City, 
though, because we stayed in a nice place there, a nice hotel, and 
they had a swimming pool and all this. Spokane, the park was 
sort of on the dark side. Victoria, a darn small ball park. No one 
wanted to pitch in Victoria. We all had a sore arm when it was 
our turn to pitch in Victoria, [laughter] 

Well, just several hundred miles, when you’re talking about Edmonton 
to Salem. 

Oh, yes. And I don’t know whether you were in the league at 
the time, but do you remember, wasn’t it Wenatchee, the ball 
club got wiped out? The whole ball club with a bus trip? 

Spokane, the bus went over, yes. Wasn’t Vic Picetti playing first base 
for them, that kid from San Francisco? 

I didn’t think it was .... 

How about Lucky Lohrke? 

Yes. 

Yes. That was Spokane. 

Well, then it was, because Lucky Lohrke missed the bus, you 
know. 

Yes. That’s how he got the name “Lucky. ” 

Yes. And then, later on, when he was playing for Hawaii or some¬ 
body, he missed the plane, and the plane went down, [laughter] 



Western International League 


135 


Were you playing in the league when that bits went down? 

I was playing in the Coast League when the bus in the Willy 
Loop went down and wiped out the whole ball club just about, 
and wiped out one of our pitchers that I had played with and was 
on very friendly terms with, Powers. Dick Powers was with me at 
Sacramento. We were roommates, and he was sent to the Willy 
Loop, and that same year the bus got wiped out. 

I believe the bus went over. It was after a night game, and they drove 
over the side of the road. 

Right. And it was that famous pass there in Washington. When 
I was playing with Vancouver, the bus driver went to sleep, and 
we darn near went over there one night, too. 

Was that the Snoqualmie Pass? 

Yes. That was it. Boy, what a memory you have. But when the 
bus almost went over, I woke up when I heard that, and from 
there on in I talked to the bus driver. I kept him in a conversa¬ 
tion. And some of the guys told Brown about it when we got 
back, and he gave me orders, “Hey! Sit in that front seat on all 
those bus trips, and keep that guy in a conversation.” There was 
another one of my jobs. I had a dozen jobs besides playing base¬ 
ball. [laughter] 

Cheerleader. Sell hot dogs between innings. 

I maneuvered myself into a position where they cant get rid of 
me, whether I can play ball or not. [laughter] 

How long did you last? How long did you stay with Vancouver then? 

Until 1955. That was my last year at Vancouver. 



136 


BUD BEASLEY 


Why did you finally quit? 

Well, it was, I think, mutual. I think they figured, “Hey, this 
guy . . . . ” We had a good ball club. The year I quit we won the 
pennant. 

That was your last year, then, wasn’t it? 

Yes. 1955. We won the pennant, and diamond rings went to 
all the players. And the club was so good that year that I could see 
they didn’t need me. Gosh, they had a good pitching staff. They 
had good hitters. They dominated the league. The only one that 
was even close to us was Spokane. Those other teams, like 
Wenatchee and Tacoma, heck, we wiped them out. It was a fore¬ 
gone conclusion before we played them. So, now I’m on a real 
good team, and they don’t need me. 

You didn’t get that many innings? 

Right. I didn’t get that many. Relief once in a while. But even 
then, they could win without me, easily. And I am over the hill. 
So I knew that this was the end. I think it was sort of a mutual 
agreement. I think I told them goodbye, and I came back early 
again, back to school. So, see, they’re dealing with a guy that they 
don’t need, and who isn’t there half the time anyway, [laughter] 
So, I think when I told them goodbye, I said, “I expect a pink slip 
in the mail for the winners.” [laughter] And we joked about it, 
but I didn’t expect to be signed again. So it was a mutual agree¬ 
ment that I had served my usefulness. 



8 

STOCKTON OLD-TIMERS 


Did you ever play baseball after that? Did you ever play semi-pro 
baseball around Reno, then? 

No, I didn’t, but I came back to Reno, and I’m not going to 
play anymore. I’ve had it. I know that. Hey, I think I’m in my 
fifties then. And then a fellow in the jewelry business here had 
formerly played for Oakland, Ed Pimentel, and he was in the 
jewelry business here, and we became good friends. We’d go to 
games together and this sort of thing. 

Go to high school games, college games? 

Yes. College, high school, and semi-pro games around. Then 
he left the jewelry business here, because he got a manager job in 
Stockton in a jewelry store. So he went down there, and he orga¬ 
nized the Stockton Old-Timers, the ex-Coast Leaguers and ex- 
California State Leaguers. Harry Clements, who was Mr. Califor¬ 
nia State League ... he got a lot of those old ballplayers in Stock- 
ton, and he organized them into the Stockton Old-Timers. All of 



138 


BUD BEASLEY 


them had to be thirty-five or older. Well, hey, I fit into that beau¬ 
tifully So they talked me in. They had a tough game coming up, 
where they’d never beaten this team, and I think it was San Fran¬ 
cisco. He talked me into coming down and playing. And I was 
coaching baseball all the time, high school, so I was still in good 
shape. I could throw. Fast ball is gone. Curve ball hangs, [laugh¬ 
ter] All this, but he conned me into coming down and pitching 
that one game. So I went down, stayed over night at his place, 
and pitched that game, and we won it. And hey, I had fun, par¬ 
ticularly, meeting all these old guys that I’d played with and against, 
so I got the second game, the third, the fourth. So, I spent the 
next three or four years playing for the Stockton Old-Timers, 
[laughter] I came across Red Adams again down there. He was 
playing in one of those games. 

So how many years did you play in that Stockton Old-Timers League? 

I was with them about five years, and they made me a charter 
member and a life member of the Stockton Old-Timers. So I’m a 
charter member and a life member in the Stockton Old-timers, 
and that got me connected with the Stockton Baseball Hall of 
Fame. Well, it’s just called the Stockton Hall of Fame, because it 
includes everything. 

All sports. 

Then, playing in that same league with me was Red Adams at 
one time, and Harry Clements, who was a former Coast League 
player and a long-time player for the Stockton ball club. And Ray 
Hamrick, who had played for Oakland. So I was in there with a 
lot of old-time Coast League ballplayers and California State 
League players. In our league at that time was Lodi, San Jose, San 
Francisco, Oakland, and we played some base teams, also. 



Stockton Old-Timers 


139 


Military teams? 

Right. But it was mostly everybody thirty-five or older. 

Did you play every Sunday, then? You had a regtdar schedtde? 

Sundays only. And it was hot. [laughter] So Sacramento was 
in there, too. One game, in particular, when we went to Sacra¬ 
mento to play, they had their Old-Timers baseball team, loaded 
with ex-major league and Coast League players. I’m sitting in the 
dug-out watching batting practice, because even then I’m still 
studying hitters, [laughter] I’m watching those hitters and sitting 
in the dug-out, and they’re taking batting practice, and the 
Westlake brothers and a lot of my former teammates are on that 
team. I knew them pretty well, but I’m redoing my homework 
here, watching them, and they’re hitting the ball out of batting 
practice. They are hitting four and five out of the park. And even 
my teammates said to me, “Holy cow! We’ve met our match to¬ 
night. Look at those guys.” Son of a gun, I beat them, three to 
two. And we played a preliminary to the Sacramento-Seattle game. 
It was a preliminary to that game. The guys sitting in the dug-out 
watching our game said, “Hey, you’d better come back into the 
Coast League.” [laughter] 

Put you on active duty. 

I had an exceptionally good night. Just one of those nights 
when you can’t lose, you know, and another time you can’t win. 
But I had an exceptionally good night that night and beat them. 
I got such a kick out of it, because they were my former team¬ 
mates. [laughter] So, this was real fun. 

You played in that league four or five years, so you were at least fifty 
years old, then? 



140 


BUD BEASLEY 


Oh, yes. Easily. 

Well, those were probably the last baseball games you ever played 
then, was with Stockton. 

They were. That’s the last time. And the last game I played 
was against Lodi, and they cheated on us. They used some of the 
Lodi players that had just finished playing in that California 
League, [laughter] 

Oh, boy. That’s real young ones. 

Right. And there were about five of those guys that were prob¬ 
ably thirty, but not thirty-five, and they beat me. I took a bad 
beating that night. They hit everything I threw, [laughter] They 
had more people on base than we had in the stands, [laughter] 
So, that told me something. 

So, after you retired fom baseball, did you still continue going to 
schools to better yourself You’d already been to Columbia? 

No, I’d finished most of my graduate work then. I was still 
coaching baseball, though, at Reno High, and was deeply involved 
in Reno High baseball and American Legion baseball. I’d also 
become very interested in collecting memorabilia from Reno High, 
and that’s what got me started on this alumni building. I was 
collecting pictures and team pictures and trophies that were be¬ 
ing thrown out, and yearbooks that were being thrown away. With 
former graduates dying and leaving letterman sweaters and tro¬ 
phies and team pictures, people just didn’t know what to do with 
them, and some of them were nice enough to call me and say, 
“Gee, we don’t want to throw this stuff away. What do we do 
with it?” 



Stockton Old-Timers 


141 


So I’m bringing a lot of it home, and my wife is going ba¬ 
nanas, because I’m loading up the house with everything, see. So, 
then I’m thinking, “What a shame that this isn’t out where people 
can see it. I have it all here, but we’ve got to get some place to put 
it.” Having come from a very strong alumni association in my 
own high school, and having my old baseball coach start up that 
alumni association in Santa Cruz, I thought, “Hey. Why can’t we 
do the same thing here?” So, I even went down and visited their 
alumni association to see how they started it and what they did, 
came back up here, and went to the school board and talked them 
out of giving us a piece of land there. I started talking to my 
former players like Link Piazzo and A1 Solari and Earl Avansino, 
and getting the money with which to carry out the dream. So, we 
got it. There it is, off and running, and I’m spending a great deal 
of time now with that. I’m spending a great deal of time also with 
Beasley Elementary School, so I’m out of athletics but deeply in¬ 
volved in the perpetuation of keeping the records going. 




9 

PHILOSOPHY OF TEACHING 


We mentioned this earlier, but I’d like to ask you again. What gradu¬ 
ate degrees do you have, and what colleges or universities did you 
receive them from? 

I did graduate work at Columbia, the University of Washing¬ 
ton, Stanford, and the University of Nevada. So I have master’s 
degrees in physical education and in school administration, and a 
doctorate of humanities. I have two master’s and a doctorate, and 
I’m still teaching at Washoe High part-time, and I’m on my sixty- 
ninth year of teaching, which is by far the record in Nevada. No 
one’s gone more than fifty, and I’m on the sixty-ninth, which is 
not only a Nevada record, but possibly a world record. I’m not 
gunning for any records. I’m happy doing what I’m doing, and as 
long as I’m happy doing it, I’ll probably keep doing it. 

You said you had a master’s in school administration. Did you act as 
a principal or vice-principal ? 



144 


BUD BEASLEY 


No, I never did want it. I never did actually want to get in 
administration. It’s too time consuming and more responsibility 
than I wanted. Besides, it would take me out of the classroom, 
and I enjoy the classroom, and I didn’t want to go, particularly in 
administration. As Joe Sellers is finding out, and Benson found 
out, and DickTrachok found out, with a lot of these administra¬ 
tive jobs, you’re in charge of discipline, [laughter] 

And that’s all. 

And that is a first class headache, [laughter] So, I didn’t want 
to give that much time, and I didn’t want to leave the classroom. 
I’ve had all kinds of opportunities to go into administration, but 
it doesn’t have that fascination for me that coaching had and that 
actual teaching had. 

But did you have a philosophy in teaching that you wanted to estab¬ 
lish a rapport with the student? What was more important to you, the 
student-teacher relationship, or the course that you were teaching? 

My philosophy is that the student is more important than the 
subject matter, and until you establish a rapport with the student, 
no matter what the subject, you’re not going to get too much 
through to him, but if you get a good rapport going with the 
student, you’re more likely to get the subject matter across. So to 
build that rapport, I go to their plays, their games, whatever they’re 
doing in school—outside of my class. I make it a point to attend 
and take great interest. These kids that are in my class now, if 
they’re playing baseball this spring, I’ll be at their games. If they’re 
in the band, I’ll go to band, and I try to show an interest in their 
interests and build rapport that way. And rather than going into 
the classroom with the subject matter as number one, I go with 
this philosophy: What can I do to make desirable changes in them? 
Whatever that change is, if it makes them a better person, if it 



Philosophy of Teaching 


145 


makes them healthier, if it makes them better able to cope with 
the world into which they’re going, do it. So, I work with my 
students now. I’ll start out, “How many of you smoke?” And if I 
could get half of them to stop smoking, hey, I’ve done them a 
favor. 

What subject are you teaching at Washoe? 

Nevada government. And with the legislature in session, boy, 
it’s gravy, you know. You can use the newspaper clippings and 
that sort of thing. 

How many classes a week do you teach now? 

I have one class that meets Mondays and Thursday nights, 
seven to nine. 

Tell us a little bit about these students. Are they students that were 
formerly in another high school? 

All of them are in either Washoe High for day school classes, 
or they’re with Reno High, Sparks, Galena, McQueen. They’re 
taking day school classes in all the high schools. Then, they come 
at night to take government. Now, they come at night to take 
government, because they can’t get it in their day school sched¬ 
ule, particularly, if they are in band or athletics. They may not be 
able to get it all in there. And then, unlike past years, they’re 
upping the credits that they demand in day school now. It’s very 
difficult for them to get everything in in day school. So they’ll 
come to night school to get it in. Quite a few of them failed it in 
day school, and they have to take it now, or they’re not going to 
graduate this spring. So, quite a few are ones that couldn’t cut it 
in day school, and they are back repeating it in night school. Here 
and there are one or two good students, though, who just can’t 



146 


BUD BEASLEY 


get it in their schedule. So, I have some good students that could 
cut it in anybody’s school. Then, I have quite a few that would be 
dropouts if they took it in day school. We have a high dropout 
rate locally, anyway, so one of my jobs is to prevent dropouts, 
which I feel I do. A lot of these kids that I have probably would 
drop out. I have quite a few foreign students. 

Language problems? 

Right. Where there’s a language problem, I really feel that I 
am needed with this group, that they need that extra help, and I 
like that. I like that rapport that I have, and I like the situation. 

Well, isn’t government a required course to graduate? 

A required course, right. Every now and then, I get some kid 
in my class who the judge has sentenced into my class. He has a 
choice: my class or Wittenberg [Reno’s juvenile detention cen¬ 
ter], [laughter] So, I get one or two of those, too. 

About how many children are in your class? 

I have around twenty. Usually, twenty to twenty-six in my 
class, and that’s about all that I have room for. My classes are held 
at Hug High School, and at night only, seven to nine at night. 

You taught and coached at Reno High from 1936 to 1976, is that 
right? 

Just about, yes. 

Over the years, of course, you coached many sports. We talked about 
that. What academic courses did you teach? 



Philosophy of Teaching 


147 


World history, United States history, United States govern¬ 
ment, journalism. I put out the yearbook, taught P.E. [physical 
education], boys P.E., hygiene. Those are the main subjects that I 
covered. By the way, I started this jogging deal that’s so popular 
here now. I started that in high school, back in the 1930s and 
1940s. My P.E. classes were jogging all the time, before anyone 
was jogging around here. So I started jogging back there in high 
school, and Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, you ran. 
[laughter] Friday you could play basketball, football, touch-tackle 
football, flag football, box, wrestling, fencing. We even taught 
fencing, gymnastics. 

I was the first one to introduce gymnastics into Reno High, 
the first one that brought baseball back to Reno High. They didn’t 
have a baseball team till 1936, when I brought baseball back. And 
we didn’t have a regular high school league, then. You played the 
university fraternities; you played the prison; you played town 
teams. There were only two or three high schools that were play¬ 
ing baseball at the time. But we had a team, and we played. That 
was the beginning of baseball at Reno High. Then, I had a very 
good gymnastic team. I was the assistant coach in football, assis¬ 
tant coach in basketball, and finally became the head basketball 
coach, and I was always the head baseball coach. That was about 
forty years of coaching, which also is a coaching record in Ne¬ 
vada. I don’t think anyone else has coached that long in Nevada. 
So I don’t know whether it’s a record to be proud of, or whether 
it’s senility that’s taken over, [laughter] But I enjoyed those years 
of coaching. I had some great local businessmen that played for 
me, and I enjoyed them. A1 Solari, who went on to star at UCLA, 
and Danny Heilman, of course. And A1 Solari is very prominent 
in business here now. Then there’s Pete Cladianos, I think, who 
you met. I had him in high school, and Don Carano of the 
Eldorado. 


Don Manoukian? 



148 


BUD BEASLEY 


Oh, by all means, Manoukian, definitely. And Jimmy Gardner 
of Gardner’s Electric. 

Roger Trounday? 

And Harker and Harker, and Bill Raggio in the senate over 
there, and Kirkland is one my boys, too. 

Chief Kirkland? 

Yes. So, I enjoy visiting and seeing them, wherever I meet 
them. 

You’ve taught thousands of people through Reno High. 

True. 

And hundreds or, maybe, thousands of them have acknowledged the 
fact that you’ve made an impact on their life. Most of the people that 
I’ve talked to, that you’ve made a positive impact on, have turned out 
to be winners in their life. 

True. 

Did you have some losers that said, “Hey, that old man Beasley is a 
pain in the neck. ” 

[laughter] Yes, I was afraid you’d bring that up. Yes, along the 
way I’ve had some losers. I’ve had two or three end up in the 
penitentiary, and I think one of the humorous stories that I have 
on that, is one of my losers was in the penitentiary, but I was 
taking him the textbooks over and tutoring him in the peniten¬ 
tiary, for free. He still had an academic interest, so I was going 
over there. And one day the warden called me, and told me that 



Philosophy of Teaching 


149 


the kid wanted to see me. I thought, “Well, what could this be 
about?” 

So I went over there, and he said, “You have to get me out of 
here.” 

And I said, “That’s not going to be easy. But why do I have to 
get you out of here?” 

He said, “You have to talk to the warden. You have to get me 
out of here. They just put my dad and my brother in here, and 
they’re the two guys that got me in here in the first place.” [laugh¬ 
ter] And he said, “You have to get me away from them.” 

So, I think that’s a rather humorous contact of the losers. And 
when you lose a kid, even if he drops out of school, it bothers 
you, but then, when you stop to think about it, Christ didn’t win 
them all, either, see. One betrayed him at the last supper, [laugh¬ 
ter] So, hey, if you have enough, you’re bound to have a loser in 
there some place. 

Fortunately, I’ve had far, far more winners than losers. As I 
told a group of my winners at a luncheon not too long ago, I 
congratulated them, because I said, “You people were a success in 
spite of me.” Roger Trounday, one of my boys who’s with John 
Ascuaga’s Nugget, was recently inducted into the Hall of Fame, 
and I’m proud of those kids. 

You’re in that same Hall of Fame, aren’t you, as a coach? 

Right. 

And Roger went in as a player, of course. 

That’s right. And this morning, I attended a breakfast honor¬ 
ing the humanitarian of the year, and I was inducted into that 
four, five years ago as the humanitarian of the year. Norm Dianda’s 
also in there. 



150 


BUD BEASLEY 


How do you keep track of all these people? Do you have any kind of 
a filing system with their names, their addresses, or phone numbers 
on it, or anything like that? 

Yes, I do. I have binders and binders and binders out there 
with hundreds and hundreds of pictures of my former students, 
and I cut things out of the newspapers daily, if I see a former 
student in there. I read the obituaries, for instance, to see if I have 
former students there. And I cut all this out of the newspaper and 
paste it into these binders. I have rows and rows of binders of my 
former students that I’ve kept track of over the years, and some of 
them, of course, are in the paper all the time. Like Don 
Manoukian—he’s always in there, [laughter] So, I’ve kept track 
of my former students and keep this running record of them. I’m 
taking clippings out of the papers and so forth all the time. And 
the Silver and Blue frequently features some of my players. Dr. 
John Kleppe up at the university in the engineering department— 
he frequently makes the newspapers, so I have him in there. And 
Dr. Pelter, Andrea Pelter. 

I keep records and pictures. I have the most complete set of 
records. The fact that I still keep track of them, I think, helps, 
too. It even shows my students that I have now that, “Hey, this 
guy is interested in me as a person. See, it’s not just a job for him. 
He’s interested in me as a person,” which I am, and if I can’t be 
interested in them as a person, hey, I don’t want to just be a teacher, 
and I do a great deal to establish that rapport with my present 
students. 

Do you contact them, like call them up on their birthday, or when 
you read their name in the papers? 

Frequently. And then, oddly enough, and a very nice thing 
that I deeply appreciate, is that they contact me, see. Like Bill 
Berrum and Art Kess, they want me to go to the university games 



Philosophy of Teaching 


151 


with them. I belong to two or three lunch-bunch groups of my 
former students where we meet and have lunch once a month. So 
I keep a very close contact with my former students. Joe Granata 
and Len Crocker are connected with the Alumni Center, and the 
Alumni Center is keeping me in contact with dozens of my former 
students, like Link Piazzo. Every Saturday we’re there at the Alumni 
Center together, and so I have and enjoy an excellent contact on 
a weekly basis with these former students. 

Last December, I believe, you were ninety years old ? 

Right. Big birthday party. Loaded with my former students. 
The Manoukians were there, of course. Don was one of the heck¬ 
lers, one of the roasters, and his sister, Jackie, she shows up almost 
every place I show up. 

Where was that party held ? 

It was held at the California Building [at Idlewild Park], and 
it was to raise scholarship money for these kids that are graduat¬ 
ing now. Then I also had two birthday parties out at the Beasley 
Elementary School. And a goodly number of the teachers in the 
Washoe County system now, are my former students, so I keep a 
good contact with them. 

How many people do you think showed up at your birthday party at 
the California Building? 

Oh, about four hundred, [laughter] 

We mentioned earlier you had seventeen foster children. I imagine a 
lot of them were at your birthday party, too. 

Yes, they were. They came up from California and different 
places for that. 



152 


BUD BEASLEY 


Did they roast you quite a bit? 

That they did. [laughter] Yes, they did. But I enjoyed that. 
That’s fun. Don Manoukian laid it on me pretty good. Dick 
Trachok did, too. I had Trachok at practice teaching, and then I 
coached with Trachok for a number of years, too. He was the 
head football coach, and I was his line coach, so we had some 
very enjoyable years together. 

Did you get to roast them back a little bit? 

Always. I’m never going to let anybody get ahead of me on 
that, [laughter] 

Now, you never taught English at Reno High, but there were some 
good English teachers out there when you were there, is that right? 

Very good. Now and then, I would substitute for an English 
teacher, Frances Humphrey. I substituted a couple of times for 
her English classes, and she was a very fine English teacher, but 
she started out at Reno High as a RE. teacher. And, by the way, 
she graduated from Reno High and played basketball, girls bas¬ 
ketball, at Reno High. Then, she went to the university and taught 
English for years and years at Reno High after she got out of 
physical education. She’s still around, comes to our class reunions, 
is in her late nineties, but still going strong. Has a lot of memo¬ 
ries; we share a lot of memories of those old days at Reno High. 
Another English teacher at Reno High was a very fine English 
teacher, but she taught English more like a coach. Boy, she gave 
them a pep talk; she cussed them out, and, I mean, cussed them 
out, too. She later became a city council woman, on the Reno 
City Council. And on the Reno Council she was rough, tough, 
rock, and sock. Came out here from New York, had a New York 
accent, but a very, very fine English teacher. 



Philosophy of Teaching 


153 


What was her name? 

Florence Lehners, and at one time she lived right across the 
street here from me. The students will never forget Florence, be¬ 
cause, as I say, she was rough and tough in the classroom, and she 
wouldn’t get away with it today, but she’d walk right down there 
and slap a kid out of his seat if he wasn’t paying attention, [laugh¬ 
ter] But very knowledgeable. 

Another one that I thought was exceptionally good was a gal 
by the name of Blythe Bulmer. She was in college the same time 
I was, graduated from college, taught for years and years. I think 
she got in thirty, forty, fifty years at Reno High. Also, she was 
very active in little theater, and took part in all their plays. She 
had taught English and coached debate and drama and was an 
exceptionally fine teacher. 

Mrs. Ernst was an exceptionally good math teacher. And an¬ 
other one that’s still around that I see now and then is Andy Morby, 
who taught foreign languages. Spoke fluently seven languages 
himself and is still studying foreign languages, long since retired 
and living here in Reno, married to a very fine artist, and they 
still make quite a few of the class reunions. 

Dave Finch was an outstanding principal. One year, I think, 
in about the 1950s, along in there, he was selected one of the five 
top principals in the state of Nevada. And the present principal of 
Reno High, Jan Ross, is a very outstanding principal. I had her 
husband, by the way, as one of my former students. She is doing 
a great job over there and is a big help with us on this Alumni 
Center. 

Then we had in the ROTC at that time an outstanding Cap¬ 
tain Hickman, that had the girls’ drill team, known as the 
Huskiettes. He was outstanding as an instructor and played in 
the city league basketball team, had played for Provo in college, 
and had great rapport with his students. He is now General 
Hickman, retired General Hickman, and is deep in the Mormon 



154 


BUD BEASLEY 


Church. He’s gone on missions and that sort of thing, but has 
long since retired. He was an outstanding teacher. 

And, of course, the late, great Herb Foster. When I moved to 
Reno High, he was the head coach, and the only coach. So I owe 
a great deal to him. Coached everything—football, basketball, 
track—and was an outstanding coach there for thirty, forty years, 
anyway, until he passed away in 1949, I believe. When he passed 
away I became the head basketball coach. But we had some very 
good teachers in those days: strict, tough, enforced a discipline 
that they couldn’t enforce today, [laughter] But they got the job 
done. 

Well, you taught at Reno High from 1936 to 1976. In 1976, when 
you left Reno High, what did you do, then? Did you go right into 
Washoe High to teach? 

No, we didn’t have Washoe High, then, but we had an adult 
education program that was strictly adult, no day school students 
were in that program, and it was before community college started. 
So we were serving the adult community in the same capacity 
that Truckee Meadows Community College serves now. We had 
all different classes. They could take shop and art and printing and 
homemaking and nursing, and finish up their high school diploma if 
they hadn’t finished, or if they were working to improve their skills, 
like bookkeeping, typing. And we didn’t have computers then, but 
we offered all kinds of business courses to help them in the jobs that 
they held in the community. So we had a regular adult program 
that was going, night school only, and I went into that. 

Where were those classes held ? 

At the old Reno High School. Then we branched out and 
began to hold them at the old Reno High School and at Wooster 
High School when it was built, and that programmed expanded. 



Philosophy of Teaching 


155 


When community college came in, that killed the adult pro¬ 
gram, and we put in this alternative high school, which is Washoe 
High now. And I moved from the adult program into Washoe 
High, but in the meantime, I had gone from Reno High into 
Adaptive P.E. Adaptive RE. was a program that I set up in the 
Washoe County system, and that was set up on a federal grant, 
and I was in that. I’d left Reno High, but was then at Hug High 
in the morning and Sparks High in the afternoon, and we had a 
similar program going that Ken Fujii ran, and it was in Wooster 
High and Reno High. 

Just what is Adaptive P.E. ? 

Adaptive P.E. was for the kid that couldn’t take regular P.E. 
due to physical handicaps, like if they’d had polio or been in a car 
wreck or blind. Any kid that couldn’t take P.E. was in Adaptive 
RE. Or if they broke their leg skiing, then we’d put them in Adap¬ 
tive P.E. and design it individually for the type of kid that was in 
it. They have a broken leg, but they still exercise the upper body. 
If they were in a wheelchair, they could still play ping-pong and 
games like that, see. So, I was in that for three years, till the grant 
ran out. Then I moved from that. 

So there is no more Adaptive P.E. in Washoe County? 

No, not now. 

It was just on a short-term basis? 

Right. And unfortunately there are a lot of kids that don’t get 
P.E. at all, and that’s the reason I started it up, because here we 
had dozens of kids who were being sent to study hall or work in 
the office or something, and in four years of high school they had 
no P.E. of any kind. 




156 


BUD BEASLEY 


Sounds like such a great idea. 

It was fabulous, and it got the kids a lot of their P.E. credit, 
and got them active, got them doing something rather than be¬ 
ing sedentary and doing nothing, see. So, a great program. 

So, currently, there’s nothing like that at all ? 

No, there’s not, and there’s a real need for it, a real need. I 
have a feeling that we’re even cutting back due to these other 
subjects that’re coming in, that we’re beginning to cut back on 
P.E. and a lot of other courses, culture courses, for instance. We’re 
not stressing those as much, because now we’re hung up on math 
and science. What I think is going to happen is we’re going to 
lose a lot of these social type programs, and I’m not so sure that 
we’re going the right way in education. I feel maybe take the cream 
of the crop and make them scientists; take the cream of the crop 
and make them mathematicians. But for every kid, I’m not sure 
it’s for them, just as I don’t think every kid’s for college. And 
we’ve gone overboard on our feeling that every kid must go to 
college. I don’t solely buy that. And I’m probably wrong, but, 
still, it’s my philosophy on education. One thing that proves that 
is those that go to college, the first year about 60 or 70 percent 
never make it to their sophomore year. To me, going to business 
college and some of those courses ... or going to beauty college, 
even, and going into the service, like the Air Guard or National 
Guard out here. They can get their college education paid for if 
they want it, but I think we should develop some alternatives to 
college and concentrate a lot on the vocations, too. Community 
college is doing that now. They’re going more for the vocational, 
and community college is serving a good purpose. 

They are raising the requirements to graduate now. 



Philosophy of Teaching 


157 


Oh, wow! 

So much in mathematics and sciences. 

Right. And I believe in accountability and competency test¬ 
ing, but another thing, were leaning too heavily toward teaching 
toward the test, you know, and I’m not sure that’s good. 

That’s always been true to a degree, I think, but now it’s becoming 
more and more that way. 

Right. Well, I think one reason is that education is costing 
the legislature more and more money, and there’s a feeling that 
we’re spending 76 percent of the budget on education, including 
college, community college, and kindergarten-twelve. Seventy- 
six percent of the budget is on education, and they’re looking at it 
thinking, “Hey, that’s a lot. Are we getting our money’s worth?” 
So, in taking a look at it, particularly, where there are a lot of 
dropouts and a lot of kids that aren’t doing well, you’ve got to get 
a standard up here, but that standard is going to cause a lot of 
dropouts and a lot of problems. 

There are kids right now that you can see that they’re stressed 
out, emotionally upset, because, “Am I going to not pass the com¬ 
petency test and not graduate?” And hey, that’s a pretty big thing, 
getting pressure from home, pressure at school, pressure from the 
legislature, pressure from the university to meet higher standards. 

And these kids work hard for four years, and then, if they don’t pass 
that math test .... 

That’s it, they’ve had it. And hey, it’s debatable whether 
Einstein could graduate from high school now, see, but he was 
highly successful in his field, [laughter] 



158 


BUD BEASLEY 


So you were in the Adaptive RE. Yon were in the adidt education 
class, and you stayed in the Washoe County School System one way or 
the other since 1976, and still. 

Right. Definitely, with all kinds of opportunities to go into 
administration. All kinds of opportunities to move into the green 
house over there at Central Administration, but I don’t need that. 
I really am not too interested in that. 

Well, you’re a teacher, not an administrator, [latighter] 

That’s right, [laughter] 

Do you have any great love of poetry? 

Yes, very much so. 

Why is that? What do you attribute that to? 

To tell you the truth, I’m really not sure. I enjoyed it clear 
back in high school. I was writing poetry back in high school, 
and I don’t know, there’s just something about it that I really liked. 

Do you write poems, as well as memorizing poems? 

Yes. I’ve been published in Ladies Home Journal ; I’ve been 
published in Redbooh, I’ve been published way back when. But 
back in high school I was writing poetry, and here and there win¬ 
ning a contest, a free meal or something, you know, but it’s just 
something I’ve always enjoyed. I have books and books of poetry 
that I read, and Shakespeare. Now, if you can imagine a baseball 
player enjoying Shakespeare, [laughter] 


That’s a contradiction. 



Philosophy of Teaching 


159 


Yes. It’s highly contradictory. And I remember one time in 
Seattle, when the sportswriter came out to interview me, as you 
are doing, and he wanted to test the microphone, test my voice, 
he said, “Say something.” 

So I quoted poetry, “Night shall be filled with music, and the 
cares that infest the day, shall fold their tents like Arabs, and si¬ 
lently steal away.” And hey, he took up on this, [laughter] He 
never heard this coming from a baseball player. But it’s always 
been something very interesting. 

Well, when yon write poetry, do you write romantic poetry? 

A little bit of everything. One of the first was ... a play was 
coming to town on Huckleberry Finn, and in the school paper I 
wrote this poem about Huckleberry Finn, and it was published in 
the school paper. Then, to get publicity for the show they pub¬ 
lished it in the town paper. Lo and behold, one of the Clemens 
cousins of Mark Twain read it, and it was published in the Sacra¬ 
mento paper. And then, later on, it was published in the Ladies 
Home Journal. So clear back in high school I was beginning to get 
some of this stuff published. And all the time I was going to the 
university I was writing poetry and submitting it in the English 
class, and I saw it was getting attention, and I’m an attention 
getter, [laughter] When I saw it was getting attention, I pursued 
it further, you know. I just kept doing it. 

Did you ever recite poetry for your students or your athletes? 

Not a great deal. I did in assemblies, though, quite a bit in 
assemblies. For instance, as a rule, on Veterans Day they’d have an 
assembly to honor the veterans, and they’d have veterans come in 
and give talks and this sort of thing. And I recited “In Flanders 
Fields” on Veterans Day, and I had it shown on the screen, with 
the crosses, you know. This brought down the house. Then, occa- 



160 


BUD BEASLEY 


sionally, if we had a losing team I’d recite a particular poem about 
a losing team, rather than one that was winning, and that went 
over big. So, from time to time, I did that. 

Did you ever recite poetry while you were waiting on the bus or going 
on a bus ride? 

Yes, that I did. I did that, too. Danny Heilman would get me 
into that frequently, and I’d recite Casey at the Bat or something 
pertaining to athletics. When I was around at these different ser¬ 
vice clubs I’d recite Casey at the Bat, and I did that at my birthday 
party. I’m going to do it in April for the University of Nevada 
baseball team. When Dusty Baker was up here, I was supposed to 
do that at that baseball banquet, but I had a night class, and I 
don’t miss the night class for anything. Perfect attendance there 
for twenty years. 

Would you care to recite Casey at the Bat now for the tape? 

Yes. We could try it. 

It seemed extremely rocky for the Mudville nine that day; 

The score stood four to two, with but one inning left to play, 

And then when Cooney died at first, and Burrows did the 
same, 

A wreath of sickly silence fell upon the patrons of the game. 

A straggling few got up to go, while in deep despair. 

The rest sat with that hope which springs eternal within the 
human breast. 

For they thought if only Casey could get a whack at that, 

Sure, they’d put up even money with Casey at the bat. 

But Flynn preceded Casey, as did likewise Jimmy Blake. 

The former was a lulu, and the latter was a fake; 

So upon the stricken multitude grim melancholy sat; 



Philosophy of Teaching 


161 


It seemed but little chance of Casey’s getting to the bat. 

But Flynn let drive a single, to the wonderment of all, 

And Blake, the much despised, tore the cover off the ball; 

And when the dust had lifted, and they saw what had oc¬ 
curred, 

There was Jimmy safe at second and Flynn a-hugging third. 

From five thousand throats or more, there went up a lusty 
yell. 

It reveled in the valley. It echoed in the dell; 

It socked upon the mountain side, it rolled across the flat, 

As Casey, mighty Casey, was advancing to the bat. 

There was ease in Caseys manner as he stepped into his place; 

There was pride in Caseys bearing, and a smile on Caseys 
face. 

And when, responding to the cheers, he lightly doffed his 
hat, 

No stranger in the crowd could doubt ‘twas Casey at the bat. 

Ten thousand eyes were on him as he wipes his hands in dirt. 

Five thousand tongues applauded as he rubs them on his shirt. 

And while the writhing pitcher grinds the ball into his hip, 

Defiance gleams in Caseys eye, a sneer curls Casey’s lip. 

And now the leather-covered sphere came hurling through 
the air, 

But Casey stood a-watching it, in haughty grandeur there. 

Close by the sturdy batsman the ball unheeded sped. 

‘“Taint me style” said Casey. “Strike one,” the umpire said. 

From the benches, black with people, there went up a muffled 
roar, 

Like the beating of the storm-waves on a stern and rockbound 
shore. 

“Kill him! Kill the umpire!” someone shouted from the stand. 

And it’s likely they’d have killed him, had not Casey raised his 
hand. 

With a smile of Christian charity, great Casey’s visage shown; 



162 


BUD BEASLEY 


He stilled the rising tumult; he made the game go on; 

He signaled to the pitcher, and once more the sphere flew; 
But Casey still ignored it. And the umpire said, “Strike two!” 
“Fraud!” cried the maddened thousands, and the echo an¬ 
swered, “Fraud.” 

But one scornful look from Casey, and the audience was awed. 
They saw his face grow stern and cold. They saw his muscles 
strain. 

They saw that Casey wouldn’t let that ball go by again. 

The smile is gone from Caseys lips, the teeth are clenched in 
hate. 

He pounds with cruel violence his bat upon the plate. 

And now . . . and now the pitcher holds the ball, and now he 
lets it go, 

And now the air is shattered by the force of Caseys blow. 
Oh, somewhere in this favored land, the sun is shining bright. 
Somewhere bands are playing, somewhere hearts are light. 
Somewhere men are laughing, somewhere children shout. 
But there is no joy in Mudville—Mighty Casey just struck 
out. 

[Casey At the Bat by Ernest L. Thayer first appeared in the San 
Francisco Examiner, June 3, 1888] 

That was fantastic Bud. [laughter] Thank you very much. We cotdd 
hardly have had a tape without that on there. So, you’re going to give 
it for the University of Nevada baseball team? 

Sometime in April. 

Some clubhouse meeting or a banquet? 

Well, this is dinner. It can’t be the end-of-the-year dinner, but 
Gary Powers has asked me to do it for that baseball banquet for 
something. And he wanted me to do it when Dusty Baker came 



Philosophy of Teaching 


163 


up for that baseball dinner, and I would have, but that I had a 
night class. 

So he scheduled Baker the wrong night. 

Right. But I did this at different service clubs when I was 
playing ball. Boy, it went over big. 

But you must have several poems memorized, dozens of poems. 

Oh, yes. Lots and lots of them. I don’t have this one down 
real well, yet. I gave it at that birthday party. Caseys Return. It’s 
better, still. It’s classic. 

Is that just recently written, then? 

No. I added some to it, and deleted some of it. I don’t know 
who wrote the Return, but the setting now is a booing, and he’s a 
bum, and he comes to bat. “And they call for Tony or for Pete, for 
bat boy, or for clown, for anyone, except the punk who threw our 
city down.” [laughter] And he comes, and they all boo him, and 
they are all cheering the opposing pitcher, see. And this time he 
makes it, though. 

He hits the ball? 

Yes. He gets two strikes on him, and everybody’s down. And 
boy, he hits it out of the park, [laughter] 

He redeems himself. 

Right, [laughter] “And now, ten thousand hats are thrown in 
air,” see. “Ten thousand throw a fit, but no one ever found the ball 
that mighty Casey hit.” And it ends, the original sequel, to this part: 



164 


BUD BEASLEY 


. . . except in Mudville square, 

the bronze bust of a patriot, arms crossed, is planted there. 

And underneath, engraved in bronze, these words are engraved 
in flame, 

“Here’s a man that rose and fell, and rose again to fame. 

He blew a tough one in a pinch, but he faced the jeering 
throng. 

He came through hell and scampered back to prove where a 
champ belongs.” 

That’s great. A great and moral story, too. 

Yes, it is. 

Don’t give up. Just come back. Come back and do it. Do you still go to 
a lot of Reno High School and university games? 

I go to all the university games here at home. I haven’t missed 
one yet. Saw those three this last week. The first, horrible; the 
second one, as good a game as you’d ever want to see. They won it 
in the tenth inning. So I go to all university games. I go to quite 
a few of the high school baseball games. Two nights a week I 
spend in the softball games, slow pitch, because I have two teams 
of my former players in that softball league. Bill Berrum and Art 
Kess, Arzoian, are a couple of guys who play in that league. 

Art spent the last two or three years in Egypt as a hydraulic 
engineer, working on the Nile River and working on the dam. I 
corresponded with him all the time he was in Egypt. And he’s 
been playing in that softball league, that slow pitch league, oh, I 
guess, five, six, seven years, as have Joe Granata and Bill Berrum. 
Well, all three of them were still very active in that slow pitch. 
And it’s a league. One league, you have to be fifty years old to 
play in it, the other one, sixty years old to play in it. And some of 
my players, former players, are playing in both leagues. I think 



Philosophy of Teaching 


165 


Berrum plays in both leagues. So does Arzoian, so does Art Kess. 
And Art Kess, of course, locally is big with New York Life. I’m 
trying at the present time to get Art Kess nominated to the board 
of directors, the national board of directors of New York Life. I 
think he’d be a good man in there: very intelligent, good athlete, 
and very well known in the community. I feel he’d be a real asset 
to the state of Nevada and New York Life. 

Does Roger Trounday play in that league? 

Rog was playing in there and was one of our better players, 
but he’s had some health problems, and he’s extremely busy with 
John Ascuaga’s Nugget there. And John’s a little reluctant to let 
him go. But Rog was a very, very good player. Matter of fact, 
when I was playing in the Coast League, I got Rog a tryout one 
time with Seattle. He was in the armed forces at the time and had 
just finished a ten-mile walk and came to baseball, and he wasn’t 
quite ready for that, [laughter] But very good at football, basket¬ 
ball, and baseball. Then, too, Joe Granata, I think, was one of the 
original organizers of that team, in that softball league. They’re all 
my former players. So every Monday and Thursday I spend my 
time in the softball league as an honorary—or ornery—coach. I 
do very little actual coaching, but I really enjoy seeing these kids 
stay with it. Ken Fujii plays in there, too, and Buddy Fujii is one 
of the pitchers. 

And another one I’d like to mention, who played for years 
and years, is Howdy Davis, former coach at Wooster High and 
one of my boys. Great athlete in high school—football, basket¬ 
ball, baseball—he did everything. He did it well. And then he 
became a coach, as did quite a few of my former players. As a 
matter of fact, I had so many of my former players come back as 
my assistant coaches that the school board called me in and com¬ 
plained that I was building a machine and hiring all my own 
players back there. I had Fujii and Kitts and Claude Mayberry, 



166 


BUD BEASLEY 


and, of course, Dick Trachok, who had had his practice teaching 
and coaching under me. 

Did Buddy Garfinkle coach for you, too? 

Oh, definitely. And it was true. I was hiring all my own play¬ 
ers back. Mike Thompson was one that had become a very promi¬ 
nent coach down in the Concord-Walnut Creek area. So the school 
board was concerned that if I hire all my players back they’re go¬ 
ing to be more loyal to me than they are to the principal or the 
school board. I didn’t see it that way, actually. But one time at a 
school board meeting I was asked, “Are you trying to build a ma¬ 
chine here?” 

And I said, “What’s wrong with a machine? They understand 
our philosophy, they’re graduates of our school, and it doesn’t 
speak too well of our school if we can’t hire our own graduates 
back. You’re telling me that we didn’t do a good enough job on 
them to bring them back on the staff.” [laughter] I pointed out to 
them other members who had graduated from the high school 
that were in the English Department and other departments. 
“Why not in athletics?” 

And they said, “You’re trying to build a machine.” 

I said, “What’s wrong with a machine? When this meeting’s 
over, you’ll go out and get in one to get home.” [laughter] So we 
had some fun with that. “But I’d enjoy having them back and 
working with me.” And they knew my system, and they knew the 
philosophy of the school. So I thought it was a great idea, and I 
did have a larger number of them on my staff. 

So, the school board never did stop it, then? 

Oh, no! They didn’t stop it, but they were a little concerned 
about it. [laughter] By the way, you asked about Buddy Garfinkle, 



Philosophy of Teaching 


167 


and I have something I’d like you to see. I have over a hundred 
binders of my former students, their pictures in there, and who 
they married, and in many cases their first kids and so forth. I 
have over 11,000 students that I have actual clippings and pic¬ 
tures of. And I kept track of their record in the service. 

There’s something, too, I think we might discuss. During the 
war I was corresponding with hundreds of my former students 
out there, and frequently I would write to one and tell him, “Hey, 
just ten miles down the road in England is one of your old bud¬ 
dies.” So they’d get together on the weekend, then, and have a 
party and celebrate, and they didn’t even know they were that 
close together. This happened also out in the islands of the Pa¬ 
cific. A lot of them would be on the same island and were un¬ 
aware that they were out there. But by writing to both of them, I 
frequently put them in contact with each other. 

How many binders did yon say you had ? 

One hundred binders, arranged by years. And they are ar¬ 
ranged in the binder alphabetically, and card cataloged. To me it 
was a hobby. I wasn’t doing it for any particular reason, but it was 
a hobby, and I wanted to keep contact with them. My rapport 
with my former students is very important to me. I still wine and 
dine and lunch with them, as they probably told you. To me that’s 
very important. That’s really the fun of teaching. That’s the re¬ 
ward of teaching. 

I talked to a gentleman yesterday named Jack Stratton, who is eighty 
years old. And it’s kind of interesting to talk to a guy that’s eighty years 
old, and I am now talking to his high school teacher, who, of course, 
is ninety years old. 

Right, [laughter] 



168 


BUD BEASLEY 


And Jack, of course, spoke highly of you, too, and he told me a little 
anecdote about when he was going to school, and you wotdd shoot 
free-throw baskets. You want to expand on that? 

Yes. My former players got quite a kick out of this, and so did 
I, that I was, braggadociously, very good at shooting free throws. 
It was quite common that I could make twenty-three, twenty- 
four out of twenty-five. What we would do is we’d shoot ten free 
throws, but we’d throw our nickels and dimes on the floor, and 
then each one would shoot ten free throws, and whoever made 
the most out of the ten would pick up all the dimes, see. [laugh¬ 
ter] So, I did this during the noon hour, during the lunch hour, 
and I did it just before they went to lunch. So, frequently, I got 
their lunch money, [laughter] For years they bought my lunch, 
unintentionally, by this free-throw contest. 

Did you ever catch hell from the authorities? 

Oh, yes. The vice-principal came down one day, and saw the 
money on the floor, and he called me aside, and he said, “You 
can’t be down here gambling with these kids.” And Harold Day- 
ton, one that frequently I won from, said, “He’s not gambling. 
He wins all the time.” [laughter] And believe it or not—again 
bragging, believe it or not—I developed a rhythm of shooting 
the free throws, and they could blindfold me, and I could still 
shoot the free throws, because shooting the free throws, you had 
that rhythm, you know. But they got quite a kick out of that, and 
every now and then they’d beat me, too. 

Another thing, I had two or three of my former students, or 
my present students, but we would make a bet on my walking on 
my hands. And I was good at that. I could walk the length of the 
gym on my hands. But when I would start out I would show 
them, demonstrate that I’m going to walk on my hands, and I’d 



Philosophy of Teaching 


169 


take about three steps and fall down. And then one of the other 
kids that was in cahoots with me would make a bet that I couldn’t 
walk ten steps. Well, he saw me fall down with three or four. So 
again, they’d put their money on the floor, and he’d egg the bets 
on, and split with me, see. [laughter] And then, after they got 
their money on the floor, I’d walk from one end of the court to 
the center of the floor, [laughter] And again, we’d pick up the 
money, and that’s how I made the money I have today, [laughter] 

So you were able to retire off of the nickels and dimes? 

Right, [laughter] Facetiously, of course. 

You mentioned that you have binders that include eleven thousand 
students? Is that how many you have tatight over the years? 

Oh, yes. And this is both boys and girls. And I still carry on a 
great correspondence with my former students, all over the world. 

But you guesstimate that you have taught eleven thousand. 

Easily. 

Maybe more? 

Right. But, of course, sixty-nine years of teaching. And back 
in those days, frequently, the P.E. class would be sixty, seventy 
students, because they didn’t have too many RE. classes. And when 
I first started teaching P.E. they weren’t dressed for P.E. We didn’t 
have the facilities, we didn’t have the lockers; we didn’t have the 
showers, so frequently they weren’t even dressed for P.E. 

You just took P.E. in whatever clothes you had. 



170 


BUD BEASLEY 


Right. Or they may bring old clothes or something. And hu¬ 
morously—imagine, I’d never get away with this today—but at 
one time they would run from the old high school for the RE. 
class there on West and Fifth Street. They’d run from the old high 
school down to the river. Now, at that time, though, they were 
dressed for P.E. They’d run down to the river, and then I had a 
cable across the river, and they’d go across on the cable on their 
hands, [laughter] If they didn’t make it, into the drink they’d go. 
[laughter] See? So we did a lot of things in P.E. that you’d never 
get away with today, but the P.E. classes were in as good a shape as 
any of the athletes in school. In those days you were excused from 
P.E. while you were taking part in football, basketball, or what¬ 
ever. When the season ended the athletes would come back to the 
P.E. class, and, frequently, the P.E. class was tougher than what 
they went through in football, [laughter] 

Was P.E. mandatory in those years? 

P.E. was mandatory, right. Everybody had to take it. You ei¬ 
ther take P.E. or R.O. [ROTC]. The only way you could get out 
of P.E. is by taking R.O., but you also could take both. 

And speaking of R.O., we had General Dale Smith, who was 
in my P.E. class at one time, General Milner, who was in my class. 
So, I got some pretty high ranking guys in the military, too. For a 
long time, Ashley Van Slyck and Willy Delzel were the top com¬ 
manders out here at the air base, and they were in my class. And 
I’m quite proud of Colonel Mason, who passed away recently. 
High ranking military people, and, of course Link Piazzo, who 
you know, did numerable missions over Europe. So I’m very, very 
proud of my former students. 

I hope I’ll be as proud of the ones I have now. [laughter] But 
I’m continually using my former students as a model for the classes 
that I’m teaching now. I probably bore them to death, telling 
them about the success of my former students, like federal judge, 



Philosophy of Teaching 


171 


Ed Reed, after whom Reed High School is named; and Buddy 
Garfmkle, principal; and Roger Trounday, Pete Cladianos, Ben 
Akert—outstanding business people in the community. And I’m 
telling them that they once sat in this class. Bill Raggio and Judge 
Salcedo—they were my former students, and I always end it by, 
“Go, ye, and do likewise.” See? [laughter] 

Well, the people you’ve taught have excelled in so many differentfields. 
It isn’t just the military or just business. 

Right. They’ve succeeded in spite of me, see. 

Go ahead. You have any morel 

Well, it’s fun to get together with these people. Of course, 
Don Carano, I’m very proud of—an attorney and heading the 
Eldorado. And Greg Carano, he’s high in management at the 
Eldorado and Silver Legacy. It’s just fun to run into these people 
from time to time. And another very rewarding thing, if I go 
down for twenty minutes of shopping or to get a tank of gas, I’m 
running into a former student. And that’s a real pleasure. 

You must know as many people in town as anyone. 

I probably do. Right. I probably have as wide an acquain¬ 
tance, yet with all the new people coming in, it does make a dif¬ 
ference, the thousands of people that I don’t know, that I haven’t 
had as former students. But yesterday I attended a meeting of 
retired state employees, and here scattered all over the place were 
my former students. And it makes it fun to get out and go places. 

Did someone speak at that luncheon yesterday? 

Yes, but he wasn’t one of my former students. 



172 


BUD BEASLEY 


Oh, I thought maybe you spoke there. 

Well, I’m frequently speaking someplace, getting a free lunch 
of course, [laughter] But it’s just great, running into them 
everyplace. Don Peckham, for instance, he missed the meeting 
yesterday. I’m going back and changing his grade. But he’s very 
active in the retired state employees. And I’m on the State Board 
of Directors of the Retired State Employees. I’m very active in 
Kiwanis as we talked about before. I’m a former president of 
Kiwanis, and a former board member of Kiwanis. And then, I 
think we mentioned once before that I have managed to make a 
few halls of fame: the State of Nevada’s Coaches Hall of Fame and 
in the national PTA. I’m in the Stockton Hall of Fame and in the 
FaSalle Baseball Hall of Fame, that includes all of California. 

That LaSalle Baseball Hall of Fame, is that in Sacramento? 

Yes, that meets in Sacramento once a year, at Christian Brothers 
High School. 

Is everyone in that? You say that that encompasses the entire state of 
California, or is it more northern California? 

Well, the FaSalle Hall of Fame is pretty much northern Cali¬ 
fornia and is loaded with former major league ballplayers and 
with former Coast Feague ballplayers. A good number have passed 
on, but we’re all still members of that. I attended the Sparks 
Sertoma Club, and I was selected as their Man of the Year back, 
oh, eight or ten years ago. I got as far in that Man of the Year 
competition that I was selected the Man of the Year in Nevada, 
California, and the Hawaiian Islands. I’ve also been selected 
Twenty-Thirty Club Teacher of the Year, Washoe High Teacher 
of the Year, and by Kiwanis International as Educator of the Year 



Philosophy of Teaching 


173 



Bud Beasley at his induction into the LaSalle Baseball Hall of Fame, 
Sacramento, 1985. 


for California, Arizona, Nevada, and Hawaii. That covers a lot of 
territory. And I’m bragging, but I’m proud of that. I really am. 

Well, your old partner, Dizzy Dean, said, “It ain’t bragging if you’ve 
done it. ” So you’ve done it. 

[laughter] I like that. Right. And as I say, that’s one of the things 
that I liked about Don Manoukian. In high school, in college, 
everyplace, Don bragged, but he made good on his bragging. 

Yes. Talk the talk, and walk the walk. 

That’s right. 


You’ve accomplished a lot of things, and you’re proud of a lot of them, 
but, to me, if I were you, I wotdd be proudest of having an elemen- 




174 


BUD BEASLEY 


tary school named after me. And yon have Bud Beasley Elementary 
School. Woidd you tell us about that, and how it came about, and 
where it’s located ? 

Yes, I’d be happy to tell you about that. When they started 
building, they badly needed about five new grammar schools 
and a couple of middle schools. When they started naming the 
schools after people, I objected to it, and my name hadn’t come 
up yet, even, but I objected to it, because I had a strong feeling 
that we should name schools after locales, like Mount Rose and 
Galena and Northside and Westside and whatever. But rather than 
name them after people, name them after the neighborhoods in 
which they were located, because the people could relate to that 
more. And then, too, I remember my good friends like E. Otis 
Vaughn and Billinghurst, and they were great educators and made 
a contribution, but the kids going there now never heard of them, 
nor did the parents. So, they lose that intimacy and that rapport 
that exists maybe today, but tomorrow it doesn’t. 

So two or three times I wrote to the school board expressing 
that feeling, that I thought it would be much better to name the 
schools after locations, rather than after people. Besides, I watched 
several schools being named after school board members, in which 
they named the schools after themselves, and this brought a great 
deal of criticism from the community. Then, I saw, too, that this 
group would propose one name, and this group over here pro¬ 
pose another name, and there was a conflict there. 

So I’m against this and wrote letters against it. Then, one of 
my former students, Lou Mendive—after whom Mendive Middle 
School is named—his name came up to name a school after him. 
I was so intrigued and wanted so much to name the school after 
my good friend and former student that I wrote a letter recom¬ 
mending him. [laughter] And the board again said, “What’s this? 
We’ve been receiving letters with, ‘No, no,’ and now this comes 

>5 

up. 



Philosophy of Teaching 


175 


So, shortly thereafter, some of my former students, of which 
Ken Fujii was one of the promoters, wanted a school named after 
me. Again I wrote the board objecting to it, but they did it, any¬ 
way. And I jokingly say that they didn’t name it to honor me, 
rather, you normally name a school after an educator that has 
passed away or retired, and here I’ve neither passed away nor re¬ 
tired, so they’re hinting for me to do one of the two, and they 
named the school after me. 

Where is it located? Well, jokingly, I used to say that it’s lo¬ 
cated halfway between Joe Conforte’s and the sewer plant, [laugh¬ 
ter] But actually, it’s on Vista Boulevard, that runs through Sparks, 
pretty close to dead ending at Highway 80. Then Vista runs clear 
on out to the Wingfield development out there, but the school 
takes off on Alta Vista and up to Canyon Drive. It’s a whole new 
area. Thousands of homes have been built in there, and that’s the 
Beasley Elementary School. 

Is Canyon Drive the name of the street that it’s on? 

Right. And it’s high on a hill, overlooking the whole valley. I 
love to think of it, and probably rightly so, as the best view of any 
school in Washoe County. It is just beautiful up there. You see all 
these mountains, and a very, very financially stable neighborhood. 
All the homes are in the high-price range, beautifully landscaped, 
and just a great bunch of parents. I wish I could attend more of 
the PTA meetings, but I can’t, because it conflicts with my night 
classes, but I do go to their school events, their plays, and dances, 
and science fair, and assemblies—spend a good deal of time up there. 

Scott Herthel, the principal, is a great guy who’s doing a great 
job. Great bunch of kids. It’s just a real treat to go up there and 
hug those little kids and sign autographs for them. And it’s re¬ 
ceived quite a bit of publicity in the papers, lately. I go up and 
read stories to them, do magic, and whatever. But I really enjoy 
mixing and being with those kids. 



176 


BUD BEASLEY 



Bud Beasley Elementary School 


What year did the school open? 

About five, six years ago, it opened with about five hundred 
students, and today we’re around eight hundred, and overcrowded 
because of the development out there. Actually, it’s pretty close to 
the Spanish Springs area, but east of Spanish Springs in general. 

Do they have any display or any of your memorabilia in the school ? 

Again, a lot of these questions you’re asking, I’m a little hesi¬ 
tant, because it’s bragging, it’s conceited, but, still, it is fact. Yes, 
just as you come in the school, there’s a beautiful bronze plaque 
there with my name, of course, and I wish I could recall the quo¬ 
tation. It’s my quotation, but the quotation of mine on that bronze 
plaque goes something like this, “This school was not built as a 
shrine to me, but rather as an opportunity for learning for all who 
come herein.” And that is the philosophy on the plaque. Then, as 
you go into the building, there’s a beautiful case, contributed by 
my former students, by the way. They’ve done a lot for me. [laugh¬ 
ter] Of course, they have to, or I’ll go back and change their grade. 







Philosophy of Teaching 


177 



DT tTw * Bt AM-EY 

ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 


•U who t mrr h'reU" 

it" -BudBeailtj 

1995 


BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

WASHOE COUNTY SCHOOL DISTRICT 


ROBERT KIRCHNER 

KAY J. LOUDON I 

JUDITH MOSS 
LEZLIE PORTER 
EDWARD VAN GORDER 
MICHAEL WRIGHT 


ROBERT BENTLEY 

MARGIE BRODERICK 
DAN COPPA 
rusty CROOK 

MARILYN FENDELANDER 
DORANNA GOODNIGHT 


WWBHON «H«f" 

D R. MARY NEBGEN 


architect 
ki . VAN WOERT 
SHEEH ARCHITECTS 


CONTRACTOR 
_«■ * SULLIVAN 

CLARK * 


STns^cctoks 


jooJ 


The dedication plaque at Bud Beasley Elementary. 


178 


BUD BEASLEY 


But there’s a beautiful case, a big case, with all my memora¬ 
bilia in there: pictures, awards, and certificates that I’ve received. 
Even my old baseball glove is in there, and baseball pictures and 
that sort of thing. I think there’s also a plaque in there for when I 
was named Man of the Year by the Salvation Army. And I have 
made considerable contributions in charity, locally, to different 
organizations and things. I’m a strong supporter of disabled vet¬ 
erans, because I have a deep feeling for them, and for many of my 
former students. But this case is loaded with memorabilia, and, 
of course, what appeals to the boys, particularly, are the baseball 
pictures in there, see, and baseballs. Occasionally, I give them an 
autographed baseball or something, and I receive autographed 
baseballs from my former students, also. If they win a trophy in 
this league that they’re in, I end up with a trophy. 

But that case, I’m very proud of it, and doubly proud of it 
because it was donated by my former students. I try desperately 
not to cost the school board anything, and when they built the 
school, believe it or not, a lot of my former students that are 
contractors and so forth, made bids at cost to get the school built. 
So, it is a beautiful school in a beautiful location, with a great 
faculty and great support from the parents. I attend their annual 
breakfast that they have every year and meet and mix with the 
parents. Then, they have a barbeque in the beginning of school to 
get everybody acquainted, and I make all of those. I do it not as 
an obligation, but as a pleasure. It’s just great to meet and greet 
the parents and those kids. It’s just great to have your picture 
taken with them, and they are all flocking around you. [laughter] 

And you get new kids every year. 

Right. And it’s things like that that mean a lot to me. You 
have no idea how it pleases me when you come, having met with 
my former students, and tell me what they have to say about me. 



Philosophy of Teaching 


179 


That means a lot to me, particularly. Obviously, when they see 
me they’re going to say something nice, along with heckling me 
and kidding me. But they’re going to say something nice, because 
I can always go back and change their grades, see. [laughter] But 
you have no idea how it pleases me when I hear from a third party 
that they’ve talked to, and they’ve said, “Hey, that guy, we had 
fun with him. We enjoyed him. He did a good job.” That really 
has meaning. 

The phrase I hear so much is that, “He was such an influence on my 
life. ’’And I’ve heard several people say, “He was the most influential 
person in my life. ” When you think about the people that these people 
have come in contact with, not just counting their parents, but as 
they’ve gone on to further education in colleges or universities or in 
the business world, and to still go back and say, “Bud Beasley, in high 
school, was the biggest influence on my life. ” 

Oh, that’s my pay. That’s why I keep on teaching. I enjoy 
what I’m doing, and if I can continue to make that influence on 
my students now, hey, that’s what it’s all about. 

Right. It’s almost a good place to close it, with your statement, “That’s 
what it’s all about. ” Because that is kind of the story of your life. 

Right. 

So, I will just say thank you very much for the time and effort you’ve 
given us. 

It was a pleasure. The only thing that I dislike about you, is 
you were a good hitter, yourself. 

[laughter] 



180 


BUD BEASLEY 


And as a pitcher, why, they once asked me if I had any super¬ 
stitions, and I said, “I’m superstitious of every guy that comes up 
there with a bat in his hand.” [laughter] 

Yes. That’s like what Ted Williams said about some pitchers. He said, 
“I hated all pitchers. ” It’s just like you. You hate all batters. Pitchers 
hate all batters. 

Right, [laughter] I always had a great respect for those bat¬ 
ters, though. I knew the tough ones, and there’s where you really 
have to concentrate, and I don’t want anybody breaking my con¬ 
centration—which Lefty O’Doul, boy, he really worked on that, 
[laughter] 

How about Stengel ? Did he try and break your concentration, tool 

They all tried it, quite a few of them. 

But Stengel, or O’Dotd, was the bestl 

With Stengel, I’m not sure that he was trying to break my 
concentration, but he saw, by imitating me, that the crowd would 
start laughing and applauding him, see. So, we both were show- 
boats, and we both were trying to continually out-showboat each 
other, and this pleased the crowd, and he knew that, and I knew 
that. And, hey, that was our bread and butter, [laughter] And at 
that time, both Casey and I were over the hills, [laughter] 

It’s amazing he didn’t try and sign you for the Oakland Oaks, because 
you’d have made a good pair. 

As a matter of fact, my own club didn’t tell me this, because 
they were going to have to give me more money if somebody else 
is going to give me more money, see. So I didn’t find out till I left 



Philosophy of Teaching 


181 


that deals like this were in the fire, and then they’d tell me, see, 
and for obvious reasons, [laughter] But I understood that both 
O’Doul and Stengel had at least made attempts. 

That they wanted you on their team? 

Right. I knew it. Jo-Jo White and Earl Sheely in Seattle—I 
knew they did, because they felt me out. “How do you feel about 
coming here?” And I later found out, though, that they were try¬ 
ing to get me a month or so before I knew it. The manager at 
Sacramento was equally anxious to get me out of there, but the 
stockholders and the business manager, they had a good thing 
going, crowd-wise, so they fought this tooth and nail. It wasn’t so 
much that I was worth that much to them as a ballplayer, but I 
did draw a crowd. 

Like yon said, you filled the seats, and you sold a lot of hot dogs and 
beer. 

Right, [laughter] 

If you had to do it all over again, is there anything you’d change? 

Oh, thousands of things. I think I would work harder to be a 
better player. I can think of a lot of things I would have done that 
would have made me a better player, even. I knew that I had to be 
in top shape, which I was. I jogged. When I was considerably 
older than the rest of the Solon players, none of them was in 
good a shape as I was, and the same at Seattle. Same at Vancouver— 
none of them were in better shape. And I also knew that I had to 
beat them with my brains. I had to be sure I knew the rules, take 
advantage of the rules. For instance, I had twenty seconds to de¬ 
liver to the plate, right? Somehow or other, mentally, I could vi¬ 
sualize that, so I’d go nineteen seconds, [laughter] But I had to 



182 


BUD BEASLEY 


figure out how to beat them mentally, also. The fast ball wasn’t 
what it once was, the curve ball wasn’t, so I had to rely on control. 
But if I could spot pitch, hey, I’m going to last two or three more 
years. And if I knew the spots to throw to. So, those two things 
were factors, but I can think of a lot of other things that would 
have made me a better player, if I had gotten serious about it. 

Well, you got older, you got smarter. 

Exactly. And don’t we all? 

Right. Hopefidly. 

Right, [laughter] 

But you woidd never have changed being an educator? 

Oh, no. 

Or a ball player? 

No. I had all kinds of chances to go farther in baseball, and 
no way. Education was my baby. And then, too, I could see that 
education would last a lifetime, where baseball isn’t going to. So 
that caused me to make decisions. 

But the two went hand in handfor you in a way, because your athlet¬ 
ics as a young man got you the scholarships and got you into college. 

Right. I owe an ungodly amount to athletics, I really do. In 
high school, in college, I got jobs that I wouldn’t have had other¬ 
wise. Got jobs doing a lot of different things, because I was play¬ 
ing on the town team or something. Even Billinghurst was a great 
baseball fan of Jack Threlkel’s. 



Philosophy of Teaching 


183 


Oh, he was? 

Yes, Billinghurst was there at all the games. Well, obviously, it 
was much easier for me to get a teaching job than somebody who 
wasn’t a baseball player, see. [laughter] And then Vaughn, his kids 
played for me. So coaching and baseball opened a lot of doors for 
me. And I owe a lot to baseball, I really do. 

Well, those are the two big things in your life, education and baseball. 

Definitely, definitely. Well, this has been fun. Yes, it has. 

Yes. I hate to see it end, but that’s life, I guess. 

That’s right—all things must come to an end. [laughter] 




A 

Adams, Red, 106-107, 138 
Akert Liquors (Reno, Nevada), 22 
Akert, Ben, 22, 171 
Alf Sorensen Recreadon Center 
(Sparks, Nevada), 52 
All-Star North Team, 106 
All-Star South Team, 106 
American Women’s Olympic 
Team, 27 

Archuleta, Frank, 39, 50 
Archuletas, 66 
Arzoian, Mr., 165 
Avansino, Earl, 24, 141 

B 

Bailey, Wes, 64 

Baker, Dusty, 160, 162-163 


Barkley, Llewellyn, 56 
Barkley, Lou, 33, 55-56 
Barkley, Mr., 49-50 
Bartell, Dick, 81, 95-96, 114, 
118-119 

Battle Mountain (Nevada), 8,14- 
15 

Beasley, Nellie, 1, 18-19, 125- 
126 

Bell, Mr., 89 
Benson, Mr., 144 
Berrum, Bill, 46, 150, 164-165 
Billinghurst Junior High (Reno, 
Nevada), 7-9 

Billinghurst, Benson Dillon, 173, 
182-183 

Bonanza Club (Reno, Nevada), 
57 

Bossieux, Fred, 26 
Bradshaw, James W. “Rabbit”, 2, 
6, 23 



186 


INDEX 


Brovia, Joe, 115, 120-121 
Brown, Harold, 22 
Brown, Mr., 130, 135 
Bud Beasley Elementary School 
(Reno, Nevada), 141, 151, 
173-175 

Bulmer, Blythe, 153 
Byars Construction (Reno, Nevada), 
27 

Byars, Marv, 29 
C 

California Hotel (San Francisco, 
California), 108 

California State League, 46, 65, 
67, 123,137-138, 140 
Calley, Jack, 112 
Carano, Don, 22, 25, 147, 171 
Carano, Greg, 22, 171 
Casazza Architects (Reno, Nevada), 
22 

Casazzas, 22 
Casey, Mr., 180 

“Casey at the Bat”, 133, 160-162 
“Casey’s Return”, 163-164 
Cassinelli, Fran, 36, 52 
Cassinellis, 30 

Chet and Link Piazzo’s Sports¬ 
man (Reno, Nevada), 23 
Chism, Mr., 18 
Church, Dr., 22 
Cladianos, Pete, 22, 147, 171 
Claremont Hotel (Oakland, 
California), 108 
Clark, Walter E., 6 


Clayton, “Smiley”, 40, 43-44 
Cleary, Joe, 85 

Clemens, Samuel, “MarkTwain”, 
159 

Clements, Harry, 137-138 
Coast League, 30, 35-37, 41,49, 
51,61,73-74,77-78,81,89- 
128, 130, 135, 138-139, 
165,172 

Cobb, Ty, 6, 83, 87-88 
Cole, Nat, “King”, 60 
Coleman, Jerry, 107-108 
Columbia University (New 
York), 15 

Columbo Hotel (Reno, Nevada), 43 
Corbett, Roger, 95 
Creech, “Lefty”, 45, 64 
Crocker, Len, 24, 151 

D 

Dallimore, Fred, 13-14, 26 
Davis, Howdy, 165 
Dayton, Harold, 168 
Dean, “Dizzy”, 130, 173 
Del Grande, Lino, 92 
DeLauer, Lee, 59-60, 84 
DeLorenzi, Norrie, 35, 59, 63 
Delzel, Willy, 170 
Dempsey, Jack, 111-112 
Dianda, Norm, 149 
Dimaggio, Joe, 75 
Doten, Mary S., 6, 20 
Downey, Jack, 111 
Dreisewerd, Clem, 98 



INDEX 


187 


E 

Eardley, Jim, 69-70 
Easter, Luke, 100, 120 
Eastland, Charlie, 51 
Edmonds Field (Sacramento, 
California), 127-128 
Edmonds, Dick, 128 
Einstein, Albert, 158 
Elcano, Joe, 54 
Elcano, Paul, 54 
Elcanos, 36 

Eldorado (Reno, Nevada), 22, 
147,171 

Elks Club (Reno, Nevada), 14 
Ernst, Mrs., 153 
Evans, Danny, 40 
Evans, Mr., 66 

F 

Fain, Ferris, 115 
Feemster, Mr., 22 
Feller, Bob, 121-122 
Fellowman, Doc, 23 
Finch, Dave, 153 
Fingers, Rollie, 60 
Finn, Eluckleberry, 159 
Fitzgerald, Eddie, 98 
Fletcher, Guy, 96-97, 101-102, 
106,117 
Forson, Fred, 8 
Foster, Flerb, 8-9, 154 
Francellini, Pat, 60-61 
Frandsen, Peter, 22 
Frankovich, John, 27 


Frankovich, Sam, 27 
Freitag, Oscar, 5, 30, 38, 48, 61- 
62 

Freitas, Tony, 112, 119 
Frost, Harry, 6 
Fujii, Buddy, 165 
Fujii, Ken, 27, 36, 155, 174 

G 

Gabrielli, John E., 22 
Gardner, Jimmy, 158 
Gardners Electric (Reno, Nevada), 
148 

Garfinkle, Buddy, 21, 36, 54, 
166-167, 171 
Gehrig, Lou, 68, 79 
Gomez, Tony, 62 
Graham, Jack, 120-121 
Granata, Joe, 24, 151, 164-165 
Grant Flotel (San Diego, California), 
103 

Grasso, Mickey, 100 
Greenhall, Teddy, 110 
Gregory, Syl, 61-62 

H 

Hamrick, Ray, 138 
Ffandley, Gene, 108, 121 
Harker and Harker (Reno, Nevada), 
22,148 

Harolds Club (Reno, Nevada), 3, 
19, 45-47 

Harrah, William F., 55 
Harrah’s Club (Reno, Nevada), 
19,55,60, 123 



188 


INDEX 


Harris, Bucky, 73, 107 
Harvey, Mr., 26 
Hawkins, Frankie, 73-74 
Heilman, Dan, 13,25-26,147,160 
Hemsley, Rollie, 121-122 
Herthel, Scott, 175 
Hickman, General, 153 
Hill, Jack, 6, 30, 37 
Hill, Tommy, 5, 49 
Holder, Brooks, 82, 100 
Hollywood Plaza Hotel (Hollywood, 
California), 104 
Holmes, Goldy, 65 
Hug High School (Reno, Ne¬ 
vada), 146,155 
Humphrey, Frances, 152 
Hund, Doc, 94 

I 

Idlewild Park (Reno, Nevada), 9, 
38,45, 151 

“In Flanders Fields”, 159 
India, Mike, 34, 49 
Ireland, Bill, 11-12 

J 

Jensen, Perry, 26 
John Ascuaga’s Nugget (Sparks, 
Nevada), 22, 149, 165 
Joyce, Bob, 120 

K 

Kess, Art, 150, 164-165 
Kezar Stadium (Bay Area, 
California), 5 


King, Art, 95 
Kirkland, Richard, 148 
Kitts, Mr., 165 
Kiwanis Club, 125-126 
Kleppe, Ernie, 57 
Kleppe, John, 57, 150 

L 

Ladies Home Journal, 158-159 
Lansdon, Al, 53, 61, 66 
LaSalle Hall of Fame (Sacramento, 
California), 172 
Lavagetto, “Cookie”, 41 
Lawlor Events Center (Reno, 
Nevada), 50 

Lawlor, Jake, 3-6, 30, 38, 40-42, 
50, 60,71,76 
Lazzari, Jerry, 26 
League All-Stars, 76 
Lehners, Florence, 153 
Little League, 53, 60-61, 115 
Lloyd, Stan, 52 
Lodigiani, Dario, 82, 100 
Lohrke, “Lucky”, 134 
Lombardi, Ernie, 117 

M 

Mack, Luther, 56 

MajesticTheatre (Reno, Nevada), 29 
Mann, Mr., 97 
Mann, Red, 106, 117 
Manoukian, Don, 27, 147-148, 
150-152, 173 
Manoukian, Jackie, 151 
Marcinko, Andy, 54-55, 84 
Marcucci, Lilio, 47, 112, 122 



INDEX 


189 


Martie, John E., “Doc”, 3,48, 51, 
71 

Martin, Pepper, 97, 104-107, 
114 

Marty, Joe, 119-121 
Mary S. Doten School (Reno, 
Nevada), 6 
Mason, Colonel, 170 
Mayberry, Claude, 165 
McCarran House (Reno, Ne¬ 
vada), 59 

McClure, Bob Jr., 55 
McClure, Bob Sr., “Buster”, 55 
McClure, Tom, 55 
Melarkey, Jimmy, 25-26 
Melrose, New Mexico, 1 
Menante, Frank, 94 
Menantes, 62 
Mendiola, Gene, 26-27 
Mendive Middle School (Reno, 
Nevada), 21, 27, 174 
Mendive, Lou, 21, 27, 174 
Mesner, Steve, 99-100 
Meyers, Richie, 110-111 
Milner, General, 170 
Mitchell, Brick, 5, 15 
Moana Ball Park (Reno, Nevada), 
44-48 

Morby, Andy, 153 
Morgan, J. P, 94 
Moring Field (Sacramento, Cali¬ 
fornia), 127 

Morkham’s Warehouse (Fallon, 
Nevada), 67 
Morrison, Greg, 28 
Morrison, Mr., 26 
Motley, Marion, 44 


N 

Nash, Bill, 84 
Neunswander, Mr., 26 
Nicely, Roy, 120 
Northside Junior High (Reno, 
Nevada), 7-8, 15 
Novikoff, Lou, 96, 100 

O 

O’Doul, “Lefty”, 37, 62, 72, 75- 
76, 107, 114, 120, 180-181 
Olivas, Jim, 60 

Opera House (Virginia City, 
Nevada), 56 

O’Shaughnessy, Bob, 5, 30 
Owen, Marvin, 100 

P 

Pace, Bruce, 68-69 
Pace, Jim, 68 
Paige, Satchel, 30, 41 
Palace Club (Reno, Nevada), 35, 
45,63 

Peccole, Bill, 58-59 
Peccole, Bob, 38, 58-59, 63, 66 
Peccoles, 5, 38, 58 
Peckman, Don, 172 
Pelter, Andrea, 150 
Penrose, Lou, 110 
Peterson, Frank, 8, 26 
Philbrook, Mr., 3, 5 
Piazzo, Link, 23-24, 36, 60, 141, 
151,170 
Picetti, Vic, 134 



190 


INDEX 


Pillette, Herman, 100, 114 

Pimentel, Ed, 137 

Pine, Ed, 28 

Pintar, John, 97-98 

Post, Dodie, 27 

Poulsons, 27 

Powers, Dick, 135 

Powers, Gary, 162 

Powning Park (Reno, Nevada), 9 

Q 

Quilici, Hugo, “Bull”, 86-87 

R 

Raggio, William J., 22, 148, 171 
Rainier Brewing Company (Seatde, 
Washington), 133 
Rainier Park (Seatde, Washington), 
126 

Ramsey Brothers, 27 
Ramsey, Bill, 98, 101 
Ramsey, Mr., 97, 117 
Rapp, Earl, 121 
Redbook , 158 

Reed High School (Reno, Nevada), 
21, 171 

Reed, Edward C., 21, 27, 171 
Reno Athletics, 19 
Reno Garage (Reno, Nevada), 
15,29-31,35,51,61,63 
Reno Gymnastic Team, 53 
Reno High Alumni Link Piazzo 
Building (Reno, Nevada), 24 
Reno High School (Reno, Nevada), 
7-12, 15-16, 20-21, 23-25, 


53-57,69-70,84,88,92,97, 
140,146-148,153-155,164 
Reno High School Alumni Asso¬ 
ciation (Reno, Nevada), 23, 
54 

Reno Larks Team, 31, 35-36,45, 
47, 57, 59, 63-64, 66, 89 
Reno Silver Sox, 41 
Reno, Nevada, 4-10 
Restelli, Dino, 121 
Reuther, Dutch, 47 
Reynolds, Darrel, 39, 42, 64 
Riordan, Bill, 58 
Riordan, “Lefty”, 58 
Robinson, Jackie, 41 
Robinson, Sandy, 131 
Ronnow, Dan, 38, 51 
Rosalyn Hotel, (Los Angeles, 
California), 103 
Ross, Jan, 153 
Rotary Club, 31,33 
Rudy, Frank, 48 
Rupp, Wimpy, 58 
Ruth, Babe, 69,79, 130 

S 

Salcedo, Fidel, 22, 171 
Salanesian, Mike, 50-51 
Sagebrush League, 4, 30, 35, 46, 
50-51,57, 59, 63 
San Francisco League, 110 
Santa Cruz High School (California), 
3 

Santa Cruz, California, 2 
Savage, Pete, 20 
Schon, Mike, 56 



INDEX 


191 


Schuster, Bill, “The Clown”, 100, 
121, 131-132 
Scott Motors Team, 44 
Scott, Bob, 21 
Scott, Mr., 44 
Scranton, Chet, 5 
Sellers, Joe, 144 

Sheely, Earl, 89-90,92,100,102, 
114,118, 124, 181 
Short, Ted, 22 

Shy Clown Club (Reno, Nevada), 
123 

Sick, Emil, 132, 133 
Sierra Nevada League, 33 
Silver and Blue, 150 
Silver Legacy (Reno, Nevada), 
171 

Smith, Dale, 170 
Smith, Mr., 22 

Smith, Raymond I., “Pappy”, 3 
Snyder, Bob, “Pop”, 41, 56-57 
Snyder, Orin, 13, 26, 36, 57 
Snyders, 56-57 
Solari, Al, 8,26, 141, 147 
Solons, 97 

Sorensen, Alf, 52-53, 84 
Sparks Eligh School (Sparks, 
Nevada), 49, 52, 57, 155 
Spina, Charlie, 67-68 
Spina, Rocco, 67 
Spitz, Louis, 86 
Springer, Charlie, 25-26 
St. Louis Sporting News, 118 
Staley, Jerry, 97 

Stanford University, California, 
15,143 


State of Nevada’s Coaches Hall of 
Lame, 172 
Steiner, Ben, 90 
Stengel, Casey, 75, 180-181 
Stockton Hall of Lame (California), 
172 

Stockton Old-Timers League, 
137-138 

Stratton, Jack, 167 
Strong Industrial League, 54-55, 
57 

Sundowner Hotel (Reno, Nevada), 
7 

Sunset League, 47 
Swope, Darrell, 7 

T 

Taylor, Dick, 61 
Thayer, Ernst L., 162 
Thompson, Dr., 22 
Thompson, Gordon, 22 
Thompson, Mike, 166 
Threlkel, Jake, 4, 8-9, 26, 29, 
30-38, 41, 43-45, 48-49, 
51, 54, 56-57, 59, 61, 66, 
64, 66, 71, 76, 77, 89, 92, 
94,182 

Threlkel’s Park (Reno, Nevada), 
9,41,46 

Torvinen, Roy L., 22 
Toscanos Hotel (Reno, Nevada), 
43 

Traner Middle School (Reno, 
Nevada), 20 

Trachock, Dick, 152, 144, 166 



192 


INDEX 


Traner, Fred W., 19-20, 22 

Trounday, Roger, 21-22,27,148- 
149, 165, 171 

Truckee Meadows Community 
College (Nevada), 70, 154 

Twentieth Century Club (Reno, 
Nevada), 14 

U 

Uhalt, Frenchy, 90, 100 

University of Nevada, 2-4, 6-7, 
16-17,26,37,44,48-49,53- 
54, 57, 59, 86, 113, 143, 
160,162 

University of Washington, Seattle, 
16,143 

V 

Van Slyck, Ashley, 170 

Vaughn, Otis E., 8, 173, 183 

Vitt, Oscar, 73, 107 

W 

Washoe Fligh Bowlers League 
(Nevada), 18 

Washoe High Bowling Team 
(Nevada), 126 

Washoe High School (Nevada), 
143,145,154-155 

Western International League 
(“Willy Loop”), 13, 41, 57, 
59, 74, 100, 114, 116, 129- 
136 

Westlake Brothers, 139 


White, Jo-Jo, 118, 121,124,181 
Whitehead, Tip, 10 
Whiting, Ed., 8 

Williams, Ted, 80-81, 120, 180 
Women’s Bowling Hall of Fame, 
18 

Wooster High School (Nevada), 
154-155, 165 
Wooster, Clinton, 27 
Wright, Al, 120 

Wrigley Field (Los Angeles, Cali¬ 
fornia), 73, 101,106 



