V * • 












Silver Peak: 
Never a Ghost Town 


Interviewee: Twenty-three people with firsthand memories of Silver Peak, Nevad 

Interviewed: 1996 
Published: 2002 
Interviewer: Victoria Ford 
UNOHP Catalog #192 


Description 

This is the story of Silver Peak, a small mining community in Esmeralda County, Nevada. As with many towns tied 
to mining, it has suffered the booms and busts that are inherent in the industry, but the difference with Silver Peak 
is that it has weathered them all and stood its ground in the desert. 

Approaches to studying history vary, and one of the most exciting aspects of this book is its use of sources— 
archaeological discoveries, archival records, and oral history interviews. This unique combination offers something 
more than a list of events, names, and dates. Information on Silver Peak’s earliest history was drawn from newspapers, 
legal documents, letters, business files, and archaeological reports. More recent history, from the 1930s onward, 
really comes alive through the oral histories that were conducted for this project. Chroniclers recounted not only 
the serious business of mining and keeping a town afloat but also humorous stories about community life at the 
place they fondly referred to as “The Peak.” 

This combination of sources provides a vast array of information on Silver Peak and addresses some of the 
following questions: Why did Silver Peak survive when other Nevada mining towns did not? What role was played 
by investors, individuals, families, and advances in technology? How was Silver Peak alike or different from other 
mining communities? The resulting story is told in this engaging look at a community that has met its challenges 
head on and has remained vibrant—and never a ghost town. 

The Silver Peak oral history project was sponsored by Mineral Ridge Resources, Inc. (MRRI) in cooperation with 
the Bureau of Land Management and the Nevada State Historic Preservation Office. The project was part of MRRI’s 
permitting process before open-pit mining operations started in 1996 at the sites of the historic Mary, Drinkwater, 
Oromonte, and Gordon-Brodie mines. Two publications have resulted from this project: a research volume containing 
the oral histories that was published by the UNOHP in 2000, entitled Silver Peak: At Work, At Play, and At Home, 
and this book, Silver Peak: Never a Ghost Town. 



Silver 

Peak 




Silver 

Peak 


Never A 

Ghost Town 


BY VICTORIA FORD 


UNIVERSITY OF NEVADA 
ORAL HISTORY PROGRAM 
2002 



Publication of Silver Peak: Never a Ghost Town 
was supported in part by 
Mineral Ridge Resources, Inc., 
and the Verne Foster Memorial Fund 


Copyright 2002 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Reno, Nevada 89557 

All rights reserved. Published 2002 
Printed in the United States of America 

ISBN: 1-56475-378-6 


Publication Staff: 

Director: R. T. King 
Assistant Director: Mary Larson 
Production Manager: Kathleen M. Coles 
Senior Production Assistant: Linda Sommer 
Production Assistant: Kathryn Wright-Ross 


Contents 


Preface vii 

Introduction xi 

PART I: EARLY HISTORY, 1863 4 928 

1 Early Entrepreneurs, 1863-1906 4 

2 The Pittsburg Era, 1906-1928 29 

PART II: THE VOLLMAR YEARS, 1928-1942 

3 Fred Vollmar Jr. 53 

4 The Mines 65 

5 The Mills 103 

6 Community Life 123 

7 The Families 153 

PART III: WORLD WAR II AND THE POST-WAR ERA, 1942-1990 

8 War and Quiet Times, 1942-1970 197 

9 New Life, New Challenges, 1970-1990 223 


10 


The Future 


253 



vi 

Contents 


Glossary 

281 

Index 

287 



Preface 


Approaches to studying history vary, and one of the most exciting as¬ 
pects of this book on Silver Peak, Nevada, is its combination of sources— 
archaeological discoveries, archival records, and oral history interviews. This 
unique combination offers something more than a list of events, names, and 
dates. For Silver Peak’s earliest history, we relied on newspapers, legal docu¬ 
ments, letters, and business files. Archaeology added information not found 
in documents—what work took place in particular buildings, where the build¬ 
ings were located, and who might have been there, such as women or people 
from different cultures. More recent history, from the 1930s onward, really 
comes alive in oral histories. With all sources combined, we can look at 
Silver Peak, Nevada, and find answers to questions. Why did it survive when 
other Nevada mining towns did not? What role was played by mining, mill¬ 
ing, advances in technology, investors, individuals, families? How was Silver 
Peak alike or different from other mining communities? What we found is 
the story in this book. 

The Silver Peak oral history project was sponsored by Mineral Ridge 
Resources, Inc. (MRRI) in cooperation with the Bureau of Land Manage¬ 
ment (BLM) and the Nevada State Historic Preservation Office. The project 
was part of MRRI’s permitting process before open-pit mining operations 
started in 1996 at the sites of the historic Mary, Drinkwater, Oromonte, and 
Gordon-Brodie mines. 

Even before the MRRI mine opened, oral history interviews were con¬ 
ducted with a total of twenty-three chroniclers during the summer of 1996. 
The interviews resulted in over 40 hours of audio tapes and more than 1,600 
pages of transcription. Chroniclers were selected who could provide first¬ 
hand information on mining and milling technology, transportation and 
housing, and on the community of Silver Peak. Some also told folklore sto¬ 
ries that were passed down from generation to generation. As with all such 
stories, people remembered different details, but the core of their stories was 
the same. For example, Silver Peak’s history would never be complete with- 



viii 

Preface 


out its stories of moving the schoolhouse into town, lighting the volcano, 
and initiating newcomers. 

Each chronicler commented that Silver Peak was a special place for 
them. Of course, some still live there, so it is home. However, even those 
who came expecting little from the community and those who have gone on 
to other jobs all clearly remembered their time at “The Peak”—a term local 
residents use with fondness. All those interviewed were enthusiastic about 
adding their stories to this project. 

The original oral history tapes were donated by MRRI to the University 
of Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) and are archived on the Uni¬ 
versity of Nevada, Reno campus. Two publications have resulted, a research 
volume and this book. Copies of the lightly edited research volume, pub¬ 
lished by UNOHP in 2000, were placed in the university libraries at Reno 
and Las Vegas, the Silver Peak and Tonopah libraries, and the Central Ne¬ 
vada Museum at Tonopah. The book is being sold at several locations, and 
MRRI is donating proceeds to the Central Nevada Museum, the Silver Peak 
Library, and UNOHP. The Silver Peak project also inspired and became 
part of UNOHP’s statewide mining oral history project. 

Each of the Silver Peak oral histories contained gems of information 
about the town and Mineral Ridge Mining District’s history. However, when 
in print, oral discourse lacks the gestures, inflection, tone, and other nu¬ 
ances that make normal conversation lively and understandable. As much 
as possible, I have kept each person’s original words, then edited the original 
transcripts for chronological and topical order so that their stories shine 
through. I have also used some oral history devices to represent the dynamic 
elements of spoken language: [laughter] appears when the chronicler laughs 
in amusement or to express irony. Otherwise bracketed information con¬ 
tains editor’s comments to help clarify a spoken passage. Ellipses (...), which 
are normally used to indicate deleted material, in this book are used to show 
that a statement is made with pauses, either for emotional or dramatic ef¬ 
fect. 

Each person interviewed has reviewed the finished manuscript of his or 
her oral history and has affirmed its accuracy. However, as with all oral his¬ 
tories, memory is imperfect, and the recollections may not be free of error. 

In addition to thanking each person I interviewed, I would like to thank 
Charles Zeier (formerly of Resource Concepts and now with Harding ESE in 
Carson City, Nevada) for inviting me to join this project; Hank Lesinski, 
Tom Rinaldi, and Ben Viljoen from MRRI for their support; Anthropology 
Professor Don Hardesty from the University of Nevada, Reno, Edward J. 
Stoner of Western Cultural Resources Management, and Renee Corona 
Kolvet, formerly of Western Cultural Resources Managment) for their ex¬ 
citing archaeological contributions to Silver Peak’s history; historian Steven 



Mehls for his archival research; and Director Tom King, Assistant Director 
Mary Larson, Kathleen Coles, Linda Sommer, and Kathryn Wright-Ross at 
the UNOHP for transcribing, designing, and publishing this book. 

Victoria Ford 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 


ix 

Preface 




Introduction 


In 1995, Mineral Ridge Resources, Inc. proposed to reopen a mine near 
Silver Peak, a small town located at the center of Esmeralda County in south- 
central Nevada. Much of the land on which they proposed to conduct op¬ 
erations is administered by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). In com¬ 
pliance with agency permitting requirements, the mining company conducted 
a number of studies to ensure that their operation would not harm the area 
or its resources. One such study was a review of the area’s archaeological and 
historical resources. Gold and silver were discovered in the Mineral Ridge 
area in the 1860s, and mining has occurred there off and on ever since. 
Enthusiastic about the area’s history, Mineral Ridge Resources wanted re¬ 
sults of that review made available to a wide audience. In cooperation with 
the BLM and the Nevada State Office of Elistoric Preservation, the mining 
company proposed an alternate approach to meeting its compliance respon¬ 
sibilities. This book is a result of that approach. 

The recording of history can be accomplished using a variety of meth¬ 
ods. I am reminded of that every time I stand in front of my bookcase. There 
are the classic histories, those that result from the review and analysis of 
written records. Typically, the emphasis is on historic events, processes, or 
persons of the near or distant past. These are the history books with which 
we are most familiar. Increasingly over the last half century, archaeology has 
turned its eye to exploring the historic period. The application of archaeo¬ 
logical techniques is especially meaningful in the desert west, where many 
events occurred between visits of the census taker and generally beyond the 
reach of the record taker. More recently, there has been an increased inter¬ 
est in the recording of oral histories, memoirs of those who participated in 
recent history. 

The alternate approach proposed by Mineral Ridge Resources was to 
combine results of these three alternate approaches to the recording of his¬ 
tory. Archival and archaeological research results were integrated with the 
oral histories of people who lived and worked at Silver Peak and its mines. 



xii 


Introduction 


Oral histories, like historical diaries, hold a certain fascination in that they 
report on the making of history by those who were there. My favorite is the 
diary of a German conscript who served with Napoleon during the ill-fated 
march to Moscow. My great-great-great grandfather also made that march 
but did not survive to write a diary. To me, the beauty of that little book is 
that it teaches something of both the context and the participants in a spe¬ 
cific chapter of history. It is both pertinent and poignant. It is that combina¬ 
tion that this volume seeks to capture. It offers a factual presentation of the 
history of the Silver Peak Mining District as seen through the eyes of the 
historian, the archaeologist, and some of the people who helped make that 
history. 


Charles D. Zeier, RPA 
Cultural Resource Specialist 



PARTI 

Early History, 1863-1928 




1 


Early Entrepreneurs, 1863-1906 


Through the years many a miner arrived in Silver Peak thinking this was 
just another mining town, just another job out in the godforsaken desert, a 
two-year, or maybe just a two-day, hitch before moving on to the next job, 
the next small town, and the next. . . until they all blended into one generic 
memory called “Nevada mining towns.” But what was it about this particular 
town, sitting in the middle of a vast, silent land, that lured miners and their 
families and then never entirely released its hold on them? 

Known for its minerals—gold, silver, and lithium—Mineral Ridge 
District mines have proven among Nevada’s most productive. By the time 
World War II arrived and the October 1942 War Production Board Order L- 
208 suspended nearly all mining of precious metals, Mineral Ridge was one 
ofNevada’s top thirteen producers, yielding more than $10 million in riches. 
It ranked along with Virginia City, Eureka, Aurora, Goldfield, and 
Tonopah. 1 One of the oldest, continuously active districts in the state, 
Mineral Ridge mines produced more gold and silver than some ofNevada’s 
legendary ghost towns, yet Silver Peak never gained the fame that settled 
upon the other rip-roaring mining camps. Why? And why did Silver Peak 
survive when other mining camps did not? 

Clues to these questions begin appearing as you drive into town past the 
unexpected, black cinder cone jutting out at the base of the foothills, a 
startling leftover from an infant volcano. A cool lake turns out to be nothing 
more than a beckoning desert mirage, the shimmering welcome of hot 
summer sun on the salt flats of the Clayton Valley playa. Here and there, the 
trained eye can spot old tailings from early stamp mills fanning out near the 
edge of the playa. The nature of the gold and silver, the location, and the 
innovations necessary to extract them from the ore determined part of the 
story. Unlike California’s placer mines or the Comstock Lode at Virginia 
City, Silver Peak’s ore was different. It challenged early-day miners to stretch 
their ingenuity and learn the latest in technology, drawing them from hard- 
rock surface mines to deep underground mines then back again to open pits 



4 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


on the surface. The design of mills changed from traditional stamp mills to 
experiments with the new cyanide and later the heap-leach processes. 
Today, chemical “mining” of lithium has been added to Silver Peak’s 
resources. 

But landscape alone cannot tell Silver Peak’s story. Right at the edge of 
town residents advertise their devotion to “The Peak.” A sign on one 
modular home announces, “A Virtual Paradise.” To newcomers, that may 
seem a satirical comment on the dry desert climate or a take-off on 
computerese. But to those autonomous souls who live and work there, the 
sign is just plain common sense. Talk to the town’s inhabitants at the Dew 
Drop Inn (the only cafe/bar/quick-stop-grocery-store open in the summer of 
1996), and each will tell you a different version about what makes Silver 
Peak special. 

Today, few recall the oldest stories that began with Silver Peak’s 
magnetic attraction to East Coast dollars. Among its investors were Samuel 
J. Tilden, prominent politician who became Governor of New York State 
(1875-1876) and a presidential candidate in 1876; John I. Blair, wealthy 
banker and railroad financier from New Jersey; and E. L. Cord, famous for 
automobile manufacturing. Each willingly offered his money, sinking cash 
into state-of-the-art machinery designed to extract precious metals from the 
Mineral Ridge Mining District’s hard rock. 2 They joined forces with locally 
famous miners who offered their talent and toil, and whose names are still 
familiar in the area—names like Chiatovich, Hill, Humphrey, Shirley, and 
Vollmar. At some point, each ventured past that black volcano cone and 
into Silver Peak’s mining history. 

Finally, the story is completed by a few tenacious families whose 
descendants store treasured memories of how, over the decades, they kept 
Silver Peak from becoming just another Nevada ghost town. Silver Peak’s 
real-life stories are alive, stories that create a picture of the boom-and-bust 
roller-coaster ride of the past 135 years, a ride that has not yet ended. Retired 
schoolteacher Alberta Merritt, who still lives at Silver Peak and has for 40 
years, summed it up best in her oral history, “I want that put on my 
gravestone .... ‘Here lies Alberta. She was just going to be here 
temporarily.’” 

Silver Peak completes a geographical triangle with Tonopah and 
Goldfield. To drive there, take the stretch of U.S. Highway 95 from either 
Hawthorne to the north or Tonopah to the northeast. It intersects Nevada 
State Highway 285. Locals often call this point the Blair Junction, because 
the Tonopah and Goldfield Railroad once connected with the short-line 
Silver Peak Railroad and carried staples into the company town of Blair, 
which was located three miles north of Silver Peak. Follow Highway 285 to 
the end of the pavement—that’s Silver Peak. Mineral Ridge Mining District 
is located northwest of town. Access is a steep, winding, gravel road which 
passes the location of many of the old mining claims mentioned in this book. 



The gravel road loops back to the south end of Silver Peak, branches into 
Fish Lake Valley to the west, or continues south to Lida. 


5 


THE MINERS 

Old-timers always said Mexican prospectors were the first to discover 
Silver Peak, Nevada, and related evidence suggests that may be true. The 
Candelaria District just 50 miles to the north was discovered by Mexican 
miners in 1864, just about the time Silver Peak was incorporated as a town. 
Church bells cast in Mexico have been uncovered east of Walker Lake, 
Nevada, not far away. 3 And John Chiatovich, who was one of Silver Peak’s 
earliest known settlers, told his son Cecil he always believed Mexican miners 
had searched the area as early as the 1850s. 

Whoever arrived first had to tolerate plenty of solitude in this vast desert, 
silent except for the song of a few birds, the scuttle of a lizard scrambling 
under a sagebrush, and the clank of a pick against hard rock. They must have 
believed the 1859 Comstock Lode wasn’t the only rich strike to be found in 
Nevada. That faith proved true when discoveries in the Esmeralda District 
one year later expanded Aurora’s population to 5,000 within two years. Next 
the Reese River District was discovered in 1862 by William Talcott, and the 
town of Austin appeared almost overnight. To dream of a rich discovery and 
life on easy street was no stretch of the imagination during such exciting 
times. 

The first prospectors of record in the Silver Peak area arrived sometime 
in 1863 or 1864 from nearby mining camps such as Aurora and Belmont, just 
70 miles away, and Austin, which is 130 miles to the north. They found 
Silver Peak’s spring seeping from a limestone butte, bringing the water so 
vital to sustain life and run the mills. That spring became the townsite. 

They also found promise—the promise of silver in the Vanderbilt and 
Pocotillo mines and gold in the Glory and the Drinkwater mines. Claims 
were filed on seven locations during that first year between July 27,1864, and 
August, 1865, and Silver Peak seemed destined for fame and fortune. 

Oddly enough, these were perilous years for the mining industry. As 
Nevada entered statehood on October 31, 1864, its mining industry was 
threatened. Stocks for mining companies throughout Nevada crashed due to 
a stock-market panic in San Francisco. In the summer of 1864, the Reese 
River Reveille newspaper reported a depression in the mining camps 
surrounding Austin. Perhaps the depressed economy at Austin drove the first 
prospectors to search in what was then called the Red Mountain Mining 
District near Silver Peak. For example, according to the Mining and Scientific 
Press (June 1, 1867), the Robinson brothers had traveled there searching for 
salt needed by the mills in Austin when they discovered the Vanderbilt lode 
and brought back a sample of float quartz that yielded $180 per ton. Their 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 



6 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 




1 0 0 10 20 MILES 

10 0 10 20 KILOMETERS 


MINERAL RIDGE HISTORIC MINING DISTRICT 


Map courtesy of WORM. 
Karen Laramore, graphic artist. 


claim was recorded on April 14, 1865. It was not unusual to find brothers 
working as partners, and during the same year Seymour and Rienzi Hughes 
staked the first claims at the Drinkwater, Chieftain, Glory, Crowning Glory, 
Western Soldier, and Valiant. 

As with most rich discoveries, it wasn’t long before the buying and 
selling began, creating a rapidly changing and complex maze of ownership. 4 
Sam Martin turned out to be a key player in early Silver Peak history and 
bought out half of the Vanderbilt from the Robinson brothers and partners. 








Ill 



t . • i 


X 


MINING Cl.AIM OPERATORS 

SILVER PEAK & RED MOUNTAIN SILVER MINE COMPANY 

SILVER PEAK MINE COMPANY 

TAYLOR &. BRUNTON 

LOUIS SCHOOF & TTETJEN 

JOHN CHIATOVICH 


150 _ 

soo 


3COM 

lOOOf 


Bob Estes, cartographer. 
Map courtesy of WCRM. 


MINING CLAIMS 

1884 

I-1 MINING LODE BOUNDARY 

I-» MINING CLAIM BOUNDARY 









8 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


He paid them with the deed to a quartz mill he built. In addition to the 
Vanderbilt, he bought out the Hughes brothers and partners, which gave him 
twO'thirds interest in the area’s best mines—the Drinkwater, the Chieftain, 
and the Glory. Martin eventually held interests in nearly all of the area’s 
major gold mines. 

In addition to market fluctuations and changing owners, two other 
factors in determining the fate of the new mining community were the 
nature of the ore bodies and the technology available to extract the gold and 
silver. At first Silver Peak’s geology seemed pretty basic. Most of the gold was 
found in lenticular quartz lenses that were commonly located in outcrops or 
veins that ran horizontally or vertically near the surface. According to 
Donald Hardesty, professor of anthropology at the University of Nevada, 
Reno, two mining methods worked well on this type of gold. One is surface 
mining, which can be as simple as one miner working an outcrop or as 
complex as a modern day, industrial, open-pit mine. 5 

The second method is called rat-hole underground mining, economical 
when the gold is buried close enough to the surface so that windlasses, whims, 
and other low-tech equipment can remove the ore. “Rat hole” was a term 
adopted from the Spanish name “el sistema del rato,” meaning “system of the 

moment,” a low-cost, labor-inten¬ 
sive system of mining used in 
Spanish Colonial America. 6 

Both of these methods worked 
well in the mines of the Red 
Mountain District. Neither re¬ 
quired the advanced technology 
nor the capital investment of the 
third early-day method—deep, 
industrial, underground mining— 
which was used in the mines on the 
Comstock Lode at Virginia City. 
When the gold was buried two 
hundred to three hundred feet 
below ground, then steam engines 
and other industrial machinery 
became a necessity for mining the 
ore, dewatering the mines, hauling, 
and milling. Thus, the technology 
used at Silver Peak was standard for 
the day. 

One elaborate system em¬ 
ployed for hauling ore to the mills 
in Silver Peak was quite impres¬ 
sive, even though it was not 
considered particularly innovative 



“The second method is called rat-hole under¬ 
ground mining, economical when the gold is 
buried close enough to the surface so that wind¬ 
lasses, whims, and other low-tech equipment 
can remove the ore.” A windlass in opera¬ 
tion. (Photograph courtesy of Sherry 
Mattei.) 



back then. When plans were scrapped for an eight-mile railroad linking the 
Drinkwater and Glory Mines to the ten-stamp mill in Silver Peak, a one-and- 
a-half-mile surface tramway was built. Using the force of gravity, loaded cars 
moved downhill and dumped ore into bins, which then filled enormous 
wagons that are thought to be the largest ever used in Nevada. The American 
Journal of Mining described these huge wagons: 


9 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


It is believed that these wagons are the largest on the coast. The tires 
of the wheels are five inches broad, the hubs eighteen inches in 
diameter, the spokes look like the arms of a water-wheel.... While 
our informant was at the mill one of these wagons, drawn by twelve 
mules arrived with 24 tons—48,000 pounds—of quartz, which is the 
ordinary load. 7 


Unlike the Comstock, Silver Peak’s early mines did not present new 
challenges. The men and their mines appeared to be ordinary for the 1860s 
in Nevada. 


THE MILLS 

Stamp mills arrived closely behind the gold discoveries, and they arrived 
on wheels. Rather than being built from the ground up, at least three of the 
four stamp mills built during that time period were either shipped from or 
(later) to other mining camps. Among these mobile mills was the Hughes 
brothers’ “toy” three-stamp mill, which they set up at Red Mountain Spring 
five and a half miles away. Water was such a precious commodity that they 
were willing to pack the ore that far to their tiny mill, which was later moved 
to Belmont, Nevada. 

In 1866 Sam Martin hauled a ten-stamp mill to Silver Peak from 
Jacobsville, near Austin. Referred to either as the Martin or Vanderbilt Mill, 
it was designed for wet crushing and lacked roasting facilities, so it was losing 
more silver than was being recovered from the ore. Ben Viljoen, who in 1996 
was a mining engineer and supervisor for Mineral Ridge Resources, Inc. 
(MRRI), commented on the shortcomings of the early mills: 

Originally, the ore was brought down from the mines by wagon 
into town here, where there were a whole bunch of mills—at least six 
or seven of them—which were amalgamation mills and gravity-type 
mills. Well, first of all, they were stamp mills, and then the material 
(after it’s crushed by the stamps) comes out through the screen across 
amalgam sheets. These amalgam sheets are copper sheets that are 
covered with mercury. And as the material flows across the sheet, 
mercury sticks to copper, and then gold sticks to mercury. So as it 
would build up with mercury, then it’s taken off with putty knives, 



10 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


retorted, and the gold’s left behind. The mercury goes into a vapor, 
and then it’s condensed back to be reused again. The gold’s 
recovered that way. And then from there it would go onto tables or 
a sluice box—some gravity method—to separate. Since gold’s 
heavier than rock, the gravity method would drop the gold out, in 
principle. 

Now, they weren’t very efficient in this area [Mineral Ridge 
Mining District], because the gold is so darn fine that the gravity 
didn’t help. The particles . . . the size of the gold is, I believe, about 
four hundred mesh, which is four hundred holes per square inch in a 
screen. So it’s very, very fine, and the gold didn’t have enough 
surface area to be caught by the mercury. And then it was such a 
small particle size that, even though it’s heavier than the 
surrounding rock, the surrounding rock was still heavier because of 
the size of it. So the gravity method was never very successful. 8 


It is not surprising that Martin’s mill closed in 1866 and never reopened. 
As awareness of milling losses increased, experimentation began. One of the 
earliest innovations was the addition of stearmpowered stamps. A forty- 
stamp mill was built by the Silver Peak and Red Mountain Gold and Silver 
Mining Company (SP/RM). 9 Although original plans called for forty stamps, 
that many were never installed, but the addition of steam power boosted 
production far beyond what was normal for thirty stamps. 10 



“One of the earliest innovations was the addition of steam-powered stamps. A forty-stamp 
mill was built by the Silver Peak and Red Mountain Gold and Silver Mining Company.” 
The mill was constructed in 1867. (Photograph courtesy of the Central Nevada 
Historical Society.) 






The company’s first mill superintendent was Joshua E. Clayton, 
nicknamed “Professor.” A well-known mining engineer and geologist, 
Clayton Valley, near Silver Peak, is named for him. According to the 
Sacramento Union and Territorial Enterprise, he was successfully 
experimenting with a new crusher. 11 It is unfortunate that the newspaper 
didn’t publish the design, because it may have been the same steam-powered 
stamps that SP/RM later installed. At any rate, Clayton’s attempts to 
modernize were innovations that relied on and protected capital 
investments. 

Investments meant life or death for Nevada’s mines. In addition, eastern 
financing led metallurgical research to develop new, cost-effective methods 
for extracting gold and silver from the ore. However, dollars alone couldn’t 
do the job. Real success came from Eastern money mixed with Nevada savvy. 
It was local men who ironed out the bugs, adapting new technologies to fit 
everyday mining and milling in the Mineral Ridge District. 


11 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


THE COMPANIES 


After its initial discovery, and thanks to East Coast investors, Silver Peak 
prospered. Soon individual miners were replaced by mining companies that 
could not only afford the technology to mine on a larger scale but could often 
afford experimenting with mining and milling technology. That required 
capital and plenty of it. Silver Peak became . . part of the capital frontier 
as much as it was part of the miners’ frontier,” according to historian Steven 
F. Mehls. 12 

In addition, several national economic forces spun into action. The 
Civil War ended in April of 1865, just in the nick of time to salvage Nevada’s 
mining industry. It freed eastern capital for western mines. Investors 
speculated that the demand for gold and silver would increase as the need to 
redeem wartime greenbacks increased. At the same time, thousands of 
veterans headed West seeking fortune and adventure. Together, money and 
manpower were the powerful forces that bounced mining out of its doldrums. 

In Silver Peak, one company dominated the scene. The Great Salt Basin 
Mill and Mining Company (later the SP/RM) became the largest operator 
during the early production era. Company owners like Samuel J. Tilden 
(later Governor of New York State) visited Silver Peak in 1864 and acquired 
the most valuable mining properties in both the gold and silver districts by 
1867. In fact, the Crowning Glory Mine was one of the most valuable gold 
properties in the state, which meant SP/RM definitely dominated the area. 
They also poured money into building mills for their mines. Their holdings 
included Martin’s ten-stamp mill, which was producing up to $2,000 per day 
in 1866, as well as their own mill that opened in September 1868. By 1869 
there were thirty stamps crushing gold ore from the Red Mountain District at 
a rate of forty-five tons per day. 



12 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


JOHN INSLEY BLAIR 
1802 - 1899 

John Blair and his money helped shape the early days of Sih 
ver Peak. Blair controlled some of the most important patented min- 
ing claims in the Silver Peak and the Red Mountain mining districts. 13 
Blair was a New Jersey investor and millionaire business tycoon who 
made his money in railroading. A self-made man, he went to work in 
a country store at the age of eleven. Within sixteen years he owned a 
chain of five general stores in New Jersey. He also ran four flour mills 
and founded the Lackawana Coal and Iron Company, and by the time 
he was fifty years old he became the director of the Delaware, 
Lackawana, and Western Railroad. 

Blair was a powerful man in New Jersey. He served as a del¬ 
egate to the Republican National Convention in Chicago in 1860 
where Abraham Lincoln was nominated as President of the United 
States. But he lost a bid for governor of New Jersey in 1868, which 
seemed to end his political career. Meanwhile, his prominence in the 
railroad industry expanded. He helped secure the charter for the Union 
Pacific Railroad in 1862 and personally directed construction of the 
first one hundred miles built west of Omaha, Nebraska. At one time 
in his career he held the position of president over sixteen different 
railroad companies. Blair also laid out sites for eighty towns and gave 
them gifts of land and money to build more than one hundred Presby¬ 
terian churches. By the time of his death he had given away over $5 
million. 

He joined another well-known East Coast investor, Samuel 
Tilden, later Governor of New York State and an unsuccessful presi¬ 
dential candidate. Along with several other partners, they formed the 
SP/RM, which was incorporated in New York in 1866. They invested 
in some of Silver Peak’s richest gold mines like the Drinkwater, Chief¬ 
tain, Glory, and Vanderbilt. 

His son, DeWitt Clinton Blair, was heir to his father’s $70- 
million fortune and continued the SP/RM’s operations until 1906. 
He then sold it to the Pittsburg Silver Peak Gold Mining Company 
for an estimated $750,000. Later, the Pittsburg Company built a mod¬ 
ern company town a few miles north of Silver Peak and named it 
Blair in his father’s honor. 

Whether or not Blair ever visited Silver Peak before his death 
in 1899 is unknown, but today Silver Peak residents still direct trav¬ 
elers to turn south at “Blair Junction”—a 130-year-old tribute to one 
man whose vision and money left his mark on Nevada. 




Meanwhile, what happened to the small mining operators who had 
played such an important part in establishing Silver Peak? Many stayed on, 
some working for the new corporations. For example, after his mill closed, 
Sam Martin went to work as superintendent of the SP/RM mill. The Hughes 
brothers apparently sold their holdings and left behind their three-stamp mill 
which was moved to Belmont. 

At least one small operator, H. W. Barton, managed independently. 
Barton’s arrastra was a good example of a small-scale operation with low 
overhead, and it stood in sharp contrast to the advanced technology 
furnished by moneyed operators of the day. 14 Barton worked the Double 
Eagle Mine six miles west of Silver Peak using a Mexican-style arrastra. The 
ore was ground by several large stones dragged by mules around in circles on 
a pavement of stone. The arrastra was a crude operation, and Barton may 
have extracted the gold by panning. 

Barton’s transportation system was also pretty basic—Native American 
men were paid fifty cents to haul a load of 100 pounds of ore on their backs 
a distance of three-quarters of a mile from the mine to the arrastra at Coyote 
Springs. Because that short distance was a grueling, steep, uphill climb, few 
offered to make more than one trip each day. Even so, the ore was so rich at 
$250 to $300 per ton that Barton seemed to have survived for quite some 
time on earnings from his low-overhead methods. 

Another company tried to follow SP/RM’s formula of land purchases and 
investments in technology—but failed. The New York and Silver Peak 
Mining Company led by an easterner named Colonel Catherwood bought up 
claims and built a twelve-stamp mill. However, Catherwood failed to study 
the local geology. It seems he purchased claims in the Silver Peak Mining 
District that turned out to be worthless: 


13 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


It was the quickest sale ever made, and was remarkable, even in those 
halcyon days when Eastern greenbacks found their way quite freely 
into the empty pockets of the prospectors. 15 

When his Silver Peak investments totaling $200,000 failed to yield a 
return, Colonel Catherwood moved his mill to Palmetto. Finding no success 
there either, it wasn’t long before he packed up and headed back to the East 
Coast. His experience confirmed that eastern capital alone did not guarantee 
success without that critical link with Nevadans. 


LIVING CONDITIONS 

When the first claims at Silver Peak were filed in late 1863 and early 
1864, the Silver Peak spring provided the most precious resource—water. It 
was so filled with minerals that later residents claimed they “chewed the 
water,” but it worked just fine for powering the amalgamation mills. 16 It 
didn’t take long for other necessities to follow. The early Silver Peak mining 



14 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


camp in 1864 consisted of three boardinghouses, an equal number of saloons, 
and two stores. Food, shelter, and recreation had arrived. The town’s 
population was 150, most likely all men. Since the mines were two to eight 
miles away, some miners probably camped closer to the jobs that paid $4 per 
day. 1 ' Jobs varied little in any early-day mining town. The choice was either 
mining or milling. Also, both ore and basic supplies had to be hauled back 
and forth between major trade centers. 

However, once the first East Coast dollars arrived, Silver Peak was poised 
at the very brink of the industrial revolution. Change arrived quickly to the 
tiny community. Jobs with some variety opened up. The standard of living 
improved as well. Big business took over from original owners, and when 
investors bought the latest in machinery to improve the milling process, a 
division developed within the town itself. Early prospectors and surface 
miners still lived close to their small claims and were still self-sufficient, but 
they were no longer counted among the community’s movers and shakers. 
SP/RM created a variety of jobs, some with more status than others. For 
example, in addition to mining or hauling, a man might now aspire to jobs 
like “millwright” or “superintendent”—jobs that conferred higher status and 
were considered newsworthy in local newspapers. 

From all appearances, Silver Peak was taking its first tentative steps 
toward permanence. The town became a major hub for mining activity in 
southwestern Nevada. In 1868 ore discoveries in Death Valley gave Silver 
Peak the added role of supply center for Lincoln and Nye County miners 
during the 1870s. Now a vital trade center, prospectors and miners traveling 
to Pahranagat and Death Valley stopped in Silver Peak. Eventually, Silver 
Peak’s prospectors were enticed to follow, creating an exploration exodus 
similar to that of other mining towns. This phenomenon was common 
throughout the mining West. 18 

Nevada newspapers acknowledged Silver Peak’s prominence during this 
time. Due to the distances between towns, it took considerable time for 
Silver Peak’s news to travel, but on May 5,1866, the Territorial Enterprise said 
Virginia City miners had been hired to work at Silver Peak. In news articles 
written with the “booster attitude” of the day, reporters touted the latest 
discoveries in glowing terms. But their articles also proved that Silver Peak, 
despite its isolated location, was far from insulated from its neighboring 
towns. Indeed, it played an important role in the state’s developing mining 
industry. 

Chinese Workers 

Nearly lost is the fascinating story of Chinese workers in the Silver Peak 
area. 19 It seems SP/RM employed one hundred men: sixty white men who 
received $70 per month plus board to work the mines and mill and forty 
Chinese who received less—$ 1 per day—probably to build roads, haul wood, 
and cook meals. 



A recent archaeological study uncovered exciting clues to corroborate 
that report. Archaeologists found two small campsites used by Chinese la- 
borers who were believed to have worked on various roads or railbeds in 
nearby Echo Canyon. 20 Along the main route to Coyote Pass was an open 
short-term campsite, according to the remains of tent platforms, tree stumps, 
and charcoal from campfires. 

Food was prepared outdoors, a feature common to other Chinese camps 
throughout the West. Along with canned foods, a typical dinner menu for 
the Chinese workers would have been fresh roasted meats such as jackrab- 
bit, sheep, goat, or pork—the latter was a favorite among Chinese. Bone 
fragments located there were unevenly chopped as though butchered with a 
cleaver, the favored method used by Chinese cooks during the early years of 
western settlement. 

An opium tin lid revealed another interesting detail of the Chinese story. 
The lid was from a rectangular opium can, and the cartouche said it came 
from a district in Hong Kong named Huan Shang and was sold by the Fu 
Fong store. 21 Translated into English, the opium brand was “Abundant Fuck,” 
and other Chinese characters were “district up,” “prosperity,” and “arriv- 
ing.” Based on nineteenth century records from a Chinese store in northern 
California, the Kwong Tai Wo Company lists the Abundant Fuck brand as 
relatively expensive opium, affordable when shared. 22 

Nearer the Oromonte Mine, Chinese workers briefly camped in a natu- 
ral rock shelter. It was formed by a large stone canopy with a pyramid-shaped 
rocky outcrop guarding the entrance, which created a U-shaped room with 
openings on either side. The Chinese were not the first to find this wonder¬ 
ful natural shelter. Native Americans probably stopped there to rest while 
they processed plants gathered for food. Remnants of their tools were found 
in this area, including four bifaces (bifacially flaked tools used as knives and 
scrapers) and a flake tool, made of grayish-black and black obsidian, along 
with two granite metate (a milling stone used primarily to grind vegetable 
foods and seeds) fragments. 

Evidence that this rock shelter later became a Chinese campsite was 
confirmed by a few small treasures left behind. Among the artifacts uncov¬ 
ered were ceramic sherds from bamboo-pattern rice bowls which were popu¬ 
lar among working-class Chinese in the late 1800s; stoneware fragments 
from one soy-sauce jar that was probably imported from China; and tea con¬ 
tainers similar to those found at a Chinese cabin site near Truckee, Califor¬ 
nia. In addition, the Chinese residents had punctured some lids from food 
cans to create kitchen tools such as strainers, sifters, and hanging weights. 23 

One longtime Silver Peak resident, Ruby Griffin, recalled details about 
the Chinese who lived in the area. She said owners of the only Chinese 
restaurant in town were generally “well-regarded” by locals. 24 As with most 
strangers, Chinese who stayed to set up a business in town were more readily 
accepted than drifters searching for work. The few Chinese men who stayed 
at the tent camp and rock shelter were probably low-paid workers who were 


15 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 



16 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


just passing through. Attracted by jobs building some of the roads within a 
two-mile radius, they camped outside of Silver Peak until their work was 
done and then moved on. Across a small ravine from the rock shelter lies 
the remnants of a road supported by a beautifully hand-built, rock retaining 
wall. However, there is no way of tracing the cave’s true occupants or whether 
they labored on that particular road. 

Evidence of Chinese women and children was also missing from the 
artifacts that survived more than one hundred years, although that came as 
no surprise. Not only were women scarce in transient mining camps early 
on, but laws such as the 1875 Page Law and later anti-Chinese immigration 
laws had stopped the immigration of Chinese women by the time these men 
came to Silver Peak. 25 

Today a headstone in Silver Peak’s cemetery honors one Chinese resi¬ 
dent. It marks the grave of Jerry Wong Hong Chong, who died at the age of 
eighty-six in 1928. The inscription reads, “Resident of Silver Peak District 
for fifty years/ He had no enemies but many creditors.” Nothing else is known 
of the man, and it is pure speculation to guess he might have been one of the 
several cooks listed in the 1900 and 1910 censuses. The only thing we know 
for sure is that he remained in Silver Peak beyond its early days and into a 
new era. 


THE TURNING POINT, 1871-1906 

The heady days of SP/RM were numbered. In spite of the huge sums of 
money pouring in from the East and good production, SP/RM hit hard times 
in 1870. John Blair closed down operations in 1871, and the property sat idle 
until 1877. Although the company protected their claims, Silver Peak very 
nearly disappeared for lack of jobs. First Lieutenant George M. Wheeler, 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, reported in 1871: 


The principal work has been upon the Crowning Glory Mine. 
The company employed seventy-five men upon it for three years at 
$4 per diem. The amount expended in the mineral development of 
these mines is about $280,000. Total amount extracted, about 
$ 2 , 000 , 000 . 

At present only four or five men remain here, all the hands 
having left, while the mill lies idle for repairs and all work is 
suspended. There are in the place about twenty houses built of 
concrete, one store, and one livery stable. Materials for making 
concrete are close at hand, gravel being on the ground and limestone 
in a butte nearby, and a lime-kiln near the mill. The company burns 
their own lime. There is one stage-line to Aurora, fare $25 to that 
point and $50 to Reno on the railroad. Freight 4 Vi cents per pound 
to Wadsworth. Mail weekly, I think. 26 



The 1880 census counted only ten individuals living in Silver Peak, one 
of whom was a female. Of those left, five were miners, two were clerks, one 
a merchant, and another a mail rider. The only female in town was a 
housewife. Only two of the ten were foreigners—one from Great Britain and 
one from Austria. Perhaps those ten hopeful souls stayed for the promise of 
a railroad. The Carson and Colorado Railroad from Belleville to nearby 
Candelaria was just two years away. That would mean cheaper shipping costs 
for food and supplies coming into the area and lower overhead to ship ore out 
to smelters, making business feasible again. 

Very little information appeared in newspapers about Silver Peak during 
this time. Sometimes no news is good news for a mining town in decline. 
Times were tough, and many other Nevada mining camps faded into 
obscurity under just such conditions. Later information revealed that Silver 
Peak did survive, thanks once again to small operators and leasers who 
worked part-time or seasonally. They stayed on in spite of the promising 
discoveries at nearby Bodie, California, in the late 1870s and early 1880s. 
The struggle for survival spanned thirty years, from 1871 to 1906, and Silver 
Peak hung on by a mere thread, one which the future would prove was made 
of gold and silver strands. 

In fact, the stage was being reset, making way for a new phase of 
industrialization following the turn of the century. After closing, SP/RM 
went through an extended period of reorganization and refinancing. The 
company resumed mining operations briefly in 1877 when it remodeled a 
mill and patented sixteen claims, but it ultimately filed for bankruptcy. 
Claims were protected and legal maneuvering continued in order to survive 
several law suits. The bankruptcy spawned a series of name changes, ending 
as the Silver Peak Mines Company operated by John Blair. Then Blair asked 
Sam Wasson to take charge of his company. Wasson was a prominent Silver 
Peak resident who arrived in 1872 and later served as a state senator from 
Esmeralda County in 1899 and 1901. Particularly interesting is Wasson’s 
description of John Blair and their working arrangement: 


17 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


There was a man (John Blair) who it was a pleasure to work for. I took 
charge of the property in 1891.1 wrote to him that if he would send 
me a grubstake I could make the mine pay. By the next mail I 
received a check for $250 and in the summer of 1891 a dividend of 
$?,000—the first ever paid on the property—was made by the 
company. I had charge of the mine for sixteen years, handling more 
than $200,000 in cash and not once in all that time did Blair look 
inside my books. He told me to handle the property as if it were my 
own, giving me a kind of lease drawn up under chin-music without 
papers and what I did was “law and gospel.” Blair took me to New 
York to see the sights and treated me like a prince. 27 



Wasson’s relationship with Blair was one built on respect between a 
Nevada miner and a wealthy eastern investor. Blair trusted Wasson with his 

18 

Early 
Entrepreneurs 


outlook; but by perseverance and hard knocks Mr. Wasson finally 
got things going in a small way and took out 2,000 tons of ore which 
pulled $20 per ton .... 

In the spring of 1898 . . . Mr. Blair authorized him to drive a 
cross-cut tunnel which had been planned to tap the ledges 750 feet 
below the croppings .... On October 27th (1898) the footwall of 
the vein was reached and the vein proved to be 70 feet wide of solid 
ore .... On the surface the north of Drinkwater vein shows an 
average width of about 16 feet, the back or Soldier Boy (Western 
Soldier) vein shows about 24 feet thick, these veins on the surface 
being about 80 feet apart. 

Sam Wasson proved well worth his $250 grubstake. The results of his 
work at the Drinkwater boosted Silver Peak’s economy for years to come and 
repaid Blair’s trust handsomely. However, problems with milling 
remained—too much precious metal was being lost in the tailings, 
sometimes as high as 60 percent of the gold values. Wasson himself managed 
$16 per ton from amalgamation of ore from the Chiatovich Stope of the 
Drinkwater Mine, but another $7 per ton was later taken out of the tailings 
with the cyanide process. 

When John Blair died at the age of ninety-seven in 1899, his son DeWitt 
was heir to the Silver Peak Mines Company, which he then reorganized into 
the Silver Peak Gold-Mining Company, but the property remained idle. 
With no work available locally, most miners left town for the Bodie boom. 
Silver Peak returned to the hands of small operators. Wasson discovered the 
Missouri lode and opened the Missouri Mine in 1885 or 1886. It was another 
classic example of rat hole mining, with several inclines and open cuts, one 
tunnel, and only one stope cut to reach the ore. 28 

The four Valcalda brothers—John, Jim, Andrew and Otis—continued 
to work part-time. They were Italian immigrants who “eked out a meager 
living” in 1885. John was apparently the most active of the brothers and led 
the way in working their six claims (the Columbus, Washington, Lincoln, 
Oregon, Peorto, and Frank 2). Using the near-surface, rat-hole mining 
method, they concentrated on outcroppings of ore and mined no more than 
ten to twelve feet deep. Sometimes they crushed the ore in large mortars, but 


valuable property, and in return Wasson lived up to his word (chin-music). 
Wasson’s skillful operations were described in detail in the Mining and 
Scientific Press, November 26, 1898: 

There having been no development work done, all the mining 
has been quarrying on the surface by flat-broke miners, and with a 
mill out of repair and antiquated in design, this was not a flattering 



they also used the simple two-stamp mill they had built themselves at the 
nearby Valcalda Springs. 

By using cost-effective surface mining techniques, the Valcalda and the 
Missouri mines were profitable for small operators, which was about all that 
remained. Other small operations and mills dotted the area including 
Columbus, Esmeralda, Vega, and Coyote Springs. Still chugging along, 
Barton’s arrastra continued as a throwback to the early days. 

Yet somewhere among Silver Peak’s remaining ten people were the 
trendsetters, those who adopted the lessee or contract system of mining, a 
method popular throughout the West at the time. The owner would lease 
portions or all of his mine to miners who received a percentage of the total 
value of the ore produced. The risk and expense of mining fell to the 
contractor, and owners could increase their income by owning a mill and 
charging leasers for processing the ore. Any actual mining activities that did 
occur were conducted at a very low level of effort, probably by local residents 
working part-time. It appears that no mills were operative during the 
period. 29 

In Silver Peak’s case, small operations and lease arrangements were two 
visible signs of hard times. In addition, the depressed economy demanded 
experimentation in milling practices in order to increase profits and lower 
overhead. Two courageous men met this challenge head-on and led Silver 
Peak toward cutting-edge technology. They were John Chiatovich and Fred 
Vollmar. 


19 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


JOHN CHIATOVICH’S MILL 

John Chiatovich’s love for mining apparently took a back seat to the 
need for a steady income once he had a family to raise. He and his wife 
Margaret established a ranch in Fish Lake Valley and launched several 
businesses in Silver Peak. The Chiatovich general store and livery not only 
supplemented the ranch income, but it supplied much needed services to the 
small community. 

His businesses were successful, but his mining fever never died. He leased 
properties from the Silver Peak Mines Company and patented the Mary 
Mine in 1891. Next he built a ten-stamp mill to process his ore. The assays 
were good and the gold was there, but when his mill wasn’t pulling out the 
values he needed for a profit, John teamed up with Fred Vollmar to solve the 
problem. Educated in chemistry and metallurgy, Vollmar must have been 
familiar with some of the latest technologies being peddled throughout the 
West, such as the new cyanide process patented by the MacArthur-Forrest 
group of Glasgow, Scotland, in 1887. 

First used on a production scale in 1889 at the Crown Mine in New 
Zealand, when the cyanide process was installed the following year (1890) at 
Crestone, Colorado, the transition from lab to mill was bumpy. Within a few 
years, it was perfected. The trick, they found, was to crush the rock to just the 



20 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


JOHN CHIATOVICH 
1829-1907 

John Chiatovich, a 
Slavonian immigrant, arrived 
in Nevada to work in the 
Comstock mines in Virginia 
City and at Belmont. 29 Later, he 
settled on a ranch in Fish Lake 
Valley, near Silver Peak. He 
opened a general merchandise 
store and a livery stable in 
Silver Peak, probably in the 
mid-1860s. He was married to 
Margaret Wolford Maginness 
Chiatovich, who had four or 
five children by a previous mar- 
riage. Together John and 
Margaret had five more chil¬ 
dren; Martin, John Jr., Marco, 

Lillian, and Cecil. 

Although he owned the ranch and operated the store, John loved 
mining. By 1891, he owned the patent for the Mary Mine, and in order 
to process the ore, he built a mill in Silver Peak. Because the mill was 
not efficient in getting the values from the ore, he hired Fred Vollmar 
to design a cyanide plant for the mill that opened in 1893. 

The Chiatovich cyanide mill has long been considered the first in 
Nevada and is one of the first in the West built specifically for the emerg¬ 
ing cyanide process of gold recovery. If Chiatovich’s cyanide mill was 
not the first, it was certainly on the cutting edge of milling technology, 
and in central Nevada he was declared the “King of Silver Peak” by the 
Goldfield News, December 1,1905, for introducing this new technology. 

John and Margaret raised their family on the Fish Lake Valley ranch, 
and several of their children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren 
remain in Nevada today. John’s oldest son Martin married Nellie Cleary 
and also had four sons and a daughter—Stanley, Jack, Pat, Margie and 
Bob. Stanley Chiatovich married Frances Hill and had three daugh¬ 
ters—Barbara Dodgion of Carson City, Janice Johnson of Idaho, and 
Jaci Jones of Fallon. John Chiatovich lived to be nearly 80, and at his 
death left the Fish Lake Valley ranch to another generation of 
Chiatoviches. 



John Chiatovich. (Photograph courtesy 
of Barbara Dodgion.) 









21 


FRED VOLLMAR SR. 

1854-1931 

Fred Vollmar was born of German immigrant parents in 
Westport, Wisconsin. 31 His family moved to California where he stud¬ 
ied chemistry and metallurgy in San Francisco. He was twenty-six when 
he set out to make his fortune on the Comstock Lode in 1880. From 
Virginia City, he followed the gold strikes first to Bodie, California, 
and then back to Lida, Nevada. At Lida, Fred worked with Bob Stewart 
to build his first mill, which provided good experience. Still a young 
man at thirty-six, but with plenty of experience and knowledge, Fred 
arrived in Silver Peak in 1890. There he met John Chiatovich. By 
then, John was sixty-four, still loved mining, and had not lost his ad¬ 
venturous spirit. His mill was struggling, still not getting the best val¬ 
ues out of the ore. Perhaps John saw an opportunity in the new cya¬ 
nide milling technology, or maybe Fred introduced the concept to John. 
Either way, together they built one of the first cyanide mills in 
Nevada. It began operating in 1893. Between 1922 and 1927, Fred 
held leases on thirty-four patented claims from the Pittsburg Silver 
Peak Gold Mining Company, and he helped the Black Mammoth Con¬ 
solidated Mining Company obtain a lease from the Pittsburg Com¬ 
pany. 

Once the mill was built, Fred started the first school in Silver 
Peak in 1895 and served on its board for many years. Fred and his wife 
Molly had two children, Fred Jr. and Johanna. Vollmar’s children car¬ 
ried on his legacy of mining interests and civic contributions. Fred 
Vollmar Jr. became the well-known Silver Peak promoter who brought 
major investors to the area’s endeavors between 1927 and 1940. Johanna 
married Hugh Cameron, and they raised two children at Silver Peak. 
Cameron reportedly maintained mining interests throughout his life. 
Vollmar’s granddaughter, Mary Frazzini, became an assemblywoman 
representing Washoe County in the Nevada State Legislature in 1965. 


right size for the cyanide to retrieve the gold—not too fine, not to the point 
where it produced slimes like the stamp mills. With that innovation, “by 
1893 mills utilizing the cyanide process became profitable from California to 
Deadwood, South Dakota.” 32 Recovery rates soared to 80 or 90 percent. 

If necessity was the mother of invention, then the father was economic 
recession. Times were tough, with Nevada’s economy experiencing a 
downturn in the early-1890s, but Chiatovich was willing to gamble, and 
Vollmar contributed the needed technical expertise. Together they built one 
of the first cyanide mills in the West. The Nevada Mining Record in its April 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 




22 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 



John Chlatovich and Fred Vollmar built one of the first cyanide mills in the West. 
(Photograph courtesy of the Central Nevada Historical Society.) 


4,1928, edition claimed, “The Old Chiatovich Mill was the first plant in the 
United States and second in the world to use cyanidation, according to the 
early-day millmen of the district.” 

Cyanide offered an exciting new process, especially for ores like those 
from the Mary Mine, but it was still being tested in the real world. It turned 
out to be a solid bet. As history shows, the cyanide process brought a 
technological revolution that is the basis for today’s milling and heap 
leaching. 

Locals know the story of John Chiatovich’s mill, but somehow he has 
been overlooked in history books. Most often credit is given to University of 
Nevada Professor Robert D. Jackson as the first in Nevada to try the cyanide 
process to recover gold and silver from tailings around Washoe Lake in 1896. 
John Chiatovich may not have been the first, but he was definitely three 
years ahead of Professor Jackson. 33 

FAMILIES AND WOMEN ARRIVE 

While recession gripped Nevada in the 1890s, and in spite of the allure 
of the 1899 Klondike gold rush, the struggling little town of Silver Peak 
survived to see the twentieth century. The 1900 census listed 135 people in 
Silver Peak and the surrounding area, so some residents seemed to be settling 
in for the long haul. Along with the Chiatoviches and the Vollmars, other 
families had arrived, enough to warrant opening the first school. A post office 
brought news from the rest of the world, and the first of a new breed, women 






prospectors, passed through town in their search for fortune. Times certainly 
were changing. 

One female prospector was Josie Earp, wife to the famous lawman Wyatt 
Earp. In the autumn of 1902, while camped at Silver Peak, she noted: 

I found a likely looking piece of gold ore that assayed so rich we 
turned back and . . . spent a couple of weeks fruitlessly prospecting 
for the source of the sample. We never found it and nearly froze to 
death trying. 34 


23 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


Josie may have crossed paths with other women prospectors in the area, 
including Ferminia Sarras for whom the town of Mina, Nevada, is named. 

Ferminia Sarras came to Nevada sometime around 1881, the first date 
she was listed on Esmeralda County tax records where she was described as 
“Spanish Lady, Belleville.” Much of her story had been lost until recently 
when author Sally Zanjani worked with Ferminia’s great-grandson to 
reconstruct the past, including the tangled family relationships and 
numerous marriages. 

Ferminia always described herself as “a Spanish lady of royal blood,” 
which was indeed true, but she was often mistaken as having Mexican an¬ 
cestry. It appears that she may have been married as many as five times 
during her life, often to men who were younger. Her youngest son was named 
Joseph A. Marshall, although Ferminia apparently never married anyone 
named Marshall. One newspaper article claimed that all of her husbands 
died violent deaths, and author Zanjani speculates that she may have been 
interested in men who were handy with a gun because they could help pro¬ 
tect her claims. One was Archie McCormack, a Canadian-born gunman 
twelve years younger than Ferminia, who was killed in 1906 in a gunfight 
while defending one of her claims. 

However, Ferminia did not depend on these men for her livelihood. She 
began prospecting in the Candelaria area in 1883 and went on to file a 
number of claims on copper mines in the Sante Fe district. From there she 
spent a few years prospecting in Silver Peak but didn’t have much luck. That 
was during the 1890s, a time when Nevada’s economy was experiencing the 
doldrums. She returned to the Sante Fe district in 1899, and it was there 
that she eventually made her fortune. She prospected alone wearing men’s 
clothing such as pants, boots, and a backpack. By the time she died in 1915, 
she had made several fortunes on her copper mines, often stashing the gold 
coins from her sales in her chicken coop where she believed her wealth 
would be safer than in the banks. 

Each time she made a profitable sale, Ferminia would travel to San Fran¬ 
cisco, stay in the finest hotels, shop for elegant clothes, and enjoy fine din¬ 
ing and young men until her money ran out. Then she would return to 



24 


Nevada’s mountains and resume prospecting for another fortune. According 
to Sally Zanjani: 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


individualism was the normal mode, not the galling restraints of 
team-work and joint enterprise; and a good deal of blatant philan¬ 
dering was both a pleasurable assertion of the self and a status sym¬ 
bol, not in the least damaging to one’s reputation. If Ferminia had 
been a man, her compatriots would have admiringly called her muy 
hombre. 35 

Ferminia named her many mining claims after her family, friends, and 
lovers, and later the town of Mina was named in her honor. She lived in 
small cabins or adobe houses in several locations but called Luning, Nevada, 
her home between prospecting trips. 

Ferminia’s belief in the value of her mines eventually proved to be true. 
Fler most valuable mines were located in Giroux Wash, Nevada. Likewise, 
her belief in herself never wavered. She arrived in Nevada a Spanish lady of 
royal blood and retained her nobility as Nevada’s Copper Queen. 36 

A NEW CENTURY 

As the town of Silver Peak greeted the new century, it touted both 
ethnic diversity and a wider selection of jobs. Most residents counted in the 
census were American or a combination of European and American, as well 
as twenty Native Americans. Thirty-six people from all over the world now 
lived in this out-of-they-way spot—Canadians, British, Hispanics, Iberians, 
Chinese, and Japanese. There were nine professionals, two merchants, six 
domestic workers, and one boardinghouse manager. Only twelve miners 
lived in the town of Silver Peak, probably because more lived in a 
boardinghouse located near the mines. 

There were thirty-two children in town at the time of the 1900 census, 
and four lived near the mines with their families. Silver Peak’s first school 
opened for the 1895 and 1896 school year, and Fred Vollmar Sr. served as 
Clerk of the School Board. Eva I. Bradshaw, the first teacher, received $60 
per month for her work. 37 

For the small town’s population to expand from ten in 1880 to 135 in 
1890, everyone had to play a part, and one of the vital parts was postmaster. 
The town’s post office had been open since April 2, 1866, and many 


One cannot resist observing that when liberated from the cloistered 
world of the upper-class Latin American woman in the place rightly 
known as a “man’s country,” Ferminia used her freedom much as a 
man of similar background would have done. In this tradition, wealth 
was to be enjoyed and generously spread among one’s friends, not 
devoted to the civic purposes of churches and organized charities; 



postmasters’ names are familiar, including Chiatovich, Wasson, Hanchett, 
and Vollmar. 38 

While the postmaster delivered the mail and the schoolteacher educated 
the children, others like Sam Wasson were busy keeping Silver Peak’s money 
in town. The Tonopah Daily Times reported that “card sharps” were a common 
occurrence. They traveled from town to town trying to fleece the locals but 
often found themselves fleeced. One wild poker game in a Silver Peak saloon 
lasted two days and nights: 

At the table were four or five real card sharps . . . from 
Candelaria. A number of old desert rats were participating, among 
them . . . Sam Wasson .... 

They proved too much for the stra,ngers. At the end of forty- 
eight hours, the sharps were all broke—their last dollar gone. They 
landed at Silver Peak with several thousand dollars each. When they 
left they had been reduced to the necessity of begging rides on the 
slow, creaking, dusty freight wagons. 

Two hundred and sixteen decks of cards were used during that 
memorable game. About the time the sharpsters would be able to 
mark a deck . . . one of the old desert rats would call for a new deck 
and the one then in use would be thrown on the floor. By the time 
the long session came to a close, discarded cards were knee deep 
about the players. 39 


25 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


Silver Peak had evolved with all the trappings of a Nevada civilization— 
families, a school, a post office, and gambling. Even so, the townspeople had 
not lost their sense of humor. 


Notes 

1. Bertrand F. Couch and Jay A. Carpenter, Nevada’s Metal and Mineral Production 
(1859-1940) (University of Nevada Bulletin) 37, no. 4 (1943). Statistics from 
Couch and Carpenter’s University of Nevada Bulletin were cited in the two main 
sources for this book. Unless otherwise stated, information for this book was drawn 
from Hugh A. Shamberger, The Story of Silver Peak, Esmeralda County, Nevada 
(Carson City: Nevada Historical Press, 1976) and from Western Cultural Resource 
Management, Inc. (WCRM), The Archaeology and History of Mineral Ridge, The 
Social and Technological Evolution of a Mining District. Prepared by Steven F. Mehls, 
Renee Corona Kolvet, Susan Stornetta, and Donald L. Hardesty, with contributions 
from Ralph Giles, Bob Estes, and Stephen Yost, (Sparks, NV: BLM Report Crr-6- 
1669-3. WCRM Report 96-R-079, 1998). 

2. To avoid name confusion, it is helpful to understand that two separate mining 
districts were first formed—Silver Peak District for silver and Red Mountain District 




26 


for gold. By the early 1900s both districts were called the Silver Peak District and are 
now referred to as the Mineral Ridge Mining District. This author will use the correct 
name for each era. 


Early 3. Sally Zanjani, AMine ofHer Own, Women Prospectors in the American West, 1850- 
Entrepreneurs 1950 (Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press, 1997), 60. 

4. Author Hugh Shamberger carefully documented Silver Peak’s changing 
ownership of mining claims and mills in his book. 

5. Donald L. Hardesty, Ph.D., “Mining Landscapes in the American West” (paper 
presented at the annual conference of the Society for Historical Archaeology, 
Richmond, VA, 1991) as summarized in WCRM, 3-5. Hardesty identified the three 
mining methods most commonly used in early western mining. 


6. Otis E. Young Jr., Western Mining (Norman, OK, and London: University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1970), 79. 


7. The American Journal of Mining, 16 January 1869, as quoted in Shamberger, 11. 

8. Victoria Ford, editor, Silver Peak: At Work, At Play, and At Home, (Reno, NV: 
University of Nevada Oral History Program [UNOHP], 2000), Ben Viljoen oral 
history, 202-203. 

9. Because SP&RMG&SMC is such a long abbreviation, the author chose SP/RM to 
represent this company. 

10. Increased production should not be confused with the increased efficiency that 
newer technology brought to mining. Investors often clamored for a greater return on 
their investments, and it was not unusual to see an increase in the number of stamps 
in a mill just prior to an operation going bust, according to Charles D. Zeier, personal 
communication, 2000. 


11. Sacramento Union, 21 August 1868, and Territorial Enterprise, 19 August 1868. 

12. Steven F. Mehls referred to Silver Peak as part of “the capital frontier” in an 
unpublished report to WCRM and in conversations with the author during 1996. 

13. Biographical sketch composed from Shamberger, 101, as well as The Encyclopedia 
Americana International Edition 4 (Danbury, CT: Grolier Inc.,1997), 53, and The 
National Cyclopedia of American Biography 7 (New York: James T. White & Com¬ 
pany, 1897), 21-22. 

14. For a Mexican arrastra, ore was placed on a large, circular pavement of stones. 
Then several large stones were dragged in a circular path around a center post by 
mules to crush the ore. Once the ore was crushed, the gold could be extracted by 
panning or other methods. For a complete description, Shamberger recommends 
Ernest Oberbillig, “Development of Washoe and Reese River Silver Processes,” 
Nevada Historical Society Quarterly, (summer 1967). 



15. Engineering and Mining Journal, (18 September 1871), as quoted in Shamberger, 

12 . 


27 


16. Ford, Leon Hill oral history, 78. 

17. The American Journal of Mining, (7 November 1868), see Shamberger, 11. While 
white workers were paid $4 per day, Native Americans were paid only fifty cents a 
day. 


Early 

Entrepreneurs 


18. Author Sally Zanjani explained in a personal conversation, January 1999, that it 
was natural for prospectors to leave once the mines were under development, because 
they preferred exploration. Ralph Mann, After the Gold Rush, (Stanford, California: 
Stanford University Press, 1982), said development of mines dropped prospectors to 
the bottom of the social scale, which pushed them to leave. Either way, prospectors 
were most often the initial claim holders who operated on a small, low-tech scale. 


19. This nearly forgotten chapter in the history of the area was mentioned by 
Shamberger who discovered statistics on Chinese workers in the Engineering & Min¬ 
ing Journal, 13 July 1869. More evidence was uncovered during a 1996 archaeologi¬ 
cal study by WCRM, Chapter 5. 


20. WCRM, 5-6. 


21. The cartouche is a stamped identifier or mark on the lid showing the district and 
store where the product originated in China. 

22. Ruth Ann Sando and David L. Felton, Hidden Heritage: Historical Archaeology of 
the Overseas Chinese, ed. Priscilla Wegars, (Amityville, New York: Baywood Publish¬ 
ing Company, Inc., 1993), 170-171. 

23. According to WCRM, artifacts from late nineteenth century Chinese camps are 
often reused items that are modified, like tin can lids with holes for straining. 

24- Ruby Griffin, personal communication with Renee Kolvet, April 1998. 

25. Sue Fawn Chung, “Their Changing World: Chinese Women on the Comstock, 
1860-1910, ed. Ronald M. James and Elizabeth Raymond, Comstock Women, The 
Making of a Mining Community, (Reno/Fas Vegas: University of Nevada Press, 1998), 
203-228. 

26. 1 st Fieut. George M. Wheeler, Corps of Engineers, Preliminary Report Exploration 
and Surveys, Principally in Nevada and Arizona (1871). 

27. The Blair Press, 4 January 1908. 

28. WCRM, 6-23 to 6-43, and J. E. Spurr, Ore Deposits of the Silver Peak Quadrangle 
55, (U.S. Geological Society Professional Paper, Nevada 1906), 27. 



28 

29. Charles D. Zeier, A Cultural Resources Action Plan for the Mineral Ridge Mining 
District, Esmeralda County, Nevada, (Carson City, NV. March 7, 1996), 5. 

Early 

Entrepreneurs 

30. John Chiatovich’s biographical sketch is a combination of information from 
interviews with John’s great-granddaughters, Janice Johnson and Barbara Dodgion, 
and from Shamberger. 

31. Fred Vollmar’s biographical sketch is a combination of information from 
Shamberger and oral history interviews. 

32. WCRM, 14. 

33. Tom Lugaski, Keck Museum at the Mackay School of Mines, conversation, 1997. 
Lugaski found evidence of a cyanide mill built in Ely that opened one year earlier— 
July 1892—than Chiatovich’s cyanide mill. 

34- Zanjani, 186. Zanjani has produced a highly readable book about women in 
mining. In doing so, she retrieved some wonderful stories that would otherwise have 
been lost. Her book grants women their rightful place in mining history. 

35. Zanjani, 79. 

36. Biographical synopsis drawn from Zanjani 1997, and Sally Zanjani, “The Copper 
Queen,” Nevada Magazine, November/December 1995. 

37. Shamberger, 26. 

38. Shamberger, 18-21, covers the labyrinth of details on the famous Hanchett 
lawsuit that took fifteen years for the courts to settle. 


39. The Tonopah Daily Times, date unknown. 



2 


The Pittsburg Era, 1906-1928 


The Silver Peak drama continued to unfold after the turn of the century, 
its fate hinging on the rise and fall of mining fortunes. A handful of key 
players remained—John Chiatovich, Fred Vollmar, Sam R. Wasson. Some 
newcomers arrived and soon proved their staying power, such as John Shirley 
and Ed Cleary [pronounced Clare-ee.]. Although John Blair died in 1899, 
the Blair name and fortunes continued to play an important role. Because 
Pennsylvania investors continued funding mining ventures, the years from 
1906 to 1928 became known as the Pittsburg Era. 1 

These years were a time of dramatic changes in the United States. 
Electricity arrived first in the mines and mills, then later in homes. 2 Travel 
by rail and auto became available to more and more people. The first cars 
appeared in Nevada, and in 1904 the Tonopah and Goldfield Railroad 
connected with the Carson and Colorado Railroad, giving central Nevada 
easier access to major markets. Meanwhile, new mineral deposits were 
desperately needed to infuse new life into Nevada’s stale economy, and they 
were found nearby at Tonopah on May 17, 1900; at Goldfield on December 
2, 1902; and at Manhattan in April 1905. These discoveries revived interest 
in central Nevada mining, and once again eastern investors entered the 
picture. With increased technology and financing, production soared during 
this time period, placing the Mineral Ridge Mining District among the top 
thirteen producers in Nevada. It ranked alongside districts in Virginia City, 
Eureka, Aurora, Tonopah, and Goldfield, each of which produced more than 
$10 million by World War II. 3 

From all appearances, people in town were oblivious to the coming 
opportunity. The Tonopah Daily Sun described the older parts of town as 
populated by “old houses of adobe, weather beaten by the hot suns of summer 
and the fierce winds of forty years” with the ruined or discarded equipment of 
stamp mills lying about the area. 4 But behind the scenes the town’s 
prominent men scurried to improve their community and make it more 



30 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


attractive for new investors and workers alike. Vollmar and Wasson helped 
lay out a new townsite for Silver Peak in June 1905. Vollmar was listed as the 
town secretary, and John Shirley’s optimism was quoted in The Goldfield 
Review: 


Silver Peak will be one of the biggest mining camps on the 
western coast. . . The camp, he says, has never looked better in its 
history. There are more men working now than at any time for a 
number of years, the mines are in better condition, and the camp 
generally is taking on an air of prosperity. 

While it is true that no definite knowledge of the transaction of 
the old Drinkwater Mine can be obtained, it is generally believed 
that it has been sold to the Schwab-McKane Syndicate. 5 


The newer section of Silver Peak already offered four restaurants, several 
hotels, saloons and grocery stores, as well as a doctor who was building a 
drugstore. Electricity was available from the Nevada Power, Mining and 
Milling Company substation. Reports that eastern investment dollars were 
once again on the way inspired new hopes and led to land speculation. 
Everything was ready and waiting for an expected announcement that 
Pennsylvania investors had purchased the Blair holdings. 

Meanwhile, two mining operations ushered in the turn of the century at 
Silver Peak and kept the town alive. The Mohawk-Alpine Mining Company 
and the Valcalda Mine were important for the town’s survival and provided 
much-needed jobs but turned out to be bit players in the town’s future. Their 
holdings were eventually gobbled up by the Pittsburg group. 


THE MOHAWK-ALPINE MINING COMPANY 


The Mohawk-Alpine Mining Company purchased fifteen to twenty 
patented claims in 1904 called the Tietjen or Homestake Group. One was 



“Electricity was available from the Nevada Power, Mining and Milling Company substa¬ 
tion." (Photograph courtesy of Sherry Mattei.) 



the valuable Mary Mine originally patented by John Chiatovich in 1891, 
along with 3,000 feet on the Drinkwater’s eighteen-foot-wide rich vein. 

The man- and horse-powered operation was described in the October 20, 
1906, Tonopah Bonanza. Adits were driven from the outcrop on the surface 
into horizontal ore bodies. A hand-powered windlass moved ore up a winze, 
which is a vertical shaft that originates underground. A whim, which is a 
drum turned by horsepower, lifted ore up an incline to the surface. From 
there, ore cars traveled by rail to a chute a quarter-mile away where the ore 
was dumped. Then horses and mules packed the ore about three miles and 
dumped it into another bin. From there it was shoveled onto wagons and 
hauled a few more miles before being handled again. Finally it was transferred 
into sacks and placed on the backs of burros that hauled it the final stretch 
into Silver Peak and the mill. 

The Mohawk Mill only operated about one year, but the combination of 
the rich veins in its mines and their location made the whole operation very 
desirable. Following an apex lawsuit, the Mohawk-Alpine holdings were 
absorbed into the Blair property, which by then had been sold to the 
Pittsburg Silver Peak Gold Mining Company. 

THE VALCALDA MINE 

The Valcalda claim group was worked for twenty years, from 1885 to 
1905. One of the four Valcalda brothers, John, worked the claims just three 
months out of each year, digging about ten to twelve feet below the surface, 
gathering the ore, and processing it in a two-stamp mill or by hand with a 
mortar. From this work, he reportedly earned $2,700 one summer—not bad 
wages in those days. However, it was never the bonanza of the Italian 
brothers’ dreams, until they finally sold their property for $30,000 to John 
Lynch (a man whose wealth came from the Mizpah Mine in Tonopah) and 
Billy and Mike O’Meara. The money from the sale came too late to fulfill the 
dreams of one of the brothers, whose sad story captured the attention of 
Sunset Magazine, December 1906: 

[Tjhree Italian brothers . . . were compelled to work their mine in 
most meager method; and to do many other things which might 
bring in the dollars so needful to their support. They burnt charcoal, 
cut wood, drove teams—did most anything, in fact, which would 
fetch an honest penny; confident ever that someday their mine 
would bring them in a fortune which should compensate them for all 
their hardships. It came finally; through the sale of the Valcalda to 
Lynch and Omeara; then the oldest of the brothers made happy 
preparations to return to Italy but before he could get out of the state 
Death came and gathered him to that shore from whence there is no 
return. 


31 

The 

Pittsburg 

Era 



32 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


Lynch and the O’Mearas revitalized the Valcalda holdings, building a 
five-stamp mill and a four-mile pipeline from the Red Mountain Spring. 6 The 
pipeline fed water by gravity into the fifty-ton mill to which another ten 
stamps shipped from Colorado, were added. Both amalgamation and cyanide 
were used, a hybrid of 1907 technologies. 

At the Valcalda Mine, good jobs were available. Records show “in 1908 
the mine employed a foreman, a teamster, three machine men (drillers/ 
miners), two muckers, a chuck tender, a blacksmith and his helper, two 
cooks, a compressor operator, hoist operator, and one man who kept 
development work up to date on the company’s other claims.” None were 
listed simply as “miner.” Even a forty-five-horsepower Peerless automobile 
was brought on site to speed communication between the mine and the 
office. 7 

After less than a year, in 1908, Samuel Newhouse (once described as the 
richest mine operator in Utah) bought the Valcalda Mine and announced 
grand plans for expansion which never materialized. The following year he 
sold the property for $ 150,000 to the Pittsburg Silver Peak Mining Company. 


THE PITTSBURG PLAYERS 


Over the next ten years the Pittsburg Silver Peak Mining Company 
would bring only the best to the area. The newest machines and modern 
electrical power would automate mining and milling. The luxuries of water, 
electricity, and an underground sewer system would all be piped directly into 
the homes. 

Finally, the long awaited news came. When the Pittsburg Silver Peak 
Gold Mining Company bought Blair’s forty claims from John Blair’s son, 
DeWitt Clinton, the $750,000 sale was announced on May 9, 1906. During 
this time a man named Martin L. Effinger, who came to Nevada from the 
Utah mines, made his mark in the area. He was credited with attracting the 
eastern investors and finalizing the sale, assisted by a Dr. Edward I. Bowes of 
Tonopah. Afterwards Effinger remained as resident director to oversee the 
whole Pittsburg operation. The Silver Peak Post of June 6, 1906, praised 
Effinger’s work: 


To sell a mine for $750,000 cash, organize a company, perfect a 
consolidation with adjoining mines, see $700,000 cash placed in the 
new company’s treasury, arrange for a campaign of operation larger 
than had ever been attempted in the State since its revival and push 
out into the field again, all within thirty days, is something that is not 
done every day in the mining world. That, however, is just what 
Martin L. Effinger, the well-known mining man, has accomplished 
since he left Tonopah for Pittsburg (sic) and New York one month 
ago. 



ARCHAEOLOGICAL STUDY 


33 


Records show the Valcalda Mine was never as fully developed as 
the Mary Mine, and because of its isolation it has always been consid' 
ered a male domain. However, a recent archaeological study uncov- 
ered artifacts left behind by a woman who lived there around the turn 
of the century, probably just before or during the Pittsburg Era. A 
1903 Liberty Head dime minted in Philadelphia helped set the date 
for artifacts. 

Who this woman was remains a mystery, but a decorated lid to a 
porcelain sugar bowl may have been one of her few treasures. A 1909 
map shows a building that was probably used as a home by the super- 
intendent, so perhaps he was a married man. Among the items found 
were a Cheeseborough-Ponds Vaseline bottle (c. 1880-1919) with a 
cork stopper and the remains of a corset—garter clasps and fasteners. 
Other items included a cookstove and canning jars, cans for food, tins 
for tobacco, and bottles such as one manufactured by Adolphys Busch 
Glass Manufacturing Company (c. 1904-1907) that would have con¬ 
tained alcoholic beverages, most often beer. Thus, the superintendent’s 
house was the center of domestic activities, while artifacts from min¬ 
ing activities were, for the most part, located elsewhere. 8 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


The new owners of the company were all prominent Pennsylvania 
businessmen and politicians, such as wealthy Pittsburgh steel manufacturer 
Charles Schwab 9 ; steel magnate and U.S. Senator George T. Oliver 10 ; and 
William Flinn, who was a newspaper publisher and Pennsylvania state 
senator. 

These were rich and powerful men, capable of backing their vision for 
Silver Peak’s mines, and their vision was a marvel. It centered on the latest 
that technology had to offer for mining and milling operations. Their one 
hundred-stamp mill would be the largest in the West, and their cyanide 
operation near the Mohawk-Alpine Mill in Silver Peak would process the 
old tailings on their property, wringing even more value out of waste. The 
mines would have the latest in electrical lights, locomotives, and telephones. 
A 3,800-foot tunnel was designed to connect the Mary and Drinkwater 
mines, and a 14,000-foot aerial tramway from the mine to the mill would 
carry the heavy ore with ease. A 17.5-mile railroad would hook up with the 
Tonopah and Goldfield Railroad, connecting the isolated community with 
the outside world’s vital trade centers. Every part of the plan would increase 
the volume of material mined by increasing the efficiency of moving and 
milling the ore. 




34 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


But as with all revolutions, when old gives way to new, this one 
contained one big surprise. When these marvelous plans were unveiled, they 
were not for Silver Peak. Rather, a company town named Blair would be built 
just two miles to the north. The whole project was so top secret that the 
company had staked out the new townsites at night. 11 

Blair was the town destined to become one of the most modernized 
company towns of its day, not Silver Peak. Blair would have the carefully laid 
out streets built to accommodate the newfangled automobiles. Blair’s homes 
would have electricity, running water piped directly into the kitchen, and a 
modern, underground sewer system—no more need for outhouses. 

Imagine the shock and disappointment. Blair’s location challenged the 
very survival of Silver Peak even more than the economic woes of the 1890s. 
The Goldfield Review (July 5, 1906) blamed Silver Peak speculators for 
pushing the Pittsburg operation into creating its own town, stating, 
“Exorbitant Demands of the Residents of Silver Peak Cause Mining 
Company to Lay Out New Townsite.” 12 Chiatovich, Vollmar, Wasson, and 
Shirley must have held out some small hope for the town of Silver Peak, but 
Blair quickly stole the show. 


BLAIR, A MODERN TOWN—1906-1916 


The futuristic visions investors held for Blair were marvelous, and little 
time was wasted implementing them. Most were completed in one year or 
less! The population of Blair exploded to 1,050 within its first year, while 
Silver Peak’s population rose more slowly to a mere 250 people. In the 
summer of 1906, tent houses blossomed in the desert and were quickly 
replaced by 100 wood-frame houses, all built within a month to house 700 
people. More miners were housed in the barracks near the Mary Mine portal. 
Businesses arrived offering all the necessities—the Blair Hotel, the Blair 



“Businesses arrived offering all the necessities .” Blair, Nevada, c. 1908-1909. (Photo¬ 
graph courtesy of the Central Nevada Historical Society.) 





Mercantile Company, a drugstore owned by a Dr. Cox, a meat market, 
furniture store, saloons, the Wells Fargo Express Company, and the Western 
Union Telegraph Company line—all were established within those first few 
months. Blair even offered a school (1907 to 1916), a newspaper, and a 
clubhouse. 

The new town had its problems. The T onopah Bonanza reported that 
“Claim jumping has begun by three new arrivals and word has gone out that 
such acts will not be tolerated.” 13 Opportunity often draws community- 
minded individuals and scoundrels alike. But once buildings were in place, 
the little company town of Blair settled in for what most hoped would be a 
successful run. 

Betting men thought Silver Peak residents would abandon their homes 
for the new, modern company town, but by May 6, 1907, the Tonopah Sun 
reported: 


35 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


. . . nothing of the kind has happened, nor is likely to ... . Silver 
Peak as a mining camp has a good excuse for its existence, else it 
would not have withstood the onslaught of the knocker for lo! these 
forty years. 


Indeed, the 1910 census revealed growing differences between the two 
communities. 14 Blair obviously became the more polished of the two towns. 
People living in Blair commanded some of the area’s best jobs. Most were 
young workers between the ages of twenty and forty, who worked in a variety 
of milling jobs (mill workers, assayers, carpenters, or managers) or in mining- 
related jobs such as the railroad. Almost anyone could find work in Blair 
because so many different skills were needed. Jobs ranged from domestics 
(housewives and laundrymen) to professionals (doctors) and businessmen 
(blacksmiths and merchants). 

Although most Blair residents were American-born citizens, some were 
immigrants from Canada, Russia, China, and Europe (representing Italy, 
France, Germany, Great Britain, Ireland, Sweden, Norway, Denmark), all 
living next to each other. Segregation did not appear to exist. Of course, the 
town was so small it would have been difficult to create the “Little Italies” or 
“Chinatowns” of larger cities. 

In contrast, few Silver Peak residents worked in the mills. Most were 
miners or housewives and domestics (lower-paid jobs), and nearly one fourth 
of its population was school-age children. Less than half of all residents in the 
entire area were immigrants, yet most of the Chinese, Hispanics, and Native 
Americans settled in Silver Peak. 15 

Several satellite communities grew near the mines and depended on 
Blair and Silver Peak for supplies and services. One was at the Valcalda 
Mine, according to an early map. 16 Living quarters included housing for a 
superintendent, two other frame houses, a boardinghouse, a bunkhouse, and 
a tent house. Residents of these were served by a school and by water storage 



36 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


SILVER PEAK VALCALDA PAYROLL RECORDS 

POSITION 

PAY/DAY 

Foreman 

$6.00 

Blacksmith 

$5.50 

Machine operators 


(Compressor operator, pump men, hoist men) 

$5.00 

Timber men 

$4.00 - 4.50* 

Machine operators 


(Miners & drillers) 

$4.00 - 4.50* 

Chuck tenders 

$4.00 - 4.50* 

Blacksmith’s helper 

$4.00 - 4.50* 

Teamsters 

$4.00 

Chinese Cooks 

$2.42 

*Wages varied based on whether the worker was in 

the mine or out- 

doors. Also, these day-wages were based on a 3 65-day 

working year—no 

paid holidays or vacations and no weekends off. Out of these wages, the 

men paid $1 per day for board. 17 


COST OF GOODS IN SILVER PEAK, NEVADA (c. 1905) 

PRODUCT 

COST 

Bottle of beer 

$ .50 

Bottle of whiskey 

$ 1.25 

Gallon of syrup 

$ 1.75 

Restaurant plate 

$ .30 

Box of caps 

$ .90 

50 lbs. powder 

$12.00 

200 ft. fuse 

$ 1.80 

Can of Sardines 

$ .25 

12 Cans of Milk 

$ 2.00 

1 pair of “drawers” 

$ 1.25 

1 pair of overalls 

$ 1.00 

1 pair of socks 

$ .25 

1 box .30-30 cartridges 

$ 2.00 

500 lbs. flour 

$19.00 

20 lbs. com meal 

$ .75 

Shot of whiskey 

$ .12 

14 lbs. coffee 

$ 4.20 

Bulk beef per lb. 

$ .09 

Sack of flour 

$ 2.50 

Bacon per lb. 

$ .25 

From a ledger in the Silver Peak Mercantile Collection at the Nevada 

Historical Society. 18 





tanks. The mine complex consisted of a hoist house, cyanide building, car- 
penter shop, blacksmith shop, office, and mill. A transformer building con- 
firmed that electricity ran the operation, although it may not have been 
available in the homes. 

Of special interest at Valcalda was the blacksmith shop, which was prob- 
ably in business during the Pittsburg Era from 1906 to 1916. During that 
time almost all surrounding properties were being worked by the Pittsburg 
Company, as well as a few independent owner/operators. That combination 
would have provided plenty of work for an independent blacksmith. There 
is some speculation that the shop may have been built by the owner of the 
Lucky Sam claim. Crucible fragments and an assay spoon suggest the smithy 
doubled as an assayer, but there were also the usual files, whetstones, pieces 
of metal, hooks, hinges, harness fittings, and horseshoes—all to be expected 
among artifacts for a blacksmith shop. One pneumatic drill bit was found by 
archaeologists, one that was never sharpened and returned to the mine. The 
smithy’s building was well-made of stone and built to last for several years. A 
nearby wood-frame building could have served as “home” to the blacksmith. 

Another small community flourished next to the Mary Mine where 60 
percent of the residents were men and lived in the boardinghouse. Only 55 
percent were American-born, which again meant more immigrants lived 
and worked near their jobs than in Blair. A small community, the Mary 
Mine camp was still larger than the Valcalda camp. It offered a clubhouse 
called the “Pool Palace,” a post office, and (briefly) both a school and a 
hospital. In addition to the bunkhouse and boardinghouse, there were tent 
houses and two classes of cottages or frame houses 19 which may have re¬ 
flected some social divisions based on job status. The mine complex in¬ 
cluded a carpenter and blacksmith shop, compressor house, oil house, aerial 
tramway and tram station, hoisting works, and transformer buildings (again, 
electricity was used), and a car shop which was likely used to repair tram 
cars. 

Other satellite camps were located at Carr Camp, Coyote Springs, and 
Gulch. By today’s standards, life in these small communities would be con¬ 
sidered harsh. The men worked seven days a week, 364 days a year, with 
only Christmas day off. The few women who lived there kept house without 
running water or indoor bathrooms. Yet new information shows that life was 
comfortable if measured by the standards of those days. A look at the follow¬ 
ing tables shows the pay scales from the Silver Peak Valcalda payroll records 
and a list of supplies with prices from the Silver Peak Mercantile ledger. 
People could earn enough to buy necessities from among the many “goods 
available to Americans during the early twentieth century . . . through the 
mass marketing and distribution systems that were in place . . . .” 20 


37 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 



TECHNOLOGY TAKES OVER 


38 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


Once plans for Blair were underway, Effinger began work on the 
Pittsburg Company’s mining and milling operation. The survey for the Silver 
Peak Railroad Company (Effinger served on its board as secretary/treasurer) 
was completed in one month, and by August of 1906 six miles of grade were 
ready for ties and rails. By October 15 the entire 17.5 miles of track were laid, 
built by the same company that built the Tonopah and Goldfield Railroad, 
and the first train pulled into Blair with a load of lumber the very next day. 

Construction on the huge new mill also started without delay. This mill 
mixed the old with the new, adding cyanidation as a second step to the 
traditional amalgamation treatment. The company’s fire insurance 
application listed a crusher building and plant located at the terminal of the 
tramway, along with the mill, carpentry and machine shops, and a stable. 
The mill itself was built entirely of steel with 20 stamps to each unit and a 
total of 100 stamps in all 5 units. Later, the final 20 stamps were removed 
from the Valcalda Mill and added to the Blair Mill. Driven by 50- 
horsepower, Bullock-type motors, each 1,150-pound stamp pounded the ore 
94 times per minute. The Merrill-Crowe process was used in the cyanide 
plant. By 1908 the mill was completely powered by electricity and over a ten- 
month period averaged 10,000 tons of ore crushed per month at a value of 
$10 per ton. By 1911 the mill was crushing more ore—15,500 tons a 
month—but by then the values had dropped to $6 per ton. 

The partially finished mill began operating in October 1907, and, when 
completed March 1, 1908, it could process 540 tons of ore each day. 21 The 
mill was recovering an incredible 93 percent of the precious gold between the 
amalgamation and cyanide processes, in addition to the Silver Peak cyanide 
mill which reprocessed tailings from old mill dumps. 

Of course, the mine was also being developed at the same time that the 
town of Blair and the gigantic mill were rising out of the desert. The Blair 
mining properties (owned by the Pittsburg Silver Peak Mining Company) 
included nineteen patented claims, fifteen Mohawk-Alpine claims 
including the Mary Mine, ten claims that were used for the town and the 
mill, and many other unpatented claims that were added over the years. 

By far the richest of all were on the Drinkwater and Crowning Glory 
veins, which ran parallel to each other and were intersected by the Mary 
Tunnel. When the Pittsburg operation took over, most of the previous work 
on these veins had been done by hand. The Nevada Mining Investor 
(December 1, 1906) described what they found: 


In the workings at the end of the Mary tunnel, huge deposits of ore 
are in plain sight. The methods of the old management were not 
those of orthodox mining. When ore bodies were discovered they 
“went to it” in a manner that would do justice to the stoutest 
Nevadan. Levels were disregarded and the stoping work was more in 



39 


the nature of quarrying rather than mining. As a result large 
chambers have been left which in point of dimension would do 
credit to the famous Mammoth Cave. Enormous pillars of rich ore 
have been allowed to remain to support the workings. 

This was similar to the “room and pillar method commonly used in coal 
mines during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,” according 
to Steven Mehls. 22 Leon Hill in his oral history described this style of mining: 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


. . . they hit this great big stope of ore. It was tremendous. Well, they 
wanted to get all of the values out that they could, so they mined that 
all the way up to the hanging and all the way down to the foot, so 
they were getting about all of the ore that they could get—of the 
high grade ore, because you had to have high grade in those days at 
twenty dollars . . . instead of putting in timber like they so often do 
in a lot of mines, they were leaving these large pillars . . . until pretty 
soon they exhausted this big ore body. So then they started to back 
out, and they started taking the pillars as they backed out.... They 
were just as valuable as some of the others, maybe more so, because 
it might have been right at the heart. Anyway, well, I think finally 
they got so many pillars out that the darn thing caved in. 23 


Those early-day drifts and tunnels were quickly expanded to suit modem 
technology. The first job was making room for the newer, larger equipment 
necessary to keep the hungry mill supplied with ore. For example, the Mary 
Tunnel was widened back to 800 feet where it struck the main drift in order 



“The town of Blair and the gigantic mill were rising out of the desert. ” Blair, Nevada, in 
1907. (Photograph courtesy of the Central Nevada Historical Society.) 




40 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


to accommodate a double-track rail line for a locomotive. To connect the 
Mary and Drinkwater mines, a 3,800-foot tunnel was drilled using pneumatic 
drills powered by compressed air and using water to dampen the dust. The 
goal in extending the main drift of the Mary Tunnel was to reach a point 
directly under the rich Drinkwater, Crown, and Crowning Glory veins and 
connect them with a winze to make removing the ore easier and more cost- 
effective. 

A contract with the new Nevada Power, Mining and Milling Company 
(predecessor to the Nevada-California Power Company) meant electrical 
power where it was needed and a substation located in Silver Peak. 24 On 
Bishop Creek in California a hydroelectric generating plant was built and the 
transmission lines reached Silver Peak sometime between 1905 and 1908, 
about the same time the first telephone lines arrived. The combination of 
discoveries at Tonopah and Goldfield and revitalization of the Mineral 
Ridge Mining District offered enough incentive to bring electricity to the 
area. 

In fact, electricity made the whole Blair experiment possible. The 
Pittsburg group’s large-scale mining operations could never have been 
realized without this “milestone” in technology. 25 The Blair Press editor 
toured the company’s underground mine and gave this firsthand account of 
the industrial-age wonders: 


We rode on an electric railway into the tunnel a distance of 
nearly 13,000 feet, the entire tunnel being well lighted by 
electricity .... In the five miles, roughly estimated, of workings in 
this mine every possible appliance to aid in rendering the lives of the 
employees safe is in use, and a rigid system of discipline is enforced to 
avert accidents. At various stations an automatic block signal system 
of electric lights guides employees going to and coming from their 
work. 

A thorough telephone system affords quick communication to 
all the main workings . . . . 26 


He also mentioned the two-story bunkhouse, complete with a club on 
the first floor. Even hot and cold running water was available from the 
company’s central steam plant that heated all the buildings and the mine. 
This ensured hot baths for the miners, previously a luxury. 27 

The age of automation had arrived. Ore cars ran on rails out of the mine 
and were dumped into loading chutes. From there, ore was transported by an 
electric locomotive pulling rail cars to the crushing plant. After being 
crushed, the ore was dumped automatically from the 400-ton bin and loaded 
automatically into 3-ton buckets on the aerial tramway which gravity pulled 
in a straight line down the mountain to the ore bins and crushers at the mill. 
What a sight to see—14,000 feet of wire from which 124 heavy ore buckets 
seemed to free-fall for 1,600 feet. In little more than a half-hour, 45 loaded 



cars carrying 110 tons of ore 
could travel from the mine to 
the mill. It all seemed perfectly 
orchestrated to feed the huge 
appetite of Nevada’s largest 
mill and to make a profit. 

Such a pace was thrilling, 
yet the challenge remained— 
mining enough high-grade ore. 
Efforts to reach that goal 
faltered. The company added a 
1,400-foot inclined tramway 
that enabled two, four-ton 
skips to carry ore from the 
Drinkwater down to the Mary 
Tunnel—a shortcut to the 
aerial tramway. An additional 
forty men were assigned to 
shovel ore from the old dumps 
down the chute of the glory 
hole, now that the new 
cyanide process could extract 
still more valuable ore from old 
tailings. 



“After being crushed, the ore was dumped automati¬ 
cally from the 400-ton bin and loaded automatically 
into three-ton buckets on the aerial tramway." (Pho¬ 
tograph courtesy of the Central Nevada Histori¬ 
cal Society.) 


Then the company acquired the Valcalda Mine in 1909, ran a rail line, 
connected it to the upper level of the Silver Peak Mine, and moved 20 stamps 
from the Valcalda Mill to the Blair Mill increasing the total to 120 stamps. 
From 1908 to 1915, about 1 million tons of ore were processed at a value of 
$5 million, but, ultimately, the race to feed the huge mill was lost. Ben 
Viljoen told the story that has been passed down through the years: 


41 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


. . . the grade of ore here in those times was so low grade that they 
had to make up for it in volume in order to show any kind of a profit. 
So they [Pittsburg Company] geared their mill at 500 tons a day, 
which was more than the Mary was able to produce at any kind of 
grade. In order to produce a .3 head grade, they could only produce 
about 300 to 350 ton a day, and the mill demanded 500. So the only 
way they could bring up enough mill feed to keep the place operating 
was to lower the grade. It was an unacceptably low-grade ore that was 
being shipped to the mill, and finally they went broke. Another 
problem they had is the mill was built in the infancy of the cyanide 
method, so it was an antique before it even operated. 28 


Hard-pressed to keep the mill operating at capacity, the miners sent 
every kind of rock they could find mixed with the high-grade ore. That kept 












42 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 



The Pittsburg Silver Peak Mining Company mill in Blair, Nevada, c. 1910. (Photo¬ 
graph courtesy of the Central Nevada Historical Society.) 


the mill fed but not producing a profit. Average ore values fell to $5 per ton 
in 1914, and the whole operation was shut down in 1915 with the last ore 
milled in early 1916. 

PITTSBURG EMPIRE CRUMBLES 


For ten years Silver Peak seemed to be losing ground while Blair kept 
gaining. Even though Blair’s population had dropped to 366 in 1910, that 
was still considered a stable core and could keep the Pittsburg operation 
running. 

One blow to Silver Peak came when its only school closed between 1903 
and 1906. It lacked students, so one elementary school was built near the 
Mary Mine portal in 1909 and another at Blair in 1910, but not without a 
fight. Surprisingly, the conflict was not between Silver Peak and Blair 
inhabitants. Instead, Blair residents accused two school board trustees, N.H. 
Mix and H.G. Knight, of showing favoritism in awarding construction 
contracts. Mix and Knight also planned to build the school one and a half 
miles north of Blair, against the wishes of the townspeople. The controversy 
reached the courts, and the citizens won. The Deputy State School 
Superintendent attended the hearing and agreed the school should be 
located within the boundaries of Blair. Silver Peak students attended the 
Blair school as late as the 1916 and 1917 school year. 

Now, while Silver Peak had weathered the competition, fabulous Blair 
started experiencing several problems. One came as the result of a fire. For 
several years the modern Blair Hotel building had been the shining 





cornerstone of the community. Owned by J. Grant Crumley and Co. 29 and 
designed by architects Hollsworth and Curtis, the two-story building 
originally cost $35,000. Each of the twenty-eight guest rooms offered a 
private bathroom and toilet, and the entire building was warmed by steam 
heat. The first floor had a lobby, bar, club room, dining room, and kitchen. 
For all its beauty and elegance, nothing could save it from the fire that swept 
through it on July 25, 1910. It was never rebuilt, even though the owners 
claimed a $25,000 insurance payment. 

Then, too, not everyone found the one-company town palatable. One 
naysayer was W. W. Booth, editor of the Blair Booster. 30 On March 13, 1907, 
just three short months after his arrival, Booth had had enough. As he left 
town he took a parting shot at Martin Effinger in the paper: 


43 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


This is a one-man town. I am informed that Mr. Effinger, the one 
man, has an interest in nearly every possible mercantile proposition. 
For the good of the town I trust that he has overlooked the sunset 
(redlight) district. 


And finally, a scandal, often referred to as the Bullion Tax Episode, 
tainted the company’s success. Indictments by the Esmeralda County grand 
jury were handed down against the officers and directors of the Pittsburg 
Silver Peak Gold Mining Company for conspiracy to defraud. Civil suits were 
filed seeking $5,000 in unpaid bullion taxes, and among those named were 
Oliver, Flinn, and Effinger. The dispute arose because the law required a 
$2.35 bullion tax per $100,000 net revenue to be paid to the state and the 
county. Although the company earned $251,000 in gross revenues for the 
first quarter of 1909, it claimed a profit of only $8,221 and said it owed no 
more than $193. 

The conflict erupted in fisticuffs. “Manager Juessen, surrounded by 
thugs, attempts an assault upon the State Bullion Tax and License Agent of 
Nevada in the lobby of a Reno hotel,” the newspaper read. Reporter J. L. 
Considine, in this story for The Reese River Reveille of Austin, named the 
thugs “the Pittsburg Silver Peak gang” and called them “anarchists.” 
Evidently, the “gang” settled the matter out of court by splitting the 
difference, and Pittsburg Silver Peak Mining Company eventually paid 
$2,500 in bullion taxes. 

Despite these occasional, colorful conflicts among its citizenry, and even 
with a declining population, Blair continued to overshadow its neighbor. 
The post office was moved to Blair between 1913 and 1916, a move that 
seemed to toll the death knell for Silver Peak, when in reality the Pittsburg 
Company was gripped in a life-or-death struggle. By 1915 the group was no 
longer turning a profit, and all operations were shut down. A year later the 
mill was dismantled and its equipment sold. By 1918 the new and modern 
company town of Blair was deserted, and the once-welcomed railroad was 
abandoned. 



44 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


Meanwhile, and seemingly against all odds, the town of Silver Peak 
survived. Locals watched Blair sink into the desert, becoming just another of 
Nevada’s many ghost towns. 31 A retrospective article published on March 
27, 1936, in The Goldfield News and Weekly Tribune told of the demise of the 
Pittsburg Silver Peak Company, complete with the moral of the story: 

The old Pittsburg Silver Peak Company, operated by a group of 
Pennsylvania political notables whose cash resources seemed 
without limit but who finally took a lesson in economics, spread 
themselves on one of the biggest mill and mill investments in 
Nevada [up to that time]. 

Failing to make a profit with a one-hundred-ton mill, they were 
advised by New York engineers to increase the mill capacity . . . 
making the Silver Peak mill at their Mary mine (Blair) the largest in 
Nevada, and the bragging of their big-scale operation, while the 
mine foremen, faced with the necessity of feeding an inefficient 
plant, were breaking more waste than ore . . . 

Finally, after the “big shots” had written off a loss in big figures, 

Fred Vollmar, born and raised in the district, proud of his pioneer 
ancestry, took the whole works in hand, defeated the chiselers, 
worked with his hands and head to produce bullion and finally today 
has a one-hundred-ton, the last word cyanide plant running. 


Nevadans taught the Easterners a lesson that became Silver Peak’s 
theme: “Don’t try to mine our country without us.” 


SILVER PEAK SURVIVES 


Silver Peak survived. Residents watched an economic recession come 
and go during the 1890s, that made the Klondike Strike of 1899 especially 
enticing to many miners who headed north to Canada. Also during the 
1890s, Cripple Creek, Colorado, was becoming the “world’s greatest gold 
camp,” another attraction. Still, hard-core Silver Peak residents held fast to 
their belief that riches remained right near their homes. Unlike some 
Nevada mining camps that seemed to last no more than an historical 
heartbeat, Silver Peak had already survived more than five decades by the 
end of the Pittsburg Era. 

Water was still plentiful. Trees carried from Cottonwood Spring and 
Creek (about a mile west of the Nivloc Mine) were planted in Silver Peak 
back in 1884 and had survived. The Silver Peak spring had fed 300,000 
gallons daily to the town of Blair and its hungry 120-stamp mill. Valcalda 
Springs served the Valcalda Mill and later the Gordon-Brodie Mill. Mills 
located right in Silver Peak drew groundwater, and the Clayton Valley playa 
held enough water during springtime and early summer months to draw 
migratory birds and even a few boaters. 



Life was seldom boring in Silver Peak. Enough residents were on hand 
and enough water was available in 1907 to throw a Fourth of July celebration 
featuring a boat race on the “lake.” 32 If that wasn’t excitement enough, 
newspaper reports of two miners murdered just three miles west of the “new 
Cottonwood district” near Silver Peak roused the community. Esmeralda 
County Sheriff Ingalls formed a posse to locate the men’s missing burros: 


45 

The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


The people of this community are wrought up over the murder, as 
both the prospectors were well known here, and if the murder (sic) 
or murderers are brought in here, they are apt to be summarily dealt 
with. 33 


A less violent but equally fascinating incident drew comment when 
Lillian Malcolm, a woman prospector and promoter, successfully financed a 
property at Coyote Springs in the Silver Peak district: 

“I raised the money in Pittsburgh,” said she, “and I had no 
trouble in doing it, which goes to show that there is a great deal of 
bugaboo about this talk of hard times and stringency of the money 
market. There is plenty of money to be had for legitimate 
propositions, if one is sincere in his or her motives. When one goes 
to business men, all that is necessary is to talk common sense. But if 
one is going to take romantic flights, and go up into the millions on 
an ordinary proposition, he is going to fall short of his expectations.” 

“Our company has been called the Scotch Lassie Gold Mining 
Company, and we have already started work upon it. The offices are 
located in Pittsburg (sic), in the Columbia Bank Building, the same 
building where are located the offices of the Pittsburg Silver Peak 
Company.” 34 

Lillian Malcolm grew up in the eastern United States and started a ca- 
reer as an actress on Broadway until gold fever struck. Then Lillian packed 
up her show costumes and headed north to Canada and the Klondike gold 
rush in 1899. She began life anew and prospected for gold, a job generally 
considered to be for men only. She was one of a handful of women who 
joined this man’s world. 

Alone, she took a sled and dog team over the treacherous Chilkoot Trail 
to Dawson. A death-defying feat, it was not the only adventure she encoun- 
tered. She also accidentally slipped into a frozen river while jumping be- 
tween chunks of floating ice, then at one point came near to starvation 
when she ran out of provisions. She wore a pistol in her belt but was not able 
to fend off the men who jumped her claim in Alaska. After a year-long court 
battle failed to retrieve her claim, she left Alaska—completely broke but 
not discouraged. 



As far as we know, Lillian was always a little bit too late, never striking 
the big bonanza. However, she seemed aware of her role as trailblazer for 
other women to follow: 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


The grandest and healthiest life known is this rough pioneer life. 
And I don’t see why more women are not out in the hills. It ought to 
be as easy and natural for women to read rocks as it is for astrono- 
mers to read the stars. The day will come when they will not sneer 
at Miss Malcolm. They will not pick up their skirts when I come 
around. Disgusting conventionality must pay the penalty in any pio- 
neer work .... Woman can endure as much as a man. Comply with 
the law and you will have man’s responsibilities and man’s reward. 35 


However, she also knew what it was like to be rejected by other women: 


. . . the criticism I received from my own sex when I first began to 
prospect. I would notice as I passed down the streets of a mining 
camp, in my tallow spattered khakis, the wives of struggling clerks 
and other low salaried men holding their garments aside as though I 
might contaminate them. My pride prevented my turning back. 36 

From Alaska, Lillian traveled to Nevada to join the new gold and silver 
strikes at Goldfield and Tonopah in 1902. Since she had no money, she paid 
for her room and board in Tonopah by telling stories of her Alaskan adven- 
tures. She tried to locate gold near Silver Peak in Esmeralda County, staked 
a claim, went to Pittsburgh to raise money from eastern investors, and formed 
a company called “Scotch Lassie Gold Mining Company.” When she re¬ 
turned, The Tonopah Bonanza reported her success in raising funds on No¬ 
vember 2, 1907: “She is a hustler of no mean ability, and has done prospect¬ 
ing on her own account, both in Nevada and in Alaska.” 

Unfortunately, her Silver Peak claims did not pan out. When her Silver 
Peak property failed to show value, Lillian continued to travel in search of 
the gold she always believed she would find. After living in Rhyolite and 
Mexico, she moved back to northern Nevada and worked in the Slumbering 
Hills Mining District. In 1911 she moved to Jarbidge in northeastern Ne¬ 
vada and continued her prospecting. From there she may have moved out of 
state, possibly to Arizona and California. 37 


QUIET TIMES—1917-1928 


When the Pittsburg operation stopped in 1915, the silence must have 
been as deafening as a curtain call without applause. The sounds of blasting, 
drilling, and mucking tons of ore, the rumbling of ore cars on rails, the 
whoosh of ore buckets sliding down the aerial tram, and the constantly 
pounding 120 stamps of the big mill were replaced by the occasional sound of 



a wagon or car and the distant ring of the leasers’ picks. Once more, lone 
miners chipped away at the ore in deserted mines. Blair faded quickly into the 
desert, leaving only a faint trace of the streets and a few artifacts. But as the 
newspaper had prophesied, Silver Peak had a reason to remain—at least the 
seventy-eight people recorded by the census in 1920 must have thought so. 

Gold production across the state was in a decline during the 1920s and 
demand shifted to by-products of gold, such as copper. That brought the 
copper mines of Ely into the limelight. 38 Left without eastern financial 
backing or new discoveries, all the technology in the world could not save 
the Silver Peak Mining District now. 

Like bit players leftover from a touring road show, owners dropped their 
claims and left town or stayed on merely to maintain the assessment work. 
The entire area hunkered down into its earlier survival-of-the-fittest mode. 
By 1926 the fittest once again numbered just ten, and perhaps none of them 
would have bet odds on the little mining town’s survival the day the stock 
market crashed in October of 1929. 

While the entire country dropped into the Great Depression years, 
mysteriously, Silver Peak never withered into the desert. Never a ghost town, 
the explanation for its survival seemed to lie, over and over, in that magic 
combination of cash from eastern investors coupled with Nevada know¬ 
how—local miners who implemented new mining and milling techniques, 
adapting them successfully to fit local conditions. 

Then the 1930s arrived along with a new local hero. Fred Vollmar Jr., 
equal parts miner and promoter, charged in and out of town by air or auto, 
becoming Silver Peak’s white knight. He delivered new investors, new life, 
and new hope to the town and its people. 


47 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


Notes 

1. The University of Nevada, Reno Special Collections Department has a stock 
certificate from the Pittsburg Silver Peak Gold Mining Company, and the company 
name is spelled without an “h”. 

2. Griffin said electricity was available at the Mary Mine and mills before it reached 
residences, so oil lamps were used in the homes. Ruby Griffin, conversation with 
author, 1996. 

3. WCRM, 3-15. In comparison, prior to 1906 Silver Peak’s production reached only 
about $1.4 million. 


4. The Tonopah Daily Sun, 29 May 1906. 

5. Shamberger, 22. 




48 


6. WCRM, 5-54. The skeleton of this pipeline can still be traced across the ridges 
from Red Mountain to Valcalda Springs and may be the pipeline Jack Brodie 
mentions in his oral history. 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


7. WCRM, 18. 


8. WCRM, 546. 


9. Charles M. Schwab was born in Williamsburg, Pennsylvania, in 1862 and died in 
1939. He entered the service of the Carnegie Company and became president of 
Carnegie Steel Co. Ltd. then President of U.S. Steel Corporation from 1901 to 1903 
and Chairman of the Bethlehem Steel Corporation. He was also the Director of the 
American Iron and Steel Institute. The National Cyclopedia of American Biography 14 
(New York: James T. White and Company, 1917), 68-69. 

10. George Tener Oliver was born in Ireland, January 26, 1848 and died January 22, 
1919 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He was an attorney who retired from that 
profession after ten years in practice and engaged in steel manufacturing until 1901 
when he sold his interests. From there he became a newspaper publisher of the 
Pittsburgh Gazette-Times and Pittsburgh Chronicle-Telegraph. He served as a U.S. 
Senator from Pennsylvania from 1909 to 1917. The National Cyclopedia of American 
Biography, Chapter 2. 

11. Zeier, 8. 

12. Shamberger, 52. More likely, as historian Shamberger noted, the ambitiousM. L. 
Effinger simply wanted to control everything—the mine, the mill, the town, and the 
men. He was, after all, a man of his times, and such efforts were common among the 
new wave of industrialists seeking to increase their power over working men, which 
eventually brought a reaction in the form of organized labor unions. 

13. The Tonopah Daily Bonanza, 30 October 1906. 

14. WCRM, 3-21 to 3-23. 

15. WCRM, 3-22. A sad note is that 30 percent of the mothers who lived in Blair 
reported a child who had died—not an unusually high number for mining towns of 
the day. For more details on childhood deaths see Hill, Cooper, and Mattei oral 
histories. 

16. WCRM, Chapter 5. Artifacts from a woman resident led to speculation that at 
least one superintendent’s wife lived at the Valcalda Mine, too. 

17. WCRM, 3-25 

18. Cited in WCRM, 3-26 

19. Listed as Class A or Class B, these designations may have been for fire insurance 
or some other legal designation. 



20. WCRM, 3-24-26 


21. Today 540 tons of ore would amount to little more than two truckloads in some 
of the huge haul trucks used in open-pit mining. 

22. Mehls, phone conversation with editor, August 1998. 

23. Ford, Leon Hill oral history, 64-65. 


49 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 


24. Electricity certainly was not new. It had been proven successful in Colorado 
mines and others around the West, but the problem was cost—how to generate and 
transmit electricity from the source to the consumer in a cost-effective way. In an 
1892 to 1893 experiment at Bodie, not far from Silver Peak across the California 
border, a man named L. L. Nunn proved a power plant and transmission system could 
carry direct current (dc) electricity to the mines. Alternating current (ac) could also 
be carried more than two miles from a hydroelectric power system to a mine. Both 
experiments took place before the turn of the century. Emil W. Billeb, Mining Camp 
Days (Berkeley, CA: Howell-North Books, 1968), 152-154. 


25. WCRM, 3-20. 


26. The Blair Press, 3 September 1909. 

27. Ford, Leon Hill oral history, 84-85. See Hill’s description of miners bathing in the 
reservoir or making a homemade shower. 

28. Ford, Ben Viljoen oral history, 203. 

29. This company also included the ever-present Effinger. Shamberger, 55. 

30. Booth edited the Tonopah Bonanza and also published the Silver Peak Post, the 
newspaper that became the Blair Booster. Shamberger, 53. 

31. In 1996 only a few artifacts remained at the Blair town site: a manhole cover from 
the once-modern sewer system, a cement foundation for what locals believe was the 
elegant Blair Hotel, and the ghostly outline of streets that from a distance look as 
though space aliens once played a game of tic-tac-toe there. 


32. Shamberger, 35-36. 

33. Tonopah Bonanza, 22 November 1907. 

34. Tonopah Bonanza, 2 November 1907. 

35. Zanjani, 94 


36. Zanjani, 100-101 



37. Bibliographical synopsis drawn from Zanjani, 89-95, 99-103. 


50 


38. Zeier, 9. 


The 

Pittsburg 

Era 



PART II 

The Vollmar Years, 1928-1942 




3 


Fred Vollmar Jr. 


THE HEYDAY 

The Great Depression struck a hard blow to towns across the nation but 
seemed to skip Silver Peak. Instead, the 1930s became the heyday, often 
called “the Vollmar years” for Fred Vollmar Jr.. Evidently “Fritz” pumped 
new life into the town of Silver Peak in more ways than one. 

Born and raised in the area, he moved away for a short time then re- 
joined his father in 1927 at a time when mining was in the dumps, so to 
speak, at Silver Peak. Whether he was away at school or to seek his fortune 
is unknown. His return was simply noted in a newspaper article without 
further explanation, yet to this day Vollmar Jr. is considered one of Silver 
Peak’s legends and its savior. Wasting little time, his name soon popped up 
on mining records everywhere. He was busy assisting small companies, forming 
new companies, and enticing financial backing for them all. 

Although Fred Vollmar Jr.’s knowledge of mining was solid, it was his 
ability to attract investors and his dashing style of promoting Silver Peak 
that caused stories of his adventures to grow to epic proportions. When he 
climbed aboard an airplane and flew off to parts unknown, everyone at The 
Peak trusted he would return with more money to ensure their precious jobs 
in the mines and mills. 

At a time when banks around the nation were closing, his legendary 
feats included landing big-name investors. Among them were E. L. Cord, 
the famous automobile maker; Tommy “Bugs” Warner, whose fortune was 
made manufacturing transmissions and gears for General Motors and many 
other cars and trucks, such as Willys and Overland; the Kelloggs of Los 
Angeles, owners of Forest Lawn; and Cecil B. DeMille, Hollywood film- 
maker. 1 Eventually, his successes in attracting southern California investors 
justified a Beverly Hills headquarters for the Black Mammoth Consolidated 
Gold Mining Company, a move that was noted in the company’s March 
1941 quarterly report. 2 



54 


Fred 

Vollmar 

Jr. 


Many mining towns had colorful characters, and Vollmar’s escapades 
certainly entertained locals. But Silver Peak natives also remember Vollmar 
Jr. as a man of substance. He not only kept miners on the payroll through 
the tough Depression years, but he was always involved in Silver Peak’s so- 
cial events. On one hand, his passion for betting on horse races was known 
to all. On the other, he could always find time to toss a football with small 
boys or to fly a doctor into town to help a sick child. Vollmar is remembered 
not simply as a character but as a man with a big heart who gained the 
respect of his community. 

Fred Vollmar Jr. was president and general manager of Silver Peak’s most 
successful operation, the Black Mammoth Mine and Mill, from 1927 to 1942. 
He was also involved in many other area enterprises such as the Lucky Boy 
Divide Mining Company. He held controlling interests in the Liberty DL 
vide Mining Company, Gold Wedge Divide Mining Company, the Nivloc 
Mine, and others. 3 It was through these companies that Vollmar had his 
hand in most major mines in the district as well as several milling opera- 
tions. Vollmar’s companies did not actually own any mines, so he worked 
mostly on long-term leases from the Pittsburg Silver Peak Mining Company, 
and within ten years his companies were operating on nearly every claim in 
the district. 

Later The Goldfield News would remember his growing reputation and 
holdings: 


When he started in the mining business he was a mere boy. Some of 
the pioneers in Esmeralda County laughed at him. But Fred has made 
good. Vollmar is interested in a number of corporations, so many, in 
fact, that it is necessary for him to now make all business trips to 
Reno, Los Angeles, Las Vegas, Salt Lake City, San Francisco and 
other business centers in a privately-owned plane, a landing field for 
which has been constructed in Silver Peak. 4 


VOLLMAR AND CORD 

Often Vollmar and investor E. L. Cord were compared. Vollmar is gen¬ 
erally credited with drawing Cord into the Nevada mining scene via the 
Mary Mine. Exactly what transpired between the two men or among Vollmar 
and his other partners, such as R. J. Carnall, is lost. However, those who 
spent their childhood, teenage, or young adult years in Silver Peak charac¬ 
terized the two men as opposites. Cord always remained aloof, while Vollmar 
always played an active part in the everyday life of his community. 

Ultimately, World War II shut down the mines and mills at Silver Peak, 
as it did all across the nation. Even before the war, Vollmar apparently faced 
financial difficulties, including an investigation by the Internal Revenue 
Service, the results of which are unknown. 



STEWART CARNALL: THE MONEY PEOPLE 5 


Ronald Carnall and Fred Vollmar Jr. were partners in the Red Mountain Mining 
Company which was formed in April of 1936 to operate the Nivloc silver mine. 
Carnall’s son, Stewart, recalled adventures accompanying his father on business 
trips to Silver Peak. Although Carnall describes a brief period of time and his 
memories are from a child’s viewpoint, he clearly sensed the excitement surround¬ 
ing the two men’s promotional activities. 


55 


Fred. 

Vollmar 

Jr. 


Fred Vollmar and my dad 
[Ronald “Pete” Carnall] were 
partners in the Mary Mine, the 
Nivloc, and the Black Mam¬ 
moth. When I was a kid, be- 
tween the ages of eight and 
twelve years old, we drove to 
Silver Peak from Pasadena, Cali- 
fornia, many weekends. We 
drove up Highway 395 and 
turned off on the blacktop just 
before Bishop to go into Silver 
Peak. We always stayed at Fred 
Vollmar’s house, and his wife 
[Lois] was a hell of a good cook! 

I don’t remember any other 
kids around when I was there during the summers, but of course I was like 
the new kid on the block. My dad took me everywhere with them. We’d go 
up and check the mines and wander around. I had a miner’s outfit, and Fred 
gave me the gold pan to strap around my shoulders. They let me chip away 
at the ore, but I didn’t know what I was doing. It was pretty spooky under- 
ground. 

Fred was an outgoing, good guy, and my dad was, too. They were both 
pieces of work—very different from the run-of-the-mill type person. They 
didn’t take me downtown in Silver Peak too much. My dad might have 
snuck away, or Fred might have snuck away and gambled on horses. One 
time my dad took me with him to Tonopah to the Mizpah Hotel. They had 
wooden boxes of silver dollars there, and he was playing roulette and damn 
near broke the place. I think he was about $40,000 in front. By the time I 
dozed off, he had lost about half of it back to the house. 

Fred was a tremendous gambler and kept a room in the St. Paul Hotel in 
downtown Los Angeles. He kept a personal barber and a personal bookie. In 
the morning, he would bet a couple hundred dollars at the eastern tracks— 
huge money in those days. After six, eight races back East, he’d go to Santa 
Anita and bet. We used to go together, and he was really good to me, but he 
kept saying, “Kid, don’t get involved in this. This gambling is a bad deal.” 



Stewart Carnall. (Photograph by Victoria Ford.) 





56 


Fred 

Vollmar 

Jr. 



“We always stayed at Fred Vollmar’s house." Stewart Camall and his father walking 
toward Fred Vollmar’s guest house in Silver Peak, c. 1934. (Photograph courtesy of 
Stewart Carnall.) 


But he let me bet. Once he warned me against betting on a race, but I wanted 
to bet anyway, so I asked one of the cashiers to go partners on a bet. You had 
to bet $2, and the horse we bet on was Tobacco Road. We won. Paid $49.80, 
so we split half-and-half on that. That’s like a windfall for a ten-year-old kid. 
That’s when I got hooked on horses. 

My father and Fred Vollmar had nothing to invest. They went out and 
looked for investors—E. L. Cord, Tommy Warner of Warner tools. They 
didn’t sell stocks at that time; they invested. Dad and Fred would take the 
investors on hunting trips, and one time I went along. My dad said, “Don’t 
get out of line with these people. They’re the money people.” [laughter] 

It was one of the best experiences of my life. We went up in the Reese 
River country out of Austin, Nevada. There must have been about twenty 
or thirty people. We rode horses about ten miles and set up camp by the 
Reese River. We caught brook trout out of that stream and saw a herd of 
about 200 deer grazing down below where we were camped. I practiced tar¬ 
get shooting to flush the sage hens out of the way. Fred Vollmar loved shoot¬ 
ing. He was an excellent marksman. I had no idea who E. L. Cord was. (When 
I became an adult I knew he had a 50,000-watt radio station in Reno, be¬ 
cause later I booked entertainers there.) 

Getting people to invest in mining was sensible, because they all made 
money. E. L. Cord made money. Warner made money. My dad made money. 
Vollmar made money. What else can you ask for? 










Fred was a very gracious 
man, an amazing man. He was 
part Indian. He was articulate, 
and he knew what the hell he 
was doing: he knew where to find 
the ore. My dad got the money 
people. Later we stopped going 
to Silver Peak. There were prob- 
lems with the I.R.S. I don’t re¬ 
ally know the details on that, but 
we kept in touch with Fred. In 
later years, 1973 or 1974, when 
Vollmar was living in Austin, 

Nevada, my wife and I stopped 
by and visited him. I said, 

“Wouldn’t you like to be at Santa 
Anita rather than here?” because 
he was bedridden then. He 
laughed. 

O 

When my father died in 
1971, I chartered a plane, took 

his ashes, and tossed them over the Black Mammoth Mine along with two 
winning tickets from a horse race and one red rose. I did the same thing 
when my mother died, because I thought she would like to be with him. I 
thought they’d want to be there, because that was the highlight of our life. 
They made money there, and our life was really good during the 1930s. I 
never felt the Depression. We had a butler, a Packard car, and a beautiful 
home in Arcadia, California. 


“1 had a miner’s outfit, and Fred gave me the 
gold pan to strap around my shoulders.” (Pho¬ 
tograph courtesy of Stewart Carnall.) 


Partners Pete Carnall (center) and Fred Vollmar Jr. (right) take a break in front of a 
mine site. (Photograph courtesy of Stewart Carnall.) 


57 

Fred 

Vollmar 

]r- 







LEON HILL: THE WHITE KNIGHT 


58 


Fred 

Vollmar 

Jr. 


Leon Hill was raised in Silver Peak and Goldfield. His father was Fayette Hill, 
superintendent of the Black Mammoth Mill owned by the Black Mammoth Com - 
pany, in which Fred Vollmar Jr. owned a part. Leon’s firsthand memories of Vollmar 
paint him as Silver Peak’s economic savior and alLaround good guy. In contrast, 
E. L. Cord bought the Molini Ranch in Fish Lake Valley for tax purposes only, 
Hill said. He didn’t live there and was not involved with the local community. 


Everyone knew Fred Vollmar. 
He was kind of a white knight, be- 
cause he’s the one that promoted 
the whole area’s mining business 
and came up with the money by 
selling stock. All of these people in 
town were kept working during the 
Depression years on account of him. 
You’d never know he was the presi¬ 
dent of that company, because he 
was involved in everything and 
with everybody in town. We used 
to go out and play touch football 
with him. He always struggled, be¬ 
cause he was a big heavy guy, and 
we were slender and young, and we 
could run like hell. He couldn’t 
catch us, but we could catch him. [laughter] There was no city government 
in Silver Peak and no money, but the people living around there would have 
these celebrations. If there were foot races, he’d give $2 or $5 to whoever 
won. He was a real good sport, a real good guy. 

He worried about his people. Back in those days the minimum wage at 
the Black Mammoth was five dollars. That was for a day. Overtime didn’t 
mean anything. You might get paid for it; you might not. But if you did, you 
just got regular pay, sixty-two and a half cents an hour or whatever it was. 
[laughter] Well, when Cord came there, the first thing he wanted to do was 
to reduce wages, but it was tied up in a contract where he couldn’t do that. 

Cord had a real bad reputation back East. He made a lot of money in the 
steel mills, and he was always afraid somebody was going to kill him. If he’d 
eat out in a restaurant, he’d always have somebody else taste his food before 
he’d eat it. He’d have people sitting with him, and he’d draw diagrams and 
stuff on the tablecloth with ink. We were a poor town, and the restaurant 
couldn’t afford new tablecloths when he drew on them. 

Whenever Cord came to town, he came by plane. It was a Lockheed, a 
big plane, and he’d give Vollmar or somebody like that a ride, but they’re 
about the only ones that ever got a ride. For the people that were close to 
him (like Vollmar and his general manager, Arthur Sweet), he gave them 



Leon Hill. (Photograph by Victoria Ford.) 




Cord automobiles for Christmas. That just got Vollmar into trouble, because 
he’d go down to LA, and he’d speed. The highway patrol couldn’t catch 
him. [laughter] In those days they didn’t have radios to call ahead, so the 
patrolmen had to get to a telephone to call ahead to the next town. By that 
time Vollmar was already past that town. 

E. L. Cord was much more aloof. He didn’t spend that much time in 
Silver Peak. He relied on Sweet and his chief geologist, Prescott, who had a 
lease. Well, later Cord wound up with the whole darn place, just before 
everything was shut down because of World War II. Sweet built a house over 
by Vollmar’s, but, of course, he was nothing like Vollmar. He was the general 
manager, and you knew it. He was civil, but he didn’t go out of his way to be 
friendly like Vollmar. 

Vollmar liked to ride horses until the good life got him, and he was too 
fat. One time in Reno he bought this parade horse, which was big enough to 
hold him, but that doggone horse was forever dancing and prancing, throw- 
ing his head and throwing foam from his mouth into your face! He shook 
Vollmar to pieces. 

Vollmar was a terrible gambler, too. He’d call in his bets on horse races 
from his phone (in his home) in Silver Peak. He’d bet on anything. 

Although everyone liked him, the people in town were real indepen¬ 
dent. They didn’t want him telling them what to do. One time in about 
1936 during the governor’s election, a friend of his, a Mr. Fulton who was 
also a Republican, was running for governor. I think Mr. Fulton could have 
carried Silver Peak in a walk, because everyone really liked his son who 
worked up at the mill. Well, Fred Vollmar wanted him to be elected, so he 
had somebody take a bunch of fliers around town, into the bars and every¬ 
where, with ballots on them marked off nice and plain. He was more or less 
telling everyone they had to vote for Fulton. Besides that, Vollmar was out 
campaigning for Fulton, but poor old Fulton didn’t get hardly any votes, 
[laughter] You don’t tell a miner what to do. That’s silly. 


59 


Fred 

Vollmar 

Jr. 


- o- - 


MERLE SWANSON: A PRETTY GOOD GUY 

Merle Swanson was a strong, healthy young man with a wife and family who 
worked his way from the bottom up at the M ary Mine, from mucking to shift boss. 
His contacts with Fred Vollmar Jr. and E. L. Cord were brief and never below 
ground. 

I knew Fred Vollmar. Well, he was a pretty good guy. I worked for him 
here at Silver Peak, and I also worked for him up at Gabbs. I hauled ore for 
him out of those mines and did quite a lot of work for him. I’ve been to his 
house where he lived down there in Silver Peak. Pretty nice. I don’t know if 
Hefty Sanderson bought that place or who got it. 



60 


Fred 

Vollmar 

Jr. 



I don’t recollect too 
much about him being un¬ 
derground, or Cord either. 

He seemed to stay away from 
underground, but I’d see him 
on the surface and talk to 
him about different things 
when he was with the super- 
intendent. 

I knew E. L. Cord, but 
he stayed pretty well in Fish 
Lake Valley. He had two 
boys. About the time the war 
broke out, he told his boys 
to get tires for his cars, and 
then right away tires were 
rationed, and you couldn’t 
get any tires. But Cord had 
bought up quite a few tires, 
and the boys went there and 
tried to get tires from their 
dad, but he said, “I told you, you needed to get those tires before the war, and 
you didn’t do it.” 

The kid said, “Well, we’ll do the best we can.” So they went and bought 
him a new . . . well pretty near a new car. Well, they got the tires, but had to 
buy a car. [laughter] 


Merle Swanson. (Photograph by Victoria Ford.) 


- -O - 

ROBERT P. DOUGLASS: PAYCHECKS AND POKER GAMES 

Bob Douglass was born and raised in Tonopah. When he graduated from high 
school, one of his first jobs was building the Vollmar mill in Silver Peak, Nevada, 
where he learned about both Vollmar Jr. and E. L. Cord. 

Silver Peak is an old camp, and the Mary Mine is an old mine. It was 
worked years ago when Tonopah, I guess, was discovered. It was abandoned, 
and I think Vollmar went in and got a lease on it. And then he struck some 
gold in there, and he was hauling that ore down to that mill down in Silver 
Peak. 

Warner brothers, you know, they’d come out there. That’s another story 
now. Vollmar owned the mine up there. Vollmar was the nephew of Harry 
Stimler, and Harry Stimler was the smartest. . . was one of the discoverers 
of Goldfield, but they were Indians. And Harry Stimler stayed down around 
Hollywood, and he sold stock. 






Vollmar hung around 
Tonopah as a kid, and he 
worked around Tonopah, and 
then he went out and got that 
Mary Mine. He leased that 
Mary Mine up on top of the 
hill out there at Silver Peak. 
And he brought Cord [E. L. 
Cord] and the Kellogg’s 
(Kellogg used to own Forest 
Lawn in Los Angeles) and 
Bugs Warner (Warner used to 
make all the gears for General 
Motors). Cord and Kellogg 
were investors in the mine 
with Vollmar, and then they 
came into Silver Peak, bought those ranches and lived down there. Cord 
liked it. He’s one of the greatest things to happen to Nevada. He was a 
senator down there from Esmeralda County, and he went up to be a legisla- 
tor. They put up the money for that mill, but I didn’t see them. 

Vollmar was around there all the time. He always had a deck of cards 
when it was payday, [laughter] Oh, I guess there were some guys that got 
away with it [their paycheck], but a lot of us kids just stayed there. I never 
had any money because Fritz Vollmar used to pay us off, and then he’d have 
a poker game. Well, after I worked there for three or four months, I never 
had enough to get a haircut for God’s sake! I never had any money when I 
came out of there, but I had a lot of fun and a lot of experience. 

- -O - 

BEN VILJOEN: VOLLMAR FOLKLORE 

Stories about Fred Vollmar Jr. have survived and probably grown over the years. 
One of Silver Peak’s resident historians, Ben Viljoen, has collected and shared 
several of the current legends from the infamous Vollmar years. 

I bought Fred Vollmar Jr.’s house. He was a very famous promoter of this 
area—Silver Peak’s answer to Graham Rice and George Wingfield. Maybe 
not quite as famous, but he was always bringing new money into the area. In 
fact, the house itself was built by the Warner brothers. He conned them into 
what a wonderful idea it would be to have a little hideout that they could 
come to and bring some of their favorite secretaries along. After they lost 
interest in partying and lost a lot of money in the mining business, they gave 
up on Silver Peak, sold the house back to him, and went back to Hollywood. 



61 

F red 

Vollmar 

Jr. 




62 


Fred 

Vollmar 

Jr. 


The house hasn’t changed 
much—still has a little bunkhouse 
right next to it and a barbecue room 
with a copper roof on it. All the big 
gardens and tennis courts are gone. 

It’s got the only private swimming 
pool in town, which Vollmar would 
drain whenever he was out of town, 
because his wife didn’t know how to 
swim. She came in drunk one night 
and fell in the swimming pool, and 
it darn near killed her. She broke her 
back. If there had been water in it, 
she would have been OK. 

There are a lot of stories around 
today about him. My favorite is that 
when he was on top of the world, he ate steak, his buddies ate steak, and his 
dogs ate steak. When he was under the world, well, then he and his dogs ate 
rabbit. 

He was one of the first in Nevada to buy an airplane. He’d fly to Long 
Beach and promote a bunch of stock, and when the people in Silver Peak 
saw his plane coming back to town, they knew everything was well. They 
would have plenty of money to operate or to do a bunch of development. 

He was half Paiute Indian, which was very common in Silver Peak, be- 
cause it was such a miserable place to live, so hot in the summers that the 
men couldn’t get white women to live out here, and some married Indian 
gals. Anyway, he used that to promote stock, and he’d tell these movie stars 
and hot shots in Hollywood that his ancestors had told him about great gold 
mines in the wilds out here, and boy, they’d flake out the money! 

Fred Vollmar Sr. is called the “Father of Cyanide” in Nevada, because he 
was one of the pioneers in the cyaniding process. Fred Jr. was no slouch as a 
mining man. He flat knew his business and his mines after two generations 
of being involved. But he had that gift of gab to be able to go talk people out 
of their very last dollar. I understand he had a number of other companies, 
and he would kind of rob money from one company to finance another— 
different ways of getting money that’s kind of illegal nowadays . 6 



Ben Viljoen. (Photograph by Victoria 
Ford.) 


Notes 


1. Ford, Bob Douglass oral history, 17. 


2. WCRM, 3-33. 





3. Shamberger, 76. 


4. The Goldfield News, 14 May 1937. Leon Hill stated in his oral history that the 
privately-owned airplane referred to in this newspaper article actually belonged to 
E. L. Cord, not to Fred Vollmar Jr. Ford, Leon Hill oral history, 103. 

5. Ford, Stewart Carnall oral history, 3-10. This is an extended excerpt from Carnall’s 
oral history. On the following pages, all similarly formatted sections should be un¬ 
derstood to be segments from oral histories from the Ford volume. 


63 

F red 

Vollmar 

Jr- 


6. “. . . Vollmar’s machination also caught the eye of the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS). Apparently, he either chose to ignore his taxes or he was so financially pressed 
that he could not pay them, and in 1940 the IRS contacted him regarding past due 
taxes. The final disposition of the tax case is unknown, but this indicates the finan¬ 
cial strain under which many of Vollmar’s enterprises were by 1940.” WCRM, 3-34. 
However, Ben Viljoen said Vollmar’s reputation for honesty was viewed as impec¬ 
cable by those living in Silver Peak, and Leon Hill (101-103) said people liked and 
trusted Vollmar. 




4 


The Mines 


Fritz Vollmar (Fred Vollmar Jr.) returned to Silver Peak and found a 
town ready for change, ready for another boom. By now, Silver Peak’s enter- 
prises were passing into the hands of the next generation. Sons of Fred 
Vollmar, John Chiatovich, the Shirleys, and the Hills ushered in the new 
era. The confusing maze of owners from Silver Peak’s early days was now 
reduced to just a few, and most of that was in Fritz Vollmar’s hands. A 1936 
map of the Mineral Ridge Mining District shows that Vollmar, through his 
various companies, held leases blanketing nearly all the claims on the hill. 

VALCALDA/OROMONTE 

One of Vollmar’s acquisitions was the Valcalda Mine. The Valcalda broth¬ 
ers’ faith proved well-placed, and their claims continued to yield enough 
gold to attract interest. In November of 1927 John Valcalda decided not to 
keep the family mine. He sold four claims to a new group, the Oromonte 
Mines Company, Ltd., and those eventually went to Vollmar Jr. But first, 
the Oromonte company made a brief stir in town. 1 

Organized by A. J. Greene, a man from Los Angeles, prudent owners of 
the Oromonte company sent a sixty-ton shipment of ore to the Mason Val¬ 
ley Smelter near Yerington to be processed before investing in a mill. At $15 
to $20 a ton for ore taken from the old ore dump, the Valcalda values war¬ 
ranted a mill, although that first load made little if any profit. 

The high shipping costs proved a reminder to keep production expenses 
low. Also convinced he could keep his men working throughout the winter, 
Greene sought a connection through the Mary Tunnel. He saw that as a 
sure-fire way to move ore off the 7,280-foot mountain less expensively. Per¬ 
haps when asked, the Pittsburg-Silver Peak Company refused the use of the 
Mary Tunnel, or maybe the Black Mammoth Consolidated Mining 
Company’s lease work was the obstacle that prevented this plan, but he 




Map courtesy of WCRM. 
Bob Estes, cartographer. 


Vdaplrd from Mumberger. I«76 
(tun and mliu Imlku affniifflll, 


Silver Peak Mining Claims 
ca. 1936 


l l Mining I axle Boundary 
i i Mining Claim Boundary 


The confusing maze of owners from Silver Peak’s early days was now reduced to just a few, and most of that was in Fritz Vollmar’s hands. 
























“[John Valcalda] sold four claims to a new group, the Oromonte Mines Company, Ltd., 
and these eventually went to Vollmar Jr." (Photograph by Arnold Thallheimer, cour¬ 
tesy of WCRM.) 


never connected with the Mary Tunnel. Instead Green developed another 
system. A surface-rail tramway carried the ore 1,000 feet to a bin which 
emptied into a huge pipe. The ore slid inside the large pipe down to the 
lower bin where it was loaded onto trucks for the final journey into Silver 
Peak. 

In addition, Greene announced plans for a one hundred-stamp mill to be 
located in Silver Peak, but instead of building new, he organized another 
company (the Calvada Mining and Milling Company) and reopened John 
Chiatovich’s cyanide mill. Revamped to handle seventy-five tons per day 
instead of the original fifty and to use amalgamation, flotation, and concen¬ 
tration processes, the mill was up and running by July 1928. 

Within a year it became apparent that even after renovation the old 
Chiatovich Mill was outdated. Now named the Calvada Mill, it simply could 
not retrieve the values needed to make the ore profitable. Greene closed the 
Chiatovich/Calvada Mill for the last time in August of 1929 and by Febru¬ 
ary completed construction on a brand new mill using all new equipment. 
This was the new forty-ton Rock and Keeler Mill, operating three shifts a 
day and recovering $18 to $20 per ton of ore. Evidently, it operated sporadi¬ 
cally, because five years later The Goldfield News (August 16, 1935) reported 
that the R and K Mill would be “reopened,” and Vollmar’s Gold Wedge 




68 


The 

Mines 


“[Greene] organized another company (the Calvada Mining and Milling Company) and 
reopened John Chiatovich’s cyanide mill.” (Photograph courtesy of Leon Hill.) 

Divide Company would reopen the Oromonte Mine. The article also men- 
tioned another important Silver Peak name: 

Ed Cleary, well-known Silver Peak mining man, has a small force of 
miners at work now clearing out the Oro Monte (sic) workings pre¬ 
paratory to resumption of actual mining. 

Historian Steve Mehls noted: 

Based on information in the file of MRRI . . . after Vollmar took 
over operations of the Oromonte, he operated the property as the 
Gold Wedge Divide Mining Company that kept five men at work as 
late as 1940 on development and minor (one hundred tons/month) 
production. 2 

No doubt Vollmar was pleased to add this key property to his operations, 
since it was centrally located between the rich Mary Mine and the Hanchett 
and Gordon-Brodie claims. 

GORDON-BRODIE MINE AND MILL 

Although Vollmar’s interests encompassed nearly every major property 
in the Mineral Ridge Mining District, a few small operations such as the 
Gordon-Brodie Mine and Mill continued nearby. It was one of the oldest 
claims in the district, originally located by the Valcalda brothers and trans¬ 
ferred to John L. Swanson in 1896. 3 











69 



THE VALCALDA MINE 

Early Entrepreneurs 

1886 

Eli Sweiger 

18854905 

Valcalda Brothers mined and milled in a two- 
stamp (or three-stamp) mill. 

The Pittsburg Era 

1906 

Silver Peak Valcalda Gold Mining Company 
bought Valcalda claims, built fifty-ton amah 
gamation & cyanide mill nearby. 

1907/1908 

Silver Peak Valcalda Gold Mining Company 
under new owner Samuel Newhouse held the 
property briefly, did little work. 

1909 

Pittsburg'Silver Peak Gold Mining Company 
acquired Valcalda claims and mine, moved 
stamps to Blair mill and connected the Valcalda 
property by rail. 

Quiet Times 


1917 

Valcalda Brothers repurchased their claims at 
the sheriff’s sale. 

The Vollmar Years 

1927 

Oromonte Mines Company, Ltd. bought from 
Valcalda brothers. 

1932 

Gordon-Brodie purchased one of the Valcalda’s 
properties from John L. Swanson. 4 

1935 

Oromonte leased to Gold Wedge Divide Min- 
ing Company, a Fred Vollmar venture, which 
optioned the Valcalda and Mary Mines to E. L. 

Cord. From there they were integrated into the 
Black Mammoth Consolidated Mining Com- 
pany operation. 

1942 

Closed due to War Board Order L-208. 




70 


The 

Mines 


In 1932 W. E. Brodie and Ray H. Gordon bought out Swanson and 
worked to develop the claim before selling it four years later to the Interna- 
tional Smelting Company, a subsidiary of Anaconda Copper out of Salt Lake 
City. According to Brodie’s son Jack, International Smelting worked all the 
rich ore bodies without developing new ones, and it wasn’t long before his 
father had to pick up the pieces. 

Water was scarce at the 7,000-foot elevation, and in 1933 Gordon filed 
a claim to use water from the Valcalda Springs in Fish Lake Valley. Earlier, a 
two-inch diameter pipeline had been built to carry the water several miles 
across to Coyote Pass. The water line was partially buried underground, and 
Jack Brodie vividly remembered helping his father dig it up and thaw frozen 
sections during the cold winter months. A redwood tank stored water near 
the spring, and after it was piped to the mines, it was stored in a 27,000- 
gallon tank. 

Brodie told the story of his father finding a rich ore body located deep 
underground sometime between 1932 and 1940. A “Colorado style” 
headframe, which was unusual in Nevada, was built to pull the ore up the 
shaft and out of the mine. A diesel-powered generator was installed in 1936— 
one of the earliest internal combustion engines used to power mine equip¬ 
ment, although Black Mammoth also had gasoline engines to power air com¬ 
pressors for drills. 

Workers at the Gordon-Brodie Mine lived a short distance away and 
near their work, as did those at the Mary Mine. Several small bunkhouses 
and homes were located near the mine entrance. Archaeologists recently 
discovered a dugout used as a root cellar or storage shed. In studying other 



“A ‘Colorado style’ headframe, which was unusual in Nevada, was built to pull the ore up 
the shaft and out of the mine." (Photograph by Lila Lindsay, used courtesy of WCRM.) 




artifacts they discovered traces of imported fruits similar to those at the Mary 
Mine, as well as pieces of a woman’s dress. It would be interesting to know if 
it belonged to Jack Brodie’s mother, because he reported that she helped his 
father at the mine. 

A fire burned the mill down in 1940 and forced the closure of the Gor- 
don-Brodie operation. Jack Brodie inherited and maintained the property 
for years until vandals “tore things up pretty bad.” 


71 


The 

Mines 


o 


JACK BRODIE: MY FATHER’S MINE AND MILL 

While Vollmar promoted Silver Peak’s Black Mammoth mine and mill, others made 
and lost fortunes nearby. One well-known operation was the Gordon-Brodie Mine 
owned by W.E. Brodie and his partner Ray H. Gordon. Brodie’s son Jack de¬ 
scribed the development, sale, repossession, and the fire that finally destroyed the 
mill and took the heart out of his father. As a teenager, Jack worked at the mine 
operating the hoist of the Colorado-style headframe, which remained on location 
for nearly sixty years. Jack also remembered his family’s financial roller-coaster 
ride from the fluctuations of the mining industry. 

W. E. Brodie, Miner 

My father (W. E. Brodie) was from Denver, Colorado, and as a seven- 
teen-year-old boy he ran away from home and ended up working in the 
mines in Pioche. After he was married (to Eda Walker) we lived in Tonopah. 
This was during the Depression, 
and my father was the under¬ 
ground foreman for the Tonopah 
Extension Mining Company. 

They had a huge mill, and they 
had a huge mining property. We 
lived in a company house at the 
Victor Shaft, and we were the 
watchmen there. We got the 
house and ten dollars a month to 
live in it as watchmen of the 
property. They had to have the 
watchman for fire insurance. 

We had a Model T car that 
my father would jack up rather 
than crank. He would j ack up the 
back wheel, put it in gear, and 
turn the wheel to start the car, 
and then he would drive over to 



Ronald “Jack” Brodie, 1967. (Photograph 
courtesy of Ruby Brodie.) 



72 


The 

Mines 


the mill. It was probably two miles away from the mine, from the shaft, and 
he would walk a route there at night and punch his clock. (This was before 
he went into Silver Peak.) There were stations all over the property that 
had a little metal box which had a key in it. This clock that he carried had a 
paper disk in it. He would go to each station, and he’d put that key in the 
clock and turn it, and that would punch the paper disk showing that he was 
at that station at that time. Then, when he went prospecting, they still paid 
us to live there rent free; he didn’t have to walk the property anymore. 


Discovery and Partnership 


The Victor Mine in Tonopah closed in 1929, and my dad went prospect- 
ing for gold. Silver had gone to near nothing (I think silver went to twenty- 
nine cents), so gold was the precious metal that everyone was looking for, 
and he found a few claims, but they weren’t very good. 

When he was prospecting he found the mine at Silver Peak. There weren’t 
accommodations to begin with. They built cabins up there, and they bought 
cabins in Tonopah, dismantled them, and then hauled them up there and 
reassembled them up there. There were three of us kids, and we were in 
school in Tonopah where we continued to live. My mother and father some¬ 
times would be up at the mine for a week at a time, or my father would be up 
there. He’d have to come to town every week for supplies and things any¬ 
way. We were left alone sometimes to get ourselves to school and so on. 

The mine was in Esmeralda County, and Goldfield was the county seat. 
We were in Nye County, and it was kind of odd because my father did have 
to go to Goldfield quite a bit for legal mining claim deals and taxes. But 
Silver Peak was a very, very small town when my father first went up there. 

The claim he found out at Silver Peak was up in the Red Mountain 
mining district. It was owned by [John L.] Swanson, and he wanted to sell 
this claim that he had. It was just a little hole in the ground, but you could 
see gold in the quartz in the bottom of the claim. My father didn’t have any 
money. The banks had closed, and we lost any money that we did have. My 
father didn’t have any wages coming in or anything. 

There were some investors around—even as far away as New York and 
Los Angeles, they were looking for gold properties to invest some of their 
money in. Somehow or another my father met up with a man by the name of 
Ray Gordon, a newlywed. He had met his wife on a trip around the world, 
and they got married. Her name was Curtis, and her folks had quite a bit of 
money, and they were looking to invest some money in gold property, maybe 
as a wedding present to the newlyweds. So they got together with my father, 
and together they made a deal with this Swanson that owned this little 
mining claim. 

I think possibly Ray Gordon may have come to Tonopah. Most of the 
mining deals were all conducted in the bars. There was a Tonopah Club, and 
the Mizpah Hotel was a stock exchange in the early days. The Mizpah Ho- 



73 



The Gordon-Brodie Mine Camp, 1939. (Photograph courtesy of the Central Nevada 
Historical Society.) 


The 

Mines 


tel. . . when you walked in the lobby, it looked like a bank, because it had 
all these windows, and it had a big blackboard on the wall with stock figures 
listed on it every day. They could have met in the Mizpah Hotel, or he may 
have come up to Silver Peak just prospecting. 

My father probably didn’t want to pay more than a thousand dollars for 
the claim. That was a lot of money. The only way he [Swanson] would sell it 
was for cash. They tried to talk him out of taking cash for it, to take part in 
cash and then hold an interest in the claim and share in the profits. But he 
would have no part of that. He wanted all cash, so they paid him full cash for 
this mining claim. And he put all that money in the bank, and then the 
bank closed, and he lost all his money. He had another little piece of prop¬ 
erty, next to the property my dad had, that had a little spring on it, and he 
lived there until he died. My father really took care of him and helped him 
out with groceries. 

In the wintertime they were snowed in completely while working the 
claim. That was the main claim, and then they staked out other claims around 
there. One of the claims that I remember was the Valcalda claims, and that 
was adjoining my father’s property. And then, of course, the Mary Mine— 
E. L. Cord bought that, and that was the Cord property during my dad’s 
time. They had adjoining claims. My father ended up owning fifty-four claims 
up there. They all had small values, but at this time gold was only thirty-five 
dollars an ounce, so you had to have pretty good ore. It was all underground, 
and it was in a hard quartz—couldn’t be mined similar to the way they do 
today in big masses of gravel. 




Developing the Mine 


74 


The 

Mines 


My father developed the mine. The first shipment that they made out of 
the mine was shipped in burlap bags that were paper lined and came from 
California. They were fertilizer bags, and they sacked all of this ore up in 
these bags and sent it to the smelter in Utah. They bagged it because it was 
so valuable—it was such high grade, all really high grade. An armed guard 
arrived in an ore car from Blair Junction. They trucked it to Blair Junction 
and then put it in a car of the Tonopah and Goldfield Railroad, which came 
through there then. That was quite a big, big thing—this first shipment. As 
I remember it, every piece of ore, every rock that you picked up, you could 
see gold in it somewhere, whether it was a stream or maybe it had what we 
call bug holes in the quartz. Bug holes in quartz had little pieces of gold 
hanging in there. It was really neat. I was only about ten maybe, and this was 
in the early 1930s. At thirty-five dollars an ounce, it was a good shipment. 
Anyway, they took the money from that, and then he had subsequent ship- 
ments. That was the only one that they bagged. The rest of it went just in 
truck loads. 

When they first developed the mines it was high grade, and then it 
wasn’t quite as high grade as they went on into the mine where they had an 
incline shaft. The first deal on the mine was probably only ten-feet deep. It 
wasn’t very deep at all. At the bottom of the mine was this high-grade gold. 
As they mined it and followed the veins down there on the fifty-foot level, 
they started to run drifts and tunnels. The high grade was about a hundred 
yards—about the length of a football field from the shaft of the gold mine. 

Where the original person that prospected that area found a little vein 
was kind of a rolling hill, and he went sixty, seventy-five feet into the side of 
the hill following this little vein of quartz. It had some value but not enough 
value to really mine it, so then he quit and just left that tunnel in there. 
Then they drove a shaft up to the top of the hill, and it was ventilated 
through there. My father put a door on the front of that tunnel, and we used 
it as a cellar. It stayed a constant temperature in there—forty degrees when 
it was maybe eighty outside, and it still was forty degrees when it was maybe 
ten below in the wintertime. We used to hang hams and bacon and even 
fresh meat and things in this cellar, because we didn’t have refrigeration. We 
stored all of the food in the cellar. They built shelves in there on the walls, 
and then the meat we had hanging from hooks. 


Cellar Was Rich with Gold 


One thing that was real ironic was about that tunnel we used as a cellar. 
The original shaft was an incline shaft that went down to the fifty-foot level. 
They used to bring the ore up out of the incline and put it in a dump truck 
and then drive the dump truck over to a big ore bin that was at the mill. But 
when the International Smelting Company took it over, they ran a drift (a 



tunnel) from the fifty-foot level over about where we were running the truck, 
and then they sank a vertical shaft. They would bring the ore to the vertical 
shaft and hoist it up to the surface; and then they ran just a track from the 
hill to the mill. The mill was built on the side of a hill. To the high part of 
the mill was the ore bin, and they just trammed an ore car over to the bin 
and dumped it in a bin right at the mill (where the headframe is now). 
That’s the vertical shaft. 

Now, not too far from that... it would be on the north side, is where 
the incline shaft was [originally]. Most of the working was on the fifty-foot 
level, and they had stopes and drifts and things into the fifty-foot; it was the 
main level to the shaft. Then I think they sank the shaft maybe seventy- 
five, a hundred feet, and then abandoned it. I think they diamond drilled a 
lot of that area before they turned it back to my father, and so they came to 
the conclusion there was no more high grade there. My father always thought 
there was, and he was going to find it again like he did before—that’s typical 
of a miner. 

Well, they drove a drift back underneath the tunnel, and one of the 
richest bodies of ore in the mine broke into the tunnel. The original miner 
that mined there probably wasn’t three feet from the biggest ore body in the 
whole mine. It ended up a great big huge stope that broke into the original 
tunnel. 


75 

The 

Mines 


The Mill 


I don’t know whether the money all came from the mine or whether 
more money came from the investors, but they built a little twenty-five-ton 
mill. In the meantime they bought another property that was out of 



“They built a little twenty-five-ton mill.” The Gordon-Brodie Mill in 1939. (Photo¬ 
graph courtesy of the Central Nevada Historical Society.) 




76 


The 

Mines 


Manhattan, and it was called the Van S Quicksilver Mine, a mine that in 
the early days had quite a bit of quicksilver and then had shut down. But it 
had a retort, and it had a diesel power plant on it. They took that diesel 
power plant and moved it to Silver Peak, and that powered the little twenty- 
five-ton mill. It was a two-cylinder diesel and, when it was working right, 
it’d blow smoke rings. It’d go, “chirk, chirk, chirk,” and you’d hear it all day 
long. At the Quicksilver mine, they had leasers in there, and they got quick¬ 
silver out. Then they would buy the quicksilver and use it at the gold mine 
to use in the mill. 

The mill was amalgamation and flotation. They used chemicals, but no 
cyanide. I’m sure it wasn’t cyanide. And one of the chemicals that they used 
there was pine oil. I’ll never forget that, because of the pine smell in the 
mill. When you went in the mill, it just had an enticing, pleasant smell, and 
that was from the flotation machine. It looked just like root beer floats. 
There’s a kind of brown foam that came over the top, and that would carry 
the fine gold in a concentrate. And then what was left in the bottom was the 
tailings. You couldn’t do it today, but in that day the tailings just went down 
the wash. 


Sold 


Through the years my dad was kind of developing the property to sell, 
and he would follow an ore body until it was pretty rich or until it was good, 
real good, and then he would leave that and follow another ore vein and 
another drift or stope. At one time everywhere you went in that mine there 
was high-grade ore: by high grade, say maybe thirty-five-dollar ore that was 
carrying one ounce to a ton. That was considered high grade. 

My grandfather from Pioche was a mining engineer, and he came and 
helped my father. His name is Frank Walker. He did a lot of work on the 
mine. He drew underground maps of the workings of the mine, and resur- 
veyed out all of the property lines and recorded all of that and worked with 
my father for several years before he sold. 

International Smelting and Refining Company became very interested 
in the Gordon-Brodie property, and they purchased it from my father and 
from Gordon. My father wasn’t going to make the mistake that Swanson 
did, so he didn’t take all the money. He took it in payments. What they did 
is, they just followed every vein that my dad had until it petered out, and 
when there wasn’t any more, they went to the next one. They didn’t de¬ 
velop as they went along, and then all of a sudden, they didn’t have any 
really good ore in sight anymore. They quit making their payments, and my 
father and Gordon repossessed the property after eighteen months. 

As a matter of fact, my father sold that mine for $250,000 dollars—a 
quarter of a million dollars. And we thought that was just. . . and it was. 
That had to be probably 1935 or 1936, somewhere around in there, and that 
would have been probably five million today at least. Gold was thirty-five 



77 


dollars an ounce. My dad always said, “Gold is going to go to seventy dollars. 
And when it goes to seventy dollars, we’ll have it made.” But he never lived 
to see it. He probably wouldn’t have believed how high it went. Well, it 
went over $650, pretty near $700 at its peak, I think. 

Repossessed—Bad Mining Practices 

When my father repossessed the mine, we moved back to Tonopah, and 
my father started to mine again and tried to develop the mine. He used to 
say that all they did was go in and take the high grade out, and they didn’t 
develop as they went. And he said in order to keep the mine operating, as 
you’re taking out high grade, you have to develop the low grade and get it to 
go into the high grade, if you can, or follow the veins and the quartz and the 
formations to open them up into a higher-grade ore. He definitely said that 
what they had done was all very poor mining. 

When he returned, I think they could mill ore as low as eight dollars a 
ton and break even. If it was over that they could make money. During the 
eighteen months away, he had reinvested all the payments in other prospec- 
tor deals, so he really came back to the mine broke. Gordon and Curtis 
didn’t feel like putting a lot more money into it. So if we didn’t get some 
money out of the mine, why, we didn’t put anything into it. It was a struggle 
to do the assessment work, and then he had fifty-four claims; and I think 
five of the main claims were patented, so they paid taxes on those. All of the 
work they did on them counted as assessment work for all fifty-four adjoin- 
ing claims. When my dad took it over again, sometimes we wouldn’t run the 
mill for a whole week while we were mining ore and building up our stock, 
and then maybe they’d run the mill ten, twelve hours a day. 

Hanchett Feud 

The Valcalda property bordered the Gordon-Brodie property on one 
area. The Cord property bordered it on another area. Then there was, I 
think, two claims or five claims right in the middle of my father’s that my 
father didn’t own. It was owned by a man by the name of Hanchett, Hanchett 
properties. There was kind of a feud there between my father and Hanchett. 
As a matter of fact, Hanchett brought an apex lawsuit against my father 
claiming that he was higher, and the ore that my father had taken out was 
on his deal. 

I’ve forgotten how an apex is, but if it goes through the end line, it’s 
yours; or if it goes through a side line, it’s yours; or something. Anyway, my 
father won the apex suit. I imagine there’s probably some records of that in 
the Goldfield courthouse. So there was some feuding going on between them. 
I think my father took a couple of shots at somebody. As I remember, some¬ 
one went to one of the stakes that bordered the claim. My father had the 
rifle by the kitchen door of the bunkhouse, and he took a couple of shots at 


The 

Mines 



78 


somebody up there, and they left. As far as I know, I don’t think any charges 
were ever made on anybody. 


The 

Mines 


Water Supply 

But as my father was trying to bring the mine back a little bit, there were 
three or four springs that were five miles away from the camp that my father 
had developed. They had a pump house, and the springs all came to one big, 
wooden water tank at the pump house. The pump house had a diesel engine 
on it that pumped water to the very top of the hill, where they had another 
big, wooden tank, and then a gravity flow from there for five miles into the 
camp. Every winter the pipeline would freeze up. I spent some of my winters 
up there as a kid freezing to death, digging up the pipeline where they went 
down into a low area. We’d build fires on it and get it all thawed out, and 
we’d do that all the way to camp until we got water running in the camp 
again. 

But not far from that mine (it would be around the southeast of the hill) 
was where the little spring was that Swanson had. Well, I think really it was 
a cave with a wooden front on it that he lived in for a house. And he had a 
stove in there. A stovepipe came out the wooden front. But we never used 
water from his spring. We used water from Coyote Springs. Chiatoviches 
were ranchers, and they had water rights in there, so we couldn’t shut off all 
the water. We had to maintain this big water tank, and then they had to 
maintain a pond at the base of the water tank for the livestock that were in 
the area. There were three springs in that area, and they built a little cabin 
over there, and they hired a pump man that would run the pump every day, 
and they would run the water up to the top of the hill. Of course, that was 
when the mill was running twenty-four hours a day. 

If you’re up at the headframe and you were looking kind of northwest, 
down a little valley, there’s a hill up there. There was a road up there, and I 
imagine it’s still there. The Hanchett property was on the left of that road 
on the hill. Northwest [from the headframe] was where Hanchett was, and 
then all of the property to the left of that was my father’s. [Nevada Attorney 
General, 1998] Frankie Sue Del Papa’s grandfather had some claims in there. 
They never did operate them that I knew of, not at the time that my father 
operated his anyway. There was a two-stamp mill in there on the Del Papa 
property. It was just the stamps. There was no building over it or anything. It 
was pretty dilapidated. Whoever had that originally, just abandoned it. The 
Del Papas . . . Frank and Fred were the two boys, and Egilio, I think, was the 
father: he was Frankie Sue Del Papa’s grandfather. He had a little store and 
a bar in Tonopah, and the store was all Italian goods. I remember most of the 
miners that worked for my father were Italian, and that’s why I love to eat 
pasta, hots of pasta. 



Hardship Caused by Fire 


I can’t remember just what year it was, but the mill caught on fire while 
my dad was in town. When he got back up there the mill had burned to the 
ground. I was in Tonopah at the time. Some of the miners and personnel 
were there. I think that someone had turned the water off, and the pipeline 
was frozen, so there was no water to put the big fire out. It was almost the 
end of my father. It. . . the trauma he went through and everything was just 
really bad at the time. Even as a kid I remember it, very much. It hit me 
really hard, also. I kind of liked the mine, until we went back the second 
time after my father had sold it: then I didn’t like the mine so much. I thought 
it was too hard a life. I wanted something better to do. 

When the mill had burned down and money was real tight, my father 
continued to mine some, and I went to work. I had several jobs. I worked for 
a dairy, the Safeway grocery store, and a service station. Then I had a part- 
time job at a roller'skating rink. I’ve always had a two-job system, but it took 
two jobs. It really did. My last years in high school, I hardly was ever home. 
I worked at Safeway until six o’clock, and then walked across the street to a 
service station and worked there until ten o’clock, and then I closed the 
service station, slept there all night and answered night calls, and opened it 
at six in the morning until the owner came at eight, and then I went to 
school. Then when school was out, I went to work at Safeway until six again. 
On Saturday, my job at Safeway was until eight o’clock at night, and then I 
worked in the service station until ten, closed it, slept there, answered night 


79 


The 

Mines 



The remains of the headframe at the Gordon-Brodie Mine, 1996. (Photograph by 
Arnold Thallheimer, used courtesy of WCRM.) 





80 


The 

Mines 


calls, and then I would open the station at six o’clock on Sunday morning. 
The Safeway store was closed on Sunday, so sometime during Sunday the 
person who owned the service station would come down and relieve me, 
and I would go home and get clean clothes and maybe eat a meal with my 
family and then go back at maybe six o’clock and close the service station at 
night at ten—at thirty-five cents an hour. When I worked at the service 
station, I got an hour’s time for every call that I would get up and answer at 
night. 

This was in the Depression era. Nobody had any money, and the service 
station owner didn’t have any money either. I never drew a paycheck from 
the service station all the time I worked there. (I did draw a paycheck from 
Safeway, which helped my family.) Finally, he [the gas station owner] went 
bankrupt, and the Cavanaugh brothers bought him out, or took over the 
bankruptcy deal, and the wages had to be paid. For the money they owed 
me, I got a little 1939 Plymouth convertible. Ithad belonged to Lois Kellogg, 
of the Kellogg cornflakes family. They had a ranch in Fish Lake Valley. When 
she had turned that car in, it was worth six hundred dollars. That’s what the 
car sold for. They owed me maybe up to two hundred dollars, which I used 
for the down payment, and then I made payments on the car after I got out 
of high school. 

My father and Gordon owned that mine up until the time that my fa¬ 
ther died in 1960. I think they may have been behind on taxes. They did 
have some leasers in there, and they had some junk people that went in 
there and moved a lot of the metal that was in the fire at the mill and the 
huge ball mill. 


- O- - 


THE MARY MINE 

Whereas early miners were able to locate gold at Mineral Ridge by dig¬ 
ging only ten or twelve feet down, by now the rich ore was further under¬ 
ground and demanded more advanced mining and hauling methods. The 
Mary Mine became the foundation of Vollmar Jr.’s operations and the epitome 
of mining technology for the 1930s. 5 Under Vollmar’s supervision an entire 
building complex flourished around the Mary Mine, including an office build¬ 
ing, change room and carbide storage, battery charging station, blacksmith 
and machine shops, warehouse, and assay office. A transformer station was 
added about 1907 when electricity replaced gasoline engines and gave min¬ 
ers use of compressed-air drills and electric hoists at the winzes. Trucks hauled 
the ore replacing humans, animals, and aerial trams. 6 

Many miners lived in a bunkhouse and ate their meals at the nearby 
boardinghouse. Archaeologists recently uncovered ornate bed frames, ap¬ 
parently used in the bunkhouse. They also found traces of the type of large 
food containers that would have fed many hungry miners—large crocks, 



81 


xx 



“Under Vollmar’s supervision an entire building complex flourished around the M ary Mine. ” 
Silver Peak c. 1914-1915. Numbered locations are as follows: 1, Office; 2, One- 
room hospital; 3, Boardinghouse; 4, Bunkhouse; 5, Mill that was built after Blair 
closed down by someone who leased the mine. The crater is visible in the back¬ 
ground (left), as is the salt marsh (right). The town of Blair is over the hill from the 
water tanks marked “xx”. (Photograph courtesy of the Nevada Historical Society.) 


The 

Mines 


THE MARY MINE 

Early Entrepreneurs 

1888 John Chiatovich 

1903 - 1906 Mohawk-Alpine Mining Company 

The Pittsburg Era 

1906 Pittsburg Silver Peak Gold Mining Company 

1917 Lucky Boy Divide Mining Company 

1929 Black Mammoth Consolidated Mining Company 

1935 E. L. Cord through the Prescott Lease 

1942 Closed 






82 


The 

Mines 


three-pound coffee tins, five-pound ham tins, and five-pound shortening 
cans, along with white hotelware platters, dishes, and cups. They also dis- 
covered loin and rib bones—what were normally considered upper-class cuts 
of meat. These may have been supplied by ranchers from Fish Lake Valley 
who brought in beef, pork, produce, and water. 

Leon Hill described the unsanitary conditions for processing this food 
and water. A rancher named Mr. Ely simply pumped water from a creek 
without any filtration or purifying system, placed it in containers, and sold 
it. When he butchered meat, swarms of flies were attracted and landed in 
the milk sold to Silver Peak residents and Mary Mine workers. 

Local gardens supplied some produce, such as tomatoes, radishes, and 
carrots, but Hill said many small mine operators came to Silver Peak from 
southern California and probably brought produce with them. His father 
brought figs from Los Angeles, and since blackberries did not grow wild 
around Silver Peak, they may also have been brought from California. Obvi¬ 
ously, a steady supply of goods from both local sources and regional supply 
centers in southern California kept the miners in fresh fruit and produce, 
meat, water, medicine, alcohol, and tobacco. Some of the men who lived 
and worked there remembered “Ma Brown,” probably Alta Brown, who ran 
the boardinghouse for Black Mammoth. By 1938, however, Ma Brown was 
replaced by the Anderson Boarding and Supply Company of Los Angeles, 
the company that also supplied huge projects like the Boulder/Hoover Dam 



“A steady supply of goods from both local sources and regional supply centers in southern 
California kept the miners in fresh fruit and produce, meat, water, medicine, alcohol, and 
tobacco." The Mary Mine commissary, c. 1939. (Photograph courtesy of the Central 
Nevada Historical Society.) 




and the Basic Magnesium Plant at Henderson, Nevada, during World War 
II. Supplies arrived weekly from Los Angeles, and: 


83 


No longer would the boardinghouse be an independent entity. Rather, 
it was part of an industrial scale enterprise that supplied subsistence 
items to locales throughout southern Nevada and California. 7 

Life at the Mary Mine became quite lively during the Vollmar years and 
was a vast improvement over earlier mining camps. In addition to a bunk- 
house and boardinghouse, there were five family dwellings. One of those 
may have belonged to a mine manager, and traces of a Scandinavian news- 
paper indicate occupants who came from northern Europe. Although some 
miners still converted tunnels into homes, tents on platforms served as hous- 
ing for most, and at least one “shot-gun style wood frame structure with a 
root cellar” showed that more modern housing was available to a few work¬ 
ers. 

Around the boardinghouse archaeologists found plain, white, working- 
class ceramics. One maker’s mark showed the china came from the Homer 
Laughlin China Company, a Liverpool, Ohio, manufacturer of popular ho¬ 
tel china which was affordable and found throughout the West. Glassware 
came in a wide variety of colors and uses, from medicinal to recreational. 
One bore the stamp of the Adolphus Busch Glass Manufacturing Company 
and dated back to the Pittsburg Era. Most of the food cans were the type of 
sanitary cans that were mass-produced at a rate of 25,000 per ten-hour day 
after 1904. These included vent-hole milk cans; upright-pocket, hinged-lid 
tin cans and flat-pocket tobacco cans; and the old key-wind top or side-strip 
cans. 

According to maps, services for health and safety were available right at 
the mine. A small hospital and a jail, along with a water pipeline and storage 
tank, were all there. Some residents drank the water piped from Silver Peak, 
even though tests showed it was high in arsenic and other minerals. 8 Leon 
Hill said drinking water was also hauled to the mine in tanks, barrels, and 
five-gallon containers during the 1920s and 1930s. Either way, water was 
available, but indoor plumbing was not, and privies were still used. 

The Vollmar era brought the glory days, and throughout the 1930s, the 
sounds of prosperity filled Silver Peak and the surrounding mountains. Men 
drilled, blasted, and mucked the ore, loaded it onto ore cars for transport 
from underground mines, and drove the trucks full of ore to the mills. Each 
job in the mines was a man’s job. Each required different skills and plenty of 
hard, physical labor. In oral history interviews, those few men who knew 
from memory the heart of the Mary Mine gave vivid descriptions of their 
jobs; the technology available and how it was adapted to fit; the working 
conditions, the accidents, and limited safety measures; and who made the 
day-to-day decisions that kept it all in motion. 


The 

Mines 



MERLE SWANSON: UNDERGROUND AT THE MARY MINE 


84 


The 

Mines 


Merle Swanson was born with mining in his blood. From childhood he has carried 
a passion for mining that he cannot explain. When Swanson and his wife, Marga - 
ret, arrived in Silver Peak, the town was still a bit rough around the edges, but they 
grew with the town as it changed into a safe place for families. His oral history is of 
particular interest, not only for its glimpse into the past when miners learned their 
trade solely by experience, but for his descriptions of the methods of underground, 
hard-rock mining used in the M ary Mine. 9 


Childhood and Background 


Oh, I started mining, looking for rocks, when I was three years old up in the 
state of Montana. I was bom in the state of Montana at Bozeman, and my folks 
had a place out in the hills. I was out looking for rocks, me and my little dog. I’d 
get tired of walking, and I’d lay down and take a nap. My little dog would stay 
with me. He was a little fox terrier. When my folks would start looking for me, 
they would start a hollering. That little dog would go down and get them and 
bring them up there where I was. And then I’d get a whipping, and they’d say, 
“Now you cannot do that any longer. You cannot do that anymore. Something 
will get you.” 

Well, as soon as they’d turn their back, I’d do it again. I’ve been that way all 
my life. I just can’t help it. I’m just that way, and I don’t have one mine, I’ve got 
over twenty mines. It’s hard to believe that I still work twenty mines. 

My mom died when I was ten. My dad deserted me, and some people up in 
Idaho raised me, and I used to go out in the hills herding sheep when I was 
eleven, twelve years old. I was all over the dam hills picking up these rocks. I 
wished I knew then what I know now. I bet I’d find a lot of ore up there. 

Well, I figured I was an old man when I was sixteen years old, and I met this 
girl, Margaret, who was fourteen. It wasn’t long, we was engaged; and it wasn’t 
long, we was married. Her aunt and uncle took off. While they were gone for a 
couple of weeks, we got married, and then that woman was so mad at me when 
she came back. Margaret and I were married for fifty-six years before she died. 
She liked mining, too. She worked underground with me, helped me get pow¬ 
der and stuff, you know. 


Work at the Mary Mine 


When I came up here to go to work at the Mary Mine, there was thir¬ 
teen of us come up here looking for a job. Everybody said I’d have to wait 
two weeks to get a job, but the super knew a guy by the name of Schillings 
that I had worked for at the Getchell Mine near Winnemucca so he hired 
me right away. I started out mucking, and I was able to do what they asked 
me to do, and wasn’t long they put me timbering, and from there I went to 
shift boss and right on up the line. The most men I ever had working for me 
is somewhere around thirty-five to forty. That counted my blacksmith. 



Where I started to work was in this tunnel here [indicating Mary Mine 
portal], but I have worked on all of the other levels up above, off and on. 
When they put me over the crew of men then, of course, I had all the levels 
to take care of. I just loved that kind of work, and the better mill grades we 
could get, the better I felt. 

We drove up every day from Silver Peak. Seems like there was a flat spot 
down in there where you could park the cars. The first thing we did each day 
was change clothes in the change room, and then we’d fill these lights in our 
building where we had a carbide room. Then we’d walk back in there to 
wherever we were going to work. We had a certain place and a certain num¬ 
ber that we had to go by. It’s on the maps, too, where we were working .... 
We knew what we had to do, of course. 

I was on day shift and this other guy, the shift boss, was on night shift. 
When I was to come back on to night shift, he was telling the super that this 
wasn’t done and that wasn’t done, because his men was pretty good drinkers, 
and they didn’t like to do too much work. So I said to the super, “Don’t 
believe me and don’t believe him. You come around towards the end of the 
shift and see for yourself whether it’s been done or not.” 

So he did. When it was time for us to change over, he said (I think his 
name was Kerner), “Kerner, you’re done. If your men want to come out and 
work for Merle, that’s fine, but you’re done. I’ve been going around with 
Swanson towards the end of the shift, and I know what was done, and what 
you said is lies. It’s not true, and, therefore, you’re out.” [laughter] 



Inside the Mary Mine portal. (Photograph by Arnold Thallheimer, used courtesy of 
WCRM.) 


85 


The 

Mines 














86 


The 

Mines 


When I was here we just had the one main road that went up to the 
other levels. Most of our ore was dropped down through the raises, and we 
picked it up and brought it out here with the train that had twelve cars and 
was run by a battery motor. The train would bring all the ore cars out of that 
tunnel, and then dumped them into an ore bin over there. I didn’t want 
them to run the motor on out there when I had a train of waste to dump, 
because we almost lost a motor. But this secretary we had, her husband 
would . . . bring out the waste, and he’d run the motor right on out instead 
of switching it down there: we had a nice place to switch them. And I told 
him I never wanted him to do that anymore. Well, the first thing he did was 
come out with the motor, and he did the same thing again. So I went in and 
asked, “Do I have the right to fire and hire here?” 

And they said, “Yes, why Merle?” 

I said, “I’m going to fire a bunch of men today.” And he was first. I 
handed that in to the secretary, and she said, “No way are you going to fire 
my husband. He was here a long time ago.” 

I said, “Well, he goes or I go,” and by darn he went, and others, too. 
Some of them I put back to work, and some I never did. We almost lost the 
motor a couple of times, and I didn’t want that. That motor cost thousands 
of dollars to replace. But anyway, he wouldn’t listen to me. 


Ventilation and Miner’s Consumption 

I’m pretty sure this is one of the hats I wore in the Mary Mine. This is a 
carbide light, and this is good for about two and a half to three hours after 
filling it. Then the light will go low, and you have to fill it with carbide. You 
carry your carbide in your pocket, and then you have a water jug in the mine 
to use in filling the lamp up with water, and then it’s good for another two or 
three hours. But if you get in where it’s gassy, and this light starts going out, 
you better get out of there, because the air is not good for you—to breathe 
this gas. There was good ventilation in the Mary Mine, because there’s open- 
ings that go right on up to the other levels. It’s just like being in a house with 
both doors open. 

At the mine we had the water piped in. We drilled off that. In some 
places we had what we call pressure tides to fill these tides up with water. 
You have to maybe carry it in to fill it in these tides. Then you use so much 
water when you’re drilling, that way you don’t get any of that dust. 

When I went to work at these mines, I heard that this miner’s consump- 
tion, this dust and stuff, would kill you, so I went and talked to a doctor. He 
said, “Merle, miners make good money. What they do is they don’t take care 
of themselves. They drink and they smoke, and neither one of them’s any 
good for you, and this is what really causes it to come on.” 

So, I listened to what he said, and I didn’t do that. I got rid of that, and 
here I am, I’m going to be eighty-four pretty quick, and I still can go in there 



and drill a round and muck out. I know a lot of people, even nowhere near as 
close in age as I am, who are not able to do that, so I feel the mining never 
did hurt me. 


87 


A Miner’s Work 

The miner has to put in what they call a round of dynamite. He has to 
drill so many holes. Well, like he’s running that tunnel in there; he’s got to 
drill so many holes and blast out. Now they have mucking machines, but in 
those days we had slick sheets. We’d put a little dirt on there so that the 
concussion from the blast wouldn’t blow the sheet up, and then it would all 
be on there, and it was easy to muck it off to their car. That’s what a mucker 
has to do—shovel it, clean that up. That way the miner could go ahead and 
put the machine on there, and they could drill all of these holes except the 
two on the bottom, maybe the two relievers, and then he’d shoot it. But 
during the day, you see, that mucker could be getting this out of the way. 
Right after that you’d have it all cleaned up, and then they could drill. Well, 
they usually put about five holes in the bottom, because that’s the receivers, 
and then there’s the three lifters. Then after that was all done, you would 
fire the dynamite. 

Well, that was for your drift work. But now your raise is where you’ll go 
up, or a winze is where you’d go down, or a shaft is where you go straight 
down. But we never had shafts here. We had some winzes but no shafts 
drilled vertically down. We had a lot of raises, a lot of drift work. On your 
back above your ore is what they call a hanging wall. Now in a coal mine 
they call it the roof, and a hard-rock miner calls it the hanging wall. 

Mining Methods 

We used all different kinds [of mining methods]; we drove drifts; we had 
our stopes; we had raises; we had winzes going. A drift is where you’re run- 
ning pretty level. They usually run your drift just a little bit uphill, so that 
way you don’t have to push a loaded car uphill when you’re coming out. A 
winze is where you’re going down on an angle, and a shaft is where you go 
straight down. I liked underground mining, because your values are much, 
much better than what you’d get on your surface with open-pit mining. 

You have to use different methods about mucking for each. We didn’t 
have any in here, but one place where I worked in the shaft, we had to muck 
that all by hand into a bucket, and then they hoisted the bucket up and then 
dumped it. You’d have to do that pretty well with the winze, too. But the 
winze buckets, it’s got a deal on it where they slide up on the timber. Then, 
when it gets up to where the ore bin is, it automatically dumps itself right in 
there, and then you let the cable loose, and it goes back down the hole for 
another trip. 


The 

Mines 



88 


The 

Mines 


Inside the Mary Mine, c. 1938. (Photograph courtesy of the Central Nevada His¬ 
torical Society.) 



Shrinkage is where you’ve got an ore body that’s laying pretty well verti¬ 
cal. It can be on sixty degrees, but it’s got to be so that the ore will run by 
itself. And all you do is run a tunnel underneath there, and you build your 
ore chutes there. You don’t have to muck on any of that; it all comes down 
in the chute. You run what you call a raise up . . . loads right into the stope, 
and every time you blast, you have to raise that a little bit more, so you have 
a way of getting it out of there. It’s the cheapest way there is to mine, be¬ 
cause you don’t have to muck any of it. 

But if you break a hundred tons a day, you can’t take that hundred ton 
out. You only can take out maybe twenty or thirty ton out of that place, or 
maybe a little more, till you just pull that ore down there, so that you have a 
place about six feet between the ore and the hanging wall to work. It isn’t 
really a hanging wall; it’s the ore body. That’s the cheapest way there is to 
mine where you have veins to work on. 

What they call cut-and-fill.... You take the ore out, and then you 
have a hole in the side of the hill, and you have to get waste to fill this place 
up. Then you raise your raise and timber, and then you can blast again on 
top of this waste. That’s not good, because you’re always losing some ore 
where there’s waste. Then when you get the ore out, you have to go get some 
more waste to fill in—that’s what they call cut-and-fill. 

Mining on a stope where the stuff is not steep enough to run, you have 
to muck it. But nowadays they have these slushers in there, so they just pull 
it over to the chute, and that’s pretty cheap to mine like that. I’ve done 
mining here with a slusher. That’s all we had, a lot of slushers in here. We 






had mucking machines in here. Well, we did some hand mucking, but some 
of the places we was in had the mucking machines, and mucking machines 
were run by air. 


Blasting 


The 

Mines 


Now back above your ore is what we call the hanging wall. On the rule, 
those hanging walls are fixed up like a cement. It’s got a pretty slick gangue, 
and it’s easy to pull the ore away from the hanging wall. In blasting it, you 
don’t want to use too much powder, but you want to use enough powder that 
you’d be able to move it out without too much concussion. You put, oh, 
we’ll say a box of powder into one round. Fill it full of powder, and then 
shoot it all at one time. It could raise heck with all the rest of the mine, too, 
because that concussion would blast a lot of things out. I’ve seen it in differ- 
ent mines where they would even break timber with that concussion. You 
know, you can talk to a person and know whether he’s a miner or not by 
about how much powder he says to use. 

You don’t shoot them all at one time. You shoot what you call the cuts. 
Now, your cuts are where you drill your holes down, and then you have the 
relievers that come up underneath. Or you could put a burn cut in, where 
you drill all these holes together (five), and you shoot the middle hole first, 
then these other holes will go where this one went off, and that’s what they 
call a burn cut. We used that too. 

The sound you get is your “boof! boof! boof!” It doesn’t bother you any. 
It makes some smoke, but it soon gets out. Especially, this mine here has so 
much opening going on up to the surface that it gets rid of the smoke. The 
air down there is a little cooler than what’s outside, but in the winter it’s 
quite a lot warmer than what’s outside, [laughter] It’s a nice place to work. I 
love it. I’ve been like that all my life, and I still love it. 


Decision Making 


I think my best skill was to be able to realize where the ore was without 
seeing it. It just came to me. I had that theory of where it should be, and I 
can’t help it. I’ve still got it today. I’ll have it until I guess I die. I thought all 
people were that way, but they say, “No, no.” I know now none of my family 
was that way. My dad was a partner in a mine, but my brothers and sisters, 
none of them were miners. It just happened to be born in me, and I’m very 
happy with the way it turned out to be. 

There were geologists that would tell them where the ore was (seems 
like the guy’s name was Wilford). A lot of times I disagreed with him. On 
the upper level (that was on the 950 level), we mined that pretty well all 
out, and I asked the super, I said, “Where do you think we ought to put those 
men?” 



90 


The 

Mines 


He said, “Well, put them down there where the slushers are.” The slushers 
are what you use to pull the ore into the chutes. I looked it over, and I said to 
myself, “Now, it don’t make no sense to go this way.” So I went the other 
way. I found some pretty good stuff. About the third or fourth day we were 
talking in one of these upper levels, and I said, “Is that where you wanted to 
put the men?” 

He said, “No, Merle, I told you down there where the slusher is.” But the 
next morning I went up there after we blasted, and we had maybe two foot of 
ore coming in the back. I hurried up and got a sample down, so it would go 
through the assay office, and we’d get it back that afternoon. And when we 
got it, he said, “Where did you get that sample from up there?” 

I said, “In there where you told me not to go? [laughter] I thought we 
ought to have another round.” The next morning we had eight foot that run 
over two ounces. I could get thirty, forty, or fifty ton a day out of there with 
about three or four men, because we all just set up the machines and slabbed 
it. 

While I was shift boss for the Black Mammoth, the geologists all figured 
that a roll on the intermediate level cut that ore off, but I didn’t think so. 
When Cord took over, that was the first thing I tried to do. I wanted to go up 
through the tunnel and go up in there again to where that ore was supposed 
to be. Anyway, after I’d found this other one up on the 950 level, then Cord 
and the super’s sitting there one day, and they got a talking, and they said to 
me, “Merle, where is another good sweetener in there?” 

I said, “Down there in the Drinkwater where you told me not to go.” 

He says, “Well, the geologist says that roll cut that ore off.” 

“Well,” I said, “I don’t think so.” 

And he said, “If you don’t think so, you go ahead.” 

I said, “Well, I don’t have a miner to put in there right then.” But I’d 
drill a round and blast in there. Then I’d have a mucker getting everything 



The Mary Mine crew in 1938. (Photograph courtesy of the Central Nevada Histori¬ 
cal Society.) 












ready so I could go ahead and drill another one that night. About the second 
or third day, the super run up in there, and he said, “Now Merle, you told me 
you didn’t have a miner to put in there, but the best miner on the hill is up 
there.” [laughter] I didn’t tell him it was me that was drilling all of that. 
Well, when we got up in there, the ore was there just like I figured it was. So 
the roll doesn’t cut it off, and in a lot of places I had two-ounce ore. After a 
couple of times, whatever I wanted to do, I always had full go-ahead to do it. 


91 


The 

Mines 


Accidents 


I didn’t want men who were drinking to work in there, because it’s dan¬ 
gerous—very, very dangerous—for anybody that drinks to ever be under¬ 
ground or anywhere else. If you’re sober and watch yourself, well it’s like 
anything else outside. It’s not as dangerous as you think it is. I’ve had a 
loss . . . one man up here, but if they had done what I wanted them to do, 
we wouldn’t have lost that guy, I don’t believe. You see, that hanging wall 
was pretty loose, so we had a lot of good ore underneath there. What I wanted 
to do is to clean that ore up as quick as we could and then blast that down, 
but the super said, “No, I think what we ought to do is timber it.” When 
they went to timber it, that darn deal broke and fell down, knocked him 
down off there, and it made him paralyzed, so he died in about a week. 

When I worked up here on the intermediate level, when I was working 
with the timber man, we were trying to hold that stope from falling in. The 
stope is a big, open, underground deal, and we were trying to hold that. It’s 
nothing to have a timber right here underneath, and that timber’s a break¬ 
ing while you’re trying to put another one in, to try to hold it. I got a scar 
here on this finger where this sliver came off of one of them and tore my 
thumb pretty near off. There was nobody in there, only me and the other 
guy. They wouldn’t allow anybody to go in there. It was dangerous in there 
where I was working, but you have to know what you’re doing. 

Reflections on the Mary Mine 

I still say that this mine has to be underground mined, because with an 
open pit you get too much waste with your ore, which lowers the grade too 
much. It’s not an open-pit mine. Now there’s a lot of places where it’s an 
open pit, but these underground stopes are not big. If they were, we’ll say, 
four or five hundred feet wide, yes. But they’re not. About eight, ten feet— 
that’s a pretty good-size stope here. 

When I left there was still good ore here. We weren’t out of ore. We shut 
the mine down just because we couldn’t get things to operate it when the 
war broke out in December of 1941. We couldn’t get powder to operate the 
mine. We had two holes that we had in ore—one down over here, and then 
there’s one up on the upper level that was in pretty good ore. But we never 
did do any work to get to that ore. Over here in the hill, we had one place we 



92 


The 

Mines 


just hit sixteen-ounce gold (or sixteen ounces of silver). When I left there, I 
blasted that in. They asked me to, so I did, and that ore’s still here as far as I 
know. The vein’s about four feet wide. I can remember that, and I’d like to 
have it, but I could never get it. 

Cord had us pull all the rail and pipe out of the mine, because he figured 
the war would go on for several years, and he didn’t want to leave the pipe 
and rail in there for some reason. We started taking it out of there about 
sometime in January or February. We didn’t get it all out of there until... I 
think it was July. Over five million dollars came out of here while Cord had 
it. He told me that at one time. It was over five million being taken out, but 
he didn’t say how much expense he added to that. 

O 


LEON HILL: HAULING ORE 

Fayette Hill’s son Leon was born in California, but has lived most of his life in 
Nevada. In 1996 oral history interviews, his memories of his youth and young 
adult years in Silver Peak were distinct and detailed. He recalled the Mary Mine 
and the hard work of mining and hauling ore. 

The Mary Mine 

After digging that ditch [for one of Vollmar’s mills], I went to work at 
the Mary Mine. There was an interesting thing about the mines. They had 
some real serious earthquakes there in the 1930s centered over around Mina. 
You could follow where the earth had opened up for, oh, several miles across 
from Gabbs toward Tonopah. It had also opened up in a few places on the 
Mary Hill. My Uncle Frank, who had studied the maps of this mine, figured 
that where the Silver Peak Pittsburg Mining Company’s mine had caved in, 
there was a pillar that should be in about the area where this crack was. He 
tied a rope to something and started letting himself down this hole. Where 
it was too narrow, he had a pick with him, and he just picked away, so he 
could get through to the bottom. He found ore down there. He found some 
on the hanging wall on the way down. He started to mine that, and he hired 
a couple of people. They made an opening, and he took a considerable amount 
of ore out of there. He made a lot of money out of that hole. 

Most of the Silver Peak area’s gold ore came from the Mary Mine. Oh, 
some came from the Orovada, and some came from the Valcalda and other 
properties up there, but the bulk of it came out of the Mary. We always 
thought of the Mary as the whole hill, although I think they called it Min- 
eral Ridge. In the early days the Silver Peak Pittsburg Mining Company hit 
this great big stope of ore. It was tremendous! Well, they wanted to get all of 
the values out they could, so they mined that all the way up to the hanging 
wall and all the way down to the foot, so they were getting about all of the 




“In the early days the Silver Peak Pittsburg Mining Company hit this great big stope of ore. 
It was tremendous!” A gold vein in one of the Silver Peak mines. (Photograph cour¬ 
tesy of the Nevada Historical Society.) 


high-grade ore that they could get, because you had to have high grade in 
those days with prices at twenty dollars an ounce. Instead of putting in tim¬ 
ber like they so often do in a lot of mines, they were leaving these large 
pillars of ore until pretty soon they exhausted this big ore body, so then they 
started to back out. And they started taking the pillars as they backed out. 
They were just as valuable, maybe more so, because it might have been right 
in the heart. Well, they took so many pillars out that the darn thing caved 
in. They didn’t think it was worth trying to dig everybody out to get those 
pillars, so they just walked away from them and left the bodies there. It was 
way before my time, but that was the story—that there were bodies left in 
there. 

Later on, when I was working for the Black Mammoth Mining Com¬ 
pany, that was their goal—to go back at this one particular tunnel. A few of 
us working there, we wanted to try to hit one of those pillars. We thought we 
were getting pretty close to it, and we started a raise. We hit what they call 
gob, which was the waste material, and it was all loose in there, because it 
had caved in. This started coming down, so we discontinued our raise for a 
cross-cut. They said, “Well, dig some of that dirt out. That might be just a 
little bit of gob coming in there.” And so we were digging this out, and we 
made a hole in there up above us, big enough that a person could go through 
it. This old miner (I say old, he might have been thirty-five or forty), he 
climbed up in there, and right after he got up in there, we heard a whooshing, 
and that hole filled up with dirt again. So he’s stuck up there. 





94 


The 

Mines 


Fortunately, there was a cavern right there, so he was safe; he wasn’t 
caught in that slide. There was a guy working with me, and we started shov- 
eling as fast as we could. Then I called down and caught the guy that was 
taking the dirt out and dumping it. I hollered and told him to get some help 
up there; we had a cave-in. So guys came up to help. We just kept digging 
and digging. The guy who was trapped had some old powder boxes up there, 
so he took those and shored it up around in there, so it would stop sliding. 
When we got a hole about so big, he said, “When you see my feet come, 
jerk.” So he jumped, and we jerked, [laughter] We got him out. 

The Black Mammoth decided not to fool around with that anymore. 
They said we could have the lease on it if we wanted. A fellow by the name 
of Wild Bill and me, we took the lease on it. We shoveled out this place 
where all of the gob was. We thought we were at the edge of that pillar. We 
got up in there where that cavern was, and we widened that hole to the left, 
so we went away from where the gob was coming. We got up into this cav- 
ern, and the hanging wall overhead, it went about forty dollars a ton in gold 
ore. It was in a limestone: it wasn’t in quartz. We got a carload out of there, 
and our share was worth about $1,000. 

I was convinced by that time that we hadn’t hit that pillar, but I thought 
it was exhausted, so I said, “Well, I think I’m about to quit this thing.” 

My partner said, “Well, I’ve got a friend that I think might want to buy 
it.” 

So we sold it. I got a thousand dollars out of it besides what I got for the 
shipment. They made wages out of it by picking. They found enough . . . 
well, you’d call it float if you were in placer country. They found enough ore 
in there to pay wages, but they never did make any money in there. 

We knew there had been a cave-in. How else would the powder boxes 
be up there? And besides that, this cavern had been drilled out for sure. You 
could see the drill holes where they had been blasted. Besides that, we found 
some bones. I had heard the story about these Mexicans who had been killed 
in there, but we didn’t ever bother with those bones. I didn’t have enough 
sense to have the bones checked out. We didn’t know whether they were 
human or animal. The Mary Mine had all kinds of openings. An animal or 
something could fall down a hole and die in there. 

Driving Truck 

Silver Peak had a lot more snow than we liked, especially when I was 
driving truck up and down Mary Hill, because that’s a pretty steep hill, [laugh- 
ter] They always kept a Cat (Caterpillar) up there, and they’d clear the road 
a little bit, but you had to put chains on and all that—heck of a nuisance. I 
drove truck for Jimmy Morris. He started working in the mill for my dad, 
and he worked there for quite a while. When the mill started going pretty 
good, they had some old truck that was hauling the ore for them. I think the 
company was doing it for themselves, but this wasn’t satisfactory, so J immy 



95 



“Silver Peak had a lot more snow than we liked, especially when I was driving truck up and 
down Mary Hill." J immy Morris’s trucks in 193 7. (Photograph courtesy of Leon Hill.) 


Morris went to Vollmar to see if he could get a contract to do that. Vollmar 
said yes, because he needed a little bit of help and didn’t want to fool with it. 
So Jimmy managed to get credit with Parker over at Goldfield, and he started 
out buying a Ford dump truck to haul ore. 

Later, by using innovative means, the miners kept managing to raise 
their tonnage more and more, and J immy couldn’t keep up with one truck, 
so he got two. Then they started to build that other mill, and by that time he 
had financing and bought some big trucks. At first they were just bobtail 
trucks—that doesn’t have a trailer. The GMC was called a T95 in those 
days, and it was just a big, heavy-duty truck—great big engine, powerful— 
and it had six wheels, duals on the back, and it drove on all four back wheels. 
That would haul about ten or twelve tons. Well, then later as the tonnage 
kept increasing, he put semitrailers on there. Then he could haul around 
twenty tons. 

The main challenge was to keep from driving off the cliff and getting 
killed, because the road is both steep and narrow, [laughter] But then it 
wasn’t all that bad; you got used to it. I would take that T95, and right after 
leaving the bin where you load—about a hundred yards or so down the road, 
there’s a place where you have to turn around a hill. Well, these tires were 
very expensive, and in order to avoid breaking them against these rocks on 
the side of the hill, you had to drive way out on that edge. In fact, that truck 
was so rigid that you could put your right front wheel over the edge a little 






96 


The 

Mines 



“The main challenge was to keep from driving off the cliff and getting killed, because the 
road is both steep and narrow.” The road down from the Mary Mine. (Photograph 
courtesy of Sherry Mattei.) 


ways there, and it would still hold upright. Then you’d pull around the cor- 
ner, and that’s the way you could miss hitting those rocks along the walls 
with that back tire. I always wondered why they didn’t use a little bit of 
dynamite and knock some more of that hill off, because I wasn’t always so 
anxious to do it, especially if there was snow on the ground. But I didn’t 
want to break a tire either. 

One time we were right up on the top of that hill.... There was a 
Northern Transportation truck ahead of me hauling a load of supplies up the 
hill, and I was coming up the hill empty. I was waiting for him down below, 
and he got about two-thirds of the way up the hill, and he couldn’t make it. 
(I don’t know why it wouldn’t pull that load. Our trucks were made for that. 
They were low-geared and had powerful engines.) He stopped, and then the 
driver was afraid to try to back down. He couldn’t back down anyway, be¬ 
cause it was around a sharp corner and up that steep pitch. So they had to 
send up for a Cat to come down and pull him up the hill. 

Vollmar came up there after a while. I guess the word got down to him, 
and he told me, “Well, I got to get up there.” 

I said, “I can’t get out of here with everybody behind me.” There were a 
lot of cars lined up by then. 

He said, “Well, pull up a ways.” 

He didn’t want to walk all the way up that hill to talk to the driver, so I 
pulled up behind that truck, and the driver of the Northern truck put a 
couple of rocks behind the back wheels. He had his brakes on, but he put 
rocks behind it because he was afraid it would roll back anyway. About that 
time the Cat came down to hook onto it. They weren’t hooked on to it yet 
when I could hear the brakes start to release: I could hear the air leaking. I 








97 


said, “Don’t let that brake go till you get hooked up!” And that was too late. 
The sucker, he took the brakes off, and it just went right over the rocks and 
came at me. 

I hollered to Vollmar, “Get out of there!” hoping I could back down, but 
he didn’t get far enough, so I stopped. I put on all my brakes, because I 
figured otherwise we’re going to wreck all these cars that were at the bottom 
of the hill and me, too, and it wouldn’t make the boss very happy. He ran 
into me and mashed up the whole front end of the truck. Oh, it was an awful 
mess! 

There was no snow that day. It was perfectly dry, but you can just imag- 
ine going up there in the wintertime. It wasn’t usual to have to stop and 
chain up going up or down. With snow on the ground, even with chains, 
and particularly after they’d run over it a while, and it starts getting hard and 
slick, you’d kind of toboggan down that hill. You’d go a ways, and then brake 
and then go again, [laughter] It was an exciting job. But I was just a kid. I 
never thought about the danger. 


- -O - 

RUBY GRIFFIN: LIFE AT THE MARY MINE 

Ruby (Shirley) Griffin was recognized as Silver Peak’s matriarch at the time of her 
oral history interview in 1996. If a stranger arrived in town asking for historical 
information, the automatic response was, “Have you talked to Ruby yet1 ” Born in 
1910, Ruby had lived in Silver Peak since about 1933. She arrived as a young, 
divorced mother needing a home for herself and her son. There Ruby met and 
married a miner named Ernest Shirley, and they began their married life living in a 
home near the Mary Mine. 

Ernie had a house up there at 
the Mary Mine. He was a leaser at 
that time, he and Stanley 
Chiatovich. They had a company 
between them, and back then they 
only had about four or five men 
working for them on this lease. It 
was a three-room house, and it was 
right on the hillside where you 
could look all over this big, im- 
mense valley down here. I just 
loved it. I thought it was just gran- 
deur to have that three-room 
house. The rooms were nice size. 

The kitchen and dining room were Ruby Griffin. (Photograph by Victoria Ford.) 



The 

Mines 





98 


The 

Mines 


together, and then we had the living room and the bedroom. We put my son 
in the living room on a cot that we bought secondhand. There was a big step 
outside, and we had chairs out there. I guess they built it meaning it for a 
porch, but it didn’t have a roof over it. In the bedroom there was a closet, 
and then in the living room there was a nice-sized closet, so I had plenty of 
storage space. There was no running water. It had to be hauled up there in a 
barrel. 

There is a funny story about the privy, [laughter] Whoever built it was a 
clown, and they built that on stilts. You had to go out across this rickety 
walk: it was a regular little bridge with a post and a railing built that you 
could hold onto which ran all the way to the building, but just on one side. 
It wasn’t that wide, eighteen inches. Ernie used to watch me go out there, 
and he always told me, “Don’t forget to hold on to that all the way. Let your 
hand slide along.” [laughter] He could just see me falling down there about 
fifteen or twenty feet. 

This house was built downhill from the road, where you walked over to 
the mill. Apparently, whoever built it worked at the mill or perhaps was the 
mill foreman. Where the road turns there’s kind of a V, and there used to be 
a bar there. I was glad we weren’t on the same side of the road, because so 
many men were going to the bar and back all that time, and they might have 
gotten in a habit of thinking they had to stop. But to get to our house, they 
would have had to come down this trail that was pretty steep, [laughter] We 
both liked that idea, for privacy. When we were sitting on the porch, we 
would hear them going by up there. As a matter of fact, some of them had 
the habit of bouncing rocks off our roof. It was a good thing that we had a tin 
roof, because you would hear a bang! (At the mine, Ernie went by the name 
of “Mac.”) And they would yell down, “Are you awake, Mac? Are you down 
there? What are you up to?” 

We lived near the Mary Mine for about a year, but we had to move into 
Silver Peak, because it would have been too much of a nuisance to try to 
drive all the way into town, especially in the wintertime, so my son could go 
to school. The house where we’re living now was for sale, and so Ernie just 
bought this. We moved down here, and I have been here ever since, [laugh- 
ter] 

Then they drove back and forth to the mine every day. There were other 
miners that needed to go up, and so did Stan (he and Frances were married 
at that time), so they bought this car—a Marquette. They used to haul the 
miners back and forth. They had a carload every time. Those old cars, they 
were built roomier, and they would just pile in there, [laughter] If more needed 
a ride they’d make room for them, because some of them that lived up there 
would come down here and stay overnight lots of times. Whoever wanted to 
ride was welcome. 



Buildings at the Mary Mine 


The bunkhouse at the Mary Mine was a twostory building. It was built 
out of real good lumber, so it was sturdy. There were two bunkhouses up 
above, and that big building had rooms all up above it. The cook and who- 
ever was running the place at the time, they had living quarters up there. It 
was there when I was living near the Mary Mine. It had been there for years 
and years—even back when the old road was there, and they hauled the ore 
out by horses and wagons. 

At that time everything was full up there. There wasn’t a building that 
was empty. Everyone that lived up there was always doing some work on 
their building, fixing it up and keeping it repaired. Transportation was a 
problem for the working men—the expense of gasoline going back and forth 
and the wear and tear on the cars. The road was worked and passable all the 
time, but it wasn’t a good road. A lot of people down here didn’t like to drive 
their car up there at all. It was steep, and a lot of the cars had trouble getting 
up there. 

During the Depression years there were good jobs available here. They 
didn’t have trouble getting miners. Of course, by law anyone under twenty- 
one couldn’t go underground, which was a good law. At that time they didn’t 
allow any women in mining. There were a lot of places that women couldn’t 
work, because they weren’t strong enough. Later the court said women could 
apply, but the mining companies wanted men. When it comes right down to 
it, women are not as strong as men. 



The Mary Mine boardinghouse (2) and bunkhouse (3) in the 1930s. (Photograph 
courtesy of the Central Nevada Historical Society.) 


99 


The 

Mines 







NIVLOC SILVER MINE 


100 


The 

Mines 


While the ore found in the Valcalda and Mary Mines was rich in gold, 
the district’s mines also produced silver. Both gold and silver played a part in 
the Vollmar family fortunes. Around the turn of the century, the area’s rich- 
est silver mine was discovered about eight miles south of Silver Peak by a 
Native American prospector, Tom Fisherman, who worked for Harry Stimler. 
Stimler was well-known as one of two men who discovered the ore bodies at 
Goldfield, a mere forty miles away, so for a short time this silver-rich lode 
was known as the Stimler Mine. 

Then a Chicago millionaire by the name of W. H. Colvin bought the 
mine and named it after himself, only spelled backwards—the Nivloc. He 
hired Fred Vollmar Sr. to work the property, and over the next twenty years 
a small town grew up the sides of the canyon. When Colvin became discour¬ 
aged about the returns on his investment, Vollmar took over the property. 
After his father’s death, Vollmar Jr. acquired the Nivloc Mine and organized 
the Red Mountain Mining Company in April of 1936 with associates R. J. 
Carnall and T. W. Warner. One short year later, Vollmar’s group sold the 
Nivloc to stockholders in a Canadian corporation. They formed Desert Sil¬ 
ver, Inc., and operated the mine for more than five years. 

While there apparently was no major union movement in the Silver 
Peak area, union organizers were in town. Pete Loncar, who as a young man 
worked at the Nivloc in 1937, recalled rooming with an “Okie,” as the mi¬ 
grant farmers from the Dust Bowl era were called. He saw firsthand how 
union men at the Nivloc harassed Okies, taunting them for being willing to 
work for food and at lower wages. 10 Another union is on the record books, 
the Silver Peak Mine and Mill Workers Association. However, there was 
some question whether or not that was under Vollmar’s control. 


Notes 

1. There is no agreement on the correct spelling of Oromonte, and official docu¬ 
ments show both Oro Monte and Oromonte. 

2. Mehls, conversation, 1998. 

3. In his oral history interview, Jack Brodie, son of one of the original owners, W. E. 
Brodie, refers to “Swenson,” while other sources spelled the name “Swanson.” 

4. This is one property that was never absorbed into the Vollmar empire. 


5. WORM, 3-35. 




6. During surveys, archaeologists located one of the narrow roads that was supported 
by a dry-laid, rock retaining wall. WCRM, figure 5-15 and page 5-32. 


101 


7. WCRM, 3-38. 


8. WCRM 7-36. While a hospital building appeared on a 1919 Pittsburg-Silver Peak 
Gold Mining Company fire insurance map, it had disappeared by 1927, and oral 
history interviews generally agreed that the closest medical help was to be found in 
Tonopah and Goldfield. 


The 

Mines 


9. Part of the oral history was recorded on videotape, and Merle refers to items that 
could be seen. 


10. Pete Loncar oral history, unpublished, in the collection of the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program. 




5 


The Mills 


THE SILVER PEAK MILLS 

When construction began anew on mills in Silver Peak during the 
Vollmar years, it was more than a show of prosperity. The renovated 
Chiatovich Mill had failed and older mills were dismantled or removed from 
the district, so mine operators were left with little choice—pay shipping 
costs or build new mills. They chose the latter: 

. . . the mills built during this period were small in capacity, with 
the size of the mill being adjusted to accommodate the volume of 
ore expected to be produced by the mine it served. The custom mill¬ 
ing of ores occurred only when mill capacity was available. 1 

The Vollmar Mill (1930), the Rock and Keeler Mill (R and K, 1930), 
and the Gordon-Brodie Mill (1936) were built during the heyday of the 
Vollmar years. Earlier, Harry Stimler tried to revive the old Fanchini-Hughes 
Mill located near the butte at the north edge of town. He even invited dig¬ 
nitaries like Governor Fred B. Balzar and George Wingfield to a barbecue in 
November of 1927, but Stimler’s plans fizzled. By 1928 Vollmar Jr. took over 
through his Liberty Divide Mining Company. 2 Within a short time the ten- 
stamp amalgamation mill was processing ore from the Black Mammoth 
Company’s Mary Mine. Retrofitted from a cyanide to a flotation system with 
Hardin equipment, it supplemented the fifty-ton Vollmar Mill. 

Across the road John Chiatovich’s oldest son, Martin, directed opera¬ 
tions where the Mohawk-Alpine Mill and the Pittsburg Silver Peak 
Company’s tailings plant had been. Fanchini and Hughes built a one hun¬ 
dred-ton cyanide plant to treat tailings from the Mary Mine and began oper¬ 
ating in the fall of 1930. By the following June new tanks were added to 
increase the capacity to three hundred tons. 3 




SILVER PEAK MILLS 

Early Entrepreneurs 

1893 

Chiatovich Mill, a fifty-ton cyanide mill in Silver 
Peak. In 1928 it became the Calvada Mill and in- 
creased to seventy-five tons, but it finally closed in 
1929. Then the R & K Mill was built on the north 
edge of town to replace it. 

Pittsburg Era 

1906 

Mohawk-Alpine Mill, north of Silver Peak across from 
the Hot Springs. In 1931 it became the Fanchini- 
Hughes Mill, with a three hundred-ton capacity and 
Martin Chiatovich as superintendent. 

7 

Blair Mill outside the town of Blair, three miles north 
of Silver Peak. 

1927 

Fanchini'Hughes Mill, a one hundred-ton cyanide 
mill (at the 1867 site of the SP&RMG&SMC Mill 
near a butte on the north edge of town). Fanchini- 
Hughes Mill in 1928 experienced a sequence of own¬ 
erships by Black Mammoth Company, Liberty Divide 
Mining Company, and Lucky Boy Mining Company, 
all Vollmar’s companies. 

1930 

Fanchini'Hughes Mill received a major upgrade. 

The Vollmar Years 

1930 

R & K Mill at the north edge of Silver Peak 

1930 

Vollmar Mill, a fifty-ton flotation mill in Silver Peak. 

1935 

Black Mammoth Mill, a one hundred'ton cyanide 
mill, was built adjacent to the Vollmar Mill in Silver 
Peak. It burned down in 1940. 

1936 

Gordon-Brodie Mill at site of Gordon-Brodie Mine. 

1938 

E. L. Cord Mill, a three hundred-ton cyanide mill near 
the Mary Mine. Closed in 1942. 




Vollmar directed both mills located in downtown Silver Peak. The mill 
to the north, known as the Vollmar Mill, was built in 1929 and designed by 
a well-known metallurgist named Albert Silver. The Vollmar Mill was con¬ 
sidered small at fifty tons capacity. It contained a “Blake jaw crusher, ball 
and gyratory crushers, Dorr classifier, Wilfley concentrating tables . . .” all 
technology readily available at the time and “. . . demonstrating a clear move 
away from the traditional stamp crushing systems that had marked the ear¬ 
lier periods.” 4 

Vollmar hired Fayette Hill to oversee the mill’s operations, and his brother 
Frank helped with construction and hauled ore to the mill. Both Hill broth¬ 
ers were known for their ability to forge new parts for machinery. Fayette’s 
son, Leon Hill, recalled being about eleven years old when he sat on the hill 
above the mill watching a group of men slide a heavy ball mill, inch by inch, 
down to where it would be installed. 

Next to the small flotation mill was the huge, one hundred-ton cyanide 
plant. Called the Black Mammoth Mill, it was built several years later, prob¬ 
ably between 1935 and 1937. 5 In fact, when banks were closed in Nevada 
during the Depression, Leon’s father used his postal savings to pay for mate¬ 
rials to finish construction on the mill. Leon worked operating a compressor 
for a millwright named Birch who was in charge of that construction project. 
Bob Douglass and a group of strong, young men also worked on the con¬ 
struction of the mill. 6 

The timing for construction on the Black Mammoth Mill is interesting. 
On the one hand, banks were closed, which caused difficulty with cash flow. 


105 


The 

Mills 



“Vollmar directed both mills located in downtown Silver Peak.” The Black Mammoth 
and Vollmar mills, c. 1934- (Photograph courtesy of Stewart Carnall.) 





106 


The 

Mills 


At the same time the price of gold increased. “Under the Gold Reserve Act 
of 1934, the price of gold was raised from $20.67 to $35 an ounce, as of 
January 31, 1934.” 7 Better prices made lower-grade ore worthwhile, but the 
process for extracting the gold needed larger mills than ever before, again 
requiring more investment dollars. For example, the 100'ton Black Mam¬ 
moth Mill in Silver Peak and the 300'ton Cord Mill built in 1938 near the 
Mary Mine were both considered large-scale operations for their time, and 
both were built with money invested by E. L. Cord. 8 Once the “big mill” (as 
the Black Mammoth was also called) started production, the smaller Vollmar 
Mill was shut down. 9 The Black Mammoth Mill burned down in 1940 leav¬ 
ing only the E. L. Cord Mill operating in the district until World War II shut 
down the gold mines. 


- O - 

BOB DOUGLASS: BUILDING VOLLMAR’S MILL 

Bob Douglass was born and raised in Tonopah, Nevada. Bob’s father, William 
James Douglass, was superintendent of the Tonopah Midway Divide Mining Com¬ 
pany, but he discouraged his sons from mining to protect them from the deadly 
silicosis. After his father’s death, Bob raised himself, finished high school, and then 
held a variety of labor jobs during the Depression years. In his oral history Bob 
describes his job building “Vollmar’s Mill” 10 in Silver Peak, Nevada. When he 
arrived in town he was young, single, and—by his own description—full of devil¬ 
ment. 

The reason I went to Silver Peak, they were going to build that mill for 
Vollmar . . . the Vollmar Mill, that’s the little one down in Silver Peak. The 
summer of 1934, I think that’s when we built that mill. 

Guy Birch (I think he was from Tonopah), he was the superintendent 
that was in charge of building of that. He was the millwright—a carpenter, 
actually—and he built that mill. It was through him that I got the job. He 
had a bunch of Tonopah kids, a bunch of Silver Peak kids, and a bunch 
Goldfield kids to help with the construction. They were paying us, I think, 
four dollars an hour. 11 

We dug all those foundations for the mill with picks and shovels—in¬ 
stead of building it with a Cat, we dug with a hand pick. There were a bunch 
of young guys. I guess I was about twenty-two or twenty-three, and they 
were all the same age, and they were full of devilment. 

When we started, we were all doing the same work, because we had to 
dig ditches to get the foundation for this mill. And then we got different 
jobs. I would sneak into the office and look at old Birch’s time book. And I 
would say, “Oh, they’re going to pay a lot of money for riggers.” The riggers 
are the guys that get up on a two-by-four and pound. Actually, they were 
going to pay the same thing for riggers, [laughter] 




“The Black Mammoth Mill burned down in 1940 leaving only the E.L. Cord Mill operat¬ 
ing in the district until World War II shut down the gold mines. ” The remains of the Black 
Mammoth Mill in 1941. (Photograph courtesy of Gerry Cooper.) 


And so old Birch lined us up every morning like a bunch of army kids. 
He’d say, “Douglass, Traynor, Clark, step up. You’re supposed to be a rigger.” 

And they were all set on riggering, but when he came to me, I said, “No, 
I come from a family of miners not circus people. I’m not going to.” I got to 
run the tugger. It was the same money, but the tugger was just like a tele- 
phone post with a cable on it, and it had a little air tugger on the bottom of 
it. You would tug everything up to them to use. I got to stay on the ground. 
I didn’t want to be up there standing around on a two-by-four or an eight- 
by-eight, [laughter] Afterwards they got mad at me, but they didn’t at that 
time. 

Oh, we put in our eight hours, seven days a week, every day! No days off. 
We just got that mill built, that’s all. Used to be Sundays off, but old Birch, 
he wouldn’t let us off Sundays. He wanted to get that job done and get out of 
there. I think after we built the mill then we left there. Oh, I was there, I 
guess, three or four months. What a guy, Birch. I’ll never forget him. He was 
a big man. He wore about a sixteen shoe, you know. He was a big man. 

We never paid much attention to accidents. We weren’t going for insur¬ 
ance in those days. They were serious accidents when something happened, 
and no safety procedures, no hard hats. I don’t remember any serious ones. 

- O - 

LEON HILL: FAYETTE HILL AND THE BLACK MAMMOTH MILL 


By the mid-1950s, more families were settling in Silver Peak. Men like Fayette 
Hill, who worked for Fred Vollmar Jr. as superintendent of the Black Mammoth 
Mill, were as deeply involved in family and community life as they were in the 




108 


The 

Mills 


mining industry. Fayette’s son, Leon, worked for his father and described the Black 
Mammoth Mill. 

The Flotation Mill 

My father [Fayette Hill] was superintendent of the Black Mammoth Mill, 
and, along with my Uncle Frank and my cousin Kenneth, Dad helped build 
the flotation plant [the small Vollmar Mill]. That was when Silver Peak first 
started to come back about 1928. He went out there when they were build- 
ing the mill, and that was probably around 1929, because the banks closed 
right around that time. It took them a while to build the mill. First they had 
to level off the place they wanted, because all the land was on a hillside. 
They also put a tank on top of the hill for water. 

The parts for the mill were shipped in from Los Angeles. The Smith 
brothers (three brothers and a sister who were Canadian people), along with 
a partner by the name of Tom Cox, went together and borrowed the money 
to buy a couple of beat-up old trucks to haul this stuff into Silver Peak. But 
right about then George Wingfield shut the banks down in the state of Ne¬ 
vada . . . , 12 I think banks all over the country were closed. The Black Mam¬ 
moth had its money in the First National Bank over in Tonopah, so sud¬ 
denly they didn’t have any money, and the Smith brothers weren’t going to 
bring in the material unless they were paid some money. My dad used his 
own postal savings to pay for the transportation and equipment. There was 
no bank in Silver Peak. So many people lived way out away from banks, and, 
also, banks were held up a lot but post offices weren’t held up as a general 
rule. I think postal savings augmented banks nearly like a government bond 
now. So anyone could just go down to the post office and deposit their money. 
The post office paid a little bit of interest, and if you needed your money you 



“Dad helped build the flotation plant [the small Vollmar Mill], That was when Silver Peak 
first started to come back about 1928.” Silver Peak viewed from above the Vollmar 
Mill, looking northeast. (Photograph courtesy of Gerry Cooper.) 




could draw it out. When the banks closed, people who had their money in 
postal savings could still get their money. So that’s how they paid for the 
flotation mill. 

They called it a thirty-ton flotation mill. It was built for twenty-five, but 
they could probably force it a little. Very briefly, the process started with jaw 
crushers grinding the ore just like any other mill. Then the ore went through 
a ball mill to crush it finer. After that the ore went over a plate, about four or 
five feet wide and maybe about ten feet long: that was a smooth sheet of 
copper. They would spread mercury all over that plate, and the copper plate 
would hold the mercury in place. Then the mud would come down from the 
ball mill over the plates, and the mercury would pick up the free gold. From 
there the rest of the ore would go down into the flotation system where a 
machine would agitate sweet oil with the ore. The sweet oil would pick up 
some of the minerals and put that over the sides. The balance of the mate- 
rial would flow down on to the concentrating table. This table was about 
sixteen feet long and four or five feet wide; it had twenty or thirty little 
metal strips about one-fourth inch by one-fourth inch that ran the length of 
the table. The muddy material came in over the upper end of the vibrating 
table and ran down over these strips. The metals, or concentrates, would 
work their way to the end of the riffles and then into the concentrate dryers. 

Then they would clean off those plates, and that mercury would make a 
ball that was saturated with gold. They’d take it down and put it into a 
retort, which is no more than a kind of crucible with a tube sticking up in 
the air. When you heat that, the mercury would go up the tube in the steam 
and then drop out to be recovered. They could recover a lot of their mercury 
this way. Once it was dry it was gathered up and shipped off paid was based 
on the value of the gold. That flotation plant was shut down after the cya- 
nide plant started operations. 


109 


The 

Mills 


The Cyanide Mill 


In the cyanide plant they used the Merrill-Crowe precipitation process, 
and the recovery was a little over 90 percent. Again, the ore was dumped 
into a chute or bin on top of the hill and went down through the jaw crush' 
ers to crush the big rocks. From there the ore went on a conveyor to a cone 
crusher, which crushed the ore a little bit smaller before going to the ball 
mill, where it was mixed with cyanide solution, and as the tank got full the 
mud flowed out over the top and down through a screen. 

From there it was pumped to a classifier, which is an oblong, open tray 
about twenty feet long. The tray sloped up a little and had two large rakes 
that went back and forth across it to rake the mud up. The purpose of the 
rake was to rake up the heavier stuff and send it back through the ball mill 
again to make sure it’s ground enough to get the gold recovery. The mud 
that’s been ground fine enough and is in solution went over the top, into a 
thickener, and on through the system. 



110 


The 

Mills 


The cyanide plant never shut down. It operated twenty-four hours a 
day, because if it ever stopped (depending on the size of the mill), maybe up 
to a million gallons of solution and mud would settle in those tanks, and 
then somebody had to go down there and shovel it out, which was a heck of 
a big job and caused delays. Once in a while the plant had to be shut down 
to put new liners in the ball mill. During scheduled shutdowns, the ball mill 
would be empty, and the material would stop going into the system. Thus, 
the classifier would be empty, and the rest of the system would continue 
operating. If the power went off unexpectedly, the mud settled in that clas- 
sifier. When you tried to start it up again, it would bend the rods. The rakes 
couldn’t move through all that mud. Actually, that never happened [the 
mud would have been removed], because you would have to have such a big 
motor to be able to start up and to move the rakes. 

An example of my dad’s ingenuity was that he took off the rods and 
exchanged them for real heavy springs. That way, when they turned the 
power back on, a spring would stretch until it got the rake going, and there 
was no damage done. It allowed the rakes to give without bending the metal 
rods. Later, that invention was patented by someone else, because my dad 
didn’t want to patent it. He said, “I don’t want to fool around with this.” 
[laughter] 

All he wanted to do was make it work. The fact that they were out in 
Silver Peak, which was away from every place, meant they had to improvise. 
It took so long to order parts, and half of these things had to be custom- 
made anyway. Even Reno didn’t have anything that could help in those 
days. Heck, there were probably only 10,000 people in Reno anyway. Dad 
made so many things that you just couldn’t believe it. 

When the ore became fine enough, it went into what they called thick¬ 
eners. These were great big tanks that were full of cyanide solution, and 
rakes went around and round inside of them all of the time. They kept stir¬ 
ring up the mud, and the lighter stuff went up through the top and then 
down through these trays that fed it into another thickener. It went to an 
agitator after going through two or three thickeners. In the agitator it got 
stirred up good with the cyanide solution before it went through one more 
thickener, and then it went into the precipitating tank. The cyanide solu¬ 
tion was then recycled back to the ball mill. 

Inside the precipitating tank was a pipe right down the middle with a 
bunch of leaves that were two-and-a-half or three feet by five feet high. 
These were made of pipe with holes in the center and covered with canvas. 
On a regular schedule the mill operator had to dump so much zinc powder in 
there, and the gold would adhere to the zinc. A vacuum pump would pump 
the solution through these leaves and back into the system again. That would 
cause the zinc to stick to the leaves. When they got ready to clean up and 
have a melt, then they’d wash that zinc off of there, down into the driers in 
the smelting room. The rest of the finished mud went through pipes over to 
a great big filtering drum where the tailings went. The cyanide solution was 



pumped out and went back into the 
system where it was recycled. The 
mud was washed off with fresh wa¬ 
ter and then went out into the tail¬ 
ings pond. That finished the pro¬ 
cess. 

Smelting and Transporting 

Then there’s the smelting. One 
night about 12:30 or 1:00, my dad 
showed up at the mill, and 
whoever’s on duty would come 
down and help him shovel all of 
that powder up, put it into great 
big crucibles, and melt it with a tre¬ 
mendous heat. Well, you have to 
put on protective rubber gloves and rubber boots and everything. Of course, 
Dad did the actual pouring. Once it was melted he poured it off. The slag 
came off first, and then he poured the gold. When we got all through, we 
had to take all the protective clothes off and leave them there. The last time 
that they used them, they burned them, because they might be impregnated 
with gold. 

He’d make bars about eight or ten inches long by about three or four 
inches wide and maybe a couple of inches high, and they were pretty heavy. 
They usually only poured one bar a night, because they didn’t like to let it go 
too long. He would dump it out, and it’d cool pretty fast. Then he’d wrap it 
in a sack and put it in his car to take it to Wells Fargo in Tonopah. 

The insurance company required that he have an armed guard, and, 
generally, it was my mother. There was a weapon there in the car, but I’m 
sure if somebody wanted the gold, they’d have given it to them. Someone 
always went with him, not necessarily my mother. My dad had to go to 
Tonopah for a lot of reasons, and most people preferred shopping at Tonopah, 
which was a little over fifty miles away, so often someone else would go, but 
no one knew when he had the gold with him. My sister Gerry thought that 
she went up to the mill one time and watched them pour that gold, but I 
think that Gerry’s having a pipe dream, because he didn’t want anybody to 
know, not even my mother. No one knew. The guys who worked in the mill 
didn’t even know until he started to do it, and then he had one of them 
come down and help him. But up until that time no one knew what he was 
doing, so they never knew when he was going to ship it. 

One time they had a bar that was about teacup size. When they were 
going into Tonopah with it, some way or other it shook way back under the 
seat, and, boy, he like to about had a fit until they found that! But there was 
never any danger of it ever being stolen, except one time some guy stole 



*' * 


Side view of the Black Mammoth cyanide 
mill. (Photograph courtesy of Leon Hill.) 



Ill 


The 

Mills 




112 


The 

Mills 


about twenty cans of silver concentrate or something from the Nivloc, and 
then took it to Mina and shipped it. But they caught him, because when 
they processed it at the mint, they knew where it came from. As soon as they 
ran their tests on it, they knew where it came from, so they knew who it was. 
I suppose nowadays, with all the crooks that are around, if Dad went down 
to process this gold, someone could very likely pass that information on to 
somebody else. But it seemed like people were mostly honest in those days. 
It’s amazing how honest they were, [laughter] 

At Silver Peak quitting time was three o’clock. My dad would go up 
there usually around seven or eight o’clock in the morning, and he’d be 
there most of the day. He’d leave the mill from time to time when he had to 
go do something, like make phone calls down at the powerhouse, because 
we didn’t have telephones everywhere. The one at the powerhouse was the 
only telephone in town in the early days. If he had to make something, he’d 
be out at the dumps looking for an old piece of metal or something that he 
could make it out of. And then he might be back at the mill at eight o’clock 
at night, or nine o’clock, or any other time. He was in and out all of the 
time. Since it ran twenty-four hours a day, he was responsible for it all the 
time. Shifts ended at three, eleven, and seven. 


Working for Dad 

I was raised around the darn mills. I didn’t want to work for my dad, but 
I did. I dug that ditch that ran the pipeline up to the water tank above the 
mills (both the flotation and cyanide mills), which were owned by Black 
Mammoth Company. It was Fred Vollmar’s fault that I was working for my 
dad. He said, “I’ve got a job for you.” 

I didn’t want a job. I was out punching cows, chasing wild horses, hav- 
ing a heck of a good time, but I thought, “Well, I better do it.” 

But I hadn’t realized I would be working for my dad until he said, “Go up 
and see your dad.” 

I dug every bit of that pipeline by hand. That was quite a ways up that 
hill, starting from the well right down below where my father lived. That 
would have been at least two hundred and fifty yards. In fact, that pump 
would go all night long, and I bet that made everyone real happy, but it 
didn’t bother me. I’d go right to sleep. The flotation plant was still there, 
and it was still running at the time I dug that ditch. At one part the ditch 
went right up next to where the old flotation plant was. That son of a gun 
was mostly solid rock. Well, it seemed like solid rock to me. Before I dug that 
ditch, I don’t know how they got the water up there, because I sure as heck 
didn’t have a ditch to dig in when I dug that one. That was in 1935 right 
after I graduated from high school. They had water, but I don’t know how 
they got the water up there originally for the flotation plant. 

I remember my dad coming out, and he’d say, “Oh, you haven’t gotten 
anywhere!” 



And I said, “Yes, you know this is easy for you. You’re the boss. You sit in 
there in the shade and watch me out here digging this ditch.” [laughter] 

He said, “Well, someday you’re going to find out what an easy job you 
really had.” 

And it’s true. At quitting time, I was all through. I didn’t worry about 
that ditch. Later on, when I had jobs that involved personnel matters and 
you’d ask someone to do something, and it isn’t in their position descrip- 
tion, or they didn’t think they were getting paid enough, or they couldn’t do 
it because they couldn’t lift something, you found out what a problem really 
was. [laughter] Your responsibility didn’t end at four o’clock when you went 
home. 

Superintendent’s Son 

I don’t think people treated me any differently because my dad was su- 
perintendent at the mill. If they did, it was probably because they were bitter 
and were taking it out on me. [laughter] But that didn’t make a lot of differ- 
ence to people. Like Stanley Chiatovich and Ernie Shirley, they were both 
big mine bosses, and Bill Graham’s brother. People liked them, and they 
respected them and did what they were told. Either that or they quit. But 
they were just treated like anybody else. It’s just they were fortunate enough 
to get the job they wanted, [laughter] Probably, half of the people didn’t 
even know I was his son. People from out of town, from Tonopah or Gold¬ 
field, they probably knew. 

After digging the ditch, I went to work at the mill for my dad before 
working in the mine. He fired me once. It was on New Year’s, and they were 
going to shut down to line the ball mill, so they wanted to get it done as soon 
as possible and get back into operation. Well, the people in the mill had an 
opportunity to work if they wanted to. They didn’t have to, but if you said 
you wanted to work, you should work. I didn’t have anything to do on New 
Year’s, so I wanted to work, because I wanted the extra money. I just threw it 
away, so I don’t know why I wanted it. Anyway I said I’d work, but then I 
didn’t show up. 

So my mother sent my sister Gerry down .... At that time I was sleep¬ 
ing downtown in an old ruins of a building. Gerry said, “You better get to 
work.” 

I said, “OK.” I think I had gone to bed at about six o’clock [a.m.[, and 
this was about seven when I should have been at work. So I thought about it 
a little bit, and I was going to get up, and the next thing I knew I was asleep. 

Pretty soon Gerry came down again and said, “Dad says for you to get up 
to work right now.” 

And by that time I felt awful. Besides that I’d had too much to drink, so 
I said, “I don’t work for anyone on New Year’s day.” I don’t think it was 
fifteen minutes, and here he came with my check, [laughter] That’s the only 
time I was ever fired. That was sure a good lesson, boy! [laughter] Oh, was I 



114 


The 

Mills 


ever glad that I got fired. I was tickled to death. I went out and punched 
cows for a while. I liked that better than working in the mill, because I 
didn’t want to work for my dad. 

Later I worked for Dad again (that was after I was married), because 
someone else didn’t show up, and I was familiar with the operations. We got 
along fine after that. I was married by then, settling down, and getting a 
little brains. I figured I had to work. I couldn’t go fiddling around chasing 
cows! [laughter] 


- -O - 


E. L. CORD MILL 

Under the supervision of Cord’s right-hand man, Arthur N. Sweet, the 
Cord Mill was built to process ore produced by the Black Mammoth 
Company’s Mary Mine. The Cord Mill was a three hundred-ton leaching 
plant and also processed ore from fifteen lessees who worked under the su¬ 
pervision of Stanley Chiatovich, grandson of John. 

The equipment for the Cord Mill came from the abandoned mill of the 
Como Mines Company at Dayton, Nevada. The mill and machinery were 
bought at a sheriff’s sale, dismantled, hauled to the Mineral Ridge District, 
and reassembled. 13 Improvements made in 1939 were coordinated with the 
Dorr Company, one of the leading cyanide-mill design and equipment com¬ 
panies of the period, so industrial-scale Mineral Ridge mines were taking 
advantage of the best technologies available at the time. 14 

Like the Black Mammoth Mill, workers at the E. L. Cord Mill kept it 
operating day and night, grinding the ore and extracting the precious gold— 
steady work, round-the-clock shifts, seven days a week, every day, with the 
possible exception of Christmas. The Cord Mill operated just four years be¬ 
fore it was closed by War Board Order L-208 in 1942. 



“The mill and machinery were bought at a sherrif s sale, dismantled, hauled to the Mineral 
Ridge District, and reassembled.” (Photograph courtesy of Sherry Mattei.) 



VIC KRAL: THE E. L. CORD MILL 


Victor Krai has had a long career in the mining industry, primarily in Nevada. 
Krai’s oral history covers his wide range of experiences, from underground copper 
mines at Ruth, Nevada, and the E. L. Cord cyanide mill at Silver Peak, Nevada, 
to surveying, mapping, and exploration geology. After spending fifteen years look¬ 
ing after mineral rights for Ford Motor Company in the Upper Peninsula of Michi¬ 
gan, Krai returned to Nevada where he continues to work as a consultant and 
part-owner ofVEK Associates. A graduate ofMackay School of Mines during the 
Depression years, his first job after college was working at the Cord Mill in Silver 
Peak. 


115 


The 

Mills 


In December of 1938, before 
the school year was over, S. 

Power Warren came to talk to 
us at the Crucible Club, a club 
of mining engineering students. 

S. Power Warren was a fairly 
well-known metallurgist from 
Denver, and I guess he had a 
pretty fair reputation. He had 
some kind of ties to the Colo¬ 
rado School of Mines. He was 
the designer and the mill super¬ 
intendent of the Cord Mill in 
Silver Peak. He was certainly 
looking for people that had had Victor KraL (Photograph by Victoria Ford.) 
cyaniding experience. - 

Actually, the whole operation (mine and mill) was called the Prescott 
Lease, although the mill itself was commonly referred to as the Cord Mill. 
The mill was not a lease, but the mine was a lease, and, therefore, the mill 
was built for the Prescott Lease. 15 

O 

I was hired as what they referred to at that time as a solution man. In 
other words, I took care of the cyanidation process. I had nothing to do with 
the actual milling, the grinding of the ore. And that was usually the way 
that was handled in those days. One man in a mill would handle the grind¬ 
ing part and possibly the flotation with it, and another man would handle all 
that was involved in cyanidation. It took two men to run the mill for each 
shift, twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. Shifts were ordinarily 7:00 
to 3:00, 3:00 to 11:00, and 11:00 to 7:00. We rotated shifts every two weeks. 
It takes about ten to fifteen men to operate that mill continuously. That 
allows for rotation and everything. 













116 


The 

Mills 


You’re on the whole time. You don’t consider breaks in this business, 
because actually, if everything’s going right, that’s your break. You really 
don’t have to do anything—just stand there and watch things; that’s all. If 
things are not going right, why, you might have too much solution in one 
particular place or some sand spills, then you’d be moving rather fast—turn 
off pumps, turn on pumps, and regulate them. These pumps were small, 
centrifugal pumps and very good, because you could turn the valves off against 
the pump; that made no difference whatsoever. Or you could turn the valve 
half on, and you could control it very well. 

They had very good equipment in that mill. Practically all of it was 
brand-new. I’m sure that the grinding unit came from some other place. We 
also had what we called a rake bowl classifier that came from Weepah. As is 
very common in the mineral industry, sometimes you have to cut things in 
half and put them back together again, and that’s just what they did to this 
classifier. In order to move it, they had to get it into smaller pieces. They 
had to cut it with a torch, more or less in half, and then welded it back 
together again at the mill. I don’t think I had even heard of that before. 
Since then I’ve run into all kinds of things . . . large pieces of equipment 
being cut and re-welded together, but this was a new idea to me. It was about 
twenty to twenty-six feet long and about twelve feet wide, so it was too long. 
They cut it in half crosswise. In other words, they cut the length in half. 

For the cyanidation process, you would make sure that your cyanide 
solution was at the proper level in the tanks and that the sands in the tanks 
were being properly discharged from one and going into the other. There 
was quite a bit of checking of the valves to make sure that the solution was 
going to the proper place in the proper quantity. All the pumps were on the 
lower level. And you’re talking about something that’s about like a three- 
story building, and so it took young men who were rather agile to operate 
this, because they’d be running from the top to the bottom quite frequently. 

Of course, the ore went through the grinding unit, and from there it 
went through the flotation process. The flotation process is where certain 
reagents are added to the pulp, and the pulp is then run through rectangular 
tanks and, by the addition of air at the bottom, causes a mass of bubbles. The 
mineral which you are trying to float adheres to the bubbles, comes to the 
top, and floats over the side of the tank, and it’s collected. And, of course, 
this is a rather involved process requiring special attention to the feeding of 
these special reagents. 

The concentrate then went through the cyanide process. This cyanide 
process was entirely separate from the sand leaching that went on just below 
that. The cyanidation of concentrates was rather new, because they some¬ 
times are difficult to cyanide, but in this particular case it worked. The part 
of the crushed ore that went through the flotation process was the fines or 
the slimes. But the sands went directly to the lower part of the mill, which 
was the sand-leaching part. There were six tanks there, and the sands first 
went to the upper three tanks and through a distribution system, which is 




“You’re talking about something that’s about like a three-story building, and so it took young 
men who were rather agile to operate this, because they’d be running from the top to the 
bottom quite frequently." The E.L. Cord Mill at Silver Peak. (Photograph courtesy of 
the Nevada Historical Society.) 


rather unique and very old. The sands were distributed evenly in the tanks 
and leached there by the addition of cyanide solution, which was drawn off 
the bottom. Then after a certain length of time (being two or three days), 
the cyanide solution would be drained out of that tank. The sands would be 
sluiced from that tank to a lower set of tanks, and by doing this, the sands 
were aerated; they were put in a different position in the tanks to get away 
from the possibility of channeling in the sands. The cyanide is distributed 
evenly in the tank, but then there’s always a possibility of channeling, and 
by moving the sand again to another tank, you get away from this problem. 

It was a unique method of sand leaching. I had never heard of it before, 
and I don’t know that it’s been used very much, but apparently it was an idea 
that S. Power Warren came up with. And I think it was a good idea. It adds 
oxygen, which is necessary for the cyanide process. There was one peculiar 
thing about that system, though. Because of this continual sluicing of sands 
from one tank to another, you put a lot of cyanide into the atmosphere. And 
we always noticed that when we were working there—a slight odor. That 
quantity is not poisonous, but it was a little bit objectionable. 

In going a little bit further in the process, there is a hazard, and it did 
cause some trouble. The cyanide solutions, what we call the pregnant solu- 
tions that carry the gold, go through a precipitation process. It’s a bag pre- 
cipitator, wherein zinc is combined with the cyanide solution. Then the 
gold replaces the zinc and forms a black sludge that contains the gold values. 
This black sludge, or precipitate, is then dried and put through a furnace to 






118 


The 

Mills 


melt down the bullion. At this particular mill, to dry the precipitate they 
used drying pans, wherein the precipitate was put in rather large, flat pans 
with heat underneath to evaporate the water. Now, what’s dangerous here is 
that you’re dealing with zinc precipitates, and when you heat zinc, you put 
off zinc fumes, which are poisonous. At one particular time there was some¬ 
thing wrong with the ventilation, or they got too much heat under the zinc 
precipitates, so the fumes were extreme in the mill, and everybody in the 
mill became sick. I think they had a combination of diarrhea and vomiting. 
I was lucky; that happened when I was off on a long break, and I was out of 
the mill. The company took very good care of everybody and brought in 
medical help immediately. 

To transfer sands from one tank to another was new to me. Large-scale 
sand leaching, as this one was, was not done commonly in those days. Sand 
leaching is an old, old cyanide process that had been used for many years 
and was very common in the very early part of the century. But it was not 
common in the 1930s and 1940s. 

Ordinarily, in the cyanide process the ore is ground to a finer state, and 
then goes through a counter current decantation cyanide process, where 
everything is in pulp form. You’re not handling any sand. Everything is ground 
finer and is handled in pulp form. 

A great deal of testing is done before a mill is built. The nature of the 
ore, the way the mineralization occurs in the rock, will determine the met¬ 
allurgical process you use to get the gold out of the rock. S. Power Warren 
must have made many tests on the ore, and he must have decided that he 
could get the values out of the ore without grinding it so fine. Therefore, he 
saved quite a bit of money in grinding, and it worked just as well. Appar¬ 
ently, the ore was such that the values were in the cleavages, so that very 
little grinding would release the ore. Just as today we’re doing a lot of heap 
leaching: if the ore is merely crushed, the cyanide solutions can permeate 
the cracks in the rock, and thereby remove the values. Much the same gen¬ 
eral idea, but here we used the sand-leaching system. 

There were two other mills right in Silver Peak using the cyanide pro¬ 
cess. I guess there was a mill operating west of Silver Peak; the Sunshine 
Mine was operating there. It was probably there before the Cord Mill, but 
these other two smaller cyanide mills in Silver Peak were there long before 
the Cord Mill. One was the Chiatovich. 

Flotation became rather important in the 1930s, and, actually, the origi¬ 
nal name is froth flotation, whereby certain chemicals and air are added to 
the pulp. The air facilitates the formation of bubbles, and the chemicals, of 
course, promote the bubbles. The gold, silver, or sulfide minerals adhere to 
the bubbles and rise to the surface, and then they have a simple means to 
scoop that froth off. And that, of course, is then filtered and dried and shipped 
to the smelter. 



The flotation system can be used separately or in conjunction with the 
cyanide system. At the Cord Mill it was used in conjunction. There the 
flotation concentrates (instead of being shipped) actually had their own 
cyanidation process, whereby the cyanide solutions dissolved the gold and 
silver in the flotation concentrates and eventually went through a bag zinc 
precipitation system and then to smelting on the site. 

Flotation was still a fairly new technology. Even in the 1930s it hadn’t 
been around very long, but it was a very common method. It was used al¬ 
most everywhere. Just like so many new systems coming in, why, in the 1930s 
they thought flotation was the answer to all our problems. Of course, it wasn’t. 

Amalgamation is an extremely old system whereby the gold pulp or slurry 
is put in contact with mercury in one way or another, and the gold and silver 
(free gold and silver that is) adheres to the mercury and forms what we call 
an amalgam. That amalgam is collected, either by gravity or on silver plates, 
and then it is put through a distillation process, where the mercury is driven 
off, leaving the sponge of gold and silver behind. It could be used in con¬ 
junction with the cyanide process. If you had free gold it would be very 
logical, almost imperative, that you used amalgamation to retrieve the free 
gold. Cyanidation does not work at all on coarse gold, because it’s too slow a 
process. I believe amalgamation was used somewhere in the Cord Mill but 
not extensively. It might have been used as an amalgamation trap some¬ 
where. 

Gravity concentration was used more when the desired mineral is rela¬ 
tively course. Because it is heavier than the gangue mineral, it is retrieved 
by panning or the use of shaking tables or sluice boxes. Panning is the prin¬ 
ciple that’s used in the concentration processes. 

In a rake classifier the coarse material sinks to the bottom and is gradu¬ 
ally raked out of the bottom of the lower part of the classifier and goes back 
to the mill for regrinding. Combine that with a larger bowl (such as eight, 
ten, twelve feet in diameter) at the lower end of this rake classifier, whereby 
you have a pulp with finer solids. A bowl classifier is something like a thick¬ 
ener, whereby there are rakes at the bottom that move very slowly, and as 
the heavy particles sink to the bottom, these rakes pull them into a central 
spot where a pump pumps the slurry to some other part of the mill. The 
principle is to remove the coarser particles that may require finer grinding 
and get them back to the grinding mill. 

I was particularly impressed by S. Power Warren’s idea of transferring 
sands from one tank to another, and thereby increasing the possibility of 
better gold recovery. It was absolutely an innovation: I don’t know of it 
being done before or after that. I was impressed by Mr. Warren’s knowledge 
of the metallurgical industry. 

Another thing I appreciated about the Cord Mill is their system of pumps. 
All the pumps were in the same place; it was very easy to get at them and 


119 


The 

Mills 



120 


The 

Mills 


very well designed—planned. He was the one who designed it. He came up 
with the idea. You could see his knowledge in the design of this mill. 

Sunshine Mine’s Shrink-Stope System 

We had some time off, of course, and my friend Gerry Hartley and I 
would go out and look around the area. We were very much interested in 
visiting the volcano cinder cone that appears in practically all the pictures 
of that area. 

We also visited the Sunshine Mine and went underground there to see 
what they were doing. They were using a shrink-stope system, which is very 
common. But the young man who was the mining engineer there was trained 
at Boston, one of the big schools in the East, and he wanted to show us this 
unique system. We were surprised to find that it was nothing but the com- 
mon, old, shrink system, which was used all over the state of Nevada. He 
was a graduate from MIT, which is a very astute engineering school, but if 
you want to learn mining, you better go to one of the western schools, be¬ 
cause you’re right in the vicinity of mining, [laughter] You’re in the area, 
and you’re more apt to get people that really know something about mining. 

The shrink system is very simple. It’s where you’re working in the stope, 
you blast the ore down, and the bottom of the stope is attached to a chute, 
where you draw the ore out. You draw up just the right amount of ore so that 
the men can still work in the stope. They’re standing on the ore with their 
equipment to drill the ore above them. When they blast, why, then more ore 
is drawn out to give enough space for men to get back in there again and do 
more drilling and blasting. 

There was no exploration going on in that area at the time, and the only 
mining operation that was going on was the Mary Mine and the Sunshine. I 
don’t know about the Chiatovich Mill, if the mill was actually operating 
then. 



“We were very much interested in visiting the volcano cinder cone that appears in practically 
all the pictures of that area." (Photograph courtesy of the Nevada Historical Society.) 



Living Conditions 


They had some tent houses set up there by the mill along the road which 
is right on a ridge, and the tent houses were on the north side of this more or 
less east'west ridge. They were very simple and very common in those days. 
They had a wood foundation and wood floor and housed one or two men to 
a tent. Gerry Hartley and I roomed together, and we worked together. We 
must have had our meals at a boardinghouse right there. I know we didn’t 
have to go any distance at all. It was all in walking distance. It was not up at 
the mine, because I have never actually been at the Mary Mine. 

When a man finished a shift, he was somewhat dirty, and it was neces- 
sary for him to clean up. Now at the Mary Mine itself, there were shower 
facilities for the men working underground. A man is filthy when he comes 
out from underground. And when he’s working in the mill, sometimes he’s 
working rather strenuously—if they have a spill, and he has to do a lot of 
shoveling or something like that. When you’re underground the conditions 
are relatively warm, and it could be snowing outside. It’s quite important for 
a man to have a hot shower and sort of rehabilitate himself before he goes 
out. At the mill, the showers were in the mill. At the mine they had what 
they call a change house, where you change from your grubby, underground 
clothes to your street clothes and take a shower in between. And, of course, 
they just took their shower and didn’t have to go very far to where they 
lived. They used outhouses, and if you wanted water in your tent, you car- 
ried it. 

O 

I had my own vehicle there, a 1936 Pontiac, [laughter] We made six 
dollars a shift in 1939. And in the mine they would have been earning about 
the same. That was pretty fair wages, because I remember my sister-in-law 
who was a registered nurse said, “Well, that’s pretty good. That’s what I 
make.” That included the room in the tent house. My wife was living in 
Reno, and on long breaks I would come to Reno. My income from the mill 
was our principal income, actually. She was working, but I was earning more 
than she was by far. 


121 


The 

Mills 


Notes 


1. Zeier, 10. 

2. Stimler and Vollmar were said to be related and may have collaborated on some 
work. Ford, Bob Douglass oral history, 17. 


3. Nevada Mining Record, 6 June 1931. 




4. WCRM, 3-36 to 3-37. 


122 

The 

Mills 


operation for several years. Perhaps the confusion between legal and popular names 
resulted from the fact that Vollmar was involved in so many operations that it was 
simpler to refer to all of them as either Vollmar’s or the Black Mammoth. 

7. Shamberger, 73. 

8. Shamberger, 80. 

9. Ford, Leon Hill oral history, 55. 

10. More likely the Black Mammoth Mill, the one hundred-ton cyanide mill. There 
is a discrepancy in dates. Douglass thought this was the smaller Vollmar Mill, but if 
he graduated in 1933, the smaller mill was already built, so he must have worked on 
the larger Black Mammoth Mill, which would have been constructed in 1937 ac¬ 
cording to Leon Hill, who remembers working with Douglass. As noted earlier, the 
confusion between legal and popular names may have resulted from the fact that 
Vollmar was involved in so many operations that it was simpler to refer to all of 
them as either Vollmar’s or the Black Mammoth. 

11. Wages were more likely $4 per day based on records from the 1930s. 

12. George Wingfield had twelve banks in Nevada that were closed in 1932. Russell 
R. Elliott, History of Nevada (Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press, 
1973), 285-289. 

13. Shamberger, 80-81. 

14. WCRM, 3-37 

15. Black Mammoth leased all of the properties from the Pittsburg group, and it was 
through Vollmar’s financial maneuvering that those properties were eventually leased 
to Cord. This came about through a person with ties to both Vollmar Jr. and Cord— 
Basil Prescott, Cord’s personal engineer and a consulting engineer to Black Mam¬ 
moth. Prescott owned the Prescott lease from the Black Mammoth Company, and it 
appears that this lease was transferred to Cord. Shamberger, 80. 


5. Ford, Leon Hill oral history, 55. 

6. It is possible that the names Vollmar Mill (flotation) and Black Mammoth Mill 
(cyanide) were used interchangeably. Leon reported that he knew both mills under 
the Black Mammoth name. Bob Douglass said he helped build “Vollmar’s Mill.” 
However, Douglass must have worked on the Black Mammoth Mill, because he 
reported graduating from high school in 1933. By then the Vollmar Mill had been in 



6 


Community Life 


While the men worked around the clock in a growing variety of jobs, a 
family town with more women and children developed in Silver Peak. Lei¬ 
sure hours found them enjoying picnics and potluck dinners on the playa, 
arranging progressive dinners with neighbors, playing softball and baseball 
games, and swimming in the reservoir. Community-wide activities such as 
these tightened the bonds between family and friends. In fact, some families 
intermarried and joined together in business ventures, further investing in 
Silver Peak’s survival. 

The population grew to 655 in 1940 with a friendly mixture of Serbs, 
Native Americans, one Mexican, and other ethnic groups: 

They all seemed to be friends every day but Saturday night. . . when 
the fights started, and that didn’t have anything to do with nation¬ 
ality .... They also had a colored family there, a fellow by the 
name of Johnson. He was a very nice fellow. He did odd jobs around 
there—shined shoes and stuff like that. He had a family. I didn’t 
have brains enough to be biased. I don’t think anybody else around 
there did. We figured they were just people. 1 

In the era before television, children made their own fun. Adults who 
spent their childhood in Silver Peak reported feeling a sense of freedom that 
helped them develop confidence and independence while still being secure 
in a small community where everyone looked out for each other’s welfare. 

By 1938 the town had a high school. According to its yearbook there 
was also a beauty shop, dairy, cafe with air-conditioning, and a baseball field. 
The old railroad bed became the road leading from Silver Peak to Tonopah, 
Hawthorne, and Bishop. Automobiles and radios linked Silver Peak with 
the outside world. As historian Steven Mehls said, Silver Peak was isolated 
but not insulated. 2 




Gathering at the swimming hole. In the water, left to right, Bob Godfrey, Bob 
Chiatovich, Leon Hill, and an unidentified man. (Photograph courtesy of Leon Hill.) 


The following oral history interviews trace the town’s progress from a 
mining camp to a family town, complete with stores, schools, recreation, 
and entertainment. Along the way a few infamous incidents stretched into 
Silver Peak legends. 


- -O - 

BOB DOUGLASS: LIFE OF A SINGLE MAN 

Bob Douglass lived in a one-bedroom, adobe building with a carpenter during the 
months it took to build Vollmar’s Mill. He remembered drinking, dancing, and 
fighting when he wasn’t working. 

I’d say the population of Silver Peak was maybe five, six hundred. This 
was in the 1930s, but it was booming out there. These places [like Silver 
Peak] were the only payrolls around. It was a good job for us. Somehow we 
never had any money, but we had a lot of fun. 

I lived across the street next to the Smith brothers’ store in a one-bed- 
room, adobe place with Eddie Johnson, a carpenter on the job. To me he was 
an old man. I think he was about sixty years old. But he used to worry him- 
self to death about my safety, because I was just a kid, and I’d be tripping and 
falling over the banisters and everything else. It was hard to find a place to 
stay in Silver Peak. We paid, I think, sixty dollars a month for the two of us. 

Right across the street was the boardinghouse owned by Perry White 
and Mrs. Brown. And they lived together, but Mrs. Brown ran the restau- 
rant and Perry White ran the bar. He also used to have a mail run between 
Tonopah and Manhattan. They had to be a jack-of-all-trades, you know. 
There must have been about twenty-five or thirty of us kids that were build' 
ing that mill. She always used to make lemonade in giant washtubs, and we 





would come in and drink three or four tubs of lemonade, [laughter] A meal 
would cost about fifty cents. I know the drinks in the bars cost us fifteen 
cents. There were no parades and celebrations, not until after I left, and 
then they used to have a lot of them. 

Dancing, Drinking, and Fighting 


125 


Community 

Life 


My brother Jack Douglass had jukeboxes in Silver Peak. He had a Model 
T Ford and three or four jukeboxes. There were two brothers down here, and 
they were bootlegging out in Sparks. Louie Benetti was a brother of Angelo 
Benetti, and Angelo Benetti got in the slot machine business. Louie thought, 
“Well, I can get into it, too,” but Louie couldn’t hardly laugh in English, 
[laughter] So he got a hold of Jack, and they started the Nevada Novelty 
Company, and they went from there. Jack had all of the southern Nevada 
route—slot machines, jukeboxes, and everything else in there. 

Everything was on the cuff down there. The bar was on the cuff. If you 
wanted to go in the bar and get a drink, old Perry just marked it down, so 
when Vollmar came along with the paycheck, there was nothing left. We 
just spent it all down there. 

There was nothing else to do out there. We could have a dance. We’d 
get the schoolteacher and the Shirley girls .... There were three Shirley 
girls: Virginia married Harvey Humphrey, Ethel married Hank Gilbert, and 
there was Jane Shirley. Well, the Shirley girls worked for Ma Brown along 
with her daughter. The Chiatovich girl and three or four different girls were 
around there, too. There were twenty of us kids, and we’d go in that bar 
where my brother had a jukebox, and we’d have a dance galore. 

Oh, we’d have our fights all the time. If we couldn’t get along, we’d go 
out there and fight. You’d get beat up, or somebody ought to beat you up. 
What the hell is the difference? You didn’t care. You shook hands and went 
on with the dance. Nobody threw us in jail for anything. If they threw us in 
jail, we’d still be there, [laughter] I was just a young kid, but I was involved 
in the fights. All of us were involved with them. 


- -O - 


MERLE SWANSON: ALWAYS WILLING TO HELP 

When Merle Swanson arrived, Silver Peak was a town changing from a rough- 
and-tumble mining camp to a more civilized family town. It was an exciting time of 
hard work punctuated by wild events. 


I kind of liked Silver Peak when I first went there in 1936 or 1937. I 
didn’t know how quick I’d get to work. We had a pickup and stuff to make a 
camp, so I said to my wife, “Where would be a good place to go?” because 
you could park about anywhere. 




Silver Peak in 1938. Buildings and locations as follows: 1, Main Street; 2, Stanley 
Chiatovich’s house; 3 and 4, Fitzgerald’s; 5, S. Lewis’s; 6 and 7, Fitzgerald’s; 8, Palace 
Bar; 9, Shirley’s hall; 10, Gilbert’s; 11, Northern Supply; 12, Schoolhouse; 13, 
Teacher’s home; 14, Sommers’s; 15, Post Office; 16, Beauty parlor; 17, Stark’s sa¬ 
loon; 18, Woitishek Lumber Co.; 1 9, Black Mammoth company house; 20, Vollmar 
home; 21, Black Mammoth company office; 22, Fayette Hill’s; 23, Kenneth Hill’s; 
24, Mrs. Shirley’s; 25, Butcher shop; 26, Louis Shirley’s; 27, Silver Peak Club; 
28, Cameron’s; 29, Phil Bissonnette’s; 30, Hospital; 31, Black Mammoth Cafe; 
32, Swimming pool; 33, Ball diamond; 34 and 35, Unidentified. (Photograph cour¬ 
tesy of Barbara Dodgion.) 


She said, “Oh, I’d like to be down there where that big tree is.” 

There were four or five guys there, and I said, “You guys got this ground 
here?” 

They said, “We got squatter’s rights. We own this lot.” 

So I asked, “How much will it take for you guys to move off?” 

They said a quart of whiskey, [laughter] I went and got the quart of whis¬ 
key. Later on we built a house there on that property, which was down where 
the store used to be. [laughter] Then we moved that house up to Hawthorne 
when the mines closed down in 1942. 

Drinking and Fighting 

One night these two guys got in a fight, and one took a knife, and he cut 
the other guy’s stomach open. Another fellow, Swanburg, was watching and 
ran down to his house as fast as he could. He didn’t have time to explain to 
his wife what happened, but he grabbed the bed sheet and ran back up. They 
wrapped the guy in it, and they took him to the nearest doctor in Tonopah. 







His wife thought he’d gone crazy. When Swanburg came back, his wife 
and daughter had moved out of the house. He was pretty well liquored up, 
and he started throwing things out of the house, [laughter] He threw a bucket 
of water right through a trailer house parked nearby. The next morning I 
said to the trailer owner, “Why didn’t you hit him and stop that?” 

He said, “Merle, I couldn’t. He was weaving too much.” [laughter] But 
they saved the guy’s life by wrapping him in that bed sheet. 


127 


Community 

Life 


Businesses in Silver Peak 


We had quite a few businesses there in Silver Peak. The one quality 
store was Hank Gilbert’s, and we had a couple of restaurants. We weren’t 
short of bars: there must have been at least five or six. They had the one post 
office. It’s still up there. There were a couple of grocery stores right close to 
Hank Gilbert’s clothing store. 

We also had a salesman there who sold Plymouth and Dodge cars. In 
fact, I bought my first new car in Silver Peak from that salesman back when 
the first 1939s come out. I give $950 for it. That was a real good little car. It 
would go seventy miles an hour in second gear. 

I always enjoyed Silver Peak while I was here. My wife liked Silver Peak, 
too, and she made friends there. It was different from other towns. The people 
were much more friendly than they are in most places. They were raised to 
help you. I remember one winter after we had the house built, we saw this 
tent on fire. We ran up there, and this little girl, about five months old, she 
even had ice in her hair, and that tent was ruined. So we brought them 
down to our place, my wife and I, and we made beds all over the floors. So 
then I put the husband, Merril Thompson, to work. 

The people in Silver Peak were always willing to help you, and we were 
always together. One would suggest something and then talk it over with 
the others, and pretty soon we’d all be doing something, like when we moved 
that school building into town. Time went by pretty fast, and we all enjoyed 
one another. 


- -O - 

LEON HILL: LUN AND TOWN LEGENDS 

Leon Hill did not attend school in Silver Peak, but he spent much of his childhood 
and youth there. The Hill family lived between Silver Peak and Goldfield during 
the 1930s. His oral history reveals a time when people relied on each other and 
created their own fun. He and his family played an instrumental role in changing 
Silver Peak from a mostly male mining town to a family'Oriented community. 
Town legends reflect the growing sense of community formed during this time. 



Commuting for School 


128 


Community 


Life 


Our family had a house and lived in Goldfield where we could attend 
school. My dad worked in Silver Peak and came back and forth, and the 
family went to Silver Peak to be with him on weekends .... Grandpa [Os¬ 
car] Hill lived in a house in Silver Peak, which he had built half under¬ 
ground like a sod house, and it looked like these igloos out at the depot in 
Hawthorne. He had a garage on top of the ground adjoining it for his old 
Model T Ford. A stairway went from the garage down into the house. He 
lived back up next to the hills, and he was the only one who lived up there, 
not too far from the cemetery. His mine was out in back of his house. He 
used to go up there and dig, make a few feet, then go home and rest. He may 
have gotten something out of it in the early days. I asked, “Is there any gold 
in it?” 

He said, “Sure, but there’s too much rock.” [laughter] 


Family Life 


My father [Fayette Hill, superintendent of the Black Mammoth Mill] 
was very involved in the family and was the most good-natured man, yet he 
was strict. We always had dinner together up until the time we got big enough 
to leave home. You could hear him laugh all over town, and everybody en¬ 
joyed him. He was always turning the hose on somebody or some darn thing. 
Not at work: he didn’t joke around at work, but he had a real playful side. 
Like sometimes my sister Gerry didn’t want to get up when he called her in 
the morning. In the summertime she’d sleep out on the screened porch be¬ 
cause it was cooler. So he’d just dump a bucket of water out the window on 
her head! [laughter] My dad always was so humorous in a lot of ways, and he 
enjoyed everything. He didn’t drink at all. He didn’t even drink coffee or 
tea, nor did he smoke, [laughter] He just liked people. 

He’d be out playing ball and taking care of his family, but if somebody 
had something that was broken, they wouldn’t hesitate to take it to my dad. 
He’d always fixed it, and there was never a charge. For example, my wife’s 
folks had a washing machine sitting outside. Around Silver Peak there’s a 
lot of dirt blowing with no grass to hold it down. The washer was one of 
these old types with an agitator inside and a wringer on top. The sand that 
blew into the machine had worked a hole in the pulley, which was made out 
of pot metal. Her dad said, “I can’t get a pulley like this. Do you think your 
dad could weld this?” 

You can’t weld pot metal or it will explode, but I took it up to Dad 
anyway, and he said, “I’ll make a new one.” So he went down to the dump, 
found an old piece of iron, stuck it in a lathe, and made one. When I took it 
down to Wilma’s dad, he wouldn’t believe that Dad hadn’t bought that some¬ 
where. But that’s the sort of thing people did. It wasn’t only my dad. 



Vacation by Automobile 


When you worked seven days a week (and back in those days you did 
that a lot), you got paid for seven days a week. If you got five dollars a day, 
you got that every day. They let you off on Christmas and the Fourth of July, 
but you were docked. Sometimes you’d get lucky and get three days a year off 
with Thanksgiving. You didn’t get holiday pay, and you didn’t have any sick 
leave either. As mill superintendent my dad always got a good vacation. His 
was a month off. The people who worked at the mines, most of them only 
got a week. Those who worked at the mill, I think they got one week after a 
year, and after about five years they got a couple of weeks. 

During summer vacation we all went with Dad on a trip. We would 
generally go to San Francisco, because my mother’s mother and her sister 
were there. We liked to go down there, because we liked to go on the beach. 
Sometimes we’d go by way of Yosemite, and sometimes we’d go by Donner. 
We always had a car, back when a lot of people were still using horses, be- 
cause my dad could fix anything. We had an Oakland, and we had several 
Franklins (those were air cooled, didn’t have a radiator), and we had an old 
Studebaker and a Star. This was really something to see! There were eight of 
us kids .... And on all the fenders and running boards we piled beds, clothes, 
et cetera. You had a cloth top, so you didn’t put anything up there, but on 

the back you often had what we 
called a trunk rack, where you 
could tie stuff. Then in the back 
seat—these cars were long and 
there was quite a space between 
the front and the back seat—they 
put the grub sacks and grub boxes 
and the cooking utensils. 

Early Childhood Deaths 

Two members of our family 
died at a young age. My sister 
Mary died when she was probably 
ten. She got pneumonia and 
passed away in 1937, which was 
after I was married. My oldest 
brother, Fayette Jr., died when he 
was twenty-three. He got perito- 
nitis. Out at Silver Peak he lifted 
an ore car and strained himself, 
or thought it was just a strain, so 
he took a physic, and then it got 
worse. He finally went to 



Leon Hill on vacation in San Francisco. 
(Photograph courtesy of Gerry Cooper.) 


129 


Community 

Life 





130 


Community 


Life 


Tonopah, because there wasn’t any doctor in Silver Peak. Dr. Craig over in 
Tonopah operated on him, but by that time he had peritonitis. It spread all 
through his body. 

If Fayette hadn’t taken a physic . . . but back in those days that was the 
thing: it was castor oil or Epsom salts, a laxative. We relied on home rent' 
edies a lot. Every spring we had to take sulfur and molasses. It was supposed 
to thin our blood, and we had to take it, too. Boy, I hated that! I stepped on 
a nail once and put peroxide on it. I didn’t even know there was such a thing 
as a tetanus shot. 


Saturday Night Dances 

No matter what, there was a Saturday night dance. Everybody went. 
The saloons were the only places with enough space, so it was either at one 
saloon or the other. They had one over at Shirley’s and another over at Perry 
White’s. Sometimes we had live music, otherwise it was a jukebox. 

Miners were a very independent lot. They were pretty proud, too. They 
played hard, and they worked hard. I don’t know why they worked so hard 
for their money, because they just threw it away. They’d buy drinks for the 
whole bar. They didn’t even know who was in there half the time. That’s 
why they were always broke. 

Things would be going along, and people would be happy, and then 
somebody’d walk up to someone else with a pair of scissors. He’d reach up 
and say, “Do you want this tie?” And he’d cut it off and hand it to him. 
Pretty soon somebody’d come by, and he’d grab him by the collar and jerk 
his shirt off, and, oh, the next thing you know everybody was fighting. They 
didn’t even know who they were fighting half the time, so one guy would 



“They had one [dance] over at Shirley’s and one over at Perry White’s.” Shirley’s bar in 
Silver Peak, owned by John Shirley (background left with white shirt and dark tie) 
and Anna Shirley (to the left of the woman in the flowered dress.) (Photograph 
courtesy of Sherry Mattei.) 




turn around and slug the guy next to him, and away they would go. Most 
everybody had a little bloody nose or a little ache here and there the next 
day. 


131 


Organized Sports 

In 1938 Silver Peak had a women’s softball team that won the state 
championship. That was softball, so they had ten players, and that took 
about every available woman in Silver Peak, [laughter] Of course, most of 
them were young. The older ones didn’t want to get involved with all those 
practices, because they had a husband to cook for and children—they had to 
take care of their wifely duties. My sister Gerry was seventeen, and she played 
on the team. I believe Dorothy Winifrey was about thirteen or fourteen. My 
wife was about twenty. And Olive .... I thought she was elderly, but she 
was probably in her late twenties or early thirties, [laughter] At that time I 
was only about twenty-one. She was the oldest one. Oh, and Kathleen 
Spaethe. She married Jimmy Morris later, after he was divorced and she was 
out of high school, but just barely. So basically they were a high school team. 

Oh, they had a heck of a team! Their coach, Walt Lyle, he was a real 
tough coach. He worked for the power company. And he kept their nose to 
the grindstone. They played after they got off work or whenever they could 
do it. They played the towns around like Tonopah, Battle Mountain, Round 
Mountain—places that weren’t too far away. That team became state charm 
pions. They went to Reno, and the mayor 3 introduced them on the radio 
and had an award for them. 

The men also had a soft- 
ball team, a baseball team, 
and basketball teams, but 
these we made up ourselves. 

We’re just a bunch of guys 
who got together that liked 
to play. We didn’t have 
coaches or anything like 
that. If somebody around 
Goldfield or Tonopah or 
Manhattan had a team, we’d 
go play ball with them. We 
had no gym, so we were 
forced to play at the town of 
the challenging team. We 
played regularly, but it was 
very unorganized in that you 
never knew who was going 
to play—whoever wasn’t on 
a shift at that time when we 



The 1938 state champion Silver Peak softball team. 
Back row, left to right: Unidentified, Rosie Lano, 
unidentified, Coach Walt Lyle, Gerry Cooper, Olive ?, 
Kathy Spaethe. Front row, left to right: Unidenti¬ 
fied, Wilma Hill, Joanne Hall, unidentified. (Pho¬ 
tograph courtesy of Leon Hill.) 


Community 

Life 



132 


Community 


Life 


were playing, [laughter] The mill ran twenty-four hours a day, and some of 
the time the mines would operate sixteen hours a day, so shift work really 
affected sports, but it didn’t stop us. It’s surprising how old some of the guys 
were. We had guys playing who were probably fortyTive, fifty. Back then I 
thought they were ancient. 

Silver Peak was a real community deal. We played backyard (or sandlot) 
baseball at night out on the flats, and pretty soon everybody in town was out 
there. Everybody knew everyone, and they’d bring whatever they had to eat. 
They would share, and, heck, sometimes I don’t think there were a half 
dozen people left in town. We played both softball and baseball. Men, women, 
boys, girls—you’d be surprised at the people who’d be playing at some of 
those games. Like my dad might be on second base, and my sister might be 
the catcher [laughter]. 


Recreation 


In summer, swimming either in the reservoir or out in the big hole in 
the playa was a necessity. When people came home from work, generally 
speaking, that’s what they would do to clean up. They’d go down there, take 
soap with them and a bath towel, scrub up, and take a swim .... Although 
some people made their own showers at home. What they would do is put a 
barrel or something on the roof, hoist the water up, and dump it in this 
thing. Then the sun would heat it during the day, and when they came 
home at night they could take a shower. 

The ones that used the reservoir for bathing generally would go into 
that stone building that’s still there. It was a jail later. It was open and had a 
dirt floor. A lot of times there’d be horses in there, but the horses didn’t care 
if you changed your clothes in front of them, [laughter] If there were no 



“The ones that used the reservoir for bathing generally would go into that stone building 
that’s still there." (Photograph courtesy of the Nevada Historical Society.) 



women around, the young guys would go in the water without swimming 
suits. I did. We’d a lot rather do that, because it’s easier to take a bath with- 
out a bathing suit on. [laughter] 

Most of the swimming was at the reservoir, because the swimming hole 
out in the playa was salty. Sometimes when we had organized ball games out 
there, the backstop itself was not very far from there. It would get real hot, 
so people would wear a bathing suit, and they’d go jump in the pool and cool 
off once in a while. The players didn’t do that: the spectators got to do that. 

In the wintertime we could skate or ski. There was a lake at Silver Peak 
from the overflow of the reservoir that would usually freeze hard enough in 
the winter to skate on. The lake was only about three feet deep at the deep- 
est. We would build a fire of wood and old truck tires on the edge of the lake 
and have a great skating rink and a lot of fun. 

There was a lot of snow on the mountains in the wintertime, because 
the mountains were pretty high. In fact, we made a lot of our own skis. We 
learned how to make them one time when Goldfield was snowed in for 
twenty-six days during a bad winter. One snowplow was coming from Tonopah 
and one from Goldfield with cars following them, and they would meet, and 
then each snow plow would turn around and go back. That way the cars 
could get from one place to the other. But when the wind was blowing so 
hard all the time (evidently we were in part of a blizzard, I think that was 
1932), that hole would keep filling up. 

A fellow from Minnesota was stranded in Goldfield while his car was in 
the shop getting worked on, but he had to get back to his business. So in 
that same shop (it was a blacksmith’s shop, too), he made himself a pair of 
skis and took off.... While he was making his skis, I was watching him, 
because I was real interested in what he was doing. He made himself a pair of 
poles, too. He got a couple of sticks, and he smoothed them up, and then got 
a couple of kid’s wheels that they had on a toy car or on their little wagons, 
and he put those wheels on there. 

What you do to make skis is take about a one-by-four or a one-by-six, 
and then you trim it down the way you want it with the pointed toe. You’d 
put that end of it in boiling water and leave it in this hot water for hours, 
and then you could bend up the tip. Then you put it on a board. They had a 
way of bracing it and hooking it up there until it dried, and it would dry that 
way. Then you’d groove it and wax it. We didn’t have clamps for your shoes 
like they had later. All we had was a toe strap that you slid your foot into. 
Sometimes you’d lose that. We tried to avoid jumps as much as possible, 
although sometimes you’d go where there was a cut in the side of the hill, 
and you’d take off. If you were lucky, you landed straight up and nothing 
would hurt you. Mostly you landed down. We weren’t very proficient. 

And he put a real wax job on the skis. He ironed it in. He used the type 
of iron that you heat on a stove like my mom used .... You could take the 
wooden handle off one flat iron and hook it onto another one. A clamp 
would hold it by snapping it in there. 


133 


Community 

Life 



134 


Community 


Life 


Another winter activity was sledding. It’s a wonder somebody didn’t 
lose a leg, because we took galvanized iron, which comes in sheets about 
three feet wide and eight feet long, and we would turn it up a little bit on the 
end so it wouldn’t catch in the snow and put a cable through there. Then 
we’d tie it behind Nobby Pergrossi’s car, and he’d tow us around town, and 
we’d ride on that sucker. If the guy in front were to fall off, with the weight 
of the back people sitting on there, that could have sawed his leg off. Later 
we started using a ladder, because people who had better sense than we did 
kept hollering at us until we finally quit using the galvanized iron, [laughter] 

To use a ladder, we had to make the front runners ... so you can saw 
each leg on a forty-five degree angle. The ladder acted as our runners. Still, 
a lot of times that front end would stick into the snow. We tried to stay on 
the roadway, because that way the snow was packed, but sometimes when 
he’d turn the car around or something, then it’d get into a snow bank and 
throw all that snow all over! [laughter] The roads would be kind of like ruts. 
If you came down that middle, boy, you had the deeper snow coming up on 
the backside of you; you got pretty cold, [laughter] We just sat on it, but 
what we’d usually do is put a blanket or something down there to try to keep 
some of the snow off. You had to improvise. We didn’t have anything else, 
[laughter] 

Most kids rode burros for fun, too. Early in the life of mining, they moved 
the ore with burros. Even in the deep mines, like over in Goldfield, they’d 
put the burros down a shaft, and then they’d have carts down there, and the 
burros would pull carts back and forth from the face to the skip. That was 
before they had the power trams to pull the ore cars. There were a lot of 
burros around that became available to the kids when the miners took out 



Sledding on a ladder. Left to right: Leon Hill, Bob Godfrey, George Muller, and Jack 
Chiatovich. The Black Mammoth Mill is in the background. (Photograph courtesy 
of Leon Hill.) 




[left town]. They just turned their burros loose, and people claimed them. 
Sometimes the mines would sell them to kids. 

When I was just a little guy, probably seven or eight, I had one named 
Beauty. He wasn’t a beauty by any means. I only paid two dollars for him, but 
I cleaned a lot of yards and stuff to get that two bucks. I thought that was the 
greatest burro! On the Fourth of July they’d have burro races and horse races 
for kids and adults. That’s how they made their fun, and I’d pretty near 
always win the speed contest and the bucking contest, [laughter] All you 
had to do was to put your feet in his flanks, and, boy, he’d buck, [laughter] 


135 


Community 

Life 


Radio and Newspapers 


There were radios in a lot of the cars, and we had radios in our house 
after I was married. (This was way before TV in our part of the country.) You 
couldn’t get any reception in the daytime at all, but at night you could get 
the strong stations like KCL radio and some of those big power stations like 
Salt Lake City and San Francisco and Los Angeles. Those had strong sig- 
nals, but just at night, and that’s how we got the national news. The first 
radio we had was one that had earphones on it, a crystal set. You got a lot of 
squeaking and squawking. At Christmastime my brother was working some¬ 
place, and he bought a Philco—one of those old, table models that was 
about one to three feet high, rounded at the top. Then later on when we got 
radio stations in Fallon, you could start picking up a little bit during the 
daytime sometimes. They say that one of the reasons reception was so bad at 
Silver Peak was because there was so much metal in that area that it inter- 
fered with the radio waves. The radio didn’t change how we spent our free 
time, because you didn’t get very good reception. At night you’d get the 
Fibber McGee and Molly show, but if people had something else to do, they 
didn’t let radio interfere with it. 

We didn’t get a lot of news, but we had a Goldfield paper and a Tonopah 
paper. The Goldfield paper you got once a week, and the Tonopah paper . . . , 
you had to go to Tonopah and get it. I think maybe that’s one of the reasons 
why we didn’t know the bad things that happened in the world, because 
nobody ever told us! [laughter] 


Famous Schoolhouse Episode 

One Halloween night I heard all this excitement, and when I went up 
to see what’s going on, I saw the schoolhouse come through town on J immy 
Morris’s big flatbed truck. Dad raised the power lines. Stanley Chiatovich 
sat up on top of the house and rang the bell all the way down the street, 
[laughter] Well, you’d have to know something was going on in a little town 
like that! 



The school had been 
placed four miles outside of 
Silver Peak, because it had 
to be forty miles away from 
Goldfield, or else Silver Peak 
couldn’t have its own school. 
Otherwise, children from 
Silver Peak would have to go 
to Goldfield and Tonopah. 

People were accustomed 
to moving houses. More than 
half the houses in Silver Peak 
were probably moved from 
Goldfield or Tonopah or 
Rhyolite or someplace. 
When they moved to an- 
other mine, it was a lot cheaper to take their home along. This schoolhouse 
wasn’t very big. It was a one-room schoolhouse, so they just drove up there 
and jacked it up a little bit, put some barrels under it, and let it down. It was 
just a light house, and so it didn’t take anything to jack it up, and they just 
backed the truck under it, let it down on the truck, and away they went. 

I know that Howard Haskin was there and Roy Cleary, Stanley 
Chiatovich, and another one. I think one of the Shirleys was there—prob- 
ably Ernie, because they had a kid in school. They were probably getting 
tired of hauling the kids out of town four miles to go to school every day. 
Then, every day they had to go get them after school. 

Afterwards, all the county commissioners got a little upset, so they had 
a hearing, [laughter] Tom Whyte was the justice of the peace for Silver Peak. 
He found everybody guilty of disturbing the peace and charged them a buck. 
And so, the schoolhouse stayed. 

The Max Baer-Ed Murphy Fight 

When I was twenty-one or twenty-two (Wilma and I were married then), 
we had a seat right in the front row for the Max Baer-Ed Murphy fight in 
1938 or 1939. Everybody in town went, and some of the people from Tonopah 
and Goldfield came out to watch. Of course, Ed Murphy was a Tonopah boy, 
and Max Baer was a world-famous fighter. He was a world champ once, and 
then he got to playing around, and he lost it. In the Stockton-Sacramento 
area where he fought, he used to go to the bar there and make bets that he 
could knock out a mule or a bull with one blow, and he did. He won a lot of 
bets that way, they say. He was a powerful hitter. 

Baer agreed to come to Silver Peak and fight for a thousand bucks. He 
was going to take it easy on Murphy. They went along sparring each other, 
and I really think that Murphy got the idea that he might be able to lick 


136 



“One Halloween night. . . I saw the schoolhouse come 
through town on Jimmy Morris’s big flatbed truck. . . . 
People were accustomed to moving houses. ” Frank and 
Fayette Hill using Frank’s trucks to move buildings. 
(Photograph courtesy of Gerry Cooper.) 





Baer. So he smacked him one, and I think it was reflex action with Max 
Baer. A lot of people said he hit him with a left, and some people said he hit 
him with a right, but I’m positive he hit him with both! Baer hit Murphy 
with a left and set him up, and then hit him with that right, and he went 
down, whop! Just like that! His head was turned, and I was sitting where I 
looked right in his eyes. I thought he was dead and, by golly, so did Max 
Baer. They started to count. They got to about five, and Baer said, “For 
God’s sake, stop counting! Find a doctor!” 

They got a doctor, and they got him up. He was still out though, and I 
heard afterwards that he didn’t remember a thing that happened after he got 
hit until about a day and a half later. He moved around, he did things, he 
talked to people, but he said he couldn’t remember a thing. Well, if you can 
knock a bull out.... I’ve seen bulls shot with a twenty-five caliber pistol 
right up close. They don’t even bat an eye! [laughter] So Baer had to have a 
powerful punch. 

I don’t think he meant to hit him that hard. I think there had been an 
agreement that Baer would be fighting a hometown boy and would take it 
easy. That’s what Freddy Fields said afterwards. Freddy was the one who 
promoted this thing, too. He’s the one who pushed Murphy. Well, Murphy 
was good at fighting with local people. I think that they planned on a good 
show for the public. I wasn’t aware of any betting. You’d have a hard time 
getting a bet. I know I sure wouldn’t have bet against Baer, [laughter] But 
maybe some of the local Tonopah people might have bet on Murphy. 


137 


Community 

Life 


Crater on Fire 


A long time ago Jim Cleary had the finest team of horses in the country. 
He was always kind of scared of things. Well, a story came out about how 
that crater outside of Silver Peak was one of the last to become extinct. 
Then Vollmar and Ernie Shirley and some of those other old-timers, they 
went out, and they hauled in a bunch of wood and some gas and some rubber 
and some green things. They built a fire in the cone of that crater, [laughter] 
When that smoke came up, and Jim Cleary saw that, he got his team, and he 
took off for Fish Lake Valley, [laughter] They said he liked to run that team 
to death, because he thought that volcano was ready to blow up. 

Casey Sisters 

Another thing we did to amuse ourselves when a new person or some¬ 
body we didn’t know came into town, they had what they called the Casey 
sisters trick. There were two fictitious girls, the Casey sisters, and they were 
very attractive girls, and it was real nice to have a date with them if you 
could. But their father was a mean old son-of-a-gun, and so people didn’t 
dare go out there when he was there. He happened to be gone on this par¬ 
ticular night, so this guy from Silver Peak would ask a new fellow, “Since 



138 


Community 


Life 


you’re my buddy, and you’re new here, I’ll take you along and introduce 
you.” A lot of times they would take a box of candy or something. 

They would get out there, and they would knock on the door, and the 
fellow that was the guide, he’d holler, “Hey Susie, everything OK?” It’s dark 
outside, and it’s dark inside the house, except they’d have a candle burning 
in the back. About that time the door would open, and a guy’d jump out 
with a shotgun. “So you’re the so-and-so who’s been fooling around with my 
girl.” He hauls off and shoots that shotgun in the air, and you’d be surprised 
how fast people can travel, [laughter] Scare off the newcomer. 

I was there one night when this happened. This guy came out there, and 
he’s a big fat fellow, and he didn’t have much hips. He was wearing one of 
these old straw hats they used to have, the hard-rib type and hard crown. He 
was all dressed up, and he had this hat on, and he had a box of candy in one 
hand and a bottle of booze in the other. When they shot at him he took off. 
Well, he was afraid he was going to lose his pants, so he dropped the candy, 
and he held on to his belt. Then he was afraid he was going to lose his hat, so 
he dropped the bottle and held on to his hat with his other hand, [laughter] 
He went across the tailings pond which was by my folks’ house or just below 
it. There was a burro laying there, and he stumbled over the burro and went 
down. He claimed afterwards that he stumbled over a jackrabbit instead of a 
burro, so from then on his name was Jackrabbit Kelly. 


- -O - 


SARAH GRABLE: THE MOUNT FAMILY 

One unique experience for children from a big city was to spend summer vacation 
in Silver Peak visiting grandparents, much as today’s children head off to summer 
camps. Lloyd and Martha 
Mount operated a dairy in Sil¬ 
ver Peak, and three of their 
grandchildren related a variety 
of experiences, all with the com¬ 
mon thread of great freedom 
and great fun. Sarah Grable is 
the daughter of Ward Mount 
and first cousin to Keith Mount 
and Nancy Adams. Sarah lived 
in Silver Peak for a short time 
as a child. In her oral history 
she gave detailed information 
on her family’s background, 
along with descriptions of her 
grandparents and of the Silver 
Peak grammar school. Sarah Grable - ( Ph °tograph by Victoria Ford.) 















Family Background 


I was born August 4, 1936, in Pasadena, California. Both Mother and 
Dad were living in Silver Peak, but my maternal grandparents objected to 
their first grandchild and their only daughter’s child being born in such a 
horrible place. My grandfather would look at this horrible desert and the 
cows and the dirt and the bugs and think, “You can’t raise a child there, and 
there’s not adequate schooling.” My mother had been a classical musician, 
and they were concerned that I was being deprived of those things. 

The Mounts were out of Kentucky. Great-grandfather Mount (I believe 
his name was Fletcher) was a U.S. Marshal and was sent to Utah to clean up 
the Mormon bigamy at the turn of the century. Fletcher’s son, my Grandfa¬ 
ther Lloyd, met Martha (my grandmother) there. Her parents had come 
from Scotland, and they were good Mormons. He fell in love with Grandma, 
which was considered wrong, because his father was out there to clean up 
the bigamy. She, of course, left her family and the Mormon area and went 
off to follow her husband to the mining fields. 4 

My dad, Ward Fletcher Mount, was born in Ely. He went to California 
because his paternal grandfather had a trucking firm that contracted to in¬ 
stall the light standards in Los Angeles. Very lucrative. That’s where he met 
Mother. Dad went to private schools. He drove a La Salle or an Auburn or 
one of those snazzy automobiles . . . and this was Depression time. He was 
well-to-do, plus his parents were making good money. 

For Grandfather Lloyd, it was the glory of finding the gold. He had an 
old Ford truck called, “Dynamite.” It was painted red and had big, hard tires. 
He had a grub box. If you were lucky enough you could go with him and the 
dog and look for gold. It was just an exciting thing to do, and he would 
always come back with gold hunks. And there were some pretty big hunks at 
times—the size of the tip of my little finger. 

Oh, he was an expert. In 1957, 1958, 1959, he went to the university, 
and they would give him students to take with him mining. He hadn’t at¬ 
tended the School of Mines at the University of Nevada. He picked up his 
knowledge through experience. It was love. Even in his seventies he would 
get in that truck and go, and Grandmother would worry, but everybody felt 
that the dog would come home if anything happened to him. 

I know the Mounts were mining in that area .... The Mounts were not 
people who worked for anybody. They ran their own businesses like the dairy. 
Grandfather was always involved in politics wherever he went through the 
union-type activity, which seemed strange because they were so indepen¬ 
dent in contracting. But they were very much Democrats in their thinking. 
In Mineral County, Grandfather was elected to the Nevada State Legisla¬ 
ture in the early 1950s. Keith Mount, Nancy’s dad, was also in state legisla¬ 
ture. And they were in Lions Club—always active, always community 
minded. 


139 


Community 

Life 



140 



“The Mounts were not people who worked for anybody. They ran their own businesses like 
the dairy.” Ward Mount at the dairy in 1942. (Photograph courtesy of Sarah Grable.) 


Home in Silver Peak 

When I grew up, it was always called “The Peak.” I remember my 
grandmother’s house as big, but I look at the pictures, and it was very, very 
small. It was rectangular. There was the living room, and then directly be- 
hind that was the kitchen. It was partially concealed, so you couldn’t see the 
sink—partitioned off so you wouldn’t be looking at dirty dishes when you 
came in the front door. And there was one bedroom and an indoor bath- 
room. My parents’ house and my grandparents’ house were kind of L-shaped 
and there wasn’t a huge distance between these two: they were very close 
neighbors. 

Horses came to the back door to eat. There was a Dutch-type door, a 
double door slit in the middle. You could open just the top half or the bot- 
tom half, or you could connect them and open them both. And we’d open 
the top half for ventilation, and the horses would come there, and you could 
feed them carrots. I don’t think they were wild: they were gentle, or they 
had been broken. 

Out front there was a tree stump. I don’t remember a tree there, so the 
tree stump had to have been hauled in. And Grandmother would chop the 
chickens’ heads off with her little ax. In addition to raising chickens, the 
dairy was there. They milked the cows. In the corral were four feeding sta- 
tions and then six places in the back where they milk them. They would 
have walked the cows in head first. There were a lot of cows around, and 
they weren’t always in the pen, because I was allowed to feed the babies, and 
so the mother cows were confined. 


















They were milking by hand. I milked a lot of cows but never got any 
milk, [laughter] I couldn’t figure out how to do that. Grandfather or Dad 
would come by and squirt milk in my mouth for me. They told me, “Don’t 
stand behind a cow, because they could kick.” But if you were in the front, 
you weren’t in any danger from the cow. 

Children weren’t considered a bother. I don’t ever remember being run 
off or frightened. I could run in the desert. I could pick up lizards, tarantulas. 
I knew what a scorpion was and to stay away from them, but I’ve never been 
afraid of scorpions. I was taught never to reach on top of the rocks. Snakes 
get out there to warm themselves. The rattlers are above there, so don’t ever 
reach overhead where you can’t see what’s laying there. And that was not 
fear, it was just, “Be smart. Don’t go doing dumb things because there are 
rattlesnakes.” My parents and grandparents taught survival skills. But that 
was the miner in my grandfather. He’s out there wandering through the 
rocks, and you certainly wouldn’t want to worry about a child doing some- 
thing stupid. 


141 


Community 

Life 


Silver Peak School 


I went to school at the Silver Peak School, and I started school too 
young. Now, there was no kindergarten at that time. I believe it was first 
through sixth grade. I was the only child that was so young (I think four), so 
they figured, well, why doesn’t she just go to school for the companionship. 

It was a scary place. I did like it, but I was scared. There were two build- 
ings, and between the two buildings, as I remember, there was an outhouse. 
And the big boys would tell me if I went in there that they would either 
throw me in or I would fall down the hole. And I was scared to death, terror- 



Sarah with her maternal grandmother and her parents at her parents’ home in Silver 
Peak, 1932. (Photograph courtesy of Sarah Grable.) 






142 



Lloyd Mount with granddaughter Sarah at the reservoir. (Photograph courtesy of 
Sarah Grable.) 


ized by the big boys. I think I just was scared all the time. At one point, I 
don’t know if they had threatened me or they were behind me walking to 
school, or if I was walking home. I can remember running like a son of a gun 
and falling over a clump of rocks and opening up both knees. I took skin off. 
I was just pouring blood. Grandmother used her cure for everything. She 
used pure lanolin on my skinned knees, which stinks unbelievably, and she 
would put Lysol in the pure lanolin. I’m sure just the soap and water that 
washed it to begin with would have hurt more than the lanolin. 

I was scared of the teacher, Mrs. or Miss Chiatovich, not because she 
was vicious or mean or ugly. I was just very young and wanted to play. The 
teacher would stand up front, and you were not to look at the blackboards 
when it wasn’t your class time to look. Apparently, you did your board work, 
and then you had your desk work. There were three boards, and somehow 
those boards would slide around behind each other so only one was visible 
with schoolwork on it. It seems we were divided into three groups. If it wasn’t 
your turn to have board work, she would hit you with this long pointer that 
she used. (This is what I remember, and I wonder if it was really like that.) 

We had inkwells, and I was left-handed. We had the wooden pens that 
you put your own points in. We had songs that we sang. We sang “ABCD.” 
We did phonics. You sound it out. And I don’t remember anybody ever 
getting reprimanded for sounding out.... If you sounded it out right and 






you sounded all the letters, that was good even though you didn’t get to the 
word. The books .... I know it wasn’t Dick and jane, because I went into a 
California school for a couple of months, and they had Dick and jane, and I 
had not had it. It was strange, because it was very big words and very big 
pictures. So maybe we had the [McJGuffey Reader. 5 

There must have been a PTA or its equivalent, and they would have 
plays and all sort of activities. One event where the blackbirds were baked 
in a pie . . . , “Old King Cole was a merry old soul,” we acted those out. I was 
one of the blackbirds in the pie, and we all got down on the floor, and they 
cut the pie, and all the blackbirds flew out. That was very exciting, because 
I think that was probably one of the few times I had real group activities. 

Nobody had ever been strict with me. I was never hit. I was never told 
“no.” I was never reprimanded, abusively, anyway. I was told, “That wasn’t 
proper. You mustn’t do that. Ladies don’t do this. Why don’t you think be- 
fore you make that choice, not just because somebody else is doing it. You 
figure out whether you should do it.” So I was disciplined in an entirely 
different way. My dad never tolerated anyone being hit. My mother was the 
same way—very gentle. If they raised their voice, you stopped, because you 
knew there was something like a car was coming. 

Well, I was not protected from ordinary things. But Grandmother Mount 
said, “Ladies do not go in bars. Ladies do not drink. Ladies do not smoke. 
Ladies do not use curse words. Ladies get up every morning and comb their 
hair, brush their teeth, and present a very good picture to the world.” But 
the way Nance and her two brothers grew up was entirely different from 
me—different children, different parents, and the grandparents were the 
only tie. 

I remember going down the mining chute [like a slide], and I didn’t dare 
get caught to begin with because I wasn’t supposed to be there. And you 
couldn’t go up because there were splinters. There was a metal divider that I 
guess allowed only smaller rocks through, and if you didn’t lay down quick, 
you could cut your head off, or so I believed. So you had to come down quick 
and lay down to get under this. Very dangerous. Absolutely off limits. But 
cousin Nancy was two years older than I am, so she was a big kid, and when 
she was around I would go down the slide. 


143 


Community 

Life 


o 


KEITH MOUNT: RIDING, HUNTING AND FISHING 

Keith Mount, born in 1926 in Los Angeles, is also the grandson of Lloyd and 
Martha Lawson Mount. As a child Keith lived in Silver Peak with his family (his 
father Keith, mother Mabel, brother Bob, and sister Nancy) while his father mined. 
As a teenager he continued visiting his grandparents during the summers to help 
with the dairy. After the morning and evening chores were finished, Keith and his 



144 


Community 


Life 


brother caught burros or wild mustangs and roamed the countryside hunting and 
fishing, activities which developed into lifetime hobbies. At the time of his oral 
history interview, Keith was retired, living in Bridgeport, California, and working 
part-time as a fishing guide. 

The Mount Dairy 

My Grandfather Lloyd 
kept the pump down at the 
pond that pumped the water 
up to the Mary Mine. When 
we were going there in the 
summers, we used to ride the 
pipeline on horses and 
checked for leaks. Brother 
and I would do that. My 
grandfather was not a me¬ 
chanic, but he kept the elec- 
trie pump operating. I re- 
member the electric lines 
coming over and going into 
the pump shed. 

We also had a dairy later. They had five or six cows. We had to milk 
some of them every day. The dairy consisted of the corrals where the cows 
were kept and then a milk shed where the milk was taken and processed. 
Basically, it was dumped from the buckets into a Coca-Cola cooler, a chest- 
type cooler that kept the milk circulating and cold. It was approximately 
three feet by two feet and probably eighteen, twenty inches deep. It had 
folding doors on the top. The theory of the cooler was that it circulated cold 
water and kept the Cokes cool. They just put the milk in there instead of 
water and let it circulate which kept the milk cool, so it was not anything 
that was sanitary. We did wash it out when it was empty. The milk was raw 
milk, and we would bottle it, but first you skimmed off three or four inches of 
cream at the top of the bottles, so that you could sell cream. We delivered 
the bottles of milk around town. We weren’t old enough to get a driver’s 
license, but we did drive. It was the same as in any old mining town .... As 
soon as you learned to drive, why, you drove whether you were ten years old 
or what. There wasn’t anything unusual about that. The sheriff in town 
never bothered anybody. We didn’t do anything reckless. We were just basi¬ 
cally doing it out of necessity. We had a 1932 or 1933 Ford pickup, and that’s 
what we drove out to the junction. We drove there all the time, but my 
grandfather rode with us. The butter and cheese and other dairy products 
were brought there, and we had to go out to where the highway met the 
highway from Coaldale. I think there was a railroad stop out there where we 
picked up the stuff. They would drop it off probably once a week and leave it 






in big bags that were insulated with ice. We also used to go to Bishop in the 
pickup to get hay for the cows, and we drove over there once a month. 

We had chores to do. Chores included feeding the cows and milking the 
cows. It didn’t take very long—six cows, morning and night. If I were to 
guess, it probably wouldn’t take over an hour or two hours in the morning 
and the same at night to do it. When we weren’t doing that, why, we were 
kind of on our own. The inducement to come up in the summers (some- 
where in 1937, 1938, 1939) and help in the dairy was that you would get a 
saddle horse to ride. 


145 


Community 

Life 


Horses and Burros 


Nellie Coughlin, the lady that ran the power station, was an old witch. 
Any time the kids came around, she was out there with a broom chasing 
them off. Next to the powerhouse there was a fenced field. She had a jenny 
in that field, and it was just as mean as she was, because you couldn’t go 
through the field without getting chased off. 

Out in the area behind the power station was that salt-grass flats, and 
there were a lot of wild burros that ran out there. We used to go out and 
catch the burros and ride them. The burros were very smart—if you carried 
a rope, you never got close to them. But if you carried a little stick of hay, 
you could get right up to them, close enough to where we could get a hold of 
the mane and jump on. To steer the burro we’d take a piece of bailing wire 
and wrap it about a foot long so that it was kind of a switch. If you wanted to 
go to the left, you’d hit them 
on the right side and they’d 
turn to the left. And we’d 
ride them until they’d 
bucked us off, and then we’d 
go get another one and do 
the same thing. Supposedly, 
they belonged to this Nellie 
Coughlin, and when she 
caught us out there, we’d be 
in trouble. 

Perry White owned cor- 
rals about fifteen miles out 
of town. He owned a bar 
downtown, too. And when 
my brother and I had our 
horses, a number of times 
Perry would give us a nickel 
to go round up his horses. 

They would be out where 
the burros were eating, out 



“Supposedly, [the burros] belonged to this Nellie 
Coughlin, and when she caught us out there, we’d be 
in trouble.” (Photograph courtesy of Sherry 
Mattei.) 



146 


Community 


Life 


in the salt marshes. Granddad made a deal with Perry White. We went up 
there and trapped these wild horses and brought them back to town. At 
Granddad’s dairy, we put them in the corral with the cows, and Granddad 
broke the horses for us the first time. My grandfather was an old cowboy, so 
he knew what to do. At the end of the summers we’d turn the horses loose. 
In the wintertime they reverted to the wild, of course, and when we caught 
them again the next spring or the next summer, we had to basically top 
them off—they’re a little green when you get them back, and they want to 
buck, so you have to kind of start from scratch again. We’d let them run 
around the corral for a day with a sack of wheat in the saddle. Then we took 
the saddles off, and we rode them bareback almost all the time. We only had 
one saddle between us. 

In order to trap the horses each summertime, we had to go back out to 
the corrals, which was about fifteen, twenty miles out of town. And my dad 
would take us up there. We had to stay at the corrals. They had a shack up 
there at the corrals, but the shack had a lot of snakes in it, so we didn’t stay 
in the shed. We’d go down to the corral and sleep where the hay was kept. 
Now mind you, we were probably somewhere between ten and fourteen years 
old. They’d take us up there to the corrals, and then Dad would go back to 
town, and they would come back about four days later and pick us up. They 
left us with enough food and stuff for the three or four days that we were up 
there. 

The corral was rigged so that the spring fed into a trough right in the 
middle of the corral, and that’s where the horses watered all of the time. 
That’s why they came there: they all had to come at some time or another, 
because it was the only spring. When they’d come in at night, you had a wire 
you could pull, and that would close the gate. Then you’d wake in the morn- 
ing and find out if your horses were there. If they weren’t, why you’d turn 
those horses loose and wait until the next night. Sometimes in the middle of 
the night, you’d catch two or three bunches of them. 

But we got brave a couple of times. At least one time I decided to ride a 
couple of the horses that weren’t ours. I got on one of the horses, and he 
came out of the chute bucking. It bucked me off almost immediately. And, 
fortunately, instead of landing crossways on the trough, I landed longways in 
the trough. If I had landed across it, then I probably would have broke some- 
thing, and we would have been up there for another two or three days with- 
out anybody to help. When we told my dad about it, he was kind of mad, 
because he could see what the consequences would have been. 


Recreation 


I remember hunting in the marshes across the road from where we lived. 
The first time I went hunting over there, I borrowed a shotgun from the guy 
that lived up at the mill, kind of across the road from the house. It was a 10- 
gauge, double-barrel shotgun. I was just a young boy. The first time I shot it, 



it knocked me down. There was a telephone pole across the street, very 
close to the ditch that came out of the pool and went down into the marshes. 
That was where my brother and I practiced with our .22. We would stick a 
penny in a crack in a telephone pole, and then walk back and shoot at the 
penny. We had to learn to shoot like that, because Granddad wouldn’t let us 
shoot the birds in the body. We had to shoot their heads off, because if you 
shot them in the body with a .22, why, you didn’t have anything left. And 
we didn’t get very much ammunition, because they couldn’t afford a lot of it. 
It was a necessity, that’s all. You just learned to do it and to do it right. 

The marsh was full of game birds. My granddad was designated the game 
warden there. Game warden wasn’t like the job it is today. You didn’t sit 
there with a book. All he did was just to make sure that somebody didn’t 
come in and kill a hundred ducks. Almost everybody hunted whenever they 
wanted to. When we went deer hunting, why, the first thing you did when 
you got to camp was kill a fawn. That was camp meat. Actually, we came 
across the state line (although we didn’t know exactly where it was), and we 
hunted and fished over in this area near Bridgeport. We wandered all the 
way from Battle Mountain to over here. Granddad was a great fisherman. 
He loved to fish, so every time he’d get a chance to get away, we would hop 
in his pickup truck and throw the camp box in there and go fishing and 
hunting. I remember fishing and duck hunting in Fish Lake Valley with Bob 
Chiatovich. 

They were all happy years. I don’t remember any of my younger years 
being unhappy years. I just don’t remember having any problems. Although 
I knew there were problems—financial problems—for our family from the 
Depression years, we always had something to eat. 


147 


Community 

Life 


o 


NANCY ADAMS: TOTAL FREEDOM 


As the youngest sister to Keith 
Mount, Nancy Adams was exempt 
from dairy chores during summer 
visits with her grandparents in Sil¬ 
ver Peak. In her oral history she 
related her experience of total free¬ 
dom—an unusual thing for a young 
girl in the late 1930s and early 
1940s and a sharp contrast to her 
life in Los Angeles during the win¬ 
ters. 

I was bom in Los Angeles in 
1932 and spent a lot of my time 
in Silver Peak, probably in first, 



Nancy Adams. (Photograph by Victoria 
Ford.) 



148 


Community 


Life 


second, and third grade—around that time. My grandparents [Lloyd and 
Martha Mount] moved to Silver Peak because the Mary Mine was opened, 
and there were jobs there. And my grandfather worked for the Mary Mine, 
and as far as I can remember, he was working on the tailings (whatever that 
was) and taking care of this little pond of water that was next to their house. 

He also ran a dairy. He had a herd of cows. The dairy was against a small 
rise, and two of the walls of the dairy were dug out from that rock. And then 
there were wooden railings for the other two fences of the dairy. There was a 
very small shack, and the cows were let out at night onto the salt flats to 
roam and would be gathered in every morning to be milked. My brothers’ 
job in the summertime was to milk those cows. They would try to teach me 
how to do it, but evidently I was too young to manipulate my hands the right 
way, because I couldn’t do it. 

My grandparents would sell the milk. They would not process it: it was 
raw milk put into milk bottles and sold to other people who lived in Silver 
Peak. 


Summers at Grandparents’ 

My parents would drive right up after school after Memorial Day, de- 
posit us there, and leave us until Labor Day while they went off for their 
summer vacation. I stayed with my grandmother and grandfather in their 
house which was probably twenty by sixteen. On one wall there was a Murphy 
bed that was taken out of the wall and let down every night. That’s where 
my grandmother taught me how to say my prayers, in bed next to her. On 



“The dairy was against a small rise, and two of the walls of the dairy were dug out from that 
rock.” Lloyd Mount at the dairy in 1942. (Photograph courtesy of Sarah Grable.) 



one wall was a kitchen. There was a sink and a stove, and there must have 
been an icebox. Other than that, it was a one-room building, and outside 
was a bathroom in a little shack. 


Riding Horses 

The corral near to the house was just across the road that came from 
Coaldale Junction. Every summer my brothers captured wild mustangs for 
themselves and broke them. That was their transportation. My grandfather 
told me I couldn’t have my own horse until I learned to get up on it by 
myself. We had a bridle only, so I had to grab this horse’s mane, shinny up it’s 
leg, and get on the horse. That way I was allowed to ride it by myself. The 
horses were named Joker and Ace, and they never lost their wildness. They 
would see a clothesline full of clothes, and they would jump and turn and 
run under it to try and get us off of their backs. We would be very good at 
learning to duck every time we’d see a clothesline, because they would not 
stop. They were very hard to control. 

The horses had a mind of their own, and they didn’t like to leave the 
corral. So you’d have to prod them and push them and kick them in the 
sides to make them leave the corral to ride out onto the salt flats. But the 
minute you turned around to go home again, the horse took the lead. I was 
such a little girl, I had no strength to hold the horse back, and that horse 
would just run for that corral and would not stop till it got right to the gate. 
And then it would stop on a dime, and I would invariably fly over its head, 
hit the gate, and fall to the ground. And that was my way of getting off the 
horse for the longest time, [laughter] 

One time my grandmother sent us to the store (the Northern) which 
was a block away. My brother’d put me on the back of the horse, and we 
trotted up there. When we got off he said, “I want you to stay outside and 
watch Ace, and I’ll go in and get the groceries. And do not touch this horse!” 

Well, when he left the wind came up, and everything’s blowing through 
the air, and the horse was very skitterish. So I reached up to pet its nose, and 
it scared him. He reared back, snapped the two-by-four in half that he was 
tied to, which held up the overhang on the store, and it collapsed. People 
were running in all different directions. And my brother came out in a cloud 
of dust and was so angry at me that he made me walk home behind him and 
the horse and didn’t ever want me to ever get on his horse again, [laughter] 


Community 

Life 


Learning to Swim 

We used to go swimming at the old swimming hole which was out on 
the salt flat. I couldn’t swim, so my grandmother decided to teach me how, 
but she didn’t know how to swim. So she put a dog harness on me and tied a 
rope to it, and she walked around the edge of this swimming hole while I 
learned how to dog paddle. At the end of the summer when my parents 




“We used to go swimming at the old swimming hole which was out on the salt flat.” (Pho¬ 
tograph courtesy of the Nevada Historical Society.) 



came back, the big event was that I jumped off of the edge and into this 
bottomless pit, and I could swim across it. It was so exciting. It was called 
the bottomless pit because the story was that someone had pushed an old car 
into the pit and no one had ever been able to dive deep enough to see or find 
that car. 


Total Freedom 


There was an old mill across the road. It was already closed at that time, 
or maybe it was just shut down for the time being. It seemed to me like the 
size of a roller coaster, it was so huge. And we’d climb every single inch of 
that mill—these old iron beams all over the place with these cars that came 
and went. We would pretend that it all worked. It was great, great fun. 

We were allowed to go wherever we wanted to go. We did have to either 
ride the horses or drive [due to the distance] to the volcano—an ash cone 
outside of town. The view from the Coaldale Junction highway was this 
perfectly round cone, but the back of it had been blown out, so you could 
walk into the cone. And on the edge of the mountain were these little claims 
where the rocks would be built up. And inside the rocks would be a tin 
tobacco can with the claim information on it. 

Every Labor Day they had a huge parade, and I was in the parade. A man 
named Harry Stimler and his wife were friends of my grandparents, and one 
time he left his felt hat at their house. Grandmother cut it up and made 
Indian moccasins out of it, and dressed me up like Little Beaver. And she 
took a burned cork and did my face all dark and put on these Indian clothes 
for me. I took Ace, the wild mustang, and they put a rope around his nose 
and up one side of the horse and put me on that horse bareback, and I won. 
And when I went up to the stand, people were cheering and clapping, and it 
scared the horse which started to rear up. I was holding onto its mane to 




keep from sliding off the back end, and everyone thought that was part of 
the act, so they cheered louder and louder. I was so scared I was going to fall 
off! And finally, my dad came up and rescued me and took me off the horse. 

O 

Silver Peak made such an impression on me, I believe, because of the 
contrast to the wintertime when we were living in suburban Los Angeles. 
We went from living in the big city to this total freedom where no one 
worried about you in any way, shape, or form. We did whatever we wanted 
to do. I’m sure that there were dangers in Silver Peak, too, that no one 
thought about, [laughter] 

I think the reason why that part of my life’s so important to me is be- 
cause that made me what I am now. Women were boxed in, in those days. 
But that freedom gave me the opportunity to think in a different way and to 
make decisions I may not have been able to make had I not had that experL 
ence. I never had the feeling that there was something I couldn’t do because 
I was a woman. It never occurred to me. And my father and my mother were 
very traditional people, so I don’t believe it came directly from them. I be- 
lieve it came from that experience of being with my brothers and doing 
what they did and having the freedom to do all those things. I think that’s 
the experience that made it different for me than it did for many people in 
my generation. 

I didn’t realize it at the time. I just assumed every child had a horse. My 
husband was from the East, and when we went to Philadelphia I would re- 
late these stories, and people would look at me like, “This lady is lying. 
Nobody does those things.” And that’s when I realized I’d had a unique 
experience—that it was different than most people. And had I not had that 
opportunity to spend my summers in Silver Peak . . . how much I would 
have missed! 


151 


Community 

Life 


Notes 


1. Ford, Leon Hill oral history, 69. 


2. WCRM, 3-39, 3-41. 


3. Mayor John A. Cooper. 

4. Sarah noted that Martha remained friends with her family, similar to any child 
marrying outside of the family’s religion. Sarah Grable, personal conversation, 1997. 

5. The McGuffey Reader series (sometimes known as McGuffey’s Eclectic Readers ) 
was developed for use in schools and was first published in 1836 by the firm of Truman 
and Smith in Cincinnati, Ohio. FirstSearch, OCLC, OCLC 43019835. 





7 


The Families 


Chiatovich, Shirley, Humphrey, Hill—these names are still well known 
in the Silver Peak-Goldfield-Tonopah area, and some have become recog' 
nized around the state. Several families formed the nucleus that helped Sil¬ 
ver Peak survive beyond the boom and bust of gold discoveries and market- 
price fluctuations. In addition, families intermarried creating a complex web 
of relationships. Descendants happily recalled the heyday of the late 1930s. 
While Vollmar hustled investors, those at home in Silver Peak reveled in 
this time of easy money—a party time for all. 

Often mentioned in both community and mining activities were three 
men—Stanley Chiatovich, Ernie Shirley, and Harvey Humphrey. Along with 
oral history comments from family members, the following brief biographies 
sketch their active lives. 

CHIATOVICH, SHIRLEY, AND HUMPHREY 
Stanley Martin Chiatovich, 1910-1960 

Stanley Chiatovich was born to Martin and Nellie Cleary Chiatovich 
in Silver Peak. Stanley’s mother died in 1920, when he was a boy of nine, 
leaving him the oldest boy in the family. He attended elementary school in 
Silver Peak and high school in Tonopah. Later he worked independently in 
the operation of mines and in leasing and prospecting around Silver Peak 
for years. 

He married Frances Hill, daughter of Frank and Lillian R. Houser Hill 
on February 2, 1934. Stanley and Frances had three daughters—Janice, Bar¬ 
bara, and Jaculine. The family moved to Gabbs in 1950. 

Stanley had been a member of the Elks Lodge and the Lions Club in 
Silver Peak. He died of complications from Valley Fever in I960. 1 



154 


The 

Families 


Ernest Jesse Shirley 
1901-1959 

Born September 5, 1901, 
to John and Anna Cleary 
Shirley, Ernie Shirley was ac¬ 
tive in mining at Silver Peak 
most of his life. He owned and 
operated the Mohawk silver 
mine, one of the Argentite 
group, which he had discov¬ 
ered when he was sixteen. He 
was a leaser and superinten¬ 
dent at the Mary Mine for 
twenty-seven years and was 
also superintendent of the 
Black Mammoth Mine. 

Ernie was married to Ruby 
Grice on August 5, 1933, in 
Goldfield. Ruby had one son 
from a former marriage, Don 
Schriber. 

Ernie served as Esmeralda 
County Commissioner for 
twelve years and also worked for the Nevada-California Power Company. 
He died of silicosis on December 24, 1959. 2 



Ernie Shirley and Stanley Chiatovich. (Photo¬ 
graph courtesy of Barbara Dodgion.) 


Harvey R. Humphrey, 1905-1986 

(by Sue Humphrey Thompson) 

Harvey Humphrey was born in Carson City on October 17, 1905, to 
Charles and Ella Mae Thorne Humphrey. His uncle, John Humphrey, dis¬ 
covered gold at what became Manhattan, Nevada, and the family soon moved 
to Manhattan where Harvey grew up with three older brothers and two 
younger sisters in a mining camp environment. Harvey went to elementary 
school in Manhattan and worked summers as a cowboy and at putting up 
hay on the nearby Monitor Valley ranches. As there was no high school in 
Manhattan, he attended high school in Tonopah where he lived with his 
aunt, Lida Humphrey Gilbert. 

In high school he met Virginia Shirley, a native of Silver Peak and daugh¬ 
ter of John and Anna Cleary Shirley. They were parents of one daughter, 
Sue Ann. 

The initial years after their marriage were tough ones in Nevada. For a 
living, Harvey dealt cards, tended bar, labored on Boulder Dam, and worked 
in mines and for the electric power company. They moved where the work 








was. After a few years, Harvey and 
Virginia moved to Silver Peak 
where Harvey initially worked for 
his father-in-law. They never left. 

Over the years, Harvey be¬ 
came owner and operator of a 
range cattle operation and devel¬ 
oped numerous mining interests. 
He was an excellent horseman 
and was a unique source of in¬ 
formation on springs and water 
resources in the area and on the 
running of cattle in the arid 
Clayton Valley. He was sought 
out for his knowledge of the Silver 
Peak Mining District by those 
who were interested in past min¬ 
ing operations or the possibility 
of new ones. 

Harvey served Esmeralda 
County for nine years as a state 
legislator, first as an assembly¬ 
man from 1958 though 1962, 
and then as a senator from 1963 
through 1966. He was chairman of the Assembly Committee on Mines 
and Mining for three legislative sessions. 

After Virginia died in 1973, Harvey lived on alone in Silver Peak for 
thirteen years until his death on August 21, 1986. During that time he was 
continually active in town projects, successful in having Silver Peak platted 
as a town and in creating Silver Lake as an evening retreat for townspeople. 
He maintained a supply of gasoline and a pump to help townspeople who 
were otherwise fifty miles from the nearest gas station. Locals as well as 
strangers stopped by for advice or information, and he was happy to help. 
Harvey loved the outdoors and spent many days prospecting in the Silver 
Peak mountain range. 

Harvey lived a Nevada life to the fullest. He grew up in the boom and 
bust of a mining camp. He breathed the air of the high country hayfields and 
creeks, chased mustangs on horseback, played basketball on the high school 
team, and raised Cain with his brothers to the ire of a strict mother. He had 
seen workers at his side slip to their death at Boulder Dam. He had spent 
long days in the saddle herding cattle and long nights sleeping on the ground. 
He drilled wells, developed springs, and experimented with cattle breeds 
suited to the Nevada desert. He had his own cattle outfit. He had watched 
gambling grow, from the view of a dealer to that of being one of the seven¬ 
teen state senators managing that growth. He had prospected, picked, dyna- 








Harvey Humphrey in 1937. (Photograph 
courtesy of Leon Hill.) 


155 


The 

Families 





156 


The 

Families 


mited, and mucked in the mines and breathed the rock-dust air. He became 
a successful mine owner and chairman of the State Assembly Committee on 
Mines and Mining. He was a good and useful citizen of his town until the 
day he died. He was a son of Nevada and a part of Nevada. 3 

- -O - 


WORLD WAR II 

The good times ended abruptly with the United States entry into World 
War II. War Order L-208 shut down nearly all gold mining operations 
throughout the country. 4 The impact on Silver Peak was dramatic. Tramp 
miners moved away to find jobs, leaving behind the heart of the town—the 
families. Even some of those left the area in search of work, but most were 
drawn back to their hometown where they designed a survival plan to keep 
them going until the war ended and demand for gold returned. One solution 
was a family-owned corporation. The Chiatoviches, Shirleys, and Humphreys 
together operated several essential businesses. Everyone worked, including 
wives who had previously stayed at home to raise children. Thus, the party 
town returned to a survival mode. 


- -O - 

GERRY COOPER: TOWN’S FIRST WEDDING 

Gerry (Hill) Cooper, daughter of Fayette and Geraldine and sister to Leon Hill, 
was born in Goldfield, Nevada, September 26, 1920. Her memories occasionally 
differ from her brother’s, which is not unusual, but they both remember their father’s 
legendary mechanical expertise and the fun they had as children creating their own 

entertainment. Gerry is still proud to 
have been the bride in the town’s first 
wedding ceremony, after which every- 
one turned out to shivaree the newly¬ 
weds. 

Childhood in Silver Peak 

I really enjoyed my childhood 
growing up in Silver Peak. Every- 
body was like one big family, and 
it seemed like everybody took care 
of everybody else. For example, my 
mother never swam a stroke, but 
if kids wanted to go swimming, the 
parents trusted my mother to take 



Gerry Cooper. (Photograph by Victoria 
Ford.) 



every kid in town down swimming even though she couldn’t swim. They 
had that much confidence in her—that’s the type of a town it was. People 
just loved each other and trusted each other. 

A lot of my memories would have been during the 1930s when I was 
growing up. That was a good time in terms of the mining and milling busi¬ 
ness. There were jobs. There were stores, and there was quite a bit going on 
in Silver Peak. The town didn’t start to really go downhill until about the 
time I graduated from high school. 

The very first thing I remember was living in the tent that one summer. 
Actually, it was one of these tents that had the board sides that came up 
about two or three feet and had the hardwood floor. It was a one-room tent, 
and it had a stove, a bed, and a table. The folks slept inside, and we slept on 
cots on the hill. 

We had homes in both Goldfield and Silver Peak. The one in Silver 
Peak was the mill home. It belonged to the Black Mammoth Mill and was 
available for people who needed housing, not just the superintendent. It was 
just down from the mill and was very good sized. There was a living room 
and a kitchen-dining room combination with a big dining table. Then there 
was another room built in the back where the girls slept and only one bed¬ 
room. There was no bathroom. We had outhouses, but we did have running 
water and a wood stove. 

In later years, my parents purchased the Minken’s house below that. 
The Minken house was a nicer home. It had a screened front porch, a living 
room, and a kitchen-dining room, and it had two bedrooms with a bath¬ 
room between, so it was more modern. 

My mother’s name was Geraldine Houser. She stayed at home and raised 
eight of us children. I have three brothers older than I, and I am the oldest of 
five girls. Our family has double cous¬ 
ins. My father [Fayette] and Frances 
Hill’s father [Frank] were brothers. My 
mother [Geraldine] and Frances’s 
mother [Lillian] were sisters, and broth¬ 
ers married sisters, so our bloodline on 
both sides is the same as if it was my 
father and mother. Frances was always 
more like a sister to me than a cousin. 

She was five and a half years older than 
I, and when I was a teenager growing 
up, she had just gotten married to Stan 
Chiatovich not too long before that, and 
she just kind of tucked me under her 
wing and took care of me. 

My Grandfather Oscar Hill was in 
Silver Peak. We called him Daddy Hill. Ellen Geraldine Houser Hill. (Photo- 
He lived in a little cabin down from the graph courtesy of Gerry Cooper.) 



157 


The 

Families 





158 


The 

Families 


mill with his mine behind it. Mom used to make pies for him, and I used to 
take the goodies over to him. If he wasn’t home then I’d go up to the tunnel 
and call to him. Then he and I would go back to where it was nice and cool 
and sit there and visit. 

Medical Care and Family Deaths 



The only time I missed school in twelve years was when my sister died 
with double pneumonia and my brother died with a ruptured appendix. In 
those days they had good family doctors who came right to your house. Be- 
fore Mary died, the doctor came and put those mustard plasters on her, and 
she tore that off. 

And then my brother, Fayette, he was pushing an ore car and felt some- 
thing give, and he had a ruptured appendix. They rushed him to Tonopah to 

Dr. Craig, who was a wonder- 
ful doctor. Also, Fred Vollmar 
had a doctor, a specialist, fly 
in from Los Angeles. He 
checked my brother and said 
that Dr. Craig had done a 
wonderful job taking care of 
Fayette, but peritonitis had 
set in. It wasn’t that there 
wasn’t medical help, it was 
more a matter of lack of anti¬ 
biotics, because today they 
could have saved somebody 
with pneumonia (I’ve had 
pneumonia four times), and 
they could have saved some¬ 
body with a ruptured appen¬ 
dix. 

These were really tragic 
losses—my sister at twelve 
and then my brother when he 
was twenty-three. I lost my 
sister when I was fourteen and 
my brother when I was six¬ 
teen. Mary was just two years 
younger than me. We were 
very close, and that was a very 
hard loss. She was so pretty 
and had such a lovely person¬ 
ality. There was a funeral. 
They were both buried in 


Fayette Hill, oldest son of mill superintendent 
Fayette Hill, showing off his drilling champion¬ 
ship cup at the University of Nevada in 1935. He 
was a freshman majoring in mining engineering 
when he died. (Photograph courtesy of Leon Hill.) 





159 



The 

Families 


“M ary was just two years younger than me.” The Hill children and a friend in Gold¬ 
field in 1925. Back row, left to right: Elwood, friend Albert Bradshaw, Fayette. Front 
row, left to right: Gerry, Mary, and Leon. (Photograph courtesy of Gerry Cooper.) 


Goldfield. In fact my mother, my father, my grandfather, my aunt, my sister 
Lois, my Uncle Frank, my sister Mary, and my brother Fayette are all buried 
there in Goldfield in a family plot.... I missed a week of school when my 
sister passed away and a week when my brother passed away. 

School and Public Services 


My dad was a firm believer in education. He said it didn’t take much to 
get to school on time, and you better get a good grade in deportment. He 
said if you didn’t get the good grades in the rest, it was because you had 
trouble learning, but you better be behaved, [laughter] That was a very firm 
ruling in our family. With my folks, manners were really taught to us from 
the time we were little. There was always the “excuse me” and “yes, please.” 
And when an older person came in, you got up and gave him a chair. 

We went to school in Goldfield five days a week, Monday through Fri¬ 
day. My father would come in on Friday night, pick us up, and we’d go to 
Silver Peak to spend the weekend. Early Monday morning (I mean early 
Monday morning), and that was before you had heaters in the car, we heated 
bricks in the oven of the wood stove, wrapped them, and we covered up 






160 


The 

Families 


with quilts, and then he’d drive us to Goldfield in time to go to school. In 
twelve years of traveling—Friday night out to Silver Peak, Monday back to 
school—I never missed a day, and I was never late in twelve years. By the 
time my younger sisters were ready for school there was a school in Silver 
Peak. 

Because of the transportation back and forth, when I wanted to play 
basketball, my brother Fayette would let my brother Leon use the car to take 
me out to the basketball games, and I did earn my letter in basketball. But 
that’s the way we did. When you went to the doctor, you went to Tonopah. 
When you did your banking, you went to Tonopah to the First National 
Bank. When women had their babies, we took a mad dash to Tonopah. 
Several children were born at Millers, just outside Tonopah about fifteen 
miles, because they couldn’t quite make it to Tonopah. The Tonopah hospi¬ 
tal where my daughters were born has been moved to Coaldale, and it’s now 
the bar and restaurant. 

The Smith brothers had a grocery store and soda fountain by the picture 
show in Silver Peak, and they also had the post office in that building. We 
did buy some of our clothing from Hank Gilbert, who had the dry goods 
store down by the Smith brothers, and then up where Mrs. Shirley lived, 
there was a store in there. But Mom bought most of our clothing and food in 
Tonopah. 


Jackrabbit Minister 


A lot of these mining towns did not have a minister or churches. Rever¬ 
end Shriver was a traveling minister who came into Silver Peak once a month 
to give church services in the schoolhouse. He lived in Carson City, and he 
was referred to as the “jackrabbit minister.” But some of the women of the 
different communities got together, and they would have a Sunday school 
every Sunday at the schoolhouse in Silver Peak, so the children of the town 
would get the religious training they needed. My mother acted as a superin¬ 
tendent of the Sunday school. In fact, I taught Sunday school when I was 
twelve years old to the real little ones. The schoolhouse was like a commu¬ 
nity center in Silver Peak. 


Queen of the Ball 


We all did things together and just made our own fun .... Every Satur¬ 
day night there was a dance at a bar by Virginia Humphrey’s house, and we 
danced all night. There was a bar with another building connected to it that 
was the dance hall. I don’t remember Mom and Dad dancing very much. 
Everyone used to take the kids along, lay a quilt underneath the bench, and 
put their little ones down to sleep. About midnight they’d stop and have 
what they called their midnight lunch—cakes and sandwiches—and then 
they’d dance some more. 



When I was a teenager growing up, my dad always made me come home 
at midnight, because he thought a good girl didn’t stay out after midnight. 
The only time I stayed out later was for the Valentine’s Dance in Fish Lake 
Valley when I was about fourteen. We went to the Molini Ranch, where 
they had a Valentine Dance with a queen of the ball [competition]. The 
miners from Silver Peak and the ranchers from Fish Lake Valley were com- 
peting at a penny a vote for the queen. The miners kept saying, “Oh, I got 
five dollars in my pocket. I got ten dollars.” The ranchers backed out, and I 
ended up being queen of the dance that night. I didn’t intend to put the 
miners in that position. 


161 


The 

Families 


First Wedding by First JP 


The first time I saw Carl Cooper was when I was back in junior high 
school in Goldfield. Fie was out of high school, because he was nine years 
older and was working on the railroad. He was playing ball, and when the 
umpire called something, he was so mad. I said to my girlfriend, “Wow, he’s 
terrible. I don’t like that guy.” We were taught you didn’t yell. 

Later on I went to work at the picture show in Silver Peak. He came out 
from Tonopah with the projectors. The projector did not stay there all week. 
They carried it back and forth from Tonopah. The movie theater had seats 
and a screen and was located right next to the store. The way the movie 
house was arranged, I was selling tickets right here, and the projector door 
was right there. So I’d look over, and I’d think “Oh, that’s a good-looking 
guy.” I’d look up, and he’d be watching me. 

We were the first couple married in Silver Peak, and we were married in 
my cousin Frances’s house in the front room. It was a very, very small wed¬ 
ding with just family there. Carl’s brothers stood up with him, and my sister- 
in-law Wilma, Leon’s wife, stood up with me. That was April 22, 1940, and 
the lilacs were in bloom in Candelaria at the time, so Frances had lilacs all 
over the place. 

Tommy Whyte, who was Silver Peak’s first justice of the peace, married 
us, and he had to go to Tonopah to find out how to do that, so my dad took 
him. Well, my dad had just bought a new Lincoln Zephyr at that time. All of 
us women talked Daddy into seeing how fast it could go. Later on that year 
they had what they called a kangaroo court to raise money for the Christmas 
party for the children. When they had kangaroo courts, they always charged 
the men, but they never did charge the women. Well, that year Tommy 
Whyte called Mom and Wilma [and my sister-in-law Dorthella] and me out 
there, and he charged us for backseat driving from that trip to Tonopah. 
[laughter] It was fun. We had a good time. 

They always held a shivaree for newlyweds. The people of the town 
came to your house, and they furnished drinks and some snacks, and they 
just spent the evening having a good time .... They hooked up a hay wagon 
on the back of a car, and they put Carl and me on the wagon and drove us all 



162 


The 

Families 


over town blowing their horns. At that time Mr. Barlow was the sheriff, so 
he took his handcuffs and put one on me and one on Carl, so everywhere 
Carl went, I had to follow him for a short while that night, [laughter] 

After that... we went to the dance, and we danced all night. Every 
time Carl and I would go out on the dance floor, they’d play “Here Comes 
the Bride.” I was young, and I was so bashful. I know my face was red all 
night. About five o’clock in the morning, half of them went home with us, 
and I can remember fixing ham and eggs for everybody at breakfast. 


- -O - 


JANICE JOHNSON: PARTY TOWN 


When Janice Chiatovich Johnson arrived on the scene in 1936, her parents, Stanley 
Chiatovich and Frances Hill Chiatovich, were busy “swinging socialites,” and 
they were not alone. Many of their closest relatives were also Silver Peak residents, 
and as a child Janice remembers Silver Peak as a party town where progressive 
dinners and baseball games brought balance to the hazardous work miners faced 
each day. In her oral history Janice describes a joyful childhood, although at times 
her family’s history included problems. Through all her memories runs a sense of 
nostalgia—for a time of great fun, when airplanes were a source of wonder and 
every day was a mystery unfolding. The recent discovery of her mother’s diary 
after Frances died added greatly to Janice’s insight about Silver Peak in the 1930s. 


I was born Janice Gaye 
Chiatovich, the first of three 
daughters to Stanley and 
Frances (Hill) Chiatovich in 
Tonopah, Nevada. My sisters 
were Barbara Faye and Jaci 
Rae—rhyming names, which 
is quite adorable. I lived in 
Silver Peak until I was twelve 
and consider myself a native; 
however, my dad was a true 
native, born in Silver Peak. 
We moved to Gabbs in 1950, 
so with the exception of one 
year, Silver Peak was a town 
of my family. For that one 
year in 1942, all the family 
men had to pick up and go 
where there was work, be- 
cause World War II shut 
down the mines. And so we, 



“I was born Janice Gaye Chiatovich. . . . My sisters 
were Barbara Faye and Jaci Rae." Left to right: Jaci, 
Janice, and Barbara Chiatovich with kittens. 
(Photograph courtesy of Barbara Dodgion.) 



along with several of my cousins’ families, moved to Reno for a year. And 
then we all moseyed back as fast as we could when the guys decided to go 
mining on their own. 

There were usually about thirty-two, thirty-three people in Silver Peak 
who were all uncles, cousins, et cetera. They were a very, very exciting bunch. 
(There was an occasional unrelated outsider.) My playmates, of course, were 
my cousins. All of the fun happened when I was a child. Poor Barbie and 
Jaci, when they came along four and six years later, the mining business was 
depressed, and the fun really pretty much came to a screeching halt with the 
advent of World War II. 

When I was born, my father was the general manager of the Mary Mine, 
and he was living high on the hog. He was very important, and it was just 
wonderful. It was the big time! They traveled by airplane. They had a base- 
ball team that actually traveled one time to Los Angeles by airplane. How 
they finagled that, I have no idea. During the boom time there might have 
been two thousand people, which was in the later 1930s when the Mary 
Mine and the Black Mammoth Mill were really going. Children were far 
and few between, actually, so I was kind of a rarity and was treated like a 
little princess—along with my cousin Susie [Sue Humphrey Thompson]. 
We eventually got our cousin Pete Shirley in about 1939. He was Louis 
Shirley’s son, and his mother died in birth. He was brought up by Baba Shirley, 
his grandmother. Then there were the three of us, so we were very special, 
[laughter] It seemed like the world was our oyster! 

Silver Peak was a growing town, and it was a party town! When I was a 
baby, they used to have progressive dinners. When my cousin Susie and I 
were pretty much the only infant-type children around, we used to be hauled 
around from house to house to house on these progressive dinners. I was told 
that one of them lasted three days, and I’m not surprised, because I can 
remember waking up on one person’s bed, and the next time I woke up I was 
on somebody else’s bed! [laughter] 

They were real party people. We recently read my mom’s diary, which 
we did not know existed until after she died. In it she indicated she hated 
being interrupted in her partying to have a baby! [laughter] And that was a 
very big surprise to us. My arrival changed everything! 

A lot of the parties revolved around baseball games, which were held in 
what we called the ballpark. It was adjacent to the powerhouse and all sur- 
rounded by tamaracks. It was like a large pasture of salt grass, and, obviously, 
they had a backstop. (It seems to me that they might have also played out on 
the flat one time or another.) There were some places where you could bring 
the car up close enough so that you could sit in the car or on the car. 

The teams traveled to Mina and played against Mina on a salt flat be- 
tween Mina and Luning. They went to Tonopah and also played in Gold- 
field. 

The teams were all men or all women. They had a girls’ team—Leon’s 
wife, Wilma Hill, and my cousin Gerry Hill, and Kathleen Morris (who was 


163 


The 

Families 



164 


The 

Families 


the wife of Jim Morris, the trucker) were on it. They won a state champion- 
ship, and the guys always admitted that the girls were better than they were. 
I guess they were a real hot team! [laughter] My cousin Pete and I became 
very good baseball players. 

Airplanes 


Airplanes were new and exciting back then. There was a hangar on the 
edge of the salt flat at the north end of town, just on the other side of one of 
the three rock hills in the middle of town. That was apparently a fairly firm 
part of the marsh. There were many places in the marsh that you wouldn’t 
dare try to land unless you could go down and put your feet on it first. We 
always had a windsock out. It was a regular hangar, and J immy Morris had a 
shop there where he fixed not only trucks but also the airplanes. 

When the airplane took the baseball team to Los Angeles, it took off on 
the flat. I went along on that trip. The airplane might have belonged to the 
Black Mammoth Corporation. I know that Hugh Cameron always had a 
plane, but I don’t think his was involved with these trips. Of course, Fred 
Vollmar was a very big deal. He was the Silver Peak tycoon-type guy. I sup¬ 
pose he’s the one that probably financed Hugh Cameron, who was his 
nephew—probably kept him in airplanes and flying regalia to get him around, 
because he went back and forth between Los Angeles and Silver Peak. 

One day I was out in the backyard playing, and I watched this little 
single-engine plane spiraling toward the ground. It landed propeller first in 

the tailings pond up at the south 
end of town. It was Hugh and 
my Uncle Bob Chiatovich, and 
I watched them get out and walk 
away, [laughter] My Uncle Bob 
had a cut on his head, and that 
was it. 

The airplane industry was so 
young that I guess these men 
were rather daring. They were a 
bunch of warriors! Later on they 
had mustanging expeditions us¬ 
ing the airplanes, and those guys 
were like bush pilots. On the 
Goldfield side of the marsh, up 
against the hills, they would 
build fences and herd the mus¬ 
tangs from the foothills into 
these chutes with the airplanes. 

Airplanes played a large part 
in Silver Peak when I was small. 



“I watched this little single-engine plane spiraling 
toward the ground. It landed propeller-first in the 
tailings pond up at the south end of town .”(Pho¬ 
tograph courtesy of Leon Hill.) 



A little later during the war (after we came back from Reno in about 1943), 
the air force base in Tonopah was in full swing. And one of those flyers, of 
course, was Chuck Yeager, the most hotshot flyer. He, among others, used to 
come out to Silver Peak and do what they were absolutely forbidden to do, 
and that was buzz the hills—buzz my hills! It was just very exciting, [laugh- 
ter] It was very illegal, and it was very dangerous, but they did it, and I 
looked forward to it. He also buzzed the water towers in various places. We 
didn’t have water in our water tower. He buzzed the one at Mina, and it blew 
apart, [laughter] He got in trouble for that, too. 

One time my cousin, Dorthella Hill (Elwood Hill’s wife), was going for a 
doctor’s appointment with her two children, Kathy and Elwood Jr. And they 
were driving toward Tonopah, still on the Silver Peak highway. They had 
just passed the volcano, and . . . this airplane had been going to buzz them 
and lost power, and he crashed on top of them. She saw what was going to 
happen; she was able to push the children down onto the floor. She was 
badly hurt, but the children weren’t. She was in the hospital for quite a long 
while, and that was the turning point—there were no more buzzings with 
the airplanes. 

Family Home and Library 

My mother and dad were married in 1934. When they knew that they 
were going to start a family, they asked my Uncle John Chiatovich to build 
them a house. That was situ¬ 
ated on Main Street, across 
the street from where the 
schools eventually were. It 
was really quite large physi¬ 
cally. It didn’t have a lot of 
rooms, and it was kind of a 
great big box. 

The living room and 
dining room opened into 
each other, separated by my 
favorite place in the house, 
the bookshelves. They were 
very modern at the time 
when they were built. I think 
my mother really thought 
she’d done a great thing—a 
little bit of architecture 
there. These bookcases had 
glass doors, and it was just a 
magic place to me. It was like 
having my very own library 



“M^ mother and dad were married in 1934 ■ . ■ and 
they asked my Uncle John Chiatovich to build them a 
house.” Barbara and Jaci Chiatovich, with their 
dog Tubby, next to their family’s house. (Photo¬ 
graph courtesy of Barbara Dodgion.) 


165 

The 

Families 




166 


The 

Families 


before Silver Peak had a library. My Aunt Gerry Hill always gave books for 
birthdays, to adults and children alike, and my father and mother always 
belonged to a book-of-the-month club. They were both big readers. Zane 
Grey, of course, was one of my dad’s favorites, but my dad was also a deep 
reader. Les M iserables happened to be his favorite book, and that always im- 
pressed me greatly. Drums Along the Mohawk —I saw that in an antique store 
the other day, and I hope I have it somewhere at home. It was a nice exist' 
ence with two intelligent parents that made books available to me, where 
otherwise it may have been very difficult, because there was no store or 
library to go to. 

I am wont to say I educated myself! [laughter] I started reading very 
grown-up books at a very tender age. My first favorite (it wasn’t very sophis¬ 
ticated) .... I fell in love with Raggedy Ann. My cousin Susie read The 
Earth is the Lord’s and Genghis Khan. Of course, she was two and a half years 
older, and she was a little bit smarter than I was most of the time, but I just 
decided, “Boy, I can read those big books, too.” I was also very much into 
taking what I pleased from the school cloakroom! [laughter] When I was 
supposed to be doing something else, I would just sit back there and read. I 
was very generous with the cloakroom books with myself and would bring 
them home. They belonged to me as far as I was concerned, [laughter] 


One Big Family 


Now, behind our house we had a huge yard, probably two city blocks 
large. Part of my backyard was the middle hill—my hill. Susie had a hill, and 
I had a hill, which had a cave in it. My cousin Pete and I, part of our life was 
running up and down that hill. Pete and I were real good pals, and I was very 
much of a tomboy. 

Below us on the hill (on my hill) was Ruby and Ernie Shirley. They lived 
in the house that Ruby still lives in. I can’t recall if I ever knew who built it. 
The Humphrey’s home was built by my Grandfather Frank Hill, so Susie’s 
was on the same street as the Shirleys’, across the street from the other hill. 
It was open house at all times between our families. That’s the way that we 
lived. We lived with each other. 

Susie was older and less inclined to be a goofball. Pete and I were just 
very athletic. We rode bikes, or she rode her horse, and we took on the 
mountains and the salt flat. One time we decided we saw a plane crash on 
the other side of the salt flat, and we were going to find it (didn’t bother to 
tell anybody) on our bicycles. Well, it finally got so marshy that we had to 
push our bicycles, because we couldn’t ride them. When the sun went down 
we knew we were in trouble. We never found the plane and never heard 
about a plane that crashed either. Our parents could see us, so they knew we 
were coming, but we were in trouble over that escapade. 



School 


I attended all of my grade school in Silver Peak. They had three build- 
ings going during the big time, during the mid- and late-1930s—one sepa¬ 
rate building for a high school. We all sat in the same room with the same 
teacher, and there were usually eight of us. There were the three of us cous¬ 
ins; then when my sisters finally got in, there were the five of us cousins; and 
until the Hills moved to Yerington, my cousin Dorothy was also there. So it 
was mostly cousins, but there was always someone there who wasn’t a cousin 
that was connected with the powerhouse substation. 

None of our teachers stayed very long, and we usually got the dregs, 
which is why I say I educated myself. Susie started school while the boom 
was still on, and Annie Tomany was probably everybody’s favorite teacher. 
She was there when there were four buildings going, and she was in the little 
building with ... it might have been kindergarten. After this experiment 
with the kindergarten, it closed. I was so crushed because I knew I was ready 
to go to school and read and write and everything. Annie Tomany allowed 
me to come to school maybe three times a week and spend a couple hours. I 
thought that was very lucky because she was so special. 

When the bottom fell out for mining, Annie Tomany moved away, and 
then we had a Miss Callings from Missouri. She came out to Nevada to get 
a divorce, and I loved her to pieces. She is probably the first one that jumps 
into my mind when I am asked about favorite teachers. She was a card and 
kind of a party girl. She used to sit down at the Black Mammoth coffee shop, 
in the restaurant with guys all around her, and she was always making them 
laugh, and I thought, “Oh, she is so cool.” [laughter] Cecilia Callings—she 
only lasted a year. She was my third or fourth grade teacher. 

Mrs. Norris came over from Dyer, Nevada, at the south end of Fish Lake 
Valley. Her husband, I think, had the post office and did various things there. 
She stayed possibly for three years, maybe longer .... She was there when 
I graduated eighth grade. Mrs. Norris had the county fix up that little first- 
grade house into a teacherage where she lived during the week. It was very 
comfortable and very cozy. My mother was on the school board at that time. 

I went to school in Silver Peak only seven years, because by the time I 
had reached the seventh year of schooling, I had been sitting in the same 
room with older kids and had heard that Nevada history book probably seven 
times inside and out. I guess it was Mrs. Norris who decided to talk to the 
state superintendent and ask if I could be tested and go on into high school. 
I skipped eighth grade, boarded with a cousin in Tonopah, and went on to 
high school at the tender age of not quite twelve. 

Well, there were boys. I had never been around boys. (My cousin Pete 
was just like my brother.) I was terribly boy crazy, and that was just the most 
exciting thing that could ever happen. I was boarding with my cousin Susie, 


167 


The 

Families 



168 


The 

Families 


who had been there a year. 

Now she was only one year 
ahead of me, and her boy- 
friends would come out in 
cars! I had gone to a couple 
of dances before I went to 
school over there, and I got 
to stay with the Cavanaughs. 

Oh, it was very exciting! I 
mean, I had moved to the 
city! [laughter] However, it 
was also very hard for me to 
move. I always seemed to be 
leaving my family once that 
started, and that was hard. 

Family History 

Dad lost his mother 
[Nellie] when he was nine. 

One of Dad’s most vivid 
memories was his mother be- 
ing sick in the bedroom in 
Ruby Shirley’s present home. That’s where he lived at the time—he and Pat 
and Jack, two of his younger brothers. At the time, the boys were rolling 
tires down the hill and having them bounce up against the house and then 
retrieving them and doing it again. His Aunt Baba (he called her Aunt 
Annie, she was Nellie’s sister) came out at least three times telling them 
that their mother was sick and please stop. But they didn’t stop. It haunted 
him all of his life. 

Dad was the oldest of five children who were then just kind of pushed 
around from one aunt or cousin to another, because their father was sort of 
footloose: he just wasn’t interested in a family. My dad always tried to keep 
his brothers and sisters together. They were each two years apart. Bob was 
just a baby when Nellie died. The children tried to spend summers on the 
ranch in Fish Lake Valley, but the kids were pretty much split up. Jack and 
Dad, the two oldest, would go wherever they were sent, and Pat pretty much 
stayed on the ranch. An aunt (Lillian Chiatovich-McCloskey) took Bob 
and Marjorie, who were the two youngest, so those two had a fairly stable 
upbringing. 

Dad continued to take care of his younger siblings his entire life. Most of 
them were in trouble at one time or another, and he would dig them out. My 
Uncle Bob was oftentimes in trouble with the law, because he was a smooth 
talker, and he sold land that he didn’t own and forged checks—very often in 
my dad’s name. He was, of course, a ladies’ man—very handsome and much 



“My cousin Pete was just like my brother." Left to 
right: Pete Shirley with Jaci and Barbara 
Chiatovich. (Photograph courtesy of Barbara 
Dodgion.) 




beloved by women, and I loved him to pieces. And Uncle Jack just was a 
heavy drinking cowboy, and would get lost and have to be brought home 
and bailed out. My Uncle Pat was just a little lost. But my dad was always 
the one that they could go to. He became the head of the family when he 
was nine years old when his mother died. He cared about keeping the family 
together, which couldn’t be done, of course. When they lost their mom, 
their family fell apart. I don’t know how much longer it might have held 
together anyway. Now his Aunt Annie, Baba Shirley, had six children of her 
own, and she started having them when she was a teenager. She did what 
she could, but let’s face it, her hands were full. I think Papa Shirley probably 
made a pretty nice living. He was a bar owner. 

When it came to high school, Daddy came to Tonopah and boarded 
with Mrs. Cavanaugh, (John Cavanaugh Sr.’s mother). John’s father had the 
mortuary, and his mother had a boardinghouse. He and John Chiatovich 
had been best friends since childhood. Dad spent the four years of high school 
in Tonopah. It was stable, and it was home, and he loved it. He shone, and 
he won an appointment to West Point. But that summer after he graduated 

(1927 or 1928) he lost an eye 
while chopping wood, and for 
about two years they fought to 
save it. He had many, many 
operations. I think the story 
is that he had his twenty-first 
operation on his twenty-first 
birthday. They couldn’t save 
it, so he had one blind eye. 

Because of that, my father 
immediately started mining 
instead of going to West 
Point, but he would not have 
lasted .... [laughter] I can’t 
think of anything that my fa- 
ther was less like than mili¬ 
tary. He was a miner. He loved 
mining. He was, I guess, a 
master miner. I’ve heard that 
from young geologists who 
used to come and follow him 
around. He j ust knew what he 
was doing. They said that he 
could follow a vein in a stope 
blindfolded. 

Fairly soon after high 
school he must have started 
working at the Mary Mine, 



“[My Uncle Bob] was, of course, a ladies’ man — 
very handsome and much beloved by women, and I 
loved him to pieces.” Bob Chiatovich in 1937. (Pho¬ 
tograph courtesy of Leon Hill.) 


169 


The 

Families 



170 


The 

Families 


because in my mother’s diary before they were married, she said, “My hon 
came down from the hill to visit, and I fixed a cake for my hon.” So the 
miners lived up there in a bunkhouse at the Mary Mine. He might have 
worked there for as long as five years or so before he worked his way into the 
superintendent’s job. That was kind of a big deal I would imagine, because 
he was a young man, about twenty-five years old, and it was a big operation. 

As a child I understood how hard he worked. I was just old enough to 
know that my parents struggled terribly. There were three of us children, 
and everybody else only had one child. I knew that things were really very 
difficult financially. He left before I ever woke up in the morning and came 
back home after dark most of the time. When they were working Argentite, 
they had to come across the flats and the sand hills, which is an invitation 
for being stuck at all times, or the car would break down. They would all try 
to go in one car, generally in Daddy’s old pickup, so if they weren’t home by 
a certain time, the women were supposed to come looking for them. Of 
course, that could be like eight o’clock at night, [laughter] And if they were 
within sight, or if they were across the flats, they would start a bonfire, so 
that we would know, “Come get us.” Otherwise, we just had to go out look- 
ing for them. We had a couple of real bad winters (I don’t think that hap- 
pened very often), and when the guys would come home they had to be dead 
tired, but they’d still have to dig up each other’s pipelines and unfreeze them 
to get water. They worked terribly hard. 

So mining was Daddy’s life. He dreamed it and ate it and drank it. And 
he was going to find that gold mine! They’re such gamblers. Well, he mar- 
ried the right woman, because my mother was a very strong person. My 
mother was actually deserted by her mother. Her father, whom she adored 
completely, eventually got her back when the people where her mother left 
her sent her on a train to Blair Junction with her name on her shoulder. She 
was six years old, and she waited until her dad heard from somebody that she 
was there waiting for him to come get her. From there on he just dragged her 
around with him—not exactly a nice existence. He was a heavy drinker 
also, but they were devoted to each other. Her life was taking care of him, 
not him doing much for her. He bought her a diamond ring and made sure 
she had pretty dresses, but she often sat outside in the truck waiting for him 
to come out of the bar, and she’d drive him home when she was just eleven 
years old. 

My mother’s father, my granddad, Frank Hill, was the most outlandish, 
eccentric character, and I loved him to pieces. He was so cool. He was a 
hoist man. He was a master mechanic. If something didn’t work and he 
didn’t have the part, he would invent it and/or make it, as did his brother, 
my Uncle Fayette Hill. They had genius mechanical skills. But Grandpa 
Frank would go off on a three-month binge, just disappear. We’d always find 
out where he was, because somebody would call, and we’d go get him. 

He would buy a pair of khaki clothes—khaki shirt, khaki pants. He’d 
put them on, and those clothes stayed on him until they wore out. He ah 



ways had a really small trailer house—just one of those little rounded things. 
They weren’t furnished like they are today. He’d just drop on the bed and 
sleep with his cigarette between his fingers and with the radio on. 

But he always had coins in his pockets, and when any kids were around, 
he’d reach into his pockets and throw them, and the kids would scramble for 
them. He was very gruff—pretended like he was just mean and didn’t like 
anything or anybody. And he used to go, “Who-ah-ha-he-ha!” [in a deep, 
scary voice] to the little children, and my two sisters were terrified! I thought 
it was the funniest thing in the world. My granddad was a real funny guy. 
Just a character. He was also a carpenter. He rebuilt a hotel that he burned 
down. He could do about anything he wanted to do. He was about five-feet- 
six high and almost that much wide, and he wore his pants hanging way 
down just like the boys today wear their pants, because his tummy hung over 
the top. [laughter] Oh, he was so cute. Only shaved every few months, and 
he used to tell me I brushed my teeth too much: “Look at me, I have all of 
my teeth, and I’ve never brushed them. It wears them out.” And he died 
with all of his teeth, I will say that. But they weren’t very pretty, [laughter] 

Neither of my parents had anyone to learn from—neither of them had a 
home [while growing up], so neither of my parents had a pattern for a family. 
And yet, they were two individuals that knew exactly what they wanted to 
do. They wanted to have a good, stable family. My dad decided he didn’t 
know anything, but “Frances’ll figure it out.” So Mom was the disciplinar- 
ian, and she was in charge of him, too. He left it up to her—everything from 
finances to children—and she took care of him very well. He loved us, but 
we were just his play-time people, and after work he’d read to us until he 
went to sleep, which was pretty quick, [laughter] On the other hand, Mother 
was very intuitive about mothering. How she came up with some of it really 
surprises me. And how well educated she was, because she wasn’t allowed to 
finish high school. She had to go with her dad to the mines .... He took 
her out of school when she had just started her junior year. It killed her, 
because she loved school. She was studying Latin and wanted to be a doctor. 


171 


The 

Families 


Swinging Socialites 

When my parents were first married during the Mary Mine heyday, they 
were probably what would amount to the swinging socialites. My mother’s 
diary was very short, covering the year before they were married and prob- 
ably two years after I was born, but it really got across to me what a social 
world they had and how closely knit they were with their friends and how 
they kept track of each other. They went out of their way to be really social. 
She would describe trying to be a fancy cook, because she’s having so-and-so 
and so-and-so over for dinner, and then she would describe what so-and-so’s 
dinner party was like and what they wore. 

The fashion! We have all sorts of pictures of my mother in these really 
great getups, and we never knew our mother as a clothes horse at all. Of 



172 


The 

Families 


course, when we were growing up, my mother had maybe three house dresses, 
and they were always tattered. And I know that made my dad feel bad: my 
dad really cared. But early on Mother was very, very into having a new party 
dress every time there was a dance. The mother I knew was the most un¬ 
spoiled person in the entire world—the most down-to-earth, sensible, per- 
son; but this person we read about in this diary was peeved because her party 
dress didn’t arrive in time for the dance, [laughter] 

Oh, they were so social! They would to go to breakfast next door, run 
over to Goldfield and see so-and-so, on to Tonopah to see somebody else, 
and on their way home stop up at the Mary Mine and visit and see who was 
there and then come home and have dinner with somebody, or somebody 
was dropping in, or they were going to Fish Lake for a party. They were far 
from being isolated. 

But the war, of course, is what really closed it down. From there on, 
there were just the thirty to thirty-three of us that comprised Silver Peak. 
They called themselves “the clan.” When we went overnight on fishing trips 
for the Fourth of July or to the rodeo or whatever, we went as a clan. It was 
an interactive, extended family, and it was absolutely the most perfect way 
to grow up. We belonged. We were part of a large, extended family. Every¬ 
body took care of everybody. 


Family Corporation 


The three cousins—Flarvey Flumphrey, Stanley Chiatovich, Ernest 
Shirley—formed a corporation for their mining endeavor when they came 
home from Reno in order to try to make a living for themselves. This was 
after the big mining interests were gone. The corporation included mining 
operations and the cattle operations. They decided to run some cattle, and 
Flarvey Flumphrey was in charge of the cattle because he was a horse person. 
My dad was a miner, obviously, and Ernie Shirley, his cousin, was also a 
miner. They were the three major holders, and then they took care of vari¬ 
ous people on the side, like another cousin, Louis, and Baba, who was Louis 
and Ernie’s mother and my dad’s aunt. 

The same corporation also owned the store where their wives worked. 
The store used to be called the Northern Supply Company, which was owned 
by the Smiths (Lindsay and Gordon) before they moved to Gabbs. There 
was a movie theater on one end, but I never could get them to open the 
movie theater for me. [laughter] There’d once been a hardware store. Any¬ 
way, they opened the bar, grocery store, and the post office, and the three 
ladies took shifts running them. 

In 1947 or 1948, it burned. Oh, boy, do we remember that! It was abso¬ 
lute .... Well, it was just a conflagration. It was early in the morning, and 
I saw there was a fire down there. I used to babysit my younger sisters during 
the day while my mother worked. (My mother never worked the bar at night.) 
I ran out our back steps, which were long and kind of steep, down toward 



173 



“The store used to be called the Northern Supply Company, which was owned by the 
Smiths (Lindsay and Gordon) before they moved to Gabbs.” The Northern Supply Com¬ 
pany in 1938. (Photograph courtesy of Barbara Dodgion.) 


Ruby and Ernie Shirley’s house screaming at the top of my lungs, “Fire! Fire! 
Fire!” And nobody was home, so I went on to the power company and 
screamed .... My cousin, Gene Boyd, was the power company guy. The 
power station is where the only telephone in town was, so maybe that’s what 
I was supposed to do. He got on the phone and told Tonopah that we needed 
any help anybody could send. 

We had a two-room, walk-in icebox in the store. Because we had cattle 
and slaughtered cows, we had whole carcasses, et cetera. And because we 
were quite a ways away from civilization, we had crates and bags—large 
stores of things. Anyway, the one thing that remained with us forever was 
the smell of the cooking eggs and ham .... Nothing was left standing. 

We children thought it was quite an adventure, of course. It was very 
eye-opening to us. A fire like that makes your blood run cold, but the excite¬ 
ment was just too much. My little sister Jaci wanted to run away. She was 
very afraid. And all the children were herded into my backyard, because it 
was far enough to be out of harm’s away, but we saw a barrel go way up into 
the air and explode—oil barrels I would assume. 

They sent help out from Tonopah. It took a little while, and by that 
time there was nothing anybody could do. That night after the fire, when 
everything was gone, people came from everywhere—from Hawthorne and 
Goldfield—people that wanted to help, and people who just wanted to look. 
Many that we didn’t even know brought food. We must have had a very 
large potluck that night. 

It was a catastrophe for the adults. Absolutely. First of all, they had to 
regroup for the post office immediately. There was nothing salvageable. I 
can’t tell you whether they were well covered by insurance. If they weren’t, 
they lost everything. They weren’t a very going concern in the first place, 
although they were listed in Dunn and Bradstreet. My father was very proud 








174 


The 

Families 


when he got word that they had been listed in Dunn and Bradstreet. It was 
a very big deal to him. It meant he was legitimate. I thought that meant he 
was rich. Far from it. It probably meant he wrote a letter, [laughter] 

After the fire, I saw my dad and Harvey working over their books. I 
knew it was bad. Out of three businesses, one business was suddenly gone. 

I don’t know how they pulled out of it, but they did. Nobody lost their 
house or had to sell their car or anything, but they didn’t have a lot other 
than that anyway. And for the town, the grocery store, which was more like 
a quick stop, was gone; along with the bar, which was a social center; and 
the post office, which was also a social center. We’d had a jukebox in the 
bar, which you could just reach around the back and click it—you didn’t 
have to put money in it. Wonderful! [laughter] We didn’t have a movie, but 
we had a jukebox. 

o- 

I cherish the Silver Peak part of my life. It’s a magical place, because 
Pete and I had the entire salt flats. We had our hills. We had the mountains 
behind us. We just knew them so well. When we couldn’t ride our bikes, we 
hiked. We had the sand dunes over on Goat Island. We had the tailings to 
play in. We even tried to ski on the tailings, but it just didn’t work! [laugh- 
ter] To me as a child, it was adventure as well. I couldn’t wait to get up each 
day and do whatever it was we were going to do, because it was exciting! 
Sometimes we would play cops and robbers, and we had like half a county to 
play in! [laughter] We just had a wonderful time. 

I know I’m independent for that reason. For instance, in bringing up my 
children, going to the hospital is not the first thing I think of, or calling the 
doctor is not the first thing I think of. I take care of it myself. I look back on 
some of the things that my mother did, and she must have been petrified. 
She didn’t have a mother to call. My sister Barbara nearly died of whooping 
cough when she was just a few months old. Can you imagine? Out in the 
middle of nowhere and not knowing what to do. 

Also, I was allowed to be very athletic, and I had a lot of time to read. I 
think we were well educated because we read a lot. And I’d go around with 
my dad oftentimes. He thought I was funny and cute, and that was a nice 
feeling . . . growing up someplace where everybody loves you. 


- -O - 


BARBARA DODGION: WE DID THINGS TOGETHER 

Barbara Chiatovich Dodgion was the second child of Stanley and Frances 
Chiatovich. Born four years after Janice, she may have missed some of the good 
times, as Janice claimed, but she didn’t miss a beat in describing the intertwined 
genealogy of her family and the close friendships that transcended blood ties. In 
Barbara’s oral history, her happy childhood memories reflect a feeling of safety in a 



community where the residents were 
nearly all related — aunts, uncles, 
cousins, grandparents. 

I was born in Tonopah, Ne¬ 
vada, February 25, 1940, delivered 
by Dr. Craig. My parents lived in 
Silver Peak, and they drove to 
Tonopah so I could be born. My 
father was Stanley Martin 
Chiatovich, and my mother was 
Frances Lillian Flill Chiatovich. 

My father, Stanley, was very busy 
with mines there in Silver Peak. 

My mother, Frances Lillian Hill, was in Goldfield, but her father [Frank 
Hill] ran the mill with my father in Silver Peak. When my mother married 
my father in 1934, she moved to Silver Peak. I was born in 1940, and we 
moved to Gabbs in 1950 when I was in the fifth grade. 

My grandfather on my father’s side was Martin Chiatovich, who was the 
son of John, one of the early settlers in that area who started the first cya¬ 
nide mill. They came into Fish Lake and settled on a ranch there. Martin 
was married to Nellie Cleary, and they were the parents of my father, Stanley 
Martin Chiatovich. Our family has double cousins on my mother’s side of 
the family. My mother’s father Frank Hill was married to Lillian; and she was 
sister to Geraldine or Gerry, whose husband was Fayette Hill; and Fayette 
and my grandfather Frank Hill were brothers. So sisters married brothers. 

My Grandmother Lillian divorced Frank. She went down to San Fran¬ 
cisco where she remarried a man named Jorgenson and had another family. 
But my Grandfather Frank stayed up here and worked in the mines and in 
the mills. After the divorce, my mother stayed with her father. Granddad 
then married a lady by the name of Betty, but they were only married for two 
years when my mother was nineteen. Well, in her diary it says that Mama 
and Daddy were engaged on Christmas Day in 1933, and they got married 
February 2 in 1934. Ruby, who was Betty’s sister, and Ernie Shirley stood up 
with them, and I think they were married in Goldfield. Then they went 
(and this amazes me and my daughters) on a honeymoon, and Ruby and 
Ernie Shirley went with them, [laughter] I think they went to Las Vegas, and 
they had a good time. Mom and Ruby went shopping a lot, and then I don’t 
know what the men did. [laughter] 

I knew that we were all very close when I grew up, because we always 
had potluck dinners out on the marsh. And whenever we did anything, it 
was all together. We went swimming together. We walked, everything .... 
We just did it together. That’s how you grew up—with other people. Every 
evening Mama and Ruby and my sister Jaci and I would all meet, and we’d 



Barbara Dodgion. (Photograph by Victoria 
Ford.) 


175 


The 

Families 




176 


The 

Families 



“I knew that we were all very close when I grew up. .. . Whenever we did anything it was 
all together.” Left to right: Jaci, Frances, Janice, and Barbara Chiatovich with an uni¬ 
dentified friend in 1947. (Photograph courtesy of Barbara Dodgion.) 


go for a walk down by the water hole or down by the marsh. We just walked 
around Silver Peak. It was always fun, just walking along and seeing every¬ 
thing. We would skip and hop, and Jaci and I would be way ahead while my 
mother and Ruby would be talking. They were close friends. 

In a community like that, when you don’t have a lot of people, every¬ 
body more or less does things together. Everyone was very close. We’d all get 
together and go out on the flat and have a supper. We [children] were free 
even in the town, because everybody knew everybody. We had certain areas 
that we couldn’t go in. We had a hill behind our house, and if my sister and 
I wanted to go up on that hill, we had to make sure that our mother knew 
that’s where we were going. Everybody kept an eye on everybody else. You 
couldn’t do anything bad or everybody would know, [laughter] We weren’t 
allowed to wander—my mother did know where we were. 

Most of the people who lived there in Silver Peak were all related, so 
more or less everybody owned or had a part of the work to do. [laughter] The 
women who ran the store were my mother, Frances Chiatovich, Ruby Shirley 
(who is now Ruby Griffin), and Virginia Humphrey. 

After the fire burned down the first store, it wasn’t too long before they 
started the other store up on the main street where people continued to get 
their mail and their supplies. My Uncle Marco [Martin’s brother] would bring 
in the supplies from Tonopah. The railroad came in from Hawthorne and 




went over to Tonopah, and they had a stop where you turn off to go to Silver 
Peak. They would leave the mail, and my Uncle Marco picked it up. Some- 
times my mother would go, and we went with her, like when we were ill. 
We’d take our paper dolls and things, and my sister and I would play in the 
back of the car .... Mother usually wasn’t there a long time. We’d go down 
with her when she tended the store, too. They took turns operating the 
store. 

Our family was very close, too. My mother was a homebody. She was 
involved in community things, but her family came first. She made sure that 
we all were taken care of. Always did. She was a good cook, loved to cook. 
While I was growing up, my father loved to read, and he would read a story 
to us every night. He wouldn’t finish the book all at once. We’d have certain 
chapters every night. We’d climb up on his lap and listen to stories. Black 
Beauty was my favorite, and My Friend Flicka. Also on Fridays at school, we 
would have a book like Treasure Island, and my teacher would read certain 
chapters for an hour or so. 

Mommy did her sewing at night. She either would embroidery or mend, 
or she sewed dresses. She did that when everybody was in bed or sleeping. 
She sewed most of our clothes. It was not like going down here [in Carson 
City] where we have lots of stores. We would go to Tonopah and do our 
shopping sometimes, which was fun. We would take off and go to Reno to 
the rodeo, and Mama would do some shopping then. But in a town like that, 
if somebody was going to town and we couldn’t go, we would give them a 
list, and they would shop for everybody. 



177 


The 

Families 


“My Uncle Marco would bring in the supplies from Tonopah." Left to right: Marco 
Chiatovich, Roy Cleary, and an unidentified gentleman, in Silver Peak. (Photo¬ 
graph courtesy of Barbara Dodgion.) 






178 


The 

Families 


Often when we 
wanted something, we or- 
dered it from the catalog. 

Catalogs were very preva¬ 
lent—Sears, Montgomery 
Ward. I don’t remember 
Penney’s. In Mama’s diary, 

I laughed, because she kept 
waiting for a dress that she 
wanted to have for her 
dance, and it wouldn’t 
come. The coat came, but 
the dress didn’t come. 

Then if it didn’t fit just 
right, there were always 
people that would help 
adjust it. That’s how things 
were done. Our favorite 
thing for my sister Jaci and I was the Christmas catalog. I think we marked 
every doll, [laughter] We would mark mostly toys, but every now and then 
there was a dress or something that we liked, or shoes. We got our Christmas 
presents by the mail, so we always made sure to order things way ahead of 
time. 

For food, we would go to Tonopah. For meat, our families owned the 
cattle. Harvey was the main one that took care of them, but I imagine they 
all did. You just had the wide open ranges, and that’s where the cows were, 
and the horses, too. And then they’d have a roundup every fall, and they 
would brand the calves and take care of them. Everybody did that, unless 
somebody was ill or something. Everybody did everything together, or things 
didn’t get done, [laughter] Children weren’t really allowed to go to the 
roundup, because that was a time when the adults were working and couldn’t 
watch us. But I do remember the cow camps, where the women would do the 
cooking and take the food to the men. 

If Mama and Daddy had to go off someplace, I remember staying with 
my cousin, Virginia, and I’m sure I stayed with Ruby and Ernie and other 
relatives. They always kept an eye on us, but mostly we went with our par¬ 
ents. If they couldn’t take their kids, I guess they just didn’t go. I went every¬ 
where with my mother. When she was busy doing something, we were taught 
to be quiet and not interrupt. 

I only remember happiness when we were in Silver Peak. I had a won¬ 
derful family, and I just remember good times. I imagine there were hard 
times, but when you’re a kid, you don’t know that, [laughter] I guess if there 
were hard times, they didn’t harp on it. It was during wartime. Things were 
hard to get, but I’m sure it probably wasn’t as hard for them as it was for 
some, because they were pretty self-sufficient. They had the cows, they had 





“While I was growing up, my father loved to read, and he 
would read a story to us every night." Left to right: Stanley, 
Barbara, and Jaci Chiatovich. (Photograph courtesy 
of Barbara Dodgion.) 






food, but everybody had to ration, so I’m sure it was hard for my mother and 
father. 

Mama was always a homemaker until after Daddy died of Valley Fever 
in 1960. Valley Fever attacks your spinal system and your brain: you lose 
control of your balance and things like that. Down in the Owens Valley, 
down by Bishop and in that area, you can get that fever, and one of his aunts 
had died from it. Actually, he had an operation at Stanford in San Francisco 
to take the fluid from his brain. Fie came through the operation just fine, but 
that night he got a blood clot in his leg, and it traveled to his heart, and he 
died. After his death, Mama became postmaster of Gabbs then moved to 
Yerington after she retired. 


179 


The 

Families 


o 


RUBY GRIFFIN: THE FAMILY BUSINESS 


Store and Post Office 

When the town died 
down after the mines closed 
down, we bought the grocery 
store out and the bar— 



Ruby (Shirley) Griffin has lived in Silver Peak more than 60 years. Born in Texas, 
Ruby arrived in Silver Peak during the Depression as a young, divorced mother 
needing a home for herself and her son. She lived with her sister Betty, who was 
married to Frank Hill. Frank’s teenage daughter, Frances, was also living in their 
home near the Mary Mine. 

Frances and Ruby quickly 
formed a friendship that lasted 
a lifetime. Frances was dating 
a young miner named Stanley 
Chiatovich. Ruby met and mar¬ 
ried his cousin, Ernest Shirley, 
who was also a miner, and they 
lived near the Mary Mine. 

Ernie died in 1959 from silico¬ 
sis, and Ruby stayed on in Sil¬ 
ver Peak serving as the town’s 
postmaster for forty-seven 
years. At the time of her oral 
history interview she was mar¬ 
ried to Milton “Griff’ Griffin, 
and her best friend Frances had 
recently died. 


Ruby and Ernie Shirley. (Photograph courtesy of 
Sherry Mattei.) 





180 


The 

Families 


Frances and I and Virginia Humphrey (she was Ernie’s sister) and her hus- 
band. And we ran that for years. It was [the former] Smith brothers’ store .... 
It was also a grocery store, and we had a meat market. 

We all shared the work. I was the postmaster. That’s when I took over 
the post office from Claire [Curran], November 8,1944. But everybody helped 
run the store, and everyone worked at the bar. When the mail came in, one 
person was always there to take over everything else while I just took care of 
the mail. I had Sunday off, and we didn’t keep as long of hours on a Saturday. 

The mail would come in just once a day. At that time the mail would 
come from Big Pine, and then it went on over to Goldfield. The next day it 
came in from Goldfield and went the other direction. The mail carrier stayed 
overnight in Goldfield: he had a cabin over there. Well, he would come to 
Silver Peak in the morning, but the time varied depending on which direc- 
tion he was coming. I think that he got in about ten-thirty or eleven o’clock. 
It especially varied in the wintertime, because sometimes he had trouble 
getting over that mountain. On the days he would be coming from Gold- 
field he would get there earlier, because he just had a short drive then. 


Silicosis Strikes 


That was during the war, and some of us stayed and some had to go to 
service. It was quite a comedy for awhile. Ernie went as far as Salt Lake City, 
but then he couldn’t pass the test to get into the military. He had been in 
the mines too long. . . his lungs. They told him he had silicosis, and he 
didn’t believe it. He came back and told me, “Oh, I didn’t get a thorough 
examination.” 

Then the military called in everybody that had already had examina- 
tions. When they called him again, he told me, “Now this time they’re go- 
ing to test me like I want them to test me.” He really had a lot of determina- 
tion. But determination or not, he had silicosis. They never even gave him 
all of his tests again. 

Well, that time he came back and decided he would go to Tonopah. We 
knew the doctor over there real well and wanted him to x-ray him again. I 
was with him, and the doctor over there didn’t want to test him. He kept 
telling him, “Forget it. Forget it.” 

“No,” Ernie said, “I’m not going to forget it. I want my lungs x-rayed. 
You’re the one that takes x-rays of everybody that works in the mines, and 
you’re going to x-ray me.” And so the doctor x-rayed him. 

Ernie said, “All right. I want to see the x-ray. I’m not leaving this office. 
I paid for that x-ray, and I’m going to see it!” 

The doctor didn’t want to show him, but when he did, he was so mad 
that he threw that x-ray at him. He says, “Take the goddamned thing and 
look at it. I don’t know how you ever got the silicosis you got, but it looks to 
me like somebody shot you in the lungs with a shotgun.” That’s just what he 
told him, so it was bad. 



Then Ernie decided he would go to Carson City. He wouldn’t let me go 
with him and drive or anything. They couldn’t do anything for him either. 
His lungs were gone. There was no hope. There was nothing they could do 
for him. He could still work, but I think he got tired quicker than the others 
did. He was one of the ball players, and he would just bend over with trying 
to breathe after he would run. But when I said, “I don’t think you should run 
because of your breathing,” he said, “My breathing’s all right. Everybody 
does that.” It’s wonderful when you’ve got that much determination, but 
sometimes it doesn’t do you any good. 

He thought he’d been careful. And he had bought those wet. . . those 
breathers. 5 He wore that on his face, and he was careful but not careful 
enough. I think that he would take it off, especially with the men talking to 
him. He would take it off while telling them what to do. And I think he took 
it off a lot more than he realized, or took it off outside of the mine thinking 
he was out of danger. Even though he was the boss, if they were working in 
places where he wanted it to be exact, he did the drilling—to be sure those 
blasts went off just exactly like he wanted them to and headed in the right 
direction. And I think he just did that too often. 

But then he lived fifteen more years and died in 1959. He went on work- 
ing right on up to the last. When you were living with them, and they just go 
ahead strong like that (and he had lots of willpower), there’s nothing that 
you could do. We didn’t talk about it unless it came up, because .... Well, 
it makes anyone angry that has something wrong with them, and then they 
think you’re trying to make it worse than they think it is. So we just avoided 
that one subject. It was his body; he wanted to do it his way. And if it upset 
him, that certainly didn’t do him any good. I don’t know how many died of 
silicosis, because so many times they seemed to die of pneumonia or some- 
thing else instead. 


181 


The 

Families 


Post-Office Perspective 


I liked working in the post office. I like people. I have seen the popula¬ 
tion go up and down here, [laughter] I’m always glad when it’s going up, not 
when it is going down. 

We had improvements in the postal service. The mail has always come 
in once a day and gone out once a day. It used to come in from California 
first. Oh, we got so many complaints when they changed it, from people 
ordering from the catalogs—Sears and Montgomery Ward from California. 
It’s unbelievable the way you could just order down there, and it would come 
right on back up so fast—maybe two days. Well, then it didn’t come up so 
fast when it changed and came from Las Vegas. That slowed it down, and it 
took about a week to get up here [in the late 1960s]. They claimed when 
they had made the change that it would be for the better, that it would bring 
the mail in faster. They always tell you that, [laughter] 



Fire Destroys Business 


182 


The 

Families 


One of our refrigerators had stopped in the store, and we sent it to be 
fixed. We had just gotten it back, and everything was all right when Marco 
Chiatovich, who had a key to the grocery store, came in that morning to 
pick up the mail. He left right after six o’clock in the morning, and we didn’t 
normally open up until nine. We decided that refrigerator must have set the 
fire off, because before we opened someone told us that the building was on 
fire. 

We rushed down there. In the far end was the post office with a big, 
plate-glass window, so we just broke that, and I got in there and saved all of 
the mail! I even saved the old desk we used. I was determined to get every- 
thing, including all of the old records. I took all of the mail out of all of 
everybody’s boxes, so I even saved all of that. The post office was closed off 
from where the fire was going in the grocery store. They were screaming at 
me, “Get out of there!” Well, I knew I was safe in there. I could see there was 
smoke starting to come in around the door, but there was no danger to it. 
And not a one of our three husbands was in town: they were all up at the 
mine working. The men who were in town at the time helped, and we fought 
the fire by hand, but the entire building went. Everything. 

When the Black Mammoth building went up for sale, we acquired that 
and moved over there. Then I moved into the small, one-room, wooden 
building, which is still standing near the mobile home that is the post office 
today. 



“1 liked working in the post office. I like people.” The old post office in Silver Peak, 
1996. (Photograph by Victoria Ford.) 





Barroom Incident 


One night three men were having a party there in the bar, and they just 
got out of hand. That’s when I decided I was going to get out of the bar. 
What got me was that you think you know people .... I had known those 
men ever since I had been here. And it was about one o’clock, so I just cut 
them off [no more alcoholic drinks]. Then they just threw things at me like 
the salt shaker. 

I didn’t serve them another drink, and they didn’t come behind that bar 
either. We had a blackjack there. I said, “You come behind that, either one 
of you, and this is it.” Oh, they told me how smart I thought I was and 
criticized me and called me names. But somehow Ernie, who was up at the 
Mary Mine, heard about it, and he came down to see. And when he did, 
they were fired, and they moved away from here, too. 

They left after two or three hours. I think I got home about four o’clock 
in the morning. I wasn’t scared. I was mad. 

The one fellow, the fighter Eddie Murphy, was working under my hus- 
band, who was up there at the mine that night. He was the worst. He always 
thought he was smart. Of course, he was just a fat boxer. But that was natural 
for Ed if he got drunk. He really tried to take advantage. And to tell you the 
truth, when he was in the ring, he was a good boxer, but none of the men 
were afraid of him. And he had wife problems and girlfriend problems all of 
the time. He brought it on himself. He had a drinking problem. I think 
that’s the reason he didn’t get any farther with his boxing career. He just lost 
control. 

Most of the miners just have a few drinks, the majority, and maybe a 
third drink, and that’s the end of it. There were certain ones that couldn’t 
handle it, but not many. [If they had a problem] most of them would go and 
help themselves. 


183 


The 

Families 


Nivloc Park 


One year we got involved in building the park at the Nivloc. Well, we 
just took toilets and old furniture up there, and we put some tables up there. 
The men built some fireplaces with rocks so they could put grills on it. The 
park was mostly for picnics, but there were different ones that stayed over- 
night, and through the years they continued to camp up there overnight. 
They had some wild parties up there. 

The people who started camping there two or three days didn’t want 
this area made into a park. They wanted it for their own private use. They 
said we were taking over, when we were the ones that had started it origb 
nally. So we just decided that we were going up there in spite of their atti¬ 
tude. I was driving our pickup, and this fellow was trying to pass me and 
started forcing me off the road. But it was wide enough that I just moved 



184 


The 

Families 


over and just got ahead of him and went on. Well, the women that were 
with me, including Frances, said, “Ruby, he’s going to hit you.” 

I said, “I’ve got room to drive. As long as I can drive, I can get ahead of 
him. I know who he is. I think he must be drunk.” 

Well, we got up there, and we got the food ready for serving. Everyone 
was going to have to buy their food that day to raise funds for the pool down 
here in Silver Peak. We had things going pretty well when they just came up 
to us and said, “Well, the party’s over.” They just started trying to tear every- 
thing up, and, of course, that just started a fight—the men and the women, 
too. We just let them have it. [laughter] 

Can you believe that we just got a downpour of rain at that time? That 
was the funniest thing. I was so glad, [laughter] Oh, we just grabbed every¬ 
thing like crazy, because we were right in a place where a cloud burst hit us, 
and it could have caused a flash flood. Some of them were still fighting while 
we were loading up. 

We didn’t think we came out much ahead on the money for the pool, 
[laughter] It was just so wild .... But this is what I liked about it—when we 
came down everybody laughed and said, “We won. Beat the tar out of them.” 
Anyway, the conflict just died out. We just took care of it then, and that was 
the end of it. Oh, we’d talk and laugh about it to ourselves, because we 
thought we won. [laughter] How can you win in a downpour? 

Elton Parsons built the lake for that park. Somehow or another we did 
get $1,100 and paid him. Well, that sounds like a lot, but for the amount of 
work and the days that he went up there and had his men and his equipment 
up there, that wasn’t a drop in the bucket. He closed in the canyon, and 
then the water from the Nivloc Mine went into that lake. Then the state 
furnished and planted fish for kids. Later on I guess the state demanded that 
they close up the Nivloc. And when they did, they closed this tunnel where 
the water came out that watered birds and chickens, and there were fish in 
that lake. It just dried up. 

Friendship with Frances 

Frances had a mother living down there in San Francisco, but she didn’t 
have anything to do with her. I guess she was the one that told me originally 
[about her mother abandoning her], but she didn’t talk much about it, be¬ 
cause she didn’t like to talk against her mother. Frank [her father] arranged 
for her to come back [to Silver Peak], and the people who had her put her on 
the bus. She had to change buses, and they put a tag on her saying where she 
was going. The bus stopped out here [at Blair Junction] and let her off. They 
just put that little kid off right out here up at the highway, and she started 
walking in. 

Well, the trucks didn’t go all the way to the highway, and Frank had told 
the truck driver, “If you see a little kid out there, you pick her up.” 



But when she left San Francisco someone had told her, “If anybody tries 
to pick you up, don’t let them.” [laughter] So they had a problem, until he 
finally talked her into getting in the truck. 

Frank kept her from then on. He boarded her out if he was living out on 
a job. As a matter of fact, one woman she lived with for several years off and 
on. Frank picked her up and kept her in the summertime if he could. Then 
when Frank and my sister Betty were married, Frances was living with them. 
[Frances and Ruby met at this time.] 

Frances would always say, “Well, you are my best friend,” and we were 
the best of friends. She was a very nice person, and she was very interesting. 
She did lots of handwork of all sorts, and she was a good housekeeper. Frances 
lived right here in back of me. Her house faced the highway, and mine faced 
this street down here. 

We went for walks every evening. Mostly we followed the same route. 
We would just go out of town down by the powerhouse, out on that road, 
and then go out there on the flat. The reason that we did, it was easy walk- 
ing. When we started walking here in town ... we were just like the Pied 
Piper. And Frances always had a dog, and I always had a dog, so we had 
plenty of dogs and kids, [laughter] We didn’t mind, and we didn’t say, “Do 
this, and do that.” If they wanted to walk with us, they had to know how [to 
behave]. Out there the dogs could run and the kids could run, and we could 
just go on about our own business and walk. This was to get her exercise and 
mine. I was born and raised on a ranch where everybody worked. You didn’t 
have to take walks there to get your exercise. There were always cows to 
milk, and the women did that because there were other chores for the boys, 
[laughter] But housework and watching kids, that doesn’t always give you 
that much exercise. 

O 

When Frances and Stan moved to Gabbs in 1950, I’m sure we must 
have paid her something for the supplies and her interest [in the business]. 
And then Virginia Humphrey and I ran it. Well, Virginia never liked to 
work, really. She was a little older than we were. So when Frances got out of 
it, then Virginia wanted out, so we paid her off, and she didn’t work any- 
more. Harvey had the service station across the street, and he was working 
for the power company, so Virginia would sell the gas and do things over 
there while he was on duty. But as soon as he was off duty, then he took over. 

Then I ran the store and post office. There weren’t that many people in 
Silver Peak then. It had died down a lot. And, of course, my hours weren’t as 
long .... When we started back up after the fire, we just had a small store 
there. While I was working in the post office, people would just gather up 
their groceries, and then I would go in there and ring it up on the cash 
register. They had to wait on themselves. Then it got to where I just did the 
post office. The mail came out of Tonopah, and if people wanted groceries, 
Marco Chiatovich would bring out their groceries for them. 


185 


The 

Families 



186 


The 

Families 


After Frances moved to Gabbs, which was about one hundred miles 
away, we still visited. Stan and Ernie still had mining equipment, and they 
were in touch about different claims. She came over quite often, and we 
made it over there quite often. Ernie passed away first, because Ernie had 
been in bed some time, but they were both sick at the same time. 

Then Frances took Stan over into California. [This time] was tougher 
for her .... She was away from home, away from her kids, worried sick 
about him, trying to get something done for him. I was right here at home 
with Ernie. After he got out of the hospital, he said, “I’m never going back. 
They aren’t doing me any good. I’m passed the helping stage.” 


- -O - 


SUE HUMPHREY THOMPSON: FAMILY TIES 

Sue Humphrey Thompson wrote a brief memoir of her childhood in Silver Peak for 
this project. The daughter of Virginia Shirley Humphrey and Harvey Humphrey, 
Sue was also the granddaughter of Anna “Baba” Cleary Shirley and cousin to 
Janice (Chiatovich) Johnson and Barbara (Chiatovich) Dodgion. She offered de¬ 
scriptions of some important Silver Peak personalities. 

When I was born in 1934, my folks were living in Silver Peak, and I 
spent my childhood there. My mother, Virginia Shirley Humphrey, also was 
born in Silver Peak. Her mother, Anna Cleary Shirley, lived in the house 
across the street out our back door. My mother had grown up in that house. 
Anna, or “Baba” as everyone called her, was from an old Nevada family but 
was born just across the California border in old Benton. In 1884, when she 
was three months old, her parents, Katherine and John Cleary, moved to the 
Silver Peak/Blair area. Baba lived most of her life in Esmeralda County. 
Katherine had been the first white child born in Aurora. 

Baba married my Grandfather John Shirley in 1900. John had been liv- 
ing in Goldfield and was part owner of the Palace Bar and later served as a 
deputy sheriff. He moved to Silver Peak where he owned the Silver Peak 
Palace Bar and was also involved with mining properties. I’m not sure when 
he moved to Silver Peak, but I have a record of him buying property there in 
1905. 

Baba was tall for that time at a height of five feet, ten inches, and John 
was six feet. When they married, John was thirty-nine and Baba sixteen. 
They had seven children. Two died in infancy. John’s reputation was such 
that his saloon was well managed and little or no trouble occurred. He was 
soft spoken and appreciated good manners in both his business life and home 
life. My mother related a strict adherence to table manners. She also thought 
him kind and caring. I have old postcards from him to her when she was a 
very small child. He had endearing names for her and would assure her how 
he missed the family and would be home soon. These cards were from a time 



when the family was relocat' 
ing to Oakland where he was 
establishing a business and 
finding them a home. They 
only stayed in Oakland three 
years. One of the stories the 
family told was that John was 
underground in one of his 
mines and a large timber fell 
and struck him on the head. 
Because of his muscular neck 
and shoulders, he survived 
without apparent harmful ef- 
fects, but forevermore had a 
dent in his skull. He died May 
28, 1939, at the age of sev¬ 
enty-two. My memories of 
him are sitting in his lap and 
being amazed at his mus- 
tache. I felt very secure and 
special. 

My father, Harvey 
Humphrey, grew up in Man- 
hattan, Nevada, but attended 
Tonopah High School, where 
my mother was also a student. 
They were married in 1929 
when Harvey was twenty-four and Virginia was twenty-three. Within a few 
years they moved to Silver Peak. Aside from living in Tonopah and Reno 
during the war years and a short stint at Hoover Dam construction, my dad 
spent the rest of his eighty-one years in Silver Peak. 

My father worked for John Shirley for a short time, then he and Stanley 
Chiatovich (my mother’s cousin) and Ernest Shirley (my mother’s eldest 
brother) became partners. Their business was mining, and they did explor- 
ing, leasing, and handling claims. The Mohawk at Argentite was a property 
discovered by Ernie, his father, and Harry Stimler. They also did leasing at 
Mary Mine and other areas. Around 1947, the wives of the three partners— 
Virginia, Frances, and Ruby—took a lease on the old Northern building and 
operated a post office, grocery store, and bar on the premises. It burned down 
in a spectacular fire that threatened the entire town. 

The Shirley, Chiatovich, and Humphrey partnership started during the 
1930s, and around 1942 the partners bought range rights and cattle belong- 
ing to Jack and Nellie Coughlin and a partner named Flint, all of Silver 
Peak. The cattle were run in the Clayton Valley during the winter, and 
when summer came they were moved to the mountains in the southwestern 



“Baba married my Grandfather John Shirley in 
1900. ” John and Anna Shirley. (Photograph cour¬ 
tesy of Sherry Mattei.) 


187 


The 

Families 





end of the valley near various springs 
and old cow camps. Jack Coughlin and 
Flint were old and the cattle opera- 
tion was in disarray, so a lot of work 
was required to gather them and get 
things straightened out. My mother 
and I helped when we could, and it 
was quite exciting. Some of the cattle 
were loco and others just wild. Ernie 
and Stanley mostly stayed with the 
mining activities, while Dad took over 
the cattle business. They would all 
help one another as need arose and 
time permitted. They also took on 
other jobs, as work and money were 
in short supply. Everyone got along 
and remained friends for life. I was 
always eager to “help” my dad with the 
horses and cattle, and when the situ¬ 
ation was appropriate he would let me. 
We had a lot of adventures and sto¬ 
ries to remember of that time. My dad 
had spent much of his early years 
working on the ranches in Monitor 
Valley, and his family were horse lov¬ 
ers, so the cattle business was of inter¬ 
est to him. It was difficult to count on 
raising many cattle in that area, so my 
dad could run the cattle and also hold other jobs. Beside his mining activi¬ 
ties, he spent seven-plus years working for the power company in Silver 
Peak, which is now known as Southern California Edison. 

The cattle business led him to become involved in water rights, and he 
spent a lot of time securing the legal rights for the springs and creeks in the 
area. Also, this was a time of change in grazing on public lands, and he 
became involved with the political side of that. It was an era and a place 
where people had to become competent in many fields in order to survive. 
While riding in the mountains looking for cattle, he always kept an eye on 
the rock formations. Along with the stray cattle, he would arrive home with 
a sack of rocks to be panned or assayed. 

My dad was always active in the community of Silver Peak. He served 
Esmeralda County nine years as a state legislator, first as an assemblyman 
from 1958 through 1962, and then as a senator from 1963 through 1966. 
Always aware of the importance of water, he tried to see that the various 
springs and streams in the area were kept open and running for the wild 
creatures. In 1964, he investigated and helped establish Silver Lake up near 





“[My parents] were married in 1929 when 
Harvey was twenty-four and Virginia was 
twenty-three." Virginia Shirley and 
Harvey Humphrey’s engagement photo¬ 
graph. (Photograph courtesy of Sherry 
Mattei.) 





Nivloc. In 1969, he spent lots of time and effort to help with the establish- 
ment of the Silver Peak townsite. He bought the small gas station from the 
estate of Marco Chiatovich and ran it along with a propane service. People 
dropped by the house when they wanted gas, and Harvey would either give 
them the key or walk up and pump the gas. 

Baba Shirley was everyone’s favorite grandmother—a very nurturing 
person. She could make a wonderful meal with “nothing in the house.” She 
cooked on an old wood stove, and her rolls, pies, and other dishes were 
wonderful. She made pies out of everything that she could find. She was the 
eldest of her siblings, and when her mother died young, leaving five boys 
and one girl, Baba became like a mother to the boys. Later her younger 
sister, Nellie, who was married to Martin Chiatovich, died in childbirth. 

Nellie left four boys and one girl behind and some of them spent a great 
deal of time with Baba. In 1939, John Peter Shirley (Pete) was born to Baba’s 
youngest son Louis and his wife Helen. Helen died of complications, and 
Baba again had a son to raise. Even in the last years of her life, children 
would stop by her house and visit, and for school plays and town celebra¬ 
tions a special seat was always reserved for Baba. 

Pete Shirley was five years younger than me. He had red hair and a 
freckled face. He was like a little brother and participated in many of our 
adventures. He was very lovable, and we all thought we should help raise 
him. 

My mother’s sister, Ethel Shirley, and my dad’s cousin, Hank Gilbert, 
moved to Silver Peak about 1936. They had married in Tonopah in 1928 
and were very close to my parents. They lived next door where they owned 
and operated a general store. Their daughter Colleen was four years older 
than I and was like an older sister. During the war years, business in Silver 



Virginia Shirley Humphrey doing dishes in Baba Shirley’s kitchen. (Photograph 
courtesy of Sherry Mattei.) 


189 


The 

Families 







190 


The 

Families 


Peak dwindled, and in 1943 Ethel and Hank literally moved their store to 
Hawthorne and lived there the rest of their lives. 

My mother’s older, brother Ernest Shirley, and his wife Ruby lived on 
the other side of us, where Ruby lives to this day. Louis, a younger brother, 
was in mining throughout his life and lived most of it in Silver Peak. My 
mother’s youngest sister, Jane Shirley, married Gene Boyd, and they had two 
children, John and Sherry [Mattei]. Gene worked as an assayer and with the 
power company for several years after their marriage before leaving Silver 
Peak. Sherry later returned and worked for Foote Mineral for several years. 

Silver Peak was a fun place to grow up. Even though there were very few 
children during most of my school years, the closeness of a small town and 
the unique environment were a rare experience. From the time I was in the 
fourth through the eighth grades there were less than ten students in the 
eight grades. It was a one-room, one-teacher school. We had some good 
teachers and some not so good, but I was lucky enough to have a couple of 
years with Annie Banovich Tomany. 

The reservoir was our swimming hole, and Fay Hill would gather the 
local children and watch out for us as we swam on summer afternoons. The 
large marsh and shallow lake formed by the runoff of the springs that fed the 
reservoir were wonderful for viewing migrating waterfowl and other occa- 
sional animal visitors. A walk around the marsh pond on a summer evening 
was always an adventure. Sometimes we would find injured birds and take 
them to Baba’s chicken house and yard to mend. In the winter, if the wind 
didn’t blow and freeze the marsh pond rough, we could ice skate on the 



Left to right: Jaci and Janice Chiatovich, Sherry Boyd, Sue Humphrey, Pete Shirley, 
and Johnny Boyd. (Photograph courtesy of Sherry Mattei.) 








pond. The salt marsh was a wonderful play yard. A bicycle ride or a walk 
across the salt to Goat Island and then a slide down the sandy side was 
exhausting. 

Some summer evenings, the town would gather at Coyote Knolls, a small 
volcanic outcropping surrounded by the salt marsh. We would build a fire 
and have a wonderful potluck. Games were played, as the marsh was soft and 
smooth, wonderful for hopscotch, jump rope, and other local games. Just 
walking barefoot on the surface was wonderful, and if a moon was full, the 
illumination on the white salt made it very bright. Occasionally, we were 
able to get someone, or maybe a group, to take us to the sand hills where we 
had fun sliding and falling down the steep sand hills. We also looked for 
arrowheads there. Getting the car stuck in the sand was always a possibility. 

Silver Peak had its share of interesting people. Thomas Whyte had been 
a Justice of the Peace and lived in a house made of bottles. The bottles were 
laid like cordwood to make the walls with plaster holding them together. 
When viewed from outside, what you saw were bottle bottoms. He was a real 
gentleman, and every child that graduated from the eighth grade received a 
year’s subscription to National Geographic from him. As I’m sure he was on a 
very limited budget, it’s fortunate that there was only about one of us a year 
graduating. 

Across the street, out our front door, lived Nellie Coughlin. She was the 
widow of Jack Coughlin, from whom the “Partners” had bought their cattle. 
She must have arrived in Silver Peak quite early. I have a paper that said 
Jack paid taxes in 1918 for twenty-seven head of stock. She was there as 
long as I remember and died around 1960 in her nineties. She was small and 
slender with short white hair and a lively face. She always wore a baseball 
cap and a housecoat. When she went out of town, she would dress up in her 
jacket made out of her favorite pinto donkey and wear gardenia perfume. 
She had a quick and lively wit and wasn’t fond of women and children but 
did enjoy men and animals. She claimed a small herd of donkeys that would 
winter in Silver Peak and go over the Silver Peak Range to Fish Lake Valley 
in the summer. She had rescued them at various times of their lives, and 
they would stop by her house occasionally and bray, and she would clean out 
their ears. In the back of her house she had a screened-in, two-room build- 
ing in which she kept “wild canaries.” Twice a year she went to San Fran¬ 
cisco to have her fortune read, and I would take care of the birds plus what¬ 
ever dogs or cats she might have. I heard she had been a horsewoman and 
rode sidesaddle. When the cattle were purchased, the brand was N-B, for 
Nellie Burns, her maiden name. 

As there was no high school in Silver Peak, I stayed with my aunt and 
uncle, Carroll and Elsie Humphrey, in Tonopah for the school season. I went 
home to Silver Peak most weekends, sometimes taking the “stage.” Marco 
Chiatovich had the mail contract to pick up the mail that traveled the main 
highway and take it to the Silver Peak post office. Some of the mail was 
picked up in Tonopah, so he would also fill grocery orders from people in 


191 


The 

Families 



192 


The 

Families 


Silver Peak who needed supplies that Tonopah had. He would also take 
passengers. He had driven a freight stage during the horse and mule era so 
appeared welhsuited for the job. He didn’t drive much over thirty miles per 
hour, and when passed would mutter, “Damn fools, they’ll be picking you up 
in a basket.” Marco also owned and ran the gas station. 

Stanley, Jack, Pat, and Bob Chiatovich were brothers and my older cous- 
ins. They and their families provided wonderful memories in my life. My dad 
always considered Stanley his best friend. He and his family lived kitty- 
corner from my house. Their oldest daughter Janice was two years younger 
than me and was like my younger sister. She was my roommate for one year 
of high school and three years of college. Stanley, Frances, and their three 
daughters moved to Gabbs when Janice was a sophomore in high school. 
Marco was an uncle of the four brothers and lived in the adobe by Baba. He 
had his dinners with the Stanley Chiatovich family. Pat was someone we 
could all ask to help us. He would fix saddles and other cowboy tack so we 
would be safe when riding. He was very kind to everyone and everything. 

Jack was a real cowboy and had been earning his living at it since he was 
a young boy. I’ve watched him ride bucking horses, and he was good. He was 
an outstanding judge of horses, sometimes choosing a young one that ap¬ 
peared to the rest of us as a bad choice, but time would prove him right. He 
was married to Gena, whose last name is now Palmer and lives in Las Vegas. 

Sam and Flora Best were Native American (Paiute or Shoshone) who 
lived in Silver Peak most of the year but also spent time in Fish Lake Valley. 
They were raising their niece, Adeline, who was two years older than me 
and went through elementary school with me. She was very good at draw¬ 
ing, and we spent many hours playing with the paper dolls that she would 
draw. She also taught herself to play the piano and could play at school 
functions, both in Silver Peak and when she went to high school in Tonopah. 
Sam would come down and visit with my dad. Flora’s sister Nellie was mar¬ 
ried to Oscar Gallagher, and they lived in town with their dog and a pet 
goose. Oscar would occasionally cowboy with my dad. 

Fred Vollmar and his wife Lois lived a block down the street behind a 
high fence in a sort of compound. Fred’s father had been an important min¬ 
ing figure in earlier Silver Peak days, and Fred was likewise successful in 
mining ventures. The Vollmars had a small living house, a game house, a 
guesthouse, and a pool. Lois was friendly and pretty. Fred was large, with a 
beautiful speaking voice and an intimidating presence. His sister, Johanna 
Cameron, lived next door to him. She had two adult children. Hugh 
Cameron, who was an early jet pilot, lived with his wife and two children in 
Silver Peak for awhile, probably in 1950. He was in Reno after that and died 
several years ago. Mary Frazzini, Johanna’s daughter, lived in Reno. Her son 
spent some time in the summer with his grandmother in Silver Peak. Bob 
Chiatovich and Hugh were close in age and good friends. 

Water was always a problem in Silver Peak. Despite the abundance of 
spring water in the reservoir and its runoff into the marsh, it wasn’t available 



for town use. Everyone had their own wells, and it was either pumped or 
pulled with an old-fashioned bucket. The water was highly mineralized and 
not too good for drinking. We generally hauled drinking water from the Big 
Spring several miles out of town. Most of us raised in Silver Peak had very 
few dental cavities. My mother loved to garden, but it was a heartbreaking 
experience there. Our pump was too small, and the water seemed to burn 
many of the things she planted. 

During most of my years in Silver Peak, there wasn’t a grocery store. 
Tonopah was fifty miles and Bishop one hundred miles, so people had to 
plan ahead. 

After high school I attended the University of Nevada, Reno but re¬ 
turned to Silver Peak in the summer and at vacation times. After marriage, 
I would travel to Silver Peak several times a year while my folks were living, 
giving my two young sons the chance to share my childhood home, and they 
always looked forward to the adventure. 

But as time went by, the beautiful flat expanse of the salt flat was disfig¬ 
ured by huge evaporation ponds. The water level in the area dropped; and 
the marsh, where we skated in the winter and where migratory birds would 
stop in the spring and fall, atrophied and dried up. The reservoir is no longer 
a place where children can spend a summer afternoon in clear, cool water. 
The little spring on the edge of the salt flat east of town where cottonwoods 
grew (and watercress in their shade), where my young boys would find earth¬ 
worms to fish for trout in Fish Lake Valley, and where our horses as well as 
the wild animals watered, dried up, became barren, and its existence is no 
longer detectable. 

I still come back to The Peak every year to maintain the graves of my 
parents, my grandparents, and the Clearys. But it is not the town of my 
childhood, and we arrive in the cool of morning, clear the tumbleweed away 
from the graves, leave new flowers, pay our respects to Ruby Shirley Griffin, 
and leave. 


193 


The 

Families 


Notes 

1. Nevada, the Silver State, vol. 1 (Carson City: Western States Historical Publishers, 
Inc., 1970), 299. 

2. Nevada, the Silver State, vol. 2 (Carson City: Western States Historical Publishers, 
Inc., 1970), 962. 

3. Sue Humphrey Thompson, the author of the biographical section on Harvey 
Humphrey, is Humphrey’s daughter. 


4. October 1942, Order L-208 of the War Production Board closed nearly all gold 
mines and suspended gold milling operations. Gold production in Nevada dropped 




194 


The 

Families 


and occurred mostly as a by-product of copper. Strategic minerals needed for the war 
effort were still mined, so many miners moved to Gabbs where they mined manga¬ 
nese, brucite, and magnesite in 1944. The War Production Board Order L-208 was 
rescinded July 1, 1945. For more details, see Joseph Tingley et al., Outline of Nevada 
Mining History (Carson City: Nevada Bureau of Mines and Geology, 1993). 

5. A mask to keep miners from breathing dust. 



PART III 

World War II and the Post-War Era, 
1942-1990 





War and Quiet Times, 1942-1970 


World War II arrived, and Silver Peak’s golden days ended with War 
Board Order L-208, which closed down almost every precious-metal mine 
nationwide. Only strategic minerals were needed for the war effort. That 
meant the E. L. Cord Mill, the Mary Mine, the Gordon-Brodie Mine and 
Mill, and small leases—all were shut down. Mining stopped and the mills 
fell silent. 

Fred Vollmar Jr. moved away from Silver Peak and spent later years min- 
ing around Austin, Nevada. Meanwhile, various members of the Chiatovich, 
Shirley, and Humphrey family partnership left town to find work. Most “mo¬ 
seyed back as fast as they could,” no doubt hoping the war would end quickly, 
returning gold and silver mining to its former level. 1 

Little did they know Silver Peak would never be the same. The cozy 
family town of the 1930s heyday had to change or die. After the war ended 
and restrictions were lifted, large-scale gold mining was still impossible due 
to material shortages and high costs. Local residents returned to prospecting 
and small mining operations, keeping the overhead low. Most of this work 
resembled a hobby and was conducted in spare time or on the weekends, 
although a few people made enough to pay their bills. 

It wasn’t until the 1960s that The Peak really came back to life, when 
the Foote Mineral Company arrived to extract lithium from the Clayton 
Valley playa. Its operation leveled out the peaks and valleys of a precious 
metals economy. However, the war years and the quiet years that followed 
took their toll on the town. Residents remembered the passing of the Vollmar 
era heyday. 



ALBERTA MERRITT: JUST HERE TEMPORARILY 


198 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


Alberta Merritt is a native Nevadan, born in Fallon on July 24, 1929. She arrived 
in Silver Peak in July 1956, and her husband was determined that Silver Peak 
would be only a temporary home for the family. However, forty years later, in 
1996, Alberta was still a vital part of the community. Originally, her husband 
worked at the power station then later owned a ranch. Once their daughters were 
old enough to attend school, Alberta returned to teaching, and she retired after 
nearly thirty years in 1985. She saw many changes in her hometown over the past 
forty years from her perspective as the schoolteacher. 


My husband’s brother, 

Dick, was working at the mill 
in Gabbs, and he was looking 
for a mill job, perhaps at Silver 
Peak. Dick asked my husband 
Nate if he would like to ride 
over with him, and Nate said, 

“Sure.” When Nate got back to 
Peavine (Peavine Canyon in 
Big Smoky Valley) where we 
were living, he said, “Oh, that’s 
the most desolate place. I’d 
never live there!” 

Lloyd Ellis, my uncle, was a 
lineman here in Silver Peak for 
the California Electric Power Company out of Bishop, California. He would 
come to Peavine and go fishing every Sunday, and we would visit. He told 
Nate that there was a job opening here in Silver Peak for a transmission 
substation operator, and Nate got the job. Well, it wasn’t too long after he 
had said he would never live here that here we were! 

We came sometime in the last part of July 1956, during the worst thun- 
derstorm and electrical storm that I’ve been in. The rain was pouring down, 
and we had a cattle truck and a pickup with the rack, all loaded with our 
furniture and our beds, and everything that we owned in the world was on 
those two trucks. We had the three girls. My youngest, Cheryl, was six months 
old. And so Leona had to be a year and a half, and Linda had to be four and 
a half or five. 

Every time the lightening would hit a power pole or a power line, this 
big fire bell in our kitchen in this new, little house that we were moving into 
would ring and just about deafen us, because it was so loud. It was meant to 
be loud so that no matter where they were, they could hear it and know that 
they had to run into the substation yard and close the switches. Then every- 
body would have power. They used these long (they must have been ten feet 
or twelve feet) sticks with kind of a hook on them to close the switch. But if 






they were tripped again by another lightening bolt or something was wrong 
someplace else, then they wouldn’t hold, and he would have to call the 
main office and get troubleshooters and the lineman from other places to go 
out and fix whatever was wrong. 

But that was really harrowing, because the lightening was hitting every- 
where all around us, and the thunder was terrible, and it was pouring rain, 
just like a cloudburst hit right in this spot. And then later on in the after¬ 
noon, why, everything was calm and peaceful and cool and refreshing. 

He worked there from 1956 until maybe 1973 or 1974, nearly twenty 
years. California Electric sold out to California Edison, I believe. And then 
California Edison sold it to Sierra Pacific Power, and then they updated 
their communication system. The only telephone in town was there at the 
substation at that time in 1956. People would have to go down and use the 
substation telephone, because no one else had any telephones. 

Most everyone had oil stoves, but we had an electric kitchen stove for 
cooking. We didn’t have any street lights, and everybody had their own 
little water system. We had running water but no drinking water. The water 
table here was quite high, and it wasn’t really fit. It tasted terrible—smelled 
worse, you know. And Saturday was the water day, because everyone got 
their water from the big spring up there about ten or twelve miles away. And 
if Nate was on duty, he’d go around with the power company truck and 
gather everybody’s containers—gallon jugs and barrels—for us and for some 
of the older people who maybe couldn’t get it. He always got water for me for 
the school, because I had to fill up this ten-gallon barrel of water. 

When Nate went, then we all went and climbed the hills and splashed 
in the water and washed the .... What was the little pond that was there? 
And, oh, pick water cress and bring it home and have watercress sandwiches. 
It was fun. 

The first house had a little porch, just a little porch as long as the kitchen. 
I imagine the kitchen might have been ten by twelve, something like that. 
There was always a front door and a back door opposite of each other, so it 
always created a nice breeze, because it does get hot here in the summer¬ 
time. Then there was the kitchen, and right off that was supposedly a living 
room. Because we had three children, we turned that living room into a 
living room and a bedroom for my husband and myself. And in the other 
room beside it, we had a set of bunk beds and a single bed for the three girls. 
When Cheryl was just a baby yet, there was a closet. It didn’t have any doors 
on it, and her crib just fit in this closet. So that’s where we put her crib, and 
that’s where she slept. And then right off of that bedroom was a little bath 
and a closet, and that was it. 

We didn’t have a garden here: we would always have to travel to buy 
groceries. We would usually go to Hawthorne, because at that time the Big 
T Market was there, and you could buy groceries real reasonably. We felt 
that Tonopah prices were really quite high. We would buy cases of canned 
goods. Our grocery bill might be like $125, but the whole floor of our pickup 


199 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 



200 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


would be full of cases of goods and sacks, and that would usually last us for 
about a month. I would bake bread and make jam, and if we had any food or 
if I could find any food, I would always can it. 

Spiegel’s and Alden’s and Montgomery Ward’s and Sears’s—and I don’t 
know if we had a Penney’s catalog, because when we first came here, Spiegel’s 
catalog had the cheapest clothes. Just before school started, I’d outfit my 
three girls from the Spiegel’s catalog. But then about ten years later, the 
prices skyrocketed, and a six-dollar dress would be probably sixty-six. I liked 
Sears because their quality was better than Ward’s. Things were shipped 
directly to the post office. Sometimes I shopped in Tonopah but not very 
often. And then there was a little dress shop, Fidel’s in Hawthorne, where I 
bought my kids’ clothes when they started in high school. They were nice, 
nice clothes. They always said, “Those Merritt girls, they look like they just 
stepped out of a band box.” They did. They looked pretty. 

We were both raised on ranches and farms, so we knew what to do ... . 
We bought the old Chiatovich ranch in Fish Lake Valley. It was just a big 
pasture, and we had the grandfather rights to the water from Fish Lake itself. 
To get started he bought milk cows. Eventually, we had five milk cows with 
two or three calves on each cow. And we had one little old Guernsey cow . . . 
and we called her June. That was the start of our herd, June and her calves. 
Then we would go to Yerington ,or wherever anybody had calves to sell, and 
bring them home. One time when he went to Yerington, he took out the 
back seat of the car, and here he brought three little calves home in the back 
seat of the car. [laughter] 

It was just a happy, happy time. Nate and I had always been out in the 
hills, in the desert and isolated, and I didn’t mind it. In fact, this is down- 
town for me now—living here in Silver Peak. 


Silver Peak’s Teacher 


I think I started subbing [substitute teaching] around the county here in 
1961 .. . all grades .... [We had] probably twelve or thirteen children 
here. There were not very many, but there was one in every grade. I loved it 
so. It was so much fun to go decorate my room and get all these neat things 
to talk about and have for the kids to look at and write about. I just had fun 
with the kids. 

There was the building [which later was remodeled and became the 
Vinegaroon Saloon] and a teacherage. Then the Mohawk Mine opened in 
the 1960s, and suddenly we had thirty-one [students], more or less, in all 
eight grades. Lydia Baird from Goldfield came and took the upper grades, 
and then I had the first four grades. She stayed at the teacherage. 

Whenever the mines closed down, then our population went down. But 
we always maintained enough [to keep a school open in Silver Peak]. Well, 
by that time Foote Mineral Company had come in, in 1961, then the fami- 



lies started coming in from Big Bear. That kept our school population up, 
and we could maintain a two-teacher school. If we had more, then maybe 
we might have an aide to help us. But sometimes if we didn’t have an aide, I 
would take some of the upper-grade students that were finished with their 
work and wanted to come into my room (they loved to come into my room), 
and I would have them listen to somebody read or have them watch some- 
body do something—you know, just to help me out and help the students 
out, too. But when you have all four grades in the lower grades, somebody is 
getting neglected. And I hated to have that happen, but it just happens. 


201 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


School Discipline 


It seemed like at first there wasn’t much discipline to be done in 1961.1 
had all eight grades, and it just seemed like things went along. The children 
were respectful. They were not troublesome: that wasn’t until the later years 
(in the late-1970s), when the whole school system was changing, and the 
children were running the classrooms, and the teachers did not have con- 
trol. I know there was one seventh grade boy, he was taller than me. I got so 
disgusted with him, because he could do the work, but he wouldn’t do it. He 
thought he couldn’t. He either sassed me or made some flip comment, and I 
took his desk with him in it, and I just shook him all around that room. I was 
so upset. Well, that’s all it took. And then I didn’t have any more problems, 
[laughter] 

I would talk to them and tell them, “I am so upset with you, because you 
do have the capabilities, and you mustn’t ever think you can’t.” And I just 
would try to build them up. Then it seemed like we were on better footing. I 
always figured if you got the Indian sign on, why, they’re not going to push 
you. Indian sign means they are leery; they are not going to push you, be¬ 
cause they don’t know what might happen. Not that I would do anything, 
but they didn’t know that, so that was a good way. 

If a child was misbehaving or annoying someone else, disturbing some¬ 
one else, I would go whisper in their ear and ask them not to, and tell them 
that they needed to get their work finished. It was not right for them to 
disturb anyone else. And, of course, they would all want to know what I 
said. Then I would go whisper in their ear, “If I wanted you to know, I would 
have said it out loud.” So I just kept them guessing. Or if somebody asked, I 
just pretended I didn’t hear them. 

Sometimes if they were goofing around, you know, flipping their erasers 
and peeling it off or poking at somebody else, why, I would walk up. They 
wouldn’t even see me coming. I used a yardstick a lot to point on the chalk¬ 
board, because the rooms were large, and for some of those kids, it was hard 
for them to see. I would slam it on their desk or on the side of their desk, 
make a big bang, and they would jump up. I’d get their attention for sure, 
and I wouldn’t have to say anything. If everybody else was busy, they would 
look around and say, “What happened? What happened?” And I would pre- 



202 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


tend I didn’t even hear. We just went on. But that’s all I had to do to get 
them back to what they were supposed to be doing rather than messing 
around, and I was letting them know it could have been worse. 

I would slap a yardstick down on their desk, and sometimes it would 
break and I would just say, “Too bad your hand wasn’t there.” Especially, if 
they were really being obnoxious or bothersome to anyone else, because I 
would not allow them to interfere with anyone else who was trying to learn. 

So I didn’t spank them, but I’d slap that yardstick on their desk and roll 
it along the sides, and then everything changed. Well, I would never have 
done that, but they didn’t know that. They thought I might. And they al¬ 
ways said, “Well, we know when Mrs. Merritt’s mad from the way she walks.” 
I didn’t stomp, I just walked fast, and I always wore heels. I always dressed 
up, and I had my jewelry and heels and hose and everything. But I walked 
fast. And boy, they knew if they heard me walking fast, that they better 
watch their p’s and q’s. And then they really shaped up. Usually, it took a 
long time [for me to get mad], but I wouldn’t put up with much. 

It may not have set right with the parents, and they would come in, but 
before they left we were in agreement and perfectly calm and contented and 
satisfied with whatever was happening in the school. But towards the last 
year or maybe two years before I retired, my methods must have been out¬ 
dated, because they didn’t work anymore. The parents were really concerned 
about their children, but they wanted to be able to discipline them from 
home, which I could see—that they should teach their children at home 
how to behave someplace else, out in the public or in the school. 

But it was very hard for me. As we kept getting closer to the 1980s, it 
was just getting worse. And the parents, they supported the school. They 
really did. But some of them would come, especially if I got after their child 
in school and the child went home and didn’t tell the whole story but told 
his side of it, you know. Then the parent would come storming into my room 
just really raising a lot of noise and yelling. I would just sit and listen until he 
was through saying whatever he had on his (or her) mind, and I would say, 
“Well, this is true, but this is why this is true.” And I would explain my 
philosophy of it, and when they left we were good friends, and I didn’t have 
any more trouble with the child. 

I would tell them, “I will take care of your child at school; you just take 
care of them at home. And I won’t believe half of anything that they tell me 
that happened at home, if you won’t believe half of anything they think 
happened at school. And we’ll get along fine.” And we did, and it worked 
fine. 

It seemed like in the families with the higher positions, management 
positions, the children felt they were freer to do whatever they chose to do 
within a classroom, regardless of inconvenience to anyone else. And I did 
not approve of that attitude. Those children knew that they would probably 
get into trouble at home, so I don’t know why they felt that they had to 
prove something in the classroom, but it was the management’s children 



that did that more often than not. Well, one time I didn’t call their mom, I 
called their dad at work. And it was the boss’s son—one of the bosses at the 
mine. And his little boy was intelligent. After that his mom came to school 
every day to see that he got his work done. 

Of course, there would be some children that were having family prob- 
lems at home, and they would be disruptive and ornery. But it wasn’t quite 
the same. This was more an attitude of, “I can kind of do what I want to 
here, because my dad’s the boss.” And it’s not a bad attitude, but children 
really don’t know where to use it. Then the other kids don’t like them. So 
naturally, if they don’t like somebody, they’re going to do mean little things, 
underhanded. Then, of course, that child has a right to be upset, and he has 
a right to get even. But I told them, if you want to fight, go past the gate after 
school and give it to him. [laughter] We didn’t allow fighting on the play- 
ground. Any type of confrontation we had to settle, I tried to show that 
there are other ways of settling a dispute than fighting. But there were times 
when someone just needed to knock a bully for a loop. We had a superinten- 
dent—when kids would get in a fight, he brought out the boxing gloves. 
And I’ll tell you, that stopped them. They took a few fisticuffs, and they 
found out. And most of the time if you confront a bully, he’ll back off and 
turn and run. 

The management people were considerate, kind, thoughtful, and they 
would be appalled if they thought their children were behaving in this man- 
ner. They would certainly not approve of it. And I’m sure that they did want 
to know, and they should know, because then they could talk to their chib 
dren and explain that you don’t act like a lord over someone else, because 
you won’t have any friends if that happens. 

Right offhand, I can’t think of any boy that was a jolly old fellow where 
everybody really liked him whose father was in management. I think it showed 
up in the boys more than the girls. 

School was Fun 

Usually, we did a lot of fun things. We had aquariums and hamsters, and 
if they wanted to bring a frog or lizard or a snake, why, we’d have them. 
Whenever I went to Bishop or during summer school (I had to go quite a lot 
to keep my credits up), I went to the teacher’s store. I would get so many 
neat ideas to bring home from the college, and when I was going to summer 
school I would go to all of these different departments to see what they were 
doing. 

One year we decided to have a newspaper. This is when we had all eight 
grades. And I said, “You have to think of a name for this newspaper. We’re 
going to sell it for ten cents a piece. And with the money that we’ve col¬ 
lected, we’re going to order from the Tandy Leather catalog, and then you 
can all pick out something that you want to make for your moms for Christ¬ 


203 

War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


mas. 



204 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 



One little girl, she named it 
“The Peek of the Week” (with 
eyelashes on the ‘ee’s). Everybody 
had to write an article. We di- 
vided our classrooms—some to be 
editors, some to critique it. We 
gave everyone a job that would 
be at a newspaper. Spelling and 
grammar and complete sen- 
tences—I used it like a language 
assignment. Then I would type it 
up, but I would not use my rib- 
bon; I would just type it on a car- 
bon for one of these mimeograph 
machines. I would type it on mint' 
eograph paper that was purple on 
one side, and then it had this 
fluid, and I would run it through 
with a crank, and then it would 
print off. And right after school 
the kids would take their papers, 
and they would be sold in no time. 
Everybody bought a paper. 


Alberta Merritt on the schoolhouse steps in 
1996. (Photograph by Victoria Ford.) 


We had back-to-school night. We always had open house after we had 
something to show them. And then we would always have Halloween par- 
ties and birthday parties and a Valentine’s Day party. We always observed 
the holidays. At Christmastime we’d always put on a big production, and 
everybody had something to say, or maybe two or three things to say. We 
had plays, and I liked to do shadow plays behind a big sheet. 

Lydia and I had more fun doing those Christmas programs. We made 
three snowmen. I had three big wire hoops and three big rolls of cotton. I 
sewed all this cotton on a bed sheet and made these three big snowmen. But 
the thing was, it was narrow at the feet, and one of the snowmen fell down. 
It was my nephew, and we couldn’t get him up. He couldn’t get his feet 
apart, because the ball had to come around close to his ankles and legs. 


Health and Counseling 


Usually, if a child was were really sick and no one was home, I think we 
had a cot. I’d just kind of isolate them and make sure they were warm. I 
couldn’t give them any aspirin or any medication unless I had written per- 
mission. If they had chicken pox or whatever, then they didn’t come to 
school. But by that time, everybody else was exposed. (I had the measles 
three times, but I never had anything else.) 





The only accident that I had to deal with was when we got the merry' 
go-round. I had it taken out, finally. I didn’t want a merry-go-round, but the 
school board decided the children should have a merry-go-round. Anyway, 
this girl was standing up in the middle—and this was against the rules—and 
there were all these kids around. She was fifth grade, sixth grade maybe, and 
she wasn’t prepared, so she fell off and broke one of her front teeth off. We 
rushed her into the ... by that time we had a lunch room and put ice on it. 

And I told the kids, “We have to find that tooth.” And I said, “It’s going 
to just look like this little rock here. It will be covered with dirt. It won’t be 
white.” And we searched, and we found that tooth. Then we stuck it in 
milk, and we stuck it in her mouth. They went to the dentist and saved her 
tooth, but they had to put a cap on it. But that was the most dramatic injury 
during the whole time. 

In the later years I did notice signs of child abuse and family problems. 
Maybe I didn’t know enough to notice it earlier, but there were a couple of 
instances. This one little girl, she was like sixth or seventh grade, she turned 
her parents in [for child abuse]. 

But there was this little boy who was . . . oh, he was so cute. Cute little 
kid. And he didn’t talk much or anything. He’d have these scratches or 
something on him. I’d ask him how he did it. Well, he did something. And 
then he came to school smelling like diesel, and his little shirt and under¬ 
shirt was soaked with diesel fuel. Well, that just burns and stings your skin 
something terrible. So when he got there, I took those shirts off him, and I 
washed his little back off with soap and water and tried to get that stuff off 
and washed out his clothes. Then I think I sent somebody home to get a 
shirt or something for him, so he’d have some clothes until it dried. 

I wanted to turn his folks in. I had kept asking around, but nobody would 
say anything. See, they were afraid to say anything for fear the parents or the 
father would do something, because they were working at Coaldale, and he 
came from Coaldale. Well, then I think maybe the health nurse might have 
gone out there. Then they left. They just took off. 

Retirement 

I was glad to retire. By 1985 I hated to get up and go to school. It was not 
the same job. The classroom was chaos most of the time. I did not have 
control. I was always after somebody all of the time. I couldn’t teach any¬ 
body anything, and that was my job and my responsibility. I took that to 
heart, and it just aggravated me that these children would not adhere to our 
classroom rules. They would be disrupting me, and they would be disrupting 
other kids. It was just terrible, and I hated it. 

It started changing closer to the end of the 1970s, beginning of the 1980s. 
By then I had twenty-eight years, and I really should have gone two more 
years [before retirement], but I could not face the thought of two more years 


205 

War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 



206 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


of that. I felt that it was going to be like that and worse. I felt I had a good 
reputation as a teacher, and I didn’t want to blow it, because I might have 
taken one of those little kids and turned him over my knee and really gave it 
to him. 

In the meantime, my husband passed away in 1983. I had the ranch. I 
had the mine. I had my house, and we had a house in Mina. Nate had eight 
mining properties. They weren’t working mines, but we had to get the as- 
sessment work done, and we had to file the papers. We had to do this with 
BLM, and we had to put up something or other. All these extra things, it 
may not have been that much, but I felt that it was. 

They had a retirement party for me. They had it at the community cen- 
ter, and I got a plaque and a ten-ounce bar of silver. Delta Kappa Gamma 
ladies came from Tonopah, because I belonged to Delta Kappa Gamma, a 
teacher’s society. The kids at school all made a block for a quilt and drew 
their picture and signed their names; and Cleo Hansen, an aide, finished 
making the quilt. It is beautiful; I treasure it. 


Women’s Work 


The only woman working that I can recall would be Ruby Shirley, and 
at the time she was postmistress. There just weren’t any other jobs available 
for anybody to even apply for. Some of the women here might have worked 
as waitresses at Coaldale. During the 1950s, there just wasn’t anything going 
here. 

I think it was just because there were no jobs. I don’t know of any woman 
that actually worked in a mine. Now in the mill and lab, I’m sure they did. It 
seems to me there’s the old thought that a woman is bad luck in a mine. The 
miners don’t want to have the women in the mine. And it’s just an old, old 
thought that’s been around forever, I think. I’ll bet there weren’t any women 
working underground at the Mary Mine. I’ll bet not. I don’t think so. I’ve 
never heard of any, and I’m sure I would have heard, because I’m sure it 
would have been an uproar, [laughter] 

Then I think probably in the middle 1960s, whenever Foote Mineral 
started up, then there were women in the office. Then women were out on 
the lake doing whatever work was required out there, right along with the 
men. So that was about... I would say mid-1960s and early-1970s. Then, 
when Sunshine Mining Company came, women could apply for a job any¬ 
where—whatever was available—out on the lands and in the cleaning and 
cooking, bookkeeping, office work. Women would clean houses for the min¬ 
ers, or they had a bunkhouse down here, and there was a lady, Sally, who 
would cook for them and kept the place clean. I don’t know whether she did 
their laundry or not. She may have. I had several friends that worked in the 
office up at Nivloc at the Sunshine Mill. 

And then someone would remark, “Well, now, who does she think she 
is, getting out there? You know, she can’t do that work.” Well, she could do 



that work. Remarks were made that women were more efficient with their 
hands and had more foresight than some of the others, so I was quite proud 
of them. They were doing men’s jobs successfully and sometimes even bet' 
ter. I thought, “Good for her.” 

My husband wouldn’t let me start working until the children started to 
school, which was fine with me. Cheryl, my youngest, was in second grade 
when I started teaching here. When she started to school, then I would sub 
around the county. Every Friday I would go to Goldfield. Anne Tomany was 
the elementary teacher, but she was also County Coordinator, because we 
didn’t have superintendents in those days here or county superintendents 
for school boards. So I would take her classroom while she did all of the 
office work. 


207 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


Women’s Groups 

Usually every Sunday we’d have a potluck, and we’d go out to Coyote 
Knolls, because it’s flat on top and the kids could run. Then at Christmastime 
everybody would have open house, and people would come and have a drink 
or coffee. And then they’d leave and go to somebody else’s house, and pretty 
soon we’d leave and go to somebody else’s house. We just made the rounds, 
but it was just up and down this street—that was all the people that were 
here. There was Ernie and Ruby Shirley, Harvey and Virginia Humphrey, 
Louie and Jean Marie Shirley, and Johanna Cameron. 

Later on, when Foote Mineral started, then they [women] would meet. I 
don’t know as we really had a name for it, but we would meet maybe for a 
crafts thing. Whatever you were working on you could take there, and we 
would just meet and visit and whatnot at the community hall. We started to 
make a quilt, and everybody had to make their block. But I don’t know what 
happened to that, because I think it disbanded. 

When my girls were little, I went to Fish Lake Valley to take them to 4' 
H meetings. Because I was their mother and their teacher, I didn’t want to 
be their 4-H leader, their Girl Scout leader, and all of that, too. 

There’s always been someone every once in a while in town that would 
say, “Why don’t we do this?” And one of my friends—Bonnie Burton, who is 
deceased now—had an aerobics class. And, boy, every Tuesday night, we’d 
be there doing these exercises. We’d do it at her house, or they’d come to my 
house. And we’d stretch, and we’d do the bars. It was just a regular thing. 

We had a pinochle club. There were eight people, and we took turns 
going to their house. We’d have two card tables, and we’d play partners. It 
would be my turn to have refreshments or snacks at my house. We had first 
prize and booby prizes, and it was fun. It was just a get-together of people 
who liked to play cards. And then it just got to the point where, well, Bonnie 
got really sick, so ... . 

We had swimming classes, but I had knee surgery on both knees (not in 
the same year). I would go down at nine in the morning and swim for an 



208 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


hour before the children came and did my water aerobics in there. Then 
Bonnie said, “Well, maybe we can get together,” because she had taught 
water aerobics in California. Then she’d go down at nine o’clock, and we’d 
all do these water exercises for an hour, and we did that for a long time. 

We’ve always had something going, something doing. I’ve heard people 
say, “Oh, I can’t stand to live here! There’s nothing to do!” Well, the thing 
is, you have to make something to do. 

I belong to Beta Eta; it’s Beta Sigma Phi, and our chapter is Nevada Beta 
Eta. It started with some of the young mothers. I think this is our fifth year. 
At that time this group started, I was still quite involved in Delta Kappa 
Gamma, but I had to go to either Hawthorne or Tonopah to their meetings. 
Beta Eta meetings would be here in Silver Peak, and I thought, “Well, I can 
stay home and still go out.” 

I didn’t help start it (Delta Kappa Gamma) but I was invited to join in 
Tonopah. I held chapter offices and a state office as personal growth chair- 
man. I was the president in our chapter and recording secretary and trea¬ 
surer for at least ten years, besides on committees. There weren’t enough of 
us to each have a chairman of a committee. You’re just a committee, and you 
probably had your name on three or four, because we all had to work to¬ 
gether. And that’s how it is with Beta Eta, too; we don’t have that many 
members now, so everybody’s on a committee. If we had a bake sale or a car 
wash or a yard sale, why, everybody pitched in and did everything anyway. 


When I retired, Anne Tomany, who was my friend and mentor, said, 
“Get out of Silver Peak. Don’t stay there.” But then she died two years after 
Nate did. Where would I go? I’ve been here since 1956. That’s forty years 
now. And all of my friends are here. And I know if I needed anything at all, 
everybody would come, and I would do the same for them. 

I wanted to put on my gravestone up there, “Here lies Alberta. She was 
here temporarily.” [laughter] 


- O - 

DENNIS GADDY SR.: FOOTE MINERAL COMPANY 

Silver Peak survived the 1960s in part due to Foote Mineral Company (Cyprus 
Amax Minerals since 1988). The chemical process to extract lithium from the 
underground water of the Clayton Valley playa has offered steady employment for 
about thirty years. Production Superintendent Dennis Gaddy Sr. watched the com¬ 
munity change over the past twenty-five years while serving as both volunteer 
fireman and deputy sheriff. Gaddy’s oral history also addressed changes at work 
due to environmental regulations that began in the 1970s and 1980s. 

In 1971 I had the opportunity to take a job here with, at that time, 
Foote Mineral Company, and I moved out from southern California. We 



had made arrangements a few 
months ahead and rented a small 
house for, I think, about six weeks 
until we bought a mobile home 
to live in. The house was very old. 
In fact, Harvey Humphrey owned 
it at the time [across from where 
he lived], and he had installed an 
indoor bathroom for us before we 
moved in. Two rooms, basically, 
with an enclosed porch that 
served as a second bedroom and a 
living room-kitchen, kind of a 
combination. 

There were about a hundred 
people in town, and, actually, our 
reception was great. In a small¬ 
town atmosphere, everybody gets involved. Probably the first week of work 
I was asked to join the fire department and the Sportsmen’s Club—hunters, 
basically. 

Fire fighting at that time was Charlie Pearson. He had an old Studebaker 
truck with some hose on it that you could hook to the hydrants, and that 
was it. There was a volunteer fire department, and I joined sometime during 
1971, and I’ve been active with the department ever since. 

There was one bar in town, the Shifting Sands, which was owned by Jim 
and Marie Gavin .... Harvey sold gas. You had to go get him. The post 
office, of course, was here and the school. That’s about it. Parsons Construc¬ 
tion, which at that time he worked almost exclusively for Foote. 

Foote supplied water basically for the whole town. Sewage was by septic 
tank, pretty much the way it is now. Silver Peak didn’t have a library at that 
time. The building that it’s in now has just been here a few years. But there 
was an older mobile home that the company donated and was the library 
building years before. 

TV- —when we first came, there was one station. There was one transla¬ 
tor. I believe it was KOLO out of Reno. There’s a translator to the southwest 
of Silver Peak on a mountaintop. And then I don’t remember which win¬ 
ter .. . if it was 1971 or 1972, but the generator burned up. So we were 
without TV for awhile. There was a TV district, and they got a bank loan to 
rebuild that translator and put in two more. Just about everybody from town 
went out and helped put up the buildings. We had three stations at that 
time, all out of Reno. 

When we came here we found a home, and in twenty-five years the 
town has grown. We were over five hundred at one point when Sunshine 
was building up—mid-1980s, I believe, and then just recently down to two 
hundred or so. Sunshine Mining Company, when they started the mine up, 



209 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 






210 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


they provided a lot of housing. All of their employees were offered the apart- 
ments that were up on the north side of town, available to rent. They also 
had a program where they would help purchase mobile homes. What Foote 
has always done, and still does, is provide the trailer court. There is no charge 
and the utilities are at the same rate the company pays. That is just for 
employees and is located just to the south of the mill building right across 
the street. 

My mother-in-law Pat Reed started a store, a little grocery store for bread 
and milk and that sort of thing. At one time we had three bars. The Shifting 
Sands, and then the Vinegaroon—I forget what it was called at that time. 
It’s been several different things over the years. The schoolhouse was turned 
into a bar-restaurant-type thing. And then the other one was out at the 
north end of town. It was called the Dead Coon Saloon, and it’s now been 
purchased and turned into a residence. 


Foote Mineral 


The company actually started here in about 1964, and its first produc¬ 
tion was about 1966 as Foote Mineral. I started as a laborer, and the opera¬ 
tion is the same as it has been over the years. It was smaller. 

We start with subsurface brines from the playa that contain lithium. We 
pump it to the surface, and it’s just like water wells. The brine stays in the 
ponds for approximately a year, and then we have an operation out there 
called liming, and we add lime to the brine to precipitate magnesium. It 
takes about another year for it to get up to the strength for the plant, and we 
bring it into the plant and, essentially, just precipitate the lithium out of this 



Early view of the playa before Foote Mineral operations began. (Photograph cour¬ 
tesy of Barbara Dodgion.) 







as carbonate. The evaporation leaves salts. The most abundant salt is so- 
dium chloride—table salt. As it gets more concentrated, it starts to leave 
some potassium salts. Magnesium we have to remove, because it would pre- 
cipitate as carbonate and be an impurity in our product. What we are left 
with is lithium chloride in solution with sodium and potassium chlorides. 

Lithium carbonate is the base chemical for all other lithium chemicals. 
Here, now, with the new plant, we take lithium carbonate and process it and 
turn it into lithium hydroxide. Foote has other plants in the East that take 
lithium carbonate and make lithium bromide and lithium chloride, lithium 
sulfate, lithium fluoride. Lithium carbonate is used in glass and ceramics as a 
flux. The aluminum industry uses a lot of it as an enhancer in certain types 
of processes to increase electrical efficiency in pots. Lithium chloride is used 
to produce lithium metal, and it’s processed similar to chlor-alkali. And 
lithium metal, of course, is used in batteries and alloyed with aluminum for 
aircraft—special alloys and things. Lithium fluoride is used in welding rod 
fluxes, that sort of thing. Several lithium compounds are used in pharma- 
ceuticals. Lithium carbonate is used in the treatment of manic depressives. 
This product that we make here is not pharmaceutical grade. It gets repro¬ 
cessed, actually, goes through hydroxide and back to carbonate to get a phar¬ 
maceutical grade. 

We produce lithium carbonate both here and on the SCL plant in South 
America in Chile. Some of that is sold directly to customers. Some of the 
bigger ones are Alcan, PPG [Pittsburgh Plate Glass], and Chemettall 
Gesellschaft, which is German. It’s used in glass, ceramics, aluminum pro¬ 
duction, aluminum alloys, and pharmaceuticals. What is indicated here [re¬ 
ferring to a flow chart] as Sunbright, that plant has been closed and relo¬ 
cated to Silver Peak, so here we also produce lithium hydroxide monohy- 
drate, which is used in greases and other chemicals. And we also produce 
lithium hydroxide anhydrous, which is used in life-support systems. And the 
biggest customer there, of course, is NASA and Boeing. It’s used as a C0 2 
absorbent in spacecraft and submarines. 

Now we actually have our metal toll produced from lithium chloride by 
DuPont. And then it goes to King’s Mountain, North Carolina. Lithium 
bromide is produced from carbonate by reaction with hydrobromic acid. And 
the customers there are Trane and Carrier, and it’s used in air conditioning. 
It’s a dehumidifier that absorbs water very rapidly. Lithium chloride brine 
has, actually, the same use in air conditioning, and it’s also used in photo 
chemicals and industrial drying. Lithium fluoride is used primarily in weld¬ 
ing-rod coatings. High purity lithium carbonate is used in pharmaceuticals. 
And specialty lithium chemicals, we have several that are very small quan¬ 
tities. Then we have a metal-casting department, and there’s two different 
grades of metal that we produce. What’s produced for battery use has to be 
ultra pure. And then what’s used in other alloys and things is a little lower 
purity. But we produce metal foil for batteries for Eveready, Duracell, et cetera. 
Batteries are for military and consumer and biomedical. We have a little 


211 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 



212 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


plant in New Johnsonville, Tennessee, that does organics, and we make nor- 
mal and secondary butyllithiums which are primarily for pharmaceuticals. 

So, our production levels go up and down based on world demand. The 
world demand is growing at a fairly steady rate. When we built the plant in 
Chile, it has a higher capacity than this one and also a little lower cost, so it 
tends to operate as much as possible. And then this is the swing plant, so we 
do go up and down. The world market affects this industry more so maybe 
than just the national market. Right now there really are only two suppliers 
of lithium chemicals in the free world, and that is us and FMC [Food Ma- 
chinery Corporation]. They have an open-pit, hard-rock operation in Besse- 
mer City, North Carolina. We produce a few pounds more, a few pounds 
less, but we don’t typically lay people off. It stays pretty steady. There were 
about forty, maybe forty-five employees when I came here, and today it is 
right at seventy-five or seventy-six. 


Environmental Issues 


In the 1960s, the environmental regulation was a lot less. Now we do 
have to have water pollution control permits, air quality operating permits. 
We don’t generate any hazardous wastes, but we still have to track our waste 
to demonstrate that they’re not hazardous—all of the same things you’d 
have to do if you were in Los Angeles or anywhere else. Basically, it’s all 
federal law. 

We have the sand dunes [in the valley], and they move back and forth 
almost across the valley. Anytime you get high winds, you get a lot of dust 
and visibility gets poor. But that’s going to happen whether we’re here or 
not. Actually, it would probably be worse if we weren’t here, because we 
have a lot of the area in the valley covered with liquid. 

In the past our operation affected the water table. In the early years, 
they essentially pumped everything they could. Over the last ten or twelve 
years we have stabilized, so basically we don’t pump any more out of the 
ground than Mother Nature puts back in. 

The waters of this valley are not potable and cannot be made potable, 
because the naturally occurring TDS [total dissolved solids] is over 100,000 
parts per million. Actually, in our water pollution control permit, the state 
granted us an exemption on the water to the valley. We still, of course, are 
not allowed to spill hazardous things or contaminate, but basically every¬ 
thing that goes out there from this plant is the same thing that comes in. We 
change the ratios of the chemicals a little bit, but that’s about all. 

The county now has their own well, and they supply drinking water for 
the town. We do still supply water for our own trailer court, and we do 
maintain our permit as a public water supplier. When Foote arrived there 
was a water system, but I understand the water was not potable. Most of the 
residents, or virtually all of the residents, were hauling water from the springs. 



When the company drilled their fresh-water well, the quality was good and 
the volume was fine, so they just tied in a line from the company’s water- 
storage tank to the town’s water-storage tank and supplied the water. 

From the wells, the town’s water meets all of the national standards and 
the state standards. What we’ve done is gone up on the alluvial fan a ways, 
and the wells, both of them, are about two and a half miles out of town to 
the south. When you go up on the alluvial fan, what you get is a recharge 
aquifer that’s coming down from Fish Lake Valley, and it’s fresh water. Our 
water meets all of the standards. It’s just a matter of personal taste. Well, the 
TDS are a little over five hundred parts per million, I believe. The national 
standard is at five hundred parts per million. We’re probably at six, but no¬ 
where in the state of Nevada is under five, so the state has [been] varied to, 
I think, 750 is allowable. 

In the 1960s and early-1970s, there was very little regulation, almost 
none. In the last ten to fifteen years there has been a lot of federal legislation 
which comes down to the state. As long as I can remember, we’ve had air- 
quality permits. We never had to have a water pollution control permit un¬ 
til, actually, during 1975 or so. We got what they call an NPDES [National 
Pollution Discharge Elimination Systems] permit which is really not appli¬ 
cable to Nevada, because it’s for navigable water. But it was the closest thing 
that you could get to meet federal requirements. 

Then in the 1980s, with all of the changes that were going on in envi¬ 
ronmental legislation, the state started a water-pollution control permit pro¬ 
gram. And what you have to do is send in a permit application, which in our 
case was about that thick—about a ream of paper. And that’s just providing 
them with enough information to make a decision on whether you should 
be operating or not. 

I worked in the plant as an operator for probably two and a half or three 
years. Then I went into the laboratory as a technician. I was senior chemist, 
and I was technical engineer for a while, then plant chemist. Actually, just 
about four years ago I moved back into the production side and took over as 
production superintendent, but the permitting function has followed me 
through several jobs. I’ve had it since I was the senior chemist in technical 
engineering. 

The resource [lithium] is not infinite. When I started, they told me we 
had about twenty years. We’re still saying we have about twenty years. Well, 
if you’re mining hard rock, you go out and drill a hole, and you sample, and 
you can block out the ore, and you know exactly what you have. What we 
have here is a fluid and it moves. So we use some statistical analysis to deter¬ 
mine what our reserves are. That changes based on several factors, one of 
which is that the more we pump, the total amount of lithium in the brine 
decreases—the parts per million in the brine decreases. So you just take an 
arbitrary number and say that’s an economic lower limit. And then you project 
when you’re going to hit that number, and it depends on production rates. 


213 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 



214 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


The lower the production rate we have, actually, the longer the property 
will last. The best projection we can do is anywhere from twenty to thirty- 
six years, because it’s a statistical projection. 

Somebody has to continually update the operating plan and follow regu¬ 
lations [for reclamation when the plant closes]. We do know what their re¬ 
quirements are for closing water wells, which essentially is what we have. 
And we’re accruing for that now. We have to actually fill the column of the 
well with mud and cement, you know, bentonite clays and cement to pre¬ 
vent leakage and that sort of thing. 

We have to drill new wells every few years, because the geology of the 
basin, it’s fairly fluid. It’s all alluvium. You get some movement, and you 
shear off wells, or you collapse a casing. And so wells have to be replaced. I 
think over the life of the property right now, we drill more than three hun¬ 
dred holes out there. We don’t operate usually more than forty at a time. 


Helping Hand 


The swimming pool in town now actually belongs to Foote Mineral- 
Cyprus. We built the pool. In the mid-1970s the management actually polled 
the town and said, “What would you like to have? There’s nothing for the 
kids to do here, especially in the summertime.” They asked not just employ¬ 
ees, but everybody in town, and the swimming pool at that time was the big 
winner. So the company did build a pool and has kept it open for the whole 
town. 

Every year they contribute a good deal of money to emergency services— 
the ambulance, fire department. In the 1970s the state started the EMT 
program, and the county bought a new ambulance in 1973. My wife and I 
were EMT’s—not the first year, but about the second or third year of the 
program. That has continued and expanded to where we now have some of 
the capabilities very similar to what you have in big cities with paramedic 
crews. Our ambulance people now can start IV’s. They just got defibrillators, 
or are just in the process of getting the defibrillation equipment. We now 
have two ambulances in town fully equipped. 

And improvements in the fire department.... Again somewhere in 
the late-1970s we got a federal fire truck that was surplus from the navy, off 
of one of the bases. We used that up until about a year and a half ago, then 
we had a fire truck custom-built in Tonopah. We have a new firehouse, 
because the new truck would not fit in the old house. We just found out last 
week that we’ve got another fire truck coming. We bid on a surplus truck 
from California. We got it: it’ll be here in a couple of weeks. We hope to 
start the fire rescue part, highway response to accidents, and that sort of 
thing. 

The company, in cooperation with the county, the local emergency plan¬ 
ning committee, has formed a Hazmat response team and a rescue team, 
basically, because federal law (OSHA) says if the county can’t provide res- 



cue from confined space and certain other things that the company must. 
Obviously, the county can’t afford the equipment that’s required, so we’ve 
formed this cooperative, and it’s working quite well. We’ve got about ten 
people now who are trained for Hazmat techniciandevel response. We’ve 
got about twelve or fourteen people that are rope-rescue trained, rappelling 
and that sort of thing. And the next step is the actual confined-space rescue 
training, and that’s happening within the next few months. 

I was an EMT instructor up until 1981, and then I quit. My wife still is. 
She’s one of the co'directors for emergency medical services for the county 
and coordinator for the Silver Peak ambulance. I am still involved with the 
fire department. I’m training officer, and I’m also a part-time deputy sheriff, 
so that’s plenty to keep me busy, [laughter] The times that we’ve had some 
problems have been when there were a lot of construction workers staying 
in town, and then you get the bar fights in the evenings and that sort of 
thing. 

The fire department—we probably average about one or two calls a year. 
Biggest problem we have is keeping the training active so that when you do 
get a call, people know what they’re doing. The sheriff’s office—I probably 
average a hundred hours a year, seventy-five to a hundred hours a year. It’s 
usually for accidents and things like that. Ambulance calls probably average 
twenty a year. A lot of those are motor vehicle accidents on the highway. 
We cover halfway to Mina and halfway to Tonopah, halfway to Goldfield 
this way and halfway . . . there’s a halfway point with Fish Lake Valley out 
Highway 6 towards Bishop. 

Well, when you have a total population of five hundred people and half 
of the jobs are with one company and half with another, that’s really all 
there is. And the county is not a rich county. They don’t have a lot of money 
for parks and things like that. Most of that comes from donations from the 
companies. 


215 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


- -O - 

SHERRY MATTEI: CHILDHOOD DEATHS 

Sherry (Boyd) Mattel, granddaughter to Anna “Baba” Shirley, is related to almost 
every prominent Silver Peak family including the Clearys, Shirleys, and 
Chiatoviches. Between 1968 and 1976 Sherry returned to Silver Peak where she 
lived with Anna and worked for Foote Mineral. She listened to her grandmother’s 
stories of the old days and learned how Anna coped with the deaths of her young 
children. Meanwhile, an avid horsewoman, Sherry rode throughout the area, ob¬ 
served changes as artifacts were removed, gravestones destroyed, and crime in¬ 
creased. For the first time, residents began locking their doors. 

My grandmother was Anna Shirley, who was married to John Shirley. 
John originally was from Virginia. He came out West when he was about 



216 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


eighteen with a brother. And then 
Anna, her family moved from Bodie 
where she was born. Originally, they 
moved to Blair. She was a Cleary. Her 
father worked at the Mary Mine and 
had several of the livery stables. Her 
mother was bom in Aurora, and then 
they moved to Silver Peak. 

One of the daughters, Ethel, mar- 
ried Hank Gilbert, and another one, 

Virginia, married Harvey Humphrey. 

And Harvey and Hank were cousins, 
who then also became brothers-in' 
law. And my grandmother’s sister, 

Nellie Cleary, married Martin 
Chiatovich. So that was the 
Chiatovich relationship. [Among 
Anna’s other children] there was Louis Shirley; Ernie Shirley, who married 
Ruby, the postmaster; and Ada Louise and Cora both died when they were 
two or younger. Anna had five miscarriages, and then there was my mother, 
Jane Shirley. My mother married Gene Boyd. 

Quite a few of Anna’s children were deceased or died when they were 
one or two. My grandmother said losing her babies was worse than knowing 
that she was going to die. She said there was nothing worse than losing a 
child. She also lost a lot of her other family members when they were young— 
her brothers. Her sister died in childbirth when she was in her twenties, the 
one that was married to Martin Chiatovich. And all of their deaths were 
pretty terrible deaths. Most of it was due to long, prolonged illnesses. A lot 
of polio epidemics, hepatitis. My mother was very ill, and she was the youngest 
child and not supposed to live. 

By that time my grandmother pretty much had my Aunt Ethel (the 
oldest, eighteen when she was raising my mother) raising the children. Anna 
said she loved them all, but it was hard to get close to them [her children], 
because she was so afraid of losing them since she had lost over half her 
children. She’d be involved with them, as far as they could come to her, I 
guess, until probably they were at least ten, and even then she was still a 
little distanced. It was actually not until they were pretty much grown up or 
married that she’d get close again. But basically most of them called my 
Aunt Ethel “Mother,” because Anna couldn’t get close anymore. It just hurt 
too much. 

And then my Aunt Ethel did the same thing when she lost her two 
children. These were the only two children she had. One, the little boy, died 
when he was two. He was the one that was run over by an ore truck in front 
of her, driven by one of the Chiatoviches. It was an accident. And then her 
daughter was killed around Walker Lake. She fell out of the car coming 



Sherry Mattei. (Photograph by Victoria 
Ford.) 







Ernie, Anna (“Baba”), Louis, Virginia, and Ethel Shirley. (Photograph courtesy of 
Sherry Mattei.) 


217 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


home from college ... for her twenty-first birthday. An engagement party, 
and her graduation from college was also that year. 

Ethel didn’t handle it well. We were there when the police came. I was 
fairly young—about ten, I guess. And when they came, it was Thanksgiving 
day. Ethel went to the oven, took the turkey out, threw it out in the back- 
yard, went into my cousin’s room and shut the door, and nobody could get in 
there. She was in there for about a day and a half. And the daughter’s room, 
she never changed it. She never changed the bed. She never took the clothes 
out of the closet, nothing. And no one else was allowed to go in that room, 
ever. She said, “That’s it. I’m not getting close to anybody ever again.” And 
she didn’t. I guess you could say she was cold. But if you needed anything, 
you could certainly go to her. It was the same with my grandmother. They 
were not huggers. 

o- 

My grandmother got close to me for some reason. My mother was her 
favorite—the youngest, the last child, her very favorite. And so I moved 
back in with her after college, and we were really very close. I think she 
finally just needed somebody, and she felt I was going to be OK. But anytime 
I would go anywhere without her, she was nervous. If I was going into town 
shopping, it didn’t matter what time, she wanted to go with me. She actually 
once said, if any of her other children or grandchildren died, she hoped she 
was with them. And she didn’t have a death wish by any means, but she just 






218 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 



“My mother [Jane] was [my grandmother’s] favorite—the youngest, the last child, her very 
favorite." Jane Boyd (right) feeding chickens with an unidentified friend. (Photo¬ 
graph courtesy of Sherry Mattei.) 


said she couldn’t take anymore. She had lost (she had said at one time) over 
twenty, and that would have to be terrible. I can’t imagine it. I really can’t. 
But she was never a bitter person, never. Always up, except for that. 

If you went into her bedroom, she’d have one picture of Cora, the oldest 
one that had died at two. And the picture was about five feet by three feet. 
And she had pictures of all of her family that had died all over the wall, but 
none of the living ones, which was odd. And she would not talk about them. 
The living ones, yes. She was extremely interested in them—how they were 
doing, what they were doing. But the others, no. She just wouldn’t. And she 
wouldn’t go to the graves. 

<> 

Anna’s nickname was “Baba” [pronounced Bobba, which is the Basque 
spelling], which is grandmother in Basque, because so much of her family 
married Basque—the Chiatoviches, the whole family. She was well loved in 
the community. Her house was never empty, never, and the community cen¬ 
ter is now dedicated to her. The schoolchildren would always stop there 
after school, and she always had a pot of coffee on and some dessert made. 
All the miners would stop there. And she had families living with her con¬ 
tinually when they didn’t have money or didn’t have a place to stay. She’d 
always just tell them there was this spare room, so she was always doing that. 
But as far as getting real close to somebody, no, she really couldn’t do that. 

Her one regret was she couldn’t get more education. She did finish and 
get her high school diploma by mail when she was sixty. And when I would 




go to college or any of my cousins would, we’d always send her our books, 
our papers, everything. She studied and read everything. She subscribed to 
over fifty magazines and newspapers. Constantly read. My one uncle, Ernie, 
who was a geologist, she was really interested in that: why he would think 
something was where, and how the place was formed. She really got into 
that. Very, very intelligent lady. 

O- 

At the time I was born in Los Angeles, my parents lived in Silver Peak. 
He worked for the power company, and she had a teaching degree, but she 
just worked substitute teaching at that time in Silver Peak. And then he 
finally did transfer back down to California. That’s where he was from. I 
spent the first six years of my life in Silver Peak and then every summer 
thereafter. I always came back in the summers and stayed with my aunts and 
uncles. They had the horses, and that’s what I loved to do was go out with 
my uncles and do all the assessment work and just be out in the hills. Riding 
out there on the horse back then, it seemed like nothing changed, and that 
was great. The old towns were still there: Weepah was still there. There 
were even tablecloths and dishes still on the tables. It seemed permanent. It 
was nice. I love the area. It’s just an incredible area. I always thought it was 
beautiful. I’m surprised when people say it isn’t. It’s just peaceful. There’s 
just something very special about it. 

There was one Indian medicine woman, a friend of my grandmother’s, 
that I used to go out with a lot, Flora Bess, and she talked about it being the 
Indian sacred ground and Wonder Mountain being their sacred mountain. 
She would take me back up in those areas. It’s the Red Mountain up towards 
Nivloc. You can see it from Coyote Springs. It’s more often referred to as 
Red Mountain. The Indians called it Wonder Mountain. She said she was 
from the All-Man’s tribe. She wasn’t a Paiute. She had a brother who was 
supposedly an Indian medicine man that lived up in the hills, who most 
people rarely saw. 

She took me with her because she felt I wouldn’t harm anything or bother 
anything, bother the “spirits” as she called them. So to a child that was 
pretty fascinating. But she disappeared when I was about twelve. No one 
really knows what happened to her. She kind of just left. 

She said there had been very ancient tribes there. She had showed me 
some petroglyphs, which nobody’s been able to find since. My one uncle 
knew where they were, Ernie, but nobody’s found them since. Near Cave 
Spring, and the area actually where the mining company [Mineral Ridge 
Resources Inc.] is going is all considered the Indian sacred ground. And she 
used to feel anybody who didn’t respect the spirits, something bad would 
happen to them. She said that’s why so many people that worked at the 
Mary Mine died so young. She felt it was just very bad luck. 2 

O 

After I got out of college, I went down there on vacation. It would have 
been about 1968, right around there, and I got a good job offer from Foote 


219 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 



220 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


Mineral company. I was a secretary, and then I would work for the geologist 
also, going out and helping survey, doing things like that. I wasn’t going to 
take the job, but my grandmother said, “Well you really want to be back 
here. Why don’t you live with me for a while? I really need you to.” So I 
lived with her for, I guess, two years, and then I got a place across the street 
and stayed there. She didn’t have running water, a bathroom, or anything, 
and that’s pretty hard when you’ve gotten used to it. She didn’t believe in 
those. She said it built character not to have those, that those were things 
you just didn’t need. I did. [laughter] 

I worked for Foote Mineral for about eight years. It was fantastic work. It 
was interesting. Foote Mineral had just started at that time with the lithium 
mining, and it was in mining, which I’ve always been interested in. 

Basically, the Sixteen-to-One Mine was open. That was from a com¬ 
pany out of Idaho, and it was running then. The Mohawk had closed down, 
the big mine that my Uncle Harvey had. Ernie originally found it in 1912 
when he was a kid. It had caved in and some people were killed, so they 
closed it. And then Foote Mineral was running, but the other mines were 
just individual, small mines, usually one or two people. 

Foote Mineral moved in a lot of trailers, and a lot of the people who 
came in were very transient, as far as they really didn’t have any family, no 
connections to Nevada. They were just there to get whatever they could 
and leave. And then there started to be some crime and . . . some drug use 
which changed things a lot. It used to be nothing was locked up, but we had 
to start locking everything up, and that was the worst part. Well, there were 
several rapes in the town, a lot of break-ins, a lot of vehicle robberies, and 
just a lot of people going up to the old mines, say, stripping the copper wire, 
burning the buildings down for no reason. We used to have a lot of old 
outbuildings in the hills to keep the stoves in, keep the canned food in, just 
in case somebody got trapped or stuck. And they would take all the wood off 
the building, take the stoves, and then just burn what was left of the build¬ 
ing down. 

Silver Peak people became a little wary of other people. It used to be you 
just opened your doors to anybody. If they got stuck or needed a place to 
stay, you let them stay. My grandmother still did, and I worried about her, 
because I was afraid of what could happen to her. She trusted everybody, and 
she never did get hurt, never had a problem. But some of the family did. 
They had a lot of things stolen . . . vehicles were stolen and some of the old 
artifacts. Even some of the tombstones on the graves disappeared, and it was 
just sad to see that go. 

Basically, there was a lot of drug trafficking. There was a back road from 
Los Angeles that came through Fish Lake Valley into Silver Peak, plus the 
airstrip. And from what I had heard, it was kind of a central drop for drugs 
for Nevada, basically, and for Las Vegas, because they could get over the 
California border on the dirt roads. There was a problem. We’d see different 
exchanges or planes landing, and we’d ignore it. We kind of avoided trouble, 



which probably isn’t a good approach, but it was better than getting in- 
volved in something like that. Some of the family, we would try not to get 
them involved, because they might have done some enforcing on their own. 
That was occasionally done down there. 

There was quite a group of miners that came in when the Sixteen-to- 
One Mine was going. They were building a mill up the valley, and there 
were a lot of people coming in and out, and a lot of them weren’t from 
Nevada at all. They were just trying to find work, so they were bringing 
them in at minimum wage, and they really had no place to stay. They brought 
in some old, horrible trailers—no water, no bathrooms—and it was really 
kind of sad the way they treated some of these people. 

It was Sunshine [Mining Company]. They were doing exploration work 
and clearing out one of the old tunnels. Parsons Construction was employ- 
ing a lot of men, too, doing different work. Part of it was the Mary Mine. 
They were going to reopen, and one of the times there were, I guess, about a 
hundred different people in there working in the different areas. It was a big 
change, yes. Just a lot of. . . I wouldn’t say strangers, but people that hated 
the country. They hated it there, and they weren’t there by choice, and they 
were just very angry people. It is tough country unless you love it. It’s hard to 
live with. 

Today the landscape has changed, because of the mining and the differ¬ 
ent things they’re doing. It’s changed a lot. The roads have all changed, new 
roads. And the houses that were my family houses, of course, different people 
living in them. They look different. Especially Anna’s house. She always 
had beautiful flower gardens around it, different things, and they’re gone. It 
was an old house. It was moved originally from Candelaria. It was well over 
a hundred years old, but it was always kept up, always painted, flowers, trees— 
lots of trees. It had the peaked roof with the long sloping back. And the back 
of it actually is two feet underground, the bottom part up to the windows in 
the kitchen, which was fun during thunderstorms when it would flood. Up 
to two feet of water in the house .... 

But just seeing the yards gone, the old corrals we had for all the horses 
and seeing a lot of the mustangs and things gone. Then I saw a lot of them 
shot [over Labor Day 1996], and that really bothered me. There were twenty- 
three or twenty-four that were shot at the one family spring when we drove 
up there. They had been dead two or three days and to think somebody 
would do that. It’s a different attitude. No respect for life, I guess. Just not a 
lot of respect in a lot of ways—for the land, for the animals, for the homes. 
Just seeing the way things are run down and dirty and a lot of trash. There 
just never was trash there before. There were no junk cars. Everything was 
picked up. It was clean. Even though it was hard to keep clean, people took 
a lot of pride in that. 

I guess it was just a family town. Everybody was related, or you called 
them a cousin even if they weren’t. And everybody worked together and 
were friends. The only one there now [from my family] is my Aunt Ruby, 


221 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 



who is my aunt by marriage. It is hard to see the family homes with other 
people in them, and it’s just sad. 


War And 
Quiet 
Times, 
1942-1970 


Notes 


1. Ford, Janice Johnson oral history, 331. 


2. Sherry clarified that diseases such as silicosis and Valley Fever also caused early 
deaths in the Mary Mine area, and as a child she was confused by the two different 
theories about deaths at the mine. 




9 


New Life, New Challenges, 
1970-1990 


By 1970 Foote Mineral Company’s lithium plant was operating smoothly, 
promising twenty years of employment for the Silver Peak community. While 
it wasn’t exactly mining, it offered steady work for the community, whereas 
two major mines opened then closed again. 

In the 1970s, the Mohawk Mine, located about ten miles west of Silver 
Peak in the Argentite District, again made headlines. It was discovered in 
1920 by Ernie Shirley, who had three partners—his brother Louis Shirley, 
Stanley Chiatovich, and Harvey Humphrey. In 1951 Shirley optioned the 
property, and the Mohawk was developed in the 1950s thanks to financing 
from Avery Brundage, a wealthy Chicagoan who was also chair of the Inter- 
national Olympic Committee until his retirement in 1972. 

Brundage created Bruhi Enterprises in 1953 to oversee operations, and 
the Mohawk was then optioned to Sunshine Mining Company of Kellogg, 
Idaho. Sunshine abandoned its option a year later. Once Brundage had de¬ 
veloped the mine and mill, U.S. Mining and Milling Corporation of New 
York purchased the mill. 1 Once again, eastern investments made mining 
and milling operations possible for Silver Peak. 

However, tragedy stalked the Mohawk Mine, and on October 16, 1959, 
a cave-in on the Hinds 202 stope, somewhere between two hundred to three 
hundred feet below the surface, killed three well-known miners. A major 
rescue effort failed, and eleven days later, on October 27, State Mining In¬ 
spector Mervin Gallagher ended rescue efforts and sealed the mine. The 
Mohawk became a grave for Bill Delorme, James Roberson, and Sam Sick¬ 
les. Complete coverage of the inquest into the accident appeared in the 
Tonopah Times-Bonanza on November 6, 1959. Avoiding the caved-in area, 
operations at the Mohawk resumed, and then again in the 1970s the Mohawk 
was worked but only briefly. 

A decade later, Sunshine Mining Company revived the Sixteen-to-One 
silver mine outside of town. New technology and rocketing silver prices 
made the old mine an attractive investment. The two companies, Foote and 



224 


New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


Sunshine, breathed new life into Silver Peak for the 1970s and 1980s. Both 
made substantial contributions to the community, building a new water sys- 
tern and establishing new housing. A new swimming pool replaced the res- 
ervoir and offered summer recreation for adults and children. Small local 
businesses once again thrived, including several bars, a restaurant, and a 
motel. 

However, this time outsiders brought with them some of the same prob' 
lems facing other towns throughout the nation. It was an era in which drugs 
were threatening workplace safety, and employers were making tough deci¬ 
sions about averting accidents by testing workers for drugs. Environmental 
issues brought a proliferation of regulations designed to improve the quality 
of life for all citizens but increasingly hampered the work of mining and 
chemical companies. The feminist movement brought women into mining, 
even into underground mines where superstition had prevented their pres¬ 
ence before. 

The mix of the 1970s and 1980s created a time of contrasts—a time of 
old meeting new, of opportunity beset with challenges. For example, while 
Foote Mineral Company complied with regulations that required a ream of 
paper to address, local citizens became impatient with bureaucratic red tape, 
took matters into their own hands, and created the Silver Lake recreation 
area just below the old Nivloc Mine. As in the past, Silver Peak residents 
accommodated change on their own terms, and the town survived. 


- O- - 


BEN VILJOEN: THE MOHAWK MINE 

Ben Viljoen loved underground mining, a skill he learned through years of hard 
work and listening to old timers. Self-described as a garden tramp miner, 2 along the 
way he has also gathered a wealth of mining folklore. Viljoen worked in the Mohawk 
in 1975, after the famous cave-in, and he knew relatives of some of the men who 
remain buried there. He said the tight-knit community of miners has its own thoughts 
on that accident. 

Mohawk Mine 

About 1975, 1976 I was working with Steve Cate. We worked up at the 
Ray Rickets mine in Gabbs, a tungsten mine. And then he quit, and I had a 
couple of real lousy partners, so I came down here to see what in the heck 
he’s up to. So he and I and Johnny Nickelbee were working together here at 
the Mohawk. 

The Mohawk silver mine was about the last of the old-type mines where 
they had the big bunkhouses and cook shack. All that’s gone by the wayside 
since then. The outfit I worked for was Spring Creek Mines, which belonged 
to Jack Zane and Mark Gavard, two pretty well-known promoters in this 



area. I’d known Jack Zane long before. There was one other partner, a Ray 
Christianson that was out at the Coeur d’Alene, and he was the mine super- 
intendent. He was a little, short guy, and he kind of had the Napoleon com¬ 
plex, and we just kind of left him alone, [laughter] He’s off in his own little 
world. 

The one thing that I liked about the Mohawk, it was the last of the 
camp jobs. 3 That was about the time that mines were really turning to trailer 
houses instead of the old traditional bunkhouse and cook shack. But they 
had actually three bunkhouses up there—one was day shift, one was swing, 
and one was graveyard—and then this humongous cook shack. They charged 
four or five dollars a day for groceries and lodging ... a dollar and a half a 
day for your groceries, and you couldn’t possibly eat everything that was 
there, so that was quite an experience. 

They had this gal out of Mina, Bobby Boyd, who was married to an old 
cowboy, Les Boyd. I can tell you stories on that character all day long. But 
anyway, she was the cook. And the meals that they put on, you could have 
made three meals out of any one. At dinnertime there might be pork chops, 
steak, and then some kind of noodles for the old-timers that didn’t have any 
teeth, and then salad and potato salad, noodle salad. They really treated the 
guys right. And that little Ray Christianson would chew Bobby out in the 
morning, because she was feeding thirty guys and would have one plate full 
of pancakes left over and feeding them to the chipmunks, and he’d be all 
upset about, “Oh, wasting money.” [laughter] 

This cook shack, it was just monstrous. Well, first you went through the 
front door (I guess I’ll describe the whole thing), and that’s what they call 
the lamp room. That’s where you plug in all your mine lights. Our slickers 
and all our underground gear is there. Then you went through another door, 
and there was a hallway with apartments on both sides for the big shots or 
investors to stay in, so they were pretty swanky. And then you went into this 
humongous dining room. Beyond the dining room was this huge kitchen, 
and then a big commissary where they stored all the groceries. Behind that 
were two more apartments. One was where Jack stayed: the other was for 
Ray Christianson. Of course, I was never in those, but I assume they were 
pretty nice. 

The bunkhouses themselves were three buildings side by side. They had 
partitions in them and two bunks to a little partition, so each guy and his 
partner would stay in there. You see, you’d better get along with your part¬ 
ner. You work with him all day, and then you’re sleeping about four feet 
away from each other all night. 

That was what they call a dry camp. There was no women and no alco¬ 
hol allowed up there, and you worked ten days on and four days off. One 
thing about Jack and Mark, they looked out for the miners, so the bunk- 
houses were real well insulated. They made a point of always having plenty 
of drinking water, and then what they called “gray water,” or just crummy 
old water that was used for showers and laundry or that sort of thing. It 


225 


New Life, 
New 

Challenges , 
1970-1990 



226 


New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


wasn’t potable water. They had plenty of water, which had to be hauled from 
Silver Peak, about twenty-seven miles, past the dump, across the valley, up 
into the mountains behind the Sixteen-to-One. Parsons did all the hauling, 
and that road is just horrible into the mine. They’d haul the ore from the 
mine down here to Silver Peak (there’s still a little muck pile behind Parsons’s 
yard), and then they’d crush it and reload it onto highway trucks, haul it 
into Mina, and put it on the railroad. 

There used to be this water-truck driver, old Spud. Anyway, the mines 
are eighty-five hundred feet [elevation], and here comes the snow. It blew in 
there about four feet deep and snowflakes the size of silver dollars coming 
down. Bobby, the cook, was having a heart attack, because she figured that 
they were going to run out of groceries—we’re snowed in for the winter— 
and she’s running around doing this inventory to figure out how long she’s 
going to make the supplies last. A few guys made attempts to get out of 
there. You’d drive along the ridge top and then straight down into the can- 
yon. You could kind of make it out onto the ridge and look into that can- 
yon—no way to try it. 

So anyway, a day or two went by and the clouds parted. After a snow- 
storm the sky is crystal clear, and there’s flakes of ice coming down, and you 
could hear a pin drop for miles. Well, we heard this low rumbling noise, and 
I couldn’t figure out what in the heck was going on. It kept getting louder 
and louder. And here comes Spud driving Elton’s water truck, and the snow 
was so deep he was pushing snow. This is a big Kenworth truck pushing snow 
with the radiator. We had figured it’d take a dog team to get out of there, so 
we asked Spud, “How in the hell did you get up here?” 

And he said, “I couldn’t find a place to turn around.” [laughter] Once he 
blazed a trail in there, then everything was OK, but we had some times up 
there. 

Another time there was a big earthquake. It was so severe that it knocked 
all the canned goods off the shelves in the pantry. Everybody on the surface 
felt it. It knocked the cable out of the shiv wheel on the headframe. I guess 
it shook things pretty well, but we were working underground—never felt a 
thing. Of course, the panic was on. They thought the whole mine had caved 
in and everybody was dead, so they called us out. We figured, “Oh, another 
fire drill,” and just kind of wandered out. Here everybody’s running around 
in this big panic, and we never felt a thing underground. 

O 

The Mohawk is where they had the cave-in. 4 There were three guys 
buried up there: Sam Sickles, Chief Delorme, and Jimmy Roberson. It was a 
terrible, terrible deal. They had a huge stope up there, and it was nearly 
ninety feet from the hanging wall to the foot wall—big, square-set stope. 
There was a big misconception, which this might be a good time to get 
cleared up. I don’t know the name of the company. It was about 1964 that it 
was operating. They had an engineer named Camozzi in there that decided 
to pull a foot wall. See, in the Mohawk you have high-grade stringers of 



very, very high-grade silver; almost jewelry rock, but these little narrow string¬ 
ers go out into the foot wall, and the foot wall is very blocky. The hanging 
wall was good, but the foot wall would run away from you sometimes. So this 
engineer decided to start pulling the foot wall, which . . . well, that took all 
the integrity of the square sets out. The foot wall started to slip, and that 
pulled the square sets into a diamond shape. Then they have no strength at 
all, and so everybody quit—walked away from it. (In those days everybody 
pretty much went to Grants, New Mexico, to the uranium mines.) 

The three guys working in there had worked in the stope. This engineer 
asked, “Well since the stope is condemned, could you guys . . . .” Asked 
these two partners if they would stay over and pull all the machines, the 
drills, tuggers—all the equipment out of that stope. Then they were going to 
go ahead and condemn it. This happened on swing shift. They pulled a 
nipper off that was working that regular shift, and they were in there pulling 
the equipment when she turned loose, and that was on the 300 level. I for¬ 
get the number of the stope. And the whole thing came at once, all the way 
to the surface. There’s chunks of trees and sagebrush and stuff down on the 
300 level. That’s 300 feet—a crater the size of a football field on the surface, 
so it all just let loose at once. It came so hard, they had steel air doors. 5 It 
blew them right out of the rib on the 300 level. 

They put out an emergency call. The best miners from all over the west¬ 
ern United States showed up. When they saw the mess, they knew there was 
no way the guys could be alive, but the families were up in arms. So these 
guys with this muck piling .... One crew started out for the incline shaft, 
spiling a drift—that’s where you drive timber ahead of you through the muck 
pile, and then catch it up with sets. And then another crew started from the 
300 level in the main shaft and drifted toward each other trying to recover 
their bodies. Of course, there was no hope, and they never did recover their 
bodies. They’re still buried there. They put up a plaque in honor of the guys, 
and some no-good rat stole it. 

The big misconception that the company and the mine inspectors bought 
is the story that it was an act of God—that they had been doing a lot of Cat 
work on the surface to do drilling, and it had rained real hard, and the water 
soaked into the drill holes and made the whole thing cave in. Everybody 
who was involved knew exactly what it was—that you couldn’t relieve that 
foot wall or the whole place runs away with itself. 

And one story shows [laughter] when your time’s up, it’s up. As that 
stope was taking weight, of course, cracks were opening up and everything 
else. And this one miner told this nipper (his job was to slush [operate a 
slusher], keep pulling muck fast and furious as he went all around his work 
area and put wedges up into these cracks), “I’m sticking around until those 
wedges start falling out, and then I’m out of here.” 

And sure enough, the same day of the cave-in, those wedges started 
dropping out of the back. So he rang for the cage, went up and got his pay¬ 
check, jumped in his car, and headed for Grants, New Mexico. He was killed 


227 


New Life, 
New 

Challenges , 
1970-1990 



228 


New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


in a car wreck at the exact same time that stope flopped. So he would have 
saved some gas money just by staying where he was. 

I know the younger half-brother of one of the miners. George Holcomb’s 
older step-brother was killed in the cave, and George and I are pretty good 
friends. And then Steve Cate knew those guys who were killed. They were 
real good friends of Steve’s dad. They worked together all over the country, 
so I heard a lot about it from Steve’s dad. 

I had heard all these stories, and then we worked in the stope right next 
to where this had happened. First of all, going back and seeing this drift that 
the guys had spiled through the muck pile .... It had been all barricaded 
off. It was kind of a tomb, and then the company decided, “Well there’s 
some more [ore] in there. We’ll just. . . .” They kept moving the barricade 
ahead a little bit. Anyway, we ended up in the stope right next to where this 
had taken place, pulling pillars that had been mined out. The last thing you 
do is pull the pillars and leave, let it cave or back fill it. And it was kind of 
eerie, because these guys’ coats and water jugs and things were still hanging 
where they had left them. 

That was a pretty wild stope. I had always heard from the old-timers that 
the ground kind of works with the tides; at noon and midnight, if it’s going 
to move, the ground really starts moving. I always thought, “Yeah, yeah,” 
because miners are just as superstitious as they come, but sure enough, in 
that one .... 

Well, the last thing Mark or Jack wanted to do is hurt somebody, but 
they did need that ore. Steve and I, they knew we weren’t the type to just go 
in there and take a nap, so they said, “If you start feeling a little weird or 
things don’t seem right, just sit down and wait a while and have a cigarette 
and watch it.” 

We worked swing shift, because they figured if it was going to flop, they 
didn’t want to endanger anybody. Day shift is when most of the people are in 
the mine. Swing was just a few miners, and then graveyard was timber repair 
and muck haulage, and swing was mainly muck haul. So sure enough, about 
eleven o’clock there was a great huge crack through the middle of the back, 
all the way up, and about eleven o’clock it started working, and dust would 
trickle out of it. By midnight, slabs would be dropping off the back. We had 
bulkheads built all over to kind of protect us, so about eleven we’d usually 
just hide out until the end of the shift, and by midnight you could hear it 
grinding and everything else, and then it would start settling down again. 
As far as I know, that stope is still standing. But, boy, we figured every night 
was the last. 

That gives you an eerie feeling. These are guys that I’d heard about for 
years, most of my life. To hear stories is one thing, and to meet family mem¬ 
bers. Everybody was so shook up about what a charade the company had 
pulled in degrading these guys’ name, and all the guys that had worked in 
that stope, and actually getting the mine inspectors to buy something like 
that. 



But then on the other end of the stick, one thing that’s so nice about 
mining is your stope or your raze or your heading is your palace. You do it 
your way. Nobody really fools with you. The shifter usually comes around 
twice during the shift to see if you need supplies. If you can handle a job, 
that’s fine and dandy; you do it your way. If not, they just tramp you and hire 
somebody that can do it. There’s no foolishness or second tries. But then 
something like the big cave-in slaps you back into reality once in a while. 
You’ve heard all these stories time and again, and then there you are, work- 
ing where it happened, and to prove it even more are their coats, their water 
jugs, their lunch pails, you know, just as if they were still working in there. 
The two miners, those two guys were some of the best. The nipper, he prob- 
ably would have grown up to be one of the best, but he was just a kid break- 
ing in. 

Miners are very, very superstitious. You don’t touch anything. That’s 
hallowed ground over there. We went in, and we admired the guys’ 
timberwork from the rescue crews. We knew a lot of the guys that had been 
on the rescue crew, and we went in and looked at the conditions that they 
were working in but not to steal anything or touch anything. 

One thing to remember with miners—where you work, live, eat with 
your partner—all tramps are very, very tight-knit to this day. The wives all 
know each other; the kids all know each other. When somebody’s hurt or 
killed or got cancer or something, everybody’s constantly on the phone to 
each other. Everybody, no matter how spread out you are, everybody knows 
what each other is up to. So when one of the gang . . . something happens, 
everybody feels it. So that’s, I guess, why it would be emotional to others 
besides the family. And you depend on your partner. If he makes a mistake, 
you usually don’t get torn up too badly: either you get skinned up, or you get 
mangled, [laughter] So you have all the faith in the world in all your bud¬ 
dies. 

O- 

Well, now with Mark Gavard and Jack Zane, it was anything but a stock 
scam. That was when the price of silver roared up to forty bucks: that’s when 
we were there. That was kind of the tail end when the price went way up. 
And then, see, that ore is kind of complex. They used to mill it at Vollmar’s 
Mill, and when we came into the picture, it had to be shipped to the smelter. 
And later on an outfit in Gardnerville, called Veda Grande, was milling the 
ore for us. They had a flotation mill over there, so they were shipping the ore 
all the way to Gardnerville to have it milled. And then, who knows why or 
what, but Veda Grande decided to buy Jack and Mark out. Their big shots 
came up, and they were all looking around. They were going to spend a 
million bucks fixing up the bunkhouse and even planned a lawn. They were 
going to do this and do that, hire all these people, but they never once 
mentioned upgrading any of the equipment underground or doing any de¬ 
velopment work. 


229 


New Life, 
New 

Challenges , 
1970-1990 



230 


New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


Everything they talked about spending any money on was for show— 
the kind of stuff the stockholders would see. And so we thought, well, this 
sounds like a pretty good time to cash our checks while we got the chance. I 
had been on to a job of just mucking out from under the stopes, and Steve 
went on the tramp. He had heard about a few jobs over on Candelaria, the 
Potosi Mine over there. So he thought he’d put the rustle on them for the 
both of us, and then I would give him the gas stake. That’s what happened, 
and, finally, he came back, and we’d landed some work, and away we both 
went. 

Oh, I’m sure it was a stock scam, but the mine operated for quite some 
time after. But those showed all the earmarks of a big swindle, which usually 
doesn’t last more than a few months, and everybody’s paycheck bounces on 
and on, and the sheriff comes and locks everything up, including your clothes 
and tools. So we thought it would be a good idea to get out while the going 
was good. 

But they did operate. And then they got another guy killed, so the mine’s 
got a reputation of a killer mine, when actually it’s very good ground. It’s just 
that accidents have happened. 


- -O - 

ALLAN YOUNG: SUNSHINE MINING COMPANY 

All mining engineers dream of starting from scratch and building a mining and 
milling operation from the ground up, according to Allan Young. Sunshine Mining 
Company gave him that opportunity in the 1980s when it opened the Sixteen-to- 
One silver mine outside of Silver Peak. Young described Sunshine’s operation in¬ 
cluding the technological innovations used to offset plummeting silver prices. Sun¬ 
shine boosted employment and helped Silver Peak’s residents by such contributions 
as improving the water system. While Young’s first impression of Silver Peak was 
less than favorable, he found that the town grew on him. 

When the Idarado [an underground mine in Colorado] closed down, we 
all went looking for work, and that was still a pretty good time, late'1970s. I 
had several options, and the Sunshine Mine in Kellogg, Idaho, offered me a 
job as a senior mine engineer, so I moved my family to Coeur d’Alene. A few 
months after I got there I heard about this project that Sunshine had in 
Nevada called Sixteen-to-One. I got an opportunity to do a little work on it, 
a little ore-reserve work and some estimating. 

Mid- to late'1979, the price of silver just started shooting up there. The 
thing that really was driving the silver price was the attempt by the Hunts to 
corner the market. By the end of 1979 it was above twenty dollars and even- 
tually, in early 1980—January, maybe February—pushing almost fifty dol¬ 
lars there for a time. Just about any silver property could make it with those 



prices, [laughter] And, of course, during that same time Carter was president 
and inflation was pretty high—double digits. Interest rates were pushing 
twenty percent: they were really high. There was a lot of uncertainty in the 
economy. And then, of course, you had gold prices that were in the $800 
range. 

When the price of silver started going up, everybody said, “Well, let’s 
put Sixteen-to-One in operation.” So they needed someone to do a plan and 
budget for the thing, basically, and I got picked. I was working on it in May 
when Mount Saint Helens [volcano] went up, because I was at work that 
Sunday. We finished in late May, early June, and then there was a June 
board of directors meeting. In March the silver price kind of crashed, but it 
turned right around that quickly. In June I think the prices were still over 
twenty dollars an ounce, twenty-five maybe. They were still good, real good. 
And I think we assumed thirteen dollars an ounce or something, which at 
that time seemed pretty conservative, but history showed it wasn’t, [laugh- 
ter] At any rate, it was a slam-dunk as far as the board goes. I was offered the 
job as project manager, which meant I had to move down there. Well, I 
jumped at the chance, because for every mining engineer one goal in life is 
to put a mine into production. 


231 


New Life, 
New 

Challenges , 
1970-1990 


Helping the Town 


I had been down to Silver Peak a couple of times before, [laughter] I 
have to admit it. . . first impressions weren’t real good, [laughter] After 
living in Coeur d’Alene and southwestern Colorado .... Lots of trees, [laugh¬ 
ter] And pulling into Silver Peak .... Well, I’ve got to say, I thought that 
probably going through town with a D9 with the blade down would prob¬ 
ably be an improvement, [laughter] But, you know, that’s just a first impres¬ 
sion. It was the end of the road, and there weren’t any trees around, and the 
place looked like it could use a good picking up, and it was just so much 
different from where I had come from. It’s a place that you have to give a 
chance to grow on you. 

My wife didn’t even see the place before we moved down there. I talked 
to her about it and told her, “Look, it’s a really terrible, terrible situation,” 
and I kind of tried to prepare her for it. Well, she actually told me that I had 
overdone it a little bit: it wasn’t as bad as I had told her. [laughter] I tell 
people that we got there at night, and I kept the drapes drawn for a couple of 
days to get her used to it. [laughter] 

There was somewhere around 250 people in town. There wasn’t a gro¬ 
cery store. You basically had to go to Tonopah to get a loaf of bread when I 
first moved there. And even at that, if you got in there on a Friday night 
after payday at the new molyfbdenum] mine (600 people out there), you 
might not even get a loaf of bread—the cupboards would be bare, [laughter] 
They had Coleman’s grocery store, and that was really the only grocery store. 



232 


New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


It was amazing. What most of the people in Silver Peak did on the week- 
ends, they would take a couple of ice chests and go over to Bishop to do their 
grocery shopping. That was only 105 miles. 

There was a kind of a bar in Silver Peak. It was called the Shifting Sands. 
It was J im Gavin’s place. He was still alive, but I think he was in the hospital 
at the time we started up there. You could get a sandwich in there, and there 
were a couple of booths: there wasn’t much room. And then that was about 
it. Harvey Humphrey had a gas pump in town there, and you had to go get 
him, and he would pump gas for you. A lot of the old-timers were miners 
anyway, so I think they always like to see mines go in. But on the other 
hand, they were a little apprehensive of what such a big development would 
do to the town. They lived there because they liked it the way it was. 

In July of 1980,1 came down to Silver Peak with Viet Howard, who at 
that time was the chief operating officer of the company. We held a little 
town meeting and went over what we were going to do. I think most people 
wanted to know what we were going to be paying and what kind of jobs 
would be available. 

There was concern about the lake, Silver Lake. It’s above town and just 
below the mine, and at that time it was being fed by the mine. There had 
always been a spring up there, and then, when a previous company had 
driven a tunnel into the mountain, they had intersected some more water 
and that allowed the water to flow clear down to the valley. 

The thing had sort of been put in over the weekend one time, [laughter] 
Someone got the idea that, “Gee, we dam this up, and we could make a nice 
little pond here and stock it with fish.” Good idea. I guess they went through 
all the proper channels to request that. (I wasn’t there at the time.) But for 
whatever reason, it got tangled up in bureaucratic red tape, and so, finally, 
one weekend someone went up there and just put it in. [laughter] There it 
was. “Now what are you going to do about it?” And then after that, they got 
the fish and game [Nevada Division of Wildlife] to start stocking it with 
trout. It was a real nice place. 

We didn’t want to disrupt that. The water was pretty good quality, so it 
was just a matter of getting the suspended solids, the particles of dirt and so 
on, out of the water before it went down there. We put in some settling 
ponds to do that. It took us a while to really get the water cleaned up. When 
we finally got our permanent pumps in down below the mine, the water 
cleaned up pretty well and fish continued to thrive in there. In fact, that’s 
the first place I took my kids when they got old enough to fish. 

Water was another concern, because the water quality in town wasn’t 
that good. Their system there was just not adequate, so a lot of times the 
water would just go off. The pipeline coming in from the well was asphalt- 
coated pipe, and that asphalt was apparently coming off. A lot of times you’d 
be taking a shower when you’d get this black greasy stuff on you. [laughter] It 
was kind of nasty. 



They had an irrigation-type pump. I remember going in the pump house 
one time, and they had this thing rigged up where they had this ... I don’t 
know whether it was vegetable oil or something dripping into this thing for 
lubrication. They couldn’t use petroleum-based oil, because it was a domes¬ 
tic or potable water source. The pump would overheat a lot, so they took a 
rag and stuck it over the pump motor, and they had water running on it. I 
mean, if you touched anything in there, you’re apt to get electrocuted, [laugh¬ 
ter] It was pretty scary. They just didn’t have any funds to do anything, so 
definitely that was a big priority. 

One of the first things we did when we came in there was hire an engi¬ 
neer to do a study on the water system, to recommend an upgrade and what 
needed to be done, not only to provide the current needs, but also the future 
needs of the town. I think he worked with one of the government agencies 
to help secure a grant to upgrade the system. The bottom line is, eventually, 
we got a new water system in town—larger diameter pipes and plastic lines 
and a proper pumping system. After that, for the most part, water problems 
were gone. That pretty well took care of it. 

During the construction period of the mill, we had some pretty rough 
characters in there—the construction crews and the welders and the steel 
workers, those kinds of guys. A pretty rough-and-tumble bunch, [laughter] 
They liked to party, and they got pretty wild around there from time to time. 
That didn’t sit very well with a lot of people. Fortunately, that was short 
lived. 

Well, bringing in another one hundred people or so created problems 
for a while, but it also improved things. With that many more people, the 
town was able to support a small grocery store and a good restaurant. Hefty 
Sanderson and Alice came in, and they built up and turned the Shifting 
Sands into the Miner’s Inn, and it became really a nice place. The food was 
great—nice little restaurant and bar there. And then there were a couple of 
other places. The Dead Coon Saloon sprang up. That was just below our 
place. And for a while, you could even rent videos in Silver Peak, [laughter] 
Almost didn’t have to leave. It was nice to be able to not have to drive fifty 
miles to get a gallon of milk—definitely an improvement. 


233 


New Life, 
New 

Challenges , 
1970-1990 


Housing Shortage 


We, of course, recognized early on that there wasn’t any housing for 
anybody. The company had done some work down there before, and we had 
a couple of trailers that we owned in town . . . there was enough room in 
those trailers for like six guys. 

At the same time, there wasn’t any place in Tonopah either, because 
Anaconda was developing a big moly mine, and there was a bit of a boom 
going on over there, too. So there just wasn’t any place to live, and we knew 
we had to do something about that. 



234 


New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


Prior to the project actually being approved, we went around and bought 
up some property in town. We bought a big lot that would eventually be¬ 
come a trailer park. We bought some lots on the north end of town where we 
eventually put in some apartments and some two-bedroom family units and 
then some studio apartments and also some houses. We had bought a house 
down on the south end of town that we kind of converted into a bunkhouse 
or a boardinghouse. Then when the project was approved, we went ahead 
and started building. We brought in four modular houses (that’s where I 
lived when I brought my family down), and then we also built some apart¬ 
ments. We also started a program where we would purchase mobile homes 
and then lease them to our employees on a lease-option program, so after a 
period of time [they could buy]. It was a pretty sweetheart deal. I don’t even 
think there was any interest charged. 

We had to provide our people with a decent place to live. The type of 
mine that we were putting in, especially because it was all mechanized, was 
going to require some pretty good technical people as well as skilled opera¬ 
tors. We were going to ask a guy to get on a third-of-a-million-dollar piece of 
equipment. We definitely wanted to keep him happy, [laughter] We wanted 
to keep our turnover down as much as possible, so we knew we had to pro¬ 
vide these people with a good place to live. It’s tough enough moving into a 
place like that: if you don’t have decent housing, it’s tougher yet. 


Sixteen-to-One 


We planned to develop the mine from two different directions. First of 
all, as an underground mine, the idea was that we would begin work on the 
7,000-level tunnel, which was driven back in the 1960s by Mid-Continent 
Uranium. We were to go in there and widen that tunnel out, and then, in 
the back end of the mine, drive ramps downward. That was our part of it. 
Then we brought in a contractor, American Mine Services, to start a ramp— 
a long decline from about 175 feet below the 7,000-level adit. And then at 
the bottom of that decline, they were to start ramping up to meet us. 

The first thing we did, we went out and purchased a 950 loader and a D6 
Cat. That was what we needed to just barely get started. We put in a kind of 
a storage yard down where the mill eventually was developed. Also down 
there at the location of the mill, we put in a temporary trailer park. I think 
that’s where some of the miners for American Mine Services lived. 

I guess by mid-September or late-September, we were pretty well roll¬ 
ing. We just had a handful of people, and the contractor didn’t have a lot 
either. He was just driving a single-heading, single-tunnel phase, three shifts 
a day, seven days a week, basically. 

Things went along pretty well until we started to hit water down in the 
lower tunnel, and by January of 1981 it was becoming a rather serious prob¬ 
lem. We didn’t expect to hit that much water, and every round seemed like 
we got into more and more. As a result, that ended up costing us a little 



more to drive the tunnel and also slowed us down a bit on the schedule, but 
we got through it. Of course, the upper watercourse there was actually a 
spring in the mine. It dried up, because we intersected it down below. But we 
had much more water down below, so we would pump that up to our water 
tanks for use. Then drill water and that type of thing and the excess would 
go to the lake through the settling ponds. 

It was really tough for a while, because we didn’t really have a good 
settling system and really didn’t have a sump, and we had a pretty high head, 
so it was difficult pumping. And then, of course, there were a lot of fines 
being created by the equipment we were running. Once we got to the bot- 
tom of the mine and developed the sumps and put in permanent pumping 
installations, we were able to settle the water much better. 

We weren’t going to start construction of the mill until we were sure 
that the ore was down there as we had expected. We intersected it down 
low, and the grade was what we had anticipated, and it was good width. So 
about April of 1981 we began construction of the mill. This was a silver and 
gold property. We had done, of course, some metallurgical test work on the 
ore back in, oh, I guess, 1979 and had determined that the ore would re¬ 
spond well to cyanidation, which was the most common method of recover- 
ing silver and gold from ores, especially from Nevada. We set about to design 
a flow sheet, and we hired an engineering firm in Salt Lake called Industrial 
Design Corporation, and they designed a plant for us. 

We had originally planned to start the mill up in February of 1982, and 
we hit that right on the money. We were projecting our first shipment of 
metal by April 1, and we hit that one right on the money, too. 

Now the mill. . . basically, it was a pretty standard flow sheet, not much 
different than the way they did it seventy, eighty years ago. Ours was about 
550 tons a day and basically consisted of crushing and grinding the ore to 
sand-sized particles and adding cyanide. We had to use a fairly strong solu¬ 
tion, because the silver minerals require a higher concentration of cyanide 
than gold, usually. And then leaching—we had five different vats, one right 
after the other, where we got about a twenty-four-hour retention time, some¬ 
thing like that. And after that it would go through a series of thickeners 
which would basically wash the slurry, the sand particles, and wash the cya¬ 
nide solution from those particles. Then we had a tailing dam down below 
there that was all lined. We used a Merrill-Crowe precipitation, which uses 
zinc dust to precipitate the silver and gold out of the solutions. We had a 
little smelting room where we had a little furnace and actually produced 
gold and silver bullion right there on site. After the gold and silver was 
smelted and made into bullion, we shipped it to our operations in Kellogg, 
Idaho. At that same time, we were building a silver refinery up there. We 
had electrolytic refining capabilities there, and that was basically the first 
feed for that. 

Originally, we started by smelting, casting anodes, for that, and then 
that became just too much of a problem for us to do down there. We just 


235 


New Life, 
New 

Challenges , 
1970-1990 



236 

New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


didn’t have the equipment for it. So then we just produced the ingots—the 
round, conical shaped ingots—and shipped those up there. They recast them 
and produced .9999 pure silver and gold. 

Innovations 

The mining system that we had originally proposed for the Sixteen-to- 
One was a long-hole stoping method—long-hole blasting. We started off 
using that method, and found out that it required leaving a lot of ground 
open for a period of time. We started to get a lot of dilution, and that was 
one of our big problems right at first. So we changed our mining system in 
1984, some time after we started up. Vertical crater retreat mining was used 
in other places. I was aware of it from articles that I had read about mines in 
Canada, for instance, that were using it, so it wasn’t a unique approach by 
any means. There weren’t a lot of mines using it, but certainly for us it was 
the way to go. 

For a modified vertical crater retreat, rather than shoot off entire lengths 
of ore off the end of these sub-levels (rather than taking vertical slices of ore, 
in other words), we would take horizontal slices of ore by lowering charges 
down these blast holes and shooting a little bit at a time rather than the 
whole thing. And as we did that, the broken ore would fill up the void be- 
low, so it would kind of support the walls. We would just bring this up, slice 
by slice, until we got to the level, and then we’d go to the next level. As it 
turned out, it had quite remarkable benefit to our dilution. It cut our dilu- 
tion from 30 percent to like 7 percent—it was a dramatic change. Produc- 
tivity wasn’t quite as good as the previous method, but the gains in dilution 
more than offset that. So that’s the way we continued the mining operation 
from then on out. 

Another problem we found was that cyanide costs were very high, and 
our consumption was high relative to other mines, and tailings disposal costs 
were high. Back in 1984, we started looking at ways that we could reduce 
that cost, and we found out that a lot of the cyanide that we were losing was 
actually just being held up, you might say, in the moisture content of the 
tailings that were going out to the pond. So we decided, if we could send our 
tailings out there a lot drier, we’re going to do a couple of things: we’re going 
to get more solution back to the mill first of all; and we’re also going to 
eliminate the need to keep raising the dam every year or so, which was costly; 
and the third benefit is that we were not going to have that big pond of 
water that we had to be worried about birds landing in all the time. 

We looked around at filters, and we finally came up with a filter built by 
Elmco. It’s called a belt-press filter, and it had been used in the coal mines 
quite a bit for de-watering, but it hadn’t (to our knowledge) ever been used 
in hard-rock tailings filtration. We decided to go ahead and do it anyway, 
and we put it in. We had some start-up problems in selecting the right types 



of filter belts and how we distributed the slurry . . . but in the end it turned 
out to be a real benefit for us. We were able to cut our cyanide consumption 
by more than half, and our tailing disposal costs basically disappeared. So it 
turned out to be a successful project for us—cut our costs significantly. 

O 

Our biggest problem was that Silver Peak was not a moneymaker for us, 
unfortunately. When the project was authorized in June of 1980, I think 
silver was twenty to twenty-five dollars an ounce. Two months after it started 
up in 1982, silver dropped to four dollars and eighty-five cents. Needless to 
say, we hit it right at their low time as far as the silver price goes. But we had 
some disappointments in ore-reserve grade as well. That was just part of the 
business. Our capital costs were higher than what we had originally antici¬ 
pated for various reasons. So in the end, it didn’t turn out to be a successful 
mine, although we had a couple of good years: 1983 was a pretty good year; 
1985, we made silver for less than five dollars an ounce—that was a pretty 
good year. But overall it wasn’t a successful project. 

Had the price stayed up, that would have solved all the other problems 
right there, [laughter] We got our other problems straightened out. We were 
producing a thousand tons a day with twenty-five people. That’s a good 
productivity, no matter where you go. And the mill operated with basically 
two people and a mechanic, so we didn’t have a lot of people. 

The first part of 1986 our grades started to go down, and that was mainly 
just due to . . . we were in lower-grade sections. It didn’t look like it was 
going to come up again. In 1984 and 1985, we had pretty much mined out 
the best areas, and the price of silver wasn’t very good. June of 1986, the 
management of the company made the decision just to shut the Sixteen-to- 
One Mine down. 

At the same time, we were doing some exploration work at a mine north 
of Silver Peak called Weepah. We had done some drilling there and had 
gotten some interesting results. What they decided was, “Let’s put Weepah 
into production, and we’ll run the Weepah ore through the mill.” We hired 
a contractor, Lost Dutchman Construction out of Reno, to do the mining 
out there for us. It was an open pit. Unfortunately, we were premature in 
making that development decision. We should have done some more drill¬ 
ing, because the grade didn’t turn out to be what we had hoped, and the ore 
body was more variable than we had anticipated. That lasted until, I guess, 
early 1987. 

It was looking like we were going to be shutting the mill down and kind 
of mothballing everything for a while. I wasn’t really crazy about that. Frankly, 
it was kind of sad to see it happen, so I was ready for a change. March or 
April of 1987, I took a job with Echo Bay Mines in Colorado. I moved my 
family in June. So that was the end of it for me. Now after that, Don Earnest 
took over. Later on that year, they put in a heap-leach operation, which I 
think was successful. 


237 


New Life, 
New 

Challenges , 
1970-1990 



238 


New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


I really have a soft spot in my heart for Silver Peak. My wife and I prob- 
ably had more friends there than we’ve had anywhere we ever lived. Most 
people don’t get a real good impression when they first go there. I think 
that’s probably a given. But you just have to give it a little time, and it kind 
of grows on you. I loved the job, and, heck, that’s a big part of it. There were 
all real people who lived there, [laughter] They were tough. I guess that’s 
what I liked the most about it, the independence of everybody. I’m sort of 
that way myself. The only thing I never did get quite used to is the wind. 
The darned wind would always blow, [laughter] And you would go away for 
the weekend and come back, and your trash cans might be in the next county, 
[laughter] That’s just typical though for Nevada. And then, of course, when 
the wind would blow hard, you’d get these dust storms that were really some¬ 
thing to see. 


- -O - 

DON EARNEST: A MINING COMMUNITY 

Don Earnest joined Allan Young at the Sixteen-to-One Mine outside of Silver 
Peak in 1981 and stayed until 1989. His oral history interview added some detail 
about how mining and milling technology had changed over the fifty-year period 
from the 1930s. Yet two other elements remained unchanged. Silver Peak’s resi¬ 
dents remained as entrenched as ever, its “cast of characters” winning the respect 
of newcomers. And the bond between miners remained, as shown by the tribute 
paid following a mine accident that killed Superintendent Phil Lapp. 

Sixteen-to-One Mine 

Silver Peak, as well as Tonopah, had their locals or their natives who’d 
been there all their lives, and anybody who spends their life in that country, 
born and raised there, is a certain breed of cat, so to speak. Places like that 
are not exactly the garden spot of the universe. But Silver Peak natives did 
not seem to mind at all the fact that here’s these outsiders or non-natives 
coming in, living and working, and in a lot of cases supervising them. 

The Sixteen-to-One silver mine was just about four and a half miles due 
west of Silver Peak, up in the Silver Peak Range. It was just past the old 
ghost town of Nivloc. The mill was closer to town . . . oh, two and a half 
miles from town, I’d say. 

My job initially was as chief geologist. I was responsible for all the geo¬ 
logic happenings at the mine and also all district exploration, which was 
defined as just about anything within truck-haulage distance of the mill. 
Initially, the major responsibility during development was to make sure that 
the miners stayed on the vein, that the vein was intersected where we an¬ 
ticipated it, and to map the geology and to do underground sampling for 
comparison to what the calculations had been, which had been based on the 



drill holes. The geology was, in some cases, very much simpler than some of 
the places I had worked—meaning that after the vein was deposited, it was 
not faulted off in a bunch of places or overturned or folded or things like 
that. It was pretty much in there as a tabular feature, like a book standing on 
its edge, so it was not hard to follow. But the challenge there was to deter- 
mine where along the vein, or along the main Sixteen-to-One structure, 
you could find ore, because even though the vein existed, there wasn’t al¬ 
ways ore-grade mineralization. 

Early on in the project, we did do some ore purchasing where someone 
who had a small mine out in the general area (sometimes as far as a hundred 
miles away) could ship us ore, and we would purchase it and then mill it at 
our mill there. That’s something that’s rarely done in the West anymore. 
The main reason is that once you start mixing other folks’ ore in with your 
own, then you create a problem of accountability of your product. But we 
did it there for two reasons. One, we thought we could make money doing it, 
and secondly, it’s a common problem everywhere in the West now. The little 
guys who are mining a few hundred tons a month or something like that 
don’t have anyplace to process their ore. 


239 


New Life, 
New 

Challenges , 
1970-1990 


Mill Technology 


We supplemented mill water from the water that was pumped out of the 
Sixteen-to-One Mine, but we still had to use well water: that’s what we 
called make-up water for the plant. Clean water around Silver Peak is a 
precious commodity. Our well that we drilled for the mill up there, I believe, 
was nineteen hundred feet deep. It cost quite a bit of money to put that well 
in. In that country nobody likes to just dump water out on the ground and 
lose it, so the point of trying a belt-press filter to de-water our tailings was to 
help recycle the water and also to eliminate the cyanide going out there in 
the water that was standing in the pond. We could essentially take the water 
out of the tails at that filter and put it directly back in the mill. 

Our decision was based on cost. We looked at the cost benefits—cer¬ 
tainly the unit itself, the capital expense of putting it in (we had to build a 
separate building to put it in), and those costs weighed against the opera¬ 
tions’ cost savings over time. We looked at them (I could be wrong on this), 
but I think the payback—in other words, the amount of time that went by 
before the operation savings paid for the installation of the thing—was some¬ 
where around nine months, which is pretty short in terms of payback time. 
Savings came from reduced cyanide costs in the mill, because we could re¬ 
turn cyanide that was already put into the plant solution system and use it 
again. We didn’t have to keep buying as much cyanide. It also came from 
savings in water. We didn’t have to use water from the well for that, which 
had to be pumped out of the ground, so there was electricity savings there. 
And we saved the quarter-of-a-million-dollar capital expense of raising the 
tailings dam. So those were the main reasons. 



240 


New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


We had some problems when the unit was first installed, the chief one 
being the life of the belts. The material was pressed between two belts that 
looked kind of like a coarse-weave fiberglass or plastic material which water 
could pass through. And because coal is quite a bit different material than 
ground-up quartz-vein ore, we had some belt wear problems initially, which 
made us go through quite a few belts. Those were solved by making sure the 
distribution of the material on the belt was even across the width of the belt 
rather than just dumping it in a glob in the middle. Once that was ironed 
out, the unit worked just fine. It’s something that pretty much ran by itself, 
and somebody would have to check on it periodically, but it didn’t require 
an operator right in the building. 


Mine Technology 


We were probably the first mine in Nevada to use a mining method that 
was called modified vertical crater retreat. With this method, sub-levels or 
drifts in the ore are driven every 125 feet vertically; those were the spacings 
we used. And then from the upper subdevels down to the lower subdevels, 
we used a drilling machine called a down-the-hole hammer rig, which drilled 
a five-and-a-half-inch hole from one sub-level to the other. And then those 
holes were loaded with explosives, and a large amount of material was blasted 
at one time, generally on the order of five hundred to seven hundred tons, 
something like that. It was a much lower-cost mining method than some of 
the other select methods, like shrink stoping or cut-and-fill. We were able to 
use it at Silver Peak because of the attitude of the vein. In other words, it 
was fairly steeply dipping. Also the vein width, rather than being just three 
to four feet wide, which many of the veins in that country are no wider than 
that, the Sixteen-to-One vein averaged about fourteen feet wide overall and 
would get up to as wide as fifty feet on one of our levels. 

It [modified vertical crater retreat] was developed up in Canada in the 
Sudbury district. Canadians actually were the ones that worked it out. Then 
Allan had been up to Sudbury and toured those operations back in the late 
seventies and realized that it was something that probably could be applied 
at Silver Peak. I think we ought to give the Canadians the credit for devel¬ 
oping it. We probably added a few wrinkles to it there, just to fit our opera¬ 
tion, but the basic method was developed up there at Sudbury. We varied 
the number of holes, for example. We felt that the placement of the holes 
was very important, so we made sure that those were surveyed in by transit, 
or that survey points were put in for the drillers to work off of, so that they 
could accurately determine the location of the hole. Occasionally, we would 
survey the bottoms of the holes where they broke through, where we had 
access to do so. And we sampled the drill-hole cuttings: the geologists on a 
daily basis went down and logged the cuttings. That way we could tell when 
a hole got out of the vein and into the hanging or foot-wall waste. And by 
telling that, then we could say, “No, we better not use this hole. We better 



bring one in a little closer or a little further in, so we’re not blasting waste.” 
That’s something we didn’t start doing initially but started to do after we got 
into operation. They do that up at Sudbury someplace, too. 

Allan left in 1986,1 think. And then I left in 1989 and was transferred 
up to Boise, Idaho, to manage the explorations for the whole company. And 
not very long after I left is when Sunshine shut the mine down and signed a 
lease agreement with an outfit called Zephyr Resources, which then came in 
and didn’t resume mining at the underground mine, the Sixteen-to-One, 
but went up on Mineral Ridge at the Mary-Drinkwater and started open-pit 
mining up there on mineralization that we had drilled out when I was at 
Sunshine in Silver Peak. 

Well, Zephyr backed out and assigned the lease that they had with Sun- 
shine to an outfit called Homestead Development out of Carson City. Home- 
stead had a gypsum mine, I think, up out of Carson City, which was the only 
other thing that they had going. A guy named Art Wilson owned the com¬ 
pany. And Homestead then came down and continued mining up at the 
Mary Mine. But they went bankrupt, and the ownership of everything was 
turned back to Sunshine. Sunshine originally had the Mary-Drinkwater and 
other properties up on Mineral Ridge under lease from a trust—a group of 
people back in Tampa, Florida. And I believe it was after Homestead left or 
went bankrupt, that lease was returned to the trust by Sunshine, and 
Sunshine’s involvement on Mineral Ridge stopped at that point. 

I would imagine that Mineral Ridge Resources Inc. has come back in 
and has agreements with all those underlying owners now. The Mary- 
Drinkwater area was owned by this trust. Moving up on top of the ridge, up 
to the Oromonte area and . . . (gosh, I’m forgetting the names of some of 
those places) the ownership on those were different. I don’t remember that 
we had that, but I would assume that Mineral Ridge Resources has gone into 
consolidation, and somehow has it all under control through agreements 
with the underlying owners now. 


241 


New Life, 
New 

Challenges , 
1970-1990 


Cast of Characters 


Silver Peak had a lot of character. It was a very desolate place, but it was 
a really beautiful one, too. I used to enjoy sitting in the Dead Coon Saloon 
and looking out across the valley, because there were some big windows in 
place of where a back bar would normally be. For the most part the people of 
the town were good people. You could call them real people. They scratched 
out a living, had been able to stay there, live their lives there. There isn’t 
one of them that wouldn’t help you if you got in some kind of dire straits. 
They sort of understood the law of the desert—that everybody helps one 
another, because everybody needs help at some point in time. 

We lived in Tonopah, because my wife was working as a computer pro- 
grammer out at the Anaconda Hall Project, or they called it Nevada Moly 
at that time, which was about twenty miles outside of Tonopah. If we would 



242 


New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


have lived in Silver Peak, she would have had probably an hour and a half 
commute every day, as opposed to the forty-five minutes that I had to Silver 
Peak by living in Tonopah. 

I got to know quite a few of the townspeople. I stopped for beers on the 
way home from work occasionally in the original Shifting Sands Saloon, 
which was the only bar in town and was owned by Jim Gavin. Then compe¬ 
tition opened in the form of the Dead Coon Saloon. A guy named James 
Allen, who ended up working for us later on, he opened the Dead Coon. He 
ran that for a couple, three years and then finally went out of business and 
went to work for us. He was an excellent mechanic. And by that time the 
old Shifting Sands had closed, and Hefty Sanderson had built and opened 
the Miner’s Inn, which was actually the demise of the Dead Coon, I think, 
when Hefty opened that. 

The swimming pool in town—the land that it was on was owned by 
what was then Foote Mineral and is now Cyprus. But Sunshine agreed when 
they went into town to jointly support the swimming pool from the stand¬ 
point of its operating cost. Foote actually did all the managing of it, but we 
paid half the bill. Once a year we would have Swimming Pool Cleanup Day. 
It was usually in the spring when they finally filled the pool up with water 
after the winter, and that was always a good time. Generally, it was held on 
a Saturday and lasted all day, started early in the morning, and, of course, 
there was always lots of beer, and by the time the afternoon rolled around 
and the barbecue started, everybody was in pretty good shape. 

Individuals that I particularly enjoyed—of course, I mentioned Ruby 
Griffin, the postmaster. Her husband, Griff, owned an old cable D8 Cat that 
we rented periodically there at the operations or out on our explorations 
projects. Griff was a first-class guy. Hefty Sanderson, of course, was a great 
guy. He and his wife Alice ran the Miner’s Inn there and certainly helped a 
lot of the townspeople out, especially some of the younger ones, with either 
hiring them when they were down and out, or they probably loaned money 
to quite a few of them to get them over hard times, I think. But they were 
enjoyable. 

Harvey Humphrey was a special delight. Harvey was an old miner. He’d 
fiddled around the area for years. I think he mined up at the Mary Mine for 
a while. I remember giving Harvey a tour through the Sixteen-to-One on 
the day we had our grand opening, which was kind of an event there for 
Silver Peak. We had the governor there and Sunshine’s board of directors. 
We had a big barbecue and a tent set up outside the administration building 
next to the mill. Early that day we took Harvey on a personal tour through 
the Sixteen-to-One; put him on one of our what we called a Getman wagon, 
which was kind of a service truck, so he wouldn’t have to walk through the 
mine. And he was amazed at the size of the drifts that we’d driven—couldn’t 
believe that, because everything that he had worked in had been very small. 

Harvey had been involved at the Nivloc Mine, too, with Jim Gavin. 
And Harvey made the comment, “You know, Jim and I never thought the 



Sixteen-toOne amounted to anything.” The old Swedish guy that had dis- 
covered it back in the 1930s put a shaft down seventy feet or so and had not 
hit anything that really amounted to anything. He said, “Yes, we never 
thought this place amounted to anything at all up here, and now it’s going to 
turn out to be one of the biggest mines in town.” But he was kind of amazed. 

Silver Peak left an impression .... Well, every place I’ve worked has 
had its cast of characters, truly unique individuals, and Silver Peak was not 
alone in that. One event that I remember is one of the funniest things that 
I’ve seen. One of the guys that worked for Elton Parsons, who had a con- 
struction and equipment outfit there just as you come into town—tremen- 
dous boneyard of old equipment, used oil drums and whatnot. Elton was a 
first-class guy. I really enjoyed working with him at the times that we rented 
equipment from him. He had a mechanic that was dating this gal in town, 
and they eventually decided to get married. She was a native, and her mother 
lived there, too. And the wedding was held at the Dead Coon Saloon, and it 
was a grand affair. It degenerated towards the end though, and this guy and 
his new bride got in a fight. Not just a shouting match but a physical fight. 
They had known each other and lived together for probably two, three years. 
Anyhow, they got in this physical fight, and her mother got into it, and at 
the end of the day they carted her mother off with a broken or dislocated 
knee. The bride was pretty well beat up, too. [laughter] I think he ended up 
in jail. But it was one of those things, when you’re standing there watching 
it, it wasn’t funny. But thinking about it afterwards, you’re inclined to say, 
“Only in Silver Peak could that happen.” But that’s not true. 

Everybody (including outsiders) was pretty much accepted. You know, if 
they wanted to start trouble, there were more than enough guys willing to 
give it to them. Make no mistake, it could get rowdy. Most of it was alcohol 
derived, [laughter] But for the most part, what you ran into at the bars was 
pretty much your standard smalbtown western stuff. 

There was a drug problem in Silver Peak, I know, when we were there. 
Well, certainly marijuana. I imagine cocaine, although I can’t say that for 
sure. I did work or keep in close contact with the deputy sheriff that was 
based in Silver Peak at the time that I was manager, and I know Allan did 
prior to me. So we were pretty much made aware of who was doing what as 
far as far as the deputy sheriff saw it. We had no drug screening—Sunshine 
didn’t. Our corporate attorney was adamant that he did not want to get into 
that. He felt at the time (and, you know, times were different then than they 
are today) that would create a larger liability problem for Sunshine if we had 
a testing program. It’s not a view that Allan and I shared with him. We 
wanted screening simply because mining’s a dangerous business, whether it’s 
underground or in the plant. If a guy shows up drunk to work, you can pretty 
much tell. If a guy shows up buzzed on something else, it’s not always easy to 
tell. Our fear was that somebody would goof up someplace, and somebody 
else would end up getting hurt or killed because of this guy’s inability to 
function. 


243 


New Life, 
New 

Challenges , 
1970-1990 



244 


New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


Plus, we knew who spent the night in the bar, because the town was the 
size it was. [laughter] In fact, there’s more than once when I would stop in 
the Miners’ Inn to get a cup of coffee to take up to the mine, and there 
would be somebody sleeping—one of my guys with his head down on the 
bar. And I’d figure, “Well, he’s going to miss shift,” and then half an hour 
later I see him up, ready to go to work. And I have to go in and say, “No, I 
think you’re taking the day off.” But the drugs were a different story, and the 
use of those was certainly a more private thing and not as easy to detect. But 
we did have some incidences up at the mine, and I’m certainly not going to 
go into those. Some of the individuals involved went on to work elsewhere 
and certainly got their act together and are doing fine today. Some of them 
have disappeared. 

Some of the old-timers, natives who lived there, wouldn’t look down on 
a guy at all who went down every night and got just totally blitzed in the bar, 
but don’t talk to them about marijuana. That was the worst thing in the 
world. 


Miner’s Bond 


The saddest thing that happened when I was there was the death of Phil 
Lapp, Sunshine’s mine superintendent, in 1985. That’s the only fatality we 
had at the operation. He was killed on the 6810 level of the mine. He was, 
what we call in the mining business, slabbed. A slab of rock, or a piece of 
rock, fell from the back or the ceiling and hit him. That. . . that pretty 
much summarizes it. I mean, I won’t go into any gory details. 

I wasn’t in the mine at the time. I was down in the office, but I went up 
to the mine right after it happened. I went underground. To help dig him 
out. There was a surveyor with him, a fellow named Andy Anderson, who 
now is back at the Silver Valley in Idaho working, I think. Andy was with 
him, and Andy was . . . buried about up to his waist. He wasn’t hurt. But he 
was there. He saw the whole thing. And it was a case of, the chance was 
taken that shouldn’t have been taken. We’ve all taken them in the mines at 
one time or another and gotten away with it. And Phil just didn’t that day. 
So we shut the mine down for a day after that happened—sent everybody 
home for the remainder of that day and, I think, the following day. 

It’s dangerous every day, and no matter what you can do, how many 
regulations and laws are enacted, there’s always going to be that element of 
risk there. Although most times, at least the fatalities that I’ve been in¬ 
volved with, I’d have to say every one of them was that the guy just screwed 
up. He wasn’t really watching what he was doing at the time he was killed. 
You know when Phil was killed—again I won’t go into details what he was 
doing—but I’ve done it, too. Not everybody, but the engineers and geolo¬ 
gists who work there, we stuck our head in the same place he stuck his. 

Phil was well respected in the community. He was a good guy to work 
for. All the guys respected him, and he lived in town. He was quite active, 



although he wasn’t a drinker: he was never in the bars, but he’d go down 
there and stop in and have a Coke and chat with the guys once in a while. 
But he was always willing to help them—overlook some times when two or 
three of them were blasting back from Billy’s whorehouse up by Mina and 
had a flat tire and got to shift late or something like that. He was always 
willing to overlook that. He was more than fair. He knew miners. He had 
been one at one time so he understood them, and everyone respected him 
for that. 

His funeral was in Silver Peak down in the community center, and a 
minister came from Tonopah to preside over that. About ten of the guys, the 
underground miners, showed up at the funeral with their diggers on—such 
as the clothes that they wore in the mine, with their hard hats and mine 
lights and everything. That was a sign of honor. They sat in the front row. 
And if you would have taken those guys and told them any other place that 
they had to sit—in the back rather than in the front row—they would have 
run out of the place. They came up and sat right in the front row, and they 
presented something to Sandy Lapp, Phil’s wife. 

Well, it [the bond between miners] has to do with something you put up 
with every day working in underground mines. Underground mines are much 
more dangerous than open pits. In open pits you generally don’t have any- 
thing that falls on your head. In just about every place that I have worked, 
every underground mine, there has been at least one person killed. And it’s 
always something that just jolts you back to reality and makes you realize 
your own mortality. It just.... I mean you go down there everyday, and 
you’re very careful, but yet you take chances and risks that you know you 
shouldn’t be taking sometimes, but you get away with them. And then some- 
body who’s your friend or somebody you know well ends up not getting away 
with something or killed because of nothing he did, just something that 
happened. And it always brings you back to reality really quickly. 


245 


New Life, 
New 

Challenges, 
1970-1990 


O 


VIVIAN BARTAK: CAN’T TRUST EVERYONE 

Vivian Bartak grew up in the mining town Contact, Nevada, and as a young girl, 
lost the tips of several fingers from an accident with blasting caps. She arrived in 
Silver Peak with her family in the 1960s. Her husband worked for Foote Mineral 
Company, while she raised five children — Patty, Sylvia, Georjean, David, and 
William. She first worked part-time at the post office and then became Postmaster 
in 1993. In Vivian’s oral history interview, she described small-town problems that 
match those facing many larger towns today. 

I came down here in 1967. We moved down from Idaho. We farmed. 
Oh, farming is hard work, and you never make a profit. My brother Joe was 
working for Elton Parsons. That’s when Elton and Jewel Parsons had Coaldale, 



246 

New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


and he had this construction com¬ 
pany here. Then my husband George 
came down to get a job down here, 
and he went to work for Parsons first. 

Next he went to work for . . . then 
it was called Foote Mineral, and I 
moved down in the fall of 1967. 

Then in 1969 they said they 
needed somebody to work at the post 
office, and I had already worked at 
the post office at Contact, Nevada. 

And so I went to work here as a part- 
time, flexible clerk. Ruby was my 
boss. Blanche Dalinski was the other 
clerk, and we had the post office in 
that little building. 6 It was cut off in 
the center, so the front part was the 
lobby. We didn’t even have a safe in there. We just had a square box that we 
had to lock. And we worked in there until 1976 when they moved in the 
trailer. 

Well, I was raised in Nevada, so Silver Peak was just another small town. 
I liked it. They had a bunch of tramp miners here when I first moved here. 
They worked for the Mid-Continent, and my brother was one of the miners. 
There were quite a few people who lived here. There were a lot of miners 
that lived here. It was busy when I moved here. Cyprus had their crew, and 
after Mid-Continent moved out, that’s when Sunshine moved in, and they 
opened up and closed. The third time when they opened up, they were work- 
ing real strong. My son David was working up there in 1983. 

At first my husband and my brother were living here, and they were 
living in Frances Chiatovich’s house. They rented it. Frances was living over 
in Gabbs. And also, my brother-in-law, Joey Bartak, was living down here 
then, too. Then we got a trailer and moved up to Foote’s trailer park. 

My husband, when he first went to work here, he was an operator. He 
worked from 1967, and then he got sick. They made him retire in 1982, and 
he passed away in 1984. He had worked up around lithium a lot, and he had 
inhaled a lot of that. He fell the one time, and I had to take him in [to the 
hospital], and they had to go into his chest so he could breathe. After that 
he just started going downhill.... when he passed away they told me that 
he had breathed a lot of that lithium in. 

Postmaster, 1990s 



Vivian Bartak. (Photograph by Victoria 
Ford.) 


Ruby retired in February of 1992, and James Frayne was the postmaster. 
He was officer-in-charge from February until June of 1992. Then, when he 




made postmaster, he bid out of here in April, and I was made officer-in- 
charge. And then in October of 1993, I was made postmaster. 

At different times I’d go into Tonopah and fill in if they needed workers 
there. And when I was in there, I would ask them to teach me all the new 
things. We didn’t have express mail out here, but when I came back from 
working in Tonopah, I told Ruby, “We’re going to do express mail, and I’m 
going to show you how to do it.” And that’s when we started doing express 
out here. It was probably in the eighties. And we have priority [mail]. We do 
an awful lot of priority mail now. 

This Friday we’re supposed to get a fax machine in and also the machine 
for using credit cards. One thing with those credit cards, it comes right back 
whether they’re good or bad. Not like checks, because last year I had four 
checks bounce. We didn’t take checks for a long time here at the post office. 
And now that we accept checks, why it was a shock to me that somebody 
would write a check to the government and have it bounce. 

When you work for the post office department, you have to go by their 
rules and regulations on everything. If you have a box rented, you put the 
notice in on the first. If it isn’t paid by the thirtieth, you allow them ten 
days. And if they haven’t paid within that ten days, you close the box and 
take the mail and put it in general delivery. And if it’s in general delivery for 
thirty days, and if they still haven’t come, you have to send that mail out. 
We have some people that will leave and never leave a change of address, 
and we can’t do anything with their mail until their box rent comes due. But 
we have some that have a box, but they never come to pick up their mail. 
They go four, five, six months at a time without ever picking anything up. 

There’s no door-to-door delivery here. Sometimes when someone gets 
express in and if they can’t get to the post office to pick up, I have delivered 
it. We had some Lange [company in Arizona and California] drillers here 
the one year, but they couldn’t get in to pick up their express. That’s how 
they got their checks was through express, so the boss asked me if I could 
take it and the paper that they had to sign with me when I’d leave at night, 
and they’d pick it up from me. I’d usually have to meet them, and I’d just 
lock it in my car. They’d be working way out on the lake, and they couldn’t 
get in. I did this for quite a few years. 

Well, when Harbert Yeargin was here, I stayed open every Friday night, 
so they could come in and make money orders. Every Friday night those 
men would come in at five, and I wouldn’t get out of there until six thirty. 
When I went to my one meeting, they said, “Are you putting that time 
down?” 

“No,” I said, “Postmasters are supposed to donate something to the com¬ 
munity, and me staying at the post office and doing that is for the commu¬ 
nity.” Well, that was their payday. And old Fred, he would go to town and 
bring the money out for all of them to cash their checks. And I said, “Well, 
Fred, you can go in there and get all that money and bring it out here. For 


247 


New Life, 
New 

Challenges , 
1970-1990 



248 


New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


them to be able to come to the post office and get money orders, I’ll stay 
open.” [laughter] I’d stay open so that they could send them. 

However, a postmaster has to be very careful, because if you’re too friendly 
with some of the people, they’ll try to get you to do favors. When you work 
in a post office, you cannot give out any information. You cannot give out 
any box numbers to people. You’ve got to be able to have customers that 
know that they can come in and trust you and get a bunch of money or- 
ders—that is nobody’s business but that customer’s, who he sends money 
orders to. 

Well, I’ll tell you something, there are some people [in Silver Peak] that 
I feel I can rely on, but there are some that I just wouldn’t. I hate to say this, 
but this community is just like drug city. Drugs are very bad here. There 
have been busts here. It’s been a problem since . . . oh, it’s been a problem 
since in the 1970s. It’s just as much here as it is in any other small town or 
even in the big cities. 


Fourth of July Parade 


The only thing they have here now is [the parade] on the Fourth of July, 
like [last year was] the first Fourth of July that the post office put in a float. 
Junior Toner [Glen Toner Jr.] and Doug Tockey did the pony express on two 
horses. We had Doug Tockey’s old vehicle, red one, and we decorated it up, 
because the post office was 130 years old here this year [1886 to 1996]. We 
took the blue ribbon. The pony express, they got the red ribbon, a round 
plaque, and a silver platter. But they insisted that all the prizes had to go to 
the post office, because it was for the post office that they’d gone in [the 
parade]. 


- -O - 

ELMER T. “HEFTY” SANDERSON: I MADE THAT TOWN 

Miner turned entrepreneur, E.T. “Hefty” Sanderson owned and operated The 
Black Mammoth Bar, Restaurant, and Motel in the 1980s. Sanderson had worked 
for Merle Swanson at the Mary Mine before opening his business, so he under¬ 
stood the mining industry. While in Silver Peak he served as Esmeralda County 
Commissioner, and after returning to Hawthorne he was elected sheriff of Mineral 
County for four terms. 

When I first came to Hawthorne from Montana in 1948,1 started work- 
ing for one of the contractors. And after I worked with them for a while, 
why, I bought a dump truck, and then I hired it out to the company. They 
were building all of those ammunition bunkers and roads. 

Before I went back over to Silver Peak, I got married to a lady, Alice, 
that had five kids. She went over there with me, took all of the kids. I had a 



home here in Hawthorne when I 
went over there, and so I sold it 
and used the money to establish 
a business in Silver Peak. I bought 
that property off of [Jimmy] 
Gavin. I knew Jimmy for years 
before he got sick, and then he 
just didn’t feel like he could op- 
erate anymore over there. He had 
what they called the Shifting 
Sands Bar, and so I bought that 
off of him and [his wife] Marie. 
Well, it was kind of a snack 
deal—not a full-fledged restau¬ 
rant. But I bought the property 
next door, which was the old 
Black Mammoth Bar, and it was 
a good-sized building. I did a lot 
of work on it first and then opened it up with a restaurant and a bar. And so 
my wife and I, we operated that. 

Then I bought some modular units new in Tonopah and moved them 
out there, and that gave us six units for a motel. Then Harvey Humphrey 
had the gas station, so we bought that off of him. That left us with a bar and 
a cafe and a motel and a gas station, so we had just about everything in 
Silver Peak. I came to Hawthorne and bought a big three-bedroom trailer 
unit, and then I moved it out there, so that gave us a place to live. I put it up 
alongside of the bar, where I could just go from one to the other. 

Foote Mineral was there when I was there. There was quite a bit of 
mining, too. There were several little properties that they were working on 
around, and they were working on the Mary, and Foote Mineral was in there 
on the lake, and it was a pretty thriving community. Mining was really pretty 
constant then. There’d be a mine start and then work for a while, and then 
it’d close down. 

I used to borrow $25,000 a week for the guys who’d come in to my place 
and cash their paychecks rather than have to take it to Tonopah or some¬ 
place. And then that’s where they’d spend the money. I thought that was 
pretty good, that I was able to borrow $25,000 a week. 

I bought some steers at the sale in Fallon and took them to Silver Peak 
and grained them, gave them the oats and corn and all the hay and stuff that 
they wanted. And I got them really in good shape. Well, I took them back to 
Fallon and had them butchered one at a time, and then I put on a free 
barbecue for everybody in the country. We had hundreds of people coming 
out there for a barbecue. That came easy for me: I’d done a lot of cooking 
anyway. When I was in the army, they sent me to cook and baker school for 
a couple of months. 



Elmer “Hefty” Sanderson. (Photograph by 
Victoria Ford.) 


249 

New Life, 
New 

Challenges , 
1970-1990 









250 


New Life, 
New 
Challenges, 
1970-1990 


I did that two or three times and got lots of people. If you want to get a 
lot of customers, cook them up a nice big meal and give it to them. You had 
no trouble getting customers. I liked to do it, because I had lots of friends, 
and I liked to take care of them. 

I had those businesses about fifteen years. And then my wife decided she 
didn’t need me anymore, and so she took up with a truck driver and spent 
my money on him. So then I had to leave Silver Peak. She got the busi¬ 
nesses when we got divorced. Well, I didn’t contest anything: I just gave her 
what she wanted. And it was kind of a sad deal, because I ... I really liked 
her. And I thought about shooting him. Then I thought, “Well, if she didn’t 
like it, I’d probably have to shoot her, too.” [ironic laughter] I decided that 
wouldn’t be the logical thing for me to do, because I’d wind up in jail. So I 
just left and gave her everything. 

But it used to kind of gripe me to go into the bar and the cafe that I 
made, spent my money for, and have him sitting in my office counting my 
money. And it was about all that I could take. I carried a gun in my pocket 
for a week thinking about it, and then I finally just gave it up. It would have 
been a poor thing to do. 

I still like Silver Peak. It was off to itself. And I actually made the town, 
and I just kind of hated to give it up. I had enjoyed my time while I was in 
Silver Peak, but I had to do something to get my mind off of Silver Peak and 
off what took place over there, so I started in different things. 


Notes 

1. He funded a two hundred-ton mill in Silver Peak, which reopened in 1957 with a 
five hundred-ton capacity Tonopah Times Bonanza and Goldfield News, 29 November 
1957. On 18 April 1958 the Times and News reported a gathering to watch gold and 
silver bullion ingots poured, valued at $7,273. 

2. A garden tramp miner is one who changes jobs frequently to learn new skills but 
prefers to stay in one state. Ford, Ben Viljoen oral history, 197. 

3. The Mohawk silver mine was owned by Stanley Chiatovich, Ernest Shirley, Harvey 
Humphrey, and Louis Shirley and was leased in June 1959 to U.S. Milling and Min¬ 
erals Corporations of Chicago. Tonopah Times-Bonanza and Goldfield News, 6 No¬ 
vember 1959. 

4. The cave-in was reported in the Hinds 202 stope of the Mohawk Mine on Octo¬ 
ber 15, 1959, with reports about the disaster and the rescue efforts in the Tonopah 
Times-Bonanza and Goldfield News on 23 October and 30 October 1959. An investi¬ 
gation report was published on 6 November 1959. 


5. Air doors control the ventilation in the mine. 




6. The little one-room, wooden house was still in Silver Peak in 1996 and sat next to 
the newer-model mobile unit that served as the post office. 


251 


New Life, 
New 

Challenges, 
1970-1990 




10 


The Future 


In recent years Nevada climbed into top place as the nation’s gold pro- 
ducer and third place internationally, thanks to the Carlin Trend discovery. 
This new wave of mining is for microscopic gold. Computerized mills, reams 
of regulations, women underground, giant equipment operating both under- 
ground and in open pits—1990s mining has ranged far beyond the wildest 
dreams of 1930s miners. With all these changes, what lies in store for a small 
mining town like Silver Peak? 

As in other parts of the state, advances in technology brought renewed 
interest in older gold properties in the Mineral Ridge Mining District. While 
the price of gold was still over $300 an ounce, the Mary, the Drinkwater, and 
the Oromonte once again looked promising. Mineral Ridge Resources, Inc. 
(MRRI) opened up the area and hopes were high for another bonanza. How¬ 
ever, by 1998, falling gold prices pushed comparatively small operations like 
MRRI to lower their overhead as much as possible—some cutting jobs, some 
folding. 

The town of Silver Peak has survived borrasca before. As of 1996, jobs 
with MRRI and Cyprus Foote Mineral (still open after almost forty years of 
operations) created a good local economy and were building the much-needed 
bridge into the future. Once again, these companies were made up of indi¬ 
viduals, many who loved The Peak and worked hard keeping the town alive. 
The following oral histories show how strongly the past continues to be tied 
to the future in the mining industry. 

Ben Viljoen, MRRI mining engineer and Esmeralda County Commis¬ 
sioner, received his training from the old-timers and serves as a living link to 
underground mining of the past. General manager at MRRI in 1996, Tom 
Rinaldi, described himself as a 1990s tramp miner and stayed in Silver Peak 
long enough to establish the new open-pit mining operation. Not long ago, 
the MRRI operation was sold to Vista Gold Mining Company. The project 
continued under the leadership of General Manager Hank Lesinski until 
the property was acquired by Golden Phoneix Minerals in 2000. Finally, 



254 


Ed Tomany recalls Pat Chiatovich’s gold, which he hopes will finally be 
located by MRRI operations. 


The 

Future 


-o- 

BEN VILJOEN: KING OF YOUR STOPE 


Ben Viljoen [pronounced Fay-une] keeps one foot in the past and one in the future. 
His roots in Nevada have grown deep from the time his grandfather immigrated to 
America from South Africa and settled at Lake Tahoe. Ben was raised around the 
lumber industry but as a child thought mining was more exciting. In his oral history 
he explained his training to become a top-notch tramp miner. He also described 
how his life changed as the underground mining he loved disappeared in favor of 
open-pit mines and government regulations. Although he learned the new ways, he 
was still hooked on underground mining where a man could be king of his stope, 
and he is still hooked on collecting stories about the way things used to be. 


Job Training, Underground 


I think my first job mining was at the Utah Mine in Virginia City when 
I was about thirteen, hand-mucking during the summer, so I got to be away 
from home and get paid, and it seemed just too much fun. Oh, I loved it. 
After setting choke in the woods, and my uncle paid in candy bars, and 
these guys paid real money, that was something, [laughter] Well, my folks 
begged and pleaded for me to go to UNR [University of Nevada, Reno], but 
I convinced them that it’d be a good idea to get some practical experience 
first. I just tramped around from mine to mine, mainly working underground. 
As one mine shuts down, because the price of the mineral goes down or else 
they work it out, I’d just gather up and go on to the next one. And it’s a 
never-ending cycle. 

Ninety percent has been Nevada, mainly because I’m what they refer to 
as a garden tramp or a tri-county tramp—not the guy that goes from coast to 
coast. If there’s any jobs in Nevada, I’d just prefer to stay here. But from time 
to time, I had to leave the state to round out my skills. The shaft jobs were in 
Arizona, and I wanted to know more about shafts, so that’s why I migrated 
down there for a short stay, and then up around Liberty in Washington to 
mine underground placer, because that’s something I hadn’t done before. So 
it’s just moving around all the time. 

For an underground miner, before you could call yourself a contract miner 
or a real miner, it takes about ten years of practical experience and moving 
around a lot to learn all the different jobs. It’s not just me. That’s what it 
takes for everybody. Or you could just stay at one mine, which those guys are 
referred to as a factory tramp. But then you don’t have the rounded back¬ 
ground. Each place is different. The ground is different. Even up and down 
the Comstock the ground is different in almost every mine. 



First of all, underground is a trade, where open pit is just construction— 
just basically laborers. Underground, you work your way up through the ranks. 
There are a bunch of different trades you can pick up. Some guys become a 
timber man or a tunnel stiff or a shaft hand. If you learn it all, you become 
what they call a contract miner, where you go out and you bid the work. 

You start out on the surface as a top lander. That’s the guy that is just 
basically a laborer on the surface, digs ditches, moves the timber from the 
timber pile over to the cage to lower it down underground. From there, you 
can become a hoist man (some mines call it an engineer) or a mechanic or a 
framer—the guy that actually cuts the timber into the sets. 

Of course, if you want to go underground, then after you have enough 
seniority, you can go down. You start in as either a nipper or a skip tender. 
Nipper is the guy that’s basically a laborer. He hauls the timber from the 
cage to the heading the guys are working in or moves powder around or 
breaks boulders on the grizzly or just all the grunt work that takes place. In 
the bigger mines they have a eager, which is basically an elevator operator— 
the guy that rings the bell codes up to the hoist men and makes sure that 
everything is right on the cage so you don’t have timber falling off. Or a skip 
tender, like at the Mohawk where we used a skip instead of a cage, is the guy 
who dumps the muck from the draw points into the skip, and that’s his job 
all day long—to just keep filling the skip every time it comes down and to 
bring it up. 

From there, hopefully, you would meet up with somebody that would 
like you as a miner’s helper or a nipper in the heading, because the miners 
always work in teams of two. They’re paid some kind of a minimum wage, 
and then everything else is contract. You’re paid so much a foot or, if you’re 
in the stopes, so much a cube as incentive pay. After being a helper, then 
you start learning how to drill a round and how to load it, how to timber— 
everything that’s involved with that. And once you think you have that 
pretty well figured out, well then you bid into the raises or sinking a shaft. 

The first miner I worked with—he and I really hit it off—was Steve 
Cate from Mina. Once in a while you click with somebody . . . just some¬ 
thing where you know what the other guy’s thinking, and he knows what 
you’re thinking, so you don’t have to stand around and compare notes: you 
just get the job done. And he and I tramped around together for, gee, quite 
a few years. He was one of the best hands I ever worked with. Every mine we 
hit, we usually pegged the board. They always keep a board showing who’s 
making the best gyppo, the best contract money, [laughter] When the com¬ 
pany pays you by the foot or by the cube, they’re always trying to gyp you on 
the amount, on the measure up, so it’s referred to as gyppo, and we were 
usually right at the top. 

Mining’s different than any other industry. Any other job, you hear people 
saying how much time they were able to hide out from the boss, where in 
mining you hear everybody bragging about how much footage they got, be- 


255 


The 

Future 



256 


The 

Future 


cause if you goof off you’re not only beating yourself out of money but your 
partner besides and the shift following you. 

I worked with all different characters. I was real lucky. I hooked in with .. . 
they’re nicknamed the Pirate Crew. They’re a pretty horrible gang: they 
would always end up in jail or a bar fight or something. But they were famous 
throughout the West as the very best in the business. Whenever we hit a 
mine, the reputation goes ahead of you, so we always had to keep up our 
reputation. We always did very well. Let’s see, there’s K Bond and Drunken 
Duncan, June McKnight, Screaming Beaman, Three-Finger Gunner, Johnny 
Nickelbee, and Suitcase Simpson and a few more guys that ran around in 
that clique. Most of them are retiring or “stoped-out” now—too lunged up 
to work anymore. The con. Silicosis. 1 


Silicosis 


I don’t think I have any problem with silicosis. I can’t breath like I used 
to, but I think that’s more age than anything else. But today, we water down 
our muck piles. We use wet-headed machines and water everything down, 
where in those guys’ days, they didn’t know how to fight the silica dust, and 
they had dry machines. That silica is what they make glass of, and it breaks 
down into razor-sharp, little particles that just scar your lungs all up. Your 
body thinks that it’s dust, so it keeps pumping in more mucus. Finally, a guy 
just drowns in it or dies of pneumonia. 

Most guys are conned to a certain extent, but all the old-timers I know 
have died of it, to one degree or another. There’s an old guy in Mina that 
just used to cough up blood all the time. It was just horrible. You’d go into 
the restroom, and the urinal would be coated with blood. John Cate, Steve’s 
dad, died of it. They had him on oxygen, and he just slowly suffocated. Any¬ 
way, that’s why most of them are gone. It’s a horrible way to die. Often they 
say it’s just bronchitis, because miners are the very toughest of the tough. 
You aren’t going to let a little particle of dust take you down, [laughter] 

Underground Versus Open Pit 

It’s only been here recently that I’ve had to work in [open] pits. That 
probably will change back again as things evolve. See, it doesn’t take too 
awful long to work out an open-pit mine, and so the next step is to see what’s 
down below that. Did the old-timers mine it all out or not? According to the 
old-timers that are still around here, it was the War Board that shut every 
non-strategic gold mine in the United States. The last day the mine oper¬ 
ated, they had all the ore they needed to keep the mill running, and they felt 
it was a real rosy-looking future. 

I like underground, because it’s very, very highly skilled labor. Miners 
are just a breed all their own. Open pit is just glorified construction, dirt 
moving, where a miner has to know what he’s doing all the time. You’re king 



257 


of your own stope. You mine it, and nobody tells you how you’re going to do 
it. It’s hard to describe, but miners all have a great pride in their work, and I 
just enjoy being a part of all that. 

Underground mining, that’s the greatest life there is, because most of 
your pay underground revolves around contract prices. The company deter- 
mines what a drift should cost to drive. So they’ll pay you your day’s pay plus 
so much a foot to get the job done faster, and so if you’re a good drift hand, 
you can make double or triple a day’s pay by producing that much more 
work. In a stope, you’re paid normally by the cube, how many cubic feet of 
ore you knock out. Or if they’re really worried about grade control, they’ll 
pay you by the ounce—so much an ounce to keep the grades up real high. 

Everything changes, and you’ve got to change with the times or end up 
like the whalers! [laughter] To change from underground to open pit, 
everything’s completely backwards. Underground, you get under the ore body 
and work your way up. In the pits you start on top and work your way down. 
There are a lot of adjustments, but it’s still mining, and everybody likes moving 
dirt around. We’re all kids at heart. 

Well, underground mining is picking up again, up north in the Carlin 
area, and they’re finding that you can only, efficiently, open pit to a certain 
depth. Pretty soon your stripping ratio comes up to a point where it’s no 
longer affordable, and now there are mines that are going underground. 

The Mary Mine 

In 1989 when I came back to Silver Peak for the second time, I worked 
with Zephyr Resources under Rory Tibbals, who was the grandson of the 
Tibbals that you see on the old mine maps at the Mary. At the time I was 
working for Art Wilson Company, which became Homestead Minerals, out 
of their Silver City office. And they were thinking about, maybe, a joint 
venture or something along those lines with Zephyr Resources. So Steve 
Russell, a very well-respected geologist, was sent down to have a look at 
their ore reserves. They had me tag along to look at the pit from a practical 
or mining standpoint, to see if things were being done the right way. 

When I got here, they were having a heck of a time with grade control. 
Their mill heads weren’t anywhere near what they thought they ought to 
be, so Rory asked me if I would stay on, still working for Homestead but 
under him, to try and solve some of their grade-control problems, which I 
did. From there, eventually, Zephyr Resources’ holdings here were bought 
out by Homestead. Of course, I was already working for them, and I just 
stayed on. At that point, they made me pit foreman under John Tully, who 
was the pit superintendent for Zephyr. And, of course, he stayed on with 
Homestead. They didn’t change the people around, just the management. 

As pit foreman, I was responsible for everything that goes on in the pit. 
The superintendent pretty much stays in the office and makes sure that ev¬ 
erything is going according to the mine model and the mine planning and 


The 

Future 



that MSHA’s happy and all of that. My job was to stay up on the hill and 
make sure everything was going according to plan. It’s like a chess game. 
Everything has to be done in the right order and the right timing, so the 
superintendent’s job was to make sure that everything was balanced between 
the mine and the mill, and he was constantly in touch with me to let me 
know whether we were falling behind in one area or getting ahead of our- 
selves in another area, or if we were doing something that, of course, the 
state or federal inspectors would be against. 

Later on, John was offered a lot higher paying position. He moved on 
and they decided not to fill the superintendent’s position, so I was stuck 
with the whole bailiwick. I believe I had forty-eight men working for me, 
including the surveyors and everybody that was in and out of the pit—ge- 
ologists and all of them, which those groups are kind of working for them- 
selves, but someone’s got to keep them pointed in the right direction. 

Women Underground 

We did have two gals working up there—one on grade control, and 
another was a surveyor. Underground in the 1930s . . . miners are very su- 
perstitious, and women underground was a taboo, which has changed today. 
What’s happening today is, they have to hire a certain number of women 
underground. In the early days, those jobs that didn’t take a lot of physical 
strength were given to the old-timers—feeling that the old-timers, even 
though they couldn’t produce physically like they used to, they had those 
little pearls of information to pass on to the young guys, so the information 
kept rolling. Where today, hiring women, they have to put them into hoist- 
man jobs and things that, even though some of them are as strong as a bull 
on the average, requires less lifting and strenuous-type work. So the older 
guys, say after age forty-eight, most of them can’t buy a job. That’s the rea¬ 
son there are so few of those jobs that are for somebody that doesn’t have the 
strength they used to. 

But now there are positions in the mines where women excel, say, in a 
hoist-man position. That’s something that’s very high pressure, and every¬ 
thing has to be done just exactly right, or you get somebody tore up or equip¬ 
ment broken. On the average, women are very patient, and they make sure 
that it’s done just exactly right. They usually make darn good hoist men. So 
I’m not saying they shouldn’t be underground, I’m just saying this is a prob¬ 
lem in the industry that somebody will figure out a solution to, and then 
everything will be fine. 

O 

Well, finally Homestead Minerals went under. It wasn’t because of the 
mine or the mill. The mill had the highest head grades in the state while it 
was operating and the lowest cyanide consumption and some of the highest 
recovery—as far as I know, the highest. We averaged about a ninety-six to 



ninety-eight percent recovery in thirty-six hours, so that’s something pretty 
incredible. The crew were just crackerjack hands. 

But the hierarchy of the company felt that they ought to be making very 
important decisions regarding the pit from Carson City and Reno .... And 
then, a lot of the profit was being pumped into outside schemes. They were 
financing some tire-shredding deal, where they were going to squeeze oil out 
of old tires for diesel and then use the shredded rubber to add to asphalt for 
highways. Probably a good idea, but the mine needed exploration drilling. 
We didn’t need a tire-shredding machine. 


259 


The 

Future 


Small Business 


From there I started my contracting business back up, which I always do 
when times are tough, [laughter] If you can’t find a job, you go make one. 
Like when mercury died off, scheelite came up. So I went to work for some 
scheelite mines around Gabbs and did some leasing around Gabbs: it de- 
pended on which one looked like it would pay the best. It’s just always been 
like that, but in recent years there’s no minerals worth mining other than 
gold because of the prices and imports. 

My business was as contract mining, contract underground work, to dry 
drift or re-timber—just basically anything that anyone wanted done under- 
ground. I did hire some people. It fluctuated a lot from just me up to, I think 
with the highest, about thirteen guys working. We were doing two reclama¬ 
tion projects. 

The worst possible example [of problems for a small mining business] 
has to be the SIIS program, the state industrial insurance. Before it was 
called N.I.C., and it was the pride and glory of the whole union [the United 
States], because they had a huge surplus every year. Everything was taken 
care of quickly and efficiently. I don’t know what happened that they de¬ 
cided to rename it SIIS and bring in a bunch of new blood, but the thing has 
just completely gone down the drain to where it’s just a bureaucratic night¬ 
mare. And the paper work we had to do. I had to have a full-time accoun¬ 
tant, not just take care of that, but that was probably . . . figure, two work 
days a week would be strictly to SIIS. 

They couldn’t really comprehend the fact that one week you might have 
ten employees and the next week one. One pay period a guy’s getting paid 
twenty bucks an hour to do underground work, and then the next pay period 
he may be working on the surface and getting ten dollars an hour. Well not 
ten, but fifteen or something. And that just takes reams of paperwork. By 
the time you got that turned in, the guy’s making twenty again, and it just 
turns into a bureaucratic nightmare. It’s set up more for the casino worker 
that gets minimum wage forevermore and that’s that. And then their rates 
are so unbearable, 24.75 percent for underground. The next closest is Cali¬ 
fornia which is around 10 percent. Arizona and Idaho are around 4 percent. 



So if I was to bid a job, I couldn’t come near anybody that’s bidding from out 
of state. 

The first thing the SIIS people say is, “Oh, they have to carry Nevada 
coverage.” Well, they have to after they get caught. By then, if there’s a little 
job, they’re done and moved out of the area. And that’s the kind of stuff I 
was geared for, small jobs. 

Maybe it’s not any one bureaucracy in particular—just so many from 
every different direction. Well, the BLM .... Here lately, since the guys in 
Nye County shook him around a little bit, they’re a lot easier to get along 
with. But you still have to take them out and babysit them and parade them 
around. Meanwhile, this is taking you away from your work. And show him 
what you’re doing; what you should have done and could have done and 
would like to do—and it drags out to a whole day. You can’t just say, “OK, 
this is it. See you.” If they drive all the way out there, they expect to hang. 
They don’t want to make it back to the office in time to have to do some- 
thing else. 

Well, the state ... I should throw something in for the state mine in- 
spectors. These guys are, of any bureaucracy, these guys are just what I’m 
sure the people who came up with bureaucracies had in mind. Our guys with 
state of Nevada are just 110 percent. You’ve got one guy covering the same 
area as five MSHA inspectors. They do all the training—or they’re capable 
of doing all the safety training—free, absolutely free. They’ll lend you mov¬ 
ies, help you out. You can call them up in the middle of the night for some 
kind of suggestions and stuff. (Well, you could. I don’t want to antagonize 
them.) 

Their guys, when they’re hired, they have to have a certain amount of 
underground experience and a certain amount of pit experience, so you can 
actually rationalize with them. “I know we aren’t doing this quite to the 
letter of the law, but here’s the reason, see. We plan to do this so that we can 
do that, which will make the whole thing safer.” Where, the MSHA guys 
come in . . . this is some guy that might have worked in a coal mine in 
Virginia or just got out of college. It’s just getting worse and worse. You show 
them the mine: they really don’t comprehend what it is they’re looking at, 
but they know that the rule says, “You do this, and you don’t do that,” and 
down the line. And you’re trying to explain an elephant to a blind man. 

With the safety training, MSHA, as far as I know, doesn’t offer any- 
thing. They used to give out pamphlets and movies. They don’t even do that 
anymore. But the state—your guys have to have a refresher once a year, and 
that involves four hours of first aid and so many hours of this, so many hours 
of that, which is all federally mandated. But the federals say you just have to 
do it. How you do it’s your business, where the state will send in EMTs or 
somebody that’s certified in mine gases, just the guy for it. And they don’t 
charge you a nickel for it. 



And then, if you have a problem on the mine site, you can call them up 
and say, “Boy, oh, boy. Now this is off the record, but we’ve got this weird 
problem going on.” 

And they’ll say, “OK. Well there was a mine in this area that did this, 
and a mine over here that was in that situation. They did that.” And they’ll 
actually help you out. [laughter] 

When I first started leasing and stuff, the bureaucracies were 100 per- 
cent behind the little guy, without stretching the law, without making loop- 
holes. One thing I just loved about the mining profession as a kid was the 
whole idea that you could go out into the mountains and just make a for- 
tune, that the possibility was there, where today you’re just strangled to 
death by every type of a bureaucrat imaginable. Most of them serve no real 
use for the public or the animals they’re supposed to be protecting. They 
don’t produce anything, and they’re just absorbing most of the budget of the 
whole company. 

My little company, when I gave up on it... . Well, I was still kind of 
stumbling along, but I had a full-time job doing paperwork. If I was doing 
paperwork, I couldn’t be mining, but if I didn’t do the paperwork, I’d go to 
jail, so I couldn’t do both. There aren’t enough hours in a day. And there 
isn’t enough profit in it to hire somebody to play around and do paperwork 
all day. So it’s a real Catch-22. The bigger companies can afford to have a 
land man that just pampers all the bureaucrats and keeps them happy, and 
they’re working a whole bunch of different projects, so it pays off. Compared 
to the small guy who’s working one mine, and he doesn’t have the money to 
fight the bureaucrats. Like a bigger company can scare them away. They 
[bureaucrats] want to impress their boss, so it’s a lot easier to tear up a little 
guy that can’t afford to fight back. So you see, a lot of the ma-and-pa-type 
mines are falling by the wayside. 

Mina, when I first was working out in this area, was a booming little 
town. The railroad was in there. There were bars, cafes, stores—everything 
that makes a town work—and just rip-roaring all the time. A bum couldn’t 
hitchhike through without getting captured to go to work at some mine 
someplace. And now the poor place is all but a ghost town. Well, the EPA 
[Environmental Protection Agency] has shut down all those mills, because 
their tailings ponds—even though they’ve been there a hundred [years]—all 
of a sudden they have to bring them up to modern code, right now, tomor¬ 
row. And, of course, the operators just didn’t have the money to do all that, 
and so all the mills are shut down, and the rail was discontinued. The back¬ 
bone of the town was the custom milling business, and so that was the end of 
the hump for Mina. But we’ll see what the future has. 


261 


The 

Future 


International Versus U.S. 


Well, another thing I hate to see so much is that we’ve got an expertise 
that has been developed well over 100 years, close to 150, that’s all going 



262 


The 

Future 


out of the country now. But most of the companies, other than a few junior 
companies like this, are putting a few token geologists in the field to make it 
look like they are still active in the U.S., while they’re all going to Chile and 
Africa .... And those people don’t want to just give away their environ- 
ment, but they want the technology, the jobs, and the assets that are pro¬ 
duced. Where before, the hub for the industry was Virginia City. That ex¬ 
pertise went to Tonopah, back to Virginia City, and then it went from Vir¬ 
ginia City to Goldfield and back to Virginia City. It stayed here [in Nevada], 
and it helped the whole area. And now it’s just flooding out of the country. 

In South Africa today, they feel that selling their technology almost 
represents half of their gold income by doing consultant work on deep min¬ 
ing for other countries. But here, this country, it’s pouring out. The biggest 
joke in the business right now is, “What do you call a roomful of geologists? 
Spanish class.” 

I’ve been offered a couple of jobs in China. Seemed pretty fun, but I 
kind of wanted to see how the Mary Mine turns out. 


Silver Peak 


The people here are real nice and all seem to work together toward 
things. They have their little squabbles about who has the first float in the 
Fourth of July parade, but as luck would have it, everything works itself out. 
So there’s a lot of camaraderie here that you don’t see in other towns. 

It’s also a lot easier to get snarled up into the local politics and the fire 
department and things like that. Here, you’re right in the thick of it, be¬ 
cause you’ve got to pitch in to make it all work. So after it does work, then 
you feel a little better about yourself—you could’ve laid at home and watched 
TV but got involved instead. 2 


- O - 

THOMAS R. RINALDI: MINERAL RIDGE RESOURCES, INC. 

Tom Rinaldi was General Manager of Mineral Ridge Resources, Inc. (MRRI) in 
Silver Peak, Nevada, in 1996. He was in the process of finalizing the permitting 
process, overseeing construction, and planning for an open-pit, heap-leaching, gold 
operation. Rinaldi gave a unique perspective on history in the making—a glimpse 
toward the future of historic Mineral Ridge Mining District properties such as the 
old Mary, Drinkwater, Gordon-Brodie, and Oromonte mines, including the im¬ 
provements reclamation will leave behind. Rinaldi described himself as a 1990s 
tramp miner. He has a degree as a mining engineer, learned about underground 
and open-pit mines through firsthand experience, and changes jobs every two to 
three years, primarily to gain new experiences and seek opportunities for career 
advancement. 



1990s Miner 

I’m basically a tramp 
miner. I’m not the old under- 
ground tramp miner. I’m just 
the 1990s version of the tramp 
miner, as it were. I’m here for 
a couple of years, there for a 
couple of years. I won’t say it’s 
because my foreman upset me, 
and I’m not going to work for 
him and just leave, like people 
used to do way back when, but 
it’s opportunities and things 
like that. 

Thomas Rinaldi. (Photograph by Victoria Ford.) 1>m a minin 8 engineer. 
- My first job was as an under¬ 
ground foreman in a large copper mine in Arizona. After that, I came to 
Nevada to get into the gold business, because it was intriguing to me. I’ve 
worked as a foreman. I’ve worked as an engineer, and then I’ve gone into the 
superintendent and management positions. I went into mining because it 
was a nice outdoor job, and I didn’t want to be stuck in a building at a desk 
job. Now it appears that is about half of my job. [laughter] 

I finished school at the University of Arizona in 1983 with a B.S. in 
mining engineering. During the years I went to college (when I wasn’t in 
college), I was working as an underground miner in Colorado. I quit school 
for a couple of years to work, so I did get a job as an underground miner and 
fell in love with it. I was a development miner. I did raise mining. I did drift 
mining, rock bolting, mucking—pretty much everything that an underground 
miner does. I was in a modern mine by today’s standards: it was all rubber- 
tired equipment. We did not deal with the small, rail-type environment. It 
was all very large, high production, so it was a modern mine by those stan¬ 
dards. In the mine where I was, we had 300 pieces of diesel equipment un¬ 
derground. We had about 300 miles of drift. It was huge, bringing out 32,000 
tons a day. We’re going to be producing about 28,000 tons from an open pit 
here. 

I spent one summer at an open pit, a strip coal mine in the outback of 
Australia. I spent one summer in a copper mill as just a laborer—one day on 
a shovel, one day on a hose—you know, that sort of thing, just grunt work. 
And then I spent one summer as a haul truckdriver at a copper mine. So 
those three summers were all surface-type environments. 

After I got my degree, then I went to work for Magma Copper Company 
at their San Manuel operation in Arizona, about fifty miles north of Tucson. 
At the time it was, and I think it still is, the largest underground mine in 



263 


The 

Future 




264 

The 

Future 


North America. The first mine I worked at, our ore came out via a tunnel. 
This one, we had to hoist everything through shafts, and we were hoisting 
66,000 tons a day—more than double what the other one was. It was a low- 
grade copper mine, 0.65 percent, which by world standards is low, but it’s 
very good grade for the United States. 

Very rewarding job; a very frustrating job. Well, front-line supervision 
can be very rewarding, because you’re given a goal on a day-by-day basis, 
and it’s between you, your crew, and the mountain (so to speak) to get that 
job done as safely as possible, as cost effectively as possible, and just to meet 
your production goals. The frustrating part about it, it was a forty-year-old 
company with 5,500 employees. Politics were horrendous. 

When I was in the copper business, copper was in the doldrums. We’re 
talking fifty-eight cents, sixty cents a pound, sixty-five cents a pound. And, 
basically, my wife and I, we really wanted to get into the gold business. And 
we had an opportunity to come north on a family silver venture, which was 
the wrong thing to do. Spent a year doing that and spent a lot of money, lost 
a lot of money, [laughter] And decided to get a real job again and go back to 
work. Through some people I knew from working here and there, I called 
around and found a new project that was opening in Austin, Nevada, and 
got a job there as a foreman. I was there two years. It was one of those 
projects that was supposed to be a three-year project with eight years of 
potential that lasted two and a half years, [laughter] It was a very hard ore 
body, and I guess hindsight would say it should have been left there. The 
company didn’t make money on it. 

From there I went to Hawthorne, Nevada, working for the Aurora Part¬ 
nership. I was again a senior mine engineer, and then was promoted to chief 
mine engineer in the two years I was there. Another small company. There 
was not a whole lot of upward mobility, so after two years I started looking 
again. I could have had a job there for close to ten years, but it would have 
been the same job, which, I mean, there’s nothing wrong with that, but I 
had different ambitions. 

Next I went to Ely, Nevada, as the mine superintendent of another op¬ 
eration that was opening up, small operation again. From there, I got a job 
back in Hawthorne with a company by the name of Nevada Goldfields, a 
very small, gold-mining company. It was an underground and open-pit op¬ 
eration with a mill. Prior to this I’ve been bouncing back and forth between 
mills and heap leaches. Most of my experience is heap leach, but I do have 
some milling background also. 

Then another company made me an offer I couldn’t refuse, and that was 
in Goldfield, Nevada, just thirty miles east of here, so I took that job. I was 
there about a year and a half in Goldfield [when] Cornucopia, which is the 
parent company of Mineral Ridge, started looking at me. For a little bit of 
stability for my family and the intrigue of building a project for myself from 
the desert up, I decided to stay in Tonopah and take this new job. Let’s see, 



two years in Austin, two years in Hawthorne, three years in Ely, a year back 
in Hawthorne, and a week away from being two years in Tonopah. [laughter] 

MRRI at the Old Mary Mine 

[To start a project from the ground up . . .] I guess, to put it in one 
word—chaos, [laughter]. For example, we’ve tried to schedule start-up 
dates .... We had a target date for the E.A. [Environmental Assessment] 
to be signed by July 19. OK, we missed that by a week. It was signed the 
following Friday, so we were real close on that one. But then you’ve got all 
these other state agencies you have to deal with also, and they all have this 
thirty-day comment period—and thirty days for this, forty-five days for that. 
And then after they say it’s OK, then we’ve got fifteen days to write the 
permit, and the state is understaffed. My major argument with the state is, 
they’ll put one person on your particular project, and if that person goes on 
vacation or something, it comes to a grinding halt. And that has cost us a 
few days here and a few days there. Now here it is September 24, and we’re 
hoping to get started October 4, which is about two months later than we 
wanted to be started. 

Right now we’re getting to the end of the permitting cycle to get started, 
which has taken two years. We have a list on our wall of approximately 
twenty permits, plus or minus a few. Some of them are major, some of them 
are minor. The three, well the four major permits: You have the Environ¬ 
mental Assessment, which is your major plan of operation, which is with 
the BLM, which is the lead agency for this project. Once that is out of the 
way (and we’re working on all these permits in conjunction with each other), 
then we have the three major state permits, which is the reclamation per¬ 
mit, which we’re about ready to finalize right now, which is going to give us 
this October 4 start-up date. The other two major permits are water-pollu¬ 
tion control, because we are dealing with toxic substances that we must 
contain, and also the air-quality permit. With those two, we can go ahead 
and get started mining. But in order to construct the components that those 
permits deal with, we have to have those permits in place first. 

And then there’s all the minor permits. Our solution pond has the di¬ 
luted cyanide solution in it. We had to have it permitted with the Depart¬ 
ment of Wildlife. We have to have explosives permits. We have to have 
permits for the beneficial use of the groundwater of the state. Oh, storage of 
the fuels on site. We have to have the state fire marshal sign off on all our 
buildings. Just, you name it, everybody wants a piece of the pie. And every 
one of these permits comes with a fee; [laughter] $100 here, $8,000 there, 
and just about everything you can imagine in the middle. There is no permit 
that they just give you. [laughter] 

Right now about half of my time is involved with the permitting pro¬ 
cess. After we get into operation and all the permits are in place, it will 



266 


The 

Future 


require . . . I’m going to say 10 percent of my time. But we do have one 
person on staff whose sole responsibility is taking care of our land and our 
permits. Today, everything has to be governed by protecting ground water, 
runoff water, the soils of the area. We have to have a plan up-front, prior to 
moving a ton of material. 

Back in the 1930s and at the turn of the century [two important eras in 
Silver Peak mining history], there were no environmental regulations. It 
was more just, “How can we best process this material most economically 
and then get rid of our waste most economically?” When they were finished 
with the material, they found a low spot, and they just filled the basin or just 
let it run down the hill and got rid of it. 

Actually, this project is affected by the national economy in several ways. 
The price of gold is very much important to us. The price of raw materials— 
fuel, cyanide, labor—are very important to the economics of this project, so 
we’re very much part of the national economy. 

Our parent corporation is a Canadian-based company, so we are an in¬ 
ternational corporation. Cornucopia Resources Limited—they’re a 
Vancouver-based, junior mining company. We’re a small mining company. 
This is our only operation at this point in time. Total employees right now 
in North America are about twenty-five to thirty people. There are quite a 
few other people in Africa where we’re doing some exploration right now. 
It’s nice being in a small corporation like this because everybody in the com¬ 
pany is on a first-name basis with each other. We have to wear many differ¬ 
ent hats, which depends on what day of the week it is. [laughter] My job— 
I’m involved with budgeting, permitting, people issues with the employees, 
production issues, construction issues, God, I’m sure there are others, but.... 
[laughter] 


Mining Equipment 

During construction and in the initial days of mining, we’ll probably 
have somewhere between 110 and 120 people here. As everything gets com¬ 
pleted, and we settle down into the daily routine, we’ll probably have about 
90 employees. 

The decision for open-pit versus underground mining here is solely an 
economic decision. Today we have much larger machines, and it’s much 
more cost-effective to move material. Technology is continually improving, 
and with those improvements the cost of moving material goes down. Now 
today, as in the early days, we want to move the least amount of waste pos¬ 
sible and primarily move ore. Back in the 1930s and the turn of the century, 
they probably moved five tons of ore for every ton of waste they mined. 
Now, today, we’re going to be moving four tons of waste for every ton of ore 
we’re mining [almost a reverse ratio]. But we can move it at such a cost- 
effective rate compared to back in the 1930s that it is still better to have a 



large open pit than to try and mine it underground. Underground mining is 
still very expensive compared to open-pit methods. 

Today with the assay techniques, the drilling techniques, the ore-con- 
trol techniques with the computers and things, we can actually be very se¬ 
lective, and we know exactly what is ore and what is waste. So it is actually 
a very selective mining method that we’ll be using. 

The public views it as big, and the equipment that we’re using is large. 
The front-end loader we’ll be using will handle 20 tons of ore in one scoop, 
and people just think of that as a tremendous amount of material. Compared 
to the Cord Mill when they were moving up to 500 tons of ore per day, we’re 
going to be moving about 3,000 tons of ore per day. Total production with 
the pre-stripping and things, we will be able to move upwards of 30,000 tons 
of material per day. Of that 30,000 tons, 5,000 to possibly 10,000 tons of 
that will be ore, depending on what day and where we’re at in the different 
pits. 


267 


The 

Future 


Milling Technology 


Cyanide technology came in after the turn of the century. In fact, the 
Blair Mill did use cyanide. OK, basically, theirs was kind of an open system 
where they just dumped their tailings. They tried to reclaim as much of the 
cyanide as possible, but the stuff they did dump, they just kind of sent it 
down the mountainside. And the tailings, wherever gravity took them is 
where they went. However, cyanide is a very delicate compound. Oxygen 
and sunlight break it down. Those tailings are anywhere from sixty to ninety 
years old. I seriously doubt there are any toxic levels of cyanide in them. 

Heap leaching probably came in the 1960s. And the difference in the 
mid- to late-1960s, early-1970s compared to what we’re doing today, heap- 
leach technology has made quite a lot of strides for the better. We know a lot 
more about what we’re doing. 

Today everything has to be closed. That was a mill environment, where 
they pulverized the material so they could get the gold out. We are just 
doing a fine crush. Instead of taking it down to a fine sand or a flour-type 
material, we’re taking it down to an eighth-inch gravel. And then we’re 
irrigating it with the dilute cyanide solution that will pull the gold into 
solution, and then we process it from there. However, our gold ore that 
we’re irrigating with this cyanide solution is on a plastic membrane, so that 
as the solution goes through, it’s collected on this plastic membrane and 
drains into a pond. From there, we process it through our plant. We bring 
the strengths in this water back up to the leachable cyanide strength, and 
then we send it right back up. So basically it goes onto the heap, down to the 
plastic, into the plastic pond, through the plant, back to the pond, up through 
the heap. The water we lose is for two reasons only: bringing the ore up to a 
moisture content that the water will pass through it and through evapora¬ 
tion. 



Heap leaching is ore-specific. Some gold ores you just can’t heap leach, 
because you have to take the material down to a flour size to liberate the 
gold. Here, basically, we have free gold and electrum [a gold-silver metal], 
and it’s on the micro-fractures. So by taking it to this eighth-inch size, we 
are opening up enough of those fracture planes that we get a good recovery. 

The other thing that dictates between a milling environment and a heap 
is the grade of ore—how much gold is in every ton of rock and the amount of 
it that you have—because a mill is much more capital intensive than a heap- 
leach project is. You’re probably talking four to five times as expensive to 
build. And you either need to have the sufficient grade to recover that capi¬ 
tal quickly, or you have to have the longevity to recover it over time. 

One of the things that we’re concerned with is getting solution to the 
entire pile of ore we have there. We use cement to tie up the fines, so that 
we don’t create blind spots in the pad. When heap leaching first began, it 
was just taken out there with trucks and dumped. We use conveyors and 
radial stackers, so that there’s very little compaction on the material before 
we leach it. Crushing has been developed better and better, so we can crush 
cheaper. We can crush finer if need be. And milling has gotten better, also. 
It’s just basically experience. We know more of what we can do with it. 
Well, for example, let’s just say that fifteen or twenty years ago, the rule of 
thumb for your cyanide strength was much higher than it is today. We know 
how little we can actually get away with and still cost effectively leach the 
gold out of the ores. 

The other thing is, we have roughly a six- to seven-year project here. 
And where the decision is made is, we get a certain recovery with the heap 
leach: we’re going to get a higher recovery with the mill, because we’re ex¬ 
posing more gold. But it’s a difference in recovery—the mill’s going to make 
more money than a heap, but that difference has to pay for the increased 
capital [i.e., the cost of the mill]. In this situation, it’s not there, because we 
have a relatively short mine life. 

The Oromonte area where we’re standing is where the leach pad is go¬ 
ing to go. 3 We’ll be crushing the ore, and this is where we will be stacking it 
to leach it with cyanide. Now, the building behind me that you can see, that 
will be torn down, and that will be where our solution pond is. Right next to 
it will be our processing facility, our carbon plant, and a gold refinery. There 
will also be an assay laboratory there, an engineering building, and then 
over on this side of the valley here will be where our crushing plant is going 
to be. The run of mine ore will come in there, which will be nominal boul¬ 
der-size materials down to fines, and then we’ll crush it to approximately a 
one-eighth-inch-maximum size material. And then we will be filling this 
basin with the crushed ore where we will be leaching it with the cyanide 
solution. The Cord Mill was still the Merrill-Crowe system, which once you 
got the gold in solution, then you dropped it out on a zinc precip. Now here, 
we get the gold in solution, and then we run it through activated carbon in 



columns and then through electrowinning. We pull the gold out of solution 
that way. It’s the next phase of technology. 

Mining Technology 

Historically, the Mary Mine has been an underground mine. We are 
doing just the opposite in open pit, heap leach. A lot has changed, you 
know. Engines have gotten more efficient. Engines have gotten larger. Tire 
technology is a big one. Fifty or sixty years ago, tires wouldn’t hold the weight 
that we’re putting on them today with the synthetics and things like that. 
Our trucks are the “babies” of the industry. They’re 58'ton class trucks, which 
is the payload. The large mines in the state are using 240-ton payload trucks, 
so five times the size of what we have. 

When I went to school, computers were just starting to come into it. We 
were using them as high-powered adding machines. That’s basically what 
they are today, but ore reserves were calculated by hand. We did have calcu¬ 
lators then, so it wasn’t with a slide ruler, but years ago it was. All ore re¬ 
serves are done with computers today. We take the assay information from 
the exploration drilling, 3-D models are created, and everything is done 
within the computer. Major change. We are able to model ore bodies with 
more information and with a whole lot less time. Computers can do it so 
much quicker. I’d hate to do the math calculations that are required to de¬ 
velop a project even this size. They were following a vein, whereas, what 
we’ve done is, mathematically, we’ve modeled it. We know where this vein 
is. 

Total, this project will last about eight years. Actual mining and crush¬ 
ing will be between five and six years long, and then after that we will do the 
final leaching on the heaps to get the last bit of gold out. Then we have to 
rinse the heaps with fresh water to detoxify the remaining rock. And then 
after that, all the material that is here is re-sloped, contoured, topsoiled, and 
seeded. 


269 


The 

Future 


Reclamation 


Actually, for reclamation, this area falls into the multiple-use policy of 
the government agency here. The contours will change, but it is primarily 
used for mining, recreation, and grazing. When we finish with the mining 
process here, we will turn it back so that it can be used for grazing and recre¬ 
ation. All the buildings we put in, all the concrete we put in, will be either 
buried or removed. The reclamation activities, basically, the goal is to make 
it for future minerals exploration, for recreation, and for grazing. OK, for the 
grazing, we need to reduce the slopes of our waste dumps and our heap and 
things so that vegetation can grow on it. We do need to seed it. Recreation- 
wise, we need to make the place accessible and also safe—in other words, 



270 


The 

Future 


deny access or keep people out of places where they can hurt themselves, 
because, as we all know, people can do dumb things, [laughter] 

When we leave, the mountain will have changes. We do have nine open 
pits. Hopefully, we’ll have two or three more by the time it’s finished, be¬ 
cause we do have some active exploration. Of the nine open pits, the large 
one will definitely stay open, because it is started in year one, and it is the 
last one to be mined. Some of the smaller areas will be backfilled. This is 
actually cheaper for us, because it saves us some reclamation. There will still 
be required reclamation, but the amount of reclamation is less because we’re 
containing it. The waste dumps will be regraded and seeded. The open pits 
will be burned. Access will be denied to make them safe for the general 
public when we’re finished. But contours, the topography’s going to change, 
but hopefully it will be equal or better than what it is today for multiple-use 
purposes. 

We’re going to be mining out a lot of the previous underground areas, 
and the one pit [at the old Drinkwater], that is our large pit. We are going to 
completely engulf that area. And the waste dump that is associated with it, 
that hasn’t been seeded or reclaimed, will be reclaimed. 

Another one of the assets of this project going in here ... in order to 
get the supplies that we need for the mining operation, there’s twenty-six 
miles of county dirt road that we must improve to get our heavy equipment 
through. This is the main thoroughfare between Fish Lake Valley and Silver 
Peak in the county here. So we will be maintaining this road for the next 
five or six years, and when we leave, the road will stay in it’s improved con¬ 
dition. The roads will be widened. The grades will be much more favorable. 
These will be roads that you can drive up in a two-wheel-drive car as op¬ 
posed to the four-wheel-drive vehicles we were using today. Right now, the 
road receives minimal maintenance by the county. We’re spending about 
$200,000 on that road right now, improving it. 


- O- - 


EDWARD “ED” M. TOMANY: PAT CHIATOVICH’S GOLD 

Edward “Ed” M. Tomany was raised in both Silver Peak and Tonopah in the 
1 950s and 1960s. Elis mother was a welEloved schoolteacher in the area, and his 
father was a miner who also was a boxer. He remembers every inch of the Mineral 
Ridge Mining District, having traveled to the mines often with his father, who told 
stories of earlier days. At the time of his interview, he served as the Chief Admin¬ 
istrative Officer, Mine Inspector for the Nevada Mine Safety and Training sec¬ 
tion. Ed recalled the very moment when his circle of friends and family from the 
mining community endorsed his government job. 

My father [Donald Andrew Tomany] and mother [Anne Banovich 
Tomany] met and married in Silver Peak, and they were living in Silver 



Peak when I was born in Tonopah 
on January 25, 1945. My mom was a 
schoolteacher in Silver Peak in 1936 
and met my father, who was mining 
gold at the Mary Mine and also at 
the mining camp of Nivloc, which is 
west of Silver Peak. My mom and dad 
lived in Nivloc. She taught school 
in Silver Peak, and she would haul 
the kids to school from Nivloc with 
the silver bullion on the school bus. 
She would drop the bullion off at the 
post office and take the kids on to 
school and teach school and then 
bring the kids home in the evening. 
She was the janitor at the school after hours and schoolteacher during hours 
and then the bus driver and the armored car. 

My parents met in 1935. My sister was born in 1950 in Hawthorne. 
Probably, they spent a good seven or eight years or more in Silver Peak, and 
then my mother taught in Tonopah for years and years and years. And then 
she taught in Goldfield and became superintendent of Esmeralda County 
schools. And at that time she frequented the Silver Peak, Dyer, Goldfield 
schools, and her best friend out there was Alberta Merritt. 

My father originally was a leaser at the Mary Mine. In fact, he was one of 
the last leasers at the Mary Mine. And at that time in the Silver Peak- 
Mineral Ridge area there were a number of small operations besides the 
Nivloc operation and the Mary Mine operation. Of course, they had the 
mill in town. He mined with a number of the old-timers out there. [There 
was] Jimmy Gavin, the Chiatovich brothers, who were very prominent first 
settlers in Fish Lake Valley—Stanley and Jack and Pat and Bob—Harvey 
Humphrey, Ernie Shirley, Fred Del Papa. 

Fred Vollmar Jr. was a very close friend of my father’s. And in fact, he 
owned a beautiful home there in Silver Peak. It had a swimming pool in the 
yard. I mean, that was unheard of—a private swimming pool at a residence. 
Fred Vollmar was instrumental in mining throughout Nevada. A lot of people 
only remember highlights of Fred Vollmar being a mining promoter, but he 
was actively involved in the development of mines besides being a promoter. 

I spent all of my time with my dad when he could take me with him, and 
then even after we moved to Tonopah, we would go back, and he would 
continue to lease. He leased at the Nivloc. He leased at the Gold Wedge. He 
leased at the Mary Mine. And then we prospected all of my life out there. 
That was his main source of income until about roughly 1956 or 1957. Then 
he became involved in the Del Papa-Boscovich ownership of the Ace Club. 
Later on he became a deputy sheriff and then was elected as the sheriff of 
Nye County. 



Edward “Ed” M. Tomany. (Photograph by 
Victoria Ford.) 


271 


The 

Future 







Family Friends 


272 


The 

Future 


I know there were a lot of old family friends that are still.... The Del 
Papa family—Joselyn Del Papa was a schoolteacher with my mom in the 
Tonopah schools for thirty years. But Fred Del Papa and his family, his mom 
and father and brother, were raised on the Del Papa mining claims on top of 
Mineral Ridge at the State Bank claims. They lived at the Campenella claim 
and at the spring, and that’s where they were raised. From the Gordon-Brodie 
Mine, the State Bank claims where the mining transpired was roughly one 
mile west of the Brodie claim. And then the Campenella was less than a half 
a mile north of the State Bank claim, so the Campenella is slightly north 
and west from the Brodie claim. Of course, Frank Del Papa lived in Tonopah. 
The attorney general of the state of Nevada today is Frankie Sue Del Papa. 
Her father was Frank. 

From the time I was a kid, I would go with my father and Fred Del Papa 
to Mineral Ridge, faithfully, every time that my dad could sneak me in the 
truck back in the 1950s. I can recall being up on that mountain with Fred 
Del Papa, my father, George Boscovich, and Manhattan Dutch in the early 
1950s on a regular basis as they tried to rediscover the gold. 

The history of the Del Papa claim was ironic. Fred Del Papa’s father (it 
was a very small, single-family operation mine) was drilling one day and 
doing the normal mining methods: drill, blast, and muck. Rail cars were 
unknown for underground. But the family operations were hand mucked. 
You drilled and blasted and then shoveled or mucked your cars full. To listen 
to Fred talk about this experience, it was that kind of gold fable that you’ve 
heard stories about. They blasted, went in to muck it up, and there was gold 
splattered all over the walls. And they actually had to sweep it up, shovel it 
up; and it was tremendously rich. 

They had the last forty-eight pounds of that, which was kept by 
Joselyn .... Well, Freddy kept it, from the time that his dad had discovered 
it, in a wash tub in the basement of his house through the mid-1970s. And it 
was not uncommon for Fred Del Papa (he co-owned the Ace Club in Tonopah 
with George Boscovich) that he would bring the tub out and let you select 
with a pair of tweezers a piece of gold that you wanted. You didn’t have to 
pan it or anything. You just reached in there, looked at a piece that you 
wanted, and you could take it out of there. 

And then my dad prospected with Del Papa until the day he died. We 
spent every day. It was a ritual, because we maintained the Del Papa claims 
for Joselyn until she sold them last year, and we maintained those for her all 
of my life after Freddy passed away. And, of course, before Freddy passed 
away in 1967, we assisted him, so we were an integral part of that for all of 
my life. 



Leasers 


Leasers made daily wages and bonuses for the amount of work that was 
completed. In other words, just as today what we call contract mining and 
bonus operations, where you actually get paid for footage, they would get 
paid for footage with incremental bonuses to be up on development. What 
you made depended on your work. Being in a good section of the mine would 
be favorable, obviously. But you could get paid for development, too, and at 
a higher rate. There was a lot of misunderstanding in some of that contract 
mining where, if you received shares and values of a mine, you were obvi¬ 
ously to benefit if you were in a rich area. But because you weren’t depend¬ 
ing on the mine and the location, you could also make above and beyond 
daily wages by being a good miner, being very prudent, being very good at 
your job, and developing above standard. So you could get paid for that 
extra development that you did above and beyond a normal day’s salary. 


273 


The 

Future 


The Mary Mine 


In fact, when my father was alive (he just passed away four years ago), he 
used to tell us where individual miners lived as we would come up the Mary 
Mine road. Sunshine and Moonshine Johnny and the Brodies and, of course, 
the Del Papa family. Freddy and my dad would name the properties and 
some of the episodes and incidents that happened, where the bunkhouse 
was. They stayed at the bunkhouses at the Mary Mine. He discussed in de¬ 
tail the cook shack and the bunkhouse when he was at the Oromonte. We 
would ask, “My God, there’s not much there. How did you keep warm?” 
Well, they cut a lot of firewood. And he would tell about the cold winter 
days and no mention of the comforts of life at all. But that was history through¬ 
out the nation—not everyone owned a car and not everyone owned their 
own home. And the style and the progress of all of these living conditions, 
it’s just been a dramatic change following the war. 

They didn’t have electricity up on top of the hill. They may have at the 
mine and at the bunkhouse, but they didn’t when he was leasing up at the 
Oromonte. They didn’t have power in the cook shack, and Del Papa’s never 
did have power at their home on the Campenella claim. Wood heat and 
kerosene lamps. 

Dugouts—early on, maybe someone started to dig a tunnel and then 
converted it. Well, they put a face on them with a door and a window. Moon¬ 
shine and Sunshine Johnny weren’t alone. The Dynamite Newmans and 
the names ... all of them. There were numerous places as you would drive 
up. It was like a tour. That was a steep grade after you left the Mary Mine to 
go on top to Brodie and Oromonte—that’s a very steep grade, and you would 
pass these as you went along. 



Sport of Boxing 


274 


The 

Future 


My father was an amateur boxer that was on the professional boxing 
card when Max Baer fought Big Ed Murphy in Silver Peak, and my mom 
kept the original fight poster. My dad fought a gentleman by the name of 
Cotton Dean, who was a local miner at Mineral Ridge. We actually have a 
photograph of my father fighting in the ring and the fight card to the poster. 

There was a whole group of folks that their pastime was in organized 
boxing as we know it today, as a sport, amateur to professional levels. And 
Nevada has a tremendous history on boxing, early boxing that originated in 
the Tonopah'Silver Peak-Goldfield area. Where today we have drilling-rock 
competitions, well, they had boxers from the mine. They were miners, and 
the guys in the mine wanted them to fight the guy from that other mine, 
that type of thing. They were employed in a very strenuous work to begin 
with, so they were physically fit. My dad said that on days where he had 
extra time, he would walk the Nivloc road or walk the Mary Mine road. The 
Nivloc, I can understand that; but that’s a hike on the Mary Mine road. 
That’s not a walk: that’s a hike. Vertical distance there. 

Local rivalry—like today on the football rivalries across town—well, 
that was rivalry across the mines. And you select your boxer, and a number 
of these people went on to become professional boxers. Small scale, but like 
Big Ed Murphy. All he was, was a local miner. Fought Max Baer, my God, 
heavyweight champion of the world! So it isn’t as if it was just a dream or a 
hobby. Some of these people went on to become pretty good boxers. 



“M)i father was an amateur boxer. . . [and] fought a gentleman by the name of Cotton 
Dean, who was a local miner at Mineral Ridge." The Don Tomany and Cotton Dean 
fight, Silver Peak. (Photograph courtesy of Tasha Hall.) 



275 


As they tell me with my dad, he was a great boxer. He taught me how to 
box, my brother and I. That was the kind of thing that you did growing up. 
He bought my brother and I boxing gloves and used to put us out on the 
sidewalk to practice. And it was a part of all those mining communities, like 
the Gans-Nelson world championship that was fought in Goldfield, Ne¬ 
vada. 4 That was brought on by the gold producers of the mines who brought 
that match to Goldfield. So in some fashion, as you would look at gaming 
and tourism today in this state, that was how it was. It was just a different 
commodity. 

Mining in the Family 

The fact that my dad was employed [in mining] . . . the excitement to 
me was the fact that we went out and actually participated in this thing, 
which was work for him. Of course, it was work for us. I was just a kid, but I 
guess it was the adventure of being unique—that I pushed an ore car, and I 
filled an ore car, and it was hard work, but I accomplished something. I 
learned to fill an ore car and dump one, but that was exciting. There wasn’t 
anything else when I was growing up, outside of organized sports at school. 
There weren’t recreational activities after school. There wasn’t TV. There 
weren’t all these things that you have today. And that’s where my energy 
was channeled. 

When I was a kid everything was rail. We pushed ore carts, and we 
loaded ore carts with shovels, and life progressed. We went on to what we 
called air tuggers. And, of course, in the deep shafts you had a hoist in the 
winze and things. And then you went on to a larger operation, if you were 
fortunate. You had [model] Twelve B muckers, compressed-air-powered 
mucking machines. 

Then in Nevada we saw this transition, which to me came about in the 
1970s when I was first introduced to rubber-tire operations underground, 
where we made the hole larger so we could bring mechanized equipment in 
to do the work for you. That came about before then in many places. But I 
was one that stayed away from that mechanization, because I was accus¬ 
tomed to the same old methods or gravity ore chutes. We loaded them and 
let gravity fill the car for us. And all those things that we did with rail and 
rail cars and electric motors and air motors and all of those things. And the 
same with the drill. 

Mine Safety 

When they [Father and his friends] would all visit together, everyone’s 
kidding each other about what they used to do and how they used to do it. 
Numerous times they referred to having near accidents, where they had pre¬ 
mature detonations of the blast when they were drilling and shooting, or 


The 

Future 



276 


The 

Future 


where they drilled into a missed hole. In one mine accident that they used to 
kid my father about later on, they thought that would be his last day mining. 
That was at the B and B Quicksilver in Fish Lake, where he was nearly killed 
in a cave-in. The slab just pushed him to the side instead of crushing him, 
and it had blocked the mine for a considerable time. 

When he took me underground, he always told my mom that I would 
wait in the truck, but that wasn’t the case. And, you know, from early on I 
was always told what I should be careful of, and where I should sit, and what 
I could and couldn’t do. And there were times when I was actually left in the 
stope, and they would work. 

Accidents were a part of life back then, and as each year went by, when 
there was a mine accident, everybody was familiar with what probably hap- 
pened. When I was in high school, one of my classmates, Jerry Sickles’s 
father was killed in the Mohawk cave-in in 1961, and he’s entombed there 
with two other miners. They were never found. They couldn’t get them out. 
You always hear “a cave-in,” but there’s more to a cave-in than a simple 
collapse of the ground. As we learn today in courses: was the ground not 
properly supported? Those were conscious things that we did when I was a 
kid, and I was with him. We always checked ground support. We always had 
to be careful of where we entered and where we were working and what we 
disturbed—simply from ground conditions. So that was inherently, as it is 
today, a part of mining. 

I’ve gone on to work in the area of mining safety. As chief administra- 
tive officer, the Mine Safety and Training section oversees mine inspections 
for the state of Nevada. Our agency was created by the legislature in the 
state of Nevada in 1909. This state undertook that process for the health 
and safety of their miners in 1909, something that never came about [feder- 
ally] until the Congressional Mine Act of 1977. This is now the Mine Safety 
and Training section. It was created by the legislature as the Division of 
Mine Inspection. And it was the Division of Mine Inspection until reorga- 
nized by state government about four years ago, when they did our name 
change and we were placed under the Department of Business and Industry. 
But prior to that, we were a division by itself, and the inspector of mines was 
an elected position in this state up until the .... I want to tell you it was in 
the 1960s. It could have been 1970s. 

I went to work in 1991 [as a state mine inspector], and one of my father’s 
best friends in later life was Leonard Traynor, the deputy mine inspector at 
the time that Mervin Gallagher was the administrator of this division. And 
I’ll never forget when my dad came to my office in Tonopah. There’s a field 
office in Tonopah which still exists. And he came to my office with two of 
his best friends. At that time it was Norman Combs and Dennis Hill, very 
prominent. Dennis Hill was the Democratic party chairman back in the 
1970s or 1980s but was very active and instrumental in the development of 
mining properties in this state. 



They came to my office and looked at me and said, “Well, now, we want 
to tell you how this works. Leonard was one of us, just like you were, and he 
helped us get our mines in shape and producing, and we don’t expect any- 
thing less from you.” 

The message was even though I’m regulatory, I’m still in the group here. 
I have a job, and even though I envision the job to be other things de- 
manded by law—which we do and will always do, and they respect that— 
that I also have an obligation to assist. Specifically, in the law, besides the 
fact that we will inspect annually for the health and safety of mining in the 
state of Nevada, it states that we will provide technical assistance and con- 
sultations to see that operations work. So that’s an easy mix for me. 

There’s a lot of work, and our industry is growing. This is a big industry 
today, and technology has grown. There are some of these things today that 
we have to deal with that didn’t have to be dealt with then, environmen- 
tally. And I’m not saying that’s not a good issue. I’m just saying that we have 
these other concerns today that were concerns then, but they weren’t under 
any magnifying glass as they are today. And I look at it in mining as being an 
educational thing only. If mining were to educate their people and the gen- 
eral populace as to what they really do and how they do that.... Yet, in my 
father’s day they had to take care of them in their own fashion. It was a local 
issue—you didn’t pollute your water source. You didn’t destroy history just 
for the mine. 


277 


The 

Future 


Grandfather’s Silicosis 


My mother was not happy with that [when my father took me down in 
the mines]. Her father died of miner’s consumption. My Grandfather Mike 
Banovich moved here from Yugoslavia because of the unrest. My grandfa- 
ther moved to Tonopah around World War I, 1917 to 1919, with other fel¬ 
low countrymen. Nevada is littered throughout its communities with Slavic 
miners, and many of those are in Tonopah. They have their own commu¬ 
nity. Ely also has a large number of Yugoslavian-Czechoslovakian families. 

He came over for a year or two without the family to get work and ended 
up in Tonopah working in the mines. He brought the family over, with the 
exception of my aunt who has passed away. I think my mom was born in 
Tonopah. But he only lived there a couple of years. He contracted miner’s 
consumption, silica dust, and died. He died very, very young—very early. 
And my grandmother [Miryna Banovich] moved the family back to Yugo¬ 
slavia. They were back there less than a year when my Uncle Bill said that 
they were moving back to Tonopah, Nevada. She sold everything they had, 
and they came back to Tonopah. 

I can recall my mom always saying that she wouldn’t have the rest of her 
family die in the mines. I didn’t understand that as well then as I do today. 
By the time my father was mining, they changed mining practices, too. One 



278 


The 

Future 


of the biggest engineering changes was the use of water for drilling. That’s 
where the majority of the problems were centered. The largest, most devas- 
tating source of the silica dust consumption for miners was drilling dry— 
referred to as drilling dry without the use of water to moisten and settle the 
dust and the silica. Wet machines, referred to as wet machines. But for many, 
many years there was nothing but dry machines. Then later, there were dry 
machines being used, but you didn’t want to get caught with a dry machine. 
If you got caught by the mine inspector with a dry machine, as you would 
today, he would turn it off. It would be removed from the mine. Converted 
or removed for health reasons. 

That’s [miners’ consumption or silicosis] been a very close issue for me 
when I do the safety classes. I use that [example of my grandfather] when we 
talk about it, because it’s an issue that I can reflect to directly—how it af- 
fected my family. My mom and her sister and my uncles were raised without 
a father because of a health issue involving crystalline silica dust in the mines. 

But I do have to put it in perspective: while that was a danger then and 
still is a danger today, the technology and the manner of enforcement has 
lessened the danger that another family would suffer the consequence that 
many, many families did. Our family wasn’t alone. I mean, the graveyards in 
Nevada, as I tell the folks in our training sessions, is just.... One needs 
only to walk through the graveyards at Goldfield, Silver City, Virginia City, 
Tonopah, and the likes to see the number of miners who died in this occupa- 
tion—at very, very young ages. 

And there were some mining districts more prone to that: Tonopah be- 
ing one, and Delamar in eastern Nevada. They had extremely high inci¬ 
dences of death by silicosis, dust consumption. In fact, this state created a 
benefits program for those families or miners who have suffered health ef¬ 
fects in their occupation of silicosis. 

My grandmother had a garden and sold products right out of her garden 
[after my grandfather died]. It was a large garden in Tonopah, my God, on 
top of the rock pile up there. She had goats and sold goat’s milk and made 
goat’s cheese. My Uncle Bill and my Uncle Dave both got jobs early on as 
kids—pumping gas, chauffeuring, driving haul trucks and cars. Everybody 
[had to work], the whole family. Barter and trade and get a job. But there 
were many families that were in that same .... That’s an unfortunate part 
of history. 


Never-ending Search 


[There’s] an old tale about one man [who] spent his life looking for gold 
up on that hill, and that evolved from Pat Chiatovich, who is now dead. 
John Brodie and Pat discovered a very rich gold ledge. I can truthfully tell 
you that we spent thirty years with Pat, Freddy, George Boscovich, Manhat¬ 
tan Dutch—all of us together, singly, and collectively—but we could never 
find that gold again. Pat Chiatovich found it when he was employed by John 



Brodie, and because of L-208 and because of the lease structures then, he 
didn’t announce it and didn’t want it developed until it was a better [finan- 
cial] climate. And then he never could find it again. He spent all of his life 
looking for it. Pat Chiatovich, he expended every bit of time he had, on off 
periods of time, with his family and friends, all looking for it. And he was 
hiking between the Brodie mine and the Campenella property when he found 
it. In that small of an area. We looked all my life. That was a ritual similar to 
the sunken treasure thing, you know. 

And, of course, it reached a point where we all... . I say we, but I heard 
many conversations in later years where my dad and George and Freddy 
would tease Pat about, “You had a dream.” But they knew that it was not a 
dream, because they participated in this same search. They had seen the ore. 
They had actually seen the ore that Pat had brought back. So it wasn’t as if 
it didn’t exist. It existed, and it still exists somewhere today. 

So there’s a sadness in my thoughts, because I saw Pat live every day to 
do that, to try to find that again, along with many, many of his friends. Well, 
he just didn’t find it. And, obviously, in my mind I’ve chosen to think that if 
they ever make this large, rich discovery of gold at Mineral Ridge, that was 
Pat Chiatovich’s. I think that would be the closing chapter of this whole 
thing. And the Del Papa family and the gold in the washtub .... So I 
witnessed that and saw that and worked for them in that mine looking to 
find more. It’s been a nice hill for me. 


279 


The 

Future 


o 


CONCLUSION 

Cornucopia Resources Ltd., a Canadian mining corporation, contracted 
a feasibility study for its Mineral Ridge property with plans to begin mining 
in 1997 at the site of the historic Mary and Drinkwater mines where more 
than a half million ounces of gold was produced from underground opera- 
tions up until 1942. This information appeared in a publication by the Ne¬ 
vada Bureau of Mines in 1995, and MRRI did indeed begin operations late 
in 1996. However, MRRI filed bankruptcy and changed hands several times 
in the process. First, in 1998 Vista Gold took over operations, but in No¬ 
vember of 2000 Golden Phoenix Minerals, a local company with headquar¬ 
ters in Reno, acquired the Mineral Ridge property. 

Golden Phoenix Minerals is currently working to locate funding resources 
to post the $3.7 million bond that must be in place before opening the mine. 
Once again, the Mineral Ridge operation is searching for a few gamblers to 
bet on another heyday. Thus Silver Peak begins a new century, not as a 
ghost town—never a ghost town—but as a mining town still in the game, 
still holding a good hand and still drawing the interest of outsiders who will 
work in partnership with local residents. 



Notes 


1. Also referred to as miner’s consumption, thus “the con.” 

2. Ben Viljoen was elected Esmeralda County Commissioner in 1996. 

3. Part of this oral history interview was recorded on videotape at the site of future 
operations. 

4. Joe Gans won the World Lightweight Championship title after a grueling forty- 
two rounds in the Gans-Nelson fight on 3 September 1906, in Goldfield. That was 
one of the first fights staged by Tex Rickard to sell Goldfield mining stock. Charles 
Samuels, The Magnificent Rube: The Life and Gaudy Times of Tex Rickard (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1957), 97-126. 



Glossary 


Unless noted otherwise, all definitions are from the American Geological Institute’s 
Glossary of Geology 1 or from Stanley Paher’s Nevada Ghost Towns and Mining Camps. 2 

adit, n. A horizontal passage from the surface into a mine, sometimes called a tun¬ 
nel. 

alluvial, adj. Deposited by a stream or running water. 

amalgam, n. A naturally occurring alloy of silver with mercury; a general term for 
alloys of mercury with one or more of the well-known metals, especially an alloy of 
mercury with gold, containing 40 to 60 percent gold, and obtained from the plates 
in a mill treating gold ore. 

arrastra, n. Large, bowl-shaped devices in which Hispanic miners ground ore with 
the aid of slow-circling mules. 3 

assay, v. To analyze the proportions of metals in an ore; to test an ore or mineral for 
composition, purity, weight, or other properties of commercial interest. 

backwall, n. Headwall or a steep slope at the head of a valley. 

ball mill, n. A rotating horizontal cylinder with a diameter almost equal to the 
length supported by a frame or shaft in which materials are ground using grinding 
media such as iron or steel balls. 

barite, n. A white, yellow, or colorless orthorhombic mineral in which strontium 
and calcium are often present. 

blasting, n. An explosion of dynamite; the act of blowing up or moving with an 
explosive. 

bonanza, n. A miner’s term for a rich body of ore or a rich part of a deposit; a mine 
is “in bonanza” when it is operating profitably. 



borrasca, n. Term referring to a mine with no rich ore. 

282 claim, n. In mining law, a portion of public land on which an individual may have 
mining rights. 

Glossary 

claim jumping, n. Taking over mining property after it has been staked by someone 
else, usually before the claim is recorded. 

collar, n. The mouth or upper end of a mine shaft. 

concentrates, n. The valuable fraction of an ore that is left after worthless material 
is removed in processing. 

crosscut, n. A small passageway that may be driven at an angle to the main entry of 
a mine to connect it with a parallel entry or an air course. A level driven across the 
course of a vein or across the general direction of the workings; thus a mine opening 
that intersects a vein or ore-bearing structure at an angle. 

cut and fill, n. The excavating of material in one place and the depositing of it as 
compacted fill in an adjacent place, as in stope mining. 

cyanide process, n. A process for the extraction of gold from finely crushed ores, 
concentrates, and tailings by means of cyanide potassium. The gold is dissolved by 
the solution and subsequently deposited upon metallic zinc or by other means. 

district, n. In the states and territories west of the Missouri (prior to 1880), a 
vaguely bounded and temporary division and organization made by the inhabitants 
of a mining region. 

dore, n. Gold and silver bullion that remains after the lead has been oxidized and 
skimmed off. 4 

drift, n. A horizontal or nearly horizontal underground opening driven along a 
vein. 

dump, n. A pile or heap of waste rock material or other non-ore refuse near a mine. 

fault, n. A fracture or a zone of fractures along which there has been displacement 
of the sides relative to one another parallel to the fracture. 

float, n. A general term for isolated, displaced fragments of a rock, especially on a 
hillside below an outcropping ledge or vein. 

flotation, n. The method of mineral separation in which a froth created in water by 
a variety of reagents floats some finely crushed minerals, whereas other minerals 
sink. 

fluorspar, n. Fluorite. A transparent to translucent mineral found in many different 
colors, it occurs in veins, usually as a gangue mineral associated with lead, tin, and 


zinc ores. 



footwall, n. The underlying side of a fault, orebody, or mine working; especially the 
wall rock beneath an inclined vein or fault. 


283 


flux, n. A substance that promotes the fusing of minerals or metals or prevents the 
formation of oxides. 

gallows frame, n. The frame supporting a pulley over which the hoisting rope passes. 

gangue, n. The valueless rock or mineral aggregates in an ore; that part of an ore 
that is not economically desirable but cannot be avoided in mining. It is separated 
from the ore minerals during concentration. 

hanging wall, n. The overlying side of an orebody, fault, or mine working; especially 
the wall rock above an inclined vein or fault. 

hard rock, n. A term used loosely for igneous or metamorphic rock, as distinguished 
from sedimentary rock. A rock that requires drilling and blasting for its economical 
removal. 

headframe, n. The steel or timber frame at the top of a shaft, which carries the 
sheave or pulley for the hoisting rope and serves various other purposes. 

high-grade, adj. Said of an ore with a relatively high ore-mineral content. 

high-grading, n. Larceny of valuable ore or mineral specimens by employees in a 
mine. 

jewelry rock, n. Rich ore. 

lagging, n. Heavy planks or timbers used to support the roof of a mine or for the 
floors of working places and for the accumulation of rock and earth in a stope. 

leaching, n. The extraction of soluble metals or salts from an ore by means of slowly 
percolating solutions; e.g., the separation of gold by treatment with a cyanide solu¬ 
tion. 

ledge, n. A narrow shelf or projection of rock, much longer than wide, formed on a 
rock wall or cliff face. A rocky outcrop; solid rock. A quarry exposure or natural 
outcrop of a mineral deposit. 

lens, n. A geologic deposit bounded by converging surfaces (at least one of which is 
curved), thick in the middle and thinning out toward the edges, resembling a con¬ 
vex lens. 

level, n. Mines are customarily worked from shafts through horizontal passages or 
drifts called levels. These are commonly spaced at regular intervals in depth and are 
either numbered from the surface in regular order or designated by their actual el¬ 
evation below the top of the shaft. 


Glossary 



284 


Glossary 


lifters, n. Refers to a set of holes drilled for dynamite blasting in a mine which, 
when exploded, lifts the rock. 

lode, n. A well-defined occurrence of valuable mineral-bearing material, 
mill, n. Reducing plant where ore is concentrated and/or metals recovered. 


muck, v. To load broken rock by hand or machine and remove it following a blast. 


ore, n. The naturally occurring material from which a mineral or minerals of eco¬ 
nomic value can be extracted. 


orebody, n. A continuous, well-defined mass of material of sufficient ore content to 
make extraction economically feasible. 

ore shoot, n. A large and usually rich aggregation of mineral in a vein. 

outcrop, n. The part of a rock formation that appears at the surface of the ground. 

overburden, n. Barren rock material, either loose or consolidated, overlying a min¬ 
eral deposit. 

patent, n. A document which conveys title to the ground, and no further assess¬ 
ment work needs to be done. 


perlite, n. A volcanic glass having the composition of rhyolite, a perlitic texture, 
and a generally higher water content than obsidian. 

pilar, n. A term used in the southwest United States for a large pillarlike or project¬ 
ing rock. 

porphyry, n. An igneous rock of any composition that contains phenocrysts in a 
fine-grained groundmass; a porphyritic igneous rock. 

prill, n. Ammonium nitrate in beads used as an explosive in mining. 

pulp, n. A mixture of ground ore and water capable of flowing through suitably 
graded channels as a fluid. 

quartz, n. Crystalline silica, it forms a major proportion of most sands, and has a 
widespread distribution in igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary rocks. 

raise, n. A mine shaft driven upward from a lower to a higher level. 

run, n. A flat, irregular, ribbonlike orebody following the stratification of the host 
rock. 


scheelite, n. A yellow-white or brown tetragonal mineral associated with quartz, it 
is an ore of tungsten. 



shaft, n. A vertical or inclined excavation through which a mine is worked. 


skip, n. A large hoisting bucket which slides between guides in a shaft, the bail 285 
usually connecting at or near the bottom of the bucket so that it may be automati¬ 
cally dumped at the surface. An open iron vehicle or car on four wheels running on Glossary 
rails and used especially on inclines or in inclined shafts. 

skip tender, n. The person who operates the skip. 

slimes, n. Ore reduced to a very fine powder and held in suspension in water so as to 
form a kind of thin ore mud. 

sluice, n. A conduit or passage for carrying off surplus water, often at high velocity. 

slurry, n. A highly fluid mixture of water and finely divided material. 

square set, n. A set of timbers composed of cap, girt, and post. These members 
meet to form a solid 90-degree angle. They are so framed at the intersection as to 
form a compression joint, and join with three other similar sets. This system of 
timbering can be adapted to large or irregular ore bodies. 

stamp mill, n. An apparatus in which rock is crushed by descending pestles or 
stamps operated by water, steam, or electric power. Also, the building containing 
the machinery. 

stope, n. An underground excavation formed by the extraction of ore. 

stringer, n. A mineral veinlet or filament, usually one of a number, occurring in a 
discontinuous subparallel pattern in host rock. 

sump, n. A pool of water in a cave, the outlet of which lies beneath its surface. 

tailings, n. Those portions of washed or milled ore that are regarded as too poor to 
be treated further, as distinguished from the concentrates or material of value. 

tram, v. To haul or push cars about in a mine. 

tunnel, n. Strictly speaking, a passage in a mine that is open to the surface at both 
ends. It is often used loosely as a synonym for adit or drift. 

vein, n. A zone or belt of mineralized rock lying within boundaries clearly separat¬ 
ing it from neighboring rock. 

whim, n. A large capstan or vertical drum turned by horsepower for raising ore from 
a mine. 

winze, n. A subsidiary shaft which starts underground. It is usually a connection 
between two levels. 



Notes 


286 1 . American Geological Institute, Glossary of Geology , Second Edition (Falls Church, 

VA: American Geological Institute, 1980). 

Glossary 

2. Stanley W. Paher, Nevada Ghost Towns and Mining Camps (San Diego: Howell- 
North Books, 1970). 

3. Zanjani, 60. 

4. U.S. Bureau of Mines, Dictionary of Mining, Mineral and Related Terms. Original 
content compiled by U.S. Bureau of Mines (1996); XML version by EduMine 
( 2000 ). 



Index 


A 

Ace Club (Tonopah, Nevada), 271-272 
Adams, Nancy (nee Mount), 138-139, 
143,147-151 

Adolphus Busch Glass Manufacturing 
Company, 83 
Allen, James, 242 
American Journal of Mining, 9 
American Mine Services, 234 
Anaconda Copper Company, 70, 233, 
241 

Anderson, Andy, 244 
Anderson Boarding and Supply Com¬ 
pany (Los Angeles, California), 82- 
83 

Argentite Mine, 170, 187, 223 
Aurora, Nevada, 3, 5, 16, 29, 186, 216 
Austin, Nevada, 5, 9, 43, 56-57, 264 

B 

B and B Quicksilver Mine (Nevada), 276 

Baer, Max, 136-137, 274 

Baird, Lydia, 200, 204 

Balzar, Fred B., 103 

Banovich, Dave, 278 

Banovich, Mike, 277-278 

Banovich, Miryna, 277-278 

Banovich, William, 277-278 

Bartak, David, 245-246 

Bartak, George, 246 

Bartak, Georjean, 245 

Bartak, Joey, 246 

Bartak, Patricia, 245 

Bartak, Sylvia, 245 

Bartak, Vivian, 245-248 

Bartak, William, 245 

Barton, H. W., 13, 19 


Basic Magnesium Plant (Henderson, 
Nevada), 83 

Battle Mountain, Nevada, 131, 147 
Belleville, Nevada, 17 
Belmont, Nevada, 5, 9, 13, 20 
Benetti, Angelo, 125 
Benetti, Louie, 125 
Benton, California, 186 
Bess, Flora, 192, 219 
Bess, Sam, 192 

Bessemer City, North Carolina, 212 
Big Bear, Nevada, 201 
Big Pine, California, 180 
Big Smoky Valley (Nevada), 198 
Birch, Guy, 106-107 
Bishop, California, 123, 145, 179, 193, 
198, 203, 232 

Bishop Creek (California), 40 
Black Mammoth Bar, Restaurant, and 
Motel, 248-249 

Black Mammoth Consolidated Mining 
Company, 21, 53-55, 57-58, 65, 69- 
70, 81-82, 90, 93-94,103-104, 112, 
114, 154, 164, 182 

Black Mammoth Mill, 58,104-114,128, 
134, 157, 163 
Blacks, 123 
Blair Booster, 43 

Blair, DeWitt Clinton, 12, 18, 32 
Blair Hotel (Blair, Nevada), 34, 43 
Blair, John Insley, 4, 12, 16-18, 29, 32 
Blair Junction (Nevada), 4, 12, 74, 170, 
184 

Blair Mercantile Company (Blair, Ne¬ 
vada), 34-35 

Blair Mill, 38, 41, 69, 104, 267 
Blair, Nevada, 4, 34-35, 37-44, 47, 81, 
216 

Blair Press, 40 



288 


Index 


Bodie, California, 17-18, 21 
Booth, W. W., 43 
Boscovich, George, 272, 278-279 
Boulder Dam. See Hoover Dam 
Bowes, Edward I., 32 
Boyd, Bobby, 225-226 
Boyd, Gene, 173, 190, 216, 219 
Boyd, Jane (nee Shirley), 125,190, 216- 
219 

Boyd, John, 190 

Boyd, Les, 225 

Bozeman, Montana, 84 

Bradshaw, Albert, 159 

Bradshaw, Eva I., 24 

Brodie, Eda (nee Walker), 71-72 

Brodie.John, 278-279 

Brodie, Ronald “Jack,” 70-71, 78-80 

Brodie, W. E., 70-80 

Brown, Alta, 82, 124-125 

Bruhi Enterprises, 223 

Brundage, Avery, 223 

Bullion Tax Episode, 43 

Burton, Bonnie, 207-208 

C 

California Edison, 199 
California Electric Power Company, 198- 
199 

Callings, Cecilia, 167 
Calvada Mill, 67, 104 
Calvada Mining and Milling Company, 
65,68 

Cameron, Hugh, 21, 164, 192 
Cameron, Johanna (nee Vollmar), 21, 
192, 207 

Camozzi, Mr., 226 

Campenella Mine (Nevada), 272-273, 
279 

Candelaria Mining District (Nevada), 5, 
17,23,25, 161,230 
Carlin Trend (Nevada), 253, 257 
Carnall, Ronald J. “Pete,” 54-57, 100 
Carnall, Stewart, 55-57 
Carr Camp, Nevada, 37 
Carson and Colorado Railroad, 17, 29 
Carson City, Nevada, 181 
Cate, John, 256 
Cate, Steve, 224, 228, 255 
Catherwood, Colonel, 13 
Cavanaugh brothers, 80 
Cavanaugh, John Sr., 169 
Cavanaugh, Mrs., 169 
Cave Spring (Nevada), 219 
Chiatovich, Barbara Faye. See Dodgion, 
Barbara 

Chiatovich, Bob, 20,124,147,164,168- 
169, 192, 271 
Chiatovich, Cecil, 5, 20 


Chiatovich, Frances Lillian (nee Hill), 
20,98,153,157,161-163,165,167, 
170-172, 174-180, 184-187, 192, 
246 

Chiatovich, Jack, 20,134,168-169,192, 
271 

Chiatovich, Jaculine Rae “Jaci.” See 
Jones, Jaci 

Chiatovich, Janice Gaye. See Johnson, 
Janice 

Chiatovich, John, 5, 19-22, 29, 31, 34, 
65-66,68, 78,81,103,165,169,175 
Chiatovich, John Jr., 20 
Chiatovich, Marco, 20, 176-177, 182, 
185, 189, 191-192 

Chiatovich, Margaret Wolford 
Maginness, 19-20 
Chiatovich, Marjorie, 20, 168 
Chiatovich, Martin, 20, 103-104, 153, 
175, 189,216 

Chiatovich Mill, 67, 103-104, 118, 120 
Chiatovich, Nellie (nee Cleary), 20,153, 
168, 175, 189,216 

Chiatovich, Pat, 20, 168-169, 192, 271, 
278-279 

Chiatovich, Stanley Martin, 20, 97-98, 
113-114, 135-136, 153-154, 157, 
162, 165, 168-172, 174-175, 177- 
179, 185-188, 192, 223, 271 
Chiatovich Stope, 18 
Chiatovich-McCloskey, Lillian, 20,125, 
168 

Chieftain Mine (Nevada), 6, 8, 12 
Chilkoot Trail (Canada), 45 
Chinese, 14-16, 35 
Chong, Jerry Wong Hong, 16 
Christianson, Ray, 225 
Clayton, Joshua E. “Profesor,” 11 
Clayton Valley (Nevada), 3,11,44,155, 
187, 197, 208 
Cleary, Ed, 29, 68 
Cleary, Jim, 137 
Cleary, John, 186 
Cleary, Katherine, 186 
Cleary, Roy, 136, 177 
Coaldale Junction (Nevada), 149-150 
Coaldale, Nevada, 144, 160, 205-206, 
246 

Coleman’s Grocery Store (Tonopah, 
Nevada), 231 

Colorado School of Mines, 115 
Columbus Mine (Nevada), 18-19 
Colvin, W. H„ 100 
Combs, Norman, 276 
Como Mines Company (Dayton, Ne¬ 
vada), 114 

Comstock Lode (Nevada), 3, 5, 8-9, 20- 
21, 254 

Considine, J. L., 43 



Contact, Nevada, 245-246 
Cooper, Carl, 161-162 
Cooper, Gerry (nee Hill), 111, 113,128, 
131-132, 156-163, 165, 175 
Cord, Errett Lobban, 4, 53-54, 56, 58- 
61,69, 73,77,81,90, 92,106,114 
Cornucopia Resources Limited 
(Vancouver, Canada), 264 
Cottonwood Creek (Nevada), 44-45 
Cottonwood Spring (Nevada), 44 
Coughlin, Jack, 187-188, 191 
Coughlin, Nellie (nee Burns), 145, 187, 
191 

Cox, Dr., 35 
Cox, Tom, 108 

Coyote Knolls (Nevada), 191, 207 
Coyote Pass (Nevada), 14, 70 
Coyote Springs (Nevada), 13,19,37,45, 
78, 219 

Craig, Dr., 130, 158, 175 
Crestone, Colorado, 19 
Cripple Creek, Colorado, 44 
Crown Mine (Nevada), 40 
Crown Mine (New Zealand), 19 
Crowning Glory Mine (Nevada), 6, 11, 
16,38,40 

Crucible Club (University of Nevada, 
Reno), 115 
Curran, Claire, 180 

Cyprus Amax Minerals, 208, 242, 246, 
253 

D 

Dalinski, Blanche, 246 
Dead Coon Saloon (Silver Peak, Nevada), 
210, 233, 241-243 
Dean, “Cotton,” 274 
Death Valley, California, 14 
Del Papa, Egilio, 78 
Del Papa, Frank, 78, 272 
Del Papa, Frankie Sue, 78 
Del Papa, Fred, 78, 271-272, 278-279 
Del Papa, Joselyn, 272 
Delamar Mining District (Nevada), 278 
Delaware, Lackawana, and Western Rail¬ 
road, 12 

Delorme, Bill, 223, 226 
Delta Kappa Gamma, 206, 208 
DeMille, Cecil B., 53 
Desert Silver, Inc., 100 
Dew Drop Inn (Silver Peak, Nevada), 4 
Dodgion, Barbara Faye (nee Chiatovich), 
20,153,162-163,165,168,174-179, 
186 

Dorr Company, 114 

Double Eagle Mine (Nevada), 13 

Douglass, Jack, 125 


Douglass, Robert P., 60-61,105-107,124- 
125 

Douglass, William James, 106 
Drinkwater Mine (Nevada), 5-6, 8-9,12, 
18, 30-31, 33, 38, 40-41, 90, 241, 
253, 262, 270 

Dunn and Bradstreet, 173-174 
Dutch, Manhattan, 272, 278 
Dyer, Nevada, 167 

E 

E. L. Cord Mill, 104, 106-107, 114-121, 
197, 268 

Earnest, Don, 237-245 
Earp, Josie, 23 
Echo Canyon (Nevada), 15 
Effinger, Martin L., 32, 38, 43 
Ellis, Lloyd, 198 
Ely, Mr., 82 

Ely, Nevada, 47, 139, 264, 277 
Esmeralda County (Nevada), 17, 23, 43, 
45-46,54,61, 72,154-155,186,188, 
253,271 

Esmeralda Mining District (Nevada), 5, 
19 

Eureka, Nevada, 3, 29 

F 

Fallon, Nevada, 135 
Fanchini-Hughes Mill, 103-104 
Fidel’s Dress Shop (Hawthorne, Nevada), 
200 

Fields, Freddy, 137 

Fish Lake Valley (Nevada), 5,19-20, 58, 
60, 70, 80, 82, 137, 147, 161, 167- 
168, 172, 175, 191-193, 200, 207, 
213,220,270-271,276 
Fisherman, Tom, 100 
Flinn, William, 33, 43 
Food Machinery Corporation (North 
Carolina), 212 

Foote Mineral Company, 197, 200, 206- 
215, 220, 223-224, 242, 245-246, 
249, 253 

Frank 2 Mine (Nevada), 18 
Frayne, James, 246 
Frazzini, Mary, 21, 192 
Fulton, John A., 59 

G 

Gabbs, Nevada, 59, 92, 153, 162, 172- 
173, 175, 179, 185-186, 

198, 224, 259 

Gaddy, Dennis Sr., 208-215 
Gallagher, Mervin, 223, 276 


289 


Index 



290 


Index 


Gallagher, Nellie, 192 
Gallagher, Oscar, 192 
Gardnerville, Nevada, 229 
Gavard, Mark, 224, 228-229 
Gavin, Jim, 209, 232, 242, 249, 271 
Gavin, Marie, 209, 249 
Getchell Mine (Nevada), 84 
Gilbert, Colleen, 189 
Gilbert, Ethel (nee Shirley), 125, 189- 
190,216-217 

Gilbert, Henry “Hank,” 125, 127, 160, 
189-190, 216 

Gilbert, Lida (nee Humphrey), 154 
Giroux Wash (Nevada), 24 
Glory Mine (Nevada), 5-6, 8-9, 12 
Goat Island (Nevada), 174, 191 
Godfrey, Bob, 124, 134- 
Gold Wedge Divide Mining Company, 
54,67-69,271 

Goldfield, Nevada, 3-4, 29, 40, 46, 58, 
60, 72, 77, 95, 100, 106, 113, 127- 
128, 131, 133-136, 158-161, 163- 
164, 172-173, 175, 180, 186, 200, 
207, 262, 264, 271, 275, 278 
Goldfield News and Weekly Tribune, 20,44, 
54,67 

Goldfield Review, 30, 34 
Gordon-Brodie Mine and Mill (Nevada), 
44, 68-71, 73, 75-77, 79, 103-104, 
197,262,272-273,279 
Gordon, Ray H„ 70-73, 76-77, 80 
Grable, Sarah, 138-143 
Graham, Bill, 113 
Grants, New Mexico, 227 
Great Salt Basin Mill and Mining Com¬ 
pany, 11. See also Silver Peak and 
Red Mountain Gold and Silver Min¬ 
ing Company 
Greene, A. J., 65, 67-68 
Grice, Betty (Hill), 175, 179, 185 
Griffin, Milton “Griff,” 179, 242 
Griffin, Ruby (Shirley) (nee Grice), 15, 
97-100,154,166,168,173,175-176, 
178-187, 190, 193, 206-207, 216, 
221-222, 242, 246-247 
Gulch, Nevada, 37 

H 

Halcrow, Joe, 245-246 
Hall, Joanne, 131 
Hanchett Mine, 68, 77-78 
Hansen, Cleo, 206 
Hardesty, Donald, 8 
Hartley, Gerry, 120-121 
Haskin, Howard, 136 
Hawthorne, Nevada, 4, 123, 126, 128, 
173,176, 199, 208, 248-249, 264 
Hill, Dennis, 276 


Hill, Dorothy, 167 
Hill, Dorthella, 165 

Hill, Ellen Geraldine (nee Houser), 156- 
161, 175 

Hill, Elwood, 159,165 
Hill, Elwood, Jr., 165 
Hill, Fayette Sr., 58,65,92,94,105,107- 
114, 128-129, 132, 135, 156-161, 

170, 175, 190 

Hill, Fayette Jr., 129-130, 158-160 
Hill, Frank, 105,108,153,157,166,170- 

171, 175, 179, 184-185 
Hill, Gerry. See Cooper, Gerry 
Hill, Kathy, 165 

Hill, Kenneth, 108 

Hill, Leon, 39, 58, 82-83, 92-97, 105, 
107-114, 124, 127-138, 156, 159- 
161 

Hill, Lillian R. (nee Houser), 153, 157, 
175 

Hill, Lois, 159 
Hill, Mary, 129, 158-159 
Hill, Oscar, 128,157-158 
Hill, Wilma, 128, 131,136, 161, 163 
Hispanics, 35 
Holcomb, George, 228 
Hollsworth and Curtis, architects, 43 
Homer Laughlin China Company 
(Liverpool, Ohio), 83 
Homestake Group, 30 
Homestead Development (Carson City, 
Nevada), 241 

Homestead Minerals (Silver City, Ne¬ 
vada), 257-258 

Hoover Dam, 82, 154-155, 187 
Howard, Viet, 232 
Hughes, Rienzi, 6, 8-9, 13 
Hughes, Seymour, 6, 8-9, 13 
Humphrey, Carroll, 191 
Humphrey, Charles, 154 
Humphrey, Ella Mae (nee Thorne), 154 
Humphrey, Elsie, 191 
Humphrey, Harvey, 125, 153-156, 172, 
174, 178, 185-189, 192, 207, 209, 
216-217, 220, 223, 232, 242-243, 
249, 271 

Humphrey, John, 154 
Humphrey, Sue Ann. See Thompson, Sue 
Ann 

Humphrey, Virginia (nee Shirley), 125, 
154-155, 160, 176, 178, 180, 185- 
188, 193,207,216 

I 

Idarado Mine (Colorado), 230 
Industrial Design Corporation (Salt Lake 
City, Utah), 235 
Ingalls, Sheriff, 45 



International Smeltin and Refining 
Company, 70, 74, 76 

J 

J. Grant Crumley and Company, 43 

Jackson, Robert D., 22 

Jacobsville, Nevada, 9 

Jarbidge, Nevada, 46 

Johnson, Janice Gaye (nee Chiatovich), 

20,153,162-174,176,186,190,192 
Johnson, Eddie, 124 
Jones, Jaci (nee Chiatovich), 20, 153, 
163, 165, 168, 173, 175-176, 178, 
190 

K 

KOLO TV (Reno, Nevada), 209 
Kellogg, Idaho, 223, 230 
Kellogg, Lois, 80 
Kelly, “Jackrabbit,” 138 
Klondike Gold Rush (18964 899), 4445 
Knight, H. G., 42 
Krai, Victor, 115421 
Kwong Tai Wo Company (California), 
15 

L 

Lackawana Coal and Iron Company, 12 
Lano, Rosie, 131 
Lapp, Phil, 238, 244-245 
Lapp, Sandy, 245 
Lesinski, Hank, 253 
Liberty Divide Mining Company, 54, 
103-104 

Lida, Nevada, 5,21 
Lincoln County (Nevada), 14 
Lincoln Mine (Nevada), 18 
Loncar, Pete, 100 

Lost Dutchman Construction (Reno, 
Nevada), 237 

Lucky Boy Divide Mining Company, 54, 
81 

Lucky Sam Mine (Nevada), 37 
Luning, Nevada, 24, 163 
Lyle, Walt, 131 
Lynch, John, 31-32 

M 

Mackay School of Mines (University of 
Nevada, Reno), 115 
Magma Copper Company (Arizona), 

263-264 

Malcolm, Lillian, 45-46 
Manhattan, Nevada, 29, 76, 124, 131, 
154, 187 


Marshall, Joseph A., 23 
Martin Mill, 9-10 
Martin, Sam, 6, 8-9, 13 
Mary Hill (Nevada), 92, 94-95 
Mary Mine (Nevada), 19-21, 31,33-34, 
37-38,40-42, 44, 54, 55,59-61, 68- 
71, 73, 80-92,94, 96-100,103-104, 
106, 114, 120-121, 144, 148, 154, 
163, 169-172, 179, 183, 187, 197, 
206, 216, 219, 221, 241-242, 249, 
253, 257, 262, 265, 269, 271, 273- 
274 

Mary Tunnel (Nevada), 38-41, 65, 85 
Mason Valley Smelter (Nevada), 65 
Mattei, Sherry (nee Boyd), 190, 215-222 
McCormack, Archie, 23 
Mehls, Steven L, 11, 39, 68, 123 
Merrill-Crowe precipitation process, 38, 
109, 235, 268 

Merritt, Alberta, 4, 198-208, 271 
Merritt, Cheryl, 198, 207 
Merritt, Dick, 198 
Merritt, Leone, 198-199 
Merritt, Linda, 198 

Merritt, Nathan “Nate,” 198-200, 206- 
208 

Mexicans, 5, 123 

Mid-Continent Uranium, 234, 246 
Mina, Nevada, 23-24, 92,112,163,165, 
206, 225-226, 245, 255, 261 
Mineral County (Nevada), 139, 248 
Mineral Ridge Mining District (Ne¬ 
vada), 3-4, 6,10-11,29,40,65,68, 
80, 92,114, 241,253,262,270 
Mineral Ridge Resources, Inc. (MRRI), 
9, 68, 219, 241, 253-254, 262-270 
Miner’s Inn (Silver Peak, Nevada), 233, 
242, 244 

Mining and Scientific Press, 5, 18 
Missouri Mine (Nevada), 18-19 
Mix, N. H., 42 

Mizpah Hotel (Tonopah, Nevada), 55, 
72-73 

Mizpah Mine (Nevada), 31 
Mohawk-Alpine Mill, 31, 33, 103-104 
Mohawk-Alpine Mining Company 
(Nevada), 30-31, 38, 81, 154, 187, 
200, 220, 223-230, 255, 276 
Molini Ranch, 58, 161 
Monitor Valley (Nevada), 154, 188 
Mormons, 139 

Morris, Jimmy, 94-95, 131, 135, 164 
Morris, Kathleen, 163 
Mount, Bob, 143-144, 147-148 
Mount, Lletcher, 139 
Mount, Keith, 138-139, 143-148 
Mount, Lloyd, 138-144, 146-149 
Mount, Mabel, 143 


291 


Index 



292 


Index 


Mount, Martha (nee Lawson), 138- 
143, 147-150 

Mount, Ward Fletcher, 138-141, 143 
Muller, George, 134 
Murphy, Ed, 136-137, 183, 274 

N 

Native Americans, 35, 123 
Nevada Beta Eta, 208 
Nevada-California Power Company, 40, 

154 

Nevada Mining Investor, 38 
Nevada Goldfields (Hawthorne, Ne¬ 
vada), 264 

Nevada Mining Record, 21 
Nevada Novelty Company, 125 
Nevada Power, Mining, and Milling 
Company, 30, 40 

New Johnsonville, Tennessee, 212 
New York and Silver Peak Mining Com¬ 
pany, 13 

Newhouse, Samuel, 32, 69 
Nickelbee, Johnny, 224 
Nivloc Mine (Nevada), 44, 54-55, 100, 
112, 183-184, 189, 206, 219, 224, 
238,242,271,274 
Norris, Mrs., 167 

Northern Supply Company (Silver Peak, 
Nevada), 172-173,187 
Nye County (Nevada), 14, 72, 260, 271 

O 

Oliver, George T., 33, 43 
Omaha, Nebraska, 12 
O’Meara, Billy, 31-32 
O’Meara, Mike, 31-32 
Oregon Mine (Nevada), 18 
Oromonte Mine (Nevada), 15, 65, 67- 
69, 241, 253, 262, 268, 273 
Orovada Mine (Nevada), 92 

P 

Pahranagat, Nevada, 14 
Palace Bar (Goldfield, Nevada), 186 
Palmer, Gena (Chiatovich), 192 
Palmetto, Nevada, 13 
Parsons Construction (Silver Peak, 
Nevada), 209, 221,226 
Parsons, Elton, 184, 243, 245 
Parsons, Jewel, 245 
Pearson, Charlie, 209 
Peavine Canyon (Nevada), 198 
Peorto Mine (Nevada), 18 
Pergrossi, Nobby, 134 
Pioche, Nevada, 71,76 


Pittsburg Silver Peak Gold Mining Com¬ 
pany, 12, 21, 30-32, 34, 37-38, 40- 
46,54,65,69,81,92-93,103 
Pocotillo Mine (Nevada), 5 
Potosi Mine (Nevada), 230 
Prescott Lease, 115 

R 

Ray Rickets Mine (Nevada), 224 
Red Mountain Mining District (Ne¬ 
vada), 5, 8, 11-12, 55, 72, 100 
Red Mountain (Nevada), 219 
Red Mountain Spring (Nevada), 9, 32 
Reed, Pat, 210 

Reese River Mining District (Nevada), 
5,56 

Reese River Reveille, 5, 43 
Reno, Nevada, 110, 131, 163, 177 
Rhyolite, Nevada, 136 
Rinaldi, Thomas R., 253, 262-270 
Roberson, James, 223, 226 
Robinson brothers, 5-6, 8 
Rock and Keeler Mill, 67, 103-104 
Round Mountain, Nevada, 131 
Russell, Steve, 257 
Ruth, Nevada, 115 

S 

Sacramento Union, 11 
St. Paul Hotel (Los Angeles, California), 
55 

Sanderson, Alice, 233, 242, 248, 250 
Sanderson, Elmer T. “Hefty,” 233, 242, 
248-250 

Sante Fe Mining District (Nevada), 23 
Sarras, Ferminia, 23-24 
Schriber, Don, 154 
Schwab, Charles, 33 
Schwab-McKane Syndicate, 30 
Scotch Lassie Gold Mining Company 
(Nevada), 45-46 
Serbs, 123 

Shifting Sands Bar (Silver Peak, Ne¬ 
vada), 209-210, 232, 242, 249 
Shirley, Ada Louise, 216 
Shirley, Anna “Baba” (nee Cleary), 130, 
154, 163, 168-169, 172, 
187,189-190,192,215-219,221 
Shirley, Cora, 216, 218 
Shirley, Ernest “Mac,” 97-98, 113, 136- 
137, 153-154, 166, 

172-173, 175, 178-181, 183, 186-188, 
190, 207, 216-217, 

219, 223, 271 
Shirley, Helen, 189 
Shirley, Jean Marie, 207 



T 


Shirley, John, 29-30, 34, 65, 130, 154, 
169,186-187, 215-216 
Shirley, John Peter “Pete,” 163-164,166- 
168, 174, 189-190 

Shirley, Louis, 163, 172, 189-190, 207, 
216,223 

Shirley, Ruby. See Griffin, Ruby 
Shirley, Virginia. See Humphrey, Virginia 
Shriver, Reverend, 160 
Sickles, Jerry, 276 
Sickles, Sam, 223, 226 
Sierra Pacific Power Company, 199 
Silver, Albert, 105 
Silver City, Nevada, 278 
Silver Lake (Nevada), 155,188, 224, 232 
Silver Peak and Red Mountain Gold and 
Silver Mining Company (SP/RM), 
10-14, 16-17, 104 

Silver Peak Gold-Mining Company, 18 
Silver Peak Mine and Mill Workers As¬ 
sociation, 100 

Silver Peak Mines Company, 17-19 
Silver Peak Post, 32 
Silver Peak Railroad, 4, 38 
Silver Peak School (Silver Peak, Nevada), 
135-136, 141-143, 160, 167, 190, 
200-205 

Sixteen-to-One Mine (Nevada), 220- 
221,223,226, 230-243 
Slumbering Hills Mining District 
(Nevada), 46 

Smith brothers, 108, 124, 160, 172, 180 
Smith, Gordon, 172-173 
Smith, Lindsay, 172-173 
Soldier Boy Mine. 18. See also Western 
Soldier Mine 

Southern California Edison, 188 
Spaethe, Kathleen, 131 
Sparks, Nevada, 125 
Spiegel Catalog, 200 
Spring Creek Mines (Nevada), 224 
State Bank Mine (Nevada), 272 
Stewart, Bob, 21 

Stimler, Harry, 60, 100, 103, 150, 187 
StimlerMine (Nevada), 100 
Sudbury Mining District (Canada), 240- 
241 

Sunset Magazine, 31 

Sunshine Mine (Nevada), 118,120,206, 
209, 221, 223-224, 230-238, 241- 
243, 246 

Swanburg, Mr., 126-127 
Swanson, John L., 68-73, 76, 78 
Swanson, Margaret, 84, 125, 127 
Swanson, Merle, 59-60, 84-92, 125-127 
Sweet, Arthur N., 58-59, 114 
Sweiger, Eli, 69 


Talcott, William, 5 
Tandy Leather Catalog, 203 
Territorial Enterprise, 11, 14 
Thompson, Merril, 127 
Thompson, Sue Ann (nee Humphrey), 
154, 163, 166-167, 186-193 
Tibbals, Rory, 257 
Tietjen, 30 

Tilden, Samuel J., 4, 11-12 
Tockey, Doug, 248 

Tomany, Anne (nee Banovich), 167,190, 
207-208, 270-271, 276-277 
Tomany, Donald Andrew, 270-277 
Tomany, Edward M., 254, 270-279 
Toner, Glen Jr., 248 

Tonopah and Goldfield Railroad, 4, 29, 
33,38,74 

Tonopah Bonanza, 31, 35, 46 
Tonopah Daily Sun, 29, 35 
Tonopah Daily Times, 25 
Tonopah Extension Mining Company, 71 
Tonopah Midway Divide Mining Com¬ 
pany, 106 

Tonopah, Nevada, 3-4, 29,31-32,40,46, 
55, 60-61, 71-72, 77-79, 92, 106, 
108, 111, 113, 123-124, 126, 130- 
131, 133, 135-137, 153-154, 158, 
160-163, 165, 169, 172-173, 175- 
178, 180, 187, 191-193, 199-200, 
206, 208, 214, 231, 233, 238, 241- 
242, 245, 247, 249, 262, 264, 271- 
272, 276-278 

Tonopah Times-Bonanza, 223 
Traynor, Leonard, 276-277 
Truckee, California, 15 
Tully, John, 257-258 

U 

U.S. Mining and Milling Corporation of 
New York, 223 
Union Pacific Railroad, 12 
Utah Mine (Nevada), 254 

V 

VEK Associates, 115 
Valcalda, Andrew, 18 
Valcalda brothers, 68-69 
Valcalda, Jim, 18 
Valcalda, John, 18, 31, 65, 67 
Valcalda Mill, 38, 41, 44 
Valcalda Mine (Nevada), 19, 30-33, 35- 
37,41,65,69, 73,77,92,100 
Valcalda, Otis, 18 


293 


Index 



z 

Zane, Jack, 224-225, 228-229 
Zanjani, Sally, 23-24 
Zephyr Resources, 257 


W 

Wadsworth, Nevada, 16 
Walker, Frank, 76 
Walker Lake (Nevada), 5 
Warner brothers, 60-61 
Warner, Tommy “Bugs,” 53, 56, 61, 100 
Warren, S. Power, 115, 117-120 
Washington Mine (Nevada), 18 
Washoe Lake (Nevada), 22 
Wasson, Sam, 17-18, 25, 29-30, 34 
Weepah, Nevada, 116, 219, 237 
Wells Fargo Express Company (Blair, 
Nevada), 35 

Western Soldier Mine (Nevada), 6, 18 
Western Union Telegraph Company 
(Blair, Nevada), 35 
Wheeler, George, 16 
White, Perry, 124-125, 130, 145-146 
Whyte, Thomas, 136, 161, 191 
Wilson, Art, 241, 257 
Wingfield, George, 103, 108 
Winifrey, Dorothy, 131 
Wonder Mountain (Nevada), 219 
World War II, 3, 54, 59,156, 197 

Y 

Yeager, Chuck, 165 
Yeargin, Harbert, 247 
Yerington, Nevada, 65, 179, 200 
Young, Allan, 230-238, 240-241, 243 


294 

Index 


Valcalda Springs (Nevada), 19, 44, 70 
Valiant Mine (Nevada), 6 
Van S Quicksilver Mine (Nevada), 76 
Vanderbilt Mill, 9-10 
Vanderbuilt Mine (Nevada), 5-6, 8, 12 
Veda Grande Mill, 229 
Vega Mine (Nevada), 19 
Victor Mine (Nevada), 71-72 
Viljoen, Ben, 9,41,61-62,224-230, 253- 
262 

Vinegaroon Saloon (Silver Peak, Nevada), 

200 , 210 

Virginia City, Nevada, 3, 8, 14, 20-21, 
29,254, 262,278 
Vista Gold Mining Company, 253 
Vollmar, Fred Jr. “Fritz,” 21, 47, 53-62, 
65, 67-71, 80-81, 95-97, 100, 103- 
105, 107, 112, 125, 137, 158, 164, 
192, 197, 271 

Vollmar, Fred Sr., 19-22, 24, 29-30, 34, 
44, 53, 62, 65, 100, 192 
Vollmar, Johanna. See Cameron, Johanna 
Vollmar, Lois, 55, 62, 192 
Vollmar Mill, 103-106, 108, 124, 229 
Vollmar, Molly, 21 




