Keston L. Ramsey: 

Early Skiing in the Mt. Rose Area 


Interviewee: Keston L. Ramsey 
Interviewed: 1983 
Published: 1983 
Interviewer: Edith S. Swift 
UNOHP Catalog #104 


Description 

Keston Ramsey was born in 1908. He has lived most of his life in the Reno area. Mr. Ramsey was active in the ski 
industry from 1945 until 1964; during those years he constructed and ran the Sky Tavern Lodge at the Mt. Rose 
Ski Bowl, which he operated. This was the first ski operation in the Mt. Rose area and was later used by the junior 
ski program. During the summer months Ramsey had a successful contracting business. 

The memoir includes a description of acreage Ramsey owned in the Mt. Rose vicinity, an account of how he built 
the Sky Tavern Lodge and lifts at Mt. Rose Ski Bowl, and a typical day on the ski slope. He discusses problems they 
had with the ski operation and tells about running ski meets and setting up courses for races in places such as Sky 
Tavern, Slide Mountain and the Mt. Rose Ski Area. 



Keston L. Ramsey: 

Early Skiing in the Mt. Rose Area 




Keston L. Ramsey: 

Early Skiing in the Mt. Rose Area 


An Oral History Conducted by Edith S. Swift 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1983 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1983. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Introduction xi 

Early Skiing in the Mount Rose Area 1 

Original Index: For Reference Only 15 




Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Keston L. Ramsey 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Introduction 


Keston Ramsey has lived most of his life in 
the Reno area. Mr. Ramsey was active in the 
ski industry from 1945 until approximately 
1964; during those years he ran the Sky Tavern 
Lodge at the Mt. Rose Ski Bowl, which he 
operated. He ran the first ski operation built 
in the Mt. Rose area. 

Mr. Ramsey not only built the Sky Tavern 
Lodge, but he remodeled it for use for the Jr. 
Ski Program when it was sold in 1968. When 
not running the ski area, in the summer 
months of 1945 to 1964, he had a successful 
contracting business. 

The memoir recorded by Mr. Ramsey 
includes a description of acreage he owned 
in the Mt. Rose vicinity, an account of how 
he built the Sky Tavern Lodge and lifts at Mt. 
Rose Ski Bowl. He described the routine of 
a day on the ski slope of his employees and 
himself. He goes into problems they had with 
the ski operation. He also tells about running 
ski meets and setting up courses for races in 
places such as Sky Tavern, Slide Mountain and 
what is now the Mt. Rose Ski Area. 


When invited to participate in the 
oral history project, Mr. Ramsey accepted 
graciously. He enjoyed recording his 
recollections through the sessions on February 
15, 1983 and March 1, 1983 at his home in 
Reno. 

The Oral History Program of the 
University of Nevada Reno Library preserves 
the past and the present for future research 
by tape recording the recollections of people 
who have been important to the development 
of Nevada and the West. Resulting transcripts 
and supporting materials are deposited in 
the Special Collections departments of the 
University libraries at Reno and Las Vegas. 
Keston Ramsey has generously donated 
the literary rights in his oral history to the 
University of Nevada and has designated the 
volume as open for research. 

Edith S. Swift 
Interviewer 




Early Skiing in the 
Mount Rose Area 


Edith S. Swift: I wanted to ask you about the 
Sky Tavern facility. The first thing would be the 
purchase of the land. How did you purchase the 
land and when? 

Keston L. Ramsey: Well, we purchased the 
land on the twenty-fifth of May, 1945 from 
Robison Neeman. At that time there was only 
the T-bar, which had been installed in 1944. 
A small building with a bedroom and a bath 
was all the facilities that were there at the 
time. We started building the hotel around the 
first of September of 1945 and had it open for 
business by December fifteenth of the same 
year. 

We had talked about how you built it and who 
you used on the crew and something like this. 

The material was pretty hard to get ahold 
of, so we had to scrounge around and there 
wasn’t too much available, as it was right after 
the war. We had a hard time finding plumbing 
materials and electrical materials although 
lumber was in plentiful supply. I had two 


crews of men from Reno which I brought up 
with me; we framed the building in after the 
foundation was in thirteen days from the time 
we started the framing until we had the roof 
on. After that, the plumbing and electrical 
work were done. In doing the outside, we had 
to build the parking lot, put the sewage system 
in, and put the water supply in. Labor was 
pretty short so we used some of the GIs from 
the Reno Army Air Base. The boys worked 
on night shift and we picked them up in the 
morning, took them up to Sky Tavern and 
worked them during the day. We would return 
them at night so that they could return to the 
base for their night shift. 

Did you have some problems putting in the 
water, also putting in the sewer? That was quite 
a challenge. 

That was quite a job. It took a lot of time 
and hand labor. We had to pack all of the 
water tank and parts up the hill by hand and 
the three-inch sections of water pipe. It took 
four men to pick one up and pack it up there, 



2 


Keston L. Ramsey 


and that’s what we used the GIs for on that 
type of work. And the sewage system, we had 
a backhoe that did most of the excavating for 
that, but we built our own septic tank. We 
built a redwood ten-thousand-gallon septic 
tank, and then we dredged out the lake to 
obtain the soil to build the parking lot in front 
of the hotel. We ended up with parking for 
about three or four hundred cars, which was 
very limited with the full capacity crowds that 
we had on weekends. 

You built a skating rink? 

We leased the area out to a party that 
tried to use the little lake for a skating rink, 
but there were so many problems with the 
wind blowing the snow after the first couple 
of weeks, he gave it up, and decided that it 
wasn’t the right place to have a skating rink. 

And you had some storms up there that kind 
of interfered with it too. 

Yes, it was a very wet fall, and during 
October and November, we averaged two 
storms a week. In October it mostly rained, 
and in November we had several snowstorms. 
In December we had several snowstorms. We 
had to haul all of our furniture up there in the 
blizzard. We finally had everything ready to 
go on the fifteenth of December. That’s when 
our first guests started arriving. 

There was more acreage involved than just Sky 
Tavern. 

Yes. When we purchased it, we purchased 
approximately eight hundred acres of land 
which included some land below Galena 
Creek at the edge of the timber; it also 
included the parcel where Reindeer Lodge is 
now and another parcel where the Christmas 


Tree is, that included two hundred and eighty 
acres up above which is now part of the Mount 
Rose Ski Area. 

Did you want to discuss what Sky Tavern was 
before you developed it? What was the history 
on that? 

As far as previous development, in 1939 
and 1940, there was a small rope tow on the 
hill that was put in by Wayne Poulsen and 
another fellow—I can’t think of his name 
right now—Ed Health. They started from 
where the old highway crosses the middle 
of the hill and went two-thirds of the way 
toward the top. After Mr. Neeman bought it, 
he kicked them off, and in 19411 built a two- 
section rope tow for him, which he operated 
just one season and then they used the little 
building down below to serve sandwiches 
and hot dogs. 

You might want to talk about why you wanted 
to go into this business. What was your 
motivation? 

I had been skiing for a few years and really 
enjoyed it. I thought it would be fun to get 
into the business. It ended up being nothing 
but a lot of hard work. Being a contractor, the 
construction part of it was no problem at all. 

You enjoyed skiing as well. And you had skis 
when you were younger? 

I’d been skiing approximately four or five 
years. I mostly walked at that time, there being 
no ski tows in the area. In 1938 they had a 
rope tow over at Donner Summit which we 
used to go over there and ski. And that fall 
they started building the Sugar Bowl Resort 
which had the first chair lift in the Sierras, I 
believe, the first one in the West. 



Early Skiing in the Mt. Rose Area 


3 


Did they have trouble getting access into Sugar 
Bowl? 

The Sugar Bowl was closed on account of 
the war years. They had to cross the railroad 
tracks, which was a restricted area for several 
years. The Sugar Bowl didn’t reopen again 
until 1946-47 season. 

The community was pretty happy to get this 
resort, weren’t they? 

Reno and the Chamber of Commerce 
were very supportive of the efforts we made 
up there, but the only problem was it was a 
small area we had when the crowds were so 
large, so that every year we had to increase the 
facilities to take care of the extra people. Of 
course the highway, at that time, was closed 
at Sky Tavern and the road couldn’t be kept 
open to Incline and Lake Tahoe. At that time 
there was nothing at Incline except three or 
four homes. That development all came later. 
The existing highway, which bypassed Sky 
Tavern, was not completed until 1960. 

We might want to talk about the everyday work 
week on the hill. What did the people do who 
worked on the hill, what was their schedule? 

The first year that we were in operation, 
we had no electricity; we had a generator, 
which generated our power. All the ski lifts 
had to be operated with gasoline motors, 
which meant that we had to pack the gasoline 
up every morning, and we had no grooming 
equipment. Everything had to be done by 
hand. We had to dig out the bottom and top 
terminal every morning, when we had heavy 
snows. We had no telephone for two years, 
so the conditions were pretty primitive there 
the first two or three years. It wasn’t until five 
years after we opened before we got three- 


phase power so that we could convert the lifts 
over to electricity. 

What did the people have to do on the hill every 
day to get the slopes ready? 

We’d have to round up a bunch of skiers 
and the ski patrol and take them up on the 
T-bar and let them sideslip down the hill, in 
order to pack the slope. We usually started 
out with a limited area during the day where 
we could ski, and then during the day as more 
area got skied out, we could expand and ski 
more of the slopes. 

Did they start work about eight a.m. in the 
morning? 

The employees would get there at eight, 
but we ran the lifts from ten until four. There 
was usually a few hours work in the morning, 
getting everything ready. We had to get the 
gasoline up there and get the lifts going. 

How many employees did you have on the hill? 

We had two regular full-time employees, 
one at the bottom and one at the top, and on 
weekends, we had quite a few volunteer people 
who worked part-time. Some were from the 
University of Nevada and some of the local 
ranchers and their sons came up and helped us. 

Who did you have working in the end? 

We had to have one at the top to make sure 
no one was tangled in the T-bar, and one at the 
bottom and he sold tickets at the same time. 
On weekends we had to have extra people to 
sell tickets and two or three people alternating 
on loading. 

How much did it cost to ski? 



4 


Keston L. Ramsey 


When we first started it was $1.50 on 
the T-bar and $1.00 for the rope tows. There 
were separate tickets; for $1.50 you could ski 
the rope tow and the T-bar, and for $1.00 
you could ski the rope tows. There was a 
beginners’ rope tow and a fairly steep tow that 
was for advanced skiers. 

In the Sky Tavern Inn there were employees? 

We had a hotel with twenty rooms. It 
could take care of fifty-two people, so we 
had to have a full set of employees for the 
kitchen, two chefs and a dishwasher, and a 
relief dishwasher and two waitresses. In the 
hotel we had two maids and two girls in the 
office. We had a little coffee shop which took 
two employees, except on weekends when 
we had extra people. We had a bar with a 
regular bartender and two extra bartenders on 
weekends. We had to haul our own supplies 
up and take all of our garbage down to Reno. 
You couldn’t get anything delivered in those 
days. 

During 1952, wasn’t there a time in which you 
were snowed in and didn’t have any supplies? 

In 1952, we were snowed in for 
approximately six weeks and had twenty 
feet of snow. There was four feet of snow in 
Reno at that time, and during the big storm 
in January, the power line going up to the 
microwave station was obliterated, and an 
avalanche took out six spans of poles. And 
the Bell Telephone Company brought a crew 
of men up with their Sno-Cats, and we put 
them up at the hotel, and they brought three 
big bulldozers up. They pulled all the new 
poles and wires and everything over the snow 
up to Sky Tavern and then cleared a road 
from Sky Tavern to the base of Mount Rose, 
and then went in with a crew and replaced 


the power line so that the microwave station 
could be put back in business again. It was six 
weeks, and during that time we had to shovel 
the top and bottom terminals out. At the top 
terminal there was several feet of snow over 
the top of the cables of the top terminal. We 
had a trench almost thirty feet deep to go, in 
order to unload the top terminal of the T-bar 
where the bullwheel was. We had to shovel the 
snow out in three layers. We had to shovel it 
up a little ways, shovel it some more in order 
to get it over the top and out of the way. 

Did you have any problems with the lifts? 

No. Wind didn’t bother the lift like it does 
the chair lift. We could run in any kind of 
weather. Usually there were only a few days 
out of the season when we couldn’t run. We 
could run practically every day. People would 
have to call up on the telephone to find out 
if we were operating. They could pretty near 
always depend on it; usually we would go the 
whole season and there were only two or three 
days when we were closed. 

Would you like to go over some of the social 
activities? 

We didn’t have too much activity. People 
would dance in the bar at night if they wanted 
to, and that was the only regular activity they 
had. Reno Ski Club would have an occasional 
party, several times a year. We would put on 
several major ski meets every year which 
attracted many people, but most of the activities 
for that were held down in Reno. We had the 
records on the juke box and people could play 
whatever they wanted. If they wanted to do the 
folk dances that was up to them. We didn’t have 
any regular entertainment, except one year, we 
had a fellow with an accordion which went over 
pretty good. 



Early Skiing in the Mt. Rose Area 


5 


How late did people ski? 

We would run the lifts from ten until four. 
Along towards spring, as the days got longer 
we would run them until four-thirty. 

How many lifts were there? 

We just had one T-bar. Also a total of 
three rope tows. We had these lifts until we 
sold it. We sold it in 1959. The people that 
purchased it put in another platterpull, which 
operated for about four years, at which time 
they defaulted on their payments and we 
repossessed it, and in 1964 we sold it to the 
Mount Rose Development Company. They 
operated it one year before they built the 
chair lifts up at Mount Rose, and after that 
they leased the Sky Tavern area to the Reno 
Junior Ski Program. Reno leased it for two or 
three years and then they purchased the land 
and built all new lifts. These are the same lifts 
that are up there today. 

There were a lot of groups up there that you 
supported. 

We helped the UNR Ski Team by giving 
them free access to the lifts and helping to 
put on their ski meets, especially the Winter 
Carnival. We also helped sponsor the Junior 
Ski Program which started out with just a few 
children and ended up with several hundred 
on a Saturday or Sunday. The Junior Ski 
Program was promoted through the Reno 
Ski Club and Marcie Herz and a couple of 
other individuals who asked us if we would 
cooperate with it. We said that we would. We 
gave them reduced rates on the lift, and so 
they started by bringing the children up in 
buses and furnishing them with instruction 
and lifts, or they had to bring their own 
lunches or buy food at the coffee shop. The 


Junior Ski Program was subsidized by the 
Reno Service clubs. Some of the clubs were the 
Tions Club and Reno South Reno Lions Club 
and other service clubs in Reno. Eventually 
the City of Reno Recreation Department took 
it over and started contributing money to it. 
After that it started increasing by leaps and 
bounds. 

You had a ski school at Sky Tavern? 

We had a ski school and a ski shop that 
was leased out. We didn’t operate those two 
facilities ourselves, but they were concessions. 
Hal Codding came over in 1948 from Sun 
Valley and he had the ski school for several 
years. After he left, his cousin or nephew, Bud 
Schonfeld, took it over and he operated a ski 
school for three or four years, and Gordie 
Wren had it for a couple of years until the 
time that we sold it. 

Did you have something to do with getting Hal 
Codding over from Sun Valley? 

I brought Hal Codding over from Sun 
Valley, to take over the ski school, and I built 
him a house up there to help him locate his 
family. Gordie Wren came over on his own 
and he had our ski school and the one at 
Slide Mountain. He also worked for the City 
Recreation Department, handling the Junior 
Ski Program. He was there up until the time 
that we sold the area. 

The Far West Ski Association was an 
organization that you had something to do 
with. 

We let them use the facilities. We were 
affiliated with the National Ski Patrol. Myself 
and some of the others around there would 
handle the First Aid, but on weekends— there 



6 


Keston L. Ramsey 


were quite a large number of ski patrollers 
available, every weekend. They were all 
trained here in Reno in First Aid, and Ski 
Rescue. 

You were also in charge of recruiting for the 
mountain troops in World War II. 

I was in charge of recruiting for the Army, 
in recruiting mountain troops. That was a 
separate unit. They were recruiting skiers for 
skiing in Italy. 

We could go over the other ski areas and what 
was going on at the time that Sky Tavern was 
going on. 

Squaw Valley was built about two or three 
years after Sky Tavern opened. Along came 
Alpine Meadows and Heavenly Valley. In 1952 
and 1953 there was big talk about developing 
Slide Mountain. That was finally finalized on 
the promotion about 1953. They opened two 
chair lifts in 1954. The lower chair lift had to 
be built because the road wasn’t completed 
into Slide Mountain until 1955. The lower 
chair lift was only used for one season as 
an access lift. It was abandoned after that 
first year. Slide Mountain operated several 
years with that one chair lift. Then they built 
another beginners’ lift and eventually another 
additional chair lift. 

Who developed Slide Mountain? 

It was a promotion deal. A fellow by 
the name of Carl Feutsch took charge of 
promoting it. He raised most of the money 
from the local clubs. The local clubs donated 
twenty-five to fifty thousand dollars apiece 
for stock in it. They raised about five hundred 
thousand dollars and built two chair lifts—the 
access lift, and the upper chair lift—and the 


shelter, and did some of the initial clearing. 
After several years, they ran into financial 
difficulties and it was in bankruptcy, and it 
was put out for bid. Wes Howell was the only 
bidder, and so he took over the operation. 
After two or three years he took in a couple 
of partners for fifty-one percent of the stock, 
and he—they booted him out and left him 
holding the bag. It has changed [hands several 
times since then. 

I wanted to ask you about your involvement 
in racing. I know that you were involved in the 
Silver Dollar Derby. 

In the late forties and early fifties, we used 
to put on the Silver Dollar Derby races. This 
was sponsored by the Reno Ski Club and the 
Reno Chamber of Commerce. The downhill 
course was held over on Slide Mountain. 
There were no lifts in that area at that time, 
so we had to pack everything in on our backs, 
including the slalom poles and First Aid 
toboggans, and set up the course and pack the 
hills. We did considerable blasting of stumps. 
This was when there wasn’t too much snow 
and we could get rid of the obstacles. The 
slalom part of the race was held at Sky Tavern. 

How was that different than it is today, that is 
setting up a course? 

There was a lot more work because we 
didn’t have any packing equipment, nor any 
Sno-Cats, and everything had to be packed 
in by hand and packed back out again. Any 
toboggans with injuries had to be pulled 
all the way out to the main highway. It was 
quite a project. We had to spend several days 
ahead of time in there packing the course 
and sideslipping up and down and setting 
the downhill. Also we had to set the flags for 
the downhill course. It was an extremely long 



Early Skiing in the Mt. Rose Area 


7 


course, almost two miles long. It was from 
the top of Slide Mountain down to the valley 
floor (almost). We had some of the top racers 
in the world here at different times. It was a 
national race. 

How was the First Aid different then than it 
is today? 

We used regular toboggans that were set 
up with different splints. We had bandages. 
None of the modern equipment was on the 
hill that they have now. We had wooden 
toboggans with the slats and ropes on the 
sides. Usually we had two people to take them 
down. We didn’t have brakes on them, and 
it took two persons to take them down in a 
sideslip to bring them down on the steepest 
part of the hill. On the flat we had to pull them 
by hand until you got them to the First Aid 
room. There were no ambulances available at 
that time; we had to provide transportation 
to the hospital in a station wagon with 
removable seats. Usually the type of injuries 
seen were fractured legs. The main type would 
be the small tibia bone although we had a few 
serious fractures. There weren’t too many, 
considering the amount of people who were 
skiing in those days. 

The bindings were real crude release 
bindings. The bindings were not near as 
sophisticated as they are today. The cable type 
was the only type available. Some people went 
for the—what they called the “long thongs” 
or what is called “beartrap bindings.” You are 
in those to stay and there is no way that you 
can possibly come out of one of those. The 
beartrap looked like this. It was a toe piece, 
and your sole fitted under two little clips, 
and leather straps bound you in tight. There 
was no way that you could come out of these, 
without undoing the straps. That is why they 
called them beartraps. 


They were all wooden skis at that time. 
The metal edges were put on with screws. It 
was quite a few years before they came out 
with plastic bottoms. You had to use several 
coats of lacquer and then use your wax on top 
of that in order to make them hold up so that 
the lacquer wouldn’t wear out. 

Were most of the races held at Sky Tavern? 

The slalom was always held at Sky Tavern; 
that was the only ski area in the immediate 
vicinity—Slide Mountain where we had the 
downhill. During the Winter Carnival, we 
had the forty-meter ski jump at Sky Tavern, 
which was usually always a big event and 
drew tremendous crowds. Some of the major 
colleges in the western part of the United 
States competed, all the way from Denver 
west. Racers from Wyoming, California, 
Nevada, Oregon, Colorado, Washington and 
Utah. These were the major colleges that 
competed. We also had several local college 
meets that weren’t on the national level. 
Denver and Utah didn’t usually compete in the 
smaller meets which were held at Sky Tavern. 
Mostly Oregon, California, Washington and 
Nevada competed in these. Sometimes they 
were held at Yosemite, Sky Tavern, or Sugar 
Bowl, and the national intercollegiate meets 
were held sometimes in Denver, or once in 
Banff, or Mount Hood. 

The racing technique isn’t all that different, 
but you have better, sophisticated equipment 
nowadays. It makes it much easier to ski on, 
and modern skis are much easier to ski on, 
especially hard pack and ice. I think that if the 
earlier contestants had the modern equipment 
that they could keep up with what the modern 
skiers can do. 

I read about some of your racing in the 
scrapbooks. 



8 


Keston L. Ramsey 


The only time that I ever competed myself 
was with the local ski club meets or something 
like that. That was more of a fun race. We 
didn’t have any of the top contestants like they 
do in the college meets. The slalom was the 
only race that I ever entered in. I never entered 
any downhill races. I entered some fun races, 
obstacle courses, but they were more luck than 
anything else. 

Did you want to talk about your two boys and 
what they did in racing at Sky Tavern when 
you were there? 

They both skied for the Reno High School 
and the University of Nevada. They both did 
very well, especially in slalom events. Allen 
was very good in fourway. He took first in 
several intercollegiate events in fourway. 
Bob excelled in the downhill and slalom and 
jumping, but he seldom went in for cross¬ 
country. 

How did they learn to ski? 

We had some instruction. In the early day 
we didn’t have any good racing instructors, 
but in 1948, Hal Codding came to Sky 
Tavern from Sun Valley and he had been 
a racing coach at Sun Valley. So we had 
his coaching and help, which proved very 
good. In fact, he coached the UNR Ski Team 
several years. The team did very well and 
took several collegiate championships, every 
year that they competed; 1950-1956 were 
the years that they competed. Bob graduated 
from the University in 1954, and Allen 
graduated in 1956. So that was the end of their 
competition. At that time they didn’t have 
these professional ski meets the way they do 
nowadays. The only professionals were the 
ski instructors. Everything was amateur. The 
Olympics, too, was amateur. Allen and Bob 


both competed with some of the top skiers in 
the Sun Valley American Legion Far Western 
Championships against boys that finally made 
the Olympic team, and both boys beat some 
of the boys that did make the Olympic team 
in some of their meets. 

The trophy that I saw up at Sky Tavern. Was it 
connected with a derby? 

The Silver Dollar Derby was put on 
by the Reno Ski Club and the Chamber of 
Commerce. Most of the trophies were silver 
dollar belt buckles. I guess they did have a few 
trophies that were donated by the Chamber 
of Commerce or the Ski Club. The trophy at 
Sky Tavern was donated by Walter and Howie 
Herz and the Ramsey family in memory of 
Marcie Herz. It was donated to the Junior Ski 
Program as a perpetual trophy. 

When you had the carnival in the winter, you 
said all the events except the races were held 
down in Reno. Where were they held? 

The sororities and fraternities held 
special events. The main ball was held in 
the auditorium down in Reno. It was the 
auditorium but it is the Pioneer now. It was 
torn down and rebuilt. The other activities 
were held up on the ski hill. Each sorority 
and fraternity held different events in their 
own facilities. Usually the slalom and jumping 
events were at Sky Tavern. Sometimes the 
downhill was at the present Mount Rose 
area and sometimes on Slide Mountain. The 
cross-country race was usually held down at 
the Galena Creek area when there was enough 
snow. Most of the time they didn’t like to have 
the cross-country race up that high like at Sky 
Tavern. 

Are the runs the same as at Sky Tavern now? 



Early Skiing in the Mt. Rose Area 


9 


There are higher capacity lifts now. We just 
had one T-bar then and three rope tows. One 
rope tow was the same as the existing rope tow 
that provides access up to the lower platter- 
pull lifts. And then we had another rope tow 
that started at the bottom of where the T-bar 
was, and it ran up at an angle about halfway up 
the hill. Further to the north, we had another 
lift that went up quite a bit higher than where 
the existing beginners’ lifts are situated. For 
three or four years on the hill right opposite 
the lodge, where the jump hill is, we had one 
rope tow that went up two-thirds up that hill. 
We used that during the ski meets to take the 
jumpers up. 

We never had any particular names for 
the lifts. Where the Rocco lift is now was 
another lift that went considerably higher up 
the hill. Rocco Spina was head of the Reno 
Recreation Commission for several years, 
and he was instrumental in helping the Reno 
Junior Ski Program through the city of Reno 
to buy the Sky Tavern area. That lift was named 
after Marcie Herz, and she was the one that 
originally got the idea for starting the Junior 
Ski Program with the cooperation of the Reno 
Ski Club and Sky Tavern, and some of the local 
clubs sponsored the Junior Ski Program. She 
was quite prominent in it for several years. 
Then Gordon Wren was the next one to take 
over. Then Norman Olsen was the director for a 
long time. Leon Stanley is the present director. 

Norm Olsen had the other Poma lift name for 
him. 

Evidently. Norm Olsen was the director 
for quite a few years after Gordon Wren left. I 
think he left around 1959, when Norm Olsen 
took over. 

When was the forty-meter ski jump put in at 
Sky Tavern? 


The forty-meter jump was built in 1948. 
At that time we had the old Mount Rose 
Highway which went across the lower part 
of the jump. As soon as we had enough snow, 
we had to build a wooden framework to carry 
the transition up across the road to where the 
jump took off. In the spring, we would have to 
tear it out, so that they could plow the road; 
the road at that time was closed to Lake Tahoe 
after the first storm. The road wasn’t reopened 
until late in the spring. The ski jump was built 
in the summer of 1948. We had a big D8 Cat 
up there that did most of the work. We had 
to do some of the fine grading by hand. 

Who did you use for a crew? 

We had some regular employees that 
worked part-time in the summer. Otis Turner 
was one of them. He worked up there for quite 
a few years. He operated the lifts in the winter 
and worked for me in the contracting business 
in the summer. Weekends we’d work up there 
getting everything ready for the next winter. I 
had a few University boys who’d come up and 
help us in order to get lift privileges. 

Do you remember the incident at Slide 
Mountain December 1, 1953, when they had 
to evacuate the lift? 

The year that they started Slide Mountain, 
the first year that they were operating they 
gave everybody in Reno free rides on the lift. 
There wasn’t enough snow to operate the lift. 
A foot or two of snow was in the hills but 
it wasn’t enough for skiing; in the middle 
of the day the cable slipped off of the drive 
wheel, I believe, they had to unload all of the 
people with ropes, and they had to walk down 
through the snow, and some of them just had 
their high heel shoes on. It was quite a project 
getting them all off the lift and getting them 



10 


Keston L. Ramsey 


back to the lodge. It wasn’t very good for the 
first day’s operation. No one was hurt. It just 
derailed and they stopped it immediately. 
There were a few wet and cold feet. 

In 1953 you had quite a few revisions in the 
lodge. 

In 1953, we built a new bar on the main 
level and a new recreation room and new 
lunch room for the juniors on the lower level. 
It made it much nicer and we could take care 
of a much larger group of people. The upstairs 
bar and lounge had a big deck in front of it, 
facing the ski hill. It had windows on three 
sides where you could look out into the valley 
or watch the skiers skiing. It was very popular. 
A lot of the people who didn’t ski would drive 
up on Saturday and Sunday afternoons and 
watch the skiers or watch their children ski. 

Could you go over what the lodge looked like 
then and what it looks like now. 

Before, the main part of the hotel included 
twenty rooms, on three levels. It had a very 
steep-pitched roof. After the city of Reno 
bought it, they made a deal with me to 
remodel it for them. The money was put up 
by the Fleischmann Foundation. I tore the 
two top floors of the hotel off completely. 
I put a new roof on. Instead of a pitched 
roof sloping both ways, I put a sloping roof 
toward the back and made a large lunch 
room approximately thirty-two by fifty-two 
feet. Then the full basement underneath was 
converted into restrooms, ski shop, and then 
First Aid. I took the bar out and used that for 
an additional lunch room. Part of the lower 
cafeteria was converted into new restrooms. 
We tore down the help’s quarters on the back 
of where the dining room area is and built a 
new kitchen to serve as the kitchen area. There 


are two areas upstairs and one downstairs now 
where the kids can eat. These areas were where 
the original bar was and where the old hotel 
was. There were two stories of the lodge that 
were completely torn off the lodge. These two 
stories contained the bedrooms. There were 
seven rooms on each floor, each with a private 
bath. The third floor was six dormitories and 
two restrooms. 

Was there a problem with avalanches in the 
Sky Tavern area? 

We never had to worry about avalanches 
in the Sky Tavern area. There were no 
avalanche problems at all in leading up to 
the Sky Tavern area on the road. Although 
after they developed Slide Mountain, they 
had one real bad area going in there which 
I understand they are having problems with 
now. 

One time they were opening the road 
into Slide Mountain with a big rotary plow. 
A large avalanche came down and pushed the 
rotary plow approximately eight feet sideways 
on the road. It was buried almost completely 
in the snow. There was just a foot of the 
window showing on one side. The uphill side 
of the plow was completely buried. The plow 
operator had the window open, and the snow 
came in and completely buried him. He was 
up to his waist in snow. He could still breathe. 
They rushed back to Sky Tavern to get some 
of us to help. We helped dig the plow out. 
We dug down and dug down one side and 
the back. They brought another rotary up 
and they thought that they could pull it out 
without digging the other side out, against our 
advice. After he hooked onto it and started 
pulling, he tore his transmission completely 
out in the second rotary. We had two disabled 
rotaries up there stuck in an avalanche. It took 
them quite a while to get the equipment back 



Early Skiing in the Mt. Rose Area 


11 


out again. That was the only time we had any 
avalanche problems at all at Sky Tavern or 
Slide Mountain. 

In 1952 you mentioned —. 

In 1951, 1952, that was the biggest storm 
that they had had in the last fifty years. We 
had six feet of snow. We were snowed in 
from Christmas to New Year’s. New Year’s 
Day, they got the road open. The next day it 
started to snow and it snowed for seven days 
and seven nights without stopping. The wind 
was averaging from eighty to one-hundred 
miles per hour. When it quit, there was over 
twenty feet of snow on the level. About the 
third day they had a tremendous avalanche 
on the south slopes of Mount Rose. It came 
down and wiped out six spans of poles on the 
power line that leads up to the Bell Telephone 
microwave station. It sheared off a whole 
row of aspen trees and carried them almost a 
hundred feet up the side of a hill on the other 
side of the valley. Some of them were standing 
up like they were still growing. 

We were snowed in for about six weeks, 
while they were using the main plows down 
on the main highway in Reno, which had four 
feet of snow. The Bell Telephone Company 
brought a crew of men up that worked for 
Harker and Harker, pole line contractors. 
They brought three big Allis Chalmers TD24 
Caterpillars, that were the biggest in the 
world at that time. They pulled all the poles 
and the wire and everything up to the Sky 
Tavern area. Then they plowed a road down 
to the bare ground all the way to the base of 
Mount Rose through approximately twenty 
feet or more of snow. They went back in and 
replaced the power line. During that time the 
Bell Telephone Company supplied us with 
supplies with their Sno-Cat. We put up all 
the line crew and employees at the hotel. The 


following year they moved the power line over 
to the other side of the valley, up through the 
Mount Rose Canyon so that they wouldn’t 
have to put up with that problem any more. 

That was one of the biggest avalanches that 
they have ever had in that area. It must have 
been three-quarters of a mile wide. Most of 
the storm came from the northwest and filled 
in all the shutes on the south side of Mount 
Rose, and when it went everything went at 
once. It took us six weeks to dig out our lifts. 
The top terminal was completely buried. The 
cable at the top had several feet of snow at 
the top of it. We had to hike up every day. It 
got so deep that we had to handle the snow 
three times to get it out. Then we cut off some 
aspen trees and planted them on each side of 
the cut that we put up there. After the road 
was open we brought some lumber up from 
Reno, boxed in the deal and made a regular 
cave so that the lift could go through, to the 
top terminal and back out again. We unloaded 
the skiers a hundred feet further down the hill 
than we normally did. The following year we 
decided to move the terminal over the top of 
the hill, and built it up higher so that it would 
take care of this particular type of condition. 

I forgot to say that before they let the 
power company crew go in there, that 
they brought Monty Atwater, who was the 
avalanche expert from Utah in there. He and I 
and the Forest Service employee from Oregon 
hiked to the top of Mount Rose two days in 
a row with high explosives on our backs. We 
shot all the remaining cornices and cleared 
the area before they would let the crew go in, 
work on replacing the power line. 

Did you want to say something about the homes 
that you built up at Sky Tavern ? 

My own place I built in 1945. It was just 
a small two bedroom and bath on the lower 



12 


Keston L. Ramsey 


level and just a living room on the upper level. 
Then in 1948, when I brought Hal Codding 
over from Sun Valley, he spent the first year 
in my little cabin up there; and then the 
following year I built a little house for him, 
consisting of a basement and two bedrooms 
and a bath. He had a wife and a little girl. They 
lived there for several years, and they ended 
up with six children. I built his house about 
1950. He was a veteran. He flew bombing 
missions over Japan in World War II. He 
obtained a veterans loan in order to build this 
house. 

He had the ski school and ski shop there 
for several years; later on he moved to Reno, 
and he let Schonfeld take over the ski school 
and run it for several years. The last year 
that we were operating, Gordon Wren had 
the ski school. Gordon Wren operated the 
ski school at both Slide Mountain and Sky 
Tavern. 

Codding’s home has been sold three or 
four times, and it is still up there. It is the 
first little one as you go up; the second one 
belonged to Prince Hawkins. The one above 
me was originally built the same time as 
mine by Tommy Harrison, who was sales 
representative for Hirsh Weiss Ski Clothing 
out of Portland, Oregon. That has since 
changed hands several times. 

What happened with the Reindeer Lodge; you 
had owned that parcel. 

The Reindeer Lodge: Robison Neeman, 
who we had purchased the land from, took 
back the land. We sold about six acres of 
land to Johnny Ross, who built the Christmas 
Tree. Robison Neeman took back a portion 
of the land that he was selling to us, that 
included the Reindeer Lodge and the parcel 
across the street where Bud Schonfeld had 
his Tannenbaum Ski Area. That included the 


forty acres where the hill is across the street 
from the Reindeer Lodge. They drilled several 
wells and they couldn’t find any water. The 
Reindeer Lodge just had a very small trickle of 
water, hardly enough to operate. Quite a few 
years later they combined with the Christmas 
Tree and filed on a spring down in back of the 
Christmas Tree and developed a good water 
supply that is now used for the Reindeer 
Lodge. And Bud Schonfeld’s Tannenbaum Ski 
Area use that water. The Christmas Tree used 
their water too. 

The Reindeer Lodge was built in 1948 or 
1950. Originally they moved three dormitory- 
type buildings from Herlong and joined 
them together. They put a roof over it. It was 
quite a screwed up mess, but they eventually 
remodeled it and made it like it is today. They 
added some rooms on the second floor. It has 
been remodeled extensively several times 
since then. 

Do you remember who originally built it? 

A fellow by the name of Vanderhyde was 
the name of the fellow who originally built 
it. The original Christmas Tree had a fire 
and burned down. They rebuilt the existing 
building which is in a different location. The 
fireplace is still sticking up from the original 
Christmas Tree out there in the parking lot 
all by itself. 

Do you know what year the original Christmas 
Tree was built? 

That was in 1946 or 1947. The new 
Christmas Tree was built in the early sixties. 

Who bought that parcel from you? 

Johnny Ross bought that parcel from me, 
when they built the original Christmas Tree. 



Early Skiing in the Mt. Rose Area 


13 


Are there any other structures on that parcel 
of eight hundred acres that you bought that we 
haven’t discussed? 

The only other structure is where the 
Stockhorse Inn is now. That was originally a 
bar that was down at the foot of the Mount 
Rose Highway just after you go into the 
timber. It was moved up to the Sky Tavern 
area about 1940 or 1941. It was closed during 
the war years. When we bought it, we used 
it mostly for the extra help’s quarters, until 
when they started building Slide Mountain, 
we remodeled it completely. We put a full 
basement under it and new restrooms. It 
was supposed to be the service area for Slide 
Mountain, when they had the two-section 
lifts going up there. After the first year, they 
abandoned the lower lift, because they built 
the road into the middle of Slide Mountain, so 
they had no need for further use for the lower 
lift. So as far as the building being a service 
area for Slide Mountain, they had no further 
use for that. Since then, it has been operated 
by quite a few people as a bar and restaurant. 
No one seems to have much success with the 
operation of it. 

What year did the road go into Slide Mountain? 

I think it was 1954 or 1955 when the road 
was completed going into Slide Mountain. 
There was a big dedication ceremony. 
Everybody came up, and the governor was 
there. The Chamber of Commerce was there, 
and there was a big ribbon-cutting ceremony. 

The last two things I have a question on are 
what was the relationship between Sky Tavern 
and Slide Mountain? 

The lower lift that was built into Slide 
was built as an access lift. Twelve hundred 


feet of that was on Sky Tavern property. We 
gave them a right-of-way at no cost, and the 
center portion belonged to Redfield. Redfield 
made a deal with them for a percentage of 
the gross revenue on that particular lift. The 
upper portion of the lift was on a portion of 
Redfield property that was condemned (taken 
away from him) by Washoe County. Slide 
Mountain now—a portion of it is on county 
property and a portion of it is on Forest 
Service property. Washoe County condemned 
a portion of that where the lower terminal and 
the lifts are now. That originally was a part of 
Redfield’s. 

So the first year you had to take the chair up 
to Slide Mountain. 

You could take the chair up to Slide from 
Sky Tavern. You had to take the chair back 
to Sky Tavern or ski down from Slide. You 
couldn’t have a continuous ski run all the way 
back. There were a few places where you had 
to climb up a small hill before you could reach 
enough incline to ski down again. There was 
just a short fifty- or sixty-foot pitch that you 
had to climb up. 

What was your area called? 

We called the area the Mount Rose Bowl, 
and the lodge was called Sky Tavern Lodge. 

What was going on at Mount Rose at that 
time?) 

We owned where the existing Mount Rose 
Ski Area is now. We owned two hundred 
eighty acres in that area. The only skiing up 
there was when we let Slide Mountain cut a 
few trails on what is now the Mount Rose area. 
These trails were where the northwest trails 
and the Kit Carson trails are now. There were 



14 


Keston L. Ramsey 


two trails cut through there. People could ride 
the Slide Mountain lift, and then they would 
have to hike over the top of the hill, and then 
ski back down one of these runs and go down 
to the intersection of the road that goes up 
to Slide Mountain. There were buses there to 
take the skiers up to the lift again. The existing 
Mount Rose Highway wasn’t completed until 
1960. There were about five years there that 
we had this bus service. Even after they built 
the existing highway (the Mount Rose Ski 
Area wasn’t built until 1965), they still used 
that bus service during the early sixties. The 
buses were free. 

Is there anything that you’d like to talk about 
that we haven’t mentioned? 

It’s been a lot of fun and a lot of hard work. 
Just like a farmer, we had to depend on the 
weather. We either had too much snow or not 
enough. It never seemed to be just right. We 
were either shoveling it in or shoveling it out. 

Is there anything that you would have had, had 
you had the area now that you didn’t have then? 

We’d have had more modern lifts. We 
went in there on a shoestring and developed 
it, and every year the business would 
increase, and every year we would have to 
put everything that we’d made back into it. 
Today, you would have to spend $ 140,000 for 
one piece of the snow-grooming equipment. 
That was more money than we would take in 
in a whole year. The hill would get moguled 
up, but we would have a group of skiers go 
up and sideslip it down. Usually they would 
just ski it out. It would get moguled up pretty 
good, but after a snowstorm it would fill it in 
pretty good. Nowadays people tear up the hill 
more, and then they didn’t tear up the hill as 
bad, then. 


Is there anything else that we should talk about? 

In 1945 or 1946, the first year of operation, 
we were about the only area that was open 
after World War II; there was quite a large 
group of people from the movie industry who 
came up and skied. A fellow by the name of 
Siggie Engel, who was later on the director 
of the Sun Valley Ski School, brought up 
these different groups of people, including 
Gary Cooper and Ingrid Bergman, Jennifer 
Jones, John Hodiak, and quite a few others 
too numerous to mention. They all seemed 
to enjoy the area. It was quite popular at that 
time. Our hotel was full all the time. 

Then during 1952, when we were snowed 
in, Joe Dimaggio was renting a little cabin 
just below Sky Tavern. He came up to Sky 
Tavern with his ex-wife and son and spent a 
few days. He was snowed in for quite a while. 
He finally got out after they got the road back 
open again. Lowell Thomas was up there, and 
I skied with him part of a day. He made one of 
these national radio broadcasts from our area, 
over the telephone, while he was up there. He 
and his son and I skied, and they were both 
very nice. 



Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



16 


Keston L. Ramsey 


A H 


Alpine Meadows, 

12 

Hard winter, 1952 

, 7, 24 

Army, U. S . , 12 


Harrison, Tommy, 

27 

Atwater, Monty, 

26 

Hawkins, Prince, 

27 



Heath, Ed, 3 




Heavenly Valley, 

Nevada, 

B 


12 



Hirsh Weiss Ski Cloth- 



F 

Far West Ski Associa¬ 
tion, 11 

Feutsch, Carl, 12 
First Aid, 11, 14 
Forest Service, U. S. 
26 


Mountain troops, 12 
Mount Rose, 8, 10, 19, 

24 , 25 

Mount Rose Bowl, 31 
Mt. Rose Development 
Company, 10 

Mt. Rose Highway, 20, 29 
32 

Mt. Rose microwave sta¬ 
tion, 7 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


17 


N 


S 


National Ski Patrol, 
11 

Neeman, Robinson, 1, 
3, 27 

Northwest Trail, 31 


0 


Olsen, Norman, 20 
Olympics, U. S., 1960, 
17 



Pioneer Theater-Audi¬ 
torium (Reno), 18 
Platterpuss, ski lift 
(Sky Tavern), 9 
Poulsen, Wayne, 3 


, 18 
17, 18 
Ly, 18 

Lon Commission, 

>, 19 

tion Department, 

Reno, 10, 11 

Redfield, LaVere, 30 

Reindeer Lodge (Mt. Rose), 
27 

Reno, Nevada, 22, 25 

Reno Army Air Base (Stead), 
1 

Reno Jr. Ski Program, 10, 
18, 19, 20 

Reno Ski Club, 9, 10, 13, 

18 

Rocco lift, Sky Tavern, 

19 

Rope tow. Sky Tavern, 3, 

4, 7, 9 

Ross, Johnny, 28, 29 


Schonfeld, Bud, 11, 28 
Silver Dollar Derby, 13 
Skating rink, Sky Tavern, 
2 

Ski jump, Sky Tavern, 16, 
20 

Ski patrollers, 12 
Ski school, Sky Tavern, 

10 

Ski shop, Mt. Rose Bowj 
11 

Ski team, Univea 
Nevada, 

Sky Taverr 

12 , 


Lions Club, 

ide Mt., 11, 12, 13, 14, 
19, 21, 23, 24, 29, 30, 

31 

Spina, Rocco, 19 

Squaw Valley, California, 

12 

Stanley, Leon, 20 
Stockhorse Inn (Mt. Rose), 

29 

Sugar Bowl Resort, 4 
Sun Valley American Legion 
Far Western Championships, 
18 

Sun Valley, Idaho, 11, 26 
Sun Valley Ski School 
(Idaho), 33 


T-bar, Sky Tavern, 6, 7, 
8, 9, 19 

Tahoe, Lake, 5, 20 
Tannenbaum Ski Area, 28 
Thomas, Lowell, 33 
Turner, Otis, 21 



University of Nevada, 6 


V 

Vanderhyde, Mr., 28 


W 

Washoe County, Nevada, 
30 

Winter Carnival, Uni¬ 
versity of Nevada, 
10, 18 

World War II, 12, 27, 
33 

Wren, Gordie, 11, 

27 


20, 




