Rene Watt Lemaire: 
Recollections of Life in 
Lander County, Nevada; Battle Mountain 
Business; and the Nevada State Senate 

Interviewee: Rene Watt Lemaire 
Interviewed: 1967 
Published: 1970 
Interviewer: Mary Ellen Glass 
UNOHP Catalog #038 


Description 

Rene Watt Lemaire is a native of Nevada, born in 1903. He has lived in Lander County all his life, engaging in business 
in Battle Mountain. Mr. Lemaire represented Lander County in the Nevada State Senate for more than twenty years. 

The oral history of Rene Lemaire contains sentiments of a small-town political leader in twentieth-century Nevada, 
and personal anecdotes about some of the leading political figures of the state. Although representing one of the 
most sparsely populated of the “cow” counties, Lemaire became one of the most powerful political figures in Nevada. 

Examination of Nevada’s legislative voting on major issues in the years preceding reapportionment in 1965 discloses 
that very seldom did the legislators divide along strict urban-rural lines. One of the reasons for the failure of such 
a voting dichotomy to develop was the presence of some small-county legislators like Rene Lemaire who were 
supporters of much of the legislation which might be termed “liberal” and who considered legislation in the light 
of state needs and not just in terms of the effect on one small part of the state. During Lemaire’s entire tenure in the 
Nevada Senate, the fifteen small-population counties could outvote populous Clark and Washoe counties fifteen 
to two in that body. 

Political scientists will be especially interested in Lemaire’s comments about Nevada politicians, both within and 
outside the legislature. Lemaire’s comments about the activities of Nevada political bosses, George Wingfield and 
Noble Getchell, whet the appetite for more information about the political methods which they used. We also find 
a partial explanation of why John Mueller was such a powerful lobbyist in the Nevada legislative halls. 

Although the accounts of some of the legislative activities are colored by the author’s close involvement, they do give 
us a different dimension on many issues, such as the “gambler’s day in court” bill, which was finally killed during 
the 1957 session. This oral history provides valuable insights into the attitudes of a respected small-county political 
leader during the times when the small counties dominated legislative politics in Nevada. 

Rene Lemaire’s memoir includes recollections of life in Lander County, accounts of the lives of the pioneer Lemaire 
and Watt families, discussions of state and local politics and politicians, historical notes on Lander County, and a 
brief conclusion. 



Rene Watt Lemaire: 
Recollections of Life in 
Lander County, Nevada; Battle Mountain 
Business; and the Nevada State Senate 




Rene Watt Lemaire: 
Recollections of Life in 
Lander County, Nevada; Battle Mountain 
Business; and the Nevada State Senate 


An Oral History Conducted by Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1970 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1970. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 


Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Introduction xi 

Special Introduction by Professor Don W. Driggs xiii 

1. Pioneers of the Watt Family of Lander County, Nevada 1 

2. Pioneers of the Lemaire Family of Lander County, Nevada 13 

3. My Story—Early Life and Career; Business and Civic Life in Battle Mountain 29 

The Battle Mountain State Bank 

Membership in Fraternal and Civic Organizations 

Interest in Aviation 

4. My Memories of Noble H. Getchell and George Wingfield 51 

5. My Political Career 65 

Important Legislation 

Remarks on Lobbyists in the Nevada Legislature 
Legislation Pertaining to Education 
Remarks about the Legislative Commission 
The Personnel Act 
Comments on Senate Bill 



Rene Watt Lemaire 


viii 


A Comment on Annual Legislative Sessions 
Memory Sketches of Legislators I Have Known 

6. Comments on the Art of Politics 109 

Conventions and Campaigns 

Statewide Campaigns and Campaigners: The “Right to Work” Bill 


7. Lander County Historical Notes 

Transcontinental Highway through Battle Mountain 

117 

8. Conclusion 

123 

Original Index: For Reference Only 

125 



Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Introduction 


Rene Watt Lemaire is a native of Nevada, 
born in 1903. He has lived in Lander County 
all his life, engaged in business in Battle 
Mountain. Mr. Lemaire represented Lander 
County in the Nevada State Senate for more 
than twenty years. Professor Don W. Driggs 
assesses Mr. Lemaire’s legislative career in his 
special introduction. 

When invited to participate in the Oral 
History Project, Mr. Lemaire accepted 
graciously. He was an enthusiastic and 
cooperative memoirist in six recording 
sessions, all at his home in Battle Mountain, 
from June 19 to June 22, 1967. 

Mr. Lemaire’s review of his chronicle 
resulted in few substantial changes to the 
script, amounting mainly to minor alterations 
in grammar and sentence construction. 
The memoir includes recollections of life 
in Lander County, accounts of the lives 
of the pioneer Lemaire and Watt families, 
discussions of state and local politics and 
politicians, historical notes on Lander County, 
and a brief conclusion. 


The Oral History Project of the University 
of Nevada, Reno, Library, preserves the past 
and the present for future research by tape 
recording the recollections of persons who 
have figured prominently in the development 
of Nevada and the West. Scripts resulting 
from the interviews are deposited in the 
Special Collections Departments of the 
University of Nevada Libraries in Reno and 
Las Vegas. Rene’ Watt Lemaire’s oral history 
script is restricted at the chronicler’s reguest; 
no access is allowed researchers until five 
years after Mr. Lemaire’s death. 

Mary Ellen Glass 
University of Nevada, Reno 
1970 




Special Introduction 


The oral history of Rene Lemaire not only 
makes enjoyable reading for the individual 
who is interested in the sentiments and 
feelings of a small-town political leader in 
twentieth-century Nevada, but the transcript 
contains personal anecdotes about some 
of the leading political figures of the state. 
Although representing one of the most 
sparsely populated of the counties, Lemaire 
became one of the most powerful political 
figures in Nevada. Judging from this memoir, 
he gained this power without consciously 
seeking it and as a reward for being a hard¬ 
working state senator whose word could 
always be trusted by his colleagues. 

Although there has been a dearth of 
scholarly research in the area of Nevada 
political history, a cursory examination of the 
legislative voting on major issues in recent 
years discloses that very seldom have the 
legislators divided along strict urban-rural 
lines. One of the reasons for the failure of 
such a voting dichotomy to develop was the 
presence of some small-county legislators like 
Rene Lemaire who were supporters of much 


of the legislation which might be termed 
“liberal” and who considered legislation in 
the light of state needs and not just in terms 
of the effect on one small part of the state. 
When it is recalled that during Lemaire’s 
entire tenure in the Nevada Senate the fifteen 
small-population counties could outvote 
populous Clark and Washoe Counties 15-2 in 
that body, the importance of legislators with 
a non-parochial view is easily seen. 

Political scientists will be especially 
interested in the comments in the transcript 
about Nevada politicians, both within and 
outside the legislature. George Wingfield 
and Noble Getchell are considered important 
political bosses in past Nevada politics, and 
Lemaire’s comments about their activities 
whet the appetite for more information about 
the political methods which they used. We 
also find a partial explanation of why John 
Mueller was such a powerful lobbyist in the 
Nevada legislative halls, for the senator from 
Lander County discloses great admiration 
and respect for this partner and representative 
of millionaire Norman Biltz. 



XIV 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


Although the accounts of some of the 
legislative activities are colored by the author s 
close involvement, they do give us a different 
dimension on many issues, such as the 
“gambler’s day in court” bill which was finally 
killed during the 1957 session. Indeed, this 
oral history provides valuable insights into the 
attitudes of a respected small-county political 
leader during the times when the small 
counties dominated legislative politics in 
Nevada. Reapportionment in 1965 meant the 
end of a political era in Nevada, for the small 
counties not only lost much representation, 
but the legislative leadership, also. Hopefully, 
however, the small county districts will 
continue in the future to send responsible 
representatives such as Rene Lemaire to the 
legislative halls in Carson City. 

Don W. Driggs,. Chairman 
Department of Political Science 
University of Nevada, Reno 



1 


Pioneers of the Watt Family 
of Lander County, Nevada 


I am Rene Watt Lemaire of Battle 
Mountain, Nevada. We are making a recording 
of not only my own life perhaps, but also of my 
grandparents’. Some of the information that 
will be given in this recording will be factual 
and some of it will probably be hearsay, but 
nonetheless should prove interesting to those 
who are interested in the Lemaire family 
and the Watt family. If they wish to do some 
research relative to this information that 
I will give in this autobiography, it is their 
prerogative. 

I will start with my mother’s side, which 
was the Watt family. In the Watt family was my 
grandfather George Watt, Sr., who came from 
Scotland. He was a native of Dunfermline, 
a city of Fife County. I believe it’s close to 
Edinburgh. He was born in 1831; he passed 
away January 5,1899 at the age of 67 years, 11 
months, and 24 days. When he was a young 
fellow, he married my grandmother. Her 
maiden name was Isabel Litster. 

Getting back to my Grandfather Watt, 
when he first started out as a young fellow, 
from what I was told, he started out as a cabin 


boy. He was working for some person that had 
two or three ships, and he started to follow the 
sea. I think that was characteristic of a lot of 
the people that came from the British Islands. 
He made several trips under this captain, and 
the captain was very well impressed with his 
ability as far as seamanship was concerned. 
And about the time that this captain was 
going to give him, perhaps, a boat of his own 
to run and operate, gold was discovered in 
California. So he decided right then and there 
that, being a young fellow, the best thing for 
him to do was to go out to California. So I 
think he got off the boat at New York, and he 
worked his way across the United States to the 
California gold fields. 

He was quite active in the handling 
of livestock. It seems as though he loved 
livestock. According to my understanding, he 
used to run mule trains from Sacramento up 
into the Mother Lode country in and around 
Grass Valley. I think he made a fairly sizable 
fortune. But in those days, of course, a fortune 
could be $5,000 or $10,000, or maybe less 
than $5,000. Anyway, I understand that he 



2 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


lost that, but he still had his string of mules. 
So he started to haul groceries on these pack 
mules from Sacramento to the Comstock and 
Virginia City. Then he also had an extended 
bunch of mule trains, pack mules, that he ran 
from Virginia City to Salt Lake City. 

From what my grandmother used to 
tell me (of course, my grandfather died 
before I was born; he died in ’99 and I was 
born in 1903), he must have had quite a 
few experiences with the Indians. Evidently 
he was friendly with them and they never 
seemed to bother him much. The route that he 
took, as far as this pack train was concerned, 
between Salt Lake City and the Comstock 
Lode, followed pretty much the Pony Express 
trail. 

On these trips he saw the possibility of 
a livestock promotion area in the southern 
part of Lander County near the county seat 
of our county, called Austin. I think he traded 
off some of these mule critters and got some 
livestock and started ranching. The home 
ranch was called Silver Creek, and it was about 
sixteen miles north of the town of Austin. 

It was on Silver Creek that he built a home. 
How he and Grandmother Watt got together, I 
never did hear. I don’t know whether he went 
back to Scotland and got her, or whether they 
met in New York, or whether she came out 
West and they got married. 

When she came to Lander County, the 
railhead on the Central Pacific was at a place 
called Argenta. There wasn’t any place called 
Battle Mountain in those days. He met her in 
a fancy wagon or a surry, one of those fancy 
deals. It took them two or three days to drive 
from Argenta to the ranch at Silver Creek. 

At Silver Creek, of course, it was just a 
ranch home, and there was a lot of things that 
was needed. I believe that my grandfather Watt 
had shipped out a lot of furniture that came 
all the way from Scotland. It either came from 


Scotland or back East someplace. Of course, 
there wasn’t any furniture manufacturers out 
here in the West at that particular time. 

But it was on this ranch, Silver Creek, that 
they raised a large family of nine children. Of 
these nine children— here is an interesting 
fact which I know to be the truth—the only 
time they had a doctor was for the first one at 
the time of birth. And due to the distances that 
existed at the time, Grandmother Watt reared 
and raised her family to young manhood and 
younger womanhood, and she never did have 
a doctor for them. She raised them on the 
good old-fashioned castor oil bottle, which is 
an interesting fact, taking into consideration 
all the fancy antibiotics that we have today. 
These old-timers, they met their problems 
head on and did the best they could and went 
ahead and raised a family. 

My grandfather Watt, when he finally 
settled down at Silver Creek, became a very, 
very wealthy man, not in dollars, so to speak, 
but in holdings, his ranches and livestock. 
When the hard winter of ’89 and ’90 came, 
he had an obligation at the bank that was 
very small as compared to his actual worth. 
He planned the following year to sell out 
and maybe distribute his ranches to some of 
his boys and move to California, where the 
winters weren’t so tough. 

Well, he was just like a lot of the other 
ranchers in that area and also up here in the 
northern part of the state of Nevada that got 
caught with that hard winter of ’89 and ’90. 
I’ve heard my grandmother tell about this, 
that it just snowed, and snowed, and snowed, 
and blew, and froze, and snowed, and blew, 
and froze. Even my mother told me that 
the snow there at Silver Creek was piled up 
higher than halfway up the windows. And 
this condition existed there for a period of 
several weeks; how many weeks, I don’t know. 
After the storm finally let up, it turned bitterly 



Pioneers of the Watt Family of Lander County, Nevada 


3 


cold. My grandfather Watt was too old to go 
anyplace, so he stayed in the ranch house, but 
he sent two or three of his boys on horseback 
to try to go to what is known as the Walters 
ranch, right next to the Jim Litster place on 
Reese River. (That Jim Litster place, by the 
way, was pioneered by the Steiner family, who 
later on lived in Sparks.) 

The first day these boys on horseback 
tried to get down to the Walters ranch, where 
my grandfather had about 1,200-1,500 head 
of cattle, the furthest they got away from the 
ranch was about two or three miles. They 
had to return. And then they tried it again 
the next day, and they tried it again the next 
day. Every evening when theyd come in, their 
ears, hands, and nose would be frostbitten, 
and they suffered through this severe cold 
that winter. 

At the Walters ranch, there was plenty 
of hay in the stacks but they just couldn’t get 
down there. Of course, in this day and age, 
we have air lifts and tractors and caterpillars 
and stuff like that. Perhaps, maybe they could 
have saved some of those cattle. As it was, 
these cattle froze to death or died through 
lack of food. In that severe bitter cold, some 
of them were standing up, some of them were 
kneeling down, some of them leaning against 
a post, just no protection for them at all. The 
only stock that he actually saved as far as the 
horses and cattle were concerned were the 
cattle that he had at Silver Creek ranch. 

And he did take a terrific whipping in 
sheep. As I have been told, he had most of his 
sheep over in what they call mid-Reese River, 
near Fish Creek and Antelope Valley area. In 
that area, as soon as the weather broke and 
they could get some men out, they went out 
and started to pelt the dead sheep. These sheep 
just piled up one on top of the other in draw 
after draw. The pelts that he was able to get of 
the sheep grossed him $40,000—I would say 


that the pelts would go, on the average, about 
a dollar apiece in a sale of that kind. And they 
certainly didn’t get all of the pelts off those 
sheep. So he must have had a terrific number 
of sheep in that area. But he waited just one 
year too long. 

I believe from what my grandmother told 
me that this was his third fortune he had lost, 
and he just lost heart. He told her that if he 
was fifteen or twenty years younger, he would 
buckle in and see if he couldn’t try to make 
another one, but it just took the sap right out 
of him. 

If his sons had gotten in like they should, 
they could have undoubtedly kept the estate 
intact. Grandmother had to sell one parcel 
after another in order to meet her obligations 
and take care of her family. The boys got 
married, and whenever they got married, this 
aunt would be jealous of that aunt, so it was 
just a typical family problem. That’s pretty 
much the history of the Watt family. 

The oldest child of the Watt offspring 
was Christine (Watt) Clark (of course, that’s 
her married name), and the second one was 
George Watt, Jr. The third was Robert Watt, 
the fourth was James Watt; and the fifth was 
Jessica (Watt) Fenneman; my mother, Helen 
Louise (Watt) Lemaire; and Isabel (Watt) 
Menardi; William Watt; and the youngest 
one of the group was Oliver Watt—in other 
words, he was the spoiled brat. No, I wouldn’t 
say that he was a spoiled brat. He was a very 
fine young fellow, but being the youngest child 
in the group, naturally he was pampered by 
his mother and by his sisters. He was a very 
fine person. 

Christine Clark was quite active in 
politics. She was a Democrat. She was a great 
friend of Scrugham’s and Pittman’s, and she 
was also a very good friend of the Tasker L. 
Oddie’s. She was quite an artist. She went 
to Dominican College, I believe it is, in San 



4 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


Rafael. She had two children. Her family has 
all passed out of the picture, including herself, 
at this time. 

George Watt was quite active. He married 
a woman by the name of Estelle McIntyre, who 
was a beautiful woman, there in Austin, and 
they had three children. George was active in 
the livestock business, and one time he ran 
the Grass Valley ranch, which at this present 
time is owned and controlled by Richard and 
Molly Magee. Molly Magee is now regent of 
the University of Nevada. At that one time it 
was not owned; it was operated by a company 
in which my Uncle George Watt was the 
general manager for them, and he lived in 
Grass Valley for quite some years. George 
Watt, through some kind of illness, I don’t 
know what it was, lost one arm and then he 
lost one leg. He ran for surveyor general for 
the state of Nevada at the same time Tasker 
L. Oddie was running for united States 
Senate. In campaigning, my Uncle George, 
with one arm off and one leg off, and riding 
an old Dodge—one of the roughest riding 
automobiles in those days that was built—he’d 
be going strong when Tasker Oddie and all of 
his group would all be all worn out. They had 
to quit, but Uncle George kept right on going, 
and it paid, too, because he won that election 
and was surveyor general for one term (for 
one and one-half years; he died in office). That 
was his political background. 

Here’s another interesting story about 
him. He was sheriff of Lander County when 
the Del Grosso murder took place. This Del 
Grosso murder took place halfway between 
here (Battle Mountain) and Austin, on a little 
narrow gauge railroad called the Nevada 
Central. The place where the murder was 
committed was the Bailey station. That’s just 
about fifty or fifty-five miles south of here 
(Battle Mountain), just before you enter into 
the canyon going up Reese River. 


They had a sort of a section foreman there 
and his name was Batista “Billy” Del Grosso. 
He had a very pretty wife and two children. 
One’s name was Henry (he was the babe), 
and then another one a little older, named 
Albert. Billy Del Grosso would have to go out 
and maintain the roadbed each day. On this 
particular day, evidently this Indian had been 
watching, and after he had left on his little 
handcar on the railroad, this Indian slipped 
in there and he murdered Billy Del Grosso’s 
wife, Angela. This oldest boy that was crying, 
he murdered him, too. But the little babe was 
evidently covered up and didn’t hear all the 
ruckus and the noise. His name was Henry. 
Later he was adopted by W. C. Hancock, who 
used to be Justice of the Peace and used to run 
the Capital Hotel here in Battle Mountain. 
Later Henry moved to Reno. But I’m getting 
ahead of my story here. 

This Indian took this woman, Angela Del 
Grosso, and garroted her with a wire and hung 
her up in the chicken coop. Of course, they 
didn’t know anything about it until after Billy 
came home and found this tragedy. I don’t 
know whether he notified the officials on the 
railroad by telephone—they had telephone 
connections then—but anyway, my uncle, 
who was sheriff, he immediately hired some 
Indian trackers and a posse and they went out 
looking for this Indian. 

Mrs. Bessie Hinman, who is here in Battle 
Mountain right now, at that time was helping 
Grandmother Watt out at the Silver Creek 
ranch. She was in the kitchen cleaning up 
the dishes, and so forth, and she happened 
to look out the window and here was this 
Indian looking in. She screamed and threw 
the dishpan in the air, and then she ran to 
the front room. This Indian got scared, too. 
But that was the first word that they had 
received as to the whereabouts of this Indian. 
So when they finally found out that he had 



Pioneers of the Watt Family of Lander County, Nevada 


5 


been there at Silver Creek, it was easy enough 
for these trackers to pick up his tracks. He 
went over Callahan Mountain, over into the 
Grass Valley side. They followed him, and 
when they finally came to his little tent, and 
so forth, they knew the Indian was in there. 
The posse that was with Uncle George, the 
sheriff, wanted to shoot him up and get rid of 
him quick, but Uncle George wouldn’t go for 
that. He went in and brought the Indian out. 
So they handcuffed him and they took him on 
into Austin and placed him in jail. From the 
evidence that they had, they knew without a 
question of a doubt that he would be hanged. 

Now this might be an unfair story to tell, 
but it’s the truth. Uncle George asked Billy 
Del Grosso, the husband of this woman, if 
he would like to pull the trap to hang this 
man. Billy Del Grosso was a very, very thrifty, 
money-hungry individual and he said, “If 
you pay me the fifty dollars.” And that really 
aggravated my Uncle George very, very much. 
But anyway, even the hangman didn’t get a 
chance to hang the Indian, and neither did 
Billy Del Grosso or anybody else, because 
some Indians came in there to visit the Indian 
prisoner that was in prison in the courthouse, 
in the jail in Austin, and they slipped him 
some wild parsnip poisoning. This Indian 
ate that poisoning. Of course, he didn’t have 
to go to the gallows, but he knew that his 
time had come. So that was it. But that’s an 
interesting story. Part of it maybe should be 
stricken due to the fact I’m mentioning people 
and their names, but nearly all of them are 
long gone by now. That’s part of the history 
of my grandparents on my mother’s side of 
the family. 

Then the next son was Robert Watt. He 
was pretty much of a homebody. He married 
a schoolteacher by the name of Cora; she was 
from Winnemucca. She taught school there 
in Winnemucca for many years after Uncle 


Robert died from a stomach ailment. They 
had two children; one was named Kenneth, 
about my age, and the other one was named 
George Watt III. Those two children were very 
successful in their business activities. Kenneth 
married Eileen Ruecktesler of Winnemucca, 
and he had a mercantile business there while 
his mother continued on with her teaching. 
His brother George did odd jobs. These two 
children, Kenneth and George, lived at Silver 
Creek ranch. (I used to go to Silver Creek 
every summer and sometimes during the 
winter for Christmas holidays.) They traveled 
eight miles by buggy to a little schoolhouse, 
the old-fashioned little red schoolhouse, 
which was centrally located to serve the 
different families in and around there within 
a radius of eight to ten or twelve miles. 

Then William Watt, he was a very quiet 
individual. And at one time he was engaged 
to Addie Callahan. Addie Callahan lived 
over the mountain, which is named Callahan 
Mountain, at a little farm. She was related to 
Jessie Mahoney, who married an Irishman 
by the name of William Mahoney. That was 
an old family that lived there at the Callahan 
ranch for many years. She was heartbroken 
when my Uncle William Watt was accidentally 
killed, and never married. 

There used to be a mine out at a place 
called Carroll Summit. At this Carroll Summit 
they encountered some very high grade, rich 
gold ore. Most of it was a tellurium-type gold. 
William was the chief hoist man and the hoists 
that they used in those days...didn’t have any 
safety guards or anything else on the gears. 
He went out this one morning to start up 
this hoist, and it was real cold. It was in the 
wintertime, and he had on one of these long 
coats. Accidentally, when he was oiling the 
machine, his coat got caught in the gears and 
it dragged him right into it. Finally, he tried 
to pull it out and he got his cuff caught, and it 



6 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


ran up his arm and almost severed his head. 
In other words, while he was caught in this 
machine, his body pressure was so great, 
it stopped the machine. These two miners 
that were working down in this shaft, they 
came up to see what was wrong, and here 
he was, imprisoned, actually caught in this 
machine, but he was still alive. He told them 
how to release the machine so they could 
reverse it and get him out of it, but before 
he would let them touch the machine to 
get him out of it, he knew there wasn’t a 
possible chance for him to live, so he said 
to these boys, “Say good-bye” to all the 
members of his family and a special message 
to Addie Callahan. That’s the story of my 
Uncle William Watt. 

James Watt, he was a rough and ready; 
I always call him my “drinking uncle.” He 
was a very fine person. He, in turn, married 
a schoolteacher who was teaching school at 
the Litster ranch down on Reese River Valley. 
Before he got married, he loved to ride horses. 
He was always jobbing somebody. Oh, he 
loved to just job somebody and get them in 
trouble. 

He’d get on these drunks. One time he 
had a little place called Valley of the Moon, 
which was about halfway between Battle 
Mountain and Austin. A fellow by the name of 
Jack Whalen, a great big raw-boned Swede (I 
imagine he was about six foot-seven, weighed 
about 210 pounds), he and this fellow Whalen 
used to get on these benders. This particular 
day they ran out of liquor and so Jim says to 
Jack, “I’ll tell you, Jack. I bet I can jump further 
backwards than you can.” 

Jack said, “Aw, I bet you can’t, either.” 

And so they got out in the yard. They’d 
been digging this well. It was about a four- 
by-six well, and it was down about thirty to 
thirty-five feet. So anyway, getting on with this 
story, Jim drew a line, and Jack backed up to 


the line and he made this big back jump, and 
golly, he did a good job. 

So Jack says to Jim, “I bet you can’t beat 
that one.” 

Jim walked over to this well and he got 
about two or three feet from it, and I’ll be 
darned, he jumped backwards down the well! 
So Whalen had to buy the whiskey! So those 
are the things Jim loved to do, to out-figure 
the other guy some way or another. 

Here is an interesting story. It might be 
a little bit long, but it’s worth telling. My dad 
was always very much interested in mining, 
and he had a lease on the New York Canyon 
mine that was owned by the Watt family. He 
had produced around about ten tons of very, 
very high grade silver ore, ore that would run 
around four or five hundred dollars a ton. 
Every once in a while these fellows that was 
working out there for New York Canyon (it 
was only about three or four miles to Austin), 
they’d go into Austin, and, oh, goodness, they 
would realty get on a big party. So they were in 
Austin one time on one of these parties, and 
when they came back, all this ore was gone. 
My dad had sheriffs and private detectives 
and everything else trying to find out about 
this ore. And they never did find out anything 
about it until recently. 

During the depression years, with a friend 
of mine, we were working at a little mining 
camp called Gweenah. We would go to Austin 
quite frequently to visit and get our groceries, 
and so forth. I was talking to a fellow by the 
name of Walter Francis, who used to run a 
livery stable years ago, but at that particular 
time he had a garage. We used to love to go 
in there and visit with him when we’d go into 
town. I was telling Walter my dad would sure 
like to know where his high grade ore went. 
And he began laughing and he said, “Doesn’t 
your dad know who took that ore?” 

And I said, “No, he doesn’t know.” 



Pioneers of the Watt Family of Lander County, Nevada 


7 


He laughed; he thought it was a big joke. 
He said, “Why, Jim Watt took that ore!” 

“Oh, he did not.” 

He said, “He sure as heck did.” 

So I came home, I think it was a week or 
two after that, and I told Dad. I said, “Dad, 
did you ever find out who took your ore there 
at New York Canyon?” 

And he says, “Nope, I never did.” 

And I gave him a little background as to 
this conversation I had with Walter Francis. I 
said, “Walter Francis said that Jim Watt took 
your ore, your own brother-in-law.” 

My dad said, “He did? Well, for goodness 
sakes!” He said, “You know,” he said, “now I 
can see how he got all that silver ore mixed 
up in his antimony ore.” He said, “Jim was 
operating a mine at Ravenswood, which was 
strictly antimony ore, and he had the nerve 
and the audacity to contact me and have me 
transfer this ore from the narrow gauge over 
to the broad gauge, and he told me that hed 
pay me the expenses on it.” He said, “I hired 
a couple of men when this ore came down 
on these flatcars and had it transferred.” And 
he said, “I looked at this ore at the time and 
I thought, ‘Gee whiz, that’s funny-looking 
antimony ore.’ But,” he said, “being a trusting 
soul as I am, I never had an idea that my own 
brother-in-law would do a trick like that.” 

That’s part of the family history. I done t 
know whether I’m digging into old closets or 
not. It’s an interesting story. That is the story 
about James. 

James had four boys. There was Jack; he 
was the oldest. His dad died with some kind 
of stomach disorder. That seemed to run in 
the family. They all seemed to fall in love with 
schoolteachers, too, by the way. There was Jack 
and there was Billy. Billy was named after his 
uncle, Billy Robert Watt. And then there was 
James; he was named after his dad. And then 
there’s a boy by the name of Russell, the little 


one. They were all born at the Valley of the 
Moon, and I think the only doctor they ever 
had was when the first one was born. 

This fellow, Jack Watt, was quite musical. 
After he left the Valley of the Moon with 
his mother when his father passed away, he 
entered the movies, and he was known as Brad 
King. They settled down around Stockton. 
He was very successful in the livestock 
business, Of course, the phenomenal growth 
of Stockton helped them quite a bit because 
they bought some farm land just out on the 
edge of town. Of course, now that area is 
being subdivided, so they realized quite a lot 
of money out of it. 

Billy was in the service during World 
War II, came back, and he spent a lot of time 
raising Shetland ponies. Jim, he was just a 
plain cowboy. He loved to ride horses and ride 
bucking horses and livestock, and so forth. 

Russell, when he was just a child out at 
the Valley of the Moon, somehow or another 
got hold of some lye. He ate a lot of this lye 
and they rushed him to Elko. Dr. Roantree 
performed an operation on this little baby, 
and cut out practically all of his stomach, and 
put in what they call a Murphy button. Now 
I don’t know what that is, but that’s probably 
a crude name for a medical term. That little 
baby survived and he was adopted by Rene’s 
(that’s my aunt that married Jim Watt) sister. 
The last time I saw Dr. Roantree in Elko before 
he died, he asked me about this little boy who 
had grown into be quite a young man then. He 
told me, “I wouldn’t have given that boy one 
chance in a million to live.” And he says, “If I 
can live long enough, I’d like to have him come 
up here to Elko so I can take a lot of X-rays, 
and I would like to write up an article for 
the medical journal.” That’s just one of those 
happenings in life, again, that I thought that 
was worth mentioning. So that’s the story of 
Jim Watt and his family. 



8 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


Then there was Jessie Watt. She married 
a fellow by the name of Edgar Fenneman. He 
was an expert certified public accountant. He 
lived in San Francisco. He Was a very fine 
pianist; that was his hobby playing the piano. 
She, in turn, was quite musical. So they really 
enjoyed each other’s company. They only had 
one child, and his name was George Watt 
Fenneman. He was born in Shanghai, China, 
five always called him my Chinaman cousin. 

Uncle Edgar was working for an export- 
import company, and that’s how he happened 
to be in Shanghai. They were there for two or 
three years, I believe. George was born when 
they were in Shanghai. They came back to 
the States again from China and Edgar kept 
on with his certified public accountant work, 
expert bookkeeper, and so forth, and he 
eventually passed away. Aunt Jessie had the 
responsibility of raising and taking care of this 
boy from about twelve years on up. And he’s 
done real well. He went into the radio business 
and was an announcer at one time. He was 
master of ceremonies for Groucho Marx on 
National Broadcasting Company. 

Aunt Jessie was quite a religious woman. 
She branched out into religion and worked 
for a religious group called Truth. She had 
offices and everything there in San Francisco. 
There were many people there from the state 
of Nevada that would visit her and attend her 
church to hear her lecture and preach. She was 
a very ardent Christian woman, and through 
her activities in this Truth organization, 
she evidently got enough money out of it to 
educate her boy and put him through school, 
and so forth. 

Then my Aunt Isabel, she was more like 
a mother to me than any of the other aunts, 
because when I was about three or four years 
old, my mother had lots of physical problems 
as far as her own health was concerned, and 
my Aunt Isabel sort of adopted me as her 


own child, so to speak. She always called me 
her son. 

Eater on she got married; she married 
Harold Menardi, who was a mining engineer. 
They had some interesting experiences in 
around what they call Mill Canyon and up 
here at Galena Canyon during their early 
married life. When they got married, believe 
it or not, they got married right here in this 
home, my dad’s home. I called it my dad and 
mother’s home because it belonged to them, 
and I’ve always cherished it in their memory. 
She got married right there in the corner of 
the living room and I was the ring bearer. I 
was quite a character. 

Here’s a funny experience that happened. 
In this big room here there was a big, long 
table. (Of course, my dad and Harold Menardi 
and Aunt Isabel were very close, as well as my 
mother.) So my dad, he had to help Uncle 
Harold celebrate. He bought the sparkling 
Burgundy, and, of course, I was just a young 
kid, so to speak. They had it down in the 
basement here in the home, and boy, did I get 
stoned! I went down there and really had fun, 
drinking the dregs out of the bottles, and so 
forth. I will always remember that. 

Aunt Isabel only had one child. Her name 
was Helen Meda. She, by the way, was born in 
this house, upstairs. Those were the days there 
weren’t any hospitals or anything. She’s named 
after my mother, Helen, and also after a sister 
of Uncle Harold’s, whose name was Meda. 

Now we’re down to the last one; that’s 
Oliver. Oliver, as I say, was the youngest of 
the Watt tribe. They sent him away to school. 
Having been raised on a ranch with unlimited 
controls, when he got down there to this 
school in California, he didn’t last long. They 
got rid of him quick. He came back home 
and helped his mother very, very extensively 
in the operation of the ranch. When she sold 
out, she sold the Silver Creek ranch and all of 



Pioneers of the Watt Family of Lander County, Nevada 


9 


her holdings to a French Basco by the name 
of St. John Laborde, who was a very fine man. 
I think he just passed away in the last two or 
three years. 

St. John Laborde married one of the 
Schuchetti girls and she was related to Louise 
Shovelin. They were all very fine, good friends 
of my dad’s. St. John Laborde, he ran mostly 
all sheep, because he had control of the whole 
Watt holdings. 

You wonder, and you often appreciate the 
fact that we’re here today and enjoying certain 
benefits, whereas those people in those days, 
they had to really live by their wits. We take so 
much for granted. Every one of the places that 
Grandfather Watt had, all those little outlying 
farm areas, ranch areas, he always made it a 
point to build some kind of a stone structure 
over which he put willows and dirt as a roof, 
always a place where he could hole up in case 
of storm, or where they were riding for their 
livestock or places for their sheep camps. 
Always a very thrifty Scotchman, so to speak. 
But you don’t see that very much any more. 
Well, today we don’t need those protective 
places for the simple reason that we have a 
method of transportation that is really out of 
this world. We have jeeps, four-wheel drive 
vehicles, that take us. Of course, in those days 
when they only traveled by horse and buggy 
and by pack train, why, they had to stop to 
give their animals a chance to rest. Now it’s all 
gasoline age. But at one time he owned I don’t 
know how many ranches down in that area, 
just ranch after ranch. But that hard winter 
really knocked him out of the picture. 

In reading an obituary that was taken out 
of the Reese River Reveille by my good friend 
Bert Acree when the state of Nevada was 
celebrating its centennial, I noticed the article 
states in 1875 and again in 1879, George 
Watt was elected an assemblyman from this 
county. He made an able and honest member 


and he won the respect and admiration of 
everyone for his devotion to the interest of 
his country and state, referring, of course, to 
my grandfather Watt. 

It was during his term in office that the 
franchise was given to the Nevada Central 
Railroad to build a narrow gauge from Battle 
Mountain to Austin. I believe that most of 
the people know that they ran out of time 
as far as having the railroad completed 
under their contract to run it up into the 
town of Austin, so they extended the city 
limits of Austin down to a little place called 
Leadville. My granddad helped put through 
the necessary legislation, which I believe at 
that time embodied a grant from the county 
of Lander for $200,000 to build this narrow 
gauge railroad. So it didn’t cost too much a 
mile to build railroads in those days. 

Before he would sanction any kind of 
support to this franchise, he made a point 
to go to all the ranches and livestock people 
down at the southern part of Lander County, 
advising them that when this railroad 
was built, it would have a tendency to be 
detrimental to them as far as their livestock 
and horses [were concerned] in connection 
with the stage route that existed from Battle 
Mountain to Austin at that time, and these 
other areas around there. Before he would go 
ahead and help put through this legislation, 
why, he had to have approval from those 
people. They all agreed that they felt the 
railroad would be more beneficial than 
detrimental to their interests as far as getting 
supplies in and out of the area, and so forth. So 
he was the one that helped put the necessary 
legislation through the legislature. 

During my tern in office I did a little 
historical research, and I finally found a 
picture in some of the old journals or some 
of the old archives of the state of Nevada 
showing a picture of my grandfather Watt 



10 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


when he was an assemblyman from Lander 
County 

Here’s another cute little story that might 
be interesting to some people. It was to me. 
My grandmother Watt’s father, his name was 
James Litster, he used to love to ride. He came 
out from Scotland with them to Silver Creek 
ranch. He would get on this little pony. He’d 
always have to put the horse in some kind 
of a depressed area on account of a game leg 
he had in order to get on the horse. He used 
to take these rides nearly every day, and he’d 
either ride up the south branch of Silver Creek 
or the north branch. I don’t know which 
branch he was riding up one day, but anyhow, 
he came across this polecat. He had used snuff 
for years and years and years, and he didn’t 
have any sense of smell. When he saw this 
beautiful cat, he got off his horse and tried 
to catch this cat. Well, you know darn well 
what this cat did to him. He really drenched 
him. He finally found a place where he could 
get back up on his horse, and he rode back to 
the ranch, and—well, they could smell him 
coming half a mile. They wouldn’t even let 
him in the house. That’s all there was to it. 
The horse stunk, and he stunk, and, oh, gosh, 
it was really terrible! He was always a fancy 
dresser. Goodness, when he’d take these pony 
rides, why, he’d always doll up just like he 
was going to be in a parade for the Queen of 
England! He was all dressed up this day, but 
they made him take off all his clothes, and he 
had to take them out and bury them. That’s 
the only way they could get rid of that scent. 
That’s just an experience, too, that happened 
out on the little old ranch of Silver Creek. 

In discussing the Watt family, it is 
interesting to recall the fact that Tasker L. 
Oddie, when he was a young man, discussed 
the possibility with my grandmother Watt 
as to having her grubstake him to go down 
to Tonopah. He did such a wonderful job in 


selling himself to her, why, she furnished him 
with a four-horse team and a practically brand 
new wagon and a couple months’ groceries. 
He drove from Austin down to the town of 
Tonopah (then in its infancy). I guess he was 
undoubtedly fairly successful down there in 
his mining ventures. He made such a hit with 
the people down there as to his personality 
that they named a mountain after him. So 
they called Mt. Oddie after Tasker L. Oddie, 
who later on became United States Senator of 
the state of Nevada. 

Speaking of mining properties, besides 
the mining property that the Watts had out 
at Carroll Summit where Uncle William Watt 
lost his life, they bought a piece of property 
out of Austin a short distance, called New York 
Canyon. (I believe I told the story previously 
about the high grade ore that was taken out of 
New York Canyon and was pilfered from the 
mine by my dad’s brother-in-law.) Well, this 
piece of property was owned by a gentleman 
in Austin, and it was very high grade silver, 
mostly all chloride silver. This gentleman 
sent his children to college from ores that he 
took out of this New York Canyon property. 
Finally one year, when it came time to do 
the assessment work, and these children had 
graduated from school and they were up in 
hoi polloi, he wanted some help from them 
either financially or physically to help do this 
assessment work. They turned the old man 
down. He became so wrathful about it that he 
got a hold of Robert Watt, whom he liked very 
much, and he told Bob, he says, “Bob, I’ll sell 
you the New York Canyon mine for $1,500.” 

Bob says, “Well, I haven’t got any money.” 

This fellow says, “Well, that’s immaterial.” 
He says, “I know that there’s ore out there. 
You can dig it out and pay me, but,” he says, 
“I’m getting to the age where I can’t do it. 
My kids have all turned me down as far as 
helping me. So,” he says, “if you want to take 



Pioneers of the Watt Family of Lander County, Nevada 


11 


a crack at it, why, I’ll give you a chance to buy 
the property” So Uncle Bob talked this over 
with his mother (which is my grandmother) 
and she grubstaked him. They went out there, 
and in the seams was this rich chloride silver 
ore. The fact of the matter is, there used to 
be a Negro assayer whose name was Henry 
Berry, and he was over at Cortez, -he nearest 
assayer at that time was this assayer. They 
shipped some of these samples over there to 
have them assayed. They got one high grade 
assay that this fellow assayed that run better 
than 18,000 ounces to the ton. Now that just 
shows you how rich, Of course, it was just a 
small high grade picked piece of ore, but that 
was the type of ore that it was. 

Well, these cowboys that my uncle got 
to help him, they didn’t like to drill in the 
hanging wall or the foot wall. So they’d drill 
right in the vein because that was the softest. 
They’d put the charges in these veins and 
they’d blow high grade ore all over the side 
of the mountain! But even so, it only took 
one shipment of this high grade ore from 
him to pay off this fellow as far as this mining 
property was concerned. 

The Watts operated it for quite a few years. 
Then I think my dad, he leased it from them 
and finally bought it from them. But anyway, 
he ended up producing about ten tons of ore 
that was high graded from him by his own 
brother-in-law. That’s another interesting 
story in connection with that Watt mine out 
at New York Canyon. 

I’d like to give a little historical background 
relative to my mother, Helen Louise (Watt) 
Lemaire. As I stated before, she was born 
January 26, 1885. She was born and raised 
at Silver Creek ranch, the home ranch of the 
Watt family. She attended school, of course, 
in a little red schoolhouse seven or eight miles 
north of Silver Creek. She was married to 
my father, I don’t know what month, but she 


was only seventeen years old when she got 
married. Being a very beautiful and attractive 
girl, of course, she had many suitors during 
her girlhood days. 

There’s one thing that I almost forgot 
to mention about the Watt family out there 
at Silver Creek. Of course, in those days, 
they didn’t have any radios or television or 
anything like that, and actually, they had to 
make their own entertainment. Nearly all the 
girls were quite musical. They always played 
some kind of a musical instrument, mostly 
the piano, and my mother was quite a pianist. 
She could also play the mandolin real well. 

So Silver Creek became quite an area 
as far as the townspeople were concerned 
from Austin. They would come out there to 
visit with the Watt family and enjoy their 
hospitality, and it was not unusual to sit down 
to an evening meal or an afternoon Sunday 
meal when there’d be anywhere from sixteen 
to twenty-four people out there. But the 
Watt family loved companionship and loved 
company, and evidently the company loved 
the Watt family, because they never hesitated 
to come out and visit with them whenever the 
opportunity presented itself. 

I was told that my dad was quite a cyclist. 
He had two or three bicycles. He and his 
brother Ernest, they bought one of these 
attachments that fit on the frame of the 
bicycle. On this little narrow gauge railroad, 
they attached these extra wheels to their 
bicycle and they would take off and go clear 
to Silver Creek station on the Nevada Central 
railroad “on the rails,” and then take the 
wheels off, and then go on up to Silver Creek 
and visit with Mother and the other Watt girls. 
That was quite something in those days. 

As I stated before, Mother was quite a 
talented piano player, and there were many 
young girls here in this community that she 
taught how to play the piano. She tried to 



12 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


teach me, but that was an impossibility for 
Mother to teach a son how to play a musical 
instrument. I think I got through the treble 
clef, but I couldn’t get past the bass clef. She 
and I always got into too big an argument. 
But she was so talented that when the silent 
movies first came into Battle Mountain, she 
used to sit down at the piano and play along 
with the movies and would fit the musical 
melodies to fit the pattern of the scenes as 
they were appearing on the screen, which 
was of that nature and of that talent that 
she could improvise and play by ear, and so 
forth. She did that for many years as far as 
this local theater was concerned, Of course, 
when sound track moving pictures came in, 
she didn’t do it anymore. She was knocked out 
of that privilege of playing for those movies. 

Locally here, Mother took an active part 
in all civic affairs. She was very active in 
the Episcopal Church, became a member 
of the Ladies Guild here, and was quite an 
ardent Episcopalian. She was a member of 
the Parents and Teachers, past president 
of that organization. She did quite a lot of 
entertaining here in the home. She had friends 
all throughout the neighborhood, always 
listened to their tales of woe and sympathized 
with them and tried to help them when they 
were in distress, which is true in a small 
community. Neighbors will fight like the 
dickens between themselves, but whenever 
there is a problem or a distress of one family 
or one group, the others would, even though 
they might not be on speaking terms, get 
together to try to help each other. So that was 
Mother’s nature. She was a very, very talented 
woman and she died rather young, which 
was a pretty low blow to my dad, because he 
worshipped her. The fact of the matter is he 
only lived two years after she passed away. 
She passed away in 1935 and he passed away 
in 1937. So that’s a brief story of my mother. 


Anybody that would pick on her son 
Land I was the idol in her heart), she would 
really bare her fangs and unsheathe her 
claws and start to work on them if they got 
too rough with me. I think that’s perhaps 
characteristic of mother love for her one and 
only child. By the way, being the one and 
only child, I sometimes have been accused 
of being a spoiled brat. I don’t know whether 
I’ve proven it to be so or not, but it’s been an 
interesting life as far as her motherly love for 
me. I remember when I was just a child (of 
course, I was more interested in the outdoor 
activities, and so forth), and it was time to go 
to bed, she’d always make me say that little 
prayer, “Now I Lay Me Down to Sleep.” I don’t 
know whether ltd be so exhilarated with the 
day’s activities or what, but sometimes I would 
forget some of the wording in that little prayer. 
Believe me, she wouldn’t hesitate to get out 
that old wooden hairbrush, and she’d keep 
pounding me until I’d have to remember it, 
regardless of whether I wanted to or not. But 
the very fact that she insisted that I take an 
active part in religious affairs, I think, paid 
me, in later life, the dividends. As I begin to 
relate my own life history, I’ll prove that point. 



2 


Pioneers of the Lemaire Family 
of Lander County, Nevada 


Now we’re going to discuss the Lemaire 
grandparents. I have here before me a family 
register which I believe should be made of 
record. My grandfathers name was Auguste 
Desire Lemaire. You could plainly understand 
that that’s quite French, especially that middle 
name, Desire He was born in France, and the 
name of the place was called Haut Loquin 
[Paido Calais].I understand that that is some 
area in Normandy, France. He was born 
February 6, 1839. He was married on June 
28, 1869 to Marie Louise Lucas. 

She was born January 26, 1852 at Fausse 
Pointe, St. Martinville, Louisiana. By that 
marriage they had five children. The oldest 
was Louis Aimee Lemaire, and he was born 
in North Bloomfield, Nevada County, in 
California on the fifteenth day of March, 
1872. The next child was Auguste Charles 
Lemaire, and he also was born in North 
Bloomfield, California, on July 4, 1873. 
In other words, he’s a firecracker. My dad, 
Henry Rene Lemaire, also was born in North 
Bloomfield, California, on the twenty-fourth 
day of February, 1875. The fourth child was 


Ernest Hubert Lemaire. He was born in Battle 
Mountain, Lander County, Nevada, on the 
twelfth day of October, 1877. The fifth child, 
a girl, was Adele Marie Lemaire, and she was 
born on the fourteenth day of October, 1883, 
in Battle Mountain. Three of the children 
were born in California and two were born 
in Nevada. 

Of these five children there’s only one at 
the moment that’s living and that’s my Aunt 
Adele. And, I believe she’s residing in Reno. 
That’s the actual family register as far as my 
grandparents are concerned, and my uncles 
and one aunt on my fathers s side of the family. 

In getting a sort of a review relative to 
my grandparents, my grandfather Lemaire 
left France when he was just a young fellow, 
at what age I don’t know, but he immigrated 
to Louisiana. Evidently that’s where he met 
and fell in love with my grandmother. Of 
course, he was adventurous; nevertheless, he 
specialized in carpentry work. When he was 
living in Louisiana, he learned the cooperage 
trade. This cooperage trade gave him the 
insight in how to curve boards and fit them 



14 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


tightly together, and so forth. They made 
these barrels for turpentine and molasses 
and the like. 

Of course, as I said before, he was quite 
ambitious, and he saved up enough money in 
Louisiana so that he decided that if he wanted 
to progress that it would be a good idea for 
him to take a chance and go to the California 
gold fields. So after he had saved enough 
money, why, he got on a boat and sailed from 
Louisiana down to Panama. He walked across 
the Isthmus where he took another boat and 
came up to San Francisco. 

When he arrived in San Francisco, he 
went to one of these hiring halls they had in 
those days, and he presumably bought himself 
a job with the only and last gold piece he had 
in his pocket—I believe it was a twenty-dollar 
gold piece—and got this card for employment. 
He had to report to Grass Valley, California. 

It took him over a month to go from San 
Francisco to Grass Valley, California. The 
reason for it was, of course, two actual reasons. 
One was the methods of transportation in 
those days; and number two, evidently he 
spent his last penny to get this job, so he had 
to work his way from San Francisco up to 
Grass Valley. 

So after about a month’s time when he 
finally got to Grass Valley, I believe he went to 
the superintendent of this mine and presented 
his employment card to the superintendent. 
The superintendent looked at it and he said, 
“Well, I’m sorry, but we just don’t do business 
with this hiring hail.” 

My grandfather had gone to all this 
trouble to get to the gold fields around Grass 
Valley, and so he told this superintendent, he 
said, “Well, I’m going to go to work for you 
anyhow.” 

And this superintendent said, “What can 
you do?” 


He said, “Oh, I’ll find something. I’ll be 
worth my pay.” 

So that’s what he did. He went to work, 
and he repaired buildings, and repaired 
windows, and put in new glass panes, and 
he repaired porches, and he painted. He was 
pretty clever at working around places like 
that, keeping buildings and structures in good 
condition. So he evidently got on the payroll. 

In those days it was difficult to find living 
accommodations in Grass Valley, so he finally 
found a vacancy in North Bloomfield. Now I 
don’t know how far that is from Grass Valley, 
but I don’t think it’s too far. That’s where 
he made his home. I don’t know if he was 
married in. New Orleans before he left, or 
whether after he got a job and got situated 
and located that he got married, but anyway, 
they got married. As I have given you a little 
background from the family register, there 
were three children born there. 

As time went on and progressed (it was 
only a matter of time), of course, in the mining 
industry, mining is up and it’s down. Now 
whether this particular company got out of 
the mining business or what, I don’t know. 
But anyway, my grandfather Lemaire had 
quite a few friends, French people, that lived 
in Winnemucca, Nevada. In fact, there used to 
be quite a French colony there. So he decided 
that he would leave North Bloomfield, and he 
evidently moved over to Winnemucca. 

How long he stayed in Winnemucca, I 
actually do not know, but eventually he was 
offered an opportunity to come to Battle 
Mountain. There was quite a large family here 
that were pioneers, known as the Blossom 
family. This particular J. A. Blossom owned 
quite a lot of business properties here in Battle 
Mountain. So Grandfather decided that he 
would take advantage of this opportunity, and 
so he moved to Battle Mountain. 



Pioneers of the Lemaire Family of Lander County, Nevada 


15 


His first business venture here consisted 
of a sort of candy or confection store. In those 
days the smallest piece of money was a twenty- 
five-cent piece. There wasn’t any opportunity 
for the livestock people or the mining people 
to jump in an automobile and travel fifty or 
a hundred miles, and they didn’t have any 
radios or T.V’s or automobiles to spend their 
money on, so they had to make their own 
recreation here in the community. When they 
would get this small change, why, they would 
give it to the children in the community. 
My grandfather was evidently doing quite 
well in this little confectionery store. This 
confectionery store was located on the corner 
of Broad Street and Front Street where at the 
present time there is a beautiful motel called 
the Owl Motel. The building that fronted on 
Front Street, right directly across from the 
railroad, was made out of adobe brick. Now 
these adobe bricks were all kiln dried in a 
brick kiln that was just a short distance north 
of Battle Mountain. Behind this building he 
had a residence there, and that’s where he and 
his family lived for several years. 

Of course, in those days mining was 
quite active in Lewis Canyon. At one time, 
I’ve been told, there was a population of 
around anywhere from 7,000-12,000 people. 
There was Lowertown, Middletown, and 
Uppertown. And at one time, the Nevada 
Central Railroad built a spur line that went all 
the way up to the mouth of Lewis Canyon. So 
that area was quite active and productive, as 
far as mineral wealth was concerned. Also, at 
the same time, there was quite a lot of activity 
in what is now known as Galena Canyon. 
And in fact there’s a town-site, the town of 
Galena. I’ve never been able to find or see a 
map of that town, but nevertheless there is 
a town up there called Galena. Well, these 
mines were quite productive, and actually, 


Battle Mountain became the railhead for the 
southern part of Lander County. Austin was 
also quite productive at that time. 

There were freight lines that were used to 
bring in supplies and take out supplies and 
bring in mineral wealth, and so forth, not only 
in these two large mines, but also from the 
county seat end of the county. So Grandfather 
did real well. He was a very thrifty Frenchman 
and he saved his money. 

Directly across the street from 
Grandfather’s store was a fellow by the name 
of E. B. Williamson, who built quite a large 
two-story structure. It also was built out of 
adobe brick, kiln-dried adobe brick. I don’t 
know whether he became ill or whether 
he wanted to retire or what happened, but 
anyway, he sold that property to Grandfather 
Lemaire. Grandfather Lemaire developed 
quite a large mercantile business on the 
ground floor and he had some living quarters 
up above the store. Right adjoining (I think he 
built that later on), to the north and west of 
the main structure there, he built additions. 
That’s where they had their living quarters, 
as their dining area was concerned. But they 
all slept upstairs in this big two-story adobe 
brick building. 

To the rear of this ground floor store 
section he had a vault, and in this vault, he 
kept money for a lot of the ranchers and 
miners. And that became sort of a depository 
or a place of safe-keeping for their valuables. 
As I said before, he built up quite a mercantile 
business. In fact, you could buy anything from 
horseshoes and harness to powder and caps 
and fuse for mining purposes; from railroad 
spikes to all sorts of women’s clothing, hats, 
and things like that. So you could see, his 
business was quite diversified. And he used to 
have a lumberyard that was directly adjoining 
the main line of the Southern Pacific Railroad; 



16 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


it was on the western end of the present depot. 
He used to sell quite a lot of lumber, too, in 
this area. 

So it was at this particular point that 
he built up quite an estate. At one time, it 
was estimated that his net worth, as far as 
the mercantile business was concerned, 
was around about between $150,900 and 
$250,000. Of course, living here as long as 
he did for so many years, he acquired quite a 
lot of property; that is, lots and buildings. He 
built homes for people to Reno, and he owned 
that whole half-block there where the store 
is now and quite a few other valuable pieces 
of property in the town of Battle Mountain. 

Naturally, these children of his were 
given the opportunity of the public school 
system that existed here at that time. The two 
elderly uncles, Louis and Augusta, were sent 
to San Francisco where they attended Heald’s 
Business College and got a background 
as far as business education, in the way of 
accounting and stuff like that. And after they 
returned, my dad and his brother Ernest, 
they went to San Francisco and took the same 
course. 

It’s interesting to know about my uncles. 
The old one, Louis Lemaire, he, after he 
came back from San Francisco, was given the 
opportunity to go into the sheep business. The 
eldest person of the W. T. Jenkins family—I 
don’t know whether it was w. ’2. himself—he 
started Fouis out in the sheep business by 
giving him 1,500 or 2,000 head of sheep. 
Sheep in those days weren’t worth very much, 
and he used to run these sheep clear up in 
and around Jarbidge. Of course, that’s a very 
wonderful summer range for sheep and cattle. 
He did quite well in that. In fact, he made quite 
a lot of money. He married a lady by the name 
of Kate Heflin Lemaire, who is still alive, and 
she’s up in her nineties. He met her when she 
was teaching school at Lowertown in Lewis 


Canyon. She’s from Napa, California, and her 
folks all live down there. Due to the successes 
he had in the sheep business, he bought quite 
a bit of orchard areas down in around Napa, 
California. 

By that marriage between Uncle Louis 
and Aunt Kate, they had two children. One’s 
name is Louis Everett, who is now running 
the Lemaire Store. His sister Alice, who passed 
away here several years ago, had married 
James Bailey. Of course, he’s now remarried. 
James Bailey was quite an athlete. He was 
involved in teaching. He was elected to the 
senate in the legislature and has now been 
given an appointment in the Motor Vehicle 
Department. So that’s a quick rundown on 
Uncle Louis and his family. 

Uncle Auguste Charles, he married a 
woman by the name of Rose Norris here in 
Battle Mountain. They had two children. 
One was named after his father, Auguste, 
who lived in Reno for quite some time and 
he had a little grocery store. He worked for 
Ring-Lee and had a little store down there, 
and so forth. Then he had a sister named 
Laverna. Laverna married a gentleman by 
the name of William Blackwell who used 
to be the—I don’t know whether he was 
some sort of a dean, but anyway, he had full 
charge of Lincoln Hall at the University of 
Nevada. They seemed to be not compatible, 
so they dissolved their partnership and she 
got married again, I believe. But they didn’t 
have any children. 

Ernest, he had two children, and he 
married a lady who used to be a teacher here, 
too. Her name was Caroline Palmer, and 
she was from Kansas. By that marriage they 
had two children; one was named Merle and 
the other is Ernest Charles. Ernest Charles 
has been the justice of the peace in this 
community now for pretty close to thirty-five 
years. When his dad passed away, he was given 



Pioneers of the Lemaire Family of Lander County, Nevada 


17 


the appointment when he was quite a young 
man, to become the judge of this community 
I guess he must have done a pretty good job 
because he’s still judge after about thirty-five 
years in office. 

An interesting little reminiscence here 
is the very fact that Uncle Louis named his 
boy Louis, and Uncle Auguste named his 
boy Auguste, and Uncle Ernest named his 
boy Ernest. So whenever anybody wanted to 
describe either Louis, Sr. or Louis, Jr., they 
never said Louis, Sr. or Louis, Jr.; they said Big 
Louis and Little Louis. The same thing was 
true of Auguste, Sr. and Auguste, Jr. It was Big 
Auguste and Little Auguste. But an oddity of 
the fact was that both of their children were 
larger than they were. But as far as saying 
the size, it meant the Jr. and the Sr. part. And 
due to the confusion that existed as far as 
the two uncles, Louis and Auguste, and their 
two children, Charles adopted the name of E. 
Charles Lemaire, so he’s always been known 
by the name of E. Charles. 

Now my Aunt Adele, she had two children, 
both girls, and she married a local man here. 
His name was James Blossom. By that marriage 
they had two children; one was Louise and the 
other was Grace. Louise is now passed on, but 
Grace still alive. She married Fred Altenburg, 
Jr., and he was killed in an airplane accident 
just south of Battle Mountain about seven or 
eight miles. Several years went by and then 
she married Dale Rose, who was a retired 
district engineer in connection with the State 
Highway Department. They are both now 
living in Winnemucca. So I think that gives a 
pretty good rundown of all the uncles and my 
aunt on my father’s side of the family. 

I would say at the time of the hard winter 
of ’89 and ’90, Louis was around about 
seventeen or eighteen years old. So he could 
really remember it. He used to tell stories 
about when that winter finally broke, in the 


spring, there had been so much moisture 
fallen during that winter, all these valleys 
in this area were practically inundated, Of 
course, Battle Mountain is located on rather 
high piece of ground, but you could get in a 
boat right here on the north edge of town and 
go clear across the valley to what is known as 
North Battle Mountain. 

When this water was going down the 
Humboldt and coming down Reese River, 
these youngsters used to go down on the 
big bridge that crossed the Humboldt. These 
cattle carcasses that died during the winter 
were floating down, and they were all bloated 
from exposure to the sun, and so forth. And 
they used to stand on the bridge, and they 
would shoot these carcasses as they were 
floating down with a .22 rifle, just to hear the 
gases whistle out through the openings in 
their stomachs. 

He told us one time that just north of 
Battle Mountain, down the river, there was a 
big barn. In this barn, the cattle endeavoring 
to get out of the severe cold, when the 
springtime finally came, these cattle had piled 
one on top of the other, and they were clear 
up to the rafters in this great big immense 
barn. The cattle, they chewed the willows 
clear down just as far as they could for lack 
of feed because they didn’t have much feed. 
In this whole Humboldt Valley area, the cattle 
were very much dependent upon the natural 
grasses and natural vegetation for feed. When 
this extreme amount of moisture fell in the 
way of snow and covered up their food, why, 
they would just eat any darn thing. They 
would practically eat some of the fence posts 
to try to keep from starving. 

The horses weren’t so bad. They were able 
to survive a lot better for the simple reason 
that they would paw down to the ground and 
find something to forage and all. But that was 
the severity of that winter. 



18 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


I have previously mentionedmy Grandfather 
Watt was in livestock—sheep and cattle. All of 
these ranches along this whole Humboldt 
Valley system, Elko County, northern Eureka 
County, Lander County, Humboldt County, all 
of those counties were very severely stricken 
by this terrible winter. And these livestock 
producers that were practically very wealthy 
men, when spring finally came, why, they were 
just wiped out, as far as their livestock holdings 
were concerned. Of course, they still had their 
land holdings, but it was really a rough go for 
them until they could finally get back on their 
feet and start producing cattle again. But that’s 
the story of this area, as far as my Uncle Louis 
used to tell us. He was a young fellow and saw 
this actually happen. 

It’s unfortunate that an interview couldn’t 
have been had with my Uncle Louis, who 
was in his early nineties or late eighties when 
he passed away, because he had a wonderful 
memory relative to all these people, and being 
of an age where he had met most of them, he 
would have been able to give a pretty close 
rundown as to their background, and where 
they came from, and what they did, and how 
they got started in this area, and so forth. 

Here is an interesting story that my uncle 
used to tell us about. During the early days 
when the railroad was in its infancy (of course, 
this was called the Central Pacific), there was 
two women here who raised large families. 
One—her name was Lizzie Altenburg, who 
later married and her name was changed 
to Morgan—ran the Nevada Hotel. Right 
adjoining the railroad and close to the depot 
was this Mrs. Nancy Huntsman, who ran the 
Capital Hotel. Of course, there wasn’t any 
dining cars in those days and they stopped 
every so often, just like these buses do now, 
the Greyhold and continental, and so forth, in 
order that their passengers could have a food 
break, coffee break, and so forth. These two 


women would go over and meet these trains 
and they would have different kinds of foods 
to sell. They specialized in one type of pie, and 
it was an apple pie. Of course, they had these 
pieces of pie all cut; the pies were all cut and 
wrapped in bags, and so forth. It didn’t make 
any difference what these passengers wanted, 
whether it was peach or apricot, why they had 
it; but when they opened it up, it was all apple. 
So they were good sales men. They sold their 
products by subterfuge. So that was a story 
that he told years ago. 

here’s another cute little story that he told, 
and I always enjoyed hearing it. There was a 
mine up here, way up at the head of Lewis 
Canyon. There was a Portuguese who used 
to run this mine, or owned it, and he had a 
brother. Of course, the store there at that time 
was quite active, and they had a large supply 
of mining supplies and all kinds of groceries, 
and so forth. This fellow that owned this mine, 
his name was Tony Angelo. 

So one day this brother of his came in the 
store and he walked up to Uncle Louis and he 
said, “Mr. Lemaire, I want a big bill of grub for 
Tony Ang’.” (He spoke rather broken.) 

And so Uncle Louis went and got three or 
four sales books and sharpened half a dozen 
pencils and got ready to write up this order 
and he says, “All right, what is it you’d like to 
have?” 

This fellow says, “I want one big long pair 
of rubber gum boots.” 

So Uncle Louis wrote that down. He says, 
“Okay, what else?” 

“That’s all.” 

But Tony Angelo did buy a tremendous 
amount of mining supplies, and groceries, 
and so forth, and that’s why Uncle Louis got 
all ready with the big order, and it turned out 
to be just one big pair of rubber gum boots. 

The religious activities here in our 
community—we had the Catholic religion, 



Pioneers of the Lemaire Family of Lander County, Nevada 


19 


the Episcopal religion, and the Methodist. I 
think those were the three. My Uncle Louis 
and his wife were Methodists and the rest of 
the family were also almost all Protestants. 
However, my Aunt Adele, she was Catholic. 

The Lemaire family played quite an 
important part and activity in fraternal 
orders. The upper story of this A. D. Lemaire 
and Sons building, as it was later called, had 
a large hall. It was the only accommodation 
that the town or community had to take care 
of civic activities of any consequence. So my 
grandfather Lemaire, a big Lrench Huguenot, 
he was quite interested in fraternal orders. 
He was a charter member of the Masonic 
order in this community. The Masons held 
their meetings in this upstairs hall. The Odd 
Lellows were also active at that particular time 
and they held their meetings there, and the 
Knights of Pythias. Of course, the womens 
organizations, they came along later—Eastern 
Star and Rebeccas, and so forth. But that hall 
was a wonderful asset to the community. 
There’s still the bell that was used to notify 
lodge members that there was a meeting that 
night; that’s still there. That bell was also used 
as a fire warning for the community. You can 
see it from the Owl Motel. If you look up the 
stairs, you’ll see this bell up there. So that’s 
part of the story of the civic activities. 

Of course, there wasn’t any parents and 
teachers organizations in those days, but it 
gives you an idea of the fraternal and religious 
organizations that were in existence at that 
particular time in a community. 

In this same hall, they had masquerades 
every year, and some of the makeups were 
really quite outstanding. I don’t think they 
imported any music. I think all their music 
they worked out themselves with their own 
talents. 

I know I was just a small child, I think 
about five or six, and my mother was a very 


accomplished musician as far as being able to 
play the piano. She trained me to sing a vocal 
number, either Lourth of July or Labor Day or 
some graduation exercise. When it came my 
turn to go up on the little stage that they had in 
this hall, I, of course, was sitting up in one of 
the front row seats as one of the entertainers. 
Mother gave me the nod, So I walked up and 
got up on the stage and I started to sing before 
she even got to the piano, So she finally asked 
me, “Well, wait a minute, wait for me, dear, 
and I’ll accompany you.” So I got through 
that all right. I think the piece that I sang was 
“I’ve Got the Mumps.” I think that was the 
first number that I ever Rendered as a vocal 
number before any audience of any size. 

The Chinese at one time were quite a 
prominent factor here in the community. 
They had a little settlement of their own. It was 
located just south and a little bit east of our 
present post office and in back of what is now 
the Commercial Hotel. The way they lived in 
those days was pretty much in—well, more 
like a root cellar, underground areas, houses. 
Then they would celebrate their Chinese 
New Year, why, the young fellows here would 
get ahold of as many firecrackers as they 
possibly could. Of course, ft was no effort at 
all to walk up on top of these underground 
adobe huts or adobe cellars. They’d light these 
giant firecrackers and throw them down the 
chimneys. And golly! These Chinamen would 
come a-booming out from underground 
just like people coming out of some of those 
places in New York, those underground 
railroads. But quite an interesting part of our 
community was these Chinese people that 
lived here. 

I don’t know how they came to be in this 
area unless at one time they worked over 
around Cortez, the mine of Cortez. Either 
that, or they were men that had worked to 
build the railroad through this area. I knew the 



20 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


youngsters here in the community. According 
to what my dad used to tell me, they used to 
go down here at Humboldt River and catch 
these carp and theyd sell these carp to these 
Chinese, who evidently liked fish very much; 
sell these carp to these Chinese for about fifty 
cents apiece. A lot of these young fellows, they 
made pretty good spending money by going 
down to the Humboldt River catching these 
carp and selling them to the Chinamen. 

Here’s an interesting historical note that 
might be of interest to somebody sometime. 
I don’t know what the fellow’s name was that 
owned the Cortez mine, whether it was a 
company, a corporation, or whether he was 
just the manager, or whether he personally 
owned it. But this Cortez property was very 
high grade silver ore. This fellow that was 
operating this mine was evidently operating 
on a shoestring. The miners would work for 
him, but due to the fact that he couldn’t pay 
when paydays came due, they all quit. In 
those days, also, the railroad was being built, 
and these Chinese, they loved to gamble and 
speculate, so he didn’t have any trouble. He got 
all these Chinese to work for him to do this 
mining for him. It was only a few months that 
he hit a very, very rich deposit of this silver 
ore and he was able to pay all these Chinese. 
And due to the fact that they was willing to 
gamble with him, he always had a soft spot in 
his heart for these Chinese. 

There’s a little camp called Lander. Now, 
that’s across the valley on the west side of 
Crescent Valley. There was quite a lot of 
activity in that community there. That was a 
mining area. I was over there one time and 
I went into one of these dugout cellars and I 
found all kinds of these earthen bottles of—I 
think the Chinese used it for this soy sauce. Of 
course, they probably had a lot of other stuff 
in those bottles, too, but it was an interesting 
experience for me to run across these old 


things. And that was way back in the ’70s and 
’80s, a long time ago. 

The attitude of the people of our 
community to these various races, colors, and 
creeds was they didn’t pay too much attention 
to them. They felt as long as these people that 
were here were peace-loving people, when 
they minded their own business, and so forth, 
why, they were accepted in the community. 
There was no one that was judged by his 
outward appearance as to whether he was a 
good person or a bad person, or anything like 
that. But once they proved themselves to be 
either bad or good, if they were good, why, 
they became part of the community, but if 
they proved themselves bad, why, the people 
of the community would not have anything 
to do with them at all. 

I’ve noticed that in a lot of mining areas. I 
lived in Tonopah, and spent some time in Ely, 
and so forth, and people of those communities, 
they accept even strangers coming into 
the area. As long as those strangers prove 
themselves to be good citizens, why, they’re 
accepted and become part of the community. 
But if they’re not good citizens, why, then, 
boy, they just will not have anything to do 
with them. That’s the truth as far as any of 
these communities up and down the main 
line of the Southern Pacific. In the later years 
now, we’ve had such an influx of people from 
other states, and drifters, nearly all the people 
here as a good citizen. He owned property, 
paid taxes, sent his kids to our public schools. 
There wasn’t any arguments or disturbances 
whatsoever, like there is in some of our large 
metropolitan areas today. 

When I was a young fellow, a young 
kid going to school, my pal and playmate 
was a full-blooded Shoshone Indian. His 
name was Willie Joaquin. But in those days 
there wasn’t any Indian village like we have 
today. The government didn’t take care of 



Pioneers of the Lemaire Family of Lander County, Nevada 


21 


the Indians in those days like they are doing 
at the moment. So there’s quite a few of the 
Indians that had bought their own lots, and 
secured their own housing, and were part 
of the community to the extent that they’re 
not living off the government. Of course, 
now, nearly all the Indians that are in this 
community, the womenfolk of those Indians 
usually do housework and a lot of the maid 
service around the motels. They’re very, very 
capable in that category of work. The men, 
they usually work as common laborers and 
work around some of these cattle ranches, 
handling livestock and things like that. But 
they have quite a few children right here. 
Now you take this Indian woman that comes 
in about once a week and helps my wife 
here. Her name is Mary Knight. She has six 
children, and she’s meticulous when it comes 
to housework. 

By the way, years ago when we were taking 
care of my oldest daughter’s children, when 
she passed away, we had this little Indian girl 
Mary. She stayed right here in our home, 
and we helped send her through school. She 
graduated from the local high school and she’s 
a very fine, capable person. She doesn’t talk 
much, but she sure works a lot. And having 
lived here before, naturally she knows every 
inch and crook and cranny of this big house. 
She can really go at it and get the job done. 
She does very fine work. 

My father and his brother, Ernest, they 
detested indoor work. They liked to work on 
buildings and paint and build, and so forth, 
and consequently, they were quite an asset to 
my grandfather A. D. Lemaire in maintaining, 
keeping in livable condition, all of these 
homes or houses that he had for Reno in the 
community. So there is always some asset that 
a person has if he can just find the answer to it. 

My dad loved politics. He became a 
Lander County commissioner; I’ve forgotten 


which year. I don’t know whether he served 
one four-year term or two two-year terms, but 
it was during his term in office they built this 
steel bridge that crosses the Humboldt River, 
which is quite a boon to the community and 
also to the people that lived on the other side 
of the river during the high water period. 

He also served as a member of the school 
district here, called the Battle Mountain 
School District, and that comprised an area 
twenty miles square, which would be about 
four hundred square miles. It was during 
his term in office as a member of that board 
that they bonded the school district for 
$30,000 and built this present building that 
is now owned by the county. It’s located on 
Third and Humboldt Street. That was put 
up in 1916. Along with him on that board 
of trustees was a gentleman by the name of 
Henry Starrett and a gentleman by the name 
of A. G. MacAllan. 

The local taxpayers were so disturbed 
about the fact that these trustees were going 
to build this expansive $30,000 building, they 
were going to launch a recall petition and 
have these trustees removed from office. My 
dad was pretty much like a duck; he didn’t 
pay much attention to it and let all this severe 
criticism roll of f his back just like water does 
on a duck’s back. He told me one day, he said, 
“I wouldn’t be surprised if it would be less 
than ten years and they’ll be building another 
building.” It was less than four, and they built 
the high school building. So he was right. 

Of course, he served as the county 
assessor here in Lander County for seventeen 
years. That’s what I said; he was always active 
in politics, and quite active civically, and so 
forth, as well as being interested in mining. I 
evidently come by my politics by my natural 
throw-down. 

He had one very serious controversy. 
In fact, he had two or three of them. One 



22 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


occurred wherein my dad assessed a fellow 
by the name of Pat Welch in the southern 
end of Lander County. They carried that 
problem clear to the tax commission of the 
state. He had another go-around with a fellow 
by the name of George Russell who was a 
cattle baron in this particular area. George 
Russell owned the Russell Land and Livestock 
Company. He owned these large holdings 
north of Battle Mountain which is far from 
the truth; he was just acting as an arbitrator 
to try to get their differences solved and bring 
it somewhere into reasonable perspective. 
Due to the fact that Dad was in this position, 
Governor Dickerson became quite angry 
with him. 

The main meeting place in Carson in 
those days was the old Arlington Hotel. Dad 
walked in there one day—into this bar—and 
the governor was buying the drinks for some 
of his friends, and he intentionally excluded 
my dad. So Dad, he looked at the pictures on 
the wall, and he spent quite a little time until 
he got all through. Finally, when they finished 
that drink, why, my dad walked up to the bar 
and he says, “Now I’m going to buy a drink, 
and I want everyone in this room to have a 
drink except one man,” and he pointed at the 
governor. 

The governor became quite angry, and he 
didn’t say anything, but he walked out of the 
bar. After he had left, my dad bought another 
drink. During the course of the second drink, 
Governor Dickerson walked into the saloon. 
My dad turned around and saw him and he 
says, “Gentlemen, a certain person just walked 
into this barroom and he is packing a gun. 
And regardless of that fact,” he says, “I want 
everyone in this room to have a drink except 
that man.” 

My dad stood right out in the open, and 
if the governor had wanted to shoot him, he 
could have very easily. The truth of the matter 


was he was armed, and why he should have 
done a thing like that, Dad couldn’t figure out. 
Nevertheless, Dad called his bluff. So after 
that episode passed, why, my dad had sort of 
forgotten it. But later on in 1910, the governor 
decided that he would take after my dad and 
beat him at an election. So up here in this 
Lemaire’s Hall, Dickerson was campaigning, 
and he had the lieutenant governor candidate 
and all the other state officials with him. He 
got up on this stand, and my dad was standing 
way in the back of the room, and I guess 
Dickerson really verbally just tore my dad all 
to pieces, how he was tied in with the utilities, 
and so forth. 

When he finally sat down, my dad walked 
up the aisle, got up on the stand, and he said 
to the audience, “Ladies and gentlemen, I was 
practically born and raised in this community, 
and you have known my past record and my 
complete history, and,” he said, “as far as the 
remarks that have been made by the governor 
here this evening,” he says, “they’re a complete 
falsehood.” He said, “When you go to the polls 
this coming November, all I ask you to do is 
to remember this: Either he’s a liar or I’m a 
liar.” And he walked off the stand. My dad beat 
his opponent— I think it was about twenty to 
one, proving that this type of campaign was 
not very ethical. 

But later on my dad told me, Governor 
Dickerson, after he had found out the type of 
a man my dad was in his sincere efforts and 
endeavors to try to bring this big battle to 
some kind of a conclusion, he realized that he 
had made a mistake and he wrote to my dad 
and apologized. He met my dad on several 
occasions and apologized to him personally, 
publicly, and every other way, but he had built 
up such a resentment in my dad’s mind that he 
never forgave him for it. So that’s the history 
as far as my dad’s problems in connection 
with his political aspirations. Of course, being 



Pioneers of the Lemaire Family of Lander County, Nevada 


23 


in politics like he was, he got to know such 
out standing people as Senator Key Pittman, 
Tasker L. Oddie, all those men that were on 
a national level as far as representatives of 
the state. 

He told me one story that was quite 
interesting about when Senator Key Pittman 
first ran for office. You can tell that politics 
doesn’t change much, because you can see 
your everyday politician, whenever they come 
into a community, they always carry a little 
black book in which they made notes to be 
sure and see this person, be sure and see that 
person, and so forth. Well, way back, many, 
many years ago, that’s when they first started 
to use that little black book to be sure and 
go see certain people. Key Pittman, he was 
not very wealthy, and the fact of the matter 
is he probably borrowed enough money to 
campaign on. He came to Battle Mountain 
and he wondered up and down the streets 
looking for Henry Lemaire, because he had 
been given his name, to be sure and look 
up Henry Lemaire when he came to Battle 
Mountain. He finally found him, and he was 
in this corner saloon. This saloon used to be 
where the Owl Motel is right now. That used 
to be quite a haven for all the politicians. My 
dad was in there visiting with some of his 
friends, and Key Pittman walked in and, “Is 
Henry Lemaire here?” he asked the bartender. 

The bartender said, “Yes, he’s down there 
visiting with those three or four men there 
at the end of the bar.” So he went down and 
introduced himself. 

And evidently my dad had been told 
about Key Pittman, and he was very happy to 
see him. So they shook hands, and after Key 
had introduced himself, Key says, “Well, I’d 
like to buy a drink.” 

Dad says, “Well, if you want, you can buy 
a drink, but,” he says, “if you want to win this 
election, you’ve got to get votes. I’m going to 


get some of the local people in here so I can 
introduce you to them.” So my dad walked 
out the front door and he hollered up and 
down the street, he said, “I have Key Pittman, 
candidate for the United States Senate in here, 
and he wants to buy us all a drink.” 

Key Pittman told me this himself. Key 
said, “You know, I went in there with the 
thought in mind that I’d buy three or four 
fellows a drink and that would be it, but 
before your dad got through,” he said, “I had 
to buy about forty drinks. But,” he said, “I 
sure carried Battle Mountain.” He said, “I 
won Battle Mountain hands down, thanks to 
your dad. And,” he said, “he was really quite 
an ardent campaigner.” So I think that gives 
you a pretty good rundown as to my dad’s 
political back ground. 

A funny thing happened. Remember 
those good old swinging doors there at the 
Golden Hotel in Reno? My dad was standing 
out there talking to a group of men one day, 
and these fellows all had known my dad 
practically all his life, and they criticized my 
dad very severely. They said, “Henry, why 
don’t you ever run for some high office on the 
state level?” They said, “You could have won it 
hands down. You are widely known. You have 
that wonderful personality.” And they said, 
“You could have really gone to town if you 
would have gone for some high state official.” 
That they meant, whether it was governor 
or something like that, I don’t know, maybe 
United States Senator. 

But my dad said, “No, I’ve always been 
very happy in my present status as far as 
taking part in politics.” And he said, “I’m 
satisfied.” He said, “I know the responsibilities 
of state offices, and I don’t think I’m qualified 
to take on that responsibility,” which was 
quite open-minded and frank about what he 
thought about his own capabilities. That was 
his thinking. 



24 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


Like I stated before, my dad was always 
very much interested in mining activities. 
He and his two brothers, Louis and Auguste, 
had acquired this Gweenah property, which 
is about seven or eight miles north of Austin 
in some low hills near Ledlie. During the 
depression we were badly in debt to the Battle 
Mountain State Bank, and when the banks 
closed, naturally the banks all called their 
loans and we had to get some money fast. 
We didn’t know where to get it. We tried to 
put up a piece of property valued at $20,- or 
$90,000 and borrow $5,000, and couldn’t even 
borrow that much. So when visiting at home 
one evening, my dad and I were talking about 
selling these mining holdings that he still had, 
and he mentioned this Gweenah. He said, “I 
think there’s a good chance that you might be 
able to find some pretty good ore out there, 
so why don’t you and I go out there and take 
a look.” 

So we drove out there, and we did take a 
look, and there was ore showing that looked 
promising. Of course, in our business at 
that particular time, we always had a very 
good business in the summertime when the 
tourism was on, but in the wintertime, we’d 
always go behind. In other words, we’d make 
good money in the summer, and then it 
would ease it up in the winter. We thought if 
there was a possibility that we could find, by 
a gamble, some ore in this property, it’d pay 
us to go out there and take a chance. 

So Don Sumin, one of the young fellows 
that worked for us, and I moved out to 
Gweenah. I had never had any mining 
experience, and Don had worked some in 
mines in Utah and around Ely. So we had a 
small knowledge of doing some timbering 
and how a mine should be run, So between 
the two of us, we put some skids down the 
shaft, and timbered the shaft, and got it in 
operating order, and we started to work on 


this vein. Thank goodness, this vein turned 
out to be not only promising, but it was very 
good. It was shortly after Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt was elected President, and he gave 
the responsibility of earmarking the price of 
silver to his good friend, Senator Key Pittman. 

Now when we went out to Gweenah to 
start the mine, and this was a silver mine, 
the price of silver was around thirty-eight 
cents. And while we were digging out this 
first shipment—cold, miserable weather, 
goodness, digging this first shipment out; I 
think it was in March—the price of silver was 
raised to about seventy-five or seventy-four 
cents. Senator Key Pittman, if he had wanted 
to, could have raised the price of silver to 
$1.29. 

This statement that I’m going to make 
is not based on fact; it’s just based on my 
thinking. I have always thought (and Senator 
Key Pittman was a good friend of mine), 
honestly and sincerely believe that as far as he’s 
concerned, the silver issue relative to its price 
structure was always a political football, and it 
was that political football that the honorable 
Senator Key Pittman used to continue to be 
reelected by the people of the state of Nevada. 
Now that’s my own thinking, and it might not 
be based on fact, but it’s my thinking. I do 
believe that when the President of the United 
States gave him full authority to establish 
a price of silver, he could have put a much 
higher valuation on it, but even then, having 
jumped the price from thirty-eight cents to 
seventy-four cents, it was a godsend to the 
Lemaires, because we realized a fairly large 
sum of money for that first shipment. And 
the following winter we did the same thing. 
We’d work out at the mine during the winter, 
work at the service station in the summer, go 
back out at the mine in the winter, and in two 
or three winters we realized enough money 
out of shipments from that particular mine 



Pioneers of the Lemaire Family of Lander County, Nevada 


25 


to pay off the mortgage, or pay off the Battle 
Mountain State Bank. And that’s the way we 
kept our Lemaire holdings intact. Otherwise, 
if they had had to sell those properties, the 
Lemaire family would have been long gone 
by this time. That’s an interesting part of that 
Gweenah story. 

Of course, my dad was quite interested 
in the Copper Queen property, which is 
adjoining the now present holdings of the 
Duval Corporation, and that’s under option 
to them. They have been doing quite a bit of 
drilling up there on the Copper Queen to 
determine the extent of the ore bodies on 
the property. That their findings will result 
in, £ don’t know. Time will tell. So outside of 
politics and mining, that’s about the highlights 
of my dad’s activities in Lander County. 

I would like to give a little analysis 
of my dad’s personality. Of course, I get 
quite enthusiastic over trying to describe 
his personality, and I just don’t know the 
adjectives to use. All I can say is that, 
regardless of how black the clouds—it didn’t 
make any difference of how everything looked 
as far as bad—why, he would always look on 
the good side of life. It was his optimism and 
his viewpoints of life that meant so much 
as far as his success was concerned, and his 
friendships that he built up over the years. 
Tie had a wonderful faith in human beings. 
If you proved to him your worthiness as far 
as a friend, why, you were his friend for life. 

During the years that he was a Ford 
dealer—and, by the way, my dad was a Ford 
dealer commencing in 1910, April. Of course, 
the Ford agency has been in our family ever 
since then. It’s the oldest Ford agency now 
in the Salt Lake district, and I believe that 
there are only two other agencies west of 
the Mississippi River that are older than this 
in fifty years. He was a Ford dealer in 1910, 
and it’s still held in the family, and this is 


’67—that’s fifty-seven years. We had been 
connected with the Ford family and the Ford 
organization for that long, which is quite a 
historical fact, too. I remember, just as a young 
fellow, my dad when he was selling the old 
Model T Fords, there would be mining men, 
prospectors, fellows out here working in the 
hills, they’d come in and they would say to my 
dad, “Now, Henry, I have to have a pickup.” 
And, of course, in those days you could buy a 
Ford Model T pickup for around about five or 
six hundred dollars. Now you can’t buy them 
for less than $2,400 or $2,600. 

Then my dad said, “Well, where are you 
mining?” 

“Well, I’m working up here in a property 
out of Copper Canyon.” Or, “I’m working 
up here in a property out of Mill Creek,” or 
someplace in that area. 

My dad would say, “how does it look?” 

Of course, these fellows that were working 
in these underground workings, they would 
be very optimistic, too, and they’d say, “Well, 
all I need is a pickup to help get this show on 
the road as far as this mine, and if you will let 
me have a pickup, I’ll pay you just as soon as 
I make my first shipment.” 

And believe it or not, my dad at one time 
had about fifteen or twenty customers on 
his books which they had never put a penny 
down to buy an automobile or a pickup truck. 
Now, that’s how trusting he was. I don’t believe 
that in all of his history as a businessman in 
connection with selling Ford automobiles 
that he ever lost a penny on any one of those 
people that brought those vehicles from 
him—which is remarkable. That was his faith 
and confidence in people. 

However, anyone, as far as he was 
concerned, that did him wrong, he would 
never trust them again. He said, “Only a fool 
trusts a man a second time after he has given 
him a bad time.” So that was him. 



26 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


A funny thing, too, some of these 
customers that came to my dad would have a 
very ill reputation as far as their willingness 
to pay the bills. But my dad never listened 
to any of this criticism that he would hear 
relative to some of these customers that would 
eventually drift into his place of business. He 
always judged a person by how they treated 
him, not what was told about them by others, 
which was a wonderful tribute to his belief in 
human beings. I admired him for that. When I 
think of this wonderful trait—the just-hearsay 
criticism of a person, he didn’t believe that. 
But believe me, if that person ever did him 
something wrong, then he was off of them just 
like a dirty shirt. He never had anything more 
to do with them. Now, that was it. 

In giving some of the background of my 
father, I overlooked one or two important 
features about him. He was quite an athlete. 
He played a lot of baseball; he was interested 
in all kinds of sports. I don’t know what 
position he played on the Battle Mountain 
baseball team, but he was quite active in 
that area of sports. On top of that, he was a 
very ardent hunter. He loved to hunt and he 
participated in a lot of trap shoots. In fact, I 
have two or three medals that he acquired at 
some of these trap shoots that took place in 
the state of Nevada. 

Another very interesting story—I think I 
mentioned about how he courted my mother 
by getting an attachment and attaching 
it on his bicycle and going from Battle 
Mountain clear to the Silver Creek switch 
[on the railway tracks]. But here is one of his 
accomplishments that I overlooked. I don’t 
know what year it was, but it was long before 
there were any roads of consequence, or any 
highways, or any automobiles. The Hearst 
newspapers in San Francisco promoted a relay 
bicycle race from San Francisco to New York 
City. They broke the entire distance up into 


segments of anywhere from thirty to forty 
miles, and they got expert cyclists to carry this 
message, and they usually went in teams. The 
one that came into this area and sponsored 
securing the necessary cyclists was a fellow 
by the name of William Rishell. This fellow 
Rishell later on became the managing force 
of the Utah State Automobile Association. 
His main headquarters, of course, were in Salt 
Lake City, but he came out to Battle Mountain 
and made arrangements with my dad and 
my Uncle Louis for these two segments. My 
dad— and I don’t know who his companion 
was, but their segment was from Golconda 
to Battle Mountain. My uncle’s segment was 
from Battle Mountain to a little place called 
Beowawe, which is near the railroad. Then 
Mr. Rishell, he was pretty smart, he and his 
companion, they had these attachments on 
their bicycle, and so they rode the rails with 
their bicycle units from Beowawe, I think, to 
Elko. He was pretty clever. As. far as choosing 
the worst part of this segment in this area, he 
gave that to some, just to some friends like 
my dad and my Uncle Louis. 

So my dad, in his trip from Golconda 
to Battle Mountain, believe it or not, he 
came across the Golconda summit where 
the present Interstate 80 highway is today. 
It was so rough going that they had to push 
their bicycles part of the way and ride part of 
the way, and coming up over that Golconda 
summit, why, this fellow that was with him, 
he didn’t have the strength that my dad had, 
and when they finally got down on this side, 
he gave out. My dad couldn’t leave him there 
in the middle of the desert, so he knew that 
there was a section house and some section 
men working on the railroad at a place called 
Iron Point, which was just about a mile or a 
mile and a half from the base of this Golconda 
hill, so my dad loaded this fellow on his 
bicycle and took him all the way up to Iron 



Pioneers of the Lemaire Family of Lander County, Nevada 


27 


Point and arranged that he would have a place 
to stay, get some food, water, and get in the 
shade out of the sun. Then my dad came on 
into Battle Mountain; and that trip was very 
overexerting. My dad in later years told me 
that that particular trip, he said, “I probably 
never should have done it because I paid for 
it in my later years. My legs, every once in 
awhile and even now, give out on me.” And 
that was many, many years ago. 

That was an experience that he had, and 
for that, his record, as far as what he had to 
go through to carry that relay message from 
Golconda to Battle Mountain, the Hearst 
newspapers had a front page article with a 
picture (drawing) of him, and they also gave 
him a bronze medal showing a picture of 
a cyclist on it. We still have the medal, but 
the article that was in this San Francisco 
Examiner, we lost that during the flood that 
occurred about two or three years ago. It 
was in storage in our basement. So that was 
another feat—what I always considered an 
important feat—that he performed as a young 
man and proved besides the fact that even 
though he was an active and a very ardent 
politician, he had other attributes, too. 





My Story—Early Life and Career; 

Business and Civic Life in 
Battle Mountain 


It’s a strange thing about my own 
personality and makeup— I like to talk 
about other people, but it’s difficult for me 
to talk about myself. But inasmuch as it’s the 
desire of this research interview to learn as 
much as they possibly can about my past life 
from infancy on up, I will try to give as much 
of it as I possibly can, and as truthfully as I 
possibly can. 

I was born in 1903, on October fifteenth. 
I was born here in Battle Mountain. Believe 
it or not, right where this nice large home 
is at the moment, there used to be a one- 
story structure. That structure is just directly 
across the street. That used to be where this 
home is now. I was born in that one-story 
structure. The doctor that was in attendance 
at my birth, according to my birth certificate, 
was Dr. George A. Pope. He was the resident 
physician here in Battle Mountain. The nurse 
for the occasion was Elizabeth Morgan. If it 
hadn’t been for the fact that those two people 
were the ones at my birth, I would have had 
a difficult time of getting a birth certificate. 
In those days, they didn’t keep a record, and 


there wasn’t a localized place, as far as the state 
was concerned, to keep records of births and 
marriages and all the statistics. Consequently, 
when World War II came along and I had to 
prove that I was born, Dr. Pope was still alive 
and we was able to get an affidavit from him, 
as well as from this nurse, that I had been born 
on a certain date. He did have, evidently, some 
office records of his own, so that was finally 
recorded and became a public fact. So I was 
finally brought into the United States legally! 

As I stated before, I went to school 
in elementary education and high school 
education in the local public schools, have a 
picture someplace showing me when I was in 
the first grade. Mother always dressed me up 
ridiculously (as I thought) and in this group 
picture of the whole school—I think there 
was not over thirty or forty students, and that 
consisted of the entire enrollment—she had 
me dressed with one of these sailor hats and 
a sort of little sailor suit with knee breeches, 
and I really looked ridiculous compared 
with a lot of the other kids that were in those 
similar grades at that particular time, because 




30 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


they were all dressed in levis. They were more 
typically dressed to the way of life of the 
community than I was. It looked like I was a 
city dude, and I always detested that picture. 
I have it someplace. 

But anyway, when I graduated from the 
elementary grades into high school, I was 
amused; when I received my diploma, it stated 
on the diploma, “Miss Rene Lemaire, she is 
entitled to enter into any high school in the 
state of Nevada.” So the superintendent of 
schools, evidently he was confused about my 
name, too. 

My first teacher was Eliza Pierce. We now 
have in Battle Mountain at the present time 
an elementary school that has been dedicated 
to her memory. She served as a teacher in 
this area for many, many years. The fact of 
the matter is, when my dad was either in the 
eighth or ninth grade here in the local school 
was when she first started to teach school. 

Another incident that I overlooked 
was the fact that Dr. Peter Frandsen (at the 
University of Nevada), the first school that he 
ever taught was this little red schoolhouse out 
of Silver Creek, and he stayed at Silver Creek 
[ranch]. That was where he lived during the 
time that he was teaching. 

I remember a hygiene class under him 
when I went to the University of Nevada, 
and I figured, oh, goodness, I’ll be able to get 
high marks here because he was a friend of 
the family’s, and taught my mother, and so 
forth. Of all the classes that I attended at the 
University, I think the lowest grades I ever 
got was in Peter Frandsen’s class. I just had 
to work like the dickens in order to survive. 
So I didn’t get any special favors from him at 
all. (That’s just a little incident.) 

I graduated from high school here in 1922, 
I believe it was; I graduated from grammar 
school in ’17, graduated from high school in 
’21, and went to the University of Nevada. 


I went one semester, and when I was at the 
University, there was a feud on between the 
north and south even then as there is today, 
and due to politics, it ended up I was elected 
president of the freshman class. My secretary 
was a young fellow whose father was the 
superintendent of the Salt Fake division of the 
Southern Pacific railroad, and his name was 
John Martin Futher Stubbs Fulton, Jr. He was 
my secretary-treasurer of the freshman class. 

Of course, in those days there was quite 
an activity of hazing and the old things that 
had to be done. There was the freshman hay 
ride and then they had a problem of putting 
posters up on the campus. The sophomores 
were all with the seniors, and the freshmen 
were with the juniors. On one particular hay 
ride, out to Moana Springs (and the Berrums 
were the ones that owned the place), of course, 
being the freshman president, I was supposed 
to be one of the outstanding leaders. We 
went out there; we really had a battle royal 
with the sophomore class. There was a lot 
of egg throwing and apple throwing, a lot of 
windows broken, and I think about two or 
three hundred dollars worth of damage done. 

And a funny thing happened; the president 
of the sophomore class was the gentleman 
from Yerington that runs a newspaper, Walter 
Cox, but anyway, it ended up that I had him 
tied up in a root cellar under full control. We 
finally called off this big battle that took place. 
This John Martin Futher Stubbs Fulton, Jr. 
was rather a sissified boy, young man, and 
these sophomores got him and broke a whole 
case of eggs over him one at a time. And if 
you didn’t think he was a mess! Anyway, the 
freshmen then raised the money to pay off 
all the damages that were done at the Moana 
Hot Springs. 

So I went one semester and darn near 
flunked out, due to my activities in connection 
with being president of the class and being 



My Story — Early Life and Career; Business and Civic Life in Battle Mountain 


31 


initiated into a local fraternity called the 
Links and Shield, which later on became the 
Sigma Phi Sigma. So I stayed out of college for 
about a year, and I went back for a year and a 
half. My ambition was to become a chemist. 
I loved that. I was working for a Bachelor of 
Science degree in chemistry, but my folks 
here at home were going in debt to put me 
through school, and the last semester I was 
down there, I don’t believe I hardly opened 
up a book, and yet I got better grades than I 
had in any of the other previous semesters. I 
felt rather guilty about it, so I decided that I 
would quit school for awhile and maybe get 
my feet on the ground. 

During my [1924] semester at school I 
came home one weekend. I had always been 
quite active in playing basketball, so they had 
me referee a basketball game between Elko 
and Battle Mountain. In this particular game 
the Battle Mountain High School team, it 
just seemed like there wasn’t anything they 
could do that was wrong. Everything they 
did was perfect. They were playing wonderful 
teamwork. Even the guards, they could shoot 
from practically any position on the floor and 
never miss the basket. Elko got very disturbed 
about it, and so they began razzing me, as the 
referee, that I wasn’t calling the fouls properly 
on the Battle Mountain team, which wasn’t 
true. But anyway, Battle Mountain really beat 
the socks off of Elko. On that tour that the 
Elko team made, they played, I think, three 
games, and they never won a game, but the 
worst trouncing they got was here in Battle 
Mountain. 

A fellow by the name of A1 Cahlan was 
the editor for the Elko Free Press, which was 
owned and controlled by a gentleman by the 
name of E. M. Steninger in Elko. He was quite 
an ardent basketball fan, and to protect the 
glory of the Elko team, he wrote a very vicious 
article in the El/co Free Press paper. 


It was quite upsetting to the people here in 
Battle Mountain. They thought that he should 
be criticized for it, so they passed the hat and 
raised seven or eight hundred dollars, and 
with my sanction, they hired a fellow by the 
name of Cliff Robbins who was an attorney 
in Winnemucca- And we filed suit against 
the Elko paper for $5,000, which seemed to 
me to be a ridiculous thing, because it didn’t 
bother me very much, but, nevertheless, the 
suit was filed. The attorney for the defendant 
was Mr. Douglas A. Castle. After about a year 
and a half or two years, the action finally came 
before the court. There was a jury trial and 
the presiding judge was Judge Orr (I think 
he was from Pioche). It was very interesting 
and amusing to me. 

The coach for the Battle Mountain team 
was a fellow by the name of W. V. Hollan. He 
was the coach, and I think he was also the 
principal of the schools here at that time. 
When we were in the witness stand, we just 
went ahead and told them the story as we saw 
it, but every one of the players on the Elko 
team got up and they gave a repeat testimonial 
that sounded like a bunch of parrots because 
every one said exactly the same thing and used 
the same expressions in their whole testimony, 
and when it finally went to the jury, they were 
not out very long. They came back and their 
decision was that the article was libelous 
and that the paper was guilty of publishing a 
libelous article. 

Then, of course, it came to the problem of 
damages. Due to the family name of Lemaire, 
or whatever the case might have been, they 
stipulated that the damages were practically 
nil, and that I was only entitled to nominal 
damages of just one dollar. Somewhere in my 
collection I’ve got this dollar that was given 
to me as damages for this lawsuit. 

But a strange thing happened. Mr. 
Steninger was really upset that the people of 



32 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


Elko County felt that way, and the decision 
was made not against the paper so much as 
it was a decision made against Mr. Cahlan. 
Evidently during the years that he had worked 
for Mr. Steninger, he had penned some very 
vicious articles about different ones in the 
county and the community. Mr. Steninger felt 
that it was only appropriate, inasmuch as the 
decision that was made was not only a slam at 
the paper, but it was also a slam at this fellow 
Cahlan, so I think he let Cahlan go. It was a 
lucky thing for Mr. Cahlan, because he moved 
to Las Vegas, and he got there at an early hour 
in the phenomenal growth of that area, and 
he became a very wealthy person. I think 
he became interested in the Review-Journal 
newspaper, and he was interested in a lot of 
real estate transactions. I think he was also 
interested in some kind of a gravel-producing 
project in which he made quite a lot of money 
using this gravel for building construction 
and things like that. But anyway, it was to his 
advantage that he actually moved out of Elko. 
It was not known, of course, that things would 
happen like that, but it was vary beneficial for 
him. That’s the story of the basketball lawsuit. 

One thing happened in my lifetime that 
I’ve never forgotten. I almost lost my life on 
the occasion—it was years ago. We used to 
have a very fast horse racetrack here in the 
southwest part of the community, and that 
particular area now is being occupied by the 
Bureau of Land Management in their housing 
development, and this oval racetrack was 
about one mile long. And one year they—the 
community here—decided to put on this 
Labor Day celebration and they decided they’d 
have this automobile race. They invited the 
different ones who thought that they were 
speed demons and who thought that they 
could provide some sort of amusement to the 
people of the community by entering some 
kind of hot rods, and they would have this 


five-mile race. So, we had a mechanic working 
for us in our garage. His name was Jurey. Joe 
Jurey. He and his brother entered this Ford 
that they had stripped down and they had put 
special timing gears in it and tried to increase 
the speed. He began bragging around that he 
was going to win this race, happened to have 
an old Ford that was quite ancient and my 
dad says, “Son, why don’t you fix up this old 
Ford and enter it against this fellow, Jurey?” 

And I says, “Well, what do you think I 
ought to do?” 

He says, “I think you ought to grind the 
valves, and maybe put on a couple of new 
tires in the rear and put on new bucket seats. 
When we get ready to run it, you can put 
some castor oil in the engine.” This castor oil 
is a lubricant that was used quite often in the 
lubrication of aircraft engines to give them 
additional compression. It’s a vegetable oil 
and it does have a tendency to give you a lot 
more compression. 

On the day of the Labor Day celebration, 
everybody went out to watch these contestants 
in this race, and there were four of them. My 
cousin, Louis Lemaire, had a stripped-down 
Ford but it was a rather heavy body, so it 
wasn’t as fast as these two vehicles, one driven 
by Jurey and one driven by myself. There was a 
fellow by the name of Frank Silvera. He had a 
Maxwell and he had taken the top off of it. He 
thought that would give it additional speed. 
He took the windshield off, too. These curves 
around the track, with the wind blowing sixty 
miles an hour, naturally, you might have a 
tendency to skid. And in order to get better 
traction, why, this fellow Silvera put some 
cement inside on the left-hand side of his 
car because it was a left-hand operated race. 
We went around counter-clockwise. The first 
turn he made with this Maxwell, all the sacks 
of cement slid over to the opposite side. The 
back end of his car really looked ridiculous. 



My Story — Early Life and Career; Business and Civic Life in Battle Mountain 


33 


It was a five-mile race and they didn’t 
have any checkered flags or any signal system 
to let you know what lap it was. I thought it 
was quite exciting. I was only about fifteen or 
sixteen years old. The gentleman who rode 
with me was named Alfred Uren, of the Uren 
family here in Battle Mountain, which is an 
old Cornish family. He worked at the express 
company, Railroad Express. And when I 
wanted to get someone to ride with me he 
volunteered. 

Each of these four contestants started 
out fifteen seconds apart. I was last. First was 
this Maxwell, and then my cousin, and then 
Jurey, and then myself. Well, they timed us 
around each lap, and it was supposed to be 
on a time basis rather than on one fellow 
trying to get ahead of the other. This fellow, 
Silvera, he eventually had to drop out because 
his vehicle was absolutely too slow and he 
wasn’t making any time at all. I think that on 
the third lap, this Ford that my cousin Louis 
was driving developed some kind of engine 
trouble. So the fourth and fifth laps was a 
real showdown contest between Joe Jury and 
me. This Ford that I drove was really quite 
alive. Any time you gave it the throttle on the 
steering gear quadrant, it just seemed to jump 
right out from under you. I think at the end 
of the fourth lap I was about fourteen seconds 
behind Jurey, and at the end of the fifth lap I 
was only three or four seconds behind him, 
eating this terrific dust that this track was 
throwing up with these speeding automobiles. 
I would have won the race right then if they 
had stopped it; why, everything would have 
been secure. But Jurey turned around and saw 
that I kept coming, and I saw that he was still 
going so I figured that there must be another 
lap to go, so I started around this track again, 
and on the last curve, I took the outside of the 
track and this fellow that was with me, Alfred, 
says, “Go ahead. Pass him. Pass him.” 


About halfway around the curve, my rear 
wheels was right up practically even with 
his—that is, parallel, and my front wheels 
was parallel to his rear wheels. And when we 
got out into the straightaway, we were even, 
wheel for wheel. And Joe’s brother, who was 
riding with him, Lester Jurey, was watching 
us and kept telling Joe, “They’re going to pass 
us. They’re going to pass us.” And Joe didn’t 
know whether I was going to pass him on 
the inside of the track or the outside of the 
track, and he naturally presumed that I was 
going to pass on the inside of the track, so he 
began crowding over to the right side of the 
track and our wheels rubbed. So rather than 
have the two racing cars tangle and go end 
over end, I took to the sagebrush. Well, out in 
that area, there is these large, high sagebrush 
hummocks, and as I went out through these 
hummocks, why, one place there, this Ford 
that I was driving, it took off into the air and 
when it came down, it landed on its two front 
wheels and it threw me out about forty feet 
ahead of the vehicle. The impact pulled the 
seat clear off the car, and it bent this Model 
“T” wishbone—it practically bent it double. It 
bent the axle and it tore a wheel and the rim 
clear off of the wooden rim on one side, and 
this other side, it tore the tire and the tube 
off of it, and it came down and this fellow, 
Alfred Uren who was on his back, and it just 
practically ripped all of the flesh off of the calf 
of his leg. And naturally the water was boiling, 
and he thought it was on fire, and it was dusty 
and everything. So fortunately, he did have 
the presence of mind to crawl away from the 
car. But the last thing I remember, I thought 
to myself, “If horses bucked like this car was 
bucking, there would be darn fewbuckeroos.” 

And when I woke up—it knocked me 
out—and when I woke up, the doctor was 
working on me in the doctor’s office. And 
that was Dr. S. R. Clark. He was pulling 



34 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


greasewood slivers out of the side of my face 
and out of my eyelids, and so forth. And 
everybody thought that I was in bad shape, 
but when I regained consciousness and I was 
cleaned up a little bit, why, I didn’t feel too 
bad. They thought that maybe I might be hurt 
internally, but I wasn’t. But this poor fellow, 
Alfred Uren, why, he was around town here 
for several months on crutches. And that 
was quite an experience for me as far as my 
ability to operate a racing car. I used to have 
a complete record of the various speeds of the 
various vehicles that were entered in this race, 
but they were all destroyed in the basement 
of my home when we had the flood here a 
few winters ago. So that’s an experience that 
everyone doesn’t have. 

When I finally decided to leave college 
for a while, I went to work for the Standard 
Oil Company. The district sales manager 
for the company at that time was Mr. P. 
H. McCullough. He was a Scotchman. His 
assistant was G. P. Litch. They had a main sales 
office in Reno. Mr. McCullough interviewed 
me and asked a few questions. He told me 
that Mr. Litch was out in the field making 
a visitation to a lot of their plant locations, 
that he would be in within the next few days, 
but I could go ahead and take a physical 
examination, which was a requirement, and 
that I could work temporarily out of the Reno 
plant until he came in. 

When Mr. Litch finally got back into Reno, 
I was called from the plant to see him and be 
interviewed by him. As I remember, it was 
on July 2, 1925. He asked me, he apologized, 
he said, “You don’t mind if I call you Reno?” 

And I says, “Certainly not.” We were very 
informal as far as the Standard Oil Company 
was concerned. 

He said, “Would you like to go to Elko?” 

I says, “Wherever the company would 
like to send me, it would be satisfactory with 


me. However,” I said, “I just won a lawsuit up 
there and it might not be for the best interests 
of the company to send me up there.” I had to 
go into detail and tell him about this lawsuit 
deal, and he chuckled and laughed to himself. 

He says, “Well, perhaps you are right.” He 
said, “How would you like to go to Tonopah?” 

I said, “Wherever the company wants 
to send me. I’m your slave now. I’ in your 
employee.” 

He said, “Well, I’ll tell you what I think 
I’m going to do. I’ll send you to Tonopah, and 
the warehouse clerk in Tonopah, I’ll send to 
Elko.” He said, “How soon can you get ready?” 

I says, “It won’t take me long to pack my 
luggage.” 

He said, “The train leaves in about two 
hours. Think you can make it?” 

I said, “Sure.” 

He says, “Well, I’ll have Mr. Carlson (who 
was the cashier at that time for the Reno sales 
office, C. A. Carlson, Jr.), I’ll have him get you 
a ticket and give you a certain amount of travel 
expense money, and,” he says, “you catch this 
train and we’ll make reservations for a berth 
on that Pullman for you.” 

So I was staying at a little hotel there 
on Second Street; I think it was called the 
Senator, right across from the old Wigwam 
Theater. So I went and got my luggage, came 
back up to the office and got my tickets, and 
went over to the depot and caught this train 
in the late afternoon. Of course, when I left 
Reno, Reno was beautiful. It was that time 
of the year when all the roses were in bloom 
and Reno was just beautiful. When I was on 
the train I woke up real early in the morning, 
just after we had left Mina, and I looked out 
at that bleak, dreary, dry, hardly-even-any- 
sagebrush-growing area, and, oh, goodness, it 
was actually the first time I had been that far 
away from home in my life, and I was about 
ready to fall off the train and start walking 



My Story — Early Life and Career; Business and Civic Life in Battle Mountain 


35 


back, but we finally pulled into the depot in 
Tonopah. 

This young fellow that I was going to take 
his place there at the Tonopah plant, he was 
at the train to meet me, and we drove directly 
up to the agents house. His name was George 
Pierce. I don’t know whether he looked me 
over or what, but the first thing he said to me, 
he said, “Do you play a musical instrument?” 

And I said, “Yes, I do.” 

He says, “What do you play?” 

I said, “I play the saxophone, and play the 
banjo a little bit, sing a little bit.” 

He says, “Do you belong to the union?” 

I said, “Yes, I belong to the union in Reno, 
the musicians’ union.” 

He says, “Well, that’s fine.” He says, “Have 
you got your horns with you?” 

I said, “Nope.” 

And he said, “Well, if I can get you a job 
playing for a dance, would you be interested?” 

I says, “That all depends upon if I can 
get a musical instrument.” And I asked what 
I could get—I asked what the pay would be. 

He said, “Well, the pay would be twenty- 
five dollars and expenses.” 

I says, “Well, you get me a horn!” 

I told Mr. Pierce, I said, “If you get me a 
horn, I’ll play for the dance.” I said, “Where’re 
we going?” 

He says, “Out to Smoky Valley, Darrough’s 
Hot Springs.” (I thought to myself, I still wasn’t 
very sold on staying very long in Tonopah, so 
barren-looking.) So he rustled up a saxophone 
for me, and there was three of us left Tonopah; 
I think it was late afternoon on July Fourth 
or July third. We went out to Darrough’s Hot 
Springs to play for this dance, and the people 
I played with became very good friends of 
mine. The gentleman that played the piano, 
his name was Billy Cardelli. He was Italian, 
and he was a very tine piano player, and he 
was also very good on the accordion. The 


other gentleman that played in the band, his 
name was Elmer Tansey, and he was a clerk 
working for the First National Bank there in 
Tonopah. He played the drums just as a hobby. 

Evidently, I was quite a success with Billy 
Cardelli, and he had quite a group of friends 
in the musicians’ local there in Tonopah. After 
we had played for this dance, which lasted ’til 
about four o’clock in the morning, we drove on 
back to Tonopah. He spread word around that 
I was quite a very fine musician. So it wasn’t 
long after that I became quite demanded for 
playing in various orchestras down there. In 
fact, I got practically a steady job playing with 
George Pierce and his group. His group was 
George Pierce, violin; Elmer Tansey, he played 
the drums; Bud Morris (he worked for the 
Tonopah and Goldfield Railroad), he played 
the saxophone; and I played the sax. We had 
about a five-piece band. 

This job that I had, working for the 
Standard Oil Company, only paid $120 a 
month. My board bill was seventy-five dollars, 
and my room was forty-five, so I didn’t have 
very much money to go on. The fact of the 
matter is there was an entire month’s salary, 
right there. But I made more money playing 
for dances in Tonopah than I was making as 
a warehouse clerk working for the Standard 
Oil Company. 

I thought that I would be in an area where 
I would be in amongst a bunch of strangers, 
but all of these people, men and women that 
I went to school with at the University of 
Nevada that were from Tonopah, why, they 
were full of the dickens, and real jovial and 
friendly, and goodness sakes, why, I think the 
happiest eight months I ever spent in my life 
was spent in Tonopah. 

There was Margaret Griffin, and there was 
her sister, Kathleen “Dolly” Griffin. There was 
Ethel Robb; she married a Fitzgerald. And 
Procter Hug. They were all in that group from 



36 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


Tonopah that were attending the University, 
so I knew nearly all of them. 

The first invitation I had socially was to take 
a blind date and go to a farewell party that was 
being given by Mrs. Grant Crumley (that was 
Newt Crumley’s mother) at the Goldfield Hotel 
in Goldfield. And all this group of young people, 
there was about twelve or fourteen couples, 
went over there, and this blind date that I had 
was Lucille Askin. She had a very charming 
sister, who used to go with a gentleman by the 
name of Bud Swazey. His mother ran a small 
hotel in back of the Hotel Mizpah. So Lucille 
and I became quite good friends. 

This first night over there in Goldfield, 
there was a gal by the name of Katherine 
Currieux. Her mother was a schoolteacher, 
and she had some mining claims up here in 
Galena Canyon. Katherine was a very tall 
girl. She played the piano real well. Newton 
Crumley was about fourteen or fifteen years 
old at that time, and he was just learning how 
to play the saxophone. He didn’t play very 
many good, sound, healthy, sweet notes. He 
was nearly all sour! So after listening to him 
for about thirty minutes, I finally talked him 
out of his saxophone, and from that point on, 
Katherine and I, we had a jam session and 
everybody just enjoyed it very much. I became 
quite well acquainted with Katherine and all 
this group that was there. 

An oddity happened. This Mrs. Crumley, 
she said to me, she says, “Aren’t you related 
to the Watts?” 

I said, “Yes, my mother was Helen Watt.” 

She said, “Well, for goodness sakes! Do 
you know when I was a young girl, I almost 
married George Watt, your uncle?” She was 
living in Belmont at that time. So as big as 
this state is, it’s not so large that you don’t run 
across people that know people or they have 
been acquainted with some of your people 
and some of your folks. 


During the time that I was in Tonopah, 
we formed a little dramatic club, and I took an 
active part in one of the plays. Oh, we had a lot 
of fun. We used to give these weekend parties. 
There’d be two or three couples would go in 
together and share the expense. Sometimes 
we’d put on a little dinner out at Alkali Hot 
Springs, and sometimes we’ll put on a little 
dinner party over at Goldfield, or maybe 
someplace right there in Tonopah. We’d put 
on these little dramas. I think the one that 
I took the lead in was called “Clarence.” It’s 
supposed to be a rather serious play, but it 
ended up pretty much of a comedy when we 
got through with it. But the people of Tonopah 
really enjoyed it. 

But getting back to my musical work, 
every year in Tonopah, the uptown musicians 
put on this big dance. The musicians’ union 
put on this big dance there in the Knights of 
Pythias Hall. And it’s all gratis work, as far 
as the musicians are concerned. They’d have 
some project like, for instance, they were 
raising money for one of the members that 
belonged to the Tonopah local at that time 
(I’ve forgotten his name). He was quite ill with 
cancer, and they were raising funds for him 
for his benefit. 

What happened at this big ball—the 
uptown musicians would go down to the 
Casino and the bawdy houses and they’d play 
orchestra down there, where the musicians 
down in that area can come uptown and they 
can play their part. 

So our group went down, and we was 
playing in the Casino, which was quite a 
historical bawdy house there in Tonopah. After 
I had played down there, I was approached 
two or three days later and they asked me if I 
would take a job playing at this bawdy house. 
That’s where the religious teaching that my 
mother pounded into me when I was just 
an infant, I do really believe that it paid off, 



My Story — Early Life and Career; Business and Civic Life in Battle Mountain 


37 


regardless of the fact that they offered to pay 
me forty dollars a night, guaranteed pay for 
three hours’ work, plus the tips. 

In places like that they have the “kitty” on 
the musicians stand, and some of these miners 
that would come in after they had shipped 
some of their ores and had gotten quite a nice 
little nest egg, why, they’d come down there 
and get to dancing with these bawdy house 
girls, and they would start throwing money 
at the orchestra. It wasn’t done every night, 
but there were occasions when you’d walk 
off the stand after playing ’til maybe three or 
four o’clock in the morning, overtime (you’d 
get paid overtime, too, by the management), 
having not less than a hundred or a hundred 
and fifty dollars in your pocket for just one 
night’s work. 

Well, I knew all these things, but I just 
couldn’t see that kind of a life, and I saw 
enough of those musicians to know that 
actually they become just nothing but bums. 
They become used to a way of life that is not 
very healthy. There’s a lot of inducements, and 
they’re very evil inducements. So with that 
thinking on my part, and the very fact that I 
love my mother and dad very dearly, and I felt 
that there was a religious obligation to them 
as well as to my own particular self, I backed 
away from it. But I still continued to play for 
the uptown dances. 

I spent all winter there, and in the early 
spring, they had transferred Mr. Pierce 
from Tonopah to Alturas; and the agent, 
Mr. Robert R. Rierson, that had been in 
Goldfield, they moved him from Goldfield 
to be in charge of the Tonopah station. When 
the order came through for me to move from 
Tonopah to Truckee, California, Mr. Rierson 
gave me a little insight as to the amount of 
work I would have to do in order to keep 
caught up, because that Truckee area was 
entirely a tourist area. 


While I was in Tonopah, I had made 
arrangements to get a spare bedroom. I lived 
with the Pierces. Of course, when Pierce left, 
I utilized the spare bedroom and lived with 
the Riersons. Bob Rierson had married a girl 
from New York. Her name was Ursula Cl don’t 
know what her maiden name was). She was 
a schoolteacher. 

She was telling me one day about how 
she happened to come out to Goldfield. 
She wanted to come West. She had this big 
atlas, so she closed her eyes and she run her 
finger around in the dark, and bingo! hit on 
Goldfield. She had to look up Goldfield in an 
old atlas and found out that the population in 
Goldfield was 25,000. Of course, that was in 
the boom days. She had an old one. On her 
way out on the train, she was telling about 
how these people asked her where she was 
going. She was from New York, and she was 
going to Goldfield. And they was telling her 
about the desert country with a rattlesnake 
under every bush. She was quite upset. She 
said, “When I finally arrived in Goldfield,” 
she said, “I didn’t know whether I was going 
to be able to stay there or not. But, of course,” 
she said, “I met Robert.” Little Cupid had a 
decision there to make and she finally decided 
to stay in Goldfield. Later on they got married. 
I think they were married before they were 
transferred over to Tonopah. They were very 
good friends of mine. 

When I moved to Truckee, everything 
that Bob Rierson told me about what I’d 
encounter as far as working was concerned 
was certainly the truth. I had to get up early 
and I had to work late. I’d get up around four 
or five in the morning, and many times I 
wouldn’t get through until about ten or eleven 
o’clock at night. I had a terrific area to serve. 
I had an old Mack truck, a solid-tire truck, 
to haul gasoline clear up on top of Donner 
Summit while they were building the first 



38 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


highway over the summit. I had to take care 
of Hobart Mills, and I had to go clear down 
to Hirsh dale on the Truckee, and then I went 
up Truckee River up as far as Squaw Valley, 
besides servicing all the service stations and 
garages, and so forth, right there in the town 
of Truckee itself. 

So I was going pretty strong. It was the 
policy of the company, knowing that their 
men had to work all of this overtime, to 
have all of their men keep a log of all the 
overtime that they worked during this heavy 
tourist season. The advice that Bob Rierson 
gave me before I left Tonopah was, “Rene,” 
he said, “now, when you get to Truckee,” he 
said, “You’re going to work a lot of overtime, 
and,” he said, “if you want to make a hit with 
a Scotchman, Mr. McCullough, when the 
time comes for him to ask you how much 
overtime you have coming, all you ask him 
for is just your vacation period.” And I didn’t 
forget that. I kept track of my time. Now, my 
overtime would be in addition to the two 
weeks’ vacation. 

So one day I was sitting in the office. It was 
just the early part of November, or something 
like that. The agent there at Truckee, his name 
was Ralph Holland. Ralph and I were sitting 
there in the office, and Mr. McCullough called 
up on the phone and he said, “Is Lemaire 
there?” 

And Ralph said, “Yes, he’s sitting here in 
the office.” 

He says, “Well, ask him how much 
overtime he’s got coming.” 

I told Ralph, I said, “You tell Mr. 
McCullough that as far as my overtime is 
concerned, all I’m interested in is just my two 
weeks’ vacation,” and I said I felt that as far 
as working for the company was concerned, 
there was many days and many weeks—two or 
three months every winter—I didn’t even earn 
my keep as far as the salary was concerned. I 


had felt that I would be derelict in my job not 
to show my appreciation by putting in a little 
overtime, a little extra work in the summer 
when the company had an opportunity to pick 
up some of the expenses, as far as paying me 
in the winter when I wasn’t doing anything. 
Mr. McCullough argued and argued, and he 
wanted to get my overtime, but I wouldn’t give 
it to him. I had, as I said, twenty-one days. So 
I made quite a hit with the Scotchman. 

It was only a short time after that that 
the Standard Oil Company decided to cut 
their operating costs by reducing the number 
of employees. They gave the choice to the 
employees themselves, especially the various 
agents that were operating under the Reno 
district. They called all these agents in, and 
they told them that they’d had this regional 
meeting in San Francisco of all the district 
managers, and they had to cut operating 
costs of the entire Standard Oil of California 
operating zone not less than ten percent. It 
was up to these district managers to go back 
to their respective sales areas and contact 
their own sales managers in each plant and 
ask them what their desires would be as far 
as a curtailment of their wages by at least 
ten percent, and where these wholesale bulk 
plants were operating on a three-man basis, 
to cut them to two in the summertime and in 
the wintertime to one. Of course, these larger 
plants, where they were operating with five, 
six, and seven men, had to make the same 
kind of curtailment as far as their operating 
personnel were concerned. 

And an interesting thing which, to me, 
showed, in a sense, the greed of human nature: 
We were on the threshold of this depression, 
and it would not have worked a hardship at 
all on everyone in connection with those 
men working under the Reno sales agency 
to have taken a ten percent cut. It wouldn’t 
have thrown anybody out of work. As it 



My Story — Early Life and Career; Business and Civic Life in Battle Mountain 


39 


was, all of these plant managers, they says, 
“Well, as far as we’re concerned, why, we’re 
getting this present salary, and we don’t want 
to see our salary cut, and if it’s necessary, 
why, I won’t mind getting up on a tank truck 
and making a delivery myself.” During that 
depression period, their decision increased 
unemployment, whereas if they’d all been 
willing to take a ten percent cut, all of these 
persons that had been steadily employed for 
the company would have continued on the 
payroll. But, that was the order of the day. 

Then the depression finally did come, boy, 
they really cut from one end of the Reno sales 
agents to the other, east and west, north and 
south! But, due to the fact that I had made 
this hit with Mr. McCullough, he kept me 
on, and there was part of the winter that I 
didn’t even work for the sales department; I 
worked for the engineering department. The 
engineer in charge of the plant, maintenance 
and everything, his name was Glen Macy. 
Mr. Macy, he said, “Rene, I hardly know what 
kind of an Indian sign you’ve got on the boss, 
but,” he said, “he wants you to work and stay 
with the company. Now,” he said, “What we’re 
going to do, we’re going to move all of the 
supplies for all of these plants from one part 
of this Reno plant area over to another part.” 
And he said, “For goodness sakes, now, don’t 
work too fast, will you. Take it easy. 

Well, in spite of dragging my heels on 
that particular job, I finished it. And he says, 
“Well, now I gotta find something else for 
you to do.” He says, “I’ll tell you what we’ll do. 
we’ll have to dig a big ditch so I can put in an 
insulating box between the steam plant and 
the warehouse. And he said, “For goodness 
sakes, don’t work too fast.” 

Well, I never dug a ditch in my life, and 
I was still the spoiled brat, the only son of a 
very fine family, but nevertheless, I grit my 
teeth and I wouldn’t give up my job. I was 


determined I was going to stay with this no 
matter what. So I was digging this ditch out 
there one day, and Mr. McCullough came out 
and he watched me for quite a while, and I 
was watching him out of the corner of my eye. 
Finally, he said, “Say, Lemaire, don’t take very 
many brains to do that kind of work, does it?” 

I said, “Nope. To work for the Standard 
Oil Company, you have to have a strong back 
and a weak mind.” Mr. McCullough never said 
a word. He whirled around and he went and 
got his— I think he was driving a Cadillac or 
a Lincoln, or something like that, and he went 
out through the yard, but he never criticized 
me for the statement that I made. 

It was only a short time after that that 
they needed some help, and inasmuch as 
I was single and was free to move around 
very readily, they sent me up to Westwood. 
I worked up there for a couple of months 
during those winter months. Then I came 
back to Reno, and they sent me down to 
Minden, and I worked there for awhile to 
relieve a fellow that had the measles or the 
mumps or something. Then finally, they 
moved me out to Fernley, and I worked there 
all summer ’til things began to open up at 
Lake Tahoe. When things opened up at Lake 
Tahoe, they sent me up to the south end of 
the lake, to what they called the Tallac branch. 
And it was at the Tallac branch that I got to 
know the Richardson family real well because 
I stayed there at Camp Richardson. 

We just had the most wonderful time 
that summer. The Richardson family are 
a wonderful family, and I accompanied 
Florence quite often on a lot of our trips, 
horseback rides, and boat rides. She and her 
brother, Bud, were twins. He was tall, good- 
looking, dark, very handsome, and Florence 
was rather short, and not too good-looking, 
but a very sweet girl. She was a wonderful, 
beautiful-personality girl. And we just had a 



40 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


lot of fun. I even played for dances up there. 
There’d be about four couples, and wed take 
the Florence B’ (that was a kind of a power 
launch), We would go over into Emerald 
Bay on these beautiful moonlight nights, eat 
watermelon, and Id twang on the guitar or 
banjo, and wed sing, and listen to the music 
from some of those resorts around Emerald 
Bay. Oh, it was a wonderful summer! 

While I was up there working for the 
company, they said, “Where you going to go 
when the Lake closes up this fall?” 

I said, “Well, there’s one place that I’ll 
never go to. That’s Wendover.” That’s right on 
the edge of the Reno sales agency area, and 
right on the edge of the desert. 

I’ll be darned if one morning R H. 
McCullough didn’t call up on the phone, 
and he said to me, he said, “Rene, we’re 
having a difficult time trying to find a place 
for you. Now,” he said, “there’s an opening at 
Wendover, and,” he says, “you’ll still retain 
your status as a plant manager at the same 
salary, or,” he said, “we can drop you back to 
what they call an area salesman, in which you 
continue on as a truck driver. But,” he said, it’s 
up to you to make the decision.” 

And I said, “Well, can I kind of think this 
over for a couple of days?” 

He said, “Sure, there’s no hurry about it.” 

So two or three days went by, and finally I 
called up the Reno office and I told him, “Well, 
I’ve decided that I’ll take that Wendover job.” 
I said, “That’ll be quite an experience for me. 
I don’t like to go out there, but I will go.” 

He said, “Well, I’m glad to hear you say 
that.” 

So when they closed up at the Lake, I had 
quite a lot of cleanup work to do, not only at 
Tallac, but also up at Tahoe City. I took care 
of a lot of the year-end business. Then I finally 
finished up there, then I was transferred to 
Wendover. Believe it or not, the man that I 


replaced (his name was J. K. Metzker) had 
bought a little cabin out of Salduro and had 
moved it in, so I bought this cabin from him; 
I think it was for around fifty dollars. So I 
was living like the life of Reilly. I had my 
own little place to live, and the people there 
in Wendover were very gracious to me while 
I was working in Wendover. 

I spent about eighteen months in 
Wendover. It was in Wendover where I met 
this cute little wife of mine. And finally, 
when I decided to get married and she said, 
“Yes,” I couldn’t see working for the company 
and being kicked around from one place to 
another and raise a family. Being the only son, 
Mother and Dad wanted me to come back 
here in their later years and be with them. So 
that was the decision that I made. 

I resigned from the company. The company 
exercised every influence that they possibly 
could to try to get me to stay on. They sent the 
manager from Elko over to see me. They sent 
the manager from Ely over to see me. They 
sent the chief auditor of the Reno office to see 
me and try to get me to continue on with the 
company. He said, “Rene, you’re silly to quit.” 
And they offered me a new place, any new 
branch or new plant facility with a great big 
increase in salary. It was quite a decision to 
make, but I still couldn’t see getting married 
and raising a family and being kicked around 
like I knew a lot of the personnel connected 
with the company had to go through. Then 
I thought of my mother and dad being over 
here all alone. They had quite a few assets here. 
I knew that my dad, especially, was getting to 
the age in life where he needed some help, and 
after all, being the only child, by coming over 
here and working with him, why, I was not only 
helping him and seeing both Mother and Dad, 
but I was also working for my own interests. So 
I moved back over here in 1929. That was the 
year I got married. I’ve been here ever since. 



My Story — Early Life and Career; Business and Civic Life in Battle Mountain 


41 


During this time, my vocations have been 
very diversified, such as assisting my dad in a 
service station, garage, Ford auto dealership, 
ranching, mining, and politics. Of course, 
I’ve been a musician. If it wasn’t that I’d been 
a musician, we’d’ve starved to death during 
the Depression. But a musician, we had cream 
cake and T-bone steaks! 

It was during the Depression years that 
we built the motel. We borrowed enough 
money on a savings and loan certificate to buy 
a carload of lumber, and with the assistance 
of some of our neighbors, we built ten small 
ten by sixteen cabins. All they had in them 
was just a bed, cold running water, and a gas 
hot plate. Then Fred Altenburg, Sr., owner of 
the Nevada Hotel, became furious because 
we were filled every night, whereas his hotel 
business fell clear off. Instead of upgrading his 
hotel, he became very resentful and built an 
elaborate service station on the presumption 
that such a competitive business would force 
us to the wall, break us. As it turned out, his 
thinking was wrong, because we were very 
successful with our motel. And as years have 
gone by, we now own his service station. C’est 
la vie. 

The Battle Mountain State Bank 

Not very many people know it, but I’m 
a past president of a bank. I’d like to give a 
little history of the Battle Mountain State 
Bank. The original stockholders of the bank 
were J. B. Horton, who used to run the 
Mercantile here in Battle Mountain; my uncle, 
Auguste C. Lemaire, who used to operate the 
Lemaire store; George Russell of Elko, who 
used to own and control the Russell Land 
and Livestock Company; W. G. Adams, who 
came here to Battle Mountain as a receiver 
for the Horton Mercantile when they were 
in financial stress; and Lred Altenburg, who 


owned and controlled the Nevada Hotel. 
Those five men put up five thousand dollars 
apiece. It only required a capitalization of 
twenty-five thousand dollars to form a bank 
in those days. They were granted a charter 
to do business as the Battle Mountain State 
Bank in 1925. 

Mr. Horton became rather elderly and 
he wanted to get out of the responsibilities 
and activities of being a director of the bank, 
so he sold his interest to a gentleman by the 
name of George Southward, an Englishman 
who married a woman by the name of Mrs. 
Jenkins. (That’s Louise Marvel’s mother.) 
When he came to Battle Mountain, he came 
here as a sort of superintendent to look 
out after Mrs. Jenkins’ ranching interests. 
His employment progressed and he also 
was successful in winning the hand of Mrs. 
Jenkins. During the big flu epidemic of 
1918, she passed away, and he came into that 
estate and inherited a good sun of money. 
When Mr. Horton decided to sell out, Mr. 
Southward had the money, and he bought 
out Mr. Horton’s interest in the bank. 

Then later on, Mr. Southward was bought 
out of the W. T. Jenkins Company by Mrs. 
Marvel and her other relatives. George 
Southward moved to Reno. When he left 
here, he sold his interest in the bank to 
Noble Getchell. Later on, George Southward 
received an appointment as superintendent 
of the banks of the state of Nevada. 

When we had the bank crisis, in order for 
this bank to open again, they had to raise an 
additional amount of capital, and with the 
assets as they were appraised, they had to 
raise an additional $25,000 (the capital was 
raised to $50,000). In 1939, Getchell sold 
his interest in the bank to me, and later on, I 
bought the interest of Charlie Littrell. In 1940 
or 1941—I forget which—they elected me as 
president of the Battle Mountain State Bank. 



42 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


The history of this bank is rather 
interesting. I think they were in operation 
only one or two years before they started 
paying dividends. The original capital that was 
invested by these five men, I think they had 
all that money returned to them in the way 
of dividends in less than five or ten years, so 
it was quite a successful venture. 

George Russell was president before I was. 
When I became president of the bank, he, 
being elderly, and being he was in Elko and 
all, he continued to serve on the board, but he 
wanted to relinquish the duties of president, 
so they chose me. 

We had a lot of trials and tribulations at 
first, due to the fact that in this area business was 
stagnant. There were very few opportunities to 
make loans. Our investments primarily were 
made in long-term government bonds in order 
to take advantage of the low rate of interest. 
Mr. W. C. Adams, who had been cashier of 
the bank for many years, in fact from its very 
inception, became very lax when it came to the 
laws, and our capital structure was such that 
we could only make a loan of around $15,000. 
On a court order certificate we had loaned the 
Gold and Silver Circle Mines $15,000. The 
one who was the receiver for those properties 
was a fellow by the name of Trouseau. Their 
operation at that time was at Midas, where 
they was mining gold. The operation wasn’t 
too successful. To meet his payroll, he had 
to continue borrowing money. (I found out 
later that he was a spendthrift.) And without 
any authorization whatsoever, besides the 
$15,900 court certificate, our cashier, Mr. W. 
G. Adams, on a personal note, loaned this 
fellow, Trouseau, $5,000. And when he did 
that, the superintendent of banks became quite 
provoked. He said that as far as our bank was 
concerned, we had overextended our loaning 
limits, over and above the maximum limit of 
$15,000. 


On different examinations that was 
made, Mr. Adams was rather careless as far 
as monies was involved, and so forth. Mr. 
W. D. LaRue came to town one time on an 
examination, and called me up before him. He 
said, “Rene, I’m sorry, but there’s something 
radically wrong with the way the money is 
being handled at the bank. I’m afraid that if 
we continue to go on like we’re going here, 
it s liable to get every one of you in trouble,” 

I said, “Well, what do you suggest?” 

He said, “I suggest you try to get another 
cashier.” 

My uncle, Auguste Lemaire, who was still 
a director, he and I went up to Elko and had an 
interview with George Russell, who was also 
still a director. We discussed the matter and 
he told me that the way he felt about it, that 
in the years past there was a question about 
Glen Adams’ honesty and they had private 
auditors come in, and they made a thorough 
investigation and an audit for the bank and all 
of its assets and everything else, and it proved 
that as far as Adams was concerned, that he 
was an honest person. He said, “As far as I’m 
concerned, if you would let Mr. Adams go and 
hire someone else, you don’t know who you’re 
going to get. You might go to the bank some 
morning and find even all the doorknobs are 
missing.” 

Now that was the statement that was made 
by George Russell. (I think that he had a “Jr.” 
behind his name. There is another George B. 
Russell; it’s the uncle of Charlie Russell.) So 
his feeling, as he expressed it, convinced my 
uncle, Auguste, that we should just continue 
on and see what the end results would be, 
but each time that LaRue came to town, why, 
he was very upset about the way this money 
was being handled, and when this loan was 
made to Trouseau, he really became upset. 
The fact of the matter, he told me, as president 
of the bank, he says, “I’m going to give you 



My Story — Early Life and Career; Business and Civic Life in Battle Mountain 


43 


fellows one of three choices. You are either 
going to have to come up with the capital, 
or you’re going to have to sell the bank, or 
you’re going to have to liquidate it.” He was 
very determined. 

And I said, “Well, I’ll take this to the 
directors and find out what their reaction is 
to it.” 

And he says, “Well, I’ll be back in 
another six months and I’ve got to have 
an answer.” So we called a stockholders’ 
meeting and discussed it. And we decided 
that since the bank was the only bank here 
in Battle Mountain, and the town did need 
facilities such as a bank, and the bank 
had been beneficial as far as the original 
stockholders were concerned, it would be 
unfair to the people to liquidate the bank. 
They all felt that it would be not advisable 
to try to increase the capital structure, so 
the final decision was that I was instructed 
to see if I couldn’t find someone that would 
be interested in buying. 

Well, at that time, as it is today, the 
largest bank was the First National Bank. I 
interviewed the officials of the bank to find 
out if they were interested in considering 
buying this bank and they said, “No.” It was 
too small for them. 

Well, previous to this problem, O. O. 
Bates had taken over the Henderson Bank in 
Elko, and had also previously taken over the 
Austin bank. I contacted him, and he said 
that if terms and conditions and everything 
else would warrant it, why, he would like 
to consider purchase. He was fearful that 
perhaps maybe someday the county seat 
would be moved from Austin to Battle 
Mountain, and if that would be the case, the 
county funds, naturally, would go along with 
the movement, and it would be very bad for 
his branch that he had bought from Eason and 
Hiskey, the old Lander County Bank there in 


Austin. That bank, by the way, is the oldest 
bank in the state of Nevada. 

Sol made several trips to Ely by airplane. 
I happened to have an airplane at that 
time, and I used to fly back and forth. Mr. 
Bates sent in Lloyd Clark, his chief auditor, 
who came over to Battle Mountain and 
made a thorough audit of all of our loans 
and everything. And the result was that 
we finally came to an agreement as to his 
purchasing of the bank, and it became part 
of the Nevada Bank of Commerce chain. In 
the deal that was finally consummated, there 
was some of our slow loans, such as those 
that had been made to the Gold and Silver 
Circle Mines, and also the mining property 
south of Valmy, called the Marigold mining 
property, we had to retain those, but all the 
rest was absorbed by Bates and his NBC 
setup. 

I always liked the banking business, 
in just the short time that I had served as 
president, and so I asked Mr. Bates if I could 
buy enough stock to be part of his Nevada 
Bank of Commerce organization and perhaps 
maybe serve as a director on his board of 
directors. He was agreeable to it, so I bought 
a fairly large block of his Nevada Bank of 
Commerce stock and became a director of 
the Nevada Bank of Commerce in 1943, when 
the deal was made. And I have been a director 
of the Nevada Bank of Commerce ever since. 
If the good Lord is willing, I will have been 
a director in the Nevada Bank of Commerce 
twenty-five years, a year from this coming 
August. So I been actively engaged in rubbing 
elbows, as far as finances are concerned, with 
some of the very fine financial leaders in our 
state since way back in 1938 or ’39 or—when 
was it? Or 1941. I think I bought that first 
stock—guess it was in ’39. That’s almost thirty 
years, isn’t it? So I’ve been connected with 
finance since that time, and that’s about all I 



44 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


have to say in connection with my financial 
associations. 

Membership in Fraternal and Civic 
Organizations 

One fraternal organization which I 
belong to is the Masonic Lodge. I never went 
any further than the third degree; I’m classed 
as a Blue Lodge Mason. Also, when I was 
just a young fellow, I joined the Knights of 
Pythias, just before I went to the University of 
Nevada in the fall of 1921. And the members 
of the Knights of Pythias lodge here in Battle 
Mountain conferred upon me a high office, so 
I was the youngest Chancellor-Commander 
that has ever been recorded—and that I know 
of—anywhere in the state of Nevada, and it 
could be, in the nation. I was only seventeen 
when I was Chancellor-Commander of 
the Knights of Pythias order here in Battle 
Mountain. 

As far as civic organizations are concerned, 
I’m a past president of the Lions Club. I took a 
very active part in the Lions Club when it was 
first organized here in Battle Mountain. But it 
went along for several years and finally, they 
dropped their charter. Finally they became 
reactivated. And I was a charter member, also, 
of the second organization of the Lions Club. 

This club has been very active in our 
community. They have sponsored many 
worthwhile projects. They are the ones that 
help plant the grass in the football field here 
for the high school. They’ve been very active 
in connection with mosquito control. They’ve 
been very active in assisting both the Girl 
Scouts and the Boy Scouts, and very active 
in the project to help the blind and the poor. 
They helped also the Battle Mountain Little 
League in a lot of their activities. Their main 
entertainment program that they put on each 
spring is their rodeo. And they’ve been very 


favorably blessed because they usually put 
this rodeo on in the month of April or the 
month of May, and as luck would have it, 
usually the weather has been very favorable 
for them. Perhaps maybe even prior to the 
time that they are going to put on the rodeo, 
or even after the rodeo, we usually get some 
kind of a snowstorm. It’s pretty hard to stay 
on a horse even when it’s dry, let alone when 
it’s covered with snow. 

Interest in Aviation 

Besides having the experience of driving 
a racing car, I used to love to fly. Fact of 
the matter is, I have down in the basement 
some very fine pictures of various interesting 
people that were connected with aviation in 
the Army Air Force. The first flying lessons 
that I ever took in my life was in Salt Lake 
City. I was working at that time for the 
Standard Oil Company at Wendover. I had a 
very good friend there that was flying, and I 
used to drive into Salt Lake over the weekend 
and I would drive out to the Salt Lake airport 
and I would take flying lessons from Tommy 
Thompson, known as the Thompson Flying 
Service. And the airplanes that we flew, back 
in 1928, were very flimsy structures and- very 
uncertain as to whether you would come 
down safely. I remember the type of plane 
that I learned how to fly was a biplane, long¬ 
winged shaped. I don’t remember whether it 
was a Fairchild or a Steerman. It was quite 
an airplane. But I finally soloed in the darn 
thing. Then I got married and left Wendover 
and came to Battle Mountain. So I got away 
from it. 

Then in 1938, a fellow by the name 
of—I just have a terrible time remembering 
names. But anyway, this pilot came in here 
with a small forty-horsepower Cub. He 
interested quite a few of the young people 



My Story — Early Life and Career; Business and Civic Life in Battle Mountain 


45 


here in the community to do some flying. 
And my cousin, Charles Lemaire, who was 
always interested in anything connected with 
aviation and mechanical work, he finally 
encouraged me to go out and fly this little 
forty-horsepower Cub. 

Well, it was a hot afternoon and a very 
underpowered aircraft, and this fellow, Fred 
something, the pilot, he said, “I understand 
you’ve had some flying experience. What we’ll 
do, we’ll get up to around a thousand feet and 
t-en I’ll let you go ahead and fly it. Then I’ll 
be able to see what experience you’ve had.” 

Well, we took , and there is one thing 
about a Cub— it will take off very readily, 
but they’re quite underpowered. We just flew 
around for about a half hour or so and we 
couldn’t get any altitude higher than three or 
four hundred feet. So he got disgusted and he 
said, “Oh, go ahead and fly it, anyhow.” We 
flew around for a little while and I was very 
disgusted and disappointed in this particular 
type of aircraft, and inasmuch as quite a few 
of my friends were flying it, I thought to 
myself, “Somebody is going to get hurt in 
this thing.” 

So, unbeknown to my wife, Etta Marie, 
I purchased a Cub airplane that was a 
trainer. At that time it was fifty-horsepower, 
a continental driven engine, a great big 
propeller, and only a single ignition, but it was 
still a much safer airplane to fly than this little 
forty-horsepower. Later I was able to purchase 
a Piper Cub Cruiser, which is about an eighty- 
five-horsepower airplane, through the factory 
at Lockhaven, Pennsylvania. It then became 
a problem of going there to get it. We were 
notified as to when the plane would be ready, 
so I flew back on United Air Lines to as far as 
Dayton, changed to Penn Central and from 
there to Pittsburgh. Then the problem came 
as how was I was going to get from Pittsburgh 
down to Altoona. I called the airport to see 


if I could charter a plane and they said, “Yes, 
you can have a pilot fly you over to Altoona.” 

I said, “For how much?” 

They said, “For $175.00.” That was about 
three times as much as I paid to come all the 
way from Salt Lake City to Pittsburgh. 

I said, “Well, I don’t want to buy your 
airplane, I just want to fly from Pittsburgh 
to Altoona.” 

Then I began looking for another way 
to go to Lockhaven, where the factor was 
(we went by Altoona). The end result was I 
bought a fare on the railroad and went from 
Pittsburgh to Lockhaven for something like 
three dollars and seventy-five cents. That was 
quite a saving to me. 

We got to Lockhaven and I had to stay 
over there that night, so the next morning I 
went out to the factory. They had the plane 
all ready and I was ready to take off and I 
began looking around for what was called a 
mixture control. A mixture control is very 
essential for your fuel mixture when you are 
flying at high altitudes. I called the attention 
of the airport operator to the fact that the 
airplane didn’t have a mixture control. He 
said, “Well, you don’t have to have a mixture 
control unless you’re flying above four or five 
thousand feet.” 

And I said, “Well, in our country, we 
couldn’t even take off from our airports 
because they’re all above that elevation.” 

He said, “Oh, gosh! You’d better take this 
back over to the factory and have them install 
that control for you. 

And I said, “Well, that would be a good 
idea.” So I was delayed about an hour waiting 
for that to be done. When he brought the 
plane back over, I asked him which was the 
right direction from there to Dayton, Ohio. 
He came out from around the hangar there, 
and he says, “Well, it’s right over that big high 
mountain there.” 



46 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


And I thought to myself that there must 
be a big high mountain range over there 
behind those little of foothills I could see 
right close by Vision in that area is not very 
clear ’cause there’s so much smoke from 
industry If you have a two-mile visibility, 
they call it a clear day back there. So I got 
the general direction, as far as going towards 
Dayton, Ohio. Before I’d left home, going to 
pick up this plane, I had a very good friend 
who was a pilot and had done a lot of flying in 
that area. And he said, “For goodness sakes, 
Pane, when you’re flying visual contact, then 
you have reference to ground points.” He 
said not to pay too much attention to those 
but to fly pretty much a compass course. 
He said that all the rivers and the railroads 
and the mountains going all directions do 
not have any definite patterns as far as their 
topography is concerned. “So be sure and fly 
that compass” (which turned out to be very 
good advice to me). 

So finally, I took off from Lockhaven, and 
I was out about thirty or thirty-five minutes, 
and, as I said before, the atmospheric 
condition there is rather smokey. I figured 
if I could just get above this haze, I could be 
able to see where I’m going. I got up around 
three or four thousand feet. And I was above 
this hazy condition where it was clear, bright 
sunlight and plenty of good fresh air. But I 
couldn’t see the ground. Then I had to come 
back into this haze, and evidently, the wind 
drift blew me off course some distance. I 
finally saw this fairly large-sized town ahead 
of me, and I thought to myself, “Well, I’ve 
got to determine exactly where I am.” I 
thought that I had perhaps drifted north on 
my course. Anyway, I drifted down over this 
depot and I caught the first few, five or six 
letters of this great big long name. I saw P-U- 
N-X-S-A... and I thought, “Well, goodness!” 
And I didn’t get the rest of it, so I went up to 


a little higher elevation in flight and I looked 
at my maps, and I looked first to see if there 
was a town that began with a P-U-N-X-S-A... 
to the north of my course, and there wasn’t 
one, so I looked south, and sure enough, 
there was a place called Punxsatawny. I’ll 
never forget that name as long as I live. I can 
forget people’s names and a lot of towns, but 
I’ll never forget that one! 

I was about fifteen or twenty miles south 
of my course, so I altered my course to make 
the correction, and I finally got back on my 
course at a place where there were these 
great, big, immense oil storage tanks, and I 
flew right straight through to Dayton, Ohio. 
There are about four or five airports there, 
and I didn’t want to land in any of the large 
commercial airports there. I had marked 
one of these small, private airports, and this 
one that I had marked, why, I hit it right on 
the nose, which is fortunate for me. I flew 
from there to a place in Illinois, stopped 
there overnight; and I flew from there the 
next day to Des Moines, Iowa, stayed there 
overnight; and the next night I flew from 
there to North Platte, stayed there overnight. 
And from there, I flew to Cheyenne. There 
was one place, crossing the prairies, where I 
went south of my course again and I had to 
make a correction. 

An amusing thing happened on that 
flight. At a place called Pine Bluff, I saw this 
wind sock out in this hay field, and there was 
a hangar there. I thought to myself, “I’d better 
check and see if I got enough fuel to go on 
into Cheyenne.” So I landed there, and I was 
looking at my maps (I had my plane right 
up close to the hangar), and I was startled. 
A little old fellow with a goat moustache (he 
must have been about seventy years old) put 
his head up over the side of the airplane and 
he says, “Hi, partner, how ya doin’?” 

I said, “Oh, I’m doin’ all right.” 



My Story — Early Life and Career; Business and Civic Life in Battle Mountain 


47 


And he says, “Hey, you’ve got a brand new 
airplane there, don’t you?” I said that I was 
just flying it out from the factory 

He says, “Well, where you from?” Rather 
than tell him that I was from Battle Mountain, 
’cause I’d have to go into a lot of detail to try 
to explain where Battle Mountain was, I said I 
was from Reno, Nevada. He seemed to know 
where Reno was. That was acceptable. 

He said, “You know, my wife and I, we fly.” 

I said, “You do!” 

He says, “Yeah, I’ve got a private license 
and I got an airplane in that hangar.” 

I said, “What kind of airplane do you 
have?” And he told me that he had a Luscombe. 
So I got out, and we got quite friendly and 
chummy and he had to show me this airplane. 

I said, “How far is it from here to 
Cheyenne?” And he said it was only about 
forty-five or fifty miles. I said, “Well, I was 
wondering if I had enough gasoline to go that 
far.” He wanted to know my cruising speed, 
and I told him that I could make it easily in 
thirty or forty minutes. 

He said, “If you don’t hit any head winds, 
that’s about what it will take you. With this 
plane that I fly, I usually make it in about 
twenty or twenty-five minutes with favorable 
weather conditions. 

So I got into Cheyenne, and as luck would 
have it, it started to rain. You have to fly across 
the Rockies from Cheyenne to Laramie and 
then to Rock Springs and through that area. 
I tried to go through there but it was snowing 
and so I stayed over in Cheyenne until the 
next day when the weather cleared. Then 
I flew on through there to Rock Springs, 
refueled, and I asked the pilot there if there 
was a chance that I could make it on into Salt 
Lake before sundown. 

He said, “Oh, sure, you can make it.” I 
did have navigation lights, but I didn’t have 
landing lights. I took off and I really had this 


Cruiser going about seventy-five to eight 
percent of the throttle. I was just crossing the 
Wasatch range, east of Salt Lake City, and all 
of a sudden...(I found out later that one of 
the spark plugs had worked itself loose in the 
right-hand rear cylinder of this machine and 
it had popped out). I didn’t know whether I 
had blown a hole in the piston or if anything 
had happened. There was a terrific racket and 
I didn’t know whether to shut off the engine, 
the ignition, or what to do. I did bring the 
throttle back a little bit, and I thought that 
if I could just take a long downward descent 
into Salt Lake, I could make it to the airport. 
Of course, you didn’t know if you had a bad 
rod or what the dickens was wrong up front 
because you couldn’t see. I kept coming 
down—I was up around nine or ten thousand 
feet above sea level because I needed plenty 
of elevation crossing the mountain. And I 
started this long descent into the Salt Lake 
airport. The sun was just beginning to set 
over across the hills over towards Wendover. 
I came in and made my proper approach at 
around a thousand feet above the airport. 

I thought to myself, “Well, maybe now 
I’d better see if this engine will rev up at all 
enough so that I might have to maintain 
level flight in case some of these commercial 
airlines come in here.” (They have a priority.) 
I tried it and I could maintain level flight. 
But with this terrible noise that was existing 
and with this engine, why, I didn’t know what 
the dickens to do. So I made a downwind 
approach pattern and finally headed into the 
wind, and when I headed that Cruiser in for 
that landing, the control tower could have 
given me all kinds of red lights and I would 
never have stopped because I was actually 
making an emergency landing. 

I got in there all right, no harm done, but 
it was quite an experience! The fellow who 
was running the Thompson Flying Service 



48 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


there at the time, I think his name was Scott. 
I taxied up to the hangar there, and I didn’t 
know until I got out of the airplane just exactly 
what was wrong. When I stepped out of the 
airplane and looked up ahead, there was this 
spark plug hanging out of the airplane on a 
wire to the edge of the engine cowling. So I 
got my bags and went into the office of the 
Thompson Flying Service there, and this 
fellow who had been working out back said, 
“Oh, that was you? Well, you just came in from 
Lockhaven, didn’t you?” 

And I said, “Yeah.” 

And he said, “Did you know your engine 
was missing?” 

I said, “Yes, I knew my engine was 
missing.” 

He said, “What happened?” 

And I told him a spark plug has just fallen 
out when I crossed the mountain range back 
there. He looked at me and looked at that 
airplane and just shook his head as if to say, 
“Boy, you sure are a lucky guy.” And I knew 
I was. 

I didn’t have any more trouble after that. 
I came right along home. I didn’t have any 
trouble at all, really, except getting off course 
twice. 

The only companion I had on that flight 
was a little red and white spider. And that 
little spider would come up to get warm on 
the main strut every day when we’d be flying 
and stay there, and when I’d land someplace 
and stop overnight I would forget about the 
spider, but the next day it would always be 
there. When I got to Cheyenne, I guess it was 
too much rain for the spider—I guess he got 
off. He got tired of my company. 

I had a lot of fun flying. I enjoyed it very 
much. During the war with Japan we had 
these training bases out here in the West, and 
the Civil Air Patrol was very often called on 
to make search and rescue missions. I was at 


that time a squadron commander of the Battle 
Mountain squadron, and we had about fifteen 
or twenty men and women that were part of 
the squadron. We had three or four planes that 
we could use to go out on these search and 
rescue problems that sometimes would arise in 
this area. I don’t know how many hours that I 
have actually flown, having been called out on 
emergencies due to planes that would be lost 
that were on some routine mission, training 
missions. Planes from the Wendover air base 
would come to Elko and back up to Pocatello 
and then back to Wendover, and then there 
would be planes that would be from California 
someplace, maybe around Sacramento, that 
would fly on a routine mission to Pocatello or 
up to different places in Idaho, and then some 
of them would get lost. 

I know there was one P-51 Mustang—there 
was a group of four or five in this squadron 
that flew to Pocatello, and they did a round 
robin; they didn’t land up there but refueled, 
and on their way back to Sacramento, one 
of these planes veered to the right, and he 
landed in a desolate area north of here up 
in the Owyhee Desert, we were called out. 
We had practically all of the Nevada wing 
of the Civil Air Patrol located here in Battle 
Mountain, established a base here to go search 
for this lost plane, and we finally found him, 
as I said, out in Owyhee. 

My cousin and I found him. He had left 
the plane. He was a former Nevada boy, and 
he evidently got pretty thirsty, and he saw all 
the cattle out there and he said, “Well, where 
there’s cattle, there must be water,” so he took 
up one of the cattle trails and went and got 
some water. He was on back a ways from the 
plane when we landed there. It was only a 
short time after that that the air force, which 
had planes located in Elko and were also 
searching, saw these two planes on the ground 
there. They radioed back, and it was only a 



My Story — Early Life and Career; Business and Civic Life in Battle Mountain 


49 


short time after that they sent out a helicopter 
from the Elko field. They picked up the pilot, 
and later on they sent in transport crews and 
they dismantled the plane and hauled it out. 
That was one mission that we served on. I’ve 
served on several. 

Some of the areas that we had to search 
was in and around the Ruby Mountains and 
also north of Elko, up around Jarbidge, and 
those high mountain countries. And it was 
usually in the dead of winter, subzero weather 
and very cold and very vicious. Fortunately, 
we were all very lucky. All of us pilots, using 
our own planes, our own gasoline, we never 
received any money in compensation for our 
services, but we felt that we was doing the best 
we could under the circumstances to help out 
these young men that get lost or have some 
kind of an airplane accident someplace. It was 
a trying ordeal. 

I know one time I was flying search in the 
Ruby Mountains, and it had been reported 
that supposedly the airplane was down south 
of Lamoille Canyon, high up in the rim rocks. 
I happened to be up in Elko at that time with 
my plane, attending a business meeting, so 
they asked me if I would take an observer 
with me and go out and take a look. In the 
meantime, all these other pilots had returned 
to Reno, and I was the only one there that they 
could call on, so I loaded up with fuel and 
took and flew out over the Rubies. Of course, 
I was flying a slow, low-powered aircraft. I 
did see this object from a distance that did 
look something like maybe it was a part of an 
airplane, but the only way to make absolutely 
sure was to go in and look in this canyon. So 
I got as much altitude as I possibly could to 
come in over a rim and flew right over this 
object, which turned out to be just nothing 
more than a large rock that had evidently 
rolled down off of this cliff On the way out I 
had to come right down to this narrow gorge, 


and I’m willing to wager the wingtips on the 
right-hand side of my plane didn’t miss that 
gorge more than six inches. This fellow that 
was with me, this observer, he was on the 
radio, and when he looked out and saw how 
close that cliff was, why, I never heard a man 
get so busy in my life than he did on that 
radio. Good luck and fortune was again with 
us, and we got back safely to the Elko airport. 
I reported that the object that they thought 
could have been an airplane was just nothing 
more than a large boulder that dropped off 
the side of the cliff 




4 

My Memories of Noble H. Getchell 

and George Wingfield 


It’s been my privilege to have been a very 
personal friend of Noble H. Getchell’s. I heard 
Noble H. Getchell make this remark, “You 
know, politics is the greatest indoor sport 
that there is in the world.” He loved politics. 
In fact at one time, he was not only the state 
senator from Lander County, but he was 
Lander County chairman. He also became 
state chairman of the Republican Party. It was 
during his several terms that he served as state 
chairman that he became very well acquainted 
with George Wingfield. 

If you remember back, George Wingfield 
served as national committeeman of the 
Republican Party for many, many years, and 
it was during this time when they was rubbing 
political elbows that they became quite good 
friends. During the depression years when the 
banks all closed and George Wingfield lost 
nearly all of his banks due to that depression 
and practically went broke, he had to sell the 
Golden Hotel in Reno. Regardless of the fact 
that he did lose the greatest portion of his 
wealth, he and Getchell still retained that 
very fine friendship. When the time came for 


Getchell to look for someone whom he could 
trust and who he believed in, that could help 
him in connection with promotion of the 
Getchell Mine, the person he contacted was 
none other than George Wingfield. 

There’s an interesting story about the 
Getchell Mine. I should start right at the very 
beginning of Getchell’s mining experience 
here in the state of Nevada. It would be quite 
an interesting story. 

Let’s start, for instance, with the Betty 
O’Neal Mine. Noble Getchell’s father, L. R. 
Getchell, was a very good friend of my dad’s, 
Henry R. Lemaire, due to their experience in 
mining. They felt sorry for each other—let’s 
put it that way. In 1918 when we had this 
influenza epidemic, Noble Getchell’s father 
contracted pneumonia and this influenza. 
And he realized at his age (he was quite elderly 
at that time) that he wasn’t going to make it. 
So he sent word up to our home here in Battle 
Mountain and asked my dad to come on down 
and see him, which my dad did. Mr. Getchell 
told my dad, “Henry,” he said, “I have all of 
the Betty O’Neal properties tied up under an 



52 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


option. I sincerely and honestly believe that 
there’s a terrific opportunity there. Previous 
to the time that I got this option, this property 
was owned and operated by people that didn’t 
know anything about mining, and the monies 
that they raised to do development work, they 
spent it ridiculously instead of spending it on 
the property to see if the property had merit. 
Now,” he said, “I sincerely and honestly believe 
that there is a big chance of a big property up 
there.” And he said, “I don’t think that I’m going 
to make it out of this illness. When my son 
Noble comes up here, will you give him this 
message that I have this property under option 
and I want him to go ahead and see if the 
property does have merit?” He says, “Noble has 
had enough mining experience, even though 
he’s been an actor and played in plays and so 
forth—he has had enough mining experience 
so that I know he would go in there and 
approach this thing from a practical approach 
and make sure that it doesn’t have merit or 
it does have merit. So if I do fade out of the 
picture, I want you to give him that message, 
to hang onto that property and do some work 
up there and see if it does have merit.” 

It was only a few days after that that he 
did pass away, and Noble came up from 
either Arizona or New Mexico. Then my 
dad delivered him the message. When Noble 
came up here, he had very little money, but 
he did have sufficient monies to take care of 
his father’s burial expenses and what expenses 
had been incurred in connection with the 
Betty O’Neal property. And he had just a few 
thousand dollars left. 

So following out his father’s wishes, 
he went down this shaft and what had 
presumably been a hanging wall structure. 
He had some of his mining men, some of 
these fellows that were working for him, 
drill a hole in this hanging wall and take a 
sample of it. It proved to be a very fine grade 


of mill ore, around twenty or thirty or forty 
ounces, and it was a large body of it. So as he 
went on down further in depth in the shaft, 
he also encountered ore, and then there was 
a drift that went to the east, I think it was, 
and he encountered ore in that area. In other 
words, practically every place that Noble 
Getchell went up there at the Betty O’Neal, 
he encountered ore that had been overlooked 
by his predecessors. When he realized that he 
had this potential up there as far as a good 
healthy mine, he realized that he had to go 
get some financing to further develop it, and 
if necessary, to go ahead and put in a mill. 

So he went back to Boston. I don’t know 
how he happened to know this person, but 
he met this person years ago. This fellow’s 
name was Sias, and he was in Boston, and 
he could have been a broker or some kind 
of a businessman or something, but anyway, 
Getchell carried this problem to him that 
he had to have this financing. The price of 
silver was at a pretty good figure at that time. 
It was back in 1919-1920, wasn’t it, because 
his father passed away in ’18. The price of 
silver was pretty fair at that time. So he raised 
this money, and he raised just enough to 
go on with this development work. As the 
development work proved satisfactory, he 
kept this friend of his advised back in Boston, 
and they raised enough money to go ahead 
and build the Betty O’Neal mill. The capacity 
of that mill, the maximum capacity, was only 
about 150 tons a day. 

So they started to mill some of this ore, 
and eventually they built a tunnel that they 
called the Getchell Tunnel which tapped this 
shaft. They called it the Able shaft. All of these 
ores that they were taking from these various 
levels in this shaft, why, all they had to do 
was just let it drop down into these gathering 
points and they would load it into the cars and 
take it all down to the mill. 



My Memories of Noble H. Getchell and George Wingfield 


53 


It was an easy ore to concentrate. When 
they finally got into production and started 
to make some money they paid five cents a 
share on their stock—outstanding for I don’t 
know how many years—each month a five- 
cent dividend per share. 

Like Getchell told me at one time, “You 
know, Rene, when I first went to Betty O’Neal, 
I was practically broke.” He said, “I’ve always 
adopted a policy that any money that I 
make, I always give Louise, my wife, half of 
it. She looks after that money so that I won’t 
gamble with it. When I left the Betty O’Neal 
and moved over to Midas, I only lacked, she 
and I, eight thousand dollars of being half 
of a millionaire. Now, that was our financial 
position. 

The reason that he left the Betty O’Neal 
primarily was on account of the depressed 
price of silver. The Midas property was a gold- 
bearing ore. So he moved over to Midas and 
he had nothing but bad luck over there. I say 
bad luck for the simple reason that the banks 
all failed. They went through that depression 
period, and this fellow that was supposed 
to be a big financier in connection with the 
operation of these Midas properties.... They 
changed, see; they consolidated the Betty 
O’Neal and the Midas property and called it 
the Gold and Silver Circle Mines Company. 
They really had a rough problem over there. 
They made money for awhile, but they ran 
out of ore. 

The ore bodies in the Midas mining 
district are all vein material and it’s pretty high 
grade, but never of any great width. Getchell 
did tell me that the bottom of the main shaft 
over there, that when they had to quit on 
account of the water problem, that They were 
in about eight feet deep of ore that run about 
forty dollars gold. That was at the old price 
of twenty-five dollars. What he wanted this 
individual from New York, who was putting 


up a lot of the money for this development, 
he wanted him to run a tunnel from the mill 
site on up to tap this shaft. He wanted to make 
this a working tunnel, primarily because he 
felt that by having this working tunnel, there 
was about a 400-foot lift that he could do away 
with as far as pumping the water out of the 
mine, and then they would have a tunnel that 
they could operate all the year long, regardless 
of the winters. 

The Midas country is a high country, and 
they have a terrific amount of snow there 
some winters. They could lay in enough 
supplies so they could continue on their 
operation without interference on account of 
weather problems. As it was, they would have 
to raise the ores up out of this Elko Prince 
shaft and haul it by truck down to the mill, 
and that was rather expensive and practically 
impossible to do in the winter months when 
they had this snow and mud condition to 
fight. There were many winters when he was 
over there that you couldn’t even go from the 
lower Clover ranch into Midas on account of 
the depth of the snow. They’d break through 
these drifts with bulldozers and try to keep the 
road open, but the snow would drift forward 
just a few minutes after they’d gone through. 
It was difficult to get provisions, and supplies, 
and mail in there. So Getchell’s taste of the 
Midas property was anything but pleasant. 

When spring finally came we had those 
depression years. There was a gentleman here 
that used to work for Getchell up at the Betty 
O’Neal. His name was Emmett Chase. Due 
to the conditions that existed at that time, 
Emmett was working out here on the road, on 
a PWA project, and he bumped into a fellow 
by the name of Ed Knight, who was a mining 
man, a prospector. Ed was telling him about 
this wonderful vein of silver ore that he had 
run across over in the Osgood Mountains. He 
told Emmett Chase, he said, “Emmett, you get 



54 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


me a twenty-five dollar grubstake, and I will 
go over there and locate some claims in your 
name and my name. We’ll work it together.” 

Well, Emmett Chase went to a sister-in- 
law of his (her name is Mrs. Merle Estes) who 
happened to have a little money in some kind 
of an account. He borrowed this twenty-five 
dollars from her and gave it to this fellow, Ed 
Knight, to go over and see if he could find 
this silver vein. 

So I think Ed bought ten dollars worth of 
groceries, and enough gasoline for his car to 
go over and see if he could find this vein. He 
was gone for about two weeks. I don’t know 
whether he run out of whiskey or run out of 
food first, but anyway, he finally came back. 
He gave Emmett Chase this hard luck story, 
he said, “I looked and looked and looked, 
and I couldn’t find that silver vein, but,” he 
said, “you know, Emmett, there’s a great big 
immense cliff, a big outcropping over there.” 
He said, “It looks like it might have some 
mineral in it. I brought a sack full of it for you, 
at least a half a gunny sack,” and he said, “I’ve 
roasted it, and I’ve tried to pan it, and it don’t 
show a color or a darn thing as far as gold.” 
So Emmet just figured that he had thrown 
twenty-five dollars away, and he was trying to 
figure out how he could pay Mrs. Estes back. 

But one day, Getchell came in here from 
Midas and he bumped into Emmett in the 
post office. (It used to be right close to that 
variety store, right there in that Owl Motel. 
There’s a big history behind that location.) 
Well, he bumped into Emmett and he said, 
“Emmett, what are you doing?” 

Emmett said, “Oh, I’m scrounging around 
trying to make a little money working for the 
PWA.” 

And Getchell said, “You got any prospects 
of any kind of ore? Anyplace where we can do 
some mining?” Getchell was getting pretty 
sick of this Midas deal. 


Chase said, “Yeah, I got some ore right 
down there at my house that Ed Knight 
brought in. Re says it won’t pan, but he says 
it looks like it might have some value in it. 
I haven’t got enough money even to send it 
away and have it assayed.” 

Getchell said, “Well, I’ll tell you, Emmett, 
you go get that sack and bring it over and put 
it in the car here, and when I go back to the 
mine,” he said, “I’ll get our assayer over there 
to assay it for us.” Getchell looked at it first. 
It just looked like plain old country rock. So 
he took it over to Midas and took it out of 
his car and threw it in the office and never 
even thought of having it assayed. It slipped 
his mind, I guess. Finally, one day the assayer 
who was also his mill superintendent came in 
and He asked Getchell, “By golly, I haven’t got 
a darn thing to do this afternoon. You got any 
sample you want me to run?” 

Getchell said, “Oh, yeah, take a look at 
that stuff in that sack there. If you’re not 
doing anything, you might as well run that.” 
He said, “I don’t think it will run anything. 
Try it, anyhow.” 

So this fellow took this stuff and looked 
at it and he said, “Well, it sure don’t look like 
it’s got very much mineral in it, but I’ll run it 
for you.” So he took it up to the assay office, 
ground it up and pulverized it good, and run 
it through the retorts or whatever they use 
to run these gold samples. After he caught 
these—there was little pellets of gold in these 
ampules, or whatever they call those things 
that they use to put in the furnaces. So he 
weighed it up, and this darn stuff run around 
eight to twelve dollars a ton. So he thought he 
was salted, so he run some more. He rerun it, 
this stuff, this ore. By golly, it still held up; it 
run between eight and twelve dollars a ton. 

So he walked down to the office and he 
says, “Say, Noble, that stuff that looked so 
poor,” he said, “I made a double check on it, 



My Memories of Noble H. Getchell and George Wingfield 


55 


and that stuff will run anywhere from eight 
to twelve dollars a ton.” 

Getchell said, “It will?” 

And this fellow said, “Yes, it sure as the 
dickens will.” 

“Well, I’ll be darned.” 

So it wasn’t long after that that Getchell 
came to Battle Mountain again, and he went 
and saw Emmett Chase, and he said, “Say, 
Emmett, can you get me some more of that 
stuff that you gave to me to have sampled over 
there at the mine? I’d like to run some more 
assays on it.” 

Chase said, “Sure, I think there’s a whole 
mountain of it out there, from what Ed Knight 
tells me.” I think Ed went out and got some 
more and brought it in to Chase, and Chase, 
in turn, gave it to Getchell, who had it run. 
It ran just exactly the same, anywhere from 
eight to twelve dollars! 

So Getchell came in again, and he got 
ahold of both Knight and Chase and he 
said, “Say, let’s go take a look at this deal you 
fellows got.” So they went as far as they could 
by auto, then they had to walk about three or 
four miles up to this big outcropping in this 
canyon. Getchell says, “Well, where is it?” 

Ed Knight said, “Well, that’s it right there, 
that great big immense cliff. That’s where I 
picked this stuff off of.” 

So Getchell took some more samples 
himself, had them run, and boy, they checked 
right out. So he got ahold of these two 
characters, and he said, “How, listen, I haven’t 
got very much money, but I would like to find 
out whether this thing has got merit. How 
what we will do,” he said, “we’ll go three ways 
on this. You fellows will own two thirds, and 
I’ll own a third. I’ll put up all of the costs as 
far as supplying the powder and the fuse and 
the caps and the drills and the gasoline, and so 
forth, and the food, but you fellows are going 
to have to put up the labor. And,” he said, “I 


want around two or three crosscut tunnels 
into the face of this outcropping to determine 
if it has any immensity or any large quantity, 
and we will check it.” 

So they established a camp there in a tent, 
and they dug these two or three little crosscut 
tunnels in the face of this outcropping. Of 
course, Getchell would go over there every 
once in awhile. One of these tunnels, they’d 
gone in, oh, goodness, forty or fifty feet. He 
went over there one day, and he could hear 
somebody drilling in the face of this tunnel, 
and he went back in there and here was 
Emmett Chase working all alone. He said, 
“Emmett, you working here all alone?” 

“Yeah,” he said. “Ed, he figured this stuff 
wasn’t worth anything, and he decided that 
he’d go prospecting.” 

Getchell said, “Well, he’s not going to go 
prospecting on my time. I’m paying you guys 
as far as the grub and supplies and everything 
else to see what this is. I’m not looking for 
any other prospects. I want to find out what 
this is.” 

So Getchell was real angry about this 
deal. He waited around the camp there until 
Ed come walking up over the brow of this 
hill. When Ed finally got there, why, Getchell 
began asking him quite a few questions, where 
he was and what he was doing. This fellow, Ed 
Knight, he says, “Aw, this thing’s not worth 
anything.” 

Getchell said to him, “Well, if you feel 
that this is not worth anything, will you sell 
me your interest?” 

He said, “Sure.” Of course, Ed was looking 
for some whiskey money. 

Getchell said, “Well, how much will you 
take for your interest?” 

Ed spoke up and said, “Well, I want at least 
five thousand dollars.” 

Getchell said, “Well, wait a minute now, 
buster. As far as were concerned, why, you told 



56 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


me this wasn’t worth anything, and yet when 
I want to buy your third out, why, you want 
to soak me five thousand dollars. That just 
doesn’t make sense.” And Getchell reached 
in his pocket, tie happened to have two or 
three one hundred-dollar bills, and he began 
kind of unfolding them in front of Ed Knight. 
Ed began to get the whiskey desire again. 
Getchell said, “I’ll tell you what I’ll do, Ed. 
I’ll give you a hundred dollars right here and 
now, on an option to buy your third interest 
for five hundred dollars. I’ll have thirty days 
to pay you the other four hundred.” Well, that 
seemed a little unfair and he began again, 
“Well, that’s all right. You either take it or leave 
it or go to work up here and do this work in 
this mine. That’s what I want, to find out if this 
thing is worth anything or nothing.” 

Well, Ed got kind of p.o.’d at Getch, and 
so he said, “Well, I’ll take a hundred dollars 
with a thirty-day option on the remaining 
four hundred.” 

So they wrote out a simple agreement on 
the back of an envelope, with Emmett Chase 
as the witness to the deal. So then Getchell 
really did go to work. He hired some more 
men, and boy, they began poking those 
tunnels! 

Every time Getchell would go to Reno, 
he would always see George Wingfield and 
visit with him, and he was telling him about 
this prospect he had, this gold property. 
(Wingfield was still Republican national 
committeeman and Getchell was still the state 
chairman.) Wingfield would say, “How’s your 
prospect coming along?” 

“Oh, it’s coming along all right.” 

Of course, as they kept digging into this 
great, big immense outcropping, the bigger 
it got. So then Getchell figured, “Well, golly 
sakes, I’ve got a mountain here and I’d better 
find out if I’m on sound ground.” So he went 
down to San Francisco and began to checking 


these section corners. Come to find out, all of 
this gold property was on railroad land. So he 
went to the commissioner for the Southern 
Pacific Land Company and wanted to know 
if they would sell him this particular section. 
This fellow said, “Nah, I don’t want to sell 
you this railroad land. You miners give me a 
pain in the neck, anyhow. All you do is just 
interfere with the livestock producer.” 

Getchell said, “Well, I still want to buy 
some of this ground.” 

I’ve forgotten the man’s name that was 
Southern Pacific Land commissioner at that 
time, but he said to Getchell, “Well, when you 
was at the Betty O’Neal and the Midas, you 
was always a good shipper on our railroads.” 
And he thought he could get rid of him, so he 
says, “Jill tell you what I’ll do. I’ll sell you”—it 
was either 160 acres or a half section of 320 
acres for this outcropping—’’I’ll sell it to you 
for forty dollars an acre.” 

Getchell said, “I’ll take it.” He thought 
he was going to get rid of him by asking this 
exorbitant price, so Getchell bought it. 

So then Getchell came back, and by that 
time, why, Emmett had moved his wife, 
Dulcie, over to this mining camp. (She’s still 
alive, by the way.) They built a road in there 
so they wouldn’t have to do so much walking. 
Getchell drove up to the camp and he asked 
Dulcie where Emmett was. She said, “He’s 
up there with the mining boys and they’re 
working in that first tunnel.” So Getchell went 
in and got ahold of Emmett, and he took him 
outside and he told him, he said, “Emmett, 
this property that you and I think we own, it’s 
on railroad land.” And he said, “I’ve just come 
back from San Francisco and I bought it.” 

Chase said, “Well, that puts me clear out 
of the picture, doesn’t it?” 

Getchell said, “No, no, no. You’re still my 
partner, but here’s what I want to do.” He said, 
“When I start wheeling and dealing with this 



My Memories of Noble H. Getchell and George Wingfield 


57 


property, I don’t want to get involved in any 
kind of litigation or anything inasmuch as 
you and Ed Knight was part of the original 
discoverers. Ed sold me his interest, now I’d 
like to buy your interest, a quit-claim deed to 
your interest.” 

Chase said, “Well, goodness sakes, you 
own it. You can just tell me to get.” 

No, I don’t want to do that,” Getchell 
said. “I’ll tell you what I’ll do. I’ll give you ten 
thousand dollars cash for your third interest.” 

Emmett said, “That’s quite a gift from 
heaven.” 

Getchell said, “Let’s not just you and I 
make this decision, let’s go down and talk to 
Dulcie, your wife.” 

So they went down to camp and they 
discussed this with her and told her the 
situation. Dulcie said, “Well, that’s really 
wonderful for you to give us that kind of 
money for something that we don’t own and 
you own it all. So,” she said, “I think it’s only 
fair and right that we give you this one-third 
for that price, if you want to give us that 
money, and I’ll be willing to sign the papers 
with Emmett.” So they had the papers drawn 
up and they both concurred on the sale, so 
Getchell had it all. 

The next time he went to Reno, he bumped 
into Wingfield. Now, this is interesting. He 
bumped into Wingfield, and Wingfield said, 
“How’s your gold prospect coming, Getch?” 

Getch said, “Oh, it’s coming along fine. 
You know, George, it’s gotten to the point 
now where, by golly, I think I’ll give you half 
interest in it.” 

“You what?” 

“Yep,” Getchell said, “I’m going to give you 
half interest in it.” 

“Well, goodness sakes, you know I haven’t 
got any money. I’m broke.” 

Getch said, “I know it, but I’m still going 
to give you half interest in this mine.” 


Wingfield said, “Well, what’s the strings 
attached to it?” 

Getchell said, “Oh, there’s strings. Soon 
as we finish eating lunch here in the Golden, 
we’ll go up in your office in the Reno National 
Bank and we’ll discuss it.” 

So after they had their lunch, they went 
up in George Wingfield’s office, and Getchell 
told him, he said, “Now, George, I want to 
give you a half interest in this mine, and I 
know that you haven’t got any money, but,” 
he said, “in your political life, and in your 
banking career, there’s been some place, 
someone up and down the roads that you 
have traveled between here and New York 
and San Francisco that have told you that 
if, and whenever, any time, you should run 
across a big mine to let them know and they 
would come and take a look at it.” Getchell 
looked at him, and he was wondering whether 
Wingfield could think back far enough to 
think of anybody that he had contacted on 
that line or not. 

And George snapped his fingers, and he 
said, “Yeah, by gosh, come to think about it, I 
did.” He said, “You know who that is?” 

Getchell said, “No, I don’t know, but I 
figured that someplace you’d met somebody 
that was in a position to finance a property of 
this nature and would have plenty of money 
to really put it on a producing basis.” 

And Wingfield said, “Yeah, I know a 
fellow by the name of Bernard Baruch, but 
before I can go to Bernard Baruch, I’m going 
to have to send out my brother-in-law, Roy 
Hardy, to take a check to see if this mine does 
have matter.” 

So Roy Hardy went out there, and he 
took samples in all of these various crosscut 
tunnels and the face of this outcropping, 
and took them back to Reno and had them 
assayed, and, by golly, they all ran a very high 
price in gold. And Roy thought that he had 



58 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


been salted. He figured that he had actually 
been salted due to the outward appearance 
of this particular type of ore. So, without any 
falderal, or without any public announcement 
or anything, why, he slips back out there and 
takes some more samples without anybody 
knowing it, takes them back to Reno, and 
they all run just like the first ones. Hell, he 
was convinced. 

So he went and told George Wingfield, his 
brother-in-law, that the best thing for him to 
do was to get on a plane and go back and see 
Bernard Baruch. So, by golly, Wingfield did. 
He went back to New York and he talked to 
Bernard Baruch, and Bernard Baruch said, 
“Well, I’ll send my engineer out to take a look.” 

So this engineer, he slipped out, took some 
samples, and he thought he was salted, so he 
went and checked again, too. Then he went 
back to New York and told Bernard Baruch 
of this bi- cliff that was just nothing but low 
grade ore. He said, “It’s complex ore. It’s an 
arsenious-gold type of ore. You might, later 
on, have to roast it in order to get the mineral 
out of it.” 

Anyway, that’s what happened as far as 
the gold mine is concerned. Then this outfit, 
I think it was the Newmont people, put up all 
the money. Of course, they formed a Getchell 
Mine Corporation, and these people put up 
$1,125,300 to put in this mill, put in the power 
lines and everything, for seventeen percent 
of the stock. This stock was put in escrow in 
some bank with the idea in mind that Getchell 
and Wingfield was supposed to buy it back 
at a certain length of time, and if they didn’t 
buy it back, why, it would be forfeited to this 
New York group. Of course, I don’t know for 
sure, but I kind of think it was a little bit of 
tax evasion in connection with the transfer 
of this stock. 

But getting back to this mining property, 
it was also agreed that Wingfield would 


be the president of the corporation and 
Getchell would be the general manager, 
and that the property would be named the 
Getchell Mine. Of course, Getchell and 
Wingfield, they had the controlling interests 
in the whole picture, but it was agreed 
between them that the first monies that were 
produced from this property would be used 
to pay back this company that was doing the 
financing. So after they finally got to rolling, 
I think it was only six or eight months, 
they paid back this company that put up 
the money, and they have been declaring 
dividends ever since. 

As luck would have it, when they declared 
limitations on the production of gold during 
the war, why, they got to fooling around over 
there, and they run across a great big immense 
deposit of tungsten which the government 
was in sore need of. So they started in to 
producing tungsten, but I’m getting ahead of 
my story a little bit here. 

When they found out the immensity of 
this deposit, they immediately contacted the 
Southern Pacific Land Company and I think 
they bought about ten sections of land over 
there that was all adjoining along this vein 
system. Instead of paying forty dollars an 
acre for it, I think they got it for around about 
seventy-five cents an acre. They had been so 
successful and productive over there. They’re 
still mining over there right now. 

I think, due to Getchell’s death, his estate 
had to be settled and Wingfield’s estate had to 
be settled. Somehow or another, why, young 
George made some kind of a deal with this 
Goldfield Consolidated (they are the ones 
that are now operating the Getchell Mine) 
and they’re shipping gold all the time from 
over there. I don’t know what process they’re 
using to extract that real fine gold out of 
that arsenic sulphur, sulphite ore, but they’re 
getting it somehow. 



My Memories of Noble H. Getchell and George Wingfield 


59 


Here’s an interesting picture of Getchell 
and his personality. When this thing finally 
became unfolded—as far as building the 
mill—and they began to realize the wealth 
that was involved in that piece of property, 
Getchell went to Wingfield and he said, 
“You know, I feel guilty as far as Emmett 
Chase is concerned.” He said, “I don’t have 
any sympathy for Ed Knight, but as far as 
Emmett Chase is concerned, he’s always been 
in my corner, and he’s always done what Eve 
asked him to do.” With that thought in mind, 
he said, “George, don’t you think we ought 
to build him a nice home over there at the 
mine and let him be a sort of a big shot or an 
overseer to kind of look after things at a very 
fine salary, say, as long as he lives?” 

Wingfield said, “That’s all right with me 
if it’s all right with you, Getch.” 

So that’s what they did. They built him a 
nice home and he lived there for several years, 
and he got this nice salary and had to do very 
little work. They had some labor problems 
over there, and I think they put Emmett at 
the gate as a guardian to keep a lot of these 
rabble-rousers, troublemakers, out. 

Then as time went on and they kept 
paying these dividends and everything, why, 
Getchell said to George one day, when they 
was having a little visitation, he said, “You 
know, George, I still feel guilty about Emmett 
Chase and this property.” He said, “What Ed 
like to do is to give him about ten thousand 
shares out of our treasury stock.” 

Wingfield said, “Now, wait a minute, 
Getch. You’re just going too far here on this 
thing. I know that Chase was probably very 
instrumental in finding this property, and 
so forth, but I can’t see us giving him ten 
thousand shares.” 

Getchell said, “Well, we’ve got plenty of 
treasury stock, and it wouldn’t hurt either 
one of us.” 


“Well,” George said, “it would hurt the 
dividends. We have to declare dividends, you 
know, and it would be a further distribution, 
expanded distribution, of these dividends.” 

So it went by for two or three weeks, and 
one day Getchell bumped into George, and 
George said, “You know, Eve been thinking 
about that, where you want to give ten 
thousand shares to Emmett Chase. Ell tell 
what Ell do,” he said. “You know, Roy Hardy 
helped discover that mine, too, my brother- 
in-law.” He said, “If you will go along and give 
Roy Hardy ten thousand shares, I’ll go along 
and let Emmett Chase have ten thousand 
shares. 

Getchell said, “That’s all right with me.” 

So that’s what happened. They gave each 
one of those men ten thousand shares in 
connection with that Getchell Mine. And that 
stock went up to fourteen, fifteen dollars a 
share, so that was a pretty nice gift of $150,000 
to each one. 

Of course, I think Emmett wasn’t a 
very smart businessman, and everybody 
that came along had some kind of a deal to 
sell him a fancy patent or something, and 
Emmett kind of fell for it. Out of all that 
money that he realized from that stock, I 
don’t think he left very much, but I do believe 
his wife is still getting some kind of a check 
from the Getchell Mine. Maybe Em wrong, 
I don’t know. But that’s the story of Getchell. 
and his mining activity here in the state of 
Nevada. 

He loved to hunt, too. He and a group 
of fellows became very good friends of Mr. 
Shoup, who used to be connected with the 
Nevada Division of the California State 
Automobile Association. He and Shoup and 
Howard Doyle and some of those fellows 
down there, they used to all go deer hunting 
together over around Monitor Valley and that 
country. They had a lot of fun. 



60 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


Getchell, with his background in the 
theatrical field, was quite an entertainer. He 
used to give these parties and dances up at 
the Betty O’Neal when he was here in Battle 
Mountain, and he used to love to dance and 
to sing. That song, “Peggy O’Neal,’ well, they 
changed that to “Betty O’Neal” and that was 
sort of the main song for the Betty O’Neal 
camp. Getchell—I used to get a kick out of 
him. He used to sing, and, oh, golly, he’d really 
sing out that Betty O’Neal. 

He had a nice home up there, and he had 
one of the best baseball teams in the state 
of Nevada, and, of course, the Betty O’Neal 
mining company sort of financed it. There was 
a lot of real fine professional ball players on 
that team, and they didn’t have to do hardly 
any work. He was trying to build a pipeline, 
I think, from a place called Whiskey Canyon 
over at the Betty O’Neal mill. He never made 
them work too hard. All he was interested in 
was winning that Humboldt Valley League 
title, as far as baseball was concerned. 

Then he became interested in the Battle 
Mountain State Bank—he used to be a 
stockholder in that bank. There used to be 
a fellow by the name of George Southward. 
He married Mrs. Jenkins. When she died in 
1918, Southward operated the W. T. Jenkins 
holdings for several years. Finally he decided 
to sell out, and Getchell bought his interest 
in the bank, the Battle Mountain State Bank, 
and also bought his stock in the W. T. Jenkins 
Company. His prime reason for buying that 
stock in the W. T. Jenkins Company was in 
order to be in a bargaining position as far 
as the water that was coming, out of Lewis 
Canyon. We used to have these drought years, 
and to operate any kind of a mill you had to 
have water. Of course, when he got ahold of 
that stock, why, naturally, Louise Marvel and 
those in the W. T. Jenkins Company were 
rather upset about it. So they had him come 


to their home to visit and discuss the problem. 
He openly told them, “I’m not interested in 
running your sheep or running your cattle or 
running your activities. All I’m interested in is 
that water. I want to get an acknowledgement 
from you folks that if and whenever I want 
some water out of that Lewis Creek, I can 
get it.” 

Well, they were happy to learn that, 
because even though water was essential to 
their big ranch, called the Martin ranch, down 
below Lewis Canyon, it wasn’t so essential 
that they couldn’t do a little bargaining to 
give Getchell the water that he needed. So 
they made some kind of arrangements. 
They took over that stock that Mrs. Marvel 
had, and got Getchell out of the picture, but 
just for a water right, and perhaps whatever 
money he paid this fellow Southward. That’s 
a little interesting sidelight of Getchell’s life 
and career. 

I’d like to add a bit more about Noble H. 
Getchell and his political activities and how 
he was able to remain in a position as county 
chairman of Lander County of the Republican 
Party, and also state chairman, and how he 
kept his political machine active and on its 
toes to, in a sense, perpetuate himself in office. 

In all of Noble Getchell’s undertakings, 
regardless of whether it was in politics, or in 
any mining activities, or a business venture 
of any kind, he was meticulous in making 
absolutely sure that all details were being 
taken care of. On the political front, he 
always arranged to have certain lieutenants 
on the precinct level as well as on the county 
level. At the precinct level, naturally, those 
lieutenants looked after his position as 
county chairman and also as state senator, 
and he had men in these key positions that 
he could trust, so that he was a senator from 
Lander County for twenty years. I think that 
he was county chairman of the Republican 



My Memories of Noble H. Getchell and George Wingfield 


61 


party here in Lander County for quite some 
time, too. I don’t think that many years, but 
he did serve in that capacity for at least ten 
or twelve years. Then, as chairman of the 
Republican party on the state level, he had 
key personnel in every one of the counties to 
look after his power and his stature as far as 
maintaining himself for the people. In all the 
years that I’ve known Noble Getchell, I never 
did hear him make a political speech. In his 
activities, he would always get someone of 
consequence who was an eloquent speaker 
to do the job for him, and they didn’t 
hesitate at all to praise his qualifications to 
be a leader, either on the county level or the 
state level. 

An interesting thing happened here one 
year when Noble Getchell was running for the 
position of state senator. He had a very strong 
opponent who was a Democrat, but Getchell 
was so well-liked by his colleagues and fellow 
senators in the Nevada State Legislature that 
during the course of his campaign, he had 
one of the most outstanding Democrats in 
the northern part of the state come down here 
to Battle Mountain, at a big public rally and 
dance, to put in a good word for him from 
the platform in a speech. That person was 
none other than the honorable Senator John 
E. Robbins, who later on, I believe, became 
Democratic national committeeman from 
the state of Nevada. 

By the way, while I mention his name, 
he was a very fine gentleman and also a 
wonderful friend of mine, and during the 
many years that I served in the legislature, I 
went to him many times for counseling and 
advice. It was through him that I learned 
much about procedures in connection with 
legislative matters, and I really feel highly 
honored that I had the privilege of knowing 
a person like John E. Robbins from Elko 
County. 


Here is an interesting look at the legislature 
during the time that Noble Getchell was a 
Senator from Lander County. There were 
about nine outstanding senators that formed 
what was called or nicknamed the “bull bloc.” 
As I remember, in this group there was John 
E. Robbins, William Dressier from Douglas 
County, a gentleman by the name of John H. 
Miller from Mineral County, and a young 
neophyte senator by the name of Walter Cox 
from Lyon County. In the senate there was 
seventeen representatives, one from each 
county. The magic number is nine, and in 
this “bull bloc” there was nine senators, and 
any legislation that was introduced, why, they 
had a signal system that if it was favorable, 
why, every one of them would put thumbs 
up; if it was unfavorable, why, thumbs down. 
It didn’t make much difference whether a bill 
would come out of committee that was good 
or bad, when it hit the floor of the senate, it 
was either passed or rejected just by thumbs 
up or thumbs down by this “bull bloc.” 

As I stated in another part of this story, 
whenever you spoke of Noble Getchell, why, 
you also, in a sense, was speaking about 
George Wingfield. Whenever you spoke 
about George Wingfield, in a sense you was 
talking about Noble Getchell, because they 
became so close due to their activities in the 
Republican party. 

As I remember George Wingfield, I would 
like to class him as one of the great benefactors 
of our state. When he came to our state and 
he landed in Goldfield, from what I’ve been 
told, he was a very, very poor man. Through 
his wits and his business capabilities, why, he 
was quite successful and acquired quite a large 
fortune in mining activities in that area. He 
broadened out his activities and entered into 
finance and built up this chain of banks in the 
state of Nevada. When I made that statement 
that he was a great benefactor of the state of 



62 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


Nevada, it was proven, due to the fine support 
he gave to one of the main industries at that 
time, the livestock industry. 

Of course, he was quite ruthless as far as 
a business deal was concerned. If you failed 
to live up to commitments, why, he wouldn’t 
hesitate to take your property away from 
you if you had it up as security. He built 
some very fine edifices in this state. He had 
the Commercial Hotel in Elko. He had the 
Humboldt Hotel in Winnemucca. He had 
the Reno National Bank Building there on 
Second and Virginia Streets in Reno. He had 
the Golden Hotel in Reno, and he had the 
Riverside. And what other large buildings that 
he had throughout the state, I don’t remember. 
Of course, he had these various banks. He 
had the bank in Tonopah. He had the one in 
Elko, and Winnemucca, and, of course, Reno. 
When the financial crash came, Wingfield 
had overextended himself in livestock loans, 
and we all know that livestock prices really 
hit the bottom. 

I was warned by the Bamburgers who 
were an old family from the state of Utah. 
Prior to the crash, Clarence Bamburger and 
his brother Ernest were going through to 
San Francisco from Salt Lake. I was their 
petroleum distributor for the Associated Oil 
Products. I was working under them as the 
wholesale distributor in this area. They both 
stopped there at my place of business on Front 
Street here in Battle Mountain, and they both 
asked me where I was keeping my money. 

And I asked them, “Why would you ask 
a question like that?” 

They said, “Well, if you’ve got your money 
in Wingfield banks, why, the Wingfield banks 
are in a very precarious condition.” 

And I said, “Oh, I’ve got money scattered 
in several banks.” I didn’t have very much 
money, but I had it scattered. I didn’t take 
their warning. The fact of the matter is, as 


far as any financial institution like a bank 
is concerned, a serious run on a bank, even 
at this particular date and age, would really 
raise havoc with the bank. And I couldn’t see 
any rhyme or reason for taking out money 
that I had in these banks, and I didn’t know 
where the dickens to put it. I could have put 
it under a mattress or something like that, 
but I felt it was much safer to leave it in the 
banks. But I did have money in the Tonopah 
Bank, and I had money in the Reno National 
Bank, and I had money in the First National 
Bank in Winnemucca. All three of those were 
Wingfield banks. I also had money in this 
Battle Mountain State Bank. And all of them 
closed. Thank goodness we had built up a very 
fine credit rating. 

And these oil companies, like the Texas 
Company and the Shell Company and the 
Standard Oil Company, they realized that 
the amount of money that we owed to them, 
we just couldn’t afford to pay at that time, 
but they put through a ruling wherein they 
would keep our tanks filled. And then, as 
they would replenish these tanks, we’d have 
to pay for all that gasoline that we had sold. 
In other words, we were put on a cash basis. 
Then, as we gradually got back on our feet, we 
in turn could pay to these oil companies for 
the past indebtedness, which I thought was a 
very nice gesture on their part. Of course, they 
could have really raised Cain with all these 
business houses, and as far as service stations 
were concerned, they could have started suit 
and probably taken over the property to pay 
the indebtedness. But they didn’t do it; they 
were very cooperative. They not only did that 
with the service station operators and owners 
and businessmen, but they also did that with 
many of the livestock people. There are a lot 
of livestock people in this northern part of 
Nevada that owed the oil companies quite a 
considerable sum of money, and had been in 



My Memories of Noble H. Getchell and George Wingfield 


63 


the practice of paying monthly. But when they 
bumped up into this kind of condition, where 
the banks were closed, why, the oil companies 
were very cooperative and extended these 
livestock people the credit until such time as 
they would be able to sell their cattle or their 
wool crop or their lambs and things like that 
to pay their bills. That was the Depression as 
I can remember it. 

I think that anyone who has studied 
finance will remember that Hoover was 
President at that time. He inaugurated this 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation. Even 
though these Wingfield banks were in this 
deplorable condition, the prices of livestock 
had hit the bottom and then they started to 
improve. I’ve heard it said by men that were 
well up in finance that if Wingfield had been 
given at least four more months’ time, due to 
this aid that he could have received from the 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation, and 
this improvement in the price of the livestock, 
that there wouldn’t have been a single one of 
his banks that would not have been able to pay 
off everybody. And they would have been able 
to continue on in their operation. 

There is something else that is of interest, 
too, the very fact that Kirman, who was the 
owner of the First National Bank in Reno, 
was a very smart banker in that he knew what 
was going to happen. He was in a very fine 
financial condition when this depression hit. 
The greatest portion of the assets of that bank 
was liquid—they weren’t tied up in livestock 
loans and they weren’t tied up in real estate 
loans like the monies of the Wingfield banks. 
A bank of that kind, in my way of thinking, is 
not an asset to the state; it’s a detriment. What 
good is a bank in any state or community if 
they don’t participate in the business of the 
community by assisting the businessmen 
and help them to improve their businesses, 
or put money into loans that would be an 


improvement to the area? But that particular 
statement would be argued for many hours. 

Kirman, when the position of governorship 
came up, was influenced to run for governor. 
I’ve always claimed that Mr. Kirman is a 
very fine man, but he became governor for 
one purpose—to produce legislation that 
would put in branch banking in the state 
of Nevada. When this branch banking law 
was inaugurated, it wasn’t but a few months 
afterward that the Bank of America took over 
the First National Bank, bought Kirman out. If 
Kirman had any other objective as far as being 
a political influence in the state of Nevada, he 
could have been readily reelected. But after 
he had accomplished what he went in there 
to do, putting in this branch banking law, he 
didn’t want anything more to do with it—he 
quit! He made quite a lot of money by selling 
his bank to this Bank of America group. If (as 
I stated before) Wingfield had been given just 
a few more months, I think he would have 
gotten back on his feet. 




5 


My Political Career 


After I moved back to Battle Mountain, I 
took an active part in politics. Of course, my 
dad was always a Republican and so was my 
mother. 

J. M. Hiskey and Neal S. Eason were the 
big wheels in those days, and so was N. H. 
Getchell. Of course, he was the senator from 
this county. Getchell was quite active here in 
Lander County. He was operating, I believe 
at that time, the Betty O’Neal properties and 
eventually he moved over to Midas. 

I worked with Mr. W. G. Adams, who was 
cashier for the Battle Mountain State Bank, 
and there was many a county convention that 
I would walk in there with proxies sufficient 
to control the whole convention. The fact 
of the matter is, I could have elected myself 
county chairman or any other office that I 
would desire, as far as the county level was 
concerned. But I couldn’t see any rhyme or 
reason to do a thing like that to either Mr. 
Hiskey or Mr. Eason because they were two 
very stalwart people in connection with 
supporting the Republican party. And it was 
amusing to me; they knew I had all these 


proxies at this first meeting, and when it came 
time for nominations for county chairman, 
unhesitatingly, I got up and nominated J. M. 
Hiskey, and by acclamation, he was put back 
in office. The same thing happened as far as 
Neal Eason was concerned. The very fact that 
I did that later proved to be very beneficial to 
me because when I needed their help when I 
decided to enter politics and run for an office, 
well, both of them were in my camp, and 
they showed it. So it was, year after year, that 
I would go into these county conventions of 
the Republican party and have those proxies 
and could have just ruled the roost, but I 
didn’t do it. 

I have always felt that in connection with 
party politics, those people that have served 
their party loyally and have been out of pocket 
a lot of expense, like these two men were, what 
benefits they might have derived out of having 
those positions, I don’t think it was worth 
even thinking about, other than just the glory 
of being county chairman of a political party, 
which didn’t mean anything to me. I gained 
their favor by doing just exactly what I did. 



66 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


Now, in collecting these proxies, we had 
only two precincts here in Battle Mountain, 
Argenta No. 1 and Argenta No. 2, and each 
precinct was entitled to so many votes at 
the county convention. The leaders from 
each precinct would hold precinct meetings. 
(Of course, these precinct mass meetings 
was very poorly attended, let’s be frank, 
but there was enough to do it legally.) They 
would choose persons whom they thought 
might be interested in going to the county 
convention, but eventually it turned out that 
they didn’t want to go, so they in turn would 
get their proxies, and these proxies, why, 
they were assigned to either me or someone 
else, split them, and we’d go to the county 
conventions in Austin. That’s how we got 
the proxies. 

In 1942 and four years previous to that, 
which would be 1938, Senator Getchell ran 
for office here in Battle Mountain, but he was 
living in Reno. It’s very, very difficult as far 
as campaigning to elect somebody that’s not 
even a resident of your county. If it hadn’t been 
for the fact that we Republicans in this end of 
the county worked like dirty dogs, Getchell 
would have got beaten in 38. The opposition 
party realized where their weaknesses were, 
and so they planned on putting up a candidate 
that was a master politician, and without a 
question of a doubt, if Getchell had run again 
for that position, he would have got beaten 
and beaten very badly. 

Well, due to the personal acquaintanceship 
I have had with Noble Getchell, I knew that 
if he would run for office and get beat, he 
would become very bitter and very vitriolic 
towards Lander County. Rather than have him 
undergo that experience, I decided that the 
best thing for me to do was to stick my neck 
out. I didn’t really have any—well, I wanted 
to win, of course, but I didn’t believe that I 
could win because it was my first venture 


towards a political office as far as vote-getting 
is concerned. My opposition, by the way, was 
none other than Charlie Caldwell. Previously 
he had been an assemblyman from this 
county, and he was widely known throughout 
the county due to the fact that he had been 
in politics. 

So Charlie and I tangled. He was a 
Democrat and I was a Republican. Believe it 
or not, our paths would cross every once in 
awhile, and, of course, we were still friends 
even though we were political enemies. 

He’d say, “Well, how you doing, Rene?” 

I’d say, “Well, I’m just about five votes 
behind you, Charlie, but I’m catching up.” 
The last time I met him before election, I 
bumped into him out in Copper Canyon. 
There was quite a precinct out there at that 
time. I bumped into Charlie, and he asked me 
how I was doing in my campaigning. I said, 
“Well, I’ve picked up a little bit, Charlie. I’m 
only two votes behind you now.” So believe 
it or not, when the election took place, they 
counted the ballots, and I won by two votes. 
That’s pretty close. If just one person had 
changed their position and voted for Charlie 
rather than for me, we’d’ve been tied. That just 
shows you how important a person’s vote is in 
any kind of an election campaign. You might 
not think your vote is worth anything, but it’s 
the truth, it is. 

So Charlie was figuring perhaps maybe 
having a recount and going through all 
the processes and troubles and trials and 
tribulations of a recount, and so forth. He 
went down to Reno, and evidently he must 
have talked to the wrong people because they 
talked him out of it. They were evidently on 
my side. 

Did Mr. Getchell help me in that first 
campaign? Not to speak of. He was rather 
hurt that I challenged him. I didn’t keep him 
from running; he could have run. He came to 



My Political Career 


67 


me personally. He says, “Rene, I’d like to run 
for office again.” 

And I told him, I said, “No, Noble, we 
had a heck of a time electing you four years 
ago, and I’m afraid if you run again, you’d 
get beaten. I’ll be brutally frank with you,” 
I says. “If you get beat, you’ll blame all of us 
and you’ll be very resentful, and I’d rather run 
myself and have you back out gracefully. If 
there’s going to be a beating in the Republican 
party, I’d rather take it than have you take it.” 

So he backed out of it. Of course, I 
think he exercised a little influence with 
the people in Austin and got me support 
down there because that was his stronghold. 
Consequently, I won that first election in 
1942 by two votes and became the senator of 
Lander County. 

I met quite a few people down there in 
that legislature, and they were friends of mine. 
One of them was Howard Browne— he used 
to be a district attorney of this county. He 
told me, he said, “You’re only just going to be 
a one-termer.” Very encouraging, wasn’t he? 

But as it proved out to be, why, Caldwell 
figured that maybe he had done something 
wrong and maybe he’d’ve beaten me on the 
heat, so he filed against me the next time 
I came up for office. Why he filed as an 
independent, I don’t know. He used to be 
a Republican, and then he changed to an 
independent, or filed as an independent, and 
then finally changed to a Democrat. I don’t 
know whether our statutes at that particular 
time stipulated that you had to have voted a 
previous general election as a member of that 
party in order for you to file as a candidate 
from that party. Whether that statute existed 
at that time or not—I think that statute was 
enacted later on. At that time, when there 
was a big difficulty over Ken Johnson, the 
two Johnsons when they ran for United States 
Senator, I think that’s when that law was 


enacted. But there was nothing to prohibit you 
from going out and getting up the necessary 
signers to run as an independent. Now that’s 
not only true as far as Caldwell was concerned 
in this instance, but it was true of this fellow 
Titlow down there in Nye County. He wanted 
to run as a Democrat and he found out that 
the statutes prohibited it because he voted as 
a Republican at the previous general election, 
so that’s when he ran as an independent and 
won. 

Anyway, the second time I ran against 
Caldwell, I really trounced him! I beat him 
by around 121 votes here in the county, 
which is quite a big plurality. That was in 46. 
That convinced Charlie that I was the most 
desirous as far as the people were concerned 
in Lander County. 

My general approach to the campaign 
was just a case of personal contact. Charlie’s 
approach, as far as campaigning was 
concerned, he used a tack that was not 
evidently a good, sound approach. He tried 
to make himself appear as an individual who 
had had some legislative experience, and he 
felt that as far as I was concerned, I had a lot 
to learn, and that if I was elected I would be 
controlled by big business. In other words, 
it belittled me. I didn’t use that at all in my 
campaigning. I have never done that in 
any of my campaigns. I think that’s a poor 
approach. I will never run down an opponent. 
If I can’t say a good word about him, I won’t 
say anything. I have tried to instill in the 
minds of the electorate of my county that I 
felt that I was capable and I felt that if I was 
elected—if they would give me that chance 
and that opportunity—I would do the very 
best I possibly could to protect their interests 
in that legislature. 

An odd thing happened afterwards. It 
was maybe two years after I beat Caldwell. 
A fellow by the name of Earl Crouch and his 



68 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


wife were living out in Kingston Canyon. I 
was out campaigning in the south end of the 
county and I went up Kingston Canyon, not 
particularly to see these people, but I went up 
there looking for votes. I stopped in at this 
house and the lady present was Mrs. Crouch. I 
introduced myself and I told her that I was out 
soliciting votes for state senator from Lander 
County and I’d appreciate anything that she 
and her husband would do for me. He didn’t 
happen to be there; he was out working in a 
mining property or doing something nearby. 
I didn’t stay very long, just passed the time of 
day, and I never even spoke of my opponent. 
So as I said before, a year or two afterwards, 
I happened to bump into Earl, and I think it 
was in Carson City. Earl came up to me and he 
introduced himself, and he said, “You know, 
Rene’, my wife and I are the ones that elected 
you.” Well, I have a lot of people say that 
inasmuch as I won by only the two votes. And 
he said, “You know why we voted for you?” 

I said, “No, I don’t know just exactly why 
you would vote for me. I did solicit your 
votes.” I said,. “You didn’t happen to be there 
the day I was there.” 

And he said, “You know, it was rather a 
tough decision for my wife and I to decide 
whether to vote for you or Caldwell, and 
after we gave it a lot of thought, we decided 
due to the fact that you did not in any of your 
conversation with my wife run down your 
opponent, whereas, when he was out there, he 
ran you down, we decided that you would be 
the best man and would be our representative 
in that senate. And for that reason alone,” he 
said, “was the reason that we voted for you.” 
And perhaps there were other people that felt 
that same way. I have never in all the years 
that I’ve campaigned for office run down my 
opponent. I think it’s poor politics because 
people become very resentful about your 
running down your opposition. So that’s it. 


So, now I’ve discussed the first two 
campaigns. I won the first term in 1942 
against Charles Caldwell by two votes; then 
the following election, four years later, he 
decided to run against me again, and that 
time I beat him by 121 votes. The third time 
I really experienced a great pleasure by going 
back into office unopposed. That was really 
a politician’s dream, to be able to go back in 
without having any opposition. 

The fourth term election, the person that 
ran against me was Dick Magee. He was from 
the south end of the county. There seemed 
to have been some kind of a feeling towards 
me on account of this county seat movement 
that was rather upsetting to them. They 
decided that I should have some opposition, 
and so they convinced Richard Magee to run 
against me. Dick wasn’t a very good politician, 
and he wasn’t a very good campaigner, so 
consequently, I didn’t have too much of a 
battle with him. 

Then, the following election, the person 
that chose to run against me was a fellow 
by the name of Ed Lauritzen. Now Ed 
Lauritzen, up until the time he decided to 
run against me, had always been a lobbyist 
for the labor interests, especially the CIO. 
He was very active as a laborite. During 
the previous sessions for this particular 
campaign, we had my colleague, William 
Swackhamer, who was in the assembly. We 
had worked very diligently to try to obtain 
more monies for our respective counties. I 
was serving on the finance committee, and 
it was during the session previous to that 
election that we had put through a bill that 
gave to each county a certain amount from 
the gambling industry which was known 
as the table tax, which netted the people of 
Lander County a very handsome sun and 
helped them take care of things that was 
badly needed. 



My Political Career 


69 


Mr. Lauritzen at that particular time 
was a member of the board of county 
commissioners, and rather selfishly he utilized 
these funds to build up his own prestige and 
his own gallantry before the electorate of the 
county But he failed to let the people know 
that it was the legislators in the state of Nevada 
that secured these funds that put him in the 
position where he could get certain benefits 
for the county of Lander. 

One thing that he did for the south 
end of the county was to convince them 
that, through his prestige and his power, 
he bought them a very beautiful Cadillac 
ambulance. Of course, there wasn’t any 
medical facilities at the south end of the 
county. The county hospital at that particular 
time was more of a first aid station than 
anything else. I do believe they had a hospital 
matron down there, but there wasn’t any 
doctor or anything. It was Ed Lauritzen that 
got them this $10,$ 12,000 beautiful Cadillac 
ambulance. I do believe that an ambulance, 
either a General Motors ambulance such as 
a Chevrolet, or a Ford, or some other vehicle 
of more moderate costs, would have taken 
care of their requirements just as well as 
this immaculate Cadillac, but that was his 
method of campaigning. 

An unfortunate thing happened a year 
or so before that, when this county seat issue 
came up again. They decided that the only 
fair way to handle this county seat movement 
problem was to circulate a petition wherein 
it would be requested that an election be 
held and let the people of the county decide 
whether the county seat should be moved 
from Austin to Battle Mountain. Very 
unwisely on my part, but thinking more as 
a private citizen, that it was a fair answer to 
the problem that existed, and not thinking of 
my position as representative of the county as 
a whole, I signed the petition. The people in 


the south end of the county were very, very 
resentful that in my position as senator I had 
expressed myself by signing this petition 
to bring this to an election, but there was 
something behind the scenes that these 
people in Austin didn’t know. 

There had been legislation passed which 
I was aware of. When we changed over from 
the old laws of the state of Nevada to the 
new Nevada Revised Statutes, due to my 
acquaintance with Jeff Springmeyer and 
Russ McDonald in preparation of these new 
revised statutes, I had asked them to make 
absolutely sure that in any movement of any 
county seat that the law be very, very definite 
as to the requirements that would have to be 
met in order to bring about either an election 
or an act of legislature, or anything like that, 
to move the county seat. I always felt that as 
far as the county seat was concerned, many 
times, grudgingly, people would move the 
county seat and afterwards would be very 
sorry for such action. 

Well, acting upon my request, Russ 
McDonald and Mr. Springmeyer incorporated 
in the statutes a conflict, and I knew this. Now 
this is, in a sense, a very deep secret that 
I have not in any way divulged to anyone 
before. I knew when I signed the petition that 
there would be a very serious fight relative to 
moving the county seat and that there would 
be a lot of ill feeling about it. I also knew that 
the people of Austin and the south end of the 
county, as this fight progresses, eventually it 
would take it to the Supreme Court, which 
they did. And, due to the conflict that was 
written in the law, the election was called . 
The Supreme Court of the state of Nevada 
said there was a conflict in the law and they 
couldn’t hold their election because it didn’t 
conform to certain time limits, and the result 
was the election was called off. So the county 
seat was saved for Austin. 



70 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


As I’ve already stated, the people of Austin 
didn’t know this, and they were still very 
resentful towards me because I had signed 
this petition. Yet, behind the scenes I had 
done more to protect their county seat than 
they ever knew 

So Ed Lauritzen, in campaigning, made 
commitments to the people of Austin that, 
as far as he was concerned, he would not 
work towards moving the county seat. And 
he made commitments to the people in the 
north end of the county that if he was elected, 
he would help to move the county seat. Due 
to this county seat issue, the people of Austin 
really went all out for Ed Lauritzen. I knew 
that as far as the Battle Mountain area was 
concerned that I would get about a fifty-fifty 
break. I figured maybe Ed Lauritzen would 
beat me a few votes, but I had to have that 
Austin support to win the election. I went to 
the people in Austin and campaigned, and 
they would not listen to me for any rhyme 
or reason.I tried to convince them that they 
should support me. I used all kinds of outside 
influence, people that were loyal to Austin and 
so forth, to try to get them to change their 
minds, but even as hard as I campaigned, 
why, Lauritzen beat me, and I think the record 
shows by thirty one votes. 

So Ed Lauritzen went to the legislature, 
the senate, and was sworn in, and, of course, 
I had a lot of friends down there in that senate 
who had known Ed Lauritzen for the simple 
reason, as I said before, that he had been very 
active down there as a lobbyist for the labor 
people. Then Ed got down there and became 
senator from Lander County, he soon found 
out that it was a lot different working on the 
floor of the senate compared to working as a 
lobbyist. He spoke to one of my good friends 
(I don’t mind mentioning his name), W. 
Howard Gray, who’s always been an ardent 
worker for big business, Kennecott Copper 


Corporation, and has been very watchful 
over the Nevada Industrial Insurance funds to 
make sure that the big business was protected. 
That was his job; and he was a very close 
friend of mine, too. 

Ed Lauritzen made a remark to W. 
Howard Gray one day. He said, “Howard, you 
know the biggest mistake I ever made in my 
life was when I decided to file and run against 
Rene’ and beat him.” He says, “I’m lost down 
here. There’s lots of things I would like to do 
for labor, but I just don’t know how to do it 
or how to go about it. And,” he says, “during 
the time I was a lobbyist, with Rene’s help as 
the senator from Lander County, he and I 
working as a team, we were the ones that were 
instrumental in putting through the industrial 
disease act called the silicosis act. Well, he and 
I was working as a team on some occasion 
previous to my being elected,” he said. “He 
and I worked together and we put through 
the collar-to-collar bill.” And he said, “As I 
remember it, during World War II, there was a 
condition existing around the air bases, at Las 
Vegas and Reno, wherein as you remember,” 
he told Howard, “as you’ll remember, all wages 
was frozen by presidential decree. However, 
any wages that were in conflict or wherein the 
legislature would enact a law raising certain 
minimums, the state law took preference.” He 
said, “Through Rene’s efforts, the first law that 
was ever passed by the state of Nevada raised 
the minimum salary for women in the state 
of Nevada.” 

What he’d told Howard was certainly the 
truth. In investigating the conditions as far as 
the wage scale that these women were being 
paid there in and around the city of Reno 
(their husbands were working out at Stead 
Air force Base—and they were just a bunch of 
kids that just got married), I went to different 
drugstores, and different business houses to 
check on the hourly wage rate that was being 



My Political Career 


71 


paid these young women whose husbands 
were out at the base. Some of them were being 
paid twenty-five cents an hour, some of them 
paid thirty-five cents an hour; even some of 
the chambermaids that were at the Golden 
Hotel were only paid around about forty cents 
an hour. In discussing these wage rates with 
some of these businessmen, they said, “We 
realize these wage rates are ridiculously low 
and we would like to have them raised, but 
we can’t go into conflict with the federal law. 
If the state would put through some kind of 
legislation to establish a minimum, we would 
certainly go along with it.” 

Now these girls, these young married 
women, believe it or not, were so destitute as 
far as monies were concerned (their husbands 
wasn’t making hardly any money out at the 
base as privates and corporals and so forth), 
these women were, and maybe I shouldn’t 
say this in this tape recording, but they were 
selling their souls in order to get enough 
money to survive. That was the condition 
that existed. 

So with this knowledge, I appeared before 
the labor committee of both houses, the 
assembly and the senate, and gave them these 
facts, and it was through my efforts that we 
raised those minimum salaries to, I think at 
that time, around seventy-five cents an hour. 
These women, for instance these maids that 
were working at the Golden Hotel, when they 
got their first pay envelope, there were many 
of them came to me and they had tears in their 
eyes, thanking me for bringing about such a 
gift from heaven, as they called it. 

An odd thing happened relative to 
Ed Lauritzen. He got himself in a trap by 
promising the people at the south end of 
the county that he would exercise every 
bit of his influence to prohibit any change 
in the statutes relative to the county seat 
movement. Then, by the same token, (he] 


came up here to the north end of the county 
and told these people that the first thing he 
would do would be to work toward passing 
legislation to change the statutes so the county 
seat could be moved. (As I stated before, the 
people of the state of Nevada had voted in 
annual sessions. I think that was the first 
off-year annual session under that particular 
law, which was the sixtieth session, 1960.) 
Mr. Lauritzen was working out here at the 
barium property, owned and controlled by 
the Foods Machinery Corporation. I honestly 
and sincerely believe he, Ed, was a very 
strong, healthy man. Of course, when your 
time comes, why, that’s it. Anyway, he had 
this heart disturbance, but I believe that he 
had a premature death primarily due to the 
fact that he was so worried about these two 
commitments that he had made to the people 
of Lander County. I think it was very upsetting 
to him, and he worried so much about it that 
it upset his health, upset his rest, and the 
result was this heart disturbance. Maybe I’m 
completely wrong, but in any kind of activity, 
political or otherwise, you cannot, under any 
circumstances, talk out of both sides of your 
mouth. If you do, you’re going to trap yourself 
and find yourself out in left field—and get 
hurt. Now that’s just exactly what happened to 
Ed. Ed was still a good friend of mine, believe 
me. Heck, when he beat me that first time, he 
and I were down here at the bar and we really 
celebrated. He celebrated his victory, and I 
celebrated my defeat. 

He knew, he found out by being down 
there in the legislature, that there was more 
than just having a seat in that senate in order to 
help get the job done. When Ed had this heart 
problem and he passed out of the picture, 
the county commissioners had to make the 
appointment to that particular office. Of 
course, Ed Lauritzen was a Republican, and 
so was I. They came to me and asked me if I 



72 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


would accept the unexpired term; it would 
be for that regular off-year session until the 
next general election— if I would accept the 
appointment. They felt that inasmuch as I 
had had legislative experience and I was a 
Republican that I would be the best one to 
consider as far as making this appointment. 
So I made application to formal procedures 
and was appointed to take that off-year 
session and have to run at the next session. 

Then the next election that took place was, 
I believe, in ’60. That would be correct for the 
simple reason that Ed had served in ’59, which 
was a regular session, and then the ’60 was an 
off-year session, which was held in January. 
Then we had the general election that fall. So 
that would be the case. 

My good friend, Dan Shovelin, the 
Irishman down the street, he decided that 
he would take me on. Dan has been a very, 
very good friend of mine and also a very 
ardent Democrat. In many of the years that 
I ran for office, my good friend, Senator Pat 
McCarran, who had an influence with Dan, 
would arrange with Dan to at least put up a 
weak candidate to run against me and kept 
Dan from being too active to get me defeated. 
I wasn’t surprised. Senator McCarran had 
died and I knew that a great influence would 
be brought to bear on Dan Shovelin to run 
against me, and that’s just exactly what 
happened. Dan is a very good campaigner. 
He started in ringing doorbells and going 
from house to house. He’s been in a business 
here in Battle Mountain for many, many 
years and he has been able to become pretty 
well acquainted with a lot of the people here 
in this area. He was a Democrat and a very 
staunch Democrat. All this group of people 
that came into mid-Reese River, these farmers 
from Oklahoma and Texas and Arizona, they 
were all Democrats and they didn’t know 
Dan Shovelin from R. W. Lemaire, and, 


consequently, they voted the party ticket 
rather than knowing the qualifications of the 
two candidates. The result of that election: I 
think I beat Dan by only four votes. It was 
that close. 

Two years went by again. Dan figured, 
well, maybe there’s some spot that I overlooked 
where I should have campaigned more 
thoroughly. But in the meantime a lot of 
these people that had moved into this area 
had become better acquainted with me, and 
so that following election, two years later, 
when he ran against me again, why, I think I 
beat him pretty fair, by thirty-four votes. So 
that’s the various problems that I have had 
maintaining myself in a position as senator. 

Here’s an observation that my wife has 
often made. She said, “You know, old senators 
never die, they just get reapportioned.” 
And that’s how they got rid of me! This 
reapportionment problem was really a serious 
thing that hit the state of Nevada. We had to 
resolve it as equitably as we possibly could to 
meet the rulings of the court. I think that it 
would be very easy for anyone that wants to 
look up the record to find out that, due to the 
population factor, the senatorial district from 
which I came was eventually determined to 
consist of four counties, Pershing, Humboldt, 
Lander, and Eureka. 

There were many people that came to 
me and wanted me to run for senator again 
from this district, but I had served the state 
of Nevada in the senate for twenty-three 
years, and as most people know, there is the 
legacy that has been handed down to me by 
my parents and grandparents here in Lander 
County. At my age I thought it would be 
more advisable to let some younger person 
represent these four counties, and so I yielded 
to my good friend, the honorable John 
Lransway, who was from Humboldt County 
previous to the reapportionment. I knew 



My Political Career 


73 


that he wouldn’t have any problems as far 
as running for that particular office, if those 
people of his own county supported him like 
they should. 

So, taking all these things into 
consideration, those are the main reasons 
why I decided that I would kind of get out of 
the political picture and sit back and let the 
other man do the work. 

The last session when we finally adjourned 
sine die, it was sort of a “crying towel” session 
because there was many senators that knew it 
was going to be their last appearance on that 
senate floor as a senator, and it’s a memory that 
I will never forget. There were many people 
who felt that with a larger representation in 
the senate from Clark County and a larger 
representation from Washoe County and a 
lesser representation from the “cow counties,” 
that our state would find itself in serious 
trouble., I made this observation from the 
senate floor, that I felt that as far as the 
general welfare of the state of Nevada was 
concerned, that with the caliber of men that 
we were leaving behind us, and that I knew 
would be elected, or would come over from 
the assembly, that the “cow counties” and the 
people of the state of Nevada wouldn’t have 
too much to worry about, because these men 
were primarily interested in looking after the 
general welfare of the state of Nevada—and 
then, perhaps, maybe looking after the best 
interests of their county later. And I think 
that’s true of life, whether its on a neighborly 
basis or whether its on a county basis or 
whatever the occasion might be. Any time any 
county decides in their own way of thinking 
that they should hog it all, it becomes very 
detrimental to the rest of the state. In other 
words, I feel that the counties of the state of 
Nevada should be neighborly counties, that 
they should be trying to help each other. Now, 
for instance, here in Lander County, we have 


had a very serious impact as far as an influx of 
people due to our mining activity. And I knew, 
years and years ago, that Clark County, due 
to the impact that they had down there with 
the building of the dam and people moving 
in there and expansion of the Strip hotels, 
and so forth, that they had a serious problem 
relative to their schools, and I know now that 
these men that we have in the legislature with 
just the actions that they have taken in this 
past session— that the people of the state of 
Nevada don’t have too much to worry about. 
It’s only those greedy, self-centered politicians 
that are more interested in perpetuating 
themselves in office that are a detriment to our 
state and not those that are real statesmen. I 
think that most of the men and women that 
are now in that legislature, whether it be in 
the senate or in the assembly, they are, nearly 
all of them, real statesmen. 

I’d like to go back to my legislative 
experiences and bring out a few of the little 
things that happened that I enjoyed. My first 
session in the legislature was in 1943. E. P. 
Carville was governor of the state and Vail 
Pittman was our lieutenant governor. Even 
though I was from a small county, I was pretty 
much on my toes and I wanted to serve on 
the finance committee. Senator Dressier from 
Douglas County was chairman of the finance 
committee and he was a big wheel. He was one 
of the old “bull bloc” members. I don’t know 
how it came to pass, but it was finally decided 
that they would increase the total number 
of the senate finance committee from five to 
seven to make room for me. Believe it or not, 
Senator Walter Cox, who was the president 
of the sophomore class when I was president 
of the freshman class at the University the 
time we had the big hay ride out to Moana 
Springs, he and I went at it again hammer 
and tongs. He wanted to be on finance, and 
he had a little bit more seniority than I did. 



74 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


In order to accommodate me, they decided 
that they would increase the total number of 
senators on the finance from five to seven. The 
Democratic party really objected to that very 
seriously; they said, for the simple reason that 
it was objectionable to them, that it made the 
committee too large and too unwieldy 

So, in order that I would be satisfied, 
they decided that they would create an 
aviation committee in the senate. To get me 
out of there as far as being a member of the 
finance committee, they created this aviation 
committee, the first aviation committee 
that ever served in the senate of the state of 
Nevada, and they put me in as chairman of 
that. 

Due to the conflict that existed between 
Walter Cox and I, why, we went along for two 
or three weeks until finally he wouldn’t speak 
to me and I wouldn’t speak to him. It was 
childish; it was ridiculous. So I got ahold of 
Walter one day, and I said, “Say, Walter, I think 
it’s about time you and I got together and had 
a little talk.” We went in one of the committee 
rooms and we discussed our problems, going 
clear back to the Moana Springs hay ride. We 
resolved our differences and the end result 
was that he and I became very, very close 
friends. Well, he got to serve on finance, and I 
got to be chairman of the aviation committee, 
so everything was fine and dandy. 

Then as time went on in that particular 
session, about the fourth week, the secretary 
for Governor Carville came up and said, “The 
governor would like to see you.” 

So I figured, oh, my goodness, what have 
I done wrong now? So at the appointed hour 
I went down to the governor’s office, and, of 
course, Governor Carville was from Elko 
County and he knew all of our family real 
well. I didn’t know what the dickens was 
coming, but anyway, he got up from behind 
the governor’s desk and he came around and 


he put his arm around me. I was telling him 
all about my ambitions as far as the state of 
Nevada was concerned, and that I didn’t want 
to make any mistakes, and so forth and so 
forth. He came around and he put his arm 
around me and he said, “You know, Rene, it’s 
certainly been enjoyable talking to you. But,” 
he said, “I kinda think you’re taking it a little 
bit too seriously.” 

I said, “What do you mean by that?” 

He said, “Well, you know our forefathers 
were pretty smart men. When they created 
this present government of ours, there had to 
be three branches. The legislative branch can 
make all kinds of mistakes, and the executive 
branch can make mistakes, but regardless of 
the mistakes that either one of those branches 
of our government make,” he said, “they 
eventually correct themselves.” And he said, 
“Sure, you’re going to make some mistakes 
up there, but just do the best you can, and I’m 
sure that everything will work out all right.” 

So I always remembered that little 
conversation that I had with Governor 
Carville and it stayed me in good stead 
throughout my years in that legislature. You 
make a mistake once in a while, but if you’re 
honest and sincere and want to do what’s 
right, most of the time, at least ninety-nine 
percent of the time, you’re right. And that’s 
the record I tried to establish. Of course, I’ve 
made mistakes, sure, but I think most of the 
legislation that I’ve supported and worked for 
has been for the best interests of the people of 
the state of Nevada. 

I’ve forgotten now when Carville was 
appointed senator— but, anyway, he was 
appointed United States Senator to fill Senator 
Scrugham’s unexpired term. He resigned as 
governor July 24, 1945, and Vail Pittman 
assumed the position as governor inasmuch as 
he was lieutenant governor, and he appointed 
Carville as United States Senator of the state 



My Political Career 


75 


of Nevada. I think the following election, 
Cliff Jones was elected as lieutenant governor 
(election of November 5, 1946.) And Cliff 
was a very ambitious young fellow, a young 
attorney, a Democrat, and he was a very good 
presiding officer. That was when Clark County 
was having such a terrible time with schools 
and this big impact of population. 

One evening I had General May with me 
and Senator Ken Johnson. We drove over 
to Reno and we went to the Riverside Hotel 
for dinner. While we were in there, why, we 
bumped into the lieutenant governor, Cliff 
Jones. I went up to Cliff and I said, “Cliff, isn’t 
there some way that we could get members 
of this legislature down to Las Vegas and give 
them a Gray Line bus tour to see the terrific 
impact of the people that are coming into 
that area in order that we would be more 
fully briefed as to these problems that we are 
having to consider up here in this legislature 
that pertain to Clark County?” 

He said, “Well, I think it could be 
arranged.” 

I said, “Well, here’s General May. Maybe 
he’ll take these Nevada Air National Guard 
planes and fly us all down there.” 

He said, “I’d be glad to.” So he made a 
commitment as far as the transportation 
problem was concerned. 

Then it became a question of housing and 
feeding the legislators if we would go down 
there to look at this problem. So he says, 
“How will we extend an invitation to both the 
assembly and the senate to make this visit?” 

I said, “Well, don’t you have a chamber of 
commerce down there?” 

“Oh, yes, we have a very active chanter of 
commerce.” 

I said,” Well, contact them and have them 
send up an invitation by telegram so there will 
be a written record.” 

And he said, “That will be a good idea.” 


So he got ahold of the powers that be 
in Las Vegas—and that’s just exactly what 
came to pass. They sent up a telegram, a 
lengthy telegram, inviting both houses of the 
legislature to go to Las Vegas and be their 
guests for a two-day weekend so we could 
visit and they would take us around and 
show us all the industries that were coming 
into that area, and the housing problems, and 
the school problems, and everything else. So 
everything went along fine. 

We took off in the airplane, and we all 
flew down there. I had Etta come from Battle 
Mountain to Reno, and she flew down via 
Bonanza. All the wives of the legislators 
were invited on this trip, too, and that’s why 
I called Etta on the phone and asked her to 
come down. She couldn’t ride in the Nevada 
Air National Guard plane, but she could 
come down by private transportation, which 
she did. 

So they took care of us royally; they rolled 
out the red carpet, believe me. They had these 
bus tours, and they took us to these various 
shows on the Strip and downtown Las Vegas, 
and wined us and dined us, and gave us all the 
briefing as to the problems that existed down 
there. It was a wonderful happening as far as 
giving all of these legislators an on-the-spot 
picture of the problems that were existing 
there at that time. 

So then we returned to the legislature and 
went to work and drafted necessary legislation 
to help them. Of course, anything that would 
help Clark County would also help the rest 
of the state of Nevada. It had to be general 
legislation. Out of that particular visitation 
there was some very important legislation 
drafted, and passed, that was beneficial not 
only to Clark County, but the state of Nevada 
as a whole.. But that’s what they called the 
“lost weekend.” That was how it started, and 
that’s what happened and the reason why it 



76 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


happened, and I’m proud that I had part of 
that “lost weekend” trip. 

An interesting note to me: during the first 
session I attended, in <43, I think the total 
number of bills that was passed, the ones 
in the senate and the ones in the assembly, 
the volumes were not over an inch thick, 
as compared to the volumes that have been 
passed here in recent years wherein the 
volumes passed by the assembly necessitated 
two volumes and were averaging about three 
to five inches thick. But that shows you that 
during the war with Japan there just wasn’t 
much to do. We were just sort of marking time 
because we had to curtail all of our expenses 
as far as capital investments were concerned. 

As time went on, we felt that if this war 
would become finalized and many of our 
soldiers and sailors and marines would be 
returning from this war, we might have an 
unemployment problem. So Senator Robbins 
and Senator Haight and myself discussed the 
feasibility of introducing necessary legislation 
to create a reserve fund. In other words, we 
would try to maintain our tax level about 
the same, but still have these monies that the 
state would need to expand facilities, as far 
as capital investments are concerned, at the 
state hospital and at the prison and at the Elko 
school and needed office space in and around 
Carson, and also office space that would 
probably be needed down in the southern part 
of the state. We introduced this legislation, 
and if I remember it correctly, better than a 
million dollars was in this reserve fund for 
building purposes to meet the needs of the 
state in its expanding capital improvements 
program. I feel kind of proud about that. 

Important Legislation 

I think one of the most important major 
pieces of legislation enacted during my 


numerous terms in the senate was the creation 
of the Purchasing Department. There had 
been quite a lot of dissension about that 
among the merchants throughout the state of 
Nevada. Even though I was a senator at that 
time, I was a merchant, too, and I have always 
felt that there’s many people throughout the 
state of Nevada who were not interested in 
selling merchandise due to the pork barrel 
type of government that sometimes existed. 
I’m not putting a finger on any executive 
department, but nevertheless, there was 
a pork barrel deal in connection with 
purchasing of goods for the state of Nevada 
up until the time this purchasing department 
was created. Now, I felt this way: here’s your 
farmers and the ranchers, comparing their 
tax problems against mine. I’m selling, in 
my business, tires and tubes that the state 
would buy, and automobiles and trucks, and 
so forth. Well, if the state would create this 
purchasing department and buy all of these 
on a bid basis, they would be saving the state 
of Nevada hundreds of thousands of dollars 
each year, and it could be reflected in either 
lower tax rates or in more benefits as far as 
the requirements of the people of our state. 

So I was an active legislator that worked 
towards the creation of this purchasing 
department, and I think that was one of the 
finest pieces of legislation that’s been enacted 
in our legislature. 

Another piece of legislation that I 
considered important for the health and 
general welfare of the people of our state 
was the silicosis act. I think that was very 
outstanding. I played a very important part in 
that, as I remember it, because when the bills 
was considered pertaining to that problem, I 
was either a member of the labor committee 
or chairman of the labor committee. 

I had known, due to the association that I 
have had with the mining people throughout 



My Political Career 


77 


the state of Nevada, that there have been 
many instances where these miners that 
worked in open pit mining, or underground 
mining, didn’t have the necessary protection 
by the companies, or they were working, 
unprotected, on their own, on a leasing 
basis. They ware young and they would feel 
that everything was going all right, yet they 
would contract this dust on their lungs, and 
the end result was that later on they became 
incapacitated and couldn’t do a full day’s work. 
They were men with families; they were men 
that had been good taxpayers, good citizens, 
but when they reached that point as far as 
their lungs were concerned, they couldn’t do a 
good day’s work. Then they were not accepted 
by any of these big mining companies, and it 
was really a serious problem. 

The first approach that was made to the 
enactment of some kind of protection for 
these silicotics was a bill that was introduced 
by Charles Russell and myself. I believe we 
took some funds out of the Nevada Industrial 
Insurance fund, the overall fund, to set this 
thing up. We were able to put that bill through 
both houses. It went down to the governor’s 
office after the session was over and Governor 
Carville vetoed it. Governor Carville said it was 
unconstitutional to take any funds out of the 
Industrial Insurance fund because that was the 
money that was held in trust. It was in conflict 
with the law and in conflict with the constitution 
of the state of Nevada, and for that reason he 
vetoed it. But regardless of the fact that he based 
his reasoning on those facts, I knew he was in 
serious trouble politically because that was one 
piece of legislation that labor had been fighting 
for in our legislature for many, many years. This 
proved to be true when he ran for office again. 
He was very soundly beaten, and it was the labor 
influence that beat hint. 

Two years later another bill was introduced. 
When the bill came back up at the next session, 


we discussed the problem and we sustained 
the governor’s veto due to the probability 
that maybe it was unconstitutional, but we 
enacted a new law, a new approach to starting 
the show on the road as far as protecting 
these industrial diseases. Rather than taking 
the monies out of the Industrial Insurance 
fund, we appropriated $5,000 out of the state 
general fund, with the understanding that 
as the premiums began to come in for this 
protection that was going to be given these 
men that were working in the mines and 
in bakeries and as painters (it was a broad 
coverage), as these premiums began to come 
in, why, this money would be repaid into 
the general fund. The premiums that would 
be coming in would be self-sustaining as far 
as taking care of these people that might be 
involved in some kind of industrial insurance 
problem. So that’s the history of that act that 
went through. 

I think I mentioned before that Ed 
Lauritzen played a very important part 
working with me in the enactment of that 
particular law, he criticized me very severely 
because when we had this hearing, we had 
that senate chamber just jam-packed. I asked 
him a lot of questions about his own family. 
Now he lost either one or two brothers from 
silicosis and I knew this. I asked him a lot 
of questions that maybe, in a sense, was 
embarrassing to him, but nevertheless, it was 
essential to put across to these legislators the 
gravity of incurring silicosis in connection 
with the mining. I’ve always felt that these men 
that work in the mines, they produce a virgin 
wealth. They produce a wealth—they’re not 
taking it away from anybody. It’s new wealth. 
Inasmuch as they have done an outstanding 
job in producing this new wealth, I felt that 
they should have some kind of protection, 
maybe not necessarily for themselves as 
much as it would be for their families. So we 



78 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


incorporated this whole industrial disease act 
along with the other insurance that is handled 
by the Nevada Industrial Insurance section of 
our state government. And it has proven to be 
quite a wonderful boon to these people that 
have worked in the mines, and also painters, 
and bakers, and carpenters, too, that have 
run into some kind of a dust problem. And, 
of course, now, under the Nevada Industrial 
Insurance program, there are certain benefits 
for companies and corporations which are 
very much interested in safety and general 
health and welfare for their employees. They 
get a kickback on their premiums annually on 
an experience record which is very beneficial. 

Actually, there wasn’t any real opposition 
to enactment of the Industrial Insurance Act. 
For instance, the large mining companies, 
especially the Kennecott Copper Corporation, 
had a program of insurance that perhaps 
would be better than the one we passed. The 
only opposition that existed against the act 
was that they wanted to make doubly sure 
that they wasn’t going to be forced to come 
into this deal. That was actually the only 
opposition. 

I think the bill was introduced a second 
time wherein they took the money out of the 
general fund, as sponsored by five senators. 
But Charlie Russell and I, we didn’t have 
anything to do with the introduction of the 
second bill, but I’ve always been quite proud 
of that particular bill. 

Then there is the collar-to-collar bill 
which a lot of people don’t know too much 
about. In large mining operations where these 
miners have to go deeply underground or they 
have to go down into these vast pits, usually 
the mine operators wouldn’t start their time 
card until they had actually started work, 
whether it was at the face of a tunnel or the 
bottom of a shaft or a bottom of a big open 
pit. Well, in some of these pits like over there 


in Ely and Ruth, it would take sometimes as 
long as an hour and a half to go from the lip of 
the pit down to the bottom of the pit in order 
to start work. And these men were having to 
utilize their own time to go that distance, not 
only down to work, but back up to the lip of 
the pit or to the portal of the tunnel or the 
mouth of the shaft, whatever the case might 
be, and they weren’t being paid for it. The fact 
that the pits had got bigger and the tunnels 
had got longer and the shafts had got deeper, 
and I felt that these men should be paid from 
the time that they appeared at the portal of 
the tunnel or at the collar of the shaft or at 
the lip of the pit. 

Here is one instance where Noble Getchell 
really became provoked with me. He asked 
me to vote against the measure, and I told 
him that I felt in my own conscience that it 
was for the best interests of the people of the 
state of Nevada, especially these miners, that 
they be granted this type of legislation. And it 
passed very readily. And that was another bill 
that was sponsored by our labor committee, 
and in which the do was very much interested, 
and the Mine, Mill and Smelter Union, and for 
which Ed Lauritzen thanked me very much 
for my hand in helping put it through. 

There’s many things that I have done in the 
years that I have been in the legislature that 
have been very, very helpful to labor. The fact 
of the matter is, I think the last time I talked to 
Lou Paley, who was executive secretary of the 
combined AFL-CIO, he made this remark. He 
said, Rene, we’re certainly going to miss you 
because you have always been a very favorable 
person as far as labor is concerned.” 

And there is a strange thing about these 
fellows that are down there lobbying for labor, 
whether they’re working for the CIO, or the 
A!’ of L, or the railroads, or whatever the case 
may be. I have always given those fellows to 
understand that as long as I was a senator 



My Political Career 


79 


from Lander County, that anything that they 
would come in and ask for that was sound, 
was reasonable, that would be beneficial for 
the people of the state of Nevada as a whole, 
I would support it all the way down the line, 
but anything that they would ask for that I 
felt that was absolutely silly and detrimental 
to the interests of the people of our state, I 
said, “I’ll fight you fellows all the way” And 
with that kind of an understanding with these 
labor lobbyists, I never had a single worry 
whatsoever. They were always my friends. 

Even when the governor (Russell), when 
he called this special session (1958) in order 
to extend the benefits in connection with 
unemployment, James Ryan was there, 
and Lou Paley. After we had had several 
hearings—it was a special session called 
expressly for that—but anyway, we had several 
hearings on it and we broadened the benefits 
under unemployment and extended the time 
limit of the unemployment. I have been very 
much in favor of that particular law, although 
I’ve criticized some of the people that have 
asked for benefits under the act when I feel 
that they’re taking advantage of it, calling 
it “rocking chair money.” But nevertheless, 
before we finally took a vote on it, why, I 
made it a point to go to Ryan and also to 
Paley and to ask them if it was in accord with 
their thinking, and met the requirements of 
those who might become unemployed. They 
were very pleased with it, so I said, “Well, that 
being the case, it will go through without any 
opposition,” and it did. It went through. 

One thing I’ve always been interested in 
as far as legislation was concerned is laws that 
pertain to the advancement and expansion 
of aviation throughout our state. During 
World War II I tried to enlist in the armed 
services, but due to a physical ailment, I 
wasn’t accepted, so consequently, I devoted 
my energies towards Civil Air Patrol and 


also to the selling of bonds. The fact of the 
matter is, I’ve been a bond sales chairman of 
Lander County ever since the savings bonds 
program was started. But getting back to 
the aviation end of it, I think I stated that 
I served as chairman of the first aviation 
committee that was ever created in the senate. 
It was during the time that I was chairman of 
that committee that certain legislation was 
introduced to levy a tax on aviation fuels 
that would be applicable to all the airlines. In 
order to find out just exactly what it would 
mean to the state, we held one hearing, and 
one hearing only, in which we invited all of 
the airlines to be present. That meeting was 
held in Las Vegas. (This was in the early days. 
As I remember it, the only active Strip hotel 
at that time was called the El Rancho.) But at 
this meeting, which we held in the city hail 
building there in Las Vegas, we ran up against 
a stone wall. These commercial airlines (and 
without a question of a doubt, they were 
honest in their statements), they stated that 
even though they were flying across the 
state of Nevada, across the southern tip, and 
across from Reno to Wendover, they could 
carry enough fuel that they could purchase 
in California and in Utah and in Arizona so 
that they wouldn’t have to refuel in this state, 
and that if we enacted any kind of legislation 
that would tax their fuels that that would be 
exactly what they would do. So they proved to 
us without a question of a doubt that it would 
be safer for the passengers, due to overloaded 
planes and so forth, that it would be better 
that they still have the privilege of refueling 
in the state of Nevada whenever the occasion 
demanded it without any tax. 

We did enact a law later on in which there 
was a tax levied on aviation fuels for the sole 
purpose of creating special funds. These funds 
would be used to improve and expand landing 
strips throughout the state of Nevada. I think 



80 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


that Reno has been very successful in taking 
a lot of this money to further its own airport, 
and I know Las Vegas has, and I know Elko 
has, but I don’t think any of the other smaller 
counties have been able to take advantage of 
any of those funds. What we tried to do by 
legislative act was to give the state highway 
department control of those funds so they 
could build landing strips in various parts of 
our state and then with state road building 
and maintenance equipment, they could also 
maintain these strips without too much effort. 
They would be used as emergency strips in 
case an airman ever got in trouble. I don’t 
know what the status of the present laws are 
relative to this. 

When Charles Russell was the senator 
from White Pine County (and I do believe 
it was the first session that I attended, 1943), 
there was a doctor in Reno whose name was 
B. H. Caples, I believe. He was a specialist 
in gynecology. He was given the assignment 
by the Nevada medical association to come 
over and endeavor to have introduced into 
the legislature a premarital examination law. 
I think Senator A. V. Tallman was chairman 
of the public morals committee. 

I had known Dr. Caples for several years, 
and inasmuch as I had met him before, he 
came to me and asked me if I would introduce 
this piece of legislation. Well, I knew that it 
would be quite a new piece of legislation, that 
it could create quite a lot of problems as far as 
hearings and so forth, and inasmuch as I was 
very much inexperienced, I asked him if he 
would go down and get Senator Tailman, who 
was chairman of the public morals committee, 
to consider it and maybe introduce it into 
committee measure. 

So sure enough, he went down to Senator 
Tallman’s desk and he sat there with Senator 
Tailman from Humboldt County for about 
an hour, discussing the merits and demerits 


of this premarital examination law. Finally 
he had to leave on account of the fact that 
we were taking up session, and Tallman says, 
“Well, you just leave this bill here with me and 
I’ll see what I can do to have it introduced.” 

Senator Tallman never did present it to 
his committee for introduction. He just kept it 
there on his desk. Right across from him was 
Senator Dressier, who was chairman of the 
finance committee. Senator Dressier used to 
play this card game called “Big Indian,” and he 
would play “Big Indian” many times darn near 
all night long, he and Walter Cox and a few of 
his old cronies. This one particular morning, 
he came to the legislature after he had had 
one of these all-night “Big Indian” card game 
sessions. So he was sitting there with his head 
down between his hands and his elbows on his 
desk? and he evidently had quite a headache, 
perhaps maybe a little hangover from having 
too much to drink. This Senator Tallman, he 
was a kind of a jobber, anyhow. When it came 
time in the order of business of the senate 
for the introduction of bills, or new pieces of 
legislation, Tallman picked up this premarital 
examination bill for introduction and put it 
over on Bill Dressler’s desk, and he says, “Bill, 
you introduce that for me because I gotta go 
to the bathroom.” So he just went out in the 
hallway a little ways and when the present 
presiding officer asked for introduction of 
bills, why, Bill, he waved the page over and 
handed it to the page, and the page took it 
up to the secretary. When the secretary got 
about halfway Through reading the title of the 
bill, why, he began to sit up, and he realized 
immediately that he had been jobbed. 

The result of it, he moved that the reading 
so far had to be considered first reading, and 
that the second reading be dispensed with, 
and the bill be referred to the committee on 
public morals. By that time, Tallman had 
come back in and it became a joke. Tallman 



My Political Career 


81 


got up and he said, “No, I don’t think that bill 
should be referred to public morals. I think 
that bill should be referred to the fish and 
game committee.” 

Well, there was a lot of laughter and 
kidding around about this bill, and finally it 
ended up in the judiciary committee. I believe 
Andy Haight was chairman of that committee, 
and there was Senator Robbins, and Charles 
Russell, and myself, and a fellow by the name 
of Nye W. Tognoni from Eureka County. 

When we was having our committee 
meetings, we came across this bill and Andy 
Haight, the chairman said, “Well, now what 
do we do with this?” 

I said, “Well, it’s had a lot of fun out 
on the floor until it finally ended up in the 
judiciary committee.” I said, “I would suggest 
that we put it out of committee without any 
recommendation.” You can do that, you 
know. You can pass a bill out of committee 
without either a “do pass” or a “do not pass” 
or a minority or majority report, and so forth. 

Senator Robbins said, “I don’t know about 
that.” He said, “That might not be the right 
thing to do.” 

Charlie Russell was sitting there. He never 
said a word. 

Finally after we discussed it some more, 
I said, “Let’s put it out on the floor without 
recommendations to see what happens to it.” 

So we put it out for the second reading 
and it was placed on the general file the next 
day for final reading and passage. Well, when 
it came time to read this particular bill, why, 
they read the bill by title and section and so 
forth, and then the chair asked if there was 
any remarks, and Charlie Russell got up and 
he made a wonderful talk in favor of passage 
of the bill. They asked if there was any further 
remarks and there weren’t any, so they called 
the roll, and believe it or not, it passed the 
senate twelve to five. 


The business houses in Reno that are very 
much interested in the marriage business, 
they was very much opposed to it. We were 
all staying in Reno—Robbins, and myself, and 
a few others in the senate. We were staying at 
the Golden Hotel. Goodness, when we got 
back to the Golden Hotel that night, why, 
our telephone began to ring, and they said, 
“What’s the matter with you two idiots, are 
you trying to kill us?” Even I voted for it. I 
voted for the bill. I thought it was a darn good 
bill that we should have examinations before 
marriage. I told these people that called me 
on the phone the way I felt about it. I said, “It 
was a good measure and I voted for it.” 

They got busy there in Reno right now, 
believe me, these business houses, and I 
imagine a lot of business houses from Las 
Vegas, and boy, they moved in on that 
assembly, and they got ahold of that bill, and 
they had the committee sit on it and it never 
did come out of committee! 

It’s just an experience. But I can still see 
Senator Dressier sitting there at his desk 
with his head between his hands, with this 
hangover from having played “Big Indian,” 
and then giving this bill (he never even read 
it before he gave it to the page) and it turned 
out to be this very controversial premarital 
examination law. That’s one of those things 
that happen in the legislature. 

Governor Pittman at one time vetoed a 
bill legalizing prostitution that has passed the 
legislature in 1947.1 remember that real well, 
too. That was towards the end of the session, 
and I think Senator Tailman was chairman 
of the public morals committee. Inasmuch 
as it was towards the end of the session, 
he introduced this bill and we made it an 
emergency measure, and it was placed on the 
general file for third reading and final passage. 

There was a senator from White Pine 
County, I think his name was Horlacher, and 



82 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


he was a very devout member of the Latter 
Day Saints religion. In fact, I believe he was a 
bishop. The fact of the matter is that he used 
to pray for our senate when we couldn’t get 
someone else that was ordinarily hired to 
come in and pray. (I say they prayed for the 
taxpayers, they didn’t pray for us legislators; 
that’s jokingly, of course.) But anyway, this 
fellow Horlacher, he voted for it, too, believe 
it or not. Finally, when he woke up to the tact 
that he had voted for this particular bill, he 
was so angry at Senator Tallman, why, he was 
really going to go over and have it out with 
him. The fact of the matter is that he didn’t 
even speak to Senator Tallman the rest of that 
session. He says, “He betrayed my confidence 
and trust in him, and I always had thought 
that whenever he introduced a measure of 
that kind, or if a measure of that kind would 
ever be introduced, it certainly wouldn’t be 
from Senator Tailman.” 

But that bill went through; it went through 
both houses, and it went on down to the 
governor’s desk, and he vetoed it. At the end 
of the session when we were giving out the 
different presents, the senators gave Senator 
Tallman a beautiful scarlet red tie. You could 
even hear him coming down the corridor I 

If we hadn’t had something like that 
once in a while, the tensions, they built up 
so greatly over there towards the end of the 
session, that unless something mirthful arises 
so that you can kind of relax and laugh a little 
bit, why, your nerves get pretty edgy. 

Remarks on Lobbyists in the Nevada 
Legislature 

Another thing interested me during the 
legislative sessions. Some of the lobbyists 
became very annoying. There was influential 
men that were lobbyists, such as Johnny 
Mueller, William Cashill, Clark Guild, Howard 


Gray, Oliver Thomas, Ray Marks, and many 
others, high caliber men that were lobbyists 
there for their clients. They were men that 
were dependable. They were men representing 
industry and commerce and people that were 
vitally interested in the general welfare of the 
state. Occasionally, someone would get very 
upset about these fellows, these lobbyists, 
and they would make a speech on either the 
assembly floor or in the senate. The senate 
was never as bad as the assembly, wherein 
they would just tear these lobbyists to pieces if 
they were coercing and using undue influence 
against the legislators. They’d say they should 
have some kind of a law enacted or a house 
rule to prohibit them from appearing on the 
floor at any time, or even try to keep them 
clear out of the capitol building, which would 
be strictly unconstitutional. 

I’ve always found in my experiences that 
this group of men, especially the ones that I 
have named, that they were very trustworthy. 
There were many times that there would be 
pieces of legislation that we would have to 
consider that we, as individuals, perhaps 
would have but very little knowledge about, 
so in order to acquaint ourselves, we would go 
to these lobbyists and ask them to give us, or 
find, the necessary information that we were 
requesting. In my period there, whenever I 
asked any of these lobbyists for information, 
if they didn’t have it at their fingertips, they 
would make it a point to go out and get it for 
me, which was very considerate of them. To 
intelligently vote on measures you have to 
know what you’re voting on. Sometimes you 
get into these very controversial measures, 
and believe me, there has been many a time, 
and I’m not ashamed to admit it, I’ve asked 
in the evenings before I go to sleep, asked for 
divine guidance to tell me what to do as far as 
voting for some of these particular measures 
that I knew were coming up the next day. 



My Political Career 


83 


Johnny Mueller and Senator Robbins 
were very, very close friends. Senator 
Robbins usually sat to the rear, on the right- 
hand side facing the president’s desk. In all 
the years that I was in that senate I never 
at any time saw Johnny Mueller sit on the 
floor of the senate as either the guest of 
Senator Robbins or any other senator. The 
minute that the presiding officer would 
rap the gavel, calling the senate to order, if 
Johnny Mueller was in the senate chamber, 
he would immediately rise and get out just 
as fast as he possibly could. He never, as 
I remember, sat on the senate floor to be 
officially introduced so that his name would 
appear on the journal. That’s what always 
happens when you’re officially introduced 
by any of the senators—your name is 
entered on the journal of the senate of that 
particular day. I don’t ever remember having 
seen Johnny Mueller’s name in the journal, 
or having ever been there when he was 
introduced by anybody. And yet, he was a 
very powerful influence and a great assist 
to the people of our state in that legislative 
branch of our government because he was 
well-versed in all problems, whether it was 
in the southern part of the state, the eastern 
part of the state, or the western part of the 
state. When our state was given the right and 
privilege of buying those industries there at 
Henderson, a bill was introduced giving the 
state of Nevada the necessary authorization, 
and I think they bought all those things for 
around about one dollar. 

Johnny Mueller was given the authority to 
sell those industries down there to practically 
whomever he saw fit. The hearings that 
had pertained to this particular bill of 
authorization was handled by the senate 
finance committee. It gave him unlimited 
power and I knew that. So before I would go 
along with approval of it in this committee, 


I made it a point to go to John personally 
and I told him, “John,” I said, “you’re asking 
for authorization here that will give you 
unlimited power in wheeling and dealing as 
far as handling these industries down there at 
Henderson. And,” I said, “if you will promise 
me that without a question of a doubt that 
you will work for the best interests of the 
people of Nevada, I’ll go along with it because 
I trust your word.” I said, “If you can’t give me 
that promise, I’ in going to try to hold it in 
committee.” 

He said, “Well, Rene, you’ve known me for 
a long time and Pin vitally interested in the 
wealth and growth of our state.” He said, “So 
help me, if this bill is passed, I will not under 
any circumstances let the people of the state 
of Nevada down.” 

I said, “Under that kind of a promise from 
you I’ll do everything I possibly can to get a 
green light out of the finance committee and 
see what we can do to have it passed in the 
senate.” 

Well, it came out of the senate finance 
committee with a unanimous “do pass” 
request, and I think it passed the senate 
unanimously. It also went over to the assembly, 
and I don’t think that there was hearings held 
at all on it. They passed it and it went down 
to the governor. It was through the efforts 
of Johnny Mueller that those people that 
are now down there that are employing so 
many people gainfully, and there was never, 
I don’t believe, any under-the-table handing 
out of any money whatsoever to get those 
Basic Industries to come into Henderson. I’ve 
always been quite proud of John Mueller due 
to the attitude and the wonderful patriotism 
that he showed in connection with all of his 
association with the legislators and the people 
of the state of Nevada in regard to all of his 
lobbying. I think it was wonderful. I pay 
special tribute to him. 



84 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


To my knowledge there was never 
a lobbyist that had the broad scope of 
knowledge of the state of Nevada like John 
Mueller did. He knew people all over the state 
of Nevada, whether he was down in Lincoln 
County around Pioche or Caliente, or up in 
Elko County, whether he was a Basco, or a 
cattleman, or whether he was a rancher or a 
miner, or in any phase of our economy here, 
in any county He always knew somebody and 
it was a wonderful knowledge. He had a very 
keen mind, and a wonderful photographic 
memory, too. In other words, whenever hed 
meet somebody, he might not see him against 
for several years, but the next time hed see 
him, he’d call him by name. 

John Mueller was for many, many years 
Noble H. Getchell’s right-hand man. Then as 
time went on, I don’t know what happened 
between him and Getchell, but there evidently 
was some kind of a controversy that arose 
between then, so he left Getchell and became 
very closely associated with Norman Biltz. 

When John Mueller finally passed away 
not too long ago, why, he and Norman Biltz 
and a fellow by the name of Thomas Dant had 
just entered into a partnership. They bought 
some agricultural land in and around Lovelock 
someplace; I don’t know just exactly where it 
was. Norman Biltz and John Mueller were very 
close friends. The fact of the matter is, the last 
time I bumped into Norman Biltz in Reno, 
and this last legislature was in session, I asked 
Norman if he bad been over to the legislature 
during this session and he said, “No, I lost all 
interest in the legislature when I lost my pal 
John Mueller.” They were very close. So that’s 
the picture of my thinking on Johnny Mueller. 

Now, these other lobbyists—I would like 
to pay tribute to people like Ray marks, who 
was connected with the railroad industry, and 
also Oliver Thomas. They were very fine men. 
Howard Gray was also connected with big 


business; that’s Kennecott Copper Company. 
I think I mentioned him previously in some 
of my other remarks. I think Clark Guild 
was primarily associated with the insurance 
group. They were all very fine lobbyists. 

And there were other lobbyists, including 
Paley, who was representing labor. I think he 
should have recognition, too, for his activities 
in the legislature. Then there was Harry 
DePaoli. He was another one representing 
labor, a very fair-minded man. Of course, 
they had a job to do—working definitely 
to improve working conditions and living 
conditions and salary conditions for these 
men that worked with their hands. In all my 
contacts with them, they never asked me 
for anything that was out of reason because, 
as I stated before, I had warned them that 
anything they came to me with that had merit, 
I would certainly give it consideration. 

We also had some very fine women 
lobbyists. I never paid too much attention 
to these women lobbyists. I was interested 
primarily in what they was lobbying for rather 
than in the lobbyists themselves. The Parents 
and Teachers have always had a fine group 
of women over there lobbying for some of 
their measures as it pertained to education, 
and I have always been an ardent supporter 
of education. The tact of the matter, I was 
another one that helped start the ball rolling 
to raise the minimum salaries for teachers in 
our state. I also played a very important part 
in allowing the teachers’ pension fund to 
become part of the public retirement system, 
in which they really bettered themselves 
two- or three-fold to what they had in their 
previous retirement system. 

Legislation Pertaining to Education 

Any piece of legislation that came up in 
the legislature that pertained to education, I 



My Political Career 


85 


was very much of an ardent supporter of it, 
whether it pertained to salary increases for the 
teachers, or retirement, or whatever it is. I’ve 
always felt that as far as the state of Nevada 
was concerned, that we should be competitive 
salary-wise with the highest throughout 
the nation, because our living conditions as 
compared with a lot of These other states are 
not as good, and our living costs are much 
higher, too. So in order to get good teachers 
and to have our kids have a good education, 
I have always been an advocate for good, 
high salaries for our teachers. It gives the 
opportunity, as far as our school boards 
are concerned, to choose the teachers that 
are going to best teach the children in their 
respective counties. Without that salary scale, 
a livable salary scale, why, it was hard for these 
boards to try to get into our state teachers that 
were properly trained and prepared to teach 
our children. 

I had quite an argument one time, when 
I was out campaigning, with an individual 
who was a very, very well-educated man. In 
fact, he attended two colleges in Europe. His 
name was William Thatcher. I believe at one 
time he owned the Reese River Reveille and 
was also its editor. In campaigning, I went in 
to see Bill, as I called him, and he criticized me 
very severely for the remarks that I had made 
on the senate floor relative to my thinking 
about salaries for schoolteachers. 

I asked Bill, “why do you feel that way 
about it?” 

And he said, “Well, look. They only work 
about four or five hours a day, and only five 
days a week. And,” he said, “They only teach 
school about eight months out of the year.” He 
said, “Why should they be given such fantastic 
salaries?” He said, “I just can’t see it.” 

His way of thinking was certainly not in 
accordance with mine, because we all know 
that there are dedicated teachers, then there’s 


teachers that just like to teach because it 
means a living salary to them, and then there’s 
other teachers that shouldn’t be teachers. 
But in order to get the real, true, dedicated 
teachers, I think it behooves the taxpayers of 
our state to go all out to see that these school 
boards are in a position to give good teachers 
good salaries so that our kids can get a good 
education. Amen. 

I would like to talk about that Peabody 
formula. There were a lot of friends on the 
committee that were the ones that secured 
the Peabody people to come out (I think they 
came from Tennessee) and make a study of 
our public school system and propose these 
various formulas, and it was finally decided 
upon this, the Peabody formula. 

In studying that particular bill, I wasn’t 
particularly in favor it from the Lander 
County point of view. But I knew that Clark 
County and Washoe County were in serious 
trouble and this formula was The only answer 
to take care of their problems. So with that 
thought in mind, I figured, well, the best thing 
for we senators and representatives from the 
cow counties in this time of distress to do is 
to go along with this legislation to help these 
people in Clark and Washoe Counties to take 
care of their problems. 

Then I said, after maybe three or four 
years, why, if this particular formula doesn’t 
prove satisfactory, why, then, we can take 
another look at it and probably amend it so 
that it will meet the needs and requirements 
of other counties besides these two largely- 
populated areas. For that reason I supported 
the Peabody bill. 

Cyril Bastian, now, he was from Lincoln 
County. There was two or three other formulas 
that was proposed, the Bastian formula, and 
some other formula by some other senator 
or assemblyman, but the end result was the 
approval of this Peabody formula. And it’s 



86 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


worked very satisfactorily, I think, up until 
recently 

Did I approve of the way that it was 
proposed, the naming of a statewide 
committee, and of the personnel of the 
committee? Yes, I knew nearly every one of 
the members on this committee personally, 
and I knew that they would certainly go 
into this very thoroughly There was three 
members that I knew very well, Howard 
Gray, Oliver Thomas, and M. E. “Mel” 
Lundberg. They represented people that are 
big taxpayers, and if they were interested in 
promoting something that would take care of 
our education problem, why, that was, in my 
book, a very substantial endorsement of this 
Peabody formula. I don’t think it had much 
trouble getting through either house. 

Some of these people changed their 
minds on the need for increased aid for 
education, for example, Mr. Lundberg started 
out absolutely opposed. He was primarily 
interested in having only the basics, in other 
words, reading and writing and arithmetic. 
He didn’t want any folderol. I think in a lot 
of these junior high schools and senior high 
schools throughout our state of Nevada that 
we should be able to give our young men and 
women the right and privilege of studying 
homemaking work and animal husbandry 
work and mechanical work and things like 
that because there’s many of these young 
girls and young men, when they get their 
high school diploma, why, that’s it, they don’t 
go any further. And if they’ve learned some 
trade, or the women have learned how to 
keep house and do some cooking and make 
a dress or something like that, I think that’s a 
wonderful asset to them, along with the fact 
that they do have a high school diploma. And 
that’s what I think Lundberg was opposed to. 
In other words, he wanted to hold costs down, 
but I don’t think you ever heard Howard Gray 


or Oliver Thomas make any commitment like 
that. I think they were all for this expanded 
program. 

I believe that that committee was created 
by law and Governor Russell made the 
appointments. The law gave him the authority 
to make the appointments of the members 
of this committee and he chose wisely as 
far as getting many outstanding leaders, 
lobbyists, so to speak, to make a thorough 
and complete study. They were the ones that 
hired this Peabody outfit; it was up to them. 
The whole study and research that was done 
in connection with our educational problem 
in this state was handled by this committee 
and the researchers that came in here, the 
Peabody group from Tennessee. 

I’ve been a very great advocate of public 
education because I think the future of 
America depends upon the well-educated 
kids of today. If we, as parents, and citizens 
of our state and nation, and taxpayers, fail 
to take care of our youth and give them the 
opportunity of a good education, I think we 
are failing in our duty and responsibility. 

The fight over the sales tax that supported 
the Peabody formula was quite an interesting 
issue. Before that piece of legislation was 
ever introduced, Senator Ken Johnson and 
I worked hand in hand to make sure that 
we had the necessary pledges as far as the 
“magic nine” votes in the senate. The senate’s 
approach to this revenue measure was to—I 
think our bill called for either a four or five 
percent tax, but food and drugs was omitted, 
and we figured that under the basis of the 
five percent tax with those two omissions, we 
would receive about the same revenue that 
was finally resolved upon when they dropped 
the tax down to two percent and included 
practically everything. 

We had many hearings in the senate, but 
inasmuch as we had the “magic nine,” why, 



My Political Career 


87 


we weren’t too worried about it. I think that 
when it finally did hit the floor of the senate, 
why, it passed nine to eight. It went over to 
the assembly, and they really chewed on it 
for quite a few weeks. The reason that they 
dropped the tax from the five percent level, 
with food and drugs omitted, was they figured 
it should be two percent flat on account of the 
accounting problem. 

My colleague, Assemblyman Swackhamer, 
was very much opposed to the exemption of 
food and drugs because he was interested 
in the general mercantile business here in 
Battle Mountain. He said, “I’ll go for the two 
percent flat tax, whereas I’ll vote against the 
five percent exempt food and drug.” He said, 
“My reason for my position in this is very 
plain. We’d have to set up a very complicated 
bookkeeping system because in our inventory 
of merchandise, we sell darn near everything. 
We sell patent medicines, which would be 
exempt under your proposal, and, of course, 
foods, but we do sell a lot of hardware items, 
picks and shovels and mining supplies and 
horseshoes.” He said, “It would be a very 
hard, difficult problem for us to separate these 
things, especially when you’re hiring green 
clerks and things like that.” He said, “Now, 
I’ll go for the two percent flat tax to cover 
everything but feed and grains and heating 
fuels.” He said, “That should be exempt, but,” 
he said, “I won’t go for the five percent.” He 
was a very powerful influence at that time in 
the assembly. I think he was sitting either as 
chairman of ways and means, or a member 
of that committee. The end result was that we 
compromised. It was getting towards the end 
of the session. 

When Mr. Swackhamer and I got home 
from having passed the sales tax we did meet 
with some opposition in the community. 
There was some people in this county that felt 
ill towards me due to the fact that I had gone 


along on this sales tax, some very influential 
people. I will not mention their names. But 
in my book, I think the sales tax is one of the 
fairest taxes that there is. 

With the state of flux of our population, 
the sales tax meets the needs of our state now, 
not eighteen months from now. Take your ad 
valorem tax or any of these other taxes, they 
always come in after the horse has left the 
barn.” But this sales tax meets every need right 
now. Due to the fact that we are so dependent 
on tourism and divorce actions and gambling 
and so forth, there’s a lot of people that are 
coming here today and are gone tomorrow. 
The only way that you could probably reach 
those people is by a sales tax. Oh, they moan 
and cry. And the ones, believe it or not, that 
cry the most are the schoolteachers. And 
yet it’s so essential, as far as our schools are 
concerned, that we should have this return 
from this sales tax to get the monies from 
these gamblers, these tourists. By the way, I 
would be willing to wager that more than sixty 
percent of the revenue that comes from this 
sales tax source is not paid by the people of 
the state of Nevada. It’s paid by the people that 
are going through the state of Nevada, people 
that spend their money here as vacationers. 
So why should the average person in the state 
cry about it when they’re getting sixty cents 
on every dollar that’s being spent to give them 
better schools and all of these various needs 
that we had to have? Of course, there’s a lot 
of people who say, “Soak the rich.” Put in an 
income tax. Put in an inheritance tax. Those 
are the last straws. 

Now here’s something that’s very 
interesting.Up until we passed that sales 
tax, we always had our finger on the gaming 
industry in this state. Any time they became 
so high and mighty in their thinking that they 
was going to start to dictate to the people of 
the state of Nevada, we had the ace in the 



88 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


hole with this sales tax. We could just shoosh 
them out the back door or the front door or out 
through a couple of windows, and the revenue 
that we were deriving from that source, we 
could automatically pick up with the sales tax. 
The problems of our educational system which 
we had to meet from some source was one of 
the main reasons that the sales tax was passed. 
Now then, we have lost that power to dictate 
to the gambler. What would happen to the 
economy of this state tomorrow if we would 
lose either one of them? We would be in a 
deplorable financial trouble. We would have to 
immediately call a special session to figure out 
the ways and means to meet this financial crisis 
if we lost either the gaming tax or the sales tax. 

The sales tax was put to the vote of the 
people. I think Lander County voted against it. 
But I still claim that it’s one of the fairest taxes 
that there is. I think it’s a wonderful privilege to 
be able to live in the state of Nevada. Very few 
people stop to figure out just exactly how little 
that tax amounts to on the grocery bill. Say, a 
family of two or three people spent a hundred 
dollars a month for groceries. Two percent, 
two dollars. Two dollars times twelve, twenty- 
four dollars a year. They send their kids to 
school, and they have all these various services 
that we have throughout the state of Nevada. 
If they can’t afford to pay twenty-four dollars 
a year for that kind of consideration, why, I 
think it’s ridiculous. And after all, they’re only 
paying forty cents out of every tax dollar, the 
people that are actually living here. So that’s 
pretty doggone cheap benefits. 

In our legislature we have some very fine 
people who come in with wonderful ideas 
as how they can improve the way of life in 
the state of Nevada. The one thing that they 
always fail to bring in with these different 
improvements is a way to raise the money. 
Now, I’ve been on the finance committee 
session after session. They come in with these 


bright ideas to do this, or do that, so that it 
would make it a lot better for all of us to live. 
Then you ask them, “Where are we going to 
get the money to take care of this particular 
benefit?” They say, “Oh, just tax the people.” 
How ridiculous can they be? 

I noticed that this last session—I think 
someone was either discussing a measure, or 
a law was actually introduced, and how far it 
got, I don’t know, but any new measure that 
was going to be advocated, the proponents 
of that measure had to incorporate in the 
measure some source of revenue in order 
that the measure could be workable. I think 
the one that sponsored that, or was going 
to sponsor it, was Senator Jim Gibson from 
Clark County, he and Vernon Bunker. I 
remember reading it in the press, that they 
were going to introduce a bill that any new 
benefit that would be made available to the 
people of the state of Nevada, anyone that 
proposed such a measure, they had to also 
incorporate in that act some source of revenue 
to make it workable. 

Here’s an interesting thing that’s happened 
over the years that I’ve been in the legislature 
that I believe is worth noting. Then I first 
went into the legislature, nearly all of the state 
agencies were funding agencies, agencies in 
which there was just so much out of each 
dollar that was definitely earmarked for them. 
They could do with it what they pleased. We 
saw that such a practice gave to these various 
state agencies a bureaucratic setup in their 
own entity that was detrimental to the best 
interests of the people of the state of Nevada. 
So through the legislative commission which 
was created during my term in office, Jeff 
Springmeyer brought this to our attention, 
and he suggested to the commission, “The 
best way to cure this particular problem is 
to have all taxes, regardless of whether they 
were liquor taxes or gaming taxes or whatever 



My Political Career 


89 


source that they might come from, all be put 
in the general fund, then when the legislature 
would meet, these various state agencies 
would have to submit a budget in which they 
had to prove to the legislators, especially the 
finance committee, the basic need for the 
funds that they needed to carry them through 
the biennium,” In other words, it gave to the 
people of the state of Nevada, through their 
representatives in the legislature, better and 
more thorough control of all of these tax 
dollars that were coming in from all sources, 
which I think was sound thinking. 

Now then, getting back to this sales tax 
problem. There have been many people who 
say, “Now why wasn’t the sales tax earmarked 
especially, definitely, so not a single dollar of it 
could be spent for any other purpose?” Well, 
these people are not cognizant of the tact 
that if that was the only source of revenue to 
maintain our educational system in this state, 
it would stave to death because the revenues 
from the sales tax alone only amounts to twelve 
or fourteen million dollars a year. Out of every 
tax dollar that is taken in, anywhere from sixty 
to ninety percent of it goes for the maintenance 
and sustenance of our educational system. And 
it’s still to the best interests of the people of our 
state to have all of these revenues impounded 
in the general fund and let it be allocated 
appropriately in accordance with the basis of 
need of these various departments, and hold 
them to the budget. 

Now, there’s been a big scrap in the 
legislature in the last two or three sessions 
relative to Nevada Fish and Game. They’re 
not subservient to the legislature, even though 
the legislature created the Fish and Game 
Commission, and by the same token they 
can destroy it. That’s an agency of the people. 
But the Nevada Fish and Game is maintained 
by revenues that’s received from the sale of 
licenses. Bode Howard, the assembly man 


from Humboldt County, had been in there 
pitching for the last two or three terms to 
try to bring the Nevada Fish and Game 
Commission back under the control of the 
legislature so that they can dole out the money 
on a basis of need, not according to the whims 
of the executive committee of the Nevada Fish 
and Game Commission. That’s true. 

Now you take a land grant college like 
the University of Nevada. A certain amount, 
according to our constitution, has to be set 
aside in the way of a tax revenue to sustain 
that university. They have moved that down 
to the lowest possible point to still be in 
conformity with the constitution of the state of 
Nevada, but by the same token, they’re doing 
everything possible to bring the dispensation 
of funds and the appropriations of the monies 
for the University under the direct control of 
the legislature of the state of Nevada, which I 
don’t go along with. There’s one exception to 
the rule as far as my thinking is concerned. 
What in the dickens does a senator from 
Humboldt County, or a senator from Lander 
County, or a senator from Eureka County 
know about the needs and the requirements 
in the way of salary scales or building facilities 
or anything else in connection with the needs 
of the University? They don’t know anything. 

I think we have a very fine group as far as 
the Board of Regents is concerned. They’re 
just as interested in saving tax dollars as we 
are in the legislature. So consequently, why 
stick our nose into somebody else’s business 
where it doesn’t belong? That’s the way I feel 
about the legislature in connection with trying 
to run the University. 

Remarks about the Legislative 
Commission 

During my term in the legislature, 
the legislative commission was created. 



90 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


The counsel for the commission was Jeff 
Springmeyer. The first year it was created— 
I’ve forgotten the year it was created-but Jeff 
is so sincere and honest in his approach to 
a lot of the problems that he was invited to 
make speeches in different parts of the state 
of Nevada. Actually he felt, according to these 
speeches that we study, he felt that he was the 
legislature and he had full authority, which 
was detrimental to the truth. 

The session following the creation of this 
commission, there was some of the older 
heads in the senate who got together and 
discussed the feasibility of just abandoning, 
just repealing the whole deal as far as this 
legislative commission was concerned. I 
think I was one of the sponsors of it, and I 
was sold on its potential, its possibilities, if 
it was run right. One of the senior senators 
came to me and he said, “Rene I’m very upset 
at Jeff Springmeyer.” He said, “As far as I’m 
concerned, why, I would like to introduce 
an act that would repeal this legislative 
commission, that would throw it out the 
window.” 

And I said, “Well, listen, before we go to 
that extent, let’s give this a little bit of thought. 
I don’t believe that Jeff (and he’s a good friend 
of mine, and he’s a good friend of yours, too), 
I don’t think he has had the proper guidance, 
or the proper restrictions, as to what he can 
do and what he can’t do as the counsel for that 
legislative commission.” I said, “If you don’t 
have any objection, I would appreciate it if 
you would hold up on the introduction of any 
legislation to do away with the commission. 
I would like to have the opportunity of 
being one of the Republicans to serve on 
that commission, with another Republican 
and two Democrats from the senate.” (They 
have four from the senate and four from 
the assembly.) “Let me see if I can’t slow Jeff 
down.” I said, “I know we can pass some 


rules and regulations in that commission that 
would prohibit him from making any kind of 
a speech anywhere in the United States or in 
the state of Nevada or in any county, unless 
he has the full authority of the commission. 
And if we feel that it would be appropriate that 
he be allowed to speak, before we? d let him 
go out and make an address to a Parents and 
Teachers Association or a Business Women’s 
Association or any Lions Club or Chamber of 
Commerce, we’d want the text of his speech so 
that we would have an opportunity to study it 
and prohibit him from going out and making 
the people feel that he is the legislature.” 

Well, evidently I put my thinking across, 
because this fellow went along with me. He 
said, “All right, I’ll go along with you. I won’t 
introduce an act this time, but,” he said, “I’ll 
work to see that you’re on this particular 
committee, too.” He said, “If that guy speaks 
out of turn after you’re on there, boy, I’m 
sure going out after him.” And he was a 
popper! So the final result was that I got on 
the commission. 

Jeff and I were good friends. I said, “Jeff, 
you just talk too much. You’ll get us all in 
trouble.” I said, “By golly, before you make 
another speech,” and this was right before .a 
commission meeting, I outlined the necessary 
procedures that he would have to go through 
before he could go out and make any kind of 
a public address. Every one of the members 
of the commission agreed with me a hundred 
percent, and Jeff didn’t take any exception 
to it. 

He said, “Well, maybe I did talk out of 
turn, but I just love this state so much, and I 
love this legislature, and I’ll fight the attorney 
general and the governor and anybody else 
to protect you fellows in the legislature.” He 
said, “I know that the press and the radio have 
put, time and time again, a bad taste in the 
people’s mouths as far as this state legislature 



My Political Career 


91 


is concerned. A lot of the times, they haven’t 
told the truth.” 

I said, “Well, that doesn’t give you the 
authority to go out and say that you’re 
the legislature, and that they haven’t told 
the truth and that you’re out to safeguard 
our interests.” I said, “That doesn’t follow. 
Under those conditions, Jeff, we want you 
to prepare a definite set of rules to prohibit 
you, or anybody else in connection with this 
commission, from going out and making 
some kind of a statement to the press or 
to radio or to any public medium or even 
a private medium. This is a legislative 
prerogative, not a commission prerogative.” 

So he said, “All right, if that’s what you 
fellows want, I’ll sure draft them.” And he 
drew up a set of rules that was really rough, 
and they were rough on him. So we passed 
the rules and then everything went along fine 
until the following session. 

Then I went to this individual and I said, 
“Well, what do you think now? Do you still 
want to introduce that measure to repeal the 
act creating this legislative commission?” 

He said, “No, that’s all right. As long as 
we got men like you just keeping your foot 
on this guy, why, we’re all right.” 

So nothing was done. I think the legislative 
commission is a terrific help to the legislature, 
especially in doing research work and a lot of 
these investigations regarding certain state 
departments. We have our own auditing 
department in that legislative commission, 
and they’ve come up with some very good 
thoughts that’s been beneficial to the best 
interests of the people of the state of Nevada, 
and I think it’s a good investment. 

Jeff Springmeyer got shoved aside in 
the reorganization of this commission, and 
there was one main reason for that. Russell 
McDonald was the person that worked 
diligently to prepare all of the Nevada revised 


statutes. He was under the direct employ of 
the supreme court judges. When the revision 
of all our Nevada statutes had been completed, 
we all knew that Russell was a very capable 
person. So we tried to figure out some way or 
another wherein we could keep him and he 
could serve during the legislative session as a 
bill drafter and still act as the attorney for the 
legislative commission in connection with all 
questionable laws that might have been passed 
by previous sessions or might be proposed by 
coming sessions. So under those conditions, 
Jeff was approached and was asked what he 
thought about it. He was very agreeable to it. 
He was willing to step down in rank in order 
to bring this about because he and Russell 
had become very close friends. They worked 
hand in hand for the legislative commission 
and the revision department for the Nevada 
state law office in Russell McDonald’s office. 
So it worked out very nicely. Russell became 
the counsel, the big wheel of the legislative 
commission, and Jeff became the researcher. I 
believe that’s his title at the moment. Jeff does 
a lot of researching, believe me. 

Of course, every once in a while Russell 
McDonald and Harvey Dickerson cross 
swords and it’s all based primarily on some 
kind of intent of the legislature. Sometimes 
in passing a law maybe the right wording isn’t 
used, maybe the right punctuation isn’t used, 
and maybe during some civil action or some 
kind of an action this particular statute will 
appear before the district court. The judges 
on the district bench level, they look at these 
laws and they say, “The law is not clear. The 
words are not proper, so what was the intent 
of the legislature?” Well, if the intent doesn’t 
meet with the approval of the different ones 
that are involved in the case, bingo, off it goes 
to the supreme court. So they, in turn, try to 
interpret what was the intent, if the wordage 
is not clear, and so forth. 



92 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


So Jeff, he’s gotten into one mix-up after 
another with the attorney general’s office over 
intent. A lot of these laws that were enacted by 
the legislature when I was there was written 
up by Jeff Springmeyer. He’s not an attorney, 
but he does know a terrific amount about law 

Now, I believe, there’s a closer liaison 
between the attorney general’s office and 
Russell McDonald than ever before, although 
they do conflict in their opinions once in a 
while. I do believe that they’re more close 
because Russ McDonald is a very brilliant, 
well-educated attorney. He’s had a wonderful 
practice outside of his activities in connection 
with the revision of the Nevada statutes 
division. So I think that whole setup now has 
leveled off, and I think everybody’s happy, 
and I know that the legislature is happy 
because they go to Russell McDonald and 
Jeff Springmeyer continuously for counsel 
and advice and recommendations relative 
to certain problems in connection with our 
statutes, which is fine. That’s where they 
should go. That’s our branch, We shouldn’t 
have to go to the attorney general’s office; we 
should go to our own attorney. Then if there’s 
some kind of a dispute, and it’s contrary to 
the concept of thinking as far as the attorney 
general’s office is concerned, why, see if they 
can’t work out their differences, and then if 
they can’t, there’s only one other place to go, 
and that’s to the courts. As far as the legislative 
commission is concerned, I think they’re 
doing a fine job. I’d hate like the dickens to 
ever see it done away with. I think it’s a great 
assist to the legislature—both the senate and 
the assembly. 

The Personnel Act 

I would like to make, a few remarks 
relative to the personnel act. Charlie Russell 
was the governor at the time the first bill 


came in. There’s arguments for and arguments 
against. I happened to be one of those that 
was against it. 

You take, for instance, these various 
department heads— and it’s a case of the old 
pork barrel deal—when one governor goes 
out the window, another one comes in, and 
he wants to put his lieutenants and majors 
and assistants in as heads of the various state 
departments. I think that’s a good idea, and I’ll 
tell you why. I think it’s a good idea because, 
after all, the governor is the executive of the 
state of Nevada and he is responsible to the 
people of the state, of Nevada. In order to get 
the job done, I think he should have that right 
and privilege, regardless of whether he’s a 
Republican or a Democrat. He should be able 
to appoint men and women to key positions 
so that they are responsible to him, and he can 
hire them and fire them in accordance with 
their productivity, or their capabilities, or the 
like, and any time they fail to be of benefit to 
the state, he can without any rhyme or reason 
just blow them out the window. 

All right, by the same token, if these 
department heads are going to be subservient 
to the governor, by appointment, why 
shouldn’t the personnel in each one of these 
various departments be subservient to the 
one that’s running that department— a 
chain of command, right? Because how can 
a department head be proficient as far as 
maintaining and running his department 
if he has a group of people in there that are 
undermining him and doing everything 
possible to sabotage him and his department? 
He can’t even fire them according to this 
personnel act. I’ve seen it. The only thing 
that the department head can do is go to the 
governor and say, “I’m whipped, I’m whipped. 
I can’t can these people—I can’t fire them. I 
know they’re sabotaging me, so the best thing 
for you to do is to put somebody else in my 



My Political Career 


93 


place and put me someplace else where I can 
get along with people, if you still want me as 
one of your lieutenants. 

So when this bill was introduced, I went 
to Governor Russell and talked to him, and I 
said, “This thing is not right whether you’re 
governor, or a Republican is governor, or a 
Democrat’s a governor, or whatever the case 
may be.” So it finally didn’t pass. I think he 
vetoed it. 

Well, the bill was then rewritten. One of 
the main reasons that Governor Russell did 
support it the second time was on account 
of the fact that there was a terrible unrest 
among all state employees. They felt insecure. 
There were dedicated employees of the state 
of Nevada, and then there was a mediocre 
bunch, and then there was a sabotaging 
bunch. So consequently, the bill was rewritten. 
I’ve forgotten its content, but there were 
more restrictions. There was an opportunity 
for a department head, if he had some real 
excuse, plausible excuse, for letting someone 
go, why, he could, but the individual still had 
recourse to a hearing board. We wouldn’t 
want a department head, without any rhyme 
or reason, to just let someone go because 
they didn’t wear their hair right or their tie 
right, or something like that. So there was 
protective measures incorporated in the act. 
But I still wasn’t sold on it. I still feel just like 
I did then. I think the running of our state 
government should be left entirely up to the 
executive branch, and these lieutenants, they 
should have the same jurisdiction to hire and 
fire as the governor. 

So when this bill finally came up for 
third and final passage in the senate (I think 
that’s where it originated), I voted against it. 
I got up and I pleaded with the rest of the 
senators. Fred Settelmeyer, who was chairman 
of the finance committee, just sat diagonally 
across from me. I was the majority floor 


leader. I looked at Fred and I said, “Senator 
Settelmeyer, we’re all making a big mistake. 
Perhaps not only on just the fact that we can 
hire and fire these people or we can’t hire and 
fire them, and we’re giving them protection 
under the civil rights act, a little civil rights 
act on the state level. But,” I said, “you’re going 
to rue the day, Senator Settelmeyer. You’re 
going to rue the day, just like every senator 
in this chamber. This is a very poor piece of 
legislation.” 

So he laughed.He had a big smile on his 
face because he figured I was all wet.Ken 
Johnson was sitting right alongside of him. 
The result of that vote—I think I was the 
only one that voted against it, or somebody 
sympathetically might have felt that they 
didn’t want to see me vote alone and voted 
against it, too, just to give me a little support. 
But the next session, the statement I made on 
that senate floor proved to be right, especially 
on account of the salary scale. 

In that bill there was incorporated this 
grade and class [schedule]. Believe it or not, 
the senate finance committee and the money 
committees of both houses haven’t any 
jurisdiction as to setting any of the salaries 
for any of these employees, whether they’re 
good, bad, or indifferent. Those men and 
women are protected under the civil rights 
act, the personnel act. They can go out and 
take a coffee break every fifteen minutes, and 
the department head, he tries to get along with 
these employees, believe me. So, at the end of 
a six months’ period or the end of the yearly 
period, or at the end of a two-year period, 
automatically these individuals receive a raise 
in their salary by grade and step. There’s no 
control. Now, that’s wrong. I honestly believe 
that employees should be paid according 
to the amount of work that they do. Now, 
there are good employees in various state 
departments, believe me, there’s some real 



94 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


hard-working people. And it breaks down 
their morale to see some others in that same 
department shoving the work load over onto 
them when they are so dedicated to their jobs, 
their families, and their state, whereas, these 
other people and these department heads 
cannot and will not do one thing about it. So 
those are the bad things against the personnel 
act. 

We went back in session after about two 
to four years. Senator Settelmeyer told me, 
he said, “Rene, you was so right and we were 
so wrong. That bill should never have been 
passed.” So he admitted his error and I was 
glad to hear him do it because Fred don’t very 
often admit that he’s wrong. And it’s true. He 
admitted to me, very openly and frankly, he 
said, “You were so right, You saw it and we 
did it. We voted for it, and you didn’t.” So he 
said, “That’s a feather in your cap.” 

Comments on Senate Bill 92 

Another very interesting happening in the 
legislature was the notorious Senate Bill 92 
that gave to the gambling industry the same 
rights and privileges as anyone involved in 
any business in the state of Nevada. I was the 
one that helped introduce it and helped put it 
through the senate, and I’m proud of the fact 
that I did do it because that was my thinking. 
I think that any industry—whether it’s 
gambling or mining or mercantile business, 
or whatever the case might be— should be 
given the same consideration. Of course, a lot 
of the people feel that the gaming industry is 
a special privilege. Maybe it is and maybe it 
isn’t. There’s different ways of thinking about 
it. 

But the history of this Senate Bill 92 is an 
interesting history. I was asked to introduce 
this very simple bill. In fact, I’ve stated just 
exactly the meat of it. It gave to the gaming 


industry the same rights and privileges as 
anybody in any other business. That was just 
how simple it was. In other words, they could 
go to court and sue, and anybody could sue 
them, and there wouldn’t be the controls, 
of course, that there are under the present 
statutes, but they would be given the same 
consideration. 

There was evidently some very important 
statutes being considered over in the assembly 
when this senate bill was introduced by my 
committee, which I believe was the public 
morals committee. All of the press and radio 
people were very much interested in what was 
going on over at the assembly. The assembly 
always has been a haven for the press as far 
as getting news articles and news releases 
in order that they could convince their 
respective bosses that they was really making 
a living the hard way. 

So this bill was introduced. It was referred 
to committee. The committee considered 
it, and inasmuch as they sponsored it, they 
passed it out for a second reading with a 
recommendation, “do pass.” It was read the 
second time. Of course, the bill, being very 
simple, it didn’t take very long to have it 
printed. So, when it was introduced one day, 
it was printed that night, and was back in our 
books the second day. That being the case, we 
considered it in committee because that bill 
was on every senator’s desk in their books. We 
considered it in committee and we didn’t feel 
it was necessary to have any public hearings 
on it. We felt that it was a simple bill and if 
there was any controversy in regard to it, why, 
we would let the assembly take care of it. In 
other words, we were passing the buck. 

I think it was either on the second or third 
day after introduction, they had the second 
reading, and the next day it came up on the 
general file and passed. Crumley, McGowan, 
Settelmeyer voted against it, and all the rest 



My Political Career 


95 


of the senators were for it, so that gave it a 
fourteen to three majority in the senate. 

So it passed the senate, and I still didn’t 
think anything about it. Then all of a sudden the 
editors and the powers that be in connection 
with the press and the radio woke up to the 
fact that this bill was well on its way. They 
jumped on every one of their reporters and 
said, “Where were you guys when this bill was 
introduced?” And they put the finger on them 
for what they considered laxity in reporting. So 
what did these reporters and radio technicians 
and everyone else do? They began throwing 
hammer and tongs at the senate, telling what 
a vicious piece of legislation this was. They 
really hammered that out against the senate 
about this vicious senate bill, and I still claim 
it’s not too vicious. It just gave anybody the 
same rights and privileges in all industries. 
But believe me, when the press and the radio 
got through with it, why, it was the most 
vicious piece of legislation that had ever been 
railroaded through a session of the legislature! 

Now, getting back to the present piece 
of legislation 11959 Act] that was enacted, 
supposedly putting gambling under more 
strict and stringent controls. In a quick 
statement, I can state this: if Huey Long had 
lived and he had had such a weapon as this in 
his hands that has been conferred upon the 
executive department of the state of Nevada, 
he would have perpetuated himself in office 
for life. Now, that’s my thinking about this 
present setup. In this present deal, you can be 
an honest gambler, or you can be a crooked 
gambler. Not that I’m sticking up for the 
gaming industry, believe me. I haven’t got 
any part or parcel of the gaming industry, 
never will have, but this gaming board that 
goes out and investigates and puts spotters 
on these various games throughout the state, 
if they’re not the right caliber of man, they 
can put the finger on any gambling table, 


in any casino, and their authority cannot be 
questioned. Any man that is the governor of 
the state of Nevada, once he gets in there, he 
makes the appointment as far as the gaming 
commission is concerned, and the chairman 
of the gaming board, he has a control there 
that is terrific. He can have his lieutenants 
go out, and as far as raising campaign funds, 
they can walk into any casino in the state of 
Nevada and say, “We want to get a donation 
for this governor’s campaign,” Governor X, 
let’s put it. These people that are running 
these casinos, that have invested in hotels 
and gaming casinos, they’re afraid to deny a 
donation. All they can do is sit back in their 
chair and throw their pencil on the desk and 
say, “How much?” I know that. It’s the truth. 
It’s the absolute truth. 

Any governor that’s in office is a cinch to 
be a two-term governor, unless we put through 
some kind of a law to prohibit a governor 
being a governor more than two terms— and 
I think that’s a good idea, especially under this 
particular gaming commission and gambling 
board setup in our present statutes. 

And as I stated before, any governor, 
I don’t care what state he might be from, 
that has gambling and has the same kind of 
controls we have, and is not limited as to the 
number of terms that he can serve in office, 
if money is the necessity to put on a good, 
successful campaign, he can get any sum of 
money that he wants by putting his finger on 
the gaming industry. I wouldn’t want to make 
any kind of statement about any particular 
governor such as Sawyer because I don’t know, 
but I do know that Sawyer spent quite a lot of 
money. Now, whether he got it from different 
sources like that—well, I don’t understand. 
Let’s put it that way. Let’s leave that as the 
question. 

When Senate Bill 92 was placed back 
in the hands of the senate for consideration 



96 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


relative to either sustaining the governor’s veto 
or overriding it, those of us that supported 
the act in the first place were quite active to 
override the governor’s (Governor Russell] 
veto. It’s the ethics of the senate that once you 
give your word to a fellow senator that you will 
support a measure, under no circumstances 
whatsoever are you to break that word unless 
you go to that individual and you get a release. 
You have to have a definite, good reason to 
convince the person that you have given your 
word to, for him to release you. That’s the code 
of the senate. 

Senator Ralph Lattin made a big error. He 
gave his word not only to one senator, but to 
two or three that he would vote to override 
the governor’s veto on Senate Bill 92. Now, 
what I’m about to say is not to defame Ralph 
Lattin, because he’s not here to defend himself, 
but this is the truth—when I first went to 
the legislature in 1943, I had some pretty 
good teachers, fellows like Senator Dressier, 
Senator Robbins, and ex-Senator Noble H. 
Getchell. The advice that they gave me was 
whenever I gave my word to a fellow senator 
that I would support a bill, never under 
any circumstances whatsoever change my 
position unless I got a release, because they 
said if you break your word, you’re all through 
as far as trustworthiness is concerned in that 
senate chamber. And I found that out right 
at the very inception, the first year that I was 
there. Senator Johnson came to me and he 
had some bill pertaining to Indian legislation 
that was not controversial whatsoever, and he 
asked me, he said, “Rene, will you support 
me on this?” 

And I said, “Sure.” I hadn’t read it or 
anything, but as time passed, it turned out 
to be a very controversial measure, and from 
the hearings that was held on it, why, I found 
that I was actually on the other side. I had 
made this commitment to Senator Johnson, 


so I went to him and I said, “Ken, I made a 
commitment to you to support you in this 
particular bill and I would like to get a release.” 

Well, Ken Johnson was very fair-minded. 
He told me, “Rene, if you vote against it, I’m 
whipped. I’ve got the ‘magic nine’ with your 
support.” He said, “If it’s that important to 
you, I’ll release you, but I would appreciate it 
if you would still be with me.” 

So when the roll was called, I voted with 
Ken Johnson, and because I kept my word 
with Senator Ken Johnson, he and I became 
very, very close friends, all throughout the 
years that he and I worked in that senate. 

Now we’ll go back to this Senator Ralph 
Lattin problem, listened to former Senator 
Getchell very diligently and attentively 
because he had a lot of experience. Besides 
giving me advice relative to supporting a 
measure when I had given a fellow senator 
my word that I would support it, he told me, 
“Now, Rene, Ralph Lattin is not the senator 
from Churchill County now, but I wouldn’t 
be surprised if he would run again and be 
elected.” He said, “I want to warn you about 
him. He’s not a man of his word.” 

I said, “Well, do you have some statement 
of fact to prove that he isn’t a man of his 
word?” 

He said, “Well, certainly. We tried to 
repeal this in lieu tax amount that Clark 
County was getting three hundred dollars a 
year from the federal government and we had 
the ‘magic nine’ number with Ralph Lattin’s 
word that he would go along with us. When 
the roll was called, he voted for Clark County. 
In other words,” he said, “Rene, never trust 
him if he ever gets back in that senate because 
he’s not a man of his word.” And he said, “He’s 
dropped out of that senate for one term. That’s 
when Andy Haight ran and was elected.” He 
said, “I don’t think that Andy Haight’s going 
to stay there. I think that he’ll probably drop 



My Political Career 


97 


out of the picture after he serves that one term, 
and Ralph will run again. And if he does come 
back,” he said, “don’t trust him.” He said, “I’m 
just telling you the truth.” 

So when this veto situation came up 
on Senate Bill 92, Ralph Lattin had made 
commitments to two senators that I know 
of wherein he would support, because he 
voted for it originally. He said as far as he 
was concerned, he would vote to override the 
governor’s veto. 

These two senators came to me and said, 
“We got it in the bag. We’re going to override 
the governor’s veto.” 

I said, “Who you got?” 

They named them all that had made 
firm commitment to override the governor’s 
veto, and one of them they quoted was Ralph 
Lattin. I said, “Nope, you’re not going to win 
this override.” 

“Why?” 

I said, “There’s one man in the group that 
has told you that he was going to go along 
with you and I wouldn’t trust him.” 

“Who is it?” 

I said, “In order to safeguard yourself, If 
I was you, I’d try to get a couple more.” And 
they worked diligently. They did everything 
possible to try to get another senator to go 
along with us, just in case this one would 
drop out. 

Now, I was the majority floor leader, and 
when this particular special message was 
considered as far as veto measures (and it’s 
a time-definite deal that’s stipulated right 
on the calendar for that day’s business, that 
at a certain particular hour of a certain day 
of a certain year, that veto message will be 
considered), lo and behold, Senator Lattin 
wasn’t in front of me, and that’s where he 
should have been sitting. So I said, “Oh, oh, 
here it comes.” I moved for a recess, and I sent 
the sergeant at arms after him. The sergeant 


at arms finally found him over at the Nevada 
Industrial Insurance building. He told him, 
“I got orders from the majority floor leader 
for you to immediately appear in the senate 
chamber. They’re having a vote.” 

He said, “Yeah, I know it. But I won’t be 
there.” 

After ten or fifteen minutes the sergeant at 
arms came back, and he gave me the message, 
so I waited until Lattin showed up, then I gave 
the presiding officer the green light to call the 
meeting to order. 

So Senator Lattin got up and tried 
to explain to the members of that senate 
chamber why he was reversing his position. 
They called the roll, and the governor’s veto 
was sustained. All we needed was that one 
vote. And even ones like Senator Settelmeyer 
and Senator Lovelock from Washoe County, 
they detested Ralph Lattin because he broke 
his word. They thanked him for reversing 
his position, but they detested him as a man 
for breaking his word. Lattin went over to 
the Democratic side of the house, and he 
tried to make conversation with some of the 
senators over there, and I never heard such 
foul language in my life as from some of 
those senators. They said, “You dirty, lying, 
double-crossing son of a bitch, you get out of 
here or I’ll haul off and poke you.” That was 
the language that was used on the floor of the 
senate. Of course, we was in recess, but from 
that moment on, Ralph Lattin was all through. 
He may as well have resigned from the senate 
right then and there, because nobody would 
have a thing to do with him. 

Some of the others who voted to sustain 
the veto were honest, sincere men. You 
understood how they felt. They didn’t break 
their word. You always knew their position. 
Anyone that’s a true statesman in that senate 
chamber will never criticize a man for his 
opinion and his vote. That’s his prerogative. 



98 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


That’s why he is there. You can still be good 
friends. Every man is entitled to his own 
opinion. He must have a definite reason 
for either supporting a measure or being in 
opposition to a measure, but the very fact that 
he doesn’t hesitate to let you know, frankly and 
truthfully, just how he feels about it and he votes 
accordingly, that’s not a detriment, that’s an 
admirable quality in my book. So there you are. 

A Comment on Annual Legislative 
Sessions 

I believe that I can support the statements 
that I made on the senate floor. At the 
moment—even today—with the increasing 
population of our state, there isn’t sufficient 
reason that I know of for having an annual 
general session. I am very much in accord 
with having a general session every two years, 
with a budget session on even-numbered 
years, at which, if there is anything of grave 
importance to-be considered, the governor of 
the state can submit it to that budget session 
for consideration. 

There’s no sense of having to call a special 
session when there is a budget session that is 
taking place. And that budget session should 
be limited to a time-definite, either twenty 
days or thirty days. I think not more than 
thirty days should be set for that budget 
session. My reason for such a budget session 
on even-numbered years is that our economy 
changes so rapidly you cannot sit down and 
intelligently guess at what the requirements 
of our state is going to be for two and a half 
years ahead. It’s just impractical because 
we’re moving too fast. We’re living in a jet 
age. Consequently, I have always thought that 
the best thing for the state of Nevada would 
be to have a budget session on the even- 
numbered years and a general session on the 
odd-numbered years. 


I was very, very much disappointed in 
that session in 1960 because I felt that it 
accomplished nothing. I don’t care whether 
it’s in the home, or in business, or even in 
the legislature, an idle mind is the devil’s 
playground. When there isn’t enough 
to consider in the legislature that is of 
consequence, you get a lot of backbiting party 
politics, and it’s not good for the legislature 
and it’s not good for the people of the state of 
Nevada. That’s why I made that observation— 
I think it was just because we didn’t have 
enough to do. 

To sun up my legislative career, I would 
like to make one statement. My wife is always 
criticizing me every time I make it, but when 
I was appointed to fill Ed Lauritzen’s place, I 
knew most of the Republican senators, and, 
of course, they always have a caucus meeting 
prior to the convening of the session. I was, in 
a sense, hurt by the fact that I wasn’t given any 
kind of recognition as having spent so many 
years in the senate or having actually served 
with most of the men that were representing 
the Republican party. But, in politics, it’s just 
like the old saying, “The king is dead; long live 
the king.” In this case it really proved to be so. 

When I went into this caucus meeting 
it had all been prior arranged that such and 
such would serve on this committee, and such 
and such would serve on that committee, 
without any recognition to me as far as 
my past experiences are concerned in the 
legislature, and many of the things that I have 
done for those very senators that were holding 
this caucus. They ignored all that, and this 
hurt my feelings. I didn’t expect any special 
favor or special appointments or any special 
recognition by those members, but it would 
have been a nice gesture on the part of those 
members of that caucus group to have said, 
“Well, Rene, we’re very happy to see you back. 
We know you’ve had a lot of experience and 



My Political Career 


99 


we know that you will be glad to help us and 
assist us in any category Is there any special 
committee that you would like to serve on?” 
hot necessarily a chairmanship, but just, “Is 
there any special committee that you would 
like to serve on?” They didn’t even give me 
that kind of a courtesy 

The only person that showed me any kind 
of consideration was Senator Walter Whitacre 
from Lyon County He said to the chairman, “I 
believe that Rene, with his experience, should 
serve as a member of the finance committee.” 

Senator Settelmeyer was the chairman, 
and he said, “Well, I certainly would like to 
have Rene serve on this committee.” 

But inasmuch as they didn’t diplomatically 
give me that consideration at the very 
inception of this caucus meeting— as I 
said, even a politician has an Achilles heel 
someplace in his character, and that was 
mine. I felt really hurt, so in order to avert any 
problem or argument or anything else, I said, 
“Here’s Senator Fransway from Humboldt 
County. He served on finance last session, 
and I think he did a pretty good job.” I said, “I 
think he should be returned.” I said, “There’s 
also Senator Henry Berrum from Douglas 
County and he’s served on the ways and 
means committee over in the assembly many 
sessions. He knows what the score is; perhaps 
he should be placed on there. But due to the 
seniority, I think Senator Fransway should 
be given the first refusal on a seniority basis 
inasmuch as that seems to be your main way 
of thinking as far as this caucus meeting is 
concerned.” 

So Fransway was put on this committee. 
So Senator Settelmeyer said to me finally, he 
said, “Rene, what would you like to do? What 
would you like to have?” 

I said, “Well, Fred, I’ve had practically 
every honor that can be conferred on 
a member, a Republican, in that senate 


chamber.” I said, “I’ve been the president pro 
tern twice. I’ve served as chairman of judiciary 
on several occasions, fish and game, aviation. 
I’ve served as a member of the finance 
committee, been majority floor leader several 
times.” I said, “I’ve had practically every honor 
that can be conferred on a member in the 
senate chamber, but,” I said, “there’s one honor 
that I’ve never had.” 

“Yeah, what’s that?” 

I said, “You know, Fred, I’ve never had the 
honor of sitting over on the Democratic side 
of the House. I would like to have that honor 
this particular session.” 

He said, “If that’s what you want, why, 
that’s what you’ll have!” 

Well, we had so many Republicans 
that actually there weren’t enough seats on 
the Republican side, so consequently I sat 
way up in the front row, way ahead of Pete 
Echeverria, who was senator from Washoe 
County. And as smart an attorney as Pete 
Echeverria is, there was several occasions 
during the legislative session that I tripped 
him due to my parliamentary knowledge. Pete 
is a wonderful orator. 

I told Pete one day, “You know, Pete, if I 
had your ability as an orator and my brains, 
I probably would become President of the 
United States. 

He would get up and he would give all 
these beautiful flowery speeches with his 
wonderful command of the English language, 
and when they’d finally call the roll, I’d vote 
against it. He’d say, “Darn you, Rene. One 
of these days, I’m going to make such a 
wonderful speech, you’re going to vote for 
what I propose.” 

Forest Lovelock and I were very close 
and very dear friends, and even though Pete 
Echeverria has a very keen mind and was very 
capable of using the English language, I have 
always felt that Forest Lovelock was just as 



100 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


smart, if not a little bit smarter than Pete. He 
had one of the most phenomenal minds as far 
as grasping the solution to a problem; he just 
got it right now, due to the fact that he had 
been in private business for so many years, 
where he had to make judgments fast and 
exercise the carrying out of these judgments 
rapidly There’s only one trouble with Forest 
and I would tell him this to his face tomorrow 
if he wanted to know what I thought about 
him as a legislator. He became too impatient 
as far as legislative procedure is concerned. 
Me would get so wrathful. I kept telling him, 
“Forest, you just can’t do that. You’ve got men 
and women from all over the state of Nevada, 
from all walks of life, and,” I said, “you cannot 
ram through any type of legislation until you 
bring about the meeting of the minds.” 

He said, “I know, but I see the answer and 
I know that it’s going to go that way eventually. 
Why can’t they do it now?” 

I said, “For the simple reason that the 
legislature just doesn’t work that way. 

He said, “Well, I guess you’re right.” 

Forest has always been very complimentary 
to me. He considered me to be one of the 
finest legislators that he had ever had the 
privilege of working with. Of course, he 
wasn’t there too long, but due to his activities 
and his opposition towards labor, why, they 
went out to get him. That’s how he lost. 
There’s no question about it. Washoe County 
is predominantly Republican, but there was 
certain issues there that Forest took exception 
to that was detrimental to the best interests of 
labor, and they took after him and they got a 
pretty good candidate to go out and campaign 
against him. That was it. 

Of course, Pete got involved in marital 
problems and he decided that as far as 
running again for the office, he’d better back 
away from it. That’s when that young fellow, 
Roger Bissett, ran. 


Memory Sketches of Legislators I 
Have Known 

What makes a good legislator? Well, that’s 
the sixty-four-dollar question! Personally, I 
believe to be a good legislator, you at least 
have to have some kind of an educational 
background and practical experiences in 
the various phases of the economy of a 
particular county. And I sincerely and honestly 
believe that you should have some religious 
background. Also, to be a good legislator, 
I think you should have a personality that 
is at least friendly, not detrimental to being 
able to associate with your fellow legislators. 
Especially, I’m speaking about the senate. I 
believe that in that position as senator, you 
should exercise a good life as far as your 
morals are concerned, not only during 
sessions, but also when you’re at home. I 
have seen some senators that were certainly 
anything but an asset to their county as far 
as morals were concerned, but as time has 
gone on, I have seen that condition improve, 
because in this day that we’re living in, 
with rapid communication and means of 
transportation, there is very little that can 
be done in that legislature that the folks at 
home don’t know about. So the men that are 
in that legislature, they’re all quite outstanding 
people, not only in their own community, but 
also on the state level, highly respected. 

I don’t know of a single person in that 
senate that has ever been reached by bribery. 
Nearly all the members in that senate are 
men of finance to such an extent that they’re 
not obligated to anybody. Of course, there’s 
instances where these various interests 
throughout our state perhaps maybe supply 
funds to a candidate that’s running for an 
office in the belief that if elected he might 
be able to give them special favors or special 
consideration. But I don’t think there’s too 



My Political Career 


101 


much of that going on. Of course, if at this 
time where we have these terrific expenses in 
connection with, say, campaigning in Clark 
County or campaigning in Washoe County, 
you have to be either in a very favorable 
position financially to carry on your own 
campaign, or you have to go out and solicit 
funds in order to be competitive as far as 
campaigning is concerned. I’ve talked to 
different ones that even now are in the senate, 
and they claim that in Clark County, to 
actively put on a campaign, to either become 
an assemblyman or a senator from that 
county, you have to have not less than $25,000. 
That’s ridiculous. That’s really ridiculous 
to have to spend that kind of money! So if 
you’re not financially able to pocket that kind 
of money to carry on an active campaign, 
naturally you’re going to have to get help from 
the outside, but I honestly believe that most of 
the men and women that are in the legislature 
today that have been successful in winning 
their respective campaigns from these highly 
populated counties, I don’t think they have 
any obligation to anybody, particularly for 
special favors. 

In recalling memories of senators I’ve 
known, I’ll start with my first session in the 
legislature in 1943. There was Senator C. B. 
Andreasen from Storey County. You know, 
there’s an old saying, “As Vermont goes, 
so goes the nation.” Well, inasmuch as he 
headed the list as far as the roll call vote was 
concerned, they always said, “As Andreasen 
goes, so goes the senate.” 

Herman Budelman, whom I knew very 
well, he was from Tonopah and he had a very 
queer sense of humor. I remember one time 
my wife came down to visit me and I had her 
sitting by my side in the senate. Of course, 
he was a Democrat and was on the other 
side of the senate chamber, and he saw my 
wife there, and he knew that it was my wife, 


or he wouldn’t have said what he did, but he 
came over, and he said, “Well, good morning, 
Senator Lemaire. I see you got a new chick 
with you this morning.” My wife looked at me 
rather funny, and by golly, it was quite cute. 

Now this senator, James Caughman, I 
almost forgot all about him. He was from 
Mineral County, and Senator Richard H. 
Cowles, he was from Washoe, and both of 
them were hard of hearing, and they both 
sat right up close to the secretary. They were 
both Republicans. I’ll never forget those two 
as long as I live, for the simple reason that in 
the morning when they would come to the 
senate chamber, they never would ask each 
other how they felt, or anything about how 
they slept the night before, or if the weather 
was cold, or anything. The first thing that 
they said to each other, “How’s your battery 
this morning?” because they both wore 
earphones. One would say, “Mine’s fully 
charged up. How’s yours?” 

Then there was Walter Cox from Lyon— 
he and I became very close friends. And 
Harry DeVotie, he was a Republican from 
Esmeralda. He was a very fine person, too. 
There is a funny thing. Harry DeVotie was a 
Republican and Harry Wiley was a Democrat, 
and they were very close friends. I don’t know 
whether it proves out or not, but one would 
run one tern and the other guy would run the 
next term. In other words, they kind of split, 
representing their county, Esmeralda. 

Then, of course, there was William F. 
Dressier from Douglas County. He was a very 
fine person and he certainly loved to play “Dig 
Indian.” That was his forte. 

Senator James Farndale, I remember him 
real well because he was a close friend of 
Charles Russell’s, the senator from White Pine 
County. Then Andy Haight, I remember him 
quite well for the simple reason that he always 
smoked a curved meerschaum pipe. He was 



102 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


the chairman of our judiciary committee 
when we considered the premarital law. 

Then there was Kenneth Johnson, the 
senator from Ormsby County. He and I 
became very, very close friends. John E. 
Robbins, who I learned to actually love, he was 
such an outstanding person, and through him 
I learned a terrific amount about legislative 
procedure. And then, of course, there was 
Charles Russell, who sat right behind me 
my first year in the session, and he was very 
helpful to me. 

Then there was Senator Clarence E. 
Sommer from Pershing County. He was a 
very fine person, and he served on the finance 
committee quite often. Then there was Senator 
James Wadsworth. He was from Lincoln 
County. He was a very devout Mormon, but 
he didn’t follow the teachings of the Mormon 
religion too fluently or graciously; but anyway, 
he was a very fine person and I remember 
him real well. 

Now going over into the forty-second 
session, both Andreasen and Budelman 
were there, Dick Cowles, Walter Cox, Harry 
DeVotie, and Bill Dressier. Now Press W. 
Duffin, he became quite a good friend of 
mine, and he served with me on that first 
aviation committee. He was from Caliente. He 
was a young fellow, and he and I got along fine. 

Of course, there was James Farndale, he was 
still there, and Andy Haight, Kenneth Johnson, 
John Robbins, Charles Russell, William C. 
Schuman, he was from Mineral County. This 
was the first time I ever had a chance to meet 
him. Of course, this was his first session, but I 
remember that on many occasions, and when 
I say many occasions, why, Ray Marks used to 
have Senator Schuman, as well as my wife and 
I, to his home on several occasions for dinner 
and entertainment. I enjoyed meeting with 
him very much. 


Then Senator Tailman, A. V. Tallman, he 
was there the previous session, too. He was 
a very good friend of mine. And then there’s 
Senator Tognoni, and he was from Eureka 
County. 

Then from Clark County in the forty- 
third session came C. D. Daker, and he was 
a politician and a wheeler-dealer, believe 
me! He accomplished a lot for Clark County 
during the time that he was there in the 
legislature. 

Senator Ralph Lattin came back into the 
picture this forty-third session, and I think 
I’ve discussed him very thoroughly previously. 
Senator E. Frandsen Loomis, he was an 
attorney, and he took Dick Cowles’ place. 
Senator Loomis was quite an outstanding 
legislator. Being an attorney, he had a very 
fine gift of the English language, and he was a 
very fine representative for Washoe County. I 
don’t know whether he became majority floor 
leader the forty-third session or whether he 
became majority floor leader forty-fourth 
session. But, anyway, he was highly respected 
by the Republican party. 

Don McGuirk, he was from Virginia City. 
Don came from a very fine family, but Don 
was pretty much of a playboy. He loved to 
cavort with the women, and so forth. Don 
and I were pretty good friends, too. 

Then there was John Murray from Eureka. 
He was a very fine person. He later on died, 
I believe from some kind of a stroke that he 
had in connection with a trip that he made to 
Elko to took over the boy’s school there. And 
he was so upset over it; it was really upsetting 
him. They were having lunch, I think, at the 
Stockman’s Hotel, and he was stricken with 
this stroke. Never recovered from it. 

Then Fred Settelmeyer came into the 
picture in Douglas County. I believe he 
succeeded William Dressier. I think Dressier 



My Political Career 


103 


passed away, and so Senator Settelmeyer was 
elected to take his place. 

Then there is Harry Wiley. We was 
from Esmeralda County. He was a southern 
Democrat. He was one of these persons that 
whenever he gave his word, you could back 
on it one hundred percent. In later sessions 
he became quite ill. I think he had silicosis. 
Even though he was in the hospital (different 
ones of our legislature, in the senate, would 
visit him), he would tell them, “Regardless of 
how sick I might be, if you ever need my vote, 
you let me know and I’ll come over there if I 
have to hire an ambulance and come in that 
senate chamber on a stretcher,” which is a 
remarkable statement, but it proved the type 
of a man that he was. 

The forty-fourth session, Senator 
Horlacher, he was from White Pine County, 
and how upset he got over the bill that was 
introduced by Senator Tallman! 

The forty-fourth session Harry Munk was 
elected to come from Pershing County. Harry 
was a very fine man, too. His wife later on, I 
believe, served as assistant secretary in the 
senate for several sessions. This last year she 
ran for the assemblywoman from this district 
against Bill Swackhamer, but she didn’t get 
too far. 

Then there was E. L. Nores. He used to be 
judge over in Lincoln County. He ran for the 
senate and won. He used to run a newspaper 
over there, and he was in the insurance 
business in that county. He was quite a 
character. He was a Democrat and he always 
relied on Senator Robbins as far as advice 
as to how to vote. I’ll never forget one time, 
he introduced a bill to do something for his 
county, and unfortunately, when they called 
the roll, why, he voted against this bill, and he 
was quite upset over it. Robbins finally stated 
to some of us, he said, “You know, if you ever 


wanted Nores to vote yes, why, you shook your 
head to vote no and he would always vote yes.” 

And then in the forty-fourth session 
was Fred Strosnider. He came up from Lyon 
County. I think he beat Walter Cox in an 
election. Fred Strosnider was a very fine 
senator. He did a good job. 

Then there was Lloyd Wilson that was 
a new one, and he came up from Mineral 
County. I don’t think he served in the senate 
too long. I think the assessor in his county 
passed away, and he resigned to take the 
appointment. He served in the forty-fifth 
session, and he evidently decided not to 
run (in the forty-sixth) in order to take this 
appointment as assessor from that county. 

The forty-fifth session was the first session 
that Senator B. Mahlon Brown came up 
from Clark County. He replaced C. U. Baker. 
Senator Brown has proven himself to be a 
very, very capable legislator. 

In the forty-fifth session there was Forest 
B. Lovelock. I think I told a little story on 
Forest as to how impatient he would get when 
things weren’t done immediately. 

From Storey County, Walter Reid, a civil 
engineer from that area, was elected, and he 
followed Don McGuirk. Walter was a very 
capable legislator. He did a very good job. 

Now in the forty-sixth session, Tailman 
from Humboldt County decided not to run, 
so a fellow did by the name of Richard N. 
Black. He was also a civil engineer, and he ran 
for the senate and he won very easily. 

Then from Nye County, Budelman was 
injured in some kind of an accident, down in 
Oakland in a street. He got caught between 
a streetcar and a car, and it really raised 
came with him. He was a cripple for a long, 
long time, and I think he still either walks 
with crutches or with a cane. He’s visited 
the legislature since he had this accident. 



104 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


The person that took his place was William 
J. Frank. Billy and I had become quite good 
friends. Bill has done a lot of mining, and has 
been very successful in mining stocks, and 
he’s owned several homes there in Tonopah. 
Here this last winter, why, my wife and I went 
down and spent ten days at Furnace Creek 
ranch visiting with, as I call him, Billy Frank, 
and his wife, Arlene. 

That year, also, Charles Gallagher from 
White Pine County came in the picture. He 
was a very capable legislator and he did a very 
fine job for White Pine County. Whenever 
we was going to have our picture taken as a 
group in the senate, why, Senator Gallagher 
would always arrange us because photography 
was one of his hobbies. One of the nice things 
about Charlie, he would take at least two 
boys from the orphan’s home in Carson City 
during the summertime and take them on a 
vacation. Each year he’d take two different 
boys. He’d take them in different parts of 
the United States, and I think that was quite 
admirable. I believe I was the floor leader at 
that time, and I paid special tribute to Senator 
Gallagher for the kindness that he had shown 
these boys out there at the orphan school in 
Carson City. I think it was wonderful. As far 
as Charlie is concerned, a fellow by the name 
of Casey Fisher run against Senator Gallagher 
later on and beat him in that general election. 

And also in the forty-sixth session was a 
fellow by the name of R. R. Orr, Senator Orr 
from Lincoln County. He was the Ford dealer 
from Pioche. He was a very fine man and a 
very capable legislator. I enjoyed the pleasure 
of having his acquaintanceship. 

Also in the forty-sixth session, Farrell 
Seevers, whom I have known many years 
previous, was elected to represent Mineral 
County in the senate. And Farrell was a very 
fine legislator, and he did a very good job 
for Mineral County, but I believe later on he 


was beaten by Bruce Parks. He became an 
appointee by Governor Sawyer in some state 
agency in this parks deal. 

Then, in 1953, Walter Whitacre came into 
the picture. I think he beat Strosnider. That 
was when Harry Wiley came into the picture 
from Esmeralda. He was a very fine person. 
Well, I mentioned him before, because he 
came in the forty-fourth session. 

The forty-seventh session in 1955, Newton 
Crumley from Elko County was elected. 
I think Senator Robbins passed out of the 
picture, or he became so ill that he chose 
not to run. Here’s something that I think is 
very worthwhile mentioning— the fact that 
all the years that I was in that legislature the 
Republican party extended the honor and 
privilege to Senator John E. Robbins to make 
the assignment of all the bills that came over 
from the assembly. So that was how dear he 
was to the Republicans, even though he was 
quite an outstanding Democrat. But above 
all of his party politics, he was really a true 
Nevadan and we all liked him very much. 
He served in the senate the longest of anyone 
that I have ever known. He served there for 
twenty-four years. That would be six sessions. 
He was a very fine legislator. 

Then Senator James Slattery came over 
from the assembly, I think. He was elected 
from Storey County. He’s a big, tall, gawky 
gentleman. Evidently he had been quite an 
athlete when he was young. Senator Kenneth 
Johnson remembered him well, and he used 
to poke fun at him, and I didn’t like it. I don’t 
think that anybody should be made fun of 
in the position of a senator, regardless of 
how gawky they look or anything like that. I 
made an observation, I said, “As far as Senator 
Slattery is concerned, he’s a lot smarter than 
he might appear.” I said, “You better kind of 
watch him because he knows where he’s going 
and how he’s going to get there,” and he’s 



My Political Career 


105 


proven that in all the years in this legislature 
as far as that assembly is concerned. 

The forty-ninth session—that was the year 
that W.. L. Cord came into the picture from 
Esmeralda County E. L. Cord is very widely 
known due to the fact that he Was at one 
time a manufacturer of the Cord automobile. 
He served on the finance committee with 
Senator Johnson as chairman. It was during 
that session that we passed that table tax bill 
that gave all that table tax money back to 
the various counties. Senator Cord played a 
very important part in getting that legislation 
passed. 

Here’s something that’s worth note. 
During his term in office there in the senate, 
Cord had some mining property over in Moab 
country. It’s what they call this atomic ore, 
uranium. While he was there, why, he sold 
that property for $17 million. He said he had 
invested about five or six million dollars in 
the property in order to put it in shape to sell 
it, and interested with him in that venture 
was John Mueller and Norman Biltz. I have 
a picture someplace of the three of them 
congratulating each other on that sale. 

In the forty-eighth session, Floyd Lamb 
was elected from Lincoln County. He served 
as county commissioner for several years in 
his county and he turned out to be a very, very 
fine legislator. He was quite hot-tempered. I, 
as majority floor leader, had to call a recess 
on several occasions. That’s one thing—as 
majority floor leader, I never would talk to any 
person roughly for not behaving themselves, 
openly, on the floor. I would, if necessary, 
move for a short recess, and I’d call them into 
a room and talk to them, tell them that now 
they were senators, and for goodness sakes, 
act that way. And they all highly respected 
me, I think, because they never challenged me 
and my request to behave themselves. Senator 
Lamb followed that advice very strongly after 


that. He has become a very capable legislator, 
and I believe in this last session here, 1967, 
this makes his second time that he’s served as 
chairman of the finance committee, which is 
one of the most powerful committees in the 
senate, which proves my point. 

From Eureka County a new face appeared 
and that was Ed Leutzinger. During his time 
that he was there in the legislature, a very sad 
experience took place and I’ve never forgotten 
it. A friend of his passed away in Eureka and 
he went over to the funeral, and as he drove up 
the main street in Eureka, his son accidentally 
shot himself. It must have been a terrible 
tragedy to Senator Leutzinger to appear on 
the scene and then see his son fall out of his 
car, shot. He heard the shot and everything. 
It was quite a tragedy. And regardless of the 
heartache that that man had, after just about 
three or four days, he came back to the senate 
and served his county over and above his 
grief, which is a remarkable tribute that I 
wish to pay to him. In a sense it proves the 
old saying that, “Regardless of the heartache 
of these actors on the stage, the show still 
must go on,” and Senator Leutzinger proved 
that by coming back and doing his duty as far 
as taking care of his obligations to his county. 

Senator Wilson McGowan was a new 
face in the forty-eighth session. He was 
from Pershing County. Due to our political 
affiliation, why, Wilson and I had become 
quite good friends. At the moment, he was 
successful in running for a position as state 
controller this last election, and I’m quite 
proud that he was given that honor by the 
people of the state of Nevada. The fact of 
the matter is, why, nearly everyone that 
knew Wilson and was friendly with him, 
they thought that he didn’t have a chance of 
winning that election, but that’s one thing 
about politics, a man can never tell which way 
the wind is going to blow. And we was all very 



106 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


happy to see him win that office. He was a very 
good senator, too. I’m very happy and proud 
that I had that privilege of serving with him. 

There’s one here, Martin C. Duffy in the 
forty-ninth session. He was from Esmeralda 
County. Martin was a very hard person to 
get acquainted with. I didn’t know him really 
too well. He worked for increasing retirement 
benefits for the legislators, which he seemed 
to be primarily interested in. I imagine that 
he must have served in some kind of a county 
position in his county previously, before 
coming to the legislature. 

Peter Echeverria was elected and appeared 
in the forty-ninth session. He took Forest 
Lovelock’s place. He was a very capable 
person. I think I made an observation in 
regards to Pete in previous remarks. That was 
the year that Ed Lauritzen took my place. I 
think I’ve gone into that, too. 

Then the fiftieth session, William Dial was 
elected from Ormsby County. He, I think, 
beat Kenneth Johnson. Bill turned out to be 
a very fine legislator, a very fine senator. (His 
name is in the forty-ninth session, also.] I 
think that was the first session that Senator 
Monroe came into the senate, 1960. Oh, yes, 
he was there (in 1959). But anyway, Senator 
Monroe, he followed Newton Crumley, both 
very good friends of mine. 

In the fiftieth session, William R. Rand 
was elected from Eureka County. He was 
an old pioneer of that county and has quite 
a lot of friends there. He is a very honest 
and sincere person, but due to his age, he 
didn’t seem to grasp a lot of the things that 
were taking place around him. But he was 
very honest and sincere, and if he ever hurt 
anybody’s feelings, why, it was regrettable, 
because he certainly didn’t want to do it. 

The fifty-first session—that’s when Senator 
Bruce Parks came into the picture. He went 
out against Senator Seevers. There was some 


skulduggery went on in the Democratic 
party. This fellow Senator Parks and Senator 
Echeverria formed a coalition. When the 
Democrats finally got in the majority in the 
senate, Bruce Parks was supposed to become 
the speaker pro tern. Senator Echeverria was 
to become majority floor leader. And they had 
a very, very bitter fight over it. In fact there’s 
still animosity existing in the Democratic side 
of the house over that ambition of those two 
characters. That’s what I’m told. 

Senator John Fransway came into the 
picture and he succeeded Senator Richard M. 
Black. I was instrumental in getting Senator 
John Fransway to run for senator from 
Humboldt County. I think he has certainly 
lived up to the faith and confidence that 
I had in him because he’s been a very fine 
legislator. I’ve heard many compliments for 
him. He certainly doesn’t vote with the crowd. 
He follows the dictates of his own heart and 
conscience, believe me, which is an admirable 
trait. 

The fifty-second session was when Henry 
Berrum came into the picture from Douglas 
County. He took Senator Settelmeyer’S place. 
He was a very fine legislator. Of course, he 
served many years in the assembly. Senator 
Roger Bissett came in from Washoe, and he 
took Senator Echeverria’s place. 

Senator Harvey R. Humphrey was elected 
from Esmeralda County. Harvey and I, we 
knew each other in Tonopah years ago when 
I was working down there for the Standard 
Oil Company, and he’s always been resentful 
towards me, on a friendly basis, of course, 
because he and I were going with the same 
girl down there. It was Lucille Askin. I finally 
talked her out of going with him and going 
with me. So he always has told me that I’d 
stolen his girl in Tonopah.. But he has a very 
sweet wife now, and neither he nor I married 



My Political Career 


107 


this girl that we were palling around with 
down there. 

The fifty-third session, Jack Bay was 
elected to serve from Eureka. Jack, he was 
pretty much of a yes-man, as far as following 
the dictates of the executive department of the 
state. Jack was a very fine person; I liked him 
very much. But I liked to see a man go into 
that legislature and not be responsive to the 
executive department downstairs. I think the 
executive department should be responsive to 
the legislature department upstairs, because 
we make the rules. 

While I’m thinking about this, there 
were many times that the governors—I 
remember these Democratic governors that 
were downstairs—they would send word 
up by their messenger for John E. Robbins 
to come down to their office, and it would 
really irritate him very much because I heard 
him tell one of these messengers one time, he 
said, “You go down and you tell the governor 
(and I forgot which governor it was) that if 
he wants to see me, I’m sitting right here at 
this chair and I’ll be glad to have him come 
up and sit with me, but I’m not going down to 
see him.” And that’s the way he thought about 
the executive department. 

An interesting character that was elected 
from Nye County in the fifty-third session 
was Emerson Titlow from Tonopah. He had 
always been registered as a Republican. Our 
statutes require that before you can file for 
office under the other party label, you have 
to have voted for that party in the previous 
general election. He, having been registered as 
a Republican, he wanted to file as a Democrat, 
but he couldn’t. So he decided that he would 
go out and get the necessary signers, and he 
ran as an independent, and he won. At that 
particular fifty-third session there was eight 
Democrats and eight Republicans and this 
one independent. Well, he was really sitting 


in the driver’s seat. So both parties were very 
attentive to him as far as trying to get him 
to swing over to their side so they’d have the 
“magic nine.” But he had made commitments 
to the Democratic party to such an extent 
that he couldn’t back away from them. 
Consequently, he met with the Republicans 
in a Republican caucus, and his request as far 
as chairman appointments was too excessive. 
We just didn’t listen to him. We told him, “You 
better go back over there and stay with your 
Democrats that you’ve pledged your support 
to.” So that’s what happened to Emerson. I 
think that covers my associations with these 
different legislators over the years that I’ve 
been in the legislature. 




6 


Comments on the Art of Politics 


I believe I’ve stated before that Charles 
Russell and I were very close friends since the 
first session that I served, which was in ’43, 
and he sat directly behind me, and whenever 
I needed any advice or counsel, why, I didn’t 
hesitate to call upon him. So he and I became 
very close friends. 

Later on in life and in politics, why, 
Charles Russell became our governor, and 
I’m not saying this to brag or anything, but it’s 
never been my policy to rush to a telephone 
and congratulate anyone that’s won a political 
office. In fact, I feel sorry for them most of the 
time. But what I was going to actually try to 
describe was the fact that I have never gone 
and sent any kind of a congratulatory message 
to anyone that’s been successful in politics. I 
know there has been quite a few people in this 
area have done it, and to me, I think they’re 
rather two-faced because I knew definitely 
that they didn’t support the candidate. They 
worked diligently against him, but they, in 
a conversation over the telephone, they’ve 
made statements to this effect, “Well, if it 
hadn’t been for my support, you never would 


have made it, and I wish to congratulate you,” 
which is—well, I guess that’s politics. 

Getting back to Charles Russell. He 
became governor, and a few months went by, 
and I had occasion to visit the capital, and 
due to the friendship that existed between 
he and I, I made it a point to visit his office. 
Being a good friend of his, why, I didn’t have 
any difficulty going right in and visiting with 
him. After we had visited a few minutes, why, 
I asked Charlie, I said, “Say, Charlie, I would 
like to have you do me a special favor.” 

Up until that particular moment, why, 
he was quite relaxed in his big chair, sitting 
behind the governor’s desk there at the capitol. 
So he began kind of stiffening up, and I spoke 
to him along this line, I said, “Charles, you 
know, I think you can give me a consideration 
of this favor.” 

He said, “Well, it all depends what you’re 
going to ask me.” He said, “Of course, you and 
I are good friends, and if there’s a possible 
chance for me to fulfill your request, I’ll be 
happy to do it.” 

I said, “Well, I think you can do it.” 



110 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


He said, “Well, what is your request?” 

I told him, I said, “Well, Charlie, I’ve 
known you a long time. You’ve taken over one 
of the toughest jobs that anybody can ever ask 
for—and that’s to be governor of this state or 
any other state.” I told him, I said, “I know 
that there are going to be occasions when 
perhaps maybe you might need some help.” 
And I shook my finger under his nose and I 
said, “Now, listen. If and whenever you need 
help and you fail to call on me, I will never 
forgive you for it.” 

He just kind of relaxed back in the chair, 
and the first thing I noticed, tears was running 
down his cheeks and he said, “You know, 
Rene, that’s the most wonderful request that 
I have had so far during my term as governor 
of this state.” He said, “Everybody that’s come 
in here previous to you have always wanted 
some special favor either for themselves or 
for some of their friends.” He says, “All you’ve 
done is just come in here and very plainly—I 
can’t express just exactly what you’ve said, 
other than all you want to do is just help me.” 
He said, “I’ll never forget that as long as I live.” 

And he didn’t. So Charlie and I were very 
good friends. Of course, he ran for the third 
term and got dumped just like Grant Sawyer 
ran for a third term and got dumped. I think 
that’s a good idea. Maybe we should amend 
our constitution and prohibit a governor 
from serving more than two terms. I think 
that’s one of Governor Paul Laxalt’s planks. .1 
think he recommended that in his message 
this last session of the legislature. And I don’t 
remember whether the resolution was passed 
by both houses at this last session or not. Of 
course, if they have passed the resolution, 
it will be necessary again to pass it the next 
general session and then it will be presented 
to the people for consideration. 

I’ve been told that someone said that I was 
one of the most powerful men to ever sit in 


the Nevada state legislature. I don’t know just 
exactly what they meant by powerful. I was 
very influential, there’s no question about that. 
Of course, I think perhaps maybe they based 
their thinking on the very fact that I served as 
majority floor leader for a few sessions, and 
as majority floor leader, you’re in favorable 
position to control and to direct the turn of 
events as far as procedures in connection with 
the senate. You have the privilege of working 
very closely with the presiding officer who is, 
of course, the lieutenant governor. You also 
have the privilege of working very closely with 
the president pro tern. In many instances, 
if the governor happens to be of your party 
politics, you act as a liaison between the 
legislature and the executive branch of the 
government to push along and to advance 
all of the various types of legislation that the 
executive department is primarily interested 
in. Now that, perhaps, might have had some 
bearing on the fact that some people thought 
I was very powerful in the senate. 

In my opinion, I do believe that the one 
who does have great power in the Nevada 
state senate is the very one who is sitting in 
as chairman of the finance committee. As I 
have brought out previously, why, Senator 
Ken Johnson and I were very, very close 
friends, and due to that friendship that 
existed, he and I sort of directed the entire 
affairs that took place as far as it pertained 
to legislation that came into our senate. Of 
course, being in the senate and being on the 
finance committee, usually there’s quite a lot 
of pressure, influences, that you can exercise. 
From being on that committee you can force— 
not actually force, but you can bring enough 
pressure to bear on certain individuals in the 
lower house to have favorable consideration 
for legislation that either the administration is 
primarily interested in, or you, as individuals, 
might be primarily interested in. I think that 



Comments on the Art of Politics 


111 


perhaps maybe might give an insight as to the 
position that I held. 

I will never forget the time when Wendell 
Willkie returned from that trip, the visitation 
that he made throughout Russia and China, 
and he was aspiring for votes in his endeavor 
to get the nomination of the Republican 
party. When he came to Reno, he had his 
secretaries make special efforts to contact 
and have a meeting with both Senator Ken 
Johnson and myself, and this occurred at the 
Riverside Hotel. In our interview with Mr. 
Willkie, we asked him (he had just come back 
from this trip through that area in the Far 
East and through Russia) if we ever became 
involved in some kind of a conflict with the 
Communists, what did he feel would be the 
eventual outcome. Before he answered our 
question, he gave it considerable thought, and 
finally he told us that the natural resources 
of Russia and Siberia and the manpower that 
existed in those areas is so tremendous, it 
corresponds greatly to the resources that we 
have here in our country, in the United States. 

Now this interview took place before the 
atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima, but 
even then he said that as far as that kind of a 
conflict, he felt that the United States would 
eventually win out, but he said it would be a 
very long, drawn out, prolonged war in which 
our country, to be successful in such a venture, 
we would practically have to change our way 
of life. Everything in our country would have 
to be given over to the state. The fact of the 
matter, he said, every man, woman, and child 
would be directed what to do, when to do it, 
and how to do it. And he said, of course, we 
wouldn’t call this transition communistic, 
but it would certainly be necessary to follow 
those trines and adopt those policies in order 
to be on the same basis and footing as the 
communist nations and peoples. He said this 
war would extend over such a long period 


of time, he said there would be undoubtedly 
several generations born before the final result 
would be accomplished, and these young 
people would become accustomed to that 
particular way of life. He said, “I do not feel 
that after the war would be accomplished, 
or we had won it, that they would ever be 
able to go back to a democratic way of life.” 
He said, “I, as an American, certainly hope 
that something like that never comes about 
because I would certainly hate to see our 
present way of life destroyed, and it would 
be because we would be accustomed to this 
new way of life. Everything would be owned 
and controlled practically by the state.” And 
he said, “That’s certainly not a democratic 
government.” I’ve never forgotten that. 

So that’s the picture as far as power that 
both Ken Johnson and I had and exercised 
during the time that we were in the senate. 

Of course, Ken got beat by Senator Dial 
from Ormsby County. It was an experience of 
internal party strife that brought that about. 
But I do believe that as far as Senator Ken 
Johnson is concerned, he has done more 
during the time that he was in office, done 
more for Ormsby County, the city of Carson, 
than any senator that ever has been in that 
office. 

flow how could we bring pressures on 
the other legislators to pass a bill? It’s done 
primarily with trading, mostly trading. If 
some people are on the fence in regard to 
certain measures and they have some pet 
measure that they would like to push along 
to the senate, why, before any consideration 
would be given to those patronizers by those 
individuals in the assembly, they would 
have to act and vote favorably on this other 
legislation that came over from the senate 
before we’d even consider theirs. That’s the 
pressure. In other words, it’s, in a sense, horse 
trading. That has gone on in the legislature of 



112 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


all states for many, many years. That’s the way 
they work. To me it seems ridiculous, because 
a bill should be either passed or rejected 
entirely on its merit. It shouldn’t be forced into 
a situation such as I just brought out. 

In all of the years that I’ve been in the 
legislature, I have never seen a single person in 
either house that didn’t have some legislation 
that perhaps maybe pertained to their county, 
that would be beneficial to their county. Even 
a salary raise bill could be blocked if they 
didn’t give you favorable consideration. 

Of course, in the assembly, it was just as 
important to have the magic number there as 
in the senate to have any legislation enacted. 
As long as you had that magic number in the 
assembly, and you were sure of that number, 
why, you didn’t too much about whether 
you went and interviewed any of the other 
members of the assembly or not. There again, 
very important legislation is essential to the 
general welfare of the state of Nevada. 

That’s where many of these lobbyists 
played a very important hand. For instance, 
now, if you couldn’t reach, say, the delegation 
that would be from Clark County, you 
would ask some of these lobbyists that were 
friendly with some of those members of that 
delegation to see what they could do to help 
work towards passage of a certain bill that 
was so important. They would work towards 
that end and give you quite a lot of assistance. 
That’s the way legislation is either approved 
or disapproved in the legislature. 

I’ve had certain influences and pressures 
brought to bear on me as far as certain 
legislation that I was very deeply interested 
in. They would exercise these pressures 
in order to try to get their own personal 
legislation through. Usually they don’t pay 
too much attention to the salary bills from 
each county because that’s purely a county 
measure pertaining only to that county; 


it doesn’t affect any other county. So any 
salary raise bill, why, they usually ignore it. 
The fact of the matter is salary bills, when 
they’re introduced by a senator in the senate, 
is referred to a select committee consisting 
of the senator from the respective county. 
So he, in turn, waits until he hears perhaps 
maybe from his constituents, and if there’s no 
objection, why, puts it out on the floor with a 
“do pass” recommendation, of course, there’s 
been some instances, very few, however, 
where salary bills have been introduced by 
different senators or assemblymen, and back 
home in their respective counties, the people 
made some complaint so they usually would 
just let it die in the select committee so at 
wouldn’t even hit the floor of either house. 
So that’s the picture. 

The people at home have a very, very 
great influence during the session, believe 
me. There are a few people that watch very 
closely the legislation that is introduced in 
our legislature. Sometimes, even though 
they might not notice any of this legislation, 
there are people there, these lobbyists, that 
feel that the legislation is either detrimental 
or beneficial to the general welfare of the 
state, and they will call their friends up in 
these respective counties and ask them to 
influence their delegation in the legislature 
to work either for the act, or against the act, 
and that’s how many people throughout the 
state become interested or take a part in the 
activities of the legislature. 

I’ve noticed in later years that the League 
of Women voters are very watchful of the 
happenings in connection with legislation. 
I’ve also noticed that Parents and Teachers 
are taking more of an active part as far 
as education matters are concerned. I’ve 
also noticed that the various chambers of 
commerce throughout the state of Nevada 
have taken necessary steps to create a 



Comments on the Art of Politics 


113 


legislative committee in their respective 
bodies, and these legislative committees 
watch and review all the legislation that is 
introduced in the legislature. And any of 
these chambers of commerce that feel that 
the legislation is not beneficial or would be 
harmful if enacted, why, they make their 
recommendations to the legislature. 

So anyone that is interested in their 
state and their county affairs, and so forth, 
it behooves them to watch very closely a lot 
of the laws that are enacted. Of course, now, 
each legislator that is in the legislature, he 
usually submits a mailing list of different 
ones whom he feels would be interested, 
and the printing office at Carson mails these 
out regularly to all of this mailing list from 
each senator in the senate. They usually get 
together so that there’s not a duplication. I 
know Assemblyman Swackhamer and I, at 
the beginning of each session, got together 
and prepared a mailing list and made sure 
that there wasn’t a duplications We tried to 
keep the leaders of our county informed by 
sending these, the first prints of bills, so that 
they would have a chance to look them over. 

Of course, I do believe that as time has 
gone on, and the mailing has become so 
great, that most of these people that are out in 
these outlying counties have very little time to 
review each one of these bills that are printed 
and mailed out to them by the state printing 
office. But there’s where this legislative 
committee of these various chambers of 
commerce play a very important part, because 
that’s the assignment they’re given, and they 
probably meet quite regularly to review all 
these printed bills that are sent out to them. 
They naturally watch the articles that are 
released in the press, too, and what they hear 
over the radio, so that they can keep abreast 
of the movement of legislation through the 
legislature. 


I know the Nevada Medical Association, 
they have men that are quite interested in 
anything that pertains to their profession. 
The lawyers have a group that watches the 
legislation as it is introduced and keep fully 
advised as to what is going on. So there’s 
many a watchdog throughout our state that’s 
watching every movement that the legislature 
might make so that they can keep abreast of 
them. 

I have some friends there in Battle 
Mountain, and I’ve made it a point on two or 
three occasions to contact them during these 
sessions and ask them if they were interested 
in any particular type of legislation, and also 
to ask that if there was something that they 
wanted to know about, to contact me on the 
telephone and I would be glad to see what 
I could do as far as giving them the correct 
information, or give them the procedures that 
was going along as far as the enactment of 
certain bills. There was one person here that 
made me feel rather proud. He said, “Well, 
Senator, as far as you’re concerned, your 
activities here in this area are so similar to 
mine, I know that I don’t even have to read the 
bills or get in touch with you because you’ll be 
looking after your interests, and when you’re 
looking after your interests, why, I don’t have 
to worry about mine.” 

I have hardly ever been on the receiving 
end of a really great popular pressure, a lot 
of letters or telegrams on any particular 
issues. Usually when there is ardent activity 
to either block a piece of legislation or to 
promote it, the pressure is directed to the 
committee where this particular piece of 
legislation has been assigned. I’ve noticed 
that Clark County’s representatives in both 
the assembly and in the senate, they really get 
just telegram after telegram to either be for or 
against certain measures that might pertain 
to their particular area. But I’ve never had too 



114 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


many pressures exercised on me in the way 
of telegrams or anything like that. Of course, 
I have received some and I’ve also received 
some letters. Then, once in a while, you get 
maybe some kind of a communication from 
some crank or some half-wit that, well, you 
know what we can do with that, we put it in 
the round file, which is the wastebasket. 

There are men and women in the Nevada 
state legislature that—maybe they have been 
promoted to run by different interests in their 
respective counties, but there are some that 
run for the office of senator and the office of 
assemblyman for the advertising benefit and 
the prestige benefit that they sometimes obtain 
from being a senator or an assemblyman. This 
particular reference is to these attorneys from 
both Clark County and Washoe County. 
For instance, from Washoe County there is 
Senator Loomis, an attorney. When you’re a 
senator, why, you do get a certain amount of 
prestige and a certain amount of advertising 
that is beneficial to your business, if you have 
business that is dependent upon advertising 
and a little elevated rank as compared to the 
John 0. Citizen. Then besides Loomis there 
recently was Roger Bissett, and I’ve noticed 
that even over in the assembly there’s quite a 
few attorneys that become assemblymen with 
the idea in mind that it will be beneficial to 
their profession. 

The women that have been over in the 
assembly, I can’t see where there is any 
instance of personal ambition to get a lot 
of advertising. I think it’s wonderful that 
women take this active part in our legislative 
programs. Now we have one senator—I think 
it’s Helen Herr in the senate who is from Clark 
County, she’s a very brilliant woman and she 
was quite active in all legislative matters in 
the assembly when she was there representing 
Clark County. When this reapportionment 
program went through, why, she campaigned 


to become one of the senators from Clark 
County and wonk due to the fact that she had 
had her name before the public in her county 
and she had done an outstanding job. 

Conventions and Campaigns 

Since I was very active in the Republican 
party, and had been for many years, having 
been in the Senate at that particular time, 
why, at our state convention I was chosen 
to be a delegate to the Republican national 
convention that was held in Chicago in 1944. 
I’ve forgotten who the rest of the delegates 
were. I think there was Mayor Tank Smith 
from Reno, a fellow by the name of Clark from 
Washoe County, and Getchell, and Albert 
“Ab” Supp from Wells, and myself—I think 
there about six delegates chosen. 

Of course, we were still at war and 
transportation was really a problem. It 
was really difficult to fly on account of the 
priorities that existed at that time. Any 
military personnel could “bump” anyone, 
even if they had reserved seats. 

We stayed at the Hotel Sherman in 
Chicago—and Getchell was a very wonderful 
host. He wined and dined us; we had a very 
good time. It was quite an experience for 
me, and it was also quite an experience for 
Ab Supp. We roomed together in this Hotel 
Sherman, and he said when the convention 
was over he was going to spend some time 
in Dearborn looking over the Ford factories. 
But after a few days (I don’t think Ab Supp 
had ever been east of Salt Lake City—he 
was a Ford dealer in Wells) of going to the 
convention day after day, even the “speed- 
ball” taxi drivers began to bother him. 

It was a very interesting experience for 
me. The keynote speaker was Earl Warren. 
In all the years that I’ve been in politics, I 
don’t think I’ve ever heard a man that has the 



Comments on the Art of Politics 


115 


wonderful talent for putting thought to the 
people in such a way. In fact, he aroused the 
delegates to such a point that if someone had 
gotten up and made a motion that all rules be 
laid aside, he would have been nominated to 
run for President of the United States! 

The one who presided over that meeting, 
as I remember, was the speaker of the House 
for many years, Joe Martin. I met him 
personally one time when he was in Reno— 
Noble Getchell introduced me to him. I had 
the privilege of meeting Robert A. Taft and 
some of the outstanding national politicians 
of that time. When they came to nominations 
for that high office, there was one man who 
got up and nominated Douglas MacArthur. 
He was a wonderful person but he hadn’t 
done any pre-campaigning, and when the 
final votes were counted, there was that one 
man who had nominated him voting for 
him, and that’s all. They tried to get him to 
change his position so That the candidate 
that was nominated would be nominated by 
acclamation, but this guy wouldn’t back off. I 
had The privilege of also meeting Tom Dewey 
(who was nominated that year) out in Reno. 

When it was time to come home, some 
of the delegates didn’t want to take a chance 
on the plane so they decided to take the 
train. I asked Ab Supp if he was going up 
to Dearborn, and he said, “No, I want to go 
home.” He tried to make plane reservations, 
and they said they would call him an hour 
before plane departure. They called about four 
o’clock in the morning, and he was so excited 
about going home that he put on his shirt and 
started out the door without his pants. 

“Hey, Ab, you better wait a minute,” I said. 

We left on The train The next morning 
and got as far as Denver, and Ab had to wait 
a day and a half or two days before he could 
get a flight into Salt Lake. We both got to Salt 
Lake about the same time. When my wife and 


I got to the garage in Wells, he was working 
out there, and I said, “I bet you’ve been here 
about a week.” 

And he said, “No, I’ve been here about an 
hour.” It was an enjoyable trip on the train; we 
had a lot of fun. 

Then another convention was held in San 
Francisco. I wasn’t a delegate to that one. I 
was an alternate delegate, and as an alternate 
delegate I got a chance to have a lot of fun, 
too. In our group at that time was Rex Bell. 
I’ve forgotten the names of the other ones, but 
they’re still active in politics, except for Rex. 
I had the privilege of visiting with General 
Eisenhower at that convention. The Nevada 
delegation stayed at the Hotel Fielding. We’d 
get on busses every morning and drive out 
to the Cow Palace, where the convention was 
being held. It was an interesting experience, 
but it was a bit of a repeat performance of 
the one in ’44.1 enjoyed it very much. It was 
a pretty unified deal; there weren’t any big 
battles as to who should be nominated for the 
office. Not the way it was in ’52. 

Statewide Campaigns and Campaigners: 
The “Right to Work” Bill 

This “Right to Work” bill was passed by 
referendum petition, and the labor people 
tried time after time to have the legislature 
repeal it. People don’t realize that when the 
people have expressed an opinion definitely, 
anyone in the legislature will take a long look 
before taking any action that is contrary to 
what the people of our state decided by a 
referendum vote. 

I knew it was a very controversial issue and 
I never took any action or part in it. Of course, 
we’ve never had any real labor problems in 
this county. It’s not a well-organized union 
area. Although I do believe that the unions, 
on two or three occasions, have supplied 



116 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


funds and have engaged in an endeavor to 
have some of my opponents beat me. But they 
have never been successful. It’s true, I haven’t 
participated in statewide campaigns. 

In large populated counties, party politics 
is paramount. Party politics, insofar as the 
small counties is concerned, they vote on their 
knowledge about him [a candidate] without 
any particular consideration as to the party. 
Anyone who runs is a very poor politician 
if he gets involved in any battle as far as one 
party fighting another. The electorate in the 
small counties usually follows party lines: 
If they’re Republicans, they usually vote for 
Republicans on the state and national levels. 
And if they’re Democrats, they follow the 
same procedure. On the county level, say, for 
state senators and assemblymen, they don’t 
pay too much attention to party politics. 

we did have a problem when we had 
this influx of people that came in here on 
Reese River Valley. When Dan Shovelin 
ran against me, he was a Democrat and 
I was a Republican. These people (being 
Democrats) didn’t know either one of us, 
and so the election was pretty close. That’s 
one reason why I’ve never participated in 
these state ballots. If I wasn’t running for 
offices, I’d probably be more active. Take, for 
instance, our county chairman who has been 
Republican chairman of the county for many 
years, Leroy Cassidy. He always takes a very 
active part in campaigning for the party on 
the state level, whereas I, even though I’m 
a member of that board, I keep hands of f 
pretty much. 



7 


Lander County Historical Notes 


Everyone who comes into Battle Mountain 
wonders where it ever got its name. The 
emigrant trains used to come in here years 
and years ago, going east and west, mostly 
west to the gold fields of California. There 
used to be a Renegade tribe of Shoshone 
Indians in this area that played havoc with 
some of these emigrant trains coming through 
here. To the east of us there is a point called 
Rockbend Point, and these Indians could 
get up on this point and they could see these 
emigrant trains coming many days before 
they could ever get into this area around here 
where Battle Mountain is now located. So, 
consequently, they would be well prepared to 
attack, or ambush, or drive these emigrants 
into turmoil. But there was one group of 
emigrants that came in here and retreated into 
what is now known as the Battle Mountain 
range of mountains. And there was a war in 
a place now called Copper Basin. It was there 
that they made their circle of wagons and had 
this big battle with the Indians. They were 
successful in driving back the Indians. It was 


from that battle that this Battle Mountain 
range of mountains was named. 

When the railroad was first built here in 
the late ’60s and early ’70s, they used to pipe 
water from a spring three and a half miles 
from the base of one of these Elephant Head 
Mountains—it looks like a chain of elephants 
walking along. At the base of one of these 
mountains was a spring called the Blossom 
Springs. The railroad used to pipe that water 
to this Battle Mountain siding, which was 
used in those days as a coaling station for 
the Central Pacific system. Because they were 
using steam engines, they would stop here 
in Battle Mountain to replenish their water 
supply and so replenish their fuel. Naturally, 
in those days, water was at a premium, as it 
is today. Since there was water here and there 
was a side track facility, Battle Mountain 
became the railhead, serving all these mining 
facilities in this particular locality, and also 
the county seat, instead of having it up at old 
Argenta, where my grandparents were when 
they first hit this country. 



118 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


I think one interesting historical area 
that has been overlooked is the Copper 
Basin area. That’s the area that this town is 
named after, that that mountain range is 
named after, and it was quite a battle. Another 
interesting historical fact (and I have seen this 
also in history books where you can find a 
verification of it), the Copper Canyon mine 
actually is the oldest mining property in the 
state of Nevada. When these emigrants used 
to come through here—now, this is before 
the discovery of the Comstock—when these 
emigrant trains used to come through here 
and they were attacked by these Indians, they 
noticed the war paint that they were using as 
a red oxide. They used this red oxide to paint 
their faces, and these were war colors. Some 
of these emigrants were evidently interested 
in minerals because they kept wondering 
where this red oxide was coming from that 
these Indians were getting. It is an indication 
of some kind of a mineral. As tame went on, 
why, they located this red oxide, and it was 
over in Copper Canyon. And in exploring 
this canyon, they found copper. I’ve forgotten 
the name of the company— I think it was 
the Maricopa or the old Glasgow Western, 
this company that was formed. They used 
to mine that copper and they used to haul it 
by wagon train from Copper Canyon clear 
through to Sacramento, where it was placed as 
ballast in ships. And these ships would carry 
that copper ore in the holds as ballast clear 
to Swansea, England, where it was smelted. 
And I’m very sure in my mind that Copper 
Canyon was the first actual mining venture in 
the state of Nevada. I might be wrong, but I 
still think it’s older than the Comstock. Now, 
there is an area that I think should have some 
historical consideration given to it as far as its 
background. 

Of course, too, there is the town of 
Austin, and there is the former county seat, 


the first county seat in this county, which was 
located down around Ledlie, and its name 
was Jacobsville. And then the Pony Express, 
and the finding of this silver ore in the Pony 
Canyon, there at Austin. A Pony Express 
[rider] uncovered this silver ore in Pony 
Canyon. There is a nice monument there that 
I saw the last time I drove through. 

Now, Jacobsville is a historical place 
because that used to be the gathering place of 
all the wagon trains that used to go through 
there. Even my Grandfather Watt used to stop 
there with his pack trains. There is a certain 
amount of water available there, and some 
pasture, and they stopped there to let their 
animals recuperate from some of these vast 
distances that they had to travel. They tell 
an interesting story about the “bullwhacker 
quartz.” This is complete hearsay. 

A fellow drove into Jacobsville and turned 
his oxen loose so that they could graze on one 
of the hillsides nearby. After he had rested 
himself for several days, he went to get his 
oxen and take off. He was gone from camp 
several days. When he finally got back, he 
was carrying some ore samples that he had 
found on one of the nearby hills. There was 
a message in Jacobsville for him saying that 
some of his people had passed away back East 
and that he was urgently requested to return 
home. He sold his outfit and got some horses 
and went back East. The people who got his 
outfit, his wagon and his animals—after he 
had departed, naturally—began looking 
around and they opened up this jockey box, 
as they call it, at the front end of the wagon, 
and there was this sack with these pieces of 
rocks. And on examining these rocks, they 
found a very, very rich piece of gold ore. It was 
so rich you could just see it—it was speckled 
all through the rock. And a piece of that ore 
is still held in the Mining Department of the 
University of Nevada. 



Lander County Historical Notes 


119 


A friend of mine, who was working in the 
Mining Department there at the University, 
he come out here and spent I don’t know how 
many weeks in and around that area trying to 
find this “bullwhacker quartz,” but he never 
could find it. Maybe someday somebody will 
find it. But that is one of those lost gold mine 
deals, and every town in the United States 
has always got a lost gold mine or a lost silver 
mine or something like that. That’s the story 
about the “bullwhacker quartz.” 

Then, of course, there is the story about 
the Stokes Castle. I think Mrs. Molly Magee 
Knudtsen could give you a better rundown on 
That. She’s now the proprietress of the Stokes 
Castle. That’s the stone structure that’s up on 
the hillside. It’s an historical monument. 

The old stagecoaches used to operate 
between Austin and Battle Mountain in 
the Reese River Canyon, south of Battle 
Mountain about fifty miles. There is a point 
in this canyon that is named Robbers’ Point, 
When these coaches used to go back and 
forth between Battle Mountain and Austin, 
the stages was robbed, I think two or three 
times, at this one point. It, s an ideal place, 
if anyone wants to attempt a robbery of the 
stagecoach, to just sit and wait there until that 
stagecoach comes along. Now these two or 
three robberies that took place there, I don’t 
think they ever did find out who the robbers 
were. They’d have posses out, and so on and 
so forth, trying to locate them. And what the 
actual amounts of money that these robbers 
obtained from these robberies, I don’t know 
who the passengers were or anything. Now, 
when my dad used to go to Austin in the 
summertime to do his work at the county 
assessor’s, we never passed that point that 
he didn’t mention that it was Robbers’ Point. 
It’s quite a little point on the road that goes 
from here to Austin, so I just thought I would 
mention it. 


Transcontinental Highway through 
Battle Mountain 

I’ve already told the story about my dad 
and the bicycle race. That was actually the 
first maneuver that was ever made toward 
establishing a road or highway between 
San Francisco and New York. Of course— 
naturally, the racers followed the railroad. 
There wasn’t any roadways at all, to speak of, 
when my dad made that bicycle relay race. 

The first designation of the route through 
here was called the Pike’s Peak Ocean- 
to-Ocean Highway. And, of course, that 
Pike’s Peak name was because Denver 
wanted the transcontinental highway to go 
through Denver. Then later on, the activity 
in connection with this transcontinental 
proposed road was called the Overland Trail. 
Later on, it was called the Victory Highway. 
Still later on, it was called the U. S. 40. Now, 
today, it’s being given the name of Interstate 
80. 

But getting back to the work the people 
here in our community did to endeavor to 
help establish this roadway, we used to have 
sort of picnics and we’d go out and pick out all 
these rocks, especially around Argenta Point. 
The road at that time used to go over what 
they call Shoshone Point. That’s a few miles 
this side of Beowawe. And we used to go out 
there and pick all the rocks and have a regular 
picnic. It was a lot of fun. 

Later on, why, the roadway was changed 
from going up on the south side of the 
railroad. It went across the valley to a railroad 
siding called Jenkins, and then went around 
by Rock Bend Point, and then to Rock Creek, 
and then across Boulder Flat, across the new 
Maggie Summit, where this new Newmont 
gold property has been discovered, and then 
it went down Maggie Creek into Carlin, 
and then up along the railroad to the Carlin 



120 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


Canyon and into Elko. That was one route. 
Then, of course, they had this first one there 
that went around the Shoshone Point and 
Beowawe and over Emigrant Pass, where the 
present highway is, down into Carlin. But 
this Boulder Flat road was quite a road. It 
was about twelve miles across the valley, and 
due to the composition of the soil, this was 
nothing but a dust bowl, so to speak. With 
just the small amount of traffic that existed in 
those days, why, it was sometimes smoother 
to get out and ride in the brush than it was to 
go along on these rutted roads, and the dust 
was just terrible. At one time, I believe, there 
was about twenty-one or thirty parallel roads 
going across that valley. Youd start across 
there, and it didn’t make any difference which 
one you took youd wish you was on one of 
the others. Flow that valley ever got called 
the Boulder Flat, I don’t know, because there 
isn’t a boulder in it; it’s just nothing but dust. 

When U. S. 40 highway and U. 5. 50 was 
established, we raised funds. We created 
this U. S. Highway 40 Association and 
had directors from each one of the towns, 
beginning with Fovelock on the west of us to 
Wells on the east of us. We had to go out and 
raise funds to make brochures and also to put 
up signs at the junctions at Fernley and also 
at Wendover. It became quite an expensive 
project because we were in competition with 
our neighbors to the south and they were 
just as aggressive trying to get that tourist 
business as we were. So finally, through the 
activities of the officers (I happened to be 
secretary and Dan Shovelin was president), 
we arranged to have a meeting in Fallon, 
Nevada, to see if we couldn’t consolidate our 
efforts to the extent that we would become 
unified in our own state, and then we could 
go down into northern and central California 
and get them to work with us to put on a 
concerted advertising campaign to try to get 


the traffic across either 40 or 50 into central 
and northern California. 

The first year that that was done, we were 
successful in our meeting with the people 
in Fallon and the ones that represented U. 
5. 50. So we pooled our funds—I think we 
put up about ten times as much money as U. 
S. 50 did. But by being unified like that, we 
were able to hold a meeting in Sacramento. 
And at this Sacramento meeting there was 
representation from the Greyhound Bus 
Fines, and the railroad, and the Redwood 
Empire Highway Association, the Oakland 
Chamber of Commerce, Fake Tahoe-Sierra 
Association—I think at this meeting there 
was around about a hundred to a hundred and 
twenty-five representatives. So it was really 
quite a meeting. And after full discussion, 
they were convinced in their own minds 
that a unification and a consolidation of all 
these funds from the various chambers of 
commerce and the various advertising medias 
of all these organizations, if they were pooled, 
it would be more advantageous than each one 
going his separate way. And that being the 
case, then they received the approval of their 
respective chambers of commerce. I think the 
first year, the fund amount Was $35,000. And 
out of that, I think the state of Nevada (or the 
U. S. 40 and U. S. 50 Highway Association) 
only put up $1,500. So that was a pretty good 
investment on our part. 

They hired a man that went into Colorado 
and Wyoming and Montana who did nothing 
else but visit all the tourist bureaus. He 
contacted all the chambers of commerce. He 
distributed all of these brochures throughout 
the hotels and motels, and any place that 
would have sort of a directive force as far as 
tourists was concerned, to endeavor to bring 
them across the state of Nevada into central 
and northern California. This program was 
so successful that the second year, I think, 



Lander County Historical Notes 


121 


the total amount of moneys raised to take 
care of this advertising program amounted 
to better than $60,000. And that was more 
successful, and naturally, it was so successful 
that the following year, they raised $75,000. 
And, of course, the amount of money 
the U. S. 40 Highway and the U. S. SO 
Highway Association put into it was very, very 
infinitesimal, compared to what these other 
organizations was putting into this fund. Then 
something happened. They got so successful 
that the thing sort of fell apart at the seams. 

But it’s interesting to me to note that 
my dad participated in the first bicycle ride 
that eventually established a route through 
here. Naturally, the old Emigrant Trail that 
cane through here was the prime indication 
that eventually the railroads would follow 
their trails. Then the bicycles established the 
possibility of a roadway, and then the early 
time automobiles. 

An interesting thing happened years ago. 
They held a race in this state in which they 
invited drivers from California and Nevada 
to participate. The race started at Reno. The 
first day they were to go from Reno to Elko, 
then from Elko to Ely the second day, and 
then tram Ely back to Reno. Believe me, in 
those days, the vehicles that they had to drive 
were very uncertain, even if they were only 
going to get around the block. And the roads 
were terrible. That’s when they went across 
that Boulder Flat that I described previously. 

Howard and Paddy Doyle were driving 
a Model T Ford with just a couple of bucket 
seats and a gas tank, and they had some steel 
wheels on it. When they drove into Battle 
Mountain, they said, “Where is the Ford 
garage?” And just about that time one of these 
steel wheels folded up underneath them. It 
really went to pieces. And in less than fifteen 
minutes, they had pulled this wheel off. My 
dad had rushed across the street and picked 


up another Ford wheel and had the tire 
mounted on it and put it back on this Ford, 
and I think their lost time in our community, 
on account of a broken wheel, was less than 
thirty minutes, which is quite a happening. 
Every once in a while now I bump into Paddy 
Doyle and he remarks about that experience. 

Then there was a gentleman by the name 
of Weaver, who was a Studebaker dealer from 
San Francisco. He was driving one of the late 
model Studebakers that year. And he got out 
here on this Boulder Flat and he hit one of 
these chuckholes and he broke the frame. He 
was quite upset about it. He said, “The next 
time I come up to Nevada and enter some 
kind of a race, I hope somebody shoots me.” 
He was quite disgusted. 

So those were some of the highlights as 
far as the establishing of this route. Of course, 
when the government, the Bureau of Public 
Roads, decided to choose a special route 
here for this Interstate 80 system, evidently 
some of the engineers that were back in 
Washington, they took a look at the map, 
and there is quite a curve that starts here 
at Battle Mountain and goes up northwest 
up around Winnemucca and then down to 
Fovelock. The air mile distance from Battle 
Mountain, or Argenta Point, which is east of 
us here, from that point to Hazen, Nevada, 
by air mile distance, is about sixty-five miles 
shorter. But these people back in Washington 
didn’t realize that there is several mountain 
ranges as well as the Carson Sink and also 
Dixie Valley, which is nothing more than a 
big bog, that have to be traversed. We had 
quite a battle there for a while to convince 
these engineers back in Washington that 
that route, even though it seemed quite a bit 
shorter, was an impractical route to use. And 
I remember Mr. William T. “Billy” Holcomb, 
who was the state engineer at that time, he 
and a couple of his employed men got a jeep 



122 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


and came out and traversed this route as it was 
proposed. And to meet the standards, as far as 
grades were concerned and everything else, 
when they finally took the total mileage, the 
distance would have been only twenty-seven 
miles shorter, actually, than going around by 
the present route. So with the pressure that 
was brought to bear on the Bureau of Public 
Roads by not only the people living in Battle 
Mountain, Winnemucca, and Lovelock, but 
also by the Highway Department, why, the 
Bureau of Public Roads was convinced that 
the best route to take was to follow the old 
Emigrant Trail through this northern part of 
our state, and also the railroad and the present 
highway system. But that was really a scare 
to all of us. 



8 


Conclusion 


I’ve done a lot of racing, and airplane 
flying, and playing musical instruments, and 
then orchestras. If it hadn’t been for the fact 
that I was able to play for dances, and I was 
a fairly good musician, I don’t know what 
we’d have done during the Depression, re 
were able to pick up a few extra dollars to 
supplement our cost of living, which came 
in very handy. 

And another thing that being musical 
helped out quite a bit was on these campaign 
tours that we’d make. We’d go out to Copper 
Canyon and play for little dances out there 
and over to Raleigh. It was a wonderful way to 
get to know the people and to get your name 
in front of them. If you played good music, I 
imagine you got their votes. If you played bad 
music, they “got” you at the polls. I was pretty 
fortunate at winning my campaigns. 

I also helped my cousin quite often when 
he was campaigning. Of course, he had to run 
every two years, whereas I only had to run 
every four years. He played the saxophone, 
and whenever he played the saxophone, 
I played the banjo. We did have rhythm. 


Whether we put out good music or not, 
people seemed to enjoy it. We had a lot of fun. 

So I’ve been in politics, and I’ve been in 
finance. Actually my life has been a thrilling 
experience— at least to me. I’ve enjoyed it 
very much. And now that I’m in that twilight 
period, it’s nice to lookback and think about 
those experiences I’ve had and how well I’ve 
enjoyed them. I had wonderful parents and a 
wonderful family. I had a wonderful partner 
in my marital life who stood by my side in all 
kinds of trials, troubles, and tribulations. She’s 
a wonderful mate. 

We’ve had two children—Henrietta, who’s 
not with us any more, and Rene Marie, who 
lives in Stockton. We only had the two girls. 

My oldest daughter, who’s not with us, she 
had three children. Her husband remarried 
about six or seven years later. He married a 
very fine woman by the name of Rand. Her 
father used to be senator from Eureka, so I 
knew him personally, and they’re a very nice 
family. She’s a registered nurse. Since she and 
Melvin Jones got married, they’ve had one 
child. They all seem to be quite happy and 



124 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


getting along fine. My oldest granddaughter, 
Helen Jones, she graduated from high school 
this year, and her sister, Cherie, and little 
Richard (we call him “Dick”), they’re getting 
along nicely in school. They’re living out on 
a ranch in Pine Valley. 

The daughter that lives in Stockton was 
named after me— we were hoping she would 
be a boy. Her name is Rene Marie McHugh. 
She’s married to an insurance broker. His 
name is John—John McHugh. And he is from 
an old Irish family that have been in Stockton 
practically ever since Stockton started out as a 
community. They are a very nice fatly, a large 
family. The McHughes are very prominent— 
doctors, and so forth. John’s father, Richard 
“Dick” McHugh, is now retired from the 
police department down there. At one time he 
was the chief of police in Stockton, which is 
a very responsible position. He’s retired now, 
and they say that he’s driving his wife crazy, 
sticking around home. 

Rene has three children. The oldest boy, 
the first child, is Tommy McHugh. The second 
child is a girl, Sally. And the third child, her 
name is Kate. My daughter, Rene, named her 
Kate after Kate Lemaire, who is my oldest 
aunt and who is still living. This made Aunt 
Kate feel quite proud, although she said, “Why 
in the dickens would anyone want to name 
anybody after me?” She said, “I sometimes 
wonder about their intelligence.” But she is 
a very sweet person, and this little girl, little 
Kate, she’s a very sweet little girl, too. All in 
all, I have a lot to be thankful for and a lot to 
be proud of, believe me. 



Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



126 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


Adams, W. Glen, 95, 97, 98- 
99, 147 

A. D. Lemaire and Sons 
store (Battle Mountain), 
32-35, 42 

See also: Auguste 
Ddsir^ Lemaire 
Airplanes See: Aviation 
Altenburg, Fred, 95 
Altenburg, Fred, Jr., 38 
Andreasen, C. B., 234 
Angelo, Tony, 41-42 
Argenta, Nevada, 3, 269 
Arlington hotel (Carson 
City), 53 

Askin, Lucille, 82, 247 
Associated Oil Company, 142 
Austin, Nevada, 3, 10, 13, 
14, 25, 34, 100, 151, 270 
Automobile racing, 73-77, 
277-278 

Aviation, 103-115, 

181-183 



:e Lemaire, 36 
Tames C. , 36 
C. D., 236 
Bamburger, Clarence, 142 
Bamburger, Ernest, 142 
Baruch, Bernard, 132 
Basic Magnesium Industries 
(BMI), 192 

See also: Henderson, 
Nevada 
Basques, 19 

Bastian, Cyril, 196-197 
Bates, Osmond George, 100- 
101 


Battle Mountain, Nevada, 3, 
26-27, 29, 32-33, 34-35, 
38, 39, 42-45, 46, 47-52, 
55-56, 60-63, 64, 66-68, 
70-72, 73-77, 94-103, 

117, 125, 140, 142-144, 
147, 148, 164, 260, 268- 
269, 273 

Battle Mountain school 
district (Nevada), 49-50 
Battle Mountain State Bank, 
57, 60, 95-101, 137-138, 
143 

See also: Ne^ 
of 

Bay, Jack 
Bell, 

247 

Berry, Hen£y^ 24 

al mine (Nevada), 
, 122, 128, 137 
See also: Noble H. 
Getchell 
Bicycle racing, 63-65 
Biltz, Norman H., 192-193, 
243 

Bissett, Roger, 262 
Black, Richard M., 240 
Blackwell, Laverna Lemaire, 
37 

Blackwell, William, 37 
Blossom, Adele Marie 
Lemaire, 29-30, 38, 42 
Blossom, J. A. , 32 
Blossom, James, 38 
Blossom, Louise, 38 
Brown, B. Mahlon, 239 
Browne, Howard, 151 
Budelman, Herman, 234, 240 
"Bullwhacker quartz,” 271- 
272 

Bunker, Vernon, 203 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


127 


Cahlan, Albert E. "Al," 

71, 72-73 

Caldwell, Charles, 149-150, 
151-153, 154 
California, 2, 30-32 
Callahan, Addie, 11-12 
Capital hotel (Battle 
Mountain), 40-41 
Caples, B. H., 183 
Cardelli, Billy, 81 
Carlson, C. A., Jr., 79 
Carroll Summit (Nevada), 

11 

Carville, Edward P. "Ted," 
167, 168-169, 170, 176 
Cashill, William, 188 
Casino (Tonopah), 84-85 
Cassidy, Leroy, 267 
Castle, Douglas A., 71 
Catholics, 42 
Caughman, James, 234 
Central Pacific railroac 
3 

Chase, Dulcie, 12! 

136 

Chase, 

125-1: 

^Iliinois, 263 
Children's Home, Nevada 
state, 240-241 
Chinese, 44-46 
Civil Air Patrol, 112-115, 
181 

Clark, Christine Watt, 6, 7 
Clark, Lloyd, 100 
Clark, S. R., 77 
Clark County, Nevada, 170- 
172, 233, 261 
Commercial hotel (Elko), 

142 

Copper Basin, Nevada, 268, 
269 

Copper Canyon (Nevada), 

150, 269-270 

Copper Queen mine (Nevada), 
60 

Cord, Errett L., 242-243 



Cornish, 75 

Cortez, Nevada, 24, 44, 45 
Cowles, Richard H., 234 
Cox, Walter, 69, 140-141, 
167-168, 184, 235 
Crouch, Earl, 153-154 
Crouch, Mrs. Earl, 153-154 
Crumley, Mrs. Grant, 82, 83 
Crumley, Newton H., 83, 218 
Currieux, Katherine, 82-83 


Dant, Thomas, 192-193 
Darrough's hot springs 
(Nevada) , 80, 81 
Del Grosso, AlbertT, 8-10 
Del Grosso, Angela, 8-10 
Del Grosso, Batista "Billy," 
^ 8-10 

Del Grosso, Henry, 8-10 
emocrats, 7, 140, 150, 

151, 163, 164, 168, 246, 
248, 266 

De Paoli, Harry, 193 
DeVotie, Harry, 235 
Dewey, Thomas E., 264 
Dial, William E., 245 
Dickerson, Denver, 52, 53- 
55 

Dickerson, Harvey, 211 
Doyle, Howard, 137 
Dressier, William F., 140, 
167, 184-185, 187, 235 
Duffin, Press W., 236 
Duffy, Martin C., 245 


Eason, Neal S., 147-148 
Eastern Star lodge, 43 
Echeverria, Peter, 230, 
231, 246 

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 265 
Elko, Nevada, 16, 70-72, 
78, 100, 142 
Elko County, Nevada, 51 
Elko Free Press, 71-72 



128 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


English, 96 
Episcopalians, 27, 42 
Estes, Merle, 122, 123 
Eureka, Nevada, 244 


James, 235 
Edgar, 17 
George, 17 
' T essica Watt, 


Farndale, 

Fenneman, 

Fenneman, 

Fenneman, 

17-18 

Fernley, Nevada, 91 
First National Bank (Reno) 
145 

First National Bank (Winne- 
mucca), 143 

First National Bank of 
Nevada, 100 
Fisher, Casey, 241 
Fish and Game Commission, 
Nevada state, 205 
Fitzgerald, Ethel Robb^ 
Ford dealership. 

Mountain, 60-6 
France, 29 
Francis, 

3ugs," 68 
k-, '24 0 

riam J. "Billy," 


Fr 

Fransway, John, 

229, 246-247 
French, 29, 32, 34 
Fulton, John Martin Luther 
Stubbs, Jr., 69 


165, 228- 


Getchell mine (Nevada), 

116, 117, 123-136 

Gibson, James, 203 

Golden hotel (Reno), 56-57, 
142, 160-161 

Goldfield, Nevada, 82-83, 
85-86 

Gold and Silver Circle 
mines, 97-98, 100, 120 
See also: Noble H. 
Getchell 

Grass Valley, California, 
31-32 

Grass Valley ranch 
7 

Gray, W, 

188, ] 

Griffins ^"Dolly, 


J • t 
.h, Nevada, 
59, 60 


82 

188, 193 
14, 57, 



Haight, Andrew, 173, 

223, 235 

Hancock, W. C., 9 
Hard winter, 1889-1890, 
4-6, 20, 38-40 
Hardy, Roy A., 132, 136 
Henderson, Nevada, 190-192 
Herr, Helen, 262 
Highway 40 Association, 
275-277 


G 

Galena, Nevada, 33-34 
Gallagher, Charles D. , 240- 
241 

Getchell, L. R., 117-118 
Getchell, Noble H., 96, 
116-141, 147, 149, 150- 
151, 179, 192, 222-223, 
262, 263 


Highways, 273-279 
Hinman, Bessie, 9 
Hiskey, J. M., 147 
Holcomb, William T. "Billy, 
279 

Hollan, W. V., 71 
Holland, Ralph, 88 
Horlacher, Fred, 187-188 
Horton, J. B., 95, 96 
Howard, Melvin "Bode," 205 
Hug, Procter, 82 
Humboldt County, Nevada, 51 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


129 


Humboldt hotel (Winnemucca), 
142 

Humboldt River (Nevada), 
38-39, 44, 49 
Humphrey, Harvey R., 247 
Huntsman, Nancy, 40-41 


I 


Knight, Ed, 122-123, 125- 
127, 129, 135 
Knight, Mary, 48-49 
Knights of Pythias, 43, 
101-102 

Knisley, Florence Richard¬ 
son, 92 

Knudtsen, Molly Magee, 7, 
272 


Independent Order of Odd 
Fellows, 42-43 
Indians, 2, 8-10, 48-49, 
269-270 

Industrial Insurance, 
Nevada state, 175-178 
Italians, 81 

Izenhood ranch (Nevada), 
51 



Jacobsville, Nevada, 
271 

Jarbidge, Nevada 
Jenkins Land 
Company 
96 
Joa 
mson 


ain) , 



48 

eth F. 

222, 235, 242, 
254, 255-256 
Cherie, 281 
Clifford, 170-171 
Helen, 281 
Henrietta Lemaire, 


Melvin, 281 
Richard "Dick," 
Joe, 73-76 
Lester, 76 


281 


K 


King, Brad See 
Kingston Canyon 
153 

Kirman, Richard, 145-146 


Jack Watt 
(Nevada) , 


Laborde, St. John, 19 
Lamb, Floyd, 243-244 
Lander, Nevada, 45-46 
Lander County, Nevada, 3, 

21, 49, 50-52, 139-140, 
149, 151, 152, 156-159, 

L62, 268-273 
also: Austin, 

;€le Mountain 
W. Dalton, 98, 99 
,attin, Ralph, 221, 222- 
225 

Lauritzen, Edwin T., 155- 
163, 177, 179 

League of Women Voters, 258 
Legislative Commission, 
Nevada state, 206-212 
Legislature, Nevada state, 
155, 159-161, 167-250, 
256-262 

Lemaire, Auguste Charles, 
29, 35, 36-37, 57, 95, 

98, 99 

Lemaire, Auguste Desire, 

29, 30-33, 34-35, 42, 49 
Lemaire, Auguste H., 36-37 
Lemaire, Caroline Palmer, 

37 

Lemaire, Ernest Charles, 

37, 38 

Lemaire, Ernest Hubert, 29, 
35, 37, 49 

Lemaire, Etta Marie Noble, 
93, 164, 172, 227, 281 
Lemaire, Helen Louise Watt, 
7, 25, 26-28, 43-44, 67, 
93-94, 147 



130 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


Lemaire, Henry Rene', 13-15, 
18, 25, 27, 29, 35, 49- 
58, 60-65, 68, 73-74, 93- 
94, 117, 147 

Lemaire, Kate Heflin, 36, 

42, 282 

Lemaire, Louis Aimee, 29, 
35-36, 38-39, 40-42, 57, 

63 

Lemaire, Louis Everett, 36, 
74-77 

Lemaire, Marie Louise Lucas, 
29 

Lemaire, Merle, 37 

Lemaire, Rose Norris, 36 

Leutzinger, Ed C., 244 

Lewis Canyon (Nevada), 33, 

41, 138 

Lions Club (Battle Mountain), 
102-103 

Litch, G. P., 77, 78-79 

Litster, James, 5, 22 

Littrell, Charles, 97 

Lobbyists, 180, 188-19 
257 

Loomis, E. 

261 

Louisiana 

Loveloofc^ i -'ET., 225, 

E. "Mel," 197, 



M 


MacAllan, A. G., 50 
MacArthur, Douglas, 264 
Macy, Glen, 90 
Magee, Richard, 7, 155 
Mahoney, Jessie, 11 
Mahoney, William, 11 
Marigold mine (Nevada), 
100-101 

Marks, Ray, 188, 193, 236 
Martin, Joseph, 263 
Marvel, Louise Jenkins*^6, 
138 

Masons, 42, 101 
May, James A, 

Medical Association,^Nevada 
stats 

Menardii Harold, 18 

en Meda, 19 
Watt, 7, 

9 

hodists, 42 

, J. K., 93 
Mueller, John V., 188, 190- 
193, 243 

Midas, Nevada, 120, 121, 
123, 128 

Miller, John H., 140 
Minden, Nevada, 91 
Moana Springs (Reno), 69 
Monroe, Warren "Snowy," 
245-246 

Morgan, Elizabeth, 66 


Me 

Morgan, Lizzie Altenburg, 
40-41 

McCarran, Patrick A., 163 

Mormons, 236 

McCullough, P. H., 77, 78, 

Morris, Bud, 81 

87, 88, 90, 91 

Munk, Harry, 238 

McDonald, Russell L., 157, 
210-212 

McGowan, Wilson, 218, 244- 

Murray, John, 237 

245 

McGuirk, Don, 237 

N 

McHugh, John, 281-282 

Napa, California, 36 

McHugh, Kate, 282 

Negroes, 24, 47-48 

McHugh, Renee Marie Lemaire, 

Nevada Bank of Commerce, 

281-282 

100-101 

McHugh, Richard "Dick," 282 

Nevada Central railroad, 

McHugh, Sally, 282 

20-21, 26, 33 

McHugh, Tommy, 282 

Nevada hotel (Battle Moun 


tain), 40-41, 95 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


131 


New York Canyon mine 
(Nevada), 13-15, 23-25 
Nores, E. L., 238-239 
North Bloomfield, Califor¬ 
nia, 29, 32 


Oddie, Tasker L., 7, 8, 
22-23 

Orr, R. R., 241 
Orr, William E., 71 


Paley, Louis, 179-180, 181, 
193 

Parents and Teachers Associa¬ 
tions (PTA), 27, 194, 258 
Parks, Bruce, 241, 246 
Peabody College for Teacher 
(Tennessee), 198 
Peabody [school] foi 
196-197, 198 

Personnel department, Nevada 
state, 

Pierce, 

Pierce 80-81, 85 

Viper Cub airplane, 103, 

104- 

.ttman, Key, 7, 55-56, 58, 

Pittman, Vail, 167, 170, 

187 

Pony Canyon (Nevada), 270 
Pony Express, 270 
Pope, George A., 66, 67 
Portuguese, 41 
Public Roads, U. S. Bureau, 
278-279 

Purchasing department, 

Nevada state, 174 


Rand, William R., 246 
Rebecca lodge, 43 
Reconstruction Finance 
Corporation, 144 


Reese river (Nevada), 38- 
39 

Reid, Walter, 239 
Reno, Nevada, 36-37, 78, 

79, 90, 91, 142 
Reno National Bank, 143 
Republicans, 116, 128, 139, 
141, 147-149, 150, 151, 
163, 227, 229, 231, 248, 
262-264, 265, 266-267 
Richardson, Bud, 92 
Rierson, Robert R., 85-86, 
87-88 

Rierson, Ursula, 86-87 
"Right to Work" bill, 
Nevada, 265-266 
Rishell, William, 63, 64 
Riverside hotel (Reno), 142 
Roantree, Robert Peter, 16 
"Robbers Point" (Lander 
County), 272-273 
Robbins, Cliff, 71 

jins, John E., 140, 173, 
185, 186, 190, 238-239, 
241-242, 248 
Rose, Dale, 38 
Rose, Grace Blossom Alten- 
burg, 38 

Russell, Charles H., 175, 
178, 180, 183, 185, 186, 
198, 212, 214, 235, 250- 
252 

Russell, George, 50-52, 

95, 97, 98-99 

Russell Land and Livestock 
Company See: George 
Russell 

Ryan, James G. "Sailor," 
180, 181 


San Francisco, California, 
265 

Sawyer, Grant, 221 
Schuman, William C. , 236 
Scotch, 1, 22, 77 

See also: George Watt 
Scotland, 1, 3, 22 
Scrugham, James G., 7 
Seevers, Farrell, 241 



132 


Rene Watt Lemaire 


Senate Bill 92, Nevada, 

1957, 217-219, 221-226 
Settelmeyer, Fred H., 215, 
216, 218, 225, 228, 229 
Shell Oil Company, 143 
Shoshone Indians, 48, 268 
Shoup, E. H. "Gene," 136- 
137 

Shovelin, Dan, 163-164, 266 
Sigma Phi Sigma fraternity 
(Nevada), 70 
Silvera, Frank, 74-76 
Silver Creek ranch (Nevada), 
3-6, 9, 11, 19, 22, 25- 
26, 68 

See also: George Watt 
Slattery, James, 242 
Smith, Francis R. "Tank," 

262 

Sommer, Clarence E., 235 
Southern Pacific railroad, 
35, 52, 69, 128-129, 134 
See also: Central 
Pacific railroad 
Southward, Edith 
Marvel, 96 
Southward, 

137-13 

^ 157, 

>211, 212 
i: Legislative 
tission, Nevada 
:e 

Standard Oil Company, 77- 


Taft, Robert A., 264 
Tahoe, Lake, 91-92, 93 
Tallman, A. V., 183-185, 
187-188 

Tansey, Elmer, 81 
Texas Company, 143 
Thatcher, William, 195 
Thomas, Oliver A., 188, 

193, 197, 198 
Titlow, Emerson J., 248- 
249 

Tognoni, t!ye W., 

Tonopah, Nevada t 
79-82, i 

Trouseau, & 7V98, 99 

Truckee^cl nla, 87-89 

(Nevada), 



University of Nevada, 68- 
70, 205-206, 271-272 
Uren, Alfred, 75-77 


Valley of the Moon, Nevada, 
12, 15, 16 


79, 81-32, 87-94, 143 
Starrett, Henry, 50 
Stead Air Base (Reno), 
160-161 

Steninger, E. M., 71, 72 
Stockton, California, 281 
282 

Strosnider, Fred, 239 
Sumin, Don, 58 
Supp, Albert "Ab," 262, 
263, 264-265 
Supreme Court, Nevada 
state, 158 

Swackhamer, William, 155, 
199-200, 259 
Swazey, Bud, 82 


W 

Wadsworth, James, 235-236 
Walters ranch (Lander 
County), 5 
Warren, Earl, 263 
Washoe County, Nevada, 231 
233, 261 

Watt, Billy Robert, 15, 16 
Watt, Cora, 10-11 
Watt, Eileen Ruecktesler, 
11 

Watt, Estelle McIntyre, 7 
Watt, George, 1-6, 19-21 
Watt, George, Jr., 7-8, 9, 
10 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


133 


Watt, George III, XI 
Watt, Isabel Litster, 1, 2, 
3, 4, 6, 9, 22-23 
Watt, Jack, 15-16 
Watt, James, 7, 12-13, 14- 
15 

Watt, James, Jr., 15, 16 
Watt, Kenneth, 11 
Watt, Oliver, 7, 19 
Watt, Robert, 7, 10-11, 
23-24 

Watt, Russell, 15, 16-17 




