H. Clyde Mathews, Jr.: 

Oral Autobiography of a 
Modern-Day Baptist Minister 

Life in California, Missionary to the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony, 
Office of Economic Opportunity, Nevada Politics and Civic Affairs 


Interviewee: Clyde Mathews, Jr. 
Interviewed: 1967-1968 
Published: 1969 
Interviewer: Mary Ellen Glass 
UNOHP Catalog #029 


Description 

H. Clyde Mathews, Jr., was born in California in 1924. He received his education in public schools in California, San 
Jose State College, and the Berkeley Baptist Divinity School. Mr. Mathews’s work and professional experiences range 
from a job as storekeeper in a small town in California to a position as head of the Office of Economic Opportunity 
for the state of Nevada. For ten years, Mr. Mathews was missionary to the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony. In 1968 he 
was a Republican candidate for Congress from Nevada. He was been active in community affairs in Nevada for the 
entire period of his residence in the state. 

Clyde Mathews is known to many people in Reno and throughout Nevada with reference to different facets of his 
varied career—as a minister, an educator, a political candidate, and an administrator of social services. To most of 
us, however, he will be remembered as an indefatigable advocate of the interests of minority members of the local 
community during a period of Nevada history when few citizens concerned themselves with such matters. He is 
one of those who cared, and whose life orientation is to involvement and service—often with regard to issues which 
are unpopular to the majority. 

In his memoir, Clyde Mathews reveals himself as a child of the Great Depression, the son of an itinerant churchman 
from the Midwest, whose early life was spent among the small communities of southern and central California 
where his parents carried out their missions. It was in the context of the intensive poverty and labor struggles of 
the 1930s and 1940s, in the period when the “Okies” were the vanguard of the tide of migration into California, 
that he recalls the earliest formation of those values and concerns which were to guide his later choices in work. 

The circumstances of his coming to Reno in the 1950s, and the first years of his ministry at Reno-Sparks Indian 
Colony, will be of special interest to all who have actively participated in the improvement of Indian and white 
relations in this community. Clyde Mathews’s honest and uncomplicated recollection of those years, and his often 
ingenuous anecdotes, will provide a moving—and, in some instances disturbing—experience to those who maybe 
familiar, but not so intimately involved, with the problems which existed. 

A significant portion of the autobiography deals with the period in which Mathews emerged into active political 
advocacy, first on behalf of the Indian community where he had his mission, and then as a dedicated participant 


(Continued on next page.) 


Description (continued) 


in the incipient civil rights movement of the late 1950s and early 1960s in Nevada. He provides a frank appraisal 
of this period—a chronicle of events seen from the inside and a sympathetic, though uncompromising, recording 
of impressions of legislative behavior and the role of political figures. Mathews’s warm, personal tributes to John 
Dressier of the Inter-Tribal Council and to Eddie Scott of the NAACP and Race Relations Center affirm the fact 
that involvement, dedication to major social issues, and participation in mutually significant social tasks are the 
fundamental conditions for the resolution of the serious problems of human relations in our society. 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr.: 
Oral Autobiography of a 
Modern-Day Baptist Minister 




H. Clyde Mathews, Jr.: 

Oral Autobiography of a 
Modern-Day Baptist Minister 

Life in California, Missionary to the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony, 
Office of Economic Opportunity, Nevada Politics and Civic Affairs 


An Oral History Conducted by Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1969 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1969. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 


Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Introduction xi 

Special Introduction by Professor Warren L. d’Avevedo xiii 

1. My Life and Early Careers 1 

2. The College Years 25 

3. Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony Community 33 

Community Attitudes toward the Indian 
Problems in Education and Recreation for Children 
The Center’s Program - Education and Recreation 
The Church at the Colony 


Observations on Indian Culture, Colony Leaders, and Tribal Policies 
Indian-Police Relationships 

The Tribal Council: Insight into Indian Methodology 
Indian Humor; Indian Language—the Communication Gap 
Relationships Between the Colony and Welfare Organizations 
Observations of Changes over the Twelve-Year Period, 1955 1967 



H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


viii 


4. Activities in Civic Organizations and Welfare Groups 79 

Washoe County Ministerial Association 
The Nevada Council of Churches 
Charitable Organizations 

Testimony before the Interior Department Task Force on the Washoe Project 

5. Civil Rights Activities 97 

Lobbyists of my Acquaintance 

The Supreme Court Test of the Equal Rights Commission 
Minority Groups’ Problems in Nevada 

6. The Office of Economic Opportunity 125 

7. Conclusion 137 

Original Index: For Reference Only 145 



Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Introduction 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr., is a native of 
California, born in 1924. He received his 
education in public schools in California, San 
Jose State College, and the Berkeley Baptist 
Divinity School. Mr. Mathews’ work and 
professional experiences range from a job as 
storekeeper in a small town in California to 
a position as head of the Office of Economic 
Opportunity for the state of Nevada. For ten 
years, Mr. Mathews was missionary to the 
Reno-Sparks Indian Colony, Reno, Nevada. 
In 1968, he was a Republican candidate for 
Congress from Nevada. He has been active 
in community affairs in Nevada for the 
entire period of his residence in the state. 
Professor Warren L. d’Azevedo’s introduction 
summarizes and evaluates the contributions 
made through Mr. Mathews’ career and 
activities. 

When invited to participate in the Oral 
History Project, Mr. Mathews accepted 
readily. He was an enthusiastic and cooperative 
memoirist through the nine taping sessions, 
all conducted in his office (Office of Economic 
Opportunity) in Carson City, between 


October 10, 1967, and January 18, 1968. In 
reviewing his oral history, Mr. Mathews made 
no significant deletions, but added the account 
of his 1968 political campaign which appears 
on pp. 244-250, as well as a few explanatory 
notes all of which are included as part of the 
text. As a courtesy to Governor Paul A. Laxalt, 
Mr. Mathews requested that the governor 
review the script; Mr. Mathews informed the 
Oral History Office that the governor had 
read the memoir, including the additions 
referred to. Mr. Mathews also donated to 
the University of Nevada Library, Reno, his 
files of clippings, speeches, correspondence 
and other items referred to in the text of his 
memoir. 

The Oral History Project of the University 
of Nevada (formerly a part of the DRI Western 
Studies Center) attempts to preserve the 
past and the present for future research by 
tape recording the reminiscences of people 
who have played important roles in the 
development of Nevada and the West. Scripts 
resulting from the interviews are deposited 
in the University of Nevada, Reno, and the 



H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


xii 


University of Nevada, Las Vegas, library 
special collections departments. A copy of 
Clyde Mathews’ oral history is also deposited 
at his request at the Berkeley Baptist Divinity 
School, Berkeley, California. Mr. Mathews’ 
oral history is designated as open for research. 

Mary Ellen Glass 
University of Nevada 
1969 



Special Introduction 


The document which follows is a 
remarkable testament to the creative value of 
autobiography in the study of lives. In a real 
sense it is an excellent example of what the 
ethnographer conceives of as “life history.” 
It is a result of the intensive recording of the 
significant events and thoughts of an individual 
member of a culture from which one may 
harvest a wealth of insights about specific 
historical incidents as well as the patterns of 
life of many persons in the culture as a whole. 

Clyde Mathews is known to many 
people in Reno and throughout Nevada with 
reference to different facets of his varied 
career—as a minister, an educator, a political 
candidate, and an administrator of social 
services. To most of us, however, he will be 
remembered as an indefatigable advocate of 
the interests of minority members of the local 
community during a period of Nevada history 
when few citizens concerned themselves with 
such matters. He is one of those who cared, 
and whose life orientation is to involvement 
and service—often with regard to issues 
which are unpopular to the majority. 


Part of the fascination of autobiography 
is what it reveals about the emergence of 
a personality in the context of a particular 
cultural setting. We are all intrigued by the 
intricacy and unexpected turning points of 
individual lives which, like our own, seem to 
be frequently fortuitous and unpredictable in 
their course. The wellsprings of motivation, 
value, and direction seem mysterious as we 
try to trace the sources of any particular act 
or decision which we or others might make. 
What, for example, brought a man like Clyde 
Mathews to Reno, Nevada, and what were 
the earlier life experiences which created the 
vehicle and the momentum of his role among 
us as we have known him? These and similar 
questions inevitably occur to the reader of 
local “oral history.” 

Clyde Mathews reveals himself in the 
following pages as a child of the great 
depression, the son of an itinerant churchman 
from the Midwest whose early life was spent 
among the small communities of southern and 
central California where his parents carried 
out their missions. It was in the context of 



XIV 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


the intensive poverty and labor struggles of 
the 1930’s and 1940’s, in the period when 
the “Okies” were the vanguard of the tide 
of migration into California, that he recalls 
the earliest formation of those values and 
concerns which were to guide his later choices 
in work. For those of us who may wonder 
what are the factors in early experience which 
help to create the “missionary” orientation 
to life work and a profound respect for the 
human conditions in all of its aspects, these 
pages of Mathews’ autobiography provide 
rich and remarkably candid insights into the 
retrospective world of a man who neither 
romanticizes or overstates himself, but sees 
himself as the product of a social situation. 

The circumstances of his coming to 
Reno in the 1950’s, and the first years of his 
ministry at Reno-Sparks Indian Colony, will 
be of especial interest to all who have actively 
participated in the improvement of Indian 
and White relations in this community In 
a state which has such a dearth of detailed 
historiography, and in which records are 
either nonexistent or rarely systematically 
studied, the observations set down through 
oral history become major contributions 
to our understanding of social relations 
and events. Clyde Mathews’ honest and 
uncomplicated recollection of those years, 
and his often ingenuous anecdotes, will 
provide a moving—and, in some instances, 
disturbing—experience to those who may be 
familiar, but not so intimately involved, with 
the problems which existed. Whether one fully 
agrees with his emphasis or interpretation or 
not, the fact remains that he is a sensitive man 
of his time probing his memory for what is 
meaningful and unforgettable to him. 

A significant portion of the autobiography 
deals with the period in which Mathews emerged 
into active political advocacy, first on behalf of 
the Indian community where he had his mission, 


and then as a dedicated participant in the 
incipient Civil Rights movement of the late 1950’s 
and early 1960’s in Nevada. His frank appraisal of 
this period, the chronicle of events seen from the 
inside, his sympathetic, though uncompromising, 
recording of impressions of legislative behavior 
and the role of political figures, provide the 
elements for the kind of history and accounting 
of public fife which is abundantly needed. This 
reader was particularly impressed by a rare 
instance of unpatronizing public recognition 
of leading spokesmen of ethnic minorities in 
this state. Mathews’ warm personal tribute to 
John Dressier of the Inter-Tribal Council, and to 
Eddie Scott of the NAACP and Race Relations 
Center, constitute affirmations of the fact that 
involvement, dedication to major social issues, 
and participation in mutually significant social 
tasks are the fundamental conditions for the 
resolution of the serious problems of human 
relations in our society 

The above comments have been stimulated 
by one man’s account of himself in a way 
which makes some small part of the world 
he lives in more significant, and his own 
life more meaningful to others. What is 
important to the reader of an autobiography 
is the conviction of honesty, and of the 
sense of responsibility of the observer. In 
this, there can be little question of this 
document. Mathews’ perceptions are clear 
and spontaneous. Few of us could hope to be 
interviewed at length and produce in the end 
so organized and straightforward a chronicle 
of our lives as we see them. Few of us have 
lived lives which touch so directly on the 
lives of many others around us in ways that 
enrich the understanding of events. If there 
were to be any suggestion for its improvement 
or extension, it would be that Clyde Mathews 
continue his recording of reminiscences and 
amplify his observations about events in the 
past twenty years of his life in Nevada. 



Special Introduction 


xv 


This archival publication of the 
autobiography of a local citizen of Nevada 
is a product of the Oral History Project of 
the University of Nevada and its director, 
Mrs. Mary Ellen Glass. Mrs. Glass has been 
the founder and prime mover of this project 
since its inception in 1964. The present 
autobiography of Clyde Mathews is a major 
justification of her dedication, and this 
writer would like to pay her tribute for her 
contributions to the recording of Nevada 
history as living reality. 

Warren L. d’Azevedo 
Chairman, Department of 
Anthropology 
University of Nevada, 1969 




1 

My Early Life and Careers 


I was born on August 20, 1924, in 
Hollywood, California, in the Hollywood 
Hospital. My parents have always joked about 
it because Eddie Cantor was in there at the 
same time for his first ulcer operation. My 
parents tell me that my birth was unusual in 
the fact that my mother was extremely heavy 
in weight and the doctors told my parents that 
they weren’t sure that the child could be saved. 
During the time of birth the doctor came out 
into the waiting room and told my father that 
he would either have to save my mother or 
me, and that he was a Roman Catholic doctor 
and preferred to save the child; and my father 
said that he was a Baptist preacher and he 
preferred that he save both of us, so he was 
to go back in and do his best, and my father 
would stay outside and pray. 

Two or three hours later the doctor came 
out and said that he had saved both of us, 
and that during the time of birth something 
happened that he couldn’t explain; but that 
it was made possible. However, both of us 
required thirty days in the hospital before 
discharge. At that time my parents were 


living in Sawtelle, California. My father was 
the pastor of the First Baptist Church of 
Sawtelle. 

For a little background on my father, he 
was born in Stotts City, Missouri, November 
19, 1893, the son of a Welsh zinc miner. My 
grandmother’s parents were immigrants to 
this country from Scotland. On my father’s 
side there was English, Scotch, and Welsh 
background. Mathews spelled with one “t” is 
a Welsh name. My father grew up in a farming 
and mining town in southwest Missouri, and 
went to grammar school and high school 
in Stotts City. At that time the high school 
was not an accredited high school, so later 
on, when he went to college, he had to go 
for five years to make up an extra year for 
having gone to a non-accredited high school. 
He became known as the “boy preacher” of 
southwest Missouri. He used to travel around 
on a mule, holding camp meetings, and would 
have as many as three thousand people attend 
outdoor revivals. One man heard him and 
became interested in my father and got him 
a scholarship to William Jewell College in 



2 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


Liberty, Missouri, where he went to school for 
four and one-half years and was the houseboy 
for the president of the school. His roommate 
was a Japanese who was studying for the 
ministry from Tokyo, Japan. 

When the war broke out, the first World 
War, my father tried to enlist, and they 
wouldn’t take him because he was a pre- 
ministerial student; but he became the 
chaplain of the home guard in Liberty, 
Missouri. It was during this time that he 
courted and married my mother, Elsie—at 
that time her name was Elsie Stone. My 
mothers parents were from New Baltimore, 
Virginia. My grandmother and grandfather 
on her side had separated when my mother 
was two years old, and my grandmother 
moved to Missouri and later remarried, and 
all together she had nine children. 

It was during 1917 that my father moved 
to Scotts Bluff, Nebraska, as a missionary for 
the then Northern Baptist Home Mission 
Society He had not quite completed college, 
but it was because of the tensions of the war 
years that he felt compelled to go into the 
active ministry at that time. They lived in 
Scotts Bluff for one year, and they used to tell 
me that the coyotes would steal the garbage 
off the back porch, so it was a very rugged and 
bleak, desolate area of the country 

My father also was a kind of nurse during 
the great flu epidemic of 1917 in that city 
and was one of the few people who never 
contracted the flu. 

In August of 1918 he came to Berkeley, 
California, to enter the Berkeley Baptist 
Divinity School. It was while he was at this 
school that he became the pastor of the First 
Baptist Church of Santa Clara, California. He 
was pastor there until 1922, and he graduated 
from the Berkeley Baptist Divinity School. 
He and my mother then moved to Sawtelle 
in 1923, and I was born in 1924. 


My first memory of life is probably when 
I was four years old. I can remember one 
night having a terrible attack of some kind. 
I woke up and couldn’t breathe and took the 
teddy bear that was in my crib and threw it 
across the room and hit my father in the face 
and woke him up. They called the doctor, 
and the doctor got there and gave me a shot 
of adrenalin, and by that time they said I was 
turning blue. But, as you can see, I survived. 
It was later diagnosed as asthma. I have a faint 
recollection of back before that, of visiting 
my aunts and uncles who were farmers in 
Missouri. And later on in life I found that I 
contacted a lung illness called histoplasmosis, 
which is peculiar to southern Missouri and is 
caught in a chicken house, and I presume in 
my uncle’s chicken house. Probably this attack 
was the first indication of allergies that sprang 
from this disease. 

My father left as pastor of the Sawtelle 
Church to another church in Los Angeles 
area, the Central Avenue Baptist Church 
on Alvarado Street. While he was there, 
he was given the job of putting four other 
small Baptist churches together into one, 
and the merged church was called the Roger 
Williams Baptist Church. It was located on 
West Adams near Vermont Street, and it was 
under his leadership that a new building was 
built. This was depression time, and my father 
obtained enough money from the Home 
Mission Society of the Baptist Church to build 
a church. In so doing, they were able to hire 
many of the church members who were out 
of work, not only to build a church building, 
but to provide a kind of poverty program for 
the members of the church. 

I attended the Normandy Avenue 
elementary school, which is near the great 
Coliseum in Los Angeles for the first six 
grades of school. I can remember that I did 
well in everything but spelling, and that 



My Early Life and Careers 


3 


continues. I also played the drums in the band 
and led the music for all of the assemblies that 
we used to have in that school. 

Generally speaking, I was rather healthy 
and rather happy. I used to enjoy very much 
attending church and being with my father 
and mother. I was an only child at this time. 
The doctors had told my parents that they 
couldn’t have anymore children. I remember 
the special birthday parties that we used to 
have at the Clifton Cafeteria in downtown 
Los Angeles. I used to enjoy going to the 
Paramount Theater for the stage show and 
going shopping with my mother in Bullock’s 
and the May Company. My father used 
to always comment on what an excellent 
memory I had because we used to take trips 
in the car and I’d go to sleep in the back seat, 
and any place that I woke up in southern 
California, I immediately knew where we 
were because I would remember the places 
from the times we had been there before. 

My father used to always get a one-month 
vacation in the summertime, and we used to 
travel, primarily back to Missouri to visit with 
my mother’s relatives and my father’s relatives. 
I can remember traveling from Los Angeles 
to Missouri in an old 1929 Chevrolet when 
none of the roads on Highway 66 were paved. 
The worst road of all on that trip was always 
around Gallup, New Mexico, and as late as 
1939 that part of the road was still the worst 
part of the road on Highway 66. 

I used to attend summer camps with my 
father and mother, and all kinds of religious 
conventions. I can even remember that 
when I was in the sixth grade I heard E. 
Stanley Jones for the first time—the great 
Methodist missionary to India—and I was 
quite surprised that a lot of people didn’t like 
him because they said he was a modernist. 
But even then, I thought he was a very wise 
man. One fact that I remember about myself 


in relationship to my father at this time was 
that I was constantly asking questions about 
theology. What do the Baptists believe? What 
do Methodists believe? What do Catholics 
believe? What do Christian Scientists believe? 
And we used to have hour upon hour about it. 

My father was a great story teller, and 
he used to tell many, many stories about his 
life as a young man in southern Missouri, 
especially about his old dog Dan, and about 
his brother, who was the most accurate rock 
thrower in southern Missouri and one of the 
great baseball players of that area. In fact, 
he was offered a contract with the St. Louis 
Cardinals one time, but his wife wouldn’t let 
him take it because she wanted him to be a 
farmer, which he has been all his life. 

Southern California provided a lot of 
cultural advantages. I used to go to the 
Saturday noon symphonies down in the 
Philharmonic Auditorium put on by the 
Los Angeles Symphony, which I enjoyed 
immensely. And I remember many times 
going to the sunrise services at the Hollywood 
Bowl. I remember one time my father was 
asked to lead a sunrise service for a group of 
movie stars, which they went to on horseback, 
thirty miles. We had a sunrise service, and I 
got to go along. I got a new pair of boots and 
some new riding pants, and we went thirty 
miles on horseback—fifteen miles up to the 
place where they had it, and fifteen miles back. 
This was before the regular Easter service, at 
our church and I can remember that my father 
was complaining after the Easter service that 
he could hardly stand up to preach on that 
Sunday because he hurt so bad from riding 
horseback. And I could hardly sit down in 
the audience because I was in the same shape. 
But it was a great time and I enjoyed that very 
much. 

In that church my father had, we used to 
have concerts put on by WPA symphonies, 



4 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


and we even had at one time a group of Greeks 
who knew how to do the Greek Orthodox 
Mass, with Gregorian chants. They were a 
special WPA project, and they came and put 
up their paraphernalia in our Baptist church, 
and put on a complete religious service in the 
Greek Orthodox fashion. I can still remember 
that with much enjoyment. 

I was the first person ever baptized in the 
Roger Williams Baptist Church. It was on an 
Easter Sunday morning, and the church was 
not even finished. Everybody stood up on the 
bare floor, with no carpets and no pews, and 
the baptistery wasn’t even complete, but we 
did it anyway 

My mother was a very warm, friendly, 
person. She had never been to college, but she 
had a good high school education and was 
a very strong person. I was very attached to 
her. She used to suffer greatly when my father 
would be caught in church politics, which is 
not unknown, and she was very sensitive to 
the criticism of people of my father. Of course, 
I used to pick some of that up and became 
very partial to my fathers side in any of those 
discussions. I think one of the tragic things of 
all of church life is the kinds of things that can 
happen within a church that make it almost 
unbearable for a minister. I have seen that 
happen to my father, and used to question, with 
great questions of great longing, why it was that 
people who were supposed to be Christians 
could act so mean to someone that they loved. 

We also used to, in some summers, go 
to the national parks in California. I can 
remember going to Sequoia National Park and 
Yosemite in an old 1929 Jewett and having to 
stop every mile on the way going up the hill 
to put more water in the radiator because it 
was boiling. But I can still look back at the 
time that we drove that 1929 Jewett through 
the Big Tree in Yosemite that you can drive 
a car through. I’ve done it many times since 


in much more modern cars. I can remember 
we had a Model T, and old Jewett, and an old 
Chevy—my father had a friend at the Felix 
Chevrolet Company in Los Angeles who used 
to always get him the best used Chevrolets 
that would come in a couple of years old—and 
we had a ’29, and a ’31 Chevrolet. We had that 
last car when we moved to Fresno. 

In 1936 we moved to Fresno, California. 
My father became the pastor of the First 
Baptist Church of Fresno—a very large 
church—fifteen hundred members—with a 
notable increase in salary. I should mention 
that, during the depression times in southern 
California, there were many days when we 
did not have any food to eat. At one time the 
church was $750 behind in my father’s salary, 
which was only $200 a month. And some 
wealthy people in the church kept us going 
by leaving boxes of groceries on our back 
doorstep. We were always very concerned 
whether or not we should even take it, but we 
were so hungry at times that we did. Finally 
my dad went to them and told them that he 
just wished they wouldn’t, and we made out 
some other way, but I don’t know how that 
was done. But in going to Fresno—this was 
in ’36—times were getting a little better. The 
salary was much better. 

I should give you an impression that I had 
in the election of President Roosevelt back in 
1932. My father was an ardent Republican, 
and he thought that maybe the worst thing 
that ever happened to the country was when 
President Roosevelt was elected. And it wasn’t 
so much his politics as the fact that it brought 
beer back into being. I grew up in life with 
a great distaste for people who smoked and 
who drank beer, and I now smoke, but I still 
can’t stand the taste of beer so—[he laughs] 
—I wonder how far back that goes. 

Life in Fresno was much different than it 
was in southern California. At the beginning, 



My Early Life and Careers 


5 


in 1936, it was much more fun; the church was 
bigger, the people were warm and friendly. 
Fresno was a smaller town and you got to 
know people better. I went to the Alexander 
Hamilton Junior High School in Fresno. I 
always got very good grades in school, except 
in English, and that was always related to 
spelling. I always used to take band instead 
of study hall, and I always had extra units that 
way. I played the drums in the band and I used 
to be the assistant conductor for the school 
orchestra. On graduation day I conducted 
a Strauss waltz for a graduation ceremony 
(“Tales of Vienna Woods”) 

While in Fresno, at the age of fourteen, I 
had a terrible time with hay fever and asthma 
and used to wake up at night with inability to 
breathe, so my father took me to the doctor. 
The doctor said he couldn’t do anything for 
us but there was a specialist in Oakland who 
could. So we went to Oakland, and I had the 
full battery of skin tests and finally found that 
I was allergic to chicken, milk, eggs, butter, 
and wheat, and about everything else I could 
think of that any boy would like. I couldn’t 
eat ham, orange juice, many things I had been 
eating. The doctor put me on a diet for two 
years and eliminated all of this that I had been 
eating. And in those two years I never had 
one attack of asthma. When I first went there, 
they took X-rays of my lungs, and he thought 
I had some kind of tumors of the lungs; and 
he sent them back to the Mayo Clinic because 
he had never seen anything like them. The 
Mayo Clinic sent them back and said, no, 
that they were calcium deposits from kind of 
a lung disease and that they didn’t know what 
it was at that time. But, in treating my asthma, 
I had no trouble; I was very active in school. 
I used to play on the baseball team and was 
very active in church work, very active with 
the young people. And after two years, I was 
gradually allowed to go back on skim-milk, 


a little bit of bread, and gradually built it up 
so that I can eat almost anything except, to 
this day, I cannot eat chicken; I have a violent 
allergy to chicken. No eggs either, and I have 
to sleep on a pillow that isn’t feathered. A little 
later on I will tell you how we arrived at where 
that allergy came from. 

I do remember that in Fresno there used 
to be three high schools that were primarily 
white, and one high school, Edison High 
School, that was primarily Negro; and I can 
remember in 1937, and ’38, and ’39, that there 
used to be big gang fights every time after 
Fresno High School and Edison High School 
played football. And while we still have that 
going on today, it’s not new. 

I attended Fresno High School, which at 
that time was connected to the Alexander 
Hamilton Junior High School. I had many 
friends. My closest friend in high was a 
Jewish boy by the name of Julius Cohen, and 
an Armenian boy by the name of Alexander 
Googoolian. Today I think he’s a prominent 
attorney in Fresno. And another boy friend 
by the name of Bill Camy. He played the 
cymbals in the band, and I remember he was 
the comedian in the band. I used to tell the 
jokes and get him laughing, and then he’d 
start acting up. We would take trips down to 
Bakersfield or Taft or some place, and keep the 
whole band in an uproar with our humorous 
antics. I did not play football in high school; 
I did play on the junior varsity baseball team. 
I was a pitcher—not too good—but I had 
a lot of fun. I was very active in the young 
people’s work of the First Baptist Church, 
and my social life at that time was primarily 
related to the social activities of that young 
people’s group. However, I was a Boy Scout 
and worked up as high as a Star Scout in the 
Boy Scouts. 

In 1937 my brother was born. I was 
twelve and a-half years old. It was kind of a 



6 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


miracle—my parents didn’t think that they 
could have any more children, and they did! 
And I named him—Paul David Mathews. I 
can remember that they called me at school, 
and I ran down to the office, and they told me 
I had a baby brother. I ran all the way back to 
the room in the halls, yelling at the top of my 
voice, “I have a brother!” And I had made an 
Indian-beaded headband for some reason, 
for him, on a loom that I had, with his name 
on it—David. His name was Paul David, but 
we always called him David. Today, he is the 
Assistant District Attorney of Washoe County 
in Reno, Nevada. 

A year and a half following that, my sister 
was born—Martha Elsiebelle Mathews. She 
is now married to a college professor and 
living in Courtland, New York. She has AR, 
BD, and MST degrees and is an ordained 
minister. Soon after her birth, my mother 
discovered that she had cancer of the breast. 
She was operated on in a hospital in Fresno 
by the best surgeon known at that time, in 
that area. It was during this time, also, that 
my father was the pastor in the summertime 
of the Church of the Sequoias up in Sequoia 
National Park. We used to go up in June and 
spend two months there while he conducted 
the services. And I can remember eating in the 
lodge, as guests of the lodge, every Sunday. My 
favorite food was lamb chops with fresh peas, 
which I ordered consistently every Sunday. 

I’d like to add something of my reading 
habits in junior high school and high school. 
In those days, of course, there was no 
television, and reading and the radio were 
of great interest to me. I used to read 
the Colliers, Saturday Evening Post, Time 
magazine faithfully every week. Also Esquire, 
with particular interest in the drama critic, 
George Jean Nathan, as well as all kinds of 
sports and young people’s stories. My favorite 
radio shows were the “Jack Armstrong, All- 


American Boy” and Jimmy Allen, an airplane 
pilot show, as well as the comedy shows—Jack 
Benny, Bob Hope, Fred Allen. 

Our home life was enriched by a multitude 
of visitors. My father, being the pastor of 
the First Baptist Church and being a very 
large church, had the benefit of many 
world-renowned Baptist leaders who would 
visit—many missionaries from Africa and 
China, as well as the top administrators in 
the convention, and educators in the schools 
were house guests in our home many times. 
My father had a very close relationship with 
Dean Malloch of the Episcopal Church of 
Fresno, and I got to know him rather well. 

My main relaxation in the summertime 
in hot Fresno was swimming. I used to pride 
myself on the ability to dive off a thirty- 
foot board at what was then the Weymouth 
swimming pool. In 1936 in Fresno, beer 
busts and wild parties by high school kids 
and teenagers were not unknown. However, 
they were unknown to me, because I didn’t 
participate in them, being kept very active 
in church work and close to home by my 
parents. In fact, I didn’t learn to dance until 
I was in college. 

There grew up in the First Baptist Church 
a small group of people who were ultra- 
fundamentalists—followers of Frank Norris 
out of Texas. My father, being well-educated, 
with a Bachelor of Divinity degree from one of 
the best schools on the coast, simply couldn’t 
go along with them. They finally caused so 
much trouble that he decided to ask to be 
moved to another church. They used to accuse 
him of never saying the words “the blood of 
Christ” in the sermons enough, so on the last 
Sunday that he preached in that church, he 
preached on that subject. And he explained 
why he didn’t use that term, which he felt at 
that time was not as meaningful to the people 
of this day and age as words like “the love of 



My Early Life and Careers 


7 


God” or “the life of the spirit.” And after the 
sermon was over, and he had already resigned 
and was ready to leave, the same people came 
and asked him to stay, and he, of course, told 
them that they were just a little late. 

And so, just before my senior year in high 
school, we moved to San Jose, California, and 
my father became the pastor of the Grace 
Baptist Church in San Jose. The pastor there 
had been drafted into the army as a chaplain. 
I went to high school in San Jose High School 
for one semester. My mother appeared for a 
while to have conquered the cancer problem; 
however, unknown to me or anyone else, my 
father knew better than that. 

Then the war broke out on December 7, 
1941. We were on the way home from church on 
that Sunday when we heard the announcement 
on the radio, and everybody was so shocked 
that nobody wanted to go home to eat, so we 
went out to a restaurant and sat and talked— 
what this implied. Everyone was so stunned 
they really didn’t know what it meant. But I 
do remember, in the next two months, the 
blackouts in San Jose. I can remember going 
down on First Street in San Jose at night and 
watching the tanks and the soldiers and trucks 
go down that street on the way from Fort 
Ord to San Francisco to get on the boats to 
go to the south Pacific. I was seventeen years 
old at this time, and we discovered that I had 
enough credits to graduate from high school 
in February, being that I always had taken 
band in school and not study hall. I had good 
grades, but San Jose High School did not have 
graduation exercises for those who graduated 
in mid-term. So my father made arrangements 
for me to go to get my diploma from San Jose 
High School, but to walk through the line in 
Fresno so my mother could see her oldest son 
graduate from high school. This was done in 
February of 1942, at which time I then went 
on to the University of Redlands. 


I’ll have to back-track a little bit on that. 
When I was four years old, the American 
Baptist Convention was held in Fos Angeles, 
California. I don’t know how it was arranged, 
but the president of the convention at that 
time was a man from southern California 
by the name of Madison B. Jones, and the 
convention on the closing night presented 
him with a big bouquet of roses as a token 
of their appreciation for his leadership. I was 
chosen to be the one who presented them to 
him. It was out at the old Shrine Auditorium, 
which is near the Coliseum, and there must 
have been three or four thousand people 
there. I had to walk out on the stage with this 
big bouquet of roses and hand them to him 
and say, “I present these to you on behalf of 
the Northern Baptist Convention.” And I did 
it well. After that was over, this man who was 
a trustee of the University of Redlands told my 
father that he would provide a scholarship for 
me to go to the University when I became of 
age. The only thing he neglected to do was to 
ever write that down, and when it came time 
for me to go to college they had no record of 
it, but they took my father’s word for it, and 
I entered the University of Redlands on a 
scholarship, plus five hundred dollars that we 
had in the bank that I had saved in pennies. 
My father used to give me all of his pennies 
at night, and I used to put them in the bank; 
and when I got to be seventeen, there was five 
hundred dollars there. I think there was ten 
dollars in there that I had gotten as a reward 
for finding a lost dog one time and returning it 
to someone. But the rest of it was all pennies. 

So I entered the University of Redlands in 
1942 at the age of seventeen and a half, and in 
May, on Mother’s Day of that year, my mother 
died in San Jose. This was a terrible shock to 
me and a very tragic time. When my father 
went to San Jose, he had to take a cut in pay, 
and with the medical expenses for my mother, 



8 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


money was not only short, it was non-existent. 
I didn’t even have enough money to get on a 
train and get back to San Jose to see her before 
she died. My father called me on a Sunday 
morning, and the only thing I could do was, 
I went over to the president of the University 
and he loaned me fifteen dollars, I think it was. 
I got on a train and went to Los Angeles, and 
got on another train and started to San Jose, 
and I didn’t even have time to buy a ticket. 
After I had gotten on the train, I found out 
I didn’t even have enough money to get to 
San Jose, so I had to get off the train in Santa 
Barbara and catch a Greyhound bus. When I 
got to San Jose the next morning, which was 
a Monday morning, my mother had already 
passed away I can remember that I was met 
at the bus station by my father, and on the 
way home he cried, but I didn’t. And I can 
remember getting home and the beginning 
of relatives arriving. My grandmother on my 
mother’s side had been living with them for a 
while, and I can remember my small brother 
and sister not really knowing what was going 
on. And I can remember a lot of the church 
people coming around and bringing food 
and trying to be helpful. I can remember the 
funeral in the Grace Baptist Church; and I can 
remember the fact that I couldn’t understand 
why everyone was crying, when, if they really 
believed what the Christian gospel taught, my 
mother wasn’t there. I had great confidence 
in God and couldn’t figure out why everyone 
felt so bad. However, later in the day, when 
I was alone by myself, I do remember crying 
because I began to ask the question of myself, 
“Why should this happen to the warmest, 
most friendly, full-of-life person I had ever 
known?” And I doubt if anyone has any 
answers to that question. 

My father and I went to San Francisco for 
three days following the funeral and spent the 
time together. I probably was in better control 


than he was. I have often thought, and he has 
said, that maybe I was the minister to him 
in those three days. We did even have some 
good times together—attended a couple of 
movies and ate some good food and visited 
Golden Gate Park. But in the excitement of 
everything, I think I only got ten dollars to 
get back to Redlands with. I took the bus, but 
when I got back I didn’t even have the money 
to pay the president back with. It took a little 
while to do that. 

I probably should have added a few things 
concerning my mother. She was a graduate 
of the high school in Liberty, Missouri, was 
very active in women’s work in what was then 
the Northern Baptist Convention of northern 
California, when my father attended Berkeley, 
and also in the women’s work in southern 
California when they lived in Los Angeles 
and also in Fresno. My father and mother 
were very active in camping programs for 
young people and had a special interest there. 
My mother’s special interest was what was 
called the World-wide Guild Girls, a group 
of Northern Baptists. There is a scholarship 
today at the Berkeley Baptist Divinity School 
that bears her name, created by my father 
after her death. 

The first semester at Redlands I did fairly 
well in the classes. It was a little difficult 
because there would be times when I felt 
pretty lonesome. I used to write my mother 
every week, and now this wasn’t happening, 
but I did write to my father. 

That summer was rather difficult—in 
fact, I an trying to remember that summer. 
The war was on, and I had a girl friend in 
San Jose. I can remember that. I did go work 
for Montgomery Wards as their janitor and 
cleanup man. My father, I think, helped me 
get the job, and I guess I was a fairly good 
employee. The assistant manager took an 
instant liking to me. He told me to do some 



My Early Life and Careers 


9 


painting in the men’s restroom. I went in and 
it was all painted grey, but it needed a lot of 
paint because there was a lot of rust around 
all the pipes and even on some of the panels 
of the stalls. So I went down into the janitors 
s room, and I couldn’t find any grey paint, so 
rather than ask anybody where the grey paint 
was, I took white paint and put lampblack 
in it and mixed my own. I went back and I 
painted it, and it looked just great, and then 
I had him come and take a look at it, and he 
thought it was perfect. He asked me where I 
got the paint, and I told him. And he had to 
sit down—he was laughing so hard—because 
they usually just check the grey paint out of 
the paint department; but I had taken what 
they had and made my own, and he thought 
that was great. So he gave me the rest of the 
afternoon off, and I got my girl friend and we 
went up to Ice Follies in San Francisco. 

I also mixed some mahogany stain and 
did all of the trim work around the store. And 
finally, I used to go to him about three o’clock 
every afternoon and I’d say, “What else do 
you want me to do? I’ve finished all the work 
assignment for the day.” 

He finally got to the place where he told 
me, “This is how much work there is today, 
and when you are through, you can go home.” 
So I used to get a whole day’s work done by 
two o’clock, ’most every day, and go on home. 
But I would get paid for the whole day—he 
would sign it out. And when I got ready to 
go back to Redlands, he didn’t want me to 
go. But I told him that I was going to join the 
Navy and I had to get back to school. He was 
going to get me a deferment, and all kinds of 
things, to try to keep me there but I went back 
to school anyway. 

This would be in the fall of 1942; the war 
at that time was getting pretty desperate, and 
in December of 1942,1 had to make a decision 
whether or not to join the service or to wait 


to be drafted. So I made up my mind and 
went into Los Angeles and found the Navy 
recruitment center. I went in and I asked to 
join the V-12 school. The interesting thing 
is that the male secretary in the Navy who 
signed me in was a movie star by the name 
of Richard Denning, who played Tarzan and 
a lot of other characters. 

Two humorous things happened when 
I was having my medical examination. The 
doctor said, “Do you have any physical 
defects?” 

And I said, “Well, I have some scars on 
my lungs; I might as well tell you about 'em.” 

And he said, “How bad are they?” 

I said, “Well, I don’t know, they are just 
there.” 

He looked down and he saw my flat feet, 
and they are probably the flattest feet he’d ever 
seen, at least that’s what he said, and he looked 
at me and said, “How bad do you want in?” 

And I said, “I want in the Navy.” So, he put 
down moderate flat feet” and didn’t note the 
scars on my lungs, and I was in. 

I went back to Redlands, and I was there 
for one whole semester in the Navy, but as a 
civilian without pay or uniform. They hadn’t 
got the V-12 people at the University yet. I 
had originally gone in to major in the religion 
department. I had always thought of being 
a minister. But I was rather disgusted with 
the religion department. I was so strongly 
attached to the theology of my father that 
anybody else who had any other ideas was 
wrong. I was really very unhappy in that 
department. I was also taking a course in 
Introduction to Philosophy and beginning 
Psychology, and I liked them so much better 
than I shifted my major to a philosophy- 
psychology major. But I had not given up 
the idea that I would be a minister; I just 
changed the department. I was an average 
student there, did best in speech and being a 



10 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


young man brought up in a minister’s home, 
I think that I felt sometimes left out at the 
University. Pre-ministerial students and 
ministers children were considered, I guess, 
in modern terms, as “square.” I had a close 
circle of friends, not a wide circle of friends, 
and did not belong to a fraternity 

During this time the best professors that 
they had at the University were taken for other 
jobs. One of the best teachers went into the 
Navy, or Army, Air Force. I can remember 
one teacher I had a great deal of difficulty 
with—he was a teacher of ancient history, 
and his name was Dr. John Rhimer. It was 
the custom of this school to have chapel every 
day for an hour. And one day we had a very 
excellent presentation on George Washington 
Carver, the Negro scientist from Tuscaloosa, 
and I especially appreciated it because I had 
met George Washington Carver. 

I’ll have to digress—I forgot about this: In 
1939, my father and I traveled with another 
minister in our ’38 Chevrolet to Atlanta, 
Georgia, for the Baptist World Alliance. We 
went down through Arizona on Highway 66 
and across Texas, down to Corpus Christi. 
(I met one of my great uncles in one of the 
small towns in southern Texas; he was the 
sheriff. And my father went that way in order 
for me to meet him.) We went swimming in 
the Gulf of Mexico and I can still remember 
the jellyfish that used to sting you when you 
got out into the water. I can still remember 
how warm the water seemed to me after 
being used to swimming in the Pacific 
Ocean. I can remember the graveyards in 
New Orleans because they are all built above 
ground. The water level is only about two 
feet underground in New Orleans so they 
build cement individual mausoleums above 
ground. I can remember they also had a 
hurricane, a gulf storm that hit the gulf that 
Mississippi borders on, and, as we went by the 


next day, you could see the boats all tipped 
over in the harbors and bays along the Gulf. 

We went up toward Montgomery, 
Alabama, and stopped in at Tuscaloosa. A 
very bright young Negro chemist took us in 
and introduced us to George Washington 
Carver, and he showed my father and I and 
the other minister through his chemistry 
laboratory. We saw a thousand different 
products that he had made out of peanuts, 
including paint that he could make and sell 
for fifty cents a gallon for Negroes to paint 
their shacks with. I will never forget meeting 
him because he seemed to me to be one of the 
most saintly men that I had ever met, or have 
yet, in my whole life. So the chapel service on 
George Washington Carver was especially 
interesting to me. Then I went to the ancient 
history class, and Dr. Rhimer got up and said 
that if he had had thirty minutes to speak 
to 750 students, he wouldn’t have wasted it 
talking about a dead nigger. Well, I got up and 
said he’d wasted the last ninety days talking 
about dead Romans, and I walked out of the 
class and I never came back. 

In June of 1943 my father remarried. He 
married a woman that I knew and who was 
a very close friend of my mother’s. She was a 
school teacher, had a master’s degree in home 
economics from Western Reserve University 
and taught school. Her name was Mildred 
McIntyre. She came from a family in Santa 
Clara. They were original members of my 
father’s church there in Santa Clara when 
he was there way back in 1920 and ’21, and 
’22-23. Incidentally, her brother is now the 
general manager and vice-president of the 
Southern Pacific Railroad, Milton McIntyre. 
She has another brother who’s vice-president 
in charge of personnel for Crown-Zellerbach, 
and another brother who is a retired vice- 
president of the Ferro Chemical Company of 
Cleveland, Ohio. 



My Early Life and Careers 


11 


I was the head usher at that wedding, 
which was held on a Sunday afternoon in 
the Grace Baptist Church, and that evening I 
preached my first sermon in that church while 
my father was gone. The title of that sermon 
was “What difference does it make?” and the 
theme of it was that we can argue all we want 
to about theology, but what difference does 
it make when it comes to helping people? I 
even quoted the controversial preacher, Harry 
Emerson Fosdick, saying why persecute 
a man who disagrees with you, who still 
does as much good as a man like Harry 
Emerson Fosdick? There were a few ultra- 
fundamentalists in that church, too, and I 
don’t say that I didn’t have some delight in 
having a chance to say what I thought. To tell 
you the real inside story on that—I think I’m 
the only one that knows it—I had a cigarette 
in the men’s room of the Grace Baptist Church 
before that sermon. 

That summer I worked for the Continental 
Can Company, on and off, while my father and 
Mildred spent a month at Sequoia National 
Park. My father was guest minister there for a 
month. I still have scars on my hands from the 
cans. It was my job to pack the sardine cans in 
big boxes and tape them. As they would come 
off the machine, once in a while one would fly 
off, and the edges were as sharp as a razor and 
they would catch you. Half the time I was all 
taped up, but it was good money. And I earned 
enough money to buy my clothes and go back 
to school for the fall semester of 1943. 

In the fall of 1943, when I went back to 
school, we were enrolled in the Navy and 
issued new uniforms, and we got fifty dollars 
a month subsistence as well as all expenses. 
We also had to take twenty-two to twenty- 
three units rather than sixteen or seventeen 
because it was an accelerated program. I 
remember, the first semester, that everybody 
flunked physics, because we had a real 


old-style physics teacher who wouldn’t let 
anybody write down the formulas; you had to 
memorize them, and nobody could. Eighty- 
five percent of the class flunked, including 
me, so the commanding officer called us all 
in and wanted to know what was the matter, 
and we told him. So he hired another teacher 
and we all took it over. And all of us passed, 
because he let us have the formula. 

I enjoyed the Navy, but I used to get 
terribly angry at a Marine lieutenant who was 
there. They had a contingency there that was 
half Navy and half Marines, and the Marine 
lieutenant who was second in command for 
the whole school was in charge of all the 
discipline and all of the drilling. I used to 
complain bitterly about having to run two 
miles right after lunch. In September, in 
Redlands, it can get to be one hundred to 
one hundred three degrees. I can remember 
one day we had spaghetti and watermelon 
for lunch and then had to go out and run two 
miles around the track. Following that came 
the course in philosophy, in which everybody 
went to sleep. 

The student gave this lieutenant (he was 
a “90-day wonder”) a real bad time, and he 
became so unreasonable at times that the 
commanding officer finally censored him and 
confined him to quarters, which taught him 
some things. 

It was during this fall of 1943 that I met 
Fern Martin. The first time that I saw her 
in chapel I said, “I want to get to know her.” 
The next Saturday night they had a dance 
downtown. I usually didn’t go to dances 
because I didn’t dance very well, but I went 
to that one, hoping that she would be there. 
She was there, and one of the dances that they 
had was called a shoe dance. All of the girls 
took off one shoe and threw it in the middle 
of the floor, and the boys ran out and grabbed 
a shoe and then tried to find the girl to match 



12 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


it. Well, I watched the shoe that she threw out 
there and went and grabbed it, and that’s how 
we got to know each other. 

I later found out she was engaged; this 
was in November of 1943, but she broke that 
engagement in March and we were engaged 
in April, 1944. And it was around the first of 
April, 1944, that the X-ray unit came around 
to take X-rays of all the V-12 people. I kind 
of told my roommates, “Goodbye,” because 
I figured that the time had come when they 
were going to find out about the scars in the 
lungs. They took the X-rays, and about ten 
days later the commanding officer called me 
down and asked me if I had known about 
those. I said, “Yes,” and I said, “I told the 
doctor when I joined and they didn’t pay 
much attention to it.” He said they were a little 
worried about it, and I had to go over to the 
Corona Naval Hospital in Corona, California. 
And, he was sorry to see me go because I was 
the leader of the military band, and during 
inspections I actually ran the inspection. He 
used to salute me when I went by, which was 
always a lot of fun. Each Saturday morning 
we had inspection out on the quadrangle 
on the beautiful campus at the University 
of Redlands, and he was sorry to see me go 
because we got to know each other a little bit 
from that experience. 

There are two other things I should 
tell about the University of Redlands 
experiences—three, I think. One has to do 
with the fact that one of the talented young 
men produced a musical called “Let’s Go 
Latin” and I went down and tried out and got 
the part of a Latin gigolo. I let my hair grow 
real long, and a mustache, and in the play I 
wore a white dinner jacket and black pants 
and long key chain. Had a cigarette holder that 
was about eighteen inches long. Was always 
flipping a half a dollar. After the play was over 
I shaved off the mustache but my hair was still 


long, and one night a bunch of the boys came 
to my room to cut my hair off. I had heard 
they were coming. And (some insight to my 
personality) I laid out a comb and a pair of 
scissors and got a chair and a sheet to wrap 
around me, and when they came I was sitting 
there in the chair with the sheet around me, 
and I just told ’em to go ahead; that wasn’t any 
fun, so they all left. 

My fiancee at that time, and now my wife, 
was one of the candidates for the queen of 
the military ball, and I’d felt that everyone 
should win on their merits, but one of the 
other girls’ boy friends went out and got a lot 
of signatures on a piece of paper as a ballot 
for his girl friend. I didn’t think it was legal, 
and I protested it; but at the same time I 
protested it, I circulated a petition, too, that 
had as many names, and they threw them all 
out. That way, at least, it was fair and square. 
She came in second, but the other fellow’s girl 
friend didn’t win either. 

I was restricted one time for a week. I had 
been out doing calisthenics every morning at 
five o’clock in the snow, with everybody else. 
One morning, about five or six o’clock, I was 
just exhausted because the Navy schedule 
was really grueling. And I didn’t get up—I 
had a cough—and a Marine lieutenant 
came around and I got put on report. So he 
restricted ten of us for the holidays. He let 
us go home for Christmas, but we had to 
be back the day after Christmas and stayed 
there till school resumed the day after New 
Year’s. When the commanding officer found 
out about it, he made the Marine lieutenant 
stay that week also to supervise those he 
had restricted. So we spent the week sitting 
around the Marine lieutenant—the ten of 
us—and we played gin rummy, I think, and 
checkers and everything we could think of 
till we were about out of our minds. And he 
admitted he’d never do it again. 



My Early Life and Careers 


13 


Let’s see, there was one other thing I was 
going to tell about Redlands. A couple of my 
very closest friends at Redlands were killed 
in the war. That made quite an impression 
on me, I think. Some of my other very close 
friends had some very narrow escapes. 
One of my buddies, Ralph Wooley, was the 
commander of an LST that was torpedoed 
in that attack on Bougainville, but he swam 
to shore, and is now the president of a large 
trucking firm in California. 

I went to the Corona Naval Hospital 
and they immediately started taking x-rays, 
and the third day I was there they told me I 
would get discharged. But they kept me there 
for ninety days because they couldn’t figure 
out what in the world those scars were. They 
had never seen anything like them. The top 
X-ray man was from John Hopkins and used 
to spend his lunch hours sitting and looking 
at the X-rays while he ate his lunch. I had a 
ball because I was on leave all the time. I could 
go for forty-eight hours and come back for 
twelve and go again. So I spent most of my 
time over at Redlands, hitchhiking back and 
forth, and sometimes I would have to stay in 
a day and I’d play nine holes of golf or read in 
the library—anything I wanted to do. So they 
called me in at the end of ninety days and they 
said they couldn’t decide what the scars were, 
but they didn’t think they were anything that 
was ever going to cause me any trouble, and 
they gave an honorable discharge. They said 
that they thought the only thing that they 
could find in all their bureaucratic books 
was to call it some kind of an arrested case 
of tuberculosis. And they were sure it wasn’t 
that, but that’s what they did. 

So when I was discharged from the Navy, 
I went into Los Angeles, where my aunt and 
uncle and grandmother lived, and stayed with 
them for a couple of days looking for a job. 
This was in July of 1944, and my chief petty 


officer in the Navy was one of the head men 
at the casting office at Central Casting for the 
movies. So I went to see the man who took 
his place about a job, doing anything—just 
carrying lumber around was twenty-five 
dollars a day. But he told me, “Stay out of 
that business,” he said, “This is no—this isn’t 
a good business.” And so I took him at his 
word and went downtown to my favorite place 
for buying clothes, which was Bullock’s, and I 
went in and applied for a job and got it. 

I worked in the varsity shop at Bullock’s, 
selling clothes for a Jewish man—Mr. 
Acker—a very fine fellow. He taught me a lot 
of things. Anybody that he liked he always 
gave a bad time, and anybody he didn’t like, 
he always treated them real nice. And when 
a salesman used to come in, if he was going 
to buy something from them, he would give 
them a terrible time and then buy from them. 
And somebody he wasn’t going to buy from, 
he would take them out to lunch and treat 
them very nicely, and never buy anything. 
That way he kept everybody happy. I was the 
best salesman, eventually, they had there. I 
liked clothes, and I had a sense of it, and I 
think in the six months that I was there, I had 
the biggest day that any single salesman had 
ever had in the department. I enjoyed working 
at Bullock’s. 

Fern was out of school and I talked her into 
coming to Los Angeles. She looked around 
and got a job at Robinson’s Department Store 
in the cosmetic department, which was only 
about three blocks from my aunt and uncle’s 
and grandmother’s, and she started looking 
for an apartment in that area. Then we got to 
talking and decided what’s the use of that? 
Why not get married, and we could live in 
the apartment that I had. 

We were going to get married in September, 
a big church wedding with my father, but 
when she got the job, it speeded things up. 



14 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


So I called my father up—I was only twenty 
years old—it was Then days before I was 
twenty-one—to see if he would send down an 
approval so I could get the marriage license. 
And at first he said he wouldn’t do it, and then 
I said I would go to Tijuana or someplace. So 
my uncle got interested in it and he said that 
he would sign it some way Well, we finally 
decided what wed do is he about our age and 
go down and get the marriage license. 

So on the day before we were to get 
married, we went to work in the morning, 
and on our lunch hour we went down to the 
city hall to get the license. We decided we 
couldn’t he about it, so we went to the public 
defender and asked him what to do. And he 
said, “Well, why don’t you have your uncle 
call your father up and see if he would send 
us a wire giving him power of guardianship 
for—you know it’s only ten days?” 

So we did that, and my father sent the 
telegram down. My uncle got the telegram, 
and as soon as he got off work, he ran down 
to the city hall, and we had to find a judge. 
It was a Friday afternoon and most of them 
were off playing golf, but we finally found one. 
And it was a big laugh. Everybody thought it 
was great that we had gone to all this trouble 
to get married. But they ran through the 
guardianship and we then got the license. It 
took all of our money that we had saved up 
to take the weekend off down at the beach to 
get the license, so we never had a honeymoon. 
We got married in my grandmother’s and 
aunt and uncle’s apartment, and went to my 
apartment. And the next day, we got on the 
streetcar and went out to Hollywood and 
had dinner and went to Graumann’s Chinese 
to the show. The next day was Sunday and 
we lazied around while we visited with my 
relatives. And the next day we went to work. 

I would like to say that, as far as I am 
concerned, Fern has been a perfect wife and 


mother. She has always been the helpmate, 
she knows me like a book, has a great sense 
of humor as a ribber, has always been fun, 
warm, and sometimes I think a silent sufferer. 
She doesn’t like to share her pains but she 
does like to participate in joys. She is an 
excellent seamstress and has made most of 
her own and our daughter’s clothes. As to 
her cooking, I think it is too good because 
I keep gaining weight. She has always been 
healthy and always congenial. I do regret that 
she has had to work most of the time we have 
lived in Reno. She has been employed most of 
the time in Reno at Sears and is an excellent 
employee. We have been married twenty-four 
years. Being that we were teenagers when we 
got married, I have a hard time preaching 
against teenage marriages and I handle that 
by not preaching about it. Fern’s beauty has 
always been a pleasure and as the years go by 
the inner beauty increases. I couldn’t ask for 
a better wife. 

In December of 1944, the smog started 
in southern California. I went to work one 
morning and Bullock’s was full of smog—you 
could hardly see across the room. I got to 
coughing and sneezing something terrible. 
And about that time we got a letter from 
Fern’ s parents (they were farmers out in 
Murieta, California, which is near Elsinore, 
south of Riverside). Her father, John Elmer 
“Jack” Martin had lost his right-hand man 
on the farm and couldn’t find anybody. He 
had a 350-acre barley farm, and they also 
raised strawberries and watermelons. And 
so I called up and asked him what kind of a 
deal he’d make if we came out of that smog 
and lived out there and worked on the farm. 
He said he would provide us our house, and 
thirty-five dollars a week clear, and anything 
that we raised there we could have. And so 
we both quit and took it, just to get out of 
the smog and the problems of the hustle and 



My Early Life and Careers 


15 


bustle of the big city of Los Angeles, which we 
had grown to not like, even though we had 
had a ball because were making pretty good 
money We ate out most of the time, and went 
to the shows, and all the plays that we could 
take in, in Los Angeles. 

So we moved to Murieta, and I worked 
on the farm for six months, driving the 
tractor and sewing sacks of barley and on 
the threshing machine. That wasn’t so good 
because there was a lot of mustard seed in 
the barley, and I used to get hay fever so bad 
I was crying all the time I was trying to sew 
the barley sacks. 

Late spring I got appendicitis and had to 
have it out. Afterwards the doctor suggested, 
“You know with your lung problems, and hay 
fever problems, you probably shouldn’t be 
working out there.” 

So I told my father-in-law, and he said, 
“Well, see what else you can find.” 

So I went up to Riverside, and walked 
into Sears and Roebuck’s and applied for a 
job, and they hired me immediately to be the 
head of the boy’s department. During the war, 
help was hard to find and I had had two and 
a-half years of college and some experience 
at Bullock’s. So they hired me at twenty-seven 
dollars a week and one-half of one percent of 
whatever I sold. Four months after I had the 
boys department, they gave me the sporting 
goods and toy department in Riverside, and 
when I took the department both of them 
were doing about $25,000 a year. I was now 
just twenty-one, so I went to work and tried 
to build up the department as goods became 
more available. And in the two and one-half 
years that I was there, we built it up to—I think 
it was about $175,000 a year. I got consistent 
raises and did very well. I remember one 
eight weeks period and Christmas in the 
toy department that we did something like 
$42,000 worth of business in eight weeks and 


we had a gross profit of forty-two percent. We 
only had $1,500 worth of toys left over, and 
the profit was exceptionally good, and the 
manager was extremely pleased. I thought I 
should have a big bonus, and he thought that 
his words of being well pleased were adequate. 
I told him I wanted some more money so they 
transferred me up to the rug department as a 
salesman at a guarantee of thirty-five dollars 
a week, and I averaged about $110 a week 
the whole time I was there. I sold more rugs 
than anybody. 

It was during this time that my father-in- 
law had had to take back a grocery store in 
Temecula, California, which is about twenty 
miles south of Elsinore. He had loaned a 
young man who had the grocery store some 
money, and the man finally came to him and 
said he couldn’t pay it, and he wondered if he 
would just buy the store out. My father-in-law 
bought the store, I think for $3,000—just for 
the inventory. He called me up and asked me 
if I wanted to be his partner, and manager 
of the store, and we would split fifty-fifty. 
I thought about it and decided to do it. I 
gave Sears two weeks’ notice, and then they 
tried to keep me there—raise my salary, give 
me a bigger department—and I told them 
it was a little too late now. But I left Sears 
with good feelings, and I always felt that that 
company was one of the most progressive 
big corporations in America, and that their 
profit-sharing system was the real answer to 
many of the labor problems in this country. 
The idea of having workers as a part of the 
ownership of a company, I think, is one of the 
ultimate solutions to our capitalistic system. 
The company has gone to the place now 
where the employees own over a third of the 
company, and their buying power of stock 
from the profit-sharing can almost control 
the stock market. Some employees who have 
been janitors all their life have retired with 



16 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


as much as $110,000 worth of stock, which I 
think is an excellent system. 

I should say that while we were in 
Riverside, on December 4,1949, our first child 
was born, a girl, Marilyn Louise. It might be 
of note that my wife had had five miscarriages 
before Marilyn was born, and we sent her 
to a specialist who used a development of a 
large drug company—a new kind of hormone 
for people who were prone to miscarriages, 
and when it became apparent that she was 
pregnant she started taking these, and stayed 
in bed for two weeks. Marilyn was delivered 
without any problems. 

While we were in Temecula, my oldest 
son, Steven, was born in Escondido. He was 
born in 1951, in February, and my wife did 
have problems there, too. It appeared that she 
was going to have a miscarriage with him, 
but we got medicine from the doctor in time; 
she spent two weeks in bed, and was able to 
carry him. 

The grocery store was really run down. 
We started the process of building it up and 
building the inventory I hired a butcher 
who was an Indian, and sixty percent of 
my customers were Indians. We did a lot 
of the public relations kind of things that I 
learned at Sears. I used to give people a box 
of candy on their birthday and we treated 
them very friendly The competitor was a 
very cantankerous kind of man, and he used 
to irritate all of his customers, even though he 
had most of then, by asking them if they were 
going to pay their bills on time even before 
they became due. 

I had the store for two and one-half 
years and in that time I kept track—I did 
$65,000 worth of credit business and I never 
lost a dime. It was done because we had an 
agreement at the time that the account was 
opened that the first of each month they 
would be given a statement and the bill was 


due by the tenth, and if it hadn’t been paid by 
the tenth, then there wouldn’t be any more 
credit. So ’most all of the Mexican people 
who worked on the large cattle ranch would 
come in and cash their pay checks on the first 
and take the grocery bill out. We used to cash 
fifteen hundred to two thousand dollars worth 
of checks on a payday, and in that way we 
had no problems. And at the end of two and 
one-half years, just after I left, the other man 
closed his business and moved away because 
his public relations with his customers had 
been so bad down through the years that 
when they found a place that they could buy 
and be treated right, most all of them came 
to our company It was called the M and M 
Market for Martin and Mathews. 

It was a kind of a family-type store; we 
all worked in it. I did have two or three other 
employees. I hired some of the Mexican youth 
to work in the store, which I just didn’t think 
about it, but they appreciated very much, 
because they’d never had anybody in that 
town who had hired Mexican young people 
before. I hired a good young man to stock 
shelves, and he did very well, and we kept 
him all the time we were there. I hadn’t even 
thought of the fact that it was kind of public 
relations. But the word got around real fast. I 
remember one time for advertising we printed 
our own newspaper—a four-page newspaper 
that I wrote. The whole thing was set up—all 
the ads. I took it to the printer and had it 
printed and distributed to about ten miles 
in either direction from that store, and our 
business increased an average of a thousand 
dollars a month right after that. We had a big 
sale. I even had a friend of mine from Los 
Angeles who was a magician come out and put 
on a magic show for the customers. One time 
I hired an old character from the town—they 
called him the mayor of Temecula—he was 
a veteran who had been gassed during the 



My Early Life and Careers 


17 


war and hurt his back in parachuting. And 
he used to be very fond of wine, but he was 
a real friendly fellow—and I hired him one 
time with his mule for a big sale that we had. 
He put a straw hat and a big sign on each side 
of the mule, walked up and down the street 
advertising our store, and even took it up to 
Elsinore and walked up and down and got a 
lot of publicity. 

To illustrate something of sales ability, let 
me refer to my father again, who, I guess was 
a natural-born salesman. When he used to 
ride that mule around southern Missouri he 
used to repair reed organs and sell Bibles on 
a door-to-door basis. When he was going to 
school at Berkeley Baptist Divinity School and 
was the pastor of that church in Santa Clara, 
he went up to some big stockbroker’s in San 
Francisco in order to see if he could get a loan 
for the church. He got the loan and also he 
got an offer for a job at five hundred dollars 
a month right then, if he would go to work 
selling stocks and bonds for that company; 
something he turned down, but never forgot, 
because when he retired that’s what he did, 
is sell stocks and bonds and that’s what he’s 
doing today in Springfield, Missouri. 

We were always a verbal family—not 
great on letter writing but very verbal—and 
to this day we probably make more long¬ 
distance calls than we do write letters. I 
grew up listening to my father preach fifty 
Sundays a year at least twice a Sunday, hearing 
some of the great preachers of all times at 
conventions that I used to go to, and some 
of the other top speakers. I was also a great 
listener to radio, and I enjoyed nothing more 
than listening to political speeches and— 
during the campaigns—and used to laugh 
and howl and roll on the floor with things 
like Roosevelt’s “Martin, Barton, and Fish” 
anecdote, or sane of the ways that Thomas 
Dewey used to lambaste everybody. I must 


say, I was always a Republican, but I used to 
enjoy hearing all sides in a debate. 

I guess the selling technique—whatever 
we had—was picked up from listening to 
people whose primary object in making a 
speech was trying to sell something. I had 
been taught all kinds of manners in the home. 
My mother used to teach me a poem: “The 
way to the heart has three little keys, Thank 
you, You’re welcome, and If you please.” And 
I heard that at least a hundred times and 
probably recited it a thousand, in my life. 
I learned a lot about business and selling 
from Sears and Roebuck’s: The customer is 
always right, it’s better to make a friend that 
costs you money than to lose one by trying 
to save a couple of dollars. One of the things 
that you did in merchandising was, move 
merchandise around so that it always looked 
new. People would come into the store, you 
move merchandise around; they’d think that 
you had something you’d never had before; it’s 
just a different place. We always kept a very 
clean store. 

I am the kind of person who takes a 
personal interest in people—I like people. 
And we used to have a lot of discussions and 
conversations in the store with customers on 
a personal basis. In Temecula I was kind of 
jack-of-all-trades. I used to be able to pop 
backs and even a stiff neck and was kind of 
a town chiropractor. I used to loan some of 
the Indian people money to put a deposit 
down to the doctor to go have a baby. People 
would come to me for counseling on all kinds 
of problems—marital problems and school 
problems and problems with their boss and 
their salaries or all kinds of things. I think I 
might have been a better salesman than I was a 
profit-maker. In that store, we probably broke 
even in the time that I was there, because we 
took it from nothing and built it up, but it was 
getting into a very profitable situation when 



18 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


I left. And by the time I did leave, my father- 
in-law did real well profit-wise, because the 
volume was there. 

I have always felt that one of the 
responsibilities of business is to sell as much 
volume at a low profit and price as possible 
because the more volume that you have, the 
more jobs you create, and that one of the 
responsibilities of business or industry is in 
the creation of jobs. While it is easy to do 
small-volume, high-profit business it isn’t 
necessarily in the benefit of the community 
to do it that way, and I never did it that way 
We always tried to be honest and fair with 
the customers, and everything was up and 
above-board. We were very competitive, but, 
I guess as far as specific sales techniques—to 
give you an example, when I left Sears and 
Roebuck’s and went down to the store in 
Temecula, I guess in the next six months I sold 
three thousand dollars worth of appliances for 
Sears without any compensation, because I 
believe in their appliances so well that I talked 
to everybody about ’em. And everybody 
that I talked to believed me, so they went 
and bought the appliances from Sears and 
Roebuck. 

There’s one story I want to tell you that 
happened in Temecula, which I think is 
illustrative of my whole philosophy of life, 
and I use this whenever possible. Into my 
store one day, the first time I noticed him, 
came in a very thin, and a very dirty man. His 
pants were Levis—terribly dirty and almost 
ready to fall off. He didn’t have hardly any 
hips, he was so thin. He had lots of whiskers, 
partially grey, a torn, dirty shirt, and a suede 
jacket that was almost in shreds, with an old 
felt hat. And he could hardly speak English. 
He drove an old Model-A truck that had a 
wooden flat bed on the back; and on it he 
had a two hundred gallon water tank. I found 
out that he had to haul his water from town 


up to his three- or four-acre farm up on the 
Indian reservation—he was a Mexican, but he 
was married to an Indian lady—because the 
windmill was broken. And he couldn’t get any 
money from the bank to repair his windmill. 
So he had to come to town and haul water 
back and forth in order to irrigate the squash 
that he was trying to raise up there. The truth 
is, he was a wetback and even the immigration 
people knew it, but he was such a harmless 
fellow that nobody bothered him. His name 
was Jesus Lopez. He used to come into the 
store and all he would buy was maybe a loaf of 
bread, a couple of cans of Pet milk (which all 
the Mexican people bought), once in a while, 
Hills Brothers coffee, but he always came up 
to the check stand, and asked me for “two 
P.A.’s and a Baby Root” (it sounded like baby 
root—r-o-o-t). I had to get my butcher, who 
could speak Spanish; I could speak a little, but 
I had to get him to tell me what he wanted: he 
wanted two Prince Albert tobacco and a Baby 
Ruth candy bar. He never even bought a Baby 
Ruth candy bar for his wife; it was for him. 
I guess he shared the tobacco. I never paid 
much attention to him, other than he came 
through the check stand and I was always 
friendly, but we never talked much. He used 
to go back and talk to the butcher quite a bit, 
and one day the butcher told me that he was 
having a lot of trouble because on his ranch 
the squash was ready to be taken off, but his 
horse that he had to pull the sled to get the 
squash out of the field couldn’t pull the sled 
because the sled would sink down into the 
sand so far that they couldn’t get the squash 
out. He had hooked his wife to the thing too, 
in addition to the horse, and neither—neither 
the horse, or his wife together—could pull the 
sled out. And he was wondering if we had 
any ideas, and so I talked to him and said 
my father-in-law had a pickup truck and I’d 
come up and see him. So I went out and got 



My Early Life and Careers 


19 


the truck and went up to his ranch, and sure 
enough, out in the middle of the field was this 
sled covered with, loaded down with squash, 
and he had the horse and his wife hooked up, 
and they couldn’t get that sled to move at all. 
So I thought, “Well, this would be easy” And I 
just drove the pickup out there and unhooked 
the horse, and hooked the sled up to the pickup 
truck and put it in low and started to pull it, 
and all that happened was the wheels went 
right down into the sand. So I had to unhook 
the sled, and hook the horse to the pickup and 
pull the pickup out. And that we could do. So, 
then, I looked at it awhile and figured out the 
easiest thing to do was just take half the squash 
off the sled and let the horse pull it out, and we 
did that twice. And then he said to me, “What 
am I going to do with the squash?” 

And I said, “Well, you’re going to have to 
take it to town to sell it.” 

And he says, “I got no way to get it to 
town.” 

Well, I said, “Let’s load it up in the pickup 
over here on the solid road and I’ll take it 
down to my father-in-law he’s going in with 
a load of watermelons—he can take this 
squash.” 

There wasn’t a great deal of it, but there 
was a good truckload. So they did that. They 
would load the sled half full of squash and 
bring it out to the road and we’d load it into 
the pickup until we had a whole pickup load 
of squash. Then I told him to get in the truck 
with me and we’d go down and see my father- 
in-law, and make sure everything was okay. 
So we went down to my father-in-law’s ranch. 
We unloaded the squash and happened to 
drop one of them, and inside it was all rotten. 
And my father-in-law picked up the squash 
and looked at it, and he picked up another 
one and cut it in half and it was rotten. And 
I turned to Jesus Lopez, and I say, “What are 
we going to do?” 


He said, “It makes no difference, it 
wouldn’t bring much money anyway. 

But he had worked for six months for that 
squash and he had plowed it and hauled the 
water for it. So we finally loaded it back up 
on the pickup truck and took it back up to 
the ranch and he fed it to his horse. But you 
could see how sad he was on the inside. So I 
told him there was nothing we could do about 
that year’s squash, but there was something I 
could do about next year’s squash. 

So I called up the Riverside College 
agriculture department and I asked them if 
they had any idea what was wrong. And they 
said, “No,” but they’d send a guy out. So they 
sent a man out who tested the soil and they 
found that there was some kind of a bug that 
lived in that kind of soil that had a certain 
composition that would eat the roots off 
down underneath the ground—that when the 
squash got up to a certain place, just getting 
ready to ripen, that it would set up some kind 
of a mechanism that made the squash spoil. 
They said that it wouldn’t do it for anything 
but squash, and if he would grow anything 
else on that land besides squash he wouldn’t 
have any trouble. So from then on he tried 
strawberries with better success. 

I was always frustrated because I wanted 
to buy him a new windmill and didn’t feel that 
I had enough money to do it and I couldn’t 
figure out why that bank wouldn’t trust 
this man enough, but you know, a wetback 
Mexican—who cared? He thanked me for all 
of my hard work with great smiles, and even 
gave me one his roll-you-own cigarettes. And 
I’d forgotten about it. Every day he’d still come 
in and get two Prince Alberts and a Baby Ruth 
candy bar. But it got down towards December 
and starting around the first of December he 
started saying, “Pretty soon Chreestmas.” And 
I’d say, “Yes, pretty soon Christmas.” And he 
kept it up every time he came in, and he had a 



20 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


twinkle in his eye, and he began to talk to me 
more, and he would tell me more. One time 
his wife needed some medicine and couldn’t 
get it, and I called the welfare department 
up and got the medicine for her. We became 
very friendly, and his whole spirit towards me 
changed and his eyes would brighten when he 
came into the store. But he would always say, 
“Pretty soon Christmas.” 

One night it was Christmas Eve and I had 
had a busy day because everybody had come 
in to buy for Christmas and we were about 
an hour late in closing. I had all the change 
counted up and was ready to turn out the 
lights and lock the door when he came to the 
door. He wanted in and I didn’t know whether 
to let him, I was so tired, but then I said, “This 
is Christmas Eve, come on in.” So he came in 
and went up and down the aisles and picked 
up what he wanted and came to the check 
stand and he said he wanted “two P.A. and 
a Baby Ruth,” and I gave them to him and I 
reached down underneath the counter and 
gave him the calendar that we were giving to 
everybody for Christmas, and I wished him 
a “Merry Christmas.” He started for the door 
and all of a sudden stopped and reached into 
the bag and took out one of the cans of Prince 
Albert and came back, looked at me straight 
in the eye and handed it to me and just simply 
said, “Merry Chreestmas.” 

The town of Temecula was a dead town; 
it was really a small, sleepy, quiet, slow-paced 
town. It was very relaxing, in fact it was the 
first time in my whole life I’d ever relaxed. 
Living in a preacher’s home was a very fast 
pace, and I had never realized what it was to 
just sit down and relax, and Temecula was a 
town that got to you—the place where you 
could do that. We had a nice home and we 
were one of the first families in the area to 
have television. The first television set was a 
seven-inch screen Motorola, with a special 


antenna, and on a good night you could 
almost see the picture. We paid two hundred 
dollars for it. 

I enjoyed that area. They built a big 
highway around it and the town became very 
alarmed because the primary business was 
tourism and to the restaurants. We supplied 
all the restaurants with meat and their 
groceries, and we were quite worried of what 
would happen if—with all the people going 
around town. So we put on a big celebration. 
The California Historical Society had put a 
plaque out on one of the homes at the Vail 
ranch commemorating a treaty between the 
army and the Indians of that area, so we had 
a celebration geared around that. 

There are some interesting sidelights to 
that. The treaty was to give to the Indians so 
many sides of bacon, so many sacks of flour, 
and so many blankets; in return they would 
not be hostile to the army And the Indians 
took the bacon and the flour and the blankets, 
and they went over the hill and found the 
bacon to be rancid, and the flour to be full 
of weevils and the blankets to be full of moth 
holes so they—I think, if my memory serves 
me, they didn’t fight, they just went off into 
the hills and never had anything to do with 
white men any more. 

On this celebration, I had seen on 
television—a newer one on which we got a 
better picture on—a comedian in southern 
California by the name of Jim Hawthorne, 
who had a late night show on channel 13. It 
was the beginning of what is today the Tonight 
Show on NBC. It was his idea in the first place. 
I watched him; he was very unorthodox, and 
I got some ideas for some jokes that were his 
style, and I sent them to him. And, lo and 
behold, two or three nights later he used them. 
So I kept sending them to him, and pretty 
soon I was writing about a third of the show 
from Temecula, by mail. And I invited him 



My Early Life and Careers 


21 


and his wife one time out to Temecula for a 
weekend to get away from Los Angeles and 
to relax. And he accepted and they came, and 
we had an enjoyable time. I never got paid for 
any of the jokes but we got a lot of publicity for 
Temecula, because he used to ask the question 
on the show: “Where’s Temecula?” So, one 
time I sent him a cigar box full of dirt, and 
he opened it up, and it said inside the top of 
the box, “This is part of Temecula.” And when 
we had our big celebration, he came out, and 
was the grand master of the parade that went 
up and down the main street of Temecula. We 
had about ten thousand people there that day. 

From that, we had a community 
organization formed. We were going to see 
what were the possibilities of a sewer plant 
and some improvement for that little town. We 
had a big potluck dinner and an election, and 
I got elected chairman of the unincorporated 
council, and I guess unofficial mayor of the 
city of Temecula. It eventually worked into a 
Civil Defense organization, because that was 
going on at the same time, and I was the Civil 
Defense chief for that whole area. 

It was about this time that a friend—a 
young man—moved into the area from 
New York who was a very interesting, very 
bright, intelligent young man, lived up in the 
mountains, had a business but, at the time, 
I didn’t know what it was. He seemed to be 
fairly affluent. We became friends, and he 
used to come over to the house and we would 
talk. There weren’t many people in that town 
who had been to college or knew anything of 
philosophy, and this young man did, and we 
became very close friends. It worked out that 
he had a mail order business that he operated 
from his home. And what he tried to do was to 
sell patents for people. He used to advertise in 
Popular Mechanics and Mechanics Illustrated. 
He also mechanized his business, one of the 
first men in business to ever use these tape 


typewriters; they would put paragraphs on 
tape and he’d press certain buttons and the 
typewriter would type out a letter, and he 
reduced his overhead this way. He was a very 
bright young fellow. He had some big ideas 
and I guess I got one of the big ideas that he 
had. 

There was a product advertised in the 
paper called “Spray-a-Shine.” It was a new 
kind of shoe polish that you sprayed on. I 
wrote to the company and asked them what 
they were doing with it in California and the 
West, and they said they hadn’t—all they had 
been doing was selling it at fairs and carnivals. 
So I saw the potential of it. This was about 
the time that Harold Schaffer of the Glass 
Wax Company had become a millionaire 
with selling Glass Wax with large ads in the 
newspaper, and I figured well, if he could do 
it why couldn’t I? So my friend said he’d loan 
me some money. 

I got on the plane and went back to 
Chicago and talked with the producers of 
Spray-a-Shine. I eventually got a contract 
from them for the eleven western states for 
the product, and came back and put it into 
all of the supermarkets in San Bernardino, 
California, for a trial, and got an advertising 
firm I knew in Los Angeles to draw me 
some full-page ads. And we sold eight cases 
of that Spray-a-Shine off the shelves of the 
supermarket in a forty-eight hour period in 
San Bernardino. So we were convinced we 
had a winner. 

The only trouble was, the stuff wasn’t 
any good. In the East with the humid air 
it didn’t bother the leather, but in the West 
in the dry, dry air of southern California it 
had a tendency to crack leather, if you didn’t 
handle it right. Most people wouldn’t read 
the instructions and we had some problems. 

So I tried to get the company to improve 
it. They didn’t know what to do, so I called up 



22 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


Harold Schaffer of Glass Wax, asked him if 
he was interested with knowing what I knew, 
how the stuff would sell—it was a dollar and 
a half a can, which is a lot of money for shoe 
polish, and it would sell that fast. So he said 
he was going to be in Los Angeles in a week 
so why didn’t I come in and talk to him? I 
went in and talked to him, and he said he was 
interested and he took it, took it to his labs. 
And they worked and worked and worked on 
it but never could figure out how to improve it. 

I eventually ended up selling what I had 
with new labels on it called “Spray-a-cast.” 
It was a way of waterproofing a cast put on 
broken arms and broken legs so that if you 
got caught in a rainstorm your cast wouldn’t 
peel away That was a failure. I got so involved 
in that, my father-in-law thought that I ought 
to devote full time to it, so he came down and 
ran the store while I was doing this. When it 
looked like that it wasn’t going to work at all, 
I came back to the store, and he went back on 
his retirement vacation. 

But I think that set up some different 
rhythms of life and whole new vistas. I had 
never flown across country and never met 
some top people or anything like this, and that 
coupled with another incident that I’ll now tell 
you, probably led to my going back to school. 

I had two very interesting customers in 
the store. One was Erie Stanley Gardner, who 
writes the Perry Mason stories, and the other 
one was a man by the name of Mr. Everett 
Lee, who was the head of one of the southern 
California cults called the Olympian Society 
One time I went out and talked to Erie Stanley 
Gardner about the future of a young man. My 
father had since moved to Massachusetts and 
had a church in Reading, Massachusetts, and 
I didn’t have close contact with him, and in 
needing someone to talk to, I went out and 
talked to Erie Stanley Gardner, about, you 
know, what does a young man do? And he said 


that he had watched me and he had thought 
that I was a rather talented young man to do 
what I had done in that grocery store, but he 
thought I was an unhappy young man because 
he didn’t think I was doing what I was capable 
of doing. He suggested either writing for 
television or to try to find out what I really 
wanted to do. 

I told my father-fix-law about this, and 
he came down and said, “If you think in that 
way, I better run that store, and you better 
go and find out what it is you want to do. So 
I went down to San Diego and walked into 
an advertising agency with a tape-recorder 
under my arm and a tape that I had made 
of a show—radio show. I played it for them, 
and they liked it. They said, “You go out and 
sell this much advertising for it, and we’ll 
put you on the air.” I guess they didn’t think 
I would, but I did. It was on for nine days, 
and it came time for payday, and when they 
gave me my check it was only about a third of 
what I thought they had promised and there 
was a big misunderstanding, or intentional 
misunderstanding—I’m not going to say. But 
anyway, I decided I could no longer work 
with them. 

I went back up to Temecula, and I went 
into the advertising agency that I had engaged 
to make the big ads for—the “Spray-a-Shine” 
business—and talked to the man who was 
the head of that, Ross Sawyer, who became 
a very good friend. His agency handled 
the Challenge butter account fox southern 
California, and I gave him a new slogan, 
“Nothing has come up to Challenge butter.” 
On the basis of that, he offered me a junior 
partnership in the company 

Now, at the same time all of this had been 
going, this Mr. Lee had been coming into 
the store, and began to talk to me about his 
cult. He gave me a book to read that he had 
written on Egyptian theology, which tended to 



My Early Life and Careers 


23 


challenge the historical person of Jesus Christ, 
and got me to thinking. In those ninety days, 
I read the New Testament. So I came back 
from Pasadena, where Ross Sawyers agency 
was, to discuss with my wife the possibility of 
moving there and getting into the advertising 
business. The more we talked, the more we 
felt that maybe God was telling us to get back 
and do what we originally planned to do in the 
first place, and that was to be a minister, which 
kind of got lost in the shuffle after the Navy and 
after getting married and going into business. 
And we decided that that’s what we would do. 

We didn’t have any money. We had one old 
car. An Indian friend of mine, Frank Gulch, 
came over one night and he said, “Clyde, 
you’ve been worried. What’s the matter?” 

And I said, “Well, I’m trying to make up 
my mind what I’m going to do.” 

And he said, “What are you going to do?” 

And I said, “I was thinking of going back 
to college.” 

“Oh,” he said, “that’s good idea. Where 
you going to go?” 

And I said, “San Jose.” 

And he says, “Going to need your car?” 

I said, “Well, I don’t know.” 

He said, “Well, how are you going to get 
up there?” 

I said, “I don’t know that either, ’cause I 
don’t have any money.” 

“Well,” he says, “I’ll give—what do you 
want for the car?” 

“Well,” I said, “I don’t want to sell it right 
now.” 

And he says, “No, I don’t mean that.” He 
says, “How much would you take for the car 
if I gave you the money now and you gave the 
car when you went to college?” 

So I told him two hundred dollars. And 
he peeled out two hundred dollars and gave 
it to me, and I got on the bus and went up to 
San Jose to find out about going to college. 




2 


The College Years 


I checked around, and it had been quite 
a while since I had gone to college, but they 
would accept my credits from Redlands, and 
they would admit me on a probationary basis, 
because of being away from school for so long. 
I went and checked with some of the friends 
in the Grace Baptist Church and they said 
that they would help some. The minister at 
that time was not there. My father had been 
well known in San Jose. It did help some in 
getting into San Jose College. 

So we came back, and we had a big auction 
at our house and we sold everything that we 
had—washing machine, stove, all kinds of 
things except the clothes, that we needed. And I 
gave my Indian friend the car and I got another 
friend to take us into Los Angeles in his pickup 
truck. We unloaded the boxes of clothes from 
the pickup truck onto the dock of my Navy 
friend, Ralph Wooley, who is the president of 
the Western Transportation Company; they 
transported our boxes of household goods and 
clothing to San Jose. We went down and got 
on the train and went up. And, lo and behold, 


when we got there with everything, when we 
got off the train, we had fifty dollars. 

I called up some people about where we 
were going to stay and I guess we arrived at 
the wrong time, because they were gone. So 
we went down and rented a very cheap motel 
for two or three days. And we finally found 
an apartment in a church member’s house 
for forty-six dollars a month. We didn’t have 
the first month’s rent, so we went down an 
hocked Fern’s engagement ring for fifty dollars 
and paid forty-six dollars rent and moved 
in. Some friends gave us some furniture. I 
started school, and didn’t have any job. I got 
a job working nights in a window decorating 
service of one of the members of the church. It 
was a pretty touch and go thing, because he’d 
pay me in the morning when we got through, 
and I’d buy enough groceries for that day and 
go back to work that night. And sometimes 
I used to have to borrow a couple of dollars 
here and there, and buy food and pay rent. I 
always paid it back within forty-eight hours, 
because I didn’t want to get in the hole. 



26 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


I want to clear up the question as to my 
lung disease here. When I enrolled at San 
Jose State, we had to take a physical and it 
included X-rays. I was called in by the health 
nurse later who asked, “Where did you ever 
get that beautiful case of hystoplasmosis?” 
I asked her what that was. She told me that 
during the war they finally diagnosed this 
disease and found it peculiar to the Missouri, 
Arkansas, Louisiana, Ohio, Kentucky area and 
it came from poultry or bats. So I told her my 
story and she said of course, but that I had the 
most beautiful case she had ever seen. This 
was later confirmed by Dr. Albert Rowe in 
Oakland when I had a physical in 1955, prior 
to coming to Reno. 

In the first semester that I was at San Jose 
State College, I had a B-plus average, so they 
took me off of probation. Then I found out that 
veterans had a thousand-dollar scholarship 
from the state, and I applied for that and got 
it. It paid $250 per year for four years. At that 
time at San Jose State College, the total fees for 
one quarter—they were on a quarter system— 
were only twenty-seven dollars. It only cost 
twenty-seven dollars a quarter to go to college. 
I majored in philosophy and took a minor in 
psychology, and in the time that I was there I 
finished up with sixty units of philosophy and 
eighteen units of psychology, with better than 
a B-average—in the last semester I had an 
A-average—maybe an A-minus. In fact, I had 
to take one semester off and work full-time 
in the rug department of Hale’s department 
store in order to get caught up. We eventually 
moved out to one of the housing projects in 
San Jose to get cheaper rent. It was during this 
time that our third child, John, was born in 
March of 1953. 

Probably the greatest influence in my 
life was my philosophy professor at San Jose 
State, Dr. Arturo Fallico; who was from Italy. 
He’d come to this country quite a few years 


ago—he had escaped Mussolini, who tried to 
kill him for his agitation for freedom in Italy 
He studied under a great philosopher Miguel 
de Unamuno y Jugo and Henri Bergson, and 
was a personal friend of Camus. He came to 
this country, couldn’t speak English, but after 
a few years was a professor of philosophy at 
Roosevelt College in Chicago, and was the 
first professor to introduce existentialism to 
California. He was one of the most popular 
teachers in San Jose State—and still is—and in 
his evening contemporary philosophy course, 
they had to close the enrollment at 350, 
because they had over a thousand kids each 
semester who wanted to take the course. He 
was a master teacher. He was an expert in the 
philosophy of history, in oriental philosophy, 
in existentialism, personalism and esthetics. I 
took every course he’s ever taught, and when 
I was through, he said to me that in all of his 
years of teaching he had probably six students 
that he felt were real students, and I was one 
of them. And I never got less than an A out 
of any of the courses that he taught. We are 
still personal friends and visit once or twice 
a year. The most memorable course that I 
took from him was a contemporary theology 
course—philosophy course, which was really 
a theology course, because it was on the book, 
The Courage to Be, by Paul Tillich. I went 
from San Jose State to the Berkeley Baptist 
Divinity School with that background and 
they weren’t even teaching that book yet at 
the divinity school. 

In addition to the time at San Jose State 
College, two or three things I think I should 
talk about. Dr. Fallico’s method of teaching 
was the symposium method. Almost all of the 
courses that we had that weren’t extremely 
large in attendance, were done in a circle. His 
main method was primarily the analogy— 
allegoric personal experience type of lecture, 
in which he would relate actual happenings 



The College Years 


27 


of life to the principles that he was trying 
to teach. As I have stated, he was a master 
teacher. 

One of the most satisfying experiences 
of college life was that I was chosen to be in 
charge of a particular part of the Religious 
Emphasis Week for the year 1953. One of the 
sections of Religious Emphasis Week was the 
“Religion in the Arts” portion of the program. 
This was a college-wide program and I was 
the chairman of the committee for “Religion 
in the Arts.” What we did was to put on a 
program in the Grace Baptist Church that 
included a dramatic reading of the Sermon on 
the Mount, singing by a Jewish cantor, music 
provided by a Buddhist choir and dramatic 
readings of religious type—prose—by some 
of the drama students of the University. My 
role was as the master of ceremonies and I felt 
rather pleased with the emphasis that came 
out of the program, showing the similarities 
between the three major religious thrusts. It 
wasn’t easy to get the Board of Deacons of the 
Grace Baptist Church to allow this program, 
but once it was held it was felt worthwhile by 
all who attended, including the deacons. 

In the summer of 1953, I graduated 
from college and spent most of the summer 
working in a prune orchard in the gathering 
of prunes, and remember vividly the fact that 
in the middle of the sunnier all of the family 
came down with the measles, including me. 
It was the most uncomfortable, unpleasant 
week I think our family ever spent; we all had 
the measles. 

When it came time to go to Berkeley, I was 
in no different shape than I had been when I 
started to college; we did not have any money. 
We had lived on an average of $125 per month 
for two and one-half years. One of my father’s 
old friends from the Grace Baptist Church 
had told me that he wanted to talk to me. So 
I went over and saw him, and he said he had 


watched me go through college and had never 
really done anything to help. He now knew 
I was going to seminary and wondered if I 
could use some help. And I said I certainly 
could; I didn’t have enough money to move. 

He said, “Well, I have helped some people 
with—you know—$500, $750.” 

I unthinkingly said, “Well, all I need is 
$150 to move on.” And that’s what he gave 
me. I think that he would have gone 500 or 
750, which we could have well used. For some 
reason, I was conservative in the request, but 
it was that money that helped us with the 
moving expenses and the first month’s rent 
in Oakland, California, where we lived when 
I went to school. 

In the summer of 1953,1 also was licensed 
as a preacher by the Grace Baptist Church 
prior to going to school. My father came out 
from Massachusetts to participate in that 
service; he was out here for the summer and 
it was all coordinated around the time he was 
going to be here. 

I enrolled in the Berkeley Baptist Divinity 
School in the fall of 1953 and took the normal 
courses from school, found the school both 
pleasing and disappointing—pleasing in the 
spirit of it, pleasing in much of the teaching 
of it, but disappointed in the fact that some 
of the things that I had already had in college 
were beyond the level of the beginning at the 
Berkeley Baptist Divinity School. My college 
professor who had taught the course on Paul 
Tillich was actually ahead of Berkeley Baptist 
Divinity School at that time, because they 
were not teaching him as a contemporary 
theologian. 

Quite frankly, it was more difficult for me 
to function in the rigid climate of Berkeley 
than it was in the permissive climate of the 
San Jose State College experience. Part of the 
reason for that was a tremendous conflict that, 
developed between the pastor of the Grace 



28 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


Baptist Church in San Jose and myself while 
I attended San Jose State College. 

Reverend Henry Croes was a man that I 
had known from Fresno. He used to be my 
Sunday school teacher, a very vigorous, strong 
young man who came from an unhappy 
home, and who I later learned was terribly 
jealous of me with my father because he 
thought that I had had everything and he had 
had nothing, and he was also very much a 
great admirer of my father. After he graduated 
from Berkeley Divinity School, he became 
my father’s minister of religious education at 
the Grace Baptist Church in San Jose while 
I was attending—while I was in the Navy 
at Redlands. For some unknown reason, he 
had worked to undermine my father in the 
Grace Baptist Church, and when my father 
left and went to the Reading, Massachusetts, 
church, he became the pastor. He was a man 
of extraordinary talent, ability, and drive, 
a man of deep insecurity, given to certain 
insensitivities in working with people, and 
yet a very capable man who built a very 
strong church. For some reason he blocked 
almost everything that I tried to do in San 
Jose, including a scholarship offered by the 
church to me while I was there. He seemed 
to take it as his own personal duty to make 
it as tough as possible for me to get through. 
He considered himself an expert counselor 
and great psychologist, and has left a trail of 
many broken people that he has dealt with. 
His recommendation for me to Berkeley was 
not of the best, and some of the problems that 
I encountered at the divinity school were a 
result of this. 

My background in theology and education 
had been more of the modern school, 
where creativity, individual thought, was 
valued. There were certain professors at 
school who were very rigid in their systems 
and demanded a great deal of conformity 


However, at Berkeley, the outstanding 
professor that they had was Dr. John W. 
Bailey, one of outstanding, world recognized 
authorities on the The Book of Hebrews. He 
has two doctors degrees from the University 
of Chicago, was at one time the president of 
the Colorado Womens State Teachers College, 
was one of my father’s favorite professors, and 
one of the saintliest, brightest, wisest men I’ve 
ever known. I was always amused that I got As 
from Dr. Bailey and less than As from other 
professors. Dr. Bailey’s attitudes and systems 
were much more consistent with the way in 
which I had been educated and brought up. 

At the time that I went to the school, it 
was going through a tremendous upheaval. 
The president was getting on in years and was 
ready to retire; the faculty was in revolt, and 
it was loaded with foreign professors, having 
one from Scotland, two from New Zealand, 
and one from Norway 

I also attended with a group of young men 
just out of the war who were known as the 
“rebel class” and we were a great challenge 
to the school, not taking the old-time cliches 
or the old-time solutions to modern-day 
problems. This group of students were really 
rebels. One young man, Bill Elliott, who had 
been the president of the student body of 
Ottawa University, was elected the president 
of the freshman class. The first day that he was 
before the student body and in the presence 
of the president, he got up and said that if 
you wanted to make it in school, go out and 
raise fifty thousand dollars for the school 
and always do what the president said. And 
this young man, who was the most brilliant 
student I had ever seen, was flunked out of 
school. They caught him drinking a bottle of 
beer at a corner bar—they didn’t know at the 
time he was counseling some college student 
who was thinking of committing suicide. 
They made life miserable for him until he 



The College Years 


29 


transferred to the University of Chicago, from 
which he graduated summa cum laude, and 
now teaches in the University of Japan, in 
Tokyo, under the auspices of the American 
Baptist Foreign Mission Society. We also 
demanded sociability with the professors 
to the point where they allowed us to have 
a kind of a party at which we put on some 
skits. The president’s picture had always 
hung prominently in the library, and I can 
remember that the skit included a scene in 
the library in which the presidents picture 
hung on the wall and the frame was a toilet 
seat, and when somebody came in and uttered 
an oath, the librarian fainted and the picture 
fell off the wall. Students don’t change much, 
I think, down through the years, and it was 
no exception at Berkeley. 

I was active in fighting for a new kind of 
seminary, very vocal about it, consistent about 
it. It is interesting to note that the seminary 
today is being reorganized along the kind of 
lines we were advocating in those days. Few 
of the professors that used to be there are still 
there. In fact, the Berkeley Baptist Divinity 
School gave the American Baptist Home 
Mission Society a psychological analysis of 
me that was later found by the Home Mission 
Society psychiatrist to be 180 degrees off, 
confirming the Home Mission Society’s belief 
both in me and disbelief in the credibility of 
the school, and is one of the reasons why the 
school is changed completely. I don’t think 
I want to go much further than that. I will 
say that Berkeley did provide a very warm 
fellowship, a very good spirit. In spite of 
differences, it provided a real good climate 
for growth, for strengthening of convictions, 
and of getting to know each other. 

In retrospect, when I think of my 
experience at Berkeley and analysis of. it, I 
know I was at war with most of the school. 
But I also knew I could never win that war 


with a direct confrontation. Rather, in my 
accomplishment after Berkeley, I would have 
to make my point. The main issue was the 
pessimism of the school. If I had followed 
their “resignation to fate” theology, the Indian 
Colony today would be just like it was in 1955. 
You see I measure success in small degrees 
and thank God for progress. I do not submit 
to the impossible when the possibility of some 
progress is always present. I also objected to 
the emphasis upon the hierarchy of service. 
They thought, and Dr. Robert Hannen even 
said it in a school convocation, that serving 
Indians was a minor charge. My point was and 
I made it well in a speech at Eastern Seminary 
one time, that it doesn’t make any difference 
what your field of service is, if you are doing 
the will of God, all kingdom tasks are tough. 
I also objected to the great emphasis upon 
-precision in everything except compassion 
which to me is the highest value of all. I 
remember a couple of times when I was at 
the school, of picking up drunks off of bus 
stop benches on the way home from school, 
finding out where they lived and taking them 
home. To me that was far more important 
than conforming to the party line. 

One of the great problems we encountered 
going to school was the fact that we lived 
in Oakland in a housing project—rent of 
thirty-eight dollars a month—and I had to 
drive thirteen miles to school, which made 
a twenty-six mile round trip each day in an 
old 1938 Chevrolet that my father-in-law 
provided for us. I was busy most of the time, 
and we had very little time for relaxation 
and social life. The pace at a graduate school 
is very, very difficult. I worked primarily in 
two jobs while I was going to school. In fact, 
I worked forty hours a week the whole time 
that I went to divinity school while I carried 
a full load of credits; part of the time in the 
kitchen of the refectory and part of the time as 



30 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


a part-time stockman in the Western Novelty 
and Toy Company in Oakland, packing boxes. 

We chose the Bancroft Avenue Baptist 
Church in San Leandro as our church, arid 
I became the associate minister of that 
church and taught the young adult Bible 
class, assisted with prayer meeting and with 
morning and even worship services, and the 
last year that I was at Berkeley I was their 
full-time custodian, which became one of 
the part-time jobs that we had. Our average 
income for the two years at B erkeley was $ 17 5 
a month and our family had increased to five, 
with the birth of John in 1953. 

In the summer of 1954, right after 
school was out, the Bancroft Avenue Baptist 
Church was in the process of building a 
new sanctuary, and through the help of the 
minister I obtained a job as a laborer with 
the contractor in building the church. It was 
my job to carry the cement for pouring the 
foundation in a wheelbarrow. It was a hard, 
tough work, which we enjoyed because the 
money was so much better than anything we 
had had. But that job only lasted about three 
weeks after the foundation was poured, and 
when I knew that it wouldn’t last too long, I 
went back over to Berkeley and talked to one 
of the professors and asked them if they knew 
of any summer jobs. 

The morning just before I got there, 
they had just gotten a wire from the Home 
Mission Society, wanting to know if there was 
anyone that could do some relief work over 
at the Indian Colony in Reno. They told me 
about it and I said I’d go home and talk to my 
wife, and I did. I called him back and I asked 
him how much it paid, and they said, “Two 
hundred dollars a month for two months.” 
I asked about transportation, and they said 
there was twenty-five dollars, that there was a 
house provided, but we would have to pay for 
the utilities and all of our food and everything 


else. But we did it. We closed down our house 
and loaded the kids and what few clothes 
and utensils that we thought we needed and 
headed for Reno. 

The missionary had had a rather trying 
time in two and a half years in the colony 
and felt that he needed ninety days off, so 
they authorized him to take it and engaged 
us for sixty of those ninety days. We lived 
in the middle of the Colony in a stone 
house, across from the church and center, 
and found it unlike anything that we had 
ever experienced in our whole lives. Our 
impression of the Colony was one of complete 
disorganization, complete despair. The 
pessimism was universal, hostility excessive. 
But we attempted to have some kind of 
program for the summer. 

The first Sunday I was there was the 
Fourth of July weekend. We announced 
church and we were the only ones who were 
there, because everybody was at the rodeo. 
So the next week we went around in the 
community and tried to talk to some people, 
and we planned a potluck dinner for the next 
Sunday. We had church and afterwards a 
potluck dinner, and we had an attendance of 
thirty-five people. The church people were all 
back. We enjoyed the summer very much with 
having church every Sunday One picnic was 
planned for everybody to get out to, and we 
did some recreational work with the baseball 
team. We had the beginnings of a boy’s club 
and a girl’s club by piling the kids in the car 
and taking off to places like Crystal Park out in 
Verdi and up at Joy Lake, behind Franktown. 

I also attended summer camp at Camp 
Chinquapin with the Nevada Sierra Baptist 
Convention high school camp, and that is one 
of the most enjoyable ten days I had spent in 
five years. It was a chance to get out in the open 
with some very sharp, open, college kids. I can 
still remember vividly sitting around the table 



The College Years 


31 


under a tent—Camp Chinquapin, everything 
was out in the open—and everybody laughing 
so hard at the dinner table we hardly could 
eat. I took one of the Indian young men from 
the colony with me to that camp—and he was 
the first one who had ever attended—and he 
lasted three days before he said he just had to 
go home because he couldn’t stand the tension 
of being—living—with white people. 

Camp Chinquapin is located on the western 
side of Sonora Pass near Strawberry Lake, and 
I promised him I’d take him home, leaving at 
ten o’clock on a Wednesday morning He didn’t 
believe me, because he started walking at nine 
o’clock. So I got in the car at ten and picked 
him up, and we came up over Sonora Pass. I 
remember that we got to the top of the pass 
and saw a car parked at the side of the road and 
people in it, and I noticed that they looked like 
something was wrong, so I stopped and went 
back and asked them what was the problem. 
They were all as pale as a ghost. I had noticed 
that their license plate was from Kansas and 
I guess they weren’t used to mountain roads. 
Their brakes had gotten hot and they were in 
a state of sheer panic at the top of this winding 
mountain road, and didn’t know what to do. 
So we put some water on their brakes, cooled 
them down, and I let the young Indian friend 
of mine drive my car, and I got in and drove 
their car down the mountain—back down 
towards Strawberry Lake and when we got to 
the bottom, they all got out and started singing 
hymns and shouting—they were Pentecostal 
people and felt we were the answer to their 
prayers. They gave us twelve dollars, which I 
didn’t want to take but which they insisted I 
take, and so I gave six of it to my Indian friend. 
He still talks about that to this day because he 
said it was the first white man that gave him, 
or shared, any of the loot. 

We got back in our car and drove over 
the mountain and got as far as Gardnerville 


and he told me to stop. He said, “You don’t 
have to go any further to Reno, I’ll go home 
from here.” 

And I said, “No, I’ll take you all the way.” 

And he said, “No, I don’t want you to.” 
And he wouldn’t let me do it, and he got out 
and I turned around and went back to damp, 
and later learned that he walked all the way 
to Reno from Gardnerville. 

I think that in those two months it was 
the beginning of establishment of some 
relationships with the Indian people that 
were later to bear significant progress in that 
colony. 

We returned to school in September of 
1954. It was during this whole second year 
that some special things happened that kind 
of shaped things to come. The missionary 
at the Reno-Sparks Colony returned to the 
colony for a short time. His wife was Chinese, 
which was one of the problems of working 
with the people of the colony. She felt very 
much as an outsider. He had applied to the 
Foreign Mission Society for service overseas 
and had been accepted to serve in Rangoon, 
Burma, and in February of 1955, he left the 
colony. He and his wife went to language 
school and then later on to Rangoon, Burma, 
to head the Christian center there. The Home 
Mission Society brought up to the Reno 
Colony a woman who had been stationed in 
Kings Canyon, in Arizona, by the name of 
June Taylor. She was an interim director until 
May of 1955. 

In April of 1955,1 was approached by the 
dean of the school to ask me if I would like to 
go back again to Reno for the whole summer, 
and I said I would. And he said, “In that case, 
would you like to stay there permanently?” 

“Well, I don’t know.” 

And he said, “Well, the Home Mission 
Society doesn’t know whether they want you 
either, but there is the possibility. Now, you’ve 



32 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


only finished two years of divinity school, and 
you have a year to go, but,” he said, “I’ve been 
talking to the faculty about it; you are older 
than most of the students, you have had more 
experience than some of the students, and 
maybe it would be better, instead of getting 
a bachelor of divinity degree, for you to get a 
master’s degree.” He said, “If you did go over 
there—you need four more units, and a thesis 
for a master’s degree, and if you stayed, you 
could take the four units by correspondence 
and then get some time off and come over and 
finish the master’s degree, the thesis, later.” 

Before I talk about going to Reno, I 
should state that I did return to Berkeley 
for one semester in 1959, instead of taking 
a correspondence course, finishing the four 
units that were required, and after having 
some success in Reno, operating in a different 
climate at Berkeley, even with some of the old 
professors, did very well in that semester. I 
had to make sixteen round trips to Berkeley 
from Reno, going over on a Sunday night 
and coming back on a Tuesday night at my 
own expense, also spending about forty-five 
days in residence and writing my thesis, 
the title of which was “St. Paul’s Concept of 
the Brotherhood of Man.” This is a unique 
thesis, no one has ever written on it before, 
there are no books on it, and it had to be 
worked up from the grassroots. In April of 
1960, I received my master’s degree in New 
Testament theology from the divinity school. 
This is a unique degree. I don’t know if they 
have ever given another one, and it is an 
academic degree, recognized as such. 



3 


Ministry at the Reno-Sparks 

Indian Colony 


So we went to Reno, and arrived on the 
first Sunday of May, 1955, with the idea of 
staying for the summer and the possibility 
of staying permanently—a possibility that 
became an actuality. We did many of the same 
things that we had done the summer before— 
beginning to get some kind of program and 
some kind of social life started for the people. 
Miss Taylor stayed as the director of girl’s 
work. She had already made some inquiries 
to the United Fund, which at that time was 
the Community Chest, and also with the 
Fleischmann Foundation—something that 
we had picked up—and made a proposal to 
the Fleischmann Foundation, and application 
to the Community Chest for admittance. 
We were granted fifteen hundred dollars by 
Fleischmann to get our buildings in shape 
and some equipment to begin a pre-school 
program, and we were admitted to the 
United Fund with an allocation of twenty- 
one hundred and sixty dollars, to begin in 
January of 1956. 

The Colony Christian Center was really 
an outgrowth of a dream of Reverend George 


Smart, who was the missionary at Stewart, 
Nevada; for twelve years prior to 1954. The 
American Baptist Home Mission Society 
had done religious work in the Reno Colony 
from the Colony’s beginning, and had had the 
Colony Baptist Church building on its present 
site, I think, as far back as 1927. 

One of the earliest missionaries was 
Reverend John Scott who lived over on Watt 
Street in Reno, and who was very much loved 
by the Indian people. He was a very friendly 
man, enjoyed singing, used to get the groups 
together for singing, had an old car and used 
to take people all over every place in it. But for 
some reason, he became disenchanted with 
his wife and ran off with one of the Indian 
ladies and created a climate that made it very 
difficult for all missionaries who came after 
him. One of my rules, as long as I was there, 
was that I never entered an Indian home 
unless the man of the house was also there. I 
used to always stand outside and talk to the 
ladies if necessary. 

But after Reverend Scott, Reverend 
Smart came at Stewart, and most of the work 



34 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


in the Colony was carried on by Reverend 
Smart and some of the women missionaries 
from Stewart, primarily on a one-day-a- 
week basis. It was primarily geared to a 
Sunday school—religious education type of 
a program. However, he dreamed of building 
a Christian center in the Colony and began 
negotiations with the Home Mission Society, 
whose headquarters were then in New York. 

The Center was built in 1951 at a cost 
of $28,000—quite a bit over an estimate of 
$17,000, and never really completed. None of 
the painting was ever done; none of the finish 
work was ever done. And it was built with 
quite a bit of voluntary help from the Indian 
people. The Center itself was built by the 
contractor, Sid King, and was a remodeling 
of the old church building plus the building 
of additional new buildings. It might be of 
interest to know that that present building is 
about to be demolished, and within a month 
or so, a new building to be built. The old 
building was designed both in Nevada and 
in New York, and never was adequate for the 
type of program that we tried to carry on. 

Another man quite interested in the 
building of the Center was Brewster Adams, 
pastor of the First Baptist Church, and there 
are pictures available in the local newspaper 
[files] of ground breaking day with Brewster 
Adams, and George Smart, and one of the 
Indians named Willie Astor, turning the first 
shovels of dirt for the construction of the 
Colony Christian Center. I think it was April 
1, 1951. 

The Center, in the beginning, was 
administered by a board made up primarily 
of white people with a few Indians. After I 
had been there twelve years, it was made up 
primarily of Indian people, with a few white 
people. 

Concerning the getting started in the 
Reno Colony, we resumed our living in the 


rock house across from the church. Our house 
was rocked every night for six solid months. 
My wife has had the experience of going to 
the door, finding it knocked upon, only to be 
met with a hose full of water. My children have 
had the experience of being beaten up after I 
had disciplined some of the Indian children 
in the program, and I have been cussed at, 
and even had a dead bird thrown at me one 
time, to see what my reaction would be. We 
became aware that this was a testing process 
that goes on in the Colony, and I guess that we 
survived it—passed the test—because at the 
end of six months it all stopped immediately. 

I can remember the first time I walked 
down the Reservation Road to pass out the 
bulletins for the Sunday service, that the 
people sicked their dogs on me, and I was 
bitten, and I could hear oaths and cussing 
from all around. However, after about five 
years, all of that stopped. The Reno-Sparks 
Colony people were so full of hatred, generally 
speaking so disorganized, and so without any 
hope whatsoever, that in many ways it was a 
colony of hell, and I have so described it. To 
be sure, there were bright spots that we tried 
to take ahold of and expand. 

In order to clarify the staying in Reno— 
August of 1955, Miss Dorothy Bucklin, who 
was the administrator of Indian fields for 
the American Baptist Home Mission Society 
came to Reno. We sat around and talked for a 
day, and she asked me if I’d like to stay because 
she had gone around and asked all the Indian 
people if theyd like to have me. This was new, 
because usually they had just sent people, but 
before they did that this time, they decided 
to consult with the Indians. I just couldn’t 
think of anything else I’d rather do than to 
stay there. I could see what needed to be done 
and I had come to like the people so well that 
I just was afraid that she was going to say that 
I had to leave. We did stay. 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


35 


Our first salary was $3,000 and $600 
car allowance. They provided my first car, 
which was a 1955 Chevrolet station wagon, 
eventually proved to be a lemon. I had to sell 
it, and I was responsible for my cars from 
then on. They provided the house, which they 
rented from the Bureau of Indian Affairs for 
$27.50 a month. We had to pay our utilities, 
which the first year were $500. My wife and I 
went in the hole—in debt $400 the first year 
we were there, and $400 the second year we 
were there, and it wasn’t until the third year we 
were there that we got raised to $3,400 a year. 
By the time that we left the Colony in January 
of 1967, my salary for 1966 was $5,600 a year, 
plus a different house, with a $1,500 a year car 
allowance, but I had to provide the Center 
bus as well as my own car. This included 
all the gas, oil, insurance, repairs, tires, 
everything, total cost of which—for income 
tax purposes—always exceeded $2,200, so we 
actually went in the hole on the car. 

My salary was raised to $6,400 a year 
for 1967, but I left in January, and they did 
hire the new man, who came in July, at my 
ending salary of $6,400 a year. In the twelve 
years that we lived in the Colony, my wife 
and I contributed $10,000, at least, into 
the program, either through payment out 
of pocket for excessive auto expenses or 
incidental expenses here or there, in addition 
to our contribution to the church, which 
averaged $600 a year. I’m still, at this time, 
trying to pay off some of the $10,000 that I 
put into that Colony. The budget was always 
set at a certain figure, but we always failed to 
meet it by about a thousand for one reason or 
another, either not enough from the United 
Fund or not enough from the Home Mission 
Society or the State Convention, but primarily 
not enough from our fund-raising project that 
we always had scheduled in the fall but never 
seemed to come off. One time we had signed 


up Mitch Miller to put on a special concert 
in the Coliseum for the benefit of the Center, 
and the day before we signed the contract, the 
Sparks Nugget hired him away from us. We 
had a series of things like that that happened, 
and as a result of it, it seemed like Mathews 
always had to pick up the deficit. 

When we arrived on the scene, we 
discovered that the church which had been 
remodeled in 1951, did not have any paint 
inside or out. They had put a little coloring 
in the plaster they put on the outside, but 
all the inside was a bare, tan brick—a very 
unattractive building. So one of the first 
strategies that I used in order to get some kind 
of group cohesion was to make the painting 
of the church a project of the people of the 
Colony. We took some of the money from 
Fleischmann and we painted the church and 
Center inside and out, using the labor of the 
Indian people and myself. And it became a 
rather attractive building; in fact, it stood 
out in the community as the best-looking 
building in the Colony. 

We also wanted to put up a fence and build 
a playground. We had about $550 that we 
could spend on a fence of the fifteen hundred 
from Fleischmann, and we needed twelve 
hundred dollars, with the lowest bid that we 
had from the Tholl Fence Company. We had 
a list of people who had been interested in 
the Center from all over the United States 
and in Reno, so I devised a postcard, first of 
all suggesting that people might like to buy a 
length of pipe—we needed a hundred lengths 
of pipe that cost $5.50 per length—and we 
sent out about three hundred postcards with 
a deadline of the first of October, and then 
we wanted to start building the fence. On the 
last day of September we had exactly $550 
returned in that fence project. Paul Tholl 
not only gave us the low bid, he gave us the 
help of two experienced people in erecting 



36 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


the fence. And the Indian people and these 
workers from Thou put up the fence in one 
day. In addition, the Isbell Construction 
Company did about $750 worth of clearing 
of the lot right next to the Center. In fact, 
they broke one of their big bulldozer-scrapers 
hitting boulders that weighed over two tons 
in that area, but they did level it for us; and 
George Miller hauled numerous loads of 
decomposed granite; and the Washoe County 
road department, unofficially, leveled and 
graded it for us. 

There was an old swing set left there 
from the Washoe County school district 
and they deeded it over to us and let us use 
it in the playground. The Elks Club donated 
six hundred dollars’ worth of very good 
playground equipment—merry-go-round, 
slides and a jungle gym. So we had a very 
good playground that has averaged fifty to 
sixty children a day using it for the past twelve 
solid years that I know of. 

With reference to the people who helped 
with the building of the playground, Mr. Tholl 
was a member of the Emanuel First Baptist 
Church of Sparks, and in putting out the 
bids—we had two—one from Reliable Fence 
and one from Paul Tholl. Paul Tholl’s was 
the lesser, and I went to him and, you know, 
just frankly appealed to him as a minister for 
some help in erecting it. He was extremely 
cooperative, and expressed real interest that 
something finally was going to be done at the 
Rend-Sparks Colony. 

Mr. Isbell, whose plant was adjacent to 
the Colony—I got to know him through his 
wife, Mabel, and I got to know her through 
the principal of the Orvis Ring School, Grace 
Warner, in what was known as the Quota Club 
that Miss Warner belonged to and so did Mrs. 
Isbell. I finally went to C. V. Isbell one day and 
told him what the problem was, and he turned 
me over to Mr. Don Duke, and Mr. Duke who 


was his foreman, made the arrangements. I 
think they had two motives; they felt keenly 
about the problem because they lived next 
door to it, and they felt that if they could 
provide some wholesome recreation for the 
young people there would be less vandalism 
in their own yards. 

Mr. Miller helped us through the assistance 
of William T. Daniel, the supervisor for the 
Washoe County road department. I’d seen 
them out grading up and down the road, and 
asked him if he could come and help, and he 
said, “Sure.” 

I said, “I need decomposed....” 

He said, “I’ll get it,” and he got the 
decomposed granite from George Miller, and 
they used a spreader. 

I also should say that Mr. Isbell had each 
year graded off the open space behind the 
colony for the baseball field. It would grow 
up with sagebrush, and each year they’d send 
over their grader for an afternoon and grade 
it off. So they had done some things in that 
area before helping us. 

Our beginning program in the church was 
Sunday school and church, and vacation Bible 
school in the summertime. Our beginning 
Center program was a pre-school, a grammar 
school girl’s club, a grammar school boy’s club, 
a junior high and high school girl’s club, and 
a junior high and high school boy’s club, a 
women’s club, baseball team and a basketball 
team. The first year we were in operation, 
our total attendance at all activities was eight 
thousand. In 1966, this program had grown 
to twenty-six different groups, breaking all the 
boy’s and girl’s clubs down into small units, 
including the kindergarten club, and then 
each group broke into two grades at a time, 
like the first and second grade boys, and the 
first and second grade girls, third and fourth, 
fifth and sixth, and so forth. We also had a 
young adults club, Boy Scouts, Girls Scouts, 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


37 


numerous activities that totaled up to twenty- 
six groups, and the total attendance for 1967 
exceeded seventy thousand. 

Down through the years the budget 
from the United Fund had increased from 
twenty-one hundred and forty to a high of 
ten thousand dollars. The total budget had 
increased from eight thousand dollars to 
about twenty-five thousand dollars. Some 
of the over-all results of this activity were 
that we reduced the delinquency rate from 
being one of the highest in the county to one 
of the lowest, and we reduced the ADC rate 
some seventy-five percent by a method I will 
discuss in a few moments. We had had no 
college graduates or anyone who had ever 
attended college in 1955, and by 1966, there 
was a Ph.D., a master’s, three B.A.’s, and five 
junior college graduates, as well as numerous 
young people who had been to trade school 
beyond high school. The drop-out rate in 1955 
was seventy-five percent of all of those who 
had reached the tenth grade, and by 1966 this 
rate had dropped to less than three percent. 

Before going any farther, I think I should 
amplify some of my impressions of some 
of the physical aspects of. the Colony. The 
Colony is located a block and a half east 
of Kietzke Lane, and runs from the north 
side of Second Street clear to Mill Street. It 
is divided into a natural “T.” There is about 
eight acres of ground that lies between Second 
Street and Mill. That long section is divided 
by Reservation Road, and the top section is 
served by what is called Colony Road. The 
Colony Christian Center sits in the center 
of the “T” and is visible from Mill Street up 
through Reservation Road. 

In 1955, there were about 375 people 
there, about ninety families living in about 
eighty shacks. At that time, there was only 
one house trailer that I know of and that 
belonged to Bill and Marlene Coffey. None 


of the houses had any paint. Most of them 
were of the old pioneer, frontier shack type. 
There was electricity, and the Colony was 
served by a water system built in 1923, with 
a central well, which we later discovered to be 
contaminated, which was causing all kinds of 
gastro-intestinal illness. In the twelve years 
I was there, I don’t think I had over a dozen 
funerals of people who died in that Colony, 
and at least seven or eight of them must have 
been infants. In the last three years, the infant 
morality rate had decreased to where I think I 
might have had one infant funeral in the last 
three years, which was caused by a violent 
virus, of a two-year-old boy who just suddenly 
died one night. 

I think it was in 1957 that the pump on 
the water system froze. The Indians didn’t 
have a thousand dollars to buy a new one. The 
Bureau wouldn’t do anything about it. There 
was no water available except front my house, 
which was connected to city water, and the 
Indian people were coming to my house with 
buckets and carrying water to their houses out 
of my hose outlets. I called the Bureau, and 
talked to Superintendent Burton Ladd. He 
said he didn’t know what he could do about it. 
I asked if he had any fire trucks that could be 
filled with water and brought. Well, he didn’t 
know, he would check into it. 

I finally called up the Sierra Pacific Power 
Company and asked them what could be done 
and they said well, they’d see. They called me 
back and said they thought that they could tap 
into the Colony line from the city line, as they 
crossed each other. They would have to put a 
reduction valve in because they were running 
at 110 pounds pressure and the Colony ran on 
forty pounds pressure. Sol arranged a meeting 
between the Tribal Council and the president, 
vice president and business manager of the 
Sierra Pacific Power Company in the Power 
Company offices, and in an hour they worked 



38 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


out an agreement. It was only supposed to 
be for ninety days because Congress was 
supposed to appropriate enough money to 
put in a new pump, a new water system, and 
new pipe before the ninety days were up. I 
even had some talks with Wally White upon 
this, who was the state sanitary engineer. But 
a very business-like agreement was worked 
out where the colony paid forty-eight dollars 
a month to the power company for water for 
everyone, and they in turn were supposed to 
collect fifty cents a month from each house. 
That agreement is still in effect, and water is 
still being provided in that way, after ten years. 

That was a major breakthrough, because 
the vice president of the power company told 
me that his negotiation with the Indians that 
day was as moral, intelligent, and with the 
sane mood and spirit as it would have been 
with the Westinghouse board of directors— 
which I had been trying to tell them all the 
time. (And a couple of men who were at that 
meeting could hardly read or write.) 

I found Indians to be extremely intelligent, 
extremely reasonable, and practical. They 
were in despair because there was no hope. 
Their hopelessness was realistic. Congress 
could never move fast enough to do what 
needed to be done. Discrimination within 
the city was extensive. The police department, 
the schools, and businesses generally looked 
upon them as stupid, dumb, hostile, sullen. 
In my relationships with them, I did not find 
this to be true. I found them to have different 
value systems, to be extremely intelligent, to 
be extremely proud, to be willing to suffer 
the way that they suffered rather than to give 
one inch in their principles, or into acceding 
to the white man’s demands for subservience. 
Indian people were not lazy; they were silently 
rebellious, and the intensity of this hostility 
was such that they would rather starve to 
death than to go to work for a man who 


treated them unequal, and never express 
this feeling openly or mentally, except to 
each other. There was a total breakdown in 
communications between the non-Indian 
community and the Indian community. In 
all the years of existence of the Reno-Sparks 
Indian Colony, a legal-political subdivision of 
the federal government, there had never been 
a meeting with the County Commissioners or 
the City Council of Reno until 1964. 

When I first went to the Colony I probably 
thought, being fresh out of seminary, that the 
answer was in the teaching of new ideas, in 
how it would be possible to get Indian people 
to live like everybody else. It wasn’t long 
before I junked that idea. 

Community Attitudes 

TOWARD THE INDIAN 

It wasn’t long after 1955 that I began to find 
the wide divergence between what people in 
Reno thought the Indians were like and what 
Indians were really like. The general attitude in 
town was one of—I’m trying to find the right 
word, it’s not easy—generally, they thought 
of Indians as very backward, lazy, drunken, 
shiftless, stupid. The truth of the matter was 
that only about ten percent of the Indians had 
a problem with alcohol. The average I.Q. of the 
Colony was a little above the average for Reno. 
We had highs of, like 140, and lows maybe 
about seventy. The average was a little over 
one hundred. We had people willing to work 
who couldn’t find an opportunity to work, a 
great discouragement from a long series of 
psychological demoralizing activities of the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs and others. 

The real word for Indians was “despair.” 
Their primary hope was that someday all the 
white people would destroy themselves and 
they could have the land back. Their despair 
was in the fact that the people to whom they 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


39 


had to show allegiance were in their own 
minds thieves who’d stolen their land and 
food supply and now gave orders. 

The attitudes of the police were not the 
best because the only Indians they saw were 
not the best. Among the Indian people that 
I -know, there’s two or three reactions to 
alcohol. One is to go to sleep, the other one 
is to become very friendly and very happy, 
and the third one is to become violent; and 
the police usually had to deal with those 
who became violent, and they used to react 
with—bluntly—brutality, and that in turn 
increased the violence. The police had very 
little contact with the other ninety percent of 
the people in the Colony. They never saw the 
fifty percent of them that worked every day 
in 1955. Now almost one hundred percent of 
those are working every day. So, their attitude 
was of wariness, of being on guard at all times. 
People in the hospital were pretty much the 
same way. At one time, ninety-five percent 
of all the money spent on Indian health 
was spent to patch up the effects of Indian 
alcoholic violence. And the hospital people 
were generally distressed to see Indians 
come. Sometimes they were very apathetic, 
and sometimes openly hostile and disgusted 
with the whole situation, because again, very 
seldom did they see the ninety percent. 

Social welfare workers were generally 
ignorant. They would make stupid blunders, 
such as work for a long time to try to get 
one Indian to tell what was going on in a 
neighbor’s house, and when finally they did it, 
then they’d go to the neighbor and say, “So and 
so said such and such,” which was just almost 
like signing a death notice to somebody. 

The business community looked at 
Indians as unreliable, because, again, many 
times the only ones they ever hired were 
those who were alcoholic, who would come 
on Monday, get paid on Friday, and they’d 


never see ’em again until they needed money 
again, maybe next Wednesday, or Thursday or 
Friday, or a week or so. What we did there was, 
I must have made a hundred speeches in Reno 
in the Rotary Club, and the Kiwanis Club, 
and Lions’ Club, and all the women’s service 
clubs, churches, and every place that I could 
get to, and I didn’t talk about the unreliables. 
I talked about the reliables, like John Dressier, 
who is the chief steward of the Iron Workers’ 
Union, who is the outstanding welder for 
Reno Iron Works, and worked for nineteen 
years as the boilermaker for the Southern 
Pacific Railroad. I talked about Hilman Tobey 
who is a cabinentmaker for the Nevada Club. 
And I talked about Vernon Newman, who is 
with the forestry department. And I talked 
about Stressler O’Daye who worked for the 
ABC Block Company. I talked about Willis 
Moose, who is a carpenter for the Washoe 
County school district, and I talked about 
the women who were the maids in their own 
homes. I used to make a great point of the 
fact that if you think Indians are so dirty, how 
come you hire them to be your maids? Ninety 
percent of the homes in the Indian Colony are 
so clean you could eat off the floor. That’s on 
the inside; the outside—who cares?—to them. 
Nobody lives on the outside anyway. 

The Bureau of Indian Affairs has attitudes 
toward Indians which are the most depressing 
that I know. My experience has been—most 
of the time—they spend about eight hours 
a day telling each other why they cannot 
help Indians. And this is because most of 
their programs have built-in failure factors, 
designed to keep them from working. Much 
of the strategy that has come down through 
the years has been to keep Indians under 
control, rather than leading towards Indian 
freedom. What is done is done so slowly and 
with so much bureaucratic bungling and red 
tape that by the time a project is completed, it’s 



40 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


obsolete. It’s a series of broken promises; it’s a 
series of unkept appointments; it’s a series of 
degrading manners of dealing with people. In 
my opinion it should be terminated and the 
Indian people should deal with governmental, 
or political, entities like anyone else. 

The old code in the Colony was “ an eye 
for an eye, and “a tooth for a tooth 2” And 
there was a great deal of fear. At night this 
was a completely dark area—no lights, and 
there were quite a few alcoholics running up 
and down the street, and there was a general 
movement of youngsters. It was not a safe 
area in which to live at all, and because of 
that, defense mechanisms were very strong in 
all the individuals of the Colony, protecting 
themselves from each’ other. And I do not 
believe that that any longer exists, because 
the people in the Colony know each other 
better, and because of a different attitude in 
the community at large—because of lights, 
because of adequate law enforcement, because 
of hope. The fact that the determination of 
their own destiny is returning to their own 
hands and they can progress, not because the 
white man has left, but they can progress on 
their own and the white man can stay also— 
sometimes with mutual aid, and sometimes 
in spite of the lack of it. 

In talking of attitudes I should also 
mention some of the attitudes I encountered 
in the church. I didn’t find much difference 
between the attitudes of people in the church 
and those outside the church towards Indians. 
Even among Baptist people with whom I 
worked, I still heard terms like “buck” and 
“squaw.” I’ve even heard statements made, 
“Why is a nice young fellow like you working 
with those old dirty Indians?” 

Some of our best support financially for 
the Center came from service clubs, like 
the Elks Club, or the Kiwanis Club, and the 
Fleischmann Foundation. We had general 


support from Baptists through the missionary 
budget of the total Convention, and some 
small financial gifts, but generally speaking, 
the education process toward what Indian 
people were like, and what their problems 
really were, was just as difficult in the church 
as it was outside, and I think that’s still true. 

One of the biggest problems of all was that 
once someone was motivated to help, their 
attitude was usually paternalistic, and this 
attitude is just not acceptable; it will not work. 
At times I even had to build walls around the 
Colony to keep certain “do-gooders” out of 
there. I remember one group that wanted to 
start a perpetual rummage facility. I didn’t 
object to the idea as much as I objected to 
the attitude of those who wanted to do it, 
because it was one of pity and one of negative 
sympathy 

Indian people want pretty much the same 
things that everyone else wants: they want a 
good home, they want a good car, they want 
appliances, they want good education for 
their children, but they are willing to sacrifice 
everything unless they can have those things 
according to their definition of freedom. 
Which really means that they want them and 
still be able to maintain the critical, core parts 
of their culture. 

Indian pride and Indian freedom are 
exactly the same thing, and anything that 
appears to an Indian to limit his freedom 
brings up his pride to the place where he 
absolutely refuses to cooperate or to act. 
Most of the Indians that I know would rather 
die than surrender to what they call “the rat 
race.” I have even heard some Indians say that 
“where the white man has to have two shirts 
we can get along with one, or none,” or “where 
a white man has to have a fancy house, we can 
sleep just as well on the floor,” and “where the 
white man has to have a car, if necessary we 
will walk.” But to sell themselves for dollars, 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


41 


they won’t do that. In fact, they won’t work 
for a man whose attitude towards them is one 
of just purchasing their labor. An Indian will 
work for someone who appreciates his skill 
first, and pays him second. He would even 
work for less to a man who likes him, than 
he would to someone who pays him a lot of 
money but patronizes him. 

Another interesting thing is—to an Indian 
the slightest hesitancy upon the part of a non- 
Indian in answer to a question is taken as a 
“no.” If an Indian goes and asks for a job and 
the man says, “Come back next week,” the 
Indian says, “He doesn’t like me.” If an Indian 
goes and applies for a job and the man asks 
too many questions, he interprets that as “he 
doesn’t like me.” If a person raises his voice, 
it doesn’t make any difference what he says, 
he’s angry. He could even say, “I love you,” 
but if he shouted it, he was angry. (These 
are psychological and cultural differences 
that one who works with people in the Reno 
Colony at least, has to learn.) Indian people 
are also very shrewd. They do not reveal all 
of their motives at the beginning, and they’re 
very meticulous in gathering facts before 
making decisions. 

Problems in Education and 
Recreation for Children 

One of the most difficult attitudes was 
in Reno High School. The principal of 
Reno High School, Mr. David Finch, was an 
Aristotelian. I’ve ever heard statements made 
that some people were born to be slaves, and 
the main way to handle an Indian child who 
didn’t perform up to standard was to expel. 
Therefore, the dropout rate was seventy-five 
percent. Luckily, on the Board of Directors 
of the Colony Christian Center was Mr. Neil 
Scott, who was in the administration of the 
school system. Somewhere back around 1959, 


I published a statement and said that the main 
objective of education for Indians in Washoe 
County should be to provide Indians with a 
salable skill upon graduation. Luckily, this 
principle was acted upon in the building of 
Wooster High School. While discipline is still 
maintained strongly at Wooster, as it should 
be, an understanding of the situation is much, 
much greater than it was at Reno High School. 
The dropout rate is something like three 
percent. And some of the graduates from 
Wooster, who even the counselors evaluated 
as non-college material, are graduating from 
the University of Nevada successfully, and 
part of it is in spite of everything else, and 
some of it was on account of some of the 
things that were done. 

In earlier years, the disturbance among 
children was so extensive that when they 
attended Northside Junior High School, the 
boys used to refuse to go to the bathroom 
in outhouses at home which were in ninety- 
seven percent of the homes in the Colony, and 
would save bowel movements till they got to 
school. Then instead of going on the stools, 
they would go on paper and throw it on the 
ceilings, which was an indication of very 
serious disturbance. Within one year after the 
beginning of our program, that practice just 
stopped of its own. 

One unique experience that happened 
to me while I was in the Colony certainly 
happens to few people. I pulled an eighteen 
month old Indian boy out of an outhouse hole 
he had fallen into. One Saturday morning 
Noonie O’Daye came running down to our 
house when we lived on the Colony—oh, 
this must have been back about 1957—and 
said, “Chucky fell in.” I asked her where and 
she said in the outhouse. I grabbed a rope 
and ran up to their house, into the outhouse, 
and sure enough down about six feet down, 
knee deep in you know what, stood Chucky, 



42 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


crying. I sent Noonie next door to have the 
Coffey’s call the rescue squad. Max Coffee 
came over and I sent him for a crowbar. Just 
then Noonie’s uncle, a Mr. Abbey, came up. 
The O’Daye’s were downtown and Noonie 
had been baby-sitting. Max came back with 
the crowbar and we got the top of the seat off. 
Chucky had fallen through one of the holes. 
I could see that there were also broken wine 
bottles down there and the child had cut his 
legs and feet and was getting pretty weak from 
crying and the fumes. We tried to get him 
to grasp the rope but he was too scared. So 
I asked Mr. Abbey if he could reach him if I 
held him. He said he would try So he started 
down head first and I held his legs. He had 
to go down until I had him around the knees 
and he finally got a hold of Chucky. I don’t 
know where I got the strength but I pulled 
both of them up out of the hole, straight up. 
I took Chucky and ran into their house. The 
grandmother gave me a washpan and I began 
to wash him. Pretty soon an ambulance came. 
They never could get the rescue squad. They 
took Chucky to the hospital. Noonie and her 
uncle went looking for the parents. I went and 
buried my clothes, the smell was unbelievable, 
and tried to wash up. Finally I went down to 
the hospital to see how he was and he was 
clean, bandaged and asleep. The parents were 
there and we were all happy. The nurse finally 
gave me some green soap to continue washing 
with and I finally got the smell off, but to tell 
you the truth, I can still smell it. To show 
you some of Indian humor for a long time 
everyone called Chucky “Rosie” after that. 

There was a vast ignorance of Indian 
culture among junior high school teachers at 
Vaughn. Mr. William Bowden was a member 
of the board of the Colony Christian Center 
and was the principal at E. Otis Vaughn 
Junior High. Through his contact with the 
Indians and growing communications and 


mutual respect between Indian parents 
and Mr. Bowden and some of the teachers, 
understanding of cultural differences, some 
allowances for it, and some give and take 
on both sides, and some new strategies, a 
great deal was done to improve the value 
of education in the Indian community and 
the techniques used in schools, which again 
lowered the dropout rate. I think a couple of 
our Indian young people have been president 
of the student body at Vaughn. I know one 
year that Joe Abbey graduated from Vaughn 
as the most popular student in school. Indians 
began to participate in athletics and excel 
in them. One of the young men that they 
thought would never get through junior high 
school, is this year the outstanding lineman 
on the Wooster High School football team 
and still in school and probably will get an 
athletic scholarship to college. His name is 
Mike O’Daye. 

We had to do a great deal of work with 
the teachers in the Reno school system to 
show them some of the cultural differences 
and to understand them. We explained that 
when they asked an Indian child to come and 
stand before the class and to recite or to give a 
report, that in order to obey that teacher that 
the child had to disobey his parents because 
his parents had been teaching him that a child 
should be seen and not heard, and should 
not get out in front, and to wait and go with 
what the group decides. Or if the teacher told 
him to write a five hundred-word theme, the 
Indian child felt that he could say everything 
he wanted to say in twenty-five words or less, 
and could, with very succinct points and 
understanding. 

The Colony was really made up of a 
group of individuals who had had some 
personality disintegration, al-most complete 
social disintegration. Parties—or anything 
positive in having fun—was unknown. There 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


43 


are people in that Colony—some of them still 
today—who haven’t spoken to each other in 
thirty years because they’ve known each other 
that long and maybe one of them had done 
something “dirty;” in their language, “did me 
dirty”—thirty years ago, and so they just never 
spoke. It is the Indian way of denying being. If 
you really want to hurt someone, you would 
ignore them. 

Most all the discipline by parents of the 
children was done with scolding, and only 
in a few families did I know of spanking. In 
many of the traditional families they would 
treat children as adults, allow them absolute 
freedom and depend on the child to come 
home when he felt like it, go when he felt 
like it, eat when he felt like it, and eat what he 
felt like. Diet was high in starch and high in 
protein, not much in terms of vegetables, but 
things that would provide a feeling of being 
full—a lot of deer meat, a lot of potatoes, lot 
of macaroni, lot of spaghetti, a lot of beans. 

One of the bright spots in the relationships 
with the town was with the Orvis Ring School 
under Miss Grace Warner. She was very 
helpful in getting for us a little help from a 
club that she belonged to. It’s the Quota Club. 
They used to give us ten dollars a month for 
our nursery school, which I’ll touch on in a 
minute. 

Miss Warner was a very unique teacher. 
She was ahead of her time. Some of her 
techniques today might be considered 
outdated, but at that time she was far advanced. 
She felt that one of the great talents that Indian 
children had was art. This was one of her 
talents and she used to spend a great deal of 
time cultivating the artistic talent of Indian 
children and, through it, giving them a sense 
of pride and accomplishment. She was a strict 
disciplinarian, and she was one that tried to 
discourage the use of nicknames. Most all the 
Indian kids knew each other by nicknames, 


but she would never recognize a person by 
his nickname. Some of the nicknames were 
fantastic! We had “Itchy,” and “Chew-it,” and 
“Neemo,” and “Noonie,” “Burgie”—all kinds 
of nicknames, but she would never call a child 
by nickname. The Indian children used to call 
me “Mathews” and she used to get after them 
very much for that, saying they should call 
me “Reverend Mathews”—building a kind 
of sense of dignity around the use of a name. 

She and I worked close together. I 
would tell her some of the problems in the 
background of kids, and she, in turn, could tell 
the teachers what some of the problems were. 
I was also able to help her with the building of 
a PTA group at Orvis Ring which I think, at 
the present time, its main leadership is coming 
from the Indian mothers, which is quite a 
change for that PTA. Through the growth 
of PTA, and some of the things that she did 
with the giving of pride in culture and art, and 
praise and a sense of dignity to the children, 
she operated a very democratic school. I think 
that she contributed a great deal toward some 
of the educational accomplishments that I 
referred to earlier. 

Charles Pullman of the State Department 
of Education also set up some workshops 
at the University for teachers who taught 
Indian children throughout the state. I have 
participated with him in those workshops in 
the relating of some of the cultural differences 
that I have referred to, and some of the 
solutions and ways that we found to deal 
with them. 

The Center’s Program - 
Education and Recreation 

One of the things that I learned about the 
program of the Center was that while there 
was a need to have an ongoing, consistent 
program, the stated program, or the organized, 



44 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


or what we called the weekly program, was 
only about half the program. What the boys’ 
clubs and the girls’ clubs did was to provide 
the beginning of hope, or something that the 
kids could look forward to. If a first grader 
knew that on every Monday afternoon Mr. 
Mathews was going to come by in his station 
wagon, pick him up, and take him out in the 
hills, and he could get out and run, at least he 
knew that there was going to be one afternoon 
that was fun, a week. 

And of all the things that we did with 
the youth, I think the fact that we had a 
consistent schedule that gave the young 
people something to look forward to, and a 
chance to be with someone who was warm 
and friendly with them, was probably the 
most valuable thing that we had in the whole 
structured program. 

The girls’ clubs would get together 
primarily to bake cookies or to do some kind 
of handcraft. I never did that with the boys. 
The boys—one of the big problems was their 
throwing rocks. Window breakage in the 
Colony was fantastic, as it was in the Center, 
and never was entirely overcome, and still 
isn’t. But one of the strategies was to take as 
high as twenty-five boys in the back end of 
my 1957 Pontiac station wagon. It was loaded 
down until the shock absorbers were sitting 
on the axles, and we would go out to places 
like—well, out towards Wadsworth and the 
Truckee River. We found a particular place 
where there was a little pond that eddied off 
of the Truckee. We’d find an old log and throw 
it out into the middle of the pond, divide up 
sides, and everybody get rocks, stand on each 
side—a team on each side of the pond—and 
they’d all start throwing rocks at that log 
and see which side could push that log by 
throwing rocks at it to the other side, and who 
ever did would win. It would take about two 
hours, either because one side ran out of rocks 


or the other side just happened to hit harder, 
and after two hours of rock throwing there 
were a lot of sore arms and that would solve 
the rock throwing problem in the Colony for 
about a week, and by that time we were out 
doing it again. There was a noticeable drop of 
throwing of rocks. 

By this I don’t want to indicate at all that 
the young people in the Colony were bad 
in 1955—young people at that time were 
at loose ends. The only structure of life that 
they had was at school. They would go in the 
morning into a structured situation, and come 
home at night into a completely unstructured 
situation. And we began to take up some of 
that slack with the Center program. We used 
to go out to the gravel pits on the other side 
of the old airport out towards Pyramid Lake, 
beyond Sparks. The kids used to jump off 
the cliff down into the decomposed granite. 
They would play “cowboys and Indians.” My 
own boys would participate in the clubs, and 
my boys always ended up the Indians and 
the Indians ended up the cowboys, which 
I thought was an interesting projection 
of image. They used to dig out from the 
decomposed granite chunks of lead of .22 
shells and .38 shells that people used to fire 
into those cliffs, target practicing. And some 
of the boys would come home—I even heard 
from mothers about it—with their pockets full 
of bullets, just the lead. But they had a great 
time in collecting that, and they used to get 
great piles of it in their back yards. 

We’d roam the mountains—I could never 
keep up with the kids in their ability to run, 
so I didn’t even try. They would jump out of 
the car and run to the top of a mountain and 
back and sit down and wouldn’t even breathe 
hard. Some of those boys that I started with 
are today outstanding athletes in the school 
system in Reno. We used to travel around 
all through Reno. I took the kids to the 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


45 


bakery, and to the Coca Cola plant, up to the 
University, even drove out around California 
Avenue and up to the golf course where the 
pretty homes were, getting to know Reno. We 
also went to Lake Tahoe. When I went there, 
the first time some of the kids fourteen years 
old had never been to Lake Tahoe, which 
seemed almost unbelievable. 

The baseball team was an interesting 
observation in personality because the boys 
were very good, and yet they had never been 
well-coached or well-managed. They had 
a hard time learning to play together. They 
had never had the experience in the Colony 
of organized play to the extent that we were 
trying to do with this team. There had been 
Colony teams—some of the young adults 
had played on baseball teams at Stewart and 
others, but a consistent team in the Connie 
Mack League was new. They had a tendency 
to quit when they got five or six runs behind. 
Some of the boys would get angry at each 
other and walk off the field and I could hardly 
keep a team together to finish the game. This 
was one of the things that I was rather strict 
about—that they had to stay in and play. I 
remember one game out at Idle wild where 
they were behind by six runs. They all wanted 
to quit and I wouldn’t let them. And, in the 
last inning, they made seven runs and won 
the game. And, that was a kind of a beginning 
of change of attitude, of stick-to-it-iveness; at 
least here was a new possibility of overcoming 
seemingly impossible odds. 

I used to pick the boys up at school in a 
1962 Ford Falcon bus and take them out to 
club—either bowling, or—as I have said—out 
visiting some business, or out to the open 
spaces to run off energy and have a good time. 
But one of the things that used to go on in that 
bus was the fact that the boys used to blow off 
steam to me as soon as they got in the bus—all 
their hostilities toward teachers or parents or 


to anything. I was able to not only absorb alot 
of that hostility and drain it off that way, but 
also reflect back to them some clear thinking, 
not quite in as emotional terms as they were 
stating them, and helped to change some 
attitudes that the boys had toward school 
and toward their teachers and toward their 
parents. I think that this technique was very 
valuable. My basic philosophy of the whole 
program was non-directional and, in a sense, 
indirect. We started a study hall in the Colony 
in 1960 because the kids had no place to 
study. Teachers came over from Vaughn. It 
raised the grade average one whole point and 
helped reduce the dropout rate. This idea was 
picked up nationally and put into the school 
systems and the Poverty programs, but it 
began with us. It later was transferred to the 
Vaughn school. 

I used to work just as hard with the 
groups in town as I did with the people in 
the Colony, trying to put both communities 
in a situation where they could communicate 
with each other. We frankly started with the 
children and worked up to the adults. We got 
the adults involved in our program because of 
their interest in what we were doing for their 
children. They would come to programs to 
see their children perform, or to see the work 
that they had accomplished, and wed get to 
talk to them, and they would get interested in 
some kind of a project. In that way we began 
to build some groups. 

I mentioned previously the lowering of 
ADC rate. In all the time that I was in the 
Center, and all the time the girls’ workers that 
we had were there, I don’t believe any of the 
staff ever dealt with the problem of illegitimate 
children with the girls directly, or with the 
boys, either. We did give some information 
on birth control, and we did point out at 
times to the children how important it was 
to babies to have a mother and a father in the 



46 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


home together. But we found that as the young 
people gained self-confidence and confidence 
in their environment, the rate just declined 
radically on its own. That when they began to 
have hope and something to look forward to— 
when their mental state was one of happiness 
rather than hostility—when they encountered 
understanding in school, when their parents 
began to take an interest in them, when the 
doors of opportunity, both in higher education 
and in employment, began to open to them, 
that the rate of illegitimate children declined. 

I also should say that the term “illegitimate 
children” is one that is a white term, and is 
not an Indian term, because in the Indian 
culture there is no such thing. The practice 
of finding a mate among the young people in 
the colony is very difficult. With 375 people, 
the choice of a mate was very limited, if it was 
limited within the Colony And a lot of our 
young people, when they got teen-age, began 
to make contacts with other reservations like 
Nixon, or Fallon, or Schurz, or Dresslerville; 
and while tribe had something to do with the 
choice of a mate, that began to diminish too, 
and the Indian people kind of set the standard 
that as long as the other party was an Indian it 
was all right. There was a few Indian children 
who actually married white children, and one 
or two or maybe three instances, Negro. This 
was not forbidden by the parents but was not 
looked on with favor either, rather with a kind 
of an innate sense of the cultural differences 
causing problems. 

If an Indian boy and an Indian girl walked 
down Reservation Road holding hands, the 
people in the Colony would consider them to 
be married. We might call it “engaged.” They 
might move in with the girl’s parents, or with 
the boy’s, and maybe a year rater they would 
come to me and want to get married, and they 
would either have a baby with them or one 
on the way. And there was a kind of logic to 


this: because if they had lived together for a 
year with no children, they might part, feeling 
that they were not spiritually suited to each 
other, the result of which was that no children 
were born. So the process of engagement, or 
of mating, was somewhat different. However, 
in view of the fact that, as far as I know in 
the twelve years that I was there, unless a 
family became completely disorganized 
due to alcohol, adultery after marriage was 
unknown, and the system seemed to work 
and be extremely moral. 

Where the problem would arise was where 
some of the teenagers from the surrounding 
reservations that had no program such as the 
Colony Christian Center, and had no activity 
other than wild parties with a lot of beer, or 
stronger, would get to the Reno Colony and 
take some of our kids out on the parties and 
have irresponsible relationships that would 
result in children. The girl would get stuck 
because the boy had no intention whatsoever 
about making anything lasting about it. 

All kinds of strategies were developed to 
prevent this, including some that the Indians 
did themselves. They began to encourage their 
kids to go to trade school, and to get away 
from the Colony, or to go to the Phoenix 
High School that the Bureau would provide, 
in order to have a wider selection of mate, 
really; or to go on re-location and learn a job. 
Many of the young people began to marry 
other Indians—young people, but from tribes 
way outside of Nevada, as far as Oklahoma, 
Arizona, New Mexico. We tried to schedule 
more activities on Friday and Saturdays to 
help. I think the fact that we finally got a full¬ 
time policeman in the Reno Colony helped 
the situation, too, because he was able to get 
the kids home, and enforce a curfew a little 
bit. I really think that the primary reason for 
the decrease in ADC, though, is related to 
the increase in self-image and the decrease 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


47 


in the dropout rate in school. What we tried 
to do was to build a climate in which young 
people felt happier growing up, and in doing 
that, some of the irresponsible things that are 
so tragic for children declined. 

However, what we would term an 
“illegitimate child” isn’t in near as bad of 
a predicament in an Indian culture as he 
would be in a non-Indian culture, because 
the parents of the girl would adopt the child, 
or the grandparents would raise the child, 
which was the old way. In fact, in the real old 
way, the grandparents raised the children 
and let the young adults enjoy life while 
they were young; and the responsibility for 
children in the old tribes was primarily with 
grandparents, and almost all teaching was 
done by the grandparent. Indian people 
tend to think of children as belonging to the 
tribe, rather than to the individual parents, 
anyway. There was not the stigma attached to 
illegitimate children in the Indian culture as 
there would be in the non-Indian. However, it 
was not looked upon as the best way; the best 
way was to live together for a period of time, 
and if a child was the result, then marriage, 
then a home, and then absolute fidelity. That 
is the normal pattern in the Colony today. 

Many times, however, the women of the 
Colony would put on a shower for a girl who 
was having an illegitimate child, and we had 
the showers in the Colony Christian Center. 
The people first came to me and asked me if 
they could put on a shower for so-and-so, and 
they didn’t know what I’d say. I asked them if 
they thought it was right, and they said, “Well, 
it’s for the child, you know.” And I knew it was 
right, so we did. I’m not so sure that some of 
the people in the larger community would 
have approved of that, but we did; and we did 
it, and I still think it’s right. 

The schedule of operation for our eight 
groups, I think I have given for 1955.1 would 


like to detail a little more of what was done in 
the years approximately 1963 through 1967. 
The program structure was pretty much the 
same. We had a pre-school program that ran 
anywhere—depending upon which year— 
from two mornings a week to five mornings 
a week. And we had anywhere from eleven to 
thirty-five children. This was an adapted pre¬ 
school program, geared to the needs of Indian 
children, in which we taught the joy of play, 
the beauty of environment, the meaning of 
authority, and social skills, plus what is called 
personality development. 

Miss Warner used to tell us that some 
of the Indian children would come to 
kindergarten “ahead” of the non-Indians 
because of the pre-school program. It also 
provided an entree into a parent relationship, 
and we always had a parent-teacher club that 
met regularly where we explained what we 
were doing with the children and enlisted 
their help. We always had volunteer help from 
some of the mothers, and they also provided 
juice and cookies at times. A couple of the 
local churches would send ten or fifteen 
dollars every quarter also for juice. The church 
up at Herlong was one of the best churches 
for giving juice. 

In addition to the pre-school program, 
we had a kindergarten club which was mixed 
with boys and girls, and usually had about 
twenty-five kids in this group. Then for the 
boys, we had a first and second grade boys 
club, third and fourth grade, fifth and sixth 
grade, junior high and high school (and also 
the same grouping for girls). We also had a 
Boy Scout troop, a Girl Scout troop; we had a 
women’s club; we had a young women’s club; 
we had a men’s club that would get together 
on projects such as some kind of a building 
project, remodeling of a building or painting. 
We also had one, two, or three basketball 
teams, depending upon the need of the year. 



48 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


And we used to have special events such as 
the Halloween party, Christmas party, some 
kind of a Valentine’s dance. 

An interesting fact on the Halloween 
parties, is that in 1956 we had our first 
Halloween party and our total attendance, 
I think, was fifty-five. We grew to the place 
where it was so large we had to have three 
Halloween parties, and wed have 160 to 175 
young people there. We used to have a “hall 
of horrors” in which we would turn out all 
the lights, and all the kids would have to walk 
through the hall of horrors and stick their 
hands in things like spaghetti, and catsup; 
and we’d tie even raw liver on doorknobs 
and made weird noises with chains and old 
record players, and blow winds with fans. The 
interesting thing was that the younger kids 
went through it easier than the high school 
kids. High school kids always seemed much 
more scared than the younger children. 

We also had a family night which met 
once a month with a potluck dinner. We had 
some kind of a program, such as a speaker 
from the University on child psychology, or 
on anthropology, or a lawyer. It was really 
kind of an adult education program. 

This was primarily the core of the program 
activities of the Center. As far as routine of 
operations was concerned, we never tried to 
build an institution. The future of the Colony 
in these years was so fluid, we never knew 
whether or not the Indian people were going 
to decide to trade the land for some other and 
build a new Colony, or decide to stay there 
and upgrade it. For that reason we made the 
Center program flexible. The policies were 
flexible; they moved with the needs of the 
people, and were not rigid. The Center staff 
did not maintain offices in the building, but 
rather visited the Colony or different people 
as needed. I used to use my house a great deal 
for meetings, both social and formal. And it 


was a strategy to get people out of the Colony 
and into a different environment. I think that 
had a great deal to do with the final decision 
to upgrade the Colony and to increase the 
motivation for better housing. 

The Church at the Colony 

One of the most successful projects that 
we ever had is the remodeling of the sanctuary, 
and this happened in 1960. The church met 
and agreed to spend $750 to purchase material 
to remodel the sanctuary. The sanctuary was 
a room about twenty-two feet in width and 
thirty-five feet in length. The front of the 
sanctuary was white plaster trimmed in dark 
mahogany wood. The ceiling was plaster and 
had become very smudged from the furnace 
(it was almost grey). The walls were grey 
plaster; floors were bare hardwood floors, and 
the pews were old pews and painted with a 
maroon enamel. The pulpit was a very old one, 
and the communion table was an old school 
desk. There were some drapes that were hung 
over the baptistery which were an old green 
color and very ancient. It really was not a very 
attractive room. 

Eighty people volunteered and put in 
over 3,000 man hours of work in ninety days 
to remodel the sanctuary. The front of the 
sanctuary was redone in native rock. Eight 
carloads of people went in eight different 
directions from Reno to get different 
colored rock. We worked the rock into the 
front of the sanctuary from the floor clear 
to the ceiling. And in the rockwork we 
incorporated a rock cross made out of gold 
rock from Virginia City, and some crossed 
arrows with real arrowheads imbedded into 
the rock, which is the symbol of friendship. 
We also had a grinding bowl and a grinding 
stone put into the rockwork, which was the 
symbol of bread. 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


49 


We bought brand new blue drapes; we 
got some mahogany plywood in a cherry 
color that completely covered the walls 
from the front clear around to the back at 
a height of eight feet. On the ceiling we put 
acoustical tile, a very attractive white design, 
and around the border, between the plywood 
and the ceiling we put ten plaques, which 
were Indian geometrical designs painted for 
us by one of the artists in the Colony by the 
name of Stanley Alvarez. Eight of the plaques 
were simply geometric designs of different 
tribes, but two plaques in the back of the 
sanctuary were of little Indian babies in a 
cradle board, which was the symbol of the 
future of the church. The beadwork over the 
basket symbolized whether it was a boy or a 
girl, in the Indian tradition, but for the white 
people, he separated them with pink and blue 
blankets, which we thought was traditional 
expression of Indian humor. 

In the middle of the back of the sanctuary 
we had a cross that was about seven feet in 
length, with a crossbar about four feet. It was 
made in a box, approximately eight inches 
in depth and eight inches across. Inside the 
box were fluorescent tubes. Covering the box 
was plate glass, covering the plate glass I had 
glued one-inch squares of Venetian glass in 
three colors, gold, blue and red, coming up 
and down—on the up and down part of the 
cross, the three colors made zigzag lines that 
looked like lightning, which symbolized the 
storm at the time of the crucifixion. And the 
crossbars with the same three colors, and in 
pretty much the same design; it looks like 
arrowheads going in opposite directions, 
which is the Washo symbol of peace. We 
chose the three colors because gold was for 
holiness, blue was for truth, and red was for 
love. When lighted, the cross gave a beautiful 
effect and our people were very proud of it. 
Mr. John Dressier did the electrical work, 


and Mr. Hilman Tobey made the box part 
of the cross. 

The First Baptist Church had moved from 
their old building into a new one and they 
gave us the carpet out of the old building, 
which was beautiful shades of brown, that we 
put on the floor. We completely remodeled 
the pulpit and the communion table with 
plywood, to which we attached some crosses 
that we made out of one-by-twos, that we 
painted with varnish and while still wet we 
sprinkled with glitter, and when dry, we 
sprayed with copper paint. It made a beautiful 
cross. Along the east wall of the sanctuary we 
placed the plastic round flower pots given by 
the people of the Flower Box. We sprayed 
those with copper, attached them to the wall 
and put artificial flowers in them. The big 
joke was they called me, “spray it with copper, 
Mathews”—anything that was standing still, 
we’d spray. All the hardware in the sanctuary 
was sprayed with copper and it made it stand 
out, and it looked very pretty, and the Indians 
got a big laugh out of that. 

One day that we were to dedicate it, 
we weren’t finished. The next day we were 
finished. We worked until three o’clock in 
the morning on a Saturday night into Sunday 
morning to finish, and by the time at two 
o’clock in the afternoon on Sunday that we 
dedicated it, it was finished. No other act of 
the Indians in the Colony did more to give 
them a feeling of pride in what they had done, 
or to give the outside community a feeling of 
hope in what could be done, and a real respect 
and appreciation for what the Indian people 
had done themselves, than the completion of 
this sanctuary. It is still considered to be one 
of the prettiest small chapels in Reno. 

Two very interesting activities of the 
church and center in our twelve years, I think, 
should be noted. One of them was—we used 
to have picnics all the time in the summer up 



50 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


at Lake Tahoe around Elk Point, especially 
around the Fourth of July, and it was really 
a day looked forward to by everyone. We 
went up and we had church together and 
communion together, and then wed picnic 
together, and then we swain and played 
baseball and that kind of thing all afternoon. 
Our people enjoyed this very much. Another 
interesting activity, once in twelve years, was 
a trip to San Francisco, which began as just 
an idea of a few people wanting to go to San 
Francisco and developed into thirteen young 
adults going. We traveled to San Francisco 
on a Saturday and attended the Ice Follies in 
the Winter Garden. We went to the Sinaloa 
Restaurant for dinner and a show. Spent all 
night in a motel, attended the Baptist Church 
that I used to work in, in San Feandro, on 
Sunday, and returned. The fact of getting out 
and away from the Colony and even Reno, 
and getting out and seeing other things was 
a new experience to some of those thirteen; 
some had been there before. But it was 
all a part of a strategy to change attitudes 
by opening windows, of knowing that the 
future of the people of that Colony was not 
confined to the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony, 
and eventually has led them to accept the fact 
that the future of the Reno-Sparks Colony is 
to be determined by those who live in it and 
not by those who live outside of it. For years 
they were told what to do, and the day is 
coming when they are saying, “This is what 
we are going to do.” And to a large extent, that 
is true today 

Not all things are successful. We were 
never really successful with consistent 
church attendance. A lot of reasons for 
this—during deer season, for example, you 
might as well forget it. We might have four, 
or five, or six people at church. As soon as 
deer season was over, it would jump up to 
thirty-five or forty But deer season is a time 


when you go deer hunting, and that is all 
there is to it. The best attendance was always 
on Thanksgiving, Christmas, and Easter, but 
the idea of consistent service was not known. 
In their old tradition, maybe four religious 
festivals a year, and morning and evening 
prayer. In other words, private devotions, 
devotions practiced by most people all the 
time. 

The need for Sunday consistent church 
was not generally accepted by the people in 
the Colony. However, most everyone knew 
what went on at church, and what was said 
within two or three hours after service, 
and the influence of the church service was 
much greater than attendance would signify. 
But the idea that Sunday was a day to go 
to church never has been, and still is not, 
accepted in the Colony. This used to disturb 
me a great deal, till it became obvious to me 
that, within an hour after church on Sunday, 
everybody in the Colony knew what I said 
anyway, via the grapevine. And by Monday 
it would be at Nixon, and by Wednesday it 
would be clear up to Owyhee; and if it was 
something highly significant or controversial 
it would be faster than that. 

I also began to realize that the old pattern 
of religious festival was not once a week on 
Sunday morning at eleven o’clock, but four 
times a year. And Indian people practice 
private devotions extensively, and the need 
for, or the pattern for—corporate worship— 
was not a part of the old culture. I’ve seen 
Mr. Dressier have evening devotions out 
watering the lawn at night, when if you 
walked up to him you would actually be 
disturbing his church service, and he is not 
alone in that practice. Indian people feel very 
close to the universe. This has not yet come 
to the place where they feel very close to each 
other in many ways, but that isn’t too much 
different from any other people either. 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


51 


We did institute two or three festive times 
that were really appreciated by the people— 
Maundy Thursday during Easter Week, where 
we had a special service in the sanctuary, 
taking out all the pews and putting in tables, 
and all sitting around a common table and 
reviewing the year and looking forward to 
the year to come, and having candlelight 
and music, and breaking bread together. We 
always had an Easter sunrise service followed 
by a breakfast, followed by an Easter service 
where the sanctuary has nearly always been 
jammed. One of the best Easter services we 
ever had was put on by the young people. 
One of the boys, Oscar Johnson Jr., painted 
about ten different pictures of the Easter story. 
As their part of the service, the story was 
told with the pictures and the young people 
explaining them to the congregation. They 
also built in the baptistery what looked like a 
tomb—the entrance to a tomb—and we had 
a very dramatic display of the Easter story at 
this time. 

I think one of the most interesting 
things to show the progress of personality 
development—we used to have problems 
with our Christmas program. The first year we 
were there we tried to put on a program and 
have the young people participate. The little 
children were perfectly willing to get up in a 
rhythm band or sing in front of the audience, 
but when they got to junior high school level 
we got no participation whatsoever. They 
didn’t want to be out in front, they were very 
shy—which happens at teenage time—and we 
couldn’t get anything out of them. 

So I finally devised an idea where I strung 
a large sheet from the floor of the platform 
to a wire that went about seven feet above— 
strung across above the platform, closed in 
by curtains. Behind the sheet we put a very 
bright spotlight, and right up next to the sheet 
I created silhouettes of the Christmas story, 


having the young people stand right in front, 
by the sheet and the spotlight would cast their 
shadows on it. We would change the scenes 
while someone would read the Christmas 
story with all the lights in the sanctuary out. 
We even made a donkey out of a carpenter’s 
horse, using a bathrobe tassel for the tail, and 
Mary was sitting on it. And from the front it 
looked just exactly like a donkey going off the 
screen. And for five or six years, this was the 
presentation of the young people at Christmas. 
They would not get out in front and recite or 
say a word. I didn’t really blame them because 
pandemonium would break loose in that 
sanctuary at the Christmas party. Kids would 
run all over, climb up the windows, open and 
shut the windows, bang the doors. We could 
get no parental control at all. 

By 1960, the young people put on a play 
and created all the scenery and made their 
own costumes, and got out in front and by 
this time, control had been obtained in the 
audience and it was just the difference of 
night and day. There was no difference here 
in this Colony, of this thing I am describing, 
than there would be any place, other than 
the fact that in the many years before no one 
had ever provided any opportunity for group 
work or programs like this that would provide 
personality development. One of the reasons 
why the dropout rate went down was because 
of this kind of thing, and there was a growing 
self-confidence in the youth. 

I also should say that I had a basic 
philosophy, and that I probably preached the 
same sermon a hundred times in a hundred 
different ways that I was there, and that is: 
that all people are sons of God, and in that 
truth should be enough confidence for us to 
live creative lives. Indian children used to tell 
me that they were “heck of a dumb,” or that 
they lived in a “heck of a shabby house,” or 
that Indians were just “heck of a no-good, all 



52 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


the time drunk.” I constantly reflected back to 
them that I knew better, that I had seen their 
tests at school, that I had heard them talk, 
that I had heard them reason, that—what’s 
wrong with being an Indian?—that they had 
survived for thousands of years before white 
people ever came. They were skilled in ways 
that other people were not skilled—and not 
everybody had the same skills—but they were 
skilled in ways that other people were not 
skilled, that there were about 200,000 different 
kinds of jobs in America. Surely we could 
find one that would be beneficial to them as 
individual. Constantly doing this—holding 
up hero figures like Chief Winnemucca— 
learning to laugh at ourselves. 

One time we put on a series of skits and 
performed these in public for an audience, 
one time of 350 people—spoofing the white 
peoples commercials on television. There was 
an Indian girl dragging two sticks with a boy 
on the back of it, and they said, “Let Chief 
Running-Hertz put you in the driver’s seat,” or 
“Chief Winnemucca’s pinenuts are the noisiest 
pinenuts in the world.” Or, we created what 
looked like a stream and a mother was down 
there trying to teach a girl to wash the clothes 
on the rocks, and the girl was saying, “Mother, 
I’d rather do it myself!” Humorous things 
like this made the point and was constantly 
beginning to build up self-confidence. 

I think we ought to add in some of 
the services of the church, some of the 
counseling that was done, and, particularly, 
one illustration of at least a probing for a 
technique. 

I had a young couple that came to me. He 
was white and she was Indian, and they had 
had a tremendous amount of marital troubles, 
and I guess that they camped on my doorstep 
about every third day for about a month or 
so. We did the normal counseling procedures 
and got it down to about once a week, and 


then finally about once a month. After a year 
I thought one night we really made some 
progress because I made a discovery that I 
hadn’t seen before. She came to me in great 
agitation because she thought he had been 
trying to kill her. So I got there and we talked 
the whole experience through. And it dawned 
on me that they were not communicating 
to each other in their gestures. The basic 
problem had been for a long time that they 
didn’t communicate to each other. They 
used to speak English to each other, but 
the words didn’t mean the same. And we’d 
gotten through that. But, I’ll give you the 
specific example of what the situation was. 
He was going to the University, and when he 
would be doing his homework she had the 
tendency once in a while to come around 
and be very affectionate. And one night he 
just exploded and told her to leave him alone. 
And she interpreted this as a rejection of her 
as a wife, and she started crying and sobbing 
and became hysterical. I have noticed many 
Indian girls and women, when they become 
hysterical, wifi go into a sound that almost 
sounds like a death rattle, and he got very 
scared, and he grabbed her and shook her 
real hard to get her out of her hysteria, and 
she thought he was trying to choke her to 
death.. When we went through this whole 
thing and I was able to show both of them that 
they were not only not communicating with 
words, but they were not communicating in 
their actions or in their gestures because of the 
two completely different backgrounds, then 
at least we reduced the counseling sessions to 
about once every three months, eventually—I 
think after five or six years of marriage—I 
don’t think it lasted, but they had come down 
the road a long ways in being able to meet and 
solve some of the problems. 

The normal counseling procedures of 
being a listener wifi not work with Indians, at 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


53 


least not the older type Indians, because they 
are the listeners. They can sit and out-wait 
anybody in beginning to talk, and the only 
way that I could ever function in this area 
was with questions and answers, reflecting 
back, statements and suggesting alternative 
solutions, and let them choose the one that 
they felt would be the most helpful to them. 

We did a considerable amount of 
employment, welfare, marital and family 
counseling as a part of the activity of the 
church. I should say that I appreciated, as long 
as I was in Reno, the great deal of freedom I 
was allowed by the American Baptist Home 
Mission Society. They saw my work as creative 
and as innovative, and they allowed as much 
of it as possible, and I can state there was 
very little outside influence or restriction. 
There was more of it from the local Baptist 
organizations—at least attempts to it. I wasn’t 
the kind that usually responded too well to 
control. 

One of the things I’ve always been 
disappointed in within church circles is the 
fact that most meetings of the churches 
(scheduled by people who are in the power 
structure of the church) are scheduled during 
the day, at the convenience of the ministers, 
when most of the people in the Indian Colony 
are of the laboring group of the town, and 
this excluded them from participating in 
the policy-making decisions. I tried, and 
have tried, and still am trying to get some 
of the board meetings of associations and 
conventions to meet at night so that they 
would be accessible to the laboring force. 

Observations on Indian Culture, 
Colony Leaders, and Tribal Policies 

Within the Reno-Sparks Colony there 
is a wide variety of attitudes, and they are 
not limited to any one tribe. They could 


best be categorized by what you would call 
“progressive,” “moderate,” “traditional,” and 
there will be representatives of each of the 
three attitudes in all tribes. The progressive 
Indian wants to take the best that the white 
culture has to offer and the best that the Indian 
has to offer and attempt to make something 
better than either one; the moderate would 
like to take the best of the Indian culture 
and a little of the white culture and to make 
something better than what now exists; and 
the traditional would like to reject all that is 
white and amplify everything that is Indian 
and to be separate and independent. 

The Indian people generally look at the 
white culture as being immoral. They feel that 
they are the righteous and moral people, that 
they are the true sons of God, that the white 
man is a thief who has stolen their land, that 
the white man’s laws therefore are only laws 
that were created by thieves, and that they are 
not obligated to obey them. Paiute Indians, or 
any Indians in the state of Nevada, prior to the 
coming of the white man, had no alcohol, no 
cuss words or swear words in Indian. They 
trained their children to be obedient, quiet, 
and not to be aggressive. It’s unknown of a 
Washo being warlike at all—in fact, most 
Indians used to have to dance for three days 
to get mad enough to fight. 

The old Indian culture is one of living in 
harmony with nature and with each other, is 
based upon mutual aid, is based somewhat 
upon clan. When the white man came to 
Nevada, the Indian was sovereign over all. He 
had survived for thousands of years without 
any help from the outside; he was fat on fish, 
pinenuts, deer, all kinds of roots and herbs, 
had his own system of healing, which was 
not unlike Christian Science in many ways, 
with sane medicinal potions, some magic. But 
when the white people came, they not only 
completely destroyed the Indian economy, 



54 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


they destroyed the Indian’s spiritual roots, 
and they destroyed their old system of 
knowledge and systems of education, and 
confronted them with a culture which was 
to a great extent upside down from theirs. 
Where the individual was valued in the 
white culture, the group was valued in 
the Indian; where expressiveness in words 
was valued in the white the ability to be 
silent was valued in the Indian. Where the 
majority ruled in the white, the decision had 
to be unanimous in the tribe. Where time 
was divided into small segments and time 
became a ruler to the white, to the Indian, 
time is in abundance and is not to be thought 
of in small segments, but in terms of long 
periods; and therefore the white people live 
too fast, busy themselves too much, die too 
soon, and never learn what life is all about, 
as far as the Indian is concerned. 

Into this situation, with the political setup 
as it was, I looked for a leader. And, one day 
I was driving down Reservation Road and 
saw a man come out of his house with three 
fishing poles, take his two boys and put them 
in the car at five o’clock in the afternoon, and 
head for the river. I knew the mother because 
she was a church member. So the next night I 
went to John Dressler’s house. Mrs. Dressier 
invited me in, and I introduced myself to 
John and I asked him if he would come to 
church on Sunday. He was the first person 
I’d ever asked personally, because I knew that 
Indians do whatever you asked them to do, 
even though reluctantly, and if I’d have wanted 
to, I could have gone and asked everybody 
in that Colony to come to church and they 
probably all would have, once. But I didn’t 
feel that that was the approach, that what 
we would do is take the small group that we 
had and try to build that group, and let that 
group grow of its own accord. If I had it to do 
all over, I might not have been as rigid about 


that and a little more pragmatic, because in 
the end, in twelve years, the original group 
had only grown about twice of what it was to 
start with in the church. The center group had 
grown ten times. 

But John did come to church, and he 
came again, and he came again, and I began 
to organize the church with a board. He came 
to the organizational meeting and they elected 
him as the moderator of the church board. 
The church had had no stewardship schedule; 
they just passed the plate, and during the year 
they might take in fifty dollars. And so we put 
it on a business-like basis and set some goals 
for the church. We drew up a budget that was 
about fifteen hundred dollars and asked the 
different families if they would contribute say 
fifty cents, or a dollar, or a dollar and a half, 
or two, or three, or four, or five a week. We 
did it at Christmas time, and we passed out 
Christmas cards to all the families, and on 
that card they wrote what their family would 
pledge to the church every week. We put all 
of the Christmas cards under the Christmas 
tree at the church Christmas party, and the 
first year they underwrote a budget of twelve 
hundred dollars. At the end of the year they 
had given twelve hundred dollars. The highest 
gift at that time was four dollars a week; the 
highest gift in 1966 by Indians had grown to 
ten dollars a week by one family. 

Mr. Dressier was employed by the 
Southern Pacific Railroad as a boiler-maker 
and had worked for them for nineteen years. 
His wife did domestic work, and was very 
intelligent. She was half Washo and half 
Basque. Mr. Dressier was a Washo, a graduate 
from Stewart. He was an expert welder. 
When the Southern Pacific yards moved out 
of Sparks, he thought he would get a two 
week’s vacation, but the next day Martin Iron 
Works called him and he went to work for 
them. When that job was over, he went to 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


55 


work for Reno Iron Works and still is their 
top welder. Since the time that Mr. Dressier 
became the moderator of the church, he has 
served for three terms as chairman of the 
Tribal Council, been the moderator of the 
Association of Baptist Churches of Northern 
Nevada, of which the Colony Church and the 
Stewart Church are the only Indian churches, 
and become the chairman of the Governor’s 
Indian Commission, the Chairman of the 
Inter-Tribal Council, a member of the 
Surgeon-General’s Committee on the Indian 
Health for the American Baptist Convention, 
and a chief steward of his union. Through the 
leadership of Mr. Dressier and the support 
that he got from others, his wife, Mr. Willis 
Moose, Mr. William Coffey, Sr., Mr. Willy 
Coffey, Jr., Mr. Willie Astor, Connie Hunter, 
Daisy Bird, Mr. and Mrs. Key Dale, Mr. and 
Mrs. Robert Hunter, Mr. Hilman Tobey, Mr. 
Vernon Newman, and others—both on the 
Council and supporting the Council—the 
Council has gradually grown to the place 
where it can transact business, set goals, 
accomplish what they set out to do. And all 
the time that I was in the Colony, Mr. Dressier 
was my chief advisor. I think every minister 
has what he calls a “right arm,” and mine 
would be John Dressier. 

Another very interesting person in the 
Colony is Mr. William Coffey, Sr. —a man 
who was crippled when he was young, always 
walked with a cane, one of the warmest, 
friendliest men that you would ever want to 
know. He has done all the handy work that 
ever needed to be done on the church. He 
went with me on an airplane flight to Detroit, 
Michigan, one time to attend a conference, 
and we drove a new car back. He has been 
with me many times to baseball games in San 
Francisco. He is one of the people that you 
could always depend upon when you needed 
something done. 


Mr. Coffey came to me one time with a 
problem with Social Security prior to age 
of sixty-five, and had been rejected by the 
local office. I tried a couple of times to find 
out why they rejected him, and all they 
said was that “he was capable of work.” So 
he went to Employment Security, and they 
made 105 attempts to place him but because 
of his educational background and his 
physical incapacity and the fact that he was 
an Indian, they were not able to place him. 
I took his case to Walter Baring when I was 
in Washington, D.C., on a trip on another 
matter. Mr. Baring got the case opened up 
immediately. They re-evaluated his physical 
condition and hired a top specialist in Reno; 
they added the educational background and 
the fact that he was an Indian to the criterion 
of eligibility, and within ninety days he was on 
Social Security and received back pay checks 
of something like thirteen hundred dollars, 
which I always appreciated Mr. Baring for, 
even though politically I probably disagree 
with Mr. Baring more than any other man in 
the state. In cases and problems like this he 
is a very warm, sympathetic man. 

We got similar help from Alan Bible on 
some of the projects, one of which I will 
discuss under civil rights. Mr. Bible has been 
very sympathetic to the Indian, and on one 
instance with regard to the public Health 
Service, went to work on the Phoenix office 
of the United States Public Health Service 
and got the whole health picture for Indians 
in Nevada upgraded. 

One of the things that we tried to do 
was to change the idea that “you wanted 
something for nothing.” This was the way 
the problem was stated, which was really 
never the problem. Indians really don’t want 
something for nothing; they’d just like to 
have what’s coming to them as human beings, 
which they’ve been denied. But the old style 



56 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


of missionary work, familiar to many, was the 
highly sympathetic, feeling-sorry approach, 
extremely paternalistic. 

Let me illustrate the tragedy, the pathos, 
the humor and frustration of missionary 
work. On Saturday night, when we lived in 
the rock house in the Colony, I heard a knock 
on the front door. When I opened the door 
an Indian woman named Ella, about forty-five 
years old and looked sixty-five, was standing 
there and swaying a little bit. She said, “Mr. 
Mathews, I need your help.” I told her to come 
in and she kinda staggered into the kitchen. I 
got her a chair and she sat down and I asked 
what was wrong. She said, “My husband hit 
me.” 

I said, “Where?” 

She said, “In the head.” 

So I looked at her head. The top was a 
mass of dirty, bloody hair. Dried blood and 
caked into a mat. So I got a hot towel and 
began to soften it up. The smell was out of 
this world. I asked her, when did this happen? 
She said Thursday. I asked her what he hit her 
with and she said stove wood. Well, it took 
me a half an hour to get down so I could 
see the wound. She had a big bump and a 
gash about three inches long. So I took her 
to the hospital. They cleaned her up some 
more, put some vaseline on it and told me it 
was too late to stitch it up. I took her home 
and the next night I found her drunk across 
the street leaning against a telephone pole. 
I took her back to the hospital, told them 
to call the Indian hospital in Schurz and I 
would talk to the doctor. He promised to 
have the men come up from Schurz and take 
her down there. She was there about three 
weeks drying out and then they brought her 
home. About a month later I was driving up 
Reservation Road one night when I saw an 
ambulance in front of her house so I stopped. 
I went in and she was in bed, covered with 


blood and screaming and cussing. I asked the 
attendant what had happened and he told me 
her husband had hit her with stove wood but 
she would not get onto the stretcher and go 
to the hospital. I walked over and said, “Ella 
what is the matter with you?” 

She looked up and said, “Hi, Mr. Mathews, 
he hit me again.” 

I said, “Well, now, you get on the stretcher 
this minute and you are going to the hospital.” 

She said, “Yes Mr. Mathews,” and did just 
that. The cussing had stopped and now she 
started to cry. She was very drunk. She said, 
“Mr. Mathews, I know the Bible, John 3:16,1 
have been bad, but Jesus loves me,” and then 
she started to sing. As they loaded her on the 
ambulance she was singing, “When the roll is 
called up yonder I’ll be there.” They took her 
to Schurz, she got better, but in six months 
she was dead from cirrhosis of the liver. The 
old time missionaries had taught her the Bible 
verse, had baptized her, taught her the hymns 
but they had never helped her to live and I 
never forgot that. Much of what I tried to do 
from then on was to try to prevent that kind 
of suffering. 

The central part of the old style program 
was in providing used clothing, candy for kids 
at Sunday school, and a big Christmas present 
to everybody. The only time that you’d ever 
see ninety percent of the Indian people at 
church was on Christmas Eve for the presents. 
We eliminated the idea of candy at Sunday 
school, but we used to provide refreshments 
at Vacation Bible School. We changed the 
Christmas program to be Christian Center 
oriented; this was primarily having parties 
in each club, with good presents provided by 
Baptist women throughout the United States 
and one big Christmas program to which 
everybody came, and everybody received a 
box of Christmas candy, but not a big handout 
for everyone. 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


57 


This caused some political problems. (The 
people in the Colony are very interesting. All 
of the politics in the Colony is not conducted 
by men.) Some of the women would choose 
up sides and argue and fuss and fight and try 
to disrupt things at the Center sometimes over 
it. Primarily the battle was always one between 
traditional against moderate or progressive 
people. As time went on, the practice became 
accepted. I think if it was changed today, that 
the traditional people would Tight the change 
because it has now become the pattern. 

For many years the Reno-Sparks Indian 
Colony had been factionated politically. 
The Colony is made up of Paiutes, Washos 
and Shoshones, which is a very interesting 
combination. Not only is it an urban 
reservation, but it is a multi-tribal reservation. 
And some of the old tribal hostilities would 
express themselves in political factionism. 

One of the most articulate Indians 
in Nevada, Dewey Sampson, lived in the 
Colony. He had a brother, Harry Sampson. 
Dewey, at one time, was an assemblyman 
representing the Nixon area in the Nevada 
State Legislature. He is a rather well-educated 
Indian man, very talented, and an absolute 
genius at playing on the factions within the 
Colony. When I first went to the Colony he 
made overtures toward me for friendship, 
and when I chose to be friends of everyone 
instead of one particular faction, he became 
an adversary. There is within my files letters 
that are as long as nine pages to the Senators 
from the state, vitriolic of nature, based upon 
no facts whatsoever, complete distortions of 
fact, which is the beginning used to cause me 
great consternation. But as time went on, and 
I realized that people paid no attention to the 
letters, I got so I didn’t either. 

It took me ten years to really understand 
what Dewey Sampson was trying to say. And 
I never did dislike him; I respected him, 


even though that feeling was not mutual. 
If I’d expressed it too strongly, the other 
Indian factions would have—I’d have all 
three factions opposed. He was a man of real 
talent. His basic thought was that Indians 
should have the right to govern themselves. 
What he was really trying to say was he didn’t 
want any interference from white people. He 
would take assistance as long as it would be 
of benefit to his faction, but anyone who was 
to give assistance to the Colony in general, he 
was opposed to. And from his own political 
point of view, this was probably justified. 

In principle, Mr. Sampson was correct 
in that Indians were capable of guiding their 
own political destiny and managing their own 
affairs. Within the context of his definition, 
if that had been done in the Colony it would 
always have been done only for the benefit 
of his faction and to the detriment of the 
rest of the people within the Colony. For 
twenty years he has made a consistent effort 
to kick everyone off the Colony except the 
Sampson tribe. This has created a great deal 
of insecurity among the adults in the Reno- 
Sparks Colony because they have no faith in 
the white man’s administration, and they have 
no way of knowing whether Mr. Sampson is 
capable of carrying out his threats of throwing 
everyone off the Colony or not. 

The real missing ingredient in all Indian 
affairs is any form of supreme court to 
which a tribal council can appeal, to get an 
enforceable final opinion. For the first five 
or six years that I was in the Colony, almost 
every tribal council meeting was taken up 
with an argument about the interpretation 
of one sentence in their constitution. And the 
Bureau, or the Department of Justice, or the 
Department of Interior, or anyone else was 
never willing to give an opinion of that one 
sentence that was final or enforceable. And 
for that reason, the tribal council was totally 



58 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


incapable of achieving any goals because all 
of their affairs went around in a circle. 

Politics in the colony is not much different 
than politics any place else. Campaigning 
is different—there is no loudspeakers, no 
speeches made, no handbills, but there is 
an awful lot of word-of-mouth, and there 
are dinners put on by different sides, and 
some competition to see who can put on the 
biggest bean feed or turkey dinner, prior to an 
election. There is always a tremendous battle 
about fraud at the elections. The losing side 
always claims that the other side voted people 
who weren’t eligible. And the election was 
never accepted by all factions as being final. 

I might mention that I never engaged 
much in partisan politics in the Colony 
between Republicans and Democrats. I just 
stayed out of that area. Maybe in the last 
election I at least let some people know where 
I stood, but there was not a high-powered 
effort at any time. 

Anyway, there is politics in the Colony; 
some of it’s tribal, some of it’s clannish, some 
of it—just happens. Give you an example of 
how politics in the Colony can operate— 
give you two or three examples. One of them 
would be on our Christmas program. As I 
have mentioned before, it used to be that 
everyone in the Colony got a Christmas gift 
at the church at the Christmas program. We 
changed that to dividing it up among the clubs 
that met, and we’d have Christmas parties 
within the clubs. Naturally, this excluded 
some people, and it became a political issue. 
Some people would come to church because 
they agreed with it, and other people would 
not come to church because they disagreed 
with it, and it had nothing to do with whether 
or not they believed in the religion or didn’t 
believe in the religion, but whether or not they 
agreed or disagreed with the manner in which 
the Christmas parties were handled. 


Another way in which politics in the 
Colony operate is by a grapevine. It’s very 
interesting how a campaign is run; there is 
no loudspeakers, and there are no circulars, 
but it’s done word-of-mouth, and it’s usually 
done at night, or it’s done on the telephone. 
And it’s done with, not necessarily rumors, 
but the positions of opposing candidates are 
known by their friends spreading what they 
say, rather than what they say themselves. 

Sometimes one group will put on a bean 
feed or a turkey dinner at Thanksgiving time, 
sometimes not. There has been a growing 
tendency for women to participate in politics. 
Part of this was the Washo influence, which is 
a matriarchal society Chairman of the tribal 
council at the present time is a woman, Mrs. 
Effie Dressier. But the three terms prior to her 
term, her husband was the chairman of the 
tribal council. 

Politics can get dirty. Sometimes a man 
who runs for an office—his employer will get 
an anonymous phone calls spreading all kinds 
of things from his opponents. The real issues 
are “bread and butter” issues, they are not 
philosophical issues, at all. In the old Paiute 
way—language, for example, there were no 
abstract words. It was pretty much a picture 
language and described events or actions. An 
example of that would be, if someone wanted 
to speak in Paiute the word “salvation,” they 
probably would have to paint a picture of a 
boy starting to fall over a cliff and his father 
grabbed him, rather than any word that 
stood for that kind of activity. Political issues 
therefore are face to face issues. 

The most gratifying event in the twelve 
years, I think, was the meeting between the 
Reno-Sparks Indian Colony Tribal Council 
and the City Council of Reno back in 
about 1964, I believe. It had to do with law 
enforcement, had to do with sanitation, had 
to do with jurisdiction, really, of who was 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


59 


responsible for what in the Colony. It came 
about after years of work, of trying to put the 
two power structures together, and primarily 
to get public recognition of the responsibility 
and power of the Indian council. It was a very 
interesting meeting in which Indians and 
white people sat across tables from each other 
and really expressed themselves and how 
they felt about things, and what they really 
wanted to get done. Some of the things were 
achieved. The city council did lend its power 
to better law enforcement and also to better 
water supply, did put some pressure on the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs to help improve the 
streets. As a side effect of it, I think some of the 
business people in town actually opened up 
some of the doors of employment to Indians 
to a greater degree than they had in the past. 
And I think that the Indian people understood 
what the town expected of them also, that they 
expected the Colony to be kept clean. And all 
the Indians really asked for in that was that 
they have the tools and the wherewithal to do 
it. There were all kinds of things explored, the 
possibility of garbage pickup... I think there 
was a ten-point program that the Indians 
presented and I cannot remember all of those. 
But, out of it, the most important thing was 
the fact that they sat together and talked. 

Of course, one of the out-group in the 
political situation in the Colony made an 
attack upon me in the paper, saying that 
Mathews was “buttin’-in.” It got nowhere 
because the vast majority of the people of the 
Colony knew that I was only helping bring 
this meeting about and not dictating it at all. 
The Indian people themselves decided what 
they were going to say and they said it very 
well. From that, other meetings have come, 
and from that, some of the progress in the 
Colony today such as street lights, a full-time 
policeman, general clean-up campaigns, and 
eventually a new park is coming. 


I should mention that in that meeting 
with the city council that I think the original 
triggering of the meeting had to do with some 
kind of vandalism, and a very strong reaction 
of the businessmen on Second Street to a lot of 
broken windows, and a very strong statement 
by someone in town, I don’t remember 
whether it was the chief of police or the city 
manager, or someone, that law enforcement 
in that area was impossible. So I tried to get 
a meeting because I wanted to show the city 
council that the Tribal Council was just as 
concerned about the problem as they were, 
that they were not apathetic or permissive 
about it. And, in my recollection, there were 
three delays in the meeting over a ninety-day 
period. I think we finally got the meeting 
scheduled the fourth time, and that was the 
meeting that was actually held. And I think 
one of the reasons that we finally had it was 
that they invited two or three of the County 
Commissioners into it, too. I think Specs 
McKenzie was there; and if my recollection 
is correct, so was Howard McKissick, Sr., and 
this gave a little broader base to the meeting 
because, actually, law enforcement comes 
under the county. 

Indian-Police Relationships 

One of the critical problems with 
regard to the whole attitude of the Colony 
towards the white community was the 
police department. When I first lived in the 
Colony, I can remember, night after night, 
seeing the paddy wagon from downtown 
loaded up with Indians, bring them out to 
the Colony and just kick them out in the 
road. I’ve even seen them get up and walk 
right back downtown. I heard stories of 
police killing Indians. On one occasion I 
called to the middle of Reservation Road to 
find an Indian who had been thrown out of 



60 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


the paddy wagon with his head two inches 
from tire tracks that were in the snow. I 
loaded him in my station wagon, took him 
home, put him to bed, and by that time, I 
was pretty angry and didn’t stop until I got 
to the chief of police’s office. At that time it 
was Ted Berrum. I went in and almost broke 
my fist on his desk, and in a loud voice said, 
“Dammit, this is going to stop!” 

And he looked up and said, “Reverend, 
what’s the matter?” 

And when I told him, he said, “Dammit, 
this is going to stop,” too. 

It was the beginning of a change. There 
was a beginning effort to realize there might 
be a reason why about forty percent of the 
adults in the Colony had a problem with 
alcohol, and that when they drank, sometimes 
the hostility would come out in some; in 
others, sleepiness and tiredness would come 
out; and in others extreme joy and affability 
or sociability would come out. 

I took it as a part [of my job] to become 
interested in the police department’s problems 
too. It was during this time that Reno was going 
through a political upheaval. Mayor Harris 
had been rather friendly to the Colony—his 
meat company would provide meat sometimes 
for their potluck dinners. He became terribly 
concerned about the smell from the sewer 
plant near the Colony; a couple of times he 
even made some phone calls to the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs concerning water problems and 
road problems, and was genuinely concerned 
about doing something to help the citizens 
of the Reno Colony, even though they were 
outside the city limits of Reno. (The Colony 
lies right on the city limit line and really is 
in Washoe County) But the police problem 
downtown, especially in the Lake Street- 
Commercial Row area, was a police problem 
for Reno. And the Wagon Wheel Bar, which 
was the favorite hangout. One time they found 


an Indian who was dead, laying on the bar. He 
had been dead so long rigor mortis had started 
to take effect, but he had a full bottle of beer in 
his hand which meant that he had just bought 
one, and they sold it to him. It was a terrible 
health problem for Reno. 

At that time the political attitude, and the 
police attitude, was that Indians are going to 
drink and we might as well have a place for 
them to drink and confine it to that; and as 
long as we can keep them out of the big clubs 
downtown, that’s the best we can do. And, that 
was the strategy. 

With the change of administration 
to the Bud Baker administration, with 
all of the political upheavals, with Mr. 
Raggio, the district attorney and the chief 
of police, Mr. Gregory, the situation in the 
police department deteriorated. There was a 
policeman on the force who was known for 
brutality—the Indians used to complain to 
me all- the time about him. I was never really 
successful in doing anything until Mr. Bud 
Baker was defeated, and I guess really what 
happened wasn’t so much that he was defeated 
as it was they had gotten Elmer Briscoe for 
chief of police. 

Mr. Briscoe is half Irish and half Mexican 
and has some feeling in this area. At that 
time, I was chairman of the Social Action 
Committee for the Washoe County Ministerial 
Association. I paid a visit to Mr. Briscoe, told 
him that the Association was going to support 
him in his efforts to clean up the police 
department after it had been scandal ridden 
through a burglary ring of policemen, but 
that I also wanted to see improvement in the 
treatment of Indians, which he promised me 
would happen. 

I’d become aware of this policeman—I 
guess we might as well say who it was 
because it is a matter of public record— 
Robert Taelour, who has been accused of 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


61 


extreme brutality. It has been reported that 
Mr. Taelour would take his blackjack, if he 
would get a new one, and take three or four 
Indians who were drunk down to the river 
and try it out on them. He was charged with 
kicking one Indian woman in vital places, and 
people who worked with Mr. Taelour in the 
police department generally were very much 
opposed to his methods. 

I can’t remember exactly what triggered it; 
it was a long series of things. I had become the 
chairman of the Nevada Advisory Committee 
to the United States Commission on Civil 
Rights, and became aware of problems 
Negroes were having with the police in Las 
Vegas, and sane here in Reno but not as much. 
But I think one of the things that triggered my 
action was when the son of the deputy sheriff 
at Nixon, Warren Tobey, was beat up in the 
elevator of the police department and Mr. 
Tobey came to me complaining. So, I picked 
up the phone one day and called Robert 
Kennedy, who at that time was Attorney 
General; I didn’t get him, but I did get his 
assistant in Washington, D. C. And I told him 
that there was a tremendous problem of police 
brutality in the Reno police department, 
and with Mr. Taelour in particular. Arid that 
began a complete FBI investigation in which 
I participated in trying to help to get some 
of the witnesses who received the effects of 
brutality. 

The police department could not find the 
girl who everybody remembered being kicked 
so brutally. I went down into the identification 
bureau with Captain Seevers, and first we 
thought we had the right one from one name 
given, and went out and interviewed her and 
became convinced that it wasn’t her. The 
Indians were very reluctant to talk because 
they were afraid of recrimination, but one 
day I happened to talk to Reginald Sampson, 
who was Dewey Sampson’s boy, who was a 


security guard at Harold’s [Club] and he said 
he thought that the girl they were looking 
for was up in Klamath Falls, and I think he 
gave me some indication of one of her names 
at one time. I went back down to the I.D. 
bureau and worked for about an hour in the 
time span that we knew that she was in jail, 
going through people who were there that 
day. I finally pulled out her card, and Mr. 
Seevers and I took it into Elmer Briscoe. He 
turned it over to the FBI, and they went up 
and interviewed her and got enough to take 
that evidence, plus some more, to the federal 
grand jury. 

The federal grand jury was empanelled 
in Carson City under Judge John R. Ross and 
eventually Mr. Taelour was brought to trial. 
I’ve talked to Chief FBI Agent L. J. McGee 
and he told me that he never worked harder 
on a case in his life. The police department 
was having terrible trouble with some of the 
evidence. I don’t know whether it was internal 
politics within the department or what. But 
they ended up with a hung jury and Judge 
Ross berated all of the witnesses because it was 
evident that witnesses on one side or the other 
were committing perjury, and they never 
could find out which one—which side it was. 
Mr. Peter Echeverria was the attorney for Bob 
Taelour and did a masterful defense job, and 
he was actually more than the prosecution 
could cope with. The result of the federal case 
was that nothing happened. 

But the chief of police fired Mr. Taelour 
anyway, and that case was brought before 
the civil service commission. Squire Drendel 
was appointed as special chairman to sit in 
judgment of it. I attended, I think, all the 
sessions of that case, which was a very wild 
affair, and the civil service commission upheld 
Mr. Briscoe’s firing of Mr. Taelour. 

One of the problems involved here was 
that Bob Taelour’s brother is the chief of 



62 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


police of Elko, highly respected within the law 
enforcement community in Nevada. 

Let me put in a little something here 
because it’s very interesting. At this time, 
I was president of the Community Service 
Council for Washoe County. (This is just a 
little bit before either one of those trials.) 
A man by the name of Bill Miller bought 
the Riverside Hotel and put a show in the 
Riverside called “Wild Horse Review” which 
was a lewd a show as ever’d been in Reno. 
There were some people on the Council that 
got pretty upset about it. A group of us from 
the Council, including some ministers, and 
some husbands and wives, members of the 
Council, went and viewed the show. And it 
was more than burlesque because there was 
actual—some of the gals were actually doing 
stimulation of themselves on the stage, or 
simulated, and it was beyond the bounds 
of anything that had ever been in Reno. So 
we made a protest and not much happened. 

I called up Pete Echeverria one night (he 
was a state senator) and asked if he would go 
with me. Pete said he would, and he brought 
along Howard McKissick, Jr. We walked in, 
and asked for the table right down at the 
front of the stage, and in the middle of the act 
Pete took out a small spy camera and started 
taking pictures. One of the girls spotted him, 
and when we left, they asked him for the 
film, and he said, “To hell with them.” It had 
been advertised “No Cameras Allowed,” and 
he said, “You show me one law in the world 
that says I can’t bring a camera into here.” 

I don’t know all that happened about 
it, but I do know that I had also talked to 
Roy Torvinen, and I know that the City 
Council passed an ordinance against any 
type of this activity, and spelled it out in 
such a way that not only would this have 
been unlawful, but any kind of a great to-do 
about homosexuality on the stages in Reno 


would be illegal. And some of the financial 
community in Reno began to put pressures 
on the Riverside Hotel and demanded 
immediate payments of bills, etc., until they 
forced the closing of the show, and Bill Miller 
was out of the Riverside Hotel. 

As an example of my cooperation with 
the police department let me tell you the 
following: 

One day I was in the Chief’s [Briscoe] 
office when he got a call from the FBI. When 
he hung up he said, “They think that a jail 
escapee is some place in the Indian Colony. 
Do you think you could find him?” I said I 
would try. I went out to the church, sat down 
and tried to figure out where he would be if 
he was there. I settled on two places, I got in 
the car and went down to the road to where 
Edie and Bob Hunter lived which was next 
door to one of the places I picked. I asked 
Edie if she had seen a strange white man 
around. 

She said, “He is next door, they won’t feed 
him, he is all around trying to beg bread.” 

I knew we had him. I called the chief 
and told him where he was. Pretty soon 
they called me and asked me to come down 
to the station. I went down and into a room 
filled with cops and FBI men. They asked me 
again where he was and I showed them on 
a map they had. I then described the house. 
What it was like inside and out, and told 
them the Hunters had a baby in their trailer. 
It was now dark. So they put on bullet proof 
vests, and got their guns. They had pistols, 
rifles, shotguns, tear gas guns and masks, 
the whole bit, and there were nineteen of 
them. I asked to go along but they said I had 
to stay in the car. I went out with the chief 
and he parked on Mill Street and he took off. 
They were going to move the Hunters and 
baby out first. Pretty soon they were back 
and they said, “We got him.” When they got 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


63 


there one of the Indians was on the way out 
to the outhouse and a cop stopped him and 
showed him a picture of the man and asked 
if he was there. The Indian said, “Yes, get him 
out, he stay three days and then we no feed 
him, but he stay anyway” The chief and Mr. 
McGee—the head FBI man—broke down 
the door and found their man asleep on the 
couch in his shorts. 

A couple of weeks later a couple of the 
FBI men came to my house and told me that 
J. Edgar Hoover wanted to thank me and 
gave me a small reward. They said that this 
man who had escaped from the Reno jail was 
very dangerous, had threatened the families 
of the FBI agents and that they had been 
spending $1,000 per day on stakeouts and 
they were very appreciative. Later the Reno 
police department made me an honorary 
police detective with a badge and all, for this, 
the help on the Taelour case and the fact that 
I always said the benediction at the annual 
police show. 

The Tribal Council: 

Insight into Indian Methodology 

The tribal council meetings that I have 
attended—and I didn’t attend too many on 
purpose. I didn’t want anyone to think there 
was undue influence, and I also wanted 
to give an impression that I trusted and 
respected them, that they didn’t need me, and 
I think this was valid. But the tribal council 
meetings that I have attended were very 
interesting. In some ways they are very much 
like a Quaker meeting. At the beginning of 
the meeting there is a lot of talk, but when 
the meeting is called to order it becomes 
very still. The difference between an Indian 
meeting and a Quaker meeting is, during the 
discussion time, the discussion can get very, 
very heated in an Indian meeting. Now in the 


decision-making time, it’s very much like a 
Quaker meeting. What they will do is bring 
up an item on the agenda to test the reaction 
of the people in the audience. 

Let’s take an example of that. They will 
say, for example, “Could we get city water?” 
And there’d be discussion that can get very 
heated. Then on whether or not their own 
water isn’t better than city water, and isn’t 
their pump better than somebody else’s 
pump, and isn’t their water as clean, etc. 
And then, if they finally are convinced that 
the city water is better than their water and 
is desirable, some kind of assignments are 
made to different members of the council 
or to people in the audience, who will go 
out and gather facts. And the way they’ll do 
that is, they’ll go to people that they know on 
the job, and in casual conversation they will 
pump that person about city water, and they 
might casually drop into the courthouse, 
and casually, in the middle of another 
conversation, ask the county clerk about 
taxes or rates. Or they’ll find some friend 
who knows a friend who works in the power 
company and they’ll find out what the rates 
are and what the cost of installation might be. 
And they’ll go direct to the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs and ask for specific information, but 
they won’t accept that. They’ll go around and 
try to get their own information and double 
check what the Bureau has to say. And at the 
next meeting in this fact-gathering process, 
they even might write letters to congressmen, 
or to somebody, or they might even talk 
to somebody up at the university. They’re 
doing that more now than they used to. At 
the next meeting they will ask, “Is anybody 
ready to report on what he knows?” and 
unless the man feels that he has all the facts, 
he’ll say “No.” And that will go on, meeting 
after meeting, until everybody who has an 
assignment is ready to report, completely. 



64 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


And on that night, they will put all the facts 
on the table, and then begins the planning 
process, and time is absolutely not a factor. 

Then someone will make a suggestion of 
another plan, and they’ll go out and do the 
same thing all over again. They’ll gather facts 
and try to test what they think that plan is. 
And they’ll come back, and if they can’t get 
that plan worked out perfectly, they’ll wait 
for somebody else to suggest an alternative. 
And they might have to go through the 
process of checking the alternative out. This 
might take three months; it might take a year, 
might take five years; it makes no difference. 
The night that they have everything about 
that total project known and planned in 
detail so that they know exactly what’s going 
to happen when they begin to do it, that 
night it will be known because when they 
sit there quietly thinking about it, it will get 
very still in that meeting. The chairman will 
then, if there is no tension in the meeting 
whatsoever, the chairman will know that 
the time has come to make the decision. He 
will ask for the reports, and he will ask for 
the plan, and usually at that time it will be 
worked out in such detail that there be no 
questions, and usually no vote will be taken 
because it’s a silent consensus and everybody 
knows that they’ve arrived. And, they’ll go 
ahead and do it, and they never have to do it 
over. All the evaluation of projects are done 
prior to their institution and not as they go 
along. They’re different in terms of process. 
They don’t learn as they go along-, they learn 
before they start a project. 

Sometimes it’s frustrating to work with 
these people. It’s frustrating when the two 
systems don’t mesh gears, and what’s really 
frustrating is how the Bureau will manipulate 
those two differences so nothing happens. 
And what has happened lately is that the 
Indian people have gotten so much more 


knowledge of the non-Indian community that 
they can actually function faster. This fact¬ 
gathering process doesn’t take near as much 
time as it used to, so the meshing of the two 
is getting a little easier. They are getting much 
more fluent in their communication of what 
they think and what their ideas are, and what 
their desires are. Their own decision-making 
processes are much more rapid. 

Television is making a great change. 
Indians in the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 
enjoy the top entertainment in the world, 
just like they were at Caesar’s Palace or the 
Copacabana. There’s all kinds of educational 
programs on television that they watch. They 
learn a fantastic amount of facts, information 
and data, from watching television and that, 
in turn, aids in their own decision-making 
process. I’m not so sure that ultimately the 
two systems can work very well together— 
the time factor. They still say, you know, the 
white man lives too fast and dies too soon, 
and he never knows what life is all about. 
They could be right. Most of the businessmen 
I talked to agree with them, but nobody 
changes. Even the Indians don’t change the 
other way, either. 

Indian Humor; Indian language— 
the Communication Gap 

I think one of the funniest stories that 
can be told as an example of Indian humor, 
is that out near Pyramid Lake there is a small 
flood control dam that’s related to the whole 
Truckee River complex, called Numana Dam. 
And what happened, I imagine in my own 
mind, was that they got Indians to help them 
build it. And when they got through, they 
asked them, “What shall we call this thing?” 
And one of the Indians said, “Well, let’s call it 
Numana Dam,” and so they did. And today, 
if you go and look on all the maps, that’s the 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


65 


name of it—Numana Dam. And the literal 
translation of that is “goddam.” 

And, what’s doubly funny about that, 
which is the stinger in it, is that there are 
no swear words in Paiute. The worst that 
they ever called anybody was a dog, and 
very seldom that. The Paiutes were trained 
to show real mutual respect of each other, 
and there was just no dirty talk of any kind 
in their language. One of the things that 
the older people object to today, in the 
Americanization of Indian youth, is that they 
become dirty and wild and disrespectful, and 
not only of parents but of each other, and of 
other people. 

[There is] a very deep sense of sacredness 
of everything, according to the Washo. The 
Paiute is much more individualistic than the 
Washo. The Washo has a greater sense of 
community, a greater sense of group spirit, 
and, of course, the Washo is a matriarchal 
[tribe]. The Washo, incidentally, has an idea 
of a supreme being. They have an old story 
the Jesus visited them about 1,500 years 
ago, and when I asked them what He told 
them, the answer is, “He told us to love one 
another.” And as a missionary, I always felt 
there was no use to try and improve on that. 
I just accepted it and discussed it as a part 
of our faith. 

I think it is interesting that there are no 
prepositions or conjunctions and there are 
no abstract words in Paiute. It is a picture 
language. 

We started a little newspaper one time 
and I asked for the word for “news.” They 
debated for a week and finally came back and 
told me, “hemana wa hanah.” What is that? 
“Something told.” They say really what it 
means is “when we all get together and talk.” 
Gambling in the old days was the newspaper; 
they used to all get together in a central place 
to play the stick game and they shared all the 


gossip and news that happened up in their 
particular areas. 

The lack of preposition in the native 
language spills over in English. The kids 
never “go to the store,” they just “go store.” 
When they’re excited, in the Reno Colony, 
their slang always includes “heck-of-a” like, 
“heck-of-a-good,” or “heck-of-a-no-good,” or 
“heck-of-a-shabby.” And they used to always 
want to go some place so they “get out and 
run round.” 

Some of the interesting ways in which 
communication happens—I’ll give you an 
example of that. They had a meeting one 
time of the Tribal Council, about ten years 
ago, in the Reno Colony, and the KDOT 
radio station had a broadcasting antenna 
immediately behind the Reno Colony, and 
the access to it was by a narrow dirt road at 
the extreme northeast corner of the Reno 
Colony. They had to have right-of-way 
permission, and they came and wanted to 
know how much the Tribal Council wanted. 
The contract was over, and they wanted to 
know how much they wanted to renew it. 
They offered twenty-five dollars a year, and 
sat, and the Indian people of the Council sat 
and never said a word—for five minutes— 
never said a word. And finally, one of them 
turned to the other one and said, “Didn’t we 
have a contract one time with one company 
that wanted to go through there and they paid 
us twenty-five dollars for ninety days?” And 
the other one said, “Yes,” and then they sat 
there for five minutes—ten minutes. 

Finally the man from KDOT turned to 
me and says, “What’s happening?” 

And I said, “They already told you the 
price.” 

And he says, “What?” 

And I said, “Offer them a hundred dollars 
for the year.” So he did, and they took it, and 
that was the way it worked. 



66 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


I found that Indians avoid specific 
questions. They don’t like to pin anybody 
down. If they can get business transacted on 
the fringe of the problem rather than at the 
core of it, they’d much rather do it that way. 
When they’re going to make a point, they’ll 
start way off to one side, and you can figure 
out where they’re going and bring it up, you 
know, indicate that you know what it is, then 
the discussion ceases. Kind of interesting. 

Great kidders, they would test people 
by telling a he, and see if you could guess 
it, if you could catch it. And if you couldn’t, 
they’d, you know, string you along for a long 
time, just to find out how good they are at 
it. And if you said, “I don’t believe that,” the 
standard reply was, “Oh, I just say,” which 
I think is interesting. The phrase for “I am 
kidding you” was “Oh, I just say.” 

Another of the funny stories was, I was 
down in Dresslerville one night, and I was 
talking to John Dressler’s uncle, who was a 
very old man, about seventy-five or eighty, 
with a very bright sense of humor. I asked 
him if he’d ever been up in an airplane, and 
he said, no, he fell off a horse once. 

I think when you’re working within 
a bi-cultural situation, that naturally you 
develop skills of communications. Recently, 
up at the University of Nevada, we had a 
training session with some Ph.D.’s from 
UCLA who were training nonprofessional 
aides in the poverty program. And on this 
particular occasion, we had forty recipients 
on the poverty program who were doing 
pick and shovel work and being paid for 
it out of poverty funds. The people from 
UCLA worked all morning on their latest 
techniques of group action, which was to 
have everybody get up, first, and tell who 
they were and a little bit of their history, and 
then they started putting up on the piece of 
paper on the wall what the group thought 


were the real needs that they had, or some 
problem that they’d like to have solved. And 
they went on, and on, and on, and on, and 
on. 

Finally, one of the Indians raised his 
hand, and he said, “Mr. Mathews, what’s 
going on here?” 

And I said, “Well, what do you mean?” 

And he said, “You know, we feel heck- 
of-a-shamed.” “We don’t—lot of guys here 
tell me they don’t want to get up and tell 
what—about themselves. They did it, but 
they’re getting a little angry because they 
don’t know why.” 

So I asked permission from the fellows 
from UCLA, and I got up and I said, “I’ll 
tell you what’s happening here.” I said, “You 
know, when you go out and gather pinenuts, 
the pinenut has a very tough shell on it and 
you have to crack it in order to get the meat. 
Well,” I said, “the men so far have been trying 
to crack the shell of fear around you so that 
when they get to the meat of the problem of 
wanting to know what the real problems are 
that you will be willing to tell them.” 

“Oh, okay,” and from then on it was fine. 
You know, they could relate to that. There 
was immediate comprehension of what I was 
talking about. Using the illustration of the 
pinenut, which was familiar to them, they 
recognized their own hard shell, because 
they even expressed it, and that it had to be 
broken down, and from then on it was great. 

When I first went to the Colony—I don’t 
know whether missionaries or some people 
have a special thing added, but when they 
would talk to me, I could catch the inner 
meaning of what they would say, even 
then. And what I usually did was reflect it 
back to them. I kept trying to say it back in 
different ways until they said, “That’s what 
I mean.” What I had to learn to do was not 
in understanding what they said, because I 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


67 


did that, but learning to say it back so they 
understood that I understood exactly 

Relationships between the Colony 
and Welfare Organizations 

The first contact I had with any welfare 
people was with Barbara Coughlan. She, 
Dwight Nelson, Marvin Piccolo, Neil Scott 
and a couple of counselors, and Mr. Rosaschi 
used to have lunch together about once a 
week over in Reno High School when wed 
share problems and successes and failures 
and some techniques. I always thought that 
that was very worthwhile—it lasted a couple 
of years. I got to know Virginia Starkweather 
rather well. At this point there was also a 
worker for Miss Coughlan by the name of 
Miss Harriet Lee, who was probably one of 
the most effective welfare people they ever 
had in Washoe County, very well educated 
and very progressive, who used to attend 
these meetings. And from it there was 
some involvement with the Mental Health 
Association, which never seemed to get off 
the ground, and I don’t think has to this day. 

From my experience, welfare people 
in Washoe County had little knowledge of 
Indian ways, and were rather ineffective 
working (as case work) with Indians, because 
of their lack of knowledge or sensitivity to the 
cultural differences. 

I have more knowledge of the Indian’s 
view of them than I do of their view of the 
Indian. The Indian saw the welfare people as 
just another place to gather. In the old days, 
they used to go out and hunt for deer and 
gather pinenuts and roots; and in these days, 
they go out to the welfare to gather the money 
to buy food, and they saw welfare people as a 
“source” for the gathering process for needs. 
There were some feelings of hurt pride, of 
having to take welfare, but not too much; 


[rather it was] a kind of a price the white man 
pays for renting our land. There was very little 
guilt attached to illegitimate children, a very 
high degree of ADC recipients When I first 
went to the Colony, and as I’ve stated before, 
we’ve reduced that about seventy-five to 
eighty percent with indirect methods. 

The welfare department also hired an 
Indian up in Owyhee, a woman, Mrs. 
Leah Manning, who in turn became kind 
of an interpreter to the rest of the welfare 
department for Indian social problems. 
Probably she has done as much as any other 
person in the whole state to help, at least in 
the welfare community. 

Concerning Barbara Coughlan, I had 
limited personal contact with her outside of 
those weekly meetings and some contact down 
in the halls of the legislature. My personal 
impression was of a highly efficient, executive 
woman, very absolutist in her thinking, very 
uncompromising in her positions. I don’t 
know how effective she was in dealing with 
welfare recipients. She was a pretty good 
campaigner in getting the more liberalized 
welfare laws in the state established, in trying 
to up-grade the level of competency of the 
staff and in administrating of her department. 
I think her downfall came because she was not 
politically astute, that to compromise and to 
arrive at a position this session which might 
lead to her ultimate goal the next session was 
not her modus operandi—she wanted one 
hundred percent of what she wanted now, and 
eventually this led to her dismissal. 

I always felt that the worst welfare people 
I ever met in my life were in the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs. There was a Mrs. Slater who 
was there for a long time, and I’m not sure 
that all the problems can be blamed on the 
people as much as the system on which they 
had to operate. She was a dedicated person 
and did understand Indians and did have 



68 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


sympathy, but she had no resources. Very 
little money, 96,000 square miles of territory 
to operate within, very small staff, and she 
operated pretty much upon the “shed given up 
technique. Many times shed just throw up her 
hands and do nothing because she couldn’t 
figure out anything to do. 

I think the most angry I got with a welfare 
group was—I have never felt that at the time 
of death that it is a time to argue bureaucratic 
law. We had a very tragic death in the Colony 
of a teen-age boy who was murdered. The 
family came to see about Stewart helping with 
the funeral expenses, which is a policy. And 
Stewart stated that they could not help them 
with those expenses because he didn’t die on 
the reservation. He died in the ambulance on 
the way to the hospital. And I asked them to 
prove it—that he wasn’t dead when they put 
him in the ambulance, and they couldn’t do 
that—he was dead on arrival. And I really 
couldn’t understand why I had to go and tell 
parents that they couldn’t get any money from 
the Bureau to bury their murdered teen-age 
son because of four or five blocks difference 
in location of land where death occurred. 
And I really put a lot of heat on that. I never 
did get the policy changed. I think that one 
of the men in the Colony loaned the family 
the money and I don’t know if he ever did 
get it back. But I’ve never been as angry in 
the whole time that I was in Reno as I was 
on that situation. And have said so in more 
ways than one. 

I have been angry with law enforcement 
people. Sometimes I’ve felt their criminal 
investigations were more efficient when nine 
crimes was committed by an Indian than when 
the crime was committed against an Indian. 
We had a boy who was shot on the grounds 
of the Isbell Construction Company There 
was conflicting testimony. The findings of the 
coroner and the justice of peace were that it was 


justifiable, and I talked to some eye witnesses 
and shared the information from these eye 
witnesses with the police, and their testimony 
was never considered. There was indication the 
boy was shot in the back while running, with 
the testimony of the man who did the firing 
that he had been jumped upon and he fired 
when the fellow had him by the arms choking 
him. There was conflicting testimony about 
that by the funeral director, too. In my presence 
the sheriff’s office told the funeral director to 
“keep his damn mouth shut.” 

But what I’m trying to convey here is the 
frustration that you have when you are the 
catalyst, or the liaison person, between two 
communities. You really begin to identify 
with the community you are trying to help. 
You try to remain as objective as you can, but 
on the scale of powers in Washoe County, a 
missionary to Indians is pretty low, just one 
step above the Indians, or maybe none at all. 
On the other hand, I’ve found times when law 
enforcement people showed great sympathy 
for the problem. They really did not function 
in a frame of mind that was very optimistic 
about solving the problem, and they kind of 
operated in a climate of despair, either out 
of ignorance—primarily out of ignorance, in 
all ways. I remember one time when some 
boys broke into the Center and broke about 
nineteen windows, and they called me and 
they called the sheriff at the same time. When 
we arrived, the sheriff looked around and 
said, “How in the hell can you put up with 
this mess?” Well, you know, it didn’t bother 
me near as much as it bothered him. But it 
did tell me, you know, that he couldn’t have 
put up with it. 

A great deal of so-called crime committed 
by Indians was their point of view—their sense 
of humor. The boys used to go downtown and 
they’d steal bicycles. And I’d ask them why 
they did it, and they said, “Well, it was there, 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


69 


and it was unlocked, and if the white kids want 
to leave their bikes around unlocked with us 
around, they deserve to have them stolen.” 
And theyd give them back. They’d just take 
’em and it was fine; they had no more feeling 
of a sense of property belonging to them once 
they had it in their possession than they did 
when they took it. They just used it, which is 
an interesting problem for law enforcement 
and judges. 

I did find in Washoe County great 
sympathy of the judges toward Indians. They 
felt terribly frustrated knowing what to do. 
They were very keenly aware of the cultural 
differences and the value system difference, 
and they usually tried to render a decision that 
they thought was in the best interest of the 
Indian, something that would let him know 
that what he did was not acceptable, but that 
he wasn’t completely condemned for it. They 
also tried to find a solution that would help 
him not have to do it again. 

The most difficult cases were the child 
custody cases where they had to take children 
away from parents and place them in foster 
homes, and to do that they had to have 
testimony of even relatives, and for one 
Indian to testify against another one is next 
to impossible, and yet at times they knew the 
situation was so desperate they had to, and 
they would find ways of telling the judge that 
they approved of what he was doing without 
actually saying it in so many words. They 
usually would say to the judge, “Well, you 
know, if you think that’s what’s best,” rather 
than, “I think that it’s the right thing to do.” 
They would make a statement like this to the 
judge, “If you think it’s the best to do, what else 
is there to do?” or, “What other way is there?” 
Really, what that meant was, “There isn’t any 
other thing you can do; you have to do that.” 

One of the great human beings in Reno, 
Nevada, is Dwight Nelson. There is no man 


that I know of who has greater concern or 
sympathy for children in the community than 
Dwight Nelson. He has worked for many, 
many years to provide Washoe County with 
first-rate juvenile services. When I first came 
to town, his office was in the old sheriff’s 
office. There was an alley between the old 
sheriff’s building and the courthouse, and 
his office and small staff was in the back of 
that alley. 

I heard Mr. Nelson make a speech 
at the Kiwanis Club on, I think, the first 
Thursday I was in Reno. He was talking 
about delinquency; he was talking about what 
needed to be done. And I couldn’t help but 
remember that the night before I had heard 
one of the sheriff’s deputies threaten one of 
our Indian boys that if he didn’t squeal on 
somebody he was going to send him down 
to Mr. Nelson for punishment. I went and 
told Dwight this, and it kind of established a 
relationship between the two of us, because 
it makes it very difficult for a juvenile officer 
to work with children, when the police are 
using him as a “boogey man.” 

Dwight was very discouraged in those 
days in fighting battles for a new juvenile hall, 
fighting battles with the welfare department, 
which was also in the same building, and 
was rather emotionally upset. I remember I 
went over to the drugstore and bought some 
wild cherry lifesavers and put ’em in a brown 
prescription bottle and got a prescription label 
from a drugstore and typed out “happiness 
pills, take one as needed” and signed it “Dr. 
Mathews” and put it on his desk. And he told 
me that those pills did more to help his mental 
health than anything else I’d ever done. And I 
think he still uses them. He fills up that bottle 
once in a while and takes one. 

He and I worked together for a long 
time on Indian problems and on an Indian 
detention home. I’ve heard him sworn at and 



70 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


cussed at and criticized by law enforcement 
people and ultra-conservative people, but 
anyone who really knows Dwight Nelson 
and really understands him knows that 
there’s only one thing that Dwight Nelson 
is interested in,, and that’s children. And he 
refuses to have children scarred for life on 
small, petty things, when really the problem 
is that most of these kids are terribly lonely, 
come from broken families or families that 
are together for reasons other than love, and 
it’s the kids his whole approach is centered in. 
He and I developed the strategy one time of 
not sending Indian children to Elko for the 
simple reason that it became a status symbol 
in the Colony to be able to say you’d been to 
Elko. So we eliminated that and eliminated 
a lot of the problems. Kids who came back 
from Elko would be the leaders in some of 
the delinquency problems. 

When I first went there, the Reno Colony 
was the biggest single delinquency problem 
in the area, and this last year they told me 
that the rate is lower than most places in the 
county. The police department just does not 
consider it as a special problem any more, 
at all. Phil Hanifan who used to be Dwight’s 
assistant, and head of Wittenberg Hall, told 
me, even last Monday, that if nothing else 
had been accomplished in my lifetime, at 
least we had’ done something about Reno- 
Sparks Indian Colony and he said he wished 
that everybody would know what it was. 
Probably it was having a philosophy similar to 
Dwight Nelson that we saw the task of being 
“people centered.” In my opinion, Dwight 
Nelson is one of the outstanding juvenile 
probation officers in the whole country, a man 
who works tirelessly without a great deal of 
community appreciation and carries many 
things that he, himself, would not even reveal 
that he has to contend with. I think he is one 
of Reno’s truly great citizens. 


Observations of Changes over the 
Twelve-Year Period, 1955-1967 

From a polluted water system to an 
adequate city-standard water system. From 
completely inadequate law enforcement 
to first-rate law enforcement. From an 
unemployment rate of fifty percent in 1955 
to practically zero today of able bodied 
people. From no college people twelve years 
ago to one Ph.D., one master’s degree, three 
B.A.’s, a couple of boys about to get their 
bachelor’s, about five junior college graduates, 
a multitude of trade school graduates. From 
a dropout rate of seventy-five percent before 
tenth grade to less than three percent. From 
one of the highest delinquency rates in the 
county to less than the average rate for any 
area. From no paint on any houses to at least 
most houses being painted; from all houses 
being substandard to almost fifty percent 
being adequate. From no house trailers, to 
now, forty- to fifty-foot- house trailers being 
used on a permanent basis with even cement 
block bases. Yards with fences. From dirt 
roads to paved roads. From a middle area 
which was a swamp to what’s now going to 
be an excellent park; from no playground area 
to a good playground area. From complete 
community disorganization to a cohesive 
community that can determine needs, make 
plans and solve problems; from a disorganized 
tribal council to a functioning governing 
body. From an attitude of despair to an 
attitude of some hopefulness. And then I’d 
say it the other way—from dependency to a 
growing independency; from a past fear of the 
larger community to a tentative confidence (in 
the sense there is an exciting cooperativeness). 
From almost total disbelief in non-Indians to 
a tentative belief that there are non-Indians 
who are helpful. From very few friendships to 
growing sense of neighborliness. From calling 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


71 


the Reno Colony a “camp” to identifying it 
as a “community.” A lessening of physical 
destruction, of physical improvements. 

It used to be that every time something 
new was put up, it was torn down; every time 
a light was installed, it was broken out; every 
time a wall was built, it was torn down. That 
has almost disappeared. 

The change in mental attitude is from one 
of extreme anxiety to rather poised calmness, 
and from one of looking to the Bureau for 
everything to looking to the Bureau for 
practically nothing. From inability—or the 
unconsciousness—of concept of planning 
to the actual planning and doing of things. 
From being “past oriented” to being “future 
oriented.” 

I think in the over-all national picture, 
Nevada, in the past, was looked at as the 
backward Indian groups in the country, 
and today some of the top leadership in the 
United States is coming from these very same 
people. What the Indian people in Nevada are 
planning and doing is, in a sense, a model to 
other Indian groups all over the country. And 
I would not want to minimize the tremendous 
shot in the arm that the poverty program has 
given to this throughout the state, because it 
has given the Indian leadership a financial 
base upon which to function in a respectable 
climate. One of the reasons why they never 
used to plan was they never had anything 
to plan with—or any time, really, to do it. 
They couldn’t afford to plan. When everyone 
was worrying about where their next meal 
was coming from, the only thing they were 
concerned about was their next meal; and 
when they know where their next month’s 
meals are coming from, they can plan usually 
not only for a month, but beyond that. There 
is a relationship between economic stability 
and responsibility, and not just one or the 
other. I will say the most dramatic changes 


that I noticed in Indian families occurred 
when the head of the household obtained a 
steady job—that that dependable income was 
the foundation for responsible family life. And 
there are very few instances of children being 
successful in school unless father or mother 
had a steady income. 

Have I mentioned the possibility of moving 
to Manogue? I don’t know whether to classify 
this as a disappointment or not because it’s a 
two-edged sword. About five years ago, I came 
to the conclusion that somebody was going 
to have to take the bull by the horns and see 
what could be done in terms of motivation in 
the Colony. The Colony was on “dead center,” 
and we were going around in circles all the 
time. And one of the reasons was, I think, 
there was a growing feeling among the Indian 
people that they didn’t have to stay there. I 
had talked to some Indians, and I asked them 
why didn’t they leave the Colony. They said, 
“because I can’t.” 

And I said, “Why can’t you?” 

And he said, “Well, because it’s against 
the law.” 

And I said, “Who told you that?” 

“Well, when I moved here, the white people 
at the Bureau told me, ‘This is yours. You stay 
here.’ And that means, you know, forever.” 
This was a time when relocation became a 
big objective of the federal government, and 
some Indians were willing to try it and go and 
get trained. Many of them came back to the 
reservation. 

Now, the Reno-Sparks Colony is zoned 
for industrial use, and it could be worth as 
much as a million and a half dollars. At one 
time I thought of seeing if we couldn’t get 
the convention center located there. It could 
be bought and the convention center located 
there—a good location between Reno and 
Sparks and good access down Second Street 
to downtown Reno. A lot of people today 



72 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


think I was right then. I did ask some of the 
Indian people what they would do if they were 
offered the money And the answer was that 
they would look for some other place because 
they wanted to stay together. So then I asked 
the question, “Well, what about those who 
don’t want to stay?” 

“Well, they can have their money and go, 
but those who do want to stay, we’d buy the 
land and build.” 

It was about this time that Manogue 
School, the new one, was built, and the old 
Manogue School out on Boynton Way was 
empty. Driving by one day, I thought to 
myself, “There’s a built-in gymnasium and a 
built-in building, and there’s plenty of land 
around here. We could actually build a model 
community.” So I went and asked Father 
Linde of the Catholic Church how much they 
would want for that, and at that time I think 
they quoted me something like $440,000, 
and there would have to be a lot of sewerage 
work done. I talked to Senator Bible and he 
said that was a possibility. I also looked across 
the street and saw the Sierra Pacific industrial 
park being built and thought it was a great 
place for a built-in labor supply. The Indian 
people not only would have access to a lot of 
jobs but the industry would have access to 
a lot of people. So I explored the idea with 
the Indian people, the leadership, first of all. 
What they wanted was plans; they wanted to 
see the picture—they wanted to see the whole 
thing down on paper. They also wanted to 
know how much the Colony was worth and 
they would want to know everything down 
to the penny. And they said that they didn’t 
think it could be done because they didn’t 
think the old people would go. So I suggested 
a feasibility study, out of which would come 
at least three appraisals. Also I went down to 
the Reno Chamber of Commerce and asked 
them if they had anyone who might be willing 


to buy that Colony, and while the appraised 
valuation is very high, the immediate pressure 
to buy it is not there yet, because there is a lot 
of land still available. 

I think the majority of the people in the 
Colony would have liked the idea of having 
a model city out on Boynton Lane. In fact, 
I asked one old Indian about it and he says, 
“Give me three day’s notice.” I think that, 
really, as long range strategy, they felt this. If it 
was possible that somebody would have come 
and made them a concrete offer, if somebody 
would have put it in writing, and someone 
would have shown them what it would look 
like—but that never happened. I could never 
get that done. 

But this kind of an “end run” motivated 
the people in the Colony to start thinking 
about the Colony to a real great extent. I put 
out a couple of bulletins that were spread 
around in which I said that at no time in 
history was there better chance to make the 
Colony just like any other place in town as 
there was right then. There were housing 
programs available, water programs available, 
recreation programs available, all kinds of 
new government programs available, and if 
they really wanted to bring this thing up to 
standard it could be done, but they had to take 
the initiative. I think that was the beginning 
of it. I think they started sending out their 
fact-finding people, and step by step, and 
piece by piece, they have made a decision to 
bring that Colony up to standard, and even 
looking to the day when they might have to 
build high-rise apartments in there because 
of the population explosion. At least that 
ground is theirs, and they know it’s theirs, and 
they’re going to hang onto it unless it became 
so financially attractive and advantageous 
to them to sell it, they’re not going to do it. 
And the money isn’t as important as the fact 
that it is kind of sacred land now because it’s 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


73 


theirs and they do have title to it. So while 
maybe I had thought that the movement to 
Manogue might have been the best. I kind of 
came to the conclusion that maybe making 
the Colony “standard” was a halfway house, 
and maybe someday you won’t be able to find 
the Reno Colony, either because the people 
have moved out or because it’s so much a part 
of the community that nobody recognizes it 
as separate any more. One thing that was a 
satisfaction was that I think a decision was 
made to do something, even if it wasn’t done 
right away. 

I think some word should be made about 
the general attitude of non-Indians to Indians. 
These are general attitudes, they’re not 
specific. I might get to some specific ones. I’ve 
traveled over 150,000 miles throughout the 
United States talking to people about Indians. 
And I have found, generally speaking, three 
or four things that really stand out in the 
minds of white people. One is they feel guilty 
about the Indian situation. Two, they are 
ignorant of its real nature. It’s pretty mush 
based upon what they have seen on television 
or the movies, or read in history books which 
are stories of a hundred and fifty years ago. 
Without exception, they are paternalistic 
about it and feel sorry. The word is, “I feel 
so sorry for the poor Indians.” And while 
there is a romanticized respect, which shows 
itself in even naming baseball teams like 
the Cleveland Indians and Atlanta Braves, 
there is a paternalistic “holier than thou” 
attitude among many Christian people. They 
look at Indians as pagan heathens, savages. 
Many liberals look at Indians as objects of 
manipulation. They have a very “looking 
down” attitude. They try to cover up their true 
feelings of superiority by extreme informality 
when they are in the presence of Indians; they 
talk way too much, they listen hardly at all, 
because they don’t think there is anything 


they could learn. And Indian people learn a 
lot about them by listening, and could teach 
a lot by talking a little, but never have the 
chance and are too courteous to interrupt. 

In all kinds of ways the Indian is looked 
down upon. In Montana they used to have 
signs in the window—”No dogs or Indians 
allowed.” I don’t think that’s true in Reno, 
but it was practiced at times; Indians were 
restricted to the Commercial Row area for 
a long time. I was quite surprised when I 
went to the Riverside Hotel and the Mapes 
Hotel with Mr. and Mrs. Dressier, when 
he was dressed in a suit and a tie, and she 
had a very nice evening dress on. We were 
accepted, but there were a lot of eyebrows 
raised because they just couldn’t adjust to 
the image presented by this Indian couple. 

I think, really, the controlling factor is 
the “out of sight, out of mind” business—for 
example, the Reno Colony is hidden from the 
rest of the town, and because very few people 
even know where it is, they don’t have to be 
concerned about it or feel responsible. In the 
defense mechanisms that arise, let’s say “that 
Indians must learn to be responsible,” really, 
in its depth, means, .1 don’t want to have 
any responsibility for it.” Rather than saying, 
“Together we can do something about it,” 
many people will say, “They’ve got to learn 
to have initiative,” and, “ they’ve got to do this 
or that.” 

In Reno I can remember making speeches 
at Lions’ Club or Kiwanis and opening it up 
for questions, and get questions from the 
audience that give real clues of attitudes, and 
usually it’s some—relating some story of forty 
years ago of some Indian that they know that 
was extremely dirty or that he carried a dead 
deer around in his car for four weeks. And 
that Indians didn’t seem to have any sense of 
time, or they just didn’t care about anything, 
which really was a clue to ignorance of the 



74 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


cultural values or what the Indian considered 
to be important. I’m sure they didn’t know 
that the Indian Rotary Clubs felt that white 
people are too clean. They washed a lot of 
the good earth off that gave them strength 
and energy They never put their feet in dirt 
and gained from Mother Earth spiritual 
power. They didn’t know that you never tell 
someone that you’re going to be some place 
at a certain time; it’s when you’re in harmony 
with the universe that both of you will arrive 
there about together. And that you never 
ask an Indian if he’s going to be some place 
three weeks from now. How does he know? 
He cannot be honest with you; he can’t tell 
you the truth because he doesn’t know the 
truth. White people say they’re going to be 
some place at a certain time. How do they 
know they’re going to be there? They might 
be dead.They take a terrible chance of lying 
by making promises that they don’t know 
the answers to. If we are at harmony with 
the universe, we will be there. So the answer 
usually, from an Indian, if you ask him if 
he’s going to be at a certain place at a certain 
time, is, “I don’t know, maybe, we’ll see,” 
because Indians do not believe in “ends “ or 
“ finality.” They never say “good-bye;” they 
always say, “see you later,” and that’s either 
in this life or the next one; it doesn’t make 
any difference. 

The people who get along with Indians 
the best are the ones, who by their very 
manner, indicate respect, and one deed is 
worth a thousand words. The people who get 
along with Indians best are those who build 
upon a relationship of consistently doing 
what they say, and doing what is wanted and 
doing what is good, and those who just talk 
about it are treated courteously but not with 
very much hope. 

Some people say to me, “Why aren’t 
Indians more aggressive?” And I have to say, 


“Because Indians are too courteous. They are 
not pushy; they are not competitive.” They 
really do not want to compete with the white 
man, because that is to either bring yourself 
down to their level, or to try to put yourself 
above them. What would really be consistent 
with their philosophy would be for everybody 
to be happy, to have their needs fulfilled 
equally. I think that this story will illustrate 
a point I am trying to make. 

One summer a few years ago, we received 
a call from the University asking that I attend 
a meeting concerning the Peace Corps. I 
went. The idea was the San Francisco State 
College had been granted the contract for 
training of Peace Corps volunteers. They had 
the idea that perhaps they could send the 
students of Nevada to live and work on the 
Indian reservations for a summer and learn 
what it was like to live with natives before 
they went to Africa, South America etc. It was 
agreed and Indians accepted the idea because 
they thought any program was better than 
no program on the reservations. They were 
especially pleased with the idea of having 
someone who wanted to help and could work 
with the young people. It was agreed that 
whole contingent would arrive in Reno on a 
Sunday night and the Indian people would 
greet them, have a pot luck dinner, a social 
hour and then the people would leave for the 
various reservations. 

A couple of other planning meetings 
were held to work out the details and then 
one Sunday night they arrived at the Colony 
Christian Center in Reno about three hours 
late. Off the bus came the Peace Corps people 
and professors from San Francisco. Most 
of them had the long hair, beards, beads, 
moccasins, duff le bags with bottles of wine 
sticking out, etc. In other words, real hippie 
type young people. Some were obviously 
neurotic as all get out, some were not. 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


75 


The Indian people were very nice, they fed 
them and talked to them but about half way 
through the evening a group of the Indian 
women came over to me and whispered, “Mr. 
Mathews, we want to talk to you.” I said okay. 
They said, “Mr. Mathews, what can we do to 
help these poor people “ I had to laugh, but 
it was decided that the Indians would just try 
to be as kind as possible and all summer they 
were. To be sure some good did come out of 
the encounter, but I am not sure who gained 
the most, the Indians or the Peace Corps. 
Personally I would vote for the Peace Corps. 

I used to have a strategy in what I called 
“public relations for Indians” and it basically 
was to talk about qualities that are mutually 
admired and to explain spiritual values in 
a way which most non-Indians would find 
acceptable. For example, if a Baptist believed 
in tithing, I would talk about the fact that 
Indians used to give ten percent of the 
pinenuts to the squirrels and to the birds, and 
that they used to dance and pray for three 
days prior to picking the pinenuts and ask 
the mountains for permission to do it, and 
then afterwards dance and pray for three days 
thanking the mountains. And then Id ask the 
question, “When was the last time you prayed 
about anything for three days?” 

I always used this illustration when I went 
on deputation, I have flown about 200,000 
miles in my lifetime and I guess 150,000 of 
that as a missionary. Each year I flew twice 
cross country on speaking tours to help the 
Baptists raise money for the missionary cause. 

And these kinds of approaches usually 
break the somewhat rigid images that 
people have, that are false, of Indians. As 
long as people only see Indians as those who 
massacred and raided, they have a violent 
feeling and they didn’t know that it took three 
days of dancing to get mad enough to fight. 
And you know, the danger in this whole thing 


is because we are talking about the differences, 
when in reality human beings are pretty 
much the same every place, and we need to 
emphasize that. The more that white people 
that I know got together with Indians that 
I know, and they got to know each other— 
attitudes can change. 

You know, the prejudice on the part of 
Indians is just as strong, if not stronger in 
some ways, than it was with white people. At 
least it was at the beginning. There was hardly 
any sympathy for white people whatsoever 
because they didn’t know; all they knew was 
what Grandfather told them about what 
the soldiers did to them—just like all that 
white people knew was what they’d seen on 
television. So one of the things I’ve heard— 
and I’ve heard this said by white people— 
and I think maybe it’s a positive thing, they 
have said to Indians, “You know, it was my 
grandfather who did that. I didn’t do it. And 
it was your grandfather that it was done to, 
and it wasn’t to you. Now you and I have got 
to find some new relationship here.” And 
most Indian people respond to that. That is a 
sincere approach. 

Summarizing attitudes in Reno toward 
Indians, I think I could say the following 
things: there was a great deal of ignorance 
about the Indian Colony. It was primarily 
out of sight and therefore out of mind, and 
only became a problem when the focus on 
the Indian Colony was forced, either through 
some dramatic news item or by a speech of 
mine or some other incident. There is an 
underlying guilt feeling in most of the people 
with regard to the treatment of the Indians. 
There is a surface desire to do something. 
There is a terrible frustration of, knowing 
how ignorant everybody is, to decide what 
was a good thing to do. In the beginning, 
there was an almost absolute breakdown in 
communications, but I think as ideas worked, 



76 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


became visible, that the willingness to do 
things for Indians increased rapidly; that 
when the people found out what they could 
do that worked, they were willing to do it. 
When law enforcement found out that one 
good policeman who understood Indians 
helped the situation tremendously, they were 
very willing to pay for him and put him there. 
And when the school people found out that by 
training teachers, the dropout rate dropped, 
they were willing to spend the money to 
train teachers and to also provide the study 
halls. Even the welfare department did some 
training on Indians. They used to train one 
worker and try to encourage her to become 
a specialist. Let me close this section with the 
following. 

I should make special mention of some 
great staff people who have served the Colony. 
I have mentioned June Taylor. She was there 
from 1955 to June of 1957. June was a very 
capable person who did excellent work and 
contributed a great deal. She was responsible 
for the girls’ clubs and the nursery school. 
She was a very headstrong woman and 
very competitive. We produced a great deal 
together but we really never communicated 
well with each other.I did help her get a 
promotion and she left to become the head 
of social emphasis program for the Southern 
California Baptist Convention. 

June was followed by Marjorie Mareau, a 
girl I really enjoyed working with. Marj was 
real down-to-earth, practical, and well loved 
by all of the girls and woman. She left us in 
1959 to get married to a friend of mine from 
Berkeley. He is today an executive for the 
YMCA in the bay area and they live with their 
children in Berkeley. I stayed with them while 
I wrote my thesis. His name was Joe Forbes. 
Marj was followed by Leona Dunterman, 
an excellent Christian Center worker and 
well loved. She was the only worker we ever 


had who could play the piano, so that was 
something special. She left to get married, a 
preacher, and lives in Herlong now. 

In 1961, Mary “Susie” Apolinar came. 
Susie was someone special. She was a Mexican 
girl from Chicago, had grown up a Catholic, 
been a convert to the Baptist and. had served 
in the Christian Center in Brooklyn, New 
York. The Indian people took to her brown 
skin and black hair and warm spirit in a special 
way. Mary is the finest missionary I ever knew 
and we worked together very, very well. I 
never could have asked for anyone better. 
We made tremendous strides when she was 
there. She was transferred to Alaska in 1964 
and a year and a half later married a chaplain 
in the Army and now lives in Washington, 
D.C. The last girl worker we had was Mary 
Sweet, an attractive, very bright girl with a 
totally different educational background than 
the others. She was an anthropology major 
and community development oriented. We 
changed strategy with her there. We actually 
plotted a few explosions among the Indian 
women, in order to get some things off of dead 
center and we did! She concentrated with 
the young adults. They really got involved 
in Colony problems with Mary there. It was 
great. 

I left in January, 1967, and she left in 
July, 1967. She went to work for the Rural 
Community Action program of the state 
and got married soon after. I have quite a 
reputation for playing cupid I guess, and some 
of it is justified. However, nature has a way of 
working on its own, too! 

In 1966 I suggested to Mary that she 
encourage the young women to put on a big 
social event in Reno and invite the top people 
of Reno so the Colony people and the elite 
could meet on a social level. It took a year and 
a half for it to happen and it took some help 
from Eileen Brookman of Las Vegas, but in 



Ministry at the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony 


77 


the spring of 1967, it did happen. Over 350 
people gathered in the Riverside Hotel at six 
dollars apiece, eighty percent Indians, and 
had food, fun, entertainment and speeches. 
All done by Indians with awards to tribes 
and non-Indians who had been helpful. 
The Indian people wore their best suits and 
dresses. They do have them and the white 
people were flabbergasted and it was just 
wonderful. Edie Hunter, Charlotte Tobey, 
Jessie Astor and many others were really the 
work horses for the event and I think that this 
is the kind of thing we must move toward and 
to me it was kind of a fulfillment of a twelve 
year dream. 





Activities in Civic Organizations 

and Welfare Groups 


The Washoe County 
Ministerial Association 

My first recollection of the Washoe 
County Ministerial Association was the 
fact that I immediately joined when I came 
to Reno and found they were completely 
embroiled in the problem of the marriage 
laws. Every meeting was geared around some 
kind of strategy to get rid of wedding chapels. 
At that time there was only one or two, and 
they’ve succeeded in creating thirty or forty 
more. The real concern, truly, was about 
ethics. I was in the Association for twelve 
years, and I really believe there was no attempt 
to aid the monetary income of churches by 
eliminating wedding chapels. There was a 
sincere concern for the whole concept of 
marriage being a sacred relationship. But the 
methods by which we, and I was one of them, 
attempted to deal with the problem certainly 
were not successful. 

It was only after three or four years that 
the tack of the Association was changed to 
social action; probably Felix Manley and 


I had as much to do with that as anybody. 
We got involved in the gambling problem, 
got involved in the political situation, the 
administration of Mayor Bud Baker; we 
got involved in the support of the district 
attorney, and in the Joe Conforte activities. 
We became a rather effective political force. 
Some of us were even on the recall committee 
of Mayor Baker. I was one of those. While the 
recall never happened, that council was not 
re-elected either. I do feel that the Association 
played a vital role there in improving the 
government of Reno. 

Some of the real leaders of the Ministerial 
Association in the old days were Rafe Martin, 
from St. John’s Presbyterian Church, and 
Father John Fedger, who was incidentally, a 
man that I used as a pastor one time, even 
though he was an Episcopalian. I wanted to 
get some advice on a marital situation, one 
of the couples I was counseling. I went to 
him and got good advice and help. I have a 
great deal of respect for Father Fedger, Felix 
Manley, David Meadows, Blake Franklin, and 
John Hargrave of the Sparks Baptist Church. 



80 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


These men were there quite a long time. We 
never had quite as much cooperation from the 
Episcopal Church after Father Ledger left as 
we had with him. 

It was only in recent times that the 
Catholic Church participated. Father Joe 
Linde belonged—oh, around 1960,1 guess— 
or 1961. The rabbi belonged. I remember 
one instance where Rabbi Phillip Weinberg 
was very upset with the Association. He 
didn’t think that we had supported Dr. 
Sidney Tillim enough in the problems out 
at the hospital [Nevada State Hospital] and 
he spoke for thirty minutes condemning in 
very emotional terms the whole Association. 
It became my job to defend the Association. I 
guess I spoke five or ten minutes. Apparently 
it helped, because we never heard any more 
about it. Rabbi Weinberg was not accurate 
in all of his facts and unaware of some of the 
quiet support that was in effect, an& he failed 
to read the newspaper and see one headline 
where we had come out publicly in supporting 
Dr. Tillim. 

Interesting sidelight, I think, to the 
operation of the Association, and I think 
one of the things that I appreciated about 
the Association as much as any was that it 
was not theologically oriented. I think every 
kind of a religious attitude was represented 
in that Association from the most extreme 
Pentecostal to Unitarian—and the Jewish and 
Protestant and Catholic. Quite a few people 
of the metaphysical persuasion were in it. I 
always thought it was amazing that we could 
work at all together on common concerns, 
and yet we did find ways. To do that, we had 
training sessions with some psychologists on 
counseling. We had courses with the hospitals 
on the role of the minister in the healing of 
patients. We’ve had conferences with funeral 
directors and the problems of the family at 
the time of death. 


All in all, I think that Washoe County 
Ministerial Association’s level of operation 
is really superior to Clark County’s. The 
issue of marrying in a wedding chapel in 
Clark County has never been a very strong 
issue. Most all the members do that, and the 
only time it ever became an issue was when 
it became the sole activity of a member. It’s 
known that some ministers in Clark County 
were making $40,000 to $50,000 a year in this 
business, one of which was not a member 
of the Association, and married something 
like thirteen or fourteen times. But the code 
of ethics, I think, of the Washoe County 
Ministerial Association is on a higher level 
than it is in Clark County. There is more of a 
sense of unity and of being able to get things 
done in conservative Washoe County 

I would like to say, though, that I think 
that the church in the city of Reno is pretty 
much of a failure. Some people would 
disagree with that, probably. Probably in the 
sacramental sense it isn’t—in meeting the 
sacramental needs of people. I think church 
attendance in Reno is considerably below 
the national average. The impact, power, 
of the church in Reno is much less than it 
is in most communities. I think the youth 
programs in the churches, with the exception 
of the Mormons, in the city of Reno is way 
below standard. In some—most places, non¬ 
existent, even in some of the larger churches. 
I would be very much surprised if the church 
had any influence at all—in the Protestant 
community—over more than ten or fifteen 
percent of the children in Reno. 

You ask, “Why?” I don’t know. I think the 
church evolved in Reno out of the old Wild 
West. Many of the [gambling] clubs supported 
the churches in the old days. Some of the 
churches never used to take offerings; they 
just got their money from the gambling clubs. 
There was no sense of personal responsibility 



Activities in Civic Organizations and Welfare Groups 


81 


for the church. Church was something that 
you went to, not something that you were part 
of, or responsible for. The old-time spellbinder 
was the most popular man in town. Perhaps 
the gambling economy has something to do 
with it in terms of guilt feelings—hidden or 
not expressed by most of the people of Reno. 
There is a great deal of confusion of whether 
or not legalized gambling is good or bad by 
most of the citizens that I have ever talked to 
in Reno. They don’t know whether it’s right or 
wrong—or if they do know, I’ve never heard. 
I’ve heard very few people who thought it 
was really right. A lot of people don’t know 
whether it’s right or wrong. If they really tell 
you what they think, they say, “It’s wrong, but 
what else can you do? You have that economy 
here.” And if that is the attitude, then it has a 
kind of a burden of guilt about it. 

It’s a very divided town. Reno is 
schizophrenic in many ways—two towns, a 
tourist town and a residential town. It causes 
a great deal of conflict in terms of long-range 
planning and community spirit. 

It’s one of the most spiritless cities I have 
ever seen when it comes to a sense of pride in 
community, and I don’t know whether that’s 
because they are ashamed of the tourist part of 
it or whether everybody is so individualistically 
conservative that they never can agree what to 
do together. There are growing signs of change— 
the Pioneer Theater [Auditorium] is one visible 
evidence of it, and some things can come from 
that that would be unifying in the community. 
I even hear talk of an opera—a beginning 
sense of cultural pride. I think the fact that the 
United Fund always has such a terrible time in 
Reno and a resounding success in Las Vegas 
is some indicator of attitudinal differences 
between a very conservative community and 
a rather liberal, free-wheeling community. Of 
course, there are great advantages in that Reno 
is much more financially stable than Las Vegas 


is, and not near as subject to community-wide 
emotional binges. 

I would say that one of the reasons why 
the church in Reno is not as effective as it 
could be is because a lot of the best ministers 
in the country would not come to Reno to be 
a minister because they don’t want to raise 
their children in Reno, and this is, I think 
to a large degree, prejudice against the area. 
However, I think Reno has built some great 
ministers. They have found a challenge so 
overwhelming that they have either had to 
produce or leave. I think a man like William 
Clawson of St. John’s Presbyterian Church, I 
think Felix Manley of the Federated Church, 
Father Henry Jesse, I think Catholic priests 
like Father Leo McFadden, Father Charles 
J. Righini, or Father Caviglia, have maybe 
become greater men because they served 
in Reno than they would have been if 
they’d served some place else that wasn’t as 
challenging. It’s kind of a two-way street, 
but a minister in Reno is in a very difficult 
position because, by the nature of his being, 
he should be opposed to the community for 
its very structure. And yet, all ministers know 
that anyone who is that way is an itinerant, 
and if you want to have a long-range ministry, 
you have to not only belong, but you have 
to challenge, too. And a ministry in Reno is 
not something that you expect to change the 
community overnight, but it’s a long-range 
process; and long-range goals are hard to 
generate enthusiasm about. 

I personally think that a real good strategy 
of all churches in Reno would be to have some 
short-range goals, and usually this takes the 
form of new buildings. A minister comes 
in to town and his short-range goals are to 
raise enough money to build a new beautiful 
sanctuary in order to attract more people 
to the church and to have a more beautiful 
place in which to live. I think there are other 



82 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


kinds of short-range goals, probably done 
best in cooperation with other churches in 
terms of social action. There are still terrible 
problems of housing and employment. I 
doubt if the marital—or family guidance— 
or family services for Reno are anywhere 
near adequate. I don’t think any youth 
organization in Reno has half the money 
that it needs to do the program they need. 
There are all kinds of what is normally called 
secular activities which really, though, are 
spiritual activities, which are really not 
supported to the extent that they should be. 
I mean by this the YMCA, the YWCA. There 
should be four YMCA’s in Reno, at least two 
or three YWCA’s in Reno and Sparks. By that 
I mean there ought to be at least one by every 
high school, and there isn’t even a chance of 
that without the financial support. Reno is a 
very wealthy town but it protects its wealth. 

The Ministerial Association also provided 
the community-wide Thanksgiving, and 
Christmas and Easter services at various 
times. Probably now the only one that’s 
really community-wide is the Thanksgiving 
service. I, personally, have dreamed of a 
community-wide Easter service on the 
Wednesday night before Easter including the 
Catholic and Protestant churches, maybe in 
the Centennial Coliseum, with the Mormon 
Tabernacle Choir or something. 

One sidelight of my personality, I would 
like to see Good Friday Services turned into 
a festival of the arts, with a symphony and 
choruses instead of the traditional seven 
last words that fifty people go to listen to 
and know exactly what is going to be said 
anyway. I’m not much for ritual. It’s all right 
if it’s not repeated so often that it becomes 
meaningless. I even like to see creative ritual 
where it can be changed once in a while, so 
the impact of its message can come through 
to the individual in new ways. 


I think one of the most effective jobs 
being done in Reno today is by the Campus 
Christian Association with Reverend John 
Dodson, a very creative man, and I think 
that one of the hopes of the church from this 
point on, is men like John Dodson, as well as 
Father Paul Towner and “White” Engeseth 
of the Episcopal Church in Sparks, and 
Reverend Fay Miller of the Lutheran Church. 
I’m very excited about a young priest who will 
be returning to the diocese by the name of 
Timothy Conlin, I think it is. It will have quite 
an impact on the Roman church in this town. 

Concerning the endeavors for the recall 
of Bud Baker and the Reno City Council, 
activities of the Ministerial Association, it 
was quite a while ago, and it was so erratic 
and so confusing I don’t know whether I 
can ravel any sense out of it or not, but.... It 
began, not with the hiring of Police Chief 
Elmer Briscoe, because that was looked on by 
the Association very positively; in fact, Felix 
Manley and I went down to the Chief the first 
two or three days he was in town and pledged 
to him our support if he, in turn, would clean 
up the police department, which had just 
been through a big scandal. But, it started, 
I think, with the threat to fire him because 
of some kind of a clandestine meeting he 
was supposed to have had with Councilman 
John Marshall and some other person prior 
to accepting the position. 

The Ministerial Association looked with 
disfavor upon this, also upon the repeated 
calling of Councilman Marshall before the 
Grand Jury, and the unclean relationship 
between some councilmen and Bill Fong, 
of the New China Club, the police brutality 
case, with Robert Taelour, the appointment 
of Peter Echeverria as an investigator of the 
police department, the blatant increase of 
streetwalkers, prostitutes, in the downtown 
area of Reno, the level of filth of one of the 



Activities in Civic Organizations and Welfare Groups 


83 


shows of the Riverside Hotel, called the “Crazy 
Horse Revue.” I think the real position of 
the Ministerial Association was that it had 
gotten to the point of almost a comic opera, 
and there were some very serious problems 
facing the city of Reno, and the competency 
of this group to deal with them was obviously 
less than what was required. 

We did listen carefully to Bill Raggio and, 
while there was internal politics within the 
Ministerial Association, there were one or two 
ministers who supported the Baker Council. 
The vast majority supported the Raggio 
endeavors, and when the recall movement 
was formed, I was on the committee to select 
some candidates, so the other ministers were 
actually engaged in soliciting petitions. We 
had numerous meetings with Bill Raggio; we 
did some checking around town; there were 
influential business people in all the churches 
who were talking to their ministers. There 
were some of the ministers even engaged 
in operating the headquarters for the recall 
which was in the Stack building there on First 
and Sierra. 

The real fear, I think, was two-fold. One 
was the fear of sheer incompetence, and the 
other fear was the possibility of infiltration of 
the gangster element in the city. I don’t know if 
there was real evidence of the latter, but there 
was certainly a lot of evidence of the former. 

I will say this about the Baker 
administration, in the twelve years I was 
in Reno, I don’t think there was ever any 
more community interest in the affairs of 
city government than there was at that time. 
Everybody was up in the air; they had a 
meeting at city hall and you couldn’t even get 
into the hallways. 

Bud came to the Ministerial Association 
one time, kind of pleading for his life, and 
said that the job of mayor was his college 
education, he hadn’t had one, and that he 


really appreciated the opportunity to learn 
about government by being the mayor. And 
everybody was, you know, appreciative of his 
educational growth, but did not really approve 
of the method by which it was obtained. I 
think we all would have got him a scholarship 
up at the University if he’d have resigned. 

There was some attempts by a car dealer, 
he was a councilman, Dick Dimond, who 
had the image in that council of being the 
fiscally responsible guy, and we supported 
that position. I don’t think we included him in 
the recall; at least the Ministerial Association 
didn’t. He was one of the few councilmen that 
we could talk to rationally, even though at the 
same time we knew there were a lot of things 
we disapproved of in his operation. 

There were a lot of underground things 
with reference to George Carr—a police 
investigation classified as a morals charge. It 
was one of those things with a lot of evidence 
for, but no proof, but it was indicative, in a 
sense, of the whole climate of that council. 
There were a lot of problems with the taxis, 
with one councilman who owned one of the 
taxis who was always fighting about how 
many taxis were going to be in front of the 
clubs. Mr. Marshall was probably the most 
controversial of all the councilmen. 

But when it came down to the showdown 
on the recall, I think the problem was that 
the people in charge of the mechanical part 
of the recall made a terrible mistake in not 
understanding all the laws and getting some 
legal opinions, and some of the signatures were 
invalid. Roy Torvinen, who was city attorney 
at that time, said there was not enough valid 
signatures to call a recall election. However, 
as proved by history, the psychological effect 
of the recall in effect produced it—all of 
them were voted out completely. There was a 
complete new council. And I’d like to speak 
of that for a moment. 



84 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


In my life in Reno I found myself 
sometimes in certain situations of greater 
influence than probably was justified. I’m 
kind of a creative thinker once in a while. I 
do remember that in the North Reno Kiwanis 
Club (Roy Torvinen was a member of that, 
and Jerry Torvinen, and some of the young 
executives in town) one time after a Kiwanis 
Club meeting, we sat around talking about 
this whole problem. And my thought was that 
what Reno lacked was a community leader 
around which the town could rally. They 
didn’t have one, and hadn’t had for a long 
time; maybe Len Harris was the closest to 
this. Anybody like, say, George Christopher 
in San Francisco; he was the example I used. 
And when they went looking for a mayor, 
that they ought to find somebody who had an 
impeccable character and also had the time to 
do the job, because it was highly underpaid; 
and I recommended that they double the 
salaries, and I think they came close to that. 
And that they find somebody who would 
have the respect. Now they settled on Hugo 
Quilici, and he had all the qualifications of 
my idea of what a mayor should be, except 
one, and that was the inspirational person. 
He’s not that. He certainly was a man of 
integrity; he certainly was a man of ability, 
and certainly a man people could respect, 
and they did do that. He was a warm, friendly, 
and congenial guy. And I think probably in 
the transition period, at least, he was a very 
good choice. 

I do know that of two men that we 
approached to run for mayor in the recall 
movement who turned it down, one of them 
was Link Piazzo. He was so flattered he 
couldn’t get over the shock, but he just didn’t 
want to confuse politics with business, and 
probably wisely so; and the other one was 
George Hamilton, and he was getting ready 
to take a trip to Europe al-id he didn’t want 


to cancel that because he had been dreaming 
of it all his life. 

In many ways Len Harris was a real Reno 
mayor. There’s two things that I can illustrate 
that with. When the Paterson’s building 
exploded and that roof went about fifteen 
hundred feet straight up in the air, I was in the 
El Cortez Hotel and it really shook that hotel. 
We all ran out, and I ran down to Second and 
Sierra and I ran right into Len Harris, and he 
said, “You’re deputized. Now you keep the 
people out of here, because we don’t know if 
that tank on top of the Gray Reid’s building 
is going to blow or not.” He was up and down 
that street, running the show. I worked there 
for three or four hours until the Air Force 
or National Guard sent in some people. It’s 
amazing that the crowds cooperated very 
well; you just had to speak with authority 
You had no badge, no uniform, no anything, 
but a couple of us kept the crowds out of 
there. But Len was up and down that street. I 
remember Mrs. Verna Paterson walking down 
in front of the Dollar Store towards Paterson’s 
just screaming at the top of her voice. Len 
stopped her, talked to her, and kept her out 
of there himself. The other occasion is when 
they had the big floods. And here’s Len Harris 
out in the middle of the water, with hip boots 
on, moving sandbags and ordering this and 
ordering that. He’s kind of a grass roots guy, 
that rough, tough fella. 

He also was very helpful to the Indian 
Colony; he helped us a lot until he found out it 
was outside the city limits. But the beginnings 
of the planning to move the sewer plant 
started under Len Harris on account of the 
smell in the Indian Colony He said, “Nobody 
ought to have to put up with that.” We used to 
have to cancel our church services on Sunday 
nights sometimes in the summertime because 
you couldn’t stand it. And of course, Dr. Tillim 
got into it with the mental hospital. 



Activities in Civic Organizations and Welfare Groups 


85 


Len Harris and C. B. Kinnison, when he 
was city manager, were the two prime-movers 
in getting a policeman in the Indian Colony, 
Don Frazier, who was half Indian and used to 
be a teacher at Stewart. The city paid half his 
salary and the county paid the other half, and 
Len was very supporting of that and so was 
Mr. Kinnison. We had a hard time selling the 
county commissioners, but we finally did it. 

Probably the essential political power of 
the Ministerial Association was in the press 
and among the congregations. I used to try 
to get the ministerial people to see how many 
people that they influenced, because there’s a 
tremendous amount of people who belong to 
the churches of which they are ministers were 
politics and work through them. 

Dr. Charles E. Fleming was the leader 
of that recall movement to start with. The 
problem we had with him was he was drunk 
all the time. There was an old lawyer, he’s got 
a law office in the Masonic building, an old 
time guy, his daughter’s his secretary—T. L. 
Withers, was really the functional chairman 
of that. Withers, myself; Bill [Raggio] was in 
the background, but he was there. He wouldn’t 
want me to say that, but he was there [Bill 
Raggio]. And some real estate guy—who was 
it? Three or four young guys. Gosh, that was 
a long time ago! When was that—’57, ’58— 
along in there? No, ’59. Fleming started, but 
we ended up with Withers carrying the ball. 
Fred Hill was in that. I don’t remember who 
those other guys were; isn’t that funny? I do 
know who was the head of the Ministerial 
Association. It was David Ricketts of the First 
Christian Church, and he discovered he had 
cancer and had to leave, and went to New 
Mexico but he turned over the file on that 
stuff to me, and I still have that some place. 

There was a constant strewn of people 
to many of us. People would go and tell 
him, and people would go and tell Felix 


[Manley]; people would come and tell me 
this, that and the other thing. One of the 
problems was centered around the City 
Engineer’s Office—Elliott Cann and the clerk. 
Everybody just lost complete confidence in 
that administration. They thought that, you 
know, everything was happening. Nothing 
happened without a payoff here or there. I 
was much less concerned at that point with 
the truth of it because that’s the grand jury’s 
problem, but what I was concerned with was 
the fact that everybody had lost confidence 
in the administration. 

The Nevada Council of Churches 

The Nevada Council of Churches has 
been a very interesting group. It is up 
and down. Sometimes it used to function 
well with Northern California Council of 
Churches, and other times it was invisible. It 
might have an existence and have an annual 
meeting at which twenty or thirty people 
from Reno attended and nobody from Vegas. 
Rafe Martin, way back in 1956, tried to do 
something about it. We actually formed the 
strategy for that Council of Churches at that 
time, but it took to 1965 to achieve, and he 
wasn’t even here to see it. 

Around 1964, the Council of Churches 
began to move a little bit, primarily from the 
thrust of Bill Clawson and Felix Manley and 
myself. When Bill Clawson was president 
they had a very good meeting in Las Vegas, 
small but very good, in January 1962,1 think. 
Brought in a bunch of the people from state 
agencies and we talked about some of the real 
problems in the state. One of the interesting 
sessions was with Martin Levine on mental 
health. We actually had a very open session 
with Martin. As you know, Martin Levine is 
Jewish, and it got into a real dialogue between 
the ministers and the Jewish psychiatrist—and 



86 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


came, ultimately, to the place where they were 
very close to agreement. Martin, for the first 
time, he said, in his life, he really understood 
what Christian preachers were talking about. 
It wasn’t too different, you know, when we 
got into a mutual language that everybody 
understood, and he understood it. That was 
a very good session—a very good meeting. 

In 1965, the Nevada Council of Churches 
for the first time authorized some official 
lobbyists at the capital grounds, myself and 
Don Thompson, from the Campus Christian 
Association, and for the sixty days they gave 
us two hundred dollars for gas and food. It 
didn’t go very far, but it was significant in 
the fact that for the first time in history, they 
actually backed up an intention with money 
We did meet almost every Saturday morning 
at the University of Nevada lunch room to 
report back. We lobbied primarily for civil 
rights but also for prison reform, and health 
and welfare things, and mental health—the 
whole gamut of social concerns. And I do 
think that for historical purposes, it should 
be noted that it was in 1965 that the Nevada 
Council of Churches took money out of the 
budget and spent it on lobbying. I had letters 
that were given to the governor and to the 
speaker of the house and the president of the 
senate, designating myself and Don as the 
official representatives of the Nevada Council 
of Churches. 

I became the President of the Nevada 
Council of Churches in 1965, with the 
resignation of Eugene Duncan, who went to 
a church in Vallejo, California. In the span 
of a year and a half, we put on a “dialogue in 
depth conference” in Las Vegas, sponsored by 
the Council of Churches, where we invited 
leaders of the state government from all over 
Nevada to a conference to take a look at the 
basic problems facing the state in terms of 
education, taxes, law enforcement, housing. 


It was a very successful conference—not as 
well attended as I would have liked it, but the 
governor and lieutenant governor both spoke, 
and we had outstanding speakers from out of 
the state, and the most significant thing was 
that the Catholic church attended—Bishop 
Dwyer was one of the featured speakers. 

I should say in all fairness, that Governor 
Sawyer’s office, and Governor Sawyer, did give 
us a great deal of help in putting that on, and 
a lot of cooperation in getting people on the 
panels, and participating in the speeches, and 
they did send some state employees there as 
attendees, which helped considerably 

As you know, one of the areas of the 
dialogue was in law enforcement, and we sent 
a letter to Attorney General Katzenback and 
asked him if he would come and be a speaker, 
and we got no reply. I think the way I want 
to tell you this is how I introduced George 
Reed, who became his substitute, because this 
is the funny part of it. George Reed ended up 
as being the speaker for the luncheon on law 
enforcement. And when I got up to introduce 
George, I said, “In all fairness, I ought to tell 
the group that we had invited the Attorney 
General of the United States, and that we had, 
way back in September, sent a letter and we 
waited a week, and we waited two, and we 
waited three, and we waited four, and we had 
received no reply, so another letter was sent. 
And we waited a week, and we waited two. 
So I called Senator Bible and told him about 
it, and he was supposed to call me back. This 
was on a Friday afternoon, and I talked to Jack 
Carpenter, and they were supposed to call me 
back on Monday. And I waited Monday, and 
I waited Tuesday, and I waited Wednesday, 
and I waited Thursday, and nobody called; so 
I called Governor Sawyer’s office and talked 
to Dick Ham. Dick Ham said he could not 
understand why we had never heard from 
the Attorney General and they would follow 



Activities in Civic Organizations and Welfare Groups 


87 


through and check on it, and he would call 
me Monday. So I waited Monday, and I 
waited Tuesday, and I waited Wednesday, 
and I waited Thursday, and I never got any 
answer. So, finally, I wrote another letter to the 
Attorney General, and this was way up in the 
first part of November. And I waited a week, 
and I waited two weeks, and I finally called 
the Attorney General’s office and tried to talk 
to somebody about it. I never got through to 
anybody. So then I called Dick Ham again, 
and I told him what all was going on, and he 
said that he could not understand what was 
the matter. He just couldn’t understand it. So 
I waited another week and I heard nothing, 
so, finally, I sent a telegram to the Attorney 
General, and I didn’t get any answer. So I 
contacted Dick Ham again and we agreed that 
we’d probably just go ahead and substitute, 
and if it was all right with them, I’d ask George 
Reed. They said it was all right, so I asked 
him. And this was in the first of December. 
One week before our conference in January, I 
got a letter from the Attorney General, and it 
said that they had come across my telegram, 
and that it had been buried in all the mail, 
and that they had known nothing about it 
at all, and that he could not come at this late 
date, but that he would be glad to substitute 
the federal attorney for the state of Nevada if 
I wanted to. I wrote back and thanked him, 
but said we had somebody else, and the truth 
of the matter is that he just wasn’t about to 
come to Nevada.” It was so funny because 
of the way I was able to tell it in introducing 
George Reed—waiting the Monday, and the 
Tuesday, etc., and by the time I got through, 
everybody was laughing. This, of course, was 
at the time when “bugging” was an issue in 
crime investigation. 

It was one year from the date of that 
dialogue in depth that the Roman Catholic 
church officially came into the Nevada 


Council of Churches, and I participated in 
that event. That developed, primarily, I guess 
I’ll have to say, from my efforts. I had a dream 
that it could be done and I started talking to 
Father Linde, who was then the chancellor, 
about it. Father Linde was a very interesting 
man. In all honesty, I will have to say, while 
I liked Father Linde very much, I’d have 
difficulty once in a while getting the same 
answer twice. Anyway, I think it’s probably 
because they were negotiating, and most of 
the approach to us was very optimistic from 
the Roman side. I had the feeling they’d like 
to try it, and yet when we’d have “showdown 
time” they didn’t show up at the meeting. 
We scheduled a meeting in May of 1966 
at the University with the leaders of other 
denominations and the Roman bishop. He 
did not arrive, and I never did know “why” 
until a couple of weeks later, was talking to 
him personally, and I found out he didn’t 
know anything about it; Father Linde hadn’t 
informed him. I do know there was great 
pressure within the Roman church, among 
the priests, especially the Italian and French, 
not to do this. They thought that they were 
lowering the prestige of the Roman church 
by associating with the Protestants. 

Well, the tack that I took on this was the 
one of just saying it was going to be done, 
and never listening to anybody who said 
that it wasn’t, and playing it very, very close. 
I didn’t write a lot of letters; I didn’t make 
a lot of phone calls; I didn’t meet with a lot 
of people. We just had our regular board 
meetings and we brought it up on the agenda. 
And the first thing we did was to change the 
constitution. In the constitution it said that 
“membership in the Council of Churches is 
open to Protestants,” and we changed that 
to, “open to those who accepted Jesus Christ 
as Lord and Savior.” The Catholics agreed to 
the word “Lord”—they said they used the 



88 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


word “King,” but that was all right, they 
understood what we meant, so that opened 
the door. And then, it developed that a part 
of the concern of the Catholic church was 
the fact that some of us in the Protestant 
churches were very aggressive in the field of 
social action, myself included. It presented 
a problem for the hierarchy in the Catholic 
church, if they were associated with the 
Council of Churches with social action 
people like myself, Felix Manley, and John 
Dodson. It would implicate them. And we 
had arrangements for that—that I would 
cease to be the president of the Council of 
Churches when they came in—my term 
was expired. That was one of the concerns. 
I had made public statements opposing the 
gambling interests, which was not a position 
of the Catholic church. However, Bishop 
Dwyer made counter statements saying that 
the situation in Nevada had gotten to the 
place where something had to happen. The 
real problem was not as much a moral one as 
it was a one of power, because the power base 
in the state of Nevada had gotten completely 
out of whack, with the gambling interests 
having the upper hand to such a degree that 
they could almost dictate policy. And my 
statement was related more to power than 
it was to morality, really. Underlying what I 
said was that we need to change the power 
base of the state of Nevada, but what I said 
was that we should phase it out, and what 
that meant was that new industry had to be 
found, in order to broaden the base of power 
of the non-gambling interests so that no one 
segment of the state would have this much 
control. Steps in that direction have been 
taken, and are being taken, and will be taken 
in the future. When Bishop Dwyer left to 
become Archbishop of Portland, I was asked 
to speak on behalf of the Protestants at his 
farewell. He later wrote a letter to Berkeley 


Baptist Divinity School recommending me 
for a D.D. degree. 

The culmination of the negotiations was 
two-fold: one, we had to negotiate with the 
Northern California Council of Churches 
to become separate, and they graciously saw 
the value of Nevada having its own. A lot of 
technical problems arose in terms of financial 
support of denominations that would shift 
to Nevada on a per capita basis. Support 
that used to come from Nevada churches 
and went to California would stay here. A 
budget was drawn up—the Roman Catholic 
share of the $5,000 budget was $2,500 on a 
per capita basis. That check has already been 
deposited and is in the treasury, one of the 
first denominations to do so—and with an 
agreement that if more money was needed, 
they would be glad to supply it. One of the 
things that I have always been aware of is that 
the Roman church knows more about power 
than Protestant church aver has and maybe 
ever will. Their resources are much more 
extensive, but in this instance, they were most 
liberal with their willingness to support, and 
very, very ethical in not wanting to control it, 
either. We even talked about the possibility of 
having a priest as the executive secretary and 
that was agreed to all the way around, that 
if the priest was a candidate who was best 
qualified, there was no reason why he couldn’t 
be. To date, they haven’t hired anybody. 

The other culmination was in the 
consultation on “The Church and the 
Gambling Economy,” that we held at the 
University of Nevada under the able leadership 
of John Dodson. I chaired it, but he was the 
head of the planning committee. We had 
together in one place, at one time, almost 
two hundred ministers in a closed session— 
not even the press was allowed, and we even 
checked the room for “bugs.” We heard from 
some of the top people of the country; Dr. 



Activities in Civic Organizations and Welfare Groups 


89 


Rasmussen from Pacific School of Religion, 
the great sociologist who laid it on the line, 
the church could never hope to eliminate 
gambling but it could take the tack of trying to 
humanize Nevada. I think that that could be 
stated as the strategy of the church. Attempt 
to get even the gaming people concerned 
about participating in the solution of some 
of the social problems of the state certainly is 
my philosophy. 

This meeting was held in December, 1966, 
and in January, 1967, the Roman Catholic 
church officially joined the Nevada Council of 
Churches. New officers were elected, and Don 
Winne, who is the assistant attorney general 
for the state of Nevada, is the new president. 

The state has some very peculiar problems 
for a Council of Churches, since the two major 
population centers are Las Vegas and Reno, 
separated by 450 miles. It is hard to get a board 
together. It is equally strange that the impetus 
and the whole movement for organization 
was in the north, and it was a matter of 
bringing the southern people into the idea 
after it once had gotten started. And while 
they are excited, and agreeable, they really are 
not in the core of it as much as the northern 
churches are because it didn’t begin there. We 
had all kinds of transportation problems, and 
program problems and problems of how you 
get even the board together, or how you have 
annual meetings and where. How do you do 
a statewide ecumenical service? The closest 
we’ve had was the visit of the Archbishop of 
Canterbury (the Episcopalians did) to which 
clergymen from all over the state were invited. 

I think that there are some structural 
problems within the council that will have 
to be corrected. I think that the board of 
directors are people who are too busy. 
They’ve got both bishops, of the Catholic, 
of the Episcopal, the head of Presbyterians, 
the head of the Baptists, and these people 


are so busy you can’t get them all together at 
one time. They need to change the executive 
board to either these people’s second man, 
or some other arrangement, at least to have a 
functioning steering committee that can meet. 

Charitable Organizations 

In 1956 the Colony Christian Center was 
accepted into the Community Chest. Mrs. 
Haley was the executive secretary, and our 
first allocation—we applied for $2,400 and 
got $2,160. They almost had a successful 
campaign, and I can remember some of the 
fighting. Even at that time there was a great 
deal of tension between the YMCA and 
the Salvation Army—almost a fistfight one 
night—Mr. Orville Wahrenbrock and Captain 
John Phillips. The Community Chest even 
then reflected some of the tensions of this 
whole community. 

The Community Chest and United 
Fund agencies have had to spend a good ten 
percent of their working hours in defending 
themselves against charges that have long 
since been proven false—over and over and 
over again, duplication of effort and waste 
of money. My statement on it is that I don’t 
know of any agency that isn’t fifty percent 
under-funded. I feel that most of them are 
very competent. 

The most successful campaign, actually, of 
the Community Chest was handled by Jordan 
Crouch, and his psychological tack was one of 
fear. That if the Community Chest went down 
the drain, then you had thirteen agencies 
calling on you instead of one, and he raised 
more money, percentage-wise, than anybody. 
But the Community Chest did not go down 
the drain. Mrs. Haley was fired and, I always 
thought, maltreated. I used to have problems, 
myself, but I never thought she was treated in 
a humane way, but that’s another story. 



90 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


The United Fund came into existence 
under Ernest Orchard, one of the most 
capable public relations men and fund 
raisers I’ve known. He had a couple of slight 
character problems that eventually were 
used against him, but he raised more money, 
percentage-wise, than anybody 

In all the time I was with the United 
Fund, the most effective campaign chairman 
that they ever had was [Charles] “Chick” 
Stout of the newspaper, the most efficient 
administrator I ever saw, quiet, but he really 
got the job done. Newspapers have always 
been active supporters of the United Fund, 
and they have always produced above and 
beyond the call of duty. Probably more 
newspaper space is devoted to the United 
Fund in the Reno area than—percentage¬ 
wise—than any other newspaper in the 
country. They’ve had good help from the Ad 
Club and from the Press Club—volunteer 
advertising agencies. 

The hardest problem that the United 
Fund has to overcome is that there is a 
community attitude in Reno that’s really 
hard to understand. They have one very 
basic principle and that is everybody ought 
to help themselves. And yet anybody that 
has a program of self-help, they are criticized 
because they don’t give direct public assistance 
money to people that are poor. There is a 
certain amount of competition among the 
agencies for the welfare dollar, and there’s 
always the problem of the multiple drives 
in addition to the United Fund by national 
health agencies like Cancer, Heart, and TB 
and Muscular Dystrophy, etc.. I don’t know 
what the answers to that ire. We had quite 
a hassle with the Nevada Rehabilitation 
Association one time—Marjorie DaCosta 
and Bill Richards felt that we were unfair 
in evaluating them. The Mayor’s Advisory 
Council on charitable contributions, I think, 


are rather inefficient, ineffectual—have made 
some decisions once in a while. 

But the real problem in the United Fund 
in Reno is money They should be at a level 
of about $500,000 a year and they can’t raise 
$300,000 a year. What happens is that the 
agencies run first-class agencies for a very 
small portion of the people that need to be 
served. YMCA’s building is used night and 
day, and doesn’t touch ten percent of the 
population. It’s in a middle-class section and 
geared to middle- and upper-class people, 
completely, you know; maybe one percent of 
the people that go to the YMCA are minority 
people, and that doesn’t help. A long internal 
battle between YMCA and YWCA is a 
disgrace in the community There’s more to 
do than either one of them can do, and there’s 
no time to fight, but personality problems and 
conflicts there cause that. 

The ultimate answer to the United Fund 
is total payroll deduction. Any time that there 
is any advance in giving in the United Fund, 
it’s always by getting some large employer 
to approve a payroll deduction. If the whole 
community would support that activity, they 
could forget all the rest of it, and that would 
take care of it. One of the problems is that 
it’s been a failure so many times that people 
hate to get associated with a failure. But with 
a few exceptions, I think it is doing the best 
that it can until the power structure of the city 
completely changes its tack. I think that the 
need is seen by the power decision makers. It’s 
so far short of the need as seen by the agencies 
that the real job never gets done, and I’m not 
an advocate of wasting money. 

Our own agency always got more than the 
percentage of increase, usually, of any other 
agency And I do think that the progression of 
increase of allocation to the Colony Christian 
Center was, you know, the best that could 
be done at the time. But I could almost 



Activities in Civic Organizations and Welfare Groups 


91 


categorically state that we could have done 
twice what we did with maybe half again as 
much money I do know this, that we did 
decrease the cost per contact from one dollar 
per contact the first, year to thirty cents the 
last year. The first year we had 8,000 total 
attendance; the last year we had 60,000 total 
attendance. The first year our allocation was 
$2,100, and the last year it was $10,000. But in 
efficiency we had reduced the contact figure 
to thirty cents per contact. 

There is a genuine lack of enthusiasm 
about the United Fund in Reno, and another 
one of the inconsistencies of logic of it is that 
everybody says that they are in favor of private 
organizations doing the job and yet, when it 
comes down to it, there is a cynical attitude 
that the government is going to do it one of 
these days anyway. They’re opposed to that, 
but they never give any money to support 
the private organizations, or very little, not 
enough. So what in effect happens is that what 
they really want is the private agency, and 
what they’re going to get is the government 
doing the job, and it’s not consistent. 

I also was in the Community Service 
Council, which has a long history of ups and 
downs. The two years that I was president, it 
had the highest number of members and the 
most active program that it ever had in its 
history. This organization always fluctuated 
between deciding whether or not it wanted to 
be “goal-centered” with projects. I wanted it 
to be goal-centered and it was, and it created 
more fellowship of social workers than it 
ever had. When it deteriorates to being social 
centered, very few people come to have that 
fellowship. I don’t know where it is this year. 

There is an internal battle all the time 
between the United Fund agencies and 
the non-United Fund agencies. There is 
always a power struggle by the non-United 
Fund agencies to keep the United Fund 


administrative people out of control of it. 
There is a great fear that it will be used for 
investigative and evaluative purposes. Very 
few private agencies want to be evaluated 
by outsiders, because evaluations of private 
agencies can be used for all kinds of purposes. 
If you want to prove that they “do nothing,” 
you can actually do that statistically, if people 
don’t know better in reading it and don’t know 
other criteria for evaluating, it could be very 
detrimental to any program. Most programs 
can be evaluated to show how much they do 
if you use the right criteria. 

There’s all kinds of subtleties within the 
Community Service Council, why it doesn’t 
really become cohesive. There is some fear 
that some time the city government is going 
to take it over and use it for political purposes. 
I always thought that it should be a voice in 
the community for generating concern for 
social problems and to do research upon 
which support could be gained for long-range 
planning and actuation. We were moving 
in that direction—we never got there, and 
apparently they are not headed there now. 
We did have something like seventy-five 
organizations in it, and the meetings that 
we had were extremely interesting and the 
programs were very beneficial. I enjoyed it 
very much. 

Some of the interesting charitable 
organizations in Reno are the service clubs. 
Service clubs supported our program very 
well; the Lions, the Rotary, the Elks, and the 
Kiwanis Clubs. We always reciprocated by 
helping with the Kiwanis Club’s program 
distribution at the Washoe County Fair and 
selling Christmas trees, this kind of thing. 

There is a lot of what is called “emergency 
welfare done by the downtown Kiwanis Club 
under Ed McAmoil. Ed’s one of those grass 
roots saints that lives in the community 
that always finds the way to buy a kid a 



92 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


pair of shoes, or a sweater, and to gather 
up the welfare baskets at Christmas and 
Thanksgiving. Sometimes he’s tried to become 
an administrator of a long-range welfare 
program, which I don’t think he’s capable of, 
but I do think he’s one of the best people I 
have ever known to do the emergency welfare 
work that nobody else can do because of the 
bureaucratic rules and regulations. I think 
there is a real need for that and I think he 
fills it very well. 

I have very positive feelings about all of 
the United Fund agencies in the Reno—I 
think they all have their own job to do and 
their own role to fulfill. I really do not think 
that there is any reason for a great deal of 
competition because the problem is much 
bigger than all of them put together can meet. 
If everybody does all they can on their own 
they’re going to have all the work they possibly 
can accomplish. 

Testimony before the Interior 
Department Task Force on the 
Washoe Project 

One of the most serious problems facing 
the Indian people in the state of Nevada has 
to do with water rights and water resources. 
The focus of this problem centered in 1964 
around the Washoe Project and its effect upon 
the water in Pyramid Lake. The Newlands 
Project and the building of Derby Dam and 
the creation of the Lahontan Reservoir for 
irrigation purposes in the Fallon - Churchill 
County area took a certain amount of the 
water that once flowed down the Truckee 
River to Pyramid Lake and put it elsewhere. 
In those days, property rights of Indians were 
not in the forefront of legal judgment. This, 
in turn, led to serious problems in the 1960’s 
as the water level in Pyramid Lake began to 
seriously fall. 


The Indian tribe at Pyramid Lake has 
the prime water rights of the Truckee River, 
legally. In all of the history of the dealings 
with the Bureau of Indian Affairs, not once, 
at any time, whatsoever, did the Bureau take 
any position to defend those rights. In the 
Newlands Project agreements, no attorney 
or representative of the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs sought to protect the water rights 
of the Indian people. Later reallocations of 
water—acre feet of water from the Truckee 
River—were done without consultation, 
consent or legal representation from the 
Indian people. And as a result, a great deal 
of the water was allocated elsewhere, and 
what water was allocated to Pyramid Lake 
was for agricultural purposes which Pyramid 
Lake people were never involved in. They 
were fishing people, whose prime industry 
was operating a fishery at the mouth of the 
Truckee River, creation of fish ladders, so that 
the giant cut-throat trout could migrate up the 
Truckee to the spawning beds at the mouth 
of Lake Tahoe. Indian people in the old days 
were the sovereign masters of the situation. 
They were in control of their environment; 
they made the fish work for them. They used 
to smoke them, and dry them, preserve them, 
so they could have protein on a year-round 
basis. And they were fat, healthy Indians when 
General Fremont arrived. 

The Interior Department created a task 
force to study the Washoe Project as it had 
been promoted by the people of the state of 
Nevada and through their Congress, and in 
October of 1964, they sent a task force to Reno 
to have an open hearing. One of the members 
of the task force was ex-superintendent of the 
Nevada Indian Agency, at that time working 
for the Department of Interior in Washington, 
Mr. Fryer. As a part of Mr. Fryer’s strategy 
for the meeting, he talked to Mr. Bennett, 
who is the present superintendent of the 



Activities in Civic Organizations and Welfare Groups 


93 


Bureau of Indian Affairs, to see if they could 
not find some aggressive person in the Reno 
area would speak vigorously in behalf of the 
Indian situation. 

I received a phone call at home and was 
invited to come to a secret meeting in the 
Mapes hotel and hear what they would like to 
have done. I went. Mr. Bennett was there. Mr. 
Fryer was there, and a couple of other aides, 
and they gave me some basic information, 
past history, even some documents, dating 
back to 1869, documents that showed that 
the old Indian agents for the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs were very concerned about 
what happened to the Indians and how the 
Pyramid Lake Reservation was established, 
that its original function was to be as a fishing 
grounds for Indians. Documents that told 
about the immorality of unscrupulous white 
people who exploited Indians into crime and 
prostitution in order to eat. 

So from the information given to me 
by Mr. Fryer, I developed a statement, and 
decided that I would go to the task force on 
the basis of being the chairman of the Nevada 
Advisory Committee to the United States 
Commission on Civil Rights, and make my 
pitch on behalf of Indian water rights on 
the basis of the conservative principle of 
protection of property rights. And that they 
had been discriminated against by the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs, the federal government, 
including Congress—especially Congress—in 
the fact that Indians had never been provided 
equal representation before the law in the 
defense of their property rights, and the 
discrimination came on the basis that they 
were Indians. And this was done. 

I went to the meeting, and my good 
friend, Les Gray, decided to go along with 
me. He was the vice-chairman of the Advisory 
Committee, and we were on very hostile 
ground. My turn came, and I got up and read 


the five-page statement, which is attached to 
this history/ It wasn’t bad when I started out, 
but it got pretty blue in there. I think one of the 
statements that was rather strong was that the 
task force was really irrelevant. They shouldn’t 
be there deciding how to divide up the water. 
They should be there asking the Indians if they 
could buy some of it, because it belonged to 
them. I felt that the Indian people would be 
very fair with the white people, in spite of the 
way that they had been treated, because they 
were reasonable people, and felt that some of 
the water that came down the Truckee could 
be shared with those who thought that ducks 
were more important than people, and fourth- 
grade agricultural land had some value, and 
that they would not treat others the way they 
had been treated for the past sixty or seventy 
years. I waited and nobody adjourned the 
meeting, so I continued with the statement 
and built a case on their behalf. 

Indian people that talked to me beforehand 
had told me that they had no objection to 
Ducks Unlimited, and agriculture purposes, 
and Lahontan Reservoir; they were madder 
than wet hens, I guess, or mad as I was, about 
the fact that so much water was just run out 
in the sand at end of Lahontan, that the canal 
leaks water, is very poorly managed, and 
very disastrously and poorly administered 
stewardship of the precious water that came 
down the Truckee. They have to stabilize the 
water level of Pyramid Lake or they can’t 
develop it economically. 

Bob Leland had made some very excellent 
and telling arguments in favor of classifying 
Pyramid Lake as a recreational area instead 
of an agricultural area because, although, 
in 1904 agriculture was at a high priority in 


*See Mathews papers, University of 
Nevada Library, Reno. 




94 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


America, in modern America, recreation has 
a much higher priority, especially in northern 
Nevada, than agriculture would. 

I was thanked for my testimony by the 
chairman. Mr. Gray got up and supported 
the courage with which I had spoken, and the 
points which I had made, and he, in a sense, 
showed a lot of it himself because this is a very 
sensitive power area. It panicked some people. 

The next day they brought Senator Carl 
Dodge, a very good friend of mine, to testify 
in behalf of the fourth-grade agricultural land. 
I was a little amused because he got up to 
speak and started out like it was going to be a 
long speech, and the further he got along with 
his arguments, the more he became convinced 
that they weren’t valid, and sat down. 

The thing that angered me was that after 
the hearing, two months later, we found out 
that the Department of Interior and this task 
force had in their possession, legal opinion 
by the Solicitor General of the Department 
of Interior that my argument was correct, 
and that the Indians did have the prime 
water rights, and that really, they ought to 
start all over with it. This is 1968, and the 
argument has still not been resolved. They 
did promise to have better stewardship of the 
water going down the Truckee River, and they 
did promise, I think it was something like 
119—guaranteed 119,000 acre feet of water 
per year for Pyramid Lake, but to the present 
time, they still have never recognized the basic 
property right of the Indians. 

I have even suggested that the Sierra 
Pacific Power Company add twenty-five 
cents per month to every residential, and 
a dollar per month to every business water 
bill in Washoe County and send the money 
to the Pyramid Lake Indian Council, which 
would give them an economic base upon 
which to develop their reservation. It would 
be the most practical poverty program I can 


imagine, and legal, and just. Of course, that’s 
never been done, either. 

There were some very active people in this 
whole thing. Of course, Mr. Leland carried 
the ball. In the beginning, Mr. Gray and I 
got in on a supportive basis to what he was 
doing. Later on, we split with him because 
we thought that he was compromising before 
he needed to. Indian people were confused; 
they didn’t know which way to go. They were 
afraid that if they went with Mr. Gray and I 
they might get nothing, if they went with Mr. 
Leland they might only get half of what they 
should, but they’d get something. They agreed 
with us in principle and I think they agreed 
with Mr. Leland, eventually, in the practical 
solution of the problem. 

Melvin Tom of the Schurz Indian 
Reservation, which has similar problems with 
the regard to the Carson River and Walker 
Lake, led the whole battle. He thought it was 
the time for Indians to demonstrate how they 
felt. He even wanted to have Indian pickets up 
and down the Truckee River, which I thought 
was a pretty good idea, but the Indian people 
didn’t. Mel was president at the time of the 
National Indian Youth Council, which I guess 
he still is. 

And there were a lot of meetings held 
in Mr. Leland’s house—strategy—they 
had a publicity campaign. We held a press 
conference at the Riverside Hotel and invited 
the press, at which the Indian leaders made 
statements on the Washoe Project—Mr. Gray 
made them, I made them, Leland made them. 
Even enlisted the help of Raymond I. Smith 
of Harold’s Club to come and testify on behalf 
of the Indians for the task force. Community 
sympathy in Washoe County was with the 
Indians. 

Power sympathy in Washoe County was in 
terms of private interest in really a frustrated 
situation because, I really think that the power 



Activities in Civic Organizations and Welfare Groups 


95 


people, even the power company and TCID 
were not antagonistic to the Indians—they 
just didn’t know how to resolve the problem 
to the mutual benefit of all. And so naturally, 
they took a very strong position of their 
own—protecting their own self interests. 
But I really think that this is a good example 
of how basic American ideals and principles 
could be applied to Indian reservations for the 
economic benefit of Indians. If their property 
rights were respected, this is a respect of 
human dignity. If their property rights were 
respected, and they were allowed to become 
economic entrepreneurs with that property, 
that the whole need for poverty programs and 
all this welfare, and everything else, would 
be eliminated. The hard thing to do is to get 
people to transfer the appropriated resources 
back to the original owners. My judgment at 
this time, and probably in the future, is that 
probably the most just group would have been 
the Indians, who would not have tried in any 
way to harm the interests of other involved 
people. And probably in some ways, this is 
the reason that they are in the shape they are 
in, because they are too just. 

Bringing this up to date, there have been 
some very fine newspaper and radio programs 
with regard to Pyramid Lake and the Washoe 
Project and the water in the Truckee River. I’m 
sure that that information will be available to 
those who are interested in this problem in 
the future. My testimony before the task force 
will be included in this history. The only other 
thing that I have to say on this was that I wrote 
an article and sent it to the Saturday Evening 
Post , entitled “Indian Freedom Now,” in 
which I recommended the termination of the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs because the Indian 
people are perfectly capable of handling their 
own. After all, they did run the whole state of 
Nevada for four thousand years without any 
help from anybody I still have the pink slip 


from the Saturday Evening Post. However, that 
article is being circulated at the present time 
for other possible publication. I will make 
one other comment, I did mimeograph five 
hundred copies of my speech and circulated 
it throughout all the Indian communities that 
I could get it to. I did it because I wanted the 
Indian people to know the kind of thought 
that could possibly be beneficial to them in 
fighting for their own rights. Every place I 
went from then on in the state of Nevada with 
Indians, I was greeted with an added sense of 
warmth, I think. 

There is still the old conditioned response 
in the Indian people of a kind of hopelessness, 
that in spite of the fact that this is right, a kind 
of a feeling of despair, that they couldn’t really 
count on the people who made the power 
decisions to ever change their mind. They did 
not trust the Bureau, rightfully. They never 
have done anything for them before, why 
should they do it now? And really, there is a 
lack of confidence that their own concerted 
efforts to pressure would ever change the 
situation. In a sense, I think I agree with 
them; I think that the only way that they can 
get anything done these days is to ignore the 
Bureau, go around them, and go direct and 
deal with the power structures that really 
affect them, and just eliminate the Bureau as 
one of them. 




5 


Civil Rights Activities 


My activities in the civil rights field 
began with a phone call from William (Bill) 
Horgan. Bill Horgan called me one day and 
said he wanted to talk to me. I said, “All 
right,” and he came over to my house. He said 
he was the chairman of the Nevada Advisory 
Committee to the U. S. Commission on Civil 
Rights and they were looking for someone 
who was conversant with the problems 
of Indians to be on the Committee, and 
that Bill Geyer, who at that time was my 
accountant, knew Bill Horgan and they had 
been talking about it and he recommended 
me. He asked me if I was interested, and 
I said that I was if they were interested in 
really doing something. He said they were 
having a hard time designing the program. 
They didn’t know exactly how to get at it, 
and I said, “Well, what about having some 
open meetings?” 

“Well,” he said, “it sounds like a good 
idea.” 

“Well,” I said, “If you want to do a survey 
in the state of Nevada with some meetings in 
Elko, and Las Vegas, and Reno, I’d be glad to 


participate, to do what I could on behalf of 
the Indians.” So that was the beginning of it. 

That year we had a hearing in Reno 
and in Las Vegas and in Elko. And on the 
committee at that time was Les Gray from 
Reno, an attorney; Elwin Robinson, a Buick 
car dealer in Ely; Woodrow Wilson, a Negro 
from Las Vegas, who was head of the Federal 
Westside Credit Union. There was a real 
estate lady from Las Vegas at that time; she 
resigned; and one of the Bunkers, Wendell, 
I think, from Lat Vegas. 

The hearing that we held in Las Vegas 
produced a lot of testimony about the 
problems on the Westside, but I also had 
some of my Indian people go out to the 
Indian colony in Las Vegas and invite some 
of the Indians. They were successful; they 
had three or four Indian ladies from that Las 
Vegas colony come to the meeting. And the 
most interesting testimony at that time that 
we got in Las Vegas was about that Indian 
colony, and Mayor Gragson attended. One 
of the things that we discovered at that 
meeting from the Indian people was that 



98 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


they had a deed that dated way back to 1917, 
I think, when the land was given to them, 
and apparently, for some reason, the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs did not feel responsible for 
them because they were getting no services, 
and no health services. They were terribly 
angry at the doctors, they said, because they 
had been promised a water system if they 
would dig the ditch for the water, and they 
had dug the ditch for the water, and they still 
didn’t have the water. 

Now the Las Vegas colony is composed of 
a multitude of different tribal people—some 
of them outlaws from other tribes, and it is 
one of the worst colonies in Nevada. A small 
group of completely despairing people living 
in deplorable shacks, almost within throwing 
distance of downtown Las Vegas. So I got up 
in the meeting and said to the mayor, not 
in the name of politics, or in the name of 
red tape, but just in the name of humanity, 
I wondered what he could do about it? And 
he got up and said that he didn’t know, but he 
was sure going to find out. 

I really have a great deal of respect for 
Mayor Gragson because he did something 
about it. He went to the Kiwanis Club and 
some of his Mormon friends and they built 
a shower house and a laundry out in the 
middle of the colony. When we got back to 
Reno, Les Gray and I got on the phone to 
Alan Bible and we found out that $25,000 
had been appropriated for that water line, 
and the Senator thought it was in. Within 
twenty-four hours the trucks from the United 
States Public Health Service were rolling out 
of Phoenix towards that colony. And within 
ninety days that water line was in there. And 
then the shower house and the laundry was 
built. And you know, that doesn’t even scratch 
the surface of the problems in that colony, 
but it opened a door, because from then on 
the welfare people would come into that area 


and at least they would get the door opened 
in the shack and people would talk to them 
a little bit. I, myself, have been in that colony 
when a fellow was standing behind a tree with 
a shotgun aimed at the back of my head the 
whole time I was there. It was a very hostile 
area, to say the least. 

Also at the meeting in Las Vegas—this 
was right after the election of Grant Sawyer as 
governor, and he made quite a few promises 
in the campaign; we decided to follow up with 
those—we passed a resolution to petition 
the Commission on Civil Rights to hold a 
hearing in Nevada on discrimination—the 
subpoena power. Mr. Bunker, who was a 
supporter of the governor, became so angry 
he walked out of the meeting and resigned 
from the committee because he thought we 
were playing dirty politics. I went to him after 
the meeting and told him that I was sorry I 
had offended him, and to make up for it he 
could do me a favor. And he got me a ticket 
to hear Frank Sinatra, and I haven’t seen Mr. 
Bunker since, but I always appreciated that. 
What he didn’t know was that I had talked to 
Grant Sawyer before we had the meeting and 
he told me that if we would do that and get 
something done down there, that he would 
follow it up with the presentation of a civil 
rights bill in the 1959 session. We did, and he 
did. But then, the facts of political life began 
to raise their ugly heads, and Grant Sawyer 
never was able to deliver in that session. 

Sawyer was elected in 1958 the first time. 
This was in ’59 and that session we did not get 
anything; they even tried a human relations 
council and that was voted down. So we held 
a hearing in Reno in which Negro people 
and Indian people came and testified to the 
problems they were having in the field of 
discrimination, like ninety-five percent of 
all the restaurants in downtown Reno were 
closed to Negroes, none of the hotels would 



Civil Rights Activities 


99 


allow them to stay, only one motel, I think, 
between Reno and Salt Lake City would 
allow them to stay The housing patterns were 
pretty definite. The employment situation was 
really critical—only the lowest end jobs were 
available at that time to Negroes. It was really 
a segregated city. 

We also went to Hawthorne and had a very 
interesting hearing. We had a lot of people 
from Las Vegas come up to help, and we had a 
lot of testimony of the Negroes in Hawthorne 
to the fact that they were scared to death of the 
sheriff, and that the El Capitan was closed to 
them. The preliminary hearing got the picture 
pretty rapidly. It seems that in Hawthorne a 
great deal of the problem, racially, began with 
the coming of the ammunition depot. Many of 
the people came from the South, both Negro 
and white, to work there. And the pattern of 
segregation was set. 

We also went up to Elko and had a 
hearing. It produced very little results except 
that everybody was claiming that the Basques 
got all the jobs in the city. The Indians and 
the Negroes couldn’t get them. Some fear of 
the police department was evidenced, but 
nothing concrete. 

So we went into the 1961 session of the 
legislature. I went down on my own as a 
lobbyist volunteer, and we tried to get the 
Equal Rights Commission. It became a very 
heated session. The chief lobbyist for the 
NAACP in Las Vegas was Charles Keller. And 
just before the session started, the statewide 
NAACP sponsored a civil rights rally in 
the assembly on a Saturday. I attended that; 
in fact, I spoke at that. I remember saying 
that—I think I quoted President Eisenhower, 
President Truman, President Kennedy, and 
that all of them had favored civil rights—the 
time had come when we no longer should talk 
about it in Nevada but should make it a reality. 
There was enthusiastic reception to these 


remarks, and then Mr. Keller got up, and in 
his inimitable New York political style, ruined 
everything. He harangued. In fact, Woodrow 
Wilson went out to the men’s room and threw 
up, he got so sick. So we were in real trouble 
when the session started. 

An immediate opponent became visible 
in Senator Slattery. We really got nowhere. 
The proposed bill had criminal penalties for 
discrimination in employment, and housing, 
and public accommodations. I had worked 
with Rex Bell and Les Gray, did not work too 
much with Governor Sawyer—a little, not 
much. Rex Bell indicated to me some sincere 
concern. He was not clear as to the mechanical 
methods of how to produce what wanted to 
be done. 

As the session wore on, the steam built 
up, and as the steam built up, it became very 
interesting. The critical day for the vote on 
civil rights in the assembly, the governor was 
in Chicago, and Chet Christenson was the 
speaker. The assessment by Charles Keller, 
Eddie Scott, and myself was that we couldn’t 
make it—but we were going to try it. So we 
let the vote go, and it was defeated. 

Mr. Keller immediately called a conference 
of the ways and means committee of all the 
Negroes that were there, and there were a 
considerable number, at which he made a 
statement, and I will quote him exactly, “It was 
a shame in the state of Nevada, that when the 
captain was away, the rats deserted the ship.” 
In which he was indicating that he’d had a 
commitment from the governor for support 
of this bill, but being that he was in Chicago, 
that those who were running the floor fight 
for him had not fought the battle with the 
sane vigor that he felt that Grant Sawyer 
would fight it. 

The press in the state of Nevada distorted 
that statement. An editorial by John Sanford 
in the Reno Evening Gazette accused Mr. 



100 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


Keller of calling the distinguished legislators 
“rats.” I think what really angered them was 
that Mr. Keller organized a picket, in which 
many of the Negroes carried placards around 
the capitol accusing the various people 
and groups of scuttling the civil rights law, 
including the Mormon Church, certain 
senators, legislators. 

Tension grew. One of the leaders of the 
movement was Eddie Scott from Sparks, 
Nevada. A few days later, to show his 
displeasure, he organized a picket line of 
about fifteen to twenty people, quite a few of 
them children, and he picketed the New China 
Club in Reno, Harrah’s Club, Harolds Club, 
the Bank of Commerce, because he felt that 
some of the senators were voting the dictates 
of the owners of these establishments. This 
created a lot of tension down in the capitol 
because there was nation-wide publicity. It 
kind of got dirty about that time because 
the gamblers accused me of trying to fight 
gambling through civil rights in this way. 
It hadn’t occurred to me. I really sincerely 
had not thought that we were hurting the 
gaming industry was very concerned with 
the practices of the gaining industry with 
reference to civil rights, and had nothing to 
do with gambling as morality. 

Now came the most fantastic coincidence 
that I know of. On the day that Eddie Scott 
was picketing I stayed in Reno that morning 
and didn’t come down to Carson. I was just 
trying to think it out; and I never did come 
to any conclusions of how to solve this thing 
because the Negroes were determined to. 
have a civil rights bill and up to this point the 
legislature was adamantly opposed. I came 
down anyway—I got in the car and came down 
to Carson. I went into the Senator Cafe, and I 
sat down at the corner of the lunch counter. 
While I was eating I glanced over to one of the 
booths and saw Senator Slattery sitting there. 


Senator Slattery and I have always gotten 
along reasonably well as people. We’ve 
disagreed almost absolutely on civil rights, 
but we were always able to kid each other 
and talk to each other. And one thing I have 
always found out about him is that he tells 
you the truth. If he says he’s opposed to you, 
he’s opposed to you. He’s not going to tell you 
he’s one way and then be another. He’ll tell 
he’s going to fight you and he does. But in the 
meantime, you can j oke with him and kid with 
him and talk about anything else besides civil 
rights. Some things we do agree on and get 
along fine. I even think the Negro people feel 
the same way Senator Slattery, in some ways, 
has been one of the most effective people in 
getting civil rights that we’ve had; you’ve got 
to have somebody who’s opposed to it, or you 
never get anywhere. 

He looked up and he saw me, and he 
motioned for me to come over, and I picked 
up my cup of coffee and went over and sat 
down beside him. I noticed he was a little pale. 
He says, “Mathews, what the hell are we going 
to do about this?” 

And I said, “Well, I don’t know, Senator.” 

He said, “Incidentally, what do you do 
for a living?” Up till now, in two sessions, he 
didn’t know 

And I said, “Well, you know, I’m the 
missionary out in the Indian Colony.” 

And he said, “Oh, I thought you were a 
lawyer. I hate lawyers.” And he was probably 
trying to tell me that now was the time to be 
friends. 

I said, “I’ve been thinking on the way 
down here, and I think I’ve got an answer 
for this.” 

And he said, “Well, what is it?” 

“Well,” I said, “Here’s the way I analyze 
the whole situation: First of all, the legislators 
are afraid to give a civil rights bill to the Negro 
people of the state of Nevada because you are 



Civil Rights Activities 


101 


afraid that they will abuse the law for their 
own self interests. And you are afraid what 
will happen if you give them one. Now,” I said, 
“The Negro people are afraid of what’s going 
to continue to happen to them if they don’t 
get one, because they’ve been discriminated 
against for three hundred years and they don’t 
see any other way out except by the force of 
law. And,” I said, “they claim that they have 
the problem of discrimination and you people 
claim that they don’t. I side with the Negroes 
on this. But in order to give you the benefit of 
the doubt, why don’t you create an equal rights 
commission, with the power to investigate the 
facts, and report back to you at the beginning 
of the next session of the legislature. And 
upon those facts, then you either create civil 
rights laws or you reject them, and throw it 
out altogether.” 

He said, “What kind of power do you have 
to have?” 

And I said, “Well, they ought to have 
subpoena power.” 

He said, “What kind of budget?” 

I said, “They ought to have enough money 
to do the j ob and you’ll have to figure that out.” 

He says, “You know, that sounds good to 
me and I’ll tell you something, I’ll go for it. 
Why don’t you go ask the governor if he will?” 

I looked over and there sat Grant Sawyer 
and Bruce Barnum. So I walked over to the 
governor and I said, “Would you go for a 
human relations commission that would 
gather the facts, with subpoena power, with 
enough budget to do it to report back to the 
next session?” 

He said, “I’ll go.” And Bruce Barnum said 
he would sure go. He said, it sounded good 
to him. So then I looked over in another 
booth and saw Senator Dodge and Senator 
Settelmeyer and Senator Lemaire. 

And I went and sat down and said, “I’ve 
got a commitment from Slattery, and I’ve got 


one from the governor on an equal rights 
commission that will gather facts and report 
to the next session with subpoena power.” 

And they said, “I don’t know if we go 
for that or not.” So I went through with 
them again the same analysis that I had 
given to Senator Slattery. And I think the 
reasonableness and rationality of what I said 
at least got from them this. They said, “Why 
don’t you go over and put something down 
on paper for us, and in the meantime we’ll 
talk about it, and we’ll meet you over there.” 

Well, that was good enough for me, and I 
got out of there and walked over to the capitol 
and, on the way over, I got to thinking of all 
the proposed civil rights bills that we had put 
together there in the last three or four years, 
that everything that I was talking about was 
in a part of three of them. So I went up to the 
legislative room there where they have copies 
of all the bills and I asked for copies of three 
bills. And I took them into a little room and 
I took a pen and I marked out parts of one 
on one, and parts of another one on another 
one, and parts of another one on the last one. 
And I got some scissors and cut them out and 
went and got some glue and glued those three 
parts on one piece of paper and then I went 
and gave them to Rex Bell. And Eddie Scott 
was still picketing. 

Rex Bell called a special committee 
meeting in the private committee room there 
off the senate chamber. He invited me and Bill 
Bailey from Reno, a Negro. In that meeting 
were Senator Slattery, Carl Dodge, Peter 
Echeverria, Mahlon Brown, I think that’s all— 
there might have been a couple more but I 
think that’s all. And they went through my law 
proposal and, first of all, they wanted to take 
out the subpoena power. I insisted that they 
leave it in there because, I said, “If you don’t do 
that—when they do report back to you, you 
won’t believe it anyway.” So they left it in. Then 



102 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


we got to talking about money. They ended up 
with only $2,500 for this commission and it 
was just, you know, terrible, but in order to get 
the thing going we agreed to it. They approved 
it with a recommendation to the senate And 
Senator Slattery got up from the meeting and 
went out to the phone booth and he phoned 
somebody, I do not know who, and during the 
conversation he turned white as a sheet, but he 
came back and he said, “I’ve agreed to it, and 
I’m going to stick with it.” And the law passed 
that afternoon and the picketing stopped. And 
that’s how the Equal Rights Commission in 
the state of Nevada was formed. 

An interesting thing that developed out 
of that, and I’ll be very candid. I’ve always 
had a great admiration for the ability of 
Grant Sawyer as a politician. One of the 
ablest communicators Nevada has ever 
know. He’s a great public relations man. But 
I’ve had difficulty in the way that he acts in 
contrast sometimes to the way he talks. I 
have been very appreciative and sensitive to 
the pressures that were on him. I know that 
within his own party Senator Monroe was 
violently opposed to civil rights of any kind. I 
know that he had great pressure from some of 
the conservative Republicans. Within his own 
party he had a lot of pressures against civil 
rights from the cow counties, but he always 
talked in favor of civil rights. Now he had the 
bill in his hands and he signed it. 

It was passed sometime in April of 1961; 
by the summer of 1961 he had still not 
appointed the commission. It wasn’t way up 
until the fall of 1961 that he began to put that 
thing together. And he only did that after 
our advisory committee on civil rights had a 
hearing in Reno and Les Gray and I took him 
apart for dragging his feet on the commission. 

I want to make special mention of my 
very good friend Les Gray and his wife Alleta. 
Les always says a friend is one who knowing 


all about you likes you anyway, and I always 
tell him that that is a two-way street. Les is a 
fine man, and an excellent lawyer and in my 
opinion would have made a great senator 
from the state of Nevada. His is a brilliant 
mind and he is a very able politician. I believe 
he is more able in getting others elected than 
in ever getting himself elected, but that does 
not mean he would not have made a great 
senator. I do not believe he has ever lost a 
case before the Supreme Court in Nevada, 
maybe one, which attests to his ability. He 
and Alleta are Christian Scientists who do 
not go to church. I call them rebels or heretics 
but they are very sincere. Les calls me his sky 
pilot but really we are just friends who share, 
encourage, enjoy and borrow from each other. 
We have worked hard together on civil rights, 
Indian problems and politics. Les is a real 
fighter and I think a great man. Alleta is one 
of the brightest persons I know and as shrewd 
a politician as they come. I count it an honor 
to call them friends. 

Governor Sawyer appointed a very 
good commission, with Bert Goldwater as 
chairman, and in January of 1962, they did try 
to have their first hearing in Las Vegas. It all 
bogged down in court actions and injunctions 
and trying to destroy the subpoena power. 
And the governor’s role—as far as I knew, 
unless there was something going on that I 
never could see—was very minimal, and Bert 
Goldwater resigned. He said if they didn’t 
have any power he wouldn’t have anything 
to do with it. So from the time that Bert 
resigned, clear up into the summer of 1962, 
no chairman. Les and I got after him again. 

The commission never really did the job 
it was supposed to do. The facts and figures 
developed by our advisory committee and 
the federal government without subpoena 
power were superior to the facts and figures 
that were developed by the commission, in my 



Civil Rights Activities 


103 


opinion. The first report of the commission 
to the legislature was less than adequate. We 
went into the 1963 session of the legislature 
with a lot of “PR” with no substance from the 
equal rights commission. I don’t want to be 
over-critical of its chairman, Bob Bailey—he 
did a great job as chairman, a great job of 
promoting the idea of civil rights—but he did 
not delegate the responsibility to anybody to 
do a professional job of preparing a report 
and gathering the real, concrete evidence. 
Maybe, due to the pressures of time and, in 
all likelihood, the financial barriers of $2,500 
a year were prohibitive. 

But we did go into the 1963 session and 
attempt to broaden the scope of the equal 
rights commission and broaden the powers 
of the punitive functions of the law. The day 
I walked into the legislature, Slattery told me 
he had me beat eleven votes to seven, and he 
was right. We worked for about sixty days and 
the first vote on civil rights when it got to the 
senate was eleven votes opposed and seven 
votes for it. There was a resurgence of effort 
by Mr. Keller and another bill was proposed, 
and a great deal of support from all over the 
state by Negroes coming to Carson, and it 
was defeated in the senate nine votes to eight. 

I think it should be pointed that while 
Republicans generally voted in a bloc opposed 
to civil rights, that its passage at this point 
could have been influenced to a great degree 
by the Democrats. But there was a very 
interesting maneuver. Of course, in 1963, 
Paul Laxalt was lieutenant governor, and 
there was a very interesting maneuver there 
to—I never did know whether Grant Sawyer 
traded Barbara Coughlan for a vote against 
civil rights by Slattery, or how that worked— 
the inner workings of that I don’t know. 
But they did say to the Republicans that the 
Democrats—I think there were only eight 
of them and there were nine Republicans— 


that the Democrats would all vote for it if all 
the Republicans would, and the Republicans 
knew that wasn’t true because there were 
at least two Democrats that were violently 
opposed to the civil rights law. They felt that 
that was a kind of a trap, that what Grant 
Sawyer was trying to do was to get at least 
two—maybe three Republicans who would 
vote for it—and with the seven votes—six 
votes that he did have, they would sneak it 
through nine to eight. And they didn’t go for 
that maneuver; they voted solidly against it. 
Senator Warren L. Monroe was not in favor 
of it, and I don’t think Senator Harvey R. 
Humphrey was. 

Anyway, the defeat of that bill caused 
more racial tension in this state than any 
single action that I am aware of. There was a 
bitter hatred created here. I was angry. I made 
a public statement that the Republicans acted 
irresponsibly. I said that they shouldn’t have 
allowed even the governor’s maneuver, if it 
was a maneuver, to do that which was right. 
And if there were three of them that were 
willing to go for the bill, they should have 
gone for it despite what Governor Sawyer 
said. In fact, I was more interested in calling 
his bluff, and getting the bill that way, than I 
was in going through the maneuver. And I 
got a lot of heat from my Republican friends 
for that statement. Later I got a lot of respect 
for it, too, because they knew I meant what 
I said, and in a way I did put principle above 
party, because I was consistent. 

I did have a commitment from Mr. Keller 
that he was going to blast the governor, which 
he never did. Generally speaking, though, 
most of the time I worked well with Mr. Keller. 
I did help in some way with getting him a 
license to practice law in the state of Nevada. I 
thought that if he was not competent, that was 
up to the bar association to say so, and if he 
was competent, then there was no reason why 



104 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


he shouldn’t. And they never did prove he was 
incompetent, so they finally did license him. 

During this time Bill Horgan became 
aware that he had cancer. I guess it was 
right after the ’61 session, and I’ve been the 
chairman of the advisory committee since 
1961, after he resigned. 

Then the world kind of changed in civil 
rights. We did go back to Hawthorne and 
we did have another hearing down there, 
completely transcribed. We found a menu 
in the Chinese restaurant that was especially 
for Negroes. When a Negro would come in 
they would hand him a different menu than 
anybody else. Coffee cost $7.50; orange juice, 
$10.00; ham and eggs, $10.00. It was fantastic, 
we have photostatic copies of that menu. 
An interesting thing developed though. We 
did talk to some of the merchants around 
town and they said the only reason that they 
discriminated was because the El Capitan did 
and because they were so powerful, and that 
if the El Capitan would, you know, change 
a little bit, they would be glad to open up. If 
they were sure that El Capitan wouldn’t take 
economic reprisals at the bank or something 
with them, they would be willing to open up. 
Everybody was fearful—Negroes were afraid 
that they were going to get maltreated by the 
police, and the small businessmen were afraid 
of the El Capitan. The El Capitan was afraid 
that they’d lose business if they let Negroes in 
because they had so many southern patrons. 

I wrote a report and said that Hawthorne 
was ruled by fear, and the newspapers 
picked that up and it became a very famous 
statement. Hawthorne people accused me of 
saying that they ruled with fear, and I did not 
say that, I said that the city was ruled by fear. 
It did stimulate a lot of action by the chamber 
of commerce down there because they said 
their image was shattered, but they got busy 
and improved the city. It was at this hearing 


in Hawthorne that Woodrow Wilson and 
the Reverend Donald Clark, both Negroes 
from Las Vegas, Les Gray, Bill Horgan and 
myself, Elwin Robison, the lawyer, and Phillip 
Hammer from the Civil Rights Commission 
in Washington went to the El Capitan for 
lunch, and we were refused admittance. Mr. 
Hammer told us that that doesn’t even happen 
in Mississippi to the advisory committee. So 
we were pretty unhappy We even telegraphed 
Senator Bible that we thought that they ought 
to maybe shut down the ammunition depot 
until the city became American in its equal 
treatment to all its citizens. No response to 
the telegram, but I think we made the point. 

Come 1965, the famous civil rights act of 
1964 by the federal government was under 
the belt, was passed; we took the tack that 
we would try to get civil rights administered 
in the state of Nevada at the local level 
and that we would put teeth into the equal 
rights commission’s law. I thought it would 
go through with a breeze, but it developed 
some very interesting opposition. Governor 
Sawyer took a very soft line on civil rights 
in 1965 and proposed a soft bill. Lieutenant 
Governor Laxalt had just been defeated for a 
senatorial campaign by Negroes primarily, on 
the Westside of Las Vegas. He’d been through 
an equal opportunity conference that our 
committee had held in Las Vegas in which 
he was subjected to intensive questioning by 
Negroes. He had been through one in Reno 
which we held, a mayor’s conference. And 
the only thing we had going for us was the 
idea that maybe the gambling people did not 
want the federal government as the first line 
of investigations in the civil rights matter, so 
I proposed a very strong bill. 

Eddie Scott and I were there right at the 
beginning of the session. We worked for about 
thirty days while they were getting tuned up 
down there, talking to each other. We began 



Civil Rights Activities 


105 


to get a little bit of progress. Eddie scheduled 
a couple of meetings, and I continually talked 
to Mr. Laxalt. We began to get a feeling that 
if we began to get some communications, 
maybe we could get the good bill done, and 
we noticed that the judiciary committee was 
beginning to really go to work on that strong 
bill, not the governors bill at all. 

The Negroes on the Westside had had 
a special meeting They called the governor 
down. Governor Sawyer went down, they told 
him that his bill was absolutely unacceptable. 
So he withdrew his support of his own bill and 
didn’t give active support to the new one; he 
just didn’t say anything. But Mel Close, who 
was chairman of the judiciary committee, 
began to do some very able and capable legal 
work on the bill, and it was constantly being 
debated inside the judiciary committee of the 
assembly. It was very good strategy to have it 
there rather than over in the senate. 

As it came along, one time a draft was 
brought out to Eddie and I to take a look at, 
and we decided we needed some help. We 
called Las Vegas and got Earl White, who 
is a Negro attorney for the Southwest Gas 
Company, and a member of our advisory 
committee at this time. And the NAACP 
flew him up to Carson, and he went through 
the bill with a fine tooth comb, made some 
recommendations for some minor changes, 
and gave his approval to it- And that, at that 
point, was what became the final bill, exactly. 

At this point I asked for some help from 
Jim Anderson of Las Vegas, who is a master 
lobbyist and strategist, to come up for the final 
day to help us in the strategy of lobbying this 
through. Then the stall came on—great big 
old stall, I don’t know what happened. Eddie 
Scott and I were sitting one day in the senate 
after everybody had gone home, and were 
discouraged as could be. Tom West came 
in. He was a citizen in the community, quite 


interested in the bill, and he was mad. You 
see, we had been sitting for three or four days 
watching on television the Selma, Alabama, 
situation with young people being beaten by 
billy clubs from police on horse-back. We 
were all in a state of shock and anger. And 
Tom was pretty angry, and he says, “By God, 
somebody’s going to have to do something 
about this and bust this thing loose.” 

I went home and I didn’t sleep well that 
night. Incidentally, in this session I was chief 
lobbyist for the Nevada Council of Churches, 
appointed with credentials, and we had been 
holding weekly meetings up at the University 
on Saturday noon as a report back on legislative 
progress to a group of interested citizens 
including ministers in Reno, and professors 
from the University. I thought through a 
statement on Selma and I went in and I typed 
it out. It was a letter to the editor, and I sent it 
in to the newspaper. It was a very strong, logical 
statement of why should we have freedom in 
America. Why should we be fighting in Viet 
Nam if we don’t have freedom in America; a 
very strong advocacy of the civil rights bill. 
It came out in the papers on Friday of that 
particular week, and Saturday I went into the 
meeting at the University pretty angry. And 
I laid it on the line; I said that I thought we 
could get the bill if we could get the governor, 
and the governor was right in the middle of 
an important week. He was getting ready to go 
to Washington and talk about Viet Nam when 
he didn’t know anything about it, and we had 
more problems in Nevada. Some of his good 
Democratic people who were in the meeting 
called Dick Ham, who was up in Winnemucca, 
and Dick Ham got ahold of the governor. 
The next thing I knew, the governor’s trip to 
Washington was cancelled; he was going to 
stay home and mind the store. 

Eddie and I and some other people 
scheduled a civil rights rally—a prayer rally— 



106 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


meeting on the capitol steps for Wednesday 
and it ended up Thursday We did that. The 
press gave us a bad time—thought it was 
phoney. Then I went downstairs and I talked 
to the governor and told him that I thought we 
might be able to make it. And he said he could 
commit to me seven votes—Democrats. If I 
could get two Republicans, wed have the bill. I 
don’t know whether he was serious or not, but 
I took it as a challenge. And I told him what 
we wanted to do was to, you know, allow him 
to provide his leadership. So we scheduled a 
civil rights rally for the next Monday on the 
capitol steps and I told him that he would be 
a speaker; Lieutenant Governor Laxalt would 
be a speaker; I would be a speaker; and wed 
have some music from the choirs of the Negro 
churches in Reno. 

Then I called Woodrow Wilson on the 
phone and he got on the plane and came up, 
and he and I went into the small anteroom off 
the senate and had a heart-to-heart talk with 
Mr. Laxalt. Paul Laxalt all through this had 
been kind of neutral; he hadn’t committed 
himself one way or the other. This time he was 
much more amenable to getting something 
done, and I told him that the climate in Nevada 
had completely changed because of the Selma 
thing; people were angry. The psychological 
moment had arrived. We told him he had lost 
his last election. If he was ever going to run 
again, he might as well do something, that this 
bill was reasonable, was on sound principles 
and was a conservative bill. So he asked 
Woodrow what he thought and Woodrow told 
him that we had to have it. The Republican 
party’s whole future was at stake, that the 
aspirations of Negroes had to be fulfilled, that 
this was a logical and reasonable way to do it. 

And so the governor turned to me, and 
from his legal mind he shot a question at me, 
he said, “Clyde, would you ever vote for a bill 
that would force intermarriage?” 


And I shot right back at him, “Governor, I 
would never vote for one that would prevent 
it.” 

And he turned to Woodrow and he says, 
“Well, you’ve got your bill.” And he said, 
“What do you want?” 

And I said, “Exactly the way it is.” 

Then he said, “Incidentally, Woodrow, 
I want you to stay because I want to have a 
press conference at two o’clock this afternoon. 
I’m going to announce it, and I’m going 
to support it. He picked up the phone and 
called up George Abbott and he set up a deal 
at his house. They had to get the cameras 
and everything over there. He went out in 
the lobby and he invited all the Negroes 
that he could find over to his house about 
three o’clock. He called Coe Swobe, who was 
the floor leader of the Republicans in the 
assembly, and told him they were going to go 
on the bill. He didn’t want any amendments 
passed; he wanted it exactly the way it was. 
To make sure that we get the sequence of 
events right, this happened after the rally on 
the capitol steps at which Governor Sawyer 
made a statement that he was cynical, he 
was pessimistic, he had never gotten the civil 
rights bill he wanted and didn’t know whether 
he was going to get one, but he hoped so. 

Laxalt made a statement where he said 
the time had come. I wrote his speech. I 
made a statement which I’ll give you for 
the files A So Lieutenant Governor Laxalt 
called a press conference and announced his 
support for the bill. It went to the assembly 
as it was, even though somebody tried a lot 
of amendments. It didn’t work. They got none 
of them. So it came to the senate out of the 
judiciary committee and nobody thought we 


*See Mathews papers, University of 
Nevada Library, Reno. 




Civil Rights Activities 


107 


were going to make it there. They thought we’d 
be killed in the finance committee because 
there was $38,000 a year for the support of 
the commission. But they didn’t know what 
we knew. 

We had had some very strong support 
from the business community. One of the 
people who was helping us had been talking 
to Wilson McGowan very strongly and so had 
the lieutenant governor. And the opponents 
of civil rights were dumbfounded when the 
bill came out of the finance- committee and 
it had the money in there. Senator Fransway, 
who was probably the bitterest opponent of 
civil rights in the state, actually had gotten the 
weekend delay to try to maneuver. But on the 
morning that this legislation, the whole bill, 
was to be considered by the senate, I wrote 
him a letter. He had always claimed to me that 
there was no problem in the state, that it was 
all imagined in the minds of Negroes. And I 
wrote him a letter in which I gave him fact, 
figure, name, date, and serial number, and 
I staked my word of honor that there was a 
problem. And I had it sent to him by the page 
ten minutes before he was to get up to make 
his speech against the bill. He read it and he 
got up to make his speech—and half way 
through it he just quit and sat down. 

Senator Slattery, I had a commitment 
from him. You see, in 1963, he had bitterly 
attacked Paul Laxalt on the floor of the 
senate because he thought that Mr. Laxalt 
was going to go for the civil rights bill in 
1963, because he came down on the floor 
and made a speech in favor of it. Senator 
Slattery attacked with extreme emotion and 
bitterness. And I had told Mr. Laxalt at our 
meeting with Woodrow Wilson that I would 
try—that I had a commitment from Senator 
Slattery. And this is what it was—Senator 
Slattery said to me that he could not vote for 
this bill because of his political stand on civil 


rights, but that he was not going to fight us; he 
would not vote for it, but he would not fight 
us. And I had a commitment from him that he 
would not even attack Lieutenant Governor 
Laxalt if he came out for it, and when I had 
that commitment, I knew we were home free. 
I told Lieutenant Governor Laxalt I had the 
commitment from Slattery that he would not 
attack him if he came out for it, which enabled 
him to move. 

And so Senator Slattery got up that 
morning and he said that he was a long-time 
opponent of civil rights, and he didn’t believe 
in it in principle, that he was going to vote 
against it, but he wasn’t going to speak against 
it, and he wanted to commend Eddie Scott, 
Jim Anderson and Clyde Mathews for the 
masterful way in which they had lobbied this 
bill, and he sat down. 

The truth of the matter, for history I 
should say that I immediately borrowed five 
dollars from him to go have dinner because 
I didn’t have any money that night. And 
instead of doing that, he took Eddie and I 
out and bought us steak dinner, which is an 
interesting sidelight to political battle. By 
this time he really didn’t want to get involved 
because he knew he was going to have to run 
in Washoe County under reapportionment 
this next time, and he did not want to have 
the emotional anti-civil rights image that he 
had when he was in Storey County. We knew 
that and we allowed that. 

That became the law, and the vote, actually, 
was eleven to seven and one abstention. 
Governor Sawyer produced his seven and I 
produced my four. So it was quite a historic 
thing. The governor had a special signing of 
the law down in his office, and people from all 
over the state came, and we all got pens, and 
he gave all the credit for it to Charles Keller, 
and Charles Keller wasn’t even at the session! 
Politics are interesting. 



108 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


I think I ought to mention one other thing 
that happened on the 1965 act. I have already 
mentioned the fact that there was a meeting of 
the finance committee with Wilson McGowan 
that surprised everyone. Eddie Scott, Jim 
Anderson and I were also invited to appear 
before the judiciary committee in the senate 
to testify in behalf of the act. Now this was 
after Paul Laxalt came out in favor of it. And 
we were requested to bring to that committee 
a list of the differences between the Nevada 
law and the federal law. So I drew up a list, 
and when Jim Anderson, Eddie Scott and I 
came down that morning from Reno in the 
car, I gave each of them a copy of the list that 
I had drawn up and they agreed that these 
were the differences. Fifteen minutes before 
that meeting I got a call from Paul Laxalt 
and he said, “You go tell Jim Anderson to tell 
the governor that if any Democrat opens his 
mouth to argue this bill in that committee, 
it’s dead, because we’ll argue it, and its got to 
go through that judiciary committee without 
argument.” And I went and told this to Jim 
Anderson, and Jim Anderson about blew 
because he felt that this was going to kill the 
whole thing, that it was a political maneuver 
to give the Republicans an out. It was political, 
but it was a maneuver to shut Snowy Monroe 
up, and I don’t know what happened but 
there weren’t any arguments in there. There 
were a couple of questions, only two or three 
questions; I think the whole thing took five 
minutes. They all knew the differences in the 
act anyway. They had one question that had 
to do with women, I think—I forget even 
what the question was. My recollection is 
that Snowy Monroe did ask one question, 
Carl Dodge asked one question, and then 
somebody excused us. We all walked out. 
And two minutes later, they all came out of 
the meeting. I’m trying to think which one it 
was—I don’t know whether it was Slattery or 


whether it was Titlow—that looked over at 
me and winked. They all came out smiling. 
Anyway, that directive from Paul, I was 
convinced, was simply an attempt to keep 
Governor Sawyer and Snowy Monroe in 
line in there, and they didn’t want either one 
of them pulling the rug out from under the 
votes that they already had. We already had 
our commitments, and he committed himself 
to seven, and they wanted it kept that way. 
Also, they didn’t want any future political 
statement made of what happened inside of 
that meeting. They just didn’t want any talk. 
You’d be surprised what, sometimes, people 
say happened in a meeting. 

Speaking of Paul Laxalt’s attitudes on 
civil rights, I think I have mentioned that I 
had analyzed him as a very capable and very 
charming young man. He grew up in a very 
small town with very provincial attitudes 
and had a tendency to verbalize cliches 
concerning the race problem. This was the 
condition when I first dealt in the legislature 
with Paul Laxalt. Since that time I have come 
to know he has an operating procedure where 
sometimes when you are talking to him to sell 
an idea or a program, he will reflect back to 
you the arguments that he has heard against 
it, and are not necessarily his own opinion, 
but to find out how, in a confrontation 
that you might have with these opponents, 
you could stand up to it. There might have 
been, I’m going to give him the benefit of 
the doubt here—there might have been 
some of that in my conversation with him 
originally on civil rights. But, as you know, 
in the Goldwater campaign, Paul, early in the 
whole conservative thrust during those years, 
aligned himself with the Goldwater thrust. 
He has since told me that he disagrede with 
Barry Goldwater in many areas, but he had 
agreed with Barry Goldwater’s opinion that 
the civil rights laws were unconstitutional. I 



Civil Rights Activities 


109 


do not know how much influence on him a 
man like Slattery had in arguing because this 
was the tack and basic argument that Senator 
Slattery always threw up when it came to civil 
rights, the idea that it was a special privilege 
legislation. My argument was always the 
opposite, that it was to overcome the special 
privileges that the majority enjoyed without 
equity or without justice. 

The campaign for Senator with Howard 
Cannon certainly had a great deal to do with 
the change of attitude towards civil rights 
with Paul. I, personally, found a great problem 
with regard to Paul’s attitude toward civil 
rights when he ran for the Senate. I did vote 
for him, though, and I told him in a letter 
that I voted for him, not because I agreed 
with his position on civil rights but because I 
disagreed with Howard Cannon on almost all 
other issues, that in spite of the fact that civil 
rights was central in my thinking, I would 
have to balance all of the other issues and I 
did vote for Paul. Maybe that letter opened 
some doors of communications, because I 
got a very friendly response from Paul; he 
said there was not another vote cast for him 
in that election that he appreciated more than 
that because he knew that we were at the 
opposite ends of civil rights in many areas, 
even though, I think, fundamentally, within 
the framework of civil rights we probably were 
in agreement on some basic issues. One of 
them being that both of us held the conviction 
that the best way to achieve the goals of civil 
rights legislation or the civil rights movement, 
was voluntary. And that all of the civil rights 
legislation that I ever participated in lobbying 
for in the state of Nevada was primarily based 
upon reasonableness and conciliation, rather 
than enforcement. I think, maybe, history 
has tended to bear out the, at least partial 
correctness of that position, because even 
though we now have enforcement provisions 


in the civil rights act, they are very seldom 
used or are necessary to use, and that still 
the efforts down the line are with trying to 
get people together and to talk to each other, 
and to come to reasonable solutions. 

I do not believe that Paul Laxalt was 
bigoted; I never did believe that he was a 
man with great prejudice. I did feel that, on 
the surface, he tended to accept positions 
that most bigots and most prejudiced people 
take, but I never did feel that it was deep- 
seated. There was another component in his 
personality that spoke to me in ways that most 
prejudiced and bigoted people did not speak. 

I think I have mentioned that we held 
a mayor’s conference on equal opportunity 
in Clark County, in Las Vegas, in 1962. He 
did agree to come down and to be on a 
panel on the civil rights legislation, and the 
Negro people from Westside [Las Vegas] 
really verbally attacked him, even including 
Woodrow Wilson, who was a Republican and 
rather respectful of Paul. They hammered 
him for forty-five minutes on the open floor 
with very direct questions. Paul’s position 
that day was that he did not feel that we had 
the statistical data available in the state of 
Nevada to prove that discrimination was a 
major problem, and they attempted to break 
his position down on that. One of the most 
telling blows was made by Bryn Armstrong 
that day, who said that civil rights was not 
a numbers game, and that if one child was 
denied the right to equal education, a law that 
prevented that would be worth it, just as our 
whole legal system is based on the idea that, 
to protect the innocent—and that it wasn’t a 
numbers game, it was a matter of principle. 
I think that that meeting was a part of the 
attitudinal changing of Paul Laxalt. I think 
one of the most telling blows was a letter that 
he received from an Anthony Lewis, who was 
a schoolteacher in Reno, which was published 



110 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


in the newspaper, which attacked him as being 
paternalistic and with southern attitudes, long 
outmoded and outdated. I don’t know what 
effect that had except that Paul went to bed for 
three days with a pain in his back. Some of his 
very closest friends were very upset with the 
attack. I sensed a difference in attitude when 
he came back to the legislature, that maybe 
there had been some thoughtful consideration 
done. And I would imagine, knowing Paul the 
way I know him, that it wasn’t what Anthony 
Lewis said that bothered him, that it was 
that Anthony Lewis felt that it was necessary 
to say it that bothered him. Paul probably 
analyzed himself in saying, “How have I failed 
to communicate my genuine and real concern 
for this problem so badly that this man, who 
is an intelligent, educated man would find it 
necessary to write this letter?” And I think 
it’s that kind of thought process that would 
go on in Paul’s mind. I think, also, that he 
would assess the political mood changes in 
the country and in Nevada, with regard to 
civil rights. And as any politician knows, if 
he is not flexible and capable of changing 
his mind, he is not going to last very long in 
politics, which is a prime requisite. 

So for the next two or three years, Paul 
and I carried on a dialogue, constantly during 
the legislative times and other times, where I 
would reflect to him what I felt were the true, 
deep-seated, just positions of a conservative, 
and he would reflect back to me what the 
arguments were on the other side, and we 
would go at it. He tried to shift a little bit in 
1963.1 know Mr. Keller and James Anderson 
had been on the phone to him at night, early 
morning, and weekends, and at one time I 
think he agreed to try to see what he could 
do to pull that bill through the senate. And 
the one Monday morning that he came down 
off of the rostrum and made a speech from 
the floor was the time that Senator Slattery 


attacked him so viciously, and he had to 
withdraw from the attempt. His commitment, 
I think to him and to Charles, was only to 
attempt it. And if the reaction was such that it 
made it impossible for him to continue it, that 
they would recognize that, and they did; they 
released him from any other responsibility 
in the matter. They only asked that he try it, 
and he did try it, and he got a terrible blasting 
which his political antenna told him he just 
better stay out of it. 

At the mayor’s conference in Reno, held 
about six months after the one held in Las 
Vegas, he gave some welcoming and opening 
remarks to the conference at the University, 
remarks that some Negroes felt, were still, 
of the paternalistic and southern attitude. I 
didn’t read it that way, but they did. And their 
reaction to it was extremely negative. I think 
that their minds also functioned in the climate 
that could not recognize change when Paul 
tried to make a slight degree of change. And 
so I sat down after that meeting and wrote 
Paul a personal letter, as a friend, and let him 
have it, right from the shoulder, that this was 
where he was wrong, and the reason was he 
was failing to communicate. I even wrote 
out paragraphs for him for the future that he 
could say what he was intending to say in a 
different way that would communicate. And 
his reaction was—I got a phone call as soon 
as he read the letter and he was madder than 
hell, which I guess has to happen. He said, “By 
God, if they can’t understand English, then I 
don’t know what to do, and I’m not going to 
speak any more to those things.” 

Well, he cooled down after that. My guess 
is that major contributing factors to the real 
support of the 1965 act came about with the 
things I have just told you, and the Supreme 
Court decision that accepted the civil rights 
act of 1964 as constitutional. The beginning 
national sympathy, and public opinion shift 



Civil Rights Activities 


111 


to be in favor of civil rights, the whole Selma 
mess, and—and I want to emphasize this—the 
1965 civil rights act in the state of Nevada was 
lobbied different than it had ever been lobbied 
before. Eddie Scott and I and Jim Anderson 
finally used a completely different approach. 

I guess I had as much to do with designing 
it as anybody. We went down there and 
presented ourselves as consultants, and I came 
with credentials from the Nevada Council of 
Churches, and we became kind of experts. 
Now Eddie was the “bulldog” that was the 
watchdog over every jot and comma and title 
in that bill as it went through the judiciary 
committee, and I was the one who was 
constantly talking to Paul. But I am personally 
convinced that what generated the climate in 
which that bill passed was Selma, Alabama. 

There was a psychological shift in this 
whole state. I told this to Dick Ham, to 
Governor Sawyer, too, that there comes a 
time, for every major project, if it’s right, 
a time when it comes to what’s called the 
fullness of time. And all of a sudden, here in 
the state, there was a shift of attitude and the 
psychological moment had arrived. And if we 
were ever going to have a civil rights law, we 
had about two weeks to get it across. Now they 
had not become sensitive to that—neither 
Dick Ham nor Governor Sawyer. But when 
they felt the pulse around after that, I know 
they found out the same thing I did, and that’s 
why they began to move a little differently. 
It’s made it possible for us to move a little 
differently. I think the maneuver I talked 
about with getting Senator Slattery to agree 
not to attack Paul Laxalt if he came out for 
civil rights was an important strategy. And I 
think that when Senator Slattery got up and 
said that he wanted to congratulate those who 
had lobbied this bill, Clyde Mathews, Jimmie 
Anderson and Eddie Scott, for the manner 
in which it was done—I think he was sincere 


about that. I also think that he was looking 
forward to his election in Washoe County as 
a senator, but I do think he meant it. 

I think the saddest night I ever saw in 
the legislature was in 1963 when we had 
tried everything that we could think of to get 
a civil rights bill, and I gave up finally and 
went home a week before it was dismissed, 
and Eddie Scott didn’t. On the final night he 
was standing over in the corner all by himself, 
and they adjourned sine die, and they did 
not have a civil rights law, and I think that 
Frank Johnson even wrote about that in the 
newspaper that the saddest thing he ever saw 
was the look on Eddie’s face. And I really kind 
of think that there was an emotional feeling 
there that everybody felt that way to Eddie 
Scott, and I think that maybe it had a little bit 
to do with getting the thing passed in 1965. 
There was a kind of a feeling that maybe they 
had let Eddie and the Negro people in the state 
down in 1963.1 think there was just a kind of 
a feeling that there was something they could 
have done in 1963 and didn’t, so they had to 
do something in 1965. 

It finally came to the place where I wrote 
most of the material that Paul Laxalt put out 
on civil rights. Some of the campaigning 
material for 1966, I wrote that. I wrote his 
speech on the capitol steps the day that we 
had the big rally for civil rights in 1965. 
And I think that when he began to hear the 
arguments for civil rights in conservative 
language, that had something to do with the 
changing of his position. And that’s what I 
tried to do. (For what it’s worth, since I’ve been 
here in the OEO office my directives from 
him have been aggressively pro-minority.) He 
wants to solve that problem. He’s pragmatic 
about the solution of it. He doesn’t want to 
argue philosophy any more—those days are 
over. He’s made speeches in the Westside of 
Las Vegas, one of which I wrote. He’s made 



112 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


statements; he’s doing things in his own office; 
he’s made a great push for minority hiring 
within state government—he wants that 
problem solved. 

Mrs. Laxalt is one of the most gracious 
ladies, and I have never seen a bigoted gesture 
or attitude toward minority people any time 
I’ve ever seen her in public. She is concerned 
about the poor people in the state, and she 
can get emotional about the haunted look that 
she sees in the eyes of some of the children, 
and is solidly in favor of a workable program 
to solve the problem of poverty in minorities 
in the state of Nevada, and I think she might 
have had some influence on Paul’s shift also. 

I think the most committed thing that 
he has done to demonstrate what he thinks 
is when he went down to Las Vegas and 
got on television and asked for houses for 
those Negro schoolteachers. This was this 
last summer, 1967. The Clark County school 
people went all over the country recruiting 
Negro schoolteachers, and when they got 
them there they couldn’t find places for them 
to live. And he was mad—he was terribly 
angry. He tried to solve it with voluntarism. 
And he couldn’t get any solution from the real 
estate people—real action that really meant 
anything. So one night he just got on the 
plane and went down to Las Vegas and got on 
television and told what the problem was, and 
gave a phone number and he said he wanted 
anybody that had an apartment or house 
for rent or for sale to call that number, and 
they got sixty phone calls in an hour. Really, 
politically, that took a lot of guts. 

I cannot also help but believe that Paul’s 
being a Basque doesn’t influence his sensitivity 
and feeling towards minority people. You can’t 
talk to Indians, or Serbians in this state, like 
the Bastas, or the Basques, and not know that 
they sometimes in the past in growing up have 
experienced the harassment of the majority, 


and they know a little bit about how it feels. 
I don’t think anybody can have complete 
empathy with the Negro people who is not a 
Negro; but if you have had some of it, you can 
have some idea what it’s like. 

Lobbyists of my Acquaintance 

In lobbying down in Carson I’ve met some 
interesting people who are lobbyists—Wallie 
Warren, very smooth professional lobbyist, 
sometimes in favor of civil rights, sometimes 
opposed to it, depending upon who the 
people were he was working for, what their 
position was. In ’61 he was opposed; in ’63 
he was opposed; in ’65 he was in favor of it. 
And I think that’s because in ’65, the Sierra 
Pacific Power Company was in favor of it, 
and that probably was because Eddie Scott 
worked for them, and they happened to have 
Fred Fletcher for a president. Wallie never got 
into an argument on this issue. Wallie Warren 
works very quietly, Very professionally, and 
he just lines up his votes on his side, day by 
day—gets the commitments and never really 
gets into a hassle with anybody else. 

Howard Gray—he had never been in 
favor of civil rights—another professional 
who’ll never get into an argument about it. 
He never favored it, always felt that it was 
unconstitutional, always felt that it was special 
privilege legislation. 

Ollie Thomas, I used to think was opposed 
to it, but he always told me he wasn’t—that 
he had no position one way or the other. He 
never functioned in the field down there on 
those bills. I never caught him doing it, but 
one way or the other, I always thought he was 
on the other side, but he told me that he was 
not, so I presume he was not. 

Fou Paley always said he was in favor of it, 
and I caught him fighting it. The labor people 
in the 1965 session spent a great deal of money 



Civil Rights Activities 


113 


bringing in outside witnesses to oppose the 
apprenticeship section of the 1965 act. They 
lost, but there hasn’t been a great deal of 
compliance with it even the way it’s written, 
but they actively lobbied against that part of 
the law. I think that Lou used to trade votes 
on civil rights for other labor legislation. He’s 
a very effective lobbyist, but he was always 
telling Negro people that he was in favor of it, 
and I know of a couple of times that he wasn’t. 
I’m not saying that he always did that. 

Norman Biltz used to come down in 1963 
on the floor. I think that his main reason for 
coming had to do with Lake Tahoe problems 
and issues. I used to ask him what he thought 
about civil rights and he always told me about 
his maids. What he didn’t know was that his 
maids used to also tell me. And while they 
were good maids and loyal to him, they didn’t 
agree with his position. I asked him about 
Indians one time and all he could do was tell 
me about something that happened in 1922, 
of an Indian that he met in Tonopah who had 
a dead deer in the trunk of his old beat-up 
car. And the deer must have been there for 
ten days because it was smelling so bad that 
they made him move the car off the main 
street of Tonopah. And Norman said, “You 
know, people like that, they just want to live 
that way.” And I kept reminding him, “You 
know, this isn’t 1922.” Well, all I ever got was, 
I think, he said, “I hope not.” 

Eddie Scott—one of the most amazing 
lobbyists that I’ve ever seen, because Eddie 
is not a highly educated man. Sometimes, 
I think the legislators thought they were 
putting things over on Eddie Scott; and what 
they didn’t know was they never have, as far 
as I know, put anything over on him. When 
they were stalling, he knew it; when they 
were maneuvering, he knew it; when they 
were trying to trick him, he knew it—but he 
would never let them know he knew it. And 


he’s like a bulldog. When he gets his teeth into 
something he will not let go until that thing 
is resolved. He would go home at night and 
call a lawyer friend of his in Sacramento, and 
would read him the changes in the law and 
get a legal interpretation and come back the 
next day loaded with legal arguments and 
never let anybody know that he had done this. 
He would never argue in legalistic terms, he 
always put the arguments in his own language, 
and yet all the time Eddie Scott was getting 
some of the top legal advice in the country on 
civil rights every night, which the legislature 
people just did not know. 

Eddie is very suspicious. I worked with 
him for three sessions. I think in ’65 we 
worked together better than ever. And of 
all the single individuals in Reno, that live 
there, Eddie Scott’s been in my house more 
than any other person, but to this day I do 
not think that Eddie Scott completely trusts 
me. In spite of the fact that we worked side 
by side, I just don’t think he completely trusts 
any white people. His experience has been 
on the other side of the ledger, and he’s been 
double-crossed more than anybody should 
expect at all. On the other hand, I doubt if 
there’ is any white man that he trusts more 
than he does me, even though I am white 
and I’m a Republican, I guess, and that’s to 
be “two against ya.” 

I like Eddie Scott—I’ve been very angry 
with Eddie and I’ve been very pleased with 
Eddie. As far as I know I have never doubled 
anybody and it—personally speaking—it at 
times hurt a little when he would indicate that 
he didn’t trust what I was saying. I probably 
went overboard at all kinds of lengths to prove 
to him otherwise, and probably did to some 
extent, but I still have the feeling that there’s 
still a slight barrier there. 

Jim Anderson, who is very skilled lobbyist 
for the labor movement in California, is one 



114 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


of the most skilled lobbyists I’ve ever seen. He 
knows what actions and reactions are going to 
be. He can predict them with extreme accuracy. 
He knows how to ride herd on a bill; he knows 
how to guide it through, he knows where to 
put the pressure, and he knows when to put it 
on and he knows when to take it off. He also 
has a tremendous amount of guts. He can be 
very rough when he wants to be, and he can 
be very charming when he wants to be, and 
he can be either way depending upon which 
he thinks is the best approach to the situation. 
Jim Anderson’s a man very scarred emotionally 
from some tragic experiences that he has 
related to me that I cannot communicate, 
other than to say that if I had been in the same 
position that he had been in, I’m sure I would 
have some of the same attitudes that he has. He 
is very suspicious of white liberals. 

I think this is the point at which I should 
say that while it is true that Governor Sawyer 
has always had the voting support of the 
Negro community in the state of Nevada, 
and while he has always had the outward 
expression of appreciation of what he’s done, 
and the outward public relations by Negroes 
in support of him, they do not trust him 
and never did. And they never felt he was 
sincere; they did feel that he was political. 
They did feel that it was easier to work with 
him because of the fact he was political, and 
because he would openly be in favor of the 
concept of civil rights, that it was easy to work 
with him that way, but they never accepted his 
sincerity at the gut level of getting it through. 

In 1963, after the original civil rights bill 
had been defeated, and the shock of that was 
over in the Negro community, there was an 
attempt by the Negroes to find some kind of 
a civil rights bill that could be passed, so that 
if they couldn’t take three or four steps in 
1963, maybe they could at least take one. And 
Governor Sawyer lost my respect during this 


time because he participated in proposing a 
bill that he, himself, knew could not pass— 
knew would not pass. All it did was to take 
up the time, the days, between the time he 
started and the time the session was over 
to keep the supporters of civil rights active 
doing something that he, himself, knew was 
going to lead to a dead end. I didn’t like that, 
and the Negroes didn’t like it either, because 
they knew it. 

We had a meeting one night in his office. 
I was invited to the meeting, and I told him 
that I really didn’t want to go—the Negroes 
wanted me to be there. And I said I wouldn’t 
go unless Governor Sawyer invited me, 
himself. And so Dick Ham finally called 
me down, and says, “I hear that you’ve 
been saying bad things about the governor 
upstairs.” 

And I said, “That’s right, and I’ll tell you 
what I said,” I said, “I’ve been saying I would 
like to see actions equal to the words that are 
coming out of this office.” 

“Well,” he said, “that’s not too bad. The 
governor would like for you to come on into 
the meeting.” 

So I went in, and they had drafted some 
kind of a bill with a cover sheet that gave the 
strategy for getting it through. And I said, 
“Why don’t we do this right and invite the 
lieutenant governor?” Wait a minute—there 
was a day lapse in here, and when I talked to 
Dick Han, I said; “Why don’t we invite the 
lieutenant governor?” 

And he said, “All right, why don’t we? And 
let’s make it a bi-partisan approach, because 
it will never work unless it is.” Everybody 
knew that. 

And when I got to the meeting, Paul 
Laxalt wasn’t there, and Governor Sawyer 
said he was running this show and he’d invite 
who he wanted to. Well, that irritated me a 
little bit, but what really irritated me was that 



Civil Rights Activities 


115 


on the cover of this proposed legislation was 
a list of arguments in favor of it. 

And Governor Sawyer said, “Now, 
most of those guys upstairs don’t know the 
difference—you know—don’t know even 
what civil rights are, so if we can just get 
them to read this cover, maybe they’ll vote 
for it and never know what’s inside of it. And 
the arguments on the first cover were not 
the same really, as what the legislation inside 
said. And it—it said to me that—you know, 
there is really an insincerity here. There was a 
kind of a maneuver here that I just didn’t like. 
Dave Meadows didn’t like it at all. They knew 
right then that this was an aborted attempt 
to doing anything. And that’s exactly what 
happened—it got nowhere. 

In the 1965 session, I think I’ve mentioned 
that Governor Sawyer’s original proposed bill 
was just nothing—so totally unacceptable 
that nobody would have anything to do with 
it. He tried to get Howard Gloyd down from 
the Reno-Sparks Branch of the NAACP to 
endorse the bill, which he did, before he even 
met with the people on the Westside of Las 
Vegas. And of course, when they finally got 
to him, they threw the whole thing out and 
told him it was ridiculous. 

He told me after 1965 that he assessed 
the mood of the legislature wrong. He never 
thought Paul Laxalt would go [for it], and he 
never thought that we could ever get enough 
votes to get a bill through with sanctions. 
And he was wrong, and I admired him for 
admitting it, because our strategy was, that 
we now had a federal law, let’s get it with local 
control and see if we couldn’t sell the gaining 
industry on the idea that we would have a 
civil rights commission that would function 
locally under local control. I think we sold 
it—there was a lot more to it—but I think 
that idea was bought, and I think that no one 
was more surprised when Paul came out for 


the civil rights act than Governor Sawyer was. 
When Paul Laxalt went out on the capitol 
steps and gave his speech in favor of it he was 
really caught off guard, he didn’t really believe 
it would happen, and said so, on the capitol 
steps. But then the votes came, and that was it. 

I think one of the most significant things 
that Paul Laxalt ever did was when he threw 
the John Birch Society out of the Republican 
party. I was a part of that. I went to a precinct 
meeting and got to be a delegate to the county 
meeting, and then they put me on as a delegate 
to the state convention, and I went to Las 
Vegas. I participated in the floor fight for 
seven solid hours to tell the people that they 
could not belong to the John Birch Society 
and hold an office in the Republican party, 
and to John DeTar’s credit, he gave a very 
rational and non-emotional defense of his 
own position, but the vote finally came, and 
they lost. And Jack DeTar and Dr. Schaefer 
both got up and walked out of the meeting. 

It took a lot of courage, but I think it 
helped elect Laxalt. He could not have the 
governorship with any kind of a duality 
position on the John Birch Society in Clark 
County. This was what made it possible for 
many Democrats to vote for him in Clark 
County, and, certainly, I don’t think he lost any 
Republican votes by doing it, because I don’t 
think the John Birchers were going to vote for 
Grant Sawyer. They had no place else to go; 
they either didn’t vote, or they voted for Paul 
Laxalt, anyway. It was a very astute political 
move. It was genuine. He was disgusted 
with what he had seen at the San Francisco 
fiasco; (1964 Republican Convention) he was 
disgusted with what he had seen at the prior 
state convention. My good friend, Les Gray, 
couldn’t even get to microphone without 
being shouted down—unruly, undisciplined 
convention, and politics just will not work 
that way in Nevada. 



116 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


One of the things that makes Paul 
Laxalt’s spirit so interesting to me is that in 
the 1964 senatorial election, there were so 
many precincts in southern Nevada where he 
didn’t get even one vote. In the Westside [of 
Las Vegas] it was 99.7 percent for Cannon. 
Cannon got all the Negro votes, which really is 
very amazing to me because Senator Cannon 
is not that strong a civil rights person. You 
know, when the big vote came on the 1964 
bill, he wasn’t there, and he did not come 
back in and cast an “aye” vote until there had 
been enough votes to already pass it. If it had 
been a tie, I’m convinced Cannon would have 
voted against it, butbeing that it was already.... 
When they had the roll-call vote in the Senate, 
Cannon took a walk, and when something like 
fifty votes had been counted, then he came 
back on the floor. Fifty votes in favor. Then he 
came back on the floor and then they came 
back to him, to vote. And he voted for it. A 
very interesting maneuver—very underplayed 
in the campaign by either side. 

I don’t think that the Negroes in the state 
of Nevada think that Howard Cannon was 
a great civil rights advocate. I know Eddie 
Scott even went out [in 1962] and supported 
Jack Streeter against Alan Bible, just to show 
Alan Bible how bad he thought he was in the 
field of civil rights, because Jack Streeter is an 
anti-civil rights man. And Eddie Scott did it 
as a demonstration against Alan Bible, which 
is interesting. Of course, they completely give 
up on Baring anyway. 

I mentioned Howard Gloyd as the 
representative of the Reno-Sparks Branch 
of the NAACP. Howard Gloyd is a public- 
relations-type personality, a very good one. 
The only other thing that he did was to come 
down and be the master of ceremonies of the 
day that we had the rally out on the capitol 
steps.He pulled way back out of that when 
the heat came on that original governor’s 


bill. Howard Gloyd, I think, even came out 
and criticized the NAACP convention in 
Denver that year on television. Some of the 
statements made, he didn’t think that they 
were right, and he did not endear himself 
to Negro community in that at all. He’s been 
a very controversial figure in the Negro 
community, and by and large they do not 
support him. They might now. He is much 
more militant now. 

The real race problem in Nevada, I think, 
is fear. I think the root of all prejudice is fear, 
insecurity, and early childhood education. 
Children are not born prejudiced, they have to 
learn it. They learn it from their environment. 
I think Hawthorne at one time was the real 
hard core of it. I think Reno is next. I think 
Las Vegas is a very interesting area. I think 
that there is probably a more liberal attitude 
in Las Vegas than any place else in the state, 
and yet there is also one of the toughest hard 
core prejudiced areas. They talk a good liberal 
attitude in Las Vegas, but their actions are not 
anywhere near in keeping with the talk or the 
policy. They probably work at it better than 
any place else, those who are really sincere. 
There’s an effort to do something, to work at 
it harder there than any place else. The biggest 
problem today is there in the Westside of Las 
Vegas. 

The prejudice against Indians is really 
different than it is against Negroes. The Indian 
in the old days was the atom bomb of his day. 
He was the fear person. In the early Reno days, 
they didn’t have atom bombs to worry about, 
but they did worry about Indians. The cultural 
differences, and the communication— 
language barrier in those times—. created 
problems that we’re still working at on both 
sides. In Sarah Winnemucca’s book, Life 
Among the Paiutes, is an example of how 
much the cultural difference was. One of the 
colonels in the army in the early days gave 



Civil Rights Activities 


117 


Chief Winnemucca a letter that gave him 
entitlement to free room and board any place 
that he traveled in Nevada, and the ranchers 
could send the bill to the army. He told his 
people that that paper was a magic rag and all 
he had to do was to go and wave that in front 
of a white man’s face, and out of nowhere food 
appeared, and a bed. Magic. Now that, when you 
think of the mind and attitudinal differences, 
you can see what the communications gulf 
would be. The first time they gave him a pot to 
cook in, he put it on his head for a hat. He never 
had seen one before, and when he found out 
what it was for, he laughed until he had to sit 
down, he was laughing so hard. He went back 
and told his family, and they all had a big laugh 
that he was wearing for a hat what was really 
something to cook in. Which to me shows the 
great security that they had among themselves, 
that they could laugh at themselves about 
something of a social faux pas like this, it really 
is great. I think that Sarah says that Indians for 
fifty years thought that all white people were 
cannibals because they had been watching the 
Donner Party. Now those kinds of experiences 
create gulfs of communication and all kinds 
of barriers to inter-personal relationships and 
cooperation. 

I think that the white person in Nevada 
is much more guilty about prejudice or 
discrimination against Indians than they 
are with Negroes because it is an indigenous 
problem. With Negroes, they migrated here, 
and they are outsiders; and some of the 
prejudice to Negroes is not so much—well, 
it is, too, that they’re black—but it’s also that 
they’re outsiders, that they’re from some place 
else. And I think some of the prejudice in the 
power moves in the state against Negroes is 
because of some of the people during the 
Civil War who were in the power structure in 
the state of Nevada had supported the South 
and some of their grandchildren today are in 


pretty powerful positions, and they still have 
the paternalistic southern attitude. 

We have a very small Spanish-American 
population in Nevada so we cannot really 
assess it as a special problem. It’s so small, 
it’s just like the oriental population—the 
Japanese and Chinese now. The Chinese, you 
know, used to be the number one problem 
of Nevada. Incidentally, when we began 
civil rights legislation the only law that we 
ever found on civil rights in Nevada statutes 
was a law prohibiting inter-marriage, and 
something that had to do with Chinese and 
voting rights, which had since been repealed 
or ignored, I forget which. 

Another item of interest to me is a kind of 
a “view” of Negro ministers’ involvement in 
civil rights. From the Westside of Las Vegas 
there was very little. A Negro church is a kind 
of a tribal domain, in which the minister is a 
chieftain; and there are territorial rights there 
that have taken years to build. And because of 
the financial supporting structure of a Negro 
church, that minister stands almost alone in 
that church. In a sense, it’s his church. The 
stewardship methods of the Negro church 
would be considered archaic with regard 
to the major denominations in the United 
States—the idea of having a memorial once 
a year where maybe one-half of his total 
income will come at one time by people just 
putting a certain amount of money on the 
communion table, or taking as high as ten or 
eleven offerings on a Sunday to pay the bill, 
are archaic. 

There is a cultural difference between 
Negro churches and modern denominational 
churches, less so with Pentecostal, more 
so with anything else, with the possible 
exception of Episcopal and Catholic Negro 
churches. Let me give you a little insight into 
that: I have been into Quaker meetings and I 
have been in Pentecostal Negro churches. The 



118 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


Quaker meeting is conducted with a certain 
peace and quiet of spirit. A Negro service will 
be highly emotional and very rhythmic, but at 
the end it will arrive at the spiritual peace and 
level that a Quaker church tried to maintain 
during the whole time. 

It’s very interesting; I personally enjoy 
going to Negro churches, and do, whenever 
I can, because I love the music and I love 
the sincerity; but I think that the idea of 
integration is a threat to the Negro clergy of 
the old traditional style. Like everything else, 
the Negro church is changing. Martin Luther 
King could have probably pastored any large, 
modern, denominational church, knowing all 
of the latest methodology, theology and form. 
Therefore, there has been a resistance, I think, 
by many Negro ministers to get involved in 
the idea of civil rights or integration. 

The most active ministers in the state in 
integration were Dave Meadows, from Reno; 
and whoever happened to be the pastor 
of the AME church in Reno, and whoever 
happened to be the pastor of the AME church 
in Las Vegas. There was some involvement in 
Hawthorne, but beyond that, primarily the 
status quo was coveted. 

Among minority people, I think the 
objectives of civil rights were desired, but I 
think a willingness to become involved in 
the movement was minimal. I think that the 
age factor was a very determining thing. The 
younger the Negro was, the more willing to 
be involved he was; the older the Negro was, 
the more willing he was to keep things the 
way they were. 

I think prejudice is a two-way street. 
I think prejudice that is on the side of the 
minority person is usually based upon 
experience and fact, and prejudice on the 
majority side is usually based upon fiction, 
but it’s there, and the end result is the sane, 
but the reason for it is much more rational on 


the minority side. However, one of the great 
problems in all this field is that people tend 
to generalize specifics. They tend to view the 
whole from, their limited experience. And in 
the rush of a movement, sometimes the whole 
truth is really not all true. 

We did a lot of work in the Indian Colony 
to get people to think in terms of good people, 
and those that we don’t consider good; or 
sympathetic people, and those we don’t 
consider sympathetic, rather than just “all 
white people are bad.” I had to do the same 
thing in the non-Indian community: there 
are good Indians, and there are other Indians 
who just could not stand the problems, and 
have fallen by the wayside. 

Personally, as a social psychologist, or 
whatever I am, I think that the simple truth 
of getting to know people as a solution is 
a vital factor in this whole idea. I heard 
Supreme Court Justice Thompson say that 
the tragic part of discrimination is it’s based 
on ignorance. That—I don’t like you, not 
because I know that you’re bad, but that I 
think that you are because you’re black; or 
that I think there’s something wrong with you 
because you’re different. Any kind of a logical 
conclusion that isn’t based upon knowledge is 
an error, and prejudice is an error because it’s 
not based upon the knowledge of a person. 
He says he knows a lot of people he doesn’t 
like, but he doesn’t like them because he knows 
they are bad, and to say that you don’t like a 
person and not even know him is a tragedy 

I would analyze the prejudice in the 
cow counties, and the conservatism in the 
cow counties, as primarily being extreme 
provincialism, and it is a tendency to keep 
all outsiders out. I think an immigrant 
from Ohio is going to have a lot of trouble, 
as well as from Louisiana. I think that 
since the Negro is much more visible and 
conspicuous, there might be added intensity 



Civil Rights Activities 


119 


to the discrimination. And I think we’re a long 
ways from solving this problem anywhere 
in Nevada or any place else. The real race 
problem is ignorance. It’s that we do not 
have enough social contact; therefore, we 
can form all kinds of inaccurate conclusions 
about people. And when you have an isolated 
community, either an Indian colony or a 
ghetto, people tend to forget about it because 
when it’s out of sight, it’s out of mind, it’s not 
a problem and therefore, there is not concern, 
and there is no effort. There’s no sense of 
inclusion in the community’s problems and I 
think that the tragedy of it is that some of the 
greatest resources that we have in Nevada for 
solving some of our problems are in the minds 
of the minority people who live in an isolated 
situation, and that they need to be included in 
all levels of community life in order to build 
better communities in Nevada. 

The Supreme Court Test of the 
Equal Rights Commission 

I have failed to cover the [Nevada] 
Supreme Court test of the Equal Rights 
Commission, haven’t I? We’ll have to do that. 

After the passage of the 1961 law setting up 
the Equal Rights Commission with subpoena 
power, and after the commission had been 
appointed, they went to Hawthorne—I think 
it was in 1962. They went in 1962, and I think 
they went again in 1964. And it might have 
been in 1964—I’m confused on the dates in 
there—but they issued subpoenas to Lindsay 
Smith, the owner of the El Capitan, and he 
refused to appear, and it finally was taken to 
the supreme court. 

First it went to the district court in Washoe 
County before Judge John Gabrielli, and he 
declared, at that time, the law on the equal 
rights commission was unconstitutional. At 
the presentation, the attorney general’s office 


of the state did not really think that there was 
the slightest chance that they would declare 
it unconstitutional. And in my opinion, they 
might not have prepared as well as they should 
have, but it was declared unconstitutional. 
And I could never figure out what was 
going on. I couldn’t figure out which side 
the governor’s office really was on, or which 
side the attorney general was on, on the 
declaration that the law was unconstitutional. 

I tried to get the United States Commission 
on Civil Rights to come in to the supreme 
court case as an amicus curiae —a friend 
of the court—and the United States Civil 
Rights Commission decided that, for political 
reasons, they could not inject themselves in 
the state of Nevada. And I never could figure 
out what that meant, but their chief counsel, 
William Taylor, did say to me that he might be 
able to get us some help through a member of 
the advisory committee in California by the 
name of Mike Heyman who was the dean of 
the law school at the University of California, 
one of the professors of law. I contacted him 
through Phil Hammer, who was our west 
coast representative of the U. S. Commission 
on Civil Rights. And he said, yes, he’d write the 
brief for us, free, if we’d get a Nevada attorney 
to argue it. And Les Gray said he’d do that, but 
we had to have some way to get into court. 

I sent a letter to the National Council of 
Churches, and I got their permission to go 
into that case as amicus curiae of the National 
Council of Churches, with a lawyer from the 
University of California law school writing 
the brief, and Les Gray, and we finally got 
Bill Horgan, who at this time was not too far 
from death with cancer, to appear before the 
supreme court as amicus curiae. 

Now while all this was going on, I was 
carrying on conversations with Dan Walsh, 
who was the assistant attorney general for 
the case, and he cleared up in my mind any 



120 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


suspicion that I had that he was not going all 
out. I was convinced that he was. However, 
the supreme court judges welcomed the 
additional brief on the amicus curiae; Judge 
Thompson wanted it, and Chief Justice Badt 
wrote me a letter inviting the National Council 
of Churches to come, and I have that letter. 

We did go, and we did argue the case, 
and Bill Horgan did a masterful job; and one 
of the emotional parts of it was that his wife 
and sons were there to see him argue the last 
court case that he ever had a chance to argue 
in public. The supreme court decision agreed 
exactly with the amicus curiae, and the amicus 
agreed with the attorney general on all but one 
point, and the supreme court agreed with the 
amicus curiae, but it was a double guarantee. 

I know Governor Sawyer interpreted it as 
a political thing, and really—it wasn’t that—I 
was very much concerned that the Equal 
Rights Commission be preserved. And it 
was kind of like insurance. Les Gray and Bill 
Horgan and the man from California received 
no pay; they did this gratis. Less office 
prepared all the material, and he was there, 
and he did argue a couple of points. It was a 
very exciting experience. I was glad that we 
could do it, and I was glad that the National 
Council of Churches agreed to let us do it. 

Jack Streeter had other feelings. He was 
the lawyer on the other side and tried to get 
it thrown out, tried all kinds of maneuvers, 
but the supreme court wouldn’t listen to him. 
And of course they lost their case. 

Minority Groups’ Problems in Nevada 

I was engaged at one time in an 
investigation of the jail over in Fallon. I had 
a case brought to me of an Indian girl who 
had supposedly committed suicide in the jail 
in Fallon. I heard all kinds of rumors that 
five or six Indians had committed suicide 


in the Fallon jail, and this is not an Indian 
trait. The evidence on this girl was rather 
strange; the autopsy was hurried. The girl 
was sitting calmly twenty-five minutes before 
she committed suicide in the jail upstairs in 
the office of the police station. She had, in 
fact, gone to sleep in the chair. They took 
her down and locked her into the cell, and 
twenty-five minutes later they found her dead. 
She was hanging from one of the bed posts. 
The pictures of it kind of made it look like, 
for certain reasons, that she did not die in the 
position that she was found. 

I tried to get the grand jury to take it up. 
They didn’t. I went to Erie Stanley Gardner 
of the “Court of Last Resort.” He referred 
it to Lamoine Schneider, who was a great 
authority on legal medicine. I had a letter back 
from Lamoine Schneider, after surveying the 
material, that something should be looked 
into, that certainly the girl was not treated 
right in interrogation or even in the way of 
handling. That’s no way to handle juveniles. 
He did question some of the autopsy evidence. 
I called Dr. Parsons, who was the autopsy 
surgeon, and he said that he had gone mostly 
upon the testimony of the mortician and 
had not completely done an autopsy- He 
did an autopsy, but his findings were based 
somewhat on the testimony of the mortician, 
and that if we could get the case reopened, and 
if necessary, he would be willing to change his 
autopsy report. 

So I went to a lawyer by the name of 
Alex Garroway, who had tried four or five 
years before this time to do something for 
the mother of the child in a legal way, I 
guess at the time of the coroner’s jury. He 
had moved his offices, and I had to have the 
physical effects of the girl in order to get the 
case opened, because we wanted to run some 
tests upon her clothes. And he had moved 
his offices, and when he went to look for the 



Civil Rights Activities 


121 


clothes, he couldn’t find them—never did find 
them. We couldn’t do anything. 

The only result that ever came from that 
was that the police department in Fallon hired 
an Indian. To this day I have mixed feelings 
about that whole thing. It was a very strange 
case. 

Some Indians have told me of a—way 
back in the twenties—of an Indian who was 
found dead in the jail in Hawthorne. He was 
taken to the Schurz hospital. In those days, 
they used to embalm and bury there. And 
just before they got ready to dress—when they 
were analyzing the body, I guess, or looking 
at it, and cleaning it up and embalming it, 
the doctor happened to notice a speck of 
something red in the corner of the man’s 
mouth. He couldn’t figure out what it was, 
but it made him look inside, and he thought 
he saw something in the back of the throat. 
They X-rayed it and found out that the Indian 
had been murdered by a long, sharp knife 
thrust through the throat clear back which cut 
the spinal cord, and then he was completely 
washed, and there was no outside wound. 
Things like that are very disturbing. 

As far as I know, there haven’t been any 
more suicides in the Fallon jail, but the fear of 
Indians to law enforcement in that area at that 
time was very intense; they had no respect for 
the police at all. It was one of those dead-end 
things where you got to the place you couldn’t 
do anything about it. I did talk to some other 
policemen in the state, and perhaps, through 
the state-wide law enforcement agencies, 
some things were done procedurally to ensure 
that this kind of thing never happened again. I 
have a theory on it, but I don’t think it’s worth 
discussing. 

In the Las Vegas area, the people of the 
Westside of Las Vegas are very fearful of the 
police and feel that they are brutal. I have 
no way of knowing whether this is true or 


not true; the crucial point is that they think 
it is, and they believe it is, and we have to 
deal with that belief. We have recommended 
some police public relations activities on the 
Westside which are being carried on. I hope 
the situation is improving, and there is some 
indication that it is. 

I have mentioned that we have run into 
a fear of the police in Elko. I think Ely is an 
interesting place. They are so proud of the 
Negro that they have out there, who is a court 
reporter, and they treat him kind of special. 

Problems of education are of interest in 
Nevada. I think the Hug High School thing 
is evidence that we still have attitudinal 
problems in the Reno area. The superintendent 
of schools has testified in the paper that he’s 
getting some very vicious ‘phone calls about 
Hug High and that they don’t want their 
children to go to school with Negroes. The 
old bugaboo has raised its head in Nevada, 
even though Nevada education has been 
integrated, as far as Negroes are concerned, 
ever since it started, and with Indians at least 
since the late 1920’s. 

In the Las Vegas area, there is still 
the problem of resistance of bussing of 
children, of the twenty-three Negroes from 
the Westside of Las Vegas attending Vo-tech 
High School, which is twenty-nine miles out 
of town, when there are still eighty-eight who 
are eligible and capable of going, but can’t get 
there because of transportation problems. 
This is a problem that seems simple to solve, 
but which the school board in Clark County 
has yet to find the solution, and one that I’m 
working on. 

Generally speaking, the prime fear, I 
guess, of the white population of the state of 
Nevada is the old bugaboo of inter-marriage, 
which, incidentally, Arnold Toynbee says is 
the only ultimate solution to the problem 
and has worked well wherever tried, Brazil, 



122 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


Argentina, South America. Races are almost 
indistinguishable down there and yet they are 
all mixed, and it certainly has not harmed in 
any way the blood stock of the natives. I really 
think that that problem is a phantom problem, 
one of these fictions of the mind that people 
focus on to find an expression to their fear. 

Some prejudice is economic fear, that the 
Negro’s advance is going to hurt their own 
job. The truth of the matter is that whenever 
more people have more jobs there’s more 
money, and it creates more jobs, and it helps 
economically rather than hinders. 

The cultural differences are a fiction, 
too. There is no more immorality in a Negro 
community than there is in a non-Negro 
community It might be a little more open 
at times, but I doubt that even. I think that 
there’s also the class warfare that goes on 
between the upper class and middle class and 
lower class people. Negroes in the middle 
class seem to have more acceptance. I think 
one of the fascinating things is the degree 
of pigmentation that has a lot to do with it. 
After the civil rights act was passed in 1965, 
I got a lot of ‘phone calls by people from 
Reno wanting to know if I knew any Indians 
that they could hire, because they wanted to 
bring the Indians into their offices first so 
that their people could get used to the brown 
ones before they had to hire the black ones. 
In any kind of office work, usually the lighter 
skinned Negro has a better chance than the 
darker. Any place that has a federal contract, 
the darker skin has a chance over the lighter 
because they want em to be visible, and when 
those federal inspectors come by they can see 
that they have hired minority 

I do know of a case where a chef from 
Paris that belongs to the highest society of 
chefs in Paris, France, and he was a Moroccan, 
came to Reno for a job. He went to the clubs; 
they didn’t hire him. The employment office 


tried every single place that they could find 
to hire this man as a cook, and he ended up 
as a fry cook at the Senator Club in Carson 
City making hamburgers, and the only reason 
they hired him was he was passed off as a 
Hawaiian. 

The unions have been a pretty closed shop 
in Nevada. Contractors generally want people 
who will work; they don’t care what color they 
are. But the union members do. And there’s 
a kind of a family thing about unions. The 
father’s a carpenter and he wants his son to 
be a carpenter, and he wants his son to be in 
the apprentice program. The same way with 
everybody—the plumbers, the painters, the 
plasterers, and everybody There’s a kind of an 
ingrown system in the apprentice program of 
continuation of hiring of father to son, and if 
there’s no Negro fathers in, no Negro children 
get in. We do have some Indians in the trades, 
and in the unions, and sometimes their 
children can get in the apprentice program. 
I know of specific instances of that in the 
painter’s union. But by and large, the skilled 
Negro craftsman still has a terrible, terrible 
time. If they’re hired at all, they’re last, and if 
they’re fired, they’re first, usually. But getting 
into the union at all is next to impossible—this 
is state-wide. 

I have great difficulty understanding the 
city of Reno, whether there is a conspiracy 
to keep Negroes out or what. It’s a very small 
community of Negroes. Most of them came 
here out of being threatened with death by 
the Ku Klux Klan in the South, and they’ve 
escaped and come to Reno, or they came here 
to visit and stayed, or something else. I know 
one lady who said that she came as a part of 
the training team for the Max Baer-Unzedun 
fight, and stayed because she liked it. A lot of 
Negroes come to Reno to visit their relatives 
and then stay. The ghetto situation in Reno, 
as everybody knows, there are pockets or 



Civil Rights Activities 


123 


areas that are kind of dispersed throughout 
the city; there is no one concentrated area. 
But until recent times they were confined 
almost entirely to service trade jobs. I think 
the significant fact that we have no Negro 
lawyer, or doctor, or dentist, or professional 
people in Reno is significant. There are a few 
schoolteachers now, but the Negro in Reno is, 
generally speaking, of the lower class, maybe 
the lower middle, with a few exceptions to that. 
Their mobility has been increased by the law, 
and their access to the clubs and to restaurants 
and to motels is almost a hundred percent. 
There’s been a great advance in employment 
opportunity, but the over-all solution to the 
problem in Reno is still a long ways away, as 
long as the community will tolerate places 
like Black Springs. Attitudinally, it shows that 
we are a long ways from solving the problem. 

Personally, I think that, for example in Las 
Vegas, that the Westside solution is going to 
he more with the Negro than with any other 
area. I think that what professional people 
there are down there, and business people 
there are, when they get together and pool 
some of their own financial resources to start 
businesses of their own, and they begin to 
have fund raising drives to support their own 
charities, at least on a matching basis, they’ll 
begin to build a sense of community there 
that’s going to be a prerequisite for the solving 
of the race problem in Las Vegas. It does not 
now exist. All the effort is toward getting the 
other community to help us, and some effort 
must be made by those who are capable of it 
in the Negro community of helping their own 
people. And when they do, I think they’ll gain 
greater respect in the other community. 

In looking back on the effectiveness of 
civil rights legislation, I think that there are 
two things I would like to add. I think that 
the whole push for civil rights legislation 
was primarily for the purpose of educating 


the public and public officials to the reality 
of the problem. And I think that more good 
was done by getting the public to focus on 
the problem, than was accomplished by the 
passage of the law. The implementation of the 
law in the state of Nevada has been minimal 
in terms of the necessity of having court cases 
or assessing penalties, etc.. There has been 
probably a token response in some areas of 
civil rights to the law. And on the other hand, 
there is a considerable change in the climate 
throughout the state with regard to the rights 
of minority people. Anyone who walks into a 
casino in Reno, for example, is immediately 
aware that there are a great many minority 
people there, when in 1960 and as late as 1964, 
there weren’t any. And while it is true that the 
law says it’s open, I think it’s also true that a 
lot of people changed their thinking about it. 

This is going to sound strange for me to 
say—I really don’t think that legislation is the 
answer to it, and I don’t think that because 
“you can’t legislate morals,” because you do all 
the time. It’s practically all you do in criminal 
law, but, you know, a law against murder 
doesn’t prevent it either, but at least it sets 
the policy of the body politic that murder is 
wrong; it sets the standard for it. It does not 
prevent immorality, but that doesn’t mean that 
you shouldn’t have the law. I think that the 
argument that “ you can’t legislate morals” is 
not the statement of the problem. The purpose 
of the civil rights law is not to legislate morals 
but to state policy of what the public thinks 
is right. Now if there are penalties, that is to 
add credence to the statement. But no law 
is obeyed unless it’s obeyed voluntarily, by 
decision. And, really, the argument that you 
can’t legislate morals is just not the argument. 

A lot of people say that the civil rights 
acts have all failed because they didn’t 
stop discrimination. I don’t think that the 
purpose of any civil rights law was to totally 



124 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


eliminate discrimination. Anybody knows 
better that that’s not going to happen. But it 
does put a principle in operation in which 
a great deal of mind changing can happen. 
The argument between having law and doing 
things voluntarily is really not the polarity 
either, because voluntarism is the only, 
ultimate way that anything is going to be 
done, even to obey the law. 

If I had it to do all over, I would still have 
done the same thing in supporting the civil 
rights legislation. There is a time and a place 
for everything, and I think the fullness of 
time had come in 1964 and 1965 and as far 
as legislation was concerned in civil rights. 

I think the problems that face America 
today in the field of civil rights are not the 
same as they were in 1963, ’64 and ’65. They 
are much different problems, the solutions 
of which are not the same as they were at 
that time. And I do think there has been 
progress. For the record, in December of 
1967, the unemployment rate in the United 
States was under four percent, and that is 
probably the lowest point in the history of the 
country. Whether that can be attributed to the 
efficiency of industry, or the Vietnam war, or 
the civil rights laws, or the poverty program, 
I don’t know. I don’t think that anybody can 
say, because it is probably a combination of 
all of those things. 

The civil rights legislation was a beginning; 
it was a baseline for the building of a sense of 
community in America that includes people 
of all races and creeds and colors on the basis 
of mutual respect. I think that the law is the 
baseline for it; it certainly is not the ultimate, 
over-all solution of it. The problems that face 
America today, in terms of civil rights, have 
much more to do with alienation of people 
than they do with the legal question of civil 
rights. The mobility of people—who pull out 
of the roots of their native environment and 


move somewhere else, take a long time for 
people to get to know each other and to find 
patterns of feeling that they belong. And the 
real solutions of the civil rights problems 
in America today have to do with making 
it possible for everyone capable of finding 
a standard of fife that is acceptable to their 
needs, and which meets the requirements of 
the needs of the individual. A part of that is 
related to people knowing each other. The big 
problem in America today is the vast majority 
of white people do not know any minority 
people, and the vast majority of minority 
people don’t know, really, any majority 
people on any kind of an in-depth basis. If 
the statement was true that “some Negroes 
are my best friends,” then probably we have 
come to as close a solution of this as you will 
ever find—if the true meaning of friendship is 
what’s talked about. If you are talking about a 
surface thing, that I know he’s a friend of mine 
because when I call him “Bill” he smiles at me, 
we’re not there yet. We might be at the first 
step of it. When we get to know each other 
as persons, then the surface things like color, 
and national origin, are irrelevant. We’re not 
there. But, I think civil rights legislation had 
a lot to do with setting the baseline for it. 



6 


The Office of 
Economic Opportunity 


In November of 1966, right after the 
election, some of my friends in Reno 
encouraged me to apply for the job of 
state director of the Office of Economic 
Opportunity I had thought of it prior to the 
campaign. 

I had not participated out in front and 
actively in the campaign, although I had done 
some public relations work, on a paid basis, 
for Mr. Laxalt. I gave away a few pens, I think. 
I didn’t feel that, being the immediate past 
president of the Council of Churches, and the 
pastor of the Colony Baptist Church, I should 
be in the forefront of a political campaign. 
I had given a blueprint for victory to Paul 
two or three years ago, which ultimately was 
adopted and followed. 

During the campaign, Mr. Laxalt made a 
couple of statements about poverty that were 
in error, and I called him on the phone and 
told him whoever was writing his speeches 
was not accurate, and they should stop it, 
or change it, because he was killing himself. 
He was talking about the “dole” and he was 
talking about “welfare,” and I told him that 


all the programs were educational, and that 
if he was going to say anything about it, he 
should say, “If were going to have a war on 
poverty, the programs should be educational 
programs,” which they are, and which he 
did—he changed the tactic. 

I sent a resume down in the latter part of 
November. I was asked for some additional 
information the first week of December, 
which I provided; some of my friends got 
very active in the promotion of the position. 
I had heard a rumor that I was one of the 
top considerees. I had heard that I would 
hear around Christmas time, and I hadn’t. I 
planned to go to San Francisco for Christmas, 
which I did, and while I was gone, apparently 
the governor tried to get ahold of me and 
couldn’t find me. I came back and was talking 
to a friend, and he said, “Hey, the governor’s 
office is trying to get you.” 

I said, “Call them and tell them I’m home.” 
And within an hour, I got a call from him and 
he asked me if I would accept the position, 
and I told him I wanted to think about it a 
while. I waited about thirty seconds and I 



126 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


told him “yes.” We worked out some of the 
small details, and I was officially on the job 
on January 20. 

I think that I ought to state why I made 
the decision to take this job. Motives are never 
singular. I had been in the Reno Colony for 
twelve years, and while I had not achieved 
my original goal, I came to the place where I 
believed that it would be achieved whether I 
was there or not. I came to the place where I 
felt that the people, themselves, were capable 
of achieving the objectives that we had all 
originally started out to do. 

I had been there for twelve years; my 
family had grown. The financial needs of my 
family at that time were in great excess to the 
financial income of that particular position. 
We originally moved over there for $3,000 
a year, and I remember the first year’s fuel 
bill was $500. We went in the hole the first 
year, and in the twelve years, I guess we put 
$10,000 of our own money into the whole 
operation, and borrowed most of it to do it. 
We lived the first two or three years, all of 
us wearing rummage clothes, and there are 
certain psychological effects that had on the 
whole family, especially children. But I think 
that they did marvelously with it. 

I felt also that my own skills had increased, 
and my own earning power therefore was 
greater, and the time had come to bring those 
two things closer together. I also felt that 
there was a need for a whole new change of 
program. The Reno Colony was in a state of 
absolute flux for the last five years I was there 
as to what the long-term prospects of that 
Colony were. And whether or not the Colony 
Christian Center and Baptist Church should 
be institutionalized, or be a catalyst agency 
for transition, could never be made because 
we didn’t know what was going to happen. It 
assumed the role of the catalyst agency for 
change, not necessarily for movement from 


the Colony to some place else, but there 
was serious consideration given to selling 
the Colony and moving. Well, the decision 
was finally made that they wanted to stay 
there and to make that Colony one of the 
best subdivisions in Reno. That required an 
entirely new approach to the Christian Center 
program, one that I felt that I could do, but 
not one that I necessarily wanted to do. And I 
felt a whole new approach [was needed] to an 
over-view, where the Colony Christian Center 
perhaps didn’t just serve the Reno-Sparks 
Indian Colony, but that whole area of town. I 
think that was motive. 

You know, to be very candid and very 
honest, in the last four or five years, I thought 
that my capacities for achievement perhaps 
exceeded some of the opportunities for it 
in that area. Maybe I had fulfilled that job. 
And the last thing, candidly, I think the 
opportunity presented itself to change, from 
the governor. I liked him very much, and I felt 
that I really would like to do this. I think it 
presented an opportunity to do what we had 
learned to do in in the Reno-Sparks Indian 
Colony on a much broader basis, statewide, 
a chance not only to get the Reno Colony 
off the ground, but maybe all the Indian 
reservations off the ground. And my directive, 
to this day, from the governor is to maximize 
all the state resources that we can possibly 
marshal to the solution of all the problems of 
all the reservations. He has great hopes for the 
Indian people, and I think, real appreciation 
for their problem and for them as persons. I 
think probably if there is any great political 
asset that the governor has, it is a sense of 
appreciation of people; he is a people-centered 
person. 

I think that the other thing that I should 
say was that this was not the only offer that 
had come. I had turned down two or three 
opportunities to move to other churches, 



The Office of Economic Opportunity 


127 


and I had even turned down, twice, another 
Baptist church in Reno. Some of those came 
early in the twelve years and some of them 
later. I had a very serious consideration for 
a federal job, of being one of the Republican 
representatives on the equal opportunity 
commission of the Commerce Department. 
I don’t know how real that was, but I was at 
least sent an application, which I filled out and 
put it in my drawer, and to this day it’s still 
there, because I got all ready to do it and then 
decided that I really wasn’t quite—I didn’t 
really feel that the Colony was at the point 
where I wanted to leave. Two years later, I 
had come to the place where I did feel it, and 
beyond that, I don’t know any more motives. 

I came down on third of January and 
had a discussion with Bruce Parks, who had 
served on the previous administration. He 
was very cordial and very helpful. He showed 
apparent appreciation of the appointment, 
that somebody who was sympathetic to the 
problem was appointed. Our relationship 
in that interim period, of him giving me 
knowledge, and getting some knowledge of 
what was going on, was very, very cordial. 
Mr. Parks had to preside over the birth of the 
department and the growing pains of it. 

The level of the programs in the state 
were: very good in Clark County, very poor 
in Washoe County, not too good in the 
Inter-Tribal Council, minimal in the rural 
counties, but at least they had all been funded 
somewhat—a beginning. I did go over to 
the regional office in San Francisco, and ran 
into a stone wall in the federal government, 
with the view by some individuals in that 
office that we were right-wing Republicans, 
the devil incarnate, we were nothing but 
obstructionists, and we had a hard time 
even getting the office refunded. They didn’t 
believe the governor was sincere because of a 
couple of campaign statements that were later 


changed. The first couple of months around 
here were very unpleasant. We didn’t pay too 
much attention to that, other than that we did 
get refunded. 

I spent the first month or two traveling 
around the state getting to know the people in 
the programs and what they were. I was faced 
with the problem of developing a budget for 
this office for submission for the year, meeting 
with the legislature, which was fairly hostile, 
and having only a staff of two. 

The Rural County Community Action 
based in the same office, the director of which, 
Mr. Russell McConnell, was very hostile to 
me—he was a carry-over from the previous 
administration, and couldn’t get the message 
that we were going to have the best poverty 
program in the states. I think, in the first 
three or four months, the continual tension 
time there, there was a growing deterioration 
in his emotional stability. We were trying to 
promote greater effectiveness and efficiency 
and equality in the programs, and more 
money, and really get them off the ground. For 
some reason, he never got the message. His 
board decided to terminate his employment 
in May, and that was a very tense time, but 
it was done by the board. They hired a new 
man, who has got some new staff, that’s done 
a rather good job in getting the preliminary 
work done for really getting at the poverty 
problems in the fifteen rural counties. 

So the beginning of the program here, as 
far as the emotional climate was concerned, 
the first few months were rather rough. 
However, towards the end of the legislature, 
they began to come through for us—I knew 
all of them, ’most all of them, which was a real 
advantage. I got all the support that anyone 
could ask for from the governor’s office, and 
the legislature began to sanction what we had 
proposed. For the first time in the history 
of the poverty program, we had legislative 



128 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


approval for it. The program actually had 
existed without legislative approval; it existed 
on a legislative technicality that was used after 
the previous legislative session. But now we 
had legislative sanction for the program and 
money. We had generated a good climate 
among the legislators in favor of the program; 
we had committed ourselves to dealing with 
some of the problems that they thought were 
serious, and we had full backing from the 
governor’s office. 

So the first six months of the year was 
actually used in terms of trying to establish 
rapport with the various community action 
programs. We assisted Washoe County in 
getting a new director. I met with the federal 
task force from the President and opened 
up the funding levels for Washoe County 
from something like thirty to $300,000 a 
year, which is now up to almost $450,000. 
We vigorously fought for a Head Start 
program for the Inter-Tribal Council, and 
were successful. Even though we wanted it 
year around, we only got it for two months, 
but at least we got that. We promoted some 
money from the Labor Department for the 
InterTribal Council. The governor even 
personally talked to Sargent Shriver on 
the ‘phone in support of the Inter-Tribal 
Council’s program for Head Start. We got 
down and we got to know the people in Clark 
County. We began to work with the regional 
office in having statewide CAP, which is 
Community Action Program, conferences, 
and we began to get to know each other. We 
began to help in some of the training of the 
Community Action people, and opening up 
coordination communications. We began to 
become related to all the branches of state 
government that are relevant to the poverty 
program, began to gather in-depth data and 
statistics on what the problem in Nevada 
really was. 


One of the chances of fate that proved to 
be most helpful was that my OEO predecessor 
had hired the United States Research and 
Development Corporation to do a $5,000 
analysis of the War on Poverty programs 
within the state. And just before he went out 
of office, I listened to the proposal and agreed 
to go ahead with it. Mr. Robert Clampett, 
the president of that company, became 
the chief consultant to this office. He did a 
thirty-day study throughout the state and 
presented us with a three-volume report, with 
recommendations. He was most helpful in 
terms of setting up the office and structuring 
it, and working out job assignments. He gave 
us the basic information that was needed to 
know what was the present level of operation, 
efficiency, the kind of activities that were 
going on in all the Community Action 
programs in the state, with some very useful 
long-range recommendations. 

As a result of the assistance of United 
States Research and Development, we were 
able to begin to establish some rapport 
with the regional office and the national 
office. They were helpful in getting a contact 
between the governor and Sargent Shriver 
with regards to the Indian Head Start 
program. Mr. Clampett was the assistant 
inspector general for the Office of Economic 
Opportunity, and Bill Haddad was the 
inspector general prior to starting their own 
company, the United States Research and 
Development Corporation, so they knew all 
the people in OEO. While I have indicated 
that we began with a feeling that we were 
looked at by OEO negatively, through some 
of the cross communications opened up by 
Mr. Clampett, we have begun to establish 
a working relationship with the federal 
people. As a result of that, it made it much 
easier for me to get some sense of what the 
situation was in the state. I will attach some 



The Office of Economic Opportunity 


129 


of the material to this report for the files for 
historical purposes.* 

We decided to view this office in its 
coordinating function, and to play the role of 
the coordinator at the state level to serve the 
Community Action programs, and to really 
make them effective and to make them work. 
My job, primarily, is to advise the governor 
on all activities of OEO in the state, to make 
my recommendations for his approval or 
disapproval of all programs. As of this date, 
we never have disapproved of any. My job is 
also to be his liaison between the governor 
and the federal OEO, and the governor and 
the Community Action programs. I do letter 
writing, memo writing, speech writing, 
‘phoning—all kinds of liaison relationships 
here. 

One of the recommendations of United 
States Research and Development was that 
there be established a human resources 
council at the cabinet level in the state with 
me as chairman. The governor followed 
through and did this last summer. I am 
chairman of that council; there is also Mr. 
Barrett from the Budget administration, 
Mr. James Wittenberg from Personnel, Jerry 
Dondero from Employment Security, Dr. 
Carl Harris of Health and Welfare, and Clark 
Russell of Economic Development. 

Our major concern at the beginning was 
the increased employment of minority people 
in state government. I think within three or 
four months there was something like a 
thirty percent increase in the employment of 
minority personnel. While number wise this 
is not maybe too significant, percentage-wise 
I think it’s very good. It’s continuing to this 
day; in fact, there’s a campaign within state 
government to recruit minority personnel for 
employment. 

We employed Mr. Willie Wynn as the 
assistant director, a Negro young man who 


at that time was working for Sears and 
Roebuck, who in the past had worked for 
department stores in Reno, and was the pastor 
of a Pentecostal church, a very likeable, very 
capable young man. He has been in charge of 
the Las Vegas office that we opened in August, 
having direct liaison with the Clark County 
Economic Opportunity Board program, and 
is our eyes and ears in Clark County. 

One of the first things that we tried to 
do down there was to assist the Community 
Action Program with their public relations. I 
did go down and talk to Tom Wilson of the 
Review-Journal to get agreements to print the 
positive publicity things that they were doing. 
There was a difficult problem with Catholic 
Welfare. It appeared for a while that they were 
harassing the program. But as an alternative 
to that, they were funded by Vocational 
Rehabilitation to do a rehabilitation program 
down there, which they, as far as I know, have 
done very well. It did relieve a lot of tension. 

There are still great problems in the 
Community Action program such as a 
lack of communication between the people 
and the staff; and within the staff, a lack 
of understanding of the real problems, a 
continuing high influx of minority people 
from the South moving into Las Vegas at a 
rapid rate, in fact almost faster than you can 
take care of the existing problems. Something 
like 30,000 Negro people live in the Las Vegas 
area, which is a fantastic rate of growth. 

We have discovered that one of the major 
problems is that the educational systems 
in the southern states are so poor that the 
young people can graduate with very good 
grades back there from high school, who 
upon any kind of testing, test out at about 


*See Mathews papers, University of 
Nevada Library, Reno. 




130 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


the third or fourth grade level in the school 
system in Nevada. This is not to say anything 
against them; it really has a lot to say about 
the system of education. So a great deal of 
the emphasis has to be on training and re¬ 
training. We look at the people who come as 
a great resource for the state, and probably 
one of the greatest under-developed natural 
resources in the state of Nevada are under- 
educated and under-employed minority 
people. The philosophy of OEO is not to give 
people money to overcome the poverty, but to 
increase their skills so that they can increase 
their income, and to provide services that will 
allow them to work, child care centers, Head 
Start, all kinds of services that will make it 
easier for them to find and to hold a job. 

The funding level is up about a million 
dollars this year, through some concerted 
efforts of ourselves and the local Community 
Action Program. A federal task force sent 
out by President Johnson met with the state 
people in the spring, and as a result of that, 
the Washoe County CAP moved from the 
$30,000 a year level of funding to almost a 
half a million dollars at the present time. The 
Inter-Tribal Council has moved from—oh, 
about a $150,000 level to around $750,000. 

At this stage I would like to say that 
I think that Clark County was the first 
program to be funded. They moved through 
the program development stage into the 
program implementation stage into the place 
where they are really operational, first, and 
they are far advanced. The other Community 
Action Programs have been moving in the 
program development area. Washoe County 
moved through that system very fast, and 
there was a considerable amount of upheaval 
because of the rapidity with which they had 
to move. There was some terribly negative 
publicity in the newspapers last summer, 
most of which has been overcome at the 


present time, and they are getting operational 
with, I think, excellent speed and quality; The 
Rural Community Action Program is just 
flow coming out of the program development 
stage and will be in the implementation stage 
within about sixty days from this date, which 
is January 19, 1968. 

We have worked hard and consistently 
in trying to upgrade the quality of all the 
programs, and with the help of Western 
Center for Community Development of 
UCLA, which has a contract with OEO, 
we have participated in the coordination 
of training activities for OEO people. We 
had one conference here in Carson City to 
train and plan for a whole training program 
of non-professional aides, taking people 
at the lowest levels in OEO and giving 
them training to upgrade their skills in 
analysis, judgment, and communication, 
coordination, self-confidence, etc.. We have 
had three such conferences in the state 
with, I think, a high degree of success. We 
have also held one session for professional 
personnel for training and planning; and 
on February first, there will be a statewide 
Community Action Conference to assist in 
the in-depth training of boards and decision¬ 
makers of the staffs. I think there is a real 
contribution here. 

I think one of the most significant 
contributions made by the state has been 
the stance of the governor, who has been 
sympathetic to the program. He supported 
the legislation nationally—he wrote a letter 
to Senator Clark and to Representative 
Perkins supporting OEO and asking for 
more flexibility in funding. He also worked 
with Walter Baring in encouragement of a 
positive vote, and Mr. Baring did vote for 
the OEO Act in its final form, one of the few 
times in recent years that he has supported 
an administration program. 



The Office of Economic Opportunity 


131 


The most significant thing that has 
happened is that we have continued a 
relationship with the United States Research 
and Development Corporation. They had 
recommended way back in the spring that 
we consider the idea of having a “model 
state.” Nevada is a large state in area, but 
small in population; it’s the assessment 
and judgment of everyone involved in 
government that it’s still in the manageable 
stage. And while planning and coordination 
has never happened anywhere in history 
to any effectiveness in the implementation, 
especially at the federal level, it is felt that in 
Nevada there is an opportunity to really do 
comprehensive environmental planning and 
implementation, coordination. 

Recently agreements have been made 
where the governor is going to participate 
in the “model state” concept. This hasn’t 
even been publicized yet. And there will be 
a new agency of state government called the 
Comprehensive Environmental Development 
agency, using the latest techniques of 
technology, including computerization, skill 
banks, cross reference of employees, so that 
any employer in the state of Nevada can push 
a button for a particular job classification, and 
the computer will kick out all the names and 
phone numbers of everybody in the state who 
has those qualifications. We are also going 
to be funded for the development of highly 
intensified skill training centers. Some new 
techniques have been developed where they 
can teach basic education on three to four 
grade levels in eight weeks. We’re all very 
excited about that. The federal government’s 
excited. The governor has established a 
relationship with Richard Cornuelle, who is 
the executive vice president of the National 
Association of Manufacturers, and we’re going 
to marshal all of the private sector to focus 
on the problem of the poverty people. The 


federal agencies such as Housing and Urban 
Development, OEO, Health and Welfare, and 
Labor will be pouring in additional money to 
Nevada, a kind of a statewide crash program. 
Already there have been photographers from 
Life magazine here to do a story on what’s 
coming. It’s the governor’s intention to make 
Nevada the laboratory of state government, 
and become the “model” for state government 
in the fifty states. I’ve been at the center of this 
development and have spent a great deal of 
my time and efforts on it, and we’re excited 
about it. 

In summary, I would say this has been 
a year of learning and, as the phrase goes, 
“getting your feet wet,” getting to know what’s 
going on, serving in every way we could. We’ve 
done a multitude of things in coordination 
between state departments. We have been a 
referral office for all kinds of people who just 
call, needing information, and we’ve made 
an effort to get the right information to them 
without the run-around. We’ve had the “hand 
holding” role, between people and groups 
who have been meeting at cross purposes. 
We have certainly been in a lobbying role for 
selling OEO and getting additional money 
and funds and programs. But over all, we have 
been in the process of developing a state plan, 
where we hope that within the framework 
of the length of this administration we can 
be well on the way to solving some of deep- 
seated problems that the poor have in the 
state of Nevada. We have been informed by 
knowledgeable people that we have one of the 
best operations in the United States in this 
office, in the over-all view. 

I’ve had to travel extensively. I’ve probably 
spent twenty percent of my whole time in Las 
Vegas this year, and I’ve been to Washington 
three times this year, and to San Francisco a 
multitude of times to meet with the regional 
office of OEO. We feel that we have spent 



132 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


the year in building a team and in building 
relationships; we have accomplished a great 
deal. But what we have really accomplished 
that’s the most significant is pinning down 
and organizing and finalizing the long-range 
plans. We have an excellent staff. We have 
done it without hardly any personal publicity, 
by design, and that’s unusual for me because 
I’m probably as well-known as anybody in the 
state, in some ways. But we’ve tried to promote 
the local operations. 

Expanding a little on the educational 
problems in Las Vegas, I was the chairman 
of the Nevada Advisory Committee of the 
U. S. Commission on Civil Rights (and I 
still am) when that committee was actively 
functioning; that was when there was no 
state commission. We’ve backed off now 
and let the state carry the ball. But in the 
beginning, I’d like to describe an overview of 
what I found throughout the state and then 
some specific examples. You would never find 
anyone who would admit that discrimination 
was a problem—’’just doesn’t exist in our 
area,” “we don’t have any problems,” and, of 
course, these are the white people. They just 
had the philosophy that people were where 
they were, and what they were, by some kind 
of either fate or will of God, and that it was 
not because of any policies or because of the 
structure of society or because of the nature 
of the people who are in control. And yet, we 
went to Reno, we went to Elko, we went to 
Hawthorne, and we went to Las Vegas, and 
we heard testimony in every place indicating 
serious problems, indicating a great desire 
upon the part of Negro people and Indian 
people really to change their conditions, that 
they were not, they were not contented, they 
were not apathetic, and they were not lazy. 
A great misunderstanding and a misreading 
between the minority community and the 
majority community By and large, I analyzed 


it to be basically—the root of it was a matter 
of oversight—out of sight, out of mind, and a 
lack of familiarity with each other. They just 
didn’t communicate to each other, therefore 
they didn’t know each other, and because 
they didn’t know each other, they were, on 
both sides, capable of believing the traditional 
historical lies about each other that have been 
passed down from generation to generation. 
A willingness to believe them, and a kind of 
unwillingness to take the risk and take the 
chance of really getting to know each other, 
because they might have to change their 
minds. I guess I have always taken the tack 
that a great deal can be done through public 
relations, and that’s why I insisted in the 1963, 
and eventually the 1965, civil rights law in the 
state, that they have that whole section in there 
that would promote mutual understanding 
and to foster mutual understanding. And 
one of the things I was most distressed with 
in the Sawyer administration was they never 
really did do any of that, and I’m still not too 
pleased, because I don’t think enough of it is 
done. 

Specifically, when you get down into Clark 
County, there’s all kinds of problems—Clark 
County still goes on the neighborhood school 
concept, that children should go to school 
in their own neighborhood. There is no hot 
lunch program down there, and, for the poor, 
this is a terrible burden on some children. The 
really under-nourished and under-privileged 
children do not even have the advantage of the 
one hot meal a day that is to the advantage of 
all the children in the Washoe County schools. 
There has been the hassles of the bussing of 
kids to get a racial mix in the schools so that 
all children can benefit from the sharing of 
knowing each other, and the sharing of talents 
that each other have, and the cross-cultural 
fertilization that comes from this kind of 
thing. They do now bus children. They have 



The Office of Economic Opportunity 


133 


done a tremendous job down there in the up¬ 
grading the quality of the level of the teachers 
that teach primarily the under-privileged 
children. 

To give an example of the attitude, the 
Vocational Technical Institute is built twenty- 
nine miles from town. Maybe by 1975 it’ll be, 
you know, right in the middle of the whole 
area, or maybe by the end of 1980, but for 
right now it’s twenty-nine miles out of town. 
It was only in the summer of 1967 that they 
bought their first jet engine to train airplane 
mechanics with, and they were still turning 
out airplane mechanics who only worked on 
piston engines and there just isn’t any need 
for them. We did hear a lot of testimony 
about minority kids who were counseled 
away from anything other than the trades 
or the vocational methods, and then there 
was not even the opportunities for going to 
Vo-Tech because there is no bussing. Even 
today, there are eighty-eight children in the 
Westside of Las Vegas who are capable and 
able and eager to go to Vocational-Technical 
Institute and can’t get there because they have 
no transportation. So far, the Clark County 
school board, primarily one person, has 
blocked any attempt to bus. 

Over all, I would say the total attitude 
of the city of Las Vegas has changed 250 
degrees in the last six years. The present 
superintendent of schools is very active in 
trying to promote community relations, and 
very active in this whole solutions-conference 
approach to the minority problem, which I 
think is very effective. It’s the kind of thing 
that I wanted the Equal Rights Commission 
to do, and they never have, but the educators 
picked up that ball and ran with it, and I think 
they’re doing very well. 

The newspapers in the state have a very 
cynical attitude towards minority problems. 
They always present the problem in a very 


cynical way—not that they choose sides, but 
they’re very pessimistic on both sides. They’re 
very suspicious of motivations all the way 
around. I have seen some reporters moved 
emotionally to change their own viewpoint. I 
remember one reporter one night cried with 
Eddie Scott when we didn’t get the civil rights 
bill in 1963. Eddie was sitting in a chair over 
in one end of the assembly when they were 
adjourning, crying, and one of the newspaper 
men started to cry, too. Incidentally, he’s now 
the chairman of the Gaming Control Board 
of the state of Nevada. And there have been 
instances—Cy Ryan one time felt kind of 
guilty that he had put on a bulletin (a news 
release) where he felt that he might have 
sided with the Negro people more than he 
should have. I didn’t think so, but—there 
has been a cynical approach to it. I think of 
the irresponsible approach sometimes’ when 
there is great publicity, red-inked headlines 
in Las Vegas, on the riots and exploitation of 
sex, murder, and violence; which doesn’t do 
much to keep things calm in Las Vegas. 

They always gave us (OEO and civil 
rights) good publicity in terms of pictures, 
but not too much publicity in terms of 
in-depth reporting of findings of what we 
were, what we had found, or what we had 
done. We were usually headline hunters— 
different kind of head hunting, I guess. I 
remember in Hawthorne, when I had talked 
about Hawthorne as a city that was ruled by 
fear because everybody was afraid of each 
other. Negroes were afraid to do this or that, 
because they didn’t know what would happen; 
businessmen wanted to open their doors, 
but were afraid to because they didn’t know 
what that guy would do; and the top guy was 
afraid to open the doors because he thought 
he would lose all his customers; and it was as 
if—everybody was afraid. Well, I made the 
statement, and the headline hit the paper, 



134 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


“City Ruled by Fear.” It implied that I meant 
that the power structure used fear to run the 
town, a kind of terroristic approach, which 
was not implied, or, in the total context of the 
report, it couldn’t even have been deduced in 
any manner whatsoever. But it was a rather 
effective way to shape up some people. 

Probably the best thing we accomplished 
in this office before I resigned to run for 
Congress was the training program we put on 
in 1968 with state government to increase the 
hiring of minority people. Dr. R. T. Williams 
of the Western Center staff of UCLA, the 
groups who had the contract with OEO 
for training agreed to and got permission 
to train state administrative personnel in 
attitudinal change to enhance the hiring of 
minority people. I had a direct order from the 
governor, Paul Laxalt, to design an approach 
that would actually accomplish this purpose. 
Governor Sawyer had done little, but he had 
talked a lot. 

This was not easy. Discriminatory 
attitudes exist within state government and 
especially in Carson City and they don’t die 
easy First we designed a program to have 
a two-day training session at Stead, with a 
speech from the governor, the attendance of 
Bob Robertson, the governor’s chief assistant, 
two days of small-group confrontation 
between top administrators and poor people. 
We recruited one-third of the group from the 
Washoe War on Poverty Program. 

Then we had a meeting with the governor 
and all of the cabinet. He told them he wanted 
it. Then we met with a committee of some 
cabinet people, some poor people, some 
trainers and staff. It almost blew up at this 
point but it didn’t. We had the sessions at 
Stead and I think we had great success. We 
followed this with a session in Las Vegas with 
secondary administrators and then one at 
Stead for the northern counterparts. 


All in all, I do think attitudes were 
changed, however painful and on all sides— 
not just one way. And as a result there has 
been a great increase in minority hiring. 
Again it took a lot of guts for the governor to 
do what he did. He caught a lot of heat but he 
did it anyway A lot of credit goes to Western 
Center people, especially R. T. Williams, and 
Pete Lopez, to State Personnel people, Jim 
Wittenberg and Charles Keever and a great 
deal to Bob Robertson. Naturally I was the 
pusher. This whole project took nine months 
from the beginning conception to completion. 

A personal evaluation, which I think is 
important in this study, would be that I ant 
still an optimist. I have long since learned 
not to expect too much too soon, but I still 
expect progress, and I still see it happen. But it 
does not happen without deep commitments 
by people who are working in the field. You 
simply cannot give up, and sometimes you 
might take a position that later you become 
convinced was wrong, and later history 
demonstrates you were right in the first place. 
And so, to those who read this, I would say 
that, up to this point, all the time and ah 
the effort, which might have only produced 
insignificant progress in some ways, was 
worth it; while the other side of it, I think 
there has been some dramatic advances in 
certain ways. 

Do I miss the Sunday pulpit? Well, in a 
way, yes. I’m now teaching the adult Bible class 
at Community Baptist Church. You know, 
the first six months that I was here, in the 
OEO, I was still carrying the administrative 
load over there at the Colony Baptist Church 
and Christian Center, and actually helped a 
great deal with advice and policy decision 
until the new man arrived; and I preached 
every Sunday until the new man arrived; 
and I preached every Sunday until the first 
Sunday of June last in the Colony Baptist 



The Office of Economic Opportunity 


135 


Church. I preached twice in the Community 
Baptist Church just last summer, and twice 
at the Incline Village Presbyterian Church. 
I’ve spoken twice this last year at the Berkeley 
Baptist Divinity School. I gave an hour and a 
half to the American Association of University 
Women at the University of Nevada last 
Saturday. I do like to preach, and if it doesn’t 
happen once in a while I probably will try to 
make it happen. But I see the Gospel primarily 
as action, and sometimes preaching is one of 
the poorest ways of achieving. 




7 


Conclusion 


With regard to awards, in 1964 I was the 
recipient of the Human Relations Award 
from the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People branch in 
Las Vegas. I think I received a plaque from 
Channel 8 [KOLO-TV station] for one of the 
persons who appeared to promote gracious 
living in the City of Reno. When I left the 
Reno Colony, I was given a nice luncheon 
by the Ministerial Association, and a nice 
dinner by the Indian people with a beautiful 
picture—a hand drawn one by one of the 
Indian artists. I honestly feel that the chance 
to serve, and the chance be called upon to do 
something, is an honor in itself, and serving 
for six or seven years as chairman of the 
Advisory Committee to the U. S. Commission 
on Civil Rights is an honor. I should say that 
Grant Sawyer offered to appoint me to the 
first Equal Rights Commission, and I refused 
that. I felt that being chairman of the advisory 
committee was kind of a conflict there. I don’t 
know whether he thought so or not, but I 
thought that I refused graciously to give him 
more freedom, and our committee, probably, 


more freedom. There were different little 
things that we could do. 

Plans for the future—in the next sixty 
days I’m going to be heading a feasibility 
study for the governor, in cooperation with 
the United States Research and Development 
Corporation, into the possibility of having a 
statewide manpower corporation to operate 
pilot demonstration, skill-training programs. 
The Unites States Research and Development 
Corporation would like me to work for them 
under the governor, and I don’t know whether 
I’m going to do that or not. My own future 
plans, without that consideration, are to 
continue in this office. 

I honestly have considered politics, either 
on the state level or on federal level. I have a 
lot of friends who keep telling me they want 
me to run for governor some day, and I haven’t 
turned that idea down, but I think, realistically, 
it would be next to impossible. I might 
consider the Senate someday. Incidentally, 
one of the oldest political strategists in this 
state told me in 1960 that I’d end up in the 
United States Senate—my good friend, Wallie 



138 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


Warren. He and I have been on opposite sides 
of the fence about as many times as we have 
been on the same side. 

This part is being added after everything 
else in this study has been completed because 
it happened after the study was completed. 
But it is important so I am putting it in here. 
In the summer of 1968,1 ran for Congress. 

For years I have been philosophically 
opposed to Walter Baring. I have seen what 
his policies do to people. It isolates people 
from people. It makes people selfish and 
hateful. It is fraught through and through 
with pride and paternalism. It divides rather 
than unites. I almost ran against him in 1966, 
but I decided the time was not right. I didn’t 
vote for anybody. I am a Republican, always 
have been, but I appear to have the image 
of a liberal because I am always involved 
in what the liberals are involved in. Even 
though I am a conservative, however, I don’t 
believe in conserving evil. I am viewed as 
a liberal on civil rights, Indian problems, 
poverty etc. But Walter Baring is so far to 
the right, I get angry He was against civil 
rights, he has racist attitudes expressed 
openly, even when done unconsciously. I 
think his patriotism is phony Not that he 
isn’t a patriot, but the way it is stated and 
displayed by him is shallow and stupid. 
He lives in the past and is a disaster, as far 
as I am concerned as a congressman from 
Nevada. He is powerless and rather a joke in 
Washington. His henchman, Charley Bell, is 
the real congressman and a bitterly despised 
man in Nevada. To Walter’s credit, he does 
have a staff who solves peoples’ individual 
problems for them on occasion and they 
do answer his mail. He calls them “the little 
peoples’ problems,” as if his voters were 
some kind of small children, and it makes 
me sick. For awhile I did not believe that 
this was enough, though, to challenge him. 


But then I made up my mind that a realistic 
man, who knew the problems of today, and 
could deal with them, a man respected in 
Washington by those who knew me, could 
not only answer his mail but had the brains 
and the guts to represent Nevada. 

One night in my hotel room in Las Vegas 
in January I decided to run. Really, I ran to 
express a point of view—to help Nevadans 
see a better way than the Baring way. I guess 
it was my way of preaching. 

I wrote the governor a note and asked 
him what he thought. The next week I went 
to talk to him. I told him the Republicans had 
to run a strong man, that we couldn’t do it 
with the Ralph Kraemers, the Carlton Adairs 
and not even the George Von Tobels. It took 
a vigorous moderate not a carbon copy of 
Walter Baring. He told me he didn’t think that 
Walter could be beat and that I should wait to 
see what the Demos would do in a primary I 
later sent him a note that said if I ran and was 
successful, I promised him I would never run 
against him for public office. I never asked for 
a commitment of support. 

Now two things, 1) I was under the Hatch 
Act and could not do anything publicly 2) My 
good friend Les Gray was going to run for the 
Senate and he wanted someone to run strong 
against Baring and keep him away from Bible. 
That helped influence me. But I had three 
motives. 1)1 couldn’t stand Walter Baring. 2) I 
wanted the Republican party to unite behind a 
strong candidate and stop supporting Baring. 
3) I had thought about being governor some 
day So I nosed around. I talked a little to the 
Hughes people. I talked to some Stardust 
people and I talked to my friends. While I 
had no commitments, I was not discouraged. 

Finally, I talked to George Abbott. He 
was enthused. I finally wrote him a letter and 
stated seven conditions upon which I would 
run. He indicated, okay. 



Conclusion 


139 


Before the state convention I talked to 
the governor again. By this time Dick Ham 
had announced on the Democratic side. He 
said to wait to the last minute and see how 
strong Ham was. If Ham could win in the 
primary, we could win easily in the general. 
But he really thought I should wait and take 
on Mike Mirabelli for state treasurer in 1970. 
So I explored some more. I went to the state 
convention. I was on the platform committee 
and I wrote the plank on welfare and helped 
on civil rights. 

One point here I want in writing: I stated 
in the platform committee the following. I 
said, “One trouble we Republicans always 
have in this area is that we sound mean, when 
we aren’t mean. Our approach is different 
than the Democrats, much more geared to the 
dignity of man, but the way we say it gives us 
a mean image. I believe we can say what we 
intend, express our compassion, make our 
point and not sound mean.” The press quoted 
me as saying I was only concerned about our 
image, which was certainly not true. The 
plank passed anyway. 

Next I checked on money. I called the 
area director of OEO who is a Republican, to 
check and see if there was any outside money 
to go against Walter. He had been ill and I got 
him at home, I told him I would need about 
$25,000. He said, okay, he would try, and 
to call him in two weeks. I told the Hughes 
people I could not go without them. In fact, 
I wrote a good letter to Bob Maheu. Some 
people told me it was a classic letter. One of 
the agreements I had with George Abbott was 
that I would not have a strong opponent in 
the primary. At the state convention Bob List 
popped up as a possible. I asked I. Lee Potter 
of the Republican Congressional Committee 
and he said someone in the governors office 
told him Bob was the one. Every time I have 
checked that out it has been denied. I called 


Abbott and I talked to List. List finally told 
me the governor had talked him out of it or 
at least discouraged him. I believe that. About 
this time I decided maybe I was getting too 
ego-involved. Maybe I wasn’t the best man. 
So I went to Woodrow Wilson in Las Vegas 
and asked him if he would run. He said some 
people had talked to him, but the answer was 
no. I went to Chic Hecht and asked him. He 
said no, but if he changed his mind he would 
let me know in plenty of time. I checked with 
Bob List. He then announced that he would not 
run. I asked Les Gray if he was going to switch 
and run for Congress. He said no. I asked the 
Like people. They said no. I asked the Raggio 
people. They said no. Then I started getting 
rumors. That Lrank Bender would run. That 
Senator Bill Larr would run. But I checked 
them all out and they were just rumors. 

I talked to Paul again. He still said it would 
be next to impossible, that I had to have the 
money in the bank, not to spend one dime of 
my own money and if I had the guts it was up 
to me, but to let him know in plenty of time. 

So I talked to my old friend Ed Manville of 
Reno. He said he thought it was a great idea, 
that he would give me money and he thought I 
was a man of great talent and could withstand 
the rigors of Washington. A friend of mine 
approached Harvey Gross. I waited to hear 
from my OEO friend. I got a maybe from the 
Stardust. I got a maybe from Hughes. I got a 
yes for the general if Dick Ham lost, a no for 
the primary from Lou Paley, with no strings 
attached. So about the first of June, I told the 
governor I probably would. 

Then Dick Ham called me and asked if I 
was or not; the stories had been in the papers 
that I was thinking about. He was going to put 
in a candidate if I wasn’t going to file because 
he couldn’t beat Walter unless there was a 
Republican primary. I told him I would run 
and beat either Walter or him. 



140 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


So the plan was I would not have a 
primary. I could spend the summer getting 
known and getting ready for the general. 
Harrah’s said to come and see them after I 
filed. So the day drew near. I called George 
Abbott and asked him on Tuesday, July 9, if 
he had gotten someone to file and then shut 
up. I was to pay his fee. This would force 
our. names onto the primary ballot and is a 
common practice. The man says, “I file” and 
you never hear from him again. George said 
he hadn’t but he would. 

Now, the problem was money. I felt I had 
to have at least $25,000 when announced. I 
figured on five apiece from the Stardust and 
Hughes, with no primary. I planned on getting 
a good finance chairman, and a good staff and 
do the normal fund raising things. So I called 
OEO again. I couldn’t get through to Horan; I 
tried for three days. I asked the governor for 
some help and he said to get it from those 
who were pushing me so hard. The truth is, I 
was pushing, no one else. Everyone else was 
willing to help but no one, no group pushed 
me. Finally OEO called, they said Horan was 
busy, that he would call me the next day, but 
that he said to tell me he had what I wanted. 
So I called George Abbott. I said I was going 
to go and wanted to know, in view of the fact 
that the central committee was meeting on 
Saturday July 13, if I shouldn’t announce on 
Friday the 12, rather than wait until the 17, 
because I could then speak to the group and 
would not have another chance. He agreed. So 
I announced and resigned on the 12. Because 
of the Hatch Act I was really in a bind and had 
been very faithful up to this point of working 
full time and then some for OEO and only 
took a little of my own time to explore this 
up until I announced. 

That night a friend of mine, an old lady 
with vast mining claims in Nevada called me 
and asked me how much I needed for the 


campaign. I told her about $50,000 for the 
primary and $100,000 for the general. She 
said she was getting a couple million the next 
Monday on a mining deal and would give it 
to me! She is still waiting and so am I. But it 
went on for a month that way. The company 
she had a commitment from backed out. 
Finally, Larry Horan called to tell me that 
what he had for me was that if Rockefeller 
was the nominee of the Republican party, his 
people were interested, otherwise not. The 
Rockefeller people actually contacted me and 
offered all kinds of help except money. 

So I went to the central committee, 
delivered my speech to a warm reception, 
went down and filed on Monday and paid my 
own filing fee. I then called George Abbott 
about the other guy to file. He told me to call 
Ralph Kraemer, that he was working on it. 
I called Ralph, and asked him to get some 
young Young Republican in Las Vegas to file, 
I would pay his fee. And he said okay. Then I 
heard Chic Hecht was going to file. I couldn’t 
believe it. I called Woodrow Wilson to find 
out. He called back and said Chic was being 
pressured, but he wouldn’t do it. The next 
day Slattery filed. He had been to the central 
committee meeting, heard my speech, got 
up and left. I didn’t think too much about it. 

Anyway, the rest is history. I am enclosing 
the clippings I have from the campaign. They 
tell the story.* I can only add a little. I spent 
$2,300 and two and a half months’ salary. I 
took in about $1,600. I supported Richard 
Nixon. Chic Hecht later told me he had about 
fifty calls urging him to run. I heard that Joe 
Conforte was a major contributor to Slats, 
from some pretty reliable sources. I don’t 
think Harold’s Club helped him. I do think 


*See Mathews papers, University of 
Nevada Library, Reno. 




Conclusion 


141 


Walter Baring had a hand in him getting in 
the race. The governor did tell me he would 
do what he could and, of course, after the 
primary would go all out. The press was very 
good to me. Bill Laub did help me get some 
free radio time in Vegas. Hank Greenspun 
did give me three articles in the paper, free. 
I did go to Barings stronghold in Vegas, the 
V.F.W., and my answers to their questions 
were so good that they said they wouldn’t ask 
me any more. 

I did have about $100,000 pledged for 
after the primary. I really got mad at Slats 
only once in the race, and that was when he 
said, “He carries the good book in one hand 
and deceit in the other.” I do not know the 
inside story of a lot of what happened when 
I announced. I do know I gained stature in 
the party. I do think I could have won with 
another $5,000 worth of TV the last week of 
the campaign. I do think Slats won on name 
identification only. I feel complimented that 
Walter was afraid of me and not Ham, and I 
got more votes for less money in a state-wide 
race than almost anybody. And I am glad I 
did it. I did learn a lot. Ideals and positions 
do not win elections. Organization, name 
identification, money, work, staff, consistency 
do. People care less of what you believe than 
that you believe it sincerely and consistently 
and are strong in your convictions. Look 
at the difference between Bible and Baring 
on positions. Look at votes. Slats did know 
more about campaigning than I did. I was 
depending on a staff. He was a senator and 
he could and did use that power. 

I worked hard. I went to every gathering I 
could find. I spent a lot of time writing my own 
speeches and press releases. I did everything 
I could have done with what I had and my 
family was just great as were my friends. I 
probably came across best election night on 
TV when I conceded. I really told it the way 


it was and I was most appreciative of the kind 
words of Guy Shipler. I told Bob Carroll on 
Channel 2 that what I had learned in the race 
was to “never run against a camel driver.” You 
see, they get too well known. I then went to 
work as the assistant state coordinator of the 
Nixon-Agnew campaign in Nevada. Oh yes, 
Willie Wynn was appointed to take my place 
in OEO. I recommended him. 

I see a lot of possibilities in the future—I 
think that Latin America holds some real 
opportunities if we can accomplish in the 
United States the solution of the problems 
of the American Indian; I think some of that 
knowledge and skill can be transferred to the 
development of Latin America. And there is 
a possibility there. I would not be adverse to 
being the Commissioner of Indian Affairs in 
the United States if the Republicans should 
get in on the Presidential race. I certainly 
think that this past year has increased my 
administrative skills on a larger, on a higher 
level. I have been pestered to death to get a 
Ph.D. by a friend of mine, and teach what I 
know in terms of social psychology, and other 
things I would learn. That’s not outside the 
realm of possibility. I wouldn’t turn down a 
possibility of a high administrative job within 
the American Baptist Convention, and very 
bluntly, I have some very strong reservations 
about competence at certain levels and feel 
that the crying need in churches today is 
increased competency. The old saying goes 
that, you know, incompetency might be 
dedicated, but it’s still incompetency. 

I would like to, in closing, give credit to 
the three greatest molders of my thought, 
I think, in life—my father; my philosophy 
professor in college, Dr. Arturo Fallico; 
and the greatest theologian that I have ever 
known, at Berkeley, Dr. John Bailey. My 
father, for his sense of being a servant; and Dr. 
Fallico, for opening up vistas of possibilities of 



142 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


truth, and action, and sensitivity. Dr. Fallico 
is an expert in the philosophy of history and 
also in the esthetics, and I think he did as 
much as anyone else to give me an increased 
sensitivity, generally; I think my father did 
it with sensitivity to people and to maybe 
underprivileged people; and I think Dr. Bailey 
opened up the whole realm of theology in 
such a creative and exciting way that I felt 
increasingly free. 

I think that theologically the reason I 
am a Christian— and I have studied the 
Oriental and the Moslem as well as the 
major philosophies—is that Jesus did not 
want to die. He prayed all night to escape it, 
and not out of fear because he knew about 
the after life, but rather because human life 
has value in itself. He did not resign himself 
to death but rather he offered himself, if in 
some mysterious metaphysical way, it would 
bring freedom to man. Willing to die for his 
friends, yes; wanting to die, no. To Him death 
was not escape or release but rather in his 
case an opportunity to share, and to stand, 
undaunted, unafraid, and victorious. 

The best sermon I ever preached in the 
Colony was on an Easter Sunday when I 
preached upon the subject, “He broke the 
Cycle.” I showed where that while it is true that 
nature is a parable of life, man is not caught in 
an eternal cycle of birth, existence and death, 
but rather because Jesus broke that cycle we can 
have birth, existence, life and life eternal. And 
you don’t have to die to have the qualitative 
Eternal Life of God in you, but rather you have 
to come forth from your shell and with trust in 
God live a life that is both creative and free; and 
it never ends. Even the old time Indians who 
understood cycles very well, they understood 
what I was talking about. Other favorite sermon 
topics were on the “Fruits of the Spirit” as found 
in Galatians V. My missionary concept was 
that the mission of the church was to co-create 


with the Spirit of God the fruits of His spirit, 
love, joy, peace, goodness, kindness, gentleness, 
faithfulness, patience and self-control. I think 
that there is some evidence that we did that to 
some degree in Nevada. 

My own feeling is that the ultimate 
salvation of a human being is to develop the 
kind of courage, or faith, which I think are 
the sane words, that allows a person to face 
reality, no matter where, no matter when. And 
I tend to think of God in terms of the living 
reality, unlimited in terms of space, eternally 
present in the sense of time, and that the 
ultimate good is to have a positive creative 
relationship between God, and yourself and 
your fellow man. And I think that probably 
the closest picture of God that we can find 
is in the very best in man, and sometimes 
even in what we call the very worst in man, 
that even the person that we judge to be the 
worst has within him all the potentialities of 
the glory that is God. 

And in my own philosophy of life—I think 
that simplicity is of one of the high priority 
values. I think the bane of mankind is to 
complicate the obvious, and one of my own 
techniques is try to keep focus upon primary 
objectives, with a minimum of effort, really. 
I think that when I described how I worked 
in putting the Council of Churches together 
and didn’t do a lot of politicking, a lot of letter 
writing, a lot of useless preliminary agreement 
seeking, but simply concentrated in getting the 
group together that made the decisions, and my 
job was to keep them focused on the objective 
of building the Council of Churches, and to let 
the spirit move within that group to the place 
where the decision was, you know, just became 
an obvious, automatic result of that process. 

I have a great optimism for the future and 
probably a great fear. I believe in freedom; I do 
not believe that we live in a pre-determined 
universe. I believe we live in a universe of 



Conclusion 


143 


infinite possibilities, but I do not believe that 
we live in a universe of infinite probabilities; 
and I think that whenever quality judgments 
are made, that progress results. I think 
that mankind makes decisions within the 
framework of infinite possibilities. I think there 
is a great deal of difference between life and 
existence; I think existence is more like a rock, 
and life is more like a saint. I think that the basic 
differences between people is qualitative. And 
I think probably the basic difference between 
mankind and God is a qualitative difference in 
the depth of what you would call holiness, or 
healthiness, or wholeness. I think that there is 
spiritual progress when man decides correct 
values. I do not believe in a hierarchy of values, 
but in a galaxy of values. 

While I do not believe that any values 
are absolute unto themselves, they are always 
related with each other, and that in a given 
situation, values assume a different priority— 
this is to say that I am not a Platonist. While 
I believe in ideas, I don’t think that they are 
frozen ideas, but living ideas that are capable, 
of growth and development and applicability 
to the situation at hand. And while I think 
Aristotle had something to say in terms of 
goals, the form and the word ontology, I do 
not believe in the rigidity with which his 
philosophy has been expounded and also of 
St. Thomas Aquinas, which was a rehash of it. 

It seems to me that it’s wrong to think of 
people in terms of stereotypes and in terms 
of conformity. I’ve used the illustration, if 
everybody was like Albert Schweitzer, then 
Albert Schweitzer couldn’t have been himself. 
And for reasons in the wisdom of God, we live 
in a universe in which supply and need can 
flow, that while in certain times in a human 
beings s life he needs and can receive, there 
are other times when he can give. And if 
it was that everybody had everything they 
needed in an idealistic situation, then the 


value of sharing or giving would not exist. 
I do not believe in a perfection, or a utopia, 
in which the concept of service does not 
exist. Therefore, I am a developmentalist and 
a process person. But I do not believe that 
process is inevitable in itself. I believe that 
which accomplishes process is the righteous 
motive of God moving inwardly within 
humanity, trying to relieve suffering. I’ll give 
one personal illustration of how I arrived at 
one, I think, critical theological position. 

My mother passed away when I was 
seventeen. She died of cancer. If someone 
was to ask me the question, “Why did that 
happen?” my answer would be, “Because man 
has not yet found how to cure it,” not that 
“God had willed it,” because I don’t believe 
that. Maybe, in the nature of things, you could 
get a secondary or third way of saying He 
did, but not in the negative sense that many 
human beings would react. And if you asked 
me, “Why was it that penicillin was invented?” 
I would say, “It was probably the culmination 
of the history of mankind’s prayer to be saved 
from pneumonia. If you asked, “How did Salk 
finally conquer polio?” I would say, “Because 
of the universal wish in the minds and hearts 
of parents that their children would not have 
to suffer this, and we live in such a positive 
universe that eventually one person, in the 
fullness of time, came to the point where he 
possessed the power of concentration, and 
dedication, and knowledge, and skill, that he 
produced the answer to the prayer.” 

And I think the future will depend upon 
the choices of men, which in one sense are 
the responses of God. And I think the best is 
yet to come. 




Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



146 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


B 


Abbey, Mr., 73 
Abbey, Joe, 74 
Abbott, George, 188, 

245, 246, 247-248, 

249 

ABC Block Company 
(Reno), 69 
Acker, Mr., 24 
Adair, Carlton, 245 
Adams, Brewster, 58 
African Methodist 
Episcopal church 
(AME), 210 
Alexander Hamilton 
school (Fresno), 8, 

9 

Alvarez, Stanley, 86 
American Baptist 
Convention, 12-13, 

251 

American Baptist 
Foreign Mission 
Society, 49 
American Bapti 
Mission Soc 

60, 94 r\ 

Anderson, James, 186, 
190, 191, 195, 196, 
197, 202 
Apolinar, Mary 
^usie," 138 
Armenians, 9 
Armstrong, Bryn, 194 
Association of Baptist 
Churches of Northern 
Nevada, 97 
Astor, Jessie, 139 
Astor, Willie, 58, 98 
Atlanta, Georgia, 17 
Attorney General, U. S., 
109 


A 



Baby Ruth candy, 33, 35, 

36 

Badt, Milton, 213 
Bailey, John W., 48-49, 

251 

Bailey, William B., 179 
Bailey, William H. "Bob, 

181 

Baker, Bud, 108, 140, 
146-147 

Bancroft Avenue Baptist 
Church (San Leandro, 
California), 51, 52 
Baptists, 1, 10-11, 70, 

94, 101, 136K138 
Baptist World §l%i£nce, 

Walter S., 98-99, 
244-249, 250 
ruce, 178 
Howard E., 231 
s, 97, 174, 199 
Bell, Charles, 244 
Bell, Rex, 175, 179 
Bender, Frank, 247 
Bennett, Robert L., 165-166 
Berkeley, California, 3, 

138 

Berkeley Baptist Divinity 
School (Berkeley, 
California), 3, 14-15, 
30, 45, 47-51, 52, 

55-56, 157, 242 
Berrum, Ted, 107 
Bible, Alan, 99, 130, 154, 
172, 184, 206, 245, 250 
Biltz, Norman H., 200-201 
Bird, Daisy, 98 
Black Springs, Nevada, 
219-220 

Bowden William, 74 
Boy Scouts of America, 9, 
63, 84 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


147 


B 


Associatio 


Briscoe, Elmer, 108, 

110, 112-113, 146 
Brooklyn, New York, 138 
Brookman, Eileen, 139 
Brown, Mahlon, 179 
Bucklin, Dorothy, 59 
Buddhists, 46 
Bullock's store {Los 
Angeles), 4, 24, 

26, 27 

Bunker, Wendell, 171, 173 


California, 1-56, 157 

California, University, 

213 

California Historical 
Society, 36-37 

Campus Christian 

(Reno), 145-146, 152 

Camy, Bill, 9 

Cann, Elliott, 15. 

Cannon, Howar 
206 

Cantor 

154 

rT 148 
i, 250 

City, Nevada, 

M/76, 182, 186, 233, 

240 

Carson River (Nevada), 

168 

Carver, George Washington, 
17-18 

Catholics, 1, 130, 138, 
141, 144, 146, 153, 
155-157, 158, 209, 232 

Caviglia, C. J., 144 

Central Avenue Baptist 
Church (Los Angeles), 

3 

Challenge butter, 41 



Chamber of Commerce (Reno), 
130-131 

Chevrolet car, 4, 7, 17, 

51, 60 

Chicago, Illinois, 138 
Chinese, 54-55, 209 
Chinquapin, Camp, 53-54 
Christensen, Chester S. 

"Chet," 175 
Christian Scientists, 

180-181 

Churchill County, Nevada, 

164 

Church of the 
(Sequoia N< 

10 

City Council/*/ Reno",' 105-106, 

i: m 

, U. S. Commission, 
, 213 

also Nevada Advisory 
Committee 
Clampett, Robert, 230 
Clark, Donald, 184 
Clark, Joseph S., 234 
Clark County, Nevada, 142, 

198, 205, 217, 227, 229, 

232, 233, 237-238 
Clawson, William, 144, 152 
Clifton Cafeteria (Los 
Angeles), 4 

Close, Melvin D., Jr., 185 
Coffey, Bill, 64, 98 
Coffey, Marlene, 64 
Coffey, Max, 73 
Coffey, William, Sr., 98-99 
Cohen, Julius, 9 
Colony Baptist Church 
(Reno) 

See Reno-Sparks Indian 
Colony 

Colony Christian Center (Reno) 
See Reno-Sparks Indian 
Colony 

Commerce department, U. S., 

227 



148 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


D 


Commissioners, Washoe 
County, 106 

Community Action Program 
See Office of Economic 
Opportunity 

Community Baptist Church 
(Reno), 241, 242 

Community Chest 
See United Fund 

Community Service Council, 
Washoe County, 111, 162, 
163 

Conforte, Joe, 140, 249 

Conlin, Timothy, 146 

Connie Mack baseball 
league, 79 

Continental Can Company, 

19 

Cornuelle, Richard, 235 

Corona Naval Hospital 
(Corona, California), 

21, 23 

Corpus Christi, Texas, 

17 

Coughlan, 

121-122, 1 

Court land^wi .0 

Croes. 

Crouch, Jord ., 159 


DaCosta, Marjorie, 160 
Dale, Key, 98 
Dale, Mrs. Key, 98 
Daniel, William T., 63 
Democrats, 182, 187, 
191, 205, 245, 246 
Denning, Richard, 16 
Derby Dam (Nevada), 164 
DeTar, John, 205 
Dimond, Dick, 148 
Dodge, Carl, 167, 
178-179, 191 
Dodson, John, 146, 156, 
157-158 


Dondero, Jerry, 231 
Drendel, John Squire, 110 
Dressier, Effie, 96, 97, 

104, 133 

Dressier, John, 68, 87, 90, 
96-98, 119, 133 

Dresslerville, Nevada, 81, 119 
Ducks Unlimited, 167 
Duke, Don, 62 
Duncan, Eugene, 153 
Dunterman, Leona, 138 
Dwyer, Robert J., 153, 156, 

157 



(Philadelphia) 

a, Peter, 110-112, 

179 

son High School (Fresno), 


Education, Nevada state 
department, 76 
El Capitan club (Hawthorne, 
Nevada), 174, 184, 212 
El Cortez Hotel (Reno), 

149 

Elko, Nevada, 110, 126, 171, 
174, 216, 237 

Elk Point (Lake Tahoe), 88 
Elks Club (Reno), 62, 70, 

163 

"Ella," 99-101 
Elliott, Bill, 49 
Ely, Nevada, 216 
Emmanuel First Baptist 

Church (Sparks, Nevada), 62 
Engeseth, Richard W. "White," 
146 

E. Otis Vaughn Junior High 
School (Reno), 74, 80 
Episcopalians, il, 141, 146, 
158, 209 

Equal Rights Commission, 
Nevada state 174-180, 
181-182, 184, 212-214, 239 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


149 


Escondido, California, 
28 


Fallico, Arturo, 45-46, 
251 

Fallon, Nevada, 81, 
214-216 

Farr, F. W. "Bill," 

247 

Federal Bureau of 

Investigation (FBI), 
109, 110, 112-113 
Federated Church (Reno), 
144 

Felix Chevrolet Company 
(Los Angeles), 7 
Fike, M. Edward, 247 
Finch, David, 72 
First Baptist Church 
(Fresno, California) 

7, 9, 10-11 
First Baptist Church 
(Reno), 58, 87 
First Baptist Church 
(Santa Clara,.•- 
California), 3 
First Baptist Church 

(Sawtelle, California), 

1 , 3 

First Christian Church 
(Reno), 151 

Fleischmann Foundation 
of Nevada, 57, 61, 70 
Fleming, Charles E., 

151 

Fletcher, Fred, 199 
Flower Box florist 
(Reno), 87 
Fong, Bill, 146 
Forbes, Joe, 138 
Forbes, Marjorie 
Mareau, 138 
Ford bus, 79 
Fosdick, Harry Emerson, 

19 


Franklin, Blake, 141 
Fransway, John, 189 
Frazier, Don, 150 
French, 155 

Fresno, California, 7-11, 
14, 48 

Fresno High School (Fresno, 
California), 9, 12 
Fryer, E. Reeseman, 165-166 


Gabrielli, John, 

Gallup, New Me? 

Gaming Cont? 
state, 

mley, 40, 215 
"Nevada, 54 
ilex, 215 
William, 171 
Scouts of America, 63, 

84 

Glass Wax company, 38-39 
Gloyd, Howard, 204, 206-207 
Goldwater, Barry M., 192 
Goldwater, Bert, 181 
Googoolian, Alexander, 9 
Governor's Indian Commission, 
Nevada, 97 

Grace Baptist Church (San 
Jose, California), 11, 14, 
19, 46, 47-48 
Gragson, Oran, 172 
Gray, Alleta Day, 180-181 
Gray, Leslie B., 166, 167, 

168, 169, 171, 172, 175, 
180-181, 184, 206, 213, 214, 
245, 247 

Gray, W. Howard, 200 
Greek Orthodox, 6 
Greenspun, Hank, 249. 

Gregory, William, 108 
Gross, Harvey, 247 
Gulch, Frank, 41-42 




150 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


H 


H 


Haddad, Bill, 230 

Hunter, 

Connie, 

98 

Hale's department store 

Hunter, 

Edie, 98 

, 112, 113, 

(San Jose), 44 

139 



Haley, Edith B., 159 

Hunter, 

Robert, 

98, 112, 

Ham, Richard, 154, 187, 

197, 203, 246, 247, 250 
Hamilton, George, 149 

Hammer, Phillip, 184, 

113 

I 



213 

Hanifan, Phil C., 126 
Hannen, Robert, 50-51 
Hargrave, John, 141 
Harold's Club (Reno), 
110, 176, 249 
Harrah's Club (Reno), 
176, 247 

Harris, Carl, 231 
Harris, Len H., 

107-108, 149-150 
Hawthorne, Jim, 37 
Hawthorne, Nevada, 174, 
183-184, 207, 210, 
212, 215-216, 237, 
239-240 
Head Start 
See Offij 
Oppoi 

Hech'fe'T C 249 

.fornia. 



Idlewild Park (Reno), 79 

Incline Village Presbyterian 
Church (Lake Tahoe), 242 

Indians, 28, 31, 33, 37, 

41-42, 50-51, 53-54, 

57-139, 150, 164-170, 

171-173, 174, 20.0, ' 

207-208, 211, 214-216, 

8, 219, 226-227, 

3 

fairs, U.S. Bureau, 

65, 67, 69, 82, 105, 

, 114, 115-116, 122, 

123, 129, 164, 165, 166, 

170, 172 

Indian Affairs, U.S. Commissioner, 
251 

Interior Department, U.S., 

164-170 

Inter-Tribal Council, 


84, 138 

Nevada, 98, 227, 229, 233 

Heyman, Michael, 213 

Irish, 108 

Hill, Fred, 151 

Isbell, C. V., 62, 63 

Hollywood, California, 

Isbell, Mabel, 62 

1 

Isbell Construction Company 

Hollywood Bowl (Los 

(Reno), 62, 123 

Angeles), 5 

Italians, 45, 155 

Hoover, John Edgar, 

113 

Horan, Larry, 248 

J 

Horgan, William, 171, 

183, 184, 213, 214 

Japanese, 1 

Hughes, Howard, 245, 

Jesse, Henry, 144 

246, 247, 248 

Jews, 9, 24, 46, 141, 152 

Humphrey, Harvey R., 

Jewett car, 7 

182 

John Birch Society, 205-206 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


151 


Johnson, Frank, 197 
Johnson, Oscar, Jr, 

90 

Jones, E. Stanley, 

4-5 

Jones, Madison B., 12 


K 


Katzenbach, Nicholas, 
153-155 

KDOT radio station 
(Reno), 118 
Keever, Charles, 241 
Keller, Charles, 
174-176, 182, 183, 
190, 195 

King, Martin Luther, 
210 

King, Sid, 58 
Kinnison, C. B., 150 
Kiwanis Club (Las 
Vegas), 172 
Kiwanis Club (N 
Reno), 148 
Kiwanis Club (Reno 
70, 125, l|3V^3 
Klamath Falls, Oregon, 

no 

KOLO-TV station, 243 
Kraemer, Ralph, 245, 
249 


Labor Department, 
U.S., 229 
Ladd, Burton, 65 
Lahontan reservoir 
(Nevada), 164, 167 


Las Vegas, Nevada, 109, 139, 
144, 152, 153, 171-173, 
174, 184, 185, 186, 194, 

195, 198-199, 205, 207, 
210, 216, 231-232, 236, 
237, 238-239, 241, 245, 

249 

Las Vegas Review-Journal, 

232 

Laub, Bill, 249 
Laxalt, Jackie Ross, 198 
Laxalt, Paul A., 182, 18! 
187-189, 190, 191-] 

197, 198-199, 

224, 225, 

231, 234, , 

241, 245-2^H24 248 , 

249/^T 

, 141 
40, 41 
rriet, 121 

islature, Nevada state, 
102, 152-153, 174-180, 
181-183, 185-192, 195, 

196, 197-198, 199-201, 

204, 229 

Leland, Robert, 167, 168, 

169 

Lemaire, Rene Watt, 178-179 
Levine, Martin, 152 
Lewis, Anthony, 194 
Liberty, Missouri, 2, 14 
Linde, Joseph, 130, 141, 

155 

Lions Club (Reno), 133 
List, Robert, 246, 247 
Lopez, Jesus, 32-36 
Lopez, Pete, 241 
Los Angeles, California, 

3-4, 12, 14, 23, 26, 39, 

43 

Lutherans, 146 




152 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


Me 


M 


McAmoil, Ed, 163 

Mathews, 

Hubert Clyde, Sr., 

McConnell, Russell, 

1-6, 7 

, 8, 9, 10-11, 

228 

12, 13 

, 14, 15, 17-19, 

McFadden, Leo, 144 

24, 25 

, 30, 40, 43, 46, 

McGee, Loren J., 110, 

47, 48 

, 49, 251 

113 

Mathews, 

John, 45, 51 

McGowan, Wilson, 189, 

Mathews, 

Marilyn Louise, 28 

191 

Mathews, 

Martha Elsiebelle, 

McIntyre, Milton, 18-19 

10, 14 


McKenzie, J. C. "Specs," 

Mathews, 

Mildred McIntyre, 

106 

18-19 


McKissick, Howard, 

Mathews, 

Paul David, 9-10^\ 


Sr., 106 

McKissick, Howard, Jr. 
119 



Maheu, Robert, 246 
Malloch, Dean, 11 
Manley, Felix A., 140 
141, 144, 146, 

152, 156 
Manning, Leah 
Manogue 
129, 

Manv 

7 

(Reno), 133 
., John, 146, 

Martin, John Elmer "Jack," 
26, 27-28, 32, 33, 

34, 39-40, 51 
Martin, Rafe, 141 
Martin Iron Works (Reno), 
97 


Mathews, Steven 
May Company 
Angeles) 

Meadows, Davic^ 204 , 

29, 32-36, 108, 

er. Bill, 111, 112 
, Fay, 146 
Miller, George, 62, 63 
Miller, Mitch, 61 
Mirabelli, Mike, 246 
Missouri, 1-2, 3, 4, 5, 

30 

Monroe, Warren L. "Snowy," 
180, 182, 191, 192 
Montana, 133 
Montgomery Ward company, 
15-16 

Moose, Willis, 69, 98 
Mormons, 142, 172, 176 
Moroccans, 218 
Murieta, California, 26 


Mathews, Ellen Fern 
Martin, 20-21, 22, 
24-26, 28, 41, 43, 
59, 60 

Mathews, Elsie Stone, 
1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 
10, 11-12, 13, 
14-15, 31, 254 


N 

National Association for 

the Advancement of Colored 
People (NAACP), 174, 186, 
204, 206, 207, 243 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


153 


N 


N 


National Association 
of Manufacturers, 
235 

National Council of 
Churches, 213, 214 
National Indian Youth 
Council, 169 
Navy, U.S. , 16, 19, 
20, 21, 22, 23 
Negroes, 9, 17, 18, 


Newman, Vernon, 68, 98 

New York, 58 

New Zealanders, 49 


81, 109, 
173-180, 
183-184, 
187, 188, 
195-199, 


171, 

182, 

185-186, 
189, 194, 
200-204, 


206, 207, 208-210, 

216, 217, 218, 

219-220, 231, 232, 

237, 239, 240 
Nelson, Dwight, 120, 
125-127 

Nevada, University, 

72, 76, 119, 152 
186-187, 195, 2 
Nevada Advisor 
Committe 
U.S. 

19, 16j6^m, 

236-237, 243 
Nevada Bank of Commerce 
M^eno),176 
Nevada Club (Reno), 68 
Nevada Council of 
Churches, 151-159, 

186, 196, 224, 253 
Nevada Rehabilitation 
Association, 160 
Nevada Sierra Baptist 
Convention, 53 
New Baltimore, Virginia, 
2 

New China Club (Reno), 
146, 176 

Newlands Reclamation 
Project (Nevada), 164 


Nixon, 

Richard 

M. , 

249, 250 

Nixon, 

Nevada, 

81, 

89, 

102, 

109 



Norris 

, Frank, 

11 



Northern Baptist Convention, 
12, 14 

Northern Baptist Home 
Mission Society, 2, 3 
Northern California Cour 
of Churches, 152, 

Northside Junior 
School (Reno^ 

72-73 
Norwegi< 

Numana I ) , 116-117 



Oakland, California, 

44, 47, 51 

O'Daye, Chucky, 73-74 
O'Daye, Mike, 74 
O'Daye, Noonie, 73 
O'Daye, Stressler, 68-69 
Office of Economic Opportunity 
(0E0), 198, 224-242, 

246, 248, 250 

Olympian Society (California), 
40 

Orchard, Ernest, 160 
Orvis Ring School (Reno), 

62, 75-76 

Owyhee, Nevada, 89, 121 


Pacific School of Religion 
(Berkeley), 158 
Paiutes, 95, 101, 104-105, 
117 

Paley, Louis, 200, 247 



154 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


Paramount Theater 
(Los Angeles), 4 
Parent-Teacher Association 
(PTA), Orvis Ring 
school, 76 
Paris, France, 218 
Parks, Bruce, 227 
Parsons, Lawrence, 215 
Pasadena, California, 

41 

Paterson, Verna, 150 
Paterson store (Reno), 

149, 150 

Peace Corps, U.S., 135 
Pentacostal churches, 

209, 231 

Perkins, Carl D., 234 
Pet milk, 33 
Philharmonic Auditorium 
(Los Angeles), 5 
Piazzo, Link, 149 
Piccolo, Marvin, 120 
Pioneer Theater 
Auditorium (Re 
143 

Police 

Pontiac ca^r>7 
Potter, Ip^Lee, 246 
Prince Albert tobacco, 

35, 36 

Procter Hug High School 
(Reno), 217 

Public Health Service, 
U.S., 99, 172 
Pullman, Charles, 76 
Pyramid Lake (Nevada), 

78, 116, 164-165, 

167, 168, 169-170 


Q 

Quakers, 209-210 
Quilici, Hugo, 149 
Quota Club (Reno), 
62, 75 



Raggio, William, 108, 147, 

151, 247 

Rasmussen, Albert T., 158 
Reading, Massachusetts, 40 
Redlands, University, 12, 

13, 14, 15, 16-17, 

19-20, 21-23, 43 
Reed, George, 153-155 
Reno, Nevada, 10, 25, 44, 

52, 54, 55, 57-139, 140, 
142-151, 152, 160-161, 

160, 163, 164, 171, 172, 
173-174, 176, 180, 185, 

187, 191, 194, 195, 201, 

207, 210, 217, 218V .219-220, 

227, 231, 237, 243 

Reno Evening Gazette, 175 

Reno High School (Reno, 

Nevada), 72, 120 
Reno Iron Works (Reno), 

68 ",' 97 

eno-Sparks Indian Colony, 

50, 52-53, 54, 55, 

57-139, 150, 159, 161, 

211, 224, 225-226, 227, 
241-242, 243, 252 
Republicans, 7, 31, 180, 


182, 

183, 

187, 

188, 

191, 

194, 

201, 

205-206, 

227, 

228, 

244, 

245-246, 

247, 

248, 

251 



Rhimer, John, 17, 18 
Richards, Bill, 160 
Ricketts, David, 151 
Righini, Charles J., 144 
Riverside, California, 27, 

28 

Riverside College (California), 
35 

Riverside Hotel (Reno), 

111-112, 133, 139, 146, 

169 

Road Department, Washoe 
County, Nevada, 62, 63 
Robertson, Bob, 240, 241 
Robinson's store (Los 
Angeles), 24 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


155 


R 


Robison, Elwin, 171, 

184 

Rockefeller, Nelson, 

248 

Roger Williams Baptist 
Church (Los Angeles), 
3, 6 

Roosevelt, Franklin 
Delano, 7, 31 
Rosaschi, Andrew J., 

120 

Ross, John R., 110 
Rotary Club (Reno), 163 
Rowe, Albert, 44 
Russell, Clark, 231 
Ryan, Cy, 239 


St. John's Presbyterian 
church (Reno), 141, 

144 

St. Louis Cardina 

Sampson, Dewey^,,-''J3? i |-l 
109 

Sampson, Haf^^lCJl''^ 

Sampson, Reginald, 

109-llJ. 

San Bernardino, 

California, 39 

San Diego, California, 
40-41 

Sanford, John, 175 

San Francisco, California, 
14, 30, 88, 227-228 

San Jose, California, 
11-12, 13, 15, 42, 

43-46, 48 

San Jose High School 

(San Jose, California), 
11 , 12 

San Jose State College, 
43-46, 47 




San Leandro, California, 88 
Santa Clara, California, 18, 

30 

Saturday Evening Post, 170 

Sawtelle, California, 1 
Sawyer, Grant, 153, 154, 

173, 175, 178, 180, 181, 

182, 183, 185, 187, 188, 

190, 191-192, 197, 202-206, 
214, 237, 240 
Sawyer, Ross, 41 
Schaefer, William H., 205^\ 
Schaffer, Harold, 38-39 
Schneider, Lamoine, 215 
School District^Washoe 
County, 62, 

Schurz, Nevada, t 
16&^215 

V i. 

Eddie B., 175, 176, 
185-186, 187, 190, 

1, 196, 197-198, 199, 
201-202, 206, 239 
Scott, John, 57-58 
Scott, Neil, 72, 120 
Scotts Bluff, Nebraska, 2 
Sears Roebuck store (Reno), 

25, 231 

Sears Roebuck store (Riverside, 
California), 27, 28, 29, 

31, 32 

Seevers, Dallas, 109, 110 
Selma, Alabama, 186, 187, 

196 

Senator Cafe (Carson City), 

176, 218 

Sequoia National Park, 6, 

10, 19 

Settelmeyer, Fred H., 178-179 
Shipler, Guy, 250 
Shoshones, 101 
Shriver, Sargent, 229, 230 
Sierra Pacific Power Company 
(Reno), 65-66, 130, 168; 

199 



156 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


Slater, Tephia F., 

122 

Slattery, James M. , 

175, 176-180, 182, 
189-190, 191, 192, 

195, 197, 249-250 
Smart, George, 57, 58 
Smith, Lindsay, 212 
Smith, Raymond I., 169 
Social Security, 98-99 
Sonora Pass (California) , 
53-54 

Southern California 
Baptist Convention, 

138 

Southern Nevada 

Vocational Technical 
Center (Las Vegas), 
217, 238 

Southern Pacific rail¬ 
road, 68, 97 
Southwest Gas Company 
186 

Sparks Baptist 
(Sparks, N 
Sparks Nuj 


.eld, Missouri, 


Stardust Hotel (Las 
Vegas), 245, 247, 248 

Starkweather, Virginia, 
121 

Stead Facility, 

University of Nevada, 
240, 241 

Stewart, Nevada, 57, 58, 
79, 97, 122, 150 

Storey County, Nevada, 
190 

Stotts City, Missouri, 

1 

Stout, Charles "Chick,” 
160 


Strawberry Lake (California), 
53, 54 

Streeter, Jack, 206, 214 
Supreme Court, Nevada state, 
212-214 

Sweet, Mary, 138-139 
Swobe, Coe, 188 


T 



Taelour, Robert, 108-] 
113, 146 
Tahoe, Lake, 79 
200 

Taylor, 

137; 

m, 213 


s, 11, 17 
11, Paul, 61-62 
Tholl Fence Company (Sparks, 
Nevada), 61 

Thomas, Oliver A., 200 
Thompson, Don, 152 
Thompson, Gordon, 211, 213 
Tillim Sidney J., 141, 150 
Titlow, Emerson, 191 
Tobey, Charlotte, 139 
Tobey, Hilman, 68, 87 
Tobey, Warren, 109 
Tom, Melvin, 168-169 
Tonopah, Nevada, 200 
Torvinen, Jerry, 148 
Torvinen, Roy Lee, 111-112, 

148 

Towner, Paul, 146 

Tribal Council, Reno-Sparks, 

65, 97, 105-106, 113-116, 

118 

Truckee-Carson Irrigation 
District (TCID), 169 
See also Newlands Reclamation 
Project 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


157 


W 


Truckee River, 77-78, 
116, 164-165, 166, 
167, 168, 170 
Tuscaloosa, Alabama, 
17, 18 


U 


United Fund, 57, 60, 

63, 143-144, 159-162, 
164 

United States Research 
and Development 
Corporation, 230, 

234, 243 

University of California, 
Los Angeles (UCLA), 
119-120, 233, 240 



Vallejo, Californi 
153 

Veterans 
Wars 
Vir 

6 

George, 

Vo-Tech high school, 

Las Vegas 

See Southern Nevada 
Vocational Technical 
Center 


W 


Wadsworth, Nevada, 77 
Wagon Wheel bar (Reno), 
108 

Walker Lake (Nevada), 
168 

Walsh, Dan, 213 


Warner, Grace, 62, 75-76, 

84 

War on Poverty 

See Office of Economic 
Opportunity 

Warren, Wallie, 199, 244 
Washos, 87, 95, 97, 101, 

104, 117 

Washoe County, Nevada, 10, 

121, 123, 124, 169, 190, 

197, 227, 229, 233, 238 
Washoe County Ministerial 
Association, 108, 140-151 
Washoe Project, 164-170 
Weinberg, Phillip, 141 
Welsh, 1 
West, Ton 

Western Novel^y^and Toy 

ipany (Oakland, California}, 

tern Transportation 
-Company, 4 3 

Westside (Las Vegas), 171, 

185, 194, 198, 204, 206, 

209, 216, 217, 220 
White, Earl, 185-186 
White, W. Wallace, 65 
William Jewell College 
(Liberty, Missouri), 2 
Williams, R. T., 240, 241 
Wilson, Tom, 232 
Wilson, Woodrow (Las Vegas), 

171, 175, 184, 187-188, 

189, 194, 246-247, 249 
Winne, Don, 158 
Winnemucca, Chief, 208 
Winnemucca, Sarah, 207-208 
Withers, T. L., 151 
Wittenberg, James, 231, 

241 

Wooley, Ralph, 23, 43 
Wooster High School (Reno, 
Nevada), 72, 74 
Works Progress Administration 
(WPA), 6 

World-wide Guild Girls, 14 



158 


H. Clyde Mathews, Jr. 


W 

Wynn, Willie, 231, 250 


Y 

Yosemite National Park, 
6 

Young Men's Christian 
Association (YMCA), 
161 

Young Women's Christian 
Association (YWCA), 
161 




