An  Interview  with  Hugh  James  Gallagher: 

A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of 
Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


Interviewee:  Hugh  James  Gallagher 
Interviewed:  1984 
Published:  1984 
Interviewer:  Lucy  Scheid 
UNOHP  Catalog  #116 


Description 

Hugh  James  Gallagher  s  family  has  resided  on  the  Comstock  for  more  than  three  generations.  He  was  born  in  Virginia 
City  in  1920,  the  grandson  of  an  Irish  immigrant  who  died  in  an  1880  shaft  accident  at  the  Yellow  Jacket  mine. 

Following  graduation  from  the  Fourth  Ward  School,  Mr.  Gallagher  attended  the  University  of  Nevada,  from  which 
he  received  a  B.A.  in  history  in  1942.  Upon  returning  from  military  service  after  World  War  II,  he  accepted  a  teaching 
appointment  with  the  Storey  County  schools,  becoming  principal  the  following  year.  In  1955,  Mr.  Gallagher  became 
superintendent  of  the  Storey  County  School  District,  a  position  he  held  until  his  retirement  in  1979. 

In  this  oral  history,  Mr.  Gallagher  makes  a  valuable  contribution  to  the  record  of  life  on  the  Comstock.  Both  his 
father  and  grandfather  were  employed  in  the  mines,  and  the  subject  of  mining  figures  prominently  in  the  interview. 
Other  topics  include  vignettes  illustrative  of  community  and  neighborhood  history,  an  account  of  changes  in  the 
nature  of  education  in  Virginia  City,  and  some  observations  on  the  shifting  economic  fortunes  of  the  Comstock 
over  the  last  five  decades. 


An  Interview  with  Hugh  James  Gallagher 


An  Interview  with  Hugh  James  Gallagher 

A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of 
Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


Prepared  for  the  Storey  County,  Nevada 
Board  of  Commissioners 

Major  funding  by  the  Department  of  Interior, 
National  Park  Service  and  the  State  of  Nevada, 
Division  of  Historic  Preservation  and  Archeology 


An  Oral  History  Conducted  by  Lucy  Scheid 
July  18,  1984 


University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program 


Copyright  1984 

University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program 
Mail  Stop  0324 
Reno,  Nevada  89557 
unohp  @unr.  edu 
http :  /  /  www.  unr.  edu/  oralhistory 


All  rights  reserved.  Published  1984. 
Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


Publication  Staff: 
Director:  R.T.  King 


University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program  Use  Policy 

All  UNOHP  interviews  are  copyrighted  materials.  They  may  be  downloaded  and/or 
printed  for  personal  reference  and  educational  use,  but  not  republished  or  sold.  Under 
“fair  use”  standards,  excerpts  of  up  to  1000  words  may  be  quoted  for  publication  without 
UNOHP  permission  as  long  as  the  use  is  non-commercial  and  materials  are  properly 
cited.  The  citation  should  include  the  title  of  the  work,  the  name  of  the  person  or 
people  interviewed,  the  date  of  publication  or  production,  and  the  fact  that  the  work 
was  published  or  produced  by  the  University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program  (and 
collaborating  institutions,  when  applicable).  Requests  for  permission  to  quote  for  other 
publication,  or  to  use  any  photos  found  within  the  transcripts,  should  be  addressed 
to  the  UNOHP,  Mail  Stop  0324,  University  of  Nevada,  Reno,  Reno,  NV  89557-0324. 
Original  recordings  of  most  UNOHP  interviews  are  available  for  research  purposes 
upon  request. 


Contents 

Preface  to  the  Digital  Edition  ix 

Original  Preface  xi 

Introduction  xiii 

An  Interview  with  Hugh  James  Gallagher  1 

Photographs  19 

Original  Index:  For  Reference  Only  23 


Preface  to  the  Digital  Edition 


Established  in  1964,  the  University  of 
Nevada  Oral  History  Program  (UNOHP) 
explores  the  remembered  past  through 
rigorous  oral  history  interviewing,  creating  a 
record  for  present  and  future  researchers.  The 
programs  collection  of  primary  source  oral 
histories  is  an  important  body  of  information 
about  significant  events,  people,  places, 
and  activities  in  twentieth  and  twenty-first 
century  Nevada  and  the  West. 

The  UNOHP  wishes  to  make  the 
information  in  its  oral  histories  accessible 
to  a  broad  range  of  patrons.  To  achieve 
this  goal,  its  transcripts  must  speak  with 
an  intelligible  voice.  However,  no  type  font 
contains  symbols  for  physical  gestures  and 
vocal  modulations  which  are  integral  parts 
of  verbal  communication.  When  human 
speech  is  represented  in  print,  stripped  of 
these  signals,  the  result  can  be  a  morass  of 
seemingly  tangled  syntax  and  incomplete 
sentences — totally  verbatim  transcripts 
sometimes  verge  on  incoherence.  Therefore, 
this  transcript  has  been  lightly  edited. 


While  taking  great  pains  not  to  alter 
meaning  in  any  way,  the  editor  may  have 
removed  false  starts,  redundancies,  and  the 
“uhs,”  “ahs,”  and  other  noises  with  which 
speech  is  often  liberally  sprinkled;  compressed 
some  passages  which,  in  unaltered  form, 
misrepresent  the  chroniclers  meaning;  and 
relocated  some  material  to  place  information 
in  its  intended  context.  Laughter  is  represented 
with  [laughter]  at  the  end  of  a  sentence  in 
which  it  occurs,  and  ellipses  are  used  to 
indicate  that  a  statement  has  been  interrupted 
or  is  incomplete. .  .or  that  there  is  a  pause  for 
dramatic  effect. 

As  with  all  of  our  oral  histories,  while 
we  can  vouch  for  the  authenticity  of  the 
interviews  in  the  UNOHP  collection,  we 
advise  readers  to  keep  in  mind  that  these  are 
remembered  pasts,  and  we  do  not  claim  that 
the  recollections  are  entirely  free  of  error. 
We  can  state,  however,  that  the  transcripts 
accurately  reflect  the  oral  history  recordings 
on  which  they  were  based.  Accordingly,  each 
transcript  should  be  approached  with  the 


X 


Hugh  James  Gallagher 


same  prudence  that  the  intelligent  reader 
exercises  when  consulting  government 
records,  newspaper  accounts,  diaries,  and 
other  sources  of  historical  information. 
All  statements  made  here  constitute  the 
remembrance  or  opinions  of  the  individuals 
who  were  interviewed,  and  not  the  opinions 
of  the  UNOHP. 

In  order  to  standardize  the  design  of  all 
UNOHP  transcripts  for  the  online  database, 
most  have  been  reformatted,  a  process  that 
was  completed  in  2012.  This  document  may 
therefore  differ  in  appearance  and  pagination 
from  earlier  printed  versions.  Rather  than 
compile  entirely  new  indexes  for  each  volume, 
the  UNOHP  has  made  each  transcript  fully 
searchable  electronically.  If  a  previous  version 
of  this  volume  existed,  its  original  index  has 
been  appended  to  this  document  for  reference 
only.  A  link  to  the  entire  catalog  can  be  found 
online  at  http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For  more  information  on  the  UNOHP 
or  any  of  its  publications,  please  contact  the 
University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program  at 
Mail  Stop  0324,  University  of  Nevada,  Reno, 
NV,  89557-0324  or  by  calling  775/784-6932. 

Alicia  Barber 
Director,  UNOHP 
July  2012 


Original  Preface 


The  University  of  Nevada  Oral  History 
Program  (OHP)  engages  in  systematic 
interviewing  of  persons  who  can  provide 
firsthand  descriptions  of  events,  people  and 
places  that  give  history  its  substance.  The 
products  of  this  research  are  the  tapes  of  the 
interviews  and  their  transcriptions. 

In  themselves,  oral  history  interviews 
are  not  history.  However,  they  often  contain 
valuable  primary  source  material,  as  useful  in 
the  process  of  historiographical  synthesization 
as  the  written  sources  to  which  historians  have 
customarily  turned.  Verifying  the  accuracy  of 
all  of  the  statements  made  in  the  course  of  an 
interview  would  require  more  time  and  money 
than  the  OHP  s  operating  budget  permits.  The 
program  can  vouch  that  the  statements  were 
made,  but  it  cannot  attest  that  they  are  free 
of  error.  Accordingly,  oral  histories  should 
be  read  with  the  same  prudence  that  the 
reader  exercises  when  consulting  government 
records,  newspaper  accounts,  diaries  and 
other  sources  of  historical  information. 

It  is  the  policy  of  the  OHP  to  produce 
transcripts  that  are  as  close  to  verbatim 


as  possible,  but  some  alteration  of  the 
text  is  generally  both  unavoidable  and 
desirable.  When  human  speech  is  captured 
in  print  the  result  can  be  a  morass  of  tangled 
syntax,  false  starts  and  incomplete  sentences, 
sometimes  verging  on  incoherency.  The  type 
font  contains  no  symbols  for  the  physical 
gestures  and  the  diverse  vocal  modulations 
that  are  integral  parts  of  communication 
through  speech.  Experience  shows  that 
totally  verbatim  transcripts  are  often  totally 
unreadable  and  therefore  a  total  waste  of 
the  resources  expended  in  their  production. 
While  keeping  alterations  to  a  minimum  the 
OHP  will,  in  preparing  a  text: 

a.  generally  delete  false  starts,  redundancies 
and  the  uhs,  ahs  and  other  noises  with  which 
speech  is  often  liberally  sprinkled; 

b.  occasionally  compress  language  that 
would  be  confusing  to  the  reader  in  unaltered 
form; 

c.  rarely  shift  a  portion  of  a  transcript  to 
place  it  in  its  proper  context;  and 

d.  enclose  in  [brackets]  explanatory 
information  or  words  that  were  not  uttered 


Hugh  James  Gallagher 


xii 


but  have  been  added  to  render  the  text 
intelligible. 

There  will  be  readers  who  prefer  to  take 
their  oral  history  straight,  without  even 
the  minimal  editing  that  occurred  in  the 
production  of  this  text;  they  are  directed  to 
the  tape  recording. 

Copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  and  the 
tape  recording  from  which  it  is  derived  are 
available  from: 

The  University  of  Nevada 
Oral  History  Program 
Mailstop  0324 

University  of  Nevada,  Reno  89557 
(775)  784-6932 


Introduction 


Hugh  James  Gallagher  is  a  rarity — a 
member  of  a  family  that  has  resided  on 
the  Comstock  for  more  than  3  generations. 
He  was  born  in  Virginia  City  in  1920,  the 
grandson  of  an  Irish  immigrant  who  died  in 
an  1880  shaft  accident  at  the  Yellow  Jacket 
mine. 

Following  graduation  from  the  Fourth 
Ward  School,  Mr.  Gallagher  attended  the 
University  of  Nevada,  from  which  he  received 
a  BA  in  history  in  1942.  Upon  returning 
from  military  service  after  World  War  II  he 
accepted  a  teaching  appointment  with  the 
Storey  County  schools,  becoming  principal 
the  following  year.  In  1955  Mr.  Gallagher 
became  superintendent  of  Storey  County 
School  District,  a  position  he  held  until  his 
retirement  in  1979. 

In  this  1984  interview  with  Lucy  Scheid, 
Hugh  Gallagher  makes  a  valuable  contribution 
to  the  record  of  life  on  the  Comstock.  Both 
his  father  and  grandfather  were  employed  in 
the  mines,  and  the  subject  of  mining  figures 
prominently  in  the  interview.  Other  topics  of 
interest  include  vignettes  that  are  illustrative 


of  community  and  neighborhood  history,  an 
account  of  changes  in  the  nature  of  education 
in  Virginia  City,  and  some  observations  on  the 
shifting  economic  fortunes  of  the  Comstock 
over  the  last  5  decades. 


Hugh  James  Gallagher 
1986 


An  Interview  with 
Hugh  James  Gallagher 


Lucy  Scheid:  Where  were  you  born  and  when? 

Hugh  James  Gallagher:  I  was  born  on  17 
July  1920  here  in  Virginia  City  on  A  Street 
affectionately  known  as  Ophir  Heights  by 
those  of  us  who  grew  up  in  that  area:  the 
Kendalls  and  the  Cobbs  and  the  Collettis  and 
so  forth.  We  used  to  refer  to  it  in  jest  as  Ophir 
Heights. 

Why  did  you  call  it  Ophir  Heights? 

Well,  it’s  on  the  Ophir  mine  property  up 
on  the  hill,  and  when  we  grew  up  heights 
were  areas  where  those  people  of  means  used 
to  live,  so  we  used  to  joke  about  that  and  call 
the  area  Ophir  Heights. 

Was  there  mining  or  is  there  a  pit  back  there? 

No.  The  last  shaft  of  the  Ophir  mine  was 
located  about  3  blocks  down  the  hill.  But 
there  were  glory  holes  and  open-pit  mines 
and  small  shafts  just  behind  my  house.  For 
instance  there’s  the  Andes  shaft  and  [other 


shafts]  all  over  this  area.  And  you  live  with 
those  things. 

What  are  the  full  names  of  your  parents? 

My  mother’s  name  was  Mary,  and  her 
maiden  name  was  Haffey.  My  father’s  name 
was  Hugh  Gallagher.  Mary  Haffey  was  born 
and  raised  in  Plumas  County  [California] 
area  in  Gibsonville;  last  time  I  was  there 
about  20  years  ago  there  was  one  house  in 
Gibsonville.  It’s  located  about  8  miles  from 
LaPort,  about  25  miles  from  Johnsville,  35 
miles  from  Quincy.  It  was  a  great  mining  area 
at  one  time,  and  her  family  was  in  the  mining 
business  there,  working  in  the  mines,  and  of 
course,  they  always  looked  at  the  Comstock. 
I’m  sure  they  made  trips  over  here,  and  that’s 
probably  how  she  got  acquainted  with  my 
father. 

My  father  was  born  in  Gold  Hill.  His 
father,  Neil  Gallagher,  came  from  Ireland 
by  way  of  Pennsylvania.  He  evidently  left 
[Ireland]  during  the  potato  famine  and 
worked  in  coal  mines  in  Pennsylvania.  But 


2 


Hugh  James  Gallagher 


then  the  great  magnetic  pull,  I  guess — the 
Comstock — even  reached  to  the  East  into 
Pennsylvania.  He  came  to  make  his  fortune 
on  the  Comstock —  Gold  Hill — and  began 
raising  his  family. 

He  as  a  very  young  man — 29  years  of 
age — was  killed  in  the  Yellow  Jacket  mine 
in  a  shaft  accident;  he  was  a  shaft  man.  They 
were  always  sinking  the  shaft;  there  were 
4-compartment  shafts  in  the  mines.  One 
compartment  was  always  sinking,  and  they 
were  sinking  down  below  the  3000-foot 
level,  and  they  were  just  ready  to  come  up 
for  dinner —  they  always  came  to  the  surface 
for  dinner — and  a  cage  was  going  up  in 
another  compartment  with  some  steel  on 
it —  drills  and  so  forth  to  be  sharpened  up 
on  the  surface.  Evidently  one  of  them — and 
this  was  an  accident  that  was  common  in 
mines — got  loose,  hit  the  timber  alongside 
the  shaft,  tipped  all  of  that  steel  over  and  the 
small  car  that  was  on  it.  Tipped  it  down  onto 
those  men  down  below.  There  were  8  men 
working  down  there;  5  of  them  were  killed 
outright,  including  my  grandfather.  One  died 
the  next  day.  Six  out  of  those  8  men — one  of 
the  horrible  accidents.  That  happened  in  1880. 

My  grandfather  was  29  years  of  age.  He 
had  2  children  at  the  time,  one  about  6  and 
one  about  9  years  of  age. 

Three  weeks  after  that  tragic  accident  my 
father  was  born,  July  10,  1880.  So  my  father 
and  my  grandmother  of  course  had  to  find 
some  means  of  livelihood.  There  was  no  social 
security  at  that  time,  no  industrial  insurance. 
They  didn’t  even  have  life  insurance.  So  just 
those  little  bits  of  remuneration  that  they 
would  get  from  a  very  generous  miners’ 
union  and  the  miners  who  worked  with  them 
was  gone  in  a  very  short  period  of  time.  She 
started  a  boardinghouse  and  raised  her  family. 
My  father  got  to  the  age  where  he  could  go  to 
work  in  the  mines;  they  would  accept  then  in 


there  as  young  men  12,  14  years  of  age.  [He] 
finished  the  eighth  grade,  and  then  he  went 
to  work  in  the  mines  to  [help]  support  my 
mother  and  the  other  2  children. 

Where  was  your  grandmother’s  boardinghouse? 

In  Gold  Hill  there’s  a  monument,  the 
Liberty  Engine  Company  Volunteer  Fire 
Department  monument.  It’s  just  below  there. 
The  building  is  long  gone,  but  that’s  where  it 
was  located,  right  on  the  main  drag,  above 
the  business  district  of  Gold  Hill,  which  had 
banks  and  stock  brokerages  and  things  like 
that.  That  was  a  tremendous  busy  part  of  the 
Comstock  in  the  1880s. 

What  year  did  your  grandfather  come  to  this 
country? 

I’m  not  sure.  I  had  talked  to  my  father  on 
occasions  about  this,  but  my  father  passed 
away  in  1948,  and  so  a  lot  of  the  things  that 
he  told  me  have  escaped  me.  But  if  he  was  29 
years  of  age  when  he  lost  his  life,  and  he  had 
been  in  Pennsylvania  in  the  mines  for  a  while, 
he  must  have  been  very  young,  probably  a 
teenager  when  he  came  to  the  United  States 
from  the  Great  Emerald  Isle,  [laughter] 

Neil  Gallagher  was  about  9  years  of  age  at 
the  time  my  dad  was  born,  and  he  had  a  sister, 
Elizabeth,  about  6.  When  they  reached  the 
age  where  they  could  take  care  of  themselves, 
they  went  to  San  Francisco,  and  my  aunt  had 
a  job.  I  don’t  particularly  remember  what 
she  did,  but  my  uncle,  Neil  Gallagher,  was  a 
policeman;  [he]  retired  as  a  police  officer  in 
San  Francisco. 

Then  what  did  your  father  do? 

My  father  worked  around  the  mines; 
pretty  near  all  his  life  he  was  a  hoistman — 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


3 


hoisting  engineer.  He  would  bring  men  and 
material  up,  run  all  the  levers,  and  run  the 
big  hoisting  equipment  that  brought  those 
things  up  and  down  the  mines.  He  did  that 
all  his  life.  He  was  very  good  at  it;  he  was  very 
proud  of  that  type  of  work.  He  used  to  talk 
about  running  the  big  double  drum  steam 
hoist  at  the  Con-Virginia  mine.  Back  when 
I  was  a  kid  going  down  there  and  looking  in 
awe  [at]  that  tremendous  piece  of  machinery, 
my  dad  in  that  cubicle  up  above,  with  just 
dials  to  tell  him  where  that  cage  was,  and  the 
great  responsibility  that  he  had  with  men — 
bringing  them  up  and  down  3000  feet —  and 
the  confidence  that  they  had  to  have  in  him. 
I  was  always  in  awe  of  him. 

But  he  did  that  all  his  life,  and  1942 
when,  of  course,  mining  ceased  here  on  the 
Comstock  [because]  the  government  closed 
everything  down  in  the  mine  business — gold 
and  silver  mining — he  left  the  Comstock  for 
the  first  time  in  his  life.  Went  to  the  Nevada- 
Massachusetts  mine  outside  of  Winnemucca. 
[That]  was  tungsten  property,  and  tungsten 
was  a  strategic  metal,  [which]  they  needed 
[at]  that  time,  and  [he]  ran  hoist  out  there.  I 
can  remember  coming  back  from  the  army 
on  furloughs,  coming  up  to  see  him  at  the 
Nevada-Massachusetts  mine.  Then  he  came 
back  in  on  Social  Security,  and  for  his  last 
years  lived  in  Virginia  City.  He  was  never 
happy  away  from  Virginia  City  and  was  glad 
to  get  back  here. 

When  was  the  first  time  your  father  started 
working  in  the  mines?  What  year? 

He  was  born  in  1880,  and  I  would  say 
that  when  he  was  about  13  or  14  years  of  age 
he  began  working  in  the  mines.  They  would 
take  young  fellows  into  the  mines  at  that  time, 
work  them  around  as  trammers  on  the  surface 
first  and  then  gradually  break  them  in.  And 


so  it  would  be  about  1893  or  1894  when  be 
began  working  in  the  mines. 

When  did  he  marry  your  mother? 

He  married  my  mother  in  about  1906 
or  1907.  I  have  2  older  brothers.  Neil,  who 
is  11  years  older  than  I  am,  lives  here  in 
Virginia  City  now  and  retired  from  the  state 
of  Nevada — in  the  state.  Mervin,  a  younger 
brother  who  passed  away  about  15  years  ago, 
was  elected  state  mining  inspector  in  Nevada 
for  16  years.  So  comparing  those  ages,  I’m 
thinking  that  probably  my  mother  and  my 
dad  married  around  1905. 

You  told  me  before  that  your  mother  died  soon 
after  you  were  born. 

Yes.  I  was  6  months  old.  My  mother 
passed  away  in  one  of  those  strange  illnesses, 
influenza  or  whatever  they  used  to  call  it, 
that  came  along  at  that  time  that  medical 
sciences  knew  little  about.  It  was  some  sort 
of  an  epidemic  at  that — that  was  in  January 
of  1 92 1 — and  quite  a  few  lost  their  life  during 
that  epidemic  here  in  Virginia  City. 

And  then  you  went  to  live  with  an  aunt? 

Yes.  My  dad  had  to  farm  me  out  because 
he  had  2  boys,  one  1 1  and  one  9.  He  could 
keep  them  and  even  raise  them,  but  a 
6-month-old  baby — that  must  have  been 
out  of  the  question.  So  he  looked  to  his  own 
family;  his  sister  would  have  liked  to  have  me 
in  San  Francisco,  and  I  could’ve  almost  grown 
up  in  San  Francisco,  I  guess.  My  mother  had 
a  sister  in  Sacramento,  and  I  could’ve  made  it 
there.  There  [were]  quite  a  few  people  in  the 
family  that  would’ve  liked  to  have  had  this 
little  baby.  But  my  mother’s  brother,  Leonard 
Haffey,  lived  here  in  Virginia  City,  and  so  it 


4 


Hugh  James  Gallagher 


was  my  dad’s  choice  that  they  could  have  me 
for  a  period  of  time  until  I  was  old  enough 
where  he  could  bring  me  back  home  and  raise 
me  with  his  other  2  sons.  So,  Len  and  Dorothy 
Haffey  raised  me  till  I  was  1 0  years  of  age.  And 
when  I  was  10  years  of  age,  my  dad  brought 
me  home  and  the  4  of  us  bached  it,  we  used  to 
call  it — bachelors  or  bached  it.  I  was  broken 
into  cooking  and  doing  some  housework  and 
those  things  that  we  all  had  to  spread  around 
and  do. 

And  that  was  in  Virginia  City ? 

This  was  right  in  Virginia  City.  Yes.  Great 
life,  too. 

[laughter]  Where  did  you  go  to  grammar 
school ? 

I  went  to  grammar  school  here.  I  started 
school  at  the  First  Ward  School.  This  is  located 
in  the  northern  part  of  Virginia  City.  The 
building  is  long  torn  down.  It’s  located  now 
where  Arco’s  gas  station  is. 

I  went  to  the  first  3  years  at  the  First  Ward 
School  and  then  the  rest  of  the  grades  were 
going  to  school  at  the  Fourth  Ward  School. 
They  were  the  only  2  school  buildings  in 
Virginia  City.  They  had  schools  in  Gold  Hill, 
but  that  was  all  there  was  in  Virginia  City.  So 
then  I  went  to  the  fourth  grade  at  the  Fourth 
Ward  School. 

Could  you  give  me  a  description  of  the  interior 
of  the  Fourth  Ward  School ? 

Well,  of  course,  it’s  such  a  tremendous 
building,  you  know.  And  the  mammoth  size 
of  it... it’s  so  impressive.  The  big  high  ceilings, 
the  expansive  classrooms.  That  was  the  way 
houses  were,  the  way  businesses  were,  with 
high  ceilings  at  that  time,  and  so  it  fit  in  with 


the  architecture  of  the  time.  The  building 
was  built  in  1876.  Big  huge  classrooms  with 
a  stove  in  the  center  which  would  heat  each 
individual  room — no  heat  anywhere  else  in 
the  building.  The  hallways  were  cold;  that’s 
where  you  kept  your  coats  in  corridors  and 
so  forth.  The  restrooms  [had]  no  heat,  and 
when  I  went  to  school  there  [were]  probably 
150  students  in  the  building.  The  building 
was  built  for  over  1000  students,  so  we  really 
had  the  run  of  the  place — 4  storeys  and  only 
150  students.  Gee,  it  was  a  great  place  to  go 
to  school.  Just  [a]  great  place. 

Do  you  remember  any  of  your  teachers  that 
you  had  there ? 

Oh,  yes.  You  don’t  forget  fine  teachers. 
Kate  Quirk,  who  was  first  grade  teacher.  Jenny 
Somers.  Irma  Mosbek  was  a  tremendous 
teacher.  And  later  on  when  I  came  back  here 
and  was  teaching  and  then  was  principal 
of  the  schools  here,  Irma  Mosbek  was  still 
teaching  here.  And  I  felt  a  little  uncomfortable 
and  always  in  awe  of  her  teaching  and  her 
methods  and  what  she  did,  and  then  to  be  a 
supervisor,  but  it  didn’t  bother  Mrs.  Mosbek 
at  all;  we  always  got  along  just  great  with  her. 
There  were  elementary  teachers  that  I  had 
that  I’m  sure  I’ll  always  remember  because 
they  were  so  effective  and  just  great.  Not  only 
great  teachers,  but  great  people  as  well. 

What  do  you  mean  their  methods  were  so 
effective ? 

The  whole  system  was  academically 
oriented  in  basic  work.  For  instance  in 
reading,  it  was  strictly  a  phonics  system.  Later 
on  we’re  going  to  get  into  a  system  where  they 
go  into  sight  reading  and  then  they  have  a 
combination  of  phonics  and  sight.  But  [this] 
was  strictly  phonics.  Mathematics  was  a  drill 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


5 


type  of  learning  and  was  repetition  over  and 
over  again,  but  something  that  you  didn’t 
forget  as  far  as  fractions  and  decimals.  And 
their  social  sciences  with  their  history  and 
their  government  was  given  to  you.  And  you 
knew  they  respected  it  so  very  much,  and 
it  meant  so  much  to  them  and  they  wanted 
you  to  be  a  good  citizen  and  understand 
your  country  and  to  love  your  country  and 
be  patriotic.  With  all  of  that  behind  it,  it  was 
a  great  way  of  teaching  and  was  an  easy  way 
for  learning. 

Could  you  tell  me  some  of  the  games  you  played 
as  a  child ? 

At  Fourth  Ward  School  there  wasn’t  a 
playground.  Just  behind  the  school  and  in  fact 
in  front  of  the  Chollar  mine  office  there  was  a 
dirt  road,  and  we  used  to  play  baseball  down 
there — one-a-cat  and  two-a-cat — and  that 
was  at  recess  or  noontime  or  before  school 
or  after  school.  They  would  throw  out  an  old 
softball  or  a  bat  and  we  could  go  on  and  on 
with  that  forever,  playing  baseball. 

Then  underneath  the  porch  there  [were] 
areas  for  marbles,  and  we  used  to  play 
marbles,  and  we  never  did  seem  to  get  tired  of 
that.  But  whatever  we  had  in  the  way  of  games 
and  recreation  was  very  simple,  because  the 
facilities  we  had  were  very  simple  as  well,  but 
we  made  the  best  out  of  them  and  enjoyed 
whatever  we  were  doing. 

And  you  went  to  high  school  at  the  Fourth 
Ward  School? 

I  went  to  high  school  at  the  Fourth  Ward. 
And  at  the  end  of  my  sophomore  year,  they 
decided  to  abandon  it;  they  built  a  new  school 
building  down  on  the  center  of  town.  There 
were  about  100  students  rattling  around  in 
that  big  old  building  up  there  that  was  built 


for  over  1000  students.  Couldn’t  justify  the 
heating  and  the  cost  of  maintenance  and  all 
of  those  things,  so  they  built  a  smaller  school. 
And  so  I  started  my  junior  year  in  the  new 
school,  as  we  called  it. 

And  that  was  what  year? 

That  was  in  1936. 

What  did  the  new  school  look  like? 

Well,  of  course  it  was  brick  construction 
and  much  more  modernistic  in  design  and 
everything  with  the  lower  ceilings  and  the 
smaller  classrooms  and  the  plastered  walls 
rather  than  tongue-and-groove  cedar  that  we 
had  in  the  Fourth  Ward  and  it  was  very,  very 
modern.  We  had  inside  restroom  facilities, 
some  new  desks,  and  of  course  new  furniture, 
and  such  things  as  radios  that  we  didn’t  have 
before  and  other  audio  visual  materials  that 
we  didn’t  have  up  there.  So  it  was  an  entirely 
new  experience,  and  that  was  modern 
education,  [laughter]  A  graduate  of  modern 
education,  1937. 

Where  did  they  get  the  money  to  build  the  new 
high  school? 

It  was  a  WPA  project,  and  gee,  they  did 
it  just  at  the  right  time.  I  look  back  on  the 
building  figures,  and  I  believe  the  cost  of  it  was 
$31,000  or  $32,000.  But  they  had  bricklayers, 
and  everyone,  all  skilled  mechanics — 
bricklayers,  carpenters,  plumbers,  whatever — 
all  $5.00  a  day.  Taborer,  everybody  got  $5.00  a 
day.  And,  of  course,  this  was  in  the  Depression, 
and  they  were  happy  to  get  it.  And  built  just 
a  fine  building.  The  principal  that  they  had 
was  Mr.  John  Gilmartin;  he  passed  away 
some  years  ago.  But  John  Gilmartin  had  an 
insight  on  that  [it]  was  the  time  to  build,  that 


6 


Hugh  James  Gallagher 


was  the  time  to  get  out  of  the  Fourth  Ward 
School.  He  took  care  of  the  local  financing 
through  a  bond  issue,  promoted  it — it  was 
successful — and  paid  it  off  in  a  hurry,  and  it 
didn’t  cost  the  taxpayers  very  much  at  all.  It 
was  a  fine  project. 

Did  many  local  people  work  on  the  new  school? 

Yes.  The  recruiting  at  that  time  for  those 
projects  first  of  all  had  to  be  done  within 
the  local  community,  Of  course,  there  were 
some  people — some  mechanics —  that  they 
couldn’t  get  here.  Some  plumbers,  probably 
not  carpenters,  and  so  they  had  to  go  outside 
[for]  them.  But  first  choice  was  people  in 
Virginia  City.  That  was  a  big  part  of  those 
public  works  projects. 

In  the  early  1930s,  what  did  people  do  for 
money?  I  know  that  this  town  was  hit  hard. 

Well,  surprisingly,  this  was  a  very  good 
mining  camp  in  the  1930s.  Gold  and  silver 
mining  is  a  good  depression  industry.  And 
mining  on  the  Comstock  and  the  revival 
at  that  particular  time... in  the  1920s,  the 
Comstock  was  down,  about  as  low  as  it  ever 
was  outside  of  1942-1946  when  all  mining 
[was]  shut  down.  But  in  1930,  the  Union  mine 
was  running,  Con-Virginia  was  running, 
the  Hale  &  Norcross,  the  Keystone,  the  New 
York,  the  Woodville,  the  Overland,  just  a  lot 
of  mines  were  operating  on  the  Comstock. 
Not  in  the  big  way  that  they  were  going  in 
the  1870s  and  1880s,  but  they  were  working, 
and  it  wasn’t  all  that  bad  a  price  for  gold  and 
silver  at  the  time.  The  Comstock  was  a  good 
mining  camp  in  the  1930s.  So  everyone  was 
connected  with  the  mining  industry;  they  had 
no  tourism  at  that  time,  of  course.  Everything 
in  the  1930s  was  derived  from  mining. 


Do  you  remember  the  prices  of  gold  or  silver? 

Well,  of  course,  when  Roosevelt  became 
president  of  the  United  States,  we  went  off 
the  gold  standard  and  where  gold  had  been 
at  $20.00  an  ounce,  then  it  went  up  to  $35.00, 
and  that’s  going  to  revive  the  mining  camp. 
Although  the  Comstock  is  primarily  silver — it 
runs  about  20  parts  silver  to  one  part  gold — the 
critical  thing  is  silver.  And  silver  didn’t  make 
that  type  of  jump,  but  it  does  go  along  a  little 
bit  with  the  price  of  gold.  If  gold  goes  up,  silver 
has  a  tendency  to  go  up  along  with  it.  If  gold 
goes  down,  then  you  get  a  tendency  to  come 
down  in  silver.  Silver  did  go  up  a  little  bit,  and 
the  good  price  of  gold  made  it  all  worthwhile. 

Going  back  to  1920,  the  mining  was  really  bad 
at  that  time.  Could  you  tell  me  about  it? 

There  wasn’t  much  going  on  at  all  at  that 
time.  Silver  was  way  down.  It  got  down  to  well 
below  the  dollar,  got  down  to  254  [or]  304  an 
ounce,  and  that  was  just  a  ridiculous  price 
for  silver.  And  gold,  of  course,  was  at  $20.00 
where  it  had  been  for  all  those  decades  before, 
and  there  wasn’t  that  much  money  available 
for  investments;  it  takes  a  lot  of  money  to  go 
in  and  make  developments  in  underground 
mining.  In  late  1920s,  the  Merger  [Comstock 
Merger  Mines  Inc.]  which  was  a  large  mill — it 
was  the  largest  floatation  mill  in  the  world 
at  that  time — was  down  in  American  City, 
for  the  town  out  there.  They  built  company 
houses.  If  you  go  out  there  now,  you’ll  see  the 
concrete  foundations  to  a  good  part  of  the 
mill.  It  was  a  mammoth  thing.  As  I  said,  it 
was  rated  as  the  largest  floatation  mill  in  the 
world  at  that  particular  time. 

OK.  Going  back  to  the  1930s,  how  many  people 
were  in  your  graduating  class? 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


7 


I  think  in  my  graduating  class  there  were 
8  students. 

How  many  people  were  in  the  town  when  you 
graduated ? 

I  would  say  around  400  people  in  Virginia 
City  at  that  time. 

They  were  working  mostly  in  the  mines? 

Yes.  [There]  was  no  other  industry  in 
town,  nothing  else  but  mining;  they  had 
to  work  in  the  mines.  Later  on,  with  better 
roads  and  better  automobiles,  and  where 
transportation  isn’t  a  problem  people  are 
going  to  be  able  to  work  in  Reno  and  Carson 
City  and  commute  back  and  forth  and  live 
here.  But  in  the  1930s  that  wasn’t  possible.  So 
everything  was  connected  with  the  mining 
industry,  that’s  all. 

What  kind  of  businesses  were  here  in  the 
1930s? 

Well,  it  was  a  long  way  from  what  they 
had.  I  read  someplace  that  in  1875,  when  they 
built  the  Fourth  Ward  School,  that  there  were 
40,000  people  in  Virginia  City,  39  grocery 
stores,  19  butcher  shops,  15  bakeries,  11 
dairies,  5  daily  newspapers,  a  railroad  with  32 
arrivals  and  departures —  all  of  those  things. 
But  I’ll  tell  you,  the  1 930s  was  a  long  way  from 
that.  As  I  recall,  there  were  3  grocery  stores 
at  the  time:  N.  C.  Prater  Company — George 
Wilson  operated  that;  Paul  Giraudo  had  a 
grocery  store;  and  Matty  Gerbatz  had  a  small 
grocery  store.  There  was  one  butcher  shop, 
as  I  recall.  Bob  White  had  a  butcher  shop 
located  on  C  Street,  between  Sutton  Avenue 
and  Union  Street.  Those  provided  the  basic 
sundries  that  we  needed  to  survive. 


They  operated  strictly  on  credit.  That  was 
a  mining  company;  in  a  mining  community 
they  operated  on  credit.  Buy  their  groceries, 
buy  their  drinks  in  a  bar,  or  whatever.  When 
payday,  they  came  around  and  they  paid  their 
bill.  And  till  the  next  payday  you  went  in. .  .1 
can  remember  going  shopping  for  my  dad 
and  telling  [them]  what  I  was  to  pick  up,  and 
a  ticket  was  made  out,  and  that  was  put  in 
a  big  register,  alphabetical  with  the  amount 
owed  on  the  top  piece.  So  they  operated  that 
way,  and  I’m  sure  they  got  stuck  for  a  lot  of  it, 
but  basically  mining  people  were  very,  very 
honest  and  took  care  of  those  responsibilities. 

Coal  and  wood  were  big  items.  There  was 
no  oil  heat  or  gas  heat  in  Virginia  City,  no 
furnaces.  Everything  was  individual  stoves. 
Louie  Roth  had  the  major  wood  and  coal 
delivery  system,  delivered  it  to  your  home — 
blocks  of  coal.  Paul  Giraudo  had  a  wood  and 
coal  delivery  system.  For  instance,  in  my 
own  home  we  had  one  stove  in  the  kitchen. 
We  didn’t  have  any  heat  in  the  bedrooms  or 
anything.  And  of  course,  the  winters  were 
cold  here  in  Virginia  City.  But  you  live  with 
that,  and  you  get  to  learn  how  to  stoke  fires 
up  in  the  evening  so  that  when  you  get  up 
in  the  morning  you  can  run  out  and  dress 
in  the  kitchen,  and  that’s  pretty  much  where 
you  lived.,  .right  there.  Except  to  go  to  bed, 
and  you  do  that  in  a  hurry,  and  you  get  out  of 
there  in  a  hurry. 

What  did  Virginia  City  look  like  in  the  1930s? 

Well,  there  weren’t  any  paved  streets 
and  very  few  automobiles;  there  were  some 
automobiles,  but  not  that  many.  Mining 
people  didn’t  have  the  bucks,  you  might  say,  to 
own  cars.  If  they  did,  it  was  one  to  a  family — 
isn’t  something  like  we  have  now,  2  or  3  to  a 
family.  [There  were]  horses  on  the  street;  I  can 


8 


Hugh  James  Gallagher 


remember  the  great  horses  that  we  used  for 
the  fires.  The  fire  department  used  horses  to 
take  their  hose  carts  and  engines  and  things 
like  that.  Every  morning,  down  the  hill  off  by 
the  Castle.. .beautiful  grey  horses.  I  was  always 
impressed  watching  them  run  down  B  Street, 
then  turn  down  Carson  Street  and  prance  up 
C  Street;  they  knew  they  were  show  horses. 
Then  back  up  by  the  Fourth  Ward  School,  up 
over  B  Street  and  back  home.  They  looked 
forward  to  that  run  every  morning  with  Dave 
Tweedy  or  someone  like  that.  I  remember 
Dave  Tweedy  was  one  of  the  drivers  and  one 
of  the  firemen. 

But  we  didn’t  have  to  look  after  automobiles 
for  a  lot  of  people,  as  we  have  to  look  out  for 
coming  down  here  today.  You  knew  everyone 
in  town.  Mining  people  are  very  close,  very 
friendly;  they’re  very  protective,  not  only 
of  their  children,  but  of  their  neighbors’ 
children,  of  their  mining  friends’  children. 
They  look  after  them  very,  very  closely,  and 
they’re  very  concerned  about  their  welfare.  So 
there  were  a  lot  of  little  family  get-togethers, 
or  little  community  get-togethers  that  were 
main  sources  of  recreation  that  everyone 
enjoyed  very  much. 

What  did  the  buildings  look  like ?  I’ve  heard 
different  stories  about  how  the  buildings  were 
really  dilapidated. 

Well,  yes.  In  mining  communities  when 
there  is  borrasca — that’s  the  situation  where 
gold  and  silver  go  down,  and  the  mine  closes 
down — mining  people  just  have  to  pick  up 
and  go  to  another  mining  camp.  They  have 
to  go  to  Tonopah,  Ely,  Butte  or  someplace 
else  because  mostly  mining  people  know 
mining  and  that’s  it.  You  have  to  get  out  in 
a  hurry  because  again  you  don’t  have  any 
unemployment  compensation  at  that  time, 
and  you  have  to  get  a  job,  so  you  move,  So  they 


would  pick  up  their  few  belongings  that  they 
had,  the  critical  belongings,  and  move  out 
and  leave  homes.  Businesses  would  take  out 
what  stock  they  thought  they  could  get  with 
them  and  just  leave  their  buildings.  So  in  a 
short  while,  with  no  preventive  maintenance, 
the  buildings  become  dilapidated  and  started 
falling  down.  No  one  to  put  them  back,  so 
there  was  that  sort  of  thing  where  they  have 
lost  major  buildings  because  of  that  situation 
where  [for]  an  extended  period  of  time  there 
was  no  care  for  the  building  at  all. 

Could  you  name  some  of  these  buildings  that 
fell  in  on  themselves ? 

Wells  Fargo  building  was  one;  it  was 
located  up  on  south  C  Street.  Even  the  front 
part  of  it,  as  I  remember  it,  fell  down  long 
before  its  time.  But  I  can  remember  the 
front  part  which  was  beautiful.  We  used  to 
tie  horses  up  on  the  outside  of  it — pine  post 
pillars  out  in  front.  Gee,  today  somebody 
would  take  care  of  that,  probably  build  behind 
it.  But  that  remained  in  disrepair  and  finally 
fell  in...  beautiful  frontage.  And  Cole’s  Drug 
Store,  and  oh,  so  many  other  buildings. 
National  Guard  Hall,  which  was  a  4-storey 
building.  Just  a  beautiful  building.  Back  end 
fell  out  on  that  one  day... finally  had  to  be  torn 
down  because  it  was  a  hazard,  just  because  of 
neglect  for  the  building.  There  was  so  much 
neglect  of  those  buildings.  That  was  the  reason 
they  lost  so  many  of  them. 

I  heard  a  rumor  that  in  the  1930s  there  was  a 
man  who  was  running  around  town  burning 
buildings.  Is  that  true? 

I  remember  a  young  boy;  he  used  to 
live  up  by  me.  [laughter]  Yes,  his  name  was 
Bodie  Mike  because  he  was  supposed  to  have 
torched  Bodie,  California,  and  he  moved 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


9 


to  Virginia  City  and  started  some  fires  in 
Virginia  City  and  scared  people  to  death. 
And  he  lived  up  behind  Pipers  Opera  House 
[which]  was  a  tinderbox.  He  was  such  a  nice 
little  kid,  but  just  liked  to  set  things  on  fire. 
Maybe  that’s  the  person  you’re  referring  to. 

What  happened  to  Bodie  Mike ? 

Finally  moved  away,  and  nobody  missed 
him  at  all.  [laughter]  Everybody  could  sleep 
a  little  better  at  night,  and  they  were  glad  to 
see  Bodie  leave. 

[laughter]  Do  you  know  which  buildings  that 
he  got  to? 

No,  I  don’t  offhand.  But  there  were  some 
that  he  torched,  and  some  brush  fires  that  he 
would  get  going,  and  there  was  just  a  maniac 
situation.  With  him  [it  was]  a  psychological 
thing... I  guess  he  couldn’t  handle  it;  he 
couldn’t  help  it,  and  there  wasn’t  much  help 
for  young  boys  at  that  time.  So  he  left,  and 
nobody  missed  him.  [laughter] 

As  a  teenager,  where  did  you  hangout?  Where 
was  the  place  to  go? 

Oh,  the  place  I  remember  was  right  down 
here  on  the  corner:  the  Hungry  Miner  Cafe  is 
there  now  and  a  laundromat.. .Jim  McDevitt’s. 
That’s  the  place  we  used  to  hang  out  in  the 
evenings.  Jim  McDevitt  and  Rosie  McDevitt 
operated  it  and  had  a  thousand  and  one  stories 
every  night  that  we  used  to  sit  around  and 
listen  to,  and  it  was  next  to  Evans’s  home.  The 
Evanses  were  a  large  family — such  great  kids. 
Set  up  a  volleyball  net  a  few  lots  away,  and 
we  played  volleyball  till  it  got  dark,  and  then 
under  the  streetlight  in  front  of  Jim  McDevitt’s 
we’d  play  kick-the-can  or  whatever  till  we’d  get 
tired,  then  sit  around  and  listen  to  Jim  and 


Rosie  tell  their  tales,  and  so  the  North  End 
Gang  as  it  was  called  hung  out  in  that  area. 
And  we  looked  forward  to  evenings  down 
there. 

How  many  were  in  this  North  End  Gang? 

[laughter]  Oh,  there  were  quite  a  few. 
Everyone  that  lived  north  of  Sutton  Avenue 
was  there.  And  then,  of  course,  in  the 
wintertime  we’d  build  a  cabin  up  here  on  A 
and  Carson  Street,  [a]  2-storey  cabin  the  kids 
did  themselves  . .  .built  it,  that  is — the  talented 
ones.  Stole  a  little  electricity  off  the  power 
line  and  had  lights  in  there  and  radios.  [We 
would]  go  in  there  and  play  cards.  It  was  called 
the  North  End  Society  Club.  And  there  were 
about  probably  25  or  30  of  us  involved  in  that 
thing,  and  around  holidays — Thanksgiving, 
Christmas  or  Easter — we  liked  to  have  a  little 
feast,  so  we  would  get  out  on  the  Carson 
River  out  at  Dayton  and  some  poor  farmer’s 
place  and  get  a  turkey  or  small  pig  or  things 
like  that  and  bring  it  back.  And  Millie  Byrne, 
who  was  a  very  nice  lady  who  lived  close  to 
the  cabin  and  put  up  with  us  all  those  years, 
cooked  that  up  for  us  and  everything  else — 
potatoes — and  we’d  sit  around  some  evening 
around  that  holiday  and  have  our  own  feast  in 
there.  But  we  had  years  and  years  of  enjoyable 
evenings,  close  association  in  the  cabin  and 
at  Jim  McDevitt’s. 

How  big  was  this  cabin? 

It  was  2  storeys,  but  it  was  one  room  on 
the  lower  storey  and  one  room  on  the  top 
storey,  and  a  ladder  to  go  up  to  the  upper 
storey  which  was  the  card-playing  hall.  Oh, 
we  had  card  rooms  on  both  floors.  We  would 
go  to  the  city  dump,  which  was  located  on 
the  north  end  out  here — people  would  throw 
away  couches  or  old  chairs  or  something — 


10 


Hugh  James  Gallagher 


and  bring  them  back.  We  had  some  young 
men  real  handy  that  would  fix  them  up  and 
repair  them,  and  so  we  had  a  whole  cabin  full 
of  furniture. 

Besides  this  cabin  and  the  McDevitts’  house 
where  else  did  you  go? 

Well,  that  was  about  it  in  the  wintertime. 
Of  course  [I  was]  involved  in  athletics — 
basketball — and  that  would  take  up  your 
evenings  [in  practice]  when  you  got  a  little 
older.  And  games  on  weekends,  so  that  took 
up  a  good  part  of  your  winter. 

Then  at  that  time,  young  people  used  to 
enjoy  outings  to  Bowers  Mansion  and  even 
to  Reno  to  Idlewild  Park  and  things  like  that. 
They  were  simple  things,  but  always  were  very 
enjoyable — good,  wholesome,  close  fun. 

Do  you  remember  going  to  the  movies  anywhere 
in  town? 

They  had  a  movie  in  the  National  Guard 
Hall.  Yes,  that  was  operated  2  or  3  nights  a 
week;  I  remember  that,  yes.  That  was  a  place 
to  go;  I  almost  forgot  about  that,  [laughter] 
And  in  later  years,  in  the  late  1930s  and  early 
1940s,  the  theater  moved  down  to  the  Odd 
Fellows  building,  now  where  Grandmas  Fudge 
is  located.  They  had  a  little  theater  in  there,  and 
again  it  was  a  2  or  3-night-a-week  movie. 

What  were  the  1940s  like? 

I  missed  the  1940s;  I  was  away  to  school.  I 
went  to  the  University  of  Nevada  in  1938,  and 
I  was  away  till  1942.  Graduated  in  1942,  and 
then  got  a  greeting  from  Uncle  Sam  that  I  had 
been  drafted  and  spent  4  years  in  the  army.  So, 
for  about  8  years  I  [was]  away  from  Virginia 
City  and  would  just  get  back  once  in  a  while 


on  a  furlough,  or  get  back  on  a  weekend  or 
during  a  vacation  while  I  was  going  to  school. 
But  I  didn’t  pay  all  that  much  attention  to 
what  was  going  on  then;  [I]  had  other  things 
to  think  about,  [laughter] 

Tell  me  about  your  university  years. 

The  university,  when  I  went  there,  was 
small;  I  think  there  were  700  students  at  the 
University  of  Nevada  when  I  arrived — 1938. 
And  I  started  taking  some  history  courses 
because  one  of  my  high  school  teachers,  Jake 
Lawlor —  I  thought  a  great  deal  of  him,  and  he 
was  a  history  major —  and  I  thought,  “Maybe 
I’d  like  to  do  that.” 

So  I  got  into  the  history  department;  they 
just  had  a  tremendous  history  department 
down  there.  Professor  Dr.  Hicks  was  head  of 
the  department.  Dr.  Hutchison  I  remember 
there.  And  Anatole  Mazour — what  a 
tremendous  teacher.  And  C.  C.  Smith, 
although  he  was  in  political  science  he  did 
have  a  lot  of  history  courses.  So  I  think  that 
has  a  lot  of  direction  for  you,  if  you  really 
have  good  professors  and  you  really  like  it, 
you’re  ready  to  jump  at  it.  And  I  did.  So  I 
stayed  with  history,  majored  in  history  at  the 
university.  It  was  a  great  department  then. 
Great  department. 

And  you  did  some  graduate  work? 

I  did  some  primarily  because  in  Nevada 
when  you’re  certified  in  teaching  you  have  to 
go  back  every  so  often  to  pick  up  courses  in 
your  major  or  your  minor  field  or  in  education 
or  whatever,  and  so  I’d  go  back  every  year  or  2 
or  whatever,  and  I  took  some  graduate  work  in 
history  and,  of  course,  in  education.  Enough 
to  keep  up  the  administrative  credentials,  and 
so  forth.  I  enjoyed  going  back,  too. 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


11 


And  then  you  went  to  war  in  1942? 

Yes,  I  went  in  the  army  in  1942;  I  returned 
in  1946. 

What  did  you  do  in  Virginia  City  then? 

Well,  when  I  was  discharged  in  June  of 
1946, 1  was  looking  for  a  teaching  job.  That’s 
all  I  knew,  and  I  had  graduated  with  teaching 
credentials  in  1942  before  the  army  picked 
me  up.  And  I  found  that  there  was  a  teaching 
vacancy  here  in  Virginia  City.  And  so  I  told  my 
dad  that,  “Gee,  I’d  like  to  teach  up  here.  I  don’t 
have  a  job.”  I  think  at  that  time  we  were  given 
$20.00  a  week  sort  of  unemployment  when 
you  were  discharged  and  my  mustering-out 
pay  was  gone  and  everything.  It  was  a  3 -man 
high  school  board  here;  my  dad  knew  them 
all  and  says,  “Come  on,  we’ll  go  see  them.” 

Now,  I  know  that  isn’t  the  way  you 
go  after  a  teaching  position.  You  write 
up  an  application,  and  you  give  it  to  the 
superintendent,  and  you  have  interviews, 
but  that  isn’t  the  way  my  dad  thought  it  was, 
and  I  didn’t  argue  with  him  at  all.  So  we 
went  around,  and  we  saw  the  school  board 
and  Mr.  Versal  McBride  and  A1  Jacobsen 
and  Cecil  Morrison,  and  they  said,  “Yes.” 
The  superintendent  didn’t  know  anything 
about  it,  but  I  had  the  job.  [laughter]  The 
superintendent  was  a  friend  of  mine  who  I 
had  gone  to  school  with,  Hank  Clayton,  and 
so  in  September,  I  started  teaching  school 
here  and  taught  social  studies.  We  only  had  3 
teachers  in  the  high  school,  and  13  students, 
and  the  principal  taught  fulltime,  of  course. 
And  I  coached  the  basketball  team,  and  at 
the  end  of  that  year,  Hank  Clayton  got  a  job 
as  superintendent  in  Yerington,  and  so  they 
were  without  a  principal  for  their  high  school. 
And  so  A1  Jacobsen,  who  was  clerk  for  the 


school  board,  came  to  me  and  said,  “Hey, 
we’d  like  to  have  you  take  that  job.  We’ll  give 
you  a  couple  hundred  dollars  extra.” 

“Oh,”  I  said,  “You  know  I’m  just  a 
schoolteacher,  Jake.  I  haven’t  had  any 
experience  or  anything  like  that.  That  would 
scare  me  to  death.” 

He  said,  “Just  go  on  down  there  and  do 
what  you  want,  and  we’ll  work  it  the  way  you 
want.  If  you  get  in  trouble,  then  come  see  us, 
and  we’ll  get  you  out  of  trouble.” 

So  I  got  an  extra  $200  the  next  year,  and 
I  became  principal  of  their  high  school.  And 
then  brought  in  a  basketball  coach,  and  we 
went  on  from  there.  A  few  years  later,  the 
elementary  school  board.,  .see,  there  were  3 
school  boards  in  the  area  at  the  time:  there 
was  a  high  school  board  of  3  people;  there 
was  an  elementary  school  board  of  3  people; 
there  was  a  Gold  Hill  school  board  of  3  people. 
So  a  couple  years  later,  the  elementary  school 
board  asked  me  if  I  would  like  to  be  principal 
of  the  elementary  school,  and  so  I  took  that 
offer.  Then  in  1955  when  [the]  legislature 
decided  to  consolidate  the  252  school  districts 
in  Nevada  to  17,  I  was  made  the  county 
superintendent  and  stayed  with  that  until  I 
retired  in  1979. 

How  many  people  were  in  Virginia  City  when 
you  first  took  your  teaching  job  here? 

Of  course,  that  was  right  after  the  war, 
and  there  was  a  little  bit  of  mining  activity 
at  that  time,  a  little  bit  of  open-pit  mining 
down  the  Con-Chollar,  and  they  were 
beginning  to  look  at  mining  again.  Oh,  I 
would  say  there  was  probably  300  to  400 
people — very  small  at  that  time.  As  I  said, 
our  high  school  only  had  13  students  then.  I 
don’t  know  how  we  got  away  with  3  teachers 
for  just  13  students. 


12 


Hugh  James  Gallagher 


Did  a  lot  of  the  kids  that  had  left  come  hack 
after  the  war ? 

Not  so  very  many  of  them  because  there’s 
not  that  many  opportunities  for  young  people 
in  Virginia  City.  Virginia  City  is  more  of  a 
retired  place  now,  or  an  older  place —  people 
who  pick  Virginia  City  are  people  who  are 
retired  from  something  and  want  to  get 
away  from  the  hassle  and  from  the  hussle 
of  business  or  of  a  job,  and  come  and  buy  a 
small  business  in  Virginia  City  and  a  small 
home,  and  live  their  last  years  in  peace  and 
quiet.  That’s  the  demographic  picture  I  get 
pretty  much  of  Virginia  City.  Nothing  here 
really  for  young  people,  so  not  many  of  them 
returned.  They  went  on  to  greener  pastures 
and  did  other  things.  We  still  keep  track  of 
them,  [laughter] 

When  did  the  tourist  thing  start ? 

Well,  that  would  be  around  1 950.  And  that 
was  when  Virginia  City  was  very  fortunate 
in  having  some  real  professional  writers 
and  artists  who  took  a  liking  to  the  great 
adventures  and  the  stories  of  the  Comstock 
and  moved  in  here:  Lucius  Beebe;  Walter  Van 
Tilburg  Clark;  Roger  Butterfield;  Duncan 
Emrich,  who  was  a  curator  of  Library  of 
Congress;  the  Katies — Katie  Hillyer,  Katie 
Best  who  wrote  for  Good  Housekeeping  and 
Redbook  and  Cosmopolitan,  good  magazines, 
you  know.  They  were  good  writers,  and  they 
wrote  about  Virginia  City  and  they  wrote 
about  the  Comstock.  Good  artists  like  Cal 
Bromund,  Lou  Siegriest  and  Betty  Larson, 
and  they  worked  all  over.  That  really  started 
something  because  with  that  type  of  national 
exposure  to  good  writers  and  good  artists, 
people  that  would  come  to  Reno  and  the 
lake. ..’’We’ll  just  get  a  little  jaunt  up  there;  and 


we’ll  see  what  we  were  reading  about,  you 
know,  in  the  national  publications,  and  what 
we’ve  been  looking  at.” 

So  that  really  started  the  tourist  business. 
In  moved  shops  and  in  moved  people  and  tour 
guides  and  so  forth  to  take  care  of  them,  and 
it’s  been  going  great  ever  since. 

Why  do  you  think  these  artists  and  writers  were 
attracted  to  Virginia  City  at  that  particular 
time? 

Well,  it’s  such  a  great  story,  and  Lucius 
Beebe  was  a  tremendous  writer.  He  had  the 
greatest  command  of  our  language  of  anybody 
I  ever  knew.  Lucius  was  a  railroader;  that’s  all 
he  was  all  his  life.  He  came  here  to  write  a  little 
story  about  Virginia  &  Truckee  [Railroad]. 
Hooked  his  private  car  on — he  could  do 
that  anywhere  in  the  United  States — put 
his  private  car  on  any  train  that  was  going 
anywhere.  [He]  ended  up  [and]  just  fell  in 
love  with  Virginia  City.  [He]  got  into  the  V 
&  T  and  then  got  into  the  Comstock  itself 
and  bought  an  old  home  over  here  and  put 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  dollars  into  it,  and 
this  was  where  he  was  going  to  live.  He  wrote 
about  it — he  revived  the  Territorial  Enterprise 
and  made  a  tremendous  newspaper  out  of 
that;  it  was  a  weekly.  It  had  advertising  from 
all  over  the  world,  too.  He  could  do  it. 

And  that’s  it.  Once  they  hit  Virginia  City 
on  an  assignment  and  then  started  looking 
into  things  and  started  to  hear  this  great 
story  and  to  see  some  of  the  things — to  see 
St.  Mary’s  in  the  Mountains,  the  Fourth  Ward 
School  and  the  Castle — and  to  see  these 
things,  there  were  so  many  enchanting  things 
they  wanted  to  write  [about].  And  they  did. 
So  that  really  brought  the  tourists  in  here,  and 
of  course,  the  television  program  “Bonanza” 
didn’t  hurt  at  all.  [laughter] 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


13 


Do  you  remember  any  movies  that  were  filmed 
here? 

No,  I  don’t.  There  was  a  movie  titled 
Virginia  City.  I  think  Errol  Flynn  was  in  it, 
as  I  recall,  but  that  was  filmed  in  Hollywood. 
Of  course,  “Bonanza” — I  guess,  90  percent 
of  that  was  filmed  in  their  studios;  some 
of  it  was  filmed  up  in  Incline.  A  few  small 
segments  I  understand  were  filmed  around 
here.  But  they’re  starting  to  do  some  filming 
around  here  now,  the  television  work  that’s 
interesting.  “Believe  It  Or  Not”  is  in  a  segment 
up  here;  “PM  Magazine”  has  done  several 
things,  and  so  they’re  starting  to  do  some  of 
that  now. 

Where  did  Lucius  Beebe  live? 

He  lived  up  on  A  Street;  it’d  be  A  and 
Union  Street.  He  bought  the  old  Dan  Connor 
home.  Beebe’s  supposed  to  have  put  about 
$250,000  into  it.  Beautiful  yard  around  it 
and  built  a  big  beautiful  swimming  pool 
up  behind  it,  and  had  a  garage  to  take  care 
of — he  had  a  couple  of  Rolls  Royces,  an 
Oldsmobile,  a  Jaguar  and  a  Jeep,  [laughter] 

He  was  a  tremendous  dresser;  he 
appeared  on  the  cover  of  Life  magazine. 
We  have  it  up  here  in  the  Delta  under  glass. 
Gee,  what  a  dresser  he  was.  This  was  at  the 
time  when  he  was  back  in  Boston.  But  he 
would  come  downtown  every  evening  to  play 
roulette  down  at  the  Delta  and  have  a  few 
drinks.  [He]  and  his  partner,  a  photographer, 
Charles  Clegg — wonderful  photographer — 
and  Lucius’s  dog,  a  St.  Bernard  about  4 Vi 
feet  in  height  called  T-Bone  Towser.  He  was 
T-Bone  because  that’s  what  Lucius  used  to 
feed  him;  he  was  the  neatest  dog.  But  they 
were  an  impressive  sight.  People  would 
look  forward  to  seeing  him  and  watch  him 


gamble.  He  was  a  firstrate  gambler — put  his 
money  on  the  table  and  made  his  bets.  He 
was  quite  an  attraction  around  here  for  a 
while. 

When  did  he  leave? 

He  left — I’m  just  waking  a  guess  now — I’d 
say  Lucius  was  here  probably  around  8  years, 
and  then  his  health  started  to  tail  a  little  bit. 
He  had  another  home  down  in  Hillsborough, 
California,  and  he  used  to  go  back  and  forth. 
But  then  he  started  spending  more  time 
down  in  Hillsborough  and  finally  stayed 
down  there.  He  passed  away,  and  since  then 
his  property  has  been  sold  up  here. 

Who  owns  it  now? 

Mrs.  Schaffer  who  has  the  Mark  Twain 
museum  and  has  purchased  that  property. 

When  did  gambling  start  up  here? 

Well,  as  soon  as  gambling  was  legalized — 
it  was  in  the  1930s,  but  as  soon  as  it  was 
legalized  it  opened  up.  There  was  always 
gambling  here,  I’m  sure,  in  back  rooms —  you 
know,  poker,  pan.... 

What  kind  of  game  is  that? 

Pan?  Oh  my,  that’s  the  game.  It’s  played 
with  7  decks  of  cards — something  like  a  gin 
rummy  game,  but  it’s  a  little  more  than  that. 
The  game’s  kind  of  a  disease  when  it  [is] 
started.  But  there  were  always  games  like  that 
played  in  back  rooms.  Then  when  gambling 
was  legalized,  it  opened  up  a  little  more.  Now, 
of  course,  it’s  pretty  near  all  slot  machines 
because  that’s  what  tourists  are  looking  at, 
and  that’s  what  they  like  to  play. 


14 


Hugh  James  Gallagher 


In  the  1950s,  how  many  people  were  in  town? 

Well,  there  was  some  growth  just  to  take 
care  of  the  tourists  that  were  hitting  here 
in  increasing  numbers  every  year.  It  was  a 
small  growth;  most  of  the  growth  was  in 
outlying  districtVirginia  Highlands  opened 
up  out  here  on  the  top  of  the  grade — that’s  a 
beautiful  area  out  there;  Mark  Twain  Estates, 
which  is  located  at  the  bottom  of  Six  Mile 
Canyon — that  opened  up.  so  the  growth  was 
in  those  areas.  In  Virginia  City  itself,  there 
was  in  the  1950s  practically  no  building  of 
houses  because  banks  and  savings  and  loan 
companies  have  always  considered  mining 
and  tourism  as  unstable  industries,  I  guess.  So 
you  really  couldn’t  borrow  a  nickel.  But  then 
after  1960  that  changed.  They  looked  at  it  in 
a  different  light,  and  money  became  available 
for  low- income  housing.  And  there  was  some 
of  that  around  here.  Then  some  developers 
came  in  and  built  some  houses,  and  a  number 
of  new  houses  built  around  here  since  that 
time  down  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  city  and 
up  on  the  Divide.  But  during  the  1950s,  very 
little  growth  because  of  that  lack  of  money 
available  for  building  houses. 

In  the  1960s,  why  do  you  think  people  started 
pumping  money  into  the  town? 

Well,  it  was  a  new  outlook  that  banks 
and  savings  and  loans  had  taken,  and  there 
were  government  guarantees  for  mortgages 
and  things  of  that  nature,  so  money  did 
loosen  up  so  that  they  could  purchase  homes 
up  here,  which  makes  sense.  The  no-loan 
business  of  the  1950s — they  couldn’t  see  that 
at  all.  There  were  just  so  very  few  people  who 
were  connected  with  mining  at  that  time. 
Of  course,  there  were  a  lot  connected  with 
tourism,  but  you  have  to  look  ahead,  and 
tourism  is  going  to  be  with  us  a  long  time: 


it’s  as  stable  as  any  industry  you  can  get.  I 
know  Reno  and  Tahoe  feel  that  way  now. 
There’s  plenty  of  money  available  down  there 
for  those  high-rise  casinos  they’re  putting 
in.  They’re  counting  on  tourism  for  a  long 
time — and  expanded  tourism.  So  I  think  that 
they  change  their  philosophy,  and  that’s  why 
there’s  money  available. 

What  were  some  of  the  first  tourist  attractions 
that  opened  here? 

I  think  just  walking  down  the  few  blocks 
down  C  Street — the  Crystal  Bar,  as  it’s  such  a 
great  place  even  today.  That  place  goes  back  to 
the  1860s,  and  they  still  have  those  beautiful 
chandeliers  and  the  glasswork  and  everything 
else  there;  so  you  could  get  the  atmosphere 
of  the  Comstock  by  going  in  there.  And  the 
Bucket  of  Blood  and  the  Delta  Saloon — a 
few  places  are  good.  Then  St.  Mary’s  in  the 
Mountains,  St.  Paul’s  Episcopal  Church — they 
were  available  to  go  into.  And  the  Castle;  I 
guess  that  was  the  only  home  that  had  tours 
at  that  time.  Others  have  opened  up  since, 
but  that  was  [what  was]  available  at  that  time. 
So  probably  it  was  an  hour’s  stay  at  that  time, 
where  now  it  is  expanded  to  a  full  day’s  stay 
if  you  want  to  soak  it  all  in. 

Were  most  of  the  businesses  owned  by  local 
people  or  by  people  who  had  recently  moved 
to  Virginia  City? 

People,  of  course,  had  moved  in  and 
bought  places.  I  think  I  mentioned  before 
that  there  are  a  number  of  people  that  are  in 
business  in  Virginia  City  who  were  tired  of 
everything  that  they’d  had  before  and  wanted 
to  settle  down  a  little  bit,  and  bought  small 
businesses  in  Virginia  City.  They’re  locally 
owned  to  the  extent  that  those  people  now 
live  here.  They’re  not  here  all  year  round.  The 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


15 


winters  are  sometimes  harsh,  and  so  it  gives 
these  people  an  opportunity  to  get  out  for  a 
few  months  and  buy  the  things  that  they’re 
going  to  have  for  next  season  and  so  forth, 
and  a  little  diversion — a  little  vacation.  So  it’s 
a  great  business  life  for  those  people  who  you 
might  say  are  semi  retired. 

During  the  really  hard  times  when  the  mines 
shut  down  in  the  1940s  why  did  people  move 
away?  There  was  a  constant  population  of 300- 
400  people  pretty  much. 

Well,  mining  was  the  only  industry,  and 
that’s  all  people  understand  when  they’re  in 
the  mining  business.  There  isn’t  any  other 
industry  to  go  to,  and  so  they  move  off  into 
some  other  area  where  there  is  mining;  that’s 
the  way  mining  people  are.  So  somebody 
moves  into  Virginia  City  in  those  mining 
days,  and  “Where’dyou  come  from?  Butte?” — 
or  Tonopah,  or  Ely,  or  Hamilton,  or  Sonora 
or  Grass  Valley.  You’d  hit  one  of  them  because 
they  just  stayed  in  the  mining  business  and 
moved  as  bonanza  and  borrasca  hit  their  camp 
and  showed  up  in  another  camp.  They  were 
constantly  on  the  move. 

What  are  some  of  the  biggest  changes  in 
education  that  you’ve  seen  during  your  years 
as  superintendent? 

Well,  one  big  change  is  school  boards.  See, 
when  I  started  out,  I  had  3  people  on  the  board; 
we  were  very  friendly.  I  called  them  by  their 
first  name.  Cecil  Morrison — he  was  always 
Cec  to  me;  A1  Jacobsen  was  always  Jake;  Versal 
McBride  was  always  Mac.  But  their  idea  of  it 
as  a  school  board  running  at  that  time,  I  think 
I  mentioned  before,  was  “Hey,  go  on  down 
there  and  do  what  you  have  to  do  to  run  that 
thing.  Now  you’ve  said  you’ve  gone  to  school 
and  you’ve  got  some  credentials  for  it,  [so]  go 


on  down  there  and  do  the  right  thing.  If  you 
get  in  trouble,  let  us  know  and  we’ll  bail  you 
out.”  That’s  just  the  way  my  relationship  was 
with  them  for  all  of  those  years. 

They  rarely  had  a  meeting.  They  didn’t 
want  [to].  There  were  some  papers  that  they 
had  me  sign;  there  were  some  vouchers  to  pay 
salaries  and  things  like  that.  So  they  would 
say,  “Well,  bring  them  around  and  we’ll  sign 
them.”  So  I  used  to... at  the  end  of  the  month, 
I  would  do  that.  Versal  McBride  owned  the 
Bucket  of  Blood.  So  I  knew  that  if  I  go  in  there 
in  the  morning  Mac  won’t  be  too  busy,  and  I’d 
go  in  there  and  Mac  would  sign  the  vouchers. 
I  knew  if  I  went  in  to  Cecil  Morrison,  [who] 
was  an  assayer  on  C  Street,  that  Cecil  would 
put  down  his  furnaces  about  10:30  and  had  to 
wait  till  things  would  cool  of  f  before  he  could 
work  his  samples.  I’d  go  in  there  about  10:45, 
and  Cec  would  sign  it.  I’d  go  to  A1  Jacobsen’s 
home  or  if  he  was  downtown,  probably 
playing  solo  down  at  Bronco’s,  I’d  wait  until 
Jake  was  a  dummy  in  the  hand;  Jake  would 
reach  over  and  sign  these  vouchers,  and  that’s 
the  way  they  put  it  all  in  my  hands. 

They  had  to  have  a  meeting  sometimes — a 
budget  meeting —  because  it  was  required 
by  law.  No  one  ever  attended  the  meetings; 
there  was  nobody  in  the  press  ever  there.  I 
would  say  that  the  first  20  some  years  that  I 
was  principal  and  superintendent  there  was 
never  a  soul  at  a  school  board  meeting,  and 
now,  man,  it’s  an  extravaganza.  First,  there’s 
an  open  meeting  law  now;  you  have  to  have 
an  agenda  published,  and  you  have  to  have 
people  there.  Everybody  has  to  be  at  their  very 
very  best,  and  that’s  a  tremendous  strain.  That 
relationship  that  I  had  with  the  board  was 
something  that  I  cherished;  I  saw  how  things 
were  changing,  and  that’s  why  I  was  glad  to 
get  out. 

I  recall,  if  I  might  tell  this  story,  A1 
Jacobsen.  He  was  the  legislative  auditor  for 


16 


Hugh  James  Gallagher 


the  state  of  Nevada;  just  such  a  tremendous 
man.  People  used  to  take  their  troubles  to 
him  or  ask  him  things  because  he  had  such  a 
tremendous  mind,  particularly  with  finances 
and  taxes  and  things  like  that.  Someone,  a 
parent,  would  come  to  Jake  and  say,  “Hey, 
look,  my  kid  come  home  and  I  saw  it  on  the 
report  card — he  got  a  D  on  the  report  card.  He 
didn’t  have  a  book  in  American  government. 
That  was  the  reason  he  got  that  D  on  there.” 

Well,  Jake  used  to  tell  them,  “Hey,  you  go 
down  there,  and  you  tell  Gallagher  just  what 
you’ve  told  me.  We’re  paying  him  plenty  of 
money  to  see  that  that  thing  doesn’t  happen, 
[laughter]  If  he  doesn’t  satisfy  you  or  if  he 
doesn’t  give  you  an  explanation  within  a 
reasonable  length  of  time,  you  come  back 
and  you  tell  me.  Then  I’ll  go  down  there,  and 
I’ll  talk  to  Gallagher.  He  knows  I’d  better  not 
come  down  there  too  often.”  [laughter] 

But  now,  of  course,  parents  take  their 
complaints  to  the  school  board  members, 
and  [the]  first  time  the  superintendent  or 
the  administrator  hears  about  it  is  in  a  school 
board  meeting  with  the  place  packed  with 
people  and  media  people  there  and  everything 
else  and  hit  you  cold.  It  was  never  that  way.  I 
think  that’s  a  big  shame. 

There’s  some  other  changes,  too.  One  of 
the  changes,  and  I’ve  never  been  able  to  really 
live  with  it,  is  students —  their  language.  I 
haven’t  been  able  to  accept  bad  language  in 
mixed  groups.  I  have  been  able  to  take  all 
the  other  things  they  handled  as  they  grow 
up.  But  I  could  never  handle  that  one.  It  was 
coming  on,  and  there  was  a  strife  there  that  I 
was  having  with  them  primarily  because  that 
was  the  way  they  were  living  at  that  time,  but  I 
just  couldn’t  accept  it.  I  wasn’t  about  to.  That’s 
a  big  change. 

I  think  another  change,  and  this  is 
working  out  all  right  but  it  just  came  to  my 
mind — dress — of  teachers.  When  I  came  on 


the  job  in  1946, 1  just  got  out  of  the  army  and 

1  went  to  Oakland  where  I  was  discharged, 
and  because  I  knew  I  was  going  to  have  this 
job  I  bought  a  suit.  I  paid  $20  for  it;  it  had 

2  pair  of  pants.  I  came  up  here,  and  I  had 
2  pair  of  pants,  and  I  wore  that  suit  for  all 
year  long,  I’ll  tell  you.  Took  [those]  pants  out 
to  24  hours  service  or  something  like  that, 
and  occasionally  I’d  get  the  rest  of  the  thing. 
Finally  I  remember  about  6  months  after 
school  started  I  went  to  the  principal,  Hank 
Clayton,  and  I  said,  “Hank,  would  it  be  all 
right  if  I  wore  a  sports  coat  with  these  2  pair 
of  pants?  And  with  my  tie?” 

And  Hank  looked  at  me  for  a  while  and 
he  said,  “Well,  yes,  I  guess  it’s  going  to  be  all 
right.” 

But  it  wasn’t;  he  was  kind  of  leery  of  that. 
But  anyway,  I  never  went  to  school  or  was 
around  students  that  I  didn’t  have  a  necktie  on 
or  I  didn’t  have  a  best  suit  or  a  sports  outfit  on. 
All  that’s  changed  now.  I  see  teachers  today, 
men  teachers,  with  a  pocket  T-shirt  on  and  old 
jeans  and  stuff  like  that.  That’s  a  tremendous 
change. 

Several  years  ago,  oh,  maybe  10  years  ago, 
a  teacher  we  had  by  the  name  of  Charlotte 
Jackson,  I  remember  she  came  to  me  one 
time  and  she  said,  “Would  it  be  all  right  if 
we  wore” — she  had  talked  to  the  other  lady 
teachers —  “slack  suits  instead  of  dresses?” 

I  says,  “Oh,  I  don’t  know,  Charlotte,  about 
that.”  I  was  like  Clayton;  I  was  going  to  have 
to  think  about  that  for  a  while.  Now,  lady 
teachers  wear  old  jeans  and  sneakers —  such  a 
big  change.  They  say  that  they  get  a  little  closer 
to  the  students  when  they  do  that,  and  they 
kind  of  come  down  to  their  particular  level, 
and  that’s  all  right.  But  that’s  a  tremendous 
change  for  me.  [laughter]  That’s  part  of  getting 
old. 

Have  teaching  methods  changed  a  great  deal? 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


17 


No.  They  don’t  change.  Good  teachers 
100  years  ago  and  good  teachers  today,  they 
still  use  good  teaching  methods  and  good 
sound  techniques  and  work  at  it.  That’s  what 
it  is — working  at  it.  Teachers  who  want  to  put 
in  5Vi  hours  in  the  classroom  and  don’t  want 
to  prepare  and  don’t  want  to  make  up  lesson 
plans  because  they  think  that  goes  back  to 
college  days,  no,  they’re  not  going  to  be  all  that 
successful.  But  the  good  teachers,  after  30  or 
35  years,  still  make  out  their  lesson  plans.  They 
use  methods  and  techniques  that  have  been 
tested  and  tried.  They  understand  students; 
they’re  sympathetic  towards  students  and 
their  problems  and  want  to  help  them 
individually.  So  it  doesn’t  change  at  all. 

Could  you  tell  me  something  about  some  of  the 
fraternal  or  social  clubs  that  you  joined? 

I  belonged  to  the  Fraternal  Order  of  the 
Eagles  up  here  at  one  time.  Let’s  see,  I  still 
belong  to  the  American  Legion;  I  belong  to  the 
Storey  County  Volunteer  Lire  Department.  I 
was  about  a  25-year  active  member;  now  I’m 
an  honorary  member — they  farmed  me  out. 
They’re  such  a  great  organization,  I’m  glad 
that  I  still  have  some  part  with  them.  Gee, 
that’s  about  it. 

Could  you  tell  me  about  the  buildings  where 
some  of  these  meetings  were  held? 

Well,  the  Eagles  lodge  used  to  meet  in 
the  Eagles  hall,  which  is  the  Miners’  Union 
Hall  located  on  B  Street  next  to  the  Knights 
of  Pythias  Hall,  between  Sutton  Avenue  and 
Union  Street.  The  volunteer  fire  department, 
when  I  first  joined  them,  met  up  where  the 
fire  museum  is  now  on  C  Street,  up  in  the 
center  of  town;  now,  of  course,  they  meet  in 
their  firehouse.  And  the  American  Legion, 
at  one  time,  had  an  American  Legion  Hall, 


located  in  the  center  of  town.  Then  [after  the] 
fire  they  didn’t  rebuild  it.  [They]  later  sold  the 
lot  and  would  usually  meet  in  the  school  or 
some  place  like  that. 

Can  you  tell  me  when  the  red  light  district 
disappeared? 

Well,  it  went  up  and  down  with  mining. 
Because  their  clientele  are  miners,  so  the  more 
miners,  the  more  active  that  area  would  be. 
But  I  can  remember  just  one  block  between 
Sutton  Avenue  and  Union  Street  where  they 
were  located,  and  when  I  was  growing  up 
there  were  several  houses.  I  never  did  think 
it  was  an  extensive  area  at  all.  We  never  paid 
any  attention  to  it;  it  was  there,  it  seemed  to  be 
part  of  Virginia  City  as  anything  else  is,  and 
we  didn’t  pay  that  much  attention  to  it.  I  guess 
that  some  come  in  or  some  moved.  We  paid 
little  attention  to  all  of  that.  But  I  think  that 
during  the  war  in  1942,  it  was  closed  down, 
as  I  understand  it.  The  army,  because  of  their 
facility  at  Stead,  closed  down  the  brothels  all 
around  here  in  Reno  and  Carson,  and  had  an 
influence  in  closing  this  one  down  as  well.  It 
stayed  down. 

Then  all  the  buildings  disappeared  in  1942? 

A  couple  of  the  buildings  are  still  down 
there.  I  think  there’s  one,  probably  2  of  the 
buildings.  Again,  because  of  disrepair  and 
lack  of  maintenance  and  just  ignoring  it, 
they’d  fall  down  or  somebody  would  use  part 
of  it  for  firewood,  and  in  a  few  years  it  just 
disappears —  just  obliterated. 

What  year  were  you  married? 

I  was  married  in  1943.  Married  Lola 
McCarthy  who  I  went  to  school  with  here  in 
Virginia  City.  Her  family  was  from  Virginia 


18 


Hugh  James  Gallagher 


City.  Her  family  was  Nulty.  Jim  Nulty 
was  conductor  on  the  Virginia  &  Truckee 
Railroad  in  the  early  1900s.  And  so  she  was 
a  Comstocker.  On  a  furlough  from  the  army, 
we  got  married  in  1943. 

And  how  many  children  do  you  have? 

We  have  3  children:  Hugh,  Jr.  is  about  35 
years  of  age  [and]  a  controller  at  the  Comstock 
Casino  and  Hotel  in  Reno;  Barbara,  who’s 
about  29,  is  a  science  teacher  at  Douglas 
County  High  School  in  Gardnerville  [and] 
Bob,  who’s  about  26,  is  social  science  teacher 
and  basketball  and  baseball  coach  in  Elko 
County  High  School  in  Elko. 


Photographs 


The  Fourth  Ward  School  built  in  1876  with  “big  huge  classrooms  with  a  stove  in  the 
center  which  would  heat  each  individual  room...  was  a  great  place  to  go  to  school.” 


20 


Hugh  James  Gallagher 


Built  in  1936,  the  Virginia  City  High  School  was  a  WPA  project. 


Photographs 


21 


Hugh  Gallagher  Elementary  School  is  named  for  Hugh  James  Gallagher. 


Photographs  by  N.J.  Broughton 


Original  Index: 
For  Reference  Only 


In  order  to  standardize  the  design  of  all  UNOHP  transcripts  for  the  online  database,  they  have 
been  reformatted,  a  process  that  was  completed  in  early  2012.  This  document  may  therefore  differ 
in  appearance  and  pagination  from  earlier  printed  versions.  Rather  than  compile  entirely  new 
indexes  for  each  volume,  the  UNOHP  has  made  each  transcript  fully  searchable  electronically.  If 
a  previous  version  of  this  volume  existed,  its  original  index  has  been  appended  to  this  document 
for  reference  only.  A  link  to  the  entire  catalog  can  be  found  online  at  http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 


24 


An  Interview  with  Hugh  James  Gallagher 


M 


Arts,  the,  24-25 


B 


Beebe,  Lucius,  25,  26-27 
Bodie  Mike,  17-18 
Byrne,  Millie,  19 


Education,  8-9,  21-23,  BO¬ 
SS;  school  board,  22-23, 
30-33 


Family  life,  14,  15-16 
Fire  department,  15,  35 
Fourth  Ward  School 
stock) ,  7-8 ,9,1 
Flu  epidemic,  19 


•r,  Mary,  3 

Gallagher,  Mary  Haffey,  1, 
5-6 

Gallagher,  Neil,  2-4 
Gallagher  (Hugh  Jr.)  family 
(Comstock) ,  37 
Gallagher  (Hugh  Sr.)  family 
(Comstock),  4,  5,  6 
Gambling,  26-28 


H 


Haffey  family  (Comstock) , 

1-2,  6 


McDevitt,  Jim  and  Rosie, 

18-19 

Milling  and  processing: 
Comstock  Merger  Mines 
Inc.,  12-13 

Mines  and  mining,  1,  5,  14; 
economy  4,  11-12,  16,  23, 

29,  30;  Nevada-Massachusetts 
mine  (Winneraucca) ,  5; 

Ophir  mine ,  1 

Mines  and  mining:  accidents, 

2 

Mines  and  mining: 

tions;  shaft  man,  2;  ho>et 
engineer , 


ions,  13 

zations,  35;  North  End 
Society  Club,  18-19 


Sports  and  leisure,  9,  18-20 
Structures/Places  (Comstock) : 
American  Flat  Mill,  13; 
American  Legion  Hall,  35- 
36;  Beebe  house,  26; 
butcher  shop,  14;  Crystal 
Bar,  29;  Delta  Saloon,  26; 
disappearance  of,  16-17; 
First  Ward  School,  7;  Fourth 
Ward  School,  7,  9;  Gallagher 
boardinghouse,  3;  Knights 
of  Pythias  Hall,  35;  Miners' 
Union  Hall,  35;  National 
Guard  Hall,  17,  20;  new 
high  school,  9-11;  North 
End  Society  Club  cabin,  18- 
19;  Odd  Fellows  building, 

20;  Ophir  Heights,  1;  red 
light  district,  36,  Wells 
Fargo  building,  16-17 


Original  Index:  For  Reference  Only 


25 


T 

Territorial ' Enterprise ,  25 

Tourism,  24-26,  29 

U 

University  of  Nevada-Reno, 
20-21 


