





A Candle in the Night: 

Basque Studies 

at the University of Nevada, 1967-2007 


Interviewees: William Douglass, Gorka Aulestia, Jill Berner, Linda White, Marcelino Ugalde, 
Joxe Mallea-Loaetxe, Joseba Zulaika, Carmelo Urza, Sandra Ott, and Kate Camino 

Interviewed: 2004-2007 
Published: 2007 

Interviewers: Kara Geiger and Mary Larson 
UNOHP Catalog #212 


Description 

1967 a small Basque studies program was established within the Social Sciences Division of the University of 
Nevada’s Desert Research Institute. As originally conceived, the programs purpose was to study the Basques (who 
were historically the foremost sheep tenders in the American West) as a key human element in the Great Basin 
ecosystem. At the time, no one imagined that such a modest, narrowly focused little undertaking could grow to 
become todays Center for Basque Studies, considered by many to be the leading research and educational institute 
of its kind outside the European Basque homeland. 

A Candle in the Night chronicles the history of the center, as remembered by many of those who were most important 
in its foundation and development. Within the context of this story, it also offers much valuable information about 
the centers offspring. These include the vast Basque Studies Library (the main repository of information about all 
things Basque for the English-speaking world), the Basque Book Series of the University of Nevada Press (one of 
the most successful ethnic series published by an academic press in the United States), and the University Studies 
Abroad Consortium (one of the largest programs of its kind in the world, with a presence in twenty-five countries). 

While the Center for Basque Studies has achieved great things and has much of which to be proud, the road to 
success was not uniformly smooth. A Candle in the Night gives the reader the kind of multi-faceted understanding 
of issues and personalities that is often missing from official institutional histories. 






^ L+v ihz 

Basque Studies at the 
University of Nevada 

1967-2007 


From oral history interviews conducted 
by Pedro J. Oiarzabal 

Edited by Pedro J. Oiarzabal 
Assistant Editors: Kathleen Coles, Allison Tracy 


University of Nevada 
Oral History Program 
2007 


Copyright 2007 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Reno, Nevada 89557-0324 

All rights reserved. Published 2007. 


Publication Staff: 

Director: R.T. King 
Assistant Director: Mary Larson 
Production Manager: Kathleen M. Coles 
Senior Production Assistant: Alli s on Tracy 
Production Assistants: Linda Sommer and 
Kathryn Wright-Ross 


ISBN 1-56475-396-4 



During the darkest day of the Franco era when we were denied 
our language, our culture, and our identity, we were consoled by 
the knowledge that an American university in Nevada had lit 
one small candle in the night. 

Basque President Jose Antonio Ardanza 




Contents 


FOREWORD ix 

PREFACE xi 

INTRODUCTION xiii 

PART ONE 

1 WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 3 

PART TWO 

2 GORKA AULESTIA 163 

3 IILL BERNER 189 

4 LINDA WHITE 221 

5 MARCELINO UGALDE 263 

6 JOXE MALLE A- OL AETXE 291 


7 


JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


307 



Vlll 


CONTENTS 


PART THREE 


8 CARMELO URZA 

337 

9 SANDRA OTT 

367 

10 KATE C AMINO 

385 

PHOTOGRAPH CREDITS 

417 


INDEX 


419 



Foreword 


Nevada is a place that surprises newcomers. Very few people— 
especially those not from the West—are prepared for the size of 
the place. The diversity of the landscape is another surprise. 

Nevada is also Basque Country. The story of the Basques is 
an immigrant story and as such is a quintessential American 
story. The Basque shepherds who settled in Nevada and the 
surrounding region helped shape Nevada's identity, and the state's 
history is filled with the history of Basques: families like the 
Laxalts, the Echeverrias, and the Ascuagas, just to name a few. 
The University's Center for Basque Studies stands out as one of 
the few such centers in the world. 

In the pages that follow, you will see multiple histories unfold 
through the memories of many of the people who founded and 
nurtured the Center for Basque Studies at the University of 
Nevada, Reno. The University's Oral History Program has captured 
the stories, and history unfolds from the mouths of people 
intimately involved in creating and sustaining the Center. This 
volume will be of interest to anyone who studies the Basques, of 
course, but more than that it is the story of how organizations 
form around an area of interest, how academic departments are 
formed at universities, and about the nature of research and 
creative endeavors in general. And it tells it all with the backdrop 
of the wide-open Northern Nevada landscape and Nevada's 



X 


FOREWORD 


pioneering spirit. Anyone interested in the people, politics and 
history of the region will find this collection interesting and 
surprisingly familiar, like reading old letters with stories of friends 
and family members. 

Oral histories are rarely the tidy summaries of facts and 
statistics that we are most accustomed to reading. More often, 
they are rich, complex stories of the type that rarely emerge except 
in more intimate settings: through dinner parties and lunches, 
and slowly from friendships built over time. A Candle in the 
Night captures the story of Basque Studies at our university in 
memorable texture and detail, with the personalities of the 
storytellers intact for the reader to enjoy and benefit from. 

Milton D. Glick, President 
University of Nevada, Reno 



Preface 


The University of Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
records and preserves primary-source interviews that illuminate 
significant topics in Nevada's remembered past. The program's 
chroniclers are people who participated in or directly witnessed 
the events and phenomena that are the subjects of its interviews. 
Following precedent established by Allan Nevins at Columbia 
University in 1948, and perpetuated since by academic programs 
such as ours, these recorded interviews and their transcripts are 
called “oral histories." 

In the period since its founding in 1964, the UNOHP has 
built an ever-growing research collection of transcripts that now 
totals about 90,000 pages. This collection is heavily used by 
students, faculty, and publishing scholars. In CD format, it has 
been acquired by about 600 libraries, and all volumes are available 
in hard copy through the university libraries in Reno and Las Vegas. 

Going beyond its scholarly mission, the UNOHP does 
something extraordinary for a program of its type: it reaches a 
large non-academic audience by publishing books and producing 
video documentaries based on selected parts of its work. A Candle 
in The Night is the latest such publication. Primarily the work of 
Dr. Pedro J. Oiarzabal, who began it while a student in my Oral 
History Theory and Methods course (HIST 786), it represents the 
first systematic attempt to record the history of the Center for 
Basque Studies (originally the Basque Studies Program) at the 



Xll 


PREFACE 


University of Nevada, as remembered by principal figures in the 
story 

Between 2005 and 2007, Dr. Oiarzabal interviewed ten 
chroniclers for a total of about thirty hours. The recordings of 
these interviews yielded over 1,000 pages of verbatim transcripts. 
As is generally the case in oral history exercises, the transcripts 
are rich in information, but a great deal of work was necessary to 
shape them into something with the coherence and clarity 
desirable in a publication. With some assistance from the UNOHP 
staff, Dr. Oiarzabal did a splendid job, extensively editing the 
interviews so as to make them highly readable without 
compromising their integrity. In the process, he gave them 
narrative form by deleting or subsuming his questions into each 
story. The chroniclers then reviewed the work and affirmed in 
writing that it accurately represents the meaning of their words. 
Readers who desire access to the unpolished oral histories are 
invited to visit the offices of the UNOHP, where the tapes of the 
interviews may be heard by appointment 

In order to more efficiently organize the different subjects 
discussed by the chroniclers, Oiarzabal added thematic sub¬ 
headings to the text, which he arranged into three parts. The first 
part comprises Dr. William Douglass's recollection of the history 
of Basque Studies, from his perspective as its first coordinator 
and the only surviving founder of the program. In Part Two, other 
chroniclers, through reflections on their personal experiences and 
observations, build a richly textured account of the evolution of 
Basque Studies, 1967-2007. Part Three specifically addresses the 
creation and growth of the University Studies Abroad Consortium 
(USAC), which is an offspring of the Basque Studies Program. 

As with all of the UNOHP's oral histories, while we vouch for 
the authenticity of the stories that make up A Candle in the 
Night, we advise the reader to keep in mind that they are personal 
accounts of a remembered past, and we do not claim that they 
are entirely free of error. Intelligent readers will approach the 
book with the same anticipation of discovery, tempered with 
caution, that they would bring to government reports, diaries, 
newspaper stories, and other interpretations of historical 
information. 

R. T King, Director 
UNOHP 



Introduction 

OROITZAPEN DEN GERORA: BEYOND MEMORY 


In 1957 Robert Laxalt, a first generation Basque-American, 
authored Sweet Promised Land, which became a highly acclaimed 
literary work in the American West, as it portrayed, through 
Basque lenses, a paradigmatic tale of the life of an immigrant in 
the United States. Within the context of claiming Basque heritage 
throughout America, in June of 1959, the first-ever Basque 
regional festival in the United States took place in Sparks, Nevada, 
attracting thousands of Basques from all over the American West. 
At the time, it was the single largest public demonstration of 
Basque identity and culture that Nevada had witnessed. 

Seven years later, a Basque club, named Zazpiak Bat ("Seven 
are One"—seven provinces as one province) was established in 
Reno, in an effort to unite all Basques from the seven different 
administrative Basque regions within Spain and France, and to 
promote and maintain Basque traditions. The institutionalization 
of the Basque presence in Reno opened a new chapter in the 
long, and sometimes not so visible, relationship between the 
Basques and other Nevadans. 

Meanwhile, the Desert Research Institute (DRI), established 
by the Nevada legislature in 1959 as a research division of the 
University of Nevada, began, in the early 1960s, to discuss the 
possibility of establishing a Basque studies program that would 
focus on the Basques of the Great Basin. At roughly the same 



XIV 


INTRODUCTION 


time, Robert Laxalt was founding the University of Nevada Press, 
which would soon have a Basque Book Series. He had been 
instrumental in raising awareness about Basque culture through 
his involvement in organizing the Sparks festival, and he was an 
influential early advocate for the Basque Studies Program (BSP), 
which would become today's Center for Basque Studies. 

William A. Douglass, a social anthropologist from Reno, was 
hired by DRI in June of 1967 to be the first coordinator of the 
Basque Studies Program, a function that he carried out for thirty- 
two years with the help and support of individuals and 
institutions ranging from the local to the international. In 1968, 
Basque bibliographer Jon Bilbao joined the program. Among 
them, Laxalt, Douglass, and Bilbao built the program's 
foundation. 

Under General Francisco Franco's dictatorial regime (1939- 
1975), Basque culture was brutally repressed, and the language 
was forbidden. During that time, Basque emigrant diaspora 
communities, scattered throughout the Americas, not only 
financially supported the Basque government-in-exile and its 
different political and cultural initiatives, but they took on the 
task of maintaining the culture, the language, and artistic and 
folkloric expressions that were banned in the Basque provinces 
of Spain. As a result of the outcome of the Spanish Civil War 
(1936-1939) the majority of the Spanish and Basque intelligentsia 
flew into exile and found shelter in America. Basque publishing 
houses, such as Ekin, and studies programs, such as the American 
Institute of Basque Studies, established in Buenos Aires in the 
1940s and 1950s respectively, mushroomed during this period. 

The Basque Studies Program in Reno was not only highly 
influenced by prominent Basque-Americans, such as Laxalt, and 
by academics, such as Douglass and Joseba Zulaika (the program's 
second director), but also by Basque political exiles, such as Bilbao 
and Basque scholar Eloy Placer. Bilbao and Placer understood 
that political commitment to the Basque cause and advocacy for 
the culture and language were inseparable. In varying degrees, 
this view was shared by others, including Yon Onatibia, instructor 
in the Basque Studies Program Summer Sessions Abroad, and 
first Basque Studies PhD graduates, Gorka Aulestia and Joxe 
Mallea-Olaetxe. 

Both Bilbao and Placer were former Basque Army officers 
who fought against Franco's rebel army in the early stages of the 



INTRODUCTION 


XV 


war. In 1945, Bilbao was made a Knight of the Order of the Belgian 
Crown for his services during World War II in favor of the 
liberation of Belgium. When Placer was buried in 1974 in 
Lafayette, Louisiana, it was with military honors, and his coffin 
was draped with the Ikurrina or Basque flag. This gives us an 
idea of the human quality and stature of some of the early 
contributors to the program. 

The year 2007 marks the fortieth anniversary of Basque 
Studies at the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR), a true 
accomplishment for everyone who has been directly or indirectly 
involved with the program. It also marks the fiftieth anniversary 
of the first edition of Sweet Promised Land and the twenty-fifth 
anniversary of the University Studies Abroad Consortium (USAC), 
another remarkable institution within UNR, whose origins can 
be traced to the first summer studies abroad programs that were 
organized by Basque Studies during the 1970s. USAC, a 
consortium of thirty-three U.S. universities, is currently one of 
the largest programs of its kind in the country, with a presence 
in twenty-five countries. Carmelo Urza has directed USAC since 
its creation, and Sandra Ott was the first field director in Europe. 
Without much doubt one can say that 2007 is the year of the 
Basques at UNR. 

The life of Basque Studies is linked to over a third of UNR's 
history. For the last forty years, Basque Studies has grown 
alongside UNR, reflecting changes that have taken place on 
campus and in Nevada society overall. In the words of Jill Berner 
and Linda White, it has transformed itself from "a tiny, little 
operation in a closet" to a "supernova." White worked at Basque 
Studies for twenty-five years and was for a decade its assistant 
coordinator, while Berner managed the daily operations of the 
program for much of the last three decades. Kate Camino has 
been the office manager for the last nine years. 

The Center for Basque Studies has become the leading 
national and international research and educational institute of 
Basque culture outside the Basque Country. Its library, holding 
over 45,000 titles, is the main informational reference for the 
English-speaking world, thanks to the efforts of librarians, such 
as Marcelino Ugalde. It is also one of the central educational and 
cultural referents within the globe-spanning Basque diaspora. 
Basque Studies has published a biannual newsletter since 1968 
and over thirty books in the last few years, while the University 



XVI 


INTRODUCTION 


of Nevada Press Basque Book Series has published a total of fifty- 
five books since 1969. 

As William Douglass stated on the occasion of the twentieth 
anniversary of Basque Studies, "The BSP is nothing more than 
the sum total of the efforts of many persons too numerous to 
name individually... many scholars, students and laymen in both 
the Old and New Worlds [and] thousands of people who have 
provided their moral and financial support." 1 In this regard A 
Candle in the Night: Basque Studies at the University of Nevada, 
1967-2007 chronicles the history of those faculty, staff, student 
workers, visiting students and scholars, and volunteers who have 
contributed to the development of the longest-lived academic 
program dedicated to the study of the Basques in the history of 
the United States. Combined, their stories are a narrative not 
only of the history of Basque Studies, but also of its offspring: 
the Basque Studies Library, the Basque Book Series, and the 
University Studies Abroad Consortium. 

Pedro J. Oiarzabal 
August 2, 2007 


Notes 

1 William A. Douglass. "The Basque Studies Program (1982-1987)." 
Basque Studies Program Newsletter, Issue 36, 1987. 



Part One 




1 


William A. Douglass 


1/ %/illiam "Bill" Anthony Douglass was born in 1939 in 
r w Reno, Nevada. His family, which was of Irish ancestry, 
had achieved prominence in the mining and gaming industries 
in the state. His grandfather, William James Douglass, founded 
the mining camp of Douglass in Esmeralda County in central 
Nevada in the 1890s. Bill's father, Jack Douglass, was born in the 
booming mining town of Ton op ah, and he became a pioneer in 
the gaming industry in the Silver State. Jack rose to leading 
positions in several Reno-based casinos, including the Club Cal- 
Neva, the Gold Dust, and the Comstock Hotel and Casino. 1 Bill 
Douglass would also participate in the family's gaming business, 
becoming particularly active in the Riverboat Hotel and Casino 
in the late 1980s. 

After graduating from Bishop Manogue Catholic High School, 
Bill was admitted to the University of Nevada, from which he 
received a BA in Spanish literature in 1961. He first visited Spain 
in 1959, studying at the University of Madrid for a year. He 
obtained an MA degree in anthropology at the University of 
Chicago in 1966, earning a PhD in social anthropology from the 
same university a year later. A week after his graduation he moved 
back to Reno to begin building a Basque studies program at the 
Desert Research Institute. 



4 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



Bill Douglass co-founded the Basque Studies Program with 
Robert Laxalt and Jon Bilbao, and he remained its coordinator 
until his retirement in December 1999. Currently, he is a Basque 
Scholar Professor Emeritus at the University of Nevada, Reno. 
Here are Douglass's memories of the development of the Basque 
Studies Program under his administration. 


Origins of the Basque Studies Program 

The chairman of the Department of Anthropology at the 
University of Chicago, Fred Eggan, visited Reno in 1961 as 
consultant to the Desert Research Institute (DRI). Wendell Mordy, 
President of DRI at that time, had brought in three 
anthropologists: Eggan from Chicago, Omer Stewart from the 
University of Colorado, and Robert Heizer from Berkeley. They 
were asked to come up with some ideas about what the new 
Desert Research Institute's Center for Western North American 
Studies might do in the area of the social sciences. (DRI was 








WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


5 


focused primarily on Great Basin hydrology and atmospheric 
physics.) 

The consultants, of course, came up with the obvious things 
like archaeology and studies of Great Basin Indians, such as the 
Washoe, Paiute, et cetera. But Omer Stewart, it's my 
understanding, said, "You've got all of these sheepherders in the 
Great Basin; plus, the Basques in Europe are kind of a mystery 
people. So why don't you have a little Basque studies program 
within your center?" DRI was intrigued by that, and I think by 
1961 DRI had accepted, in principle, the idea of a Basque studies 
program. 

I was a first-year graduate student at the University of Chicago 
at the time. When Eggan got back from Reno, he told me about 
the meeting and said that he hoped I didn't mind that he had 
thrown my name into the hopper. I said, "OK." 

Eggan said, "We expect you back next fall, and you can have 
a fellowship." I didn't have a fellowship up to then. 

I said, "But I've already 
made arrangements to go to 
the Basque Country to start 
my fieldwork." (Julian Pitt- 
Rivers, a Europeanist at the 
University of Chicago, had 
given me contacts with Julio 
Caro Baroja and people like 
that.) 

Eggan said, "We'll release 
your fellowship to you in the 
field. Start your field 
research." 

Basically, that's what 
happened. I took my wife and 
son and went to the Basque 
Country in the fall of 1963. 

Before we left, I was back in 
Reno that summer, working 
construction. I had a cousin 
in Carson City, Blanche Robb, 
who knew Bob Laxalt very 
well. 2 My cousin said, "Would Bill Douglass conducting fieldwork in 
you like to meet 'Frenchie' the Basque Country, 1960s. 










6 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


before you go? I think he's going to the Basque Country, too." 
(Frenchie is what they called Bob Laxalt in Carson. Bob was 
planning his second major trip to the Basque Country, which 
was going to be a year-long sabbatical leave. He was taking his 
three children, and he was going to put them in school, so it was 
quite an expedition.) 

I said, "Sure, I'd love to." 

Blanche talked to Bob and set up the appointment, and I 
went over one evening and saw him. Bob told me he was on his 
way to the Basque Country. DRI had hired him and his wife, 
Joyce, to look into this whole Basque studies program idea and 
to see how it would be received in the Basque Country. 

Bob told me, "I've been hired as a consultant on this deal, 
and I'm going to try and make some informal contacts over there. 
I'm going to put together a bibliography, because back here we 
really don't know what there is, and Joyce is going to be taking 
a lot of slides. DRI is going to pay her for shooting a lot of 
photographs." 

In the end, Bob put together a bibliography of, say, 1,000 
items, which was very small compared to what was out there. 
Jon Bilbao, 3 a Basque bibliographer, was doing his 300,000-item 
bibliography at the same time, but they didn't know each other. 
Bob, in effect, was duplicating Jon's effort on a very tiny scale. 

It was kind of amateurish in a lot of ways. It was very ad hoc. 
I mean, it was like they were just making it up as they went 
along, because Bob really didn't know much. He had a few 
contacts in the Basque Country. For instance, he knew his cousin, 
Jon Mirande, a Basque writer and author, and a few other people, 
since he'd been over to the Basque Country, and, of course, he 
had family there. He had made a trip back with his father that 
resulted in his book, Sweet Promised Land. 

Bob said to me, "That's as far as I'm going to go with this, 
because I'm not a Basque scholar. I'm a Basque. I'm going over 
there for a sabbatical year to write a novel, but I don't pretend to 
be a Basque scholar. I don't know when this thing's going to 
take off, and I'm not sure where I'm going to be yet, but let's 
stay in touch and see what happens." 

I said, "Sure." I was very pleased, and he was quite generous 
with his time and everything. 

So I knew about the program, or I knew about the idea, the 
concept. In this regard, I have always considered Bob Laxalt, Jon 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


7 


Bilbao, and myself as the founders of the Basque Studies Program. 
We all had different roles at different stages. Bob was involved in 
the initial steps of developing the Basque Studies Program within 
DRI. However, he never intended to take a role as an academic, 
but to provide help when needed. He was totally supportive. 
Bob was very clear from the beginning that his main interest 
was the University of Nevada Press. 

Meanwhile, there were three people in Reno who got involved 
in the idea of a Basque studies program and started to run with it. 
Wendell Mordy's wife, Brooke, was studying anthropology through 
correspondence at the time. (I think she might have even gotten 
her doctorate before it was over, but she at least had a master's.) 
Wendell Mordy's major assistant, Joy Leland, was doing the same 
thing. Joy was his "Girl Friday," his right-hand person. Joy and 
Brooke were pursuing their graduate studies, but I can't remember 
at what universities. I think maybe Brooke was pursuing at least 
some of it at the University of Utah. Those two were part-time at 
this new Center for Western North American Studies as it was 
getting off the ground. The third person was William "Bill" 
Jacobsen, a linguist in the English Department. 

Around 1962 Warren d'Azevedo was brought to Reno by DRI 
to be the first chairman of the Center for Western North American 
Studies. 4 Warren was sort of torn—rather than putting all of his 
energy into the center, he really wanted to see an anthropology 
department at the University of Nevada. He was working out at 
Stead 5 and trying to get the DRI's center off the ground, but his 
heart was really into building a department at the university. He 
very quickly negotiated a transfer from DRI to the university. I 
think he went into the Sociology Department, which then was 
called Sociology and Anthropology, even though there was only 
one full-time anthropologist on its faculty, Arnold Strickon. 

When I was a freshman and sophomore at the University of 
Nevada, I had classes from Mary Sellers, an anthropologist in the 
Sociology Department, who had to teach sociology half-time. 
Then I studied for a year at the University of Madrid. When I 
came back for my senior year, the university had hired Strickon, 
who was quite good. 

Warren came and worked with Carl Backman, the chairman 
of Sociology, to create, essentially, a schism—a separate 
Anthropology Department. This was the 1960s, and anthropology 
was a hot field in American academia, and it was expanding across 



8 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


the country at the time. By the time I came back to Reno in 
1967, the Anthropology Department had four positions— 
d'Azevedo, Don Fowler, Mel Aikens, and Floyd Sharrock. 

So Warren came to the University of Nevada, but he was still 
connected with DRI as the nominal director of this center. Mordy 
wasn't real happy with the situation. He had hired d'Azevedo, 
and d'Azevedo's loyalties were split, and there was a bit of tension 
between DRI and the university in those days. There was 
competition. Also, DRI didn't like their personnel to teach, 
because they felt that they should be writing grant proposals. 
The institution lived, and probably still does to a large degree, 
off of soft money—the indirect cost recovery from grants. I mean, 
if Warren was down at the university campus building an anthro 
department, that was time taken away from writing proposals 
and bringing in grants to DRI. There was that ambivalence. 

The whole idea that social sciences and humanities could 
survive in the DRI-type climate was a little naive, because of the 
magnitude of our grants. It was hard to get a big team grant in 
the social sciences and humanities, because it is kind of a lone- 
wolf job, and you don't have a lot of lab expenses. A huge grant 
for us would be $50,000, and DRI might get $10,000 or $12,000 
or $20,000 in indirect costs. Well, that's nothing. But if DRI got 
$1,000,000 for hydrology, they could maybe get $300,000 or 
$400,000 or $500,000 in indirect costs from the federal 
government. So that grant was worth ten times our grant to 
DRI. We were stillborn, and our kind of work really wasn't going 
to make it out there. I don't care whether it was Warren 
d'Azevedo's ideas or my ideas or Mary Ellen Glass's ideas, 6 but we 
all ended up out of DRI. 

Actually, when I came back in 1967, there was nobody at the 
Center for Western North American Studies. d'Azevedo had left, 
and there was a vacancy in the directorship of the center. Then, 
Wilbur Shepperson of the History Department assumed the 
directorship, but on an acting basis, for about a year. Probably 
during my second year at the Basque Studies Program, DRI had 
hired Don Fowler as the director of the center, and he became 
my supervisor. He was hired out of UNR's Anthropology 
Department. He was one of d'Azevedo's proteges at the time. 
Then Fowler eventually left DRI and went to the Anthropology 
Department full time. (Fowler retired in 2004 and became an 
emeritus faculty member after a forty-two year career on campus.) 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


9 



"DRI had hired [Don] Fowler as the director of the center, and he became 
my supervisor. He was hired out of UNR's Anthropology Department. He 
was one of d'Azevedo'sproteges at the time. "Don Fowler (left), Director of 
DRI's Social Sciences Center, and Jon Bilbao at UNR, June 1978. 


Before I came to DRI, I went to the Basque Country from 
1963 to 1965. I was already done with about a year's worth of 
fieldwork in Echalar in Navarra, and I was going to switch to 
Murelaga in Bizkaia when I decided to go see Bob Laxalt. He was 
in St. Jean Pied de Port. I got in touch with him—I forget how, 
probably a letter in those days—and he said, "Come on over." 

So I went there, and Bob told me all of the things that he'd 
been doing that year. He had met with Basque scholar Philippe 
Veyrin, who was very ill. Philippe Veyrin was very excited about 
the idea of a Basque studies program. Bob, on his own initiative, 
had secured from him a commitment to sell—not to give, but to 
sell—his personal library to the University of Nevada if the 
university library wanted to buy his collection. It was about 750 
volumes on Basques. Bob told me the story. Veyrin had said, 
"You know, Bob, I really want to see that happen. I can't give 
you the books, because my wife's going to need some money for 
them, but you'll have right of first refusal." 

Bob had already contacted the director of the library at the 
university, Dave Heron, who was, by the way, a great guy. Dave 









10 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


committed to buying Veyrin's library, with the help of a very 
well known regent at that time, Molly Knudtsen, who was a big 
benefactor. Molly committed, I think, $6,000 for Veyrin's 750 
volumes as a kind of loan to the effort, but a loan that didn't 
have to be paid back. Bob had political connections in the sense 
that his brother, Paul Laxalt, was then the governor of the state 
of Nevada. 7 Bob was very friendly with Molly, who was quite 
supportive of starting the University of Nevada Press and the 
Anthropology Department. 

Molly was kind of an amateur archaeologist, and she had a 
ranch out in central Nevada, so she knew a lot of Basques. Her 
relations with Basque sheepherders hadn't always been great, 
but she had some neighbors that were Basque ranchers, so she 
would tell stories about being a cattleman and that kind of thing. 
Nothing huge and dramatic, but there was always a little bit of 
tension there. 

Molly believed in the idea of DRI taking on a Basque studies 
program as one of its initiatives. In fact, she was one of the first 
people that I was introduced to by Bob Laxalt when I came here 
to start the program. Bob was introducing me around and said, 
“You've got to meet Molly Knudtsen." Bob and I drove out to 
her ranch, and we spent a couple of days out there. We told her 
what we were doing, and she gave us a little bit of money. I 
think she gave me $1,000. It was probably the first donation 
that I had anything to do with. 

By the time I saw Bob, Veyrin had died, and Bob was in the 
process of making the arrangements to have that library shipped 
to Reno. The Veyrin collection was very valuable as the 
foundation for the Basque collection. When I first came to Reno 
I could appreciate that, because I had a personal library largely 
dealing with Hegoalde [Spanish-Basque Country], and Veyrin's 
library largely dealt with Iparralde [French-Basque Country], and 
that was harder to get. 

Bob had also met an anthropologist named Morton Levine, 
who was from Vassar College. Morton was doing fieldwork in 
the French-Basque area of the Basque Country at the time. 

Bob said, "I think this thing's going to go. There seems to be 
a lot of interest in the Basque Country. When I get back, I'm 
going to recommend to Mordy that he go forward, but I'm not 
going to do it. I'm going back to my job as director of the 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


11 


University of Nevada Press, so why don't you think of going 
back to Reno? I'll put your name in." 

Bob kind of half recruited me to come to Reno eventually, 
but he really had no authorization to offer me anything. He was 
just planting seeds. I wasn't at all committed to the idea of going 
back to Reno. However, I said, "I'd like to consider it, but I've got 
a lot to do. I have to go to another field site, then I've got to go 
back to Chicago. I still have a little bit of coursework to finish. I 
want to write my MA thesis, and I want to complete my PhD 
dissertation before I take a job. So I'm two, maybe three years 
away optimistically, probably more." 

Bob said, "I don't know what's going to happen, but at least 
keep it in mind. Maybe it'll be up and running by then, and maybe 
you'd like to come and be part of it." Anyway, we did stay in touch. 

I returned to Chicago, probably in September of 1965. I was 
taking a few classes, and I insisted on writing my MA, because I 
wasn't sure I was going to get a PhD. I wanted a fallback, because 
I had a wife and a child. I thought, "I can teach at a community 
college. If I flunk my doctoral exams, at least I'll have something." 
At Chicago they didn't want you to do that. You could if you 
insisted, but they didn't want you to. 

I wrote a master's thesis, and my advisor said, "Well, write 
about something that won't be in the way of your doctoral 
dissertation," which was on rural exodus and emigration. 

I said, "OK." I had a bunch of stuff about funerals and 
funerary ritual. So I started working that material, and I got more 
and more fascinated by it, and I wrote a thesis called Death in 
Murelaga. Then the following year I wrote my dissertation. (I 
transferred to Berkeley for my second year of graduate work, so I 
kind of lost contact with the whole Chicago scene. It's a long 
story, but I later took my Chicago PhD comps off campus at 
Berkeley, because my mentor back in Chicago, Sol Tax, arranged 
for it. I got a high pass.) 

In the fall of 1965, while I was still writing my MA thesis, I 
went to the American Anthropological Association (AAA) 
meetings in Denver. Warren d'Azevedo, Joy Leland, and Wendell 
and Brooke Mordy wanted to meet with me in Denver, as they 
were going to the meetings. 

All four of them showed up. Wendell was there to recruit 
me, because they hadn't been able to find anybody to do the 



12 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Basque Program in all those years. It turned out that there just 
wasn't anybody in the Anglo-American world qualified to do it. 
I don't know whether they ever approached Morton Levine, but 
I kind of doubt it. Morton was at Vassar, so he probably wouldn't 
have come anyway. They didn't know about Jon Bilbao, and, of 
course, Jon Bilbao didn't have a PhD. That would have been 
problematic from DRI's standpoint, because Jon couldn't be a 
principal investigator. You have to have your doctorate to sign a 
grant proposal, so that wouldn't have worked. 

They really did a recruiting number on me. They said, "We'd 
like you to come out at the end of this year. You can start the 
program, and you can write your dissertation in Reno." 

I thought about it, and I said, "OK, I'll take the job, but not 
until I have my dissertation in hand." 

I was afraid. One of my teachers, when I was an 
undergraduate, had never finished her doctorate. She was ABD 
(All But Dissertation). She took a job, and she never got around 
to writing her dissertation. That was not that uncommon, and I 
thought, "Boy, you know, I'm supposed to build this program. 
Who knows how much time I'll have to write this dissertation? 
And I have a fellowship, so I can pay my bills. I'll just sit here 
and finish, and when I'm done, I'll go." In those days the 
academic marketplace was huge and was great, particularly in 
anthropology, and particularly for graduates of Chicago, because 
Chicago was listed as the number-one school in the country. So 
I wasn't worried about a job per se. 

For instance, in the fall of 1966 I went to the AAA meetings 
in Pittsburgh, and I had three different job offers there. I didn't 
take them, as I'd made this commitment to Reno. Plus, Reno 
was more lucrative. The highest job offer I got was to teach Anthro 
101 for $9,800 a year, and Mordy had offered to pay me $ 11,000. 
I was going to make $100 a month more if I came to Reno to 
start the Basque Studies Program. I guess that was probably a 
little factor. However, I was a little ambivalent about it. There 
was a piece of me that liked the idea, but going back to your 
hometown after having been away for so long, it didn't seem 
like a great leap forward. Particularly in those days, nobody went 
back to their hometown. 

Mordy communicated to me, "We'll hold it open, but when 
you come to Reno to see your family for Christmas, I want to see 
you." A month later I went out to dinner with him. He kept in 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


13 


real close touch, because I think he was afraid I'd take a job 
somewhere else—that I'd have second thoughts and wouldn't 
come. 

Meanwhile, Brooke Mordy, Joy Leland, and Bill Jacobsen 
wrote a grant proposal to the National Science Foundation (NSF) 
proposing a Basque studies program. They actually submitted 
the proposal with my name on it as the anticipated coordinator 
of the program, and probably with my vita, such as it was—I 
hadn't published anything at that point. The proposal was pretty 
institutional, and it was pretty ambitious: three or four positions, 
including my salary. It was for a short term, and there was going 
to be some work on the Basque language, which was, of course, 
Bill's input. I really don't remember all of the details. Shortly 
after I got to Reno, we received notification that it was denied, 
so it didn't go anywhere. [In 1972, Bill Jacobsen became the 
linguistic coordinator of the Basque Studies Program.] 

I arrived in Reno in June of 1967. As soon as I graduated 
from Chicago, I traveled across the country with my belongings, 
my wife, and my son. I started my new job on July 1, just in time 
for the Basque festival cycle. I was a kid—I was twenty-seven 
years old, and I had very little experience. I was brand-new with 
a green degree. At the first meeting we had, Mordy said, "I don't 
know what to call you." 

I said, "What do you mean?" 

"I don't think we should call you 'director' yet, because there's 
just you, and you don't even have a secretary. So you're not really 
directing anything. Why don't we call you 'coordinator'?" 

"OK, that's fine with me." 

Mordy said, "We'll change it later." Well, it became actually 
a point of personal and professional pride for me never to change 
it. I was coordinator of the Basque Studies Program the day I 
retired. We now have a director of the Center for Basque Studies. 
They changed the name in 1999. But I always kept the title of 
coordinator. 

Mordy thought that the Basques of the American West would 
open their wallets, and all we had to do was run around and tell 
them we were going to have this program. He said, "Well, you 
can have your own building . . . ," and this, that, and the other 
thing. There was a piece of Mordy that was empire building. 

Mordy brought a fundraiser from the University of California, 
Berkeley, to sit down with me. The fundraiser talked about all 



14 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


these ways we could raise money: “We can do this, and we can 
do that." 

Bob Laxalt, I think, might have been at the meeting, and, of 
course, they thought of requesting some state support, since 
Bob's brother, Paul, was the governor. At the time, DRI didn't 
have state funding for anything, or it had very minimal state 
funding. It might have had Mordy's salary, but basically, DRI 
was launched as a soft-money operation, a research institute 
that was going to live on its own grants. Mordy didn't really 
have great access to the university budgeting process in those 
days. Over time, I think DRI has become certainly more a part 
of the state budget system than it was, but then it was really in 
its infancy. 

The idea was to run around the American West and raise 
money at Basque festivals, because the festival cycle was starting. 
There were several Basque festivals around the American West, 
such as in Elko, Ely, Chino, and Bakersfield. They were spin-offs, 
really, of the big national festival held in Sparks in 1959. Bob 
Laxalt and Pete Echeverria had been part of that. 8 In Boise, of 
course, there was one which had been going since before the 
national festival in Sparks, but there weren't a lot. The whole 
idea of clubs and festivals was also in its infancy. 

I didn't know the first thing about Basques in the American 
West! I knew a fair bit about European Basques. I'd lived there 
for two years, and I'd read a lot. I'd just written an MA and a 
doctoral dissertation on Basque subjects. When I was growing 
up in Reno, I went to the Catholic high school with some Basque 
kids such as the Gastanagas, and I thought they were Italians. I 
mean, Gastanaga, it ends in a —it must be Italian, you know, 
because mainly we were Irish-American kids and Italian-American 
kids. There was a sprinkling of Basques, but I didn't know 
anything about Basques when I was in high school. 

During that summer of 1967 while I was traveling to the 
festivals, I would start looking into the situation of Basques in 
the American West. I didn't even know their distribution. I was 
using Bob Laxalt's file from the mail he got after he published 
Sweet Promised Land and the mailing lists that they generated 
from the 1959 Basque festival in Sparks. So I had a bit of an idea, 
but in those days I don't know if anybody really knew about the 
distribution. The Basques in Boise weren't in that much touch 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


15 


with the Basques in Bakersfield. You had the northern tier of 
Bizkaians [those from the province of Bizkaia in Spain], and out 
in Montana and Wyoming you had Navarrese and French 
Basques; the twain kind of met in Nevada. Now we know that, 
but I didn't know that at the time, and I really didn't know where 
I should be going to interview people. 

I took a tape recorder with me, and I started doing some 
interviews, including one with Beltran Paris, at the Ely festival. 
Then several years later, after we finished Amerikanuak, I was 
trying to think what I was going to do next. I happened to listen 
to those tapes, and I got very stimulated to go back out there 
and follow up with Beltran. 

In the fall of 1967 I attended the AAA meetings in 
Washington, D. C. Morton Levine and a guy named Grant McCall 
were also there. Grant McCall was an anthropologist who'd been 
running around the American West, even before me, doing his 
MA research at San Francisco State University. He ended up 
writing an MA on Basques in the American West. We had driven 
out to that Basque festival in Ely together. Grant knew Nevada 
was going to be doing a Basque studies program. 

Jon Bilbao’s It was in Washington that I met Jon Bilbao. I had 
arrival; never met him before, despite the fact that Basque 
fundraising philologist Luis "Koldo" Mitxelena had urged me, 
efforts t wo summers before, when I was in the Basque 
Country, to go over to St. Jean de Luz to meet with 
him. They were very close. Jon Bilbao had helped Mitxelena when 
Mitxelena was basically destitute. Jon was a bibliographer who 
had been expelled from Spain for his Basque nationalist politics. 
He was teaching Spanish on the East Coast of the United States 
to earn his living while he was doing a Basque bibliography. 

We were in this hotel room in Washington, D.C. in 
November, and I was six months into my job. Jon and Morton 
were there. Jon was anxious to see something serious happen in 
Basque studies in the United States. Grant McCall was also there. 
Grant was just getting his MA, so he was going to continue to be 
a doctoral student somewhere else. Eventually he got his degree 
in Europe, and today he lives in Australia. He ended up doing 
research on Easter Island. He hasn't done anything Basque related 
for thirty or thirty-five years. At the time it wasn't clear what he 



16 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


was going to do. One thing that was evident was that Grant was 
not far enough along in his career to be part of anything that we 
were going to be discussing at that meeting, but he was there. 

Morton asked me to come up to Vassar, so I did. There, Jon 
told me about his efforts to start a Basque program at Indiana 
University based on folklore, because they had the major folklore 
department in the country. Jon had kind of pitched Basque 
folklore at them, and they had been interested, but nothing 
happened. He and Morton were working on the idea, with 
Margaret Mead and the American Museum of Natural History in 
New York, of doing some kind of a Basque program tied into 
whatever Morton was doing at Vassar. Jon was real interested in 
and supportive of that. That was their main thrust, and then 
here's this thing going in Nevada—me running around asking 
Basques for money. 

Morton tried to talk me into leaving Nevada and coming to 
Vassar. He said, "You come here. I've worked on the French- 
Basque side, you've worked on the other side of the frontier, and 
we'll do this program together. Margaret Mead is interested, and 
we'll tie this thing into the American Museum of Natural History." 
In a way, I guess it was a little bit tempting. But you know what? 
It really wasn't that tempting! 

I wasn't real comfortable with Morton, because I didn't think 
Morton had done very much in a year of field research in the 
Basque Country. I got the sense that he needed me to come to 
Vassar to solidify his effort. I could just tell from talking to him 
he didn't know very much, you know! And he stayed ... I forget 
in what Basque village, but he hardly ever went out. He was kind 
of a reclusive guy, and he wasn't much of an anthropologist. He 
wasn't a very outgoing guy anyway. His wife was a pianist, and 
she'd play the piano, and he'd stay in the house. 

Morton published an article on primitive cave art, but that 
was not based on field research. Then he did some serology. He 
got hooked up with a medical doctor, and they took some blood 
samples, so he did a little bit of work on the Rh negative issue. 
But really it was kind of strange, because he was essentially a 
social anthropologist, and he really didn't do much Basque social 
anthropology. I don't think that he ever published on any social 
anthropological aspect of Basque society or culture. So I wasn't 
impressed by Morton at that level. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


17 


However, I liked Jon Bilbao a lot, and I asked Jon if he would 
come to Reno and give a lecture in the spring. So Jon came and 
gave a talk about the Basque language, and it was well attended. 
Jon and I were hanging out together for two or three days. We 
started talking, and Jon was getting frustrated because nothing 
had happened with that Indiana University project. Jon was 
getting impatient and was starting to wonder whether Morton 
could deliver in New York. I started picking his brain about what 
a Basque program ought to do, because basically we were making 
it up. Nobody knew what a Basque program might be. And, of 
course, I was inventing it in part around my interests, because I 
was the only person. Jon got all pumped up and excited, because 
for him it was sort of an intellectual exercise. 

Jon talked about the importance of bibliography and of 
building up a library collection somewhere outside of Europe. 
We had the Veyrin collection coming, and that was going to be 
a start. Jon was the kind of guy that would throw out two ideas 
a minute and twelve an hour. Two of them were good, and ten 
of them were dicey, so you had to be a little careful. I learned 
later that Jon was a fount of ideas but without priority. He was 
just a colmena [beehive] of ideas. 

One day, Jon and I were in my office, and he was telling me 
about a collection of documents in the possession of the Intxausti 
family in Ustaritz that had been in the Philippines. Anyway, Jon 
said, "This family's got this chest in their attic full of documents 
regarding Basque nationalism, and I'm afraid they're going to 
disintegrate or be destroyed through humidity or dry rot or 
rodents or whatever! They should be microfilmed." 

I said, "Jon, how much would it cost to do that?" 

Jon said, "It'd cost about $500, and I'd do it myself." He was 
just picking out a number. 

I said, "Well, OK." And $500 in those days was real money. I 
was being paid $11,000 a year, so that'll give you an idea. 

I picked up the phone, and I called Dave Heron, and I 
explained the deal, and Dave said, "OK, you've got the $500." 

So I hung up the phone, and I looked at Jon and said, "OK. 
It's a deal." 

He said, "It's a deal?" 

"Yes! It's a go." 



18 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


He looked at me, and I thought he was going to cry. He said, 
"I can't believe it! That's the first time, after all of this talk about, 
'Yes, we're interested in this. We're interested in that.'" 

All of a sudden, with one telephone call, we got the $500 
commitment for him, and he was amazed. In fact, he said that 
the main reason he later accepted a position with the Basque 
Studies Program was because of that phone call. He'd say that to 
me many times in the future. We didn't have a portable microfilm 
unit then, but we bought it for that project. We gave him the 
camera, and Jon carried out the project the next summer, in 
1969. 

Then I took him to the airport, and I asked him, "Jon, if 
there was a way to bring you to Reno, would you come?" 

He said, "Yes." 

The spring of 1968, I was getting really discouraged, so I went 
to see Mordy, and I said, "I'm really tired of this. I mean, I'm by 
myself, and I'm fronting for an idea that is not working out." By 
then they had probably spent almost $40,000 to raise $10,000 
between my salary, travel expenses, brochures, et cetera. Our efforts 
to raise money from the private sector were over. I was an amateur, 
and I was green, but I was smart enough to know that this wasn't 
working. I was also getting discouraged professionally. 

Mordy asked me, "OK. What would it take to keep you here?" 

"Well, there's this guy, Jon Bilbao, and we just had him on 
campus. Jon is the leading Basque bibliographer, and he's got all 
these contacts, but he doesn't have a doctorate. If we could bring 
him here, I think then we would have a real program. At least 
there'd be two of us as opposed to just me." 

Mordy said, "I'm willing to make a nine-month commitment 
of $1,000 a month. He would be a consultant. That's all I'm 
willing to do." 

I thought, "Oh, man. Jon's going to walk away from a job 
back east and come out to Reno for an offer like that? I mean, 
that's ridiculous." But I said, "Well, thank you. I am glad to know 
that." 

Then Mordy said, "How is this Bilbao? How good is he?" 

"Well, I think he's very good." 

Then he looked at me, and he said, "Well, I'll tell you, I hope 
he is, because if he comes, I'm going to be watching him, and 
I'm going to be watching you. I want you to know something, 
Bill: first raters hire first raters; second raters hire third raters." 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


19 


So Mordy was saying, "I'm going to be judging you by this 
deal if I hire him." Then when I got up to leave, the last thing he 
said was, "Are you doing any work?" 

"I just told you. I've been running around." 

He said, "No, no. Real work, your work." 

"In the nighttime, in the evenings, and on weekends, I'm 
rewriting my MA thesis, because my advisor, Julian Pitt-Rivers, 
wants me to publish it." 

He said, " Good, because I know that you won't stay unless 
you're doing something that you care about, some real work." 

Then I called Jon, and I told him, "Jon, this is the deal. Please 
don't laugh." 

And Jon didn't even hesitate. He said, "I'm going!" He was 
so tired of teaching Spanish for a living and was so anxious to 
come out and give it a try, that he committed! Boom! We 
eventually hired him as a consultant in 1968. That's how we got 
through the first year of the Basque Studies Program. 

I don't remember precisely when Jon came. At that time he 
was going to the Basque Country during some summers, so my 
guess is that during the spring semester he probably resigned at 
Washington College, in Maryland, where he was teaching. Then 
he probably went to the Basque Country, which might have been 
the first year that they let him back in Spain, or gave him back 
his passport, since he'd been exiled. (He'd stay in St. Jean de Luz, 
and then his kids, Iban and Amale, and his wife, Marta, would 
come over from Getxo near Bilbao. Jon and Marta were pretty 
estranged by then, but they weren't divorced. Mitxelena and 
other people would go to St. Jean de Luz to see him.) 

Then that fall or winter of 1968, when the Western Range 
Association held its annual meeting in Reno, Bob Laxalt got 
his brother Paul to sponsor a dinner at the Governor's Mansion 
as a fundraiser. This guy from California was advising us, and 
he was giving us the sort of standard how-you-raise-money 
thing. I don't remember all the details. I was certainly new and 
ambivalent about it—I didn't like asking people for money— 
but we brought maybe twenty people together in Carson who 
were on the board of the Western Range Association. They 
were pretty successful ranchers from around the American West. 
They were all delighted to get to know Paul Laxalt, because he 
was the most successful Basque politician in the American West 
at the time. 



20 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



"They were all delighted to get to know Paul Laxalt, because he was the 
most successful Basque politician in the American West at the time." 
Fundraising dinner at the Governor's Mansion in Carson City, Nevada, 
for the Basque Studies Program, 1968. Bob Laxalt is in the first row on the 
far left, and Paul Laxalt is in the first row, third from the left. 


Paul was gracious, but we blew it. They announced this 
fundraising campaign, but we didn't put the arm on anybody, 
so everybody went away without really closing the deal. It was 
kind of funny. We asked anybody that wanted to send some 
money back .... Well, it was real bad. I know today that we 
probably should have had proper professional fundraisers. Of 
course, professional fundraising was not as developed as it is 
today. 

Afterwards, I got a check back for about $100 from the 
Etchart family in Montana, saying, “Well, we hope this will 
help." It was nice of them. But nobody else sent us a penny 
at that point. The only two that gave us money were people 
that had been invited to the dinner but couldn't come. One 
was Gene Gastanaga, a casino owner from Reno—he sent us 
$1,000 and raised some other money for us. Then there was 















WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


21 


Mrs. Alfrida Teague in southern California. Mrs. Teague's 
maiden name was Poco, and she was of French-Basque 
descent, from a ranch up in Smoke Creek Valley. She'd married 
a guy named Milton Teague, a very wealthy and influential 
man who was the CEO of Sunkist Fruits. Mrs. Teague sent us 
$1,000 initially. Then she put the arm on some people in the 
Los Angeles area, including Robert Erburu, a lawyer of The 
Times Mirror Co., who sent us $500 at the time. 9 Mrs. Teague 
raised $7,000 or $8,000, as I recall. Eventually, two or three 
years later, a rancher in Colorado did give us another $1,000, 
if I remember correctly. 

So at that point I had had another summer out there going 
to the Basque festivals, and also I was doing a bunch of 
interviewing. I was beginning to get a better feel for the 
distribution of Basques and some of the issues, having done some 
oral histories. 

We were still based at DRI, but I was teaching part-time down 
at the university in the Anthro Department, and Jon was teaching 
Basque. That was probably the biggest class we've ever had in 
Basque. He had about forty students, and he barely knew Basque. 
I mean, he was not euskaldun [a Basque speaker], not even 
euskaldunberri [a new Basque language speaker] really, and he 



Dinner at the Gastanaga's residence in Reno, c. 1971, in honor of the first 
significant private donation to the Basque Studies Program. Gastanaga 
donated $ 1,000 per month for several years. Left to right, seated: Patricia 
Douglass, UNR President N. Edd Miller, Ellen and Gene Gastanaga, Nena 
Miller, and Bob Laxalt. Standing: Bill Douglass, Eloy and Amparo Placer, 
Jon Bilbao, Linda Gastanaga, John Laxalt, and Joyce Laxalt. 
















22 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


wasn't hugely motivated to study the language. I don't remember 
Jon really trying to learn Basque. I think he'd pretty much given 
up on that. (Bill Jacobsen, for instance, knows a lot about the 
structure of Basque, but he doesn't speak it.) 

Jon was using a Basque grammar, and I think he was about 
two lessons ahead of the students. We had a large turnout for 
that first class, but after that we didn't, and I don't know why. I 
mean, people liked his teaching; they liked Jon and everything 
else. I don't think it was like he was a disaster as a teacher, but 
I've never been able to explain that. It was the novelty, but at a 
university you would think every four years you could have 
novelty, because students come and students go. 

Of course, now I know that the Center for Basque Studies 
has a decent attendance in its classes. I know Basque Studies 
faculty like Gloria Totoricagiiena, Joseba Zulaika, and Sandra 
"Sandy" Ott's classes have a lot of students. I mean, now it's all 
pretty mainstream, but in those days I taught a Basque culture 
class, and I had about fifteen students. 

Meanwhile, I had written a grant proposal to the National 
Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) to study Basque identity 
maintenance in Elko. The grant was for about $30,000, and it 
was for a yearlong project. There was money in there for an 
assistant and for some interviewers, because I was going to apply 
a questionnaire. Shortly after Jon got here, or maybe during that 
winter, I was informed that I got the grant. It was the first one 
we ever received. 

Of course, the clock was ticking on Jon's deal because he had 
a nine-month commitment at $1,000. I was teaching this Old 
World Basque culture class in Elko, and I hired a couple of people 
from my class to do some interviews for me there. It was probably 
the spring semester, because I asked Jon to come out and give a 
lecture on the language—he knew a lot more about it than I did. 
So I'd drive out every two weeks on Fridays, and I would teach 
three hours Friday night, and three hours Saturday morning, 
and then I would come back to Reno. It was supposedly a three- 
hour-a-week deal, but because of the distance and the driving, I 
would jam two into one. 

We were riding along, and we were in a big, big, big 
snowstorm. In fact, it probably didn't even make sense to try 
and go. We were driving about twenty-five miles an hour, so it 
took us about ten or eleven hours. We got there just in time for 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


23 


the class. We were in the car all day, and I had told him then that 
I was doing this work in Elko, but I was beginning to be concerned 
that a study of just the Basques of Elko didn't make a lot of 
sense. But because of the NIMH grant, we had to concentrate on 
Elko. I asked him if he'd be interested in collaborating with me 
on a book that would be on Basques of the American West. 

I said, "Jon, I'll hire you in that position as the assistant on 
the NIMH grant. We'll go to Elko for the summer. You'll work in 
the archives and do a little interviewing in town, and I'll go out 
and live in the sheep camps for awhile. We'll stay at the Star 
Hotel, so we'll also experience the hotel life, and then we'll go 
from there," which we did. Well, that day was the genesis, or the 
germ, of Amerikanuak. 

Then we wrote a couple of other grant proposals. The 
problem, of course, with trying to live on little grants like that 
was you never had time to write up your results. It's a treadmill, 
you know. By then I had decided I wanted to go to Italy to look 
at another rural sending area of European immigration, where 
there was population decline because the economy had collapsed, 
rather than to go back to the Basque Country. I thought I'd learn 
more about Basque immigration if I had something to bounce it 
off of, to compare it to. 

I knew that Italy, particularly southern Italy, was one of 
Europe's major seedbeds of emigrants. Also, I knew from 
reading the literature that rural southern Italian society was 
very distinctive and very different from Basque society. So I 
figured that there were enough cultural, social, and historical 
differences between the two to study all the same issues that I'd 
studied in the Basque Country, and indeed that was true. I felt 
like I learned more about Basque emigration and rural social 
structure by going to southern Italy than if I had gone back to 
the Basque Country and continued to work in Murelaga and 
Echalar, or gone to some other field sites in the Basque Country. 
I think getting that comparative dimension taught me more 
about what made Basque emigration different than if I had stayed 
immersed in the Basque topic. Plus, I was also looking at Basque 
immigration from this end, and I was hammering it pretty hard 
between my dissertation work in the Pyrenees and then studying 
Basque sheepherders in the American West, and then Jon and I 
expanded that to Latin America. I thought, "I'm due for 
something else." 



24 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I got involved with two Italianists—two anthropologists. Peter 
Benedict from Chicago and Connie Cronin from Arizona were my 
graduate student peers at Chicago, and we were going to go to 
Italy and do a study together. Connie had worked in Sicily, and 
Peter was of Italian descent. So we wrote a grant proposal together 
to the NSF, but it didn't get funded. Peter pulled out and went 
back to Turkey where he had done his first fieldwork, and Connie 
didn't go forward either. I forget why not. I was left alone with this 
Italian project idea, but I wanted to do it. 

Finally, I got a grant and went to Italy and did that work on 
my own in 1972 and 1973. By then I also realized that the sheep 
industry of the American West was collapsing. At the time, 
another of my interests was the mining camp of Tonopah. My 
father was out of there, and I had gotten interested in the mining 
camp as a failed phenomenon as well. I don't think that the first 
proposal included Tonopah. I put together this larger proposal 
about studying failed economies and the kinds of strategies 
people developed when, all of a sudden, their economic 
assumptions collapsed. The sheep industry was down, the mining 
economy collapsed in the American West, and the peasant 
economy in southern Italy went downhill. 

I had previously proposed unsuccessfully the study in southern 
Italy, and I'd had a couple of grant proposals to study Basques of 
the West turned down. So I basically took those proposals, wedded 
them together, dressed them up a little bit, and submitted them to 
a very special and very small program called the Research Scientist 
Career Development Award, which was a branch of the NIMH. 
They also had the Research Scientist Award. 

Those two programs were very elitist in the sense that 
they only gave a handful of grants each year. The Research 
Scientist Award was for senior scholars, and the Research 
Scientist Career Development Award was for junior people 
like myself. I think the year I got mine they gave out seventeen 
in the entire United States, and they did about the same thing 
with the Research Scientist Award. You received five years of 
salary support and $20,000 of research funds that you could 
use any way you wanted. 

And boom, I got through the screening process. NIMH sent 
three people to talk to Wendell Mordy's successor, John Ward, 
the new president of DRI. I mean, it was a very, very thorough 
kind of deal, and next thing I knew, I got the grant. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


25 


Jon and I had already started working on Amerikanuak. We 
were researching it from about 1969 through 1971 and then 
eventually writing Amerikanuak. We had a division of labor. 
Jon was working on certain chapters, and I was working on 
others, and then he would give me his stuff, and I would rewrite 
it so it would be one voice. I filtered Jon's input through my 
own filter so that we'd have one style for the whole argument. 
(Actually, Joseba Zulaika and I used the same procedure much 
later when we collaborated on a book on terrorism, Terror and 
Taboo, 1996). Otherwise, it would have been a strange 
manuscript, particularly since Jon wasn't a native English speaker. 
We were probably done with Amerikanuak by 1973, but it took 
about two years to get the thing out. Just the editing and 
publishing process was at least two years. It was very frustrating, 
because it was taking so long. Then, we probably did a little bit 
of rewriting as we got new information, even during the editing 
process. 

At the same time, we had also begun the Basque Book Series 
within the University of Nevada Press. The series became an 
integral part of the Basque Studies Program in the sense that I 
took on its editorship. It was a time-consuming thing, but I was 
doing it as the coordinator of the Basque Studies Program in a 
way, although it wasn't part of my job description. [Bill was an 
editor of the University of Nevada Press Basque Book Series from 
1969 to 1999.] 

It's also fair to say that Jon Bilbao was putting a whole bunch 
of his effort in those early years into his bibliography, Eusko 
Bibliographia, because when he came here in 1968,1 don't think 
the first volume was out. Eusko Bibliographia came out over a 
number of years, and the first volume was probably about 1969. 10 
Jon would spend probably 80 percent of his time working on 
Eusko Bibliographia, because he was always preparing the next 
volume while he had to proofread the last one. Proofreading 
Eusko Bibliographia was no joke. So then he'd have all his 
galaradas [galley proofs] from the publisher, and he was under a 
lot of pressure all the time. He would be reading the galaradas in 
one hand, and then he had his fichero [card catalog] with which 
he was generating the next volume in the other. So Jon was 
bogged down in that for a few years, really, and it was his main 
commitment. All those were the central focuses of the Basque 
Studies Program in the early years. 



26 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


From DRI As I said, I had received five years of funding, and 

to UNR; Jon didn't. I was getting concerned for him, because 

Bob Laxalt Jon's position at DRI was very tenuous. Jon couldn't 
as be a principal investigator on a grant, because he 

advocate didn't have a doctorate. He was a humanist and 
didn't really fit DRI, which largely focused on 
natural science. Social science was a stretch for them, so a 
humanist like Jon was over the top. Plus, Jon was very interested 
in instruction at the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR) and 
developing the Basque Library, where he was spending a lot of 
his time. 

That's when we began to negotiate a transfer of the Basque 
Studies Program to UNR, as well as getting one position as part 
of the move to protect Jon. It was in part to essentially see if we 
could get a state-funded position for Jon Bilbao. It was going to 
be a library effort, which reflected, of course, Jon's bibliography 
and library collection development background. That's how all 
of that happened. It took us awhile to make the transfer, but at 
DRI they knew I was working on it, so they kept paying Jon a 
salary. We didn't have grant support really for him, but they just 
sucked it up. In other words, the president of DRI and the 
president of UNR both agreed that the transfer made sense. 

Actually, the Oral History Program transferred from DRI to 
the university library sooner than we did, which became the 
model for moving the Basque Studies Program. When we started 
the Basque Studies Program, Oral History antedated us by a year 
or two. [The Oral History Program was founded in July of 1964 
as part of DRI and was transferred in 1969.] There was a lady, 
Mary Ellen Glass, who was Tom King's predecessor and the 
founder of that program. She was very uncomfortable at DRI, 
because she was a humanist, and she was not having a lot of 
success getting DRI-type grants and surviving. She was under a 
lot of pressure to produce, and she couldn't. 

There were two or three occasions in the political history of 
the program when Bob Laxalt was very instrumental. For 
instance, Bob helped me negotiate with the chancellor of the 
university system, Neil Humphrey, a position for Jon Bilbao and 
the transfer of the program from DRI to UNR. 

The problem was that the chancellor had decided that nobody 
within the university could approach the legislature directly. It 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


27 


was a very, very firm rule. All the chancellors had the same rule, 
and it gets violated a little bit, but pretty much it's a firm rule. 

The whole idea of transferring the program down from DRI to 
UNR and getting a position for Jon Bilbao came shortly after they 
had closed UNR's budget process, which only happens every two 
years. The process was already in motion, and it was really too late 
for me to put in any kind of a formal request. Basically, we would 
have had to wait two extra years, but the presidents of DRI and 
UNR wanted to do the transfer right then. So everything was ready 
except the legislative and the budgetary process, because the 
biennial budgets were already in place. The train had left the station 
for that year because of the legislative biennium. 

Paul Laxalt helped us at that point, and Bob did a lot of lobbying 
in the legislature. I mean, Bob was a very political animal. He used 
to write Paul's speeches, and he was a part of Paul's inner circle and 
one of his advisors, so Bob knew most of the politicians in the 
state, not as director of the University of Nevada Press but as Paul's 
right-hand man. Well, I don't know if he was his right-hand man, 
but he was part of the Laxalt political entourage. 

For example, Humphrey used to ask Bob to get involved with 
the university's budget in the legislature. Bob was kind of half a 
lobbyist every legislative session. Bob was in Carson City always 
talking about the University of Nevada Press budget, and he 
managed to get quite a bit of funding from the legislature for 
the University of Nevada Press over the years, but he also did 
other things at the legislature. 

So Bob took me to Humphrey, and Bob explained the 
situation. Humphrey said, "Bob, you have your own connections 
in the legislature. If you want to work on this outside the 
framework, that's OK. In other words, I will not be upset if you 
get this approved as a special legislative item and you get it put 
into the university budget." 

Bob went to Carson City, and he lobbied real hard. He lobbied 
William "Bill" Raggio, who was his next-door neighbor in Reno 
at that time. (They weren't next-door neighbors when Bob died, 
because Bob had already moved out to Washoe Valley, but their 
kids had gone to school together.) They were very close, and 
Raggio was the most powerful guy in the legislature. He was also 
a Republican, which meant he worked closely with the Laxalt 
faction, because they were Republicans. 



28 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Finally, we got the Basque Studies Program and a position 
for Jon Bilbao as part of the university budget. The program was 
transferred in 1972. It moved into the Getchell Library building, 
into two really little rooms downstairs along with the books, 
which, by then, we had already been using for some time. At 
that point, the program and the library were housed together. 

While Jon and I were both at DRI, they had given us some 
space in the library, because the Veyrin collection had been placed 
in Special Collections. There was this gray period for three or 
four years, in which Jon and I were down to the university library 
a fair bit, and Virginia Jacobsen, then Bill Jacobsen's wife, was 
also there as a volunteer part-time secretary or office manager. 
Jon would be at DRI in the morning, and then in the afternoon 
he would come down to the library and play with the Basque 
collection. I would come down sometimes, too, and read. 

We also had a few people coming to read the books, so we 
were just kind of running the collection ourselves. Jon was 
handling the books, but we had no librarian. I don't think you 
could check any books out then, because none of them were 
cataloged. So, you could come and read, and Virginia would keep 
an eye on you; it was totally amateurish. 

Jon had one office, and Virginia had the other office, and 
then it was the library collection. That was the program, and 
that was all the space that we were given. So none of this area 
that we're in now was ours. Those two offices across the hall 
weren't ours, nor that big office that I had. I didn't have an office 
at the library at all, even though I was the coordinator. However, 
I still maintained an office at DRI, and I remained there for the 
meantime. I think I fairly quickly got the office that I ended up 
in, but the overall space was very small, and we quickly filled it 
up, and we had to start storing books at Stead. 

At the end of my five year-grant in 1976 I added Tonopah 
and Australia (to look at the Basque and Italian sugarcane cutters) 
to a request to renew my NIMH grant. By then I knew that some 
of the Italians that I interviewed in southern Italy had cut 
sugarcane in North Queensland and so had some Basques from 
Murelaga, so my proposal was a comparative study of the two 
groups and their adaptations. (I knew they'd all lost their jobs 
when they mechanized the sugarcane harvest, so I was tying 
pieces together.) NIMH gave me another five years of funding, 
so for ten years my salary was paid by NIMH, not by DRI. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


29 


Towards the end, probably about the eighth year of funding, 
1979-1980, it was real obvious that DRI was going to go in some 
other directions, and the Basque Studies Program was evolving 
in a whole series of dimensions, none of which made sense at 
DRI. By then we had a pedagogical dimension and a library 
collection. We were doing the study-abroad summer sessions that 
Jon had started in 1970. 

Jon also became increasingly involved with Basque clubs 
throughout the American West. We'd been in Argentina, and 
Jon was all charged up and wanted to bring some of the Basque 
clubs together in order to create something similar to FEVA 
(Spanish acronym for the Federation of Basque-Argentinean 
Entities). That's when we hosted a meeting in the Bible Room, 
which was attended by reps from the Basque clubs of Reno, Boise, 
and San Francisco. That's when they decided to go forward with 
a national federation of clubs called NABO (North American 
Basque Organizations, established in 1974). In addition, I didn't 
really want to stay at DRI after my grant was over. 

By then I was working more for DRI. I wasn't really working 
that much on Basque stuff, because we'd already done 
Amerikanuak: The Basques of the New World in 1975, and I had 
also published Beltran: Basque Sheepman of the American West 
in 1979.1 had been in Tonopah conducting research for seven or 
eight months in 1976, and I had also been to North Queensland 
and done some preliminary research on both Basques and Italians 
in 1977, so I wanted to go back there again, which I did in 1980. 
So all of that was going on, while I was still the nominal 
coordinator of the Basque Studies Program at UNR. The only 
thing left of the Basque Studies Program at DRI was me, and I 
was doing a lot of non-Basque stuff. 

At that point, we began to lobby for a second position at 
UNR. Bob Laxalt also helped us again in similar fashion. It wasn't 
quite as much of a crisis when I transferred down, because I was 
on that NIMH grant. So we put that into the regular cycle, and 
then Bob did some lobbying in Carson for that item with the 
governor, and it went through. 

In a way, the university was stuck with me when I came off 
of my big ten-year grant, because one of the conditions that 
NIMH put on those grants was that there would be a place for 
me when I finished the work. NIMH had had some bad 
experiences where they provided five years of support for a 



30 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


scholar, and he left his department, essentially, at least as a budget 
item, for five years. Of course, life goes on, and then there's not 
a slot for him to come back to. There had been some situations 
where people had lost their jobs at their universities because they 
accepted this grant. One of the things that they did on the site 
visit was that they met with the presidents of both DRI and UNR 
and got commitments that there'd be a position for me when I 
got back, even though I didn't have tenure, because you didn't 
have tenure at DRI at all. They were committed to continuing 
my position, whatever that meant, because at DRI nobody's 
position was continued forever. 

About 1979 or 1980 by mutual consent we began to work 
towards the idea that maybe we could get funding in place in 
the university budget for me to be at UNR, which we did. In fact, 
we'd transferred my position while I was still on the grant. Then 
there was a commitment to make it a regular part of the university 
budget request, so that's how I came to UNR. I went from that 
grant to a coordinator position in the library. That's probably 
when they gave me that office at the library. 

It's fair to say that it's real questionable whether we would 
have gotten our legislative approval for the first professional 
position, the classified position, and our half-time position with 
the library later on without Bob's intervention. Anytime we had 
something going in the legislature, Bob was right on the point. 
Even though Bob had his own private budget with the University 
of Nevada Press, he was very generous with his political capital. 
He was willing to spend some of his capital on the Basque Studies 
Program. That was Bob's main contribution to the program. 

I once went to the Basque Country in Paul Laxalt's place as 
his proxy for an Air France event. In May of 1969, Air France 
dedicated a plane called Le Pays Basque, because they were going 
to start a new service from Paris to Biarritz. They wanted Paul 
Faxalt, who was governor at the time, to go on the inaugural 
flight trip, and Paul couldn't do it for some reason. Bob called 
me and said, "I can't go. Paul can't go. Would you go?" 

I mean, it wasn't Air France's idea for me to go. It was the 
Faxalt family's idea. So Jean-Feon Iribarren, then president of 
the San Francisco Basque Club, Pedro Rachet, a representative of 
the Basque community in Santiago de Chile, and I went. We 
were kind of VIPs. There was a little banquet when we got there, 
and we each said, "Hello," "Good evening," "Pleased to be here," 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


31 


and "Fly Air France." So we spent about a week over there, and 
after the banquet we each went our own way. I was able to do 
some business for our program in the Basque Country thanks to 
the trip. 

I remember when Paul came once, only once, to the program. 
That was 1983. Paul was a U.S. Senator at that time, and he was 
on campus for some library event. I forget what the occasion 
was, but it didn't have anything to do with Basques. 

Bob said, "Paul, if you're going to be in the library, why don't 
we go by the Basque Studies Program?" But Bob couldn't lead 
that tour of the Basque Studies Program, because he didn't come 
very much either. 


The Basque Book Series 

Bob Laxalt founded the University of Nevada Press in 1961 
and was its director for over two decades. Probably Bob's one 
thought in getting involved from the beginning in the idea of a 
Basque studies program was that the University of Nevada Press 



"I remember when Paul came once, only once, to the program. That was 
1983. "Senator Paul Laxalt visits the Basque Studies Program. Left to right: 
Paul Laxalt, Bill Douglass, and Jon Bilbao. 







32 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


would publish Basque books. I don't know that he thought of it 
as a series per se, because the University of Nevada Press was very 
small, but they did have an existing history and political science 
series, which I believe Wilbur Shepperson was editing at the time. 
The series as a concept was already established at the University 
of Nevada Press, so there was a bit of a precedent. 

At the time Bob and I met, the University of Nevada Press 
was a tiny, infant effort. I doubt if the entire backlist of the 
University of Nevada Press, then, was twenty volumes, maybe 
not even that. Its entire publication schedule each year was one 
or two books. The University of Nevada Press was struggling to 
get off the ground, and Bob was the main force behind that. 

Bob and I used to meet all the time, and we became very 
close friends. I would always walk across campus to the University 
of Nevada Press to talk in his office. Then we would go to lunch 
often—maybe once a month. I would tell him what we were up 
to, but frankly, we'd talk more about the University of Nevada 
Press than we did about the program, unless there was something 
heated up over here. 

Bob was very focused on the idea of starting a Basque book 
series within the University of Nevada Press. That was Bob's main 
interest, and he wanted me to edit it. When we'd get together, 
we'd talk about how we should start this series. His interest in 
the Basque Studies Program didn't really go much beyond that. 
Interestingly, he almost never came to the Basque Studies 
Program. I mean, I'll bet Bob probably set foot in the program 
five times in his life, while having an office right across 
campus. 

Of course, the issue was, "What would the Basque Book Series 
be? What would it consist of?" Obviously it was going to be a 
series of books in English, and at the time there weren't very 
many books in English about Basques. I mean, there was just a 
handful. There was, of course, Bob's book, Sweet Promised Land, 
but it was out of print by then, and there was talk about another 
edition by his main commercial publisher. 

Right from the beginning I was telling Bob that, if I was going 
to edit the series, I'd really like to see Sweet Promised Land, but 
Bob's literary agent had no interest whatsoever in publishing it 
with the University of Nevada Press, or with any other university 
press for that matter. I think that for literary agents university presses 
are kind of graveyards. That's not the way they do it if they want 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


33 


to make money on a book. Plus, Bob was very ambivalent about 
that, because he was the author and the director of the University 
of Nevada Press. 

But Bob said, "I'm going to write another Basque book for 
the series, and I've already told my agent that." 

So that was going to be his contribution to the series. We 
thought that the series should consist of Basque classics, sort of 
like this clasicos [classics] that historian Gregorio "Goio" Monreal, 
Basque philologist Pello Salaburu, and myself are working on 
now for the Center for Basque Studies. 

The initial idea, when the series was established in 1968, 
was to publish the translations of Julio Caro Baroja's book, 
Los Vascos. I entered in a negotiation with Caro, who I knew 
well, and he agreed. However, I was young, and I insisted that 
he had to revise the book, because the book had been first 
published in 1949. Caro was working on other things, and he 
really didn't want to revise it. He just wanted to leave it and 
have it be treated as a classic. I was ambivalent about that, 
because a lot had happened since 1949. Of course, it was still 
Franco's time, so I guess it's questionable just what kind of a 
revision he could have done, except that he'd published a whole 
lot of stuff about the Basques since his first book as a very young 
man. I just thought it would have made sense for him to revisit 
Los Vascos. At first he agreed, but then he found it kind of 
overwhelming. 

I can really appreciate that. Before Amerikanuak came out again 
in 2005, people talked to me about revising it, but I had no stomach 
whatsoever for going back and revising it. I wrote a short preface 
and said, "Ahfesta,” you know, "There it is." Caro did that basically 
with me, and I just said, "Well, I don't think so." 

By then we had purchased the Philippe Veyrin collection, 
and we were in contact with Veyrin's widow, so another prime 
candidate was Les Basques by Veyrin. Then, of course, there was 
Rodney Gallop's A Book of the Basques. Gallop's book had been 
out of print for God knows how long. We got in touch with 
Gallop's original publisher, Macmillan, and they were really 
pleased as punch to sell us the rights, because they had no plans 
to bring it out again. I think they thought they'd died and gone 
to heaven, because once we published it we never heard from 
them. So we agreed to give them some percentage, which also 
provided a royalty for Gallop's widow. 



34 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


My thought originally was that the first three publications 
in the Basque Book Series would be Gallop, which was originally 
in English, and the translations of Los Vascos and Les Basques. 
Those would be three real classic overviews. It made sense to 
start with Gallop, because clearly it was going to take less work 
to put in print than the other two, which were both going to be 
translation projects. At the time we had no experience with 
translation and all of the sorrows more than the joys of translating 
into English, and we've certainly become experts and veterans 
of that war. And it is a war, but it's always an adventure. We were 
pretty naive at the time, and the only thing we did understand 
was that it was going to take awhile to get those two books 
translated, and so if we wanted to launch the series, we should 
start with A Book of the Basques. 

Funding At the time, the University of Nevada Press had a 
the series very, very conservative financial officer, Ken 
Robbins, who would refuse to let the University of 
Nevada Press ever go deficit or take any chances. His idea was 
that you published a book, you put it in the marketplace, and 
you sat around and waited for the money to come back from 
that book. Then when you had enough money saved up, you 
published another book. Well, that is about as conservative as it 
gets within the publishing game. Of course, the University of 
Nevada Press's growth was very stunted by that whole philosophy, 
so the Press was having trouble getting out one or two books a 
year, as there was no money in the can. 

Robbins kept saying, "No. We're not ready yet. We don't have 
the money to publish A Book of the Basques.” 

Plus, even as a tiny press, they had a big backlist of other 
commitments that they hadn't met. They were swamped with 
stuff that they were one way or another planning to publish, 
but because of this very, very slow publishing process and this 
fiscal brake on it, they were getting further and further behind. 
In a way, Gallop was in competition with everything else over at 
the University of Nevada Press, and it didn't come out for a least 
a year after we had its rights. It was getting to be very frustrating. 

At some point I sat down with Bob, and I said, "Tell you 
what. Why don't we make a deal? The deal will be that we'll set 
up something called the Basque Book Series Fund within the 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


35 


University of Nevada Press, and the deal will be that we'll lend 
you the money for Gallop." 

We had some discretionary funds. We probably had $10,000 
or $15,000 in the bank altogether after a year and a half from 
that fundraising that I did. Then, we had $2,000 left from Molly 
Knudtsen's $6,000 donation, because the library picked up part 
of the Veyrin collection tab. (Originally there were two or three 
installment payments. I think they paid Veyrin's widow some 
money down, and then they were supposed to pay her some 
more after the books got here.) When it came down to the last 
installment payment of $2,000, Dave Heron said, "Don't worry 
about it. I've got some extra money in my budget this year that 
I haven't spent. I'll just cover it out of the library budget." 

So, we put in $3,500 to cover the costs for Gallop, and then 
I said, "Basque Studies will fund all Basque books in the future. 
The way we'll do that is we'll have this formula: the University 
of Nevada Press will get 65 percent of the profits from the sale of 
Basque books, and this fund, owned by the Basque Studies 
Program, will get 35 percent of the profits. We will pay production 
costs for future titles out of the Basque Book Series Fund, but 
until the fund is large enough to cover all production costs of 
books of a year, you, the University of Nevada Press, will front 
that money as a loan to the Basque Book Series Fund." 

In other words, let's say that there is $10,000 starting the 
year in the Basque Book Series Fund, which built up from the 
original $3,500 by accumulating the 35 percent of the profits 
from the sale of Basque books, and that year we spent $15,000 
on two new titles. At that point, the Basque Book Series Fund 
not only was empty, but it owed $5,000 to the University of 
Nevada Press, because the University of Nevada Press had put in 
the extra money to pay the cost of the publications for that year. 
Now, say, there were five titles out by then in the market, plus, 
the two new ones that we had just published. 

The two new books had pretty big sales—a lot of money was 
coming in from them—but a little bit of money was coming in 
from sales from the backlist. The way it worked was, during that 
year the first $5,000 in sales of Basque books went straight to 
the University of Nevada Press to pay the loan, and the next 
$10,000 got booked back to bring the Basque Book Series Fund 
back to where it was at the beginning of the year. The Basque 



36 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Book Series Fund leant all of its money to production, and the 
University of Nevada Press leant $5,000 to production to get to 
the $15,000 in theory, and it was only in theory, because the 
University of Nevada Press never put the money in the bank, 
and that caused some problems later. It's like the U.S. Social 
Security system, where the government spends the money, and 
they put an IOU [I Owe You] into the bank. 

Now, we're back to zero. The University of Nevada Press has 
been paid, and we've been paid. Let's say that the sales that year 
were $30,000 of all the Basque books put together. What 
happened was, $5,000 went to the University of Nevada Press, 
the next $10,000 went to restore the principle value of the fund, 
and then out of the last $15,000, the University of Nevada Press 
got 65 percent. In other words, they got two-thirds, and we got 
one-third. This math is a little bit different. Let's say that, at the 
end of the year, the value of the Basque Book Series Fund went 
from $10,000 to slightly over $15,000, because it was 35 percent 
of $15,000. That would be the new number going into the next 
year, and then we'd look at the production schedule. Maybe that 
year the production costs were $20,000, so we'd pull the plug on 
all of the money, and all of that $15,000 went to the $20,000 
initially, and then the University of Nevada Press had to lend us 
another $5,000 that year. 

That's the way the Basque Book Series Fund worked for a lot 
of years. For the first twenty years of its existence the fund never 
really turned a profit in any given year, even though the Basque 
book sales were going up and up and up, because we published 
more books, and we were covering the entire cost, so the cost of 
any publication was charged against the fund. 

By the early 1990s the Basque Book Series had reached the 
point where the book value of the fund was growing too quickly. 
Probably the last really big, big hit for us in terms of production 
cost was Linda White and Gorka Aulestia's dictionaries [Basque- 
English Dictionary, 1989, English-Basque Dictionary, 1990, and 
Basque-English English-Basque Dictionary, 1992]. Those were 
huge and expensive to produce. We had to front a lot of money, 
and publishing the dictionaries wiped out the Basque Book Series 
Fund, when it was up to $50,000 in value. It took a couple of 
years to get back on our feet financially. As it turned out, they 
were also hugely successful, much more than I ever thought they 
would be because they were unique, and we got the money back. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


37 


All of a sudden, the worth of the Basque Book Series Fund 
was starting to go through the roof. It was probably about 1993 
or 1994 when then director of the University of Nevada Press, 
Tom Radko, called me up one day, and he said, "Bill, I'm really 
concerned about this, because the University of Nevada Press 
has never really funded that money, but it's a liability on our 
books. So auditors looking at it treat it as a debt, and we owe this 
money, and then the auditors say, 'Well, where's the money?' 
and we don't have the money in a bank account. It's a big liability, 
and it's growing quickly, and we've got to do something about 
it." I think when he and I met, the book value of the series was 
$72,000, and it had gone up by $20,000 that year alone. 

(At the end of February I received a report once a year, about 
the previous year's activity. They would do all of the bookwork, 
and they'd close the books on December 31 on the series, but 
then it would take them a couple of months to clean up the end 
of the year accounts, because they also would charge back a bunch 
of expenses—even some promotional expenses. Sometimes they 
were charged against the series, and sometimes they'd pay for 
part of them. I mean, we always had deals like that. We'd put a 
flyer out, and they might pay for part of it, but they might charge 
the rest of it to the series.) 

Radko was very concerned, and he said, "This is getting out 
of control, and clearly, there's no need to have a bunch of money 
lying around supposedly dedicated to Basque books." 

We agreed to do two things. We decided to always 
maintain $60,000 as the benchmark for the fund. (That was 
generous, because normally in a year we weren't spending 
$60,000 on production, but you never knew. I mean, we were 
starting to get into some translations, and we were running up 
some pretty hefty translation costs.) And we decided that every 
year when the report came out, if the value of the fund was 
over $60,000, they would write us a check for the difference. 
So Radko wrote the Basque Studies Program a check for 
$12,000 the first year. 

The other thing Radko was going to do was to set the other 
$60,000 aside in a real account, if he could, because the University 
of Nevada Press was always having financial crises. It's not as 
though the University of Nevada Press has ever been way ahead 
of the curve in terms of its finances, but he was going to try. 
There would actually be some money there, so it wouldn't be an 



38 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


unfunded liability, in effect, from the University of Nevada Press's 
standpoint. 

This new agreement didn't change a thing in relation to the 
original one. It's just that we kind of added to it, as our original 
agreement did not call for a payout. The original agreement was 
kind of open-ended, and I guess we should have had in the 
original agreement some similar provision. But what was clear 
was that the Basque Studies Program owned the Basque Book 
Series Fund, plus it owned a third of the inventory of the backlist 
in the warehouse, because we had paid for 100 percent of the 
publications. 

It got to be a huge asset. At one point I calculated that just 
the books in the warehouse were worth $200,000. Plus they owed 
us cash, and we had partial proprietorship of the books. [In 2006, 
however, the University of Nevada Press paid off its cash debt to 
the Center for Basque Studies and assumed total control of the 
Basque Book Series.] 

A Book of Finally we got Gallop's book out, which became 
the the first Basque Book Series publication. I worked 

Basques; closely with Bob on that; we illustrated the first 
the news- edition with the photographs that Joyce, Bob's wife, 
letter had taken in the Basque Country when they had 

gone over on sabbatical. (They belonged to the 
Basque Program at the time, but she had some kind of publication 
rights.) We were kind of involved at several levels, and I wrote a 
little one-page introduction or preface to the edition. We printed 
2,000 copies of the Gallop book, thinking there would a certain 
demand for it. 

Gallop's book sold out in a matter of weeks. We were back 
reprinting in practically no time at all—in just a matter of weeks. 
It absolutely blew us away! We had no idea it was going to be 
that way. A Book of the Basques was an enormous success, far 
beyond what anybody anticipated. Since then, Gallop has been 
through about at least five editions, and it's still in print. That's 
about a 10,000-or-more-copy book at this point, and that again 
is virtually a huge deal in America in university press publishing 
circles. 

I don't have the right numbers, and the University of Nevada 
Press has lost some of this history. I tried to get some of it at one 
point for certain negotiating purposes with the University of 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


39 


Nevada Press, but the recordkeeping got pretty vague going all 
the way back to 1969. It should have been there, but this goes 
back to before records were computerized. When the University 
of Nevada Press began using computers, who knows how much 
they input or how much they just threw away and started over. 
It's hard to get a real good profile of how some of those old 
publications did over the years. 

By the time Gallop came out we had a newsletter, which was 
a real invention. It was my idea, and I thought it up before Jon 
Bilbao came here. [The Basque Studies Program's newsletter was 
first printed in November of 1968.] If we were going to develop 
a program with certain public dimensions such as a library 
collection, and we were trying to raise funds, it made a lot of 
sense to have a newsletter. Also, we needed a mailing list for our 
Basque books. 

Beginning in 1967,1 was driving around the American West— 
Montana, Wyoming, Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, and up into 
Washington, Oregon—trying to find old Basques, in order to do 
oral histories and to just kind of get a feel for things. I was really 
on the road a lot, and some of it was Basque festival related, and 
some of it wasn't. 

Wherever I stayed, I would go through the local phone book 
to mark every Basque last name. That was even before zip codes, 
so most phone books, particularly in rural areas, listed addresses. 
Back in the 1960s most people's addresses were in the phone 
book, even women's. (Today women don't like to have their 
addresses in there for obvious reasons.) People didn't worry about 
it. The idea of having an unlisted phone number or having just 
your name in the phone book but no address, that's all pretty 
new—since junk mail started and since society got nastier. 

Marking names, of course, was not a perfect system. There 
were urban areas, especially, in the American West where it was 
very imperfect. It was flawed. In other words, if you open up a 
Los Angeles telephone book, which I did, there were probably 
four pages of Aguirres, and in all of those Aguirres there might 
be two Basques, because the rest might be descendants of 
sixteenth-century conquistadores from Latin American countries 
(primarily from Mexico). Those people have no notion of the 
fact that they're Basque descendants. I mean, somebody might 
if they got interested in roots and traced their origins, but they 
would all consider themselves in that sense to be descended from 



40 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Spaniards; there's no appreciation of their Basqueness. But, if 
you go to the Boise telephone book and there were fifteen 
Aguirres, fourteen of them were Basques. 

So in Los Angeles I was very, very selective and really just 
went after French-Basque names, and there were quite a few. For 
example, I would take Hiribarren with an h, Hirigoyen with an 
h, Etcheverry with a y, that kind of thing, because obviously 
they were French-Basque names, but Iribarren without an h was 
problematic. In Elko or Winnemucca, in all of those sheep 
districts, virtually every Basque surname that you found in the 
book was a good one—a good catch—but not in Los Angeles. 

I put together initially about 5,000 names by hand, just 
copying them down, and that was really the core of our newsletter 
mailing list. So by the time Gallop came out, we maybe had 
5,000 or 6,000 names in the list, and these people had already 
received three issues of the newsletters. I would imagine Gallop 
was announced in the third issue. But through that vehicle we 
just—boom!—sold the thing out immediately on mail order. Of 
course, that newsletter list grew, and now I think it's up pretty 
close to 10,000 names—roughly twice what I started with. 

We probably mailed the first newsletter to 7,000 or 8,000 
people , and I think we probably asked people if they didn't want 
to be on the list to let us know. 11 Some people wrote back in and 
said, "I don't know why you sent me this. I'm not interested in 
that kind of thing." I'm sure that they were the Aguirres 
descended from Mexico in Los Angeles. 

Also, I asked the Basque clubs to give me their membership 
names, and for the most part they wouldn't. We didn't have 
that much credibility. I don't think there was hostility. I can't 
ever remember flat-out hostility, but there was ambivalence on 
the part of the officers. The officials of Basque clubs are always 
pretty nervous, anyway, since they're subject to a lot of criticism 
and under a lot of scrutiny. They don't like to take chances, 
particularly with things like the mailing list. We might have 
received one or two club mailing lists as part of that first effort 
but not much. There was no NABO yet, and there was no Basque 
government. So, the whole Asuntos Exteriores [the Basque 
government's External Affairs Department] didn't exist. 

The newsletter has always been done twice a year, but I can't 
remember whether in the earliest years we might have missed 
one or two issues. I was its editor for almost thirty years. Eloy 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


41 


Placer edited one or two editions when I was in Italy doing 
fieldwork from 1972 to 1973. 12 Then later on I think Linda White 
from the Center for Basque Studies edited it for a while, and 
now Jill Berner composes and edits it. [Jill is currently the 
promotional and publicity staff for the Center for Basque Studies.] 

The book As we started to move forward, Bob got me involved 
series with the University of Nevada Press, not just as the 

takes off series editor of the Basque Book Series, but also as 
a member of the editorial board of the University 
of Nevada Press in 1970. It was about the same time that the first 
edition of A Book of the Basques came out. When I first came to 
Reno, Bob didn't put me on the editorial board right away, 
because he didn't know me professionally. But as he began to 
get more respect for my ability to edit and waited for my opinion 
along those lines, then it was kind of a natural progression. 

Also Bob and I ended up in a kind of professional relationship, 
because Bob would give me his manuscripts—he was writing a 
lot of things—and I'd do a little bit of editing sometimes, and 
he'd respect it. We'd sometimes talk about whatever he was 
working on, and he kind of liked to bounce ideas off of me. Bob 
very open about that. He didn't always take my advice, which he 
shouldn't have, but basically, he used me as kind of a sounding 
board. 

When I went off the University Press Board, I had been on it 
longer than anybody else at that point. Wilbur Shepperson had 
been on there longer than I had, but he was off by then. [Bill 
was a member of the University of Nevada Press since 1970 and 
a member of its Executive Committee until his retirement in 
1999.] 

Given the success of the Gallop effort, we immediately moved 
away from the idea of translations. We would have published a 
revised edition of Los Vascos, but we knew that in asking Caro to 
revise it, by the time he did so and gave us a new manuscript 
and we translated it, it would have taken years. So that couldn't 
be our second publication, and it was clear that we probably 
ought to do something different. 

Bob's whole involvement with his first Basque Book Series 
book really came about in response to the success of Gallop and 
the fact that we didn't have a follow-up manuscript in hand. 
Bob happened to have fn a Hundred Graves: A Basque Portrait 



42 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


completed. That was the book that he had promised us. The 
book is a series of little vignettes on the Basques based upon the 
year that I met him over in the Basque Country. Bob told his 
agent, "I'm going to give this book to the Basque Book Series, so 
stop showing it around." I think Bob might have even had a 
contractual obligation to shop that book to his commercial 
publisher of Sweet Promised Land. The publisher took a pass on 
it, because it was a very different book than Sweet Promised Land. 
So in 1972 In a Hundred Graves became our second publication. 

Jon Bilbao knew Stanley Payne, from the University of 
Wisconsin. Payne was a leading historian of Spain and Portugal, 
and he used to be in touch with Jon over Basque bibliographic 
matters, because Jon's bibliography wasn't out yet. Jon suggested 
to Stanley that he might want to consider doing a book on Basque 
nationalism for our series, and he agreed. I was surprised when 
he agreed, but he did. 

Payne was a very fast worker, and, of course, he had a lot of 
material. His Basque material was embedded in his broader 
historiographic treatment of Iberia, but he could pull out fairly 
easily his interpretation of Basque nationalism, which was, 
essentially, from a Spanish centralist perspective. In other words, 
he treated Basque nationalism as a regional, ethnopolitical, or 
ethnonationalist movement rather than from an independentist 
perspective. Payne submitted his manuscript, Basque Nationalisn, 
and we got it out in 1975. 

Meanwhile, I had talked to Jon about doing Amerikanuak. I 
think by then we were starting to get a pretty good idea of the 
Basque situation in the American West, and I was doing that 
project in Elko about the Basques when Jon went to work on it 
with the NIMH grant support. It was real obvious to me that we 
ought to do a book about Basques in the American West. 
Eventually, it evolved it into Basques in the New World. 

It also became obvious, in looking at Elko, that you couldn't 
understand why Basques went to Elko and what they did there 
without understanding why they didn't go to Boise, and why 
the ones in Boise didn't go to Bakersfield, and ultimately why 
the ones in Boise and Bakersfield didn't go to Buenos Aires. In 
other words, the scope just kept opening out, and all of these 
divisions—Elko town, Elko County, state of Nevada, American 
West—began to pale in significance when you began studying 
Basque immigration. It became more and more evident that you 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


43 


had to look at it as several individual Basque diasporas in relation 
to the homeland. We got into this research back in the late 
1960s and early 1970s from a practical standpoint, way before 
diasporic studies became popular. It just became evident that 
we had to keep expanding our purview. 

The other thing that became evident was that there was an 
awful lot of “Basque" history masked under Spanish history in 
Latin America. All you had to do was scratch the surface a little 
bit, and you could reinterpret a lot of Latin American history 
with Basque spectacles. That got us into a whole new interesting 
area. Basically, we decided that Amerikanuak was going to be a 
real important deal. By the time we finished researching and 
writing Amerikanuak it was 1975. 

I, by the way, had published my MA thesis, Death in 
Murelaga, with the University of Washington Press in Seattle in 
1969. Somehow the Washington Press heard that I was working 
on Amerikanuak, and they wanted to publish it. The director, 
Don Ellegood, got in touch with me, and he said, "Bill, if you'll 
submit up here, I will nominate your book for something called 
the Sick Award.” 



Bill Douglass in Florence, Italy, 1973. Photograph taken for publicity for 
the publication of Muerte en Murelaga, first edition, by the publishing 
house Barral. 












44 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


There was a family named Sick in the Pacific Northwest that 
was wealthy, and they had endowed a kind of literary award at 
the University of Washington. Ellegood thought there was an 
excellent chance it would win this prestigious award, which 
entailed a little bit of money. It was some kind of a prize—then 
they also brought you to Washington to give a distinguished 
lecture on the campus, and they published the book in a deluxe 
edition. 

It was tempting, but I said, "No. It's really the reason we 
started the Basque Studies Program here, and so it's committed 
to the series I edit." Amerikanuak was the fourth publication in 
the Basque Book Series. 

By the way, Jon Bilbao and I, when we published 
Amerikanuak, we donated our royalties to the Basque Book Series 
Fund. When we did that, Bob changed his contract on In a Hundred 
Graves and donated that book's royalty. So for a while there was 
another source of income for the Basque Book Series Fund—not a 
huge source of money, a few hundred dollars every six months 
from each of the sources. We were building the thing up. 

So we've got Gallop, Faxalt, Payne, and Amerikanuak. But 
then we had a big hiatus. There were a lot of problems at the 
University of Nevada Press, and they were having trouble meeting 
their commitments. They were essentially out of money. The 
University of Nevada Press had a huge project on its plate called 
the Doten Diaries, and it was under a lot of pressure to get the 
multi-volume out. It was very expensive, and it took them a lot 
of years. Ken Robbins wasn't about to spend money on Basque 
books. Even though in theory we had money in our Basque Book 
Series Fund, there was no money in reality for the next title. 

In thinking of setting the Basque series up in the first place, 
I had some thoughts in mind. One regarded all of this work that 
I was putting in, because I was spending at least 25 percent of 
my time on this series, uncompensated by the University of 
Nevada Press. I would acquire, edit, copyedit and, in some cases, 
even translate manuscripts. I had all kinds of adventures. 

We went all the way from 1975 until 1979 before the fifth 
publication came out, which was my book on Beltran Paris. In 
part it was an easy, short, simple, and very inexpensive book for 
them to bring out as opposed to, say, Amerikanuak or some of 
the other things we might have done. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


45 


In 1979 the Basque Book Series took off again. In 1980 we 
published Bob Clark's The Basques: The Franco Years and Beyond 
and Gustav Henningsen's The Witches' Advocate, which I had 
worked on for fifteen years. I recruited Henningsen in Julio Caro 
Baroja's house, where I met him in 1969 or 1970, during a trip to 
the Basque Country. He was working on Basque witchcraft, and 
he wanted to edit the Spanish inquisitor Alonso de Salazar's report 
on witchcraft as well as write a thirty-page introduction to it. 
Well, before it was over, The Witches' Advocate was a 500-page 
book with no Salazar documents, and I went through that whole 
process with Henningsen. In fact, I even flew to Copenhagen 
and spent some time working on and editing it, as there were 
some issues with his English. He's Danish and speaks very good 
English, but it's one thing to speak good English and another to 
be able to write perfect English for publication purposes. 

Then Rachel Bard submitted Navarra, the Durable Kingdom, 
which was published in 1982. I worked with Dorothy Legarreta 
for several years as well, and she produced her book, The Guernica 
Generation, in 1985. Then Richard Lane and I, in 1985, submitted 
the photo book, Basque Sheepherders of the American West. At 
that point, the series was pretty well established. Also, it was 
about then that Bob Laxalt left the University of Nevada Press. 

I had always been after Sweet Promised Land, but Bob's agent 
kept saying, “Well, we're going to bring it out." 

His agent was shopping it around in New York, and there 
were all of these possibilities that didn't happen. Bob and I had 
been talking about it for fifteen years, and it hadn't come out. 

I kept saying, “It's the fundamental literary text of Basques 
in the American West. It's everybody's story, and it needs to come 
out." 

Bob's ambivalence about publishing his work in the University 
of Nevada Press was waning, and I kept saying to him, “Look, it's 
not your idea, it's mine, and I'll take full responsibility for the idea. 
I'm the one that's trying to talk you into it. You're not trying to 
talk me, the series editor, into your book. It's the opposite." 

So little by little his objections eroded, but his agent's defenses 
didn't erode, and he didn't want to give it up. Finally, I convinced 
Bob, and Bob told his agent he was going to submit it, so we 
published it in 1986. Again, I don't know how many editions it's 
gone through, but I'm sure it's sold 10,000 copies or more in the 



46 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


University of Nevada Press editions. That was another huge 
success. By then the series was very successful. The power, the 
strength, or the force within the series was becoming pretty 
strong. 

We never really got back to the idea of doing translations for 
translation's sake. The idea of doing Los Vascos proved sterile, 
because Caro Baroja wouldn't budge, and I wouldn't budge. 
Further, we never really seriously went after Les Basques, because 
it became obvious that the series was capable of attracting original 
scholarship. In fact, at first I used to go out and chase authors a 
little bit. I mean, if I knew somebody was doing a dissertation, 
because they came through here, and if I felt the topic was of 
interest to us, I might say, "Look, have you thought about 
rewriting your dissertation as a book and submitting it here?" 
We got a few things that way. 

Some of the books took years and years and years. Jim Jacob's 
book on French Basque nationalism, Hills of Conflict: Basque 
Nationalism in France, was a problem. It took fifteen years. With 
both of Jacob's and Henningsen's books I kind of gave up at a 
certain point. I thought they'd never happen. It had been fifteen 
years, without constant effort but rather periodic revisiting of 
the subject without being confident that the authors were going 
to ultimately produce a book. We were also getting a lot of stuff 
across the transom, as they say, being submitted—books by Clark, 
Bard, Legarreta, Renato Barahona with his Vizcaya on the Eve of 
Carlism, and Cyrus Zirakzadeh's A Rebellious People. 

We went after Jesus Maria Lasagabaster's Contemporary Basque 
Fiction: An Anthology, which came out in 1990. That was our first 
real foray into a translation project, because we thought that we 
needed a book on Basque literature. So we talked to Lasagabaster, 
and he had a published anthology already. That was the first time 
that we went out and translated a book virtually from scratch. 

Bob wrote the Basque Family Trilogy [Child of the Holy 
Ghost, 1992, The Basque Hotel, 1993, and The Governor's Man¬ 
sion, 1994]. Again, Bob sort of shopped it around commercially 
through his agent, and the agent was unsuccessful in placing it. 
Bob had a lot less patience with his agent over the trilogy, be¬ 
cause he'd been down the same path with another book he'd 
written, which isn't about Basques. It's set in Dayton and with 
rattlesnakes— A Man in the Wheatfield. There had been some 
aborted movie deals that didn't happen, so Bob was getting a 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


47 


little more cynical or skeptical about representation from his 
agent and from others. 

By then Bob was very pleased with the response to the Basque 
Book Series' edition of Sweet Promised Land, and he was making 
money off of it, so he was also pleased with that. Then Bob 
basically just dug in his heels with his agent and said, "I'm going 
to publish the trilogy in the Basque Book Series." We did all three 
books. 

Cookbooks Just for fiscal or financial reasons university presses 
and travel have evolved over time in a direction of having to 
guides offer more works with popular appeal rather than 
academic originality. The marketer at the University 
of Nevada Press kept saying to me all the time, "We've got to do 
a cookbook. We've got to do a cookbook." 

The elitist in me was frankly appalled at the idea of publishing 
a cookbook. Then one day the marketer came to me, and she 
showed me how Harvard had just published a cookbook on New 
England cuisine. That spiked my gun. I no longer had an academic 
argument. If Harvard was doing cookbooks, why couldn't 
Nevada? 

So we translated and published Jose Maria Busca Isusi's book, 
Traditional Basque Cooking, in 1993. He was famous in the 
Basque Country, and Jon Bilbao suggested it, but I'm sorry to 
say we should have done a different book. It was a lousy cookbook 
to publish. It's got some recipes and all, but it's really a book 
about Basque food and ingredients, which is not a cookbook. 
That's probably, in part, my fault, too, because given the fact it's 
not a cookbook, it was easier for me to agree to publish it with 
some recipes at the end. It's almost a "study," [laughter] so I 
guess it assuaged my academic conscience to say, "If we're going 
to do a cookbook, we'll do a book about cooking." 

The cookbook sales were great, but I think that there were a 
lot of disappointed buyers, too, because they thought they were 
getting a cookbook, and they got this very stilted book about 
seafood in the Basque Country and stuff like that. But, of course, 
in 2001 we got another cookbook out, Mary Ancho Davis' 
Chorizos in an Iron Skillet. My guess is that it's done real well, 
because Sara Velez Mallea was very interested in that one. She 
pushed that one real hard. 13 In 1998, we published our first 
guidebook, A Travel Guide to Basque America, by Nancy Zubiri, 



48 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


which had big sales. [The second edition came out in 2006.] So 
at the University of Nevada Press there was this sort of pressure 
building, too, to not just do academic books. 

For example, Mark Kurlansky's The Basque History of the 
World is a book that I would have resisted publishing. I reviewed 
that book for the Revista Internacional de Estudios Vascos 
[International Journal of Basque Studies ]. I basically gave it a 
favorable review but with an asterisk, saying that its importance 
is not its originality. Kurlansky has a pleasing writing style, and 
he's a good writer. He's assimilated a bunch of material, and he 
tells a story cleverly, but from a Basque scholar's standpoint, 
there's absolutely nothing in this book of interest, nothing that's 
new. It's just kind of a refrito [a refry]. It's a rehash. 

I don't think that the book is full of egregious errors, but it's 
a quaint kind of book, and it's a book written from a particular 
point of view. That's fine, because it's a point of view that doesn't 
get much support or much advocacy. Even within Basque circles 
it's a very controversial view, but it's a viewpoint that is virtually 
unrepresented certainly in the Anglo world. In that sense I think 
Kurlansky's book was really an interesting exercise, and I'm glad 
he did it. 

What Kurlansky did was he attracted, to the Basques, the 
world's attention in a way that our whole Basque Book Series 
never has. One could say in a sense that if you're trying to 
popularize and trying to reach the broadest possible audience, 
Kurlansky's book is more successful than the entire Basque Book 
Series put together in terms of its impact. Having said that, I 
still wouldn't have recruited that book for the series. Joseba 
Zulaika, then director of the Center for Basque Studies, looked 
at it more carefully, and he asked me to look at it in manuscript 
form, so I did. Zulaika knew Kurlansky somehow, or maybe 
Kurlansky knew of us and got in touch with Zulaika, but he 
wasn't submitting here. He just wanted Zulaika to look at it, 
and I think he acknowledges that in the preface or somewhere. 

The Another thing that happened was that we started 

Occasional our Occasional Papers Series at the Basque Studies 
Papers Program, which was not part of the Basque Book 

Series Series. There were two policies at the University of 

Nevada Press that made it difficult for us to publish 
certain works. One policy was that they would not publish 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


49 


literature, novels, or poetry. They were inundated with poetry 
submissions, because the world's full of people who write poetry 
and want to get it published. So a lot of university presses won't 
even look at poetry, in part because they're afraid to open that 
Pandora's box. The University of Nevada Press and a lot of presses 
wouldn't do novels—fiction—for the same reason. 

Sweet Promised Land would have been somewhere on the 
cusp, because some people think of it as a novel. I don't. I think 
it's a travel account, a long essay ... a lot of things, but I don't 
think it's a novel. But, of course, some of Bob's work, for instance 
A Man in the Wheatfield, is more novelistic. Part of Bob's 
reticence over the years to consider the Basque Book Series as a 
potential publisher was the fact that he was a novelist. He thought 
of himself as a fiction writer, primarily, but he also did other 
things, too, such as National Geographic articles that weren't 
fiction). 

Radko came out of the humanities and immediately set about 
changing that policy through the University Press Board, which 
opened new possibilities that didn't exist before. 

The other thing that the University of Nevada Press was not 
interested in initially, like many university presses, was collected 
essays. Virginia Jacobsen kind of got on my case about that, and 
she said, "We should have an occasional papers series, which 
should focus primarily on collected essays, because we know 
many scholars, and we could give them a theme, or we could 
even have a conference and publish the proceedings." 

So Virginia sold me that idea. There was a publishing 
precedent within the Basque Studies Program. The precedent was 
we did hold a conference in honor of Jon Bilbao at DRI, when 
we were still out at DRI. The proceedings, Anglo-American 
Contributions to Basque Studies, were published by DRI in 1977. 
(I don't know whether it was signed off as the Center for Western 
North American Studies, because they changed their name about 
three times. Later they called themselves the Social Science 
Center. It might have been the Social Science Center by the time 
they published that.) 

At the time, Jean Decroos had done a sociological dissertation 
on Basques from San Francisco, but he died prematurely before 
he could entirely rewrite it as a book. So here we have this "book" 
that I thought should come out. I thought it was good, but it 
was very, very technical. It was still a dissertation, and I was 



50 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


ambivalent about putting it in the Basque Book Series, because 
it really wasn't a book in that same sense. So I published Decroos's 
The Long Journey in the Occasional Papers Series in 1983, and 
that's how we launched the series. 

I sent letters to people and invited them to submit essays for 
two different volumes of the Occasional Papers Series— Basque 
Politics: A Case Study in Ethnic Nationalism, published in 1985, 
and Essays in Basque Social An thropology and History, published 
in 1989. 

Then Barbara Rosen wrote a book about the Basque composer 
Juan Crisostomo de Arriaga, and she wanted it to go in the Basque 
Book Series, but I knew that the University of Nevada Press 
wouldn't be interested. It wasn't fiction, but they had never done 
anything on music or about a composer, and I just knew that 
there would be some resistance to publishing it at the University 
of Nevada Press. I suggested to her we put it in our series, and 
she went for it. Arriaga, the Forgotten Genius was published in 
1989. 

Success of One thing that should be remarked is that the sale 
the book of Basque books was phenomenal and 
series inexplicable—really weird. The reason I say that is 

because I used to be asked by directors of other 
university presses about the Basque Book Series, because it became 
very emblematic of the University of Nevada Press. It became 
known for the Basque Book Series, because it was so unique. 

Fifteen or twenty years ago, the Basque Book Series was 
producing roughly a third of the total sales of the University of 
Nevada Press, and the University of Nevada Press was growing, 
too. They were publishing in more areas, but we were up over 
$100,000, $125,000, $130,000 a year in sales at a time when the 
total sales of the University of Nevada Press were around 
$400,000. Just from an internal standpoint, the series was a big 
economic factor within the University of Nevada Press. 

At the time, there were other universities that were trying to 
play the ethnic game, particularly after the Roots phenomenon. 14 
There were presses trying to specialize in different groups— 
Italians, Jewish .... For instance, Judaica Press, founded in 1963 
in New York, has proven to be a pretty good success. There's 
more than one press that has specialized in Jewish books, because 
the Jewish reading public is pretty extensive. So there's a pretty 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


51 


good and bigger market for Judaica than any other ethnically 
related series of books. 

At some point university presses thought that there would 
be some money to be made in publishing books about ethnic 
groups, but basically it was not that good. There were two or 
three attempts by university presses to capitalize on Italian 
Americans, and there are millions and millions of Italian 
Americans, but Italian studies bombed. Irish studies, same deal. 
It's just like all of America's other ethnic groups. 

I know that because my Italian book, Emigration in a South 
Italian Town: An Anthropological History ( 1984), was published 
by the University of Rutgers Press when they were trying to move 
into ethnic studies. They simultaneously published three books 
on Italy by three fairly well-known people, thinking that they 
would support each other and would establish Rutgers as an 
Italian-American studies press. Their sales were in the hundreds 
for each of the titles, and Rutgers moved away from it. I think 
they brought out 800 copies of my book, and it took them awhile 
to sell them. I don't think Rutgers publishes on Italians any 
longer. 

Marlie Wasserman, who was the director of Rutgers Press at 
the time, cornered me at an AAA meeting, and said, "Tell me 
about the Basque Book Series." She could not believe our history! 
She asked me to explain to her why it was so successful. Until 
ten years ago, around 1995, our minimum press run for every 
title was 2,000 copies, and some books were 5,000. We published 
5,000 copies of Amerikanuak in the initial press run, which was 
unheard of in American press publishing. We had enormous press 
runs. By then we had enough experience to know that there 
would be demand, but it took a long time to sell it out. 

In those days the standard university press run would be 
1,000 to 1,500 copies. Everybody would print more books than 
they really thought they would need and warehouse them, 
because the technology was not there to reprint inexpensively. 
Today that's not a problem, because any press can virtually 
produce fifty books on demand or one book on demand. The 
technology has made it so warehousing the books is not a big 
deal. But back then everybody's nightmare or worst fear was that 
you'd publish a book, and it'd sell out too quickly—the sales 
would be tailing off, but there was still a demand for it—and 
you'd sitting there with a book that people still wanted three 



52 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


years after you brought it out, and you were out of books. It was 
just about as expensive to bring it out again as to do the original 
press run. But you're not going to bring out another 1,500, 
because you can see that, although you've saturated the market 
pretty well, still and all there's a demand for fifty or a hundred 
books. 

The real art in university publishing, or any kind of 
publishing, was to estimate how many you were going to need 
in order to come up with a good estimate, because if you made a 
bad guess—if you printed 2,000 and sold 400—that would be a 
huge disaster financially. But it was almost as big a disaster if you 
published 1,000 and there's still demand for the book, so you're 
left wondering, “Do we reprint?" You didn't ever want to have 
to reprint, everything else being equal. 

I don't know what it was, and still is, behind the success of 
the Basque Book Series. I can't explain it to this day. What's even 
more amazing to me is the fact that there are very few Basques 
in the United States, relatively speaking. Fifty-some thousand 
people, roughly, identify as Basque, according to the 2000 U.S. 
Census. There's a certain kind of exotic interest that Basques 
create or elicit. Certainly here in the American West there's a 
curiosity about the Basques. 

The other thing that kind of boggles my mind is that among 
those 50,000 people there's not a huge intelligentsia. I had 
mentioned earlier that Judaica Press does well, because there's a 
whole sort of Jewish intellectual establishment. There are a lot 
of people of Jewish descent teaching in universities; there's also 
a tradition of going to university in that ethnic group, and until 
recently that wasn't true of Basque Americans. Basque-American 
kids were growing up in Elko and Winnemucca, and there wasn't 
a big tradition in Elko or Winnemucca for anybody to go to the 
university. It was almost an anti-intellectual atmosphere, but 
people were buying the books. 

My guess is part of our sales were symbolic, certainly initially. 
I think the Gallop book, for instance, was purchased by a lot of 
people that maybe didn't read it, but they just wanted the book, 
so they could lend it to their friends, but I can't document that. 
Then, other buyers read Gallop because it was highly readable, 
but many of the other titles were less so. I think the phenomenon 
of buying a book just to have it was a real factor in the sales of 
our first ten books. But after that, we had published more books 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


53 


than casual readers had space for on their library shelf, so they 
stopped buying them. They only bought the ones they really 
wanted. The cookbooks and the travel guide always went through 
the roof, and they had much more popular appeal than our strong 
academic titles. 

I think the Basque Book Series probably represents 80 percent 
or more of the serious work on Basques in English. I mean, it's 
had a huge impact that way. I would even go so far as to say by 
now the Basque Book Series constitutes the intellectual patrimony 
of the Basques of the United States. 

When we first started the Basque Studies Program, there was 
a question throughout the American West, "Who are the 
Basques?" or, "What's a Basque?" 

Nobody understood who Basques were, and now you don't 
hear those questions much anymore. It's not just because of our 
efforts, but we certainly contributed to that. If you were a Basque 
American and your neighbor asked you a question about the 
Basques, you were stumped. You could give them your opinion, 
but you couldn't give them something to read. About the best 
you might be able to do was to give them a copy of Sweet 
Promised Land, but that was certainly not about Basque history 
or the Basque people per se. It was about Bob Laxalt's father and 
the immigration experience. 

In a way we kind of launched the series as a popularizing 
effort. It started out with a philosophy similar to Mark 
Kurlansky's, because A Book of the Basques, Los Vascos, and Les 
Basques were kind of popular books, in their own way. So you 
had those kinds of pre-Kurlansky treatments of the Basque 
Country. They were three overviews with a lot of anecdotes—a 
chapter on witchcraft and a chapter on some of the exotic stuff, 
on Juan Sebastian Elcano [first circumnavigator of the world], et 
cetera. 

Then to that we added Amerikanuak, which we certainly 
didn't intend to be a popularized account, per se, but we knew 
was going to be another overview. Amerikanuak was essentially 
an introduction to a really serious sociological study that never 
got written about the Basques of Elko County. We sort of thought 
of Amerikanuak as kind of the introduction to that book. The 
same thing happened to the Basques in Elko County as what 
happened to Salazar in the Basque Book Series. Salazar's 
manuscripts have never been published by the Basque Book 



54 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Series, but what we did publish was a 500-page introduction to 
the Salazar manuscript. 

In fact, the whole first chapter in Amerikanuak is as obvious 
to a Basque reader in Europe as, say, Kurlansky's book. It's just 
situating the Basques, everything from prehistory through the 
last 1,000 years of Basque history in all seven provinces. I would 
think that somebody in the Basque Country picking up 
Amerikanuak would be just skipping chapter one and going right 
to chapter two, if they're really interested in the true subject 
matter of Amerikanuak. But you couldn't assume that kind of 
background information for the Anglo reader, so that's why we 
provided that. But it's been a successful book. 

Life's funny. That was as far as our original thinking went. 
There's a way in which brick by brick and without any kind of 
game plan, the series just evolved. I edited the Basque Book Series 
until I retired, and then I went back to editing it for a year after 
retirement, because there were some problems with continuity. 
Then Sandra "Sandy" Ott from the Center for Basque Studies 
was the editor at some point. [As of April 2007 there is not a 
member of the Center for Basque Studies who serves as editor of 
the Basque Book Series.] 


The Basque Studies Library 

By the time Jon Bilbao got here, the Veyrin collection had 
arrived and was put into Special Collections, which wasn't terribly 
accessible. They also placed some books in a display case. I think 
it's fair to say that of all the people in the library who impinged 
upon that collection, the Special Collections librarian, Bob 
Armstrong, was the least enthusiastic. He was real ambivalent, 
because he really didn't know what to do with those Basque 
books. (He had a very strange history with the library himself. 
He disappeared—he just didn't come to work one day, but that 
was later. He was kind of a strange guy.) 

I think Armstrong thought it was sort of a one-time thing. 
"Now we have this collection, 750 books. That's nice." Special 
Collections frequently gets that kind of one-shot donation of 
this, that, or the other thing. He didn't really have a place for 
the collection. He had less space then for the whole Special 
Collections than we have today for the center. He had a bunch 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


55 


of stuff in boxes out at the off-campus storage area in Stead. 
Armstrong was not thrilled by the idea that this was going to be 
an active, growing collection. I mean, he was not openly hostile, 
because he knew that there were some fairly powerful people, 
including the director of the library, who liked the idea, but 
initially, we framed the collection as a special collection. 

Armstrong wanted to place the books in the general stacks 
with some rare books possibly up in Special Collections, but Jon 
and I didn't want that. We resisted merging our books with the 
general collection and the idea of buying books and sticking 
them wherever appropriate, sprinkled throughout the general 
stacks—the history books with history, European history, et 
cetera. 

We were very nervous about that. We thought that the 
collection would be better served if it stayed together, otherwise, 
first of all, it would lose its personality. Secondly, one of the big 
advantages for a user was the capacity to be able to browse, to 
just go to a general topic area, and all the books were there—not 
scattered—and they're all Basque. I know myself, in my own 
research, that I've discovered important items that I would have 
never found otherwise just by fooling around, browsing in our 
stacks. So there was a kind of benefit. 

We recognized almost immediately we had some interest by 
people that wanted to come to UNR because of the Basque 
collection. I remember that historian Richard Etulain was the 
first person that got a major grant for that. The grant was from 
the National Endowment for the Humanities, and he came for a 
year to work in the library in 1973. 

Our collection wasn't properly cataloged; our books posed 
some big problems for the catalogers, and they were already way 
behind in processing the general collection. One of our fears 
was that the Basque books would not get cataloged in a timely 
fashion and that they would be in some room somewhere. We 
wouldn't know what we had, and we wouldn't have that 
synergism. Finally, we were able to convince the director of the 
library that we needed to have our books physically in one place, 
and the books stayed at Special Collections. So there was that 
kind of initial tension with Special Collections. 

Of course, my thought was that the Veyrin collection was 
the first brick in a wall, and one of my big priorities was to build 
on it. One of the things that I did understand about having a 



56 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Basque program was that without a serious library collection, we 
would never have a serious effort, so I began lobbying for a budget 
to continue to buy Basque books. 

Back then there were very, very scarce library resources on 
Basques around the United States. Most major university 
libraries—Berkeley, Harvard—might have fifteen, twenty, twenty- 
five items. My own library was as large as or larger than the Veyrin 
collection at that point, as I used to buy books on my own from 
Libreria Manterola, a bookstore in San Sebastian. At one point I 
even cross-listed my own Basque collection and brought the 
books physically to the library and leant them out to people. 

We all—particularly those of us close to Basque Studies and 
certainly somebody like Jon Bilbao, even I—knew that there was 
a vast world of Basque-related scholarship out there, but it was 
in various languages, and it was compartmentalized topically or 
miscataloged, to put it that way, in a lot of strange ways. A lot of 
Basque stuff was masked under Spanish, French, Latin American, 
or Philippine histories, so tracing down Basque material was as 
much an art as a science, and you had to have some proper and 
special criteria to know how to pursue it. Of course, Jon Bilbao 
was the world's expert, but I even understood that before we 
recruited Jon. 

Jon became the de facto librarian. He was half a librarian, 
because he understood librarianship and custodianship. He was 
the main person in advising any user that would come in and 
finding them material. He was literally hands-on, and he 
developed some kind of a catalog system. It was a serial thing, 
and he had a fichero [card catalog] for that too. He was always 
making ficheros. He was an inveterate card cataloger, whether it 
was trying to list Basque vocabulary or whether it was 
bibliographic entries. He was always surrounded with card 
catalogs. 

For example, the main reason for Jon to place old or rare 
books in the Basque collection general shelves was, in part, due 
to his serial system. If we had 2,843 volumes, the next one that 
came in was 2,844, so I think there was a way in which he was 
trapped by his own logic. I don't think that Jon thought it was a 
great idea to have an original Larramendi book [Basque author 
Father Manuel Larramendi, 1690-1766] out there so anybody 
could steal it. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


57 



"So tracing down Basque material was as much an art as a science, and 
you had to have some proper and special criteria to knowhow to pursue 
it. Of course, Jon Bilbao was the world's expert. "Jon Bilbao demonstrates 
a traditional Basque instrument called alboka —a double hornpipe—at 
the Basque Studies Library, 1980. 


At the time, Armstrong was in on the design of the new 
Special Collections space, which was going to be all of this area 
where we—Oral History was here then—Special Collections, and 
Black Rock Press are now. It was all going to be sort of under 
Special Collections. When it came time to design our initial 
quarters, Armstrong allocated us a really small space. In other 
words, it was the two offices where Kathryn Etcheverria [UNR 
library employee, 1983-2006] is right now and a bit more where 
the reference books and the computers are today. That was going 
to be the whole Basque collection, and there were going to be 
two offices, and material that didn't fit in there was going to go 
to Stead. I was real unhappy with that. 

At that point, I don't know whether it was the pressure of 
the remodel and the expansion of Special Collections, but Bob 
Armstrong disappeared. He didn't give notice, and as far as I 
know, he just didn't come to work one day. After a few weeks 
everybody started to get concerned. I don't whether he just got 












58 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


in his car and drove away 
from Reno, but he just 
disappeared. I don't know 
the full story there, but it 
was kind of a mystery. I 
don't think anything 
happened to him. I think 
they verified that there was 
no foul play involved and 
it was a personal choice. 
But somehow or other his 
wheels came off, and he 
decided he didn't want to 
work here any longer, and 
he didn't want to face the 
process of unwinding, so 
he just left. Now, maybe 
there's a whole other story 
that I'm unaware of, but 
that was the one that came 
across to us. 

All of a sudden, Ken Carpenter became the Special Collections 
librarian, and he was in charge of the remodel and the expansion 
design. They were reorganizing space within the building, and 
they were going to spend some money on its physical expansion. 
The library went out a ways. It wasn't a huge expansion, but it 
was an expansion, and we were designed into it. Fortunately, 
Ken was a lot more open to the Basque collection idea and to the 
Basque Studies Program. He was for it. Ken and I sat down, and I 
said, "Ken, the way our space is designed right now, it is already 
way too small, without even thinking about accommodating any 
growth or accommodating visitors. It's just terrible space." 

Ken agreed, and that's when he knocked down a couple of 
walls and brought the collection all the way back to the stairwell. 
We were physically removed from Special Collections. It's pretty 
much the way it is today in Getchell Library. 

Then Ken said, "We've got this classroom, Bill. It's right next 
door. That could potentially be space, too, because it's adjacent 
to the Basque collection. So if you guys expand, maybe down 
the road, that space could be allocated to you as well." After I 
moved down from DRI, and probably within a year or two of 



Visiting scholar Juan Cruz Arrosagaray, 
(right) with Jon Bilbao at the Basque 
Studies Library, April 1976. 











WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


59 


that library expansion, I needed to have an office. Ken understood 
that and gave us that space. 

The next room over, which is now storage for the collection, 
was a classroom; maybe it was a bigger classroom, and they built 
a wall when we finally needed to take some of that space. I think 
that might have happened, but I'm not sure. They could have 
been designed as two different rooms, and they used the other 
room initially. 

Develop- We had collection development as one of our big 
ing the priorities, and, of course, with Jon Bilbao, that was 
collection very efficient. The development of the collection 
was essentially Jon's work. Jon was the cornerstone. 
I would take very, very little credit for that. I mean, I had 
something to do with it as I was a facilitator in the sense that I 
would help get resources for it and stuff like that. But basically it 
was Jon's initiative and Jon's lead. That was an area in which I 
totally trusted Jon. Whenever he came and said, “We need X, Y, 
or Z," as far as the collection went, I never questioned it. 

Under Jon, the collection reminded me a lot of regional 
archives or town libraries that I've used in Europe, where you've 
got one person who knows where everything in the place is and 
is totally in love with the collection. Jon loved his books. 

Jon was totally generous. I've encountered librarians who 
were anything but and who treated the public library as 
essentially their private collection, and they would literally freeze 
people out. They would have an area of interest that they planned 
one day to write about, so they'd try and hide it from you. But 
Jon was the opposite. Jon was delighted if anybody showed up. 
He had a proprietary sense that the books were all his children, 
but he wasn't proprietary in the sense that he defined boundaries 
or tried to keep certain stuff just for himself. No, quite the 
opposite. 

At the time, we had great financial resources for collecting 
books. The big problem was the benign neglect. The collection 
suffered mightily from benign neglect. What we didn't have were 
the human resources to process the books, to catalog them, to 
run a library, to lend them out, and all of those kinds of things. 
Our books weren't cataloged for the most part, so it was hard to 
put the code in. It was hard to check books out to people, because 
we weren't part of the library cataloging system, so we weren't 



60 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


on the Library of Congress or the Dewey Decimal systems. Most 
of our books were just Jon Bilbao's Basque 1, Basque 2, Basque 3, 
et cetera. We also had logistical issues with space, because we 
very quickly outgrew our quarters, and we had to send materials 
to Stead. 

We had a great acquisition program in the person of Jon 
Bilbao. Also, the person in charge of the library budget, Milton 
Wolf, the acquisition librarian, was very, very favorably disposed 
to the collection and thought it was the most unique one in the 
library. So did Harold “Hap" Morehouse, former director of the 
library, and Steve Zink, current dean of libraries. All of the upper 
echelons in the library always thought that it was a jewel in the 
library's crown. It was a big crown jewel, because it was the one 
thing that we had that nobody else had, and librarians like that 
kind of thing. 

Milton, as the person in charge of acquisitions in the higher 
levels of the administration, had several functions, including 
the library's budget—the book budget. He would allocate the 
book budget to different academic departments around the 
university. Milton gave us 1 percent of the university library budget, 
which was disproportionate to other academic departments within 
the university, because he wanted to stay on top of the Basque 
collection. The library has been very, very generous with the 
budget. Ultimately, our budget kept going up over the years [by 
the mid-1980s, the budget was increased by another 1 percent], 
and now I think it's about $70,000 or $80,000 a year. 

Of course, during the late General Francisco Franco years 
and the years immediately after Franco, we had enough money 
to essentially have standing orders in the Basque Country for 
everything that was in Basque or that was about Basques. In 
other words, we would buy every Basque book. We would even 
buy books in Basque on physics and stuff like that, which are of 
less direct value to our mission than a lot of books. 

In 1973 Jon managed to get another major collection, which 
was Basque scholar Ramon Goni Nagore's private collection. Some 
bookseller—and I'm not sure which one of those working with 
Jon—approached us about the Goni collection deal. Jon looked 
at it, and he thought, “We've got to buy it." We went to the 
library administration, and they gave us extra money that year 
to do it. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


61 


Then there was a huge explosion of publications in the 
Basque Country because of the establishment of Eusko Jaurlaritza 
[the Basque Autonomous Community Government in Spain] 
following Franco's death. There was this big exuberance leading 
to all these publications. It reached the point where we had to 
become somewhat selective, though not hugely selective, but 
we had to prioritize what we would buy and what we didn't 
buy—we probably stopped buying books on physics printed in 
Basque. For example, in 1998 we got archivist Jose Maria Harte 
de Jauregui's Spanish Civil War collection, I think, pretty much 
the same way we got Gobi's books. 

We would get offers from booksellers all the time, and some 
of them got us into unusual situations. For instance, some of 
the parish books from the church of San Pelayo of Bakio ended 
up with a bookseller in Bilbao. I don't know whether the parish 
priest sold them or whether they were stolen and taken there, 
but material ended up there, and the book dealer in Bilbao offered 
them along with some other things, some census materials— 
unique handwritten stuff—to Jon. 

Jon bought ten or twelve books from that book dealer mainly 
to conserve them, to keep them together, because his fear was 
that people would just tear a page out of the book—tear the 
entry of their baptismal certificate or their great-great-great- 
grandfather's baptism, or they would buy just that page, and 
then they'd frame it and put it on their wall. And, of course, the 
records would be destroyed and dispersed. So Jon talked to me 
about it, and he said, "We need to protect this for the short 
term, and then we'll see what happens." 

Ultimately, in 1999, Marcelino "Marc" Ugalde, then Basque 
Fibrarian, gave the material back to the bishop of Bizkaia, who 
gave us our money back, whatever we paid for them, I think, 
$2,000 or something. There were strange things like that. 

If we had an opportunity to buy a particularly unique item 
or collection—little ones, but expensive and really unusual stuff— 
and we didn't have enough money to buy as much as we wanted 
just from the mainstream in that year's library budget, every 
time I ever went to the central administration or to the library 
administration, they found the money and bought the thing. I 
give those examples to underscore how well the Basque collection 
was treated and appreciated from the library standpoint. 



62 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Reporting Regarding the Basque collection, Jon and I were 
lines reporting to Armstrong from the beginning, and 

that was the price I had to pay for keeping the books 
from disappearing into the general stacks. So if they were going 
to be a special collection, then the Special Collections librarian 
was the custodian. Then Ken Carpenter became the Special 
Collections librarian, and later the assistant director of the library. 
They later got Bob Blesse in as the Special Collections librarian, 
but I continued to report directly—not through Bob Blesse, but 
to Ken Carpenter. 

So there's a way in which, as that happened, without any 
kind of a formal deal, we ended up following the reporting chain. 
We followed Carpenter as he moved up, because there'd been 
pretty much a de facto split between the Basque collection and 
Special Collections, even physically after the redesign of the 
library. 

I would go two or three months without seeing Bob Blesse. I 
might run into him in the hall, or I might be over in Special 
Collections on some research related thing, but as far as really 
just talking about administrative issues, internal politics in the 
library, or about a minor issue, I'd go talk to the library 
management—Morehouse, the director, Ken Carpenter, or to 
Ruth Donovan. They were all very favorably disposed towards 
the program, but it was a real loose and an informal kind of 
relationship. 

When the Basque Studies Program was transferred to UNR, 
Morehouse graciously agreed to not just house us but to be our 
administrative, nominal supervisor. To me it made sense for the 
Basque Studies Program to be housed in the library because of 
the collection. Even when I was personally located at DRI, in my 
capacity of coordinator of the Basque Studies Program, I reported 
directly to Morehouse. I remember for a while that Morehouse 
preferred that I spend more time with Ken Carpenter, but I was 
mainstreamed to him. However, we had already established that 
loose relationship with the library administrators, and it didn't 
tighten that much once they became our superiors. We were a 
real autonomous, stand-alone deal. 

We didn't really have a whole lot of interaction with the 
library, except for every year I had to evaluate the Basque Program 
staff and Morehouse had to evaluate me. I think when my 
position at UNR was approved, we got one classified position. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


63 


[Virginia Jacobsen was the assistant coordinator of the program 
between 1974 and 1979.] I supervised Jon and the classified 
position. Then, we hired Cam Sutherland, who might have been 
hired for a year or two before Jill Berner came onboard in 1976. 
Jill was probably our first permanent, full-time, classified 
employee. (Jill just received an award for thirty years of service 
as a classified employee.) Then Jill took pregnancy leave in 1981, 
and we hired Linda White as the departmental secretary, and 
then Linda became a professional in part through the whole 
Basque-English dictionary project. Later on Linda got her PhD 
in our tutorial PhD program. 

So about once a year Morehouse and I'd sit down and chat 
about the whole thing, and he'd say, "Well, tell me what's going 
on," and I'd kind of update him on what we were up to. 

He'd say, "That's nice." 

As our supervisor, he just wanted to be kind of up-to-date on 
any initiatives that might be going on. It was totally painless 
and totally semiformal at best, if not informal, and he was a very 
easy person to work with. Ken Carpenter, Ruth Donovan, and 
Milton Wolf were very supportive. 

Also every two years as a coordinator I would have to prepare 
a budget for the biennial state legislative process, asking for new 
positions that went nowhere. The budget request would go to 
Morehouse, and he would forward it, usually with a neutral 
recommendation. When Morehouse agreed to be our supervisor, 
he made it very clear that his condition was that we would not 
enter into competition with his budget. This was a problem for 
the Basque Studies Program, because it was somewhat inhibiting 
for its development. So we were kind of a stepchild, and it was 
fair enough, because that was the agreement coming in. 

Morehouse was always very reluctant to let us go out and 
fight for our budget, and we were not even in UNR's budget. We 
were in a different budget category called Statewide Programs, 
and we still are. Statewide Programs is kind of a grab bag of 
miscellaneous initiatives with no oversight—an elephant's 
graveyard of programs within the university system. So we 
were in with the Small Business Center and some cancer 
research deal. Basically, you were an orphan in Statewide 
Programs. 

But at the same time, you were kind of protected in a way, 
because Statewide Programs was something that just got sort of 



64 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


automatically funded each time. However, it was virtually 
impossible to grow an effort under that rubric, because you didn't 
have a champion within the budgetary process. In other words, 
there was no supervisor of Statewide Programs. It was very, very 
hard to get a new position or any kind of an increase or anything 
in Statewide Programs. 

Structurally my request would go from Morehouse to some 
UNR budget and finance committee, then to the UNR president 
and the upper administration, and then to the chancellor, and 
the chancellor would present the system's entire budget to the 
regents for their approval, which would inevitably be for at least 
half as much money as there was any chance of getting. From 
there it would go to the governor. The governor's people would 
cut it by more than half again. Finally it would go to the 
legislature, and the legislature would restore some of it and maybe 
add a few other little items to the university budget and the 
entire state budget. 

The process in our system is for the governor to present his 
budget, and then the legislature approves part of it and changes 
part of it and denies part of it and adds some of their own ideas, 
because the legislature has the final say on the money. The 
governor doesn't. 

Morehouse, as the director of the library, was fighting for 
the library budget, but he wasn't about to go to the mat for the 
Basque Studies Program, which was in this odd category of 
Statewide Programs. At least initially, and then for about the 
first ten years that we were here under the library administration, 
we had virtually no direct support, within the system, to grow 
our program. 

We didn't have a lot of supervision, because Morehouse didn't 
really understand what we were doing, and I don't think he cared. 
He trusted me. Any paper that I needed signed, I'd take it down 
the hall, and he'd sign it without questioning. I can't ever 
remember once Morehouse saying no to me or second-guessing 
me. I wasn't down there a lot, but whenever I went down, he 
assumed that I knew what I was doing, and he'd sign. In a way 
we were unsupervised and unscrutinized. We just basically did 
our thing, and in a way, the Oral History Program was in the 
same boat as us when it was at the library. It was not highly 
supervised either. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


65 


At times there was a little bit of tension —tension may not 
be the right word—but there were some issues with the library 
faculty and with staff within the library, because they didn't really 
understand us. We weren't librarians, but we were librarians. 
Technically, we were in the library, my position technically was 
in the library, and it was this kind of a weird category. I don't 
know how it is today, but then the library staff was a very 
democratized organization, and they were always setting up 
committees and challenging the library administration for this, 
that, or the other. They also wanted to have all these evaluation 
processes, and they would evaluate each other, and they would 
do all of this stuff. 

So they didn't know what to do with us, because we were 
under the same roof in the library but not of the library. It was 
like we weren't the perfect fit, and so not being the perfect fit, 
they didn't know whether or not to involve us in the committees. 
Sometimes they would, and sometimes they wouldn't; 
sometimes we'd be in for a while, and then we would be out. 
They didn't know whether to evaluate us or not—some years 
they might, and other years they might not. There was a little 
bit of grit in the grease, in the machinery. Nothing huge, but to 
the extent we had any kind of friction within the library, that 
was more or less it. 

Our first We were going along, but, as I said, the biggest 
profes- problem we had was maintaining the collection. 

sional By the time Jon Bilbao went back to the Basque 

librarians Country in 1982, it was getting away from him. 

[Jon was awarded the rank of Professor Emeritus 
Basque Bibliographer upon retirement in 1981.] He would come 
down and spend a lot of hours in the evening just working on 
the books and putting them on the shelves and running his 
primitive cataloging system, but the thing was outstripping his 
ability to do it that way. 

Also, we were getting a bunch of nontraditional material— 
photographs, postcards, documents, and letters—so it was all of 
the headaches of that kind of thing, as opposed to a book that 
has got some pretty narrow parameters and you know what you 
need to do with it. But for cataloging that other stuff, you've got 
to make it up kind of as you go along. Maybe there were no 



66 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


computers then, or if there were, they weren't today's computers, 
and so there wasn't that whole aid that we now have. Jon was 
doing it all longhand on cards, on fichas. It was very amateurish. 
So it got to be pretty tough for him. 

Then Jon left, and, boy, we tried to stay on top of the collection, 
but it was just really badly getting away from us. The library was 
outgrowing everybody's capacity to handle it. The collection was 
becoming unmanageable. Morehouse and I saw that, and we 
realized that we had to do something about it; we needed a librarian. 

We were also beginning to feel that we needed better contacts 
with booksellers. By then Jon was living in the Basque Country, 
and all of our books were going through him. He had managed 
to institutionalize his bibliographic research. He had his own 
locale and staff, and he was still collecting materials for his Eusko 
Bibliographia. We would buy our books from a bookstore in 
Vitoria called Linacero, and they would go over to the library 
Sancho el Sabio, where Jon was processing the books for Eusko 
Bibliographia. Then, they would pack the books and ship them 
to Reno in those days. We also developed a relationship with a 
bookseller in Bilbao, and they were sending the books to Vitoria. 
Then Linacero was sending them on, along with other stuff we 
were buying from them. 

Morehouse also realized that the collection wasn't getting 
cataloged. We were way, way behind. So Yoshiko "Yoshi" 
Hendricks [a UNR library employee from 1970 to 1999] became 
the person in charge of cataloging the Basque books. Yoshi came 
to UNR from Austin, Texas, because of the Basque collection. 
She had been in Navarra, and she knew Spanish and some Basque. 
It was the thing that tipped her over the edge, and she wanted 
to come here. Ultimately, Yoshi and Virginia had a falling out, 
and then she stopped coming around the program. But initially, 
Yoshi was in the Basque Program every day. 

Yoshi had some clout in the cataloging area. They were 
cataloging some of our books, but it was a real ad hoc effort, and 
it was around the edges, and maybe 100 or 200 books a year 
were getting cataloged, and we were buying 1,000 by then. So 
we were getting further and further behind. Books were lying on 
the floor in little piles. They were not even getting on the shelves, 
and we limped along. We used student assistants for a year or 
two, but it became really obvious that the thing was totally out 
of control, and I talked to Hap. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


67 


I said to Hap, "It's your collection. You guys are buying these 
books. We've bought some of them, I guess, through donations 
to the program and all, but essentially, they're your books." 

It wasn't even clear who owned the books or whose books 
they were. There had never ever been a meeting at which I sat 
across from the director of the library and we discussed who 
owned the books. I don't think that we could have suddenly 
started packing up the books and walking out the door without 
hitting trip wires. I'm sure that the library would have said, "Wait 
a minute. Those are our books. That's our collection." The library 
always, I think, pretty much assumed that the books were theirs, 
and I always assumed that they were pretty much their books. 

Hap agreed that we should go in together on the biennial 
request, and he would put part of the library's prestige behind it. 
That was the first time he was willing to really go to the mat and 
ask for resources for the Basque collection. 

Then we convinced the central administration to allow us to 
be able to lobby in the legislature for that full-time position. So 
we went in, and we requested a full-time librarian, with half of 
the position in the program's budget and half in Morehouse's 
budget. That was so he would only have to ask for a half-time 
position. Morehouse didn't have to lobby for it, but he had some 
problems getting his library staff to agree to it, because by then 
the library faculty had a lot of input in the budgetary process 
and what the director of the library would ask for. 

Hap finally got the half-time position request through his 
own staff. I think the people in the library, in fairness, understood 
the thing was out of control and something had to be done. 
Yoshi, I'm sure, was very supportive of that, and she was still 
here, and she was pretty important and had her own power base. 

So once again we brought the Laxalt connection to bear. We 
got that position funded, and we went on a national search and 
hired Maria Otero-Boisvert, a Cuban American, as the first 
professional Basque Studies Librarian. She and her husband came 
to Reno, and her husband went to work over in Carson City as a 
lobbyist—a high-placed guy. I think he's an attorney—a very 
accomplished young man. He was a staffer for the governor or a 
U.S. senator, maybe Senator Harry Reid. 

So Maria did a good job and got her arms around it. She 
didn't know Basque, but she was very fluent in Spanish—she 
was close enough to her Cuban background—and some French, 



68 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


too, if I'm not mistaken. Her English was fine, because she was 
born in New York, and so she'd been educated in the U.S. She 
pretty much got the thing under control, never perfect, but then 
I don't think anybody has ever got that thing perfect. It's its 
own little—or big—beast. It's always a work in progress. 

Then, Maria and her husband decided to move to Chicago, 
and she got a job at Loyola University as the librarian. Her 
husband maybe had an MA and went back to school to the 
University of Chicago or Northwestern. It was a personal reason, 
and I think it was more related to his career than to hers. Maria 
was here from 1986 to 1989. 

Now we've got the position, but we didn't have a librarian. 
We went again on a national search, and in 1989 we found a 
very, very qualified individual, Ellen Brow. She had been the 
Iberian and Latin American acquisitions librarian for the Harvard 
University collection. She was impressive, and she spoke Spanish 
and some Portuguese and had a lot of contacts with booksellers. 
Ellen had good, longstanding connections in Latin America. 

In 1994 we came up with a grant to the federal government 
that gave us two years of cataloging support. 15 Sheila Milan, a 
library employee, and Ellen wrote that grant proposal, which 
was submitted to the U.S. Department of Education. We put the 



"Ellen had good, longstanding connections in Latin America." The Basque 
Studies Program faculty and staff at the Basque Library, 1990. Left to 
right: Jill Berner, Linda White, Bill Douglass, Joan Brick, Ellen Brow, and 
Joxe Mallea-Olaetxe. 





WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


69 


grant proposal in, but Sheila, who was going to be in charge of 
that cataloging project, left the university before the grant was 
approved or maybe right afterwards. We were to receive about 
$200,000, if I remember correctly. 

At one point the library administration was even prepared 
to resign the grant. It was just a question of logistics. It wasn't 
that the library was against it, but they were just kind of, "What 
are we going to do? We've got to perform, and the grant's 
supposed to start pretty soon." 

I said, "That's unacceptable. We can't do that. We can't give 
away this one opportunity to get 10,000 Basque books cataloged. 
We've got to pull out the stops and do everything we can to save 
this." 

We helped the library find some students from the Basque 
Country that could come over and work, and we saved that 
project; the library was glad, too. Kathryn Etcheverria was 
appointed to head the project. That's her first real involvement 
with the collection. We cataloged 10,000 books. 

Ellen ran that library from 1989 to 1993. I really don't want 
to get too deeply into personalities, but it didn't work out. She 
was very intelligent, very pleasant, but she was pretty 
disorganized. She got involved in a whole lot of stuff around the 
library—she was on all the major committees—and she was 
highly esteemed within the library. But the Basque collection 
per se wasn't getting a lot of attention, and, I mean, we got to 
the point where there were books lying on the floor. There were 
unopened boxes of books, and there were unpaid bills. There 
were all kinds of problems, and it got worse and worse. 

Finally, I got involved when I saw what I saw, and I said, "It's 
over. We can't continue this way." 

It was painful for Ellen, it was painful for me, and it was 
painful for everybody concerned. She was a lovely lady, and 
everybody liked her, and I liked her. But it just was not possible. 
The management of the collection was frightful and even way 
worse than it had appeared when Jill and I dug into it, sorting 
through the unanswered correspondence, paying the stale bills, 
et cetera. 

The whole thing caused some other professional grief. Shortly 
after we terminated Ellen, or actually let her resign, the Library 
Personnel Committee evaluated everyone as part of the annual 
evaluation process. As I said, everything was very democratized. 



70 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


That committee would forward its conclusions to Morehouse, 
which then became part of his decision regarding the director's 
recommendations for promotion and merit pay increases. Ellen 
had an intimate friend on the Personnel Committee, and she 
argued that I should be censured for my arbitrary and spiteful 
treatment of Ellen. I guess it was a motion, and it passed. 

So when I met with Morehouse to review my performance 
for the year, he shared with me that criticism. I was stunned and 
angry. I had never been asked to meet with the committee to 
face my accuser or address the charge. No one came to ask for 
my version. I thought it was grossly unfair. Morehouse showed 
me his recommendation, which was highly positive. I received a 
merit increase every year of my service at DRI and UNR, and that 
year was no exception. I thought of protesting, but Morehouse 
just signed his evaluation. Later I sent a memo for my file, 
protesting the committee's procedure. 

Then we got Marc Ugalde involved. Marc had been a student 
worker with our program when he was getting his degree in 
education at UNR. He probably knew the collection, after Ellen, as 
well or better than anybody, 
because he had been kind of 
the key person after Jon Bilbao 
left, and Marc had been real 
hands-on. So of anybody 
around, he was the guy who 
understood the collection best. 

Marc was a schoolteacher at 
Galena High School. That was 
his first year, and he wasn't that 
happy. I mean, he didn't like 
teaching that much. 

I talked to him, and I said, 

"Marc, I know you're not a 
professional librarian, and 
here's this professional 
librarian position. Would you 
be interested? If you'd be 
interested, you could get your 
librarian degree by corres¬ 
pondence. We can't guarantee 
that you'll get the permanent 



"So of anybody around, he was the 
guy who understood the collection 
best" Basque Librarian Marc Ugalde 
at the Basque Library, 1994. 









WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


71 


job, but what I will promise you is that we'll support you going 
to school as much as we can. Would you be willing to come 
here and be the acting interim librarian while you get your 
librarian degree? You could meet the minimal standards of the 
position, as long as you're doing a good job and you're making 
progress. We'll accommodate it within your schedule and release 
a little bit of time for you to study. I'll try and keep that position 
unfilled for you to be able to finish your degree and get certified, 
so that you would at least be competitive, and you'd have the 
credential." 

We agreed to that. It worked out the way I had suggested 
that it could, and Marc got his library science degree from Arizona 
State University—a much respected librarian school and library 
science program. It took him awhile—three or four years— 
because he was doing it by correspondence. I think he left for a 
semester to be in residence down in Arizona. 

The position was announced, and he was one of the 
candidates but with no guarantee of getting it. But, he did get it, 
and he got it in a fair, free, and open competition. It wasn't 
wired at all. But once he had his library credential, he obviously 
had a lot of background in the collection. He knew some Basque, 
some Spanish, and he was the best candidate in that round. There 
was a national search and a selection committee. I didn't make 
that decision, and Steve Zink didn't make it exclusively. I don't 
think Steve was on that committee, and I don't remember who 
the members were, but we had people from around the university 
and at least one other person from the library. After Maria and 
Ellen, he was the third "permanent" librarian. 16 

Since Jon Bilbao, I think it's fair to say, even with Ellen, that 
we have not had anyone with comparable, substantive knowledge 
equal to Jon's, and we may never have that. I don't think that 
Marc had perfect coverage either, because different scholars who 
have come through have talked to me about, "Well, you've got 
this hole. You've got that hole." 

I mean, I don't know that anyone, including Jon, was capable 
of 100 percent perfect coverage. I don't think there's anybody in 
the library staff today who knows the field of anthropology well 
enough to develop the anthropology collection without the 
Anthropology Department, and you can probably say the same 
about virtually every department on campus. So the Basque 
collection shouldn't be any different. 



72 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


One of the biggest challenges we've always had post-Jon 
Bilbao—and this was true under Maria, Ellen, Marc, and 
Kathryn—was the lack of interface with the Basque Country. 
With Jon, both when he was in Reno and then when he moved 
back to the Basque Country, there was a wonderful period. I 
appreciated it at the time, but I didn't realize just what a 
wonderful thing we had going when Jon Bilbao went back and 
did Eusko Bibliographia, and he brought all the material together 
in Vitoria physically to be sent to Reno later on. 

That was better coverage than when Jon was in Reno and 
then would go back every year, and he'd go to the bookstores. 
Basically, that was the closest thing to perfection that we ever 
had, because Jon even had connections in the Basque 
government. So ministries that were publishing stuff which was 
getting distributed very poorly even in the Basque Country would 
send two copies over to Eusko Bibliographia. One would end up 
in Sancho El Sabio, and the other would come to Reno. 

Under all of the successor librarians, only Marc went to the 
Basque Country twice that I'm aware of. I think Maria, Ellen, 
and Kathryn might have been there once. The connections with 
the worlds of librarianship and also of bookselling in the Basque 
Country have clunked along. They are not nonexistent, and they 
are probably 30 percent of what they ought to be. Ideally, one 
day you would have a situation where you have a person that's 
really in intimate contact on an ongoing basis with the whole 
bibliophile world of the Basque Country and other places, too, 
such as Latin America. But that's a tall order; it's hard to do, and 
it requires a very special person. It's hard to be on the road a lot, 
and the resources aren't necessarily there. At least they haven't 
been devoted yet to allow that to happen quite the way it could 
or should, and we pay a price. 

There's an ad-hocness to the whole thing, and so inevitably 
you're going to develop holes in the collection, because you're 
not in that tight relationship. It's easier for things to drop off 
the radar screen. 

There are three or four people that I'm aware of in the Basque 
Country who are really on top of the current books coming out 
and also used books and who are really aware of what's 
happening. But we've got to be in a very tight relationship with 
those people, and you can't cobble together in ad hoc fashion 
what those people have, because they go to work every morning, 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


73 


and they spend all day, every day, working on these issues, and 
they're right at the vortex. Those are the people we need. 

We no longer have a Jon Bilbao; we no longer have a Eusko 
Bibliographia that served as a kind of funnel of material to this 
collection. For a number of years we had that real luxury. It didn't 
cost us anything, and it was the most effective coverage we ever 
had of the Basque books before or after. 

I don't know that you could ever get back to that, because it 
was very ad hoc. It had a whole lot to do with Jon Bilbao, his 
personality, and with his Eusko Bibliographia initiative, and 
that's all pretty unique. I don't know if something quite as 
efficient as that even exists in the Basque Country today. I doubt 
it. Those days are over. 

Joining Right about 1995, I was approached by Ann Ronald, 

the who was the Dean of Arts and Science at the time. 

College Ann always loved our program, and she knew a lot 
of Liberal about the Basque Book Series, because she and I were 

Arts on the University Press Board together for a number 

of years. She was from the English Department before 
she became the dean, and we had a good personal relationship. 
After she became dean she used to kid me, and when she'd see me 
on campus, she'd say, "I want your program," and I thought she 
was kidding. Well, one day she said, "I'm serious. I want your 
program." 

I said, "What are we talking about here?" 

We had lunch, and Ann said, "I think that you belong in the 
College of Arts and Science, and I think you would be a great 
addition rather than being a library program." 

I said, "Oh, man! I don't know!" I explained to her that we 
were really in Statewide Programs, and we weren't a library 
program. We were based in Getchell Library, but we were a 
Statewide Program. She already had some background, because 
she had recruited the Oral History Program, and they were in 
Statewide Programs with us. It wasn't as though we were totally 
breaking new ice or breaking the mold or something in 
administrative terms. There was already a precedent. 

I said, "First of all, I'll talk to the staff, and I'll talk to Steve 
Zink." So I held one of my very infrequent staff meetings. 

I almost never had staff meetings. Everybody'll tell you that. I 
always used to kid people saying I was a "benign Franco." [laughter] 



74 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Probably I had fewer staff 
meetings in thirty-two years 
than Joseba Zulaika, former 
Director of Basque Studies, had 
in six months. Nobody really 
wanted them. We were really 
small, and it didn't make a 
whole lot of difference to have 
a staff meeting, for instance, 
between Jon and me, because 
we had lunch every day 
together. So basically there was 
no need, even when we got 
another position, because it 
was face-to-face and so 
intimate. Plus, frankly, people 
like Aulestia, Bilbao, or Zulaika, 
in those years, didn't 
understand the university and 
didn't want to understand it. 

They were from a different 
world, and they just wanted to 
stay very concentrated on their projects; they didn't want to be on 
committees around the university. It was a very, very foreign world 
to them, and they just wanted me to go out there and do that stuff 
for all of us. And it made sense. I kind of understood the way the 
university worked, and I could do it, and I did so for thirty-odd 
years. Staff meetings were pretty rare, but then it became less rare 
towards the end of my tenure. But they were still pretty rare. We'd 
meet two or three times a year maybe. 

I got everybody together and said, "Hey! The Dean of Arts 
and Science wants us to join. What do you guys think?" 

We debated back and forth. We had some teaching 
commitments in some departments, particularly in 
Anthropology, History, and Foreign Languages, and we were 
beginning to develop one with Human Geography. We weren't 
getting paid extra for it, but we had some bridges to those 
departments. Also, they were involved in our program through 
our tutorial PhD program, established in 1984. Political Science, 
I think, had a passing or an ad hoc interest in us because of 
Basque nationalism. We had also started the University Studies 



Iban Bilbao, his wife Chantal Egiluz, 
and their children pose before a 
portrait of Iban's dad, Jon Bilbao, 
during a visit to Basque Studies, 1996. 










WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


75 


Abroad Consortium (USAC) too, in 1982, and certainly Foreign 
Languages, particularly, was highly benefited by the consortium. 

So, anyway, everybody said, “Go for it. Explore it." Our people 
wanted to go into the College of Arts and Science, because we 
were in this odd-duck category vis-a-vis all of these departments 
and all of these disciplines that we were products of. By moving 
into the College of Arts and Science, we were, in effect, also 
cleaning up the relationship between the library and the program. 

So I sat down with Ann, and I explained to her that we had 
these informal and really unbalanced, asymmetrical, and 
essentially unfair relationships with several departments within 
her college. We were doing things for them, but we weren't really 
being compensated at all. The fact of the matter is that, if we 
wanted to teach a course on Basque language, Basque literature, 
or Basque history, they'd say, “Thank you very much," and 
schedule a course. But that was it. 

They wouldn't budget any of their departmental budget. So 
it wasn't just in the library that we were excluded from the budget. 
In our whole teaching dimension the program was excluded from 
the individual departmental budgets, but they were always 
perfectly willing to let us teach for nothing. They would then 
count FTEs [Full Time Equivalent students] as theirs, but we 
weren't generating a lot of FTEs. I mean, we'd get seven or eight 
students. Oftentimes our courses would have been canceled had 
they had to justify themselves economically, but because we were 
doing them “for nothing," in theory, the department and the 
central administration didn't care. 

Ann said, “If you'll come in the college, I will work hard to 
develop joint appointments between the Basque Program and 
the relevant departments. I'll try and get a position—half-time 
Basque Studies and half-time in each of those departments that 
you work with." That sounded pretty good. 

We had had very, very little success in growing the program 
because of the elephant's graveyard phenomenon that I've talked 
about—the Statewide Programs thing. It was a very clunky deal, 
and the idea of having the Dean of Arts and Science for us pushing 
this agenda, that was another deal. 

We went into Arts and Science, and actually, Ann's 
commitment didn't work out. I think we ran up against a sort of 
passive resistance within the departments, because each 
department has its own set of priorities. (I used to go to the old 



76 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


College of Arts and Science chairs' meeting once a month, and 
there were sixteen, seventeen, or eighteen of them, and I made 
it very, very clear who and what we were. Tom King was there 
with Oral History, too. So Tom and I were heading two programs 
that were unique—nonpedagogic or nonacademic—and all the 
rest were teaching departments.) 

If Ann wanted to give them a position with some kind of a 
Basque whatever, the departments would probably have accepted 
it. But the idea that they would have to take half of a position in 
their budget and pair it up with a half a position in our budget 
and go out for a very specific kind of person, they wouldn't want 
to do it, really, when push came to shove. I didn't encounter 
hostility, just indifference or maybe passive resistance. So it never 
happened. That was naive, but that was the main incentive for 
us to go into the College of Arts and Science. 

Of course, I had to sit down and negotiate our administrative 
departure from the library with Steve Zink, the head of the library. 
When Steve Zink took over for Morehouse, nothing changed. 
They have different personalities, and Steve is a little more hands- 
on, a little more hierarchical, and a little more administratively 
oriented than Hap was, but Steve was hugely supportive of the 
program. He liked it and thought it was great. He had even come 
to me at one point and talked me into submitting an article on 
Basques in the U.S. Census to a journal that he was editing on 
government affairs. That was before Zink became director of the 
library, today's dean of libraries, so I had a little bit of a 
relationship with him from that, and he had appreciated it. 

Steve was OK with the administrative move. However, we 
were going to remain physically in the library. But I gave up two 
things in return for the program continuing to stay in the library 
as well as for the library to take control of the Basque collection. 
We would definitively mainstream the Basque collection within 
the library. 

One thing I gave up was the half-time library position, which 
was, then, transferred to the library budget. In effect, we gave 
them a half-time position to make up the full-time Basque 
Librarian, who is now exclusively within the library. 

By the time I left, I was no longer evaluating Marc as the 
Basque Studies Librarian, and Joseba did not evaluate the Basque 
Librarian, to my knowledge. In the past, Maria Otero and Ellen 
Brow reported to me and to Milton Wolf. Milton Wolf and I had 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


77 


to evaluate them jointly, because half of the position was ours, 
and half of the position was Milton's. We had this kind of fairly 
inefficient deal where we had the dual evaluations of the Basque 
Librarian. Also, the fact that the Basque Librarian was not full¬ 
time library faculty meant that it was tugged in two directions, 
and the collection still had not been mainstreamed as effectively 
as it probably should have been. 

I felt about as confident to evaluate the librarian, by the way, 
as the library committees feel evaluating, say, Joseba Zulaika and 
what he does. In other words, it was a little hard for me to give a 
fair evaluation of the librarian, because I'm not a librarian. Just 
like it's a little hard for the library staff or faculty to evaluate an 
anthropologist. It's not impossible, but it's not great. 

I understand that librarians probably have a whole set of 
issues and concerns that are unique to librarianship, such as space. 
What do you do with duplicates? Do you treat this collection 
any differently than Special Collections? I mean, if you treat the 
Basque collection totally differently but as mainstream within 
the library, I am sure that there are consequences within the 
library. A person in charge of another division in the library is 
going to be thinking, “Well, how come they get that kind of 
special treatment and I don't?" The library structure is a whole 
world of its own that I personally don't understand that well. 

The other thing I gave up was part of my salary. It was obvious 
that we really needed an assistant librarian as well. In other words, 
the collection was too big for one full-time librarian, and there 
was no money. By then I was in the process of going into phased- 
in early retirement. I was on 80-percent salary, because I had 
given up 20 percent of my salary and my position to fund Gorka 
Aulestia's project. When the dictionary was completed by the 
end of the 1980s and Aulestia went home to Europe, I continued 
at the 80-percent level, because I was getting more and more 
involved in the casino business downtown with my family, and 
I ended up with half ownership of the Riverboat Hotel and 
Casino. I had some commitments downtown, and I didn't want 
a full-time position. So we kept that money. It was kind of an 
annual negotiation with central administration, and every year 
we kept that .2 position. It became sort of a contingency fund 
for the program. 

When we were making this transition to Arts and Science, 
the university offered a phased-in early retirement program, 



78 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


which had certain benefits. I don't think they still have it, it was 
just a window, but at the time they were going to give you a year 
of salary if you went as low as half-time. And you'd still earn a 
full year's credit towards retirement, even if you only worked 
half-time. It was attractive enough just even from a fiscal 
standpoint. My salary then was up pretty close to $100,000 a 
year, and I was going to go from .8 to .5, and that 30 percent or 
.3 was $30,000 in round numbers. 

Hap or Steve—that was right about when Steve came on line 
as director and there was a lot of transition—went to central 
administration, and they agreed to create a Basque Library 
assistant position out of that .3, rather than taking it back. 
Normally, within the system, if you abandon some funding or 
part of a position, you don't keep it as a department. De facto it 
reverts to central administration, and then they reallocate it. 
You might be able to go in and talk them out of it, or part of it, 
for your program or your department or your effort, but it wasn't 
automatic. So we consolidated the assistant librarian position as 
part of the move of the program to the College of Arts and 
Science. That position is now in the library budget, and it was 
funded by the two former pieces of my salary. 

They picked up both half-time positions in return for the 
idea that the Basque collection would be the UNR library's full 
responsibility. By then this arrangement of the Basque Studies 
Program controlling the Basque collection was really a bad idea. 
It became increasingly evident that there was a big downside to 
the whole idea of having our own little collection in our own 
little world. You could have your books, but now you've got 
30,000 of them, and we were not spending any of our resources 
on cataloging them or keeping them up. 

For the last five to ten years, before we made that transfer to 
Arts and Science, it became obvious that our having control over 
the library collection was a big mistake, because it just meant 
that the collection was ignored or neglected for the most part. It 
meant that we had a huge and growing problem in maintaining 
and stewarding that library properly. It had just gotten way out 
of control. The library always assumed that the only people that 
could really grow the collection, that had the expertise to do it, 
were us. There was always the sense of, “We don't really 
understand what the Basque Program's doing, but they take care 
of the collection." 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


79 


The library would back our decisions, particularly Jon Bilbao's 
decisions. We all followed Jon's lead for a lot of years until he 
left. The collection just grew, and the situation just evolved into 
a loose relationship with the library. By the same token, because 
the relationship was so loose, we were always down the library's 
list of priorities. We were never up in the top three priorities. So 
for better or worse, it seemed to make sense to give the collection 
to the library, and I still believe that it was the right decision. 

I had no problem with using my own personal position to 
help it happen, because I thought it was a very important thing 
in the evolution of both the program and the library collection. 
In fact, the library has always chased along behind the collection, 
trying to catch up. It's never been easy for the library to stay on 
top of it. Even today with two people and student assistants, it's 
gotten to be a really big, important, and complex collection. 

Because of the schism, the split—and I don't mean schism 
in the sense of tension but in the sense of administrative 
division—it is absolutely true that the program lost any kind of 
administrative control over the collection. I didn't really have 
any kind of input into the collection afterwards. We 
mainstreamed the Basque collection within the library 
framework, and we're no longer under the Special Collections 
librarian. Technically, the general library acquires and processes 
the books and cares for them. 

So Steve took over the administration of the Basque Library 
collection, while Ann Ronald assumed the responsibility of being 
our supervisor. So she would do my annual evaluation, and I 
would evaluate Joseba and Linda, because by then we had only 
three—well, two and a half, because I was down to half-time— 
professional positions. 

I reported to Ann, but I would see Steve a lot, because they 
started to get into the planning for the new library building, the 
Mathewson-IGT Knowledge Center. The new library building has 
been in the planning stage for seven years or eight years, maybe 
longer. They've been talking about it for as long as I can 
remember, really. But it was getting real serious about 1997. 

That's about the time that Ann wanted to physically move 
the program into the old College of Education building that she 
was going to inherit as part of that college's move to new quarters. 
She wanted to put foreign Languages and Basque Studies and 
some other international stuff and maybe History in that 



80 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


building. She wanted to create a kind of international building, 
and she even wanted our books. 

I went to Zink, and he said, "First of all, you're not going to 
take the books, and, secondly, I don't want the program to leave. 
The only non-library program that I want to keep is the Basque 
Studies Program. I want you in The Knowledge Center." So there 
was a tug-of-war between Zink and Ronald, not bloody, but she 
had a whole agenda for us, which involved moving in with 
Foreign Languages. 

Steve argued strongly and virtually insisted upon our staying 
physically with the collection and moving into the new building 
with the rest of the library. Steve wasn't in a position to stop us 
from moving as a program, but he was not going to let the books 
go, and we didn't want to leave the book collection behind. (The 
center is the only non-library function that, I think, is going to 
be in the Knowledge Center.) 

It would be my impression that Steve thinks that the collection 
is an even more prominent feature of the library if the center is 
there with the collection and vice versa. The center is enhanced by 
the library collection, by being in the same space as the collection, 
and the collection is enhanced by having the Basque scholars and 
the activities all within the same physical framework. 

There are problems—the day-to-day stuff, little frictions 
between the Center for Basque Studies and the library. There are 
failures along with successes like anything else in life. But I think 
on balance it's fair to say—at least it's my perception—that, the 
library is happy to have the Basque collection and the center. 
They designed us into the building because they're so proud of 
the collection, and they wanted the center to stay with the books. 

For example, the library is kind of featuring Basque Studies 
in some ways in the new library building. The space that we're 
moving into is really prime space. They've even designed exhibit 
space that really has nothing to do with the library per se, but 
we're going to have some cases and some places to exhibit artifacts 
or visual materials. 

So it all ties together in Steve's mind. I'm not privy to 
everything that goes on in this library, but to my knowledge 
there wasn't any resistance to that idea by the planning 
committee. I never heard that anybody ever said, "Hey, what is 
the center moving into the library for? Why is it staying with 
us? Why don't we leave it behind?" 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


81 


They could leave us behind, and that, to me, was always an 
option. One of the possibilities is that the Basque Center could 
be somewhere else. It doesn't have to automatically or necessarily 
be with the collection. I mean, there's going to be a lot of space 
available in the Getchell Library. (I don't know that a decision 
has been made about this building, but there are some issues 
with it, and I don't know about its future.) To my knowledge 
nobody ever raised that possibility on the library side. They've 
always encouraged and assumed that the two would stay together. 
Most of that, of course, happened on Zulaika's watch after I retired 
on December 31, 1999. 

I believe today it makes more sense for the program or the 
center as a research effort per se to be in the College of Liberal 
Arts [which was split from the College of Arts and Science in 
2004] rather than in the library, because the library framework 
was somewhat inhibitive. There were a lot of dimensions of the 
Basque Studies Program that didn't really fit the library that well. 
The library wasn't conducting research, at least the way we were 
conducting research, or implementing courses overseas. But there 
are also dimensions of the program that don't fit the College of 
Liberal Arts that well. The Basque Program's kind of a strange 
animal, and it's got a lot of facets. There's no obviously perfect 
place for the Basque Program. 

Looking We're the only academic entity now left in the 
forward library. I think it's really important for the center 
and the library, going forward, to negotiate a very 
fine, positive, and mutually respectful relationship, because we're 
going to be sharing the same physical space. We're going to have 
to cooperate at a lot of levels. I mean, even just things like hours, 
keeping the doors open, and backing each other up, because, 
ultimately, we have very little staff, and they have very little 
staff. Together there's more critical mass to be able to keep the 
doors open and the lights on. 

It's going to be like sharing an apartment with somebody in 
some ways. If you're going to paint the apartment, you ought to 
sit down and discuss it with your roommate and not just go buy 
some paint and paint the apartment, because your roommate 
might come home and start screaming. So there are a lot of 
human issues that need to be worked out, and I don't see why 
they can't be worked out. 



82 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


There are a lot of reasons why the waters ought to be smooth. 
But it needs to be negotiated. If there's a perception of problems, 
I think they need to be discussed openly and frankly in a spirit 
of trying to improve a situation that maybe needs improvement, 
whatever that happens to be. 

If the center and the library ever get to the point that they're 
not talking to each other, it's going to be a miserable circumstance 
for both sides. It would be like having a roommate that you 
don't even talk to in your apartment. Given the way it's going to 
work in the future, it would be a lose-lose situation for everybody 
concerned. 

I also think that it's probably important for the center to 
have a little bit of input into the collection philosophy and 
user policies, because after all, a lot of the users—not center 
staff—are nevertheless coming through the framework of the 
center. When we're providing grants for the people in Europe 
or for any scholar to come to Reno, clearly we shouldn't be 
creating problems for them. I think the goal should always be 
that the patron, both our patron and the library's patron, 
should receive the very best possible treatment and service 
and have the very best possible experience for choosing to 
come to Reno. If they have a bad experience, because either 
the library or the center lets them down, it's going to reflect on 
both of us. 

The fact of the matter is that every department on campus 
participates in the development of the general library collection, 
and usually certain key individuals within departments 
participate a lot more than their colleagues. I mean some of 
their colleagues are professors who have never walked across 
campus and come into the library. They've either got their own 
books, or they work online. 

A particular faculty member who's library oriented can have 
an enormous impact on the development of a collection by 
coming over and filling out cards and requests and saying, "Well, 
we need this. We need that. We need the other thing." 
Somebody's got to do it, and you get these odd individuals 
sprinkled throughout the campus who have a lot more influence 
on collection development than their colleagues. They are active, 
and they get in the face of the library staff, particularly the 
acquisitions person. Those people get way more attention, and 
ultimately their agenda gets met. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


83 


For instance, Milton Wolf used to try and get departments 
to have a designated departmental representative that he could 
talk to in order to help him in, say, developing the anthropology 
collection. Now, that was one framework, and it probably still 
exists. It seems to me that it would make sense in our case to 
have a library representative on the center staff who interfaces 
with the library on issues of collection development. I mean, it 
would seem to me to make sense. I don't know if that exists 
right now. That might be a real important thing. 

There's always a give-and-take between the development of 
the library and the faculty of the entire university. One can make 
the argument that it should be even more so in terms of the 
relationship between Basque Studies and the library regarding 
the development of a very specialized collection. The fact of the 
matter is that the staff here possesses the specialized knowledge 
to develop it more so than do the librarians. I would say that 
that has always been true. Maybe it won't always be true. Maybe 
there'll be a librarian in the future that knows more about the 
world of Basque books. Maybe there'll be another Jon Bilbao. 
With Jon Bilbao, we had the world expert, and there weren't any 
Basque libraries either, because we're talking about Franco's time 
for the most part. 


Basque instruction at home and abroad 

One of the things that Jon Bilbao wanted was for us to 
sponsor students going to the Basque Country. So we started a 
summer program effort in the town of Ustaritz, over in the 
French-Basque area. 

I was a little ambivalent about the idea of a summer program. 
It was one of those things where Jon was the throttle and I was the 
brake. Jon thought we should be doing that, and I was always 
ambivalent about that kind of public service stuff, and again that 
gets into my academic elitism. But there were just the two of us, 
and I thought we could only do so much. I mean, I was already 
doing the newsletter, and I knew that was taking some time, 
although not a huge amount. (I would write it in a day or two, but 
you had to gather the information and whatever, and it was a 
service thing more than research. It wasn't the kind of publication 
and writing that I was hoping that we would produce.) 



84 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


We were at DRI at the time, and, of course, we had to run the 
summer program through the Continuing Education 
Department of UNR. It really was not a DRI-compatible activity, 
and Jon and I were under a lot of pressure to just survive with 
grants. It was taking time away from our grant writing, our 
research, and our writing for publication. I was ambivalent about 
that tradeoff, but Jon really wanted to do it, and I didn't say no. 
I did some of the things for that program because I was the 
administrator, so I had to deal with the airlines and the travel 
agents more than Jon at the time. But I did it. 

The summer program was a big adventure for us, because in 
those days you had to get, initially, a minimum of thirty-five 
passengers to get a charter deal on an airplane. It was a little bit 
like book publishing. You had to decide how many copies you 
were going to print. Well, in those days if you wanted to take a 
group to Europe, for instance, you couldn't just go buy individual 
tickets and take twelve people, because the tickets were $2,000 
apiece if they each went by themselves. The airlines had group 
rates, but you had to guarantee x number of people. 

The first year we tried to take a group to Ustaritz, we panicked 
because we only had about thirty people by the time of the 
deadline when we had to put the money down. So we cancelled, 
and then in the next two weeks we had about five or six more 
applications, and we were sorry to have cancelled, but it was too 
late. 

We were able to keep some of those people in reserve, so the 
next year we did the first program in Ustaritz. [The Basque Studies 
Program ran five summer sessions abroad from 1970 to 1981.] 

That first year Jon led the summer program and taught a 
little history. Musician and Basque teacher Yon Onatibia taught 
Basque for us, and he also taught dancing and played the txistu 
[flute]; everybody loved him. 17 1 went and got Caro Baroja in his 
home, Itzea, and brought him over, and he gave a lecture, and I 
took him back home. Jon also invited some political people from 
different points of view to come in and talk: PNV [the Basque 
Nationalist Party in its Spanish acronym] types, ETA [the Basque 
Country and Freedom in its Basque acronym], et cetera. 

We kind of opened it up in the evenings for people to present 
any point of view. In fact, I think he even put out an invitation 
to Falange [a Spanish fascist party]. Different groups came in 
and took advantage of that, and they just talked to the kids. I 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


85 



The first Basque Studies Program Summer Sessions Abroad staff in 
Landagoien, Ustaritz, 1970. Left to right: Eloy Placer, Bill Douglass, 
unidentified, Yon Onatibia, and Jon Bilbao. 


taught the Old World Basque culture class for a little while, 
because I wasn't there the whole summer. Eloy Placer also went 
and taught literature. The four of us—Onatibia, Placer, Jon, and 
myself—were the instructors the first year. 

Eloy Placer was from Alava, and he was kind of an expatriate 
like Jon. I don't think he had as much political baggage, but I 
think he wanted to get out of Franco's Spain, and he came to the 
United States. He was a Spanish instructor at several universities. 
I knew about him through the Foreign Languages Department. 
He was, then, in Lafayette, Louisiana. When we started the Basque 
Studies Program, the Foreign Languages Department said to us, 
"We would like our next hire, if possible, to be Basque or to have 
some kind of Basque dimension." 

So the Foreign Languages Department hired a guy named 
Juan "Maguna" (Magunagoicoechea was his full name), who was 
an ex-priest, as a mainstream Spanish instructor in the Spanish 
Department. 18 He interfaced with us at some kind of a personal 












86 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


level, but he was pretty hostile 
to Basque nationalism. I think 
he was out of a Carlist [tradi¬ 
tionalist pro-Franco] family 
from Gernika. I'm not 100 
percent sure, but I think so. In 
a lot of ways he certainly was a 
Spanish nationalist. I mean, 
that would be my categori¬ 
zation of Juan. But it's not as 
though we got into big fights 
or anything. 

Maguna used to hang out 
with us. It was a social thing for 
him to come over and talk to 
Jon Bilbao, primarily, and me, 
too. In fact, Jon used to 
complain about it, because he 
would just sit across the table 
from him and blah, blah, blah, 
blah, blah, while Jon would be 
working. 

Maguna didn't take any 
Basque initiatives that I can 
recall. I mean, he wasn't interested in teaching Basque literature. 
He didn't have any publications to my knowledge that had 
anything to do with Basque. Essentially he didn't really do 
anything Basque. We were just in the infancy of the program, 
and he really wasn't the liaison with us that Foreign Languages 
wanted. Maguna never came up with an idea. He never said, you 
know, "I could do this," or whatever. 

So he got off on a whole bunch of personal stuff, and I'm 
not even sure what it all was, but he decided to leave Reno. He 
went to work for the U.S. Army's Language School in Monterey, 
California. (They've got this big language school down there with 
all different kinds of world languages—I mean, even some very 
exotic ones.) But, I think Maguna was not even a fluent Basque 
speaker. He was like Jon Bilbao in the sense that he came out of 
that generation where it was very hard to learn Basque in the 
Basque Country, and it was a deprecated language. 



"Eloy Placer was . . . kind of an ex¬ 
patriatelike Jon. I don't think he had 
as much political baggage, but I think 
he wanted out of Franco's Spain." 
Eloy Placer (left) and Bill Douglass on 
the bus to Ustaritz during the 1970 
summer session. 





WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


87 


Meanwhile, the Foreign Languages Department recruited a 
guy named Eugene Grotegut. Grotegut was a German specialist, 
and he was actually, like myself, a native Nevadan, and he wanted 
to come back to Nevada. Grotegut had been at the University of 
Kentucky and had met Eloy and had become very close friends. 
Then Grotegut had gone somewhere else. I don't think he came 
here from Kentucky, but I could be wrong. I think Grotegut 
maybe was at a Canadian university, but they brought him in to 
be the departmental chairman. They were having difficulties in 
the department, and they wanted to bring in an outside 
chairman, and he had a lot of good academic credentials. 

Grotegut got very interested in this little, baby Basque Studies 
Program, because it was tiny. I'm talking maybe 1969, 1970 or 
something like that. He said to me, "I want to replace Maguna 
with a Basque specialist. There's this person, Eloy Placer. He's 
excellent, and I would love to bring him here for these reasons." 19 

Eloy had written a book, Lo Vasco en Pio Baroja, and that 
was probably his dissertation. Eloy was again a non-speaker of 
Basque, but he was a Bascophile —a linguist. Eloy and his wife, 
Amparo, came to Reno, and he had some grown children that 
stayed down in Louisiana, because they'd been in Louisiana for 
several years by then. I forget how many—maybe two boys and 
two girls. I'm a little vague about this. 

Eloy definitely rolled up his sleeves, and as I said, he went to 
Ustaritz with us on the first summer session program and taught 
Basque literature. Of course, he couldn't handle euskaldun 
[Basque-language] literature, but he did Unamuno and other 
works, but from a Basque perspective. 

Eloy was very, very sympathetic to the Basque Studies 
Program. He loved the idea. He was willing to do anything. He 
would come over a lot. He even gave us some books to put in the 
collection. I forget how many, but he had a little private 
collection. He was totally positive, and he and Amparo were very 
much part of our tight social circle. Eloy died of a massive heart 
attack and just dropped dead, so it was a big tragedy. Then 
Grotegut said, "We're going to replace Eloy with a Basque 
specialist," but that never happened. 

I don't know whatever happened in his department, but there 
wasn't anybody available who was fluent in Basque. I remember 
Grotegut asked me specifically for some recommendations, and 



88 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


we didn't know anybody. We couldn't come up with a candidate, 
so he had to fill the position. I'm sure within his department 
there were various opinions about who they ought to hire and 
the directions they should go, particularly for the Spanish section. 
They're always pulled between Latin America and Iberia, Golden 
Age versus Noventayocho [1898 generation], and all of that. So 
to cover with four, five, six, or seven people the whole spectrum 
of Spanish literature at large, as Hispanic literature, is pretty tough. 
So anyway, Grotegut was never able to make good on that 
particular promise. 

We wanted to do the first summer program outside of Spain, 
and we wanted to hold it in Iparralde, in part because we wanted 
to talk about politics, and it was Franco's times. We started in 
Ustaritz, because of Basque scholar Eugene Goyheneche, who 
lived there. Jon talked to him about needing a place to hold the 
program, and he said, “Well, why not Landagoien?" 

The municipality of Ustaritz owned a self-contained, little 
convention facility, called Landagoien, and you could rent it. 
It's got sleeping rooms and aulas [meeting rooms]. It sits on a 
hill up above the town of Ustaritz. Somehow or other the 
University of Pau was a little bit involved with Landagoien, but 
I'm not sure just how. I think Goyheneche and his wife negotiated 
it for Jon, and it worked. So we went there for two or three years. 

Probably in the first year, I'm going to guess, the students 
were about two-thirds Basque Americans and about a third 
Americans from all over the American West. I think over time 
the Basque-American presence which attended the program has 
gone down percentage wise. I think the students were very excited 
to be there, and the program was quite structured. They had to 
sit in class every day, and we were ambitious. We didn't have a 
whole lot of contact with the local community in Ustaritz. It's 
not as isolated as Arantzazu, but it's like Arantzazu, because it's 
up on a hill. It wasn't too far to walk into town, but we didn't 
have a huge impact on it. You could walk down there, but it was 
a kilometer or more, so our students weren't just circulating every 
night in the bars or something. 

We did a very memorable summer program in 1972 in which 
we partnered up with the Office of Higher Education in the state 
of Idaho. They got a grant from the National Endowment for the 
Humanities to foster Basque studies in the state of Idaho. David 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


89 


Grover, who was the head 
of that department, got in 
touch with me and 
wanted me to be a 
consultant in writing a 
grant proposal, and I 
agreed. (By then our 
Basque Studies Program 
was getting to be a little 
bit established. We were 
publishing the Basque 
Book Series, and we had 
a grant, and we were 
doing the research in 
Elko and doing work on 
Amerikanuak. And we 
had run at least one of 
our first programs in 
Ustaritz.) 

Grover was also 
working with Basques in 
Boise—Pete Cenarrusa [Secretary of State of Idaho from 1967 to 
2002], Ramon "Ray" Echevarria, who was a very young Catholic 
priest and teaching a Basque culture class at Pocatello University, 
professor Pat Bieter, who was teaching at Boise State University, 
and John Sita, who was a linguist at the University of Idaho in 
Moscow. He was kind of a wild man. He was from Georgia in the 
Soviet Union. He was interested in Basque linguistics, and he had 
gotten Idaho to buy Basque books. They had 1,000 books. I think 
eventually they might have even sold them to us or sent them 
here. I can't remember. 

Finally, they wrote this very eclectic kind of grant. It was 
going to do a little of this, a little of that. Some of it was very 
publicly oriented. I mean, they were going to send the Oinkari 
Basque dance group from Boise around the state and probably 
do some oral histories. It was not a highly integrated, focused 
thing. It was a bunch of activities under one tent. 

Grover asked me what I thought they could do, and I said, 
"Well, we've got this program we're running in Europe, and 
wouldn't it be interesting if maybe we could feature a special 



The first Basque Studies Program Summer 
Session Abroad at Ustaritz, 1970. Left to 
right: Eloy Placer, Julio Caro Baroja, Bill 
Douglass, and Jon Bilbao. 









90 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


graduate-level Basque linguistics seminar and try to encourage 
some graduate students around the world to get interested in 
Basque as a linguistic phenomenon?" 

I got in touch with Basque-language linguists Koldo 
Mitxelena, Rudy de Rijk from Holland, and Bill Jacobsen, and 
they agreed in principle, if we got the money, to be the instructors 
of a seminar on Basque linguistics. So we wrote this into the 
grant, and it was a $12,000 item out of about $40,000. We're 
talking about 1971, and that was a lot of money, compared to 
today. The idea was that we were going to give a $1,000 
scholarship to each of ten candidates that would attend. 

The grant got funded, and we advertised the seminar around 
the world. In fact, we got one student from Argentina, maybe 
one from Europe, a couple from Harvard, and one from Berkeley. 
Anyway, we had all these great candidates. 

Then I met with people up in Idaho, and actually things got 
a little dicey, because once they had the money in hand, there 
were some second thoughts about spending that much of the 
grant on this idea, but they were pretty much locked into that. 
But then there got to be a couple of issues of who was going to 
go. We wanted this national-international competition to 
identify the best candidates, and they wanted Sita and I think 
one other person out of Idaho that really wasn't going to get a 
grant on a merit. 

That got to be a bit of a hassle, and Bill Jacobsen and I were 
organizing the thing from Reno, and we refused to go along 
with that compromise. Eventually, the Office of Higher Education 
up there provided additional funding for a couple of the Idaho 
people to go. I think we went from ten to twelve that way. 

Anyway, we went to the Basque Country and ran that seminar 
at the Arantzazu monastery in Onati, which is a nice and 
spectacular place. We thought that would be a real good place, 
because it was all self-contained, and there were very few 
distractions. There are lodgings, and you can rent them from 
the frailes [friars]. I think it was through local historian Inaki 
Zumalde that we went to Onati. I know that Zumalde was very 
involved in the negotiation regarding a Franciscan monastery 
down in the town where Boise State subsequently held its first 
year-long program. The linguistic seminar was kind of its own 
program within the larger summer school program. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


91 


It was a very important program, because that year several 
key people attended. I think that it's fair to say that those 
summers in Ustaritz and in Onati had a big impact on the Basque- 
American community, particularly up in Boise, because some of 
its key players over the next thirty years were students from those 
programs, which really changed their lives. 

Carmelo Urza, today's director of the University Study Abroad 
Consortium (USAC), went. Then Carmelo would come back to 
Reno and would get his MA in Spanish at UNR, but with a Basque 
thesis, in part because he'd gone on that program. Miren 
Rementeria Artiach, who until a short time ago was Pete 
Cenarrusa's secretary and key aide, went. Julio Bilbao, a Basque 
American who was subsequently quite active in the Basque 
community in Boise, and Ray Echevarria also came along. It was 
a very impactful program. 

Actually, Cenarrusa's big involvement with Basque affairs 
resulted from that first little Ustaritz initiative, because his son 
Joe went on our Ustaritz program and came back to Boise all 
charged up about it. I think Joe was their only son, and he talked 
his parents into going over to the Basque Country. Pete was a 
Basque American, and he was proud of his heritage, but he had 
never been to the Basque Country. Pete went over with Joe, and 
he came back all fired up and incensed and very politicized. Pete, 
throughout his career, was always very, very pro-Basque, maybe 
even in favor of Basque independence, and he took a lot of stands 
throughout the rest of his career. But he had never even been to 
the Basque Country until Joe went on our little Ustaritz initiative 
and fell in love with the place and came back. 

Jon Bilbao had that vision, and he thought that a summer 
program would be a big, big impact just in terms of maintaining 
Basque culture in the American West, and he was absolutely 
right. But I was ambivalent about whether that was our role, 
the role of an academic department. I wasn't against it. I just 
didn't know if it was our role, because in my mind it was more 
like the role of a Basque club, even, or a role for a NABO, which 
didn't exist at the time. 

For me as an anthropologist, the really appropriate role was 
to study Basques and study Basque identity main-tenance— 
Basques were my "subject," if you will, rather than my object. I 
wasn't supposed to create my subject or maintain my subject; I 



92 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


was supposed to try and understand my subject. I wrote two 
articles about the history of the program 20 , where I talked about 
the ambivalence that I felt about crossing the line between the 
objective investigator, if there is such a thing—and one can make 
an argument that there's no such thing as scientific objectivity, 
if you will—versus crossing the line and becoming a fomenter 
or, in other words, creating the thing that you're going to study. 

Anthropologists are used to a kind of messiness regarding 
this issue in the sense that anthropological interviewing might 
happen in bars or wherever it happens and is face-to-face. It's a 
lot less structured along those lines than is your average 
sociologist who would think that you totally contaminated your 
whole field, your whole subject of study, by having a program 
that sends out newsletters and publishes books and provides part 
of the cultural legacy for the very phenomenon that you purport 
to be studying. Sociologists would generally be appalled at all of 
that, versus anthropology, which is a little messier. 

Jon, of course, had no ambivalence whatsoever about 
getting involved, because his intellectual interests were in 
things like the language and Basque prehistory. Jon's career, 
indeed all of his life, had been about preserving Basque 
culture, whether he was fighting in the Basque Army during 
the Spanish Civil War or whether he was with Jose Antonio 
de Aguirre [the first Basque government president, 1936-1960] 
in New York City, around the United Nations, as part of the 
Basque government-in-exile, or whether he went to Boise as 
Aguirre's appointed representative. 

Ramon De La Sota, then head of the Basque delegation in 
the U.S., sent Jon to Boise as a missionary to essentially find out 
what remained of Basque national consciousness there and also 
to try and raise it. Jon had a terrible time in Boise, and it was a 
very unpleasant experience for him, because there was a whole 
lot of indifference, particularly about Basque politics. Most of 
the Basques in Boise weren't interested. 

He left Boise and went to Berkeley to begin doctoral work, in 
part because he felt, I think, pretty disappointed in what he'd 
found in Boise and probably disappointed in his own efforts. 
I'm sure he was a little embarrassed that he wasn't able to produce 
more, but he always stayed very involved in Basque nationalist 
affairs. [Jon pursued his doctoral studies at Columbia University 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


93 


from 1940 to 1942, but he never completed the degree. In 1995 
the University of the Basque Country awarded him an honorary 
doctorate posthumously.] 

Founding Jon wanted to continue that whole study-abroad 
USAC effort. But then, Pat Bieter from Boise State 
University jumped in, and he wanted to run a year- 
round program, so he recruited Jon at some point—if not the 
first year, then the second—to help him for a year. They were 
having some problems getting that off the ground and also in 
terms of negotiating deals, and they wanted to set the program 
up in Onati. At that point I said, "Jon, we were having enough 
trouble just recruiting enough students for our summer program. 
I don't think we should compete with Boise. I mean, let's forget 
it. If Boise State's going to run their deal up there, let them do it. 
More power to them. Why duplicate the effort?" 

That's when Jon got a little bit involved with Bieter. Jon was 
very instrumental in helping Pat set that up. Jon had the contacts 
in Onati, and that actually got to be somewhat controversial, 
because there was a bomb threat from ETA. Some people in ETA 
thought Jon was with the CIA. It was then that Jon took a leave 
of absence from Reno for either a semester or a year, and that's 
where he met his second wife, Gayle Slavin, who was an older 
student on the Onati program. She wasn't a kid. [They got 
married in Reno in 1985.] 

Bieter also hired Carmelo Urza to be the director of the Boise 
program for a year. Carmelo by then was married to Nikki Laxalt 
and had gone to Iowa for his PhD, and he was teaching at the 
University of Richmond. Somewhere in there, maybe before he 
went to Richmond, he took a year off and became the director 
of the Boise State program in Onati. 

Pat finally set up Boise State's Onati yearlong program in 
1974. Then Bieter started having trouble finding students, 
because they only were recruiting from Boise State, and also I 
think Pat Bieter got tired of it. It was a big effort, and it was a 
lot of commitment on his part, and I think he just kind of 
burned out a little bit. Bieter couldn't find a replacement, 
and I think he just basically said, "That's enough." So Boise 
State dropped its Basque abroad program after three or four 
or five years. 



94 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


So for a year or two there was nothing, and then I called Pat 
and said, “Look, Pat, why don't we partner up? You guys did all 
that on your own," and they did. I mean, they really didn't want 
other universities involved. Pat thought he could maintain it as 
a Boise State thing because of the relatively large Basque 
population in Idaho, but it was very relative. I mean, we're talking 
about 5,000 or 6,000 people in all. But he thought he could do 
his program as a stand alone. I said, “Pat, why don't we see if we 
can get the Idaho universities and the Nevada universities 
together. We could approach Idaho and Idaho State, you're at 
Boise State, and I could approach UNLV. If we can get enough 
people and we can get this thing established, then maybe what 
we could do is to hire a full-time person to run it. Then you 
won't have to do it." 

Pat said, “OK. Good idea. But let's just keep it to Boise State 
and Reno, because most of the Idaho Basque interest is here in 
Boise." So we didn't approach Pocatello or Moscow at the time. 

I went to the Foreign Languages Department, and I 
approached Grotegut, and I said, “This is what we're thinking of 
doing, and this could be very important for your department. 
Also, we want to approach UNLV," which we did. 

Grotegut really liked the idea, and we went to the central 
administration to see Joe Crowley, then president of UNR. 

Pat was going to deliver Boise, and UNLV had also agreed. 
We had decided we'd put $5,000 each up as seed money to do 
the advertising, the preliminary stuff, and we also needed a 
director and went for it. Pat was willing to put up $5,000, but Pat 
couldn't get his administration to come up with the money. I 
believe the private Fereday Foundation in Boise did so. The Basque 
Studies Program here put up the $5,000 for UNLV out of our 
little bit of discretionary monies. (I can't remember whether we 
ever got it back.) So UNR came up with two-thirds of the money, 
and half of that money came out of our program. That's how it 
started. 

We had three universities, and we launched the study abroad 
program. We approached Carmelo Urza, because he'd had that 
experience in Onati, and I asked him if he'd be interested. 
Carmelo was teaching at Richmond, and I don't think he liked 
teaching that much. He liked the idea, and he wanted to move 
back west. He agreed in principle that if the idea floated, if we 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


95 


had enough wind under the wings by such and such a date (when 
he had to make up his mind whether to renew his contract, 
probably by the spring), that then we would talk again. 

I forget exactly how we promoted the academic yearlong 
program at first. I mean, I'm sure we did it through our newsletter 
in part. So we got enough interest, and I think Pat recruited some 
people up in Boise. [A total of thirty-one students from eight states 
went that first year, 1983-1984.] Carmelo agreed to come out. By 
then we had the tuitions coming in, and we had factored in his 
position to run it, and it was going to be in Donostia-San Sebastian. 

Then we hired Sandy Ott as the first field or on-site director 
of the first USAC program [called University Studies in the Basque 
Country Consortium until 1988 or 1989]. Sandy had studied at 
Oxford University, and she'd finished her PhD, but I don't think 
she had a job. She was doing some fieldwork in the Basque 
Country, some kind of postdoc. 

Jon Bilbao and I negotiated the location for the program 
with Goio Monreal, then rector or chancellor of the Basque 
University system, at the kitchen table of his in-laws' caserio 
[farm] in Ea and signed the deal on the back of a napkin or 
something. Then Goio said, "Well, there's no space." However, 
Goio agreed to give Sandy his Donostia office when he wasn't 
there and didn't need it. Then we've got one classroom. 

The Basque University was up and running, and it was under 
Goio from 1981 to 1985. I thought that Goio was the first until 
Alfonso Perez-Agote told me on my trip with him last year— 
2004—that Goio was actually the second rector, but he was kind 
of the first real or important one, the first guy to have a whole 
agenda and to get some things done. Goio was the one who laid 
the groundwork, even though technically he was the second one. 
[The first chancellor was Ramon Martin Mateo.] 

Alfonso said, "He was a friend of mine, and actually he got 
me back into good graces." Alfonso was on the outs politically 
and was ostracized, and this guy had been his mentor or 
something when he was getting his dissertation. So he put 
Alfonso back into the good graces of the system, and he opened 
the door for Alfonso. But he didn't last very long as president. 

Anyway, there was no space at all. We were going to hold 
the program in Donostia, which had a very underdeveloped 
university campus located on a hill in Zorroaga, and they had 



96 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


very few buildings at the time. They had this old building up 
on a hill that had been something else. It wasn't built as a 
university. The campus wasn't downtown where the main 
campus is today. Back then the campus was either under 
construction or not even started yet. Eventually, the program 
moved down to new facilities. 

I remember one of the big crises that first year was that the 
Basque students all went on strike, and we had to meet American 
standards back here regarding class contract hours. We tried to 
stay out of harm's way, so we continued to hold classes. We had 
these American universities' requirements, and we had these kids 
from various American universities, and if they observed the strike 
and didn't study, their whole year would have been useless to 
them. Had the universities back here found out, they'd have 
said to these students, "If you didn't have enough contract hours, 
we're not giving you credit." So we were in a real bind on that 
one. The students met their classes very quietly, and they 
continued their program. 

Because of the strike, the university was closed most of the 
time, and we had to purchase books. That first year Sandy ran 
the library out of the boot of her car. She had the books in the 
trunk of her car. The books were in English—because most of 
these kids didn't know enough Spanish and certainly not enough 
Basque to do their assignments with that kind of literature. So 
we had most of the published stuff in English about the Basques, 
and she carried that around in the back of her car. So she'd check 
out books to the students from her trunk, physically. 

When you think of where the consortium is today, I don't 
know—dozens of countries and dozens of universities involved 
from this end, millions and millions of dollars of budget, thousands 
of people moving around the planet, and hundreds of employees. 
When you think how the whole thing began, with Carmelo back 
in Reno scrambling to try to get enough kids to sign up for the 
second year so he'd still have a job, really, because if he didn't get 
enough kids, he didn't have a job. [laughter] And Sandy over there 
in Donostia, trying to keep the wheels on, facing strikes, and 
borrowing Goio's office and running a library out of the trunk of 
her car. I mean, that was the beginning of USAC. It was pretty 
ironic—a real-wing-and-a-prayer operation. Now it's the second 
largest international studies abroad consortium in America. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


97 


Developing I need to underscore the fact that when we were 
the Basque with DRI, it not only did not encourage teaching, 
studies it discouraged it, because it got in the way of the 

minor research mission of the institute, and it was a 

research institute. Some of the faculty staff at DRI 
used to insist upon teaching as a part of their mission, and they 
would come down to UNR and try, depending on their academic 
department, to negotiate something, and that's exactly what 
happened with me. 

The first semester I was in Reno, I taught basically half-time 
in the Anthropology Department, uncompensated, and that was 
another reason that DRI had a problem with it. Then I taught an 
Old World Basque culture class, a class on European peasant 
society, a class on contemporary Latin America, a course on 
kinship structure, social organization, and a course on 
anthropological theory. So in other words, I taught broadly and 
outside the framework of Basque studies per se. That went on 
for two or three years initially. 

I insisted upon teaching, because I didn't know whether the 
Basque Studies Program was going to last, and I was pretty nervous 
personally about taking a job to develop a program that might 
or might not succeed. Maybe I'd spend two or three years after 
getting my doctorate, and then I would be back looking for a job 
as a teaching academic, and I would have no experience teaching. 
I was nervous about that, and I wanted to get the teaching 
experience. We got involved with the research in Elko and for 
Amerikanuak, and I got pretty busy, so I cut way back on my 
teaching. 

I guess after about those first three years, I never did teach 
again, except the Basque Culture class, which I taught several 
times in Elko, sometimes in Winnemucca on the road, and also 
here in Reno, periodically every four or five years, something 
like that. So I had a really truncated, if you will, teaching or 
pedagogical career. However, in the late 1990s I team-taught a 
European Peasants course with Marie Boutte, a UNR 
anthroplogist, and Joseba Zulaika. By the same token, I gave many 
more public lectures than most of my colleagues. I was often 
invited to talk about Basques and Basque Americans. The 
invitations ranged from grammar school classes to service clubs, 
and I never refused. I also gave papers regularly at academic 



98 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


meetings, at times more than one in a given year. I also lectured 
at other universities such as Cornell, Brown, Utah, New Mexico, 
Barcelona, London, et cetera. 

Along comes Jon Bilbao, and Jon had a different philosophy, 
really. Jon was also interested in pedagogy, whether we were doing 
it over in the Basque Country and taking Basque Americans with 
us, or here. Jon had a strong interest in the program providing a 
cultural backbone, if you will, to the Basque-American experience, 
because the Basque-American experience was very under¬ 
developed at that time. There were no publications, to speak of, 
and certainly no courses. 

Jon taught the Basque language class, and the first year was 
a huge success, and then the enrollment tailed way off. Then 
Jon moved away from trying to teach the language as he struggled 
with that course. 

We had stopped teaching the language until Gorka Aulestia 
came to Reno. I'm not so sure whether Gorka taught Basque for us 
a semester or two. Gorka also, I think, taught a course on Basque 
literature. Then Linda White came to work for the program and 
soon started learning Basque, because she became involved in 
the dictionary project with Gorka. Linda thought we should teach 
Basque or offer it, and this was before, I think, she even had her 
PhD, but she was motivated to teach the language. Then as Linda's 
research evolved—her dissertation topic was in the area of Basque 
literature—she wanted to teach in that area as well. By then Gorka 
had left, and Linda sort of picked up the baton, if you will, of both 
the language and literature at that time. 

Then Joxe Mallea came to UNR as a graduate student in our 
PhD program. I think maybe even before he had his doctorate, 
but not way before, he proposed teaching a Basque history class 
for the History Department, and the History Department agreed 
to that. Jon Bilbao at least once taught a Basque history class, 
but it wasn't an annual offering or anything like that, and it 
hadn't been offered for years when Joxe did it again. 

I was always ambivalent about getting too involved as a 
program on the teaching side, but we always had a little bit going. 
We were a lot more faithful to our DRI research origins, even 
after we had moved down to UNR. I always emphasized that we 
were special on campus. Most UNR departments are primarily 
teaching, and we weren't, and Oral History wasn't, and some of 
the other things in Statewide Programs weren't. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


99 


In other words, I went with our origins. I've talked about the 
downside of being in Statewide Programs. Well, the upside is 
that it's not an instructional category, so we weren't under the 
same kind of pressure to teach as other departments. I was always 
very afraid of that. For one thing, my own predisposition is more 
towards research and writing, but that wasn't the only reason. 

As I said, we were teaching all of those years, but just a few free 
courses for Anthropology, History, and Foreign Languages. We often 
ran a course with four students in it, but I'm sitting there 
watching that, and I'm thinking, "Boy, if we ever get defined as 
a teaching department, or if our survival ever depends upon our 
ability to fill courses, we could be in real trouble." On my watch 
we played down the teaching role, and I was very nervous about 
it, because most of the university is driven by an FTE formula. 

So I always used to emphasize, "We're not a teaching program, 
but we'll teach for nothing." So for instance I would teach every 
three years maybe one course on campus. I'd do the Old World 
Basque culture class, in part because I had to let the well fill up 
again to a certain level before I dipped into it. You have to get 
some new students on campus, because the fifteen that wanted 
to take my class had taken it. That class did actually pull its own 
weight, barely, in terms of FTE minimal course requirement. 

Given the esoteric nature of Basque Studies, one small 
university's student population seemed insufficient to drive big 
numbers in the classroom. Now, it's turned out, that's not true. 
I think that the current Basque courses are doing well. In a way, 
it was a lack of effort in development of the teaching dimension 
of the program and a lack of leadership in that area on my part. 

At some point, as USAC kicked in, it became kind of 
obvious. . . well, not obvious, but there began to be a small 
demand for a minor in Basque studies in the sense that we'd 
have kids coming back from USAC, some from here, some from 
other universities—who wanted to continue to study things 
about Basques. Then the student would say, "Well, I've taken 
the culture class, I've taken a history class, and I've studied a 
year of the language. Can't I get some kind of recognition for 
that?" 

So we developed the concept of the Basque Studies 
undergraduate minor. There really wasn't anything organized 
very systematically back here, so we proposed a minor in Basque 
Studies, and it was a very straightforward proposal. It took a 



100 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


couple of years and three or four times to get it approved, as 
you've got to write it up, and you've got to defend it, and you've 
got to go through the Courses and Curriculum Committee and 
that kind of thing; there were a bunch of hoops that you had to 
deal with. 

Finally we've got this minor in Basque studies in the 
humanities and social sciences, particularly in three 
departments—Anthropology, History, and Foreign Languages. 
The requirements weren't real huge, but I think we required two 
years of the language and maybe nine more credits in Basque 
literature, Basque history, and Old World Basque culture, 
something like that. The minor is purely elective. So an 
engineering major could minor in Basque studies, theoretically. 

Despite the fact that there seemed to be a demand for it at 
the time, my guess is that we didn't have very many people who 
actually completed the minor; there was just a handful. I bet 
you that we may have turned out as many PhD's by now as we've 
turned out minors. I wouldn't be surprised, but I could be wrong. 
I was not tracking that whole thing. 

The minor was one of those ideas that seemed good and 
proper and obvious at the time, but once it was put into practice, 
I'm not so sure that it actually produced a whole lot of results. 
That doesn't mean that I regret having done it at all, and certainly 
there was no downside for us. Even if there are only a handful of 
students that completed it, it probably meant something to them 
and to their lives, and so it's OK. 

The The PhD is a whole other area, and that was a tricky 

tutorial one. What happened really was that Bill Jacobsen 
PhD and I, at the time, were the only two people with 

program doctorates affiliated with the program. Bill was kind 
of an adjunct with us. He was never a full-blown 
staff member, but he'd been in on it from the beginning, even 
before I came here. He collaborated in starting the Basque Studies 
Program and all that. He was very excited, enthusiastic, and very 
supportive of it. 

Then, of course, Virginia, his wife, (at the time—later they 
were divorced), became interested in Basque Studies. She has a 
PhD from Berkeley in Assyriology, and she was a very, very 
competent person in her own right. She came in and basically 
volunteered her time, acted as our secretary, and helped Jon 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


101 


Bilbao fool around with the books and that kind of thing. 
Ultimately, Virginia did get a half-time position, and she was 
salaried for five years. So the Jacobsens were positive. Virginia 
and Bill had some real impact on the program. 

Bill and I were asked, each in sort of different areas of 
expertise—he in linguistics and myself in anthropology—by other 
universities to be the outside member of doctoral dissertation 
committees, because a student was doing a Basque-related topic, 
and they really didn't have any expertise. I did one in Utah, one 
at Purdue, and one over in England; the London School of 
Economics, possibly ... or maybe it was Oxford. I think maybe 
I was technically an outside member of Sandy Ott's committee. 
And there were one or two other American universities. Bill went 
on two or three committees as well, but I can't remember at 
which universities. 

They'd ask us to serve, and we agreed to do it. Both of us 
found it to be a very frustrating experience, because, first of all, 
we had fairly minimal contact with the student. It was hard for 
us to have a lot of interaction with the student, although the 
student might come and use the Basque Library. Students spent 
from one day up to six months in residence working on their 
dissertation, using the library, so we got to know them that way. 
But then they'd go back to their university, and as far as the real 
process, they were interfacing with their in-house committee 
and not with us. Sometimes we would be kept apprised, and 
sometimes we wouldn't. We'd be kind of out the loop. For me to 
interact with a student in Indiana was sporadic. 

It was also frustrating because we couldn't have a lot of 
control over the quality of the dissertation without having the 
real power to input into it. In other words, all of a sudden— 
boom!—we'd receive maybe the final draft of the dissertation, 
or certainly an advance draft of the dissertation, and the news 
that the student was going to defend it soon. We'd be asked to 
read it and provide, from a Basque expertise standpoint, a 
judgment on whether or not it was good enough for a doctorate. 
Then the whole committee would look to us and say, “Well, 
should this be approved or not?" 

We got put in a sort of uncomfortable position. It was an 
enormous responsibility in a way. We were being asked to thumbs 
up or thumbs down on a person's career. It would always come 
down to kind of crunch-crunch time. I mean, maybe Bill and I 



102 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


were both picky, kind of perfectionists in some ways, so that was 
kind of hard on the students. I think that was true. But, there 
were also some fundamental problems with all of these theses, 
particularly since the students in question were often going with 
advice from people on their committee who really had only a 
vague idea of the subject matter. So they weren't getting the 
greatest direction. It was a very frustrating deal and really wasn't 
a good arrangement. 

At that point we, mainly just Bill and I, sat around and talked 
about it. (Maybe Jon was still here. I can't remember.) I said to 
him, "I wonder what would happen if we proposed a very unusual 
formula?" and I laid it out. The idea was that you could do a 
"tutorial PhD," and it was sort of patterned after what goes on at 
Oxford or at Cambridge, but not entirely. 

We decided to propose a tutorial PhD program that was totally 
unique. In principle it was a very, very unusual arrangement. It 
was a pretty radical idea, but we had a lot of credibility on campus, 
and the graduate dean at the time, John Nellor, was very 
supportive of us and liked us. It took maybe a year or two, and I 
had to prepare a bunch of paperwork for it and send it to different 
committees, and it had to go through the ropes. But the regents 
approved it. [The Basque Studies tutorial PhD program was 
established in 1984.] 

I argued that there was enough Basque interest to warrant a 
modest, tiny PhD program, and that Basque expertise was highly 
scattered around the world and wasn't concentrated in any one 
place. It was mainly housed at universities around the world but 
not exclusively. What we could do was to have a PhD program 
in which a student would come here for at least one year in 
residence, maybe more. We would also have the flexibility of 
cycling the student out anywhere in the world to work under an 
external mentor that might possibly be at another university, or 
possibly somebody like Caro Baroja, who wasn't at any university. 
And we would then transfer any credits earned back here towards 
the degree. 

For instance, my example would be, say, if you were going to 
do Basque immigration in Argentina, we would look for an 
immigration specialist at the University of Buenos Aires and 
connect with that person and say, "Would you take this student 
under your wing if he or she comes down and enrolls formally 
in courses at your university for six months or a year, or, maybe, 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


103 


would you serve as the outside committee member? We will pay 
you, and we will bring you to Reno for the defense." That was 
the model that we proposed. 

What it really was was a directed dissertation. It was not about 
training a student to be an anthropologist or an historian or 
whatever. I said, "You know, maybe we could do a deal where a 
student would have to enter the program with a master's degree. 
Otherwise, you couldn't even apply." 

That way we could involve departments at UNR that had 
master's programs but not PhD programs, so that we were not 
getting into a situation where we were trying to run parallel 
doctoral programs. Two of the three departments that we were 
involved with, Foreign Languages and Anthropology—we had 
these working relationships with those departments through our 
volunteer teaching—only had master's degrees at that point, and 
the third department, History, had a PhD program, but I don't 
think they'd given out a doctorate in about ten years. So their 
programs were en tela de juicio or, I mean, up in the air. 

I knew there was a lot of ambivalence and a big internal 
debate within History, at that time, about whether they should 
even offer a PhD. I don't think there is today. It was a controversial 
issue within the department, and I don't know all the details, 
but there were detractors and proponents of the idea. 

We had an admissions committee that consisted of myself 
ex-officio—in other words, the coordinator ex-officio—Bill 
Jacobsen ex-officio, and then the chairs of the three departments. 
Eventually, they began to argue for a delegated person. But it 
was a five-person selection committee, with the three 
departments and two people from Basque Studies. The idea would 
be that you had to come in with a master's in hand, so you were 
already an anthropologist or a historian. Then you would spend 
one year in residence, and we would negotiate the terms of the 
degree, of the dissertation, and any kind of coursework that might 
be required, and there would be a participating department. 

In effect, the doctoral program would be tailored to the 
student's interests and needs and would profile on an ad hoc 
basis each student's program of study within these broad outlines. 
Given the kind of loose nature of the program, in that it was an 
ad hoc program within very broad or wide parameters, the whole 
idea was that every incoming student would be treated as a 
unique case to a degree—within broad parameters, no, but 



104 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


narrowly, yes—so that the details would always have to be 
negotiated. That was the idea. That's why we called it ''tutorial." 

If you were an historian, we would sit down with the History 
Department, and we would negotiate what History expected of 
you, but the student would not necessarily have to meet all of 
the requisites for the PhD in that department. History was the 
only one with a PhD program at the time, so that's why I'm 
using it as an example. So you would get a doctorate in Basque 
studies and, in parenthesis, history, or anthropology or whatever. 

I don't know if the Foreign Language Department has a PhD 
today, but they didn't then. Now Anthropology has a PhD 
program. The Anthropology PhD program, by the way, started 
out totally predicated upon ours. I mean, their involvement in 
ours provided them with the model. They proposed a tutorial 
PhD, but it very quickly evolved into a totally standard PhD 
program. So the Anthropology PhD program is the traditional 
American PhD program with all of its requisites. Well, once 
Anthropology got its own PhD program, it began to impose more 
of its own requirements on our students. 

Originally, the idea was only to have a couple of students at 
one time. Actually, somewhere along the line, we were able to 
establish the idea that there would be two graduate fellowships 
devoted to this program, and they were a regular part of our 
state budget. They were a part of the center's, or the program's 
budget in those days. Of course, you need two fellowships to 
even have a couple of students around, because you don't just 
give it for one year, and then the student goes back and competes 
again. 

If you commit, then you're committing to two or three years 
at least for the student to complete the study. So if you got two 
fellowships, and you committed one, then the next year you 
only had one, and if you committed that one too, the third year 
you were out of fellowships until the first student finished and 
freed one up. The capacity for building growth within that 
program is extremely limited. Those two fellowships are great to 
have, but they are very finite in terms of their impact. 

In practice, like a lot of other things, the tutorial PhD program 
didn't come off exactly as we foresaw it. It worked up to a degree. 
I mean, it didn't work perfectly ever. For example, the whole 
relationship with Anthropology, I think, is one that needs to be 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


105 


renegotiated, or it has to be negotiated all the time, because 
Anthro has its own PhD program. 

I know Basque studies PhD graduate Lisa Corcostegui, for 
instance, was forced to go back and take some courses that you 
might call remedial or whatever. Lisa came out of Foreign 
Languages and then wanted to do her degree in anthropology, 
so she triggered part of the problem. I mean, if she had stayed in 
Foreign Languages, say, and she decided to do something that 
was more literature related, or if Foreign Languages had agreed 
to sponsor her dance dissertation, which they might have, I don't 
think that they would have said no, it wouldn't have been such 
a problem. But she wanted to do it in anthropology, which is 
fine, but given her background and given her MA, the 
Anthropology Department was more reticent to just accept her 
MA as the equivalent of their MA and then accept her for just 
directed dissertation research, and that slowed her down. 

Lisa had to do some coursework, and she had to take the 
four-field exam on anthropology. She had to learn enough to be 
examined in four fields, which is not easy even for a standard 
anthro student. It's probably as challenging as it gets in terms of 
PhD programs, because they test you over linguistics, physical 
anthropology (which is all about biology and genetics and is its 
own world), and archaeology, which has very little to do with 
cultural anthropology. So it's a real full plate. But she wanted to 
do it, and she did do it, and I commend her for it. 

Unlike the minor, I think that that program has been 
extraordinarily successful. We probably have the best track record 
at UNR of bang-for-the buck in terms of selecting students and 
getting them out the other end. We have produced eight PhD's 
in twelve or fourteen years, which is fine. The idea isn't to flood 
the whole world with Basque studies PhD's. We've had sixteen 
people altogether since the beginning of the deal. Gorka Aulestia 
was the first one to get the degree in December of 1987, followed 
by Joxe Mallea, Linda White, Cameron Watson, Pauliina Raento, 
Javier Cillero, Lisa Corcostegui, and Pedro Oiarzabal. Magda 
Czajkowska-Vazquez's been there for a long time, and Nancy 
Faires is still in the program. We've got three new students— 
Juan Arana, Argitxu Camus, and Beatriz Robinson. 

We've only had three students who started the program who 
did not complete it. One was killed in an accident—Rodolfo 



106 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



Basque Studies Program PhD students Javi Cillero and Lisa Corcostegui at 
the Basque Studies Library, September 1998. 


Luera—one was asked to leave, and one decided to leave. Rodolfo 
Luera stepped off a curb down in California somewhere, and a 
truck ran him over and killed him. He was a pretty good student, 
too. Then there's a little category of people in there who were 
still question marks, because they're still studying. But that's a 
pretty incredible track record given the nature of the effort. 

I don't have the statistics, but my guess is that if you turn 
out one in four who starts, that's big. Our dropout rate is about 
as high as the doctorate rate of most PhD programs—one in four, 
one in five. Essentially we graduated about half of the people 
that went in, and of the other half, half are still studying. We 
only have three out of sixteen who are absolutely not going to 
complete the program for whatever reason. Well, hey! I think 
the UNR History Department, for instance, went ten years 
without producing a doctorate, even though they had that 
program on the books. I think ours has been a big success. 

The one dimension that really never happened was the idea 
of cycling the student off to be at a foreign venue getting credit 











WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


107 


and all of that. That never really quite happened. Gorka had an 
expert on bertsolaris [Basque verse improvisers], Juan Marl 
Lekuona, who came here for the defense. Then Mallea had an 
historian from the University of Mexico, from the Autonoma. I 
don't think Linda had anybody like that. I don't think Cillero 
did, as I can recall. Lisa didn't. Well, she was involved with dance 
expert Juan Antonio Urbeltz, but I think fairly informally. I don't 
think he was part of the defense or anything like that. 

Bottom line, we've got a minor, and we've got a PhD program 
and nothing in between. You can't get a master's in Basque 
studies, and you can't get a BA in Basque studies. It's kind of 
strange, really. You have a minor or a doctorate. I don't know 
what you would do with a BA in Basque studies. I can see where 
a doctorate might help you get a job somewhere teaching or 
whatever, but not a BA in Basque studies. 

A minor makes sense if a person wants to spend a little bit of 
their discretionary credits in learning about the Basque heritage, 
because it's not their main major as an undergraduate. But having 
a BA in Basque studies might be very difficult to translate into 
real-world opportunity. It might be even difficult to go on to 
graduate school with a BA in Basque studies. I mean, students 
are probably better advised, if they're interested in Basque 
anthropology, to get a BA degree from the Anthropology 
Department, then apply to the Basque Studies tutorial PhD 
program or apply to graduate school elsewhere and do their 
dissertation on Basques. Those possibilities exist. 


Looking One of the things that's kind of fascinating to 
back: me is that everything I've talked about, so far, is 

operating older than the University of the Basque Country. 
without I mean, we started almost ten years before its 

Basque establishment. But we also preceded the death 

govern- of Franco, the creation of Eusko Jaurlaritza, and 
ment the Basque and Navarrese public university 

support systems, which all changed dramatically the role 
of this program. 

I think Basque President Jose Antonio Ardanza, when he 
visited Reno, talked about how we were a candle in the dark. 21 1 
mean, we really were. It was virtually impossible for anybody to 
pursue Basque studies in the Basque Country itself, calling them 
such, under Franco. There was a little bit going on, and Jose 



108 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



"Basque President Jose Antonio Ardanza, when he visited Reno, talked 
about how we were a candle in the dark. "Bill Douglass explains the history 
of the Basque Book Series to Basque President Jose Antonio Ardanza during 
an official visit to UNR, 1988. Left to right: Carmelo Urza, Bill Jacobsen, 
Bill Douglass, Marc Ugalde (in back), two unidentified individuals, and 
President Ardanza leaning on the table. 


Miguel de Barandiaran was fooling around and was doing his 
thing, but he was a very isolated man. The Jesuit University of 
Deusto was doing a little bit, but they, I think, were very cautious, 
so were Julio Caro Baroja and Koldo Mitxelena. 

All of these people were pretty much denied standard 
academic careers, because of the political situation throughout 
most of their productive lives. They were all kind of lone-wolf, 
semi-isolated people. It was even true on the other side. In 
Iparralde, for instance, Eugene Goyheneche was always trying 
to do something, but there was no university on the French- 
Basque side either. So we were the only truly institutionalized 
Basque studies academic program in the world at that point. 
Reno, in that sense had a very, very different kind of role. It was 
small, tiny, but it was a precursor, if you will, to the subsequent 
academic organization of Basque studies in Europe. 

Plus, we had Jon Bilbao here, which meant that everybody 
around the world involved in Basque studies knew about him. 











WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


109 


Jon was a clearinghouse for information. We were dos gatos [two 
cats], but he was a titan or magnet in terms of information, in 
part because people not only wanted to be in Jon's bibliography— 
they wanted recognition in his bibliography—but they also 
wanted bibliographic information from him, because he hadn't 
published his bibliography yet. Everybody knew that it was in 
the works, knew that it was imminent, but imminent for a nine- 
or ten-volume work like that would take a number of years. So 
people would write Jon all the time, asking for bibliographic 
references in their particular areas of interest. It was a two-way 
interaction. It was perfect for our collection development. 

So in a way, we knew what people were doing. We probably 
had a better idea in Reno of what was going on in Basque studies, 
as fragmented as they were around the globe, than anybody else, 
including Jose Arteche, who was the librarian of the Diputacion 
de Gipuzkoa [Provincial Council of Gipuzkoa]. I mean, Arteche 
was hosting people, and he knew a whole lot, but I don't think 
he had much of a feel for all of this diasporic stuff around the 
world. Everything was so fragmented in those days, and it was 
so politicized, and you had to be so careful. Anything that was 
being published over in the Basque Country, of course, was being 
closely censored. 

So people began to send us some clandestine material 
anonymously. We would get a box of, maybe, books. I mean, 
some people were afraid to even have Gallop. That's an 
overreaction, because I don't think anybody ever went to jail in 
Franco's Spain for having Gallop, but there were some people 
who were that nervous. We'd get a box of political stuff, ETA 
stuff, from Barcelona with no return address. People just wanted 
Basque material collected somewhere outside the Basque 
Country, where it would be preserved. 

Then when the changes happened in Spain after Franco's 
death in 1975, suddenly the Basques and Navarrese were in a 
great measure of control of their affairs and could build their 
own internal institutions. They got a Basque university system 
off the ground, and the University of Deusto created its own 
Basque Studies Program, and the University of Navarra hired 
Barandiaran. 

All of a sudden, the culture was no longer proscribed, and 
our role shifted. It's fair to say that we became much more 
oriented towards the diaspora at that point. We had real strong 



110 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


credentials for that, because we had produced Amerikanuak and 
some other publications that were diaspora related as part of the 
Basque Book Series. (Maybe 20 percent of the book titles in the 
series would be diaspora. However the Basque Book Series is very, 
very eclectic.) 

I wanted to be cautious, and we had to make some conscious 
decisions in order not to compete for scarce resources in the 
Basque Country. The Basque institutions began to emerge, and 
then every folk dance group . . . everybody was in the face of 
Eusko Jaurlaritza, asking for money. There was a big rush. It was 
natural, because, suddenly, there was this money that had never 
been there before, and everybody wanted some of it. But we did 
not go after any of that money. 

The first support that this program ever had from the Basque 
government was not our idea; it was their idea. It was with respect 
to Ardanza's visit in 1988. 

The Basque government didn't have a diaspora-affairs 
orientation from the beginning. The government had been in 
existence for seven or eight years by then and hadn't really done 
anything with respect to the diaspora. I don't think that they 
had their Asuntos Exteriores in place. Right around the early 
1980s the Basque government held a congress or two, in the 
Basque Country, on the Colectividades Vascas en el Mundo [the 
Basque Communities in the World], They invited people from 
around the world, and Jon Bilbao and Gloria Castresana went. 22 
I didn't go. At that point, Josu Legarreta was Joseba Arregi's 
assistant, and Arregi was the Consejero de Cultura [Minister of 
Culture] when Ardanza came in. 23 Josu was in the front office, 
because I remember visiting Arregi, and I had to go through Josu. 

Josu got in touch with me on behalf of Arregi, and he was 
sort of a contact person with the diaspora under Arregi. He knew 
San Francisco and Boise. But I don't think they had a formal 
diaspora person, and there was not an office in charge of the 
diaspora relationship yet. 

I knew Josu, and he knew me. Josu said, "The president's 
going to Idaho, Nevada, and California, and we want you all to 
organize meetings with the governors in the three states, and 
he'll have meetings with key business people." 

It was a very unrealistic request, because to get a meeting 
with a governor was possible in Idaho and Nevada, but in 
California it was impossible to get a meeting with the mayor of 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


111 


San Francisco, let alone the governor. It was even tough to get 
him an invitation to the San Francisco Basque Cultural Center, 
because it was all people from Iparralde. It was dominated by 
French-Basques who were pretty anti-Basque nationalism and 
who were pretty suspicious of Eusko Jaurlaritza. There were a lot 
of Basques in San Francisco who were either indifferent to or 
even a little bit hostile to the club hosting Ardanza's visit. Finally 
Ardanza ended up going to the San Francisco Basque Cultural 
Center. 

Josu wanted all of this recognition, if you will, and they were 
particularly sensitive, as I recall, because I think King Juan Carlos 
had just come to the United States. The Spanish press had been 
pretty appalled, because they were defining the trip as kind of a 
failure. King Juan Carlos didn't get to see the president of the 
United States, and he invited a bunch of Hollywood movie stars 
to some kind of an event, and about 90 percent didn't come. So 
Josu was concerned about that and about setting up protocol. 

I told Josu, "You have to treat each of these states differently, 
and Idaho should arrange the Idaho visit, and they'll do it. I 
mean, Idaho Secretary of State, Pete Cenarrusa, will help. I'm 
sure they'll do a good job up there. We can do some stuff in 
Nevada, but in California it's going to be virtually impossible to 
accomplish anything." 

Well, Josu didn't like that response, and he wasn't entirely 
sure that it was accurate. 

Right about then a European PNV parliamentarian, Jon 
Gangoiti, visited the program. And one of the things he said 
was, "Well, this program is fantastic." That was always the 
reaction from Europe. Anybody—particularly politicians and 
newspaper people—that would come and visit this place would 
say, "We didn't know this was here," or, "We couldn't imagine 
that there'd be something like this." Well, some of them kind of 
knew, because they came on U.S. State Department-sponsored 
visits, and they had requested us on their agenda. So they knew 
enough about our program to be curious, but they were never 
really quite prepared for what they found, and Jon Gangoiti was 
no exception. He said, "This is so great. So how much support 
do you have from the Basque government?" 

I said, "We have none." 

He said, "Well, that's terrible. That's shameful. There should 
be support from the Basque government for this." 



112 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



"Anybody—particularly politicians and newspaper people—that would 
come and visit this place, would say, ‘We didn't know this was here,' or, 
'We couldn't imagine that there'd be something like this. "'Jokin Intxausti 
(center), a minister of the Basque government, tours the Basque Studies 
Program with Carmelo Urza (left) and Bill Douglass in 1986. 


I said, "We've never asked for money for three reasons. First 
of all, nobody asked us from Europe to start this thing. It was 
our idea to start it, and the people in Nevada fund it. We get 
grants, and we have even a few donations, and that's where we 
get our funding. So I don't really see an obligation on the part of 
the Basque Country to support us. Secondly, there's a bunch of 
new institutions in the Basque Country—I mean, a whole 
infrastructure's being developed over there—and there's a lot of 
competition for scarce resources, and I'm ambivalent about trying 
to put our hand out at the same time that there are so many 
local programs that are basically underfunded. Thirdly, I don't 
know what it would be like to get money from the Basque 
government, because there are no strings attached to our money. 
I don't know whether getting money from the government there 
would be with some strings attached; it might allow them to 
start to drive part of our agenda, and I'm not prepared to permit 
that." 

Gangoiti said, "Ardanza's coming, and it would be really 
appropriate if you could think of something that would really 






WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


113 


help your program and that Ardanza could announce publicly. 
Arregi's coming with him, and it would probably be Arregi who 
would sign the agreement, and whatever happens would come 
out of the Ministry of Culture. Think about it." 

Meanwhile, I told Jon about my concerns about the agenda 
of the Ardanza visit. Jon was back in the Basque Country by 
then. 

Gangoiti said, "You've got to come over and talk to Arregi, 
because he is the one most responsible for that. And please bring 
an idea about what might be appropriate as some kind of support 
from the Basque government for your program." (Jon was tied 
very closely with the higher echelons. He was quite close to Xabier 
Arzallus, then President of the PNV, Ardanza, and Arregi. He was 
an influential guy.) I agreed to do that. 

Jon and I talked about it and kicked it around. I thought 
about it, and I also talked to Carmelo Urza. 

I decided to fly over to Europe. I remember Legarreta was in 
the outer office. He knew that we were going to be requesting 
some money. He was kind of in control of the budget, and he 
thought it might come out of some monies under his control, 
so he was very nervous and very concerned about that. He also 
knew I was going to be talking about Ardanza's visiting agenda. 
I went in with Jon Gangoiti to see Arregi. Legarreta didn't sit in. 
We talked about the agenda, and I convinced Arregi that we 
should treat the three states differently, and they lowered the 
expectations about California, fortunately. 

Arregi approved our request. We asked for Eusko Jaurlaritza 
to provide a visiting professorship, so a professor from the Basque 
Country could spend a year in Reno. We also asked for two 
student scholarships in each direction—for two American 
students to go the Basque Country through Carmelo's program, 
and for two Basque students to come and study at UNR. 

The Boise Basques did a good job, and Ardanza met with 
their governor and key politicians. In Nevada we set up a meeting 
with Governor Richard Bryan, who was a very good friend of 
ours, and Ardanza signed a cultural agreement with the state of 
Nevada. The governor hosted a dinner in a restaurant in Carson 
City. Then we had an event back at the university. Ardanza gave 
a little talk, and the chancellor of the university received him, 
and that's when they signed an agreement between the university 
and Eusko Jaurlaritza, which included our request. 



114 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


So what we asked for had nothing really to do with supporting 
our program per se. We were doing it through the Basque Studies 
Program, and it was going to be great, but we were essentially 
asking for support that would benefit people—two students in 
the abstract and also an established professor from the Basque 
Country. 

As it turned out, the deal never worked very efficiently. I 
don't know, the student thing might have, but the visiting 
professorship, which was the only thing I was involved in, as 
the other was through US AC, never worked very well. I mean, 
once or twice it worked, but most of the time it didn't function, 
because it got very politicized over there, and it fell afoul of the 
budgetary process. 

They were lucky to get the annual budget approved six 
months after the year had already started, and they couldn't 
approve that year's candidate until the budget was in place. Then 
they felt that it had to be an ad hoc thing every year, and it had 
to be announced in the Boletin (the Basque government's Official 
Gazette), but it couldn't be announced until the funds were in 
place. So they would announce the opportunity in the Boletin 
in June or July of every year, which nobody's reading in July, so 
there were no applications, and somebody's supposed to come 
here in September. 

Then at the last minute they'd find some ABD person without 
a PhD, or someone who had just got their PhD but hadn't even 
published yet—just some soltero [single man] or soltera [single 
woman] that could make a decision in two minutes—whereas, 
an established professor with a family needed a year of 
anticipation. 

Plus, Arregi was very uncomfortable with the whole deal, 
because it should have been under the Ministry of Education, 
and he had to pay for it. So he was anxious to shift it to education, 
which eventually they did. But it didn't work any better in 
education because of these other problems. In a way, it was a good 
idea in the abstract, but in practice it didn't work out very well. 

Now we have a new agreement with the Basque government. 
Goio Monreal's going to be the first academic to come under the 
William A. Douglass Distinguished Scholar Award. [Goio was in 
Reno for the 2005-2006 academic year.] That's basically the same 
idea, except it's going to be set up differently, and we're going to 
invite top people a couple of years in advance. They're already 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


115 


talking about who might come after Goio. [The 2006-2007 
William A. Douglass Distinguished Scholar was political scientist 
Pedro Ibarra.] 

Also in this new agreement the decision-making resides 
within the Center for Basque Studies, and it doesn't have to be 
made within one budgetary cycle. In other words, you can look 
over the horizon. I don't know how they're doing that, because 
their entire budget is annual. But I guess maybe they'll do it 
with an asterisk. Maybe they'll say to the recipient, "OK. We'd 
like you to be able to go, but if the funding is not available at the 
last minute, you can't go." I'm just speculating. 

So that was the first and only Basque government support 
that we ever had until just before I retired and before Joseba 
Zulaika became director of the program. 

Joseba wanted to do Basque online courses. We got 
approached by Extended Studies, and we were being pulled in 
the direction of teaching online, and Joseba liked the idea, and 
he convinced me. We approached the Basque government in 
1998 or 1999. I was over there, and I talked to Inaki Aguirre, 
current General Secretary for External Affairs. Inaki kicked me to 
the Ministry of Education, and they liked the idea to develop 
the online courses in English. In fact, the Minister of Education, 



Left to right: Goio Monreal, first William A. Douglass Distinguished Scholar 
Award recipient, Harold Morehouse, Bill Douglass, and Joe Crowley, 
November 2005. 













116 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Ander Gurrutxaga [then assistant to the Minister of Education] 
and another person from education and I had lunch at a 
restaurant just up the street from Eusko Jaurlaritza. I remember 
discussing this and getting a commitment actually from Ander 
Gurrutxaga, that, yes, indeed they would fund it. 

But again, I didn't see any problem with us being involved 
with the Basque government or using the Basque government's 
money, because essentially that's a global outreach service. It 
introduces Basque instruction into the Anglo world. I mean, there 
are other forums now, and I think some other Internet 
instructional initiatives have been taken in the Basque Country, 
if I'm not mistaken. It's not unique. But when I was proposing 
it, it was the only one of its kind. I didn't feel hugely vested in it, 
because I was retiring, and, at least, I thought that I wasn't going 
to sit down and write an online course. [Eventually Douglass and 
Zulaika did co-author an online course on Basque anthropology.] 
So I was advocating it more as an administrator rather than as a 
player. Then Zulaika took over and ran harder with the concept. 

I thought it was entirely proper and appropriate for the 
Ministry of Education in the Basque Country to provide some 
funding to develop course materials, and they did. They gave us 
$60,000 to develop the first few courses. That got approved just 
about the time I retired, and that was part of Joseba's momentum. 
So that kind of opened the door to our funding with the Basque 
government, too, and then Zulaika has built on that. But the 
first opening wedge was with the Ministry of Education. Since 
then Joseba has gone after regular support from the Basque 
government. I think the center had about 90,000 euros [an 
equivalent of over $121,000 as of April 2007] in 2005, including 
the Internet courses and some other things too. The Basque 
government provides 15 or 20 percent of the center's funding. 

Post- I retired on December 31, 1999. For a couple of years 
1999 prior to that event there was considerable nervousness 
and among the staff. In thrity-three years the Basque 

Joseba Studies Program had had but one coordinator. There 
Zulaika was a kind of, "What will happen to us now?" in the air. 

I held a couple of staff meetings at which I sermonized 
and cheerleaded: "You'll be fine. If survival of this place truly 
depends on a single person, then we haven't built much of a 
foundation!" 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


117 



Bill Douglass's retirement party at Luciano's Ristorante, Reno, December 
22, 1999. From left to right: Linda Ugalde, Kate Camino, Marc Ugalde, 
Jill Berner, Carmelo Urza, Bill Douglass, and Bill's wife, Jan. 


About that time the university decided to subject every 
department to outside review. Most of the chairs wanted to be 
among the last to undergo the scrutiny. It all entailed a great 
deal of preparation. You had to write an extensive history, current 
status, and future prospects of your department and then receive 
three outside reviewers for several days to answer their questions. 
Well, I decided that rather than an imposition it was a marvelous 
opportunity for our staff to think about and transition to their 
post-Douglass future. I went to the dean, who was Robert “Bob" 
Mead, having succeeded Ann Ronald, and volunteered our 
program for the first review. 

Linda White, who was the assistant coordinator, prepared most 
of our report, and central administration appointed Robert Clark 
of George Mason University, Begona Aretxaga of Harvard, and 
Jacqueline "Jacquie" Urla of the University of Massachusetts as 
the outside review team. When it was over, the final report stated 
that, in the program, UNR had an underappreciated jewel of 
international significance. The recommendation was that the 
Basque Studies Program receive a high priority in UNR's budget 
for the upcoming legislature. It also stated that our name should 
be changed from “Program” to “Center" since we had far outstripped 
the original designation and were now a multifaceted center. 












118 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I met with several administrators from central administration 
to review the report. They started kidding around, but semi- 
seriously, that we should change the name—they were avoiding 
the growth and resources issues. So I gave a speech in which I 
stated that since I was retiring I had little stake in the outcome, 
but if they were serious about their own process they needed to 
take all of the report into account. I also said that if they chose 
to ignore the program's potential then it was their loss. After all, 
wasn't the whole idea of program review meant to identify centers 
of excellence and then foster them? Well, Bob Mead jumped on 
that, and before it was over I had a verbal commitment of support 
for our future budget requests. They also agreed to support the 
idea that my position should be restored to a full-time one (1.0 
FTE) again. This was relatively easy since my salary as a veteran 
full professor could about fund a junior position. In fact, they 
managed to deliver on that commitment rather quickly. 

Clearly, the center has gone in some new directions under 
Zulaika. I think he is more interested in pedagogy than I was, 
which is fine. He had already stirred the online stuff up, and he 
was also the main guy behind teaching courses on campus. 

Zulaika has encouraged all of the staff to teach at least one 
course on campus; I don't know if it's one a semester or one a 
year. We didn't really have that requirement under me. In other 
words, I never went down the hall and said to Linda, “Why don't 
you teach Basque next semester?" 

Linda would come down the hall and say to me, "I'd like to 
teach Basque next semester. Is that OK?" 

So that was the way it worked in the old days, and now I 
think there has been a collective decision by the staff to do more 
standardized teaching through the various departments. I don't 
think, however, that they get compensated by them. So in effect, 
they're doing it as part of their salary and their duties as staff. 

Joseba, Linda, Gloria, and Sandy are taking instruction in a 
whole other direction, and they seem to be getting a lot more 
students than we used to get. Of course, the university is a lot 
bigger, but still.... Also, I think that this is due to USAC, because 
you get kids going from here to the Basque Country, and then 
when they come back, they take some of these courses if they 
didn't get them over there. So, there's a little bit of a change. But 
essentially, they are now a Basque teaching department amongst 
other things. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


119 


It's a little tricky, because basically there's always going to be 
that tradeoff between research and teaching. You have that same 
tradeoff in a standard academic department. At the center, maybe 
the thrust is reversed. Here, if the primary mission is research 
and publication, then the teaching has to be kept in perspective. 
In the average academic department, people are teaching a large 
course load, and so the problem is how do they get some time 
for their research? Here, it's sort of the opposite. How do you get 
some time for your teaching? 

Then there's the whole online thing, and I pretty much stayed 
away from it. But my guess is that it can represent a big time 
commitment, because that's all tutorial, and you're dealing one- 
on-one with a student over the Internet. I don't know how that 
goes, but it may be more demanding to teach five people that 
way than to teach fifteen or twenty students in a classroom 
setting. There's a way in which the whole virtual university 
approach, that is now very developed here, has particular cost 
attached to it. In other words, it does bite more into the time of 
the staff. Any staff person that is taking on students in that 
capacity, in effect, is taking on a teaching load that is potentially 
significant. It's a question of philosophy, of mission, of priorities. 

Zulaika also came in with this whole publications program— 
a Classics Series, a Literature and Translation Series, the 
Proceedings of Conferences Series—and that got to be pretty 
elaborate. He basically went to the Basque Country and lobbied 
effectively. I was involved in some of that, because Zulaika would 
take me into the Basque government, and we'd talk to the 
Minister of Culture or the Minister of Education. Little by little 
we made our case. 

Zulaika is running things very differently than I was, but I 
have no judgment to pass or make on the last five years. Zulaika 
has had some incredible successes, both in Europe in getting 
funding and support for the program and here in setting up the 
Center for Basque Studies Advisory Board that I'm the vice-chair 
of. I was skeptical about the board, frankly, because I was not 
sure whether it was a good idea. It's proven to be an incredible 
idea, a wonderful thing. 

The advisory board is made up of largely non-academics, but 
there are also two or three academics on it, and it's getting to be 
a large board—I don't know, fifteen people or something. They're 
mainly powerful, powerful people from around the world from 



120 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


business and other professions. Just the other day I got word 
that Xabier Irala—the president of BBK [Bilbao-Bizkaia Savings 
Bank in its Basque acronym] and former CEO of Iberia [the largest 
Spanish airline]—is going to join our board. I met with him when 
I was just over there and talked to him about it, and he's now 
said yes. 

We've got people like Irala and Juan Zelaia, a Basque 
industrialist, on the board. Those are the kinds of people that 
we've attracted onto the board. Of course, John Echeverria, the 
board's chairman, and his family have been incredible. They made 
a $500,000 donation, essentially, to the center. So all of that is 
mind-blowing to me. [In 2006 Bill donated a private house to 
the center to be used as the residence of the William A. Douglass 
Scholar Award recipient.] 

Zulaika has also got an endowment fund going, and we 
already have about $1,000,000 in it, and that throws off some 
income to the center. There's a lot of excitement surrounding 
the center. I mean, kind of coincidentally or casually or 
serendipitously we're going to have this incredible space in the 
Knowledge Center, and that's exciting. The center is going to 
make a huge qualitative leap just in terms of its physical appearance 
and the commodiousness of its space and all of that. I mean, 
wonderful, exciting things have happened over the last five years. 

My guess is that Zulaika's presence has been a critical 
difference, a critical factor. Some of what has happened over the 
last five years might have happened under me, but I think some 
of it wouldn't have. I mean, we wouldn't have gone as strongly 
in the direction of teaching online. In part, I'm a bit of a dinosaur 
when it comes to the Internet, anyway. I don't understand it 
that well. I don't use it that much compared to most people. It's 
also a generational thing. If I had been providing the leadership, 
my guess is that I wouldn't have had either the interest or the 
expertise to provide quality leadership in that area, and Zulaika 
did. So there's all of that. I'm sure we wouldn't have had this 
advisory board if I had been running the show, because I was 
skeptical when we started it. 

Then there are also our successes in the legislature. When I 
retired, we only had three professional positions, and one of them 
was not tenure track. It was Linda White's position, and that's 
another story. Then we got two more positions in the legislature, 
so we went from essentially three professional positions to five. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


121 


The state of Nevada's support has just about doubled under 
Joseba. 

I've come to realize now, because I've gone down to the 
legislature in three or four capacities on different occasions over 
the last two sessions of the legislature, I had no idea how well 
and how thoroughly we were perceived by certain very powerful 
people in the Nevada legislature. I mean, I was totally blown 
away by that. 

At one point, in 2001, we had a lobbying session with Joe 
Crowley and Senator Bill Raggio, and we met with Raggio, whom 
I know, but he's not what I would call a friend or something. 
This was when we were trying to get the funding for two new 
faculty positions, the ones that Gloria and Sandy came on in 
2002. Actually, it was complicated. Our positions went in as part 
of UNR's request but failed to survive the process as a priority. 
We were, however, able to receive a green light to do our own 
lobbying for last-minute inclusion at the end of the legislative 
session—should the legislature be so inclined. 

Basically we were in Raggio's office, I think Joseba was there, 
and somebody said, "Well, Bill Douglass is here, because we want 
him to tell you a little bit about the history of the program." 

I started talking, and about thirty seconds later Raggio just 
looked at me and said, "Bill, believe me, I know all about the 
program. So let's not waste our time reviewing that. I'm very, 
very supportive of what you all are doing, and I admire what 
you've done." 

(Raggio had been the contact person in the legislature when 
we had lobbied with Bob Laxalt, back in the early times, but the 
program had evolved a whole lot since then. We hadn't been to 
the legislature in that kind of capacity for fifteen years, I mean, 
doing a one-on-one sort of lobbying effort. When we went in 
before, Bill Raggio wasn't quite as powerful as he is today. He was 
certainly a senator and an important guy from the north, but I 
don't think he was running the Senate Finance Committee in those 
days. Maybe he was, but I don't remember him in that capacity. 
But he was the kind of guy that if he got out there and went to bat 
for you, it could make a difference even back in the 1980s.) 

Then Raggio said, "You have my support, but it is a tight 
year, and we're not going to know for a couple more weeks what 
kind of money we have. But if there's anything left over, you 
have my support for it." 



122 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Dina Titus, a Nevada State Senator from down south, is also 
hugely supportive of us, and she's at the University of Nevada, 
Las Vegas (UNLV). We had some earlier contacts with her, when 
she first came to UNLV. She's a political scientist, and she was 
actually doing, I think, an article on evolving regionalism in 
Andalusia within the Spain of the autonomies, right after the 
approval of the Spanish Constitution, probably in the early 1980s. 
She got in touch with me, and I'd sent her some references, and 
that's how I got to know her. Then she got married to Tom Wright, 
who was a Latin American historian at UNLV. Both Tom and 
Dina have taught for USAC, and particularly he's taught in Chile 
and in Donostia in the summer of 2005. 

During the same 2001 legislature session, Titus asked us to 
come down to the legislature, where she made a statement 
regarding the Center for Basque Studies as "my favorite program 
within the entire university system," before the Senate Finance 
Committee, so it's part of the public record. She stated at this 
session not only how much she admired the center, but she was 
looking forward after the session to going over to San Sebastian 
to visit her old haunts, and she gave a big speech about how 
incredible USAC was. 

So Joe Crowley, Carmelo, and I went down to Carson City, 
because Crowley and I sort of started USAC, and, of course, 
Carmelo has turned it into something totally way beyond 
anything we imagined. It's the strongest single foreign-student 
presence still in the Basque Country. Well, in the legislature Titus 
introduced a measure to honor USAC. 

So we got both positions. I thought we might, if we were 
lucky, get one. I mean, I would have viewed that as a huge success, 
and we ended up with two. 

Then the Center for Basque Studies hired both Gloria and 
Sandy in 2002. At the same time, Joseba Gabilondo was hired 
with my position, on my vacancy, if you will, in 2001. He replaced 
me because the search was not for an anthropologist. It was for 
the best possible Basque specialist, and that was the condition, 
and we didn't specify the field. [Gabilondo left UNR in 2005.] 

The money was available, maybe July 1, but we weren't ready 
to spend it in 2001, because there had to be a search, and that 
usually takes six months. Sandy was at Oxford University, and 
she had to give notice and had to finish out her contract. Sandy 
came probably in September of 2002. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


123 


I think Gloria was just finished with her PhD but really didn't 
have a position anywhere, so Gloria was a little more flexible 
than Sandy and was pretty much available, and Zulaika just said 
to her, "I'll give you some travel money and some kind of a 
stipend, and, in effect, you can go to work for us early. Go ahead 
and start." 

Gloria had a whole bunch of ideas about what she wanted to 
do and individual initiatives going down regarding diaspora, and 
she was going over to the Basque Country about that time. So 
Zulaika probably "hired her" in January or February—I mean, 
put her on as a consultant or something. Her actual full-blown 
position didn't start until July 1, 2002. 

So the Center for Basque Studies has become a more mature, 
more complex, more multifaceted program. It's a very different 
animal now. It is quite unique in the world of academia. I mean, 
it's a strange animal in a lot of ways. It's not a standard 
department, and it's got this huge library dimension. I don't 
know exactly what the center is. I think partly it's had the 
flexibility to become what it is, because it's not in one of the 
traditional boxes. It's a library program; it teaches; it's on the 
Internet. It started a studies abroad consortium, and it does a lot 
of research and writing. It's got a publishing program, and it 
edited for many years the Basque Book Series at the Univeristy 
of Nevada Press. 

It's all those things; it's all of the above. I don't know what 
defines it. I don't even know what our mission statement says. I 
don't know if they have a mission statement, and if they do, I 
would be hard-pressed to write it. 


Basque politics and ethnicity 

The Basque Studies Program was started during the Franco 
era. At that time, from a Spanish nationalist standpoint, to even 
have something called the Basque Studies Program was an 
obscenity. I think it's fair to say that Spanish nationalism in this 
Francoist guise denied any kind of relevance to regionalism and 
nationalism within Spain and treated its own brand of 
nationalism as a kind of universalism, but at the very least it had 
its own boundaries. 



124 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


It certainly wasn't universal globally, but it was viewed as 
the Hispanic reality or whatever you want to call it. Anything 
that even suggested that there were internal cultural distinctions 
to be made within Iberia was grounds for imprisonment— 
grounds for all kinds of things. And here we were in Reno, where 
they couldn't really lay a glove on us. 

I'm sure that there were people in the Franco machine, and 
certainly in the press, such as ABC [a Spanish right-wing daily 
paper], who didn't like the idea at all that an American university 
would even start something called a Basque studies program. I 
mean, culture was political, and it still is, and there was no way 
to get away from that. 

Then we hired Jon Bilbao, and he had been very close to 
President Aguirre, although by the time Jon came to Reno, he 
was not a big-time player in the Basque government-in-exile, 
but he still knew all of those people. That whole Basque 
government-in-exile thing in New York had broken down. I know 
that in the 1950s Jon stayed in touch with the Aguirre contingent 
in St. Jean de Luz, and he was involved with a magazine titled 
Eusko-Jakintza. Jon worked with Barandiaran in getting a couple 
of issues of that magazine out in an editorial capacity. 

Jon also became one of the organizers of an international 
conference held sometime in 1956, in St. Jean de Luz. It was like 
a world congress of Basque studies. They were trying to keep the 
flame alive. So, I mean, he had his oar in the water, yes, but I 
think his whole commitment became more and more cultural 
and less and less political over time, although he was always a 
huge sympathizer of Basque nationalism. 

But the fact of the matter is that Jon was a Spanish teacher 
back East, and he'd been expelled from Spain for some of his 
earlier activities. So he was pretty neutralized, and he was 
interested in starting a Basque studies program or some kind of 
Basque-related effort. Jon was working hard on his bibliography, 
and his main passion in life at that point was getting Eusko 
Bibliographia out, and by then he was in the third decade of 
working on it. Between Eusko Bibliographia and trying to build 
a program with me, his plate was full. 

People have said that Jon was in the CIA, but I don't know 
whether he was in it or not. But I do know, because Jon told me, 
that way back when—I guess it would have been right after the 
Second World War—Jon, Aguirre, and all those guys were involved 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


125 


with the U.S. Secret Service. They'd done that spy thing down in 
Latin America for the U.S. government, for the Allies, because 
they were hoping that the Allies were going to take Franco out. 
The U.S. was trying to decide how it was going to interface with 
Franco's Spain after Mussolini and Hitler were gone. 

I know Jon had an apartment in Madrid for, at least, a little 
while. They'd use it for parties to be able to have contacts with 
people in the Franco government, the American Embassy, and 
the Office of Strategic Service, which evolved into the CIA after 
World War II as we got into the Cold War. Jon had an American 
passport, because he was born in Puerto Rico, and he was a very 
socially astute person. He had personal charm. 

That was even before the creation of ETA, way before ETA. It 
was not tied in at all to the more modern or the more 
contemporary issues. So I know Jon was involved in some of 
that, but formally with the CIA, I don't know. 

At one point I had a visitation—and I've gone public with 
this since—from the CIA. It was the day before I went to Australia 
to do field research, sometime in the early 1980s. This would 
have been under President Ronald Reagan. I was contacted, right 
after Reagan first got into office, and William Casey was the head 
of the CIA. 

The CIA had university contacts around and throughout the 
country, and they'd have somebody on campus, the kind of 
liaison in whatever they were doing. I don't know what they 
were doing. Anyway, the light bulb came on in the head of UNR's 
clandestine CIA rep, "Well, jeez, you know, there's ETA, that's a 
problem, and these folks are close to the Basque government." 

So these two CIA guys came to see me. One of them was 
military, navy personnel or something, out of San Francisco, and 
the other one was attached to the American Embassy in Madrid. 

They wanted me to put an agent in USAC as a student to try 
and penetrate ETA through the university system, but I told them 
I wouldn't do it. Then they asked if I would be willing to monitor 
all of the press over there and send them periodic reports, and I 
said, "No. I don't have staff for that. This is a public institution 
and a public library. If you people want to send somebody here 
to read the newspapers or whatever, we'll accommodate them. 
We'll give them a desk. Anybody that comes here is welcome to 
use these books, including your people, but we're not going to 
prepare reports for you." 



126 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I spent the whole afternoon arguing with these guys, and I 
was leaving the next day for Australia for a year. That night I 
went home and turned on my television set. William Casey was 
testifying before Congress, and there was some kind of scandal 
or a stink about the CIA using journalists and academics. Casey 
got up there and testified under oath to the U.S. Congress that 
the CIA never uses journalists or academics, and I'd had these 
two guys in my office that afternoon! I turned to Jan, my wife, 
and said, "I'm awfully glad we're getting on the airplane 
tomorrow." We got on the plane and flew away from it. It was a 
weird sensation to go through that experience. 

The CIA had contacted me once earlier, about two weeks 
before the guys from San Francisco came up. The Madrid chief 
came with one of them, and I told the guy, "I'm really concerned, 
because we had this guy, Jon Bilbao, and we've had a little bit of 
grief over the fact that there was this rumor about his 
involvement with the CIA." 

I just had mentioned that in passing. When that guy came 
back—and I have no way of proving the accuracy of his 
statement—he said, "Oh, by the way, I looked up Bilbao in our 
files. We don't have him in our files, so he didn't work for us." 

Now, I sell it for what I paid for it, and it could have just 
been sand in my eyes. I remember that during the first visit from 
the CIA guy when I brought up that deal about, "Well, we had 
this man working here at one time, and he's always had this 
kind of problem of having this reputation," and the agent didn't 
react. If I can take him at face value, the CIA didn't have a record 
of having had Jon Bilbao on their payroll. I knew he hadn't heard 
of Jon Bilbao. But of course that was earlier, so that didn't mean 
anything for certain. 

Windmills A few times people raised the specter of, "Well, are 
and wide- you guys Basque nationalists?" or, "Do you guys work 
open for the Basque government?" I totally reject the idea 

doors that somehow Basque nationalism exists in a 
vacuum. Basque nationalism requires Spanish 
nationalism and French nationalism to exist at all. It doesn't 
exist in some sort of an intellectual void. I know that there's a 
common, popular parlance in the Basque Country or in the 
Basque press, and certainly in the Spanish press, to refer to the 
nacionalistas, meaning the Basque nationalists, and the no- 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


127 


nacionalistas, the non-nationalists. Well, as far as I'm concerned, 
the no-nacionalistas don't exist. I think we're talking about 
Basque nationalists and Spanish nationalists in varying degrees. 
And, there's also a tendency, I think, to paint Basque nationalists 
with a single color or with a single coat and to dismiss them and 
to trivialize them. The fact of the matter is that there's a big 
spectrum of Basque nationalism, ranging from extreme radicalism 
on the part of, say, the most radicalized ETA members that are 
fighting for an independent Basque Country that would include 
the French Basque area, on the one hand, all the way to people 
who are mildly sympathetic to Basque nationalism but aren't 
even sure they're going to vote nationalist in the next election, 
depending on who's running and what the issues are. 

Basque nationalism is a great big umbrella, just like Spanish 
nationalism is. There is extreme right-wing Spanish nationalism, 
extreme left-wing Spanish nationalism, even though that seems 
like a contradiction in terms. But, hey, the most radical branch 
of Basque nationalism is leftist as well. The supposed 
"universalism" of the left when you play it out in terms of Spanish 
and Basque politics doesn't seem to hold. It gets more 
complicated than a simple dichotomy. 

Let me open that out more broadly to the criticism of the 
center, but from a personal standpoint. I would add that not all 
Spanish nationalists are anti-Basque, but there are some Spanish 
nationalists who are anti-Basque. I think that the anti-Basque 
Spanish nationalists have been waging a very effective campaign 
for a long time based upon disinformation. 

I think that Basque nationalism has been on the defensive 
for a lot of years. In other words, it is constantly defending itself 
against a bunch of sometimes subtle rumors and sometimes 
blatantly false rumors or weird rumors. There's this constant 
"factory," if you will, that produces distortions about the whole 
Basque nationalist agenda, about what Eusko Jaurlaritza does, 
about what the Basque Nationalist Party, HB [United People in 
its Basque acronym], or ETA do. I think it's a very, very 
sophisticated campaign, and it has been organized particularly 
through the media and through El Pais [a Spanish news daily], 
in my view. The Basque government and Basque nationalism 
have expended an incredible amount of energy, since the death 
of Franco, defending themselves and trying to run around and 
put out little fires that have been started by political arsonists. 



128 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I view the disinformation that's put out about this place as 
part of that campaign. I don't think we're singled out because 
we're special. I just think that we're viewed as part of the problem 
by Spanish ultras to the extent that there's a disinformation 
campaign out there regarding Basque nationalism at large, and 
we are one of the targets. One of the reasons is because we are 
that little window on the world. We are an international 
dimension of Basque identity. I don't regard us as an outpost of 
Basque nationalism, but as I said, for Spanish ultras, even having 
a Basque studies program at an American university is an offense. 

I'm offended by their campaign. I'm insulted by it personally. 
For instance, I don't think that the Basque government has to 
defend itself for having given this particular scholar the Lagun 
Onari [To a Good Friend Award], because I think that my vita 
speaks for itself. Had I thought that the Basque government was 
giving me the award because of some kind of perceived quid pro 
quo or service or some kind of direct payoff for having done 
things for them, I would not have accepted the Lagun Onari 
Award. For somebody to suggest otherwise is a personal and 
professional insult to me, and it irritates me. 

However, the other thing that I would say is that when 
newspapers in the Basque Country or in Madrid, El Pais and others, 
publish articles about this center without calling me or calling 
Zulaika and asking us, that's terrible journalism. I mean, they can 
call, and we can say, "No comment," or, "No, it's not true," and 
then they can put in the article, "No comment," or, "We called the 
center in Reno, and, of course, they denied the accusation." But 
they don't even bother to call us, so to me that's terrible journalism. 
I find that to be a cowardly act and shoddy journalism. 

If I was going to write an article attacking the University of 
Nevada, you'd think I would call some people at the University 
of Nevada and say, "You know, I'm very upset about this, that, 
and the other thing, and it's my belief that you guys are doing 
the following. Is it true?" I mean, at least give your target the 
opportunity to comment if you're a journalist. You just don't 
write articles about people that are essentially libelous without 
checking your sources and including your target. That's what a 
good journalist does. So it's bad journalism, and it's cowardly. 

I'd heard about some articles [e.g., Gloria Castresana publicly 
criticized the center for being an instrumental part of a Basque 
nationalist agenda], suggesting that somehow or other we were 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


129 


linked up with ETA or maybe we were getting funding from ETA. 
This whole thing about ETA is very recent, and it's just a smear 
campaign. 

In the case of Gloria Castresana, it's a personal vendetta. 
She worries me least of all of these people, because she's 
essentially paranoid about this place. She thinks that all we 
do is get up in the morning and think of ways to hurt her, 
which is preposterous. I think we give her a thought once 
every ten years, and usually it's in reaction to something like 
what she did in Bilbao. I think that maybe in a way we have 
offended her with the biggest insult possible, which is to 
ignore her. But anyway, my point is that Gloria was a kind of 
an aberrational thing, to my mind. 24 

The fact of the matter is the more successes that the center 
has, the more stuff that it does, the more importance that it 
acquires, and the more coverage it gets in international media, 
in the Spanish national media, in the Basque media, and so on, 
the more vulnerable it becomes to smear campaigns and 
innuendos and accusations. The more contribution this place 
makes, the more it's going to irritate the ultra-nationalists on 
the Spanish side. In fact, I've had death threats; I've had various 
things over the years from that sector, but what can you do about 
it? I've had anonymous thises and thats and profanity directed 
at me over the telephone for even deeming to have something 
like this program. 

I know Zulaika sometimes gets upset and very concerned 
about that image issue, and it is of concern. He wants to counter 
that and contest it, and my advice to him is always, "Forget it. 
Put it out of your mind, because you can't win. They want you 
to waste a lot of time and energy trying to tilt with windmills. 
They build these little windmills, these lies out there, and you 
can waste a lot of your time and energy attacking the windmills. 
So why are you going to bother? You're not going to change 
their minds and their agenda, and the readership is probably 
pretty much decided one way or the other, too. You're not going 
to change a lot of minds there either." 

It's not a concern that has bothered me a lot over the years. 
As I said, you can't really persuade people who don't want to be 
persuaded, so why waste your time? There are always going to 
be people out there that are going to view us as the CIA, the 
American government, the Basque government, or ETA, which 



130 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


is really a joke. It's pretty hard to be a pawn of the Basque 
government and also be a pawn of ETA simultaneously, but 
apparently people are prepared to believe that. It's preposterous, 
but when it concerns Reno, I guess they could merge the two in 
their minds. 

What I'm getting back to is that I've always said you can 
never prove a negative or disprove a negative. You can't prove 
you're not in the CIA, you can't prove you're not getting 
clandestine support from the Basque government or the 
American Government. You could prove it if you were and you 
wanted to go public with it. You can prove affirmatives. I mean, 
if somebody accuses you of being a bastard, how do you prove 
that you're not a bastard? So that's a real tricky deal. I always 
said to the staff, "You've got to ignore it, because if you let it, 
it'll drive you crazy, and they win." 

I can also understand why people that want to view us as an 
extension of ETA or the Basque government or the PNV or the 
CIA are going to believe it no matter what we say. I think that 
interpreting us that way makes perfect sense within the logic of 
their personal universe, and it's pretty hard to shake a person's 
fundamental logic. If I were a Spanish nationalist in Madrid, or 
if I were Jaime Mayor Oreja [a Spanish nationalist] for instance, 
who sees Basque culture as totally politicized at every level, an 
operation like this abroad festers, rankles. 

I will say categorically, and I can say this, we've never, ever, 
in the thirty-three years that I was in charge of this place, once 
received five cents from ETA. I've never once received support 
from the Basque government until very recently. But we didn't 
say, "Give us $40,000 a year for operating, and then we'll do 
whatever you say." 

The Basque government has only called me once. I had one 
call, one time from Josu Legarreta saying that he was having 
problems getting responses from Boise and San Francisco to a 
request for proposals that the Basque government had put out 
to the diaspora. I guess he'd given them some money, and the 
reports weren't coming in in a timely fashion. Josu asked me if I 
would be willing to make some phone calls for him and see what 
was happening, because he wasn't getting anywhere, and he was 
concerned. He wanted to get me involved in that, but that was 
more at the level of a personal favor. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


131 


I pretty much told him, "Josu, I don't have any more leverage 
over Boise and San Francisco than you do." That was pretty much 
my reaction, I'm sure. But I think I made a call or two. If that's 
working for the Basque government, I guess in that particular 
case I did, but all I was trying to do was just underscore to Boise 
and San Francisco that they probably ought to send in some 
kind of report or get back in touch with Josu. That's about it, 
and that in thirty-three years! 

Another thing I would say about this place is that we always 
had the door open to anybody and everybody. We've never once 
turned down a visitor, nor did we ever make it a condition of 
employment here that your "politics" be right. I mean, we had 
Maguna, who, as I say, was probably a Spanish nationalist or ex- 
Carlist. Eloy Placer was certainly a Basque nationalist in 
sentiment, and Jon Bilbao was profoundly PNV—profoundly. 



"We always had the door open to anybody and everybody. We've never 
once turned down a visitor, nor did we ever make it a condition of em¬ 
ployment here that your 'politics' be right." Basque politicians visit the 
Basque Studies Program in 1985 as part of a U.S. State Department tour. 
Back row, left to right: Mario Onaindia, Jaime Mayor Oreja, Joe Crowley, 
Joy Crowley, unidentified. Front row: both unidentified. 















132 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


President Ardanza came to Reno, and Xabier Arzallus visited 
the program for two or three days, but I wasn't in Reno. Txillardegui 
[aka Jose Luis Alvarez Enparantza], who was one of the founders of 
ETA, also came here. (This was well after he was out of ETA, and he 
was an academic.) Mario Onaindia, from EE [Basque Left in its 
Basque acronym], came with Jaime Mayor Oreja, who is very anti- 
Basque nationalist, a very strong Spanish nationalist, and a leader 
of PP [Popular Party in its Spanish acronym]. 

So my point is that we've never, ever, ever, to my knowledge, 
discriminated against anybody for their politics. There were a 
lot of people who came through the program that I couldn't tell 
about their politics, and their politics are none of my business. 
But we had a procession of journalists and political figures. Of 
course with the political figures always kind of knew their politics, 
because you'd get a CV in advance, and if you were a socialist 
member of the Spanish Parliament, Mario Onaindia, Jaime Mayor 
Oreja, or Arzallus, that said something about your politics, right? 
But we didn't invite them because of their politics ever. Most of 
the visitors that came here came of their own initiative, most 
likely through a U.S. Department of State program. 

I don't even understand all the details, but that program 
pretty much tries to introduce the United States to foreign 
journalists and politicians. Those are the two categories that turn 
up in this program. And if you qualify—and I don't know how 
you do it, whether you apply to the American Embassy in Madrid, 
or whether they put out a call for proposals, or whatever—but 
you can say, "I am the editor of El Mundo [a Spanish newspaper], 
and I am very interested in going to the United States to see how 
the United States conducts counter-terrorism and also how 
bilingual education works in the United States." 

You write a little proposal, I think, and then you send it in, 
and if they say, "Well, yes, this guy is pretty interesting," then 
they usually try to pair you up—sometimes you come by 
yourself—with a couple of other people. They might put you 
together with, say, a member of the Basque Parliament and maybe 
a member of the Spanish Parliament that also wanted to come. 
So that's how you get a Mario Onaindia and a Mayor Oreja in 
the same visit. 

Then you'd pick your agenda. Maybe there's some program 
that one of you wants to visit in Oklahoma, and maybe there's 
another program that somebody wants to visit in Florida, and then 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


133 


maybe one or more of the people say the Center for Basque Studies 
in Reno, because they're curious. They fly you over, and they give 
you an interpreter, and you go to Oklahoma, Florida, Reno, and 
UCLA or Los Angeles. And it's fairly fast—a week, ten days, 
something like that. We've had a lot of visitations, probably as many 
as a fifty people, who have come through here in that capacity. 

I remember one time we had a journalist from Nigeria that 
somehow or other heard about the Basque Studies Program, and 
he had some interest because of ethnic diversity in Nigeria. We 
hosted him, and he was a nice guy. That's the main door through 
which our casual foreign visitors entered. 

They had this one Cuban guy who was frequently an 
interpreter for the State Department, particularly whenever they 
were having Spanish speakers. He came here so often that he got 
to be kind of a friend. As soon as he would come, he would 
deposit his guests, and he would say, "Well, I know you don't 
need me now. I'll see you in two days." And he'd hang out. He'd 
go downtown and go to casinos, or I don't know what he did. 
But he knew that we didn't need an interpreter, and he just stayed 
out of the way. He understood that it would just slow everything 
down if he tried to do his job, which was to interpret, because 
we could all handle the Spanish language. 

We also started the summer stipends, where we devoted a little 
bit of money—we give out $1,000 to two or three people to come 
and use the library—and we did it over at the Basque University. 
And I started to get this entire backlash, because the Basque 
University is very politicized. We would invite proposals, and you 
had to propose some kind of a project, some serious reason for 
coming here. Then the staff would all get together, and we'd all 
read the proposals. "Well, this one sounds good, that one sounds 
good." I mean, the person had to have reasonable credentials, and 
we'd see the credentials, but we certainly didn't care about their 
politics. We didn't care if they were PP or whether they were HB. 

Then I'd go back to the Basque Country, and I'd be knocking 
around with some of my friends, and they'd say, "How could 
you have given a grant to so and so? Don't you know that she's 
HB or he's PP?" 

And I always used to try and explain, "We're not running a 
political operation over there, we're running an academic 
operation, and they happened to submit one of the better 
projects." And that's the only criterion we have! 



134 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I very seldom have ever talked politics with any of my 
colleagues. Jon Bilbao and I very, very seldom discussed Basque 
nationalism or even current events over there. I mean, it's not 
as though we never did, but it just wasn't a burning topic for us. 
Same with Zulaika; I don't discuss politics with him that much. 
Obviously, after the March 11 th bombings in Madrid we talked 
politics, or when we're sitting down writing together about 
terrorism, which we've published some about. Even then, 
though, we're talking mainly about international issues or issues 
in countries other than Spain or the Basque Country or France. 

We were doing our deal, because really, in terms of the whole 
big, broad spectrum of what's going on, the discourse that passes 
under the rubric of terrorism these days, the Basque Country is 
a pretty small deal compared to Palestine or Iraq, for God's sakes, 
or Afghanistan or Al-Qaeda. It pales in comparison. The fact 
that ETA, say, threatened to blow off a couple of bombs outside 
the Olympic stadium in Barcelona to demonstrate that they're 
still around is pretty small stuff in the big picture these days. 

In fact, Zulaika's and my whole focus on terrorism includes 
a little Basque dimension, and we could have developed our 
whole discourse on terrorism and counter-terrorism without ever 
mentioning the Basque case once. The extent to which we 
mentioned the Basques was because a couple of University of 
Chicago Press readers, who were reviewing the manuscript, Terror 
and Taboo, were saying, “Well, these two guys are Basque 
specialists. They should put more Basque stuff in here." 

So we actually rewrote the manuscript and included a few 
things from our Basque experience and our own backgrounds, 
which weren't even in the first draft. We added that chapter 
where we talked about ETA at the end, and I put in a little bit 
about my experiences as an anthropologist back in the 1960s. 
But even then we were kind of resisting the idea, because we 
weren't writing a Basque book. It certainly was not a book about 
ETA. 

Ethnicity: We are committed to the notion that there is such 

The Old a thing as Basque ethnicity, and I would come back 
Law to how that gets defined and where. But if we didn't 

believe in that, we should turn out the lights and 
go home. How can you have a Basque studies program or a center 
for Basque studies that is premised upon the idea that there is 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


135 


absolutely no distinction between Basques and anybody else? I 
mean, then what do you do? Why would it even make sense? 

Particularly as an anthropologist, I am committed to the idea. 
I see distinctions, even ethnic distinctions, within the broader 
American population, and I'm not talking about divides such as 
with Hispanics or divides such as with blacks in American society. 
I'm saying that within white America you can make certain 
"ethnic distinctions." So I don't have a problem with that. 

I understand that some people would like to pretend that 
race and ethnicity do not matter. I think they do matter. I think 
they drive a whole lot of issues within American politics today 
despite the universalist dialogue or discourse, and certainly 
internationally that is absolutely true as well. I think that some 
people, who happen to live somewhere in Iberia, would like to 
pretend that there is no such thing as ethnic distinctions within 
Iberia, but then why have the Spain of the regions or the 
autonomies? Why waste all of the energy that gets spent upon 
the various minority languages within Spain? Why tout diversity 
in your tourist literature? 

The Spanish national tourism thrust in part elevates the 
distinctiveness of the Basques, the distinctiveness of the Catalans, 
and the distinctiveness of the Andalusians. They don't just say, 
"Come visit Spain because all of the women wear a flower in 
their hair, and we don't play the castanets anymore, and there's 
no such thing as bull fights. We're thinking of outlawing them." 

I mean, the point is that the Spanish national imagery 
projected to the outside is very ethnically and culturally diverse. 
So it might be nice for "Spaniards" to sit around and say, "Well, 
there's absolutely no distinction amongst us," but I think that 
that's more of an exercise in wishful thinking by intellectuals. 

I think that there's a little, thin, liberal layer, just like in this 
country, that would like to pretend that there's no such thing as 
religious fundamentalism or racism or anything else, that we're 
all just good little Americans irrespective of color, class, 
educational background, and regional origin. That's a lovely, 
beautiful discourse maybe, and it's totally utopian, but it doesn't 
correspond to any kind of reality other than what goes on in a 
few coffee houses in New York and San Francisco and at some 
university campuses among some segments of the faculty and 
student body. But that's about how deep its roots are. That kind 
of discourse in America is miles wide and three inches deep. 



136 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I think that they've got a comparable kind of thing going 
down in Iberia, and maybe even worse, because here we wiped 
out our ethnic homelands. We pretty much hammered the 
American Indians, took over their land, and put them on 
reservations. Maybe the Navajos and the Hopi and Zuni are a bit 
of an exception. So we got rid of the ethnic homeland issue here 
very effectively out of the barrel of a gun. In Iberia that's not the 
case. 

Then you start the segue into the differences between what 
does identity and ethnicity mean in the United States, say, versus 
in Europe. I would totally agree, for one thing, that having once 
pretty much liquidated our Native American populations and 
certainly marginalized them as any kind of a serious political 
entity, except maybe in the casino business, that what we are is 
a nation of immigrants. We are a nation basically of sub-strata 
of European immigrants of various kinds with a whole very 
complicated history, including intra-group tensions and 
accommodations and violence even. 

We've got this kind of white American sub-stratum and the 
whole black slave dimension that was brought in. Then we have 
the big Hispanic and Asian deals. In other words, we have the 
new immigration, if you will, that pretty much postdates—not 
entirely—the white European period; that is pretty much a late 
nineteenth and twentieth-century phenomenon for us, whereas 
the white thing goes back to the eighteenth century and early 
nineteenth century. 

So we've got all those elements in play, but in the final 
analysis, there is a huge amount of construction of identity that 
goes on. And then you throw in all of the intermarriage. We've 
had this racial divide, and all of that is driving our history in 
various ways. 

It really doesn't have an analogy. I guess the closest thing to 
an analogy in Iberia—and it's certainly not of the same 
magnitude—might be the gypsy issue or maybe now the African 
immigration issue today, but that's brand new in Iberia. In the 
United States, this dimension is several centuries old now. 

We have this wonderful exercise in the U.S. Census now 
where Americans are able to identify themselves ethnically to 
the census taker, and you can list, I think, up to three ethnic 
origins or none. You can say, "I'm an American," or you can say, 
"I'm Irish, Italian, and Chinese." Then they count the categories, 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


137 


and that's how we get to this number of about 50,000 Basques 
now in the United States. It's not that 50,000 people check the 
box, because it's a sample thing still, I think. (Initially, it was a 
sample, one in five or something like that, and then they would 
extrapolate and get 10,000 people saying “Basque," and then 
they'd say, "Well, there are 50,000." And I'm rounding that off, 
because those numbers don't end in zero.) 

The point is that Americans go through a very, very different 
kind of exercise vis-a-vis the census taker regarding identity. I 
doubt if they even census identity in Spain, whether they even 
have an ethnic identity question, or if they do, they don't mean 
whites. In other words, Basques and Catalans aren't asked, “Are 
you Catalan, or are you Basque?" but maybe today you get asked 
if you're a Moroccan or if you're a sub-Saharan African. You might! 
I'm not sure how that works. 

After five centuries of centralizing forces, still you've got an 
ethnic homeland that's called Catalonia, and you've got an ethnic 
homeland called Euskadi or Euskal Herria [the Basque Country], 
and you've got an ethnic homeland called Galiza or Galicia. The 
same is true even in the biggest single centralizing juggernaut 
and ethnically leveling playing field in the world, arguably, which 
is France. The French are still choking a little bit on the Corsicans, 
the Bretons, and the Basques. And now in France you've got the 
process of creation of new ethnic identities going on all the time. 
Now they've got this huge Muslim population. I think France 
has the largest one in Europe now. 

These issues are never static. So when we talk about identity 
formation, the idea that somehow it's all going away, I think, is 
wishful thinking. If anything, I think that it's possible to discern 
right across the planet at least as many particularistic forces at 
play as there are universalistic ones. Whether it's religious 
fundamentalisms, or whether it's ethnic identity formation and/ 
or ethno-nationalism, you've got all of these incredibly strong 
forces that have pretty much absorbed or outlasted the 
Enlightenment attempt to wipe it all out. 

If you want to talk about failures regarding the issue of identity 
and ethnicity, the real failure is the failure of the Enlightenment 
enterprise and its pandering to universalism. It just hasn't worked! 
If it had worked, internationalism would be a lot stronger today 
than it is, and it would not be as assailed as it is. What we basically 
have is a United Nations that is virtually powerless and that is 



138 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


more symbolic in show than it is substance. And if, in fact, the 
Enlightenment project had succeeded, we'd be living in a very 
different world today than we live in, in my view. 

Is it ridiculous to have a Basque studies program? The one 
thing I will say is that I guess by our very existence, from some 
people's standpoint, we are a Basque nationalist enterprise, 
because we deign to recognize Basque ethnic distinctness and 
argue for it and study it. So to the extent that that's a political 
act, I guess we're a nationalist operation. But I can promise we're 
not a PNV operation or an HB operation, we're not a PP operation 
or a PSOE [the Spanish Socialist Workers Party in its Spanish 
acronym] operation either. We're none of the above, and 
hopefully, it will always be true. I would deny that we have a 
specific nationalist agenda at the center. 

Goio Monreal and I brought out a book, The Old Law of 
Bizkaia, in 2005. (Well it's Goio's book, but Goio, Linda, and I 
collaborated—Linda and I as translators and Goio as the compiler 
and editor.) The Old Law of Bizkaia is a canonical political text 
in the sense that it is probably the most canonical text 
underpinning Basque nationalism. 

But we are not bringing it out to underpin Basque 
nationalism. The Diputacion of Bizkaia [the Council of the 
Province of Bizkaia] is subsidizing that book, and the Basque 
government is not supporting it. We approached the Bizkaian 
government with a proposal saying, "We want to start a Classic 
Series at the Center for Basque Studies, and we're asking you for 
support for the first of four books of this series," amongst which 
happens to be The Old Law of Bizkaia. 

One of the first four titles that we were considering was Goio's 
Old Law of Bizkaia, because it's so canonical, and it's virtually 
unknown in Spain, let alone outside Spain. We also wanted to 
do something on Jose Miguel de Barandiaran, on Koldo 
Mitxelena, and on the Basque language apologists. [Anthology 
of Apologists and Detractors of the Basque Language was 
published in 2006.] Those books seem like four very, very obvious 
texts to do under the rubric of Basque classics. 

We did The Old Law of Bizkaia first, because we thought it 
would be the easiest. I'm not so sure we were right, but we 
thought it was going to be the easiest, mainly because Goio and 
Linda had worked together on a pretty much finished translation, 
and Goio thought he was going to write a 40-page essay situating 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


139 


the book. But the translation needed work, and we had to go 
back and revisit it and do a lot to it, and Goio wrote about 180 
pages, and then I wrote a preface. So the whole thing grew, and 
I'm not so sure that one of the other subjects might not have 
come out faster, but we believed that we could get Goio's book 
to the market quickly. 

It turns out that that was the first publication sponsored by 
the government of Bizkaia. Even the scheduling of it was 
accidental. I'm sure, though, that some people over there will 
take a look at the chronology and say, “Oh well, these guys went 
to the Diputacion of Bizkaia and said, 'You give us some money, 
and we'll publish the Old Law, and that will be our first priority." 
It's just not true! But if you want to believe it is true, I can't 
convince you otherwise. 


Reflections on my career 

There are parts of my career that have nothing or have little 
to do with Basque studies. I've worked on tourism in Las Vegas, 
on Italian immigration, and on Italian family history research. I 
guest-edited an issue on Iberia for the Journal of Family History, 
which is the major journal in its field, and I wrote an article in 
there on the Basque stem family. I also got interested in 
borderland studies. One of my publications was about the frontier 
influence of how being situated next to the border and sharing 
an international frontier or a border as part of the municipal 
bounds affected people in Echalar. It was an interest that I 
maintained and revisit periodically. I have probably published 
four or five articles sprinkled over twenty-five years on the 
influence of frontiers on those living near them. I also worked 
on the subject of terrorism without it being a specifically Basque 
orientation, although some Basque stuff creeps in. 

I guess in terms of balance my published articles are more 
important than the books, but they're virtually impossible to 
talk about, because there are so many and they're on such a 
wide range of topics. But collectively, or taken altogether, they 
probably weigh more than the books. Nevertheless, I think there's 
also a way in which you become more known for a book than 
for a particular article, unless your article happens to be so 
completely path-breaking that it revolutionizes a particular 



140 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


academic field. Once in a while that happens with an article, but 
books are a little more prominent. 

For example, Death in Murelaga grew out of the idea that I 
had for an MA thesis, and which actually, in a lot of ways, turned 
out to be almost my most influential publication. I mean, it's 
kind of a joke, ironic in a way. 

It had a fair bit of impact in the Basque Country. There was 
no anthropology in those days in the Basque Country to speak 
of. There really wasn't a field called anthropology. But Death in 
Murelaga was a book that was read widely, and I've only come to 
appreciate that in recent years. Bernardo Atxaga read it and loved 
it—it was one of his favorite books when he was young—and 
Angel Lertxundi told me the same thing. These were people who, 
in the whole generation of Basque writers, read that book and 
commented on it. Somebody told me that there was a discussion 
group of Catholic-action people around the cathedral of Bilbao 
that kind of used to meet clandestinely in the church. They 
assigned that book when it came out, and they all discussed it! 

Now the book just got republished in the Basque Country, 
and there were a lot of people who came out of the woodwork 
and told me, "I read your book thirty years ago, and it really 
influenced me." 

Most of my books don't get read that widely, and I'm 
surprised, because these are not anthropologists that are saying 
this. Most of those readers are total laymen. 

I went off on a bunch of tangents for years, and finally Jon 
Bilbao and I did Amerikanuak. I would have to say that far and 
away the most successful book that I published regarding Basques 
was Death in Murelaga, and far and away the most successful 
book that I published dealing with Basque immigration would 
be Amerikanuak, so I guess those would be two real high points 
in my career. I think that Amerikanuak had a lot of influence, 
maybe even too much influence. There's a way in which it defined 
a field and then limited it, in my view, in the sense that it was 
canonical in a way. I mean, it provided a baseline for studies of 
Basque immigration in the New World, and it influenced a lot of 
people's work. It's pretty hard for anybody to publish in that 
area without citing it, and so that, I guess, makes it canonical. 

I think that there's a way in which the book casts too long of 
a shadow, and both Jon Bilbao and I kind of felt that people 
were not crawling out from under the shadow enough in the 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


141 


sense that we never viewed Amerikanuak as definitive. We 
understood, having written Amerikanuak, what an immense 
topic we had taken on, and we certainly didn't presume to have 
covered it exhaustively. I think we covered a lot of the broad 
outlines and then provided a good, broad framework for people 
to fall back on for framing their own research. But there's a way 
in which I think a lot of people who followed us were too timid 
or too intimidated by Amerikanuak to break out of the mold or 
to take bigger risks. I'm a little ambivalent about its legacy. I 
think in one sense it made a big contribution, and I think in 
another sense it also inhibited some people. 

Pretty much after we finished Amerikanuak, I thought, "What 
am I going to do next in the Basque area?" 

So I did Beltran, which was an oral history of Beltran Paris, a 
Basque sheepman in eastern Nevada. That book kind of grew 
out of the interviews that I conducted the first summer, running 
around to the Basque festivals. I went to Ely announcing the 
program, and I met Beltran. I found him to be pretty 
extraordinary, and we just had a little bit of an exchange at the 
festival. So I said, "Look, can I come out to your ranch tomorrow 
and sit down with you with a tape recorder?" I did that and 
taped him for maybe an hour or something. 

Ely was the first festival I visited, so I had no frame of 
reference. I had nothing to compare it to. But I wanted to 
interview some elderly Basques, like sheepherders, just to get a 
feel for it. I knew one of the things, maybe the core or highest 
priority for the new program, would be to research the Basque 
presence in the American West. That's pretty much why DRI 
had started the program, and I was trying to get my feet wet, 
because I didn't know that much about the subject. 

One day years later I started listening to some of those old 
tapes, and I listened to the Beltran tape, and I was struck by the 
fact that his life was so emblematic of the whole Basque 
immigrant experience and sheepherding. He was a sheepherder, 
then he was a camp tender, and then he was on his own. He was 
a tramp sheepman, and then he got some land, and then he 
became a sheep rancher. His life was all within the same industry, 
and he became kind of a patriarch out in the Butte Valley in 
eastern Nevada. I thought, "I don't even know if the man is still 
alive." This would have been maybe six, seven years after the 
first interview. 



142 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I called out to the Ely Hotel, which was a Basque hotel, and 
the proprietor was a Basque woman named Mariana or Marianne. 
I talked to her several times over the years, because anytime I 
went through Ely, I stayed at the hotel, so I knew her. I said, 
"Mariana, is Bert Paris—because his Anglicized name was 
Bert—still alive?" 

She answered, "Oh, yes, yes. Doesn't come to town as much 
as he used to. He's getting older, but, yes, he's alive. I know I saw 
him not long ago." 

So I contacted the Paris family and asked if I could come out 
and sit down and talk to them. That's when I drove out to the 
ranch and told them about my interest in possibly doing an oral 
history. The family decided to do it, and I told them that it would 
affect all of them. I also told them that my only condition would 
be that I'd let them read it at the end, but if they wanted to 
censor it, I would not permit that. 

In other words, I had to have freedom, and I said, "It's not 
just going to be all laudatory and praiseful. We've got to talk 
about the warts. We've got to talk about life, really, life as it was 
really lived and not glorified. If you all are uncomfortable with 
the final product, the deal would be that we'll just stick it in a 
box at the university under lock and key, not to be opened for 
fifty years, and we'll all be gone." They agreed to that, and so we 
went forward. 

That resulted in the Beltran book, and actually it took a long 
time, and it was very, very hard to write. It was a difficult, difficult 
project in a lot of ways, even though the book looks quite simple. 
But my hardest challenge or my greatest difficulty was the voice, 
whether to frame it in first person or third person. I framed it in 
first person, but once I did that, then I had the problem of his 
English. If I ran it through my filter and made it academic and 
in perfectly acceptable English, it didn't ring true to me, because 
it wasn't Grandpa. 

Then I tried a version in which I stuck totally with his bad 
English, and it was horrible. Five pages into it, the reader would 
have thrown the book against the wall and said, "I'm not going 
to read this! It's too hard." So I shut myself away on the Oregon 
coast for a couple of weeks and just listened to the tapes. By 
then I had dozens if not hundreds of hours of tape with him, 
and just listened and listened and listened until I could almost 
put myself into his linguistic frame, and then I wrote it. I wrote 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


143 


it in a sort of quaint or nonacademic English that I hope preserved 
the flavor of his English, but without being too off-putting or 
pedantic or redundant. 

I got involved in doing a comparative study. At one point I 
decided I wanted to go to Italy to study emigration from a 
southern Italian town. I ended up in Italy in 1972, and while 
there I ran across people that knew people from Murelaga in 
North Queensland. In other words, they were returned sugarcane 
cutters in the Abruzzo in Molise in the town of Agnone. They 
had cut sugarcane in North Queensland, and they knew some 
Basques in North Queensland. It's a small world, you know? 

In Murelaga I lived with the Goitiandia family for about a 
year. The name of the caserio [farmstead] was Goitiandia as well. 
I knew that Basques had gone down under, because Goitiandia's 
youngest daughter, Beatriz, married an "Australian" named Josu. 
He was from Gernika, and he was back from having been a 
sugarcane cutter. There were several men in Murelaga who had 
been to Australia and cut sugarcane out there. So I had some 
information from those guys about Australia, and also from Josu, 
because I interviewed him about what it was like to be a sugarcane 
cutter in Australia, thinking that one day I might write about 
that, but from the perspective of Basques exclusively. 

I thought, "Well, maybe I could go to Queensland and do a 
field study of sugarcane cutters, Basque and Italian, and see if 
there's a difference in some of their adaptive life strategies." But 
I knew that there were no more sugarcane cutters in Australia, 
because by the 1970s or early 1980s the industry had already 
been mechanized about ten years earlier. It wasn't that long before 
that there had been sugarcane cutters, and I didn't know whether 
I could find enough of these people to do a study. I thought, 
"Maybe I can locate enough people and reconstruct all of that, 
but maybe not." 

I went to Australia for a couple of months in 1977, knocked 
around, met quite a few Australian Basques, and got involved 
with the Gure Txoko Basque Club in Sydney. There were a bunch 
of ex-cane cutters down there, so I interviewed them. I went up 
to North Queensland, got to know the Mendiolea family almost 
immediately, because they were from Murelaga. In fact, they were 
from a fallen-down baserri right in front of Goitiandia's. They 
were in their forties. Their mother and father had emigrated to 
Australia because the family had had some serious illness back 



144 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


in Murelaga and three or four young children died in that farm, 
and the village doctor told them they had to move to a warmer 
climate. So that's why they went to Australia. But anyway, I got 
to know some people, and it was obvious to me that there was 
enough material to warrant going out there, and so I did. 

Jan, my wife, and I went out, and we lived for pretty much a 
year in Australia in 1980, really as nomads. I bought a secondhand 
taxicab, and it was a station wagon from Sydney. We loaded 
everything in the car and drove up to Queensland, and before 
the year was out, I think we put about 25,000 miles on that car 
just up and back and all around. We made it out almost to 
Adelaide and to Griffith, which was an agricultural district that 
some Basques had moved down to, and the mining town of 
Mount Isa, too. I came back and published an article or two in 
English out of that work, but my monograph came out in Spanish 
[Azucar Amargo: Vida y Fortuna de los Cortadores de Cana 
Italianos y Vascos en la Australia Tropical—Bitter Sugar: Life and 
Fortune of Italian and Basque Sugarcane Cutters in Tropical 
Australia ]. 

Alfonso Perez-Agote had a series with the University of the 
Basque Country Press, and Alfonso asked if I would be willing to 
publish it there, and I did in 1996. To this day I've never gotten 
around to publishing my Australian research in English in 
monograph form, although I'm working on it right now. 

In the meantime I met Richard Lane who was running around 
the American West. He had done a PhD dissertation for Yale 
University in Elko and Elko County, but he was really into 
photography. As it turned out he was always ambivalent about 
being an academic, but he got his doctorate. He was at the 
University of Idaho in Moscow teaching as an anthropologist 
for a while and pretty much hated it. Basically he walked away 
from his academic career, and he was tenure track, or he may 
have even had tenure by then, I don't know. He wanted to be a 
photographer. Richard came to Reno, and we gave him a little 
bit of money, not much, to organize our slide collection and to 
also organize his slide collection with the idea being that we 
would get a copy of each of his slides and that we'd have some 
rights to use them. (He was living really hand-to-mouth, and he 
was a bachelor with very modest wants.) He and I ended up 
collaborating on a book on Basque sheepherders in the American 
West, which is a photo book, but I wrote the text for it. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


145 


I got involved in Basque nationalism, too, and I keep coming 
back to that subject, [laughter] When I was doing field research 
in Murelaga, the parish priest, Don Emilio, was a very, very strong 
Basque nationalist, a PNV guy. He was a hard-liner in his own 
way but totally PNV and pretty uncomfortable with ETA. At the 
time, Xabier Amuritza came out of the seminary, and his first 
posting as a priest was in Gisaburuaga parish, which is practically 
a barrio [neighborhood] of Murelaga. So I got to know Xabier 
well, and I also knew Alberto Gabikagojeaskoa, who was a pretty 
hard-line, young Basque priest with a parish over by Gernika. 

Xabier and Alberto were really pushing the envelope in terms 
of challenging the bishop and challenging the authorities over 
what they perceived to be Basque cultural genocide. They got 
into a lot of legal difficulty. They were tried, and they ultimately 
both ended up in prison after a hunger strike at the bishop's 
house. I think it's fair to say that Xabier and Alberto were less 
uncomfortable with ETA than was Don Emilio. 

Their whole generation of priests, because they were younger, 
was fairly closely identified with ETA and was condoning the 
initial phases of the violence. I think that a lot of priests parted 
ways with ETA over time, but not all. Some stayed strong 
supporters of ETA, but I think that as the conflict became bloodier, 
a lot of priests fell by the wayside. But I'm talking about very 
early on. ETA started in 1959, and I'm talking about the mid 
1960s. Nobody had died yet. So we're talking about a very 
different ETA, and we're talking about a very different phase of 
the conflict. 

Don Emilio basically proselytized me in the sense that he 
was constantly trying to convince me of the merits of Basque 
nationalism. He was my mentor, if you will, in the subject of 
Basque nationalism, and he was an interesting guy. He'd been a 
chaplain in the Basque Army, and he spent three or four years in 
prison camp, as a prisoner of war, and was afraid he was going to 
get executed at one point. Then when he was turned out and 
finally released, he was driven out of his hometown, Lekeitio, by 
the mayor. He finally got posted to a little, dinky town in Alava. 
His career had suffered mightily because of the conflict and 
because he was a Basque nationalist. But he was very avid, a very 
bright guy, very intelligent, widely read, and a nice guy. 

Don Emilio revved my motor, and at that time, I've got to 
say, I think probably part of my personal decision to come to 



146 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Reno to take the position was driven by Don Emilio's influence 
over me. I could have just gone off and been an anthropologist 
somewhere else, but to come and build a Basque studies program, 
in a way to me it was like my contribution to keeping the flame 
alive of a very, very repressed culture, in my perception at the time. 

I think over the years my personal commitment to that aspect 
of Basque nationalism, and I'm talking about a personal thing 
now, is probably still there today. I mean, I'm sympathetic to it. 
As an anthropologist I'm certainly at least empathetic to it, but 
I think that there are ways in which I'm less prepossessed with 
it. I don't think I was ever "radical" radical. I'm less concerned 
with it today than I was then, but that was my personal 
introduction to Basque nationalism. 

At some point a guy named Milton DaSilva came through 
Reno, and he was a graduate student at some university back 
East, maybe Brandeis. Milton was doing a dissertation in political 
science on Basque nationalism, and he would ask me questions. 
What I knew about Basque nationalism I had learned at Don 
Emilio's kitchen table or in a bar. I hadn't really read a book yet 
about Basque nationalism. (Actually there weren't very many 
books on the subject at the time.) It wasn't a big, burning thing 
for me, and I certainly didn't possess specific expertise in Basque 
nationalism. I'd interviewed a few people as an anthropologist 
when I was doing my general ethnographic work, but it just 
wasn't a huge part of my concern when I was doing field research 
in the Basque Country. 

DaSilva had suggested maybe someday we could write 
something together. Then I got an invitation from Oriol Pi- 
Sunyer, who was a Catalan-American anthropologist at the 
University of Massachusetts Amherst and who had worked in 
Catalonia, to go to Ontario and give a paper on Basque ethno- 
nationalism. I contacted DaSilva, and I said, "I've got this 
invitation, and I really don't feel comfortable with doing it on 
my own. I have not read the literature that you've read, and I 
certainly haven't read the literature on ethno-nationalism 
generally. So, do you want to collaborate on this thing?" 

We did, and it ultimately got kind of desktop published by 
Oriol in 1971. There are four or five papers in a collection, and 
ours is one of them. That was my first real formal or academic 
brush with the subject of Basque nationalism. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


147 


Then I guess it would have been about 1987 or so, they had 
the Second World Congress of Basque Studies that went on for 
weeks and weeks. Alfonso Perez-Agote, whom I didn't know at 
all—I'd never met him at that point—got in touch with me. He 
wanted me to be part of a session on the sociology of nationalism. 
I wrote him back and said, "I'm sorry. I don't know anything 
about the subject. Thanks for the invitation, but I really don't 
know anything about it." 

But Alfonso insisted, and I forget how he convinced me, but 
he did. All of a sudden I was going to go to this conference on 
the sociology of nationalism, and I did a kind of a crash course. 
I started reading Anthony Smith and Walker Connor, because I 
didn't know their work really. I knew a couple of Walker Connor's 
articles, and I sort of knew that he had launched the field of 
ethno-nationalist studies in America after World War II. But then 
I had to get serious because I was going to go to this conference, 
and there were some heavy hitters like Michael Hechter and 
Walker Connor. 

That forced me to really get into the subject of ethno- 
nationalism. I wrote a paper, and I gave it at the conference, and 
Walker Connor liked it a lot. He and I got to be very close friends 
at that conference, which is a friendship that continues to this 
day. He then encouraged me to submit my paper from the 
conference to Ethnic and Racial Studies, a journal edited by 
Anthony Smith in London. I did, Walker supported it, and they 
published my paper. So I was mojado [wet] in the subject of ethno- 
nationalism. 

Then Alfonso invited me to come to the University of the 
Basque Country campus of Leioa to give a short course on the 
subject of identity. That forced me to read Stuart Hall and people 
like that—people that I hadn't read. So Alfonso really was a huge 
stimulus for me, mainly by prodding me from behind rather 
than pulling me forward. It was more like he would get me 
involved in a commitment that would force me to break some 
new ground for my own work, which I appreciate in retrospect, 
although at the time I was ambivalent about boning up on the 
subject that he wanted me to expound on. 

Gurutz Jauregui visited Reno, and we wanted to have Gurutz's 
book, The Decline of the Nation-State, published at the University 
of Nevada Press in translation, and we couldn't find a translator. 



148 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


So I agreed to translate the book, and that kind of got me more 
into the subject of nationalism. 

Then I decided at some point to recruit one of Alfonso's books 
on the subject of nationalism as a possible candidate for 
translation, except that as we got into it, I said to him, "Alfonso, 
what we should do is a synthetic kind of work. I mean, rather 
than picking one of your books and translating it, why don't 
you do an overview of your own work on the subject?" He did, 
and it came out in spring 2006, in the Basque Book Series [The 
Social Roots of Basque Nationalism ]. Cameron Watson did the 
initial translation, then I spent a lot of time translating, doing 
some polishing of the translation, and editing. 

At one point Joseba Zulaika and I wrote an article together 
on ETA as a concept rather than as a structure. We published it 
in a pretty important and well-respected journal in the Anglo 
world called Comparative Studies in Society and History in 1990. 
That led us to Terror and Taboo, which has a certain Basque 
dimension, but it was not intended to be a Basque book or about 
nationalism per se. But obviously nationalism comes into it, 
because we're talking about the IRA, the Palestine Liberation 
Organization, and about ETA, and there's an ethno-nationalist 
dimension to all of those conflicts. 

Terror and Taboo is a book that I really identify with. As an 
American citizen, it contains and reflects a lot of my own personal 
political frustrations, and as someone who, like all of us, is 
inundated by terrorism and counter-terrorism discourse and 
who's pretty skeptical about it. So that was a kind of cri de coeur 
book. The other day I was reading the epilogue, and it was scary. 
I mean, I hadn't looked at it for a long time. In the epilogue of 
that book we predicted everything that's happened after 9/11. 
It's a little bit dated, but we pretty much predicted that America 
would become the promised land of counter-terrorism if we kept 
going down the path we were going down. Indeed, it's all been 
borne out, in fact, even more so. We thought we were being 
hyperbolic at the time, and we weren't being adventuresome 
enough, really. We thought we had almost crossed the line then. 
But here we are, and it's eerie. I was kind of nervous when I was 
done reading that epilogue. 

Nationalism is a subject that I never really went out and 
embraced in some systematic way, but I guess if you're a social 
scientist and you're interested in things Basque, you can't get 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


149 


away from the subject in some respects. So some of my vitae 
would provide prima facie evidence to anybody that wants to 
say that, "Well, Douglass is just interested in, or he's just a kind 
of a spokesman for, Basque nationalism." 

Then, political scientist Pedro Ibarra and I wrote about the 
subject more recently in the conference that was held at the 
center [titled Nationalism, Globalization, and Terror and held in 
April 2002]. It's a subject that never quite goes away from me at 
this point, but it's never my mainstream interest. 

One of the things that happens to you as an academic, 
particularly if you're as eclectic as I've been .... I used to think 
I'd publish an article and close a book. But by publishing about 
a subject, you don't close a book, you open the book. Your article 
gets published, and then somebody is organizing a conference, 
and they know about your article, so they invite you to come to 
the conference. Then you've got to go back and revisit the topic 
and prepare something different, and I've never been good at 
just regurgitating old stuff or rewriting the same old paper for 
the next conference, because I find that boring. So I always kind 
of roll up my sleeves and try to do something different each 
time, but that's not always possible. 

I naively thought that I could go off and fool around with 
Italian studies a little bit and maybe write a book and then drop 
it. Well, you can't really drop it, because then all the Italianists 
know about you. Family history is another thing. I've been pulled 
into some controversies, into a bunch of stuff in the field of 
family history generally, and I didn't even get into that through 
my Basque lens. I got into that through my southern Italian 
work, and I also did some stuff on Basque family history after a 
lot of churning around in Italian family history. 

But, again, that's been something that became a periodic 
commitment, and I would be periodically pulled in. Somebody's 
going to organize a collection of essays, so I'd get invited to 
submit an essay on my stuff. In a way, your fan keeps getting 
opened up more widely rather than narrowing, and that was 
something that took me a while to learn. 

I have to sit down and take a fresh approach to my subject 
matter, or I bore myself. The big exception is encyclopedia articles. 
I've probably written the entry "Basques" in ten or twelve or 
fourteen encyclopedias. The fact of the matter is that it's very, 
very hard to be original with an encyclopedia article, so much so 



150 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


that I now refuse to write them. I will not write an encyclopedia 
article on Basques. I've turned down three or four requests since 
writing my last one, because I'm very tired of that subject. I did 
the encyclopedia article in the Encyclopedia Americana in 1989, 
and it's a short entry, but the biggest one was the 1980 Harvard 
Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups —actually, I'm very 
proud of that one—organized by Harvard University, which was 
a major undertaking with big financing. 

The project was under the editorship of a historian named 
Stephan Thernstrom, who was big in immigration and ethnic 
studies. I've never met Thernstrom, and the person who was 
really organizing it was a woman named Ann Orlov, and she was 
the person in the trenches, the one that you corresponded with. 
I can't remember how many ethnic groups were in it, but it was 
something like two hundred. It's a great big, fat book, and it 
became a canonical work of its kind. 

Ann sent out a model of what she wanted, almost a 
questionnaire or a talking point deal, an outline, and I didn't 
like the model at all. I mean, I had a lot to say about some items 
that she wanted information on, but some of the items had no 
relevance whatsoever to the Basque-American experience. It 
wasn't Old World Basque, although they wanted a little section 
on the Old World homeland of the ethnic group in question, 
but it was really about an American ethnic group. 

I struggled with her model, and I guess many other 
contributors were struggling with the project, too. Finally one 
day I just set the model aside, and I started writing. I wrote about 
twenty or thirty pages, double-spaced, which was about the 
length she wanted. I sent it to her with a letter saying, "I know 
this doesn't fit your model, but this is what I have to say about 
the Basque-American experience. I was finding that the outline 
you sent me was impeding my writing rather than facilitating it, 
so I understand that this is not what you had asked for. Take it if 
you want, but I understand if you can't use it." 

She wrote back, and she was delighted. She said she was fine 
with it, and so that's what got published in that encyclopedia. 

Five or six years later, I ran into her at the Social Science 
History Association meetings, and I didn't know her personally. 
I had a lot of exchange with her by mail, but I had never met 
her. I went up after she gave her talk, and said, "Ann, I'm Bill 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


151 


Douglass, and I just wanted to say hello, because I feel like I 
know you, but we've never met." 

She said, "Oh, Bill Douglass! I want to tell you a story." 

I said, "What's that?" 

She said, "When I got your essay, we were having a big 
problem, because nobody was doing the work. Everybody was 
kind of jammed up, and I couldn't understand why, but 
everybody was kind of having your problem. When you sent me 
your essay, I ran off two hundred copies and sent a copy of your 
Basque essay to every other contributor, saying, 'This is what we 
want.'" 

I was very honored by what she had to say. [laughter] So that 
essay turned out to be the model essay for that publication. That's 
one I am proud of. 

I was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of 
the Basque Country in 1984. That was Goio Monreal's doing. He 
was the rector [chancellor] of the Basque university system at 
the time, and by then I had four or five books out, and the 
program was hitting its stride. Amerikanuak would have been 
out by then, not in Spanish yet but certainly in English, and also 
Muerte en Murelaga in Spanish, or Death in Murelaga here. We 
had already started the studies abroad consortium, so I'd 
established an interaction with Goio by negotiating the 
consortium. Goio and I were pretty good friends at that point, 
so he proposed me for an honorary doctorate. I went over, and 
there was a nice ceremony in Vitoria. Enrique de Gandia from 
Argentina and I were the two people who got an honorary 
doctorate that year. 

I was also named one of twenty corresponding members of 
Euskaltzaindia, the Basque Language Academy, in 1998. That one 
just dropped down from the sky. I had had virtually no interface 
at all with Euskaltzaindia. I know Enrike Knorr well and a few 
other members of the academy personally, but, it wasn't as if we 
had a whole lot of intimacy or interaction. I don't know who 
proposed me for that. I remember when I heard about it, Joseba 
and I had gone down for the day to Davis. It was in May, and our 
conference was going to come up in the summer of 1998, so we 
drove down to the university at Davis because Jacques Derrida 
and Manuel Castells, from the University of California, Berkeley, 
were giving a lecture, and we wanted to hear them. Also, we 



152 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



Bill Douglass receives the Doctoris Honoris Causa medal from Goio Monreal, 
President of the University of the Basque Country, October 2, 1984. 


wanted to get Castells to come up to our conference in Reno 
and maybe even give the keynote address. 

We were successful. There were some family and health 
complications, but he did agree to come. Anyway, Joseba and I 
were driving back to Reno, and I remember we got up on top of 
the mountain and had dinner at a place called Rainbow Lodge, 
and it started snowing. It was snowing really hard, and I didn't 
have chains, and we were maybe ten miles from Donner Pass 
wondering if we were going to get over it. We had to drive real 
slowly going down. We probably got to Reno about one in the 
morning. I fell asleep, and the telephone rang, and it was Joseba. 
He said, "Do you know what? I was just checking something on 
the Internet, and they just made you an honorary member of 
Euskaltzaindia." That's how I found out about it. The bishop of 
Bilbao, Karmelo Etxenagusia, was visiting Reno shortly thereafter, 
and he was asked by Euskaltzaindia to bring me the actual 
physical paper certificate, so he hand delivered it. 

In 1999 the Basque government gave me the Lagun Onari 
Award. The Basque government has another award that it's similar 
to. It's kind of the sister award to the Lagun Onari Award that's 
given to a Basque who has made a great contribution to Basque 








WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


153 


culture. That's an internal award—it's only for Basques. Lagun 
Onari, by the very title, "To a Good Friend," means to an outsider. 
To my knowledge there've been five Lagun Onari Awards, and 
four of them have been given to presidents of countries or ex¬ 
presidents: Julio Maria Sanguinetti of Uruguay, Eduardo Frei-Tagle 
of Chile, Francesco Cossiga of Italy, and the ex-president of the 
Czech Republic, Vaclav Havel. 

When I was given that award, it came to me as a total surprise. 
I got to the Basque Country as I was supposed to give the opening 
address of the Second World Congress of Basque Collectivities 
in 1999. I had given the first one in 1995. When I got there, I 
was told that some newspapers wanted to interview me, because 
I was going to be given the Lagun Onari Award, and frankly, I 
didn't know what the Lagun Onari Award was. I found out rather 
quickly, and I was very honored. I was given that award through 
the initiative of Iriaki Aguirre [the Basque government's General 
Secretary of Foreign Affairs]. He was the one that proposed me 
for it, I found out subsequently. Iriaki Aguirre felt it was important 
to give the award to somebody who was not a politician. 

By then they had given one award to Sanguinetti, and they 
had given one to Frei, and neither one was sitting president, but 
the political implications of those two awards were obvious. I 
mean, Chile and Uruguay were big destinations of Basque 
migration. I guess one could almost say that in giving the award 
to the ex-presidents, they were giving the award to those 
countries. I was the third, and Iriaki told me specifically that he 
was of the opinion that they shouldn't continue to set a precedent 
of only giving it to foreign leaders and foreign politicians. 

They then gave the award to the father of the Czech Republic, 
Vaclav Havel. I'm just reading between the lines—nobody in the 
Basque government has ever told me this—but my guess is that 
they gave it to Havel at about the same time that they were 
working on the Plan Ibarretxe [a proposal to renew the 1979 
Gernika Statute, which established the constitutional framework 
of relationship between the Basque Autonomous Community 
and the Spanish state]. I think the symbolism of the Havel thing 
was to give something to the man who had effected a peaceful 
separation of the Czech Republic and Slovakia. 

Havel steered the country of Czechoslovakia through a 
breakup, if you will, and he had great personal influence over 
that. I'm guessing that's why they probably picked him out, 



154 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



Basque President Juan Jose Ibarretxe (left) congratulates Bill Douglass for 
receiving the Lagun Onari Award at the 1999 World Congress of Basque 
Collectivities, Vitoria-Gasteiz. 


because I don't think Havel had any specific connection to the 
Basque Country to my knowledge. And obviously, there are no 
Basques in the Czech Republic, or maybe there are ten or 
something, but we're not talking about an historical tie. I think 
the symbolism is fairly evident, and Havel was recognized as a 
statesman who had taken a country that had a lot of internal 
and political tension and helped steer it towards a peaceful 
resolution of those differences. 

The fifth award was given to Cossiga, and it's my under¬ 
standing that Cossiga got it because he went out on a limb during 
the Jose Maria Aznar years [President of Spain, 1998-2004] and 
tried to broker a contact between Madrid and Vitoria-Gasteiz [in 
relation to resolution of political violence in the Basque Country]. 








WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


155 


And Cossiga, I think, got roughed up. I think he was insulted or 
rejected by Madrid, and he was told to mind his own business. I 
have that secondhand. 

I think that the Basque government appreciated Cossiga's 
effort to bring the sides together at a very difficult time when 
there was a total impasse and a brick wall. So they gave him that 
award in appreciation for and gratitude for his effort, even though 
it didn't go anywhere. [In July 2005, the state of Idaho received 
the Lagun Onari Award, and in October 2006 the Republic of 
Argentina recieved it as well.] 

I was also very proud to get another two awards in 1999. I 
was given the UNR Outstanding Researcher of the Year Award 
and the Distinguished Faculty Award, which is the only time 
that both awards have ever been given to one person in the same 
year. I think there's one other person that got both of those 
awards, but in the same year it was unheard of. 

The Outstanding Researcher of the Year Award is about your 
whole academic career. There's a committee that selects the 
outstanding researcher, and the committee is comprised of the 
previous five awardees. So when you get that award, you have to 
go on that committee for five years, and every year the longest- 
standing member of the committee goes off and chairs the 
proceedings the last year that he or she is on the committee. I 
think I went off in 2004, because I got it in 1999. So you have to 
be nominated by somebody within the university, then once 
you're nominated, the committee gets in touch with you and 
says, "You've been nominated. Do you wish to apply?" Then 
you have to put together a statement, and the chair of your 
department writes a statement. You provide, of course, a vita 
and samples of your work—as much or as little as you want. You 
can give them a boxful of books, if you want. Then you're 
competing against all of the other nominees around the 
university. 

Actually, Carmelo nominated me one year, and I didn't get 
it. Then he asked me the next year if I wanted to be nominated, 
and I said, "Not really." If I didn't get it, I didn't get it. What I 
didn't understand, at the time, was that there's a kind of 
unwritten rule that one year it's in social sciences, humanities, 
and the arts, and the next year it's in the hard sciences. It's kind 
of an unwritten rule, but it's the way it works. And I was 



156 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


nominated in the wrong year, so it was going to go a 
mathematician or a physicist or whatever, you know. I didn't 
understand how it worked, but I subsequently found out. 

Nineteen ninety-nine was my last year as the coordinator of 
the Basque Studies Program, and I think that it probably called 
some attention to me in the sense that it would have been the 
last year I would have been eligible for the award. Had they not 
given me the Distinguished Faculty Award that year, my guess 
is that I would have been ineligible after that, because I would 
have been emeritus. So I guess that was my last chance, and 
somebody recognized that and said, “We should consider 
William Douglass." 

I haven't a clue how the Distinguished Faculty Award works, 
because there were no consequences for me after getting that 
award. I know that there's a committee and a nomination process. 
I was just handed a plaque and a check at an awards ceremony, 
and that was the end of it. Oh, I think they also put my face on 
the next year's campus telephone directory, and that was one of 
the things they do if you're the Distinguished Faculty person, 
[laughter] 

Both UNR awards are a great honor. They're the highest two 
awards that a faculty member can get here at this university, and 
so I was very fortunate to receive them both. 


Notes 

1. For further information see Jack Douglass, Tap Dancing on Ice: 
The Life and Times of a Nevada Gaming Pioneer (Reno: University of 
Nevada Oral History Program, 1996). 

2. Robert "Bob” Laxalt (1923-2001) was the University of Nevada 
Press director between 1961 and 1983. Bom in Shoshone, Idaho, Bob 
became the public literary voice of the Basques in the American West 
following the publication of his memoir, Sweet Promised Land, in 1957. 

3. Juan Manuel "Jon" Bilbao (1914-1994) was the author of Eusko 
Bibliographia. Born in Cayey, Puerto Rico, he obtained a BA in Spanish 
medieval history at the University of Madrid in 1936 and an MA in Spanish 
at Columbia University in June 1939. As a result of the Spanish Civil War 
(1936-1939) Jon, an officer in the Basque Army, went into exile with the 
Basque government in 1937. He resided over three decades in different 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


157 


countries, including Cuba, France, and the United States, and he died in 
the Basque town of Getxo. 

4. See Warren d'Azevedo, Warren d'Azevedo: By Dead Reckoning 
(Reno: University of Nevada Oral History Program, 2005). 

5. DRI was originally located in facilities at the former Stead Air Force 
Base, north of Reno. 

6. Mary Ellen Glass (1927-2007) was the founder of the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program and was its director until 1983. 

7. Paul Dominique Laxalt (b. 1922) was lieutenant governor of Nevada 
from 1962 to 1966, governor from 1967 to 1971, and a U.S. senator from 
1974 to 1987. He became one of the most influential Basques in the history 
of Nevada. 

8. Peter "Pete" Ignacio Echeverria (1918-2000) was a well-known 
lawyer who served in the Nevada Senate from 1959 to 1963 and later was 
chairman of the Nevada Gaming Commission from 1973 to 1977. 

9. Robert Erburu became the director and the chairman of The Times 
Mirror Co., publisher of the Los Angeles Times. 

10. The first volume of Eusko Bibliographia was published in 1970, 
and between 1970 and 1977 a total of ten volumes were published. In 
1984, another three volumes were added, for a total of 400,000 entries. 

11. Center for Basque Studies records indicate that the first issue of 
the newsletter was sent to 900 people but the overall mailing list might 
have been larger at that time. 

12. Eloy Elecea Placer (1914-1974) was born in Ozaeta, Basque 
Country. He was a former lieutenant in the Basque Army and a political 
exile who fled General Franco's Spain in 1949, finding refuge in the United 
States. He earned a PhD degree from Louisiana State University in 1958 
and taught Spanish in Texas, Louisiana, New York, Kentucky, and finally 
Nevada, and was a member of the University of Nevada, Reno Foreign 
Languages Department from 1969 to 1974. Placer was the coordinator of, 
and one of the instructors for, the Basque Studies Program Summer Sessions 
Abroad. He passed away in Reno in 1974. 

13. Sara Velez Mallea is currently the Managing Editor of the 
University Nevada Press, and she has been involved in the Basque Book 
Series for several years. She has been responsible for editing over 50 percent 
of the Basque books. 



158 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


14. The "Roots phenomenon" refers to the unprecedented interest in 
ancestry and ethnicity among Americans as a result of the highly popular 
TV adaptation of Alex Haley's best-selling novel, Roots: The Saga of an 
American Family (New York: Doubleday and Co., Inc., 1976). 

15. Previously, in 1983, the National Endowment for Humanities 
awarded the library over $64,000 for cataloging Basque books. The grant 
was initially written by Harold Morehouse and Yoshi Hendricks. 

16. Marc Ugalde was the Basque Librarian until July 2003, then 
Kathryn Etcheverria took over as an interim librarian between 2003 and 
2005. Imanol Irizar was selected as the new Basque Studies Librarian as of 
January 2006. Due to personal reasons Imanol was temporarily replaced 
by Nere Erkiaga from August 2006 to June 2007. A new search for a Basque 
Librarian began in the summer of 2007. 

17. As a consequence of the Spanish Civil War, Yon Onatibia Audela 
(1911-1979) went into exile, first to Venezuela in 1941 and then to the 
U.S. He studied at the New York College of Music and was a delegate of 
the Basque government-in-exile in New York from 1951 to 1963. After 
twenty-seven years he returned to his home in Oiartzun, and it was there 
that he died. 

18. Juan Pedro Magunagoicoechea obtained a PhD degree in Spanish 
literature at Columbia University in 1975. He has taught Spanish at several 
American universities and is currently living in California. 

19. According to the University of Nevada Board of Regents' Meeting 
Minutes (July 1969) both Dr. Grotegut and Dr. Placer were first hired in 
1969. So, in this regard, Placer might have been hired prior to Maguna. 

20. See William Douglass, "In the Mirror: Reflections on the Origins 
of the Basque Studies Program," RIEV 38:1 (1993): 185-198 and "Through 
the Looking Glass, or Becoming the Datum," RIEV 38:2 (1993): 49-61. 

21. During a visit to Reno in March of 1988, Basque President Jose 
Antonio Ardanza noted, “During the darkest day of the Franco era when 
we were denied our language, our culture, and our identity, we were 
consoled by the knowledge that an American university in Nevada had 
lit one small candle in the night." 

22. Gloria Castresana Waid is President of the Basque American 
Foundation, established in 1984. To our knowledge the Basque American 
Foundation is currently inactive. The organization is a splinter group of 
the Society of Basque Studies in America, which was founded in San 
Francisco in 1979. 



WILLIAM A. DOUGLASS 


159 


23. Josu Legarreta is the current director of the Directorate of the 
Basque Communities Abroad, in charge of institutional relations between 
the Basque government and the Basque diaspora. 

24. At an anti-Basque nationalist congress held in Bilbao, Gloria 
Castresana accused UNR's Center for Basque Studies of having attempted 
to squelch all Basque studies initiatives in the United States other than its 
own and of serving as a stalking horse for Basque nationalism. She 
subsequently accused Douglass of unspecified rapina [theft] in a letter to 
a Basque Country newspaper. 








Gorka Aulestia 


■ ~rorka Jon Aulestia Txakartegi was bom in the coastal town 

* of Ondarroa in the Basque province of Bizkaia in 1932. 
He studied at the Catholic Diocesan Seminary of Vitoria and at the 
Jesuit University of Deusto, Bilbao, where he earned a bachelor's 
degree in sociology. He was a parish priest in the Basque Country 
and a missionary in Africa, and he earned the first PhD in Basque 
studies from the University of Nevada, Reno. In 1989 Gorka was 
inducted into the Society of Basque Studies in America's Ninth 
Annual Basque Hall of Fame for authoring the most comprehensive 
Basque-English dictionary at the time. He is currently teaching 
Basque literature at the University of the Basque Country. (This 
oral history was conducted in Spanish and translated into English.) 

A calm beginning: from Franco's Spain to Reno, Nevada 

I see myself with two different lives. In the first one, in 1966 
or 1967, I was a priest in Bilbao. I heard about a young 
anthropologist, William Douglass, who had come to Echalar to 
learn Basque. That was the first time I heard a little bit of talk 
about Reno, Nevada, so I knew that a Basque studies program 
had been established in an American university. 



164 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



Gorka Aulestia, 2007 


It seemed curious to me that an American would have come 
to the Basque Country, to Navarre, and then to Aulestia [Murelaga 
in Basque] to stay with a family to learn Basque. I was curious 
and began to inquire about what he was doing and about his 
thesis Muerte en Murelaga [Death in Murelaga]. I have always 
been interested in Basque culture, in the Basque world. This was 
my first knowledge of someone from the outside who was 
interested in our culture. 

At the time I didn't maintain any contact with Bill. I knew 
that he was the friend of friends of mine, such as the bertsolari 
[Basque verse improviser], Xabier Amuritza, who used to go quite 
often to Aulestia and the Lekeitio area, and also Don Emilio, 
another parish priest who very much loved Bill. Don Emilio was 
older than me, and I knew him, but I didn't have any personal 
relationship with him. 

Later, I became a parish priest in Gernika. Sometimes when 
Father Juan Maguna [Magunagoicoechea] came to Gernika, he 
used to celebrate Mass at my church. His family members were 
my parishioners. Maguna used to come with the Reno program, 






GORKA AULESTIA 


165 


with Jon Bilbao and Eloy Placer, and they would organize a 
summer studies program with Koldo Mitxelena, in Iparralde as 
well as in Hegoalde or Hego Euskal Herria [southern Basque 
Country]. 

I learned through Maguna about the courses that he taught 
about Baroja and so on and how they would come to the Basque 
Country with thirty or forty girls and boys from Reno as part of 
the Basque Studies Program Summer School. Then between 1970 
and 1975 I started learning a little bit more about what was being 
"cooked" in that program. This was my second encounter, a much 
closer, more significant and real encounter with the Reno 
program. 

This was the end of the Franco regime. I left the Basque 
Country on June 10, 1975, and Franco died at the end of 
November. On September 27, Franco had given the order to 
execute ETA members Angel Otaegi and Jon Paredes, aka "Txiki," 
together with three other non-Basques—Jose Euis Sanchez-Bravo, 
Ramon Garcia, and Jose Humberto Baena—who were members 
of FRAP [acronym for Antifascist and Patriotic Revolutionary 
Front; these were the last executions of Francoism], The moment 
was very tough, and on the eve of Saint Isidro in mid May, four 
people had been killed in Gernika: a married couple who were 
very close friends of mine, an ETA member, and a Civil Guard 
member. 

For Gernika, the death of those four people in May, who 
died in such a bestial and brutal way, as I said on one occasion, 
was like a second bombing. 1 There were people who thought 
that I was involved in that matter [with ETA]. While I was getting 
the corpses ready for the funeral the next morning, seven Civil 
Guard members with machine-guns entered my house. In the 
following days I had to change houses in order to sleep. I stayed 
very nervous, and there was lots of pressure for some days. 
Anyway, it wasn't a place to live or to do anything. I put my 
situation in order with my bishop, Don Antonio Anoveros, who 
was very nice to me, and I decided to leave. 

I was really attracted to the idea of doing something with 
my life in support of the Basque culture and the Basque language. 
While I was a priest, I had been in Otxarkoaga, a neighborhood 
in Bilbao, for four years in a world completely different from 
mine. It was not a Basque-speaking world. I am from a Basque- 



166 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


speaking and Basque-nationalist family from Ondarroa. My first 
language was Basque, and at the age of eleven I couldn't speak 
Spanish. 

Then I saw the beginning of my second life, and I wanted to 
conclude the first part of it. I wanted a calm beginning, starting 
from zero as I did. 

I didn't speak English, but I did know French, because I had 
studied for a year in Paris, getting ready to become a Basque 
missionary in the Congo. I ended up teaching French grammar 
to teachers who were going to be missionaries the following year. 
I knew French grammar quite well. 

At a given point, I put together everything in two letters of 
recommendation. One letter was from Don Antonio Anoveros 
and was directed to William Douglass, and the other was from 
Matilde, who was one of the daughters from the baserri in 
Aulestia, where Bill Douglass had studied Basque. Matilde was 
married to one of the Arriens from Gernika, and she was one of 
my catechists. Then, when Matilde learned about me suddenly 
leaving Gernika, she sent a recommendation letter to Bill. Of 
course, I think that Bill Douglass, once he saw the signature, was 
predisposed to welcoming me with closed eyes. 

Prior to my arrival in the United States I'd never exchanged 
a word with Bill, and I think I never saw those letters. I believe 
both Matilde and Bishop Anoveros asked him to welcome me. 
When I arrived in Reno, I introduced myself to Bill, "I am Gorka 
Aulestia." (By the way, Bill told me later that Jon Bilbao said 
that he was the one who introduced me and the one who made 
me part of the Basque Program. But I told him, "Bill, how could 
he say that? Was he losing his memory or what? I didn't know 
Jon Bilbao, did I? I came with the two letters, directly.") 

Bill Douglass welcomed me and offered me a place in the 
Foreign Fanguages Department teaching Spanish. At that time, 
the department had Gerald Petersen and Eugene Grotegut, a very 
close friend of Eloy Placer, who knew the political history of the 
Basque Country. 

By the time I went to Reno I was secularized. I left the papers 
officially in order, but a year later I got a notification from Don 
Antonio, and it seems that Rome demanded more reasons for 
me to be secularized. Well, from the moment that a forty¬ 
something-year-old person takes such a decision in life, it seems 
to me enough reason. I think that the canonical law is very 



GORKA AULESTIA 


167 


good, but it seemed a joke. I sent a note to Don Antonio, and I 
got the secularization in fifteen days. What I didn't get in a 
whole year, I got in fifteen days. 

Then, the following year, 1977, I married Mertxe de 
Renobales from Bilbao. Mertxe had a bachelor's in chemistry, 
and she continued her career in chemistry in San Francisco. 
Because of the marriage, she had to come to Reno, but there 
wasn't a PhD program in chemistry, so she had to do a PhD in 
bio-chemistry. In 1979, she went to Pullman, Washington, to 
do a post-doctoral in bio-chemistry, where, at the time, there 
was a very prestigious professor. At the end of our stay in America, 
a little boy arrived. The gynecologists had told us that we 
couldn't have children because of some difficulties with Mertxe. 
I think that the university laboratories where she worked had 
something to do with it. But, look, we overcame that, and a 
little boy came on March 14, 1988. His name is Iker Aulestia 
Renobales. 

Officially, I started my first course as a UNR student in January 
1976.1 see myself on that hill, near the swimming pool, where I 
enrolled in January. I didn't know even where I was, and little by 
little, I got used to it. 

At the beginning, the university administration didn't want 
to accept my priesthood career studies of twelve years, and I had 
to do two trips to the Basque Country. I also had a bachelor's in 
sociology from the University of Deusto. Bill Douglass said to 
me, “What kind of papers do you have?" 

“I haven't got any papers, but look, I have one from Deusto." 

Jon Bilbao and Bill Douglass called me and said, “Listen, it 
seems that they want you to first do a bachelor's degree." 

Well, they didn't allow me to do the master's at that point. 
Later on, they called me again saying, “They have found in the 
university by-laws, in small print, that those who have come 
out of seminaries and have been priests could enroll in master's 
programs." 

However, what saved me was my “studies" at the Sorbonne 
University in Paris. I got a very good mark in French at the 
Sorbonne —tres bien —but what UNR didn't know was that the 
exam I took and those studies only lasted eight hours with a 
sandwich break at noon, [laughter] I was very well prepared in 
grammar. Then the examiners said, “Please talk about one of the 
regions of France." 



168 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Of course, for me France was Euskal Herria [the Basque 
Country], Labourde, the fishermen of Donibane. I got an 
excellent mark. 

Once UNR saw the transcripts from the Sorbonne and Deusto 
universities, they said, “We cannot send this gentleman to do a 
bachelor's degree." So they allowed me to do a master's degree. 

I began, little by little, to teach Spanish in the Foreign 
Languages Department, and then later, I even taught French. 
When I met Carmelo Urza, he was a student at UNR and was 
also teaching Spanish 101. He left the textbook that I then used 
to teach, because I got Carmelo's teaching assistantship. At the 
time, Carmelo was trying to do a master's thesis on Jose de Arteche 
[“Jose de Arteche: The Life in his Works," 1978], It had a very 
long prologue of seventy-some pages. I don't know whether the 
prologue had a continuation or even how the story ended. 

Then, Carmelo married Monique Laxalt, and they moved to 
Iowa. He came back with a PhD and taught some classes, and he 
ended up organizing the program for studying abroad. I saw him 
as the right person for that program—more suited to it than 
teaching courses on subjects that Bill, Jon, Joseba Zulaika, or I 
had taught. I saw him more as a businessman establishing studies 
all around the world, with his telephones and his Post-its. At the 
beginning, the Studies Abroad Program was parallel to the Basque 
Studies Program itself. Bill saw it as a parallel structure. Carmelo 
had done impressive work. 

Personally, Carmelo is very nice, very nice, but we have 
completely different sensibilities. He was born in the Basque 
Country, and I think his parents are from Sestao, but he emigrated 
when he was little. 

Between January 1976 and 1979, I did a master's in French 
["Le Pays Basque vu par les Romantiques Frangais," 1978] in two 
and a half years, and then in a year, another master's in Spanish 
literature. I focused intensively on doing my two master's degrees 
while I taught Basque language for five hours. At the beginning 
I practiced both careers at the same time, but later on the 
department told me, “You have to choose one." I chose French. 

I loved French literature, because I knew the grammar quite 
well, but not so much the literature. I enjoyed it tremendously 
with professors such as Enrico Bertalot—with whom I later 
became very good friends—and the French lady, Madame Paule- 
Colette Fricke. Bertalot died, and my wife and I attended his 



GORKA AULESTIA 


169 


funeral. I also had a great relationship with Madame Fricke. The 
courses were marvelous, and I still continue to read many French 
novels. At one point, I brought from Paris some two hundred 
novels, and I enjoyed them. 

Because I had a Spanish passport I did not necessarily have 
to start my studies in Spanish. I knew that the Spanish 
Department didn't like my choice very much. "If you are Spanish 
why did you choose French?" 

There were little things that we could overcome with time. I 
have nothing against the Spanish people. I enjoyed the Spanish 
master's very much, and I finished it really fast, because I already 
had some credits from my French master's that I used for my 
Spanish master's. I met great people. I couldn't forget them, and 
I put them on my PhD committee. Nelson Rojas was—I hope he 
is still there—an outstanding person. We used to go to the 
mountains with Nelson. 

Beginning in January 1976, I earned $300, $320 a month in 
the Foreign Languages Department, and with that I sustained 
myself. During those years the Basque Studies Program didn't 
have a nickel. Until 1979 my pay didn't increase too much. That 
was the traditional teaching assistantship, I believe. Once I came 
back in 1979, 1980 from Pullman, my situation changed radically, 
because Basque Studies offered me a permanent contract. 

Building a pyramid: the Basque-English dictionary 

When I finished with the master's, I thought about going 
back to the Basque Country, but my wife had gotten a post¬ 
doctoral position in Pullman. Between 1979 and 1980,1 embarked 
to Pullman, but before I left Reno, when we were getting into 
the car, Bill Douglass explained to me the situation. "Gorka, there 
is $50,000 or $52,000 to bring Koldo Mitxelena to Reno [to do a 
dictionary], but he and his wife said 'No.' Would you do it?" 

I said in the prologue of the first Basque-English dictionary 
that I thought twice about the answer—if the Basques don't have 
a dictionary of that kind, well, something should be done in 
that regard. I felt like a pygmy to embrace such an endeavor, but 
at the beginning, we thought that the dictionary would have a 
vocabulary of 2,000 or 3,000 words, like the one made by 
community activist and scholar Joseph "Joe" Eiguren in Boise, 
[laughter] But instead of being only Bizkaian dialect [Basque 



170 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


dialect from the province of Bizkaia] it would include other 
Basque dialects. We never thought that it would take us seven or 
seven and a half years. 

So I embarked on this project, looking up to the one above 
and trusting in Him, with very little strength, very bad English, 
and knowing that I wasn't a Basque language specialist. I knew 
Latin, Basque, Spanish, French, and enough Italian, and I have 
learned Greek, but everything depended on the goal. Joe Eiguren, 
having been a fisherman in Lekeitio, did a dictionary, didn't he? 
So, I said, "Yes," and that's how it started. 

Bill even promised me a green card, and I got it in a matter 
of a few months. I never thought about being an American 
citizen. I just wanted to finish my commitments and return to 
my country as soon as possible. Thanks to Robert Laxalt, we 
also obtained several grants. However, during the first years, we 
defended ourselves as we could. There was a time when there 
was no money. 

In addition, I had a half-invitation from Diputacion de Bizkaia 
to take control of the Department of Culture in Bizkaia. So I 
went to the Basque Country to explore the situation. Well, there 
wasn't a specific offer, but I would have earned much more than 
in Reno. But for me to abandon the dictionary project—at that 
moment it was to the letter "H"—and to go back to my country 
seemed like treason to Bill and to our Basque culture. I had given 
my word to Bill that I would come back, so I did without doubts. 

I remember that there was even a moment when Bill told 
me, "There is not any money, Gorka, but if you come back to 
America you will find a new contract at the Basque Studies 
Program." And there it was, the new contract, and I signed it. At 
one point Bill even reduced his own salary to half for me to get 
paid. I also survived through scholarships, and thanks to his 
personal money, we could bring the dictionary project forward. 
That is how it went, little by little. For instance, during my stay 
in Pullman I didn't receive any compensation for my work on 
the dictionary. However, when I came back to Reno with fifteen 
boxes of a year's worth of work without having been paid at all, 
I had a contract that gave me more security and a good salary to 
live on. 

I began the dictionary on May 17, 1980. That was the date 
that the volcano Mount St. Helens exploded. Then I spent the 
whole winter—by the way it was quite harsh with a lot of ice 



GORKA AULESTIA 


171 


and snow—working on the dictionary and also attending some 
English linguistic classes at the University of Pullman, because 
all day alone doing the dictionary was too much. 

At least the infrastructure was done, but, of course, without 
dialects and without many examples. Then we needed to translate 
everything into English. My wife helped me during our stay in 
Pullman, and then back in Reno, scholars Gretchen Holbert and 
Mateo Osa also helped me. 

If I had been in Egypt, well, the dictionary project would 
have been like building a pyramid—that's the impression I have. 
It wasn't like an obsession, but when I woke up at three in the 
morning, the first thought that came to mind was on which 
card, in which letter, I was. I always wanted to go back to my 
country, but I had committed myself for many years. I saw a 
pyramid on top of me, and I was not able to get out. 

My official UNR title was lexicographer, and that was very 
strange to me, because I didn't know what I was. I knew I was 
male, Basque, a former priest, and that I had a desire for work, 
but I didn't know anything else. In a presentation of two books 
at EUTG [acronym for University and Technical Studies of 
Gipuzkoa, today's University of Deusto San Sebastian-Donostia 
campus], the presenter said, "This man who has done these two 
books, is neither a linguist nor a lexicographer," and I thought 
about the American title of lexicographer. 

A good person at UNR didn't know what to call me and baptized 
me with the title of lexicographer, [laughter] Well, I had some 
knowledge and interest in languages, but, of course, if you don't 
crown it with a baptism or a title, it seems that you are nobody. 

In 1982 Linda White began working on the dictionary. I was 
very impressed by Linda's impressive capacity for work and by 
her command of English. I taught her various courses on Basque 
language—I think it was level 101, 203, 204—Basque dialectology 
and Basque conversation. Then, without credits we used to spend 
a day improving her conversation skills. She was interested in 
speaking. Anyway, Linda White's help was ten over ten. If it 
hadn't been for her, the dictionaries would not exist—maybe a 
player [author] would have existed, but as I said, the dictionary 
would have lacked another language. 

With the exception of a few friends that I can count with 
the fingers of one hand, not only for my English and the 
dictionary project and the literature classes, I believe that Linda 



172 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


has been the most wonderful person I have met, on a cultural as 
well as on a personal level, in my fourteen years in America. 

Linda is an extremely intelligent woman, not only because 
of her language skills, but also because she was very perceptive 
about my English difficulties. She captured immediately what I 
tried to say with my bad English. On many occasions she was 
more aware of what I wanted, not because of what I said but 
what I tried to say. How could anyone have such proficiency 
with the languages? 

I have such a good memory of her, and I will continue to 
have. We have two very difficult cultures, two different ways of 
understanding life, two different ideologies about many 
important things in life, and two different sensibilities. 
Sometimes Linda said, "And being so different we have never 
argued. After so many years working so closely together—we put 
so many hours in the dictionary project—we have never argued." 

Linda's personality is very soft, with great manners. She always 
got on well with the then secretary, Jill Berner. She was also very 
receptive to the people who came to Reno to see the library or to 
learn. Also, Jon Bilbao was 
a master in it. How well 
they welcomed the people! 

Linda has such fluency 
with the languages, so 
she acted as the bridge, as 
a Cicerone. She could do 
anything. 

I am not sure if Linda 
White has already pub¬ 
lished her new Basque 
grammar, Aurrera [Aurrera! 

A Textbook for Learning 
Basque, 2007], In her 
prologue she thanks me, 
because the first word 
that I repeated every day 
when we worked on the 
dictionary was, "Linda, 
aurrera [onward]," and 
the word stuck with her. 

In my heart there will 



"I believe that Linda has been the most 
wonderful person I have met ... in my 
fourteen years in America." Left to right: 
Gorka Aulestia, Linda White, and visiting 
scholar, Nere Lete, at UNR's Quad, 1980s. 






GORKA AULESTIA 


173 


always be a place for a monument for Linda White. I am very 
thankful to her. Thank you Linda, eskerrik asko. 

In an ordinary working day in Reno, as I said, I woke up 
usually at three in the morning, but I remained in bed resting a 
little. Now I wake up at four and go out at five. My first thought 
was on which page, in which letter, and in which example I was 
in the dictionary, and I thanked the one above for a new day. 
From three o'clock I didn't sleep very much. It was like that for 
seven and a half years. 

Many times I went to work at seven in the morning—the 
library didn't open officially until eight—in order to warm the 
"engine." Well, each of us in the department had the key to the 
small door through which we entered the main library. One 
day I was even followed by the police, because I went to work at 
four in the morning. I just wanted to finish the dictionary, so I 
worked Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, and sick days. I gave them, 
I don't know, two months of accumulated sick days. I didn't 
"marry" the administration in that sense. I put in lots of extra 
hours without pay. 

Immediately, Linda would show up. The official people 
showed up at eight because they had to clock in. Bill used to 
show up at any time he wanted. When Jon was around, Bill used 
to come at eleven in the morning, and he would say, "Jon, too 
early." [laughter] Of course, if you are working on the 
bibliography cards until the wee hours of the morning and 
drinking whiskey with moderation, then the next morning at 
eleven, when the rest of us have already been there for five hours, 
you would think that you had got up very early. We ah laughed, 
but when everybody had gone Jon stayed with his pack of 
cigarettes, his bottle of whiskey, and his library cards. Jon also 
used to go to the Santa Fe Hotel [Basque restaurant and former 
boardinghouse], and there he was drinking with the local Basques 
in the bar. Jon stayed there. 

At twelve it was swimming-pool time. That was my lunch hour. 
I went up the hill to the swimming pool, which had recently been 
opened. Then I went back to have a coffee. I didn't bring anything— 
my wife used to bring me the American sandwich, as I called it— 
and I resisted until five, and then I went home for dinner. 

This working style reached a point that was clearly shown in 
a picture that Lisa Corcostegui took. [Lisa also assisted Gorka 
with the dictionary.] At the Basque Studies door there was a sign 



174 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


that read, "Gorka, open twenty-four hours." [laughter] Somebody 
told me once, "Why don't you bring a bed? Here you have the 
bathroom, and you have the bar near the bookstore. You are just 
missing a mattress." [laughter] This was just a joke, but it didn't 
bother me having to work so hard. The first Basque-English 
dictionary was published in 1989. 

Certain tranquility: obtaining a PhD in Basque studies 

The Tutorial PhD Program in Basque studies wasn't even 
planned by the time I finished the master's and began the 
dictionary. Maybe in Bill's mind there was a plan, but I didn't 
see it. 

What did it take to keep me going? I have seen my future 
clearly since the first day in Reno. I still say that I am a man very 
grateful to America, and when I say America and the Americans, 
obviously, I say Bill Douglass 
and Linda White, because I 
was offered a new beginning 
in my work. However, I 
didn't want to continue 
living in America after 
having finished my commit¬ 
ments. My goal was to finish 
and above all to get a 
diploma, to be able to go 
back quickly to the Basque 
Country in order to continue 
teaching. 

I saw in the Basque PhD 
the possibility of an exit, 
besides the subjects I could 
get in the PhD program. It 
was a PhD tutorial program, 
and Bill didn't lie to us. Since 
the first day he told us, "Well, 
in relation to the professors 
available, we don't have 
many, at this moment." 

So I ended up with an 
agreement with Bill. Half a 



"'Why don't you bring a bed? Here 
you have the bathroom, and you have 
the bar near the bookstore. You are 
just missing a mattress. "Gorka open 
24 hours" sign at the Basque Studies 
Program entrance door, 1980s. 












GORKA AULESTIA 


175 


day—the mornings—would be devoted to the dictionary, and 
the evenings would be devoted to my doctoral courses. I began 
the program in 1985. Since I had begun my studies in French 
and Spanish literatures, I knew clearly, without a doubt, what 
my doctoral dissertation subject would be. I was going to do it 
on bertsolarism. 

I graduated with a PhD in Basque studies in September of 
1987. [The dissertation was entitled, "El 'Bertsolarismo': Literatura 
Oral Improvisada del Pals Vasco"—The 'Bertsolarism': Improvised 
Oral Literature from the Basque Country.”] As I explained in 
one of the chapters of my book on bertsolarism [Improvisational 
Poetry from the Basque Country ], there are similar phenomena 
around the world. Because of this chapter many Basques and 
the bertsolaritza association (Bertsozale Elkartea) have visited 
many countries from Japan to Cuba, and from the Canary Islands 
to the Balearic Islands, to learn about how others sing and 
improvise verses. I believe this enriches us. 

Obtaining the PhD meant certain tranquility in the sense 
that at any moment I was going to get what I wanted, to leave 
America. Even more, my wife was pregnant with our son, Iker. 
She had already applied for tenure in the Basque Country, but 
she didn't get it because the position had already been given. In 
that sense, let's say, she didn't get what she aimed for. Then she 
got tenure among seven other candidates, but this time the 
process did justice. Then my wife always thought, "We could 
never go back to the Basque Country." 

I told Mertxe that one day we would come back home. My 
wife had gotten her PhD and done postdoctoral research, and I 
had also done a PhD. So what that meant was the tranquility to 
be able to say to Bill Douglass, as I told him in the elevator, "Bill 
I am leaving." 

Like many other things, I believe Bill was bothered by it, 
though I didn't see any reaction from him. Carmelo once told 
me that Bill thought I was going stay there until retirement, but 
my ideas were very clear. 

However, I believe that my return to the Basque Country 
was very beneficial for the program, which has changed a lot 
under Joseba Zulaika. At first, Bill may have taken it badly, because 
it was unexpected, but in the end Bill has been better off with 
me leaving in order for Joseba to enter the program, because of 
everything that he has done. I think now Bill must be very happy 



176 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


that I left. I could have done very little, because I wouldn't have 
been an innovator. I would have been a perpetual worker but 
only doing things on Basque literature. I had neither the ability 
nor the willingness to do administrative things. You lose your 
health. The few things I do, I do intensively, but nothing more. 

Joseba, I remember, arrived as a student. He was working in 
Reno preparing his dissertation without having finished yet at 
Princeton University. At the beginning, Joseba, as every student, 
had very little money, poor guy! I used to see him working like a 
dog during the weekends, putting in many, many hours. I was 
even worried about his health—eating that spread of peanut 
butter, which would stink up the whole office. I remember that 
in Sparks I offered him the first potato omelet in my house. Well, 
he did the omelet, because he told me he was a specialist in 
making omelets, putting onions in, et cetera. 

That's how Joseba became part of the Basque Program—with 
the "negativity" argument as a central issue in his conversations. 
Joseba lived the academic arguments very intensely, almost 
obsessed. He had an impressive ability for working, and as he 
has shown us later on, also a great ability for writing, for opening 
and discovering new worlds from the anthropological perspective, 
with very interesting contributions. 

I went back to the Basque Country in 1989, and I got a 
teaching job at the University of Deusto. I asked Father Plazaola, 
the chancellor of the University of Deusto, San Sebastian campus, 
who has since passed away and with whom I had become very 
good friends, "Why did you choose me?" There were thirty-three 
candidates for a small position, to teach just one subject. 

He said, "I chose you because all the candidates had three 
initials after their names—'Lie.' [short for bachelor's in Spanish]. 
There was only one who also had three different initials—'Doc.' 
[short for doctorate in Spanish]. And who is he? Gorka Aulestia." 
At that time, my uncle was at the University of Deusto, on the 
campus of Bilbao, but I didn't ask him for a job. It was a small 
job, but that's how I began. 

One day a Japanese lady came to see whether I was willing to 
go to Kobe, near Tokyo to teach, and I told her, "I think you are 
mistaken. My brother, Gotzon, is the musician." 

She replied to me, "I like his music, and we know who your 
brother is, but we like the music made from poetry in the 
phenomenon of the Basque troubadours. We have the famous 



GORKA AULESTIA 


177 


haikus in Japan, which are similar to the Basque versifiers, and 
we are interested in a course or a semester." 

Well, a person from Japan came to Vitoria to offer me the 
possibility of work because of the bertsolarism phenomena. That 
was thanks to Reno, Nevada. 

The Basque Studies Program: from close and afar 

By the time I arrived in 1975, the Basque Program was eight 
years old. Since the beginning Bill Douglass has always been in 
charge of the boat. Jon Bilbao was there sometimes, because he 
used to stay temporarily. He used to travel many times to the 
Basque Country to work on his bibliography. Juan Maguna was 
teaching Spanish literature in the Foreign Languages Department, 
substituting for the deceased Eloy Placer, who was from Alava. 
Jill Berner, the administrative assistant, preceded me by a few 
months. She started in 1976, and she is still there. [In 2006, Jill 
celebrated her thirtieth anniversary at UNR.] 

During my stay, if Jill Berner—so wonderful—would have 
had the decision making and the strength of Linda .... You 
invited Linda to do something, and she didn't hesitate 
whatsoever, [laughter] Jill has done everything that she was asked 
to do. She has even taken Basque classes. She has focused on being 
a very efficient and positive secretary, and she is a delightful lady 
of great manners. In that sense, Jill, despite being different, is very 
similar to her friend, Linda. Jill has been a golden contribution to 
the program. (Jill, her husband, and their daughters stayed in 
my house in San Sebastian when they visited the Basque Country 
for the first time. I have very warm memories of her.) For me 
there are four foundational fathers of the Basque Studies Program, 
and I have written about it in nine different articles 2 . 

For many years Robert Laxalt had been the brain behind all 
of this. Laxalt was in Katanga, Congo, at one point, and years 
later I was also in Katanga, but with a completely different goal. 
He said that he was in Katanga as an American spy, and I was 
there as a missionary. 3 

The Desert Research Institute contacted Laxalt about the 
establishment of a Basque studies program. The center's office 
wasn't where it is now but outside the university campus. After 
some years—all this has been written about on numerous 
occasions—Laxalt focused his work on the Basques and thought 



178 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


about a Reno native, the young William Douglass, who was 
finishing his anthropology studies in Chicago, to manage the 
program. 

Bill went to Madrid with his family, because of his interest in 
Spanish literature. I believe it was Julio Caro Baroja who 
recommended him to study the Basque language of the 
"barbarians" who live in the north, so Bill began fieldwork first 
in Echalar, Navarre, and then in Bizkaia. 

Bill had also been, let's say, the brain behind the program. 
However, in fourteen years, I never saw Robert Laxalt in the 
program, which tells us about who was behind the scenes. It is 
just a simple fact, isn't it? I think, and I don't mind saying it, 
that Bill didn't make any serious decision without consulting 
and discussing it with his friend Robert Laxalt. 

We cannot understand the Basque Program without Bill. He 
is a person with an extraordinary capacity for work, with very 
good English writing skills, with a great comprehension of 
Spanish, and, even, of Euskara [Basque language], at least during 
a few years of his life, although he doesn't speak it 100 percent. 
He also did great and interesting studies in his field of 
anthropology, and he continues to do so. 

As a director he survived economically through many difficult 
years that I also lived through. Bill was a man who never imposed 
himself on you. However, you did everything according to what 
he said. He wasn't a traditional director of a program, a dictator, 
imposing and getting angry with people—much to the contrary. 

So what I can say about him is entirely or nearly entirely 
positive. To finish, I would say that he is also an "American." 
This word for me is very significant and says much. He has the 
right to be American as I have the right to be Basque, with 
everything—the connotation and semantic—that the word 
"American" implies. 

In third place was Jon Bilbao. To speak of the Basque Studies 
Library at the University of Nevada, Reno is to speak for many 
years of Jon Bilbao. During the first years, he had the order of 
the library in his mind, with little pieces of paper in each book. 
We received many, many books through Basque libraries and 
bookstores, such as Linacero in Vitoria and Kirikino in Bilbao. 

Jon also taught an outstanding Basque history course. He 
wasn't a historian, like others such as Martin Ugalde who wrote 
five volumes of history. We could argue that academically you 



GORKA AULESTIA 


179 


can see that they are not historians, but they gave lots of 
information, and that was the only thing that we cared about 
when we—the majority of us—didn't know anything. He also 
taught a Basque-language course. 

Jon was also in charge of the summer courses abroad. I think 
that Jon never failed to attend any of the summer courses in 
Onati with the people from Boise and with Yon Onatibia. He 
was always ready, and he didn't mind going back to his homeland, 
although he wasn't born in the Basque Country. Jon Bilbao had 
been 100 percent perfect for the program because of his courses 
and his work on the library. 

Regarding his personality, well, you have to respect it because 
of his age, birth, hobbies, past, and political party. He was very 
influenced by the Spanish Civil War. Jon was very interesting, 
different, and very well educated. As Joseba Zulaika says, "When 
all the Basques were playing the txistu [traditional flute], he 
played the guitar; and when the rest of us were wearing a tie, he 
was wearing a scarf." Sometimes Jon Bilbao could be defined by 
dropping the "n" of his first name, becoming "Jo" [phonetically 
similar to "Yo," in Spanish, which means "I" in English], 
[laughter] But I don't want to attack his personal way of being, 
and I'd prefer to focus on the positive about him, which is a lot. 
Besides, he is dead, and I don't like to talk about anybody, and 
less about the deceased. 

We were very different religiously and politically, but he was 
a very respectful and well-mannered man. So having a well- 
educated person made a difference in the program. It is not the 
same to have a person who gets angry very easily over anything, 
who is a dictator, and who provokes uneasiness in the group, 
because we were a group. He was the opposite—kind, always 
doing favors, and as I said, always welcoming people, by phone 
or in person. He was a true host, with a very heavy Spanish 
accent when he spoke in English, but despite that, you could 
follow the conversations easily. He was very positive and a good 
friend of Bill Douglass. 

Jon and Bill did Amerikanuak. I believe that Jon did a number 
of chapters, but the English language and many other chapters 
were Bill's. As Bill says, that book, together with Linda White 
and Gorka Aulestia's dictionary, marked the beginning of the 
production of forty-something books published by the 
University of Nevada Press. 



180 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


The fourth founder was Eloy Placer, who had the additional 
limitation of having lived less long. He died quite soon after 
arriving in Reno. He taught Spanish in the Foreign Languages 
Department and specialized in Pfo Baroja. He was nearly executed 
in Spain because of his pro-Basque sentiment and his past. He 
was denounced by the parish priest of Aguarain, but the priest 
recanted his lies. Eloy's mother kneeled down to beg the priest 
for forgiveness. One of his brothers was executed, and the other— 
the father of the priest Felix Elecea, very famous in Vitoria today— 
died on the frontlines. 

Eloy's prison sentence was pardoned, but they made his life 
impossible once he left prison, where his brother had been 
executed together with the great poet Lauxeta [Esteban Urkiaga, 
1905-1937]. Eloy went to Valencia and married a girl from there. 
Then he ended up in Reno after studying in Louisiana and 
teaching Spanish at various universities. 

To me, each one of the four had contributed different things, 
but all of them were very interesting people. Then, a lot of people 
came through the program. Everyone within the limits of their 
capabilities has contributed something, beginning with the 
magnificent Linda White, Marcelino Ugalde, Joxe Mallea, and 
many more. 

During my time in the mid-1980s, the Basque Studies PhD 
program was established. In that decade I believe that this event 
was very important. For the first time in America, there was the 
possibility of doing a PhD in Basque studies. I remember that 
the first two graduates were myself in Basque literature and later 
Joxe Mallea in Basque history. The third graduate was Linda 
White. I read Linda's dissertation, and I think that I got an 
invitation to be part of her committee, but I couldn't go to her 
defense due to a death in the family or a family problem. 

The first evolution in Basque Studies was the PhD Program. 
The second was the library, which kept growing. Jon Bilbao retired 
and went back to the Basque Country. During those years he 
was spending more and more time in Algorta, and while in 
Algorta, he used to go to Vitoria to continue working on his 
bibliography. However, Jon didn't stop sending us books through 
his old contact, Karlos Zarraga [Jon Bilbao's main Basque book 
dealer, who retired in 2006]. I don't know how many thousands 
of books we received. After Jon left, another librarian came, Maria 



GORKA AULESTIA 


181 


Otero-Boisvert, who was here for a short period of time. I think 
that she was Cuban or born in Cuba. 

In relation to the personnel, I don't see the growth today 
that it had during those years with Joseba Zulaika. After I left 
Reno I came back twice—in 1995 and in 2003 for two or three 
days each time. I haven't maintained much direct contact with 
the program. I am very thankful, but in the Basque Country I 
became involved in other projects. I continue to be a professor, 
a member of Euskaltzaindia, and coeditor of the journal Revista 
de Sancho El Sabio. I continue to write, to publish books and 
papers, and I am very happy with my family. 

To tell the truth, on my last trip in 2003, I saw everything— 
materially, physically, structurally—very changed, and this gives 
a very favorable and positive impression. Even the names of the 
Basque Studies Program and the newsletter have changed. And 
of course, there is more space and more personnel. Sandra Ott 
and Joseba Gabilondo [Associate Professor with Basque Studies, 
2001-2005] were there, and there were four rooms around the 
office manager, Kate Camino. And Marcelino Ugalde was there 
with his library in the old offices where Jon Bilbao and Linda 
White had previously been and where I had worked for thirteen 
years. I also remember the very favorable recommendation letters 
that I did for Gabilondo, who later on did not get tenure. I was 
sad about that. 

Under Joseba's directorship a series of interesting projects 
have been created, and I hope Gloria Totoricaguena, the current 
director of the center, will continue them. [Gloria Totoricaguena 
was director of the Center for Basque Studies from January 2006 
to September 2007, when she resigned her position and left the 
University of Nevada, Reno to pursue other opportunities.] I met 
Gloria in 2003, and I saw her again at the Basque Book and Music 
Fair in Durango in 2006, but I don't have any correspondence 
with her, so I don't know her plans or where the program is heading. 
Many others, such as Gregorio Monreal who went after me and 
came back for a sabbatical year, had more contact with Bill. 

During Franco's time and even today, the Basque Studies 
Program and the Basque Studies Library have been very 
important. I am not going to play with semantics like others do, 
"So, this library is the best, the one from there is the best, and 
we are the best." Well, it is one of the best libraries including the 



182 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


ones inside and outside the Basque Country. During Franco's 
regime two CIA members came to the Basque Studies Program, 
and they wanted to know what the program was doing. This 
reflects on the significance and importance of the then new¬ 
born, small program. I know that the CIA didn't obtain anything 
that could damage the Basques and the Basque Country. 

Culturally, today's center is the most significant regarding 
Basque studies. Outside the Basque Country the center is and 
will continue to be very significant for many years, unless a 
catastrophe happens—for example, if a director of the program 
undoes what William Douglass and others have built, though I 
don't think it will happen if it hasn't happened in forty years. 

There are euskal etxeak [Basque community-based clubs], 
picnics, and parties all over California and Latin America, and 
now they are starting to introduce the Basque language, and 
that's great. Folklore is very good, but as Xabier Lizardi [Jose Maria 
de Aguirre, 1896-1933] used to say, he was not totally satisfied 
with only having the Basque pelota [handball game], the txapela 
[beret], and the alpargatas [espadrilles or sandals whose soles are 
made of rope], but he also thought you needed the Basque 
language. So, in the Basque Country we have not only the 
language, but we have also developed history, anthropology, and 
different fields in relation to the Basque culture. 

In 2006 I was in Durango at the Basque Book and Music Fair, 
and there were literature and history books published by the 
center that weren't translated into English in my time. Today 
the cultivated world speaks in English. Forty or fifty years ago it 
spoke in French. 

If the Basques want to tell something to the world we have 
to say it in English. So, if we want to be known, if we want to 
play our little flute, that is, the small language of our small 
country in the global orchestra, we have to use the language 
that the majority can understand; and today one of the most 
important languages is English. That's why I was committed to 
finishing the dictionary. That's why it is essential to translate 
and to have a dictionary like the one produced by Linda and me. 

I think it was a very important decision, and in many aspects 
it was against my better interests. If I had decided to leave the 
dictionary in the "H" letter and return to the Basque Country to 
earn more money, who would have finished it? I think that there 



GORKA AULESTIA 


183 


will be more and even better dictionaries, but somebody had to 
take the first step. 

So there is a need to use the English language in everything. 
Maybe in the future we will have to use the Chinese, Indian, or 
Russian languages. However, while the United States remains 
the economic power, the English language is the one to be 
imposed on the colonies, and not precisely by England or 
London. 

Looking back, I don't remember taking part in important 
decisions regarding the Basque Studies Program, so I never felt 
that I was a 100 percent qualified member of the Basque Program 
as others could be, because my future was in another place. In 
that sense, I have never felt like a Jon Bilbao. I don't blame Bill. 
Jon became a friend of Bill's, but I have never felt that I was his 
friend. I was a worker, a co-worker, particularly on the dictionary 
project, teaching Basque, or writing papers. As Jon Bilbao wrote 
in a prologue for one of my books, "With the diligence of a 
missionary he writes book reviews for the journal World Literature 
Today." 

For example, Bill called for a meeting in a casino, because 
Sandra Ott, until then the director of the studies abroad program, 
had resigned. The subject to be discussed was whether the new 
director should know Basque. Jon, Bill, Laxalt, and I were at the 
meeting. I had something to say, and I said it. And the four of 
us, even Jon who was the toughest one, agreed on demanding 
that the new person should necessarily know Basque. However, 
Felix Menchacatorre was then selected as the replacement for 
Sandra Ott, but he didn't know Basque. [Felix is still the director 
of USAC in the Basque Country.] So then you ask yourself, what 
value are your thoughts if no one takes them into account? They 
tried their best, maybe. 

I don't know why this happens, maybe because of the years 
that you are a student and you are treated as such. So I cannot 
see why calling you "PhD" means that the previous personal 
relationships have to change. I have never psychologically 
overcome that period. I always considered myself a second-rank 
person, and this didn't bother me, because I have never had any 
obsession about becoming rich or progressing. On one occasion 
I told Bill, "You are paying me this much, and lettuce cost that 
much last year, and the cost of living is increasing." 



184 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


The poor man said, "We don't have any money, so be happy 
to have lettuce. At least you have lettuce to eat." 

I think that others such as Joxe Mallea and Marcelino Ugalde, 
whose first Basque course I taught when he was eighteen, have 
had it much worse than me. I cannot complain. This is not about 
complaining. In a similar situation, I thought that Linda would 
stay there as the director of the program, but I was mistaken. 
More than once I told her, "Look Linda, don't think that I am 
interested in the program because one day I want to be the 
director. I don't want to be anybody here. I want to finish my 
obligations and go back. Right now, Linda, if you learn Basque 
you would be a very important person in the program." (I never 
told her that she would be the director of the program.) It 
distresses me the way she ended up. 

However, Bill always respected my decisions regarding the 
work on the dictionary. For example, a person who later on 
finished a Basque-English dictionary went to Reno to explain 
his work, but his proposal was totally wrong. So I told Bill not to 
bring me anybody like that, and he respected it. In that sense, 
Bill saw that the dictionary was taking too long, and that the 
expenses were increasing, but he never rushed me to finish. Bill 
knew I would begin working before he used to get there, and he 
knew that the dictionary project was too slow. However, he never 
ideologically or philosophically, in any sense, rushed me or 
bothered me. I am very grateful to him for that. 

Bill always encouraged me to keep writing book reviews and 
all that, but he never consulted with me on any serious decisions 
about the program. So you are respected there to a certain degree 
and even positively valued, but without any possibility of saying 
something about the management and about the innovations 
that could be built within a common and shared house. 

Basque studies, identity maintenance, and nationalism 

Basque studies is Basque culture to me. I am a native Basque 
speaker, but I am not saying that the most important element 
within the Basque culture is the language. I am not going to say 
that it is the soul or the spirit of the Basque people. However, 
within the constituent elements of Basque identity, I give the 
Basque language capital significance, because I am a native 
speaker, and I was born and grew up with such living experiences 



GORKA AULESTIA 


185 



"He never ideologically or philosophically, in any sense, rushed me or 
bothered me. Iam very grateful to him for that. "Gorka Aulestia and Bill 
Douglass at the Eloy Placer Memorial Reading Room, Basque Studies 
Program, 1982. Placer's portrait is on the wall behind them. 


and sentiments. I wouldn't like to live in a Basque Country 
without Euskara. Maybe I would immigrate into another country 
and establish something to teach the language. I enjoy speaking 
in Basque. 

I think Basque studies influence Basque identity. What has 
happened to the Native Americans in California and Nevada and 
particularly with the Paiutes? What remains on the reservations? 
A group of alcoholic people? Culture would make us free. Culture 
would make us free and Basques, while it keeps going. 

Let's think a little bit about what we were or about our 
nineteenth-century betsolaris. The majority of them didn't know 
how to read or write. For example, Xenpelar [Juan Frantzisko 
Petrirena, 1835-1869] and Txirrita [Jose Manuel Lujanbio, 1860- 
1936] only knew how to read but not how to write. (I talk about 
this in my book, The Basque Poetry Tradition.) Let's think about 
my sons-in-laws, who are ten or fifteen years younger. They had 











186 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


to take their exams in the University of Valladolid, because we 
didn't have a Basque university system; we didn't have a public 
television company We didn't have anything, anything. My wife 
had to go to University of Zaragoza to do her bachelor exams. 

Then since the death of Franco we have recovered our culture. 
We have a public university with maybe 60,000 students. We 
have a public television system with two channels—one only in 
Basque—and a network of ikastolas [Basque-language schools]. 
My son, who was born in America and came to the Basque 
Country when he was three months old, did his whole high- 
school degree in Basque, and my nephews from Ondarroa did 
their university degrees in fine arts and music in Euskara. 

So all this undoubtedly influences our identity. Today, things 
that we couldn't imagine forty years ago come to be. Culture 
would help us to preserve and maintain identity, and in turn 
identity—as more identical we are and more Basque we are— 
would demand more culture. It is happening the same politically. 

I know a person who has written thousands of pages in Deia 
[the Basque Nationalist Party's daily newspaper] since 1980. He 
wasn't young then, and his ideas about the Basque Country have 
evolved from being an autonomist, a federalist, to pro¬ 
independence. Twenty years ago, he thought that the 
independence of the Basque Country was absurd; however, today 
he accepts it with total normality. 

I am not from any political party. My party is my land, my 
small nation, and above all the culture of this small nation. I see 
nationalism as positive. I have said all my life that I am nationalist 
and pro-independence, but in order to achieve this I don't have 
to break up with France or Spain, and I don't have to kill anybody. 
We need peace, and we need dialogue. 

More nationalism for this small country doesn't mean that 
on the day of independence we have to get rid of those people 
who came from Burgos [a neighboring Spanish province] or from 
elsewhere, but much the opposite. The people from Galicia built 
our sewer system during Franco's time, and the people from 
Extremadura built our streets, and the children of those people 
from Extremadura—like my friends from Otxarkoaga—only go 
to Extremadura during summer vacation to visit their few 
remaining relatives. They feel as Basque or even more Basque 
than me. So, I wouldn't say that there is a worse or better sense 



GORKA AULESTIA 


187 


of identity because of more nationalism. It is the same identity 
that the rest of the nations have. 

Here [in the Basque Country], for example, we feel weird 
about the Basque language. You go to any public office in Paris, 
and the logical thing is that they speak to you in French. And in 
Stuttgart and in Frankfort, in Germany, the logical thing is that 
they speak to you in German. Here, still, in that sense we need 
more culture and more identity. 

I remember a person asking me, "How do you feel, because 
in Spain . . . ?" 

I told him, "I don't know what you think and how you feel 
about Spain, but since I was a child I don't feel Spanish— 
witnessing how my dad was tortured and the prisons and the 
blood and the dead and so on. I have a Spanish passport because 
it was imposed on me, but I don't feel Spanish." 

In this regard, I tie identity and culture very closely in 
understanding nationalism as having a positive connotation. But 
I am not in favor of exaggerated or radical nationalisms, because 
we know where the twentieth-century radical nationalisms took 
us. I am very much against all those perversions. The good wine 
from La Rioja is good as long as you drink it moderately, but if 
you drink it too much, you get drunk, and you end up 
committing monstrosities. 

I'd say yes to nationalism, but always in consideration of 
other things. We don't need to be against the French and against 
the Spanish, because they have good things to teach us— 
literature, gastronomy, geography, history, and so on. So I do 
believe there is a direct relation of cause-effect, effect-cause 
between both nationalism and identity. 


Notes 

1. In 1937, Gernika experienced the first deliberate aerial 
bombardment against a civilian population in Europe. The attack was 
conducted by the Nazi Condor Legion under the command of General 
Franco. 

2. See for example Gorka Aulestia, "Lo Vasco y los Vascos en la 
Universidad Americana — What is Basque and the Basques in the American 
Univesities," RIEV 43:1 (1998): 83-109. 



188 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


3. See Robert Laxalt, A Private War: An American Code Officer in the 
Belgian Congo (Reno: University of Nevada Press, 1998). 





Jill Berner 


/ ill H. Berner was born in 1948 in Modesto, California. She 
obtained a BA degree with a double major in fine arts and 
Spanish language and literature at the University of Nevada, Reno 
in 1970. Later she pursued graphic design studies at Truckee 
Meadows Community College. Jill has been working for the past 
thirty-one years at Basque Studies, which makes her the longest- 
standing member of the center. At present, she is the Webmaster, 
newsletter editor, and publications production specialist of the 
center. Since 1997 Jill has served on the UNR Balloon Race 
Scholarship Committee (chair in 1999 and 2000), and she is 
currently the president of the University Toastmasters Club. In 
2000 the Women's Resource Center honored Jill for her 
distinguished service to UNR. 

A tiny, little space, a tight-knit group of people 


When I first heard about the Basque Studies Program in the 
late 1960s, early 1970s, I was a student at UNR. I used to work in 
the main library, where Basque Studies was housed. After I 
graduated, I worked for a couple years in the circulation 
department as a library assistant. Then I applied for a job in 



190 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Basque Studies in 1975, and in 
January of 1976 I was hired to 
work at the Basque Studies 
Program. They knew that I 
spoke Spanish, because I had 
majored in Spanish and art, 
and that's why I got hired. 
They really thought that 
knowing Spanish was a big 
plus. They needed someone to 
do clerical duties and to 
answer the phone—not that 
it was that busy here, but they 
wanted some additional help. 
At first I was working half-time, 
maybe twenty-five hours a 
week, as an administrative aide 
or administrative assistant. I 
had a small child, Thomas, 
who was one year old, so that was all the hours I wanted. After a 
while they offered me thirty hours a week, and then when my 
son was a little older I started working full-time. 

I just remember that the Basque Studies people were a pretty 
tight-knit group. At that time there was Virginia Chan Jacobsen, 
who was half-time assistant coordinator of the Basque Studies 
Program and my immediate supervisor; Bill Douglass, who was 
the coordinator of the program; and Jon Bilbao, the Basque 
bibliographer. Gorka Aulestia was also here. He came to Reno 
because his wife, Mertxe de Renobales, had some kind of a beca 
[scholarship] to do a PhD in chemistry, or maybe it was post-doctoral 
research. Gorka had decided to do a master's in French while he 
was here. They stayed on, and Gorka became our first PhD in Basque 
Studies. He used to come around quite a bit, because, obviously, 
he was Basque, and he was interested in the program. 

We had a couple of students working for us, and one or two 
volunteers who would come in from time to time, too. It was 
pretty well staffed. 

When I got here in 1976, there were already quite a few 
elements of the program in place, and it just went on from there. 
That small staff did everything. Bill was the one who had the 
whole vision to expand into a lot of different areas. They already 








JILL BERNER 


191 



"I just remember that the Basque Studies people were a pretty tight-knit 
group." Basque Studies Program faculty and staff picnic at Whitaker 
Park, Reno, c. 1976-1977. Left to right, standing: Jill Berner, Norman 
Silver, and Jon Bilbao. Middle row: Colette Etchart, Virginia Chan 
Jacobsen, and Helaine Hess. Front row: unidentified. 


had the newsletter and the Basque Studies Library going, 
although it was pretty tiny at the time. They had acquired the 
Veyrin collection, and Jon was cataloging it in our kind of 
haphazard way that we cataloged things at that time, [laughter] 
We didn't have a professional cataloger, so maybe haphazard 
isn't a good word, but we had to do a rather abbreviated form of 
cataloging. During those first years Bill and Jon went out and 
did research on Basques in the American West, and Bill also went 
to Australia. Bill and/or Jon would go out and give lectures and 
presentations in the community and even further away in 
Nevada, like Elko and Ely. 

We were downstairs in the basement of Getchell Library, in 
two of those little classrooms along the east wall, which are now 
study rooms, near where the Multimedia Center is today. I think 
it's called Lower Level Two. The building was smaller then. They 









192 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



"l-Ve were downstairs in the basement of Getchell Library, in two of those 
little classrooms along the east wall, which are now study rooms." The 
Basque Studies Program's periodicals room, 1977. Jon Bilbao is at the center 
of the picture, and Jill Berner is at the back with unidentified visitors. 


didn't have this whole half of the building that we're in now. 
Virginia and I were in one room, and Jon and Bill, I believe, both 
had desks in the other room, or at least Jon did. The library 
collection was just lining the walls of these two rooms. That was 
all the space we had. I was surprised that the Basque Studies 
Program was so tiny and its library collection was really small. 
The books were just jammed, filling the whole wall space. 
Whenever we had a big project to do, like mailing the newsletter, 
we had to go outside into the main room of the library and work 
on those big tables. 

We were in those two rooms until April of 1977, when they 
moved us up to what was then the new section. The library 
doubled its size. We were given that corner, Room 274 and a 
couple of adjacent rooms, where we were for many, many years. 
So suddenly we had a lot more space, and the library started to 
expand. We had some storage space out at Stead then, too, where 
the main library has its storage area. 










JILL BERNER 


193 


I started doing some quasi-secretarial-type things. I just did 
some typing—letters and forms and maybe purchase orders. I 
remember that they were working on the newsletter, and Virginia 
asked me to translate an article that Gorka had written in Spanish 
on his experiences as a priest somewhere in Africa. 

I didn't know a lot about the Basques, so it was interesting 
to every day learn a little more—some unusual fact about the 
Basques and their origins—just from listening to Bill, Jon, and 
Virginia. I remember Virginia would tell me about how they 
didn't know anything for sure about the origins of the Basques. 
I would also check out the University of Nevada Press works on 
the Basques, and I would read them. I learned way more about 
the Basques than I had ever thought I would know in my life. It 
was a unique and interesting place to work. 

People would always ask, "Why the Basques? Who are the 
Basques? What on earth do you guys do up there?" We were 
working in this building, but we were sort of the outsiders. I 
used to say we were the "ugly stepchild," because we didn't get 
much attention from the library—I don't think anybody else in 
the library knew for sure what we were doing or why we were 
here, [laughter] We were administratively part of the library at 
that time, but that changed, and later on we became part of the 
College of Arts and Science (now the College of Liberal Arts). 

I met Virginia first when I was working in the Circulation 
Department in 1970, 1972, because she volunteered there for a 
little while, and then she found her niche in Basque Studies. She 
liked that a lot better. Back then, most of the professors were 
male, and UNR had a group called the Faculty Wives Volunteers 
that would volunteer in various departments on campus. (That's 
ridiculously sexist now.) Virginia was married, at that time, to 
Bill Jacobsen, who was a professor in the English Department. 
He was involved with Basque Studies to a degree, because, as a 
linguist, he had an interest in the Basque language. Virginia had 
a degree from Berkeley in anthropology, so she came into the 
program and started working about fifteen to twenty hours a 
week. She was a volunteer for a while, and then she was offered 
the job of assistant coordinator, half time, in 1974. She left in 
August of 1979. She and her husband divorced, and she moved 
to the Netherlands and remarried. [Today her name is Virginia 
de Rijk-Chan.] She's come back to visit a couple of times, because 
she has family in the San Francisco Bay area. 



194 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Virginia was great, and we became really good friends. We're 
still friends, and we still correspond, but not very often anymore. 
I remember we used to talk about cooking and recipes a lot! 
[laughter] Things that women talk about, I guess. She is Chinese- 
American; she had a lot of Chinese recipes, and she was interested 
in all kinds of food. She used to go on the Basque Studies Program 
Summer Sessions Abroad to help coordinate them, and she 
brought me a Basque cookbook. Oh! She loved Basque cooking. 
She said it was excellent. She was very impressed, and when she 
came back she would describe the dishes they had eaten. 

Virginia brought a lot of organization to the program. The 
term “absent-minded professor" comes to mind sometimes when 
I think about Bill and Jon. Bill and Jon were good friends, but 
they were very different. I think Virginia was, on some days 
especially, in many ways like the “den mother" that was trying 
to keep everybody on track, because we would lose things, forget 
things. We were often on a hunt to find some lost paper or who 
had the camera last or where we had put it. [laughter] 

Virginia would try to keep everybody organized, and she 
taught me an awful lot about work ethics in general. I guess I 



Virginia Chan Jacobsen, 1977. "I think Virginia was ... in many ways 
like the 'den mother' that was trying to keep everybody on track, because 
we would lose things, forget things." 






JILL BERNER 


195 


was pretty green when I started working here. I had worked as a 
library assistant for a few years downstairs, and that was the extent 
of my work experience. She taught me a lot about the working 
world, about the university, how the system works, and about 
public service and answering the phone—just the little details of 
carrying out your job. She took the time, and I was really grateful 
for that. 

From library work to publications: life with computers 

At some point after we moved up to the new library section in 
1977,1 became a library assistant, because that's what I had worked 
at previously after college. They offered me the opportunity to 
help in cataloging—what they called cataloging. We didn't really 
catalog the books. It was sort of an ad hoc, seat-of-the-pants 
cataloging operation. Jon assigned every book what he called a 
"B" number. It was "B" and a chronological number. I guess he 
started with one, with the first book they ever got, and went on 
through however many thousands of books they had. He wrote 
that number inside the book in pencil, and then we typed the 
number, the author, the title, and the publication data on the card. 
We made a couple copies of the card using carbon paper for each 
book. This was back in the old days! [laughter] 

I can't remember what I did when, because the job and my 
title changed over the years. I got promotions a couple of times, 
so I have moved up the scale here and there. I was also the only 
clerical help for a long time, so I did a little of everything. After 
a while I was checking off the list when books would come in. 
We'd get the packages directly from Spain, and most of them 
were shipped in the bottom of a boat, so they'd come in months 
later. We'd have to check the packing slips and see if we got what 
we ordered. 

At various times I have typed letters in Spanish, requesting 
serials. We did that a lot, because we'd miss issues. They'd skip 
an issue, or somehow the subscription would just cease arriving, 
and we'd have to try to reinstate it. I also typed about twenty 
pages of a vocabulary list for whoever was teaching the Basque 
classes at that time. I think it was for Rick Chiarito. He was a 
reference librarian in the library, and he actually taught Basque 
for a while, maybe one semester. I also helped with book 
cataloging and various library tasks that Jon had me do. 



196 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


After Virginia left I was the office manager, too, for a while, 
and I did what Kate Camino is doing now, including handling 
the accounts for a few years. At that time we got the account 
data from the Controller's Office as these large, gray printouts 
on tractor-fed printer sheets, showing income, expenditures, et 
cetera. I was not a bookkeeper or an accountant of any sort, and 
for me it became kind of a challenge. 

I did library work until Bill asked me to start doing the 
newsletter's layout, which was previously done by the university 
printing services. We have always published the newsletter twice 
a year, and Bill was the editor. He would also write most of the 
material, but sometimes we got input from other people, such 
as short articles. Virginia and I helped push that through the 
process. 

The newsletter header was a laubuiu [a four-headed cross], 
and we actually had the lauburu for the logo on our stationery. 
It was even a symbol for the Basque Book Series. Eventually the 
university wanted a unified look to their stationery, so we were 
no longer allowed to use the lauburu. We began using their little 
blue Nevada map. Eventually Linda became editor of the 
newsletter, and she provided the content, and I did the layouts. 

We didn't have computers in the early days, so we typed 
everything on our IBM Selectric typewriters with carbon paper. I 
remember that was a pretty nightmarish deal. That was hilarious 
too. [laughter] The Oral History Program used to be in this area, 
Room 281, at Getchell, where we are right now. They were right 
down the hall from us, and Mary Ellen Glass, the director of the 
Oral History Program, had acquired an Osborne computer, which 
was one of the first PCs that were available. Bill had talked to her 
about it and thought that it sounded like just the ticket. By then, 
Gorka and Linda were working on the Basque dictionary together. 
So, the main reason for getting this computer was to input the 
Basque-English dictionary, because we had tons of data that, of 
course, had to be in a certain order. It would have been virtually 
impossible to do it in any other way. 

For example, if you made a couple of mistakes using that 
IBM Selectric to type the vocabulary list, you had to start over 
on that page. You could use white-out to a certain degree, but if 
you left out a word, and they were not in order any more, you 
had to retype the entire page. 



JILL BERNER 


197 


We thought that this sounded great, and Mary Ellen, Bill, 
Linda, and I went down to this computer store that sold the 
Osbornes, and we came back with one. It looked like a sewing 
machine case, and it had a handle on it, like a little suitcase 
almost. You opened this little case up, and the back part of it 
folded back, and there was this tiny little screen about eight 
inches across, [laughter] 

Looking back on it, it was just incredible. We couldn't do 
that much with it. We had little floppy disks—they were pretty 
large actually, but not much storage on them—and Linda and I 
typed away on that. Lisa Tipton-Corcostegui also helped with 
the inputting of the first dictionary on that computer. 1 Another 
Basque-American student, Gretchen Holbert, also helped with 
some of the English definitions. Eventually, over time, things 
progressed. Thank God! The computer industry expanded very 
quickly, and we got a “real" computer after a while. 



"We didn't have computers in the early days, so we typed everything on 
our IBM Selectric typewriters with carbon paper. I remember that was a 
pretty nightmarish deal." Jill Berner and Auriane Ugalde (back) at the 
Basque Studies Program's office, 1970s. 











198 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Bill had finished his research in Australia and Italy, and he 
brought me a manuscript [From Italy to Ingham: Italians in North 
Queensland] and said, “The University of Queensland Press wants 
to publish this, but they want me to provide camera-ready copy— 
in other words, the whole book layout exactly as it will be printed. 
Can you do this?" 

I said, “Well, I can find out how." 

The university library had one computer person that was in 
charge of technical assistance for this kind of project, so I 
contacted him, and he said, "What you need to get is a program 
called PageMaker, and I can help you a little bit. There are a 
couple other people on campus using it." 

We got this software program, and I taught myself by going 
through the workbook and getting help from a few other people 
on campus as I needed it. I learned how to lay out the book, and 
that was my first professional incursion into the book-layout 
and publishing field. 

I later started taking graphic design classes at Truckee 
Meadows Community College (TMCC), and I got a certificate in 
Graphic Design and changed my whole job. But it started out 
with doing that book layout for Bill, for the University of 
Queensland Press, in the 1990s. 

Previously, I had worked on a couple other book layouts, 
because we were publishing an Occasional Paper Series way back 
in the 1980s. Linda and I worked together on Barbara Rosen's 
book on Arriaga, the Basque composer. The technology was way 
different then. We had to have a typesetter set the type up, and 
then we glued these printouts to sheets, the way we wanted 
them laid out, with the photos. It was much more primitive; it 
wasn't done digitally. Once we got the computer and the 
PageMaker program, things got a lot easier. It is funny how my 
library skills fit in here for a while, so I was using that, and then 
I developed these other computer skills. 

From the Elderhostel programs to Ikasi 

We were not ever a completely academic, teaching 
department, although we always taught classes. We made it a 
goal to always teach Basque language and Basque culture. I think 
Jon was the first Basque language instructor, because Linda told 
me she took the class from him. Bill and Jon had tried teaching 



JILL BERNER 


199 


a Basque language class at night, feeling that there might be 
interest among Basque-Americans in the community. I don't 
think that it was a huge success. They did have some attendance, 
but they only did that once or twice and then went back to the 
regular daytime schedules. Bill taught a Basque culture class a 
few times. I know Jon also taught Basque history then. 

I don't think we needed to teach more at that time. The 
university was a lot smaller then, and we just didn't have the 
staff. They were focusing on other things, and I don't think there 
was a huge demand for the Basque courses. Bill just didn't see 
that as a big part of our mission. He always said we're a research 
entity, not a teaching entity. 

We used to have Elderhostel programs in the 1980s. We did 
one program, I think, every summer or every other summer for 
several years. It was a national program. I think it still exists, and 
the organizers hold programs on different campuses all over the 
country. It's geared toward retired people or people over fifty- 
five. Usually, they would set aside housing in dormitories for 
these people. A lot of the programs were held in the summer 
when the campuses had more resources available in terms of 
classrooms and dorm rooms. 

Our program was about one week long, and it gave just a 
smattering of information on various aspects of the Basques. 
Jon would give a couple classes on history. Someone would give 
a couple classes on the language or would teach a few words, 
a few phrases, or just talk about its origins or the syntax. 
They'd teach anthropology, the culture, of course, for a couple 
hours here and there. Then, in the evenings they had sessions 
on things like how to play the Basque card game mus, and Jon 
was a really popular mus teacher, because he'd teach them how 
to cheat, [laughter] Isn't that a key part of that game? I haven't 
ever played it myself, but there are certain codes like a wink 
means I have a good hand. It's very similar to poker in terms 
of trying to bluff, and they pass little hints and codes to their 
partner. 

Now, we do our own program called Ikasi, which is geared to 
any adults, especially Basque-Americans who are interested in 
learning a little more about the culture and history. It is also a 
week-long program. Ikasi and those Elderhostel courses are very 
similar in organization. Elderhostel stopped doing those programs 
here. I can't remember why, but they closed it down. 



200 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Twins, Darlene Ammons-Reed, and Linda White 

Since Virginia had left in 1979, Basque Studies had to hire a 
new full-time assistant coordinator, and that was Darlene 
Ammons. Darlene worked at Basque Studies from 1979 to 1981. 
She later married Mike Reed 2 and started a different career. She 
passed away in 2004. 

When Bill came back from Australia, he realized that the 
library operation wasn't going well and the clerical operation 
needed help. Bill had several grants during that period, as I recall. 
I know he had a career-development grant from the National 
Institute of Health, which was a five-year grant. He did a lot of 
research out of the country. That, I believe, was the grant that 
took him to Australia and Italy. 

Then I went on maternity leave. I told Bill, "I am just going 
to take three months off, and I'll be back." So they thought they 
could get by. Then I called Bill back, and I said, "We've had a 
surprise. We have twins! I just don't think that we can find 
childcare that easily, so I am going to take a little more time." 
We didn't know we were having twins until the day they were 
born. It was too much to deal with, so I had to take nine or ten 
months of leave. Bill was very understanding about that and 
about my schedule going from part time to full time and back to 
part time for a while after I came back. 

Bill decided, "Oh, my God, we better get somebody in here 
for a while." He asked around the library, and Linda White had 
been a library assistant in the Acquisitions Department 
previously and had left, because she was pursuing some other 
interests. He got hold of Linda and asked her if she wanted to 
come and work as a temporary employee. I remember Bill calling 
me at home to say, "Since you're going to be gone so much 
longer, we've decided to hire somebody to help out. We're 
thinking of hiring Linda White, and I hope that's OK." Maybe 
he thought I was going to feel threatened. 

But I said, "Oh, I know Linda! Yes, we went to college together. 
I think that's great. She'll be great." She had worked on campus, 
which always helps, because you know the administrative ropes 
a little bit, the various departments and things you have to go 
through to get things done. My twins, Melanie and Megan, were 
born in November of 1980, and Linda was hired part-time in the 
spring of 1981. 



JILL BERNER 


201 


UNR, at that time, was a much smaller place, so I knew a lot 
of people then. I was delighted that Linda was coming to work 
with us, and it was nice to reconnect with her. Linda and I knew 
each other as students a little bit already. We were casual friends 
through going to college together and being together in a couple 
of classes in the Spanish Department. We were also in a Spanish 
honor society together called Sigma Delta Pi. 

We still joke about those Spanish classes. We had a class in 
Spanish literature—I think it was Generation del Noventaiocho 
[Generation of 1898]—which was taught by this older professor 
named Dr. Kline, who was just a nice, good-hearted guy. He was 
almost fluent in Spanish, but he spoke it with an American accent, 
which was horrible. I don't know, in those days, maybe they didn't 
learn conversation. We just had some funny anecdotes from that 
class that we would laugh about. 

One of the most adored professors in the Spanish Department 
was Eloy Placer. Linda and I had also been in a couple of Eloy 
Placer's literature classes together. He was a wonderful professor. 
I remember being told that Eloy was a consultant for the program 
while he was here. 

Eloy had a great sense of 
humor, [laughter] Linda and I 
often talked about the jokes Eloy 
made and the stories he told. Of 
course, at that level—it was third 
or fourth year—the whole class 
was given in Spanish, and he 
would occasionally tell little 
jokes, but Linda and I would 
usually be the only ones 
laughing, and the rest of the class 
didn't know what that meant. 

Were we the only ones who got 
the joke, or did we have a strange 
sense of humor, or what? He had 
been imprisoned by Franco 
during the civil war years, 
because he was on the "wrong 
side." I just remembered him 
telling stories about what he 
called "Franco's college," his 



"One of the most adored professors in 
the Spanish Departmant was Eloy 
Placer ."Eloy Placer (1914-1974). 










202 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


years when he was in prison, because he studied or read quite a bit 
when he was there. Too bad that he is not here to tell his story, but 
he passed away in 1974 rather suddenly of a heart attack, before I 
started working here. 

When I returned to work in September of 1981, Bill said, 
"Well, we are keeping Linda, because you really need another 
person to help out." They had decided that they needed the 
extra help, so they were going to keep her and me. 

Linda and I were both library assistants, so that worked out 
really well. We both sat at desks across from each other with our 
Selectric typewriters. We always chatted a little bit. We were both 
working on cataloging at one point and answering phones and 
so on. Linda has a hilarious sense of humor. She's just wacky, 
and we used to be laughing half the day. I think sometimes Bill 
would come in, and we were laughing, and he probably thought, 
"Good Lord! I've hired a couple of lunatics! Are they ever going 
to get any work done?" But we did. We managed to get our 
work done, [laughter] 

Later on, when Linda was working on the dictionaries, we 
hired Jeanne Harris to help out with the office tasks. She was 
here from 1984 to 1987. Then Joan Brick became the 
administrative assistant until 1995. In about 1998, Kate Camino 
was hired as the office manager and has been a real boon to the 
Center. She is fluent in Basque, French, and Spanish, and is a 
Basque-American with many ties to the Basque Country as well 
as the U.S. Basque community. Her expertise is invaluable. 

Linda eventually went on 
to work on the dictionary 
projects, and she had a 
phenomenal career path in this 
place. I remember Gorka and 
Linda working on the 
dictionary. They would go to 
the back of the library and sit 
at a table by the window, so 
they had the natural light, and 
just work for hours and hours. 

It sounds like an exhausting 
schedule, but they got that 
project done. 



Joan Brick, 1990 






JILL BERNER 


203 


Linda got her PhD and went on to be a professor and to 
teach Basque. She was also the assistant coordinator for a while, 
and she did a lot of administrative things. [Linda was the assistant 
coordinator from 1989 to 1999.] Linda retired in June 2006, and 
it has been great working with her all these years. Linda and I 
have become great friends. 

Unfolding the Basque Studies Program: USAC 


The development of USAC (University Studies Abroad 
Consortium), which came out of our Basque Studies Summer 
Session abroad after Carmelo Urza took over, has been one of 
the major developments in the history of the Basque Studies 
Program. Bill and Jon started our study abroad programs back in 
the 1970s, and that became more and more structured after 



"Linda has a hilarious sense of humor. She's just wacky, and we used to 
be laughing half the day. I think Bill would come in, and we were laugh¬ 
ing, and he probably thought, 'Good Lord! I've hired a couple of luna¬ 
tics!'"]!!! Berner and Linda White, March 2006. 






204 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Carmelo came onboard in the early 1980s. We took students or 
teachers, anybody who wanted to go, to the Basque Country for 
a six-week summer session. Jon made a lot of the arrangements, 
because he had a lot of contacts over there, and Virginia also 
helped a lot with organizing this. In fact, she and Jon would go 
to the Basque Country and assist. They also hired various people 
over there who spoke English to teach. I know Yon Onatibia was 
involved with teaching music and dance, and Jon Bilbao taught 
Basque history and maybe culture, too. 

Onatibia participated in at least one or two of the summer 
studies abroad programs. He also taught in the early years of 
NABO's summer music camp for children [today's Udaleku 
program]. When anybody mentions his name, I always picture 
him holding the drum and playing the txistu. Somebody took a 
picture of him when he was here one time, and Virginia painted 
a portrait from that. It's hanging in the Basque Library. 

After Virginia left, she took up painting, and she did several 
portraits, which are hanging in the library. I think the first one 
she did was the one of Onatibia, who she was very fond of, and 
Jon Bilbao was next, because they were very close friends. She 
painted a delightful portrait 
of him, and then the one of 
Bill. I think she did it from a 
photo; I don't remember. She 
brought the painting with her 
once when she came to visit. 

The Study Abroad session 
was a popular program, but we 
only ran it every three 
summers. It was a pretty 
humongous undertaking, 
administratively and also for 
our people to have to pack up 
and go over there. 

I met Carmelo when I 
started working at Basque 
Studies. Carmelo was a 
master's student at UNR. I "When anybody mentions his name, 
think he got his undergrad / always picture him holding the drum 
degree in Idaho and came and playing the txistu." Portrait of Yon 
here and did a master's, Onatibiaby Virginia Chan, 1989. 






JILL BERNER 


205 


because I remember him visiting the program a few times. Of 
course, being Basque, he was just magnetically drawn to us. All 
the Basques ended up in our office at some point, [laughter] 
Then he went off to grad school to do a PhD. 

I guess when the Studies Abroad summer program became 
too much work for us to handle, Bill thought of Carmelo to 
come back to Reno and run the Summer Abroad program, and 
he expanded it into a semester- and year-abroad program. 

Carmelo needed space, so Bill talked Special Collections into 
giving us a little office, and he actually had them divide it in 
two. We might have had to pay to build the wall and knock out 
another door. Bill was always finding creative solutions to all 
these problems. So Carmelo started running the program out of 
those two offices, but he eventually ran out of space. 

I remember Carmelo wanted to have a contest to name this 
new entity that he was creating out of our little summer pro¬ 
gram. I think he thought 
of the name himself, so 
it just became a defunct 
contest, but for a while 
we were all trying to 
think of names for it. He 
thought of University 
Studies Abroad Consor¬ 
tium, and he liked it, so 
he was the winner of his 
own contest, [laughter] 

Then Carmelo moved 
into the office where we 
are now—Oral History 
had been here for years— 
and quickly expanded. I'd 
come down here to talk 
to somebody, and they 
had at one time twelve or 
fourteen people all 
working in here, cubicle 
after cubicle, with wires 
and phone lines running 
all over the floor. There 
were two offices where 



Jon Bilbao and Jill Berner at the Basque 
Studies Program's office in the new section 
of the Getchell Library, c. 1979-1980. The 
Basque ongi etori sign at the top of the 
entrance door welcomes all. 












206 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Gloria Totoricagiiena and Xabier Irujo [Assistant Professor at the 
Center for Basque Studies since 2006] are now, and the rest was 
one open room. It was really chaos. I don't know how they did 
that for as long as they did. 

So, of course, after a while Carmelo was out of our bailiwick, 
and the university made USAC a whole separate entity. Then 
USAC moved over to the Old Gym building where they are now. 
They have a big area there, and they've probably taken more 
and more territory over there. It was fun having them around, 
though, for a while. We have close ties with Carmelo, not only 
because of all the friendships over the years, but because he is 
tenured under the Center for Basque Studies, so we count him 
as one of our faculty. 

Expanding: visiting students, conferences, and the library 

Another major event was when the Basque government 
started funding student exchanges, and that was one of the first 
connections we had with the Basque government. The Basque 
government started to have a more active role with the Basque 
diaspora, and there were some exchanges back and forth. We 
would bring a grad student from the Basque Country for an 
academic year, and the student would help out with our Basque 
classes and work on a project, maybe a thesis. 

We had some good students. Nere Lete was one of the first 
students that came over in 1988. Then, I remember other visiting 
students such as Estibalitz "Esti" Amorrortu, Amaia Rekalde, and 
Javier "Javi" Cillero, who ended up doing his PhD in Basque 
studies. He was a wonderful guy, and we became very good 
friends. I was taking Basque language classes, trying to learn a 
little Basque to help me out in my job, and Javi took on the task 
of tutoring me twice a week. He would come in for an hour at 
lunch time to talk in Basque with me, and he taught me a lot, 
although I subsequently forgot much of it. He worked hard at 
trying to make me an euskaldunberri. 

Meanwhile, we had a visit from Lehendakari Jose Antonio 
Ardanza in the late 1980s, and it was a big event for us. A few 
years later, Eusko Ikaskuntza [the Society of Basque Studies] from 
the Basque Country recognized our twenty-fifth anniversary by 
giving us an award. 



JILL BERNER 


207 


In 1995 we had a conference about Basques in the Mexican 
regions [The Basques in the Mexican Regions: 16 th -20 th Centuries], 
and in 1998 we had a big international congress at the Riverboat 
Hotel and Casino [Basques in the Contemporary World: 
Migration, Identity, and Globalization]. We published three books 
in our Occasional Paper Series from the conference's proceedings. 
I didn't do the layouts for the three volumes, because we wanted 
all three done at once, and we were doing them on a tight 
deadline. I just oversaw the production. There were at least thirty 
or forty authors involved, and there was a lot of communicating 
with them and getting permissions. It was a big project. 

We also had the library going, and the collection was 
increasing, because the main library started to give us a budget 
for books, which was something we hadn't had prior to that. I 
don't remember how we obtained some of those materials we 
had at the beginning. So Jon went into an extensive collection 
mode. He had made arrangements with a couple of book dealers, 
huge bookstores such as Linacero in the Basque Country, and 
later Urretxindorra, to just send us pretty much all the 



"He was a wonderful guy, and we became very good friends. I was taking 
Basque language classes, trying to learn a little Basque to help me out in my 
job, and Javi took on the task of tutoring me twice a week." PhD student 
Javi Cillero and Jill Berner at the Basque Studies Library, September 1998. 








208 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


mainstream material that there was in Basque or about the 
Basques or authored by Basques—anything and everything that 
was published. Of course, Basque publishing was just really 
starting to take off in the late 1970s, and then we quickly had a 
huge influx of materials. 

We were getting large shipments of books every couple of 
months, and we had to unpack them, check them in, and check 
them off the lists, which they had sent previously, and we did 
that fast cataloging process. Actually, when I got here the 
cataloging department was helping out a little bit. There was a 
woman named Yoshi Hendricks who worked a few hours every 
week on some of our books, and she cataloged them fully and 
put them into the system. But there was not enough help to 
properly catalog everything. Gradually, over time, we had a little 
more help from the library, and they started taking that over, 
eventually, but that wasn't until they had hired the first Basque 
Studies Librarian, Maria Otero-Boisvert, in 1986. 

Maria was here for three years before her husband decided 
to go back to school, and they relocated to Ohio or somewhere. 
So we hired another librarian, Ellen Brow, but there were some 
difficulties with her, and she left. We were in a bind, and Bill 
wanted somebody to come in who was knowledgeable about 
the Basques and maybe knew something about the collection 
already, and he talked to Marc Ugalde, who had previously worked 
with us as a student at UNR. 

Marc was a local Basque-American from a big family, who 
grew up on a ranch in Fallon, Nevada. He was very practical, 
really laid back, down-to-earth, and a nice guy and very family 
oriented. Marc was, at that time, a teacher in the Washoe County 
schools, but he was burned out on teaching and was thinking 
about going to library school. 

So Bill hired Marc as a library assistant to work as an interim 
person and take care of the collection while we thought about 
what to do. Marc went to library school, and he was able to do 
some of the studies as correspondence courses, and we actually 
helped him out with some of his library science courses. He went 
to Arizona to finish up, because there was a residency 
requirement, and he finally got his degree. 

At that point, we were searching for a librarian, and Marc 
became one of the candidates, and he ended up being hired as 
the Basque Studies Librarian. Of course, the fact that he'd worked 



JILL BERNER 


209 


with the library for a couple years helped his case. He had not 
only worked here as a student, but he'd worked as a temporary 
library assistant and as a professional. So he'd put in a lot of time 
and was dedicated to the Basque Studies Library and the whole 
Basque Studies arena. Marc always described it as his dream job. 
He was happy working here. All the visitors who used to come to 
Reno enjoyed working with him, because he knew the collection 
from top to bottom. 

Marc was another very dedicated worker. I think everybody 
that's worked at Basque Studies has invested a lot of themselves 
in it, and because those who are Basque are into their heritage, 
this was just an ideal place for them. It had appeal for a lot of 
these people that really treasure their Basqueness. I mean, a lot 
of us aren't Basque, but we also have our reasons for being here 
and being interested and enjoying it. 

The Basque Studies Program then moved into the College of 
Arts and Science, and I think it was a great move, because 
suddenly we weren't the ugly stepchild anymore! We had more 
financial resources, a little more attention from the overall 
administration and from the College of Arts and Science. Ann 
Ronald was the dean when we made that switch in the mid 1990s. 
It seems to me that she was the one who brought it up and said, 
“You guys should be over here." 

Here we were, this very unique ethnic research program, 
which was considered a center of excellence, and they wanted 
us to join that college, so it was very flattering. It was more 
appropriate, too, for us to be in that college, rather than being 
part of the library, because even though the Basque Library was 
growing, the research and teaching side of Basque Studies didn't 
belong in the library—not that we had that much of a teaching 
mission at the time. 

When they split the College of Arts and Science into the 
College of Liberal Arts and the College of Science, of course, it 
made sense for us to go with Liberal Arts, although there was a 
moment of thinking, “Well, we could go with Liberal Arts, or we 
could go back with the library," but that essentially didn't make 
any sense. 

When we went to Arts and Science, the Basque Library 
remained under the administration of the library. The split had 
some drawbacks, because even though the library and the 
program had remained close, we were split physically, and that 



210 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


made a big difference. We used to all be in one area together, but 
it was no longer possible because of logistics with more and more 
staff on our end of things and a growing library and an increasing 
library staff. 

The move helped the Basque Library in a way, because the 
library administration made more of an effort to put some 
resources into it. We already had a Basque Studies Librarian and 
a half-time library assistant and some student help in the deal 
through Bill's negotiations with the library administration. Then 
they also devoted one cataloger—I think at first it was half-time 
and maybe later full-time—towards cataloging the collection 
using the Library of Congress system. There was a huge backlog 
of Basque books to incorporate into the catalog, so the library 
requested a grant and carried out a two-year project in which 
they did incorporate a lot of that backlog. Kathryn Etcheverria 
was the librarian in charge of that project. So the Basque Library 
was developed a little more after that split. 

There's always been talk, at least in the last fifteen years, of 
incorporating the Basque collection into the main library and 
just doing away with having this separate, physical space and 
separate support staff for it. But I think it would be a big mistake, 
because the way the collection is set up now, you have a person 
in charge who's at least theoretically knowledgeable about the 
Basques and the collection and can help researchers find what 
they need quickly, which really facilitates their work. 

The Basque Library has a good reputation, so we do get a lot 
of researchers here. If the collection were broken up and just 
scattered throughout the library with no central support staff to 
provide for it, I think the interest on the part of researchers would 
evaporate. They wouldn't find it to be such a great resource 
anymore. The books would be there, but I don't think it would 
have the same appeal. There are a lot of old, rare materials there, 
too, so I just wonder how they would handle that. There's a big 
photo archive, slides, and ephemera, so I think it would be tricky 
to incorporate all of that into the other main library departments. 

It's essential to remain in close proximity, because researchers 
not only want to use the library, but they want to network with 
our faculty, and that's a big part of the whole experience for 
them to come to Reno. They meet us, and we get to meet these 
people and interact. 



JILL BERNER 


211 


Like home to me: Bill and Joseba 

I have been with UNR for thirty years and working almost 
all that time for Basque Studies, and it's been wonderful. Since 
Bill has retired, I'm the longest-working human being now on 
staff. Wow! I never thought about being the senior member. I 
think that sounds too old. Can I be that old? [laughter] Yes, it 
seems strange. When I look back, I can't believe I've been here 
for thirty years. It's really weird, because it's a whole lifetime. I 
was a different person, and I was just a kid when I started here! 
My children grew up while I was working here, and now they're 
adults. They have finished college and are doing their own thing. 
A lot of my life is tied up in this place. 

The thing that made my job continue to be interesting was 
the fact that it changed quite a bit over those years. Also, the 
people that I worked with and the visitors have always been 
wonderful. For the vast majority of the time we have had good 
people. It's been very rewarding over the years to meet a lot of 
different people from the Basque Country, and I've made some 
good friends. Also, we changed locations a couple times over 
that period. 

I remember a couple times in my career, thinking, "Maybe I 
could earn more money somewhere else," and I became interested 
in graphic design. I have an art degree, but I had never used it 
much. As I said, I took the design courses at TMCC and changed 
my career. I actually thought for a while I might have to look around 
if I want to work in this field. I just lucked out when Joseba came 
onboard, because he wanted to stress the Internet and publications, 
get a good brochure printed, and change the design of the 
newsletter. So I was in the right place at the right time. 

I think it would have been hard to change jobs, because 
Basque Studies has become like home to me after all these years. 
I looked around at other departments on campus and some other 
places, and they were run a lot differently and maybe more 
bureaucratically. I'm sure there were other interesting 
departments on campus, though, but I just didn't take that path 
in the end, so who knows? I wanted to stay in one of the public 
employment areas because of my retirement. My pension fund 
was by that point adding up, and I wanted to stay with the 
university or the county or some state entity. 



212 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


We were a happy little family back then in the early days. We 
didn't have as many visitors from Europe back then, because we 
didn't have any formal arrangements like we do now with the 
Basque government. We used to celebrate birthdays, and Jon 
always brought champagne. That was his contribution! He always 
had a bottle of champagne, [laughter] We just had a pretty fun 
time. Jon was just a delightful person. He was great to work with 
and had a great sense of humor. He was very professional, very 
focused, and he accomplished an incredible amount of work with 
his Basque bibliography. I worked with him on that a little bit, 
typing the entries. He was really immersed in his work. He'd be 
up here on weekends and evenings. Gorka also was a great guy. 
Oh, my God! He was hilarious, too. He was just an incredible 
scholar, very intensely into his work. 

There have been some amusing incidents over the years. 
When we were in Room 274, in that little office—well, not so 
little, compared to our origins—we set off the fire alarm in this 
building I don't know how many times, [laughter] Back in those 
days, you could still smoke in the offices, but not out in the 
more public areas. Of course, all these Basques here were smokers. 



"We just had a pretty fun time. Jon was a delightful person. He was great 
to work with and had a great sense of humor. "Jon Bilbao and Jill Berner 
at the Basque Studies Program, c. 1977. 














JILL BERNER 


213 


Jon was very polite, so he'd stay in his office and close the 
door and smoke a cigar once in a while, and I guess he threw the 
cigar stub in the trashcan, which, of course, had a plastic liner, 
and it started a fire and set off the smoke alarm. Every time the 
smoke alarm would go off, the entire building had to be 
evacuated—everybody on every floor, every student, and every 
worker. 

Ken Carpenter was the head of Special Collections, and he 
was also in charge of building security. I sat at a desk that faced 
the door, and I would see him coming down the hall with this 
grim look on his face. He could look at the electrical panel and 
could tell where the fire alarm had started, and shaking his head 
he'd say, "Did you guys set off the fire alarm again?" [laughter] 

Another time Gorka was on one of his rants. He would get 
on a subject and just go on enthusiastically about it. He was very 
intense. So this one time he was standing by my desk kind of 
waving this cigarette around and talking, ranting, and he had 
his hand up in the air, gesturing. Of course, the smoke alarms 
were up there on the ceiling, and the smoke from his cigarette, 
sure enough, set off the damn fire alarm! The bells started 
clanging, and here came Ken 
down the hall, glaring at us. 

"You guys did it again ? I can't 
believe it!" 

Every time they did that, 
the fire department had to 
come out to investigate, to turn 
off the alarm, and then give the 
all clear so everybody could go 
back to work. Then later, 
smoking was prohibited inside 
the buildings, and it was very 
tough! People had to go out in 
front of the building and have 
a cigarette. But it sure cut down 
on the fire alarms. 

I've been awed at how 
much the center has grown and 
how much we've accomplished 
over that many years. It's just 
incredible. It was basically a 



"The bells started clanging, and here 
came Ken down the hall, glaring at 
us. 'You guys did it again? I can't 
believe it!'" Pat and Ken Carpenter, 
August 1979. 







214 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


tiny, little operation in a closet, practically, and now the library 
has expanded so much that it is bursting at the seams. We even 
have that area out at Stead where there are several rows of stacks 
filled with bound journals and children's books, things that they 
didn't have room to store up here. 

I also think we've kept up with the university's progress. 
We've expanded right along with it, and, in fact, I'm amazed at 
the stuff that we're involved in and that we've been doing over 
the last ten or fifteen years. We've gotten involved in promoting 
Basque musicians to come here, Basque art exhibits, and even 
Basque theater. Our publications production has expanded under 
Joseba Zulaika's directorship. Now we have all these new book 
series that we're doing, above and beyond the Basque Book Series 
that was established at the University Nevada Press. We've been 
presenting conferences yearly now for the last few years, and we 
have a conference papers series. We've been publishing Basque 
literature in translation, the Basque classics, and, of course, the 
textbook series, which was the first one. We have about twelve 
textbooks to go with online classes that were developed over the 
last five or six years. 

Our teaching agenda has expanded, too, and our courses have 
been incorporated into the Liberal Arts and the university's overall 
curriculum a little better because of cross-listing and because a 
couple of courses have been made capstone and diversity courses. 
This has increased the popularity of Basque Studies, and now 
the courses draw more students. I think that's great. More 
students get a little exposure to Basque culture, and a lot more 
people know who the Basques are and don't have to ask, “What 
the heck are you guys doing here? Why do we even have this 
program in Reno, Nevada? Basques? Why Basque Studies?" 

Actually, we have gotten those questions many times. The 
Basque Studies Program and the Basque Library were all together 
at one point, and since I was answering the phone a lot, I would 
get a lot of those questions, and I would always say, “We are in 
Reno because the Basques are a significant minority in Nevada," 
and I'd explain a little bit about the origins of our program, about 
DRI wanting to add a human element to its research program, 
and about how they thought of the Basques and decided to create 
a program of study. To go along with that, of course, they felt it 
was necessary to have a research library; hence, the Basque Studies 
Library. 



JILL BERNER 


215 


I would say, “We exist to research and publish our research 
about the Basques, mostly." I think there's been a lot of emphasis 
over the years on the Basque diaspora, because we have a unique 
opportunity to research that in the American West. Our main 
mission is still researching and publishing, and the teaching is 
becoming a little more important. 

At the beginning of the program, a lot of people didn't know 
what a Basque was. Well, heck, when I started here, I have to say 
I knew next to nothing about the Basques myself! I was just a 
kid when my family moved to Reno, and I had lived here for 
quite a while, so, of course, I'd heard of the Basques. I don't 
think I had before then. We had eaten at the Basque restaurants, 
and we used to go out to Gardnerville to the Overland Hotel. 
Every time relatives would come into town, we'd take them out 
there. My mom was interested in Sweet Promised Land, so I had 
read it and learned a few things. 

I never went to the Basque Country until 2003. The students 
that went on the summer session abroad would come back and 
be very enthusiastic, and everybody else would go and bring me 
a souvenir and tell me how beautiful and wonderful it was. So, 
finally, I went there to see it for myself. And it really is beautiful! 

But I learned quickly working here. I picked up information 
here and there, and so I was able to answer some questions when 
people would call. 

We would get the weirdest questions, too. I remember people 
would call and ask, “How do you say 'happy birthday' or 'I love 
you dearly' in Basque?" Stuff like that. I guess they were writing 
a card or a note to someone who was Basque. I think the most 
common question was from people who were Basque-American, 
asking about their surnames, the meaning of their name, and 
whether we had any information about their genealogy. The 
library has some reference works that have information about 
those things, so we would just go to the shelves and find the 
reference book and look it up and offer to send a photocopy of 
the information to them by mail. Or if people came in, we could 
photocopy something and give it to them or help them find the 
information sources. 

Today, there is probably greater awareness about the Basques 
and the center, but I think, from talking to the former librarians, 
that they get a lot of the same questions, because I'm not in the 
question-answering end of the business anymore. In fact, we've 



216 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



expanded our services quite a bit, because we're involved now 
with a grant that's funding a Basque genealogy project. I think 
they're going to be charging for those services, though, because 
it's on a more extensive and professional basis. 

I worked with Bill for over twenty years, and he was a great 
boss, because he was not only very respectful and treated me 
very well, but he always allowed me to be flexible with my hours 
and work schedules, which was great. He is just a phenomenal 
person, a phenomenal scholar, and actually a businessman, too, 
because he was involved in his family's business for many years, 
and I think those skills were beneficial to the program. He has a 
great problem-solving ability and was very focused on his 
research. He'd come into the main office, and if you threw a 
question at him or maybe 
made a funny remark or a 
joke, sometimes he would 
kind of look at you 
strangely. He was focused 
on his work and not on 
whatever nonsense we 
were babbling about. 

[laughter] 

Bill's record speaks for 
itself—I mean, the things 
he's done with the center. 

In addition, I found him to 
be a wonderful human 
being, very understanding, 
compassionate, always 
reasonable, and he treated 
everyone well and respect¬ 
fully, as long as we were 
respectful and did the job 
right. I always appreciated 
the fact that he had a lot 
of confidence in me. He 
would ask for a certain 
result or for some project 
to be completed, and then 
he would let me decide 
how to do it. He was not a 


"We would get the weirdest questions, too. 
People would call and ask, 'How do you 
say "happy birthday" or "I love you dearly" 
in Basque?'" Jill Berner at the Basque 
Studies Program's office, 1980s. 












JILL BERNER 


217 


micromanager. I like working with someone like that, who 
doesn't try to totally control everybody else's work life. We had 
a good working relationship, and I think he would agree with 
that. 

Bill's also a very private person. He kept his personal life very 
separate from his work life, but occasionally, he would have 
parties at his house, and the whole office group would go over 
there with any visitors that happened to be around at the time. 
He and his wife, Jan, were wonderful hosts, and then you saw a 
different side of him, because he became really jovial and told 
fabulous stories about his travels and research. It's been a pleasure 
working with him over the years. 

I think that towards the end of his career here, Bill was ready 
to turn the management of the program over to somebody else. 
He had taken on a lot of projects and started a lot of initiatives 
with Basque Studies. The researching and writing were his favorite 
thing—not the administrative end of things, but he had done a 
very good job of both. Bill would charge the staff and the faculty 
with the need to start some new initiatives. He was a little tired 
of always carrying the ball and always being the idea man. 

When it came time for Bill to retire, we changed the title of 
coordinator to director, and we changed the name of the Basque 
Studies Program to the Center for Basque Studies. An outside 
group of scholars, including the late Begona Aretxaga, Robert 
Clark, and Jacquie Urla, scholars not connected with the Basque 
Studies Program, did an evaluation of the program—an external 
review, required by UNR on a periodic basis—and they 
recommended that we change its name to reflect its basic research 
mission. They made some other recommendations as well, 
namely that UNR give us some more money and a couple more 
faculty positions, which became a thrust after that. The university 
was forced to look at this, obviously, and took it as seriously as 
they did any of these outside reviews. 

Then the faculty got together and wrote new bylaws. The 
faculty decided that the directorship should rotate every three 
years, so no one person was either burnt out with the 
management of the program or glorified with it or whatever you 
want to call it. I think that a lot of departments do it this way, 
because it is an administrative burden in a way. Whoever is the 
director for that period of time takes a big administrative role 
and doesn't have much time to do research. They discussed 



218 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


among themselves who would take on that role, and Joseba 
Zulaika was chosen as director for the period. His term started 
with 2000, the new millennium. 

Joseba was hired as a faculty member in 1990, but he had 
been conducting postdoctoral research projects in Reno since 
the early 1980s. All these people that came to UNR in their youth 
for a temporary stay—we all got sucked into the vortex, didn't 
we? [laughter] There is a trend there. A lot of us came here as 
students and just kept reappearing or eventually signed on for 
the long run. 

In March of 2000 we moved from Room 274 over to the 
room that had been Oral History and then USAC, Room 281, 
because we were running out of space. We remodeled it, at our 
own expense, into six little offices and a main reception area. It 
physically separated the library operation from the administrative 
and faculty offices for the first time in the history of the Basque 
Studies Program. 

The amazing thing about Joseba is his energy. He's just like a 
whirlwind. He became director, and I think he thought, "I can't 
keep following Bill's footsteps. I've got to reinvent this thing." 
That whole idea of the new millennium and the new century 
was being talked about everywhere, and all the changes that were 
taking place. Joseba was motivated to make his own mark and 
take things to a new level. There's probably a lot of pressure on a 
new director to do that, instead of just following the same path. 

Joseba had a lot of innovative ideas, and one of the most 
impressive things he did was to get a couple more faculty 
positions. It was the right idea at the right time. It's just 
phenomenal the way that all fell together, and this little, tiny 
program ended up convincing the legislature to grant us the 
funding for two new positions. Consequently, we hired Gloria 
Totoricagiiena and Joseba Gabilondo as the first two hires. After 
Joseba Gabilondo left, Sandra Ott was hired. Xabier Irujo and 
Marijo Olaziregi are recent hires, filling retirement vacancies. 

Joseba started all kinds of new initiatives. One of the big 
things that he wanted to do was to have a larger web presence. 
The Internet by then was a much bigger entity, and every program 
and department on campus had a Web page. Linda White had 
created a Web page previously, just by doing the HTML and 
learning it on her own, so we already had a presence on the 
Internet, but not huge. Of course, whoever develops these 



JILL BERNER 


219 


programs started coming out with new software programs to 
make it easier to do Web development and Web design. 

So one day, Joseba said to me, "Why don't you take on a new 
project and put on a new hat and be the Webmaster for Basque 
Studies? I want you to redesign the Web site completely, and we 
want you to expand it." We involved a consultant, Martin 
Gastanaga, who had a Web company in town, and he helped us 
quite a bit, initially. Joseba was great at getting people to volunteer 
some time and to pick their brains. A designer in the Bay Area, 
Gunnlauger Briem, also did some preliminary work on it. Then, 
since I had taken some Web design courses at TMCC, I ended up 
doing much of the site design myself. 

Then Joseba pushed the teaching and the publishing agenda 
quite a bit. He's pushed all of us to a new level, I'll tell you that! 
[laughter] He's raised the bar in terms of what's expected in the 
work pace around here, but we know how to have a good time, 
too. Every now and then we go out and raise a little hell. We've 
had a few dinners, and we've had conferences in town. But it's 
been stressful, too. Maybe it's partly because I am getting older, 
but all of us, I'm sure, would agree that we're doing more in less, 
or in the same amount of, time. It's something to be proud of, 
but sometimes you just want to rest a little and enjoy the fruits 
of your labor. Someday we'll hopefully be able to do that. 

Under Joseba's term we always had meetings and were able 
to give our input, but the weight of the decisions fell on him, so 
he had to make the call most of the time, because he was the 
one who was going to take the heat if things didn't go well. So I 
understand that, and that's fine. Sometimes I think Joseba—well, 
everybody, a lot of these guys—took on more than our staff, our 
numbers, could efficiently assume. But we always pulled it off, 
or almost always. We've gotten ourselves obligated a few times 
and then said, "My God, what have we done?" 

I remember Jon used to get us into obligations, too. I mean, 
it just happens. You feel you know these people, and you feel 
you owe them something, and you end up saying, "Yes. We'll 
bring you here give to a lecture, or we'll publish your book, or 
we'll do this, or we'll do that." I think that's how we ended up a 
lot of times in the last few years with some of the problems 
we've had. [laughter] 

Joseba is extremely intelligent and a bit temperamental but 
a very loving, compassionate person, too. There is a lot of candor 



220 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


there. One thing I have appreciated about working with Joseba 
is that I have always been able to talk to him very openly. I have 
never been afraid to tell him anything. At the same time, he 
always tells you exactly what's on his mind, and he's also willing 
to listen to you. A couple times he got mad at me, and I felt very 
free to get mad at him right back and tell him my feelings exactly 
on that subject. So you don't have to guess at what he's thinking 
or feeling at any given time. 

The makeup of the staff has changed quite a bit in the last 
several years, and now that the directorship will change more 
frequently, it will be interesting to see how much balance and 
continuity we will maintain. 


Notes 

1. Lisa Corcostegui and her husband, Enrike Corcostegui, also a former 
visiting student at the Basque Studies Program, established Zenbat Gara 
Euskal Dantzari Taldea in 1989, the first-ever Basque student association 
at UNR. It is dedicated to the teaching and promotion of Basque folk 
dance. She completed a PhD in Basque studies (anthropology) in 2005. 

2. Michael "Mike" Reed had been a UNR faculty member of the College 
of Business Administration since 1972 and dean from 1993 to 2006. 
Currently, he is Nevada System of Higher Education Vice Chancellor of 
Finance. 




Linda White 


L inda Louise White was born in 1949 in Scotia, in 
northwestern California. She obtained a BA degree with 
a double major in Spanish and French in 1971 and an MA degree 
in Spanish in 1975 from the University of Nevada, Reno. She 
earned a PhD in Basque studies, with an emphasis in language 
and literature, from the same university in 1996. 

Linda spent nearly four decades at UNR. She worked at Basque 
Studies for twenty-five years, serving in a variety of positions, 
from library assistant and lexicographer to assistant coordinator, 
assistan t professor, and associate professor. She is an avid language 
teacher, translator, and fiction writer. She speaks several languages 
fluently, including Basque, Russian, French, and Spanish. 

fn 1993 Linda was inducted into the Basque Hall of Fame by 
the Society of Basque Studies in America for her contributions 
to Basque culture, and in 2000 the UNR College of Arts and 
Science (today's College of Liberal Arts) awarded her the Mousel- 
Feltner Award for Excellence in Research and/or Creative Activity. 
She retired in 2006, and she is currently a Basque Scholar Professor 
Emerita at the University of Nevada, Reno. 



222 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Like coming home 

I first heard about the 
Basque Studies Program 
when I was an undergradu¬ 
ate student at UNR. One of 
my professors, Eloy Placer, 
was actually involved in the 
Basque Studies Program, 
and I did book searches in 
the library for him. Dr. 
Placer would give me cards 
to order for the collection, 
and a lot of them had to do 
with Basque things, so that 
was an interesting way to 
get information about the 
program. 

Also, during my senior 
year in college I took an 
evening class from Jon 
Bilbao in Basque. We met 
once a week, and everyone else in class was of Basque descent, 
retired and from the community. I took the class because I loved 
learning foreign languages, but the rest of the students just 
wanted to talk about cultural things. So I would get really 
frustrated, because I just wanted to speak the language, damn 
it! But it was an interesting and very pleasant class. I learned a 
lot, but I didn't really come away speaking anything, because 
that wasn't what the class was designed for. 

I did a double major in Spanish and French and graduated in 
1971. I went away for a year and came back to do my master's 
degree in French in 1972. My French was much stronger than 
my Spanish, but I absolutely hated French literature. I couldn't 
force myself to read it. I could not bear it. So the summer after 
my first year of graduate school, I took a bus to Mexico and 
stayed for six weeks in Saltillo, where I studied nothing but 
Spanish. I bought Spanish-language comic books to study 
vocabulary from, and I had a tutor for two hours a day. My tutor— 
I'm sorry I don't remember her name—absolutely hated the 
United States, [laughter] 



Linda White, 2006 













LINDA WHITE 


223 


I was very insecure and afraid of everything at that time in 
my life, and I dreaded meeting with her, because she was so anti- 
American. It was torture, but I had to defend my country. So all 
I did was talk two hours a day trying to convince her that not all 
Americans were from Texas, [laughter] I don't know if I made 
any headway, because she was obviously doing it for the money 
that I paid her. I don't care about the political impact, because I 
came home fluent in Spanish. 

When I came back to Reno, I went to Dr. Placer's office, and 
I said, "I cannot stand to study French. I have to change my 
major for my master's to Spanish literature." He asked me why, 
and I said, “Porque me da placer. Porque me da placer. Because it 
gives me pleasure," which is his name translated into English. 
So, he got a kick out of that. 

Then I went to see Eugene Grotegut, the chair of the Foreign 
Languages and Literatures Department, who also taught German 
in those days. I told him that I was changing my major, and he 
said, "Well, Madame Fricke is going to be extremely upset with 
you." 

I said, "Yes, I assume she will be!" 

"Well, if there's any fallout, I'll do what I can to help you, 
but you have every right to study what you want to study." 

So I changed my major to Spanish literature in the middle 
of my master's degree, and the French department went ballistic, 
[laughter] Dr. Fricke—we called her "Madame Freak"—decided 
that if I was not going to study French, I should not have a TA 
(Teaching Assistant) position. She made so much noise about it 
that the department revoked my teaching assistantship. 
However, Dr. Grotegut was such a nice man that he said, "Don't 
worry. You have a job." So he gave me twenty hours a week— 
basically my assistantship—and had me work in the language 
laboratory for the first semester. The language laboratory, at that 
time, was housed in Frandsen Humanities, but it was part of the 
Foreign Languages Department. So you didn't come to the library 
and do it at the media center. 

By my second semester the department had another TA 
position for Spanish, and they gave it to me. I was very fortunate 
to have Dr. Grotegut, Dr. Placer, Dr. Nelson Rojas, and other 
people on my side. They were really great. I was so glad that I 
switched to Spanish literature. It was like coming home. 



224 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


From what I gathered, Dr. Placer was in prison during the 
Spanish Civil War, and one of his brothers was killed in the war. 
(I was a student, so it was not like we sat and talked about his life 
on a personal level.) After the war he came to the United States 
in exile. He actually taught at the University of Louisiana. His 
wife's name was Pilar, and I think they had three children, but 
I'm not sure, because his older children were already grown. Only 
one of his sons came to Reno with him and attended school. I 
didn't know the family really well. 

Dr. Placer would tell us stories about the war in our classes. 
He could tell which of us were improving in our Spanish and 
which ones weren't, because the ones who were improving 
understood his stories, and they would laugh about them. One 
day he said in class, "Did you know that I died during the Spanish 
Civil War?" 

We're all sitting there, and about four of us were going, 
“What? That's impossible!" 

He started laughing, and he said, "Yes." He received a letter 
saying that he had been killed in the Spanish Civil War, and the 
terrible part was that it was his brother who had been killed. So 
it was like his mother lost both her sons momentarily. It was 
very sad. He would also tell us old jokes, like came delata, which 
means "meat in a tin can." [laughter] Well, it doesn't make much 
sense in English. It's during the civil war, and two guys are 
talking, and one of them said, "What did you have for 
dinner?" 

The other one said, "I had carne de lata," and he was a Chinese 
fellow, see. 

And the first guy goes, "No. You couldn't have had carne de 
lata, because the food production has halted, and nobody has 
any carne de lata. Nobody has canned meat." 

The Chinese fellow said, "No, no. You don't understand. I 
had carne de rata, carne de rata, 'meat of the rat,' the rata that 
corre, corre, corre, corre through the calle. Yes, run, run, run 
through the street." I guess it would have been funnier if I told 
the joke in Spanish. 

What Dr. Placer told me one day really made an impression 
on me. At the time, foreign languages had a great big TA room. 
It was really an exciting place to be, but it was just loud and 
constant chatter. It was a madhouse in there. People were talking 



LINDA WHITE 


225 


all the time, and students were coming and going. All the TAs in 
Spanish and French—I don't think there were any German TAs— 
had a desk in this huge room. So Dr. Placer told me, "Our graduate 
Spanish students need to speak more Spanish, and you're the 
one to do it. I think you should start speaking Spanish in the 
graduate office all the time." 

"Me? Why me?" 

"Because you went to Mexico, you came back fluent, and 
you changed your major. Now, speak Spanish in the graduate 
room." And so I did. Pretty soon every time we walked in the 
door, we were either speaking Spanish or French. No English was 
allowed in the grad room. 

So I finished my master's studies very happily. The saddest 
thing was that Dr. Placer passed away three months before I did 
my orals, and that was horrible. That was the worst week of my 
life. Well, I've lost family members, but he was so important to 
me in my education, and he just meant a lot to me. So it was 
hard to lose him. Then Dr. Gerald Petersen took over and chaired 
my committee, and I finished up in March of 1975. I taught on 
an LOA (Letter of Appointment) for the department the 
following fall and also started working in Getchell Library in 
January of 1976. 

At the library I worked with Lou Amestoy in a department 
that no longer exists called Bib Search (Bibliographic Searching), 
and we were part of the book acquisition process. We double- 
checked to make sure that we didn't already have books that 
were being ordered and those kinds of things. It was a very mind- 
numbing, boring kind of work. But it was your big life lesson 
about jobs, you know? It's not the work; it's the people. So the 
people were nice and great, but the job was not. I kept saying to 
myself, "I did a master's degree, and now I am doing this?" Basque 
Studies was also in the library downstairs at that time. 

Then I decided to try writing nonfiction articles full-time, so 
in spring of 1979 I left the library. You're young, and you want 
to do these things, and you don't realize that it takes two or 
three years to establish yourself before people start buying your 
work. I finally realized that I wanted to write fiction. I did not 
want to write essays the rest of my life, but fiction was not a way 
to earn a living. So I was unemployed and ran out of money and 
ended up working someplace else for about a year. 



226 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



The Basque Studies Program's collection in the basement of Getchell 
Library, 1973. 


Learning Basque, the dictionary, and becoming faculty 

One day I got a call from Ruth Donovan, who at that time was 
the assistant director of the library under Harold Morehouse. She 
asked me if I would be interested in working in Basque Studies, 
which I thought was a wonderful thing for her to do. I felt like I 
led a charmed life at that moment, but I really needed a job. There 
was a position in Basque Studies, because Jill Berner had taken 
maternity leave and found out that she was having twins. So she 
had to take a year off, instead of three months, and they needed 
someone to fill in for her during that year. So I said yes. 

Back then, Darlene Ammons was the assistant coordinator 
of the Basque Studies Program, and she was the person who 
interviewed me and hired me in 1981. Then at the end of the 
year, when Jill came back, I was half expecting that my job would 
end. But Bill Douglass called me into his office and said, "Would 
you like to stay on?" 

I said, "Yes! If it's OK with Jill." 

He said, "I already asked her, and she said it's OK." [laughter] 
So that's how I wound up staying in Basque Studies. There's a lot 












LINDA WHITE 


227 


of stuff behind the scenes there, because you don't just hire 
somebody in the state system. You have to acquire a position. 
You have to fight for an extra position and be granted the right 
to hire somebody by the university, and that's what he had done. 

Jill and I were library assistants. We were at the library, but 
we were a totally separate entity, and people didn't have a clue 
about the Basque Studies Program. We just had rooms inside the 
building. We did all of the ordering of books and all the shipping 
to the building, but nobody downstairs opened the packages, 
because they didn't go through the acquisitions process yet. We 
would collect all the invoices, and then at one point the invoices 
were sent down to Acquisitions, so they could keep a record of 
what we had ordered and bought. We were our own little, bitty 
library, in and of ourselves. We, the program and the Basque 
collection, were all one entity. 

Jon Bilbao was the bibliographer, which meant that he 
decided where the books would go on the shelves and did a do- 
it-yourself cataloging. It wasn't cataloging, but he did access 
numbers for the books, and then he put cards in, so people could 
find the books. Jill and I helped him do that. He would give us 
books and say, "Well, you do these numbers, and then I'll tell 
you if they're right." Or, "You type up these cards for me." We 
did filing cards, and we checked out books, and we knew the 
collection backwards and forwards, because we were reshelving 
books all the time. 

Jon would leave the books on a table, and Gorka's great 
delight was to open those packages and see what the new books 
were. Jill and I would open packages, if Gorka hadn't already 
opened them all, because we were the ones who were putting 
the flags in the books, giving them numbers, and putting them 
on the shelves. 

Then Jon Bilbao retired, and Bill Douglass did some 
negotiating with the dean of libraries to use some monies to 
provide a librarian for Basque Studies. I don't know the details 
because I wasn't part of that. We hired a librarian in the late 
1980s. The librarian was a split position—half of that position 
belonged to the library, and half of it belonged to Basque Studies, 
which made it very difficult for the librarian. 

In my opinion that was the beginning of the split between 
the library and the program, because once you have a position 



228 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


split like that at a university, 
in order to be tenured, your 
alliance has to lie somewhere, 
and that position was going 
to be tenured through the 
library. 

Jill and I did a lot of 
correspondence and a tremen¬ 
dous amount of typing, and 
there were no computers 
when I started. My God, I feel 
so old now! There were no 
computers! We did everything 
on those old IBM Selectric 
typewriters. Bill Douglass was 
busy with his research, and he 
was writing books, and he 
didn't type. It was almost a 
cultural thing, when men did 
not type their own things. He 
was a faculty member, and he 
had secretaries to do the 
typing. 

Also, there was no e-mail, 
so all correspondence had to 
be typed up. The reason that 
you had to have two people to handle all of that was because 
you didn't have computer files. You couldn't correct things on 
screen, so if you made a mistake, you had to go back and retype 
the whole page, especially for manuscripts. For letters it wasn't 
too bad, because if it was only one or two mistakes, you could 
try to use white-out, and you could retype over the white-out. 
But if you had more than that, then you had to retype the whole 
thing, because otherwise it looked tacky. It looked like you weren't 
doing a good job, like you had sloppy people working for you. 

Then 1982 was the year that Osborne came out with the first 
portable computer, which had a little six-inch screen. I don't 
know how it came about, but Bill said Jan, his wife, bought the 
Osborne. Bill walked into the office with a box, and the box was 
bigger than the top of a desk. He said, "Jan and I are going on 
vacation. Here's your computer. Open it up and have it running 



"Jon Bilbao was the bibliographer, 
which meant that he decided where 
the books would go on the shelves and 
did a sort of do-it-yourself cataloging." 
Jon Bilbao surrounded by the Basque 
collection, late 1980s. 












LINDA WHITE 


229 


by the time I get back in a week." So Jill and I spent the whole 
next week setting up the computer and learning how to use it. 
That was the first computer in Basque Studies, and we were one 
of the first offices on campus to have a computer. 

I believe that Gorka Aulestia was also in the program at that 
time. He had come to Reno in 1980, six months or a year before 
me. He and his wife, Mertxe, were in Pullman, Idaho, in 1980 
when Mount St. Helens erupted. He was already working on the 
Basque-English, English-Basque dictionary. After my first three 
months working at Basque Studies I started private lessons in 
Basque with Gorka. 

Gorka had me come up to the office at 7:30 in the morning, 
and between 7:30 and 8:00 we would do a Basque lesson. Gorka 
was a traditional language teacher. Within language teaching 
there is a methodology called "traditional method," which is 
really difficult sometimes, because you have the book and the 
exercises, and you read a question, and then you try to answer 
the question, and so on. But his heart was in the right place, and 
he would talk to me in Basque. Well, at the beginning there was 
very little I could say. 

We structured our lessons around a very short story. Gorka 
found some books with very elementary Basque in them, and 
there would be one or two pages of Basque. My job was to read 
that little story and learn whatever I could about the grammar, 
and he would ask me questions about it. I would go home with 
the couple of pages in Basque, and I would spend four hours a 
night trying to figure out what all the words meant. 

Every weekend I would spend between ten and fifteen hours 
trying to learn a verb form or drill myself on something I'd found, 
like the present tense auxiliary verb forms, for example. I would 
write my own drills, my own questions for the story, and I would 
write out the answers, and then I would tape record the questions 
and the answers as best I could, using my Spanish pronunciation. 

For $81 I bought this little hand-held computer from TI, 
Texas Instruments, or something out of Popular Mechanics, to 
create a computer drill. You could hook it up to your television, 
and it had a little finger keyboard. You'd have to type everything 
in line by line, and then you couldn't save anything. So I'd type 
in the exercise, the drill; it would run on my screen, and then I'd 
lose it, and I'd have to start over again the next week. It was very 
labor intensive. I spent a tremendous amount of my spare time, 



230 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


between twenty and thirty hours a week, creating my own Basque 
lessons and then practicing them. 

Then for the two and a half hours a week that I was with 
Gorka, I would say, "Here's what I've done this week. Here are 
the exercises I've come up with, what I've been practicing, and 
my questions, and I'm prepared to answer." So he would ask me 
the questions that I had prepared for myself, and then he would 
ask me some other things based on what was in those questions. 
It was quite an ordeal, and yet, of course, I loved learning 
languages, so it was one of the happiest times I can remember, 
because all my spare time was consumed with learning a foreign 
language. Life doesn't get any better than that. So I had a really 
good time learning Basque. 

After a couple of years of learning, Gorka and I would speak 
Basque to each other all the time, even though I still wasn't very 
fluent. But we could communicate what we needed to 
communicate and do all of that in Basque. 

I stayed a library assistant until my Basque reached a certain 
level, which took nearly two years. Then, in 1983 I started working 
with Gorka on the dictionary, which was extremely intensive 
and very detail-oriented work. Gorka would work on his own, 
building a corpus for four hours a day, and then we would work 
together in the afternoons for three or four hours. We would 
have all our dictionaries spread out around us, and we would 
come up with the definitions for the words, and very often they 
were words in Basque that I did not yet know. So the first thing 
Gorka would do was tell me what the word meant. Well, often 
Gorka told me what he thought the word meant, and that wasn't 
always what the word meant! [laughter] 

Sometimes we would have to go into the Basque dictionary 
to find out what the word meant in Spanish, and then we would 
go to the Spanish dictionary, if I didn't recognize it there, and 
we would find out some synonyms for it in English. Then I would 
tell Gorka what each of the English synonyms for the Spanish 
word meant for the Basque word, so that he could say, "Yes, this 
one is appropriate. No, that one is not appropriate." 

It was an extremely complex and intense kind of mental 
game for us. We often had to investigate in the French 
dictionaries, as well. It depended on where we found the word, 
because maybe the word was from a French-Basque province, 



LINDA WHITE 


231 



"So the first thing Gorka would do was tell me what the word meant. 
Well, often Gorka told me what he thought the word meant, and that 
wasn't always what the word meant!" Linda White and Gorka Aulestia 
working on the Basque-English Dictionary, mid-1980s. 


and then obviously we aren't going to find that word in one of 
the dictionaries from the Spanish side. 

Gorka used these big, clumsy, art-gum erasers, which 
crumbled on the paper, because they were the only thing that 
really worked on the pencil. So when we finished for the day, he 
would shout, “Iepal” and bounce the art-gum eraser so hard 
against the table that it would flip up and hit the ceiling. That 
was how we ended our sessions every day. 

There were few Basque-English word lists in existence, prior 
to our dictionary. For example, Joe Eiguren, from Boise, had put 
a list of words together from Bizkaian Basque with some English 
equivalents. It was a noble effort, and we actually looked through 
it, and there were times when it was handy for us. There were 
also a couple of other word lists that some people included in 
the back of their books. But, for all intents and purposes, we 
were the first comprehensive Basque-English, English-Basque 










232 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


dictionary ever attempted, that actually addressed the problems 
that a dictionary should address, except for pronunciation in 
English. Gorka didn't think that was necessary. 

I think Gorka saw the audience for the dictionary as 
mainly American students trying to learn Basque. Gorka put 
some advice about pronunciation in the beginning of the 
dictionary, but his feeling was that if they can pronounce Spanish, 
they can pronounce Basque. In other words, the vowels are the 
same, and there are some differences in the consonants and so on, 
but he felt that addressing them in the preface was sufficient. Later 
on, what we discovered was that many more dictionaries sold 
in the Basque country than sold in the United States, so the 
main audience for a dictionary was school children in the 
Basque Country. 

They really would have benefited by having the English 
pronunciation guide, but it wasn't there. I tried to convince 
Gorka, but he got to make the decisions. I thought it would be 
worthwhile, but he felt we were in a race against Michael Morris's 
dictionary project. So he was very urgent about, “We have to 
finish, and that will slow us down." So we never did that. 

I'm really proud of the work we did on the dictionary. But if 
I could go back and change anything about our dictionary, I 
would include the English pronunciation guide so that non- 
English speakers would have a clue about how to pronounce the 
English words. But I don't see any opportunity to make an edited 
version or a new edition. Five or six years after we finished our 
dictionary, Michael Morris came out with his dictionary, so now 
there is an English-Basque dictionary with the appropriate 
pronunciation guides. 

After we worked on the dictionary for a while, Bill called me 
into his office and said, “We have to change your position," 
because the university had told him, “You have two people 
working on that project as equals. One of them is a professional, 
and one of them is a classified person." 

I don't know exactly how it happened, but he gave me the 
choice of either remaining a classified person or having my 
contract changed to professional. I did the professional route, 
and it did change my status. 

I went from library assistant to lexicographer, which was a 
faculty position. Can you believe they invented the title of 



LINDA WHITE 


233 


lexicographer for me? Gorka and I were the only lexicographers 
on campus. 

I did not have my own office at the time. I was up front with 
Jill, and we had our little Osborne computer and two desks. Bill 
said, "If you're now a professional, you cannot sit up front, 
because people will expect you to type, and you're a professional, 
and you cannot type other people's things." This was in the Stone 
Age, and things were different. 

I said, "That's fine." There was no office for me, so I wound 
up working for six months in a study carrel, [laughter] So, on 
the one hand, I was professional, and I wasn't expected to type 
other people's stuff, and I couldn't sit at the front desk; but on 
the other hand, I was demoted to a study carrel, because there 
wasn't anyplace to put me! Then, eventually, the office where 
Michelle Rachal is now became my office. [Rachal was the Basque 



"Can you believe they invented the title of lexicographer for me? Gorka 
and I were the only lexicographers on campus." Linda White holding a 
copy of the Basque-English Dictionary at the Basque Library, 1990. 






234 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Library assistant from 2004 to 2007 and was replaced by Shannon 
Sisco in June of 2007.] 

Once Gorka and I finished the dictionary, we had to change 
my title to assistant coordinator, and I became administrative 
faculty, which is not a tenure track position. I'm not comfortable 
talking about a lot of things that went on around that situation. 

Tenure in the United States is a very strange thing, and 
administrative faculty positions are hired year to year and are 
often weighed down with paperwork. They run offices and have 
to be in charge of a lot of people or a lot of money in order to 
get ahead as an administrative faculty person. And who did I 
have? We're so tiny. 

From 1989 to 1999 I was the assistant coordinator, so I started 
doing a lot of administrative support for Dr. Douglass. For 
example, I attended the College of Arts and Science department 
heads' meetings in his stead, while he was either out of town or 
doing other things. I did a lot of other administrative chores 
and paperwork. Dr. Douglass would pass on mail to me that 
needed answering, and then I would take care of some of that. I 
helped organize whatever conferences or functions we were 
doing. Especially during his last five years, I did more and more 
with regard to the administration of the program, because he 
was half-time and wanted to spend more time writing. 

When Dr. Douglass retired, and Dr. Zulaika became director, 
he made one of his priorities to go to the dean of Arts and Science 
and lobby very, very strongly and actively for changing my 
position to an academic faculty position, and that got done 
within about six weeks. And boom, my position was changed to 
academic faculty in 2000, but my tenure status did not. So I'm 
still on a yearly contract. It's been that way all my life. So there's 
no point. I've been here too many years to worry about it. I've 
been here thirty years, and I don't have tenure. 

Having my position changed to academic faculty was probably 
the biggest positive change in my career, because the rules 
governing administrative faculty and academic faculty are different. 
It was a big plus for me to become academic faculty. I felt finally 
that my education and my job title coincided, and I felt very much 
liberated to do the kinds of things that academic faculty positions 
do. It freed me psychologically to actually pursue my own research 
and to leave a great deal of that administrative work behind. 



LINDA WHITE 


235 


Of course, one of the things that really helped in that area 
was having Zulaika become the director of the center, because 
then almost all of my administrative work was his concern and 
not my concern. My position title no longer included assistant 
coordinator. There has not been an assistant coordinator since 
then, but Zulaika has support people, like Jill and Kate Camino. 
When I was assistant coordinator under Bill, Bill had me. I 
remember at one point Jill complained that she didn't have 
enough to do, and then I realized that I was taking on way too 
much. Now, Jill has all that on her shoulders, because Zulaika 
doesn't have an assistant coordinator. I'm just the graduate 
advisor for the PhD program. 

I began an intensive period of research and writing, and a lot 
of my publications came out in 2000. That was the year I won 
the Mousel-Feltner Award for Excellence in Research and/or 
Creative Activity. The dean, Bob Mead, actually called me on the 
phone and said, "Linda, I want you to go up for the Mousel- 
Feltner, and I want you to tell Zulaika about it, because he's brand- 
new as director, and I'm not sure he knows about it. I'm telling 
you this, because you've got all these publications this year, and 
that doesn't happen every year to anybody, and you have a chance 
for the Mousel-Feltner. I want you to do that." 

I said, "Wow! OK. Thanks!" 

So I went to Zulaika and said, "I think we should put me up 
for the Mousel-Feltner." 

Zulaika said, "OK." [laughter] And I got it, so I was very 
pleased. The award was a huge psychological boost for me, 
because I'd been just working with my head down for so many 
years, and people forgot to say, "Hey, you've done a good job!" 
Over the last years I've noticed that people get so busy at the 
center that they don't have a chance or the opportunity to say, 
"Wow, that was great!" So you just keep working and working 
and working with little or no reward, it feels like. You get your 
paycheck, but there's just not a lot of effort wasted on praise or 
those kinds of interpersonal rewards. 

It was wonderful to win the Mousel-Feltner. I felt that my 
college had really acknowledged the work I was doing, and I felt 
like I was truly a member of the faculty of a college. So when I 
did my acceptance speech for the Mousel-Feltner, I thanked 
Zulaika for helping me earn the Mousel-Feltner. He was surprised 



236 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



"The award was a huge psychological boost for me, because I'd been just 
working with my head down for so many years, and people forgot to say, 
'Hey, you've done a good job!'" Bob Mead and Linda White hold a 
certificate commemorating Linda's Mousel-Feltner Award, May 2001. 


that I thanked him, but if he had not become director, I would 
not have earned the Mousel-Feltner. 

The 1980s: USAC, visiting students, a minor, and a PhD 

The 1980s was a period of incredible growth. There was a lot 
of energy, but at the same time Basque Studies was very small. 
Then the energy was different. Now the energy seems to be 
outward. At the time there was a wonderful atmosphere of team 
experience. 

In 1982 Carmelo Urza came onboard as a faculty member 
and to run our summer abroad program. The original plan was 






LINDA WHITE 


237 


to do a summer program in Europe every three years, but it was 
a huge amount of work. 

Carmelo did his master's degree in Spanish with me at UNR, 
and we shared the same graduate office in Frandsen Humanities. 
Then he got married and went to do his PhD right away. After 
he finished his PhD, he got a teaching job in Virginia. When Jon 
Bilbao left, we had a faculty position open up, and Carmelo got 
the job. 

Carmelo grew that program so large that within a couple of 
years it became a year-round Basque Studies Program abroad, 
and he just kept growing it. That was phenomenal. Pretty soon 
he had to have his own office and spun off of the Basque Studies 
Program. Now, he's still tenured through our department and 
runs USAC as a separate entity administratively. 

Bill Douglass was writing books like crazy. He was still in the 
heart of his research, and so there was a lot of excitement there. 
It was really exciting for me, too, because I was learning Basque. 
When I got to a point where my Basque became proficient, I 
also started teaching the Basque class that Gorka used to teach 
before he went back to the Basque Country. 

At the time we had a convenio [an agreement] with the 
Basque government to send young Basque scholars to Reno for 
a year. When the agreement was signed there were five people 
with cameras, clicking away! It seems really small in retrospect, 
but back then it seemed like a big deal to us. It was a lot of 
fanfare. For many years we had a wall hanging of the convenio 
we signed in the reading room. 

We thought they would send young people who were still 
working on their degree, but they sent people who already had 
their licenciatura [bachelor's degree], and the Basque government 
told them they were going to be teaching Basque. Well, I was 
teaching Basque, so we had some conflict of interest and some 
misunderstandings, but we turned them into a team. I ended up 
training them how to teach within the American system. It was 
a fun, exciting time, because we would have three or four young 
people from the Basque Country around at any given time. We 
also had other people who would come, like on USAC 
scholarships, and a lot of them were young. 

We had an atmosphere during that time where everybody 
spoke Basque in the program. It was just very energizing, exciting, 
and upbeat, and it was a really wonderful time. I really enjoyed 



238 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


that. For instance, Javi Cilleros came as one of the students 
sponsored by the Basque government, and he wound up staying 
ten years. So things like that were happening then. We were 
attracting people, and they would come for a year, and then 
they would find a way to stay. So we ended up with this growing 
body of young Basque people who came to do one thing or 
another. And then the next year more people would come on 
the Basque government's convenio, to teach or help with the 
Basque classes. 

Basque Studies was very much a small research program with 
a library collection. We were not an academic department. 
However, during that time the minor in Basque studies was 
established, because we had enough professors to occasionally 
offer classes for a minor. Since then, probably ten or twelve 
students have graduated with a minor in Basque, because there 
might be one every year or two. Almost every single student has 
been Basque American, but it's not like people flock to us and 



"We were attracting people, and they would come for a year, and then 
they would find a way to stay. So we ended up with this growing body of 
young people." Visiting students, scholars, and Basque Studies faculty, 
Basque Studies Library, c. 1990. Front row, left to right: Nere Lete and 
Linda White. Second row: Angel Ansa, Lisa Corcostegui, Itxaso Sanchez, 
Mila Alvarez, Josu Rekalde, and Eneida Andueza. Back row: Bill Douglass. 





LINDA WHITE 


239 


say, "I want to do a Basque minor!" They wanted to study Basque 
because their family was Basque. 

When the minor began, it was two years of Basque 
language, plus three additional classes. Around 2004, we 
changed it so that it was the first year of Basque language, and 
then you could use the second year as one of your additional 
classes, but it didn't have to be a language class, and it is up to 
twenty-one credits. So there's more flexibility for people now to 
do the minor. The minor made good sense for us, because if 
people were taking our language class, that was a big chunk of 
the minor, and all they had to do was take a couple other Basque- 
related courses. So, we didn't have to offer a whole lot of classes. 
The minor was a way to reward those people who were interested 
in our classes. 

Within the university, if you're going to be a teaching 
department, and if you're going to offer a major, you have to be 
an academic department. You have to have enough faculty 
members to provide enough classes on a consistent basis to allow 
students to take those classes and finish their major. We never 
had that kind of critical mass. We're still not big enough to do 
that. The Women's Studies Program teaches, but they don't do 
any of the other stuff we do, either, and they constantly have to 
hire people part-time to help with those classes. 

There was no PhD available in Basque studies at the time, 
even in the Basque Country, so there really was a need for it. It 
just seemed like the next natural step. I was an underling at the 
time, so I was not in on how the PhD program was established. 
I kind of viewed that from afar, and I wasn't privy to the 
conversations or anything. I just remember that Bill came in 
one day and said, "OK. It's a done deal. We're going to do a 
tutorial PhD in Basque studies—a very special kind of PhD." 

Bill came up with the idea of five participating outside 
departments, which would have, to a certain extent, a lot of say 
in what the student has to do. However, we try to keep most of 
that control. For example, the Anthropology Department has 
the student do a degree in anthropology, so they might as well 
be getting their PhD in anthropology, you know. Anthropology 
is very active in what they want students to do, and they get a 
lot of input on required classes. 

Students who want to do a PhD in history also get input 
from History, because the History Department has a PhD program, 



240 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


and they have their own ideas about what a student should do if 
they're affiliated with them. Joxe Mallea was an early student in 
that program. Political Science is also a participating department, 
and so is Geography. Geography came in when Pauliina Raento 
wanted to do her degree in that field. So each one of those PhD's 
is different. 

When I had a student who was interested in Basque, it was 
easy for me, because the Department of Foreign Languages has 
no PhD. So even though the department is involved with students 
doing a PhD in Basque literature, they have been much more 
laid back about letting me and the student construct a program. 
We've had a lot of freedom in designing the program. That's a 
blessing. 

So I can sit down with a PhD student in literature, and I can 
say, "This is what you want to do for your dissertation. You're 
going to cover certain things. You need to have some kind of 
background in Basque lit. If you only speak Spanish, then you're 
going to read historiographies and translations, but you need to 
know something about Basque culture to be able to tie that in." 
So students who do a PhD in Basque literature get to plunge in 
right away and concentrate on Basque literature, culture, and 
language. 

We have offered enough courses in culture and history to 
give people a nice foundation in Basque culture. We also have 
the requirement that before you get your PhD, you have to show 
some kind of proficiency in the Basque language. For most people 
it's taking two years of Basque language and then passing a 
proficiency exam, which consists of reading simple newspaper 
articles and translating them. So you show that you can use a 
dictionary and you can find out something in the Basque 
language for your research. 

We had a couple of people who signed up for the Basque 
Studies PhD program who didn't get very far. We had someone 
who wanted to do linguistics but had a decided problem with 
gambling. He didn't know he did, I'm sure, until he came to 
Reno. But you can't come to Reno and make that discovery and 
then have any hope of success. One unfortunate fellow died in a 
hit-and-run accident. The first PhD students to graduate from 
that program were Gorka, Joxe, and I. 



LINDA WHITE 


241 


Basque Studies organizations 

The Anglo-American Basque Studies Society only lasted about 
three years, and it was an in-house effort by Darlene Ammons to 
organize a scholarly discussion group. She took possible members 
from the mailing list for our newsletter. She knew some of the 
people who were scholars and so on, and she thought it would 
be a great idea to have this organization that could have a 
discussion group about Basque culture. 1 

She did this a little ahead of her time. This was before the 
Internet. Now, we do this on the Internet without thinking. This 
is what Yahoo! Groups was like before the Internet. If we were 
doing this today, we would set up a group on Yahoo! Groups, 
like we did for Ikasi 2005, and the next thing you know, we 
would have a discussion group. Well, we didn't have the Internet 
back then. 

However, the association didn't work well because you had 
to print a newsletter and solicit membership to pay for the 
mailings and all of that. If you can go to Yahoo! Groups, and 
everybody gets in for free, it's no big deal. But it faltered quite 
early on, actually, because some people did subscribe, but then 
for the monies you got, it barely covered the postage and the 
printing of the newsletter, and then you had to create a 
newsletter. So that's not a discussion group. That's one person 
or some people in our office doing a tremendous amount of 
work, trying to get a second newsletter done on a more than 
annual basis. It just became a huge headache for Darlene. I may 
be speaking out of turn—maybe she loved it. She's gone, God 
rest her soul. But just in my observation, it seemed like a huge 
struggle to get something going, and it eventually petered out. 
People stopped subscribing, and we quit publishing. 

But not all Yahoo! Groups discussion lists are successful, 
either. I started an online discussion mailing list for the 
Consortium for the Study of Basque Women, and it was dead. It 
just sat there. About once every six months some brand-new 
member would find us and think we were going to answer all 
their research questions. Maybe somebody would answer 
them, but likely as not, no one did. That was the early days for 
those things as well, and it was not on Yahoo! Groups. So, 



242 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


obviously, there's a need for Yahoo! Groups, so hooray for them, 
[laughter] 

At one point, I decided to translate a novel by a Basque 
woman, which turned to be Nerea eta Biok by Laura Mintegi. 
Basque men are the first ones people think about translating, 
and unless you make an effort, you're not going to get the work 
of women into English. I thought it was worth being read in 
English. So Laura gave me permission to translate her novel, and 
then the poor thing had to wait six years to see it published. [It 
was finally published in 2005 under the title of Nerea and /.] 

So the consortium started off that way. Dr. Jeronima "Jeri" 
Echeverria—now the Provost at California State University, 
Fresno—came to town, and we went for coffee, and I told her 
that I wanted to publish Laura's book, and she said, "Maybe what 
we need is a group, so like people can talk to each other and all 
that." It sounded like another Anglo-American Basque Studies 
Society. So anyway, she wanted to do a group. Then Dr. Teresa 
del Valle from the University of the Basque Country decided 
that she also wanted to be a part of that. I'm not a big group 
person, and I don't want to start societies. I don't want to conquer 
the world, so I was not interested in organizing group activities. 
The Ikasi program is the closest I get. 

Dr. Echeverria and Dr. del Valle felt that the optimum place 
for the group to happen would be the Basque Studies Program, 
because it made the most sense to have it centered here. [The 
consortium was established in February of 1997, and it was 
terminated in 2003.] So the three of us were supposed to organize 
and run this group, and each of us with our own agenda. There 
was an intention of doing some kind of gender studies, but I was 
the one doing it. Other people weren't coming here to do their 
gender studies. My agenda was to publish Laura Mintegi's novel. 
I thought, "Well, OK. This can be our publishing agenda, getting 
this book done." 

Then they thought, "It'd also be really a great idea if we could 
set up a list server, so people could talk to each other." Well, it 
was the early days for list servers, and it never worked right. Then 
we revamped the Basque Studies Web site, and they wanted 
information about the Consortium for the Study of Basque 
Women on it. So we created some information for the Web site. 
And frankly, I'm kind of complaining here, but there was a lot of 
pressure on me to organize some event or do something with a 



LINDA WHITE 


243 


group that was not my idea in the first place. "Do that! Do that! 
Do that!" But nobody said, "And let me help you." [laughter] I 
just wanted to get the book done. 

I love working with Jeri Echeverria and with Teresa del Valle, 
but things happened in their lives that kept them away from the 
consortium. Neither of them had the time to be involved. Dr. 
Echeverria was promoted into administration at her university, 
and Dr. del Valle was in Europe doing what she had to do over 
there. 

So finally I decided that I couldn't do this by myself, because 
that's not what I'm comfortable doing. It was one too many 
things to have piled on top of an already very busy schedule. I 
had my whole publishing agenda; I had to teach, and on top of 
that I was supposed to run the consortium. So I was involved in 
doing a lot of things, and that was the last one that got attention, 
because it was not high on my priority list, and there wasn't a 
lot of activity for it. I didn't even know what I was doing with 
this organization. I didn't really have a feel for what the purpose 
of the organization was, aside from a chat group. That part of 
the consortium was someone else's spark. 

Then Carmelo mentioned to me that maybe it shouldn't be 
called a consortium, because that implied that there were a lot 
of universities involved, and because his USAC was also called a 
consortium. So I said, "Well, that's fine. Then let's just take it off 
the Web site and call it defunct and shut down the list," and 
that's what we did. Because what was I supposed to do? Change 
the name on something that was not going anywhere and that 
I really was not inspired to do anything with alone? 

We also decided to terminate the consortium, because we 
wanted to take our gender issues in a different direction. We like 
to pretend that we've pretty much fought that battle. Well, we 
all know that battle hasn't been won, but we wanted to turn our 
energies in a different direction. 

A literary fieldwork dissertation and women in translation 

In 1993, Bill and I had a conversation about my future, and 
he said, "You're doing all the work as if you had a PhD, so why 
don't you get one?" So I agreed to do a PhD. We had to ask 
special permission from the president of the university, who at 
that time was Joe Crowley, and then we had to go through proper 



244 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


channels so that we could get that special permission to work 
half-time while I did my PhD on campus. We were granted those 
permissions because the Basque studies PhD was not available 
anywhere else as late as 1993, and so in order to do my degree in 
that field, I had to do it here. 

I was allowed to work half-time from 1993 to 1995, and I 
defended my dissertation in April of 1996. By then I started to 
work full-time. It was really hard, because I worked more than 
half-time while I was doing the PhD, but it was impossible not 
to, because it all blended together. 

I'm really glad I did the PhD, because the personal fulfillment 
was wonderful, but also, in subtle ways it changed other people's 
perspective on me. After finishing my degree I felt a difference, 
very much so. I was treated differently, more like faculty and less 
like administrative support. But I don't think anybody purposely 
meant to treat me less like faculty before. 

My PhD was in Basque literature. Actually, it's interesting, 
because I have always considered myself, and still consider myself, 
a teacher of foreign languages, first and foremost, but we didn't 
offer a PhD in language teaching or in linguistics, because the 
university didn't have a linguistics department. The English 
Department is now beginning to add more linguistics classes 
and that sort of thing. At the time, it also made more sense to do 
Basque literature, because my undergraduate and my master's 
degrees were all in literature, not in linguistics, and also because, 
academically, that covered more area for us at the program. 

It took me twelve years to learn to read Basque, so I couldn't 
have done my degree sooner, but I had to acquire enough 
language skill to actually read the language. Usually, you can 
read a language within a year with a dictionary, but Basque is 
completely opposite. You can start speaking Basque within a year, 
but it takes forever to learn to read. 

When you do a PhD in literature, you assume that you're 
going to do a library PhD, where you pick a work, and you read 
it, and you read all the criticism, and then you contribute to the 
body of criticism. I was a PhD student at the Basque Studies 
Program, and nobody did that here. I may have done one of the 
few fieldwork literary dissertations in the history of the country. 
Basque Studies has always been very much anthropology 
oriented. Also, the chairman of my committee was Bill Douglass, 



LINDA WHITE 


245 


and that's why I did fieldwork. I don't regret that, but it was just 
a very unusual way to do a literature dissertation. 

I did my PhD on Basque women writers. So I wound up going 
to the Basque Country and living in San Sebastian for four and a 
half months and doing fieldwork interviews with Basque female 
writers and meeting a couple of critics and that sort of thing. I 
recorded those interviews in Basque in preparation for writing 
my dissertation, and it was wonderful also for my language level. 
It really came together for me when I was in the Basque Country. 
That was an excellent experience, but it was like being in limbo 
for four and a half months. 

(I had Cameron Watson, a graduate student from the 
program, living in my house while I was gone, and that worked 
out really well for me. I didn't have to worry about my house or 
my pets. I hope it worked out well for him.) 

In San Sebastian I lived with a woman, who was a widow, 
near the university, but she was never home. So it was as if I had 
this tiny, little apartment to myself. I wanted to write while I 
was there, but I could not write, and I could not force myself to 
do any kind of brainwork in that little, tiny apartment. I had to 
go to the university library and do all my reading and writing 
there. So I spent all my time outdoors. It's like everything was 
happening on La Concha, on that beautiful beach in San 
Sebastian. I did a lot of talking to people and that kind of cultural 
assimilation by being outdoors. 

I remember one week I tried to set up appointments with 
people, and it was such a nightmare for me, because nobody on 
the Spanish side of the Basque Country talked on the phone. I 
was able to talk to Basque author Itxaso Borda two or three times 
on the telephone because she was in France. I would start calling 
people, in San Sebastian even, about five or six in the afternoon 
until ten or eleven o'clock at night, and nobody answered the 
phone—nobody, [laughter] I couldn't use the phone in the 
apartment, so I had to go out and use a pay phone. I used up my 
phone card with no answers. It just rang and rang and rang. 

Finally, after a whole week of this I began to feel desperate, 
because I needed to set up these appointments for my work, and 
I could not reach people. I was in total frustration. I just threw 
everything down. I finally gave up, and I said, "That's it! I'm not 
touching the damn phone again. I am taking the weekend off." 



246 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I put on my walking shoes, and I just strolled along La 
Concha, along the promenade, and I got halfway around, and I 
ran into one of the people that I had been trying to call. They 
were out walking next to the beach. So I set up my appointment. 
Then I kept walking, and I ran into a second person I had been 
trying to call, [laughter] So I set up that appointment. I kept 
walking, and by the time I got to the old part of the city, I had 
run into three people that I had been trying to call, and I said, 
“Well, that's it. I'm never making another phone call in the 
Basque Country again. It is not worth the effort. I'm just going 
to go out and walk around." 

It was so amazing. That was a huge cultural difference for 
me, because everything in the States is done and arranged on 
the phone. But once I started walking around town, it worked 
out OK. If you go out walking in the evening, you're going to 
meet everybody you need to meet. They're all out there doing 
the same thing. It eliminated a huge burden of guilt for me, 
because I was feeling so guilty that I was not sitting in that little 
apartment trying to write. 

When the lady came home from her job—about ten o'clock 
at night—she would turn the TV up really loud, and it was a 
little, tiny apartment. I would be in my room, and I could hear 
this television blaring in the other room, and I couldn't 
concentrate, so I couldn't do any work at night. Plus, she wanted 
me to join her and watch TV. She understood Basque, but she 
wouldn't speak it. So the only person that I lived with did not 
want to speak Basque. I had to do all of my practicing with Basque 
outside. 

If I were to go back and do it again, I would sign up for 
Basque classes. But it was very difficult to try and do that while 
trying to do interviews with people, because you had to be ready 
to go when they needed you, and it took a tremendous amount 
of time to get them to trust you enough to actually set up an 
interview and talk to you. So it wasn't a matter of just saying, 
"Can I talk to you on such-and-such a date?" You had to meet 
the person, and then you had to socialize with the person, and 
then you had to socialize more. Then you had to hopefully 
establish a rapport, because you only got interviews from the 
people who felt they had a rapport. Then after two or three 
months, you finally got the interview. 



LINDA WHITE 


247 


So all of the interviews actually took place during the last 
month of my trip, because I had to do all of this personal 
interaction buildup ahead of time, which I didn't regret and I 
didn't mind doing. And it was very different from that American 
feeling of, "Go, have your agenda, make your appointments, ask 
your questions, and get out." There was none of that. So it was a 
total cultural immersion and cultural experience. 

When I came back to Reno, I tried to work all this fieldwork 
into my dissertation, and my dissertation really became a 
historiography. The more women I talked to, the more I realized 
that a lot of women were writing, but none of the literary critics 
talked about them. For instance, Basque critic Jon Kortazar 
mentioned the name of one female in one of his books, which 
was published in 1980. As I read through these histories of Basque 
literature, it seemed to me that there were no women. I thought, 
"Where are the women?" I know they're writing, because I'm a 
woman, and I write, and women like to write. As reported in 
newspapers of the past I knew that women were winners of 
writing contests, but once they reached a certain level, it seemed 
that they stopped writing. I said, "Well, that doesn't make sense." 

What was actually happening was that they continued to 
write, but they were ignored by the publishing industry and by 
the critics in the Basque Country. The number of women who 
didn't get published was probably astronomical. So a lot of what 
they did was lost, because nobody seemed to read it, and nobody 
talked about it. Once I realized what was going on, then it became 
a detective story, and I did a lot investigative research to locate 
women's names. 

I would find four mentions of women in a book, and then I 
would start looking them up and reading about them. Then I 
would find that they had friends and that they worked with 
somebody, and then I would look those people up. If you went 
to a bookstore like Bilintx, since there were no female names on 
the backs of the books, you had to actually open the book and 
hope you got a clue. So I spent a lot of time in bookstores, pulling 
books off a shelf and trying to find out who that author was. 
Little by little I started building this body of writers who happened 
to be female. 

In the Basque and Spanish societies, there was a convention 
about not using the first names of the authors. This was also 



248 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


another cultural block to discovering who these women were. 
So you would read an article about five or six or ten different 
authors, and they would not give first names. They would use 
the last names, and then if they gave you anything, they would 
give you the first initials, so you had no idea if they were male or 
female. And if you think about it, when a field is dominated by 
one gender, you automatically assume all the references you find 
belong to that gender. So you might have an article that talked 
about ten male writers and two female writers, but they were all 
treated with the initials, and everyone, including myself, assumed 
they were all men. So they would just block out the possibility 
that any of them could be women. 

We do this in American culture, also, with doctors and nurses. 
People automatically ask, "Who was your doctor, and what did 
he say? Who was your nurse? Was she nice to you?" But we're 
learning how to change that, because there's a big crossover 
now—a lot of women becoming doctors, a lot of men become 
nurses—so we have to be aware of that in American society. 

I discovered that as of 1996, 18 percent of published 
Basque authors were female. Almost a fifth of all Basque 
writers from 1545 to the present were female. I'm sure that 
the number is greater now, but I don't have statistics to back 
up my feeling. I believe that more and more women are 
writing, and whether or not they are being talked about in 
the Basque Country, it's happening more often. Because now 
there are some critics like Mari Jose "Marijo" Olaziregi, who 
happens to be a literary critic among other things, and she 
talks about the women more often. [Since June 2007, Olaziregi 
has been an assistant professor at the Center for Basque 
Studies, filling Linda's position after she retired.] Although 
Marijo did her dissertation on Bernardo Atxaga's readers and 
readership, she also turns her attention to women writers. 
And because she's highly respected in the Basque Country, 
the male critics are more likely to also address those issues. 
So that's been a really positive change. 

I've been doing quite a bit of research since my dissertation. 
I'm really proud of the translations that I've done. Actually, I 
started doing translations in the early 1990s. A View from the 
Witch's Cave by Jose Miguel de Barandiaran, Teresa del Valle's 
Korrika: Basque Ritual for Ethnic Identity, and Gorka Aulestia's 



LINDA WHITE 


249 


Improvisational Poetry from the Basque Country were some of 
my early translations. 

I also translated Mariasun Landa's children's books, Txan 
Fantasma and Errusika, but they didn't turn into the big sellers 
we were hoping they would be. There were things that had 
nothing to do with the translation or the quality of the books 
and had everything to do with stuff happening inside Nevada 
Press. I'm not qualified to talk about that, because I don't really 
know what was going on, but there seemed to be a distribution 
problem. 

I'm proud of those associations with the Basque writers that 
I've forged over the years. Unfortunately, when you work at a 
university, you wind up doing so many things as part of your 
job that the things you're most proud of are sometimes the things 
that you get to spend the least time on. At least, it feels that way. 

I really enjoy translation more than I enjoy supervising 
translators, let me put it that way. [laughter] So I'd rather do the 
work hands-on than be the director of the Basque Studies 
Literature and Translation Series, as it were. I'd rather get in the 
trenches and actually do the translations. I thought about our 
Literature and Translation Series in American terms, where you're 
lucky if you can publish one book a year. Marijo Olaziregi, coeditor 
of the series, thought about it in Basque terms, which is, "Quick! 
Let's work as fast as we can and get as many of these published as 
possible within the timeframe, before the money runs out." So 
between her mind train and my mind train, we're kind of striking 
a balance. So far we have published An Anthology of Basque 
Short Stories, And the Serpent Said to the Woman, and Rosetti's 
Obsession, and we've got the fourth, fifth, and sixth ones lined 
up. 

Every project that I wanted to get done, I've managed to do 
it, including the translation of Laura Mintegi's novel, Nerea eta 
Biok, and the introduction. The translation of the Fueros that I 
spent many years doing was also published in 2005 as The Old 
Law of Bizkaia. Bill Douglass did the translation of Gregorio 
"Goio" Monreal's introduction to that book. 

Goio wanted to do a book about the old law of Bizkaia, and 
he talked to Bill, who was head of the Basque Book Series at the 
time, and they talked to Nevada Press, and they thought it would 
be a good book. But they needed the Fueros translated into 



250 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


English so that when Goio's part of the book was ready, the Fueros 
would also be available in English. When that project started in 
the early 1980s, they came to me and said, “Would you be 
interested in translating the Fueros from Old Spanish?" 

And I said, "Wow! It's a legal document and in fifteenth- 
century Old Spanish. Sure. I'll give it a try." I really enjoy 
translations, and it was a way for me to do something creative 
on my job. At the time, I was still doing a lot of library assistant 
work. 

The manuscript is the first written collection of the old laws 
of Bizkaia. Prior to the moment in time when scribes attended 
the meeting under the tree of Gernika 2 and wrote down what 
was being said, all of those meetings were done orally, and there 
was no written record of those old laws. So it was meaningful, 
because it was the first time anyone had written those laws down. 
It was also entertaining, because the very first paragraphs of that 
set of old laws included the names of all the representatives from 
the Basque Country who were present at the meeting. So you 
have this long list of Basque names being represented in Old 
Spanish by various spellings and all kinds of fun stuff. You felt 
like you were a part of history. You're standing there basically 
eavesdropping on this meeting. 

It was also difficult, because in situations of that sort the 
people who attended the meetings knew what was going on, 
and they used shorthand. They talked about things that they 
didn't have to stop and explain, because everybody there 
understood what they were talking about, except the translator 
who had no clue what they were talking about, [laughter] 

At the beginning, I couldn't coherently read the entire 
original manuscript for pleasure. So it became intensive research 
from the very first paragraph, because there were forms of Old 
Spanish that I was not familiar with. I had to look up old verb 
forms, like tuviese, which were never spelled the same way twice, 
and convoluted syntax. 

I just plunged in and started translating. I didn't know that 
much about the laws of fifteenth-century Europe and much less 
about Spain, so there were times when I could not translate 
certain terms and the names of certain positions, like correguidor. 
How do you say that in English? There's no modern English word 
that means correguidor, because correguidor itself is a definition 
of a job that no longer exists. So I actually left some of those 



LINDA WHITE 


251 


words in Spanish, and they were explained in footnotes. I was 
halfway through the project before I realized that, “Oh, this word 
that they keep using over and over, what they really mean is 
this," and things just kind of coalesced for me. 

I worked and worked and worked for a couple years on the 
book, because people kept saying, "Keep working, because Goio 
is writing the introduction. So you want the translation ready 
by the time Goio's introduction is ready." 

By the time I got through it and went back and started reading 
my own translation next to the original, I was going, “Oh, that's 
hysterical! Look what I did here. OK, let's change that." After I 
finished the whole project, I could understand the real meaning 
of different words. Things started to make sense, because I knew 
where I was going. There were some words in the beginning 
that may not have made sense to me, and then by the time I 
finished reading the book, the book itself had explained what 
those words meant. 

So finally I finished the translation, and I said, “Wow! I did 
it." It was a real challenge, and I'm actually very proud of that 
effort. I really enjoyed the mental aspect of translating it. I think 
my English translation might be the only one. I could be wrong, 
but I looked for them at the time. I wanted to know how other 
people dealt with certain words, and I did not have any luck. I 
found some modern English translations of Old English 
collections of laws, but that didn't help me, because England 
and Spain had two different legal systems. 

The things, I think, that we can learn the most about are 
probably embedded deeply in the Fueros. You need to read it 
carefully, because a lot of the old laws had to do with property 
and possessions and that sort of thing and about how to deal 
with a certain situation if something happens, so that the local 
authorities could make decisions based on the evidence brought 
before them. You also have to really look for the parts that dealt 
with the Basque Country as a whole, such as military service and 
divorce laws or the lack thereof. There didn't seem to be any 
rhyme or reason to the order of the laws. Whatever came up 
became the next article in the Fueros. 

Of course, the laws covered a wide variety of topics, and they 
were really interesting and fun to read and gave you a real view 
of society at the time. There are laws on how to handle situations 
where your neighbor accidentally cuts down a tree on your 



252 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


property or apples fall from your tree onto your neighbor's 
property. Whose apples are they? There are also laws about 
women and who can marry and who can't. If a woman is a widow 
and she has three children, and if she wants to remarry, do those 
children remain her husband's children, or do they become the 
new husband's? Or if a woman brings property to a marriage, 
does it belong to the husband or to the children? 

The people at Nevada Press called me one day and said, "Hi. 
We hear that Monreal's book is almost ready to go." 

I said, "I guess you could say that, although Monreal has not 
written his part of the book yet. However, Linda White's 
translation is ready to go." [laughter] You grow up as a woman 
on this planet, and you just get used to these kinds of things. 
But in all the years that I've worked on the project, it has always 
been Goio Monreal's book, although he didn't write his part of 
the book until 2005, and I did the translation ten years before. 
Well, I think that he'd been working on it in between doing 
other things. It just takes time. So it's a little sexist frustration 
there. 

Then Bill asked me if they could publish my translation as 
part of the Center for Basque Studies Classic Series, not as part of 
the Basque Book Series. I said, "Sure, I'd love to have you publish 
it, because I did that translation ten, twelve, or fifteen years ago." 
But I explained to him that I was involved in so many other 
things and trying to publish another book, that I couldn't re¬ 
involve myself in the translation. I was more than willing to 
give it to them, but someone who was knowledgeable about the 
legal system of medieval Spain would have to look at that 
manuscript. I said, "I can't reeducate myself and take a degree in 
medieval law, so I can review my own translation." Bill took the 
translation, and it was published. 

There's only one of my pet projects that I've always wanted 
to do that I have not completed in my career yet, and I may run 
out of time. It is a verb dictionary, a list of conjugated auxiliary 
verbs in Basque with possible translations into English, so that 
people could read Basque text sooner. But that's the project I 
have not had time to work on. 

The thing that slows you down when you're learning to read 
Basque is all of the verb tenses that you have not had time to 
learn in a classroom setting. There are over 3,000 auxiliary verbs. 
If you're lucky, you have time in a couple of years to learn only 



LINDA WHITE 


253 


the present and past-tense verb forms. You might get an inkling 
that there are conditionals and subjunctives and all those, but 
you never really get a chance to learn them. 

In spoken Basque you can practically get by completely with 
just present and past-tense auxiliary verbs. You almost don't need 
anything else to be understood in your daily interactions. But as 
soon as you open a book or a newspaper, suddenly everybody is 
writing with these esoteric verb forms that you never hear spoken, 
and it really slows you down. You don't know where to find 
those verb forms; you don't know who the subject is. It's just 
very frustrating. 

In my list you could look up any of the auxiliary verbs, so 
you would know what the subject of the sentence was and what 
tense you were reading. Then you wouldn't have to learn all 
those verbs before you could actually read a text in Basque, and 
I thought that it would be very useful. 

I was lucky enough to be awarded a sabbatical leave in 2004, 
which allowed me to put all of my teaching materials together 
from the last twenty-five years of teaching and create a Basque 
language textbook for English speakers. Teaching Basque has been 
really pleasant, and I have loved teaching it. I tentatively entitled 
the manuscript Aurrera, and it will be published by Nevada Press 
in February 2008. 

Basque Studies nowadays: a supernova 

The program has developed in many different ways over the 
years, and it's been quite remarkable. We've added two new 
faculty positions, and that has been a tremendous help in the 
growth of the center, because as a research center, our productivity 
relies mainly on the research and the publications we produce. 
So we were very fortunate when the Nevada State Legislature 
allotted us those two new positions after the death of Pete 
Echeverria. It was not literally done in his memory, but you 
couldn't help but feel that it was an important way to pay homage 
to his memory. 

We felt very privileged and grateful that they saw fit to expand 
the center by providing us with two additional research positions. 
That grew us to five faculty members, which is amazing when 
you think about it. Actually, that grew us to six, because Carmelo 
Urza is tenured through our center. So we're really five faculty 



254 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


physically at the center, and Carmelo is at USAC, but he is a part 
of us. 

Then, Dr. Zulaika has done amazing things when it comes 
to fundraising and was highly instrumental in helping to create 
the center's advisory board, which is heavily involved in 
fundraising for us. It's just outstanding the kind of progress we've 
made in that area. 

The individual faculty members and their various productions 
and publications have gone a long way to changing the focus of 
the center and to really increasing the amount of work that the 
center can produce. The outreach factor has also changed, because 
everybody has their own special areas, and they contribute in 
their own way. As a literature person, I probably work closer to 
the vest. In other words, I do my own work, and I don't have 
other people involved in it per se. 

Other faculty members have brought their own strengths to 
it. Dr. Totoricagiiena knows people all over the world, throughout 
the diaspora, whereas Bill Douglass's field was immigration. It's 
as if Dr. Totoricagiiena fills the slot that was empty after Dr. 
Douglass retired. So that connection to all the Basques outside 



Center for Basque Studies and USAC faculty and staff pose with Linda 
White, April 2006. Left to right: Carmelo Urza, Sandra Ott, Kate Camino, 
Linda White, Jill Berner, Gloria Totoricagiiena, and Bill Douglass. 









LINDA WHITE 


255 


the Basque Country has not been lost, because now we have 
Gloria, who works in that area. 

We used to have this little, comfortable sun that rolled along, 
shining where it could. In the past we shined because we did a 
newsletter, and that was our outreach to the Basque-American 
community. Or we shined because we started a book series with 
the University of Nevada Press, and it has gone really well. 

Then we reached this critical mass after the addition of our 
new faculty, and all of a sudden we became this supernova, this 
active, exploding, stellar mass that's shooting off in all directions 
at once. And it can sometimes be uncomfortable, because there's 
so much going on and there are many demands. It seems like 
those pictures of a supernova exploding. So we're not the central 
little sun anymore that just shines here and there. 

We did a conference or two in the past, but now there's this 
push to try and do one every year or every other year. That's a lot 
of work for the whole center, but it may not specifically impact 
every faculty member. Even though everybody has their own 
interests when the conference arrives, everybody is expected to 
be there. So whenever there is something like that going on, 
everyone is drawn in by the sheer gravitational force of this event. 
This happens quite often and much more often than it ever used 
to. 

Then we don't always communicate as well as we could as a 
group, because there's so much activity. People are so busy trying 
to keep their own work together or trying to maintain their own 
sanity that they don't always say, “Oh, by the way, we're doing 
this, this, and this." So sometimes these things kind of hit you 
upside the head. You don't have a clue what's coming. 

So you can walk into the office thinking, “Thank God, at 
last I have a day when I can sit down and I can work on my verb 
dictionary," or whatever else you are working on, and you find 
out, “Oh, we have foreign visitors today, and everybody has to 
go to the meeting." Or, “Some of our researchers want to give a 
talk, and they're leaving Wednesday, so they're giving the talk 
today, and we need you downstairs. We need bodies in the seats." 

You would think that a research center is this quiet, closed, 
little place where you do your own thing and you send out a 
newsletter. Those days are gone, gone, gone! Nowadays it is just 
all-encompassing, outward moving, and fast paced, and there is 
action on several fronts at once. I think that's a really healthy 



256 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


thing for the university and for the center, but it's not always a 
fun thing to experience for the people who are actually living 
through it. However, I think overall the positive aspects of the 
growth and the change really outweigh the negative aspects. 
But change is never comfortable, and it's not always easy. So it's 
kind of a tradeoff. It's been quite a ride. 

It takes a tremendous amount of work to reach out to the 
overall university, and it takes someone to coordinate it 
consistently and be in contact with university publications and 
venues for self-promotion. There are a lot of people on this 
campus who don't even know we're here, and they haven't got 
a clue what we do. So here we are, knocking our heads against 
walls, and bing, bang, bing, bang, like a ping-pong ball, trying 
to get everything done, and people see us from the outside and 
have no idea how active we are. We don't have the personnel or 
the time to carry out our own self-promotion and make ourselves 
as visible as we need to be in order to change that perception. 

We, frankly, are too busy trying to do everything on the 
director's agenda and all these other things that we're involved 
in. We don't even have enough people to be doing as much as 
we're doing. We used to laugh about being cuatro gatos [four 
cats] in the dark trying to run a program. Now, we've got more 
faculty members, but we have also increased exponentially the 
amount of work that we want to accomplish and the number of 
projects that we are involved in. So we still often feel like we're 
just four cats in the dark. 

We're just mushrooming and growing. At the end of every 
year, you try to stop and say, “Wow, look what we've 
accomplished!" But sometimes—and maybe this is a factor of 
my age, too—it feels like your head is spinning so fast that you 
don't even have time to stop and see what you've accomplished. 

Within the university you always have that “publish or 
perish" thing. You're always competing, not against just yourself, 
which can be gratifying when you do more than you think you 
could have done, but also against every other faculty member 
on campus, for the obvious rewards, such as merit increases. 

Then, of course, the center has always prided itself on hiring 
excellent people, and when you hire excellent people, they tend 
to be very self-motivated, and they tend to really push their 
production all the time. They tend to never slow down. Well, if 
you get a critical mass of people like that in one arena, it can get 



LINDA WHITE 


257 


pretty insane. You feel like you're on a merry-go-round that never 
stops! And nothing you did last year is going to help you two 
years from now. What you did last year was great, and that helped 
you this year, but now you're working this year to try and help 
yourself next year. Everybody wants to raise the bar higher than 
last year. The ideal is to do better this year than last year, and the 
center is really good at doing that. 

After a while you say, “Where are we going to go now?" You 
keep raising the bar every year, and pretty soon you start to feel 
like if you don't do better than last year, then you fail. The bar 
has been raised so many times that you're producing at an 
outstanding level, but because you didn't do more than last year, 
then you feel like you didn't do well enough. So you can never 
do well enough. The bar keeps being raised and raised and raised 
and raised. It makes me chuckle. I think that's why people retire 
eventually, because they can no longer imagine jumping the bar. 
You can't jump it anymore. It's just, “Oh, my goodness!" 



"I think that's why people retire eventually, because they can no longer 
imagine jumping the bar. "Linda White accepts a commemorative plaque 
for her service to the Center for Basque Studies during her retirement 
ceremony, April 2006. 

















258 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


We had one year recently where the center published twenty 
or twenty-four books, something like that. I can't even remember, 
but it was such an outlandish number. Now, every year that we 
come in under twenty-four books, we're going to feel like we 
didn't do as well. That's insane, you know? [laughter] I don't 
even know if the University of Nevada Press publishes twenty- 
four books in a year! I mean, there's not another department on 
campus that does that. It's just incredible. 

I think the raising-the-bar analogy is actually true for 
individuals as well as the center. Dr. Zulaika has specific goals in 
mind, and he has encouraged raising that bar beyond where other 
people might be comfortable. But everybody's personality is 
different. For instance, I prefer to work at a somewhat slower 
pace but feel sane. That's just me, and I'm getting older. But in 
my own way I raise my own bar. I mean, I have certain projects 
that I want to get done, and I do whatever I have to do to get 
them published, and that contributes to the big picture as well. 
That's true with every individual in Basque Studies, because you 
have an office full of incredible, super overachievers, who are 
constantly saying, “Yes! I can do that!" That's the only way Zulaika 
could actually have the center publish twenty-four books in a 
year. 

We, the Basque Studies faculty, went to this big conference 
in London [First International Symposium on Basque Cultural 
Studies, 2002], and we all stayed at the same university dormitory. 
Just a word of advice—never stay in a university dorm, especially 
the one we were in in London. Just awful! They did have a 
cafeteria downstairs, and so we would go down in the morning 
and have our breakfast before we went to the conference. One 
morning Bill and I were sitting together, and he said, “You know 
what? I look at everything Zulaika's doing, and I should have 
retired earlier." [laughter] Which I thought was really funny, 
because there was a definite change. 

The first year with Zulaika as director was incredibly exciting 
and very different. His management style was completely 
different than Bill's. His energy level was amazing. He had all 
these things he wanted to do. He didn't know where we were 
going yet, but he was trying to put together a plan. Faculty 
meetings were just incredible exercises in near anarchy, which 
was refreshing, you know, for a while. I think that Zulaika's 
personality is one of the reasons that we are exploding like a 



LINDA WHITE 


259 


supernova in all those different directions, and, like I said, a lot 
of that is very positive. 

On a personal level, Zulaika is one of the warmest human 
beings I've ever known, and so that makes it much easier to 
accept the chaos or at least forgive chaos on the path to getting 
things done. When there's a problem is when a human being is 
not kindhearted or when a human being is ruthless as well as 
being one of those mega-overachievers, because then there's no 
joy in it at all. Zulaika has such a personal touch, even though 
when things go crazy he tends to lock himself in his office and 
not speak to people. Yet if you go in and talk to him, he's open, 
and he's warm. Maybe it's a gender thing. I think men in crisis 
tend to shut up, and women tend to talk. A lot of his personality 
has opened up different connections for us in the Basque 
Country. 

He is hyperactive, so there's this nonstop activity going on 
at all times, which really increases the project load, because he 
has all these ideas, and he wants to accomplish them all while 
he's director. He's got this personal side to him that makes it 
easier to accept—well, not easy, because let's face it, sometimes 
it's crazy—the kinds of change we've been going through. He 
tries to be open and honest and hear you out. So there are lots of 
positives in his personality, too. 

I'm not saying we didn't have some of that before. Dr. 
Douglass would certainly sit down and listen to you, but there's 
this personality difference. I think that's why I started with the 
anecdote about Bill, when he said, "I should have retired a year 
ago," because he himself could feel the difference in the energy. 
That's basically what it comes down to. You do it for so long that 
you run out of new ideas. And then somebody else takes over, 
and suddenly, boy, you're thinking differently. Zulaika was a new 
energy. So it was just a very big change personality-wise for the 
center. 

Basque studies is not a discipline unto itself. It's an 
interdisciplinary field. We all write about Basque topics, but there 
are different methodologies being used and different theories 
being bandied about. The center currently is in an excellent place 
to pull research from various areas together, and I think that 
Zulaika is doing a good job with his publications. It's a rather 
ambitious publication agenda, but it is getting research out to 
people in English. We felt that one of the functions of the center 



260 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


was to help disseminate research on Basque studies. So we seem 
to be going in that direction. That's one of the things that a lot 
of us had in mind for the center. 

Are we really promoting Basque culture if everything has to 
be done in English, because that limits who gets to read about 
it? This question is always kind of there at the back of your mind. 
We have to publish in English because we are part of an American 
academic university, and the language of that system is English. 
Our focus as part of an American university is to disseminate 
information to as many people as possible, in the United States. 
That has to be a starting point, and, of course, a lot of people in 
the world read English. 

For the center to survive, we have to be able to show the 
university administration what we're doing, and they have to be 
able to look at what we're doing and understand it. I think that 
we'd have a short life term if we didn't publish in English, if we 
had to provide a translation to our university administration 
and then have to justify what we're doing and say, "Look, we've 
just written this magnum opus, and it happens to be in Basque, 
but take our word for it." 

If you're going to publish in other languages you have to 
have native speakers of those languages working onsite. So if we 
decided to do that, all of us native English speakers would have 
to give up our positions, and we'd have to hire natives from the 
Basque Country who could then conduct the publication agenda 
in Basque and/or Spanish. The center would have to change 
completely. 

The university is unlikely to fund research that appears only in 
Basque and Spanish. So we would have to take the center and move 
it to the Basque Country. We would have to be funded by the 
Basque university system or the Basque government, and then 
everybody working here would have to become Basque in order to 
fulfill that. Even though, on an emotional level I'm sure there are 
people here, myself included, who cringe now and then at the fact 
that we have to do everything in English, we really don't have a 
choice other than publishing in English due to the logistics of the 
situation and where the funding is coming from. 

I think we may also be heading off in directions that I 
probably wouldn't have thought of or chosen. In the early days, 
there was an emphasis on the academic. The outreach was limited 
to making speeches to Elderhostel and those kinds of things. Bill 



LINDA WHITE 


261 


would go to conferences, and Jill and I would take care of the 
books. We were an academic place, and we did not go to Basque 
clubs and dance or any of those things. That was not what we 
were about. 

Now there is a huge shift. We're now a member of NABO, 
and I don't think it's necessarily a bad thing, but it's obviously a 
change from that total academic focus to a much more broad- 
based outreach aspect. I feel that our Ikasi program is our 
contribution to NABO, and we do a good job with that. 

We are also moving into areas that take us even farther away 
from the academic, like our Basque genealogy project. It's like a 
rebound. It's like we were way academic over here, and now we're 
expanding the center's outreach and doing a lot more with the 
Basque-American community, so we're headed in the other 
direction. We're bouncing way over there on the other side, and 
that's just my personal take on it. Considering the history of the 
center, whatever comes of the genealogy work will probably be a 
contribution of a major kind to Basque scholarship, even though 
we're going to have to get there by doing even more outreach. 

If we look at the situation of the center in ten years, the 
things that to me look like we're headed toward total outreach 
will probably have bounced back toward the middle, because 
the people conducting that research are academics. So you can't 
get away from that. We're still academic, but we have to change 
with the times. The university is interested in outreach, and so 
the Center for Basque Studies is interested in outreach. 

Bill has always been interested in migration, but his interest 
began in the Basque Country, and he followed it over here. The 
focus of the program was, and probably for the most part still is, 
the Basque Country in Europe. Our focus has always been 
European Basques. There's always been an effort made to stay in 
touch with that culture. Whereas, for other organizations around 
the American West and North and South America, I think the 
focus has been more on Basques in the New World. 

Now we're starting to enter that territory. We're actually 
becoming more involved with the Basque-American population, 
because our focus has started to shift. When I go to American 
conferences on foreign language and literature to talk about 
Basque literature, it's almost impossible for me to find someone 
to relate to. I wind up relating to people who are talking about 
Spanish literature, but even they don't get it, because I'm talking 



262 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


about Basque literature as it exists within Spanish literature. I'm 
not talking as an American reading Spanish literature. 

I am constantly being forced to shift my thought process 
and think less about Basque literature in the Basque Country 
and more about Basque literature in comparison to other 
minority literatures outside the Basque Country, in order to 
function in American academic societies, like MLA (Modern 
Language Association). 


Notes 

1. The Anglo-American Basque Studies Society was established in 1980. 
After Darlene Ammons left Basque Studies in 1981, Carmelo Urza edited 
and distributed the newsletter until 1985. According to the Basque Studies 
Program Newsletter, it had approximately 400 subscribers. 

2. Different socio-economic classes met regularly at the Assembly 
House in the town of Gernika, in the province of Bizkaia. An oak tree 
outside the Assembly House, known as the Gernika Tree, became the 
symbol of the province and the local laws. 




Marcelino Ugalde 


M arcelino “Marc" Ugalde, a second generation Basque 
American, was born in Fallon, Nevada, in 1963. From 
the University of Nevada, Reno, he received a BS in biology with 
a minor in Basque studies in 1986 and a BS in education with a 
minor in anthropology in 1989. In 1995, he obtained an MA 
degree in library and information science at the University of 
Arizona. 

For twenty-two years, Marc was affiliated with UNR's Basque 
Studies Library and was the head librarian from 1995 to 2003. Marc 
was one of the most influential librarians in the development of 
the Basque Library. During his tenure he was Chair of the Library 
Faculty and Chair of the Ethnic Studies Program. In 2003, Marc 
was recognized by Library Journal as one of the "2003 Movers & 
Shakers" of the librarianship profession in the U.S. and Canada. In 
June of2000, he received a Senatorial Recognition Certificate from 
Richard Bryan, U.S. Senator from Nevada, for his contributions to 
the Reno Basque Festival Library of Congress Bicentennial Local 
Legacies Project. 

As a remarkable Basque culinary aficionado Marc has taught 
Basque cooking at UNR and at Truckee Meadows Community 
College, and he has authored various articles on Basque-European 



264 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



cuisine. He has also given a few workshops on Basque genealogy, 
and speaks Basque and Spanish. Marc is currently the head 
librarian at Bishop Manogue Catholic High School in Reno. 

Love are first sight: first involvement with the library 

I had first received information about the Basque Studies 
Program from my oldest sister, Auriane Ugalde, after I returned 
to UNR in the fall of 1981 from a visit with a cousin to the Basque 
Country that summer. My sister had mentioned that there was a 
position open for a student research assistant. I spoke about the 
position with Darlene Ammons, who was the Basque Studies 
Program's assistant coordinator at the time and was also a friend 
of my sister's. She hired me to help out with certain small 
administrative tasks for both the program and the library. 

Shortly after 1981, Darlene stopped working in the program. 
Linda White was hired earlier that year, and Jill Berner was out 
on maternity leave with the birth of twin daughters. She came 
back after I was hired, and she was in charge of day-to-day 









MARCELINO UGALDE 


265 


activities at the time, so Jill 
would set up my duties for the 
day. William Douglass was 
then out in Australia doing 
fieldwork. 

This may sound a little 
corny, but it was really kind 
of a love affair at first sight. I 
knew the background of the 
program a little bit through 
my sister. I had met Jon 
Bilbao before, and I had 
listened to interviews given 
by William Douglass about 
the Basques in the American 
West. Actually, the Basque 
Studies Program was one of 
the reasons I decided to stay 
in Nevada versus going 
outside of the state to go to 
college. I was well aware of 
my Basque heritage, and I 
really wanted to pursue that, 
and this was an outlet for me 
to do it. So I was very excited 
to attend, because I had an 
opportunity to work in the 
Basque Studies Program. 

I had not met Bill yet. I 
always had visions of what 
he would look like. I'd heard 
his voice a number of times, 
and then I was the only one 
in the library this one particular afternoon when Bill came 
in. He'd just gotten back from Australia. He was doing some 
remodeling on his house, and he was wearing some old work 
boots and jeans. He came in, and I happened to ask him, "Gee, 
can I help you?" not knowing that it was Bill Douglass, 
[laughter] He then proceeded to tell me who he was, and I 
felt very small at that time. That was my first encounter with 
Bill. 



"I had first received information about 
the Basque Studies Program from my 
oldest sister. "Basque Studies Program 
student worker, Auriane Ugalde, c. 
1977. 











266 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Jon Bilbao had officially retired from the university some 
time before I came onboard in 1981, but he still remained part 
of Basque Studies. I didn't see Jon too much those first two years. 
I don't remember what his actual title was after he retired, but 
he was still the bibliographer for the program and spent most of 
his time in the Basque Country. I would meet Jon again the 
following year, in 1983, as my history teacher in Donostia, when I 
studied on the very first USAC program directed by Carmelo Urza. 

Jon still remained the key person for selecting materials and 
working with book vendors in Europe. He was the one that set 
up the acquisition programs with a couple of different bookshops: 
Linacero, which was a very important one for him, and Kirikino. 
Karlos Zarraga, the contact at Kirikino since the early 1970s, was 
the gentleman that Jon had known very well and trusted and 
had set up as a vendor. Then in 1990 we began working with the 
bookstore Urretxindorra, because Karlos had changed employers 1 . 

Through Jon's own funding, he continued to work on his 
Basque bibliography. Jon's collaborator and assistant with Eusko 
Bibliographia in Vitoria-Gasteiz was Luis Moreno. Luis was the 
main technical person of the two-man team. He started to work 
with Jon in Linacero, and later, in the late 1970s, in Sancho el 
Sabio's library. After Jon's death in 1994, Luis was acting director 
of Eusko Bibliographia with a staff of three people. 

Jon's greatest contribution to Basque studies was his 
comprehensive Basque bibliography. Lor the Basque Studies 
Program, Jon was always an important person, and he made sure 
that Reno was aware of certain materials. So through Jon's 
connections in Europe, his acquaintances would always contact 
us and send us a number of free materials dealing with political 
propaganda or cultural posters and pamphlets. The library is really 
indebted to his care in so many ways, especially with such 
ephemeral material. In many ways Jon encouraged me to stick 
with Basque Studies. Jon was a friend and a mentor. 

In the fall of 1984, when I returned to UNR after attending 
USAC in the Basque Country, I continued to work part-time, 
about twenty hours a week, looking over the collection, adding 
books to it, reshelving materials, becoming familiar with the 
collection, and helping patrons with a few things. So it was real¬ 
ly, for me, very, very interesting. I just spent hours in the library 
reading and looking over the materials and talking to all the 
different visitors, which were not as many as there are today. 



MARCELINO UGALDE 


267 


The Veyrin and 
Goni collections were 
the basis for establish¬ 
ing a Basque library in 
Reno. Robert Laxalt 
was doing fieldwork in 
the early 1960s in 
Iparralde—the French- 
Basque territories—for 
National Geographic, 
when he heard through 
his contacts about a 
collection for sale by 
the widow of Philippe 
Veyrin. Veyrin was a 
Bascologist or expert 
on the Basques in the 
north on the French 
side, and he had a 
fairly extensive library 
collection. So it was 
really through the 
efforts of Robert Laxalt 
that UNR purchased Veyrin's important collection. The 
acquisition happened before Bill came onboard as the head of 
the Basque Studies Program in 1967. 

That first year was a very important one for Bill to really decide 
if this Basque Studies Program was going to be successful. I 
remember discussions with him about that, and he was very iffy 
about whether or not the program was going to continue. His 
major role was looking for funding for the program, so he did a lot 
of fundraising that first year. But obviously, he was looking for a 
colleague to work with, and I really don't know how Bill first came 
in contact with Jon Bilbao. Jon was in the United States at that 
time teaching on the East Coast and was contacted to see if he 
would be interested in being a part of this newly created Basque 
Studies Program. He joined Bill in 1968, one year later. 

When Jon arrived in Reno, he got in contact with the widow 
of Ramon Goni Nagore. Goni Nagore was the secretary of the 
Basque President-in-exile, Jose Antonio de Aguirre. Goni was an 
intellectual from Pamplona who also had an extensive library 



"The library is really indebted to his care in so 
many ways, especially with such ephemeral 
material." Basque Studies Program assistant 
coordinator Darlene Ammons and Basque bib¬ 
liographer Jon Bilbao at the Basque Library in 
1980. 













268 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


about Basques in Spain that would complement Philippe Veyrin's. 
Without delay, Basque Studies was able to purchase Goni's library. 
In addition, some Basque materials from the University of Idaho 
were also acquired. 

Looking back to the early writings of both Bill and Jon, the 
creation of this ethnic research program was inconceivable 
without establishing a research library. So it was from very early 
on that the initial founders of the Basque Studies Program 
understood the importance of establishing a strong, 
comprehensive research collection. 

Jon never considered himself to be a librarian. He was a 
bibliographer, a linguist, a historian. He did not have official 
training in librarianship. When the Basque Studies Program 
moved out of DRI to the university campus library in 1972, the 
Basque Studies Program's Library would now begin to receive 
the necessary care it deserved! For whatever reason, the prestigious 
Basque Library received little attention. 

Because of Jon, bless his heart, again, not being a librarian, 
he just put everything in accession order. This system was 
adequate since the collection was small. It was not that much of 
a problem for people to browse the shelving—"this is what's 
new"—and we would add a few hundred items annually. That 
was OK. But by the mid 1980s we began growing the collection 
and systematically purchasing more materials from Europe and 
Latin America, and we needed assistance to get the material 
processed properly. 

In the 1970s, through Jon's efforts, UNR library cataloger 
Yoshi Hendricks officially began to catalog the Basque collection 
in a regular flow as best as they could. Yoshi lent her expertise. 
Jon and Yoshi became friends. She had studied and lived in 
Pamplona and was fond of the Basque culture. 

However, the Basque collection always seemed too exotic to 
the catalogers. I know this for a fact through my years of talking 
to some of the old catalogers who were there when I first started 
working. Nobody had had expertise in the language, so Basque 
materials were always put on the back burner. "Oh, we'll get to 
it, we'll get to it, we'll get to it. Oh, you know, we just don't have 
time." But through the efforts of Yoshi, we were able to begin 
really getting some official cataloging by following the Library 
of Congress system. 



MARCELINO UGALDE 


269 


The work was limited, and the library still didn't see the need 
to begin to move the daily processes of organizing and classifying 
Basque materials into the steady stream of university materials. 
So that was kind of done on an ad hoc basis until the first 
librarian, Maria Otero-Boisvert, was hired in 1986. 

Having a research center housed within a library, that in itself 
was always a major source of misunderstanding for many years. 
They had the Oral History Program and Basque Studies, but 
neither of them were library departments. They were left alone, 
totally autonomous from the library administration. But the 
funny thing with the Basque Studies Program was that we had 
this library that needed some attention. 

We're talking about functions that the centralized library 
could perform to assist us in moving things around. But the 
Basque Studies Library's major role was interacting with the 
faculty and visiting scholars. The major clientele of the Basque 
Library was foreign scholars and students or Basque Americans 
who were not affiliated with UNR. 

At the time, there was no administrative distinction, no 
separation between the program and the collection. There was 
no Basque Library as a separate entity from the Basque Studies 
Program. They were all one. It was an ethnic studies research 
program with its own library, and it was totally self-sufficient. 
To a certain extent, the library/program was somewhat of a 
museum, because we displayed some Basque art—paintings, 
drawings, sculptures, tree carvings—and flags. 

Our patrons, Basque Americans (most of our visitors to the 
Basque Library at the time), always viewed the library and the 
program as one entity, never making any distinction between 
the two. Both elements functioned together, understanding that 
one couldn't function without the other. There was no need of 
a Basque Library if you didn't have the research program and 
vice versa. 


USAC, 1983 

I studied abroad with the USAC program for a year in 1983. 
At that time, USAC was called University Studies in the Basque 
Country Consortium, which was established one year earlier. 
Carmelo Urza came to Reno in 1982 and took an office in the 



270 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Basque Studies Program to run the Basque Studies abroad 
program. At the beginning US AC was an organic part of the 
Basque Studies Program, and it became a monumental event in 
the history of the program. I don't think anyone would suspect 
that today, obviously, because of the growth and the programs 
that it had all over the world. 

Carmelo had participated as an administrator-teacher on the 
Onati program, which operated out of Boise. Pat Bieter, a professor 
at Boise State University, managed it. So the idea of US AC grew 
out of the Onati program. They had made the decision that Onati 
was still too small a town, not cosmopolitan enough, to attract 
enough students outside of Basque families. Finally the site 
selected was Donostia-San Sebastian. I believe the Onati program 
hadn't run since 1979. 

I had visited my grandfather's natal village and house in the 
summer of 1981, when I graduated from high school. I went 
with a cousin from Winnemucca, Belzarena. We were the same 
age, and we grew up together. His grandmother was my 
grandfather's sister, and she was the owner of the family baserri. 
His paternal grandmother was from Urepel, and his paternal 
grandfather was from Eugi, Navarra. But his father was born and 
raised in the U.S. His mother was my father's first cousin, and 
my father and grandfather brought her over in 1962 on a tourist 
visa. My grandfather quickly found her a husband, [laughter] 
She was from the same small village of Angiozar—a barrio 
[neighborhood] of Bergara, Gipuzkoa—as my grandfather. 

We spent a month in my grandfather's house, where my 
cousin's grandmother was born, and then we traveled around 
Europe, as well. That was my very first experience with the Basque 
Country, and shocking indeed it was, because I was envisioning 
a more traditional country after hearing the stories from my 
grandfather and my father. Of course, it was different. This was a 
few years after the death of Franco, and there was major change 
and growth in the Basque Autonomous Community. I enjoyed 
visiting very much. Being over there for a summer as well as 
working at the Basque Program for two years really reinforced 
my desire to learn the Basque language. 

Kate Camino, her sister, Marguerite, and I were among the 
very first group of students—the founding group—that went to 
the Basque Country in 1983 with USAC. (I had already met 
Marguerite at the Basque Studies Program, because she studied 



MARCELINO UGALDE 


271 


Basque under Gorka Aulestia.) We left in June and spent the first 
five weeks with intensive language training in Fuenterrabia 
[Hondarribia in Basque]. Then in October we moved to Donostia 
to live with families and/or in apartments for the remainder of 
the year. 

At the beginning, the majority of students studied Basque, 
although I decided to study Spanish as well. Out of forty-five 
students, forty-two were all studying Basque, and only three 
were studying Spanish. After the first year, the reverse is true. 
Most people go to Donostia to study Spanish, and just a few 
study Euskara. 

I studied under Jon Bilbao, Sandra "Sandy" Ott, Joseba 
Zulaika, and Inaki Aguirre, who taught Basque political 
institutions. I also studied Basque cooking with Juan Mari Arzak, 
who gave us two or three classes, and Pedro Subijana, who taught 
a class. The cuisine class was one of my favorite things. For me, 
gastronomy was ultimate, because I love food. So I really ate my 
way around the Basque Country, [laughter] 

Sandy Ott was the on-site director during the first abroad 
program, and I was in her anthropology course. So I went around 
the Basque Country doing fieldwork with her quite often, and 
we visited and stayed with different families. I was in every 
province spending time studying. I went to Santazi in Zuberoa 
or Xiberoa, to Aramaiona in Araba, where Sandy was doing 
research, and I got to go on a jaball [wild boar] hunt. I also went 
to Alkiza, just outside of Tolosa, where Sandy knew a couple of 
bachelor shepherds. 

I spent a couple of weeks living with them. My fieldwork 
topic was to compare Basque shepherding in Europe versus the 
system of shepherding in the American West. For me it was a 
very interesting project. Many students said to me, "How could 
you do that? There is no bathroom in the house! How can you 
spend two weeks with no night life there in Alkiza?" [laughter] 
Everything I did in that baserri was work—going out with the 
shepherd in the morning, making cheeses, or learning how to 
milk the ewes. What I liked about it was that I got a chance to 
make cheese. 

I also got the chance to talk to my grandfather's youngest 
sister, the baby of the family, who lived in Onati. In fact, for my 
dialectology class, I studied a sample of her dialect from Onati. 
So I had a smattering of linguistics study there, as well. 



272 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Having contact with so many people was very fulfilling, 
rewarding, satisfying—an amazing experience. It was very 
interesting to meet some of the families and all the different 
characters while traveling with Sandy. It was the opportunity of 
getting to know more about the people in the place where my 
grandparents came from. It was reconnecting with the language. 

The most important thing was to modernize the feelings of 
nationalism, of a sense of identity. We students were always called 
Americans, and even if you were Basque American, you always 
understood yourself to be at least partially Basque. But many 
people over there told me, "You're not Basque. You're American. 
Maybe you have Basque ancestors, but you live in America. You 
don't live in the Basque Country today, so you're not Basque." 
That was kind of hard to swallow, initially. 

In fact, that year a woman from the Basque Country named 
Begona Prado met my parents when she was working in Reno 
on a cataloging project at the Basque Library. She had gone back 
for Christmas to visit her family, and she invited me for New 
Year's. They were from Algorta. Her younger brother, his 
girlfriend, and I went to a party for New Year's 1984. 

Her brother was very interested in an American coming over 
to study Basque. I definitely had more sentiment of feeling Basque 
than he did, being from Algorta. So there was a whole conflict 
arising over the questions they asked me, "Why would you come 
from the United States to learn Basque?" Over that small 
discussion there was somewhat of a conflict between the young 
men at the New Year's party. Of course, alcohol had something 
to do with it, too, I'm sure, [laughter] 

I thoroughly enjoyed it, and I would never in all my life 
trade that experience, even though it postponed my studies at 
UNR for a year. There was no way I was going to miss that 
opportunity. It moved me toward becoming a Basque librarian. 
It helped me develop skills and made me more aware of Basque 
culture and Basque history. 

Maria Otero-Boisvert and Ellen Brow 

After my year in Europe, I came back as a student assistant 
for the Basque Studies Program for the next two years. I would 
have loved to continue working with the library, but due to 
financial reasons I became employed elsewhere. Then within a 



MARCELINO UGALDE 


273 



“There was no way I was going to miss that opportunity. It moved me 
toward becoming a Basque librarian. It helped me develop skills and made 
me more aware of Basque culture and Basque history." Marc Ugalde in 
his office at the Basque Library, c. 1986. 


year I realized that I wanted to get back to the university, so I 
started a degree program in secondary education in 1987. 

By then, they had actually held the very first application 
and interview process for a professional librarian for the Basque 
Studies Program, and they hired Maria Otero-Boisvert from, I 
think, University of Michigan, in 1986. Then, Maria hired me as 
a library assistant in 1987, because I had good knowledge of the 
collection. I also did some cataloging for her during those years. 

The first professional librarian was half-time in Basque Studies 
and half-time in cataloging, so she had to divide her time that 
way. Half of her salary was paid by Basque Studies and half paid 
by the central library. 

Maria didn't stay long in Basque Studies. She was very capable, 
but she was very frustrated with the amount of work needed to 
improve the library. Maria left in 1989. Her husband had been 
admitted to graduate school at Columbia University in New York, 




















274 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


and she decided to move with 
him, so she had to resign her 
position. 

For the next year I was left 
on my own, and I pretty 
much took care of the Basque 
collection. I was only a 
Library Assistant I, but Basque 
Studies didn't want to 
increase my rank. I am not 
sure why. I was performing 
some of the professional 
duties. I was still a student, 
and I functioned as that, 
working part-time and going 
to school. 

Then they hired Ellen 
Brow from Harvard Uni¬ 
versity. She came onboard 
July 1, 1989, and that's why I decided to leave. I mean, there 
was not adequate funding for two people in the Basque Library. 
I decided to go to the Basque Country for the entire summer to 
study Spanish and Basque culture through USAC. I came back 
and finished my degree in teaching in 1989, and I was hired by 
Sparks High School in 1990. 

In 1993, Ellen resigned her position. She became very 
frustrated in dealing with the library administration on how to 
move the daily library operations and tasks into the workflow of 
the general library. Many things had happened since the days of 
Jon Bilbao, when he oversaw the collection on a daily basis. They 
were beginning to purchase more media for instruction and for 
patrons. The volume of material coming into the library had 
really increased, and there were more and more contacts with 
rare book dealers. 

Ellen felt overwhelmed. (I felt that myself at times, dealing 
with the workload. It's incredible for one person to work alone 
in the Basque Library.) I think, too, through Ellen's frustration 
in trying to implement a more professional process and to move 
the library into the modern age of technology, she ran into many 
hurdles and roadblocks. Her answer was to ignore the Basque 
collection, and she became very involved with library committees 



"Marla hired me as a library assistant 
in 1987, because I had good knowledge 
of the collection." Basque Librarian 
Maria Otero-Boisvert, c. 1988. 








MARCELINO UGALDE 


275 


and university committees, and unfortunately, the Basque Library 
really suffered for a couple of years. 

After I had taught Spanish for two years, Bill Douglass called 
me into his office and said, "We need some help." He wanted to 
know if I would consider coming back to the library from a 
teaching career in the public schools. I had to think about it. Bill 
offered to help me pursue my professional library degree, so I'd 
be able to apply for the position whenever it opened up. For me 
that was sufficient, and I was actually jubilant to come back to 
the Basque Program and Library. 

So I did come back, and I was the interim librarian for them 
until the position opened. Dr. Douglass and I understood that 
there was a possibility that I might not be the best candidate for 
them in the interview process, and I accepted that, but I did my 
best. I started in June of 1992 and worked there until June 2003. 

I strongly believe that there was somewhat of an 
embarrassment in relation to the issue of Ellen Brow on the part 
of the Basque Studies Program's administration. Bill was out of 
the country for part of the time that Ellen was there, and maybe 
there wasn't a strong understanding of how the library should 
really operate and function within the existing structure of the 
Basque Studies Program's administration. She saw that maybe 
the fit was better with the main library than with the program. 

When I came back to 
the library, there were 
books stacked up in the 
aisles between the ranges 
of bookshelving. There 
were carts everywhere full 
of materials. You couldn't 
get into her office. It was 
from floor to ceiling full of 
book packages that she 
hadn't opened in two 
years. Obviously, there was 
also some major fmstration 
with the Basque Studies 
faculty at that time, 
wanting to look at new 
research or anything newly 
published. 



Librarian Ellen Brow, 1990. 











276 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


The split between the library and the program 

The first year I reported to Jill Berner, the office manager 
and program assistant at the time. I spent the next years, from 
1992 to 1995, working with the collection as the Library Assistant 
II. My position was a state classified position, not a professional 
position, and at the beginning my salary was coming out of the 
program. Then, when I made the move from a classified position 
to the Basque Librarian position, I began to be paid by the library. 
We were receiving help in different areas, from different 
departments of the library, in processing and dealing with our 
periodicals, our serials. But still the authority was left to the 
Basque Studies Program and to the Basque Library. I went on to 
do the basic duties of library work, and it was a great challenge 
to get the Basque collection operating again. 

In 1993 discussions began between Bill Douglass and the 
dean of libraries, Steven Zink, for the purpose of administratively 
separating the Basque Library from the Basque Studies Program. 
They made decisions about the collection and about what I was 
doing that directly affected me, but I was not made a part of 
those decisions. I was not asked what I thought. 

In 1993 we had the official separation of administrative 
powers among the two entities, the program and the library 
collection. Then we realized that the program, later to become 
the Center for Basque Studies, and the library could no longer 
be housed together. So in 1997 we actually had a physical break 
between the two due to space constraints. When we were housed 
together, it was obviously a natural fit. But the program needed 
more offices, and the library needed more room, too, because 
the collection doubled from 1992 to 2003. Both the program 
and the library needed to grow. Basque Studies moved to what 
used to be the Oral History office [in Gethcell Library]. There 
was a subsequent move for the Basque Studies Program, out of 
the administrative control of the library and into the College of 
Arts and Science, which was a natural progression. 

After the split, my supervisor became Mike Simons, who was 
the head of reference, or was it Milton Wolf? Traditionally, the 
Basque Librarian worked with collection development. 

There was quite a bit of confusion the first two years after 
separating and creating two different entities—a Basque Library 
entity and then the Basque Studies Program. There was also some 



MARCELINO UGALDE 


277 


confusion in dealing with personnel from the library. "Well, 
what's going on? Now you're a separate entity? We are no longer 
dealing with the program?" Basque Studies always remained 
autonomous within the library, but the poor Basque Library lost 
all autonomy. 

We began to see the dilemmas of who had authority to make 
decisions. We saw a bit of a problem coming down the pike with 
who really controlled the Basque Library. Was it the Basque 
Studies Program? We had always felt that the library belonged to 
the program. I think it was very clear for the library 
administration, under the years of Harold Morehouse as the 
director of libraries, that the Basque Library belonged to the 
Basque Studies Program. In the 1980s we had financial help 
coming to the Basque Library, and the Basque Studies Program 
felt it was something that the university should do to help, but 
the collection was still theirs. 



"I went on to do the basic duties of library work, and it was a great 
challenge to get the Basque collection operating again." Marc Ugalde 
working in his office in the Getchell Library, c. 1992-1993. 












278 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


When we actually had this administrative split in 1993, there 
was the question of, "Oh, who does the Basque collection belong 
to?" The main library assumed that they owned it. "It is ours, 
and we have more decision-making power than the program." 
Now the library took complete administrative and financial 
control of the Basque collection, and that was a big shift. So, 
who owns it? That's a tough question to answer. I would say 
both entities, and that is exactly what I heard in different 
conversations from the central library and Basque Studies. The 
dean said that it's his library, and the program said it's their library. 

At the time, I thought that the separation between both 
entities and the change of power and control was good for the 
Basque Library. But in retrospect, it's been a major detriment to 
the library and to the program. I personally don't feel that the 
separation was in the best interests of Basque Studies and/or the 
Basque Library, and I strongly believe this. It's not just because I 
was fired in 2003.1 think we all see the results of what has replaced 
me, at least currently, in moving the Basque Library into the 
twenty-first century. 

To some extent the separation has benefited the collection 
in that it now receives more attention from the central library. 
From a collection standpoint, getting involved a little bit more 
with the central library on campus helped me to begin to see 
some of the weaknesses in the services and areas of instruction 
for our visiting scholars and graduate students. From that 
perspective, it has helped to pursue a more systematic approach 
and to mainstream some of our functions, such as processing 
materials into the daily workflow of the libraries. 

The separation also brought a little more visibility for me. I 
attended many different library meetings and brought more 
matters of the Basque Library into the main library. However, I 
felt like my colleagues in the library never really understood the 
unique nature of a specialized librarian versus the everyday duties 
of a general undergraduate library with a little emphasis on 
graduate work. 

For instance, the library administration became puzzled 
when I requested some monies from the library to attend the 
1994 Basque book fair in Durango, in the Basque Country. Their 
response was that there wasn't really any need for a librarian to 
go to Durango. I had to write proposals to the dean requesting 



MARCELINO UGALDE 


279 


the trip, but we finally got them to agree. [Marc also attended 
the Durango book fair in 1997 and 2002.] I think there was a 
little bit of jealousy among the librarians about some of my 
duties and what I was able to do. "How does the Basque Librarian 
get a chance to travel to Europe and participate in functions 
there, and not us?" 

I think the split also provided a sense of relief for Basque 
Studies who no longer had to supervise someone outside their 
realm of understanding of the duties and expectations of a 
professional librarian. Basque Studies had an input into the 
development of the library only through me. But I was 
constantly being reprimanded by the library administration, 
especially the last three years of my tenure, because I was 
spending too much time with the Basque faculty. Holy cow! I 
was spending way too much time with the center. 



"I think there was a little bit of jealousy among the librarians about some 
of my duties and what I was able to do." Marc Ugalde at the Book and 
Music Fair in Durango, Basque Country, 1994. Left to right: Journalist 
Miel Elustondo, his then wife, Blanca, Marc Ugalde, singer Mikel Laboa, 
and Mikel's (unidentified) friend. 






280 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


On a couple of occasions, face to face, I was asked by Steve 
Zink, "Where does your loyalty lie, with the library or with the 
center?" 

I told him, "Sir, it is to both. I exist because of the center, but 
I perform a function that coincides with the work of the central 
library." He did not reply. I think up until the separation that 
question was inconceivable, because it was well understood what 
function the library had within the program. 

In that split, the central library began to see, "We've taken 
over the Basque collection. How do you manage it?" I saw myself 
as a mediator between Basque Studies and the library 
administration. And I think there was some success there, because 
I was able to help my colleagues in the library to see a little more 
of what was going on in the center, the unique nature of the 
collection, and how our services didn't always mesh with what 
needed to occur in a general university library. 

I was also able to help in certain decisions, such as changes 
in services or how to deal with vendors in the future. At the 
same time, I was able to help the center to understand how things 
were done in a university library environment in the United 
States. So I think it was good for both sides, because I think 
there was that communication. 

For me it was a constant game of not playing one loyalty 
against another, but being a facilitator of library work. I also 
understood that Basque Studies still felt that it was the rightful, 
or majority, owner of the Basque collection, but I also understood 
that the library had appropriated a fairly substantial amount of 
money to the Basque Library for purchasing materials and 
electronic services, especially in my last years working at UNR. 
On the other hand, Basque Studies had always received special 
grants or gifts from families for the library. 

It has always been my understanding and belief that 
without this administrative split there was no sense of split 
identity, at least, when I was the librarian, because the center 
and the library were one. One entity existed only because of 
the other, and the Basque Library was just kind of 
piggybacking onto services and/or processing from the main 
library. There was no identity crisis. 

I knew exactly why the Basque Library existed—to support 
the curriculum and the research needs of Basque Studies. That 
was my mission, and that philosophy became a bit of a problem 



MARCELINO UGALDE 


281 


for the central library. For me the true challenge was to strongly 
communicate between the two worlds, one of a library nature 
and the other of specialized research. But if someone didn't 
understand that, then it became an identity crisis. Even after 
the physical separation of the two entities, I never saw myself 
completely apart from the program, because I couldn't function 
without the program. In fact, I maintained a position on the 
Basque Studies faculty—as a nonvoting member, but still a 
member of their faculty. 

During my last years as the Basque Librarian I participated in 
some of the designing for the new library. The library 
administration really didn't want the Center for Basque Studies 
in the Knowledge Center. If Basque Studies wanted to be housed 
in the new library—and supposedly the dean of libraries was not 
against it—they needed to come up with their own funding. 
That was not my idea. That was coming down from the library 
administration. So if there have been recent developments or 
evolutions of these plans, of which I am not aware, then they're 
finally getting their act together. They might begin to see that 
the Basque Library and the program are not separate, that they 
are one and the same. 

A dream come true: collection development and funding 

While working full time for the Basque Studies Program, I 
pursued graduate work in library information science from the 
University of Arizona with the help of Basque Studies. I went 
down to Tucson, Arizona, the summer of 1995 to take my 
comprehensive exam and orals, and I completed the degree on 
time. I then had a professional degree and was ready to apply for 
the job that fall, 1995, as the Basque Librarian for the Basque 
Studies Program. I applied for the position and was selected, and 
Dean Zink approved the appointment to the Basque Studies 
Library. A dream came true. I could not believe it. This was 
something I had waited many years for. "All right. This is going 
to be under my total direction now." 

I wrote a new collection development policy, which is a tool 
of the trade that states what we will collect and where we will 
make purchases in continuing to build the Basque Library. I 
looked over what my predecessor, Ellen Brow, had done, and 
then I modified that. 



282 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I got in touch with many publishers and vendors in the 
Basque Country and Latin America in order to purchase materials. 
My goal definitely was to maintain the integrity of the vision of 
Jon Bilbao in order to build a comprehensive collection of Basque 
materials, as well as the most complete collection on the Basque 
diaspora. Around 1992, there were between 21,000 and 25,000 
volumes, and I took the collection to almost 60,000 volumes. I 
more than doubled it during my tenure. I think that my tenure 
was an era of positive growth and development, even with the 
separation. I built the first Basque Studies Library Web site in 
1998. 

There was definitely a paradigm shift in the philosophy of 
collecting materials between Jon Bilbao and I. Jon developed 
the Basque Studies Library collection at the time of Franco's 
regime, in which many things were not officially collected in 
the Basque Country per se, and they could possibly have been 
destroyed. Jon was very worried, and he believed in collecting 
everything —from a matchbook to a little, old cardboard of a 
particular pub or bar. Everything was fair game for the Basque 
Studies Program collection. 

Through some discussions with Jon, I strongly believe that 
he saw Reno as maybe not the place for permanently holding 
everything, but as a place where materials could be kept to 
preserve the cultural patrimony of the Basque people. But Jon 
also had an idea, a philosophy: the materials were there to use. If 
the Library of Congress, Harvard University, or Yale had a 
particular book or materials that we didn't have, that was OK. It 
was something we didn't need to acquire, because it was already 
in good hands. We could get access to it. But, at the same time, 
he encouraged you to collect as much as you could. 

During my tenure in the library, we came to a point where 
space became a big issue, and we had to be a little more judicious 
on what we were purchasing. So I had to rely more on what was 
being utilized by visiting scholars or faculty but still develop a 
very comprehensive collection. I thought that we could become 
the strongest, most comprehensive collection of Basque diaspora 
materials in the world, and that was really my main focus—not 
that we were not as concerned with materials about Euskadi [the 
Basque Country], but I pursued many more avenues in building 
up the collection from a diaspora point of view. 



MARCELINO UGALDE 


283 


We also focused some attention on purchasing archives. I 
came in contact with an antiquarian book dealer out of Bilbao, 
who had known Jon Bilbao, and he offered some very nice 
materials. In 1999, we purchased the Huarte Jauregui Archives 
on the Spanish Civil War, the most complete archives dealing 
with Basque materials. The documents provide information from 
the popular front and the nationalist front. They were put 
together by an archivist himself, Huarte Jauregui, who was also 
a commandant in the Basque Country. From the same vendor 
we were able to purchase some nineteenth-century archives on 
the Carlist wars. 

I was also asked by Basque Studies to purchase different 
collections, such as Julio Goien Aguado's private library from 
Argentina. Most of the monies to purchase that collection came 
from the central library, but the program had to come up with a 
fair amount of money, as well, to help purchase it. 

Now that the Basque Library was under the control of the 
central library, I had to make myself more visible to my colleagues 
in the library, so they could see that I was a team player. 
Consequently, I worked about three hours a week on the main 
reference desk. I knew also that I had to play the games of the 
central library, and I had to get involved in things that took me 
out of the Basque Library. I was expected to get involved in other 
university committees, because of my tenure-track position. I 
was placed in the first-year or "freshman experience" program, 
and then I got involved with the ethnic studies committee and 
became its chair for two years. All those tasks took me out of the 
Basque Library. There were advantages and disadvantages, and 
initially I didn't think that the disadvantages outweighed the 
advantages. 

But what it came down to in the end was that Basque Studies 
faculty began to ask me why I wasn't around more in the Basque 
Studies Library. At the same time, the main library was upset 
because I wasn't doing more things for the central library and 
thought I should be doing less for the center. So it was a difficult 
role to play to keep peace with both entities. It wasn't easy to 
show my library colleagues that there was some professionalism 
in the Basque Library and to show the Basque Studies Program 
that we were making strides and moving the library collection 
where it should go—into the twenty-first century. 



284 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


On top of that, I did all the work alone in those first years, 
until I was finally allowed to have an assistant through the 
generosity of Bill Douglass. Bill allowed some monies to be 
identified for an assistant in the Basque Library. For the first 
time ever, we had two people professionally working on the 
collection. 

My first assistant was Juan Ibarguren, a graduate student in 
history, who had come to Reno from the Basque Country, because 
he had heard about the Basque Studies Program while living in 
New York. He had helped to catalog a portion of the Basque 
Library between 1994 and 1996, and after the project was 
completed I subsequently hired him for a year and a half to be 
my assistant. His computer skills were fair, and his language skills 
and knowledge of the culture were very much appreciated. So 
we were able to grow, but then he decided to move to San Diego. 

After that I spent some months alone while we did the search 
process, which was never easy, and we hired Brett Copeland in 
2000. Brett had already worked in the library, in Acquisitions 
and then Serials. Brett was also of Basque descent; his mother 
was an Erquiaga. Brett worked with me for two years. Then I 
hired Demosthenes “Dee" Papaeliou from Chicago. [Dee was the 
Basque Assistant Librarian from 2002 to 2004.] So in my tenure, 
from 1993-2003, I had three assistants, which required a fair 
amount of training. So it was never easy. 

When Basque Studies was 
moved to the UNR campus, 
it remained a statewide pro¬ 
gram, which was its funding 
source. The Oral History 
Program got started, as well, 
as a statewide program for the 
university. It really wasn't out 
of the base budget, the 
funding source of the 
university itself. I think that 
was important, and Bill really 
understood that, because no 
one could touch the funding "Brett was also of Basque descent; his 
that allowed the program to mother was an Erquiaga." Basque 
begin to grow—slowly but Assistant Librarian Brett Copeland at 
significantly—over time, the Basque Library, 1999. 








MARCELINO UGALDE 


285 



Basque Assistant Librarian Dee Papaeliou and Marc Ugalde, c. 2002 


With what operating monies the program had in the early years 
they bought materials for the library. Whenever there were 
donations, I'm sure that went to help with library materials. 

Bill Douglass has always been a strong supporter of the Basque 
Studies Program. I know he has provided help many times. Jon 
Bilbao, in the early years, also purchased materials for the library 
with his own private funds. The grants and outside funding used 
to purchase the initial Basque archives leave no doubt that it 
was the Basque Studies Program that owned those materials. The 
Basque Library was really a private collection for the program. 

In the mid-1980s those lines became blurred. The Basque 
Library, as part of the program, first received a small portion of 
the library budget through the efforts of Maria Otero-Boisvert. 

When I first took over the Basque Library in 1992, the central 
library was still feeling the high from an evaluation or recognition 
by the university that the Basque Studies Program was an area of 
excellence in the university system. Basque Studies received a 
very high rating, based upon our collection development officer, 
Milton Wolf, who had been in the library for a number of years. 
It was a rating that the university as a whole did among the 
different colleges and departments. I left in 1989, and then I was 





















286 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


hired again in 1992, so somewhere in between that time Basque 
Studies was recognized as a program of excellence. 

Personally, Milton Wolf really liked the program and thought 
it was important and unique at the university and was very 
generous with the Basque Studies Program, with the dean's 
approval. This was the first time that the program received 1 
percent of the total library annual budget for the university. That 
was approximately $30,000 at the time, and the Basque Library 
began to grow from there. Through my years, from 1995 to 2003, 
I was able to move up to 2.7 percent of the total budget, just 
under $100,000 annually. 

When Milton left to take a job in the Midwest around 1997, 
Steven Zink began to see that this rating, this recognition as a 
program of excellence, held no more weight for the Basque 
Library. So I had to demonstrate that we deserved our monies. 
I'm not saying that the dean didn't recognize that Basque Studies 
was a valued research program at UNR, but we would no longer 
have the luxury of receiving monies because of this previous 
recognition. 

So a standard formula was adopted on how to allocate funds 
to each of the different library fields or specialized libraries at 
UNR. The dean would still say that he felt he was more than 
generous in allocating our funds, but it was never really clear 
that he followed a formula—for us, anyway. I don't think that 
the central library had any interest in the Basque collection, 
besides the monetary aspect. 

Donnelyn “Donnie" Curtis was hired after Milton left. That 
position was modified to supervise all the specialized branch 
libraries on campus. I fit in as a specialized library, so she became 
my supervisor. 

I began to see more and more concerns coming from Donnie. 
“Why are you purchasing that? What's this for?" They put 
pressure on me by questioning my decisions on purchasing for 
the Basque Studies Library in the later years, particularly from 
2000 on. Someone who didn't know the field questioned the 
validity of the purchases, “Well, if no one's going to use it. . . ." 
How would they know? It became this whole thing of use versus 
value, in relation to a comprehensive collection of Basque studies 
materials. I think they recognized that certain things would be 
happening in the future. 



MARCELINO UGALDE 


287 


With my departure, they could begin to absorb possibly more 
monies. It's easier to make those reductions in the allocations 
without someone there with a greater knowledge of what would 
be needed for the Basque Library in the future. Of course, I can 
only speculate, but I think time will tell. I strongly believe that 
the administration really didn't care to spend that much on the 
Basque Library. Its budget increased up until about 2000, and 
then it was fairly steady for the next three years. Actually, in 
2003, I believe, it took a $10,000 reduction. 

A stolen dream 

For me there was never a sense of being disloyal to the library 
administration or the Center for Basque Studies by my working 
with either entity. But in the last few years before I left, I noticed 
that there was always a major tone against me, a major character 
flaw maybe, because the dean of libraries saw what he considered 
more loyalty to Basque Studies than to the library. Again, not 
numerous times, but many times, I was asked by Dean Zink where 
my loyalty was. I never viewed it as such, but I think this definitely 
played into not being granted tenure. 

I was too much a part of the center maybe, because I had too 
much of a familial connection with the faculty and not just a 
working relationship. The dean wanted somebody neutral, 
somebody working mostly for the library with a few 
responsibilities to the center, even though I was involved with 
library instruction and helped out at the main reference desk for 
the general library. But it wasn't good enough. Maybe I didn't 
get tenure because I didn't try to publish some things that the 
dean thought I should publish. That may have been a factor. 

Many on the teaching faculty and in university 
administration firmly believe that a librarian should not have 
tenure on school campuses, mainly because our terminal 
degree is not a doctorate. It can lie with a master's. So we're 
not qualified to really be under that tenure umbrella. 
Librarians, on the other hand, would defend it on the fact 
that we think we are professionals. We do some similar things, 
especially trying to publish, and the whole key is trying to 
define what librarians should publish, because many librarians 
are research oriented. 



288 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I think determining who should get tenure and who 
shouldn't is left too much up to subjectivity and mostly to the 
dean. Based upon my own situation where I successfully met all 
the criteria, it is my understanding that the dean had a lot of 
input there. I would say that a lot of interpretation of data comes 
from our annual evaluation. We have a different measurement 
in our annual evaluation since we don't teach, and then they 
expect us to do a whole lot of research. 

Our publication record doesn't have to meet the same type 
of criteria or standards as that of teaching faculty, plus we are on 
a twelve-month contract, and we don't have time off. We're not 
on a nine-month contract where we would have time to go out 
and actually do more research. We're on a more service-based 
structure, which doesn't allow you a whole lot of time to do 
research. Basically, we're not seen as equals on the same field. 

In my case there was a much stronger and different 
interpretation of my position as a Basque Librarian. Where did I 
fit into a library field, which was geared toward a general 
undergraduate university library? Another element to my demise 
was the library's interpretation or understanding of what a Basque 
Librarian does. 

I was a specialized librarian, and there is no other similar 
position to mine. I didn't even fit as a branch librarian. If you 
are a music librarian, all the universities have music librarians. 
You can look at how your colleagues do their job and what they 
publish. You have engineering librarians, science librarians, and 
medical librarians, and all other universities have those, but no 
one else has a Basque Librarian, so what does a Basque Librarian 
really do? 

In the number of years I was at UNR, I tried to help the 
administration see what a Basque Librarian does that doesn't fit 
into the picture of a general undergraduate library. Are language 
skills important in a position like mine? Absolutely. But it is 
known that our dean doesn't care that the Basque or the Spanish 
languages are so important, even though that was one of the 
criteria for hiring me, at least according to the announcement 
that went out for the position. So I think it was just a total 
subjective interpretation of my record. As I went through the 
years for the tenure process, everything looked good. I was on 
the proper path of doing well, and the interpretation by the dean 
obviously was something different. 



MARCELINO UGALDE 


289 


The first committee to review my tenure application was 
within the library itself. Within each college, typically, there is a 
committee that evaluates their own candidates coming up for 
tenure, and I always had the unanimous decision by my 
colleagues to be granted tenure. Then you compiled a list of 
names of people who may not necessarily know you, because 
they didn't want you to send your tenure application to people 
that you knew. Those people might be aware of the type of needs 
or duties that you performed, and they might be slightly familiar 
with your work, so they would be able to judge and evaluate 
your tenure application on work duties. The evaluation that came 
back from a peer review was that they all believed that I should 
be granted tenure. 

Then it went to the university committee and tenure 
promotion committee. But before it went to the overall school 
committee, it went to the dean of the college, and they accept 
or decline tenure or promotion. The dean had denied tenure in 
my case, so it didn't even go to the university-wide committee 
until I asked for a review, and when that happened, they approved 
it, as well, recommending an increase in salary. They usually 
grant a salary increase with your tenure at UNR. 

But the dean still had a say. So in my case, even though three 
levels of peer review said yes, one person said no, and that's what 
stood. So was it a personality thing? The dean said no, because 
he believed, based solely on my record, that I didn't deserve 
tenure. Again, it's the interpretation of what a specialized person 
does, and I don't believe the dean really understood it. 

The dean had a different idea of the type of restructuring he 
wanted with a new person in charge of the Basque Library. He 
wanted that person to have more affiliation to the library and 
just a slight sense of responsibility to the center and its faculty. 

Jon Bilbao was completely with the Basque Studies Program, 
totally identified and working with it. He was a bibliographer, 
but he tried to develop some relationships within the library to 
help process and move materials and get them cataloged properly. 
Then they hired professional librarians, Maria Otero-Boisvert and 
Ellen Brow, right after him, and they were half time with the 
program and half time with the library, understanding that their 
connection with the library was just to process this Basque material. 

Then I came along, and initially I was seen as totally with 
the program. Then I moved as a completely independent entity 



290 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


out of the program to be tied with the central library. So the 
program lost having even half a say over what the duties of their 
Basque Librarian were. Basque Studies totally lost power over 
the library. 

It was a huge balancing act—trying to keep the library happy 
by being a true colleague of theirs, caring for the overall university 
library, participating in their meetings and what have you, and 
then trying to meet the needs of my clientele, which were the 
Basque Studies faculty and visiting scholars. So it was a very 
difficult balancing act, and I guess I didn't do too well, but I see 
that it's going to be difficult for anyone to do that. 


Notes 

1. In a conversation with Karlos Zarraga (May 3, 2007), he stated 
that Jon Bilbao used to acquire books from different bookstores. From 
Linacero, he obtained books related to the province of Araba, from 
Manterola, books on Bizkaia and Gipuzkoa, and from Gomez de Pamplona, 
books on Navarre. Then, he would acquire books about Iparralde when 
he would visit that part of the country. 




Joxe Mallea-Olaetxe 


7 oxe Koldo Mallea-Olaetxe was born in 1940 in Munitibar, 
Bizkaia. He obtained a bachelor's degree in arts from Pius 
Mortara College in Onati, Gipuzkoa, in 1964. Immediately 
after, he was sent to the U.S. as a member of the Order of the 
Lateran Canons. Some years later, in 1985, now secularized, 
Joxe received an MA in Latin American history at the University 
of Nebraska, Lincoln. In 1988, Joxe earned a PhD in Basque 
studies with an emphasis in history from the University of 
Nevada, Reno. 

Joxe is the leading authority on Basque arborglyphs (tree 
carvings) in the American West and maintains the largest 
database of its kind in the country. In this regard he advises 
federal, state, and local agencies, as well as individual 
archaeologists and historians, on ways to best record and 
safeguard the history of the Basques by maintaining tree carvings 
and sheep camps. Joxe is a history instructor at Truckee 
Meadows Community College, where he has taught for nearly 
two decades, and an adjunct faculty member at the Center 
for Basque Studies. 



292 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Zumarraga, tree carvings, and oral literature 

I came to the U.S. in 1964, and I worked in New York for a 
number of years. The first time I heard about the Basque Studies 
Program was probably in 1965 or 1966, and that's when Bill 
Douglass came to New York to talk to me, but I don't know if 
that was the first time I saw him. I also knew about Bill from 
other sources. We had mutual friends in Bizkaia, and, of course, 
I was very involved with the Basque culture and language at that 
time, as I was in the old country. I knew about all his efforts in 
Nevada, and I might have written to him before that. I was very 
proud that Nevada was doing something like that. 

I studied in Onati, and in the early 1960s we published a 
magazine in Basque called Erein. I remember that we used to 
buy every Basque book available—actually, a little money came 
from the States—and I read just about every book that was out 
there during the Franco years. That was our early school in Basque 
studies. I was very involved with everything that was Basque— 
the history, the language. 

Actually, it was the 
language that interested 
me at first. I consider 
myself a frustrated linguist. 

I realized that there were a 
lot of opinions and theories 
on the Basque language, 
but nothing was clear. 

Nobody really knew what 
the real answer was. I just 
let it go and started reading 
and studying history. 

So I had this early 
relationship with Bill, and 
I always had Basque 
Studies in the back of my 
mind, because it was very 
important to me, but then 
there was a hiatus of quite 
a few years. [From 1979 to 
1984, Joxe worked with 

handicapped adults in Joxe Mallea-Olaetxe, 2000 









JOXE MALLEA-OLAETXE 


293 


Crete, Nebraska.] During this time I made several visits to Reno. 
I had visited Reno in 1966 for the first time. I had a sister in 
Winnemucca, Nevada, and I had lived in Nevada for years before 
I went to UNR in the 1980s, so I wasn't a stranger to Nevada. 
[Joxe was involved with a weekly Basque-radio program in Elko 
and Winnemucca from 1968 to 1971.] 

Then I decided to go back to college, and I got an MA in 
Latin American history from the University of Nebraska, Lincoln 
in 1985.1 had a chance to stay in Nebraska and do a PhD in early 
colonial Latin American history. In Nebraska they had strong 
faculty and everything, but I much preferred to pursue my 
original Basque goals, because very few people were doing it. So 
I transferred to UNR to do the PhD in Basque studies, which had 
just been instituted. I really like Nevada, and that was another 
reason for coming here. In Nebraska the weather is not very good. 
It's hot and humid in the summer and cold and humid in the 
winter. But in Nevada the weather is much better, and besides, 
there are Basques around here. 

I came to Reno, and at that time, Bill Douglass, Jon Bilbao, 
Gorka Aulestia, and Linda White were here. Linda was just a 
student, but soon she began working with the dictionary. There 
were other people here ahead of me, like Yon Onatibia and Eloy 
Placer, but I didn't know them. Marcelino Ugalde was also at 
UNR as a student. I know he took Basque or Euskara classes from 
Bilbao, even though he didn't speak the language. When I came 
to UNR, I took over those classes. They paid me for teaching the 
class, so it was my only job while I was doing my PhD. 

The Basque PhD program was interdepartmental. It was not 
only Basque Studies, but also the History, foreign Languages, 
and Anthropology departments. We were a small part of all those 
departments. In my mind, Basque Studies was the biggest thing 
in the world, but very few people knew that it existed, and I 
couldn't believe it. [laughter] I would ask students, and they 
would say, "Basque Studies? What's that?" They didn't publicize 
it, because it was a research center. They also published books, 
but very few students around here read them. 

Bill Douglass was my supervisor, and Judy Whitenack, Prank 
Hartigan, James Tigner, and Guillermo Porras Munoz, from 
Mexico City, were on my PhD committee. The PhD took me 
three years. Bilbao was still in Reno, so I was most interested in 
his research expertise, and I took history classes from him because 



294 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I was a historian. He was born in Puerto Rico, and he had 
published books on Basques in America. But by the time I got 
my PhD, Bilbao wasn't here anymore, and he wasn't a member 
of my PhD committee. For that I relied on Porras. I also took one 
class from Douglass early on, the first one. Everybody, including 
Gorka and myself, were taking those classes from the Basque 
program, and I don't know if there was anybody else taking them. 
Then, of course, I took the classes that I needed from Frank 
Hartigan and James Tigner. 

Since the Basque PhD program was a tutorial program, we 
were doing a lot of the work on our own. For example, I tried to 
learn fifteenth and sixteenth-century handwriting, and that was 
pretty difficult. The program bought me a big book that was 
published in Barcelona. I was actually able to read a few things. 
Some of those guys had very clear handwriting, and others 
abbreviated everything. 

My PhD subject was Juan Zumarraga, first bishop of Mexico 
City during the sixteenth century. Now, I'm working on a 
manuscript for publication, which is almost ready. Zumarraga is 
probably the most important Basque person in America, without 
a doubt. I can't say Simon Bolivar was Basque, just because his 
grandfather was from Bizkaia. He knew about his Basque ancestry, 
but it's not the same. He lost a lot of the culture when his parents 
were born in America. 

Very few people know Zumarraga. He was a Franciscan from 
Durango who wrote in Basque. So you know what we think today 
about those old friars? They were just friars. But Zumarraga was 
another animal, a different character. He had economic views of 
the colonies that were far ahead of anything in Europe at that 
time. He wrote and printed the first books in America, and he 
was instrumental in putting together the first university in 
America, ninety years ahead of the first university in the U.S. 
Since in Nevada we call Pedro Altube the "father of the Basques," 
in Mexico, without a doubt, Zumarraga was the patriarch of the 
Basques. He was a very powerful person, and not just because he 
was a bishop. He had a very particular relationship with the 
Hispanic Emperor, Charles V, who died before Zumarraga in 1548, 
and then Phillip II took over, and supposedly Phillip II used to 
laugh about Zumarraga's letters, because his Castilian was so poor. 

My external advisor, Guillermo Porras, knew sixteenth- 
century Mexico City the best, so I was very lucky to work with 



JOXE MALLEA-OLAETXE 


295 



Participants at the Second International Conference, The Basques in the 
Mexican Regions, 16 th -20 th Centuries, 1995. Participants include Joxe 
Mallea-Olaetxe, front row, second from left. 


him. I remember when I sat with the committee to defend my 
thesis, the first question Porras asked me was, “When Zumarraga 
came for the first time to Mexico and he was walking down the 
road from Puebla, the highlands, and he saw the big City of 
Mexico, what do you think he was thinking?" 

I said, "I have no idea! What was he thinking? You tell me!" 
He knew so much history that he felt comfortable asking me 
that question, but I wasn't quite up to it. [laughter] 

After working on Zumarraga, and about the time I finished 
my PhD, I rediscovered the Basque tree carvings. If anything, 
my legacy would be the study of those tree carvings, which I've 
been recording for seventeen years. When I came to the U.S., I 
discovered that the Basques have been in this country for 150 
years, and very little research had been done, and very little had 
been published, especially about sheepherders. 

The study of tree carvings is not archaeology, even though 
the U.S. Forest Service and BLM [Bureau of Land Management] 
archaeologists and historians thought that it was archaeology. It 
took me years to convince them that it was history. It just wasn't 
written on a piece of paper; it was written on trees. It's just cultural 








296 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


history, ethnohistory. Tree carvings are a little bit like Zumarraga. 
Even though there are so many of them, and even though 
Zumarraga did so many things, the Basque people, especially, 
don't know beans about him. They know more about Ignatius 
of Loyola and Francis Xavier than about Zumarraga. Sure, Loyola, 
through the Jesuits, did a lot and left a legacy, too, but single- 
handedly Zumarraga did a lot more to influence Mexican culture. 

Basque tree carvings are in about ten states in the American 
West, so it's huge, and yet, very few people know much about 
them. I think it's a Basque curse. We do a lot, but it's not known. 
It was James Lockart, a Latin American historian, who twenty 
years ago said that the Basques did in America essential tasks for 
the Hispanic empire, but they haven't gotten credit for it. He hit 
it right on the nail! That has happened left and right. Maybe it's 
the Basque curse, or maybe it's what we should be known for. 

I lived ten miles north of the UNR campus, and I was looking 
out the window at the aspens. In the fall they become brilliant 
yellow, gold, red. I told my kids and my wife, "Let's go for a 
hike." So we went into the grove, which was very close to where 
we lived, and that was the rediscovery of the tree carvings, because 
twenty, twenty-one years before that I had already seen the 
carvings in Elko, where I lived for three years. I was actually in a 
sheep camp, and I asked the herders, "What's all this?" 

"Bah! You know, it's just to kill time, nothing." 

This is also very typical Basque. They don't give any 
importance to what they do, which ties very well with what I 
said earlier. So the Basques knew that all the herders carved their 
names and all the stories on trees but didn't seem to appreciate 
it. They never talked about them. I had to ask them over and 
over and over. 

However, after twenty years, I think the Basques are starting 
to appreciate the old herders. They go back to their sheep ranges 
where they herded sheep, and they take a look at these aspens, 
trying to find their names in there. But back then I don't think 
a lot of people appreciated the tree carvings. 

For example, the history of the Peruvian and Chilean 
sheepherders should be recorded now, because they're the ones 
doing that job now. But what's going to happen is that someone 
will come around twenty years from now, and he or she will 
start recording it, digging into it. Same thing happened to the 
Basques. Douglass and Bilbao wrote Amerikanuak, and there's a 



JOXE MALLEA-OLAETXE 


297 


lot of sheep history there, and there's also a mention of tree 
carvings, and even photographs. But, Douglass and Bilbao didn't 
realize what was on these trees and how much information was 
on them, because the Basques did not volunteer any information. 
Also, I don't know how much they went into the mountains, to 
the sheep camps themselves, and how many trees they saw. 

One day I went to Elko to give a presentation, and only one 
Basque herder showed up, and I asked him, "Why didn't the 
Basque sheepherders come?" At the time, I knew almost every 
one of them in Elko. 

"Oh, forget it! They want to forget about those years. They 
don't care. They know too much about those things." 

So that's what we were facing when trying to record a history 
of Basque sheepherders. They want to forget about those years. 

Whenever I saw something written in Basque on a tree, for 
me it was a very special tree, because none of these herders ever 
went to school to learn how to read or write Basque. Last year 
when I did research in the Bridgeport area on the U.S. Marine 
base, I found a lot of carvings in Basque, so I was very gratified 
with all of the findings. For me it is a highlight when I see 
something that has been carved a long time ago. 

Those who carved in Basque did so because that's the only 
thing they had inside. They hardly spoke any Spanish, especially 
the ones from Iparralde, and they knew very little French. So no 
wonder the people from Iparralde carved most in Basque, and 
people from Bizkaia would carve "Gora Euskadi [long live the 
Basque Country]!" and things like that, but not much more. 
Although a couple of days ago I was up in Susanville, and there 
was a fellow by the name Mallea who carved, "Agur bildotxa 
ekarrik [so bring here the lambs]." [laughter] So there were a few 
of those, too. 

Peruvian, Chilean, and Mexican sheepherders keep carving 
trees because they have seen the Basque ones, and it has become 
a tradition for them, too. They have the time and the trees. So 
it's a nice thing. In fact, they do much more than the Basques 
when it comes to politics, because they also are more cultured. 
They've gone to school, and a lot of these people are from the 
cities, whereas a lot of Basques hardly knew how to write—not 
all of them, because there's also Latin written on trees! So, some 
of those guys knew not only Spanish, Basque, French, and 
English, but also Latin. 



298 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



"Whenever I saw something written in Basque on a tree, for me it was a 
very special tree. "Joxe Mallea-Olaetxe reads the inscriptions made on an 
aspen tree deposited at the Basque Library, 1990. 


The Peruvians carve, for example, more, “Viva Peru [long 
live Peru]," and "I'm from Peru," and things like that, than the 
Basques did. The Basques, a lot of them, simply put their first 
name, last name, and the date, and that's your typical carving. 
That was enough for them. 

At the same time, for the last four years or so, I have 
intensively focused on Basque oral literature in the U.S., the 
bertsolariak [Basque verse improvisers]. In my mind, academically, 
culturally, and historically speaking, bertsolaritza in this country 
do not compare with tree carvings in any shape or form. We 
only have four or five bertsolari poets who can improvise and 
sing. What happened was that nobody else was studying this 
form of art, and that's exactly how I started with the tree carvings, 
too, because nobody else was studying it. I saw what was at stake, 
and I saw that these trees were going down and that we'd already 
lost 70 percent of them. Same thing is happening with the 










JOXE MALLEA-OLAETXE 


299 


bertsuak [Basque verses] and the Basque oral poetry in the U.S. 
Again, there were not very many people who knew about it. 

I discovered the camcorder in 1988 or 1989, and the people 
at the SHPO (Nevada's State Historic Preservation Office) in 
Carson City told me, "Don't use it, because the video doesn't 
last any time, and if you do so, try to use black and white film.” 
But then I realized that for tree carvings, the camcorder was the 
tool, so I bought a camcorder—actually, the first one was bought 
by the state of Nevada for my research, and I think it should be 
somewhere around the Basque Studies office. It was an old thing. 
So I have used the video recorder at the Basque picnics going 
back fifteen years or more. Whenever the bertsolaris were 
performing, I would tape everything. 

Then one day I looked at these materials, and I thought, I'm 
going to make a small publication, maybe 100 pages. At first I 
thought I would do it only in Basque, but then I felt, "Who is 
going to read this? People who speak Basque don't read." Then I 
said, "OK. I'm going to make it bilingual." Then the word got 
around, and I started getting bertso paperak or verses written on 
papers and information from all over the place, most of them from 
California. What I thought was going to be 50 or 100 pages turned 
out to be much bigger. In fact, Shooting from the Lip was published 
in 2003 by the North American Basque Organizations (NABO), 
and it has over 400 pages. I already have another manuscript of 
written bertso paperak almost ready to go to press, which is about 
bertsolari poets who did not improvise but wrote on paper. 

I wonder how many Basques have bought the book, because 
NABO hasn't done any publicity, and they just sit in a warehouse. 
The organization that has done more than anybody else to have 
this Basque bertsolaritza known in America is the National Cowboy 
Poetry Gathering in Elko and the Western Folklife Center. 

Through the National Cowboy Poetry Gathering, the 
bertsolariak, John Curuchet, Jesus Arriada, Jesus Gobi, and Martin 
Goikoetxea, went to Washington, D.C., a couple of years ago, 
where they got the highest national Folk Art Award from the 
National Endowment for the Arts. (Since then Arriada retired, so 
we have another man, Graxian Alfaro.) In May of 2006, they 
went to the United Nations, and maybe in another year or so we 
may go finally to the Basque Country to have a little competition 
with bertsolaris from there, because the Basques in the Basque 
Country now know only one kind of bertsolaritza. 



300 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


These guys in America are the old type and sing about their 
lives. They don't sing about philosophical matters or politics or 
current issues like they do in the Basque Country, at least not in 
championships or txapelketak. Well, they do a little bit, but they 
sing more about what they know. Maybe we will go to the Basque 
Country one day soon. 

The Basque language and Basque studies 

When I came to this country, for some reason, I did let go a 
lot of other previous research and interests of mine that were 
Euskara, politics, too, and life in the Basque Country under 
Franco. I'm not trying to criticize anybody, but in my mind 
Euskara and anything to do with the Basques is the same thing. 
In other words, if you don't use your language to study the 
culture, then the results are going to be a little bit skewed. 

In that sense, Gorka Aulestia studied the language and the 
bertsolaritza [the art of improvising verses] phenomenon. 
However, he wrote in Spanish. So my little share or my little 
contribution on Basque studies would be my research on 
bertsolaritza, but I'm not taking anything from Gorka, because 
he also published about it. Until I came to the U.S., I didn't write 
one single thing in anything but Basque, and here, of course, I 
have to use the English language. So I had to leave aside the 
Basque language more than I liked to. 

The use of the English language to promote Basque studies 
is a reality. What can you do? You publish a book in Basque, 
and how many are going to read it? Probably we're not just 
talking about now. This is the history of the Basque Country 
going back 2,000 years or more. The reason why officials in 
the Basque Country did not use their language—even when 
they spoke Basque and wrote instead in Latin or Castilian or 
Occitan, in a bigger language, a language that was spoken by 
and understood and read by more people—was that more 
people would know about what they wrote or what message 
they wanted to convey. It hasn't changed. 

I lived with Euskara, and to me there is no other way. But I 
think people who are in Basque studies should know the 
language—that would be the minimum that I would ask from 
everybody—and use it sometimes, you know? Bill Douglass 



JOXE MALLEA-OLAETXE 


301 



Joxe Mallea-Olaetxe (center) at a Basque Studies function. On Joxe's left 
is Bill Douglass, and on the right are Nere Lete and Gorka Aulestia. 


learned to speak Basque, and the people were amazed how well 
he spoke Bizkaian Basque, but then he didn't use it, and I guess 
he didn't feel like he learned enough to write in Basque, although 
he has written something in Basque, so he used Spanish instead. 
Bill also spoke Spanish with Gorka, not me, because my Spanish 
was kind of poor. I didn't know any Spanish until I went to school, 
and then in Onati we always spoke Basque. So I always kept my 
Basque aldean [within me]. And Linda, being an American and 
all, she learned Basque fast, taught it and translated it. So there 
have been some great things done in the program. 

Gorka and I always spoke Basque, but nobody else did, and 
that hasn't changed in all these years in Basque Studies. So if 
there's one thing that I miss in the Basque Studies Program it is 
the use of the Basque language as a vehicle. Someone, say, from 
America who is interested in the Basques and doesn't speak the 
language, but speaks Spanish or French and goes to the Basque 
Country to do research on the Basque culture, would obviously 
use Spanish or French to do it. So then he comes back to write a 







302 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


master's or a PhD or whatever, and he uses dozens and dozens of 
terms, all of them in Castilian or French like bacalao la Vizcama 
[Bizkaian cod] or caserlo [farmstead]. 

The reason is that he used Spanish or French to communicate 
with his research participants, so they gave him information back 
in the same language. They will learn either French or Castilian 
names rather than Basque names, because the interview was done 
in those languages. Then some Americans who read his published 
research are going to conclude that, “OK. So in Basque, 'farm' is 
caserlo." So at the beginning of the book or the publication of 
these researchers, they should warn the readers about the pitfalls, 
but they don't. So we have this huge confusion, and a lot of 
people still think that Basque is a combination of Spanish, French, 
Portuguese, even though it's a very different language. It's been 
the curse of Basque culture. 

The Basque program in Reno has gotten a lot of mileage, 
because they were—as the saying goes—in the right place at the 
right time. In Argentina, they published books much earlier than 
Basque Studies here, but somehow they haven't gotten the 
publicity, the name, and recognition, even though there were 
many more Basques in Argentina. A lot of those who went to 
Argentina—and those who ended up after the Spanish Civil War 
in Venezuela or in Nicaragua where there was another center of 
Basque learning and some books were published—were educated 
people. But here, a lot of it happened because Paul Laxalt was 
governor of Nevada and a U.S. senator, and his brother, Bob, was 
a well-known writer and founder of the University Press, and 
also because of Bill Douglass and Jon Bilbao. 

Bob Laxalt was a very good friend of mine. He was like a two¬ 
pronged enterprise—one was the Basque Studies Program, the 
other was his books, his personal writings. His books were widely 
read, and that's how the Basque community became known in 
the West, or at least in Nevada. Bob initially had a lot to do with 
Basque Studies, but after a while, when Bill Douglass settled in 
Reno, then Bill pretty much ran things on his own. 

Bob's first book was about his father, about sheepherders. 
There were a few books already written about sheepherders, but 
nothing with the insight that Laxalt had on his father and how 
he lived, and then he linked it a little bit to the old country. But 
Bob didn't speak the language, so his connections to the old 
country, to his father and mother, were in a way broken. At home, 



JOXE MALLEA-OLAETXE 


303 


they spoke English, I guess, and maybe they learned some French. 
I don't know if any of his books mention the language that his 
mother and his father spoke between them. I'm sure they spoke 
in Basque. She was running a hotel or little ostatu, so she needed 
English, and I'm sure that she told their children, "Now, you 
speak English. Learn the language." I never met his mother or 
father, but the father was a real Basque. 

Jon Bilbao's legacy is tremendous. Bilbao was a guy who 
spent—I'm not going to say every night—day after day at the 
library, when everybody else went home, because he lived alone 
and didn't have family in Reno. He would just read and read and 
take notes. That's how he built a huge bibliography. He was just 
a dedicated man. He also went to the local Basque hangouts 
quite a bit and talked to the Basques. It was a shame that he 
didn't know the language. He could have had much more insight 
into the Basque culture if he did speak it. He knew the history 
and the culture, and he probably read everything that was 
published on the Basques. 

Bill Douglass himself told me that when he was a student, 
he started working in construction, and there he met the first 
Basques, and he thought they were Italians. So Bill didn't know 
anything about Basques initially. But he has been the man for 
all these years. By that I mean he was the head, the coordinator, 
and he never shied away from work. His publications are 
incredible. In another sense, Bilbao was also the man. I think 
Bill relied a lot on him. So what Bill contributed to Basque Studies 
is tremendous, but it was that happy coincidence of Bill Douglass, 
Jon Bilbao, and the Laxalts, and the fact that there were a lot of 
Basque people back then in Reno. 

In the 1960s there were lots and lots of Basques, but in the 
1970s Basque migration to the U.S. started to wane, and then in 
the 1980s, maybe there was a trickle, and that was it. A lot of 
those who came in the 1940s and 1950s stayed, and those who 
came in the 1960s, it was so-so, because things were getting better 
in the Basque Country. The dollar against the peseta and the 
franc was not as great an incentive as it was before. A lot of the 
1960s people from Bizkaia, who ended up, for example, in Boise, 
Elko, or Winnemucca, stayed. But after the 1960s, fewer and fewer 
came, and I think a lot of them just went back after the official 
three-year contract, because they couldn't get the papers. Unless 
you got a green card to work, you had to go back. It's still the 



304 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



"He was the head, the coordinator, and he never shied away from work. 
His publications are incredible. Butin another sense, Bilbao was also the 
man. "Jon Bilbao and Bill Douglass looking at a magazine at the Basque 
Library, late 1980s. 


same thing with the Peruvians. Anyway, it's hard to say how 
many stayed and how many did not, because we don't really 
have numbers. Nobody has done a study to, say, take 100 Basques 
to see what happened to them—how many stayed and how many 
left. 

After I graduated in 1988, I was employed at Basque Studies 
for two years. When Joseba Zulaika came, I left, and I've been 
working at TMCC (Truckee Meadows Community College) ever 
since. I've been away from the Basque program for a few years, 
because I didn't have the time to get involved, and slowly I've 
been forgetting that this place exists almost, [laughter] 

I am always very happy to read all the books that come out 
of the program. I think a big change was when the program 
became more involved with the Basque government, but I don't 
know how much they are involved now. For example, in 1989 or 
1990, the Basque government gave me huge grants to work on 
Zumarraga and on the tree carvings. That was when the program 
and the government began to work together. That would be one 











JOXE MALLEA-OLAETXE 


305 


development that has produced considerable fruit. I think it was 
Zulaika who got into that more than Bill Douglass, because, 
obviously, he is from the Basque Country. Then more recently, 
when Zulaika became the director, a lot of things changed. I 
think one day Bill said that it was like a brand-new Basque Center. 





JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


m oseba Zulaika was born in 1948 in Itziar, in the Basque 
province of Gipuzkoa. He received a bachelor's degree in 
philosophy at the University of Deusto, Bilbao, in 1975. Two 
years later, he obtained an MA degree in social anthropology at 
the Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada, earning a PhD 
in cultural anthropology from Princeton University in 1982. 

Throughout his career, Joseba has conducted extensive 
fieldwork in various areas, such as with deep-sea fishermen, 
farmers, political violence, and the urban regeneration of Bilbao. 
He has authored and edited over twenty-five books and nearly 
one hundred articles, including book chapters. He has also 
delivered over one hundred papers at national and international 
conferences. 

Joseba has been affiliated with Basque Studies for twenty- 
five years and was its director from 2000 through 2005. He is 
currently a professor at the Center for Basque Studies. 


Total peace: first visits to Reno 


I got my bachelor's degree in philosophy in the fall of 1975 
at Deusto, and I wanted to do anthropology, but there was no 



308 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


anthropology in Spain at the 
time. I wanted to go to an 
Anglo-Saxon country, so I 
went to London, and there I 
found out that Canada was an 
excellent place to get a 
scholarship. In 1975 I got a 
scholarship to study at the 
Memorial University of St. 
John's, Newfoundland, where 
they were interested in the 
Basques because of their 
fishing and maritime tradition. 
They admitted me for a 
master's, wondering, "Who is 
this guy?" So that's where I 
ended up, and I loved it there. 
They were great people, a great 
department, and that's where 
I did my first ethnographic 
work on deep-sea Galician and 
Basque fishermen, the bacaladeros [cod fishermen]. The thesis 
was then published as a book called Terranova. 

I don't know who told me about it first, but I knew when I 
was in Canada that there was a Basque Studies Program and a 
library in Reno. Actually, in 1976, I applied to come to Reno to 
do a thesis on Basque mythology, and I talked to Virginia Jacobsen 
on the phone. I told her I was interested in a library research 
study, and a few weeks later I got the reply saying that there was 
no grant that I could use, so I decided to stay in Canada. 

After getting a master's, my mentor at Memorial University, 
Robert Park, applied for me to Princeton University, and I got 
accepted. At Princeton my mentors were James Fernandez and 
Hildreth Geertz. I felt that it was a jackpot for me. So in 1977, I 
went to Princeton to do my PhD, and after I did my grad work 
there and my fieldwork in the Basque Country, I went to Reno 
in the fall of 1980, and I stayed there for three months. I finished 
my dissertation on Basque political violence in the summer of 
1982, and I went back to Reno for an entire year. So that's how I 
began my relationship with the Basque Studies Program. 



Joseba Zulaika, 2007 




JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


309 


In the summer of 1983, I went to the Basque Country, and I 
began teaching as an associate professor at the University of the 
Basque Country, in Zorroaga, Donostia-San Sebastian. I spent 
the summers of 1984 and 1985 in Reno. In 1985 I received a 
three-year grant from the Harry Frank Guggenheim Foundation 
of New York, and with that I quit teaching at the University of 
the Basque Country, and I continued my own research. Then, 
once again, I went back to Reno in 1987, and I stayed there for 
nine months. 

During my first visit to Reno, I met Bill Douglass and Jon 
Bilbao. For three months I used the library for my dissertation, 
and I have strong memories about Jon, who was the librarian. I 
became very good friends with him. We would work seven days 
a week, Sundays included, and we would spend most of the day 
at the library. In the afternoons we would take a coffee, and it 
was the only time of the week in which he would engage in 
conversation about anything with me. Bill Douglass and Jill 
Berner were here, and by then, maybe, Linda also. When I came 
back for an entire year in 1982,1 used that office where the Basque 
Librarian is now. It had a window, too, and I just loved it. I had 
a great time. I had total freedom to do my writing and nothing 
else. Each time that I went back to Reno, I always enjoyed it. It 
was for me a place where I could entirely devote myself to writing 
and reading. I was quite happy in Reno. 

My first impression was that the Basque Library was a great 
resource. I'm an anthropologist, so anything that I needed on 
Basque traditional culture was here: Basque history, politics, art, 
all the works by Julio Caro Baroja, Jose Miguel de Barandiaran, 
and all the anthropologists. During my year in 1982, 1983, I 
worked mostly on issues of aesthetics, and Jon Bilbao gave me 
invaluable help in getting all the articles on aesthetics by Eduardo 
Chillida and Jorge Oteiza, so I spent a lot of my time working on 
that. 

Then I had in the main library the works of all the foremost 
anthropologists, which I also used a lot. I had an ideal 
combination of the basic literature on Basque issues and an 
overall good library on the current contemporary disciplines. So 
my impression was a combination of having an enormous 
resource and total peace. It seemed I had the luxury of having 
the whole library just for me. There were visitors, but nothing 



310 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


much. I was just by myself, and nobody bothered me in anything. 
Jon would always help me find any book. It was an ideal situation, 
and I felt it was so quiet. It was a jewel for me and a treasure that 
the world didn't know about. I always felt really, really fortunate 
to be here. I also liked Reno's ambience of intense light, the 
mountains, the desert, and the laid-back style. I loved it all. 

Gorka Aulestia finished working on his dictionary and left 
in 1989, and that's when UNR opened up a new position in the 
Basque Studies Program, although Gorka didn't have the position 
of Basque scholar. They only got one candidate, so they opened 
it again for 1990.1 decided to apply, and I don't know how many 
candidates there were—half a dozen or so—and I was lucky to 
get the nomination. So I was hired as a Basque scholar in 1990 
until now. 

I think it was the first time, probably, that they opened a 
search for a Basque position. The administration must have 
accepted the need for a Basque scholar at the program. Since we 
are a statewide program, Bill must have gotten an expansion of 
his statewide monies to create this position, or maybe, while 
creating the dictionary, he got expansion of all the funding. I 



Joseba Zulaika reading a book at the Basque Library, 1990. 










JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


311 


don't really know those details. My contract was a tenure-track 
contract, so every year we renewed it. After four years I got tenure, 
and after another five years or so, I got full professor. 

At that time, in 1990, Bill was the coordinator, as he had 
been from the very beginning, and Linda was his assistant 
coordinator. Then we had Jill and Joan Brick in the office. 

I came to Reno with my wife, Goretti, and daughter, Garazi, 
who was a year and a half old in 1990. Then my son, Joannes, 
was born in 1993. Garazi may be a good reason why I'm here, 
because she brought me down to reality. I thought I didn't need 
to work anymore, because I got the three-year grant, which was 
just incredible for me at that time, [laughter] That was why I 
had quit teaching in Zorroaga. But now I had to support a wife 
and a child. So that was the reason I thought I needed a job. 

I told my wife, "Let's go for ten years, and then we'll see." And 
now fifteen years have gone by, but I keep telling my wife another 
ten years. She remembers the original timetable, and it is one of 
those topics that I try very hard not to bring up, because it might 
be a problem, [laughter] Now the children go to school here, they 
have their friends, and here we are. We go back to the Basque 
Country regularly, and we are very happy with this arrangement. 

I did my studies in Canada and in this country, and I knew 
what the University of the Basque Country in San Sebastian was 
like—I didn't feel like going back to teaching there. I was not 
happy in San Sebastian while I was teaching in Zorroaga. That 
was why I quit and I asked for the Guggenheim grant. I could 
have had pretty much the same job in San Sebastian, but I much 
preferred Reno to San Sebastian for my work because of my 
experience as a researcher-writer. Reno had been a blessing for 
me. I had all the time in the world to read and write, and no 
entertainments from that side of the world, no diversions of any 
sort, and I just loved that. So I feel much happier here as a writer 
than over there where everything was far more factionalized, 
problematic. So luckily—very, very luckily—my wife did not 
object to coming to the States, and when we came, we knew 
that we were coming for a long stay. 

Back to basics: the Nevada Legislature and the advisory board 

Before I became the director of the Center for Basque Studies, 
I did nothing but research and writing. I was the happiest scholar 



312 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


in the world just doing that. I didn't even know who the dean of 
the college was, and I never took part in any committee. Then 
when Bill retired in 1999, by default I had to be the director, 
because I was the only other tenured faculty. I had to fill the 
shoes of Bill Douglass, and that's what I've tried to do for six 
years. It was not easy, but we survived, and I think we have even 
improved in some areas. 

I had never been in management before, so I went back to 
basics. "Let's create a research center, let's publish, and let's get 
to the basic reference-book work." So we got a good grant, which 
I helped write for a database, and the center was the initial 
impulse behind it. Let us get to basics in just teaching and 
connecting with the students. 

I took Bill's history of thirty-three years, in which the center 
had become internationally known as a center of excellence in 
Basque studies, and I expanded into fundraising, into 
institutional help from Basque homeland institutions, into new 
positions, into publications, and into a new curriculum. I couldn't 
have done that without the history of the center, so I have been 
pretty much totally on the shoulders of what Bill did. 

The Basque Studies Program became the Center for Basque 
Studies in 1999. In that year we had an external review process, 
which was carried out by Begona Aretxaga from Harvard 
University, Jacqueline "Jacquie" Urla from the University of 
Massachusetts, and Robert Clark from George Mason University. 
They did an excellent job in seeing the strength and weaknesses 
of the program, and they issued a series of recommendations 
that were taken very seriously by us and by the dean at the time. 
Their view was that Basque Studies was undervalued within UNR, 
and that the program had a much bigger potential because of its 
uniqueness and its own history of excellence. 

One of their recommendations was to obtain two new 
positions. So, during my directorship, the Basque Studies faculty 
pretty much doubled. When I became director, Bill was in a half¬ 
time position; Linda and I each had a full-time position. Now we 
have five positions plus a sixth de facto position, which is the 
William Douglass Distinguished Scholar. 

We are a statewide program, and every biennium there is the 
opportunity to ask for more funding or more positions or 
whatever. In previous biennia, we had asked the Nevada 
Legislature for more, but it never resulted in anything. In 2000, 



JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


313 



Goio Monreal (right), the first William A. Douglass Distinguished Scholar 
Award recipient, with Bill Douglass, November 2005. 


the year I took over as director, initially we were told that there 
weren't going to be any new positions available. Yet, the last 
minute, because I insisted on it, the university allowed us to ask 
for new positions and expansion of the program, assuming that 
it was again pie-in-the-sky. In the fall of 2000, we found out 
that for the first time we were on the list of priorities for 
funding from the legislature. We were at the bottom, but we 
were there with our request for two new positions, and we 
were surprised. 

How did we get there? We never really figured out how, but 
my own feeling was that Bob Mead [the dean] did all he could to 
support us because of this favorable review program stating that 
we would have a bigger potential if properly supported. Joe Crowley 
had really liked this program, too. Through thirty-some years of 
history by then, he couldn't do much for Basque Studies, because 
this was dependent on the statewide program. It was his parting 
gift to the center and to Bill. Both Joe and Bill were retiring at the 
same time. This is my speculation, but that is what I felt after I 
asked over and over, "How did it get on this list?” Bob Mead always 
told me that he thought Joe had something to do with it, but Joe 
himself would never tell you this. 










314 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I had a meeting with Bob Mead and Bob Dickens to talk 
about what we should do now that we were on this priority list. 
(Dickens is the UNR lawyer who takes part in all of the 
negotiations between the university and the legislature.) I 
remember getting there and Bob Dickens looking squarely at 
me, and the first thing he said was, "Well, it is my job to tell you 
that being on this list doesn't mean much, that it is very remote 
that you are going to get anything from this." 

I said, "OK, but let's find out what we have to do." We began 
getting information and mobilizing the recently created center's 
advisory board as to how we should go about making the 
possibility real. It is here that the advisory board became a 
decisive tool for us. It became a godsend for the center in terms 
of fundraising and influence in the Nevada community and in 
the university community. We had our first advisory board 
meeting in late January of 2001, and Joe Crowley and Bob Mead 
were at that meeting. After the meeting, before dinner, John 
Echeverria, a member of the board and later on its chair, had a 
phone call at home from William "Bill" Raggio telling him that 
they were going to honor his father, Pete Echeverria, in the 
legislature. Raggio asked John to take part in the event. 

Bill Raggio and Pete Echeverria, although from different 
political parties, were close friends, and Raggio had entered 
politics working with Echeverria. Pete had also been influential 
in Nevada politics, and John was in the same law firm as Raggio. 
There were those kinds of associations. 

This was all totally new for us. Back then I knew nothing 
about Basques in Nevada politics, but there was a tradition, and 
the Laxalt family was the main name when Paul Laxalt was 
governor and senator. So there was then some influence from 
the Basque community through that connection. 

Suddenly, we found ourselves in a very strong position. Soon 
we would learn that Bill Raggio was the guy that "cut the cod 
[has the last word]," as we'll say, and he was the decisive legislator 
in getting these two positions funded. So the fact that Bill Raggio 
called John was a significant moment for us. We commented on 
this, and when John called Bill Raggio back, the first thing Raggio 
said was, "John, there is no money, so there's no point." 

John came to tell us, "Raggio says there is no money, but he 
has asked me to go see him." After waiting a couple of months, 
we had a meeting with Bill Raggio in April. 



JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


315 


This possibility of a visit 
kept our hopes alive. 
Obviously, we mobilized Joe 
Crowley and Bill Douglass as 
the well-known director of the 
Center for Basque Studies, 
whose history everybody knew 
in the legislature, and 
Michonne Ascuaga, who was 
also in our advisory board. We 
also mobilized Pete Ernaut, 
who then mobilized somebody 
important in the legislature. 
Pete Ernaut was a very 
influential lobbyist who ran 
Kenny Guinn's election 
campaign for governor and was 
Governor Guinn's first chief of 
staff. So he's well connected, 
and he's willing to use his 
influence to help Basque 
Studies because he feels Basque. 

One morning, we were all in this meeting with Bill Raggio, 
and this was the time when the legislature was approving bills, 
and it was a hectic time in which legislators have just a few 
minutes to spare. So we got there, and Pete explained to him, 
“Bob Laxalt died last year, and we need to keep the tradition of 
these Basque studies alive. In fact, the Center has lost a position. 
The librarian used to be part of the Basque Studies Program, 
and we gave the librarian position to the library, so actually, the 
program has lost a member in the last ten years or so." 

So Pete made our demand that we needed to recover that 
position, plus one more, according to what the external reviewers 
had recommended. Then Bill Douglass started saying something 
about the center, and Bill Raggio just cut him off, "I know all 
about the center. You don't have to tell me anything about it." 

Then Joe Crowley spoke in supporting the center's work, and 
Bill Raggio simply said, "After the Italian studies"—he's of Italian 
descent—"Basque Studies will be my next priority. We'll see what 
we can do." 



"Bill Raggio and Pete Echeverria, 
although from different political 
parties, were close friends .... Pete 
had also been influential in Nevada 
politics. "Pete Echeverria, June 1959. 







316 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



"So [Pete's] well connected, and he's willing to use his influence to help 
Basque Studies because he feels Basque." Basque Parliament officials 
visiting Carson City, Nevada, July 1999. Standing, left to right: Carmelo 
Urza, Ana Ansa, Juan Mari Atutxa, Kate Camino, Koldo Ordozgoiti, Benan 
Oregi, and Pete Ernaut. Seated: Governor Kenny Guinn. 


The next thing we knew, after an anxious wait of several 
weeks, was that we got the two new positions. You can imagine 
that moment of total exhilaration. For a research center with 
three faculty members, moving to five faculty members was a 
major step in its history. It practically doubled our faculty. We 
now have five full-time faculty devoted to research and to the 
creation of texts and the creation of networks. I think we can be 
a very vital group in reviving Basque studies and in expanding it. 

The idea of the advisory board came partly out of the dynamic 
of the center, partly by chance. What forced this was that when 
Bill retired, Bob Mead called me to say that the Center for Basque 
Studies should be a site for an endowed chair under the name of 
Bill Douglass. 

I ask him, "So what does that mean? How much do you need 
for that?" 

"Two million dollars." 


















JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


317 


I ask him, "So, who's going to raise that money?" 

"Well, you." 

The College of Arts and Science, at the time, had a 
development officer who could help us. So in the spring of 2000 
I started talking with the dean about what we should do to raise 
that kind of money. The woman in charge of development 
resigned that year, and there was somebody new who did not 
have much experience, and it became very obvious that we would 
have to raise the money or nobody else would. Being 
inexperienced as I was, I thought that the dean was telling me 
this for real, that I had to raise this money. I took it seriously, 
and I started wondering, "How the hell are we going to raise 
this? This is just impossible." 

After we talked to several people, there was the idea of creating 
an advisory board. I said, "Well, I've done my part, and if it doesn't 
come out, well, it won't be my fault." The dean himself was in 
favor of the advisory board, but not everyone thought it was a 
good idea. I had the good fortune in this process of meeting 
with Cheryl Miglioretto, whose father is Italian and whose 
mother is Basque. 

Cheryl had just retired from her job as director of the Nevada 
Arts Council with a lot of experience in organizing things. I was 
going to Bilbao the summer of 2000, and she decided to accompany 
me on that trip to the Basque Country, and that was her first time 
there. She took advantage of my going there, and in this process 
we had plenty of time to discuss the advisory board. She became 
my ally and my advisor, and we started collaborating on how this 
could be done. One initial idea was that Bill should be on the 
board, because he had all the historical authority behind this. I 
went to talk to him, and, initially, he was ambivalent, because the 
idea of the board was to raise money for a William Douglass 
Endowed Chair. Bill wouldn't participate at all in the advisory board 
if its purpose was to raise money for that. That was his condition. 

So we left that aside, and slowly we realized that the advisory 
board had its own intrinsic value for us. Bill and Carmelo Urza, 
both, overcame their initial doubts. I was totally inexperienced 
in any of this, so they had plenty of things to have doubts about. 
When they began supporting the idea, the board began to take 
shape. 

That summer Pete Echeverria died, and we went to the 
funeral, and there for the first time I heard John giving a eulogy 



318 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



"She became my ally and my advisor, and we started collaborating on 
how this could be done. "Joseba Zulaika and Cheryl Miglioretto Ansotegui 
during the first meeting of the Center for Basque Studies Advisory Board, 
January 2001. 

of his father. I met John Echeverria, and Nikki Laxalt told us that 
he was a very powerful lawyer in San Francisco. This advisory 
board was all I had on my mind at the time, and I thought that 
he could be a good member of the Basque board. 

I consulted in everything with Cheryl, Bill, and Carmelo, 
and it was Christmas when we started inviting two dozen people, 
including John, to become members on the board. John didn't 
even reply to the first invitation. I had heard from Kate Camino 
that she knew Theresa, John's sister, and after I didn't get any 
reply from John, I said to Kate, "Why don't you ask her why 
John hasn't replied?" 

Kate called Theresa, and Theresa told John, "They invited 
you. You have never replied." 

"Well, let them send me that again." John said. 












JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


319 


So, I sent him a second letter, and John showed up as soon 
as he got it. It was already January, and there was a whole bunch 
of other people invited, but they either replied or refused to come. 

Finally, we got on the board people like Michonne Ascuaga. 
I just thought that it would be quite, quite difficult to have 
Michonne on our advisory board, but I said, "Let's invite her." I 
don't know why, but I thought that I should go to her with Joe 
Crowley. So in my naivete I had the nerve to tell Joe Crowley 
that we needed somebody like Michonne for our advisory board. 

"OK. Let's go, great," was Joe's instant reply. So we met 
Michonne, and her father, John Ascuaga. We brought the pictures 
of the first Western Basque Festival of June 1959. He was all 
excited, and Michonne was interested and listened to us. We 
were establishing a very powerful advisory board, and we were 
very excited about it. We had Pete Cenarrusa, which meant a lot 
to us because of what he means for the Basque community here. 
Mike Bidart also came, and he is very involved with Basque culture 
in California. We invited Josemari Basagoiti from Mexico, a great 



extern Basque Fe 
ft to right,: Johr 
ihn Laxalt, Joe A 


iva 

1 Committee, Ren 

o-Sp; 

isc 

uaga, Bob Laxalt, 

and 

:he 

o. Martin Esain. a 

nd Pi 












320 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


guy who has been considered a big banking figure in Mexico. He 
was very much in love with Basque studies in cultural and global 
terms. He's been living in Mexico all his life. Joe Ansolabehere, a 
writer for Disney in Hollywood, also came to the first meeting. 

We invited Jose Ramon Cengotitabengoa from Chicago and 
Emilia Doyaga from New York. They are both involved with the 
Society of Basque Studies in America. Emilia has never failed to 
show up for one of the meetings. We invited somebody 
representing NABO, and its president delegated John Ysursa. From 
the academic world, we had Begona Aretxaga, Jeri Echeverria 
(the provost of California State University-Fresno) Pello Salaburu 
(former president of the Basque Country University, whose 
contribution has been very significant), and also Bill Douglass 
and Carmelo Urza. The first Center for Basque Studies' Advisory 
Board meeting took place on January 31, 2001. Other members 
present at the meeting were Anita Anacabe-Franzioa and Felipe 
Muguerza, then the president of FEVA. 

That's how we started, and then obviously John Echeverria 
took over the election, and he created the bylaws, always with 
the help of Bill Douglass. John has been the motor behind the 
advisory board. The goal of the advisory board, as the name says, 
is to advise the center. It's not to decide in any sense what the 
center should be doing academically. It helps the center in 
achieving its academic and financial goals. In that regard, 
fundraising is a key aspect of an advisory board, as well as 
connecting the center with the Basque-American community 
and with the Nevada Legislature, for example. It also provides 
the center with an area of influence, in front of the administration 
here and with institutions in the Basque Country. 

Basque Americans have put up a significant amount of their 
own private monies, and they have given us influence in the 
legislature, influence at UNR with the president, and influence 
with the Basques. So the advisory board's impact on the center 
these last years has been enormous. The advisory board has raised 
over $ 1 million as of 2004 for a quasi-endowment which brings 
about 5 percent interest. Its goal is to raise $3,000,000 as part of 
the center's endowment fund. I don't know of any department 
in our college that has an advisory board that is helping them 
this significantly. 

When I became the director, I talked to Bill Douglass about 
getting support from Basque public institutions. Since the Center 



JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


321 



"[The board] helps the center in achieving its academic and financial goals." 
The first Center for Basque Studies Advisory Board meeting, January 2001. 
Left to right: Joe Crowley, Bill Douglass, Anita Anacabe-Franzioa, John Ysursa, 
Emilia Doyaga, Jose Ramon Cengotitabengoa, and Joseba Zulaika. 


for Basque Studies benefits Basque studies overall, and more 
concretely Basque universities and Basque scholars who come 
here and enjoy our hospitality in opening up the American 
system, I felt that Basque institutions, and not just Nevada, 
should support the center. John Echeverria and the advisory board 
gave the center an enormous influence with the political and 
financial institutions in the Basque Country. They helped us to 
achieve agreements with the Basque government and with 
Diputacion de Bizkaia. 

The people who run Independent Learning, a department in 
Extended Studies, didn't have sufficient personnel, and they asked 
if we could get a grant to put our courses online. So I went to the 
Basque institutions, always supported by Bill, to ask for help for 
online courses, essentially, publications, and conferences. With 
the occasion that Bill was given the Lagun Onari Award, we got 
a $60,000 grant from the Basque Ministry of Education, which 
we turned into an annual agreement, not only with the Ministry 
of Education, but also with the Ministry of Culture and the 
Department of Foreign Affairs. They reacted very positively, 
because in this globalized context we have to collaborate in 




322 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


making Basque culture and Basque studies internationally 
known. Consequently, we need to have books about Basque 
history and language in the libraries of the world, and for that 
you need money. 

It's strategically important for Basque institutions to let 
themselves be known worldwide, and for this there have to be 
publications in English with a guarantee of quality, and we're 
providing that guarantee, and that's why they began supporting 
us. We do have the basic infrastructure as a center, but we don't 
have extra money to organize a conference, for example, or we 
don't have $15,000 to spend in translating a novel or a scholarly 
book important enough to be published outside of the Basque 
Country in English. They are helping us strictly in this spirit of 
expansion of Basque studies, taking advantage of our 
infrastructure. 

We are very, very small fish compared with the University of 
the Basque Country. They have thousands of professors that are 
reading in English, but they should be writing and producing in 
English, also. We have taken a role to make them aware that if 
they want to be academically sound, and if they don't want to 
be totally irrelevant, they have to publish in English. They need 
to open up to the Anglo and the global world more. They are 
not doing this yet, but I'm sure they are doing more and more 
every year. In that regard, we are an influence in that direction, 
and in our smallness, we might be leading the way in that. 

We Basques have our autochthonous language, but we have 
done pretty well in going outside to the world for centuries and 
in letting the world know, in Spanish or in French or in other 
languages, who we are. Now the dominant lingua franca is openly 
English. There has been this Basque migration to the American 
continent, and I feel that the English language is one of the 
Basque languages, too, although it's not the autochthonous 
language. Same with Spanish, it's one of the Basque languages. I 
am Basque, and I talk English over here, and my son talks English. 
In a way it is my language, and my son is Basque, even if his 
language is English. I see English as part of our project. 

I think the Basque institutions' consideration on funding us 
was influenced by the fact that Nevada within the overall picture 
of the center's finances, has provided us the positions, the library, 
and the basic infrastructure, which has been the lion's share 
throughout the history of Basque Studies. Then you add to that 



JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


323 


other financial sources, such as the grants we have achieved— 
for example, the one to digitize the library in the early 1990s, 
and the one to create an electronic database, which we just 
completed in 2004. These are major grants that have become a 
very important part of Basque Studies. So that is the basic financial 
structure of how the center works. We have been lucky in raising 
this money in these last years and in mobilizing these new 
initiatives. So we are on a good path of expansion into interesting 
areas. 

Regaining a presence: courses, conferences, and publications 

The Basque Studies Program has been a research program 
since its beginning. It was not a teaching program. We had hardly 
any students. We rarely had public lectures or conferences, and 
the people who came here to do research would get into the 
library, and nobody else would see them. So we were absent, 
almost, from campus life. 

The role of the Center for Basque Studies has been to provide 
a library: basic reference sources, basic bibliographic and 
etymological dictionaries, and basic information for research on 
the Basques. Also, our role has been leading potential PhD 
students and scholars in how to research Basque topics on a wide 
range of issues. 

The research on the Basques has been possible through 
creating that basic infrastructure for research in order for anyone 
to use our library and to get the basic references on the Basques. 
In the past, this pushed Jon Bilbao to do his fourteen-volume 
bibliography. Now, we have added to that an electronic library 
database project and an improved library. We also produced 
textbooks for students and new publications on contemporary 
topics and conferences with the same spirit of expanding Basque 
studies. 

From 2000 to 2003 we created a curriculum with our own 
courses, and that was an important thing to do. We are a research 
center, essentially, but also we have a teaching component that 
is significant, although it is not our main mission. Before, we 
used to have our courses in Anthropology or Foreign Languages 
or History, and we used to have just half a dozen students in 
each class that we would offer once a year or once every other 
year. The number of students interested in Basque studies is not 



324 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


large, but they are scattered from different universities in America, 
from Europe, or elsewhere. They are interested in diverse Basque 
topics, whether it is the industrialization of Bilbao, the 
Guggenheim Bilbao Museum, the history of some aspect of the 
Basque Country, the language, political terrorism, or Euskara. 

Since we are, or we have been until now, the only ones 
providing instruction on Basque studies in English, we had to 
reach out and get information to those few people who want to 
write their paper or their thesis and have interesting, good, and 
significant projects with great potential. (A Basque Studies 
Program at Boise State University was established in 2005.) We 
felt that the format of the online instruction really fit us well. 
Then again, if we do not provide this instruction, nobody else 
will. 

So we created about a dozen courses on Basque cultural 
studies, literature, cinema, museums, social linguistics, 
cyberculture, modern history, economy, social institutions, and 
politics—in English. We offer them not only online but also on 
campus. For example, in spring 2006 I did fieldwork in Bilbao, 
and I taught an online course on Basque culture as if I was in 
Reno, essentially in the same way. So the Internet and online 
teaching allows us freedom to do research. 

Now, we have a significant number of students through this 
medium of the Internet, so the online courses are also a way of 
justifying or fulfilling our mission of teaching. It is in that spirit 
that we started online teaching, and it has been very positive for 
us. In the last two years that I've taught Basque culture, I have 
had the maximum number of students, which is thirty students, 
online. These numbers in our small world are significant. 

We wrote and published the textbooks that accompany these 
courses, which provided an opportunity for the authors to have 
a textbook and a course in English. In the end, we are the 
beneficiaries of a lot of work done by these authors. Also, at the 
time of the implementation of the online courses we had Nere 
Amenabar who helped with their design. Many thanks to Nere. 1 
A lot of these things have been done with the help and hard 
work of a lot of people who do this just because of their love for 
Basque studies. 

A few of these revamped courses on campus are diversity 
courses and capstone courses. We also have a minor in Basque 
studies online, which is the first minor online in any discipline 



JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


325 


at UNR. So that has made our courses far more desirable, and we 
have far more students. That has also made our teaching more 
interesting because of the intrinsic nature of the courses 
themselves—war and memory, identity across countries, the 
Guggenheim Bilbao Museum, or cinema—not just because of 
the Basque connotations. So we have really expanded our 
presence in the university in that regard. 

The other major change we have made was to create a new 
research agenda, which encompasses mostly an annual 
conference on a cutting-edge topic. The first conferences have 
been on politics, on the Guggenheim, on oral literature, and on 
diaspora. Other conferences could be on literature, cinema, 
juridical institutions, and the language. The conferences bring 
together specialists from the Basque Country and from American 
and European universities to mix their approaches and their 
discourses. Then, we publish the results of those conferences. 
We have already brought speakers of prominence to our 
conferences, like Ernesto Laclau, Slavoj Zizek, John Beverley, and 
Dean MacCannell. So we have become far more prominent in 
the university. 

We have also expanded our publication agenda exponentially 
in order to increase research on different topics. We have created 
five new Basque series, one being conference papers from our 
annual gatherings. A second is a series of Basque classical authors 
in which people like Julio Caro Baroja or Koldo Mitxelena or 
Jose Miguel de Barandiaran will be published in English in well- 
translated, nice editions. A third series has to do with literature 
and translation, because there are significant Basque writers that 
deserve to be translated. A fourth series has to do with migration 
and diaspora studies, and the fifth series is the textbook series 
that I just mentioned. 

One of the most important things that Bill Douglass is known 
for is the creation of the Basque Book Series. You don't have any 
kind of study without a text. Bill published throughout the 
history of Basque Studies about fifty books, and that has been a 
major breakthrough in Basque studies. Now, if you look at this 
global academic world, it's not much that you have fifty books 
on the Basques, if you are going to cover all the different fields. 
One of our challenges is to publish far more on the different 
fields. There is so much published in Spanish and Basque, but 
there are just one book or two books in English. We have to 



326 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


expand that, and the Nevada Press has been just excellent for us, 
and we owe a lot to the press in every sense. 

There has been a significant change in the industry of 
publishing academic books this last decade. This has resulted in 
more difficulty in marketing academic monographs. In our case, 
Nevada Press is going to have increasing difficulty in publishing 
our books if they are not made marketable. This prospect has 
pushed us into fundraising for subsidies for publication and 
distribution of books. We have gone to the Basque institutions, 
saying, “We need help to publish books on Basque literature or 
on Basque classic authors in English, and we need to distribute 
them to libraries and have a way of marketing these books." 

We have substantially increased publication, and I think it's 
still not enough. We could and should publish more, but we are 
a small group. We are probably publishing 90 percent of all 
academic books published on the Basques. If we don't publish 
them, there's nobody else to do it. So we have this pressure on, 
"You do it, or nobody else does it." We have the pressure to get 
the funding and the experts on translations, on editing, on 
indexing, on layout, and to be able to do a nice job and to 
distribute and promote the books. 

We're just beginning to create a new infrastructure for 
promotion and distribution of the books that we will be 
publishing. We had to take into account that this is for us a new 
area of work in the sense that publishing has its own rules and 
has its own world that you have to be aware of, and we're just 
getting into it. So we still lack a lot of experience on this. But we 
have made here another qualitative step, I believe. 

We have gotten far more involved in the Basque-American 
diaspora, since we have become part of NABO. Our thinking is 
to create courses and to publish, but for whom? We need students, 
and the Basque community should be the first ones interested 
in Basque studies. We wanted to let them know what we do. We 
were being accused of living in an ivory tower and not being 
connected with them. We said, “We are quite willing to do 
whatever—a lecture, a presentation of a book, a film—you ask 
us to do in any festival in order to provide the cultural component 
that is needed." 

They invited us to be a member of NABO, which was their 
idea, and we said, “OK." There were some initial difficulties, 
because we are not a Basque club but an academic center. 



JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


327 


However, they sorted it out legally for us, and we were the first 
academic entity in NABO. In exchange, we created, for example, 
the Ikasi program for Basque adults to learn about their culture. 
It is an Elderhostel program. That's how we opened up to the 
Basque community, and they really received us well, and they 
were happy. So we became actively involved in cultural activities 
in the Basque-American community. 

We will have a resident grant to bring to Reno artists, writers, 
and filmmakers from the Basque Country. So these are things 
that I foresee will be coming in a year or two. We are expanding 
the academic world of Basque studies, and I think we have made 
improvements. Certainly, we have to significantly increase our 
research on migration and diaspora. We have already started a 
genealogy project, which is the beginning of a much larger project 
that Gloria Totoricagiiena will carry out under her directorship 
starting in January 2006. 

How the genealogy project came about is one more example 
of how the center is at a crossroads of every topic that pertains 
to the Basques. Genealogical interest is one of an increasing 
number of interests that more and more people have because of 
online technologies. In the past we had lots of inquiries about 
surnames and genealogical trees and so on, and our way of 
replying to this was to refer them to some experts in the Basque 
Country. Then, in 2002, we began considering the possibility of 
having some genealogical expert from Europe replying to these 
questions. Two of our advisory board members initially showed 
great interest in this, and we thought that perhaps their donations 
to the board could go into genealogy. 

Our initial reaction to this was rather ambivalent in the sense 
that Linda, Bill, the new members, and I were not experts in 
genealogy. We hadn't been trained, and we felt that we, each 
one of us, had our own research priorities. Yet, on the other 
hand, we became increasingly aware that genealogy was an open 
field that could lead into instant studies in history and oral 
tradition, and it was one more way of approaching Basque 
migration studies. In 2004, one of the board members, Pete 
Ernaut, once again showed interest in Basque genealogy, and he 
thought he could help us, and we told him that we were also 
interested. 

We decided to make a genealogical conference in Bilbao, 
where we gathered experts in the field [Conference on Basque 



328 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Genealogy, April 18-19, 2005]. The Basque-American genealogy 
project could entail large databases on the presence of the Basques 
in the United States through all existing U.S. Census data. This 
could really open doors into knowing more than we know now 
about the migration of the Basques to this country and other 
countries, systematically. The idea was to complement from Reno 
the massive project on all the sacramental books of the Basque 
parishes, which is supported by the Basque government under 
the Basque bishopric's supervision. 

This is pretty much the genesis of the genealogy project, 
and in the future it could be a flourishing field. But it will have 
to be as a branch of the center, because we are not experts on 
this. We could put up the infrastructure and train people in 
genealogy, and it could have its own set of publications of interest. 
Time will tell how far we go, but if there is real interest, it might 
also be self-funding, in that people would pay for genealogical 
research on their family trees. 

We Basques are a very small group, and Basque immigration 
into the U.S. has been rather reduced, and we cannot compare 
with standard ethnic groups like the Polish or the Irish. For a 
series of historical reasons, the Basque Studies Program was 
created at the University of Nevada, Reno, and we have been the 
only Center for Basque Studies in the U.S. doing research for 
several decades. But let us not forget that we are a very small 
center. We are just at the very basic stage of having a library, of 
offering a series of courses, of having a series of publications on 
Basque scholarship from history to political science, language, 
and other topics. 

We have become an obligatory reference place for anything 
having to do with Basque politics or language or history, so that 
has given us a lot of name recognition. But the reality is that we 
cannot boast of having what we don't have. In terms of Basque 
studies internationally, we are almost the only name, because 
we publish in English, and in this global academic world English 
is the lingua franca, and we have benefited from that, obviously. 
But, the reality is that Basque studies is a very minor field of 
American academic studies, and because it is so minor, in a way, 
it's easy to do significant steps. 

Our new bylaws state that every three years we have to select 
a director. I have served two trienniums, so my directorship ended 
in December of 2005. I'm quite happy to go back to my research 



JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


329 


and writing. I've done my share of what I owe to the center in 
that regard. 

However, I believe that we need to continue to improve and 
expand what we are doing in a gradual way. I think there could 
be a much larger international collaboration of different 
universities, and to the extent that we can do that we will have 
a more international university of Basque studies and 
international research collaboration on diaspora studies. I think 
it is for us to achieve as much as we can. 

It isn't the quantity but the quality of research that is of 
value. Quantity is not enough. The quality of a good book can 
have far more impact than ten not-that-good books. I think we 
are heading towards the internationalization of the Basque 
university and systematic research on Basque diaspora studies, 
as well as the creation of cultural and artistic networks, in 
which we could bring Basque academics, writers, artists, 
filmmakers, and opinion-makers through different 
universities. By creating that network we could cover this country 
and other countries throughout South America. We are still far 
from creating that network, but we are making the first steps. It 
will be a lot of work, but I think there's much that can be 
done, and we can see the initial steps being taken in that 
direction. 


Being from here, being from there 

I have lived outside the Basque Country at least two-thirds 
of the last thirty years of my life. By now I consider myself 
American. My son is American, and I've decided to get American 
citizenship. [Joseba obtained U.S. citizenship in February of 2007.] 
Certainly, as a Basque American, I feel that my Basqueness is 
very much mediated or filtered intellectually, aesthetically, and 
even politically in some sense by living in the U.S. I am very 
critical of the politics of George W. Bush, but I owe to the U.S. 
my anthropological education, and I am at home here. 

At a level of intellectual biography, of course, and even at 
the level of personal identity, I am very much "contaminated," 
and happily contaminated, by being an American. Since my kids 
are from here now, certainly I feel intellectually and politically 
committed to this country as much as to the Basque Country, 
although my primary identity is still Basque. 



330 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


In that regard, an important part of my intellectual function, 
to a significant degree, is to be a broker between the American 
academic and intellectual world and the Basque world. Still, I 
feel that I am from here, and I don't feel like I'm, in any way, in 
exile or out of my element. I am quite happy living here, and I 
don't dream of having to go back anywhere. 

When you come here, you think, “Well, I'll go back after 
some time." Now I don't think of retirement as an either/or, 
either here or there. In practical terms, it might come to that at 
some point, but in terms of imagining myself in the future, I 
don't see an either/or. I see myself living in both places, traveling 
back and forth between both worlds, and it is that living back 
and forth between the two worlds that I most cherish. 

From the U.S. or the American public perspective, you can 
hardly understand Basque politics. My feeling is that there is an 
enormous ignorance of what Basque is, because, first of all, it is 
a difficult thing to understand. The Basque Country, in its 
smallness, becomes so labyrinthine and so complicated that 
people from here don't have the patience or the time to 
understand it. It's too complicated for such a small thing. What 
is going on in Basque politics is ignored from here. 

On the other hand, I think there is knowledge of Basques, 
through articles in National Geographic or even some films and 
documentaries, as kind of a different linguistic and cultural group 
somewhere there in the Pyrenees between Spain and France, 
which can easily be exoticized. Particularly in the American West, 
we are known for the tradition of Basque migration to these 
states and the entire shepherding complex. 

From the Basque Country perspective there is an anti- 
American sentiment and a rather negative view of American 
politics for a variety of reasons, in a situation like now particularly. 
There have also been a lot of television programs on Basque TV 
regarding Basques in the U.S., and because of the distance and 
projective nature of these images, inevitably, they are colored in 
a very stereotypical way. In some sense they are unreal and 
idealizing as all projective images are. Basques in the Basque 
Country have a sense of Basques in Reno or in Idaho that is 
perhaps not very realistic. 

In the global culture in which we live, I think there is a need 
for creating global images. Basque TV, Basque nationalism, and 
the Basque society in general need these images of globalism, 



JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


331 


also. The Basques in the American West are good candidates to 
project these Basque global representations. It might look like 
too much is being made out of it, and if Basque TV is so interested 
in this, it's partly because they are creating this idea of the Basques 
being global, which is historically real, but it adds to the idea 
that we Basques have migrated suddenly, and we live in the 
American West by tens of thousands of people. If you have a guy 
with a tattoo, wow, we are Basque and as American as what we 
see in Hollywood movies. 

How real are these images? This aura of globalism that comes 
through the media, art, museums is part of the culture in which 
we live, and in that construction of globalization for the Basques, 
we are pretty much the targets of that demand from the Basque 
Country. I think we fulfill that role of being presented from the 
Basque Country. "Look, we are also Americans." Well, we are 
just filling that role, and one could feel some ambivalence about 
it, but on the other hand, I see it as quite normal. To see 
Basqueness not as something entirely local could also be a positive 
thing. Basqueness can be an element of globalization, and being 
Basque can be a way of being international, of being beyond 
boundaries, of being beyond nations. 

Basqueness, through its migrations, through its maintenance 
of cultural heritage, through its learning of languages and cultures 
outside of the Basque Country, is an element of globalization. 
In that regard it is an enrichment of the tapestry of different 
cultures and different languages. It looks like it has to be fake, 
because it is so telegenic, and it is so much created by TV. There 
is obviously that fakery of something being seen through the 
TV, but I find it part of a world of communications and image 
parameters in which we live, and it's unavoidable. 

I, as a writer who lives outside of the Basque Country, believe 
that providing to these very local Basque realities an 
international, historical, amplified, and larger context that is 
outside of their so-called original or homeland or native context 
is something that enriches and actually makes the Basque reality 
be understood in a much more appropriate light. It shows you 
that your Basqueness was created initially in this interaction of 
historical, political, and cultural currents, so you understand your 
own identity in better ways. 

Whatever is the richness or the value of your tradition, it 
becomes better understood in a context that also includes the 



332 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


exterior to who you are or where you move to. The intellectual 
task from the diaspora of defining Basqueness in this global 
context is a very important function that we have to accomplish 
from here if we are going to understand what it is to be a Basque. 

To be a Basque is not only to have Basque surnames and to 
be born in a Basque area in a rural milieu, but to be Basque is to 
have a historical and cultural appreciation of your past, and this 
is a crucial part of what Basqueness has to offer in this world 
besides the brute fact that you were born there. If you are living 
in San Francisco, Manila, or Buenos Aires, to get interested in 
the tradition, migration, and history of your former generations 
and how they came to live wherever they are now and how they 
used to live, to talk, to think in previous centuries is crucial. 

The model of Basqueness becomes far more interesting if it 
is in this globalized, hybrid, and international context than it is 
in the context of your being born or having always lived in the 
Basque Country or that you have never mixed with anything 
else. In redefining Basque realities, identities, histories in these 
other contexts and still preserving them, there is something 
intrinsically interesting to Basque identity, in terms of language, 
tradition, aesthetics, expressions, histories, or oral narratives. In 
this mixture of things, Basqueness becomes far richer than just 
this pure thing that is untouched, nothing but Basque. 

It is our intellectual mission, in the diaspora, to redefine 
Basqueness in those terms and to make the Basques from the 
Basque Country conscious that all identities are partly 
constructed and partly very historical. We understand better who 
we are when we become far more open to mixing ourselves with 
other cultures. So we see the richness of who we are in its own 
terms, not just because we have been born Basque or because 
whatever we have is the best thing in the world. 

We have known other things in the world, we have known 
other cultures, other languages, and still we appreciate ours, 
because it is ours, because that is how our grandparents talk, and 
we thought it had to do with something sacred or something 
untouchable. We like it because it's ours, but we are above our 
own culture of progress and our own culture of tradition. We 
can make with it whatever we want, because it is ours. 

When your identity is the result of your own election rather 
than something that is given you by birth, there is a new sense 
of value. When you choose to study your tradition, and when 



JOSEBA ZULAIKA 


333 


you choose to appreciate it because it's yours, not because you're 
just given it, there's an added value to that. We also have to 
make the Basques in the Basque Country realize that being a 
Basque in San Francisco is as interesting as, or more interesting 
than, being a Basque in Lekeitio. In Lekeitio you are Basque 
because that's all that is there, basically. But if you decide to 
continue being Basque in San Francisco, it's because, on top of 
being American, you want that culture for yourself that in itself 
has a value that shouldn't be seen as a decaffeinated identity 
and that is being chosen by the people. 


Notes 

1. Nere Amenabar was a visiting doctoral student from the University 
of the Basque Country in 2000. Since 2001, she has been the Web course 
designer in Independent Learning at UNR. 




Part Three 





Carmelo Urza 


■ armelo Urza was born in 1948 in the industrial town 
of Sestao, Bizkaia. At the age of five Carmelo, his 
brother, Enrique, and his mother, Marfa Luisa, joined his father, 
Anastasio, in Boise, Idaho, where he grew up. fie went to Boise 
State University from which he received a BA in Spanish with a 
minor in history and education in 1971. 

Carmelo studied at the University of Madrid for a year in 
1969 and in the Basque Country in the summer of 1972. In 1978, 
he received an MA in Spanish literature at the University of 
Nevada, Reno. In 1981 he earned a PhD in Spanish language and 
literature from the University of Iowa, Iowa City. 

Carmelo founded the University Studies in the Basque 
Country Consortium (USBCC) in 1982 and has been its director 
ever since. The consortium would later become known as the 
University Studies Abroad Consortium (USAC). 

UNR and Boise State University's study abroad programs 

The first time I heard about the Basque Studies Program was 
from a friend of mine in Idaho, Sandy Boyd. She was my next- 
door neighbor. She is a Basque girl, and she had heard of the Basque 



338 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Studies Program and of some 
scholarships that were available 
for study on its summer 
program in the Basque Country, 
and this was probably 1971. I 
was interested in studying 
abroad and got the information 
from her and applied for a 
scholarship. I was awarded one, 
and I ended up going to 
Landagoien in Iparralde and to 
Arantzazu in Gipuzkoa in the 
summer of 1972 through UNR's 
Basque Studies Program. The 
summer program was struc¬ 
tured in that way in order to 
expose students to the political 
situation in the Basque Country 
while in Iparralde, since it was 
difficult to do so in the south 
because of Franco. 

At the time, I was a teacher in Boise, Idaho. There were a 
number of Basque people from Idaho, particularly from Boise, 
who had also received similar grants, including other teachers, 
such as Julio Bilbao, a school principal, and Pat Bieter, a professor 
at Boise State University. 

We were also exposed to a number of historical figures 
through Jon Bilbao during that summer of 1972. We had an 
opportunity to spend time with Telesforo de Monzon, who was 
just starting the political coalition HB [United People, in its 
Basque acronym]. Pat Bieter and I also spent an afternoon in 
Landagoien with Jon Etxabe, the head of the military ETA [Basque 
Homeland and Freedom, in its Basque acronym]. 

Etxabe was a big, strong, square-jawed man of mythical 
proportions, he was bigger than life. It was a difficult time. 
Etxabe's brother owned a bar outside of Onati up on the hill 
going towards Bilbao, and a few years later his brother and his 
wife were killed by Guerrilleros del Cristo Rey [Christ the King 
Guerrilla Fighters—a Spanish neo-fascist death squad created after 
General Franco's death in 1975]. In 1979, in Baiona, Etxabe was 
shot by Triple A [Apostolic Anticommunist Alliance—another 



Carmelo Urza, 2007 







CARMELO URZA 


339 



Faculty and students of the Basque Studies Program Summer Session 
Abroad at the Arantzazu Monastery, 1972. Left to right: Carmelo Urza, 
Miren Rementeria, Julie Chacartegui, and Gloria Garatea. Playing txistu 
is Yon Onatibia (with beret), accompanied by and unidentified musician. 


far-right death squad active in the 1970s] and was hurt very badly, 
and his wife was killed. 

One day, while the program was in Arantzazu, Jon Bilbao 
was driving Julio Bilbao, Pat Bieter, and I through the town of 
Onati, and we went by this building, and Pat Bieter said, "What's 
that building over there?" 

Jon Bilbao said, "That's the Colegio de San Lorenzo, and that 
belongs to the Canonigos Lateranenses [the Order of the Lateran 
Canons.] It's a seminary, and it's pretty much vacant these days, 
because there are not very many people going into the seminaries 
anymore." 

So, Pat said, "Wouldn't it be wonderful if we could develop 
an academic year-long program in Onati in a building like that?" 

When we went back to the U.S., Pat started working on 
the idea of establishing a year-long academic program for 
study in the Basque Country. Some of us helped in one way or 
other, but for the most part it was Pat Bieter who created what 
would be known later on as the Onati program. The program 
was administered by Boise State University. The first Onati 
program took place from September of 1974 through the spring 
of 1975. 











340 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


(At the end of July 2005 in Jaialdi [the International Basque 
Cultural Festival that takes place every five years in Boise], we 
had the thirty-first anniversary of the Onati program, and almost 
everybody went! We were a very close group, and it was moving 
to see everyone and sad in remembering the professors who 
passed away—Eloise and Pat Bieter, Jon Bilbao, John Woodworth, 
Joe Eiguren, Anes Mendiola, and Willis Sullivan. I am the only 
surviving professor from that group.) 

During that summer of 1972 I also met Eloy Placer, who was 
from the Foreign Language Department at UNR, and Eloy offered 
me a Spanish teaching assistantship to do my master's in Reno. 
So I came to Reno for the 1973-1974 school year and worked on 
my master's degree. In the fall of 1974 I went to Onati as the 
instructor of Spanish language and literature for Boise State. 

Plans continued to develop for the program as normal. There 
were probably between seventy and eighty people from Boise, 
including faculty. However, about a week before we were to leave 
the U.S., there were like five petardos [small bombs] placed in 
the facilities that were being renovated for us at the Colegio of 
San Lorenzo, and it was a clear warning. Also, probably starting 
about a week or ten days before we arrived, there began to be 
passed out in Onati a lot of pamphlets saying that the Americans 
who were coming were in a drug and alcohol rehabilitation 
program. 



"We were a very close group." Faculty and students of Boise State 
University's Onati program pose at San Lorenzo school, c. 1974-1975. 










CARMELO URZA 


341 


Jon Bilbao was apparently in contact with those folks, and 
Pat and I were told that there was no problem, “You should just 
go ahead and continue to come. No problem." So when we arrived 
at Bilbao's Sondica airport, it was taken over by the Guardia Civil 
[Spanish Civil Guard]. It was just surrounded by tanks and 
Guardias Civiles everywhere. It was just absolutely extraordinary. 
They were there to "protect" us. All along the road from Sondica 
to Onati, like every kilometer or so, there was a Guardia Civil 
member standing there, all the way! 

When we got to Onati at night, the whole town had been 
taken by the Guardia Civil. There were dogs, horses, and 
tanquetas [small tanks]. To go in like that under those 
circumstances was just unbelievable! The entrance going up the 
hill to San Lorenzo was closed off by little tanks from the Guardia 
Civil. I remember Pat asking me to go up to the commander of 
the Guardia Civil and thank him for being there and caring for 
us, which was really a horrible thing to have to do. We had no 
choice. 

Then later on in November of 1974, an article appeared in 
Cambio 16 about how there were agents of the CIA in Onati. 
Cambio 16 was a magazine with credibility, and it would print 
things that maybe the dictatorship did not like. Cambio 16 came 
to do an interview of all the students and the entire faculty. “Are 
you guys agents of the CIA?" and all the students were laughing. 

I remember one of the student's quotes that got published 
saying, “Yes, we came here to steal the secrets of the chocolate 
factory Azor," because Onati had three or four chocolate factories 
at the time. 

Jon Bilbao had always been accused of being an agent of the 
CIA, so I would imagine that the article was directed towards 
him. He had apparently worked with the OSS, which was the 
precursor to the CIA, during the Second World War, trying to 
make things happen in the Basque Country. 

Probably more than half of the students in the Reno program 
in 1972, in the Onati program in 1974-1975, and in the University 
Studies of the Basque Country Consortium (USBCC) and then 
USAC, were of Basque descent. I think that the effect of that was 
the development of a group of young educated people in the 
United States who had been to the Basque Country, who spoke 
the languages, and who had re-established their roots in the 
Basque Country. They had sort of revitalized their ethnicity in 



342 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


some ways, recharged their ethnic batteries—however you want 
to say it—and had done it by direct experience, not through the 
eyes of their parents who emigrated maybe in the 1940s or 1950s 
or 1960s and whose memory of the Basque Country was nostalgic 
and based in baserris. 

Rather they came to know the Basque Country in its current 
state and developed friendships and really became grounded 
there, and that has had a huge impact. When you look around 
the American West, an awful lot of people who are leaders in 
Basque-American communities and are well educated were part 
of those study-abroad groups. 

The first Onati program also had a wonderful group of faculty. 
Yon Onatibia was the Basque language teacher, and he also taught 
dance and txistu to several of the students. He was a wonderful 
human being and very warm and generous with his time. Joe 
Eiguren taught history and was very much involved and was a 
very passionate man, and he gave the group a tremendous 
amount of credibility. Anes Mendiola, who was a teacher, was 
born in Boise but spoke good Bizkaian Basque. She was with us 
the first time she ever went back to the Basque Country, and she 
was probably in her fifties. She was just a very strong, dynamic, 
wonderful woman, and I think she also gave the group a 
tremendous amount of credibility with all the local people. Anes 
Mendiola was like our house mother. Willis Sullivan, who also 
taught Spanish, was from Boise and was also a wonderful, 
enthusiastic, and warm human being. 

Pat Bieter, who also taught, was the director. Then there was 
also John Woodworth and his wife Rebecca. John was a professor 
emeritus of the English Department for Boise State. He liked 
theater, and he was a great professor and just a tremendous 
presence, and he was just wonderful, as was Rebecca. Woodworth 
died in Onati during that year, around March or April. His 
daughter was visiting with her husband and kids, and he just 
went to bed and passed away in his sleep. I think that was an 
experience for the students. There was no mortuary and no way 
of handling the body, so the students and the faculty had to get 
the coffin and go up to the fourth or fifth floor, get the body 
and put it in the coffin, take it to the cemetery, and then have a 
wake all night at the cemetery. There were a lot of experiences 
like that that made this group just extraordinarily close and very 
unique. 



CARMELO URZA 


343 



"Rather they came to know the Basque Country in its current state and 
developed friendships and really became grounded there, and that has had 
a huge impact. "Yon Onatibia gives a lecture to students and faculty of the 
1972 Basque Studies Program Summer Session Abroad, Landagoien, Ustaritz. 


Then, I remember that the first program in Onati produced 
something in the neighborhood of eight to ten marriages, within 
a group of about seventy students. In part it was because there 
was a lot of interaction with locals. I think that the experiences 
lived by that group has been lost with the type of programs 
offered today. Onati was a very small town, and there wasn't a 
whole lot to do. There were two movie theaters, and then, I 
think, ETA destroyed one of them. There was virtually no TV 
because ETA blew up the TV transmitter. 

So a movie theater was all we had, and bars. Students would 
go downtown and go to the bars and talk to the local people. 
That's what everybody did. Also Onati was very isolated. You 
couldn't get in or out of Onati very well. There was no train 
getting out of there. You could take a bus, but it would take you 
forever to get to Donostia or Bilbao. Students were fairly isolated 
there. That was not positive, but as a result they relied upon 
themselves, and they spent a lot of time together. 

In 1975 I came back to Reno for a year, and after completing 
my master's, then I went to the University of Iowa to do my PhD 














344 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


from 1976 to 1981. (The title of the dissertation was "Historia, 
Mito y Metafora en La Saga/Fuga de J. B. Torrente Ballester" 
["History, Myth and Metaphor in J.B. Torrente Ballester's La Saga/ 
Fuga".]) After I finished my PhD, I taught Spanish at the 
University of Richmond, in Richmond, Virginia, but I was always 
in contact with the people of Boise State, Pat Bieter and so on, 
and with the people at the Basque Studies Program, Jon Bilbao 
and Bill Douglass. 

In 1981 there was some talk between Bill Douglass and Pat 
Bieter, and I was involved in those conversations. "Gosh, why 
don't we do something together and do some kind of a 
consortium effort between the Basque Studies Program and Boise 
State University?" The talks had to do with the possibility of 
joining forces and developing a consortium that would organize 
study abroad programs in the Basque Country and that would 
draw on a larger population than either Boise State or UNR alone 
drew on so they would have enough students to have a viable, 
ongoing program. The Reno and Onati programs did not have 
much continuity. Following these conversations, I was hired by 
UNR in 1982 to run the new consortium program. 

The Onati program operated on about an every-third-year 
basis. After the 1974-1975 Onati program, it continued 
sporadically. I know Patxi, from Elko, and his wife, Julie 
Chacartegui, directed the program one year, and then Pat Bieter 
probably directed it another year. Over a period of about ten 
years, the Onati program probably functioned about three times. 
Each time the program kept getting smaller and smaller, and it 
was a greater struggle to continue to have that program go. They 
would announce the program, and then they would not have 
enough students, and they would cancel it, and the next year 
they would announce the program, and they would not get 
enough students, and they'd cancel it. And then the third year 
maybe they'd get enough students to have a program, and they'd 
go! 

The same thing happened at the University of Nevada, Reno, 
with the Basque Studies Program. It had a summer program that 
went about every third year as well, and for the same reason. 
They wouldn't have enough students. Then the pool would kind 
of build, and at some point somebody would pull the plug on 
the pool, and everybody would go abroad. So you'd have to start 
that building process again. 



CARMELO URZA 


345 


From USBCC to USAC 

My contract in Reno started on September 1, 1982, and the 
Basque government was having the first world Basque diaspora 
conference [The American Basques in the Basque Country 
Congress, September 2-7, 1982, Donostia-San Sebastian]. I had 
an opportunity to go over there, as they agreed to pay for my 
airplane ticket. The Basque government was paying for Basque 
representatives to go from all over the world to San Sebastian 
and have some kind of voice in the Basque government sponsored 
activities, more than anything. I participated in the conference 
for a week, and then I was able to start organizing the program, 
so I kind of piggy-backed. 

Bill and Jon Bilbao had talked to Gregorio "Goio" Monreal 
and then to Enrike Knorr, who were the rector and vice-rector of 
the University of the Basque Country respectively. So by the time 
I really came on board, there was some semi-formal 
understanding that the program would be established in Vitoria, 
because that's where filologia Vasca [Basque philology] and 
filologia Espanola [Spanish philology] were taught. 

I went to Vitoria, and I spent probably five or six days there 
with Enrike Knorr, who was the president of the campus of 
Vitoria, which was just starting. Enrike is a very, very nice man 
and immensely helpful and a good friend to this day, but I 
thought that the campus was too underdeveloped. 

The university campus did not exist, there were no real 
buildings, and there was no real student life. Enrike hadn't even 
moved to his office yet. The city itself was fairly small and 
provincial at the time, and the Basque government was just 
getting started. [Vitoria-Gasteiz is the seat for the Basque 
government.] Everybody went to Vitoria to work during the week, 
and they all left on weekends and went back to their towns. 

I didn't think at that time that Vitoria was the most 
interesting or appropriate place for American or Basque-American 
students to go. Basque was not spoken on the streets at all. Since 
nobody, or very few people, in Vitoria spoke Basque, it seemed a 
little awkward to go from the United States to Vitoria to study 
Basque where Basque was not spoken. It was not a place where 
one could go and study Basque easily. 

So I started looking at other places and talking to other people. 
I talked one time with the University of Deusto, even, and they 



346 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


were very interested. I thought that Onati was a wonderful, 
wonderful place, a beautiful place. However, it was a small place 
for a lot of students of diverse backgrounds. There were very few 
resources and very little to do. It was a very, very authentic place 
but very limiting. It also was very difficult to get in and out of 
and very restricted that way. (I love going to Onati still. Every 
time I go to the Basque Country, I always try to go to Onati and 
to Arantzazu [the Arantzazu Franciscan monastery]. I feel very 
close to Arantzazu.) 

In fact, all of the university students from Onati were all 
studying in Bilbao and Donostia. They weren't in Onati. So I 
thought that was far better to find a place where American 
students and students from other countries would have the 
opportunity to be able to meet people of their own age. I think 
that's probably one of the most important things that we can do 
as an organization, and that is to provide the contacts for our 
students to meet and befriend and spend time with local students. 
That's an extremely important aspect of our job. 

Ultimately, I asked Goio if we could start the program in 
Donostia. I thought that it was probably a more interesting place 
at that time, and perhaps at some point in the future we could 
expand or change. Considering what we were trying to 
accomplish, I thought Donostia was more appropriate and more 
attractive, with a beach, the bay, the magnificent views, and the 
much higher rate of Basque speakers and much better contacts. 
It had more university infrastructure, it had more buildings, and 
it had a lot more faculty. It had infinitely more human and 
physical resources than Vitoria at the time. Goio was kind of 
reluctant, because he knew that Enrike Knorr really wanted us to 
go to Vitoria, but he acquiesced and was very gracious about it, 
and he helped us then get established in Donostia. 

Goio was a law professor, and his office at the law school was 
vacant, and he let us use his personal office as a place for the 
resident director, who was Sandra Ott, during the first year. Sandra 
Ott, an American from Pomona, California, had just finished 
her PhD at Oxford in anthropology, and her field of studies was 
Basque culture in the French Basque Country. So she had a great 
affection and knowledge of the Basque culture, and this was kind 
of an interesting stretch for her. 

We also had some office spaces up in Zorroaga, which was, 
at the time, pretty grim and pretty primitive. That building, the 



CARMELO URZA 


347 


aula magna, eventually collapsed about eight years later. It was a 
cold place in the winter and the students had to sit in classrooms 
with gloves and sweaters. Then we were able to use some of the 
other buildings around the law school, such as the barracones 
[barracks], which were mobile or temporary buildings with very 
small classrooms. They would only hold about fifteen or twenty 
people in a class, so they were not very usable for the very large 
classes that the Basque University had there. But they were perfect 
for us. We started piecing the thing together, and that's how we 
started the program, which was the first program. 

The first group of students went to Donostia in late August 
or September of 1983. There were twenty-eight students, 
including Kate Camino and her sister Marguerite, and that was 
the kick-off. The consortium, at the time, was called the 
University Studies in the Basque Country Consortium. It was 
the first academic year-long program, and we continue to 
organize them to this day. Then, we started a summer program 
in the Basque Country in 1984. 

We spent the first month in Hondarribia at the youth hostel 
there up on a hill. During that time we would drive students 


t 



USAC classroom in Donostia-San Sebastian, 1986. 












348 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


back and forth in order to find housing for the students in San 
Sebastian. Then in October when the University of the Basque 
Country opened its doors, we all moved from Hondarribia to 
San Sebastian. We did that for about three or four years, until we 
had enough experience to be able to move all the students to 
San Sebastian. 

There had been a lot of student strikes over the first fifteen 
years or so in the Basque university, but we've always had a sort 
of strategy of being able to move our classes to non-university 
buildings. We had to have the classes in order to be able to meet 
our contact hours for American accrediting standards. Otherwise, 
it could have been a disaster for us. At the same time, we tried to 
be sensitive to the political situation and did not want to breach 
the strike and go on campus and have our classes like nothing 
was happening. 

For example during our first program in 1983, if I remember 
correctly, we had acquired some books in English, so we had a 
little bit of a library, and then the week when classes began and 
the university began, the library closed for renovation or for some 
other reason. So there was no library for quite some time, and 
Sandra Ott had the books in the trunk of her car, and that became 
the library for awhile. 

Sandra was resident director in Donostia for three years, and 
then she went back to Oxford. She was commuting back and 
forth from Oxford to the Basque Country, because her husband 
was at Oxford. When we opened up a summer program, it became 
a bit too much of a demand on her time, so she relinquished the 
position and went back to Oxford. The quality of her work is 
evident to this day. Felix Menchacatorre took over the position. 

Felix had just finished his PhD in Spanish literature from 
the University of Cincinnati and had been teaching at Xavier 
University in Cincinnati. So he went back to the Basque Country 
and was one of our first teachers, as was his wife, Patricia 
O'Connor. Now, Patricia is resident director of the San Sebastian 
program, and Felix is resident director of the Bilbao program 
and the overall USAC coordinator in Spain. Felix has been with 
USAC for twenty-four years, and he has been absolutely 
instrumental in the success that USAC has had in San Sebastian, 
in Bilbao, in the Basque Country, and in all of the Spanish state. 
He is also responsible, I'm sure, for USAC receiving the Tambor 
de Oro [Golden Drum] Award in 1995. He does not get the public 



CARMELO URZA 


349 


recognition that he should for all of his contributions. He's a 
very intelligent, dedicated, hardworking, and honorable human 
being. 

Obviously, I'm the USAC employee of the longest duration, 
and then Felix, Patricia, and Luis Mokoroa are the longest. Luis 
is a chef in San Sebastian and president of La Cofradia Vasca de 
Gastronomia [the Basque Gastronomic Society]. For the last 
twenty-four years he has taught the Basque cuisine class to our 
students at the cofradia in Donostia, which is very nice and very 
authentic. They've just been wonderful over the years. 

Then, in 1984 we started organizing a program in Pau 
University, France, that went into effect in the fall of 1985. And 
again, there was kind of a Basque connection. There was a Basque 
scholar, Txomin Peillen, teaching at Pau, so we thought that a 
new program would be attractive to French Basques to study 
Basque and also French. Then in fall of 1987 we established a 
program in Turin, Italy. It was probably somewhere around the 
establishment of the Italy program when we changed the name 
of the consortium to the University Studies Abroad Consortium, 
so that it had a broader appeal and was more accurate. (The 
change of name happened around 1988, 1989.) We have almost 
always had programs in kind of unusual places, and we have set 
ourselves apart from other study abroad organizations. We are, I 
believe, to this day the only American program in San Sebastian, 
in Pau, and in Turin. They've all been great, very authentic, and 
interesting places to educate students. 

The heritage of USAC was to create programs, the opportunity 
for American and Basque-American students to study in the 
Basque Country, and that was the original purpose of the 
consortium. We have always been focused on the Basque Country 
and still are today. The Donostia program is still a very popular 
and wonderful program with a great quality. 

Both my children, Gabriel and Alexandra, studied in the 
program in San Sebastian for an entire year, and I'm a believer in 
it. Our second program in the Iberian Peninsula was in Bilbao, 
and we kept focusing on the Basque Country. We then started 
having a sort of increase, and this was during the growth years 
in Spain, so we wanted to create a third site. We talked to the 
Public University of Navarra on several occasions, and we went 
over to meet with them. They never got back to us. I guess they 
weren't interested. 



350 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



"We have almost always had programs in kind of un usual places, and we 
have set ourselves apart from other study abroad organizations." Carmelo 
Urza holding the 1990-1991 USAC catalog. 


We realized that we had to create another program site 
somewhere else, so we started looking around, and we started 
talking to a lot of different universities, and we found a Madrid 
university and also a university in Alicante. The Alicante 
university really came by surprise in some ways. We didn't really 
think we wanted to go there, but we talked to them, and we 
realized that they were really good people and it was a nice 
campus, a terrific setting, and that everybody was starting to go 
to Alicante. So we thought, "Boy, we better jump on this while 
we have a chance." And we're so lucky that we got in, because 
now there are probably four or five American programs in 
Alicante, but we were there early, and we're very happy with 
that. 

The other university that we made an agreement with—and 
this was a mistake—was the Spanish extension university, called 
UNED, the Universidad Nacional de Educacion a Distancia [the 
National University of Long-distance Education]. That was the 
biggest university in Spain with 120,000 students, huge! The 
facilities we were using were outside of Madrid in Las Rozas, and 
they were absolutely magnificent. They had state-of-the-art 









CARMELO URZA 


351 


facilities with a beautiful cafeteria and great everything. You 
couldn't ask for anything better. So, we signed a contract with 
them. 

However, their students were adults with jobs and families 
and tended to go to the university at four or five o'clock in the 
afternoon, so there were very few students on campus during 
the day. They had this facility open and just empty all day long. 
Those students weren't the kind of students that our students 
would hang with, because they were not traditional students. 
Our students lived in Madrid, and it would take them forty-five 
minutes to an hour to get to Las Rozas by bus, which was the 
only way of getting out there. So we were with UNED for one or 
two years, and then we both realized that it was a mistake. 

We were very lucky to find the Universidad Rey Juan Carlos 
I [King Juan Carlos I University], and we're still there now. It's 
been a wonderful university, a wonderful relationship. It's the 
University of the Autonomous Community of Madrid under the 
name of King Juan Carlos I. They have magnificent facilities and 
beautiful campuses. They have cafeterias, a magnificent new 
library, and great buildings of all sorts. 

There are three campuses of that university, and we are on 
the campus of Vicalvaro, which is also a metro stop, so our 
students, who all live in Madrid, jump on the metro, walk out of 
it, and they are at the campus. There's a law school, they teach 
sociology, political science, liberal arts, and their students are 
very compatible with our students. 

Developing the consortium: administration and finance 

Pat and Bill were able to put together some initial funding 
for the consortium. My recollection is that Bill Douglass 
personally put up $7,500. In Boise the Simpson family put up 
$7,500 for the beginning of this consortium. Boise State 
University and the University of Nevada, Reno also contributed 
$7,500 each. 

Both Pat and Bill in different conversations asked me 
individually if I wanted to head up that effort, and that's how it 
happened. So I said yes, and I was very happy to do so, and then 
they said, "Would you want to organize it from Boise or from 
Reno?" I was from Boise, and I wanted to organize it from Boise. 
My wife, Monique Laxalt, was from Reno and wanted to live in 



352 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Reno. So I guess that's how we wound up in Reno. But I am 
happy here, [laughter] 

We started the consortium with UNR and Boise State, and 
then the University of Iowa, where I did my PhD, joined just 
right after that, because I knew some key people there. I did my 
BA at Boise State, my MA at University of Nevada, Reno, and my 
PhD at the University of Iowa, so I felt very comfortable working 
with those universities. The University of Nevada, Las Vegas 
(UNLV) came on next. 

The fifth university to join was Fresno with Jeri Echeverria, 
who was at the time just a professor in the History Department. 
Now she is provost of Fresno State, and we're all very proud of 
her. I think after Fresno possibly Chico was the next university, 
and then probably University of Idaho, which was, back then, 
part of another consortium. 

One of the keys of our consortium is to maintain a balanced 
and egalitarian relationship between all the member universities, 
to make sure that everybody gets what they need out of it, and 
that they all have a voice in the consortium in the decision and 
policy making. That is, we wanted USAC to be a true consortium, 
and I think it is. 

In the early years, Pat, Bill and I may have met for a drink at 
different occasions and talked about consortium matters, and it 
was really kind of three guys having a meal. Later on we 
formalized that, and we created a board of directors. So then the 
board of directors had one representative from the first nine 
universities that were in the consortium. After nine I realized 
that it was becoming more unwieldy and it would be much more 
difficult to operate efficiently. It would be very difficult to get, 
say, twenty-two people to sit in a room and make any kind of 
decisions. So we limited the board of directors to representatives 
of the first nine members. 

People talk about consortiums all the time and, many, many 
consortiums come and go. They're very, very difficult, sensitive, 
and delicate to maintain. They're destroyed on a daily basis 
everywhere, because somebody starts dominating or getting the 
best out of it, and it becomes some kind of imbalance, and 
somebody doesn't feel like they're being taken into consideration, 
and so on. But we've been very, very successful so far in 
maintaining that balance and in creating academic credibility. 



CARMELO URZA 


353 


When we first started developing the consortium, I realized 
that there was a general notion at American universities that, 
yes, study abroad was fine, a lot of fun, but it was academically 
light, without a whole lot of serious academics going on abroad. 
I realized that the success that we might have was contingent 
upon the kind of academic credibility we could create. So we 
were very, very serious about the academic credibility from the 
beginning to the present, and I think that it has paid for itself 
over the years. 

At the beginning, we used to take every university that ever 
applied to the consortium, and we were delighted to have them. 
Each new member provided credibility for us and gave us a 
broader student base. At this moment, there are a lot more 
universities that want to join US AC, and we're becoming much 
more selective. I don't think we want to grow a lot more. We 
have a fair number of universities that express interest in joining 
the consortium, but it is difficult for us to accommodate them 
without affecting our identity. 

One criterion is that universities have to be from areas where 
we don't have much of a presence in the United States, for 
example, on the East Coast and in the Southeast. Another 
university in California or in Ohio, where we have five members 
already, would not have as much interest for us as a university in 
the Southeast, where we really have no members. 

We also want universities that are going to bring academic 
credibility with them and that are going to increase our standing 
among our peers. The most recent universities that we accepted 
were the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, the University 
of Maryland, College Park, Clemson University, the University 
of Arkansas, the University of Tulsa, and the University of Loyola 
in Chicago. Those are all first-rate academic institutions. 

USAC has also been very, very lucky, because a million things 
can go wrong. For example, we're exposed to currency 
fluctuations, and indeed we've had a lot of problems in the last 
couple of years because of the drop in the value of the dollar. 
However, exchange rates also helped us once upon a time, when 
the dollar was increasing in value and we were able to create a 
reserve account, and now we've been able to suffer less through 
these very lean times because of that reserve account. Had it 
happened the other way around where the dollar dropped before 



354 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


it became really very, very strong, we would not have had a reserve 
account, and we would have died on the vine. 

We were, and are, what's called a self-funded program, so we 
have to basically create our own revenues from student fees, and 
there are some economic realities to organizing study-abroad 
programs. You have to hire people, you have to be able to pay 
salaries, and you have to meet payroll like any other economic 
enterprise, because we're an economic enterprise that has a 
certain economic reality in certain economies of scale. The 
economy of scale is just simply an economic principle, in which 
the larger you are—the more units or students that you have— 
the less you have to charge to be able to produce this product. 
So, we're able to operate more efficiently as we have grown. 

If we had one program in the Basque Country with twenty- 
eight students—one little program for one set of students—and 
we had x-number of faculty and staff in marketing and advertising 
and so on, it would not be a very efficient operation. So it was 
bound to suffer the same issues and the same problems as the 
previous attempts had happened at the Basque Studies Program 
and Boise State, in which you just simply would not have enough 
students to be able to create economic viability every year. I had 
left a position at the University of Richmond, and I did not want 
to fail, and I did not want to have a program once every three 
years. 

If you were going to be advertising or marketing one program, 
it cost you the same to market four programs or five programs or 
six programs, because you just simply added one more line to 
the advertising that you were buying. This was a far better 
economic model than when we were spending a lot of money 
marketing one program for very few students to go to one 
particular place. 

So really it was an issue of economy of scale. The first five 
years of the program I was the only person in the Reno office, 
and I did absolutely everything. I did the budgets, marketing, 
the catalog, the typing, the filing, and I also talked to the classes. 
I realized, nonetheless, that it was just simply too top-heavy of 
an organization for one program to be able to sustain that kind 
of administration. 

So, the increase in the number of programs would provide a 
little bit of financial margin that could help contribute to 
advertising and administrative costs and general overhead of the 



CARMELO URZA 


355 


consortium. It was just a logical business arrangement, because 
we were receiving no subsidization. 

Now, we are probably among the five or six biggest study- 
abroad programs in the United States, and we have had a lot of 
luck. We have 38 program locations in 25 countries, and we are 
sending about 2,500 students abroad in 2007, and we just started 
the consortium with 28 students. We have about 310 employees 
worldwide. We have 33 U.S. universities that are members of the 
consortium, and that's very important. 

It's hard to tell how many students might have gone abroad 
with USAC over the years. I think we once kind of made some 
guesses and calculations, and maybe about 17,000 students have 
studied with us. Those are 17,000 really well-served students in 
the sense that they've gotten an international dimension that 
they would never have gotten otherwise. It's made the world, 
Idaho, Nevada, et cetera, much better places. It seems that half 
of Reno now knows where the Basque Country is, because they 
have all been there, [laughter] 

There's been an evolution, obviously, in terms of how we've 
been housed administratively and physically. The consortium 
started from within the Basque Studies Program, and Bill Douglass 
and Pat Bieter were the two prime movers. My office was in the 
Basque Studies Program, and I was paid on the regular University 
of Nevada Basque Studies payroll. Then at some particular point 
they moved us administratively, but not physically, over to 
Continuing Education for a couple of years, and then we broke 
off and became independent. But while we were at Getchell 
Library—maybe the first sixteen, seventeen, or eighteen years— 
I occupied at least eleven different offices. If somebody was on 
sabbatical, that's the office I got, so we were all over that library. 
For the last five years or so we've been at the Old Gymnasium 
building. 

I had been at UNR for a number of years, and I realized that 
I had to make a decision in terms of my own career—to remain 
the consortium's administrator or to go back to academics and 
teach. If I was going to continue as an administrator for the 
consortium, I wanted to have tenure, so I applied for and was 
granted tenure through the Basque Studies Program. I still 
participate in certain meetings and functions of the Center for 
Basque Studies. I'm very happy to have a role. I still enjoy it 
immensely, and it's really kind of nice for me to do something 



356 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


different than the consortium. Also, the relationship between 
USAC and the Center for the Basque Studies is very 
complementary, as we collaborate and work well with them and 
with the University of Nevada, Reno. 

The Center for Basque Studies' evolution has also been 
wonderful. Once upon a time it was Bill Douglass and his research 
and Jon Bilbao and his bibliography. Each had certain interests, 
and it was wonderful as far as that went, but Basque Studies did 
not have a great deal of outreach or variety to its activities. Since 
Zulaika took over as resident director, he's been able to maintain 
a wonderful initiative of thirty years that Bill started and expand 
upon it. 

Joseba has been able to create more dimensions to the Center 
for Basque Studies: the Web classes, all the electronic stuff, more 
publications, conferences, closer contact with the Basque centers 
in the local Basque communities, and the creation and 
development of the advisory committee and the fundraising 
aspect. It's been very exciting to watch it from the outside. 

It's easy to think that those comments diminish what Bill 
has done, but quite the opposite. Bill created a Basque Studies 
Program like nobody else could have. Given his circumstances, 
interests, personality, character, and so on, I don't think anybody 
else could have created the Basque Studies Program like he did. 
What Bill accomplished—the huge, huge dictionary project, 
publications, and credibility—was just absolutely unbelievable. 
But now there are a whole lot more people and a lot more 
professionals that are fully funded, and everybody's producing. 
It'll be a very, very exciting future for the center. 

Basque Studies has perhaps a broader worldwide reputation 
than any other department on this campus, because it certainly 
has contacts and relationships with entities and individuals all 
over the world. However, since it has never been a teaching 
program, it has not traditionally been part of the fabric of the 
university. It's been part of the library, and it's been part of state 
funds, and it always has sat independent of the university in its 
normal activities. Now, Basque Studies is part of the College of 
Liberal Arts, and it has better visibility. In some departments like 
Anthropology and Foreign Language and so on it's certainly well- 
known, and there's a lot of collaboration with them. 



CARMELO URZA 


357 


Local and global outreach and awards 

Throughout the years, I have been involved in a number of 
projects through USAC, Basque Studies, or just as myself. For 
example, the Basque National Monument was not a USAC 
project, and it was really a product of the individuals that were 
involved in it. Basque Studies was not involved as an institution, 
but Bill Douglass was very involved. So Bill and I were the ones 
involved at the university level, and Janet Inda 1 was very involved 
from the Basque community. The three of us were operationally 
important on a day-in day-out basis. There was another level in 
which Bob Laxalt and Warren Lerude and other committee 
members were very involved as well. In fact, Warren and Bob 
went to the Basque Country on a fundraising mission, and they 
worked with Nekane Oiarbide. Nekane was our primary contact 
person in the Basque Country, and she was instrumental in 
fundraising for the project in the Basque Country. 

Jose Ramon Cengotitabengoa, a president of an iron import- 
export company in Chicago, came up with the idea of a Basque 
monument in 1984. At Pier Twenty-Three—I may be wrong about 
the number—in Chicago, there was a sculpture exhibit that the 
Basque government had participated in by taking the artistic 
pieces of three sculptors, Nestor Basterrechea, Remegio 
Mendiburu, and Vicente Larrea. Jose Ramon met these three 
sculptors, and he became very enthusiastic about the initiative 
and thought that we should springboard it into creating a Basque 
monument park in the United States with each of them creating 
a certain element. 

I can't remember whether it was predominantly Jose Ramon 
as an individual—even though individually he was the one who 
actually funded it, spent time, and so on—or whether he was 
doing it as part of the Society for Basque Studies in America, as 
he was president of that organization at that time. 

On at least two different occasions Jose Ramon took these 
three sculptors to Basque centers around the American West, 
and he brought them to Reno. They all presented their ideas 
and tried to get support for the ideas, and he spent really a couple 
years trying to get the project off the ground. Each one of them 
had one monumental project. Basterrechea had the Basque herder 



358 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



as an icon, very much like 
the sculpture that exists in 
Rancho San Rafael now. 
Larrea had the makila [a 
traditional Basque walking 
stick or cane] as a cultural 
icon. It's a big, red sculpture 
that looks sort of like an 
abstract makila. (That 
sculpture is now by the 
Sondika airport, just right 
between the two freeways, 
near Bilbao.) Mendiburu 
had a project of a head of a 
carnero [sheep] with the 
eyes and the nose hollowed 
out. It was a huge sculp¬ 
ture, a forty-ton granite 
monolith. 

After a couple of years, 
Jose Ramon had some 
personal difficulties, and he 
had to resign from the 
project. However, he had 
gotten a lot of us excited 
about it. So at some point, 
a committee formed by Bob 
Laxalt, Bill Douglass, Janet 
Inda, Warren Lerude, 
Preston Hale, and myself was established in Reno. We decided to 
go ahead and do the project ourselves, because Reno was a Basque- 
populated area between San Francisco and Boise and Elko and 
Ely. It was a centrally located place for the monument project. 

However, we thought that three projects were just way too 
ambitious. When there had never been one Basque public project 
ever in the United States, to do three was just an overreach. So 
we decided to start with one project. Then, there was a selection 
process that took place in terms of how you select the monument. 
There were some really great sculptors who presented. Ultimately 
Basterrechea was selected, and his sculpture was the one to be 
built. 


"Warren and Bob went to the Basque 
Country on a fundraising mission. "Bob 
Laxalt and Warren Lerude pose under the 
Tree of Gernika in the Basque Country. 
Left to right: Mayor of Gernika's wife, 
Mrs. Zuzaeta, Nekane Oiarbide, Mayor 
Juan Luis Zuzaeta, Bob Laxalt, Warren 
Lerude, and two unidentified individuals. 














CARMELO URZA 


359 



Left to right: Jose Ramon Cengotitabengoa, Joe Crowley, Bill Douglass, 
and Bob Laxalt pose next to Nestor Basterrechea's sculpture, Orreaga in 
the Getchell Library's main entrance, 1985. 


We fundraised and planned for maybe two years before the 
project was finished. [The National Monument to the Basque 
Sheepherder was dedicated on August 29, 1989.] Janet Inda was 
the main person who fundraised in the United States for the 
committee, and the fundraising was primarily done in two ways. 
We were looking for institutional monies from the city of Reno 
and Washoe County Parks as well as ayuntamientos [town halls] 
and the diputaciones in the Basque Country. There was a 
minimum amount of money, something like $7,500, to be able 
to get on that list. So we raised a fair amount of money that way, 
and then we raised the rest of the money by asking for $300 
donations for anybody who wanted to put a name on the plaque. 

There were two categories of names on the plaques—one, 
just as a simple donor, and the other one was "In Memory of." 
So there were a lot of people who bought a name on a plaque in 
memory of their uncle, father, grandfather, and so on and so 
forth, who had been a sheepherder or had come over as a herder. 









360 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


That was pretty widely supported, and more support from some 
areas than others, and we raised enough money to be able to 
make the project. [The total cost of the project was around 
$350,000, and nearly half of it was raised in the Basque Country.] 

I describe a lot of this in my book called Solitude [Solitude: 
Art and Symbolism in the National Basque Monument, 1993], 
which is the name of Basterrechea's sculpture— Bakardade in 
Basque. It was titled that way because of the solitude of the herder, 
out by himself. It evokes a kind of emotional and physical 
strength that it took to be out there alone week after week, month 
after month, and year after year—a tremendous loneliness that 
one faced and how hard that was. 

At the beginning, the Basque community in the United States 
wasn't enthusiastic about the sculpture, especially the first 
generation, because they did not understand abstract art. So they 
preferred a figurative sculpture, in which you would have a herder 
standing there with a hat and boots and holding a lamb in his 
hand and so on. 

That figurative sculpture, called The Shepherd, actually, got 
made in 1998, and it was one that was not selected by the 
committee. It was done by a dentist from Auburn, Douglas Van 
Howd. The Shepherd is now at John Ascuaga's Nugget Hotel and 
Casino in Sparks. (Van Howd is the same guy who did the wolves 
sculpture that is located at the University of Nevada, Reno 
Stadium and the skier at the Reno-Tahoe International Airport.) 

Basterrechea, on the other hand, defended the abstractness 
of his work by saying that the mere external elements, like a hat, 
a coat, pants, or boots, did not really tell you about the herder. 
In fact, he said that to be a herder required a tremendous amount 
of mental and emotional strength. So he built a block-looking 
and very, very, very strong sculpture with huge arms and big 
neck, big everything to represent strength. In the back he 
engraved an allusion to the cosmos. It represented the herder 
emerging from the earth, being part of the earth and part of the 
cosmos, under the stars and so on. It was a complex message 
that could perhaps best be expressed using abstractions and 
symbols. 

Some people in the committee thought that the more you 
could get people to come up and not see the Basque herder as a 
simplistic icon, but rather as a complex icon that required some 
interpretation and understanding of what the monument was 



CARMELO URZA 


361 



Reception at Bob Laxalt's residence to celebrate the completion of the 
Basque National Monument, August 29, 1989. Left to right: Secretary of 
State Frankie Sue Del Papa, Carmelo Urza, unidentified, Janet Inda, Nekane 
Oiarbide, Bob Laxalt, and Joyce Laxalt. 

all about, the better the exercise would be. To be a sheepherder 
was much more than just simply to be out there with your hat, 
even if everyone agreed on what that hat looked like, which 
they didn't. 

After more than fifteen years the Basque community has 
embraced the monument. The monument is in an area with 
some natural trails. For example, the Washoe County School 
District takes a lot of school children up there. They explain to 
them all the elements—certain trees, the water system, the 
creatures that live in the American West like coyotes, cats, owls— 
and also the herders and the sheep and how it worked in the 
American West as part of one whole environment. 

A few years ago there was an article in the paper that stated 
that the Basque monument was still the most important public 
monument in Nevada. A lot of people go there and see it, and I 
think they do believe that, too. It's aged, also, and I think that 
aging is positive. The bronze is not so bright. It's more tarnished, 
and it's more part of the landscape. Of course, it is also a place 
where there really were sheepherders. 




362 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



" [Basterrechea] said that to be a herder required a tremendous amount of 
mental and emotional strength." Carmelo Urza speaking at the dedication 
ceremony of the Basque National Monument, Rancho San Rafael, Reno. 
On his right is the sculptor, Nestor Basterrechea. 


The national monument is one of a number of Basque-related 
projects in the area. During the summer of 2007, by the way, a 
new Basque exhibit was added to Rancho San Rafael, down on 
the main park and next to the museum and botanical garden. 
The herder was becoming mainstream and moving downtown. 
I did propose the sister cities project to UNR, the city of Reno, 
and the city of Donostia-San Sebastian, and each accepted. They 
were cities that were about the same size, they had a similar 
economy based on tourism, there was a sort of ethnic tie between 
the Basques here and the Basques there, and they were connected 
through the Basque Studies Program and through USAC, so it 
made sense. Hundreds of students from Reno were going to San 
Sebastian and living long periods of time there, and people from 
the Basque Country and the University of the Basque Country 
were coming here and spending long periods of time. So there 
was a lot of relationship, a lot of traffic, a lot of activities going 
back and forth, and so it was a very lively relationship. 










CARMELO URZA 


363 



Basque President Jose Antonio Ardanza (left) receives a replica of the 
Basque National Monument from Bob Laxalt (right) and Carmelo Urza, 
March 1988. 


I asked Joe Crowley to go to the city council meeting with 
me for the vote of the proposal, and Joe was great at helping like 
that. He was always willing to help in those kinds of things and 
had enormous credibility. I went to Donostia with Pete Sferrazza, 
who was the mayor of Reno at the time. I was enormously grateful 
for Sferrazza to accept to represent Reno at the sister cities' 
twinning ceremony in January 1990. He paid for his own ticket 
to Donostia. It was a wonderful, eloquent, and beautiful 
ceremony. 

Also, a second mayor of Reno, Jeff Griffin, went to San 
Sebastian to the Basque Country, at a different time, and 
participated in a conference, all pretty much on a voluntary basis 
on his part. With the passage of time, I think that Donostia has 
been somewhat disappointed with the relationship, because they 
tend to see twinning activities in terms of putting together choirs 





364 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


and sending them to each others city. These kinds of activities 
are proposed by the twinning committee in San Sebastian and 
paid for by the city hall, and there's a budget for that. However, 
there's no budget for that in most U.S. cities. 

While we've had at least two mayors of Reno who have gone 
to Donostia on their own nickel to represent the city and be part 
of the activities, ironically, no active mayor of Donostia has ever 
been in Reno. We have sent three or four teams of girl soccer 
players from Reno to participate in the Donostia Soccer Cup, 
but Donostia has never sent anyone to come to Reno to 
participate in any activities. We have sent thousands of students 
from this area, and they've never sent any students in this 
direction. 

So it's really kind of interesting from that perspective, because 
I think that most of the activity has been from here to there, 
and yet I've always got the impression that Donostia has been 
unhappy with the relationship. I would imagine, and that would 
be just my perception, that the relationship that Reno has with 
Donostia is probably the most active that Donostia has, but we 
send no choirs back and forth. 

In January of 1995, USAC was awarded the Golden Drum 
Award [the Tambor de Oro] by the city of Donostia-San Sebastian. 
[Robert Laxalt received the same award in 1986.] Technically, 
the 1995 award was actually given to me, but I accepted it in the 
spirit of Basque Studies and USAC, and I believe that that was 
appropriate. The award has to be given to somebody who is not 
from Donostia, so locals cannot apply or are not considered. It 
predominantly recognizes activity or work that reflects well, 
positively, on the city. The award is given out during their annual 
festival, in which they have thousands of kids on the streets 
with drums, which are a symbol of the city. When we got this 
award, Justo Segura, a Basque priest from Japan, a missionary 
and a holy man out there doing good, also received it. 

In April of 2001, the Nevada Legislature honored USAC, and 
that was a USAC award. It was a joint proposal of both bodies of 
the assembly and the senate, which was promoted by, or 
sponsored by Dina Titus. (Dina just ran for governor of the state 
of Nevada in November 2006, and she lost by four percentage 
points but was a very, very strong candidate.) Dina wanted to 
get USAC some public recognition for its many, many years 
contributing to the education of the state of Nevada. So it was 



CARMELO URZA 


365 



"I accepted it in the spirit of Basque Studies and USAC, and I believe that 
it was appropriate." Carmelo Urza gives an acceptance speech at the 
Tambor de Oro Award ceremony, Town Hall Donostia-San Sebastian, 1995. 



Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 34 in honor of USAC, April 18, 2001. 
Left to right: Bill Raggio, Dina Titus, Bill Douglass, Carmelo Urza, Tom 
Wright, Lorraine Hunt, Susan Thompson, and Joe Crowley. 







366 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


very wonderful that Dina worked to recognize us. I am very 
grateful for that. Bill Douglass, Joe Crowley, Susan Thompson 
from UNLV, and I went to the ceremony at the legislature, which 
was very nice. 

Dina knows USAC well, because she has been a visiting 
professor at USAC in Donostia. She's a professor of political 
science. Her husband, Tom Wright, is a professor of history at 
UNLV, and on four occasions he has been a visiting professor for 
USAC in Chile, in Costa Rica, in Madrid, and Donostia as well. 

In May of 2005, USAC received the Thornton Peace Prize, 
which was established by Bill Thornton and his wife, Barbara, in 
recognition of programs that promote peace in the world. So we 
were honored to have been selected for that prize. [USAC was 
nominated by Joseba Zulaika, then director of the Center for 
Basque Studies.] 

USAC is an organization that we built over a long period of 
time, one brick at a time. I would never have imagined USAC 
five or ten years ago being what it is now, so I don't know that I 
could even possibly envision what it's going to be like five or ten 
years from now. [laughter] We might not exist five years from 
now very easily for a lot of reasons, such as exchange rates, war, 
terrorism, and a lot of bad things. But if we continue with the 
same sort of progress that we made over the last twenty-five years, 
I think that we are probably going to be sending more students 
abroad —even more students than we send now. We may also be 
sending them to more locations that are less traditional, non- 
European, but cutting edge, such as India, the Middle East, China, 
and Africa. And we will probably have more universities that 
belong to the consortium. I'm getting tired just thinking about 
it. [laughter] 


Notes 

1. Janet Inda was born in 1945 in Fallon, Nevada, and she became 
the first female president of NABO in 1979. Janet was involved with the 
Basque Studies Program and its collection of books during the early years, 
as she worked at the University of Nevada's main library. 




Sandra Ott 


an dr a Jean "Sandy" Ott was born in 1951 in Corry, 
Pennsylvania. She received a BA in English literature in 
1973 from Pomona College in Claremont, California; an MLitt 
in social anthropology and a DPhil in social anthropology from 
the University of Oxford (Wolfson College) in 1976 and 1979, 
respectively. 

From 1983 until 1991, Sandra was an Associate Fellow of St. 
Antony's College, Oxford. From 1991 until 2002, she was a 
Supernumerary Fellow of Kellogg College, Oxford and was elected 
as a Visiting Fellow of that college in 2002, a status she retains at 
present. From 1989 until 2002, Sandra served as coordinator of 
the Basque Visiting Fellowship at the University of Oxford, in 
conjunction with St. Antony's College. She created the fellowship 
in 1982, with the help of Eusko-Ikaskuntza, the Society of Basque 
Studies, and the Basque government. Sandra was the chief 
administrator at the Department for Continuing Education, 
University of Oxford, from 1989 until she took up her position 
as an associate professor at the Center for Basque Studies in 2002. 



368 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


The Basques of Santazi: north and south 

I heard about the Basque Studies Program from the late 
professor Julian Pitt-Rivers, who was in Paris at the Ecole des 
Hautes Etudes en Sciences Social and then held the Chair of Social 
Anthropology at the London School of Economics. When I chose 
the Basques as the topic for my DPhil thesis at Oxford, I knew 
that I didn't want to go to Spain, Greece, or Italy, because that 
was where most anthropologists in those days were mainly going. 
Pitt-Rivers said, “Why don't you write to Bill Douglass at the 
University of Nevada in Reno at the Basque Studies Program?" 

It was 1975, and Franco had just died. I wrote to Bill, and I 
still have his reply to me, in which he suggested that I should 
work in Iparralde, partly because nobody had done any 
anthropological fieldwork there. He also suggested that I should 
see Eugene Goyeneche in Ustaritz. So Eugene was the first person 
I met in the Basque Country. He in turn asked me what my 
objectives were, and I said the first thing I needed to do was to 
learn Euskara. 

Eugene talked to me about possible sites for my fieldwork 
and recommended Santazi ( Sainte-Engrace ) in Xiberoa. He 
thought it was an interesting 
place in terms of its culture, 
and he knew about its 
shepherding syndicates. I had 
said that I wanted an isolated 
and solidly Basque-speaking 
community, too, and Santazi 
was just about the most 
isolated place on the map at 
the time. 

Eugene then got me into 
an ikastola [Basque language 
school] called Mendiberri, 
which was a Baiona organi¬ 
zation. They were based in 
Uhart-Mixe just outside 
Donibane-Garazi. (I don't 
think it exists any longer.) I 
went there for a month. But 
when I decided to work in 



Sandra Ott, 2007 





SANDRA OTT 


369 



"So Eugene was the first person I met in the Basque Country. He in turn 
asked me what my objectives were, and I said the first thing I needed to 
do was learn Euskara. "The 1978 Basque Studies Program Summer Session 
Abroad students and faculty, Ustaritz. Far left: Eugene Goyeneche. 


Xiberoa, I asked if I could learn Xiberotarra [the Basque dialect 
from the province of Xiberoa] rather than Euskara Batua [the 
unified Basque language], so Mendiberri found me a tutor, and I 
ended up living in a local cafe in Pagole, which was nearby. I 
lived with a family during that month rather than in the school, 
because the school was full of young people, who, I have to say, 
weren't terribly serious about learning Basque. 

By then I had already done my MLitt, based upon fieldwork 
on a Gaelic-speaking island off Donegal in 1974-1975. I began 
my doctoral research in the summer of 1976. In 1977, I went to 
Reno to work in the Basque Studies Library for one month, and 
there I met Jon Bilbao. I lived upstairs at Louis' Basque Corner [a 
local Basque hotel and restaurant] for nine dollars a day, and 
every night I went to the bar and to the dining room to eat. In 
those days Louis' was full of many Bizkaian-Basques, so it was a 
great way to practice my Euskara. 

At the time, Jill Berner was in Reno, and I remember, and 
she remembers, too, that Jon Bilbao used to smoke everywhere, 
including in the library, and she was always terrified that he'd 
set the place on fire, given that he was a rather distracted person 











370 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


and would forget what he was doing, [laughter] I also saw Bill 
then, and I didn't see him again until 1998, which was the year 
that Basque Studies organized a conference that I participated 
in. The Basque Studies Program was a small operation, a very 
friendly environment, and I spent my days in the library, which 
had a fantastic collection. I have very happy memories of those 
days, of the program, and of Louis' Basque Corner. 

At the end of my month, Jon came into my little study room 
and said, "Sandra, you've been here for a month, but you haven't 
been gambling." So he insisted that—even though my flight back 
to England left at 7:00 a.m. the next morning—the two of us 
should go eat crab at John Ascuaga's Nugget in Sparks, which 
was then a very separate community from Reno. And we did. 
We went to Ascuaga's seafood restaurant and gambled until 5:00 
a.m. If I remember correctly, I won nine dollars, and Jon lost 
twelve dollars, [laughter] He took me back to Louis' and threw 
me on the airplane. 

(Since I teach a Basque culture class at UNR, Louis Erreguible, 
the owner of Louis' Basque Corner, comes every semester that I 
offer it and talks to my students about his experiences emigrating 
from Maule in Xiberoa in 1948 and about Basques in the 
American West from his point of view. Then we all eat together 
at Louis' Basque Corner, and Louis and Lorraine, his wife, eat 
with us. One thing my Basque culture students learn is the word 
"commensality," because anyone who studies and works among 
the Basques knows how important the experience of eating 
together is.) 

I did my fieldwork in Santazi, which is right on the border 
with Nafarroa and (to the north and east) with Bearn. I was 
interested in studying the local institutions, ritual practices, the 
religious life, and the importance of the first-neighbor institution. 
The shepherding syndicates were really interesting to me, because 
I knew that they were organized in a very systematic way. So my 
thesis was a local study of that mountain commune. The 
fieldwork was conducted over a period of about a year and a 
half, during which I always lived with a local Basque family. 

When I first arrived, the first people I asked to help with 
accommodations didn't have any room in their farmhouse. But 
the second family I asked, with the help of Txomin Peillen— 
who is very well known in Iparralde for his own scholarship and 



SANDRA OTT 


371 


has a weekend house in Santazi—agreed to help me. I didn't 
want to say, "Please, would you like to put me up for a year?" So 
I just said, "I'm looking for accommodation for a couple of 
weeks." 

The family wanted to know, of course, what I wanted and 
why I was there. Having worked in Ireland, where people were 
very suspicious of me and of one another, I braced myself for a 
similar experience among the Basques, and I could not have had 
a more different reception. They were direct in their questions 
to me. I told them I wanted to learn their dialect of Basque, their 
customs, their way of life, and to live with them rather than 
among them. The family took me in and said I could eat with 
them and work alongside them every day. But initially I slept in 
the woman's sister's abandoned house, which was next door. It 
had running water and a bed. I slept there for two weeks, and 
then they took me to the house and gave me a room of my own. 

I went back the first winter, and I helped kill nine pigs. Each 
pig takes three days, so that's twenty-seven days of pig killing. I 
also helped them with the maize harvest, hay making, milking 
sheep, milking cows, and I also herded them. I just did whatever 
people did on the farm. Then in 1978 I got to know another 
family at the other end of the valley, and that's the family with 
whom I stay whenever I go back. 

I finished my thesis in early 1979 and got my doctorate from 
the Institute of Social Anthropology at Oxford University. In 
those days we had to do a first-year postgraduate diploma, which 
entailed a tutorial once a week, and then we had six papers as set 
examinations at the end of it. 

I became an adjunct faculty member at the Center for Basque 
Studies very soon in my career. In 1979, I taught at Oxford 
University for one year as a temporary lecturer in ethnology, in 
the Pitt-Rivers' Museum, and then I taught social anthropology 
at Oxford Brooks University, which was a former polytechnic. I 
became a full-time university administrator in 1983. I took up 
my academic appointment at UNR in 2002.1 spent thirteen years 
as Oxford University's head administrator in continuing 
education, which was entirely administrative. 

This year is my thirtieth anniversary of having been to Santazi 
for the first time. During all that time, I kept in touch with my 
friends and family in Santazi, and I went back every year to see 



372 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


them. I didn't do any more fieldwork, but when I was there, I 
always took notes to keep abreast with what was happening in 
the community. 

Certainly, I have seen a lot take place. I have seen entire 
households evolve and develop—the older generation die off, 
the people I knew as children grow up, marry, and have children 
of their own. I've had a unique opportunity as an anthropologist 
to do that, because so few of us are able to keep in touch like 
that. 

When I first went there in 1976, they didn't have roads to all 
the farmhouses, and my family had to transport all of their 
materials, their groceries, everything, by mule from the valley to 
their house way up in the mountains. The roads were completed 
soon after I arrived. There were two telephones—one in the post 
office and the other in the town hall—in the entire valley, which 
is about eleven miles long. There were probably about 360 people, 
well over 120 households. People were still cultivating the land 
with teams of oxen and mules, and very few people had cars. 

By the middle of the 1980s, people began to enjoy European 
Union subsidies for agriculture, and by the 1990s my family's 
farm had become quite prosperous. They had three Lamborghini 
tractors. That family is probably among the most successful of 
all the households and the most traditional, as well, in their 
views about Basque culture. They now have well over 400 animals, 
which is a huge number. Most households in the 1970s only 
had between 30 and 50 sheep in their flocks. 

The shepherding syndicates still exist, but most of them don't 
function the way they used to. The children in my household 
now have computers, but at one point there was great resistance. 
They got their computers two years ago, and the father, who's 
now in his mid-forties, was very much against this. The 
grandmother and the mother managed to get used computers, 
and the girls now use them in school. 

The population has decreased, and there are probably only 
100 citizens now, so there are a lot of abandoned farms. They're 
still, like elsewhere in Xiberoa, opposed to outsiders buying 
property there, because they have a very special attachment to 
that socio-physical space. It's a different way of life in some 
respects, but in other ways it hasn't changed, because those 
people are still up at five o'clock in the morning. They work 
seven days a week, and they don't have holidays. Culturally, my 



SANDRA OTT 


373 


family is extremely proud and hard working, and they love their 
way of life. A lot of rural people haven't been attracted at all to 
that way of life. My household is probably an exception, rather 
than the rule. 

It's very hard there. If you're not a shepherd and a farmer, 
there is no employment to speak of in the mountain commune, 
so you have to seek work in the lowlands, in a factory or an 
office. A lot of the young people, as they did in the past, don't 
want to stay and inherit a farm. They sometimes find work in 
Baiona, but they tend to stick closer to home than in prior 
decades, when they tended to go to Paris. The rate of immigration 
to the Americas has been very low, especially since the First World 
War. At the end of the nineteenth century and early twentieth, 
many Xiberoans immigrated to Montevideo. But unlike Baigorri, 
for example, not many Xiberoans came to the States, although 
there are many northern Basques in Gardnerville. The Lekumberri 
family in Gardnerville is, in fact, from Xiberoa originally. 

There are definitely cultural differences between the north 
and south of the Basque Country. Some may not like to hear 
that, but I think both sides have been influenced respectively by 
Spanish and French cultures. That's unavoidable. On the northern 
side, French is the dominant language. In many parts of the 
south, Spanish is dominant. The town of Maule in Xiberoa is a 
particularly interesting case, because 50 percent of the people 
are of Spanish origin and descent or Southern Basque, and 50 
percent of the people still speak Spanish. So it's kind of an 
interesting mix of Basque speakers, French speakers, and Spanish 
speakers there. 

The northern side is much more rural than the south, but 
there are some similarities with rural parts of Hegoalde, as well. 
The north has a different feel to it. It's a different way of going 
about things, and, of course, I worked in a province that regards 
itself as a little bit different. They are Xiberotarrak [those from 
the province of Xiberoa]. They have some rather unusual ideas 
about southern Basques and about anybody who's not native 
Xiberoan. [laughter] 

Having lived in Donostia for three years, I found that the 
rhythm of life there was different. In the south, you socialize in 
the streets, in public places, and you tend not to go to people's 
houses. In the north, it's the opposite. That's a different universe. 
I try to address subtle differences between northern and southern 



374 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Basque society in the Basque culture class at UNR, but it's hard 
to pinpoint them. 

Donostia-San Sebastian: the first USAC program 


My interest in study abroad began when I was nineteen. In 
the early 1970s, I didn't want to go abroad with other American 
students, so I designed my own study abroad program. I went to 
the Outer Hebrides and lived there for nine months. It was the 
first time that I became interested in foreign cultures and foreign 
languages. I went off by myself with a backpack and a sturdy 
pair of boots, and I didn't know a soul. I had a real appreciation 
of what study abroad can do for an individual, because that 
experience for me was absolutely central to the person I became. 

The Basque Studies Summer Session Abroad Program was 
instituted in the mid-1970s, I think. UNR collaborated with Boise 
State University, with Pat Bieter at BSU and Jon Bilbao here at 
UNR. I know they stayed in Onati, and I think that was the 
genesis of USAC. 

During the summers of 1980-1982, I was Jon Bilbao's 
assistant. We ran the Basque Studies Program summer study 
abroad sessions in the Basque Country, in both north and south. 
We were mainly based in a seminary facility in Ustaritz. I also 
taught a course on Basque culture. 


Give Yourself 

A YEAR 
TO 

REMEMBER 



SPAIN 
PROGRAM 
1975 -1976 

A Unique Study Opportunity 
with Boise State University 



A Full Academic Year ... 

Spain. 



A Chance to Study . . . 



Become Involved . . . 




The Campus . . . 



"The Basque Studies summer session abroad program was instituted in the mid- 
1970s .... I know they stayed in Onati, and I think that was the genesis of 
USAC. "Boise State University's 1975-1976 Onati program brochures. 






SANDRA OTT 


375 



Some faculty and students of the Basque Studies Program 1978 Summer 
Session Abroad. Front row, left to right: Maria Lourdes Perez-Zubeldia, 
Maria Jesus Perez-Zubeldia, Maite Falcon Ormazabal, Teresa Baksh, and 
linguist Rudolf de Rijk. Back row: Ernest Bordagaray, Jon Bilbao, Virginia 
Chan Jacobsen, Auriane Ugalde, Mary Stubbs, Susie Stubbs, Mitchell 
Guriador, Darral Yturriaga, Linda Norwood, Josephine Bade, and Elizabeth 
Larsh Ynez. 


Jon Bilbao, whom I loved dearly, needed my administrative 
skills, because sometimes he would not pay attention to detail. 
The first summer in Ustaritz everything went smoothly. Then 
we went to Hegoalde, and we were supposed to be based in 
Vitoria-Gasteiz. I was on the bus with about seventy-five students, 
and at the time Jon had a little, tiny Panda car, a Seat. He said, 
"Sandy, buy them all coffee. I'll be back." He drove off and left 
us in a roadside cafe outside Vitoria-Gasteiz. 

I said, "Where are you going?" 

He said, "I just have to remind myself where we're going." 
He'd forgotten exactly where the accommodation was located 
in Vitoria-Gasteiz, which at that time was a small town. So three 















376 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


hours later, by which time the students were rather upset about 
what was going on, Jon returned, and he said, "Follow me." 

So we followed him into Vitoria-Gasteiz. At that time my 
Spanish was, certainly, rudimentary, and the bus driver was 
furious with me, because Jon kept going down one-way streets, 
the wrong way. We couldn't lose him, because in those days we 
didn't have cell phones, and I didn't have any idea where we 
were going. We were going down these one-way streets the wrong 
way, and the students were half entertained and half horrified. 
Finally, we arrived at the facility, which was actually one of 
Franco's old army barracks, and there were gitanos [gypsies] 
camped outside the grounds. The students looked at me and 
said, "This is where we're going to stay?" 

I said yes. There were problems. The facilities were unisex! 
We nearly had a mutiny. Jon was completely lovable and 
frustrating at the same time, because he would not always pay 
attention, and then he'd end up getting into trouble. He'd just 
shrug and smile and say, "It's all right." [laughter] 

And I would get uptight and say, "Well, I'm not sure it's all 
right!" 

He'd say, "Don't worry." 

I remember Jon putting 
me in a room with the 
students saying, "You go 
handle it. I'll talk to the 
director and see if I can get 
us out of this reservation. You 
just try to prevent a mutiny." 

Jon was charming, but if 
you had problems and you 
had students wanting to 
mutiny on you, it got a bit 
worrisome at times! [laugh¬ 
ter] He was a good friend, and 
we all know that Bill and Jon's 
friendship was also very close. 

I prevented a mutiny. 

Some of the older students 
rallied to help Jon and me. We 
promised them that we 
would move the group as 



Left to right: Sandra Ott, Bob Laxalt, 
and Jon Bilbao, attending the presen¬ 
tation of Laxalt's Tambor de Oro 
award in 1986. 







SANDRA OTT 


377 


soon as we could. So we scoured the countryside, and, of course, 
because it was July, everything was booked. We finally found 
accommodation in an old spa, which no longer exists, in the 
town of Urberuaga, and the students adored it. It was great fun. 
It was really an adventure. 

As a result of that, in 1982, after the summer school was 
over, Bill Douglass rang me in England to see if I would be 
interested in being the first director of the newly created 
University Studies in the Basque Country Consortium in 
Donostia under Carmelo Urza. He knew that I had had experience 
in solving problems. After consultation with my then husband, 
I agreed to serve as the first director and did that for three years, 
until 1986. The first program of which I was director was in August 
1983. Those early summer programs were the beginning of the 
consortium idea. 

For me, there were two important things. One was the 
convenio between the University of the Basque Country, UNR, 
and Bill Douglass. Gregorio "Goio" Monreal and I had met in 
the summer of 1982, and I think that was his first year as rector 
of Euskal Herriko Unibersitatea [University of the Basque 
Country]. From the very beginning we owed Goio a huge debt 
of thanks, because he managed to get our facilities organized. 

My second concern was getting students accommodation 
with local families, because we certainly encouraged people to 
stay the full year in order to benefit fully from the language 
instruction. But some of the students were uncomfortable with 
that and were content to live with other Americans, so we also 
accommodated that. 

We were a very small outfit. I was responsible for all aspects 
of the program and representing Carmelo's office in Donostia. 
I'm not even sure that he had a secretary back then. I also taught 
the Basque culture class. We didn't yet have the convenio worked 
out with the Basque University, and Goio was doing his best to 
help make arrangements for us. I didn't have any office or phone, 
and I had all the students' books in the trunk of my car. My first 
office was my car! 

I remember sitting in my car writing checks to pay the bills. 
I cycled down to Telefonica [the Spanish public telephone 
company] every morning for about three months, begging them 
to get me a phone. Again, it was Goio who helped me. Today 
USAC is one of the largest study abroad programs in the world, 



378 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


with excellent facilities. We started off roughing it a little bit 
because we had to. So times have changed. 

Felix Menchacatorre and Patricia "Pat" O'Connor, were 
among our first faculty. They both taught Spanish language and 
literature, and they succeeded me when I left in 1986 to take up 
a job at Ithaca College. Judith Whitenack, from UNR's Foreign 
Languages and Literatures Department, was in Donostia the third 
year I directed the program. Eli Areizaga and Francisco "Paco" 
Caballero are still with the program. I hired Eli in 1984 to teach 
Spanish. I found her through the College of Education. Alan 
King taught Euskara for one year, and then we got involved with 
HABE [the Basque government's Basque Language Department] 
to teach Basque. Jon Bilbao taught a Basque history course, and 
some of his students would say to me, "Dr. Ott, can you help? 
Professor Bilbao is fascinating, but sometimes in the middle of a 
lecture he starts speaking in Spanish and forgets that he has to 
talk to us in English." [laughter] 

So I'd have to grab Jon and say, "Jon, you just gave half that 
class in Spanish." 

He went, "What?" 

Bill Jacobsen also taught in the program. Baleren Bakaikoa 
taught a course in Basque in economics, and he's still in the 
Facultad de Derecho [Faculty of Law]. Luis Mokoroa and his wife, 
Arantzazu, are still involved with USAC in Donostia. Luis was 
involved from the very beginning in our one-credit Basque 
cooking course. They're still using the same sociedad that we 
used. That kind of continuity with those people has been very 
instrumental in making USAC a success, because they understand 
the needs of American students. I have many longstanding 
friends from the USAC program. 

Jon continued to teach for the USAC program after I left in 
1986, and I think he was pretty active until he retired to his 
house in Getxo. He always had a really close interest in the 
program. I can't remember exactly when his involvement ended. 
I saw a lot of Jon when he was working in Sancho el Sabio in 
Vitoria-Gasteiz. That was the summer when I was doing fieldwork 
in Aramaiona. I'd always call his house and see him. I miss Jon! 

In 1983, Goio gave me his own office in the Facultad de 
Derecho, because he worked on the Leioa campus, near Bilbao. 
So that was our base and where I had meetings with the faculty. 



SANDRA OTT 


379 


I was usually up and in the office before the local people were, as 
they tended to sleep in more than I did. 

I lived in the neighborhood of Antiguo for two years, and in 
the third year I stayed in Gurutz Jauregui's flat in Amara, because 
Gurutz was at Oxford University as our first Basque Visiting 
Fellow. (Colleagues at Eusko Ikaskuntza liaised with me at Oxford 
to recruit and select the fellows. That program is still in place at 
St. Antony's College, Oxford.) 

During the 1980s Donostia was not the cosmopolitan place 
it is today. It was smaller, and I had one of the few bicycles in 
town. I cycled between my apartment and our offices in the Law 
Faculty. I remember Basque farmers coming into town with their 
ox-drawn carts to go to the markets. I often saw shepherds and 
their flocks along the main boulevard in Antiguo. At the time, 
Donostia had a sense of faded glory. A lot of the eighteenth- and 
nineteenth-century buildings that have now been renovated were 
in disrepair. There were derelict factories in the middle of town, 
so the whole setting has changed dramatically. 



"I'd always call his house and see him. I miss Jon!" Jon Bilbao's private 
library at his residence in Getxo, December 1992. 










380 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


On the first Donostia program in 1983-1984, there were 
twenty to thirty of us. We met in Madrid, stayed in Hondarribia 
for the first orientation, and then moved to Donostia. The 
University of the Basque Country was not as well off as it is now, 
and we had very modest accommodations. (When I go to 
Donostia now, I'm so struck by the opulence of the facilities. It's 
good to see that progress has been made on so many fronts.) 

The students were all good sports, because we didn't have a 
proper classroom. Everybody was good natured about it. Our first 
classroom, which was later torn down was actually in Zorroaga. 
It was pretty dismal, grim, and primitive. We had a room without 
any windows. It was freezing cold, and I think we had to get a 
gas heater, [laughter] 

I appreciated my USAC students even more when I went to 
London to direct Ithaca College's study abroad program for three 
years, because the Ithaca students really wanted the whole thing 
on a platter. They were far less adventuresome. They didn't really 
want to learn a foreign language, and they spent most of their 
free time going to Amsterdam and Paris. They were tourists rather 
than students of other cultures. They went to London to go to 
the theater and be close to European capitals. I found the students 
from the American West much more ready to take on a challenge, 
and they also went abroad for a very different reason. 

I remember taking USAC students out in the countryside 
and going on pilgrimages with local people. When I helped Jon 
Bilbao direct the summer programs and then the USAC program, 
I always took my students to Santazi to meet my family. I took 
them to Aramaiona, too, where I also knew local people. I got 
them in the field, introduced them to shepherds, and they watched 
cheese-making. Our students really had a taste of local culture. 

I also took a number of our students to see their families. 
Many had Basque relatives. I often spent weekends with the 
students and their kin. I translated for the students until they 
were fluent enough to communicate adequately with their 
families. One of my former students, Annie Bidart, has her own 
consultancy in Reno. I ran into her at the art museum in 2002, 
after all those years. She said, "Sandy, I'll always be grateful to 
you. You took me to Baigorri to meet my aunt and uncle. I was 
mad at you because I was so frightened, but you said, 'You can 
do it!' And I did! You helped me realize that a lot of things were 
possible." 



SANDRA OTT 


381 


I think that's one of the points of studying abroad. Young 
people not only learn about different cultures. If they're Basque 
Americans, they also discover their own family heritage. They 
also discover a lot about their capabilities and do things they 
never dreamt they could do. I put Annie Bidart in touch with 
her roots in a very poignant way, and I know that the same 
happened to Kate Camino and her sister Marguerite, too, with 
their relatives. 

I also took one young man to Baigorri, I think, or Banka, and 
he was scared to death. We tried to find his grandmother's 
farmhouse. I had to go to the town hall and help him with some 
genealogical information. I talked to the mayor, and I finally 
found the farm. We went up to the farm, and he said, “You mean 
you just go to the farm?" 

I said, “Yes!" 

“Well, it's enough that I just take a picture of the farmhouse." 

I said, “No, no. You've got to meet your family." 

I pushed, dragged, and shoved him, and we went to the 
farmhouse. There was nobody there. It was one of those big 
traditional farmhouses. I went, “Ooh-ooh!" like that, as one does 
in rural Basque society. No answer. 

He said, “Really, really, no one's at home! I'll just take a 
photograph, and we can leave." 

I said, “No, no. They've got to be around here somewhere." 
Then I went “Ooh-ooh!" again, and I heard, “Ooh-ooh!" up on 
the hillside, where they were making hay. They waved. I waved 
at them, and they came down to the farmhouse, and I explained 
in Basque who we were. They just engulfed this young man in 
hugs and kisses, and, of course, we were offered wine and cheese 
and bread. I translated for them. 

Students like him learned that study abroad is not easy. If 
you really immerse yourself in another culture, it's tough, you 
know? It's difficult learning another language, and they'd have 
trouble with the eating hours and the food. One student rang 
me up at about midnight and said, “My family wants me to eat 
garbanzo beans, and I don't like chickpeas." 

I said, "Well, you just have to adjust. You're abroad, so forget 
about peanut butter. The reason that you're here is to learn about 
other people's cultures and ways." In those days you couldn't 
buy peanut butter in the Basque Country, anyway. That was a 
big concern for many American students at the time! 



382 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


The students learned to appreciate that their classroom was 
also outside the classroom. Their university was all around them, 
because they were participating in a different culture. That was 
important for them to know. That was the kind of experience 
that I wanted to bring to my students. For me, an important 
part of my role as director was to open many avenues so that the 
young people could meet their families and share their heritage. 
There are qualities that are irreplaceable in a study abroad 
experience. Students have to learn how to be independent. That's 
a big part of the study abroad experience. They would find out 
so much on their own, too. Kate Camino even teased me last 
year and said, “You never knew half the stuff we got into." 

I said, “Just as well." [laughter] 

I always promote the US AC program in my own classes at 
UNR. Every semester at least three or four of my students have 
been on one of the USAC programs, and quite a few have been 
to Donostia. It's really an important part of education, and I 
wish that we had greater access to funds to help more students 
have that experience. 

During the first two years of my directorship, almost 
everybody on the USAC program was of Basque descent. Marie 
Lekumberri, whose family is from Xiberoa, was one of my 
students. Annie Bidart, the Camino sisters, and Marcelino Ugalde 
were my students in that first year, 1983. 

By the third year, one could see a shift. There was less interest 
in learning Euskara, and there were more Spanish majors. In 
subsequent years, the profiles changed again, with a lot of 
students from Scandinavia, for example. But in the initial years 
of USAC, the Donostia program was very Basque oriented. 

The nature of study abroad has changed over time, and let's 
face it, the Basque language and culture are of minor interest. There 
are many more young Americans who want to learn Spanish. That's 
why the program went more in that direction, simply because that 
was the target audience. The clientele wanted that. 

I also helped set up the USAC program in Pau as a university 
administrator. I think it must have been my third year when I 
went and talked to certain people at the University of Pau about 
the possibility of setting up a program, which became very 
successful. I lectured to them in 2005, when I was over there 
doing fieldwork, and I think they had seventy-five students, 
which was the largest group they'd ever had. 



SANDRA OTT 


383 


Back in Reno 

It was a great pleasure and privilege to come back into 
academia at the Center for Basque Studies and to pursue the 
study of a people I've loved for a long time. I have some of my 
dearest, dearest friends in life in Santazi. So it's a very personal 
connection and a privilege to be able to do academic work again 
after so many years as the administrator. 

I've just finished a book manuscript on the experiences of 
Basques in the 1920s-1930s and during the German occupation, 
and that's under peer review at the University of Nevada Press for 
its Basque Series. I've become much more of an historian of France 
as well as an historian of contemporary northern Basque society. 

I just gave a paper at a French historical society on gift-giving 
and the management of justice in Xiberoa. I've been writing 
about Xiberoa customary law, the longstanding desire among 
Xiberoan Basques to manage conflict and justice on their own, 
rather than to allow external authorities to interfere. This is 
particularly apparent in borderland communities like Santazi. 

I received a Scholarly and Creative Activities Grant of $5,000 
from the College of Liberal Arts, which enabled me to go back to 
Pau during the 2006 Christmas break. My new research project 
concerns Basque-German relations during the Occupation. 
Virtually nothing has been written about that, and I found a 
rather extraordinary series of thirty-nine letters written by a 
German officer to a female collaborationist in Pau. I haven't 
figured out yet whether he was in the Wehrmacht [German Army] 
or in the SS [the Schutz-Staffel, a Nazi elite unit]. In the spring of 
1943, that officer toured the grand chateaux of the Loire Valley 
in Louar. He described his excursion in one letter and also 
reflected upon the barbarity of the war. 

I am also interested in the Breton nationalist movement 
during the Occupation and its dealings with the Germans. My 
interest in Iparralde ties in with the story of Eugene Goyeneche, 
who was very involved in a nascent northern Basque nationalist 
movement. But at the moment I'm focusing on German-Basque 
relations and the Nazi officer's letters. 





Kate Camino 


athleen Joan “Kate" Camino, a first generation Basque- 
X American, was born in 1964 in Buffalo, Wyoming. From 
the University of Wyoming, she received a BA in French and a 
BA in Spanish in 1988. In 2000, she obtained an MA degree in 
French at the University of Nevada, Reno. 

Kate speaks fluent Basque, French, and Spanish. She has 
taught Basque at the UNR campus for several years and continues 
teaching the courses offered online. From 2000 to December 
2006, Kate was ElTB's [Basque Public Radio and Television] 
correspondent for their Web site's English news edition. 

As part of the North American Basque Organizations, Kate 
was selected as a U.S. delegate and attended the 1999 World 
Congress of Basque Collectivities in Vitoria-Gasteiz, Basque 
Country, and since 2000 she has been the Zazpiak Bat Reno 
Basque Club's dance instructor. In June of 2000, she received a 
Senatorial Recognition Certificate from Richard Bryan, Nevada 
U.S. Senator, for her contributions to the Reno Basque Festival 
Library of Congress Bicentennial Local Legacies Project. 

Kate has been employed at the Center for Basque Studies 
since 1998 and is the Program Assistant/Office Manager. She is 



386 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



currently pursuing an MA degree in education at the University 
of Nevada, Reno, which she will complete in 2008. 

Being Basque in Buffalo, Wyoming 

My father, Martin, was born in Arnegi, which is in Basse 
Nafarroa, right on the border between France and Spain—Arnegi 
and Valcarlos. My mother's two sisters were also born in Arnegi 
and came over when they were seven and nine. My grandfather 
was injured in World War I with mustard gas and had gone home 
to recuperate and decided he wasn't going to go back to the war, 
and so he crossed the river that created the border at that time 
and came to the States, and then seven years later he sent for 
Grandma and the girls. So my poor Grandma was there for seven 
years. She used to tell stories about how hard it was. There were 
no men in Arnegi, and there was one fourteen- or fifteen-year- 
old boy that would make a circuit of all the farms, trying to help 
all these women with the livestock and chores. 

My grandfather, at that time, had started his own sheep 
operation in Buffalo, so they moved out to the country 
immediately. Grandma had to learn how to drive a team of horses 
and all that kind of stuff, and she'd tell us stories about coming 











KATE CAMINO 


387 


to town, and she couldn't speak English, so she would pick up 
Dominica Esponda, who was the wife of John Esponda, one of 
the most famous Basques in Buffalo. She would accompany her 
to get supplies, and then they'd drop off Mrs. Esponda, and they'd 
drive back out to the country. She'd talk about the girls having 
to run beside the wagon sometimes, because it'd be so cold on 
the wagon that they'd freeze to death. I can't even fathom what 
that must have been like for them. 

My mother, Florence, was the first in her family to be born 
in the States, but her first language was Basque. She was actually 
sent home the first day of school, because nobody could 
understand her, which broke her heart, because she always talked 
about how she couldn't wait to get into school. Eventually she 
acquired enough English that she could attend regular school. 

In 1962 my parents and their six children—that was before I 
was born—had traveled to the Basque Country and had gone to 
the Sanfermines [Pamplona's July festivities], and my mom had 
taken these movies that were just phenomenal. I remember in 
second, third, or maybe fourth grade, taking these movies that 
were on reels—the old 98 mm—and showing them in school. 

In 1962 in Iparralde, you can see in these movies that the 
electricity was coming from the outside of the house, and you 
could see all the wires, and the baserris were completely different 
from what our houses look like. They couldn't drive up to the 
family baserri, so here's Dad walking up the hill with all these 
kids, and he's got my sister Marguerite on his shoulders, who 
was just two. It was really impressive. My mom had great footage 
of the encierro [the running of the bulls in Pamplona] and people 
running in front of bulls and getting trampled. It's pretty 
shocking for little American kids to see that kind of thing! It was 
really startling, [laughter] 

I don't know if I really understood much at the time, but I 
knew my dad and my grandma were born in the Basque Country, 
but I don't know if I had much more information than that. 
Nobody had ever been to Europe or had anyone in their family 
who had ever been to Europe, and it was really unique. And we 
always talked about the Basque Country, and people asked us, 
"Where's your dad from?" 

"From the Basque Country." I remember individual instances 
like that, but, I mean, it wasn't like all of a sudden, there's a 
revelation, "Oh, I'm Basque," because we were always Basque. 



388 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


My grandmother was always upset because none of us spoke 
Basque, but she always spoke to us in English. So when I was old 
enough to respond, I would say, “Why didn't you ever teach us 
Basque?" Then, she'd speak to me in Basque. It was just 
something we grew up with, and the Basque language was in 
our house. 

Since it was such a small community, my parents and my 
grandmother would take turns on Sundays to host all the other 
Basques. They'd all get together and eat a big dinner and play 
mus until the middle of the night. I remember being annoyed, 
growing up, and wanting to go to sleep, because it was generally 
on a Sunday, and I'd have to get up for school the next day, and 
my parents were downstairs whooping and hollering over a mus 
game, [laughter] 

My older sister, Mary—who has passed away—out of any of 
us, was really interesting to me, because Mary spoke Basque as a 
child. Then my next sister could understand Basque, but she 
didn't speak it, and then it went down the line. So by the time I 
came around, English was the language of choice at home. But 
when Mary had kids, she really became determined to teach 
herself Basque again, which she did. She ended up actually 
marrying a man from Elizondo, and so their son always spoke 
Basque, too, as a baby and that was, I know, one of her proudest 
accomplishments. Basque was very important to her, and she 
was very tied to her culture. 

When my parents and my brothers and sisters went in 1962 
on that trip to the Basque Country, Mary was fourteen, and it 
really, really marked her, and she always vowed that she wanted 
to go back. Unfortunately, she didn't get that opportunity. At 
that time, she could understand Basque but probably couldn't 
respond as much, but she really created a bond with a lot of the 
cousins, regardless if they spoke the same language or not. She 
was very driven, obviously. 

When I was growing up in Buffalo, there wasn't even an 
organized Basque club until 1980-1981. I didn't think of being 
Basque as anything special. It was just the way we were. We were 
Basque, and everybody knew we were Basque. There were a 
number of Basques in the community, and most of us were 
related. So I remember as a kid, it was always fun, because you 
could say, “Oh, yes, you're my cousin, and you're my cousin, 



KATE CAMINO 


389 


and you're my ...We were all related somehow, and that kind 
of created a bond among us, even though we were barely related 
in some of the cases, [laughter] 

When I was little, they used to have the Basque annual picnic 
in Buffalo on August 15, and they held it in the mountains at 
Hazelton, which used to be a trading post, because everybody 
was in the mountains at the time. They were all sheepherders, 
and it was easy for them to come. 

I was the seventh child, and growing up I was told that you 
couldn't attend the Basque picnic until you were fourteen, so 
my parents didn't have to chase kids around, and they could 
enjoy themselves. I was really amused when my brother who 
was a little bit younger got to go, but his excuse was that he was 
an altar boy at the Mass. But us girls didn't go till later on, actually, 
because it also became too expensive. 

Later on there weren't very many people that had sheep on 
the mountain any longer, and the picnic became a free-for-all, 
because nobody was charging any admission, and nobody was 
controlling people coming in or if they were bringing food or 
booze or anything. It just got out of hand, so they ended up 
holding it just at the church hall, and it wasn't as big an affair. It 
was more like a potluck dinner, and then after dinner everybody 
would play mus, and the kids would play around outside. At 
that time, there weren't any dancers. When my older sister, Mary, 
came back from California where she had lived for a number of 
years, she was just saddened that the picnic was no longer held 
on the mountains, that people had kind of lost interest, and 
very few people gathered in the church hall. 

Mary actually got in touch with Bill Douglass and Janet Inda, 
who was NABO's president at the time, and she also wrote a 
grant to the National Endowment for the Humanities to start a 
Basque club in Wyoming. In 1980 or 1981, Bill came to Buffalo 
with Janet, and they had a big forum with all the Basque people 
just to see who was interested. My sister had gone to a 
tremendous amount work, went through phone books, and had 
got Basque addresses from all over the state. So initially, members 
of the Buffalo Basque Club were from all over the state of 
Wyoming, from Rock Springs and everywhere. To create the 
Basque club was a huge undertaking for her, but she made it 
happen. 



390 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


At that point Mary also started dance instruction. Initially, 
there were basically two families—three of my sisters and myself 
and then two of the Maxwells sisters—who comprised the Buffalo 
Basque Dancers. The first time we performed, we traveled to Salt 
Lake City for the 1983 NABO convention, which was the summer 
before I went on the USAC program, or what would be known as 
USAC later on. It was kind of daunting, because the Oinkaris 
[Basque dancing group from Boise, Idaho] were there, and we 
were five girls from Buffalo, Wyoming, and we're having costume 
changes. When we were going to do jauzi dances, we'd all dress 
as boys, and if we were doing jotas or fandangos, some would be 
girls, and some would be boys. We were very amateurish as we 
didn't know what we were doing, but we really believed in what 
we were doing. That was really an eye-opener for me. 

It was very special, too, because one of my father's brothers 
came from the Basque Country to visit us. I remember the 
emotion in his eyes when he saw the San Francisco klika 
[marching band composed of French horns and drums], and all 
the dancers—including the Onati dancers, which are part of the 
Oinkaris, who dance during the Mass, and the Mass was all in 
Basque. It was really a tremendous affair, and that also bolstered 
my interest and my pride in being Basque, and then it just kind 
of went from there. 

I really didn't think about being Basque till I was older in 
high school, because I was the only Basque, [laughter] I remember 
my friends saying, “Oh, I'm Scottish, and I'm Dutch, and I'm 
German, and I ..." or they would have a mix—you still hear 
people saying, "Well, I'm a quarter Basque, or I'm half Basque, 
or whatever," and you kind of chuckle. 

Both of my parents are Basque, so I was kind of unique in 
that way, because I would just say, “Well, I'm Basque." 

My mother and my father, my sisters, Connie and Marguerite, 
our cousin, Shirley, who was a cousin on my mother's side, and 
I went to the Basque Country for the whole summer of 1980. It 
was my first trip to the Basque Country, and it was the third 
time that my father has been in the Basque Country after he 
left. 

My father was drafted in the U.S. military and fought in World 
War II and went back on leave in 1945, and that was the first 
time he had gone back to his home to visit the family since he 



KATE CAMINO 


391 


left in 1928. He was in North Africa and in Italy a little bit, too— 
in the European theater, they called it. It seems it was not 
necessary to be a citizen to be in the army in those days, and I'm 
still not clear on how that worked. 

Because my father had done his French military service and 
had served for two years, they automatically made him a sergeant. 
So he was in charge of a troop, but he didn't speak English, 
[laughter] It just so happened that there was a man from Montana 
who was Basque American, and so my father would give the orders 
in Basque, and the other man would translate them to English. I 
didn't realize that my father learned most of his English in Texas 
at the military base. After I was made aware, I paid attention to 
some of the things that he would say, such as "dowg," and he'd 
say it with a Southern drawl. But then you understood why. 

The second time was in 1962. Since my father was the eldest 
of his family, the next eldest had taken over the family farmstead 
and took care of Grandma and Grandpa. My father being the 
eldest of twelve, when he was twenty-five, there was still a ton 
of children left to be raised, and his parents were still too young 
for him to take over. My uncle Francois wasn't even the next 
eldest, but he decided that he was going to live in the baseni, 
but that didn't work. He left, and my Uncle Michel, who had 
married one of the neighbors from the house just adjacent to 
my father's house, moved in, because my grandfather was still 
living there and still needed help. My grandmother passed away 
really young. 

So when my father went back in 1962, my mom used to tell 
the story, Uncle Michel came with his boneta [his beret], ringing 
it in his hands, crying, and my dad said, “What's the matter?" 

He said, “Oh, please, please. I have seven kids. You can't kick 
us out." He thought that Dad had come back to reclaim the 
baserri. 

And Dad said, “Absolutely not! You guys haven't finalized 
any paperwork?" So they immediately went down and legally 
signed it over to my otto [uncle], Michel. Now his children are 
the ones living in the baserri. 

Before 1980 I had met not the majority, but quite a few of 
my father's brothers who had already come to the States to visit, 
but I had never met any of my aunts and, of course, none of the 
cousins outside of two that we had met. It was also a very 



392 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


emotional visit for my father, getting back with his brothers and 
sisters. 

Having never traveled anywhere, growing up in Wyoming 
in a pretty sheltered life, we got to the Basque Country, and 
things were different. I remember getting off the plane and going 
to my aunt's house. She had prepared this fantastic meal, and 
we were starving, actually, but we didn't realize that there was a 
five-course meal. We didn't know anything. So we loaded up on 
the soup and on the hors d'oeuvres, and then there was fish, 
and then there was meat. I remember those kinds of things just 
shocking me. We were all big milk drinkers at that time, and we 
asked for a glass of milk, and they opened one of those cartons 
that didn't come out of the fridge. The milk wasn't cold, and it 
wasn't good. It didn't taste like milk from home, and we were 
disappointed, [laughter] So we learned to drink Banga, which is 
like this nasty sugar drink. It is like juice. 

The trip was really amazing. It was great to be able to go back 
with my father and have him show us the house where he was 
born. We were able to sleep there and imagine all the things that 
would have gone on when he lived there. 

After coming back I decided that I really needed to learn 
Basque, because there's nothing more boring than sitting around 
one of those dinner tables for six hours in a row and not 
understanding a word that's being said! [laughter] So that really 
started my motivation to learn Basque. Despite having so much 
family and so much history, I couldn't even tap into it, because 
I couldn't ask any questions. It was just frustrating. 

I had a little Spanish, but since my family is from Iparralde, 
that didn't serve me very well. I did have a couple of uncles that 
would try and communicate with me in Spanish. There are a 
number of my cousins—because either their mother was French 
or their father was French—who didn't speak Basque either. I 
found out that we're all kind of in the same boat. Some of my 
cousins were able to speak some English. I felt great frustration 
at all of these family gatherings, because I couldn't understand 
Basque or French. My father didn't speak French either, because 
he had left the Basque Country early enough. He must have 
spoken some French, but he didn't remember much. I never heard 
him speak French. 



KATE CAMINO 


393 


Studying in Donostia 

The first time I heard about the Basque Studies Program was 
in 1977 or 1978, when my sister, Marguerite, graduated from 
high school. She chose to come to UNR because of the Basque 
Studies Program. She wanted to learn more about the Basque 
culture and Basque language. That was her motivation. My 
parents had somehow already been receiving the newsletter from 
the Basque Studies Program and knew that it existed at that time. 

Then, in the spring semester of 1983, I had just transferred 
to the University of Wyoming, which was my sophomore year 
in college, and I saw a poster about studying in the Basque 
Country through USAC, so I was just bound and determined 
that I was going to do that program. My sister Marguerite had 
graduated already with her BA from UNR and was doing graduate 
studies, and she also heard about the study abroad program, so 
she was aware of it, too. She decided that if I would go on the 
program and spend the year in Donostia, she would go. That's 
when we determined that we could stick it out, if we were 
together! [laughter] 

My grandmother, who was my maternal grandmother and 
lived in Buffalo, said, "Oh! What a waste of time! You're never 
going to learn Basque! You'll probably learn some Spanish, maybe 
some French, but you're never going to learn Basque." They were 
just convinced that if you didn't learn Basque as a child, there 
was no way you could learn Basque. At some level it is true, 
because the more and more I'm around this language, it's pretty 
obvious there's so much to learn. 

In 1983 we started the program with some days in Madrid 
and the area and toured Segovia and Toledo. It was time to get 
acquainted with the other kids on the program. There were about 
twenty-five of us. There were quite a few from Boise, such as 
Theresa Noble, Rosa Marie Arrubarrena, Tony Ansotegui, and 
from other parts in Idaho also, such as Janice Mainvil from Weiser 
and Mike Schultz. (Theresa Noble and Tony Ansotegui ended up 
marrying men from the Basque Country.) 

There were also quite a few from Nevada, such as Marcelino 
Ugalde from Fallon, Cam Drake from Winnemucca, and also a 
few from the Reno area, such as Mark Doering, but I don't think 



394 


A Candle in the Night 


that he was Basque. I don't know if those from Reno were 
originally from there or if they were just studying at UNR. There 
were also a couple of older Californians who might have been 
professors from other consortium universities. I don't know how 
old they might have been, because I was eighteen, so everybody 
seemed ancient to me! [laughter] 

There was a Joe Jaio, and I always wonder when I'd see 
Erramon Jaio if there's some connection there, but I don't know. 
Max Beterbide was from Susanville, or Marysville, maybe—one 
of those "-villes"—and he ended up staying in the Basque 
Country. I think he's still there today. Coming from my little 
sheltered Wyoming life, Andrea, another student, used to scare 
me to death with her craziness, [laughter] Andrea was a punk 
rocker from California, and she used to listen to the Violent 
Femmes. I don't know if she had her nose pierced, but she had 
some kind of piercing. 

There was a couple, Nick and Janny. Janny was somehow 
related to the Santa Fe Restaurant in Reno, but I don't know 
what that connection was, and Nick was her boyfriend. There 
was an Alan, who, I think, was just there for one semester. Then 
there was Erramon from Chico, and an older gentleman, also 
Erramon, who, I think he must have been a professor. Diane 



Students from the 1983-1984 USAC group in the Reiser Pub in the Basque 
Country. Kate Camino is sitting, second from the right. 






KATE CAMINO 


395 


DeChambeau, an older lady, might still be around here. I've heard 
Carmelo talk about her, so she's still affiliated somehow. 

We had a session where we were instructed about safety. If 
we were walking down the street in the Basque Country and 
somebody insisted on buying us a drink elsewhere or was trying 
to get us out of the area, then we better listen, because that was 
one of the tactics that they used so that innocent people weren't 
harmed in bomb blasts or whatever. Again, being from Buffalo, 
Wyoming, it was just completely incomprehensible for me. 
[laughter] After Madrid we headed to Hondarribia, and we stayed 
at an albergue [youth hostel]. 

We had intensive Basque language. We had four hours in 
the morning with native speakers and then four hours in the 
afternoon with Alan King, who would give us grammar lessons 
and would clarify and answer questions about what we had 
learned in the morning. It was tremendously frustrating, and I 
cried every day, because I just didn't feel like I was getting it. Our 
only savior was Rosa Marie Arrubarrena from Boise, who grew 
up speaking Bizkaian Basque, and her whole motivation was to 
become literate. We were learning Batua, but it was kind of more 
Giputxi [dialect from the province of Gipuzkoa]. The professor 
would just pull out a pen, for example, and he'd say, " Hau 
boligrafoa da [This is a pen]." So we didn't know if he was saying, 
"This is a pen," "What's your name?" "I'm so happy to be here." 
We had no idea. 

So Rosa Marie would say, "He's saying, 'It's a pen'!" 

Then we'd have to go one by one and repeat what he said. 
So, “Hau boligrafoa da," “Hau boligrafoa da," “Hau . . ." and 
“Hau liburua da [This is a book]," “Hau liburua . . ." 

Sandra "Sandy" Ott was the resident director at the time, 
and Felix and Pat Menchacatorre were instructors, who were 
newlyweds. (They had just been married on the East Coast 
somewhere, New Jersey, maybe. They came over in a Volkswagen 
van which had been shipped over, so that was "trippy.") Alan 
King was another one of our instructors, and then I believe Jon 
Bilbao also taught a course on history. Then we had resident 
instructors for the Basque language from AEK [Basque language 
teaching association] originally. 

We were in this albergue for a month, and during that month, 
I tried to venture out. My sister decided that she better take care 
of me, but that wasn't at all in my plans, [laughter] I was probably 



396 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


a little more ornery than I should have been, but I took every 
opportunity to go out in the evenings and do different things 
that my sister just wasn't interested in. 

Alan King sometimes would take a group of us, and we'd 
drive to Donostia, and we'd go to the old part there, and we'd 
try out our Basque. We'd be so proud, because we could say, 
“Zenbat da [How much is that]?" [laughter] It was a great 
experience, and we were there for the fiestas or the bestak 
[festivals], so it was a lot of fun. 

During that same time there were tremendous floods in 
Bilbao and in the old part of Bilbao, and a lot of the kids were 
evacuated from there and brought to this albergue. A lot of the 
monitores [chaperones] were kids of our age, probably in their 
early twenties, and they took care of all these kids. They 
befriended a number of us in the program, and we'd get together 
at dinnertimes, and sometimes we'd have songfests or we'd dance 
or whatever it might be. 

These guys got fake guns, like water guns or something, and 
ski masks and banged on my sister's door, because my poor sister 
didn't spend too much time outside of class, doing a lot of 
socializing. We were rooming with Annie Bidart, and they were 
sound asleep. They opened the door, and these guys with hoods 
on demanded their passports, [laughter] At first, of course, Annie 
was scared to death but realized who they were and so was lipping 
off back to them in Spanish, saying, "Ah! You can have my 
passport, but you don't look anything like me. It's not going to 
do you any good." Of course, my sister was having a cardiac 
arrest, because she had no idea that this was a joke. So that was 
one of the more traumatic moments during our stay in 
Hondarribia. 

I happened to be out on the town that night and rolled in 
way too late—three in the morning or something—and they 
had locked the door! So, of course, I had to knock on the door to 
wake them, and my sister cussed me out for an hour and a half 
because, had I been in bed and the door been locked, this never 
would have happened! [laughter] Anyway, she decided to socialize 
a little more after that, which was probably a good thing. 

Marguerite and I were kind of unique. We were from the French 
side, which was unique, because most of the other kids' families 
were from the Spanish side, from Hegoalde. We knew some of the 
old songs that a lot of the other kids didn't know, so it was like the 



KATE CAMINO 


397 


Camino sisters' show sometimes. If we'd go somewhere, they'd 
make Marguerite and I sing something in Basque. 

One day, Jon Bilbao came to the albergue with musician 
Xabier Lete and wanted to know if anyone knew how to play 
mus. They had a mus tournament with all the monitores, with 
all these kids that were there from Bilbao, and, of course, we had 
to participate, because Marguerite and I were the only two that 
knew how to play mus. So we played mus with Jon Bilbao and 
Xabier Lete, which is still just like the day before yesterday, 
because I was so scared. Xabier Lete called me "Katti Kenua", 
and my sister was "Marga Muslari". We cheated horribly. We'd 
just say what cards we had in English, because we were so 
intimidated by what was going on! [laughter] Of course, they 
stomped us, because we didn't really know what we were doing. 

Then after our month in Hondarribia, we moved to Donostia, 
and you either moved to your home stay, or a number of the 
kids on the program got apartments together. So Marguerite and 
I were taken into the house of Kontxita and Inaki Olaizola. Their 
house was a piso [a flat] that consisted of four rooms, and that 
was shocking. We kept thinking that there must be something 
else behind this door like a corridor that had more rooms, but 
that was it. [laughter] Marguerite and I shared a bedroom, and 
the startling thing about that was that Kontxita would lock up 
the phone. At the time, my mother was very ill, and after pleading 
and crying and bawling, Kontxita decided that she would leave 
the phone, so in case somebody would call us from the States, 
we could answer the phone if she wasn't there. She wasn't there 
a lot of the time, so that worked out fine. 

Once we went to Donostia, we were supposed to start our 
regular routine of going to school. We were actually going to 
school at Zorroaga in Amara in Donostia, which was scary in 
itself. There's an old church, and it had a big “Nuklearik ez" [No 
to nuclear power plants] sign on the side of it. I don't even know 
for sure who was actually housed there, maybe the faculty of 
philosophy. They were very rebellious, and they were always 
having demonstrations and sit-ins and lockouts and one thing 
or the other. Sandy ended up putting the library books that we 
most needed in the back of her car, because we could never use 
the university library. 

If you didn't have class, there was really nowhere to go, and 
you couldn't go to the library or the bar and the cafeteria area. 



398 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


So it just became difficult, because most of us were kind of hostage 
in the university. I just remember how I had to walk up this 
huge hill to go to Zorroaga, and when it was raining, I just got 
soaked and was miserable. Sometimes we'd luck out, and we'd 
coincide with Felix and Pat, and they'd load up everybody in the 
back of their VW van. You'd go at eight or nine o'clock in the 
morning, and you'd stay there all day. It was just like an American 
routine—you go to school all day long. 

USAC ran like the American university system. You chose 
whatever topics, and your classes would start at different times 
of the day, just like it does in the U.S. But we always hung out at 
the facultad [faculty building], because that's where everybody 
was. 

It's funny, I barely remember my classes. I was doing both 
Basque and Spanish, so I would have Basque language, a Spanish 
literature class, Spanish grammar, and then I had another Basque 
review class. In the first semester there were twenty of us in 
Basque and five taking Spanish classes. In the second semester 
there were five of us in Basque classes and twenty in Spanish 
class, [laughter] The five of us that remained were all those who 
had had Basque either from our parents or our grandparents, so 
it was very close. A lot of the others hadn't had Basque in their 
households, and they didn't have the exposure, and that was 
just kind of the conclusion I came to. For some of us the Basque 
language was still in our ear, because we heard it all the time at 
our house with my grandmother and so on. 

In the second semester Alan King took advantage of those 
small numbers, and we did some linguistics courses, and we did 
a great exercise. Each one of us had a tape made from our homes. 
So, we asked our mom to hide a tape recorder in the kitchen 
when Grandma was over, so we could just record a conversation. 
Then when it came back, we had to transcribe it, and we were 
trying to determine if the Basque had evolved. Is the Basque in 
Buffalo the same as the Basque in Arnegi, or had it changed in 
some way? So it was really cool. 

I remember the first time I wrote a postcard home in Basque 
how good that felt and how excited my parents were to get that 
and their reaction. Then I felt like, "Oh! Hallelujah! this is so 
wonderful," when we got that tape that had my mom, my dad, 
and my grandmother, and they were all speaking Basque, and I 



KATE CAMINO 


399 


was able to understand it—not fluently, not everything, but pretty 
much. 

As part of this linguistics course, we were also to record some 
Basque in Arnegi. In 1983 my family still had an open fire, and 
in the evenings everybody would sit around the fire, and my 
aunt would knit, and my cousin would read and whatever people 
did around the fire and chitchat. So we did some recordings then 
in order to have examples of the Arnegi Basque. 

It's funny now to go back after obtaining more Basque and 
being able to understand those tapes more fluently. "Oh, how 
stupid they must have thought we were." At one point we listened 
to a tape and realized that my family was trying to ask Marguerite 
questions, but she didn't understand that they were talking to 
her, and she wasn't responding! [laughter] Well, neither one of 
us were, so I wasn't much help either. 

The first semester I also took Sandy's anthropology class, and 
that was the first time I had ever seen Joseba Zulaika ranting and 
raving with big, bushy, black hair. As part of the program there 
were some outings, some extracurricular activities that were 
organized depending on the courses that you were taking. For 
instance, Sandy took her class to see how sheep cheese was made, 
so some students spent a weekend with some sheepherders. 

It became obvious that we couldn't continue at Zorroaga, 
and we moved to Derecho [Faculty of Law building] completely 
on the other side of the city, and it was great. We did our 
coursework, and we were very, very fortunate, because we had 
teachers that came to Derecho to teach us Basque, and Alan was 
also there. So for a time we continued the same routine. We'd be 
with a native speaker in the morning and then with Alan in the 
evening or in the afternoons. 

USAC was set up very close to the American system. The 
only difference, though, was that in Donostia, we had the 
opportunity to dance with Argia [a dance company], which was 
phenomenal. So Monday nights we would have dance lessons 
with Argia at the Museo de San Telmo [San Telmo Museum] in 
Donostia, which was like a dungeon, and the floor was cracking. 
That was also daunting, because here I was next to Argia dancers, 
and I was coming from my poor Buffalo Basque dancing roots, 
[laughter] But we held our own, and we did all right. We never 
performed or anything, but it was a great experience. 



400 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Our dance teachers were Joxe and Fernando. Joxe Mendiola's 
son, Oier, was in Reno and did the music camp, Udaleku [NABO's 
annual children program], with us in 2002. I've had the 
opportunity to see them a couple times since, and that's just 
been great. 

We'd go to dance, and then afterwards we'd go to this bar in 
the old part called La Cepa and have mixto [mixed] sandwiches 
and Coca-Cola, [laughter] They had rounds of cheese the size of 
this office, and they'd lob off chunks of it, and then they'd make 
mixtos, and you eat either mixto serrano [mixed cured ham] or 
mixto jamon York [mixed fresh ham] sandwiches. That was as 
close to a ham sandwich from home as we had ever found, and 
that was our favorite thing to do after dance. That was a whole 
ritual. 

My sister and I did perform for Pentecost in Arnegi, which 
was really kind of cool, but it was very intimidating, because 
everybody was watching us. You would hear them, "Oh. 
Amerikano horiek [those Americans]," or, “Martinen alabak 
[Martin's daughters]." They didn't know our names individually, 
but they knew that we were Martin's daughters or we were the 
Americans. I remember feeling so bad, because I didn't know 
how to entrechant [click my heels], and so everybody noticed 
that I couldn't do it properly, [laughter] 

Then we also had cooking class at the Sociedad Gastronomica 
with Luis Mokoroa. We also had a course from Juan Mari Arzak 
who taught us how to cook some kind of sparrow, some kind of 
bird. And, of course, you can imagine Marcelino [Ugalde] .... 

When I look back at it, it's kind of a shame, because I was so 
out of touch. I didn't know Arzak from anything. So we're sitting, 
goofing off, and not paying attention. A cooking class for me was 
kind of that, because I've never really been interested in cooking. 
But the highli g ht was that you got to eat what you cooked. How 
many people have had a personal cooking lesson by Arzak? What 
a bunch of dumb goofs I hung out with, [laughter] But that was an 
excellent experience, really, and I know my sister, who is four years 
older than me, had a little more appreciation and a little more 
sense of what was going on around her than I did. 

We were such a phenomenon that EITB was always there 
trying to interview us. I remember Bingen, who used to have a 
cooking show, came to interview these Americans at the Sociedad. 
And at this table there must have been fifty people, and my 



KATE CAMINO 


401 


sister and I were sitting across the table from each other. The TV 
camera stopped at us, and they said, "What is your favorite dish 
in the Basque Country?" So I didn't even know what to say, and 
they said, "Oh, well, you can say 'hamburger,' if you want." 

I thought, "I'm not going to say hamburger!" I had that much 
sense, [laughter] So I was going to say babarrunak [beans]. Well, 
you think I could get babarrunak past my lips when the TV 
camera's rolling? Hell, no! It was just ridiculous! We, my sister 
and I, actually, were on TV a lot, and I don't know why that was. 
It seemed like we were singled out. They also filmed us at the 
albergue in Hondarribia when we initially got there. 

As time went on, almost every weekend my sister and I would 
go to Arnegi and spend time with the family. So that was really 
interesting, too, because we would try and use the Basque that 
we had learned, and then they would say, "No. Here we say it 
like this" 

I would go around the house with my cousin's wife, Marie 
Claire, and say, "How do you say this?" So I actually created an 
Arnegi dictionary. So that was very helpful, too, because some of 
the variations were extreme, so it was good to have that as a 
backup. 

It was also a great opportunity, too, because we never had 
any exposure to my mother's family from the Basque Country. 
So we were able to go back to my grandma's baserri, which is just 
not very far from my father's baserri, and meet the people that 
lived there. At that time my grandmother still had a brother 
living in the baserri. That was really neat, too. 

Also, as part of Marguerite's graduate work, she had worked 
out a project with Bill Douglass to do our family tree for graduate 
credit. So after we got a little bit of Basque under our belts, we 
would go to the town hall, and they'd just let us into the records, 
which was great. So we were able to see our parent's birth 
certificates and things that were just outrageous to us like 
Grandma being born in eighteen-hundred something. Marguerite 
completed a huge family tree and took advantage of being there 
and going house by house, so we ended up knowing all the aunts' 
and uncles' kids and all their kids' kids. 

As I said, we mostly, on the weekends, would go stay with 
somebody from our mother's family or our father's family, as 
did most of the kids that had immediate family—aunts and 
uncles. Then we'd come back and trade stories about all the silly 



402 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


stuff that happened because we couldn't communicate with our 
relatives. 

I guess different things happen when you go abroad, and all 
you have is yourself to survive! For example, Joe Jaio went into a 
store because he wanted to buy some olives and ended up buying 
two kilos of olives, because he didn't know how to talk himself 
out of having ordered two kilos of olives! [laughter] And, you 
know, mistakes trying to order beer. “Bi cerbeza bat [Two beer]" 
was one of our big jokes, that somebody tried to say in a bar 
sometime, and just silly stuff like that. 

We had an instant in our house that was a lot stupider. 
Marguerite and I came home one night late and went to wash 
our faces, and there was no hot water. Right at the door of our 
apartment building there were national policemen on both sides, 
and that was something to get used to, too. You're not used to 
walking by guys with machine guns very often, and so we were 
always nervous around those guys. It worked out very well for 
Marguerite, because she'd always say, "Well, go ask Kontxita what 
happened." So Marguerite didn't have to worry about it. 

The next morning I went out to Kontxita, and I tried to say 
in my broken Basque, "Gosh, you know, we came home last night, 
and there was no water." 

She went, "Oh, yes. Bu-la-la-la-la. Bomba.” 

I said, “Zer [What]?" 

‘‘Bu-la-la-la-la. Bomba." 

And I said, "Oh, my goodness!" I went in, and I told 
Marguerite, "There was a bomb. That's why there was no water. 
That must be why the national police were here." And my sister 
was already packing her clothes. She was so out of there, scared 
to death, and I think when Kontxita'd obviously realized that 
we were kind of panicking, she got her Spanish-English dictionary 
and showed me bomba meant "water pump." There was just a 
problem with the water pump, [laughter] 

Then, actually, some kind of traumatic experiences happened, 
too, like that year on Santo Tomas [a traditional farmers' market 
celebrated on the Feast of Saint Thomas, December 21]. We were 
all in the old part of Donostia for Santo Tomas and checking out 
all the livestock and everything and, of course, drinking a little 
bit. They were having idi probak [rural sports involving animals] 
with the oxen, and there were dancers and txistulaiis [flute and 
drum players]. 



KATE CAMINO 


403 


My sister and I had decided to go home for a while and rest 
up, because we wanted to come back out that night. So we got 
home, and we're getting ready to go and got a phone call. It 
might have been Alan King telling us not to come, because there 
was a huge demonstration. At that time in front of the aide 
zaharra [old city quarters] in Donostia, there's a big median, a 
big grass kind of park area—maybe it's still there, but I think it's 
now peatonal [pedestrian area]—and the national police had 
come in, and there were just rows and rows and rows and rows 
and rows of their vans. 

Some of the people in our group got caught in those riots. 
Marcelino Ugalde told me, and Tony Ansotegui, too, that all of 
a sudden all the national police in all their riot gear were shooting 
rubber bullets and throwing tear gas, and some of our people 
had no clue what was going on. So those that were together 
ducked into a bar, and somebody in that bar, I guess, had been 
throwing something out at the national police from the bar and 
then hiding back behind the screen. I think it was Marcelino or 
Tony that told me that the iron screen thing flew up, the doors 
flew open, and here they were with their machine guns, and 
they were making everybody get out of the bar, and how frightened 
they were, because they had no idea what was going on. 

In their estimation, as the people were leaving the bar, the 
police were getting cockier and kind of taunting the people, 
like poking them with their guns. So you can imagine all of 
these poor American kids were scared to death in that situation. 
Marcelino told me they started running, because Tony actually 
lived in the aide zaharra, and they tried to get to her house, and 
he felt something whoosh by him, and it landed. I don't know 
what it hit, some kind of pole or something, and it was a rubber 
bullet. 

Then I know that Mike Schultz, for example, had been 
stopped and was questioned by a national police, and, of course, 
he had no language, and Alan King happened upon him. So 
they threw Alan and Mike in one of the vans for a time. 

It was just a great group of people, and we hung together for 
most of the time. We got along really well, and we still see each 
other on certain occasions, like in Jaialdi in 2005. Marcelino is 
great, because Marcelino has kept in contact or knows the 
whereabouts of most of the Nevada people, and then we see 
mostly the Idaho people. 



404 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I knew a lot of people who were marked seriously by the 
USAC experience and have gone back a lot to the Basque Country 
or have become leaders in their Basque communities and part of 
their Basque clubs. For example, in Boise, there are a million 
organizations that you can become involved in, and most of 
those people have become involved in those organizations or 
have continued in USAC in some capacity. Marcelino and I both 
ended up at UNR, and it was fun to reminisce with him about 
the things that happened that year in Donostia. 

USAC gave me another opportunity to be with my family, 
from both my father's and my mother's sides. It was a 
tremendous, tremendous learning experience, and whatever 
Basque we came home with was way more than anybody had 
anticipated. So that was a great feeling. It also made me aware 
that a lot of people in my family and many of my cousins didn't 
speak Basque, and many of them only spoke French. So I decided 
that I'd better go back and learn French. In 1985, I went back to 
the Basque Country with my parents, and that was actually the 
last trip I was able to take with my parents. It was wonderful, 
because I could understand Basque. We could sit around a table, 
and I could converse with my family. 

We got to take our parents back and show them where we 
lived in Donostia, and they got to meet Kontxita and Iriaki. We 
actually stayed at the Maria Cristina Hotel in Donostia. Of course, 
at the time it cost about a buck fifty to stay there, because the 
exchange was still so wonderful—the wonderful world of pesetas 
[the Spanish currency prior to the Euro]. It was before the hotel 
was renovated, so even though it was really high end, it still 
wasn't what it is today. 


Studying in Pau 

I was studying in Laramie, at the University of Wyoming, 
when I heard that Carmelo had recently established a USAC 
program at the University of Pau. So, in 1986, I went to Pau for 
the first time as an undergraduate on the USAC program, to study 
French for foreigners. This was another terrific experience and a 
lot different than my Donostia experience. Of course, I was a 
little bit older, and I was with students from Denmark, Norway, 
Germany, Spain, and from all over Europe, and Morocco, too. 



KATE CAMINO 


405 


There was some confusion about my housing situation, so I 
was fortunate to live with Christine Gazaniol's family, who was 
the resident director of the Pau program at the time. She'd found 
all the housing and mediated problems and things like that. They 
lived right across from campus, and that was great. 

Unfortunately, that was the year my dad died. I got a call in 
November and came back to the States from Thanksgiving till 
just into the New Year. After my dad passed away, then I went 
back and finished my studies in Pau. 

Then, Carmelo made me aware that Michel Inchauspe from 
Donibane was giving grants for students to go back and do 
graduate work at the University of Pau. I applied for a grant, and 
I got it, and that was all because of Carmelo. So had I not gone 
in 1983, I wouldn't have met Carmelo, and so he never would 
have let me know about this opportunity. 

After I graduated from the University of Wyoming, I went 
back to Pau in the fall of 1988 to do graduate work. This was a 
much different situation, because I didn't have the USAC support, 
and I had to find the classes, and I was just like a regular college 
student. That was really difficult. I had hoped to continue with 
my Basque language program in Pau, but I was put in a four- or 
five-year maitrise program in French, with Sebastian, a guy who 
had also gotten the same grant. This maitrise class had been 
together for the last four years, and all of the sudden, these two 
Americans came in, like on the fourth year, and we weren't very 
well received. Our French probably wasn't at that level either, 
but, I mean, there wasn't really an alternative. These lousy 
maitrise classes ate my lunch, [laughter] It was horrible. 

Then I did seek out some other Basque options, so I had a 
great conversation course with Txomin Peillen from 
Euskaltzaindia. Then there was another linguistics course I had, 
too, but I can't remember who the teacher was. He was from 
Canada, because he taught it mostly in French, but I know we 
spoke English in that class. 

However, studying at Pau was still a great experience, and it 
offered me another opportunity to be there and see my family, 
spend time with them, and strengthen my Basque. A lot of my 
family on my mother's side, they kept telling me, "Oh! You're 
wasting your time! And why do you bother with Basque? Basque 
isn't going to take you anywhere, and you need to learn French." 



406 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


I'd just nod my head, and I'd say, "Personally, it's important 
to me to be able to speak to these people." 

"Well, you could speak to them in French." 

I'd say, "Ah, whatever." 

So during that year, I was kind of being on my own and 
thoroughly enjoying it too much. I had the big exam at the end 
of the year in May, so I didn't pass. There were like forty of us in 
that class, and in the first round, only six passed out of the forty, 
[laughter] So I didn't feel so bad, and the other American guy 
didn't pass that round either. But then, it was like, "You either 
go home, or you stay and then retake it in the fall." 

I'd burnt through my grant, and I was in tough shape. I had 
made a lot of friends my first year in Pau, so I was fortunate 
enough to have a place to stay. I ended up working as a maid 
that summer in Lourdes, and then at night I would wash dishes 
at a Mexican restaurant in Pau, so I could stay the summer and 
survive. It was just insanity, when I think about it now. [laughter] 

After the summer, I worked in a baserri owned by a Bearnais 
man [from the French province of Bearn]. It was room and board 
in trade for cooking and cleaning. Because I was Basque, he just 
assumed that I knew all the ways of the baserri, that I knew how 
to run the animals and do the planting and all that kind of thing. 
Poor guy, he was kind of disappointed, initially, but we got along 
OK. 

Then it was getting close to September, and I thought, "Gosh, 
I haven't studied a lick." I retook the exam in the fall and did not 
pass. It was like October when I went back to Arnegi to say good¬ 
bye to my family and to a boy from Buffalo who had just gone to 
a barnetegi [Basque-language school] in Lazkao to learn Basque. 
He was at his family's house in Lasa, and he had Mary Bieter with 
him from Boise. Mary said, "Oh! Well, what are you doing?" 

I said, "I don't know what to do. I guess I have to go home 
and find a job." 

She said, "We really need a teacher at the Lauro Ikastola just 
outside of Bilbao, if you're interested." 

So instead of coming back home, I started as an English 
teacher at the ikastola, which was another daunting experience 
but a wonderful one and an opportunity to reinforce my Basque. 
I did that for that school year, and I came home in the summer 
of 1990 and then returned to Lauro the next fall of 1990, and I 



KATE CAMINO 


407 


ended up staying until February of 1991. That was when my 
oldest sister, Mary, passed away. 

I came back to Buffalo, and my sister Mary had been serving 
as the dance instructor pretty much in Buffalo until the time of 
her death, so I filled her vacancies. I took over the dance group, 
and I became the NABO delegate for the Buffalo Basque Club, 
while serving on the board of directors. I got very involved in 
the Basque community there and enjoyed it immensely, because 
I could practice my Basque, and I just felt like I was learning so 
much from the immigrant Basques in Buffalo and how they 
spoke. 

The Center for Basque Studies: like night and day 

It became very clear, very soon that I couldn't make a living 
in Buffalo. My sister, Marguerite, after graduating from UNR, 
ended up marrying in Reno and never left. She kept saying, "Why 
don't you come to Reno? Come to Reno, get your master's in 
French and your teacher's certification, and you can become a 
teacher, and there're just a lot more opportunities than in Buffalo, 
and that's what you should do." My mother had passed away by 
that time, and I moved to Reno in August of 1997, and I enrolled 
as a graduate in the French program to do a master's. 

During that time, I had come to the Basque Studies Program 
to visit Marcelino a couple of times. After my first semester in 
Reno a Basque friend that I had met when I was going to school 
in Montana called me one day and said, "Are you going to apply 
for that job at the Basque Studies Program?" 

I said, "What job's that?" 

She said, "Oh, yes. They're looking for someone." This was 
January of 1998, and I applied for the job and was hired as a 
student worker at the program in January of 1998, which was 
serendipitous, because that was also when they were organizing 
this tremendous conference [Basques in the World: Migration, 
Identity, and Globalization, July 6-9, 1998], They were bringing 
seventy-two scholars from all over the world to present on topics 
in Basque studies. So it was fast and furious. 

I remember my first day at Basque Studies. They hadn't had 
coverage, for example, for the phones for so long that Jill Berner 
and Linda White loved me. I wasn't even sure how to transfer a 



408 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


phone call or how to do anything, but they were so thrilled that 
they both left and took a lunch hour together. I just remember 
being scared to death! So that's how I started. By April they had 
hired me as a part-time classified, that I still hold today, because 
I was still doing my master's. (I'm not quite the same rank as I 
was eight years ago, but the same position, and it's been fantastic.) 

When I first started, there was a flurry of activity around 
that conference, and that was huge. But some of the heat was 
taken off, because we held it at the Riverboat Hotel and Casino, 
which belonged to Bill Douglass at the time, so a lot of those 
kinds of arrangements didn't fall on my shoulders. Besides that 
conference, we were busy in the summertime with the arrival of 
new scholars. My job description was typing, and I mostly typed 
for Bill's publications. He was my first boss at Basque Studies. 
After the conference I retyped the papers presented for inclusion 
in the proceedings of that conference. Jill still handled most of 
the finance end of it, so I did filing, and I was the one that stuffed 
the newsletter, mailed it, and maintained the newsletter mailing 
list. 



"I remember my first day at Basque Studies. They hadn't had coverage, 
for example, for the phones for so long that Jill Berner and Linda White 
loved me." Kate Camino multi-tasking at the Center for Basque Studies 
office, April 2006. 












KATE CAMINO 


409 


During my year in Donostia, we all got together for 
Thanksgiving dinner, and Jon Bilbao, Bill Douglass, and Carmelo 
Urza joined us. At the time I was so naive, and I didn't come 
from Reno, so I didn't know what the Basque Studies Program 
was or who Bill Douglass or Jon Bilbao or Sandy Ott, from Oxford, 
were. They were just some more guys to me. [laughter] Then 
when I started working at UNR, I thought, "Oh, what a dip I 
was. They must have just thought, 'This Camino could not be 
more of a hick.'" I had no concept as to who any of these people 
were. 

I remember when Bill first walked into the office and how 
scared I was, because by that time I had realized what a doofus I 
had been in 1983. But he didn't really remember me from that 
time of my life, so that was encouraging, [laughter] 

In the meantime, I was elected the secretary of the Zazpiak 
Bat Reno Basque Club from 1997 to 1998 and then the president 
from 1998 to 2000. Since then, I have become the club's dance 
instructor. In 1999, we organized the annual NABO convention 
in Reno as part of the celebration of our Renoko Aste Nagusia 
[Reno Basque Cultural Week, July 19-25, 1999], Roby Yturbide, 
my vice president, was of great help. We also had the opportunity 
to honor the organizers of the 1959 Western Basque Festival and 
Bill, too, as he was going to retire in December of 1999. 

Because of my involvement in the Renoko Aste Nagusia, 
Eusko Jaurlaritza [the Basque government] chose me to attend 
the World Congress of Basque Collectivities in 1999, which was 
also when Bill received the Lagun Onari Award. Lehendakari Juan 
Jose Ibarretxe spoke about Bill, and I don't think there was a dry 
eye in the house, and he was sincere and full of emotion. And 
Bill cried, and I remember thinking, "How phenomenal, and how 
phenomenal that I worked for this man, not having a clue who 
I was around!" [laughter] It's really something. The same thing 
with Joseba Zulaika, who is world renowned, and Linda White. 

You hear over and over how during Franco's regime the 
Center for Basque Studies was the glimmer, the light at the end 
of the tunnel. It's really, really remarkable, and I'm really thankful 
to have had an opportunity to be a part of it, and for being able 
to be exposed to all of these great people. 

Then Bill retired, and Joseba took over, and all hell broke 
loose! [laughter] All of sudden one of the first big things I took 
on was the summer film course with Jaume Marti-Olivella, and 



410 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 



The 1999 World Congress of Basque Collectivities United States delegation 
at the Bilbao town hall. Kate Camino is in the front, second from the right. 



Opening ceremony of the 1999 World Congress of Basque Collectivities, 
Vitoria-Gasteiz. Left to right: Inaki Aguirre, Bill Douglass, President Juan 
Jose Ibarretxe, unidentified person, and Josu Legarreta. 
















KATE CAMINO 


411 


arranging to get films from the Basque Country that he could 
show, coordinating with the Riverside Theaters and so on. Then 
I was involved with the whole publications initiative, which 
meant dealing with a number of individuals for contracts and 
all the paperwork that it entailed. Then Jill's job description 
changed and became completely dedicated to publications and 
the newsletter, so I took on all the financial end of it from that 
point. I did all the account reconciliations and all the paperwork 
involved with paying invoices. 

At that time, we were just Joseba, Linda, Jill, and I. Joseba 
initiated this whole online course movement, which allowed 
professors from the Basque Country to be involved and write 
courses and textbooks and the whole nine yards. The time and 
energy that we spent, too, in trying to get those approved through 
Courses and Curriculum was unbelievable. It involved an 
incredible amount of paperwork, and the poor photocopier was 
just blown up. I remember Joseba calling Goreti, his wife, and 
telling her to bring us lunch, because he was going to help me 
collate. We had to have thirty copies of each one of those courses, 
and I don't know how many courses we presented initially, five 
courses or even more maybe. 

We were still next door at the Basque Library, we hadn't 
moved into the offices yet, and we had piles of paper. We just 
went round and round and round and then stapled, and round 
and round and round and stapled. Joseba was right into it, and I 
was very impressed by that, because he was the director. He 
shouldn't have been sitting there stapling packets together, but 
he was, because he believed in it. Then it was a terrific effort and 
boon to the Center for Basque Studies, too, because we're not 
supposed to be a teaching department, but these online courses 
just allowed another outlet, another opportunity. Plus, there were 
only two faculty members at the time, and so it took some of 
the weight off of their shoulders, so at least we'd have some 
course offerings, if they could do it online. 

Joseba also asked for two additional positions, and I remember 
preparing that biennium budget and that whole governor's 
report. I remember sitting here, and Linda's on the floor with 
papers all around her, and Jill's over here, and we're going through 
trying to find the history of things, and it was just us. Joseba 
spent an immense amount of time putting that document 
together. Much to his credit, the name changed from the Basque 



412 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


Studies Program to the Center for Basque Studies after the initial 
program review, which was a fabulous benefit to the center, too. 
The reviewers had nothing but great things to say about us, which 
obviously helped when they were making this proposition to 
the legislature to increase our budget. I'll never forget the day 
when Dean Bob Mead [Dean of College of Arts and Science from 
1997-2003] came to the office to tell Joseba that we had gotten 
the enhancement. He didn't even say anything about two more 
positions. He just said, "The enhancement." 

Mead's seemingly very straight-laced, and the poor man 
almost fainted because of Joseba's reaction! [laughter] Bob Blesse 1 
came from down the hall from the Black Rock Press to see what 
was going on, because he heard Joseba screaming, and it was 
just a tremendous, tremendous moment! It was one of those 
moments that you just wished you had a movie camera, because 
it was just priceless. Joseba was so happy and clapping, and he 
was shouting, "Cora Euskadi [Long live the Basque Country]/' 
everywhere. It was wonderful. That was a great moment. He 
always said it was because of those cuatro gatos [four cats], and 
we did it somehow. 



"He always said it was because of those cuatro gatos [four cats], and we 
did it somehow." Center for Basque Studies faculty and staff, 2000. Left 
to right: Linda White, Jill Berner, Joseba Zulaika, and Kate Camino. 









KATE CAMINO 


413 


At the time, Linda was really tired of teaching Basque. She 
had done it for twenty-five years and was ready to teach some 
Basque literature courses and some other gender courses or 
whatever she could, just to vary a little bit. I graduated with my 
master's in French in May of 2000, so I started working full-time 
that spring semester. Then I asked them, "Maybe I could teach 
101, and Linda could continue with 102, and we could alternate 
years." Well, the first year we offered the courses simultaneously. 
I did 101, and she did 203, and I had like thirteen people in 101, 
which was a record at the time, and that went well. Then the 
next year, in 2002, the college cut the budget, and they were no 
longer able to pay me as an LOA [Letter of Appointment], and I 
wasn't able to teach that year because of budget restraints. The 
following year, when the budget was put back in place, I taught 
101, and Linda must have done a literature course. 

So, I taught from the fall of 2000 through spring of 2006. 
Linda eventually turned over all online-course teaching to me 
and did the second year, too, because she just wanted to pursue 
other courses. Then she took a sabbatical year, and different 
things came into play, and I ended up teaching both levels up 
until 2005. 

Bill and Joseba are like night and day. It was very hectic with 
Joseba, and there were some tense moments, but he really, really 
accomplished a number of substantial things. Getting that 
enhancement was huge. Then the quality of the international 
conferences that he put together, the level of scholars and 
speakers that he's brought to UNR and all the publications had 
an impact on the campus. Finally, people on campus knew that 
there was a Center for Basque Studies, and they also knew about 
Joseba Zulaika, because you can't miss him in a positive way. 
Basque Studies has changed a lot over the years. 

I've kind of been in pivotal moments. In eight years I've had 
three bosses with three different managing styles and three 
different philosophies. So it's always exciting, that's for sure! 
[laughter] I've been very fortunate, because I have been able to 
be part of the program when Bill was still its director, and then I 
was part of the program when Joseba Zulaika took over, and all 
the new initiatives and new activities at the center that I 
undertook under Joseba. 

It's becoming evident that it's more and more difficult to 
keep up the pace that Joseba started, and Gloria Totoricagiiena 



414 


A CANDLE IN THE NIGHT 


now has stepped back a bit. Now, with Linda's retirement, we're 
down a faculty member, and that obviously impacts course 
offerings, et cetera. 

Also many things are being questioned with the changing 
of the guard at the Center for Basque Studies and the change of 
guard on the university campus. This campus is completely 
different than it was when Joseph "Joe" Crowley was around. 
Things that Dean Mead or Dean Herzik 2 approved of and were 
all gung-ho for, such as the whole online mission, are now being 
called into question. The university has a rule that if you don't 
teach a course every five years, you have to take it out of the 
catalog. If you take it out of the catalog, that means that if that 
professor, for example, wants to teach that course again, you 
have to start from zero, and you have to go through the whole 
Courses and Curriculum procedures again. So it's really kind of 
disappointing, because it's a lot of effort to get those courses 
approved, and now they're just going to be slashed. 

Joseba had also thought that it would be a great opportunity 
for these scholars that had written the online courses to come to 
teach their course on campus every other year. When we proposed 
these courses, we said that they would be eventually taught on 
campus. If it doesn't fall within that five-year timeline, then you 
can't, because it wouldn't be in the catalog. And Gloria has to 
deal with that. It's just the reality of UNR today. 

Then the number of publications that we've cranked out 
over the last few years is just mind-boggling, but it also has 
become clear that we can't maintain that pace. The activity is 
probably going to calm down for a while until we can get a grip 
and really evaluate what our mission should be, because we'll be 
forced by the new regulations at the university level. We need to 
fill Linda's position so we can fulfill the teaching that we need 
to do. So it's a time to see what's left, and what we can do with 
what's leftover. 

Also, after 9-11, all of the paperwork and the bureaucracy 
involved with bringing people from the Basque Country is a 
whole new game. Even with our Begona Aretxaga travel stipends, 
we've become a lot more limited in how we can pay people from 
abroad. We need to reevaluate all of the things that we took for 
granted, that we just always did, and that we were known for 
doing and all the facilitating we used to do to bring people from 



KATE CAMINO 


415 


the Basque Country to give a talk and to carry out research. It's 
just not that easy anymore, unfortunately. 

I see the center evolving a little bit that way. We can't just 
keep up the status quo internally, because we don't have as many 
people as we should, but externally, too, because of the factors 
at the university level and the United States level. The 
Department of Homeland Security has kind of put a monkey 
wrench into our activity around here. 

I've had extraordinary opportunities through my job at the 
Center for Basque Studies. Obviously, somehow somewhere, my 
experiences with USAC and my knowledge of Basque, Spanish, 
and French—because we do so much with scholars from the 
Basque Country—have been an asset for being in this position. 
Had I not gone on the USAC programs, I probably wouldn't have 
ended up in this job. Also having a rapport with Carmelo Urza, 
when I came to Reno, didn't hurt. So it's amazing! I can't believe 
it's been nine years that I've been working for the Center. 


Notes 

1. Robert "Bob" Blesse was the head of the Special Collections 
Department in the University of Nevada, Reno Gatchell Library from 1981 
to 2006. He has been the director of the Black Rock Press at UNR since 
1986. 

2. Eric Herzik was the interim dean of the College of Arts and Science 
(and later the College of Liberal Arts) from 2003 to 2005. 




Photograph Credits 


4 

Center for Basque Studies 

152 

Basque Studies Library 


(Theresa Danna-Douglass 

154 

Center for Basque Studies 


photograph) 


(Basque government 

5 

Basque Studies Library 


photograph) 

9 

Basque Studies Library 

164 

Pedro J. Oiarzabal 

20 

Basque Studies Library 

172 

Gorka Aulestia 

21 

Basque Studies Library 

174 

Basque Studies Library 

31 

Basque Studies Library 

185 

Basque Studies Library 

43 

Basque Studies Library 

190 

PerdoJ. Oiarzabal 

57 

Las Vegas Review-Journal 

191 

Basque Studies Library 


(Brad Peterson photograph) 

192 

Basque Studies Library 

58 

Basque Studies Library 

194 

Basque Studies Library 

68 

Basque Studies Library (Ted 

197 

Basque Studies Library 


Cook photograph) 

201 

Basque Studies Library 

70 

Basque Studies Library 

202 

Basque Studies Library (Ted 

74 

Basque Studies Library 


Cook photograph) 

85 

Basque Studies Library 

203 

Center for Basque Studies 

86 

Basque Studies Library 

204 

Basque Studies Library 

89 

Basque Studies Library 

205 

Basque Studies Library 

106 

Basque Studies Library 

207 

Basque Studies Library 

108 

Basque Studies Library 

212 

Basque Studies Library 

112 

Basque Studies Library 

213 

Basque Studies Library 

115 

Pedro J. Oiarzabal 

216 

Basque Studies Library 

117 

Basque Studies Library 

222 

Center for Basque Studies 

131 

Basque Studies Library 

226 

Basque Studies Library 



418 


PHOTOGRAPH CREDITS 


228 Basque Studies Library 

231 Basque Studies Library 

233 Basque Studies Library (Ted 

Cook photograph) 

236 Center for Basque Studies 
238 Basque Studies Library 

254 Pedro J. Oiarzabal 

257 Pedro J. Oiarzabal 

264 Pedro J. Oiarzabal 

265 Basque Studies Library 
267 Las Vegas Review-Journal 

(Brad Peterson photograph) 

273 Basque Studies Library 

274 Basque Studies Library 

275 Basque Studies Library (Ted 
Cook photograph) 

277 Basque Studies Library 
279 Basque Studies Library 

284 Basque Studies Library 

285 Center for Basque Studies 
(Jill Berner photograph) 

292 Basque Studies Library 
295 Basque Studies Library 
298 Basque Studies Library (Ted 
Cook photograph) 

301 Basque Studies Library 
304 Basque Studies Library 
308 Center for Basque Studies 
(Theresa Danna-Douglas 
photograph) 

310 Basque Studies Library (Ted 
Cook photograph) 

313 Pedro J. Oiarzabal 

315 Basque Studies Library 

316 Basque Studies Library 

318 Center for Basque Studies 
(Lisa Corcostegui 
photograph) 

319 Basque Studies Library 
321 Center for Basque Studies 

(Lisa Corcostegui 
photograph) 

338 Center for Basque Studies 
(Theresa Danna-Douglas 
photograph) 


339 Basque Studies Library 

340 University Studies Abroad 
Consortium 

343 Basque Studies Library 
347 Basque Studies Library 
350 Basque Studies Library (Ted 
Cook photograph) 

358 Basque Studies Library 

359 Basque Studies Library 

361 Basque Studies Library 

362 Basque Studies Library 

363 Basque Studies Library 
365 University Studies Abroad 

Consortium 

365 Center for Basque Studies 

368 Center for Basque Studies 
(Theresa Danna-Douglas 
photograph) 

369 Basque Studies Library 

374 Boise State University 

375 Basque Studies Library 

376 Basque Studies Library 
379 Basque Studies Library 
386 Center for Basque Studies 

(Theresa Danna-Douglas 
photograph) 

394 Kate Camino 
408 Pedro J. Oiarzabal 
410 Kate Camino 
410 Center for Basque Studies 
(Basque government 
photograph) 

412 Center for Basque Studies 



Index 


A 

A Book of the Basques, 33-34, 38, 
41, 53 

A Man in the Wheatfield, 46, 49 
A Rebellious People, 46 
A Travel Guide to Basque America, 
47 

Aguirre, Inaki, 115, 153, 271, 410 
Aguirre, Jose Antonio, 124 
Aikens, Mel, 8 
Air France, 30-31 
Alicante, Spain, 350 
Altube, Pedro, 294 
Alverez, Mila, 238 
Amenabar, Nere, 324, 333n 
American Anthropological 

Association (AAA), 11-12,15 
American Museum of Natural 
History (New York City), 16 
Amerikanuak: The Basques of the 
New World, 15, 23, 25, 29, 

33, 42-44, 51, 53-54, 89, 97, 
110, 140-141, 151, 179, 296- 
297 


Amestoy, Lou, 225 
Ametzaga, Xabier Irujo, 206, 218 
Ammons, Darlene, 200, 226, 241, 
262n, 264, 267 

Amorrortu, Estibalitz "Esti," 206 
Amuritza, Xabier, 145, 164 
Anacabe-Franzioa, Anita, 320-321 
Anglo-American Basque Studies 
Society, 241, 262n 
Anoveros, Don Antonio, 165-167 
Ansa, Ana, 316 
Ansa, Angel, 238 
Ansolabehere, Joe, 320 
Ansotegui, Tony, 393, 403 
Anthology of Apologists and 
Detractors of the Basque 
Language, 138 
Anthropology Department 

(University of Nevada, Reno), 
10, 21, 104-105, 239 
Apostolic Anticommunist 
Alliance, 338-339 
Arana, Juan, 105 
Arantzazu, Spain, 88, 90 



420 


INDEX 


Ardanza, Jose Antonio, 107-108, 
110-113, 132, 158n, 206, 363 
Areizaga, Eli, 378 
Aretxaga, Begona, 117, 217, 312, 
320 

Argentina, 302 

Arizona State University (Tempe), 
71 

Armstrong, Bob, 54-55, 57-58, 62 
Arregi, Joseba, 110,113-114 
Arriada, Jesus, 299 
Arriaga, the Forgotten Genius, 50 
Arriens, Matilde, 166 
Arrosagaray, Juan Cruz, 58 
Arrubarrena, Rosa, Marie, 393, 
395 

Arteche, Jose, 109 
Artiach, Miren Rementeria, 91 
Arzak, Juan Mari, 271, 400 
Arzallus, Xabier, 113,132 
Ascuaga, John, 319 
Ascuaga, Michonne, 315, 319 
Atxaga, Bernardo, 140 
Audela, Yon Onatibia, 158n 
Aulestia, Gorkajon, 36, 74, 77, 
98, 105, 107, 163-188, 190, 
193, 196, 202, 212-213, 227, 
229-232, 237, 240, 271, 293- 
294, 300-301,310 
Aurrera! A Textbook for Learning 
Basque, 172, 253 
Australia, 28 
Aznar, Jose Maria, 154 

B 

Backman, Carl, 7 
Bade, Josephine, 375 
Baena, Jose Humberto, 165 
Bakaikoa, Baleren, 378 
Bakardade, 360 
Baksh, Teresa, 375 
Barahona, Renato, 46 
Bard, Rachel, 45 


Baroja, Julio Caro, 5, 33, 45-46, 

84, 89, 102, 108, 178, 325 
Basagoiti, Josemari, 319 
Basque Book Series (University of 
Nevada Press), 25, 31-54, 73, 
89, 108, 110, 123, 148, 157n, 
196, 325, 383 

Basque Dictionary, 196, 230-231 
Basque Family Trilogy, 46 
Basque Government, 206, 212, 
237-238, 304, 321, 345 
Basque Library (University of 
Nevada, Reno), 26, 54-83, 

181, 191-192, 207-210,214, 
226, 266, 268-269, 274, 276- 
278, 280-283, 285, 309-310, 
323 

Basque National Monument, 357- 
362 

Basque Nationalism, 42 
Basque Politics: A Case Study in 
Ethnic Nationalism, 50 
Basque sheepherders, 296-297 
Basque Sheepherders of the 
American West, 45 
Basque Studies Literature and 
Translation Series, 249 
Basque University (Zorroaga, 
Spain), 95-96, 133 
Basque Visiting Lellowship 

(University of Oxford), 367 
Basques in the Contemporary 
World: Migration, Identity 
and Globalization, 207 
Basques in the Mexican Regions, 
207 

Basterrechea, Nestor, 357-359, 362 
Beltran: Basque Sheepman of the 
American West, 29,141-142 
Benedict, Peter, 24 
Berner, Jill H., 41, 63, 68-69, 117, 
172, 177, 189-220, 226-228, 
235, 254, 264-265, 276, 311, 
369, 407-408,411-412 



INDEX 


421 


Berner, Megan, 200 
Berner, Melanie, 200 
Berner, Thomas, 190 
Bertalot, Enrico, 168 
Beterbide, Max, 394 
Beverley, John, 325 
Bidart, Annie, 380-382, 396 
Bidart, Michael, 319 
Bieter, Eloise, 340 
Bieter, Mary, 406 
Bieter, Pat, 89, 93-95, 338-342, 
344, 351-352, 355, 374 
Bilbao, Amale, 19 
Bilbao, Iban, 19, 74 
Bilbao, Juan Manuel "Jon," 4, 6-7, 
9, 12, 15-19, 21-23, 25-29, 31, 
39, 42, 44, 47, 49, 54-63, 65- 
66, 70-74, 79, 83-86, 88-89, 
91-93, 95, 98, 100-102, 108- 
110, 124-126, 131, 134, 140, 
156n, 165-168, 172-173,177- 
181, 183, 190-192, 194-195, 
198-199, 203-204, 207, 212- 
213, 219, 222-223, 227-228, 
265-268, 271, 282, 285, 289, 
290n, 293-294, 296-297, 303, 
309-310, 323, 338-341, 345, 
369-370, 374-376, 378-380, 
395, 397, 409 
Bilbao, Julio, 91, 338-339 
Bilbao, Marta, 19 
Bilbao, Spain, 346, 348-349, 396 
Bizkaians, 15 

Blesse, Robert E., 62, 412, 415n 
Boise, Idaho, 91-93, 113, 338 
Boise State University (Idaho), 93- 
94, 339, 344, 351-352, 374, 
404 

Boletm, 114 
Bolivar, Simon, 294 
Bordagaray, Ernest, 375 
Boutte, Marie, 97 
Boyd, Sandy, 337-338 
Brick, Joan, 68, 202, 311 


Briem, Gunnlauger, 219 
Brow, Ellen, 68-72, 76, 208, 274- 
275, 289 

Bryan, Richard Hudson, 113 
Buffalo Basque Dancers (Buffalo, 
Wyoming), 390, 407 
Buffalo, Wyoming, 388-389, 407 

C 

Caballero, Francisco "Paco," 378 
Cambio Sixteen, 341 
Camino, Connie, 390 
Camino, Florence Urizaga, 387, 
390, 393, 397-398, 404, 407 
Camino, Francois, 391 
Camino, Kathleen Joan, 117, 181, 
202, 254, 270, 316, 318, 347, 
381-382, 385-415 
Camino, Marguerite, 270-271, 
347, 381-382, 387, 390, 393, 
395-397, 399-403, 407 
Camino, Martin, 386-387, 390- 
393, 398, 400, 404-405 
Camino, Mary, 388-390, 407 
Camino, Michel, 391 
Camus, Argitxu, 105 
Carpenter, Kenneth J., 58-59, 62- 
63,213 

Casey, William, 125-126 
Castells, Manuel, 151-152 
Cenarrusa, Joe, 91 
Cenarrusa, Pete T., 89, 91, 111, 
319 

Cengotitabengoa, Jose Ramon, 
320-321, 357-359 
Center for Basque Studies 
Advisory Board, 119-120, 
314,316-321 
Center for Western North 
American Studies (Desert 
Research Institute, Reno, 
Nevada), 4, 7-8, 49 
Chacartegui, Julie, 339, 344 



422 


INDEX 


Chacartegui, Patxi, 344 
Chan, Virginia, [See de Rijk-Chan, 
Virginia] 

Charles V, 295 
Chiarito, Rick, 195 
Chico State University 
(California), 352 
Chillida, Eduardo, 309 
Chorizos in an Iron Skillet, 47 
Cillero, Javier, 105-107, 206-207, 
238 

Clark, Robert P., 45, 117, 217, 312 
Clemson University (South 
Carolina), 353 

Club Cal-Neva (Reno, Nevada), 3 
Colegio de San Lorenzo (Onati, 
Spain), 339-340 
College of Arts and Science 

(University of Nevada, Reno), 
73-78, 209, 317, 415n 
College of Liberal Arts (University 
of Nevada, Reno), 81, 415n 
Comparative Studies in Society 
and History, 148 
Comstock Hotel and Casino 
(Reno, Nevada), 3 
Conference on Basque Genealogy, 
328 

Connor, Walker, 147 
Consortium for the Study of 
Basque Women, 241-243 
Contemporary Basque Fiction: An 
Anthology, 46 
Continuing Education 

Department (University of 
Nevada, Reno), 84 
Copeland, Brett, 284 
Corcostegui, Enrike, 220 
Corcostegui, Lisa, 105-107, 173, 
197, 220n, 238 
Cossiga, Francesco, 153-155 
Cronin, Connie, 24 
Crowley, Joseph N., 94, 115, 121- 
122, 131, 313-315, 319, 321, 
359, 363, 365-366, 414 
Crowley, Joy, 131 


Curtis, Donnelyn, 286 
Curuchet, John, 299 
Czajkowska-Vazquez, Magda, 105 

D 

DaSilva, Milton, 146 
Davis, Mary Ancho, 47 
d'Azevedo, Warren L., 7-8, 11, 
157n 

de Aguirre, Jose Antonio, 92, 267 
de Arriaga, Juan Crisostomo, 50 
de Arteche, Jose, 168 
de Barandiaran, Jose Miguel, 108, 
138, 325 

de Gandia, Enrique, 151 
de Jauregui, Jose Maria Harte, 61 
de Jauregui, Huarte, 283 
De La Sota, Ramon, 92 
de Monzon, Telesforo, 338 
de Pamplona, Gomez, 290n 
de Renobales, Mertxe, 167, 169, 
171, 173, 175, 186, 190, 229 
de Rijk, Rudolf, 90, 375 
de Rijk-Chan, Virginia (Jacobsen), 
190-196, 204 
de Salazar, Alonso, 45 
Death in Murelaga, 11, 43, 140, 
151,164 

DeChambeau, Diane, 395 
Decroos, Jean, 49 
Del Papa, Frankie Sue, 361 
del Valle, Teresa, 242-243 
Derrida, Jacques, 151 
Desert Research Institute (Reno, 
Nevada), 3-10, 12, 14, 21, 24, 
26-30, 49, 84, 97-98, 141, 

157, 177 

Dickens, Robert, 314 
Diputacion de Gipuzkoa, 109, 
138-139 

Distinguished Faculty Award 

(University of Nevada, Reno), 
155-156 

Doering, Mark, 393 



INDEX 


423 


Donostia-San Sebastian, Spain, 

95, 346-349, 362-364, 373- 
374, 379-380, 382, 393, 396- 
397, 399, 402-404, 409 
Donovan, Ruth H., 62-63, 226 
Doten Diaries, 44 
Douglass, Jack Raymond, 3, 24 
Douglass, Jan, 117, 144, 217, 228 
Douglass Mining Camp 

(Esmeralda County, Nevada), 
3, 24 

Douglass, Patricia, 21 
Douglass, William Anthony, 3- 
159, 163, 166-170, 173-175, 
177-179,181-185, 190-192, 
194, 196, 198-200, 203, 205, 
208, 210, 216-217, 226-228, 
232-234, 237-239, 243-244, 
249, 252, 254, 258-259, 261, 
265, 267, 275, 284-285, 292- 
294, 296-297, 300-301, 303, 
305,310-313,315-318, 320- 
321, 325, 344-345, 351-352, 
355-359, 365-366, 368, 370, 
376-377, 389, 401, 408-410, 
413 

Douglass, William James, 3 
Doyaga, Emilia, 320-321 
Drake, Cam, 393 

E 

Echalar, Navarra, 9, 23 
Echevarria, Ramon "Ray," 89, 91 
Echeverria, Jeronima, 242-243, 
320, 352 

Echeverria, John, 120, 314-315, 
317-321 

Echeverria, Peter Ignacio, 14, 

157n, 253, 314-315, 317, 319 
Echeverria, Theresa, 318 
Eggan, Frederick Russell, 4-5 
Egiluz, Chantal, 74 
Eiguren, Joseph, 169-170, 231, 
340, 342 


Elcano, Juan Sebastian, 53 
Elderhostel, 199 
Elecea, Felix, 180 
Elko, Nevada, 22-23, 42, 52-53, 

89, 97 

Ellegood, Don, 43 
Elustondo, Blanca, 279 
Elustondo, Miel A., 279 
Ely Hotel (Ely, Nevada), 142 
Ely, Nevada, 15, 141 
Emigration in a South Italian 
Town: An Anthropological 
History, 51 

Emilio, Don, 145-146, 164 
Encyclopedia Americana, 150 
Enparantzal, Jose Luis Alvarez 
"Txillardegui," 132 
Erburu, Robert, 21, 157n 
Erein, 292 
Erkiaga, Nere, 158n 
Ernaut, Pete, 315-316, 327 
Erreguible, Lorraine, 370 
Erreguible, Louis, 370 
Esain, Martin, 319 
Esponda, Dominica, 387 
Esponda, John, 387 
Essays in Basque Social 

Anthropology and History, 50 
Etchart, Colette, 191 
Etchart family (Montana), 20 
Etcheverria, Kathryn, 57, 69, 72, 
158n 

Ethnic and Racial Studies, 147 
Etulain, Richard, 55 
Etxabe,Jon, 338-339 
Etxenagusia, Karmelo, 152 
Euskaltzaindia (Basque Language 
Academia), 151-152, 181 
Eusko Bibliographia, 25, 66, 72- 
73, 124, 156, 157n, 266 
Eusko Ikaskuntza (Society of 
Basque Studies), 206 
Eusko-Jakintza, 124 
Eusko Jaurlaritza, 61, 107, 111, 
113, 116, 127 



424 


INDEX 


Extended Studies (University of 
Nevada, Reno), 115 

F 

Faires, Nancy, 105 
Federation of Basque-Argentinean 
Entities (FEVA), 29 
Fereday Foundation, 94 
Fernandez, James, 308 
Foreign Languages and Literatures 
Department (University of 
Nevada, Reno), 223, 240 
Fowler, Don, 8-9 
Franco, Francisco, 60-61, 83, 85- 
86, 88, 107, 109, 123-125, 

127, 158n, 165, 181-182, 186- 
187, 368, 376, 409 
Frei-Tagle, Eduardo, 153 
Fresno State University 
(California), 352 
Fricke, Paule-Colette, 168-169, 

223 

From Italy to Ingham: Italians in 
North Queensland, 198 

G 

Gabikagojeaskoa, Alberto, 145 
Gabilondo, Joseba, 122, 181, 218 
Gallop, Rodney, 33-35, 38-42,109 
Gangoiti, Jon, 111-113 
Garatea, Gloria, 339 
Garcia, Ramon, 165 
Gastanaga, Ellen, 21 
Gastanaga, Gene, 20-21 
Gastanaga, Linda, 21 
Gastanaga, Martin, 219 
Gazaniol, Christine, 405 
Geertz, Hildreth, 308 
Gernika, Spain, 164-165, 187n 
Getchell Library (University of 
Nevada, Reno), 28, 191-192 
Glass, Mary Ellen, 8, 26, 157n, 
196-197 

Goikoetxea, Martin, 299 


Goitiandia, Beatriz, 143 
Gold Dust Casino (Reno, Nevada), 
3 

Goni Collection, 267-268 
Goni, Jesus, 299 
Goyheneche, Eugene, 88,108, 
368-369,378 
Great Basin (Nevada), 5 
Griffin, Jeff, 363 
Grotegut, Eugene K., 87-88, 94, 
158n,166, 223 
Grover, David, 88-89, 

Guerrilleros del Cristo Rey, 338 
Guinn, Kenny C. 315-316 
Gure Txoko Basque Club (Sydney, 
Australia), 143 
Guriador, Mitchell, 375 
Gurrutxaga, Ander, 116 

H 

Hale, Preston, 358 
Hall, Stuart, 147 
Harris, Jeanne, 202 
Hartigan, Francis, X., 293-294 
Harvard Encyclopedia of 

American Ethnic Groups, 150 
Harvard University (Cambridge, 
Massachusetts), 47 
Havel, Vaclav, 153-154 
Hechter, Michael, 147 
Hegoalde, 10 
Heizer, Robert Fleming, 4 
Hendricks, Yoshiko, 66, 158n, 

208, 268 

Henningsen, Gustav, 45 
Heron, Dave, 9, 17, 35 
Herzik, Eric, 414, 415n 
Hills of Conflict: Basque 

Nationalism in France, 46 
History Department (University of 
Nevada, Reno), 239-240 
Holbert, Gretchen, 171, 197 
Hondarribia, Spain, 347 
Huarte Jauregui Archives, 283 
Humphrey, Neil D., 26-27 



INDEX 


425 


Hunt, Lorraine T., 365 
I 

Ibarguren, Juan, 284 
Ibarra, Pedro, 115, 149 
Ibarretxe, Juan Jose, 409-410 
Iberia, 135-136 

Idaho Office of Higher Education, 
88, 90 

Ignatius of Loyola, 296 
Ikasi Program, 199, 327 
In a Hundred Graves: A Basque 
Portrait, 41-42, 44 
Inchauspe, Michel, 405 
Inda, Janet, 357-359, 361, 366n, 
389 

Independent Learning (University 
of Nevada, Reno), 321 
Intxausti family, 17 
Intxausti, Jokin, 112 
Iparralde, France, 10, 88, 108, 

297, 338, 368, 387 
Irala, Xabier, 120 
Iribarren, Jean-Leon, 30 
Irizar, Imanol, 158n 
Isusi, Jose Maria Busca, 47 

J 

Jacob, James E., 46 
Jacobsen, Virginia [See also: de 
Rijk-Chan, Virginia], 28, 49, 
63, 66, 100-101, 375 
Jacobsen, William H. Jr., 7, 13, 22, 
90, 100-103, 108, 193, 378 
Jaio, Joe, 394, 402 
Jauregui, Gurutz, 147, 379 
Jesuit University of Deusto 
(Spain), 108-109, 176 
Judaica Press (New York), 50-52 

K 

King, Alan, 378, 395-396, 398- 
399, 403 


King, Robert Thomas "Tom," 26, 
76 

Kline, Doctor, 201 
Knorr, Enrike, 151, 345-346 
Knudtsen, Molly Flagg Magee, 10, 
35 

Kortazar, Jon, 247 
Kurlansky, Mark, 48, 53-54 

L 

Laboa, Mikel, 279 
Laclaw, Ernesto, 325 
Lagun Onari Award, 128, 152-155, 
409 

Landagoien (Ustaritz, France), 85, 
88 

Lane, Richard, 45, 144 
Larramendi, Manuel, 56 
Larrea, Vicente, 357-358 
Las Rozas, Spain, 350-351 
Lasagabaster, Jesus Maria, 46 
Laxalt, John, 21, 319 
Laxalt, Joyce, 6, 21, 38, 361 
Laxalt, Monique "Nikki," 93, 168, 
318, 351 

Laxalt, Paul Dominique, 10, 14, 
19-20, 27, 30-31, 157n, 302, 
314 

Laxalt, Robert "Frenchie," 4-7, 9- 
11, 14, 19-21, 26-27, 29-34, 
38, 41-42, 45-47, 49, 53, 121, 
156n, 170, 177-178, 183, 
188n, 267, 302-303, 315, 319, 
357-359, 361, 363-364, 376 
Legarreta, Dorothy, 45 
Legarreta, Josu, 110-111, 113, 
130-131, 159n, 410 
Lekumberri family (Gardnerville, 
Nevada), 373 
Lekumberri, Marie, 382 
Lekuona, Juan Mari, 107 
Leland, Joy, 7, 11, 13 
Lerude, Warren, 357-358 
Les Basques, 33-34, 46, 53 
Lete, Nere, 172, 206, 238, 301 



426 


INDEX 


Lete, Xabier, 397 
Levine, Morton, 10, 12, 15-17 
Libreria Manterola (San Sebastian, 
Spain), 56 

Linacero Bookstore (Vitoria, 

Spain), 66, 178, 207-208, 266, 
290n 

Lizardi, Xabier, 182 
Lo Vasco en Pio Baroja, 87 
Lockart, James, 296 
Los Vascos, 33-34, 41, 46, 53 
Louis' Basque Corner (Reno, 
Nevada), 369-370 
Luera, Rodolfo, 105-106 

M 

MacCannell, Dean, 325 
Madrid, Spain, 350-351 
Magunagoicoechea, Juan Pedro 
"Maguna," 85-87, 131, 158n, 
164-165, 177 
Mainvil, Janice, 393 
Mallea, Sara Velez, 47, 157n 
Mallea-Olaetxe, Joxe Koldo, 68, 
98, 105, 107, 180, 184, 240, 
291-305 

Manterola, 290n 
Maria Cristina Hotel (Donostia, 
Spain), 404 

Marti-Olivella, Jaume, 409 
Mateo, Ramon Martin, 95 
Mathewson-IGT Knowledge 

Center (University of Nevada, 
Reno), 79-80,120 
Maule, Xiberoa, 373 
McCall, Grant, 15-16 
Mead, Margaret, 16 
Mead, Robert W., 117-118, 235- 
236, 313-314, 316, 412, 414 
Memorial University of Saint 
John's (Newfoundland, 
Canada), 308 

Menchacatorre, Felix, 183, 348- 
349, 378, 395, 398 


Menchacatorre, Pat, 395, 398 
Mendiburu, Remegio, 357-358 
Mendiola, Anes, 340, 342 
Mendiola, Joxe, 400 
Mendiola, Oier, 400 
Micheo, Joe, 319 
Miglioretto, Cheryl, 317-318 
Milan, Sheila, 68-69 
Miller, N. Edd, 21 
Miller, Nena, 21 
Mintegi, Laura, 242 
Mirande, Jon, 6 

Mitxelena, Luis “Koldo," 15, 19, 
90, 108, 138, 165, 169, 325 
Mokoroa, Arantzazu, 378 
Mokoroa, Luis, 349, 378, 400 
Monreal, Gregorio "Goio," 33, 95, 
114-115, 138-139,151-152, 
181, 249-250, 252, 313, 345- 
346, 377, 383 

Mordy, Brooke (nee Davis), 7, 11, 
13 

Mordy, Wendell A., 4, 7-8, 10-13, 
18-19, 24 

Morehouse, Harold "Hap," 60, 62- 
64, 66-67, 70, 76, 78, 115, 
158n, 277 

Morris, Michael, 232 
Mousel-Feltner Award for 
Excellence in Research or 
Creative Activity, 221, 235 
Muguerza, Felipe, 320 
Munoz, Guillermo Porras, 293- 
295 

Murelaga, Bizkaia, 9, 23, 28, 143, 
145 

Museo de San Telmo (Donostia, 
Spain), 399 

N 

Nagore, Ramon Goni, 60, 267-268 
National Endowment for the 
Humanities (NEH), 55, 88, 
158n, 389 



INDEX 


427 


National Geographic, 49 
National Institute of Mental 

Health (NIMH), 22-24, 28-29, 
42 

National Science Foundation 
(NSF), 13 

Navarra, the Durable Kingdom, 

45 

Navarrese, 15 
Nellor,John, 102 
Nerea eta Biok, 242 
Nevada Legislature, 364 
Nevada State Historic Preservation 
Office, 299 
Nicaragua, 302 
Noble, Theresa, 393 
North American Basque 

Organizations (NABO), 29, 

40, 91, 261, 299, 326-327, 
366n, 389-390, 400, 407, 409 
North Queensland, Australia, 28- 
29, 143 

Norwood, Linda, 375 

O 

Occasional Papers Series (Basque 
Studies Program, University 
of Nevada, Reno), 48, 50, 

198, 207 

O'Connor, Patricia, 348-349, 378 
Oiarbide, Nekane, 357-358, 361 
Oiarzabal, Pedro J., 105 
Olaizola, Inaki, 397 
Olaizola, Kontxita, 397 
Olaziregi, Marijo, 218, 248-249 
Onaindia, Mario, 131-132 
Onati, Arantzazu (Spain), 90-91, 
93-94, 374, 339-344, 346, 374 
Onatibia, Yon, 84-85, 179, 204, 
293, 339, 342-343 
Oral History Program (University 
of Nevada, Reno), 26, 57, 64, 
73, 76, 98, 157n, 196, 205, 
218, 284 

Ordozgoiti, Koldo, 316 


Oregi, Benan, 316 
Oreja, Jaime Mayor, 130-131 
Orlov, Ann, 150-151 
Ormazabal, Maite Falcon, 375 
Orreaga, 359 
Osa, Mateo, 171 

Osborne Computer, 196-197, 228 
Otaegi, Angel, 165 
Oteiza, Jorge, 309 
Otero-Boisvert, Maria, 67-68, 71- 
72, 76, 180-181, 208, 269, 
273-274, 285, 289 
Ott, Sandra Jean, 54, 95-96, 101, 
118, 121-123, 181, 183, 218, 
254, 271, 346, 348, 367-383, 
395, 397, 399, 409 
Outstanding Researcher of the 
Year Award (University of 
Nevada, Reno), 155-156 
Overland Hotel (Gardnerville, 
Nevada), 215 

P 

Papaeliou, Demosthenes "Dee," 
284-285 

Paredes, Jon "Txiki," 165 
Paris, Beltran "Bert," 15, 44, 141- 
142 

Park, Robert, 308 
Payne, Stanley G., 42 
Peillen, Txomin, 349, 370, 405 
Perez-Agote, Alfonso, 95, 144, 
147-148 

Perez-Zubeldia, Maria Jesus, 375 
Perez-Zubeldia, Maria Lourdes, 
375 

Peruvian Sheepherders, 297-298 
Petersen, Gerald, 166 
Pier Twenty-Three (Chicago, 
Illinois), 357 
Pi-Sunyer, Oriol, 146 
Pitt-Rivers, Julian, 5, 19, 368 
Placer, Amparo, 21, 87 
Placer, EloyElecea, 21, 40-41, 85- 
87, 89, 131, 157n, 158n, 165- 



428 


INDEX 


166, 177, 180, 185, 201-202, 
222, 224, 293, 340 
Plazaola, Juan, 176 
Prado, Begona, 272 
Public University of Navarra, 349 

R 

Rachal, Michelle, 233-234 
Rachet, Pedro, 30 
Radko, Tom, 37, 49 
Raento, Pauliina, 105, 240 
Raggio, William J., 27, 121, 314- 
315, 365 

Reed, Michael, 200, 220n 
Rekalde, Amaia, 206 
Rementeria, Miren, 339 
Renobales, Iker Aulestia, 167, 175, 
186 

Research Scientist Award 

(National Institute of Mental 
Health), 24 

Research Scientist Career 
Development Award 
(National Institute of Mental 
Health), 24 

Riverboat Hotel and Casino 
(Reno, Nevada), 3, 77, 207, 
408 

Robb, Blanche, 5-6 
Robbins, Ken, 34, 44 
Robinson, Beatriz, 105 
Rojas, Nelson, 169 
Ronald, Ann, 73, 75-76, 79, 80, 
117, 209 

Roots: The Saga of an American 
Family, 50,158n 
Rosen, Barbara, 50 

S 

Saint Jean de Luz, France, 19, 124 
Saint Jean Pied de Port, France, 9 
Salaburu, Pello, 33, 320 


San Francisco Basque Cultural 
Center (San Francisco, 
California), 111 
Sanchez, Itxaso, 238 
Sanchez-Bravo, Jose Luis, 165 
Sanguinetti, Julio Maria, 153 
Santa Fe Hotel (Reno, Nevada), 
173 

Santazi, Xiberoa, 368-373, 380, 
383 

Schultz, Mike, 393, 403 
Sellers, Mary, 7 
Sferrazza, Pete, 363 
Sharrock, Floyd, 8 
Shepperson, Wilbur, 8, 32, 41 
Shooting from the Lip, 299 
Sick Award (University of 
Washington), 43-44 
Sigma Delta Pi, 201 
Silver, Norman, 191 
Simpson family, 351 
Sita, John, 89-90 
Slavin, Gayle, 93 
Smith, Anthony, 147 
Solitude: Art and Symbolism in 
the National Basque 
Monument, 360 
Sondica Airport (Bilbao, Spain), 
341,358 

Sparks, Nevada, 14 
Star Hotel (Elko, Nevada), 23 
Stead, Nevada, 7 
Stewart, Omer C., 4-5 
Strickon, Arnold, 7 
Stubbs, Mary, 375 
Stubbs, Susie, 375 
Subijana, Pedro, 271 
Sullivan, Willis, 340, 342 
Sunkist Fruits, 21 
Sutherland, Cam, 63 
Sweet Promised Land, 6, 14, 32, 
42, 45, 47, 49, 53, 156n 



INDEX 


429 


T 

Tambor de Oro, 348, 364 
Tax, Sol, 11 

Teague, Alfrida (nee Poco), 21 
Teague, Milton, 21 
Terror and Taboo, 25, 134, 148 
The Basque History of the World, 
48 

The Basques: The Franco Years 
and Beyond, 45 

The Decline of the Nation-State, 
147 

The Guernica Generation, 45 
The Long Journey, 50 
The Old Law of Bizkaia, 138-139, 
249-252 

The Shepherd, 360 
The Social Roots of Basque 
Nationalism, 148 
The Witches' Advocate, 45 
Thernstrom, Stephan, 150 
Thompson, Susan, 365-366 
Thornton, Barbara, 366 
Thornton Peace Prize, 366 
Thornton, William, 366 
Tigner, James, 293-294 
Times Mirror Company, 21 
Titus, Dina, 122, 364-366 
Tonopah, Nevada, 24, 28-29 
Totoricagiiena, Gloria R, 22, 118, 
121-123, 181,218, 254-255, 
327,413-414 

Traditional Basque Cooking, 47 
Tree of Gernika, 250, 262n, 358 
Turin, Italy, 349 
Txakartegi, Gorka [See Aulestia, 
Gorka] 

U 

U.S. Bureau of Land Management 
(BLM), 295 

U.S. Central Intelligence Agency 
(CIA), 125-126, 182 


U.S. Department of Education, 
69-70 

U.S. Forest Service, 295 
Ugalde, Auriane, 197, 264-265, 

375 

Ugalde, Linda, 117 
Ugalde, Marcelino, 61, 70-72, 76, 
108, 117, 158n, 178, 180-181, 
184, 208-209, 263-290, 293, 
382, 393, 400, 403, 407 
Universidad Nacional de Educaion 
a Distancia (UNED) (Spain), 
350-351 

Universidad Rey Juan Carlos I 
(Spain), 351 

University of Arkansas, 353 
University of Chicago, 5, 12, 134 
University of Idaho, 352 
University of Iowa, 352 
University of Loyola, Chicago, 

353 

University of Maryland, College 
Park, 353 

University of Massachusetts, 
Amherst, 353 

University of Nebraska, Lincoln, 
293 

University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 
94, 122, 352 

University of Nevada Press, 7, 10- 
11, 25, 27, 30-39, 41, 44-50, 
73, 123, 147, 157n, 179, 193, 
214, 249-250, 252, 255, 326, 
383 

University of Pau (France), 88, 

349, 382-383, 404-406 
University of Rutgers Press, 51 
University of the Basque Country 
(Leioa), 147, 151, 322, 345, 
348, 377, 380 

University of the Basque Country 
(Vitoria), 345 

University of Tulsa (Oklahoma), 
353 



430 


INDEX 


University of Washington Press 
(Seattle), 43 

University Studies Abroad 

Consortium (USAC), 74-75, 
85, 91, 95-96, 99, 114, 118, 
122, 125, 15 7n, 168, 194, 
203-206, 218, 236-237, 266, 
269-270, 341, 344, 348-349, 
351-356, 364, 366, 369, 374, 
377-378, 380-382, 390, 393- 
394, 398-399, 404, 415 
University Studies in the Basque 
Country Consortium 
(USBCC), 337, 341, 347 
Urbeltz, Juan Antonio, 107 
Urla, Jacqueline, 117, 217, 312 
Urretxindorra, 207-208, 266 
Urza, Alexandra, 349 
Urza, Anastasio, 337 
Urza, Carmelo, 91, 93-96, 108, 
112-113, 117, 122, 155, 168, 
175, 203-205, 236, 243, 253- 
254, 262n, 266, 269-270, 316- 
318, 320, 337-366, 377, 395, 
404-405, 409, 415 
Urza, Enrique, 337 
Urza, Gabriel, 349 
Urza, Maria Luisa, 337 
Ustaritz, France, 17, 83, 85-89, 91, 
374 

V 

Van Howd, Douglas, 360 
Venezuela, 302 
Veyrin Collection, 191, 267 
Veyrin, Philippe, 9-10, 33, 35, 54- 
56, 267 

Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain, 345 
Vizcaya on the Eve of Carlism, 46 

W 

Waid, Gloria Castresana, 110, 128- 
129, 158n, 159n 


Ward, John, 24 

Washoe County School District 
(Nevada), 361 
Wasserman, Marlie, 51 
Watson, Cameron, 105, 148 
Western Range Association, 19 
White, Linda Louise, 36, 41, 63, 
68, 79, 98, 105, 107, 117-118, 
120, 138, 171-173, 177, 179- 
182, 184, 196-198, 200-203, 
218, 221-262, 264-265, 293, 
301, 311-312, 407-409, 411- 
414 

Whiteneck, Judith, 293, 378 
William A. Douglass 

Distinguished Scholar Award, 
114-115, 120,312-313,316- 
317 

Wolf, Milton T., 60, 63, 76-77, 83, 
285-286 

Woodworth, John, 340, 342 
Woodworth, Rebecca, 342 
World Congress of Basque 

Collectivities (1999), 409-410 
Wright, Thomas C., 122, 365-366 

X 

Xiberoa, France, 383 
Y 

Yahoo! Groups, 241-242 
Ynez, Elizabeth Larsh, 375 
Ysursa, John, 320-321 
Yturbide, Roby, 409 
Yturriaga, Darral, 375 

Z 

Zarraga, Karlos, 180, 266 
Zazpiak Bat Reno Basque Club, 
409 

Zelaia, Juan, 120 



INDEX 


431 


Zenbat Gara Euskal Dantzari 
Taldea, 220 

Zink, Steven D., 60, 71, 73, 76, 
78-80, 276, 280, 286 
Zirakzadeh, Cyrus, 46 
Zizek, Slavoj, 325 
Zorroaga, Spain, 95, 346-347, 397- 
399 

Zubiri, Nancy, 47 
Zulaika, Garazi, 311 
Zulaika, Goreti, Etxauit, 411 
Zulaika, Joseba, 22, 25, 48, 74, 77, 
79, 81, 97, 115-116, 118-121, 
123, 129, 134, 148, 152, 168, 
175-176, 179, 181, 211, 214, 
218-220, 234-236, 254, 258- 
259, 271, 304-305, 307-333, 
356,366, 399, 409,411-414 
Zumalde, Inaki, 90 
Zumarraga, Juan, 294 
Zuzaeta, Juan Luis, 358 




