Claire H. Hewes: 

The Hofer Family of Carson City 


Interviewee: Claire H. Hewes 
Interviewed: 1965 
Published: 1966 
Interviewer: Mary Ellen Glass 
UNOHP Catalog #008 


Description 

Claire Hofer Hewes, the daughter of Theodore R. Hofer and Flora Kingsley Hofer, pioneers of western Nevada, was 
born in 1898. Theodore Hofer arrived in Nevada to take a position as messenger boy for the U.S. Mint at Carson 
City. He later became director of the mint. Meanwhile, he pursued many business and social interests with various 
members of the community. Flora Kingsley Hofer, who traveled west on a wagon train, arrived in the capital city 
in the early days of Nevada’s statehood. With T. R. Hofer, she raised a family of six children. The Hofers were all 
well-known members of Carson City society. Mrs. Hewes’s interview is especially interesting for the sociological 
information it contains, as the Hofers were leaders in the social group to which they belonged. 



Claire H. Hewes: 

The Hofer Family of Carson City 




Claire H. Hewes: 

The Hofer Family of Carson City 


An Oral History Conducted by Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1966 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1966. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Introduction xi 

Claire H. Hewes: The Hofer Family of Carson City 1 

Original Index: For Reference Only 7 




Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Claire H. Hewes 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Introduction 


Claire Hofer Hewes is the daughter 
of Theodore R. Hofer and Flora Kingsley 
Hofer, pioneers of western Nevada. Theodore 
Hofer arrived in Nevada to take a position as 
messenger boy for the U. S. Mint at Carson 
City He later became director of the Mint. 
Meanwhile, he pursued many business and 
social interests with various members of 
the community. Flora Kingsley Hofer, who 
traveled West on a wagon train, arrived in 
the capital city in the early days of Nevada’s 
statehood. With T. R. Hofer, she raised a 
family of six children. The Hofers were all 
well-known members of Carson City society. 

Mrs. Hewes recorded her brief memoir 
in her hotel room while she was visiting in 
Reno from her home in Los Altos, California. 
The interview is especially interesting for 
the sociological information it contains. The 
Hofers were leaders in the social group to 
which they belonged, and acquired attitudes 
that reflected both the company and the 
community. 

The Oral History Project of the Center 
for Western American Studies attempts to 


preserve the past and the present for future 
research by recording the reminiscences of 
persons who have had important roles in some 
phase of Nevada or western development. 
Typescripts of the interviews become a part 
of the University of Nevada Library Nevada 
and the West Collection. Some interviews in 
the collection include memoirs by Mrs. Lucy 
D. Crowell of Carson City, Associate Justice 
Milton Badt of the Nevada Supreme Court, 
mining engineer and former University of 
Nevada Regent Roy A. Hardy, and former 
White Pine County Senator Charles Gallagher. 

Permission to cite or quote from Mrs. 
Hewes’ oral history should be obtained form 
the Center for Western North American 
Studies, University of Nevada. 

Mary Ellen Glass 
University of Nevada, 1966 




Claire H. Hewes: 
The Hofer Family of Carson City 


Marietta Hungerford Dana was my 
grandmother. Her mother, Margaret Kennedy, 
married Charles Dana—and the ancestry goes 
right back to Richard Dana, the author. My 
grandfather who married her was Henry 
Kingsley, and his brother was Ezra Kingsley. 
They were born in Pennsylvania and then 
went to Hammond, New York. They fell in 
love with the two Dana sisters. They formed, 
with others of upper New York State, a wagon 
train that joined another wagon train in 
Independence, Missouri. Mother’s mother 
had one other daughter, Armanda, who was 
born before my mother. She died of cholera on 
the North Platte River and was buried there. 
The Indians did not attack the wagon trains 
that they came in, although they had rumors 
they were coming. Mother did not mention 
anything about their food except they 
were very well-equipped with everything. 
They came, the Motts and themselves. Vira 
Thatcher was a descendant of the Mott family. 
They are Nevada people, too. 

Then they came to Nevada. My mother 
said that the Kingsley’s wagon train and 


the Motts’ were the biggest to cross in 
1852. They were the best because they were 
better equipped with cattle, horses and 
everything. So they came to Salt Lake City. My 
grandmother danced with Brigham Young; 
they had quite a gala time in Salt Lake City 
that winter. Then they came on to Placerville. 

My mother, Llora Evelyn Kingsley, was 
born on one side of Placerville, Coon Hollow; 
and her sister, Isadora Kingsley was born at 
Buckeye Plat on the other side. Even with the 
ownership and the responsibility of having a 
tavern, they also panned gold, naturally. 

The living at Placerville wasn’t too 
difficult. Mother told me they had a nice 
tavern and the social life was very nice, too; 
of the gentleman-and-lady type. They were 
not snobs, but they were exclusive. They just 
didn’t go with everybody; that was it. 

There were plenty of forms of recreation. 
There was a lot of needlework, knitting and 
crocheting, and embroidery. They loved to go 
out huckleberry picking and hiking, too; they 
liked that. And the ladies would get together 
to have social affairs. They had sewing circles, 



2 


Claire H. Hewes 


too. I have other names and records that 
I’ve kept of their social life. They made trips 
everywhere, too; Diamond Springs, Shingle 
Springs, Markleeville, and back to Placerville 
all by stage. They rode horseback. 

Then they moved on to Markleeville, 
and stayed there for some time. My mother’s 
chum there was former Mayor (of Reno) 
Stewart’s mother, Mary Duffy Stewart. Life in 
Markleeville was very typical of Placerville. It 
was crowded. They always waited for the stage 
to come in to bring the mail and take them 
on trips. 

Well, then from Markleeville they went 
on to Genoa, Nevada, where another daughter 
was born. That was Adele Kingsley (later 
taking the name Waters from her step-father) 
who later became a very famous actress with 
David Belasco, with McKey Ranken, and 
with Nat Goodwin. She made her debut 
with Fannie Davenport, which is interesting. 
I have all the accounts of her successes in 
San Francisco and in Virginia City, and all 
through the East where she went with the 
stock company. 

Then from Genoa they went to Gold Hill, 
still with a hotel and still panning for gold. 
They had many dances at the International 
Hotel and wore gorgeous clothes. They sent 
East for their beautiful things. Then they came 
on to Carson City and bought the old White 
House which was a hotel. It had formerly been 
a Pony Express stop. 

My grandmother, Marietta Hungerford 
Kingsley, divorced her husband and married 
Dr. John W. Waters, who came to Carson 
from Baltimore, Maryland. He became a 
messenger boy in the Mint in Washington, 
D. C. Then Colonel Abe Curry wanted 
some messenger boys for the opening of 
the Mint in Carson City, so they sent from 
Washington five young men. I believe one 
was Johnny Ince of the Ince Movie Picture (I 


mean later) , and my father. There were five 
of them altogether. 

Coming to Nevada in 1869, my father 
took the ship from Baltimore to Panama. Of 
course there was no canal, so he came across 
the Isthmus by train and took another ship 
on the West Coast and came up. I don’t know 
how many days and months it took to get to 
San Francisco. Then from San Francisco he 
took a train to Sacramento; and then from 
Sacramento, the stage coach to Carson City. 
He went to the White House to live. 

So the romance started when my mother 
was very young. 

Mother was in Misses Clapp and Babcock 
exclusive school for girls and so was her sister, 
Isadora. The other sister went to San Francisco 
to study dramatics. My grandmother, my 
mother’s mother, didn’t approve of her getting 
married so young. 

Father was quite young, too. Mother used 
to go to the Virginia and Truckee Railroad— 
right close to the Mint— and put pins on the 
track and make scissors. The pins would be 
flattened by the train’s wheels, and they called 
the flattened pins scissors. When it was time 
for the Mint to close, Father would escort her 
home. So, they were married. 

Another of the young men who lived at 
the White House was Richard Edward Kelly. 
He was from England, and on his mothers s 
side was a close relative of Queen Victoria. 
The name Kelly, of course, in his father’s. He 
fell in love with my mother’s sister, Isadora, 
and they were married. Where the Schultz’s 
lived was their home in Carson City. That is 
now where Mrs. Raycraft and her sister, Mrs. 
Montrose, live. They were the Schultz girls. 
That was my aunt’s home. So the romances 
from the White House included both of the 
sisters. 

The Kelly’s had two children; Edward 
who died at the age of three, and Pansy who 



The Hofer Family of Carson City 


3 


was considered the most beautiful girl in San 
Francisco society of that time. 

I think Paris Ellis and George Mills came 
to the White House, too. So did A. M. Ardery 
who was with the Virginia and Truckee 
Railroad. His wife was a Ferris, and that’s the 
family of the man who invented the Ferris 
Wheel. Then Father went from messenger 
to chief clerk and then to be superintendent, 
appointed by Benjamin Harrison. I have that 
appointment and certificate. Then after he 
left the Mint, he went into mining with Jim 
Butler, Frank Golden, George Wingfield and 
Cal Brougher out in Tonopah and Goldfield. 
He was also in the insurance business and in 
real estate in Carson. He was with Mr. Morris 
Cohn, the attorney, I recall quite clearly, as a 
friend and in the settlement in Smith Valley. 

He had a commission to bring German 
settlers, but the date I have now forgotten. 
And then he was State Bank Examiner. He was 
well informed about Goldfield when Bernard 
Baruch was up there, and William Randolph 
Hearst. George Wingfield and my father and 
Jim Butler and Cal Brougher struck it rich in 
Tonopah. Of course, all was prosperity then. 

My mother and father had six children. 
The oldest was Theodore Robert Hofer, Jr. He 
went to Rensselaer Polytechnic in Troy, New 
York, but that was too far away to suit my 
mother and father. So they brought him back 
so he would be closer. He entered Stanford 
where President Hoover waited on his table. 
His best friends were Will and Wallace Irwin, 
the journalists, and Fred Marriott, whose 
father was editor of the Call, one of the papers 
in San Francisco. So they would come up, 
these boys, every summer to our cottage at 
Fake Tahoe and of course they would come 
down to Carson, too. 

At Senator Stewart’s home, he was raising 
his granddaughter. She fell in love with my 
brother and he with her. So he would not go 


back to Stanford. I don’t know just how many 
years he had, just one more to finish I think. 
But they wanted to get married, so he taught 
school. 

Senator Stewart’s granddaughter, Bessie, 
(her grandmother was Mrs. Foote) was born 
in Bodie. Her mother was divorced from Mr. 
Fox and then she married Count Romero. 
Count Romero was the Spanish Ambassador 
to Persia. She (Bessie Fox) was then put in 
the Whitaker School in Reno. One of her 
dearest friends was Mrs. Shockley, whose 
husband was president of the First National 
Bank in Reno at one time. Then Senator 
Stewart’s daughter decided that she wanted 
her daughter to be raised in Paris, so she took 
her out of the Whitaker school and put her in 
a convent in Paris. She and her husband, the 
count, were touring. Then Bessie fell in love 
with Jerome Bonaparte in Washington, D. C., 
when she was living there with Senator and 
Mrs. Stewart. Well, when she came to Nevada, 
why, she forgot all about Jerome Bonaparte 
and married my brother. Very interesting 
little things. They lived in Gardnerville, where 
Theodore R. Hofer Jr. taught school for a little 
while; and then my brother taught at Empire. 
Then he was appointed Postmaster in Carson 
City. He later made quite a sizable fortune in 
Tonopah and Goldfield, the same as my father. 
He built a lovely home there. 

Then there was another brother, John 
Winthrop, who passed away with membranous 
croup when he was five. Dr. Smart and Dr. 
White put a tube in his throat, but they 
couldn’t save him. So I lost my brother then. 
Then my sister Etheline Dana Hofer married 
a naval officer at Annapolis, James Perdue 
Olding of Carson City. Then Hazel Adele 
was the next one. She married Roy Booth, 
who was a telegrapher for the Southern 
Pacific Railroad and also the Virginia and 
Truckee. Then came Gladys who married Otto 




4 


Claire H. Hewes 


Heitman of Carson Valley. She died in the flu 
epidemic and he was later murdered. Then I 
was last and I married a naval officer, Captain 
Frederick Ray Hewes of Boston, M.I.T. and 
Harvard, a civil engineer; and that’s the family. 

When Father was in the Mint, James 
Garfield came out and visited at the Lake 
Tahoe cottage with my mother and father. 
They became very, very close friends; I have 
their letters. Later he became President. 

Then Gutzon Borglum came to sculpture 
John Mackay’s statue. He became a good 
friend of my father’s while he was living at the 
Davis ranch. He presented Father with two 
hunting dogs in bronze chained together— 
perfectly gorgeous! Lucy Davis Crowell has 
another statue that he did. 

There were interesting people and times 
in Tonopah. Cal Brougher and the others were 
all big, sturdy, husky men. They would have 
to be to go out there and rough it. And that’s 
just what they did. Mother wanted to go after 
Father had been out there a few times. She 
said, “I would like to try it”, and so he said, 
“No, someone would have to haul water in for 
miles and you would live in a tent. You will not 
have any of the conveniences.” I don’t know 
just how long Mother did stay, but she found 
it not to her liking at all. So she returned. All 
of these men were—well, I guess they had 
large families, and naturally they were all 
interested in trying to find the pot at the end 
of the rainbow. They did a lot prospecting, I 
know. Father covered every bit of this whole 
state on horseback, by stagecoach, by train 
burros, everything. He just happened to be 
good friends of these gentlemen, so that’s how 
he went out with them. They were apparently 
very good friends. 

In Tonopah I think it was all camping. 
Later they did have the Mizpah Hotel. I think 
Cal Brougher had some building, too. Mother 
went out later and stayed at the Mizpah. But 


the first time she went, there was just tents. 
There wasn’t much for the ladies to do but talk. 

My father was with George Wingfield. 
That’s why we moved to Reno; because George 
Wingfield wanted my father to come over here 
and be with him, mining and real estate and 
all. Also my father had had great experience 
at the Mint and being State Bank Examiner. 
He was supposed to take care of the books and 
the legal end of it. So he stayed with Wingfield 
for some time, but he would not introduce my 
mother or any of his family to Mr. Wingfield. 
Wingfield’s partner, Mr. Nixon, was definitely 
not like him. 

Barnie (Bernard) Baruch was a fine man. 
He would really and truly give you the last 
drink of water, if he could. He was so good 
to everyone; everyone, not only to my father. 
He was a fine person. 

Senator Stewart was over at our house all 
of the time. He loved me. He had a long white 
beard and—oh dear! 

I was so awed by that beard; I think more 
than his stature! 

He was a large man, powerful and very 
strict. He worshipped his great-grandson, my 
nephew, Stewart Hofer. There was nothing 
that he would not do for that child until really, 
he was spoiled! 

I have many memories about living in 
Carson. Everyone had servants. We always 
had from two to three—never less—and 
nursemaids. They went right along with the 
family. We were all born in Governor Nye’s 
mansion, except my brother Theodore R. 
Hofer, Jr., who was born at the Centennial at 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. My father bought 
it from Governor Nye. Then we had a Chinese 
cook. And the nursemaid, Carrie, was related 
to the Hironimous family. Hironimous, that’s 
an old name, but she was the nursemaid. Then 
when I came along, we had colored help and 
white help, and even the mothers of some 



The Hofer Family of Carson City 


5 


of the nicest friends I had, worked for my 
mother. 

It was always great ceremony for dinner. 
We must dress and bathe. Everything was 
served in much decorum. Of course, the 
meals always had menus that my sister-in- 
law, Bessie Hofer, would print in French. We 
would go right through the menu. Beautiful 
candelabra were on the table, and everything 
was passed by the servants and done the 
correct way—even to finger-bowls. Wine 
was served with the meat course and the fish 
course. You wouldn’t believe it with the little 
homes there in Carson. 

The carriages! Families would come in 
their rigs and make their New Year’s calls. 
Father would greet them with his gold- 
handled cane. All the other fathers came with 
stove-pipe hats and swallow-tail coats. 

Then George and Ada Mills entertained 
Ambassador and Mrs. Whitelaw Reid and my 
sister Gladys and I received them at the door 
as little girls. To open the door was a great 
event. 

They would come, all the pomp and 
ceremony. H. M. Yerington’s second wife, 
Clara, was my godmother and the same for 
my sister Gladys, and Stewart Hofer. We all 
stood in awe and I think somewhat afraid of 
H. N. Yerington. I understand that he was one 
of the finest men. 

Governor Sadler and Governor Colcord 
and Governor Jones etc. and their families 
were alike. They were aristocratic and 
everything was done according to etiquette. 
Sadler was a large man, very sedate and 
impressive looking. The aristocrats and the 
politicians would pass the house, and we 
wouldn’t even say, “How do you do”. We would 
more likely hide behind a bush; and the same 
with all the children. It was awe, I don’t think 
we were exactly afraid, it was more of awe. 
They were so straight-laced and dignified. 


Governor Jones was before my time, of 
course, but they were our neighbors and close 
friends of my mother and father. They thought 
the world of them. So many others, Governor 
Adams, Governor Colcord—they were all 
great friends, and all entertained beautifully, 
magnificently. Nowadays, you just can’t do 
it. I came in at the end of it all, but I did see 
some of it. They weren’t snobbish, I’ll never 
say that about Carson, but they were dignified, 
and they were a little aloof. Maybe that was 
snobbishness, but I thought it was part of a 
pattern. 

The Vanderleiths were a devoted brother 
and sister, devoted. She was lovely. 

The Woodburys, and the Castles, and 
the Davises and the Raycrafts, the Rickeys 
and Eleanor Yerington and we were devoted. 
We all rode horseback and we ice-skated, 
and played “Run Sheep, Run”, and “Prisoner’s 
Dare Base”, and “Hide and Go Seek”. Carson 
City was a perfect place to raise children, just 
perfect. That was a happy time. 

The Chinese were so intriguing. That was 
just one street practically. We were able to go 
with our parents and buy fire crackers and 
everything there for the Fourth of July. The 
Chinese had many laundries, and they blew 
through something to dampen the clothes. 
And even as a child, my nose went up in 
the air. I just wondered whether they were 
spitting through it, but my mother said no, 
that that was just water they were blowing on 
the clothes. They did most of our laundry, for 
everybody. They also had their queues and 
would “chop-chop” along the street. That’s 
before they were nationalized. They were a 
happy community and devoted servants, very 
good. 

The Indians, as I remember, were always 
gathered around the Virginia and Truckee 
yard up at the Round House playing Fan 
Tan with much roughing and groaning. We 



6 


Claire H. Hewes 


were amazed at how they loved to gamble. 
Their “campoodies” were very odoriferous. 
The “mahalas” would come and peek in the 
window wanting to scrub your floors and 
bring you pinenuts and putting their hands 
up, looking through the window frightening 
you to death. All the time they were scrubbing 
the floors the Indians would grunt and groan. 
Mother would give them yards of material; 
they loved that and bandana handkerchiefs. 
They would scrub your floors, I recall, for 
twenty-five cents. 

And they would have pow-wows. When 
a girl became of age, they had a great to-do. 
I saw one (when I was in high school) , in 
Fairview out of Gardnerville and Minden. 
There was much to-do then. They had food 
in their hands, I remember, but I was afraid 
to eat it. I crumbled it; I was afraid it might 
be dirty. There was much hilarity. I should 
remember better because we went to that 
pow-wow when I was old enough, but that’s 
one thing that’s kind of faded about. They sang 
and made a lot of commotion. 

My mother had some very dear friends 
who had no money at all, and they were just 
devoted to us. But as I look back, they were 
clannish. The plumbers went together and 
the tradesman went together. The people 
who were in the railroad went with those that 
were in politics and socialized with them. The 
saloon-keepers kept to themselves. There was 
nothing against it, they just weren’t included. 
Now whether that was snobbishness, I don’t 
know; whether they didn’t want to associate, 
I can’t be certain. But I know they weren’t 
included—any of them. Although there were 
many saloons on every corner of the street, 
I don’t know that any of the families ever 
socialized with saloon-keepers. It was distinct; 
it was really separate, to be truthful. The 
Chinese were apart; they were servants. And 
the Indians were apart. In my memory, I don’t 


think there was any real social distinction 
between the Chinese and the Indians. But 
the Chinese, as I recall, were the ones who 
cooked for you and did your laundry. The 
Indians would chop wood, and they would go 
on camping trips and do the cooking and the 
hard work and wash the dishes and all. But I 
don’t think there was any difference between 
them socially. 

The Jews were very prominent and very 
educated and very refined people, and they 
were all accepted. The Zabriskies, the Cohens, 
and Barnie Baruch, and the Platts—oh, all of 
them—were accepted as I remember. They 
really were wonderful people. As for religious 
groups, I don’t think there was any distinction. 

I don’t want any exaggeration, only the 
truth to the best of my ability. These are things 
I recall as well as what Mother and Father told 
me. 



Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



15 


8 


Claire H. Hewes 


A 


F 


Adams, Jewett W., 11 
Ardery, A. M., 4-5 


B 


Baltimore, Maryland, 3 

Bank Examiner, Nevada State, 5,8 

Baruch, Bernard, 5, 8-9, 13 


Fairview, Nevada, 12 
Ferris family, 5 
First National Bank, Reno, 6 
Foote, Mrs. Henry Stuart, 6 
Fox, Mr., 6 



Dana, Amanda, 1 

Dana, Charles, 1 

Dana, Margaret Kennedy, 1 

Dana, Richard, 1 

Davenport, Fannie, 3 

Davis family, 11 

Davis ranch, 7 

Diamond Springs, California, 2 
E 


Hoover, Herbert, 5 
I 

Ince, John, 3 
Independence, Missouri, 1 
Indians, 1, 12, 13 
International Hotel, Virginia 
City, 3 

Irwin, Wallace, 5 
Irwin, Will, 5 


Ellis, Paris, 4 
Empire, Nevada, 6 




Original Index: For Reference Only 


9 


J 


R 


Jews, 13 

Jones, John E., 10-11 
K 

Kelley, Edward, 4 

Kelly, Isadora Kingsley, 2, 4 

Kelly, Pansy, 4 

Kelly, Richard Edward, 4 

Kingsley, Ezra, 1 

Kingsley, Henry, 1 


Ranken, McKey, 2 
Raycraft family, 11 
Reid, Whitelaw, 10 
Reno, Nevada, 2, 6 
Rensselaer Polytechnic 
Institute, .5 
Rickey family, 11 
Romero, Count, 6 

S 



Mackay, John W., 7 
Markleeville, California, 2 
Marriott, Fred, 5 
Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, 7 
Mills, Ada, 10 
Mills, George, 4, 10 
Minden, Nevada, 11 
Mint, U. S. {Carson City), 
3, 4, 5, 7, 8 
Mizpah Hotel, Tonopah 
Mott family, 1 


New Y 
Nixon, 
Nye, 


Sacramento, 

Sadler, Reinhold, 1( 

Salt Lake City, 

San i 
4, 5 
Schultj„ 

California, 

, 6 
, 6-7 

alley, Nevada, 5 
them Pacific Railroad, 7 
Stanford University, 5, 6 
Stewart, Annie Foote, 6 
Stewart, H. E., 2 
Stewart, Mary Duffy, 2 
Stewart, William Morris, 6, 9 


Tahoe, Lake,5,7 
Thatcher, Vira, 1 
Tonopah, Nevada, 5, 6, 7-8 


Olding, Etheline Dana Hofer, 7 
Olding, James Perdue, 7 

P 

Panama, Isthmus of, 3 
Pennsylvania state, 1, 9 
Placerville, California, 1, 2 
Platt family, 13 
Platte River, 1 


V 

Vanderleith family, 11 
Virginia and Truckee Railroad 
4, 7 

Virginia City, Nevada, 3 
W 

Washington, D. C., 3, 6 ' 
Waters, Adele Kingsley, 2-3 




10 


Claire H. Hewes 


W 


Waters, Dr. John W., 3 
Waters, Marietta Hungerford 


Whitaker School, 6 
White, Dr., 7 
White House Hotel, Carson 
- City, 3, 4 
Wingfield, George, 5, 8 
Woodbury family, 11 


Yerington, Clara, 10 
Yerington, Eleanor, 11 
Yerington, Henry M., 10 
Young, Brigham, 1 



Zabriskie family, 13 

































