Frank W. Daykin 


Interviewee: Frank W. Daykin 
Interviewed: 2004 
Published: 2013 
Interviewer: Susan Imswiler 
UNOHP Catalog #224 


Description 

Frank W. Daykin, born October 28, 1920 in Cleveland, Ohio, found his way to Nevada after law school and solo 
practice, and ultimately reshaped the way Nevada legislative law is read. An only child of a doctor and a teacher, 
Daykin aspired to teach classical languages. He read Latin and Greek, and was fluent in French and German. He 
graduated from Adelbert College (now Case Western Reserve University), majoring in mathematics and physics. 
He was commissioned a second lieutenant-captain in the U.S. Army Signal Corps and served in North Africa 
(Morocco) and Europe. After WWII he studied mathematics and physics at Princeton University but settled on 
law school at Case Western Reserve. 

Daykin combined a solo law practice with managing the family farm. Perhaps ready for a change, he came to Nevada 
on the advice of a friend. While waiting to take the Nevada Bar, he was hired by the Nevada Legislative Counsel 
Bureau (LCB). In a twenty-year span at LCB, Daykin became a Nevada institution. Known for his scholarship and 
exacting standards to language and the law, he became synonymous with the difference between “shall” and “should,” 
and known for Daykinisms. As a member of the National Conference of Commissioners of Uniform State Laws, 
Daykin always tried to improve the language of Nevada’s statutes. He is a true citizen scholar. 

The oral history interviews with Frank W. Daykin were part of the Nevada Legal Oral History Project, a joint effort 
of the Nevada Judicial Historical Society, the Ninth Judicial Circuit Historical Society, and the University of Nevada 
Oral History Program. 



Frank W. Daykin 




Frank W. Daykin 


An Oral History Conducted by Susan Imswiler 
Edited by Patricia A. Cooper-Smith 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 2013 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp@unr.edu 
http: / / www.unr.edu/ oralhistory 

Nevada Judicial Historical Society 
Carson City, Nevada 89701 

Ninth Judicial Circuit Historical Society 
Pasadena, California 91105 


All rights reserved. Published 2013. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 

Director: Alicia Barber 
Production Assistant: Karen Frazier 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words maybe quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface ix 

Introduction xi 

1. Early Years and College 1 

2. Military Service, Law School, and Civic Life 11 

3. Nevada and Legislative Counsel Bureau 19 




Preface 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Frank W. Daykin 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 



Introduction 


Frank W. Daykin, born October 28, 1920 
in Cleveland, Ohio, was a Midwesterner with 
the soul of a classicist. He became “the editors 
editor” and, in the process, reshaped the way 
Nevada statutes are read. 

An only child, his father a surgeon and 
his mother a teacher of Latin and algebra, Mr. 
Daykin acquired an early desire for knowledge. 
He aspired to teach classical languages, the 
subject he called his “great love.” Studying 
Latin and Greek, and fluent in French and 
German, Mr. Daykin chose pragmatism over 
love, majoring in mathematics and physics at 
Adelbert College (now Case Western Reserve 
University). 

A post-Pearl Harbor college government- 
sponsored physics project took Mr. Daykin 
into the U.S. Army Signal Corps. He was 
commissioned a second lieutenant-captain, 
and served in North Africa (Morocco) and 
Europe. After World War II, Mr. Daykin 
studied mathematics and physics at Princeton. 
At his aging father s request for help with the 
family farm, he returned home. 


Settling on the law as a career, Mr. 
Daykin attended law school at Case Western 
Reserve. He established a solo law practice 
and managed the family farm, which led to an 
office on the farm, and a position as member 
and chairman of the Lake County (Ohio) 
Planning Commission. 

How a self-described loner and Ohio 
farmer came to Nevada is a testament to the 
lure and mythology of western opportunity. 
On the word of a local urban planner that 
Nevada “was a good place,” Mr. Daykin 
organized his affairs and headed west. While 
waiting to take the Nevada Bar, he was hired 
by the Nevada Legislative Counsel Bureau 
(LCB) and, as they say, the rest is history. 

In the span of twenty years, Mr. Daykin 
became an institutional oracle to the Nevada 
Legislature. His maxim was that “a law, a 
statute, should either command or prohibit 
or declare the law. It has no other legitimate 
office.” Mr. Daykin became synonymous with 
the difference between “shah” and “should.” 
“Shall,” he explained, “is a command. ‘Is’ 



Frank W. Daykin 


xii 


declares the law.” Like Xerox or Kleenex 
or Google, Mr. Daykin was the namesake 
and embodiment of an entire category, the 
Daykinism —a “kind of language which 
is correct English, rather than common 
speech, and something which occurs often 
enough in different bills that it is recognized.” 
Throughout his LCB career, Mr. Daykin 
continued to “reconcile the substance of the 
statutes,” and “correct the language and style.” 

Mr. Daykin talks of his time as a member 
of the National Conference of Commissioners 
of Uniform State Laws, which dovetailed with 
his interests in producing good language and 
style in drafting laws that could be adopted in 
all fifty states. He speaks of his scholarly values 
and philosophy. He acknowledges the changes 
in the legislature and legislators as Nevada 
grew from “one senator and one assemblyman 
from every county” into a more populous 
and urban state. His practical leanings are 
apparent when he admits that while bringing 
the LCB into the computer age, he kept “the 
old Mag Card typewriters on standby.” 

In his own words, one of his major 
contributions was to “attempt rationality in 
the reapportionment,” and in continually 
trying to improve the language of the statutes. 
Lrank W. Daykin is a true citizen scholar. 

for readers who are interested in 
examining the unaltered records, copies of 
the recorded interviews are available in the 
Special Collections department of the UNR 
Library. 

Susan Imswiler conducted oral history 
interviews with f rank W. Daykin in September 
2004, at his home in Reno, Nevada, as part of 
the Nevada Legal Oral History Project, a joint 
effort of the Ninth Judicial Circuit Historical 
Society (NJCHS), the Nevada Judicial 
Historical Society (NJHS), and the UNOHP. 
Begun in 2001, the project was intended to 
record the life stories of leading members of 


Nevada’s legal profession and to educate the 
public about law and the courts by making 
those stories widely available through various 
media. 

Members of the boards of NJHS and 
NJCHS compiled and vetted lists of potential 
narrators, ultimately selecting representatives 
from both the state and federal benches and 
bars. The UNOHP, under the direction of 
Tom King and his successor Mary Larson, 
recommended interviewers, most of whom 
were professional oral historians, and donated 
equipment and transcription services. Brad 
Williams, of NJCHS, coordinated the project 
from its inception. Susan Southwick, of NJHS, 
oversaw that group’s participation. Patricia 
Cooper-Smith completed the copyediting 
and introductions. Alicia Barber, Director 
of the UNOHP since 2009, supervised the 
project’s final publication and dissemination. 
The project was made possible by a generous 
challenge grant from the John Ben Snow 
Memorial Trust, with matching funds 
provided by the U.S. District Court for 
Nevada Attorney Admissions Lund, the 
Washoe County Courthouse Preservation 
Lund, and the Nevada State Bar. Thanks 
go to Susan Southwick and the Board of 
Trustees of NJHS, and to Susan Imswiler, who 
interviewed Mr. Daykin. 

Patricia A. Cooper-Smith 
Carson City, Nevada 
May 2013 




Frank W. Daykin 
circa 2011 


(Courtesy of Cooks Photography) 














1 

Early Years and College 


Susan Imswiler: This is September 26, 2004. 
My name is Susan Imswiler. I’m here in Reno 
at the home of Frank Daykin, with whom we 
are beginning a series of interviews. Thank you 
very much for taking part in this project. 

Frank Daykin: You’re welcome. 

Today we’re going to cover a little bit of your 
family background and your childhood. Could 
you tell us where you were born—the city, the 
county, the state? 

I was born in East Cleveland, Cuyahoga 
County, Ohio, on October 28, 1920. 

And you do have a middle name. What does 
the W stand for? 

The W stands for Washington. Thereby 
hangs a tale. My father was born on George 
Washingtons birthday. I was named for him. 

Did you know any of your grandparents, 
personally? 


Only my grandmother on my mother’s 
side, and I can’t really say that I knew her, 
because she died when I was, perhaps, five 
or six years old. I only have a memory of an 
old lady sitting in a chair. 

Did you remember any of the names of your 
grandparents? 

Yes. My paternal grandfather was John 
Daykin. My paternal grandmother was 
Ann Daykin. My maternal grandfather was 
Thomas Kelly. My maternal grandmother’s 
name I do not recall. 

You said you were named after your father, 
Frank Washington Daykin—how did he come 
to locate in Ohio? 

His grandfather came there from 
England, part of a group of four families. 
They sold up everything they had in England. 
They made the passage. They bought little 
farms, that is, land they could clear for little 
farms, in what was then the Western Reserve 



2 


Frank W. Daykin 


of Connecticut, Sharon Township, Ohio. This 
was in 1833. 

And your father was a doctor? 

Yes, he was a Doctor of Medicine. 

Was he, at the time, a country physician, or 
did he practice in a town setting? 

He practiced in the City of Cleveland, 
but he was a general practitioner all his life. 
However, his greatest, what shall I say— 
skill, perhaps—lay in the field of internal 
medicine, curing by the use of drugs and 
medications without surgery. He was an 
expert surgeon, but he declined to do it. The 
Cleveland Clinic, of which you may have 
heard, used to refer their inoperable cases 
to him. They would ask him to call in at the 
clinic when they had one. 

Did his practice have any kind of an impact 
on your family life? Was he frequently called 
out at night, for example? 

The answer to that one is no, for at the 
time he married my mother, which was 1919, 
the year before I was born, he moved away 
from his office out to East Cleveland and 
thereafter would take no night calls. There 
was a little sign on the office door, “If the 
bell does not answer, call Dr. Sunkel or Dr. 
Battles.” And the numbers were given. 

That was a great idea. 

That was that! 

Was there ever a time that you thought you 
might want to follow your father’s footsteps 
and practice medicine? 


No, I never really contemplated that. For 
one thing, I did not think, and still do not 
think, that I had the intellect to do what he 
did, and I didn’t want to be second-class. 

Was your dad involved in any political 
activities or any community activities that you 
remember? 

Politically, he was a friend of Senator 
Mark Hannah’s, and he took part in the 
campaign of 1900, when William McKinley 
ran for president, Theodore Roosevelt for 
vice president. He carried Roosevelt’s coat, as 
the expression had it, in northeastern Ohio, 
meaning, he stood there and could whisper to 
the candidate, “That’s Commissioner So-and- 
So from Summit County coming up.” And the 
candidate could be delightfully cordial. 

Did any of your father’s stories stir up any 
interest in you in politics? 

No. He didn’t, of course, ever pursue 
politics, and I had no calling toward it. 

What was your mother’s full name, and where 
was she born? 

Her name was Maria Kelly Daykin. She 
was born in Cleveland in 1879. 

And she was a teacher? 

She was a schoolteacher, yes. She taught 
Latin and algebra at East High School in 
Cleveland. 

Now, in many cases in the West during the 
1800s a teacher had to give up the classroom 
once she married. Did your mother have to 
make the same choice? 



Early Years and College 


3 


She did not have to, but she did, of course. 

Did you have any brothers or sisters? 

No, I was an only child. One look at me, 
and that was that! Actually, of course, my 
mother was forty-one when I was born; my 
father was sixty-one. 

Do you have an earliest memory? 

Yes. [laughter] It is of being pulled along 
on a little hand sled by my father on a street 
that I could walk to and identify still in East 
Cleveland, and that dates, as best they could 
identify it, from about two years old. We 
could date it, because I remembered the spot. 
I remembered there were no houses along the 
street, and they were built soon after. 

Now, you were home schooled for your 
elementary school years. 

Yes. 

By your mother? 

Yes. 

What kind of an experience was that for you? 

As far as I was concerned, a very pleasant 
experience. She bought a series of lessons 
from the Calvert School in Baltimore and 
taught them to me. 

Now, were you living, more or less, outside of 
town during this time? Or you were actually 
living in town? 

East Cleveland is a suburb of Cleveland. 
However, it was a city of about 40,000 people 


then. It was about six miles east of Public 
Square. So, I would say it was an urban, rather 
than a rural, environment. 

Now, you would have been around nine when 
the stock market crashed. Were you aware of 
anything happening at the time? 

Yes, I was. However, the stock market 
crash did not have any particular adverse 
effect upon us. My father was a shrewd 
investor. He held a lot of bank stocks; he 
held a lot of bonds—when I say “a lot” we 
were not extraordinarily wealthy, but in 
proportion—and some other small common 
stocks. What did have an impact was four 
years later, roughly, Franklin Roosevelt’s 
devaluation of the dollar. My father turned 
on a dime. Except for war bonds during 
the Second World War, he never afterward 
bought a bond. 

He was interested in a number of the 
banks. He’d been, for example, chairman 
of the finance committee of Pearl Street 
Bank, which merged into the Cleveland 
Trust Company. So he had large holdings in 
that. He also had substantial holdings in the 
Union Trust Company, at that time, and the 
Guardian Trust. Of the three largest banks 
in Cleveland, all were closed during the 
Bank Holiday, and only one was permitted 
to reopen. That was the Cleveland Trust. 
The Union Trust was liquidated, and a new 
bank started from its remaining capital. The 
Guardian Trust Company paid out eighty- 
six cents on the dollar in liquidation. The 
Cleveland Trust Company, fortunately for 
the city, reopened. One of the directors of 
the Cleveland Trust was Newton D. Baker, 
who had been Woodrow Wilson’s Secretary 
of War. The president of the Union Trust was 
Joseph R. Nutt, who had been the treasurer 



4 


Frank W. Daykin 


of Herbert Hoover’s campaign in 1932. Need 
I say more? 

Now, did you notice changes around you? You 
said your family was reasonably well insulated 
from some of it. 

Yes. 

Were you aware of other things occurring? 

No. Things occurred, of course. Money 
was tight, generally, in Cleveland, less from 
1929 on than from the 1933 events. It was a 
big change in our way of life. In those easier 
days when people would work, my mother 
had employed a maid. Never after. Well, I 
remember digging weeds out of a neighbors 
lawn for ten cents a peck—clay soil, [laughter] 
That sort of thing I remember. 

I assume your father’s practice declined 
somewhat during the Depression. 

His practice did not decline in volume. It 
declined in what people.... 

The ability to pay? [laughter] 

Yes. Father never sent a bill. He kept his 
accounts in his daybook. He told his patients 
it was cash or charity. A lot of them, however, 
you pay a dollar a week, or the like. 

Backing up just a bit, I hadn’t been aware 
that your father had been born in 1859. Did 
he have any memories of the Civil War or 
Reconstruction that he passed on to you? 

His only memory of the Civil War— 
remember, he was a child—was of soldiers 
drilling before they were sent to war. Of 


course, the Reconstruction occurred in the 
South, and Cleveland was in the North. 
He never expressed any memories of the 
Reconstruction Era. 

OK. I just was terribly curious about that, 
[laughter] Now, you mentioned your first job 
was digging weeds at ten cents a peck. 

[laughter] Yes. 

Did you have other jobs as a young boy, after 
that one? 

Not particularly. My father didn’t 
encourage me to work outside. Of course, I 
took care of the yard, and we had a farm at 
Perry, Ohio, about thirty miles out, where 
we went every Sunday, and I would help my 
father with whatever he chose to do. 

What kinds of chores did you have on the farm? 

We rented the farm to a succession of 
tenants, who were progressively worse and 
worse, as I remember during my childhood. 
Father did not, of course, perform any of 
the day-to-day farm work. I can remember 
helping him and the tenant drive cattle 
sometimes from one field to another, or 
drive cattle down into the big woods. I can 
remember when Father would go down there 
to salt them, when I was a very small child 
looking at them, and for safekeeping he would 
put me up in the center of a hollow stump, of 
which there were plenty handy wherever he 
chose to salt, [laughter] 

Now, I assume that you were probably a big 
reader as a child, weren’t you? 

Yes. 



Early Years and College 


5 


Now, you were home schooled through, what, 
about sixth grade? 

Yes. The Calvert course went through the 
first eight grades, but my mother enrolled me 
in the seventh grade, the beginning of junior 
high school, and a very good thing she did, 
because it took me a couple of years, really, to 
get used to public schooling. I got reasonably 
good grades during the seventh and eighth 
grades, but it was the ninth grade and after 
that.... 

That really took off? 

Yes. 

Did you have a favorite sport or a favorite game 
as a child? 

As a child, I was totally non-athletic in that 
sense. Father believed in walking—he would 
come home from the office, and we would 
walk every afternoon—and swimming—he 
taught me to swim and so forth, that sort of 
thing, but playing sports, “Nonsense!” He 
never had. I never did. 

Did you have any hobbies or any collections 
that youd like to talk about? 

I had a stamp collection as a boy, which I 
failed to keep up. Of course, I have the stamps, 
but.... 

What can you tell me about some of your 
childhood friends? 

My best friend, probably, was a boy named 
J.V. Duff. He and I went through junior 
high school, high school, college together. 
We walked to every one of them, including 


college, living at home. We walked a mile and 
a half one way to go to Shaw High School. 
When we started college, we turned around, 
and we walked a mile and a half the other way 
to get to Western Reserve, [laughter] 

That’s great, though. Sure saves on cars. 

It sure did. Incidentally, my father never 
owned an automobile. He got around his 
practice—and he made a lot of house calls— 
on the streetcars and buses that Cleveland 
had and walking, of course. He had me learn 
to drive as soon as I was sixteen, and I got a 
drivers license, in case we ever had to use a 
car, but we never had one. As far as his driving, 
he said, “Well, I use my hands in diagnosis, 
and driving an automobile coarsens the 
hands.” 

I thought to myself when I was a boy, 
“Well, that’s a handy excuse for not wanting 
to have a car.” 

Many years later I heard where an 
inquiring reporter had asked Major-General 
Curtis LeMay, the chief of staff of the air force, 
whether American boys made especially good 
pilots, because they were always fussing with 
automobiles. Replied the general, “Oh, no! A 
pilot should never drive a car. It coarsens the 
hands.” [laughter] 

In that case, I have to ask, I’ll bet you have vivid 
memories of your first car? 

Yes, I have. Actually, that was an oddball 
situation. When we were both seniors in 
college, my friend Duff lined up a car that he 
wanted to buy. It was a used Ford, oh, not too 
many years old, in good condition. The agreed 
price was ninety dollars, but Duff didn’t have 
ninety dollars right at that moment. So he 
said if I would buy the car and pay for it, I 



6 


Frank W. Daykin 


could drive it until he got the ninety dollars 
together, [laughter] So that was my first car. 

How long did it remain your car? 

Oh, a matter of a few months. Both Duff 
and I did tutoring, partly to pay for our 
college work, and I drove it to some of my 
tutoring. Of course I let J.V. drive it to some 
of his and so on. [laughter] 

Now, did your family travel at all or take 
family vacations? 

No. As to the second, the answer was no. 
I never knew my father in all his lifetime to 
take what would be called a vacation. But 
beginning when I was seventeen, he and I 
started going out farther west into the Middle 
West looking for good farmland. Meeting the 
double liability, you know, of those banks was 
a very serious matter, but we got a little money 
together looking to buy land. So we knocked 
around the summers of 1938, 1939, 1940, 
1941, together in the Midwest. 

Do you remember any specifics of where you 
looked? 

Oh, yes. First summer we went down to 
Texas. Father thought there was good land 
in Texas, and he had letters of introduction 
from bankers he knew in Cleveland to a 
fellow who was on the board of the Southern 
Pacific. 

That fellow said, “Well, about how much 
land do you want?” 

“Oh, two, three thousand acres,” as land 
was going in Texas at that time. 

“Well, you know, I’ve got a small ranch 
I’d like to sell you, but it’s about twenty 
thousand.” [laughter] 


We knocked around a little and didn’t get 
anything. Then we looked primarily in Iowa 
and Nebraska. 

Now, still kind of covering your childhood in sort 
of a circular motion, you went to Kirk Junior 
High School, and then Shaw High School, both 
in East Cleveland. Do you remember, were you 
either a leader or a follower at school? 

I did various things in junior high. I 
worked on the school paper a little bit. In high 
school we had various after school clubs, and 
both J.V. and I belonged to different ones of 
those. 

What clubs did you belong to? 

There was a Latin Club, and that’s the 
one that I remember by name. We also, in 
our senior year in high school, published 
an anthology of writings of the pupils in 
celebration of the one hundredth year of a 
school on that site. It hadn’t been a public 
school when it was founded. I worked on that. 
J.V. and I and, I think, Phyllis Steinfurth were 
the editors of it. 

What were your favorite classes? 

Favorite classes? Oh, gosh, I liked all 
of them. I enjoyed geometry, especially. I 
also worked on the school paper. I was the 
collection manager for that. The reason for 
the association of ideas was, Mr. Gifford, my 
geometry teacher was in charge of the financial 
aspects of the school paper, [laughter] 

What was it like being the collections manager? 

That meant going out and collecting 
for the advertising that was sold. I never 



Early Years and College 


7 


remember not being able to collect, even 
though this was just coming out of the 
Depression. 

Were there any teachers who really made an 
impact on you? 

Mr. Gifford, very strongly. I guess he was 
the most influential in my junior high or high 
school. 

You mentioned you were coming out of the 
Depression. Were you at all aware, even 
peripherally, of European affairs at that point, 
while you were in high school? 

Yes. That last year was 1938. Christopher 
Morley’s History of an Autumn pretty well 
sums that one up. 

Did your family talk much about European 
affairs at home? 

Oh, yes. After the Second World War 
had broken out in Europe, I remember one 
little classic of my father’s. He picked up the 
morning paper, which he was in the habit 
of reading at breakfast, and he read out the 
headline, “Hitler Invades the Balkans.” For 
the first time I felt sorry for that man. 

Now, a lot of his patients were immigrants. 
Cleveland was a large, industrial city with 
many Balkan immigrants. My father, 
incidentally, footnote, spoke German 
excellently, and he spoke Bohemian 
perfectly. He had learned that early in 
his practice. He had a patient who was 
a shoemaker, and, of course, they spoke 
together in German, and the shoemaker 
asked the doctor, would he teach him 
English. Father said, “Yes, if you will teach 
me Bohemian at the same time.” 


So that he could better communicate with his 
patients? 

Yes. 

Wow! Your whole family must have an amazing 
flair for languages. 

He therefore knew those people intimately. 

Was the buildup in Germany anything you 
talked about in high school, too? 

Oh, yes. Duff, particularly, carefully 
compared, all the way from 1933 on, the 
careers of Franklin Roosevelt and Adolf 
Hitler. 

Oh, while this was occurring? 

There’s a perfect parallel. 

What kind of an atmosphere do you remember 
in school? Did people fear that this was heading 
our way? What do you remember about that? 

No, I don’t think so. Well, certainly not 
in high school or before the war. During the 
war, when I was in college, no, there wasn’t 
any particular thought that it was coming our 
way. Pearl Harbor astonished most people. 

Yes, I’m sure it did. 

Including us. 

You graduated from high school in 1938 and 
immediately went on to college, walking a mile 
and a half the other direction. 

Yes. Duff and I each had a half scholarship, 
that is, half our tuition was paid. 



8 


Frank W. Daykin 


How did you get your scholarship? 

Just applied for it—and our grades. 

Now, at that point, when you started college, 
did you have any inkling of what you wanted 
to do with your life? 

Yes, I thought I wanted to teach. My father 
never thought much of that, that is, he was 
never in favor of it. 

Did he say why? 

He didn’t think that teaching was a very 
profitable occupation, and one should do 
something.... But he never urged me to study 
or to practice medicine. I wanted to teach 
classical languages. I learned Latin in high 
school. They didn’t teach Greek in high school 
by then. They had when my mother was 
teaching in high school, but they didn’t then. 
So I studied Greek at home, taught myself the 
basics of it, and then took advanced courses 
when I was in college. But that was my great 
love. However, I also majored in mathematics 
and physics. 

When you mentioned that you majored in 
mathematics and physics, one of the things I am 
aware of just from general history is that there 
was a lot of uncertainty during that period of 
time. Rutherford had split the atom. People 
had realized that the atom was not as solid or 
as predictable as they had originally thought. 
Were you aware of this? Sometimes that period 
is referred to as the Age of Anxiety. 

We didn’t consider it any matter of 
anxiety. We knew there was no anxiety 
about it, as far as teachers of physics were 
concerned. We just studied what we knew. 
My last year of college in physics, when Pearl 


Harbor had just occurred, I was working 
throughout the year—Pearl Harbor fell 
kind of in the middle of it—on advanced 
projects that the government wanted certain 
physics departments to look into. One of the 
professors and another fellow by the name of 
Gene Haake and I were carrying out some of 
that work. 

Can you go into any detail about the work you 
were doing, or is that classified information? 

I don’t know whether they ever declassified 
it or not. An electric arc, which is what is used 
in spectroscopy, requires the flow of electric 
current from one terminal to the other. 
The farther apart you can separate those 
terminals—in layman’s terms—the better 
look you have at what is streaming down 
across it. Our task was to try to develop a 
type of electrical circuit that would permit 
a longer arc. Actually, we were reasonably 
successful. I never knew what became of the 
work afterwards. 

Did you have to have any special clearance to 
work on those projects? 

No, because we didn’t know enough of 
what was going to go on out of it. We simply 
didn’t. However, that assignment did mean 
that when I graduated I was able to get a 
commission in the Signal Corps. 

I do want to back up a little bit before we go 
on to that, in fact, before we even get to Pearl 
Harbor. Were there any other extracurricular 
activities that you participated in during 
college? 

Yes. I was a member of the Phi Society. I 
was never a member of a fraternity in college, 
and I was the first independent, non-fraternity 



Early Years and College 


9 


member who had ever been elected president 
of the Phi Society, [laughter] 

There must be a story there. 

Simply, that a number of us didn’t belong 
to the fraternities, which tended to be social. 
We didn’t belong to them, and we decided 
among ourselves that if we got together 
behind one person, by golly, we might be able 
to elect him, and the other fellows wanted me 
to, and I was it. [laughter] 

Pretty good political instincts. 

OK. That was about the only extracurricular 
there. You see, we were tutoring a little on the 
side. Inside I was supposed to—and did— 
tutor the football team. And until my son, 
now in high school, took up football, I had 
no use for football ever thereafter, [laughter] 

I am not even going to touch that one. 

No. Of course, we tutored on our own 
account, also, to help make up that other three 
hundred dollars. 

With all that going on, did you have time for 
girls, at all? Did you date during college? 

Yes, a little. 

Now, on to the big one. Where were you when 
you heard about Pearl Harbor? 

Father and I were down at the farm. 
Remember, Father didn’t drive. We had been 
driven by a man he knew out there. We came 
up at the end of the day, got into the car to go 
home, and the man who owned the car turned 
on the radio, and that is when we heard about 
Pearl Flarbor. 


Can you tell me what you felt? For example, 
when I heard about 9-11 on the radio, I just had 
chills. Do you remember anything like that? 

We were surprised, of course, but didn’t 
have chills or anything like that. Well, this 
was it. My thought was, naturally, well, this 
was war, and, certainly, we were going. My 
father never even suggested that I ought to do 
anything to be deferred or anything like that, 
but he said, “Make sure you are in some kind 
of active service.” His memory of warfare, of 
course, by word of mouth, was the First World 
War, where most of the casualties were disease 
and so forth in the trenches. “Stay out of the 
trenches!” 

That would have been excellent advice. 

When I told him that the Signal Corps 
had the highest rate of casualties of any line 
outfit—and it did —that didn’t faze him in 
the least! You’re up, out of the mud, moving 
around. 

Did the war cast a pall over the rest of your 
college years—or the rest of that year? 

No, it didn’t. We simply, as I have told 
you, began that military project; we finished 
it. That was that. 




2 


Military Service, 
Law School and Civic Life 


There was a feeling of enthusiasm? 

Yes. I applied to several services. I tried 
for the Marine Corps and was turned down 
as not physically qualified. I was underweight. 
I had glasses then, and so forth. I had other 
lines out. I applied for the Signal Corps 
commission, and was sent down to Fort Hays 
to the physical examination. Father went with 
me. The doctor went down, and everything 
that didn’t pass, that is, where I wasn’t up to 
standard, he wrote, “Waived,” after it, and 
recommended me as physically fit. [laughter] 

What did you do in the Signal Corps? 

The theory on which I was commissioned 
was that I understood electronics, because of 
the work in the physics laboratory. However, 
I was sent to Fort Monmouth, New Jersey, 
company officers’ training course, supposed 
to be a ninety-day course. I had been there 
for just about one month. One of the lecturers 
was telling the student body that they were 
going to have to take this seriously, or some 


people were going to ship out. An enlisted 
man walked out from the wings and handed 
him a note. He opened the note, “Lieutenant 
Daykin, Lieutenant McElmoyle, report to 
the commandant!” And there was just a gale 
of laughter. You know, the student body—we 
didn’t know each other much. 

“Well, those guys are going to get thrown 
out!” 

We were sent to Camp Pickett, Virginia, 
and that was where General Patton was 
putting together the Western Task Force for 
the invasion of Morocco. You see, they knew, 
from the application and so forth, that I was 
fluent in French. I also had the electronic 
knowledge. They were organizing two radio¬ 
broadcast operating detachments to take 
over the civilian facilities after we landed and 
occupied Morocco. We landed, and after three 
days the French ceased resistance, and they 
jolly well operated their own facilities quite 
happily. 

From there on, I did a great variety of 
assignments within the Signal Corps. I’ve 
often thought that one reason that I seemed to 



12 


Frank W. Daykin 


do all the odd jobs is because that was literally 
what I was given—if there was something odd. 
Successful though I was, I wasn’t burdened 
with any body of military doctrine. I think I 
was the least trained officer who ever served in 
the Second World War. [laughter] NoROTC, 
no nothing. 

What were some of your odd jobs? 

The first one, we went around and 
surveyed the radio equipment of the 
various French forces and did a little other 
reconnaissance while we were at it. We took 
photographs, for example, of the fact that 
a Jeep could just cross the road bridges in 
northern Morocco on the south side of the 
Riff Mountains. They were built primarily 
to carry a narrow-gauge railway. They were 
built just wide enough that they would 
carry a passenger car. We brought back a 
photograph of a Jeep in the middle of one 
of those bridges. That allayed any anxiety 
on the part of the base commander that the 
Germans were going to send tanks down 
through Spain and Spanish Morocco. Tank 
come up to that bridge, you know, [laughter] 

We got clear around behind the Atlas 
and down as far as Agadir and looked down 
at a Spanish enclave at Ifni to see if there was 
any particular fortification going on, duly 
reported that. 

So a lot of what you did, really, was 
reconnaissance? 

That aspect of it. There was a captain—and 
I was a second lieutenant—and a couple of 
enlisted men. I could talk to the French. We 
had a French officer along, also, to tell the 
French they were supposed to answer, but I 
didn’t have to work through an interpreter. I 
could ask and be answered. 


Did you ever find yourself in a combat 
situation? 

The mission never involved hand-to-hand 
combat. Of course, an amphibious landing 
is a combat situation, and I made the one at 
Fedala, north of Casablanca, under General 
Patton. I made the one on the Riviera under 
General Patch with the Seventh Army. So, yes, 
I have been in combat situations. 

What kind of technology did you have to work 
with at the time? 

My assignments were actually less 
technological. I was grabbed off, when the 
broadcast station detachment was being 
dissolved, by Colonel Thornton and put into 
the supply section of the base headquarters. 
Rather than direct technology, it was shipping 
out to support the Allied invasion of Sicily, 
re-arming the French forces, there again, 
taking their signal equipment and what was 
necessary in working with the French officers. 

So you spent pretty much the entire war in the 
southern theater, then? 

First Africa and then Europe. 

Where were you when you heard that the war 
was finally over? 

I was right about where it finally ended. 
Seventh Army was around in southwest 
Germany. We had just captured Marshal 
Goering, and then in a day or so the war 
was over. I think I heard the first shot fired 
by American forces, and I heard the last, 
metaphorically. 

Did you have occasion to see any of the prison 
camps? 



Military Service, Law School, and Civic Life 


13 


Yes. And I think about it as little as 
possible. I had to go into Dachau very briefly 
to look for a man whom intelligence wanted. 
I spoke fluent French, fluent German. 
“Daykin, go look!” [laughter] And I didn’t 
find him. But I have memories I’d rather not 
bring up. [crying] 

How long did you remain in the army after 
the war ended? 

I served in the Occupation until about 
September of 1945, so that would be about 
four or five months. Then, because I had 
served in Africa, I wasn’t to be sent to the 
Pacific, so I was sent home. Neither officers 
nor men who had served in one malarial 
area—and North Africa was —were to be 
sent to the other, which was the Pacific. 

I was rotated home. I got home in 
about November of 1945. See, I had left in 
October. So that was just over three years 
continuously overseas. Then I had a lot 
of accrued leave, because you didn’t take 
any leave during that three years, so I was 
technically on active duty until about the 
following February, but home on leave. Then 
I went into the reserve. 

Now, you were away from your family, your 
friends, for three entire years—probably 
minimal communication, an occasional letter? 

Yes. 

That’s so different from today. 

Yes. The Vietnam veterans had a lot of 
stuff that was rougher than we did, but they 
would serve for a matter of months. 

How different was it for you to come home 
after not seeing people for three years? 


I guess I kind of picked up. 

Had you been able to keep in fairly close 
correspondence with your family? 

We could exchange those letters that were 
called, I think, V-mail. You had a sheet about 
so long and so wide on which you could write. 

About four by six? 

Yes. Then it was folded over and mailed. 

You tried to cram as many words as possible 
on there? 

Yes. That was the contact. 

Tell me about the day you came home and saw 
your family again. 

I went through Indian Town Gap. I was 
processed out there and put on leave. I walked 
over to the Pennsylvania Railroad Station, 
took the train to Cleveland, then took the 
streetcar route home. Of course, I’d been able 
to let them know by mail that I was coming. 
They were glad to see me. 

You were technically on active duty till about 
February, and then you joined the reserves. 
What did joining the reserves entail? Did you 
have to do anything beyond that? 

In the reserve duty at that time, you were 
called up for about two weeks each year. I 
did not have to be called up while I was in 
law school, I know, because that was a two- 
calendar-year, continuous course. But later 
on, after I was out farming, we had about 
two weeks of active duty training, and we 
were supposed to take what you might call 
extension courses—study and send them in 



14 


Frank W. Daykin 


and so forth. The reason I left the reserve—I 
had been rather faithful in doing that—but 
one year they announced that absolutely no 
one of the officers would be retained unless he 
completed the course—and I did. Then they 
announced at the end of the year, “Oh, well, 
because of hardship, we’re going to defer for a 
year.” And I handed in my resignation. I was 
so totally disgusted. So I did not serve in the 
Korean War. 

That worked out well for you. Now, you went 
to Princeton the fall after you returned home, 
right? 

I went to Princeton that fall, actually. 

Oh, you got home in November and immediately 
went to Princeton? 

Yes. The professor who had supervised 
the project that I worked on was teaching in 
the graduate school at Princeton. I wanted to 
travel a little there, and I dropped in on him, 
and we talked. He said, “Well, come on.” They 
were pretty darn informal about it then with 
that uniform on. 

So, you found yourself a graduate student in 
Princeton in mathematics? 

Yes, mathematics and physics. 

You were also a teaching assistant? 

Yes, in mathematics, partly paying for the 
tuition. 

How did you like teaching? 

I enjoyed it. I’d made up my mind during 
the war that there wasn’t going to be enough 
call for teaching in classical languages, so I 


had better follow the other prong of what I 
had studied. I would cheerfully have gone 
on there and tried to get a college position. 
Probably could have got one there, from all 
that I know of. But anyway, my father pointed 
out that I had better come home, because at 
that point he was eighty-seven. Eighty-six in 
1945. After I had completed that one partial 
year, he thought I had better come home and 
help look after things there at home. I couldn’t 
pursue any graduate study in mathematics or 
physics. I had already as an undergraduate 
taken all the graduate courses that there were 
at Western Reserve. 

And they didn’t confer a graduate degree, 
having taken all that? 

Oh, no, because I had taken them for 
undergraduate credit. See, they didn’t have an 
extended department there. I decided to take 
up law instead. So I am an accidental lawyer. 

Are there any professors or courses that stand 
out during the time you were in law school? 

Yes. We had an excellent faculty. They 
were all older men, you see, who had come 
out and were teaching. But we had some 
cracker jacks. Dean Finfrock, who was the 
dean of the law school, was an old man, but 
he taught equity. Fletcher Andrews taught 
agency. Clinton Dewitt taught evidence. He 
also taught suretyship. 

This is where your article came from? 

Yes. See, I was put on what was called 
the case notes board, which they didn’t have 
really a law review at the time—one was set up 
afterward—and our papers were published in 
the Ohio Law Abstract, which contained cases 
and articles and so forth from the profession. 



Military Service, Law School, and Civic Life 


15 


Your first publication was in 1949? 

“Guarantor Distinguished from Surety.” 
Yes. See, we went to law school as a continuous 
course. It was a three-year course in two 
calendar years. There were no vacations. 
We took term, term, term. During the last 
term we were allowed to take the Ohio State 
Bar examination, even though we had not 
completed the course, but they held our 
grades to see whether we would be graduated. 
Then, if we had passed the bar and been 
graduated, as virtually all of us were, the chief 
justice came up from Columbus to swear us 
in. 

What was the purpose behind compressing 
three years into a two-year course? 

Ours was an unusual class. We had three 
young women in it, but otherwise, everybody 
was either an officer or an enlisted man 
from the armed forces. Some were still in 
the reserve; some weren’t. But we were all 
pretty much—or wed better be by that time— 
matured. They compressed it to give us a good 
start. 

Now, you weren’t trying to work while all this 
was happening, were you? 

No, I was not. However, some of the 
fellows did. I remember one lad, a friend of 
mine, who fell asleep in class, [laughter] That 
was all right, except that he had lain back, 
and he fell over backwards and slid under 
the table. He hoped that the professor hadn’t 
noticed. So very discreetly the chair came 
up, and then Lantz came up and sat in it. The 
professor paused in his lecture, “Welcome 
back, Mr. Lantz!” and continued, [laughter] 
Yes, some of them did, and they had a harder 
row to hoe than I did. 


They sure did. Did you, at that point, have a 
specialty in mind, a direction you thought you’d 
be going in law? 

No, I did not. Rather the opposite. I don’t 
know that I thought of it too much while I was 
in law school, but definitely when I got out of 
it. My model as a lawyer was what my father 
had done as a doctor, that is, general practice. 
Serve people, don’t get buried in some kind 
of a specialty. 

That is an interesting idea. How well would you 
say law school prepared you for actual practice? 

As well as I expected, for I didn’t have any 
training in the nuts and bolts of it. I expected 
to open my own office and kind of learn as I 
went along—which I did. 

That’s what happened, OK. Someone who’s 
majoring in teaching does a semester or so of 
student teaching—they don’t have anything like 
that in law school, do they? 

No. And even less, I think, then than 
perhaps now—though I haven’t visited the 
law schools recently. 

So, your background was more than theoretical? 

Yes. They taught you the law. And, of 
course, Western Reserve did not concentrate 
upon Ohio law, as the night school downtown 
did, but we passed the Ohio bar exam. 

Did they specifically prepare you for the bar 
exam, or did you have to study in addition 
for that? 

No. As I think I mentioned, our class was 
allowed to take the bar examination at what 
was in fact the end of our fifth semester of 



16 


Frank W. Daykin 


the law course. No, we didn’t study especially 
for the bar. [laughter] Who had time for that 
while studying law? 

But you were successful. 

Yes. 

And you opened your own private practice. 
Yes. 

You mentioned you had to pretty much learn 
the nuts and bolts of opening a practice on your 
own. Tell me a little bit about that process. 

I rented. Rather than going into a firm, 
because I wanted to be alone, I rented a 
very small office downtown. I didn’t hire a 
secretary; I didn’t have the income from the 
practice to do so, and incidentally, I never 
have—hired a secretary, that is. 

You’ve always done your own office work, too? 

Yes. 

Wow. 

And went along. I took what cases came 
in. Of course, there is one thing about having 
very few cases when you are starting—you 
can spend a lot of time on each one and thus 
teach yourself what has to be gone through 
and done. 

Do you remember your first case? 

No. [laughter] Well, I remember my only 
criminal case, to which I was assigned by the 
common pleas judge. 

Oh, tell me about that. 


It was a soldier whose unit was on 
duty there in the Cleveland area. He had 
purportedly married a local girl, and then 
she was suing him for non-support of their 
expected child. I went and interviewed him in 
the jail. I discovered that he had been married 
in Georgia, not in fact divorced, because he 
had failed to pay the lawyer who was getting 
the divorce in Georgia. He could not be guilty 
of non-support, but he was, in fact, guilty of 
bigamy. 

What a mess. 

I told him, “Look, I think I can work a 
way out of this. You will agree to an allotment 
from your pay for the support of the child 
up here. We will plead guilty to the charge of 
non-support, but I will not conceal from the 
district judge—the common pleas judge—the 
facts.” And I didn’t! 

The prosecuting attorney was perfectly 
willing to take that settlement. It provided 
for the child, [laughter] The district judge 
said, “Fine.” And, of course, here I was, 
a reserve captain in the army. I had no 
difficulty going down to the local army office 
and getting this allotment set up. So that was 
the end of that. 

I never liked criminal law. I never 
voluntarily took a criminal case, [laughter] 
That’s the funniest, and that’s because the 
early civil cases—I do not remember which 
was first—were less distinctive than that one. 

I would guess so. Was there such a thing as a 
typical day when you first began your work? 

No. There really wasn’t. Of course, work 
was very slow coming in, even though, as I 
say, I devoted exhaustive time to working out 
each one. I spent some of the time reading 
biographies of, not particularly, lawyers, but 



Military Service, Law School, and Civic Life 


17 


men who had been successful. That was about 
it. 

What professional affiliations did you have at 
that time? 

I would have to say none. I’m sure there 
was a bar association in Cleveland, but I had 
not hunted it up or joined it, and I never was 
a member of any legal or other fraternity. 

You did at one point become a county 
commissioner for the area—a county planning 
commissioner? 

County planning commission, yes. That, 
however, was not in Cleveland. 

Oh, I’m sorry. 

I maintained an office in Cleveland for 
a couple of years after I was graduated from 
law school, and then I moved out about 
thirty miles to Lake County, where we had 
the farm, because it was either going to go 
to pot, and I would have to sell it—which 
my father had urged me not to do—or I was 
going to have to take hold of it and dig it out, 
which I did. 

So, at the same time, you were trying to 
establish a law practice...? 

I was farming. Actually, practice developed 
probably about as well down there, because, 
of course, I was known in the community. 
I had known people as I was a boy growing 
up. The farm was well known. The name was 
well known. People would come down there 
if they wanted to see me and would come to 
the house. My office was in my home there. 
They would be told, “Well, he’s down in such 
and such a field.” And being farmers they’d 


go down and wait for me at the end of the 
field, [laughter] I’d finish the round and talk 
to them. 

I have to ask, what were you farming? 

Oh, all right. It was a dairy farm, that is, 
dairy cattle, but, of course, we raised all the 
feed. The farm had been very badly grown up 
to brush. I was operating and then trying to 
clear a field at a time. 

Were you doing all your own milking at the 
time? 

Yes, with a surge-milking machine, of 
course. That wasn’t milking by hand. 

Right. So you had quite a tight schedule there 
to work with. 

Yes, I did. [laughter] Dairy cattle have to 
be milked twelve hours apart and at the time. 

Right, that’s sort of an unforgiving business. 

Yes. I did very little, of course, litigation. 
Whatever I had to do in court—probate 
matters and things like that—I had a more 
flexible schedule. I would pick a rainy day, 
dress, go into the county seat, and tend to 
that. 

Now, I assume you had your own car by now? 
Yes. 

You were not taking the bus as your father had? 
No, I was not. 

During the time you were in Ohio, did you 
marry and raise a family? 



18 


Frank W. Daykin 


I did marry. I did not have any children 
at that time. 

What brought you to Nevada in 1963? 

I had met Jack Pike, [Miles Nelson Pike] 
who was a former justice of the supreme court 
out here, and he persuaded me that Nevada 
was a very good place to practice law. So I just 
came out, and that was it. I just came out here. 

Now, I think we should probably go back. 
You referred to the planning commission and 
the like. I drew the first zoning resolution 
for Perry Township, the township in which 
I lived, and then that was adopted. In 1957 
the county commissioners re-established a 
planning commission that I guess they had 
had in the 1920s, and I was one of the first 
eight commissioners appointed. They had one 
commissioner from each township, plus the 
county commissioners as ex officio members. 

Now, what kind of issues were involved? Was 
there urbanization occurring, or what was 
happening? 

Urbanization was beginning. Yes, you’re 
following me very nicely. Zoning, subdivision 
of land, planning for urbanization. We worked 
somewhat by subcommittees. I was chairman 
of the committee on land use and zoning. I 
retained that even when I was, after about 
three years, asked to be chairman of the full 
commission. The first chairman knew a great 
deal more about planning than I did, but he 
was very tolerant and very slow in getting 
meetings underway. The commissioners 
couldn’t quite stand it, so Ed said he would 
like to resign from that, and they asked me 
if I would take it. I did. And I got the show 
on the road. I would wait. A meeting was 
scheduled for a certain time. We would meet 
as soon as there was a quorum, whether or 


not everybody had come. We have a quorum, 
the meeting will come to order. Well, pretty 
soon, we had a quorum at the appointed time, 
[laughter] Everyone knew who walked into 
the meeting late. 

And that would be on the record, probably 

Not particularly, but, you know, we all 
knew each other. 

Right. Now, you mentioned the former 
commissioner knew a lot about planning. 

He was an architect, and he was interested 
in planning. He gave us a book to read when 
the commission was reconstituted, The Crack 
in the Picture Window, about the various 
failures of subdivision and the hardships of 
it. It had been written in the East. 

The reason that leads into my coming 
to Nevada is that I realized that suburban 
development was inescapable. I would not 
indefinitely be able to continue to operate 
a farm. Therefore, when Jack told me that 
Nevada was a good place, I kind of organized 
things and came out here. I retained the land, 
but got a neighbor to farm it. Of course, by 
that time it was in much better shape, and it 
could be tilled. 



3 


Nevada and Legislative 
Counsel Bureau 


So, when you came to Nevada, this was the 
first time, and you didn’t really have any job 
leads, did you? 

No, I didn’t. I just came out. I arrived in 
October. The bar would not be given again till 
September of the following year, and in any 
case, in those days, one had to be a resident 
for six months before he could take it. I asked 
what I could do while I was not a member 
of the bar. Jack Pike, as a supreme court 
justice, had worked on the statute revision 
commission, and he said, “Oh, I think Russ 
McDonald,” who was the director of that 
and had remained as the legislative counsel, 
“can always use lawyers. You don’t have to be 
admitted.” So he introduced me down there, 
and Russ hired me at the legislative counsel 
bureau (LCB). 

Now, what kind of a learning curve was there 
in that type of work? 

[laughter] The first work we were set to 
doing, because it was between sessions, was to 


work on the digesting of Nevada cases. Russ 
intended to publish not only the annotations 
to the statutes, but a digest of Nevada cases. 
The first job was so-called placing digests that 
had previously been written under the various 
topics. I did that and then was made a digester 
when I had that experience. I worked through 
the first volume that was assigned to me very 
quickly. Russ thought, “Either this fellow does 
a crackerjack job, or he isn’t doing the job 
right.” 

He assigned a bunch of the digests to one 
of his former deputies in whom he had great 
confidence. The fellow said, “Oh, the digests 
are just fine!’ Russ inquired whether I was 
really willing to stay. 

I said, “Yes.” 

“Well, then I’m not paying you enough.” 
And he raised the ante on that. 

I took the bar in 1964, passed it, and then 
my first session was 1965. 

Now, I want to back up just a little bit. 

Certainly. 



20 


Frank W. Daykin 


When you say you were putting these digests in 
correct order and things—this ispre-computer? 

Yes, yes! 

What was involved in doing that? 

You wrote the digests by hand on slips 
of paper. You always gave a good condensed 
summary of the facts before the point of law, 
and you wrote a separate digest entry for each 
separate point of law in the case. Yes, you did 
it all by hand. 

And did you have to then do the typing yourself, 
or were there typists who took care of that? 

There were typists. No. [laughter] I am not a 
handy typist. 

What preparation did you have to do for your 
first legislative session? 

Of course, we began drafting bills a 
couple of months before the session began. 
People made early requests. Russ would take 
requests after the election. We simply drafted 
the bills. There wasn’t any special course of 
training. Now, the whole point of having a 
legislative counsel in Nevada was to make 
sure that if a bill was enacted the whole body 
of the Nevada Revised Statutes (NRS) would 
be internally coherent and consistent, that is, 
if what the requestor wanted was to change 
such and such a provision, the drafter’s 
responsibility was to find out what other 
provisions might have to be amended—that 
maybe the requestor had never thought 
out—in order to maintain consistency and 
coherence. 

There must have been a fair amount of research 
involved. 


There was. Of course, you had to be 
familiar. But Nevada’s body of statute law 
was then—and to some degree still is— 
manageable and comprehensible. 

Does that mean we’re heading away from that? 

Yes, we are, simply because the legislators 
want to legislate too much. When I came 
out to Nevada, the entire body of Ohio 
statute law, unannotated, was contained in a 
volume about four inches thick of ordinary 
size. The basis of Ohio law—Ohio was not a 
code state, you see—was the decided cases. 
Nevada had in similar format five volumes 
of about equal thickness. Nevada then 
had a population of, oh, less than 200,000. 
Less than the county of which I had been 
chairman of the planning commission, 
[laughter] Ohio had a population of about 
ten million. But, you see, we had somewhat 
followed the California model, but in much 
less detailed form. 

Essentially, Ohio law is based more on case law? 

Yes. It too wasn’t multiplied. I’ve seen the 
Ohio revised statutes since. 

They’re a bit thicker now? 

Yes, they are, which is not an improvement. 

I’m sure it’s not. Now, at that point you were 
also in private practice, weren’t you? 

Yes. The legislative counsel was allowed 
to maintain a private practice. My original 
intention was to work for Russ through the 
first session, because, of course, I owed him 
something for having taken me in. Then I was 
going to join a firm in downtown Reno. Russ 
was also a member of that firm. The other 



Nevada and Legislative Counsel Bureau 


21 


partners grumbled about how much time the 
duties of the legislative counsel took. So, at 
the end of the session, Russ proposed to me 
that he would withdraw from the firm, and I 
would not join it. We would run our private 
practice together in Carson City and run the 
office. 

It sounds like the Legislative Counsel Bureau 
at that time was almost an ad hoc kind of a 
thing. In order to have a private practice, were 
you consulting or moonlighting? How would 
you describe that? 

The duties of the legislative counsel fully 
performed did not require full and undivided 
attention. You could do both. Of course, 
during a session, you didn’t do anything in 
that line, but sessions were only about three 
months long, believe it or not, out of the two- 
year period. 

That goes along with the smaller books, I guess. 
It does. 

Now, what was the name of the law firm in 
Reno that you had initially planned on joining? 

Breen, McDonald, and Young. This was 
Fran Breen and Cliff Young. 

You were the chief deputy legislative counsel in 
the 1965, 1967, and 1969 sessions? 

Yes. 

And then, as well as deputy director of LCB 
in 1969? 

Yes. 

How did the work change during those years? 


It continued to increase. We would hire on 
lawyers during the session, and that was never 
really good, because you had more trouble 
[laughter] trying to train them, but nobody 
except me really wanted to go on. 

Now, the purpose of the legislative counsel 
bureau is to make sure that new laws do not 
conflict with existing laws and to draft laws 
correctly. 

Yes. 

Were there pivotal issues or pivotal laws that 
came out of those sessions in the late 1960s? 

For example, Nevada adopted the Uniform 
Commercial Code. I was the one who finished 
putting it in shape, that is, not changing the 
substance of it at all, of course, but putting it in 
the format to be enacted. The legislature also 
began to appoint study committees to work 
during the interim on legislation to be enacted 
during the next session. So we, of course, 
staffed those committees. I did most of it. 

And so you were basically there to tell them, 
“No, you can’t do this,” or “Yes, you can do that.” 

No, to reason along with them how to 
adapt the substance into the form of the 
law. In those days a study committee would 
produce a finished draff of the bill. 

Oh, that’s changed definitely, hasn’t it? 

Sounds strange now. We worked through 
the criminal code, crimes and punishments, 
and revisions of criminal procedure. We 
worked through a proposed structure of 
the Nevada court system, which required 
constitutional amendment, and which the 
voters promptly rejected, [laughter] 



22 


Frank W. Daykin 


It sounds like you were doing a lot of revamping. 

Yes. The legislature was trying to improve. 

Was this a conscious recognition that the 
population was going to grow? 

Yes, in part. 

Anything else that brought it about? 

I think that probably was the motivating 
force. Also, I think the legislators realized that 
while the 1957 revision had made no changes 
in the law—it had simply enacted it—that, yes, 
there were things to do. We ought to be looking 
at improving the law. 

What kind of working relationship did you have 
with the legislators and with the lobbyists? Did 
you have a lot of contact with lobbyists at that 
time? 

A very close working relationship with 
the legislators. Russ, of course, had the central 
office. I was what was called the senate bill 
drafter. Senators were supposed—if they 
wanted to talk directly to somebody—to come 
to me. There was an assembly bill drafter at 
the other end of the hall, literally, in the old 
capitol. The lobbyists—yes, the good ones 
worked closely with us, because they would 
try to get things in, and, of course, we wouldn’t 
take anything from a lobbyist—it had to come 
from a legislator. That was their job, but a good 
lobbyist can be very helpful. 

In what way? 

He, if he is a good lobbyist, knows the 
substance of what is wanted, frequently, 
much better than the legislator whom he had 
persuaded to introduce his bill. 


And has probably done the background 
research? 

Yes. 

I see. And so, a bad lobbyist you would 
characterize as one who simply has not done 
his homework? 

Yes. Doesn’t bother with the substance, just 
tries to use influence to get things passed. I will 
give you a little vignette of what a really good 
lobbyist does. There was a bill pending which 
related to finance companies. The assembly 
committee on judiciary wanted someone in the 
finance company to come in. So the chairman 
of the committee told me, and I said, “Well, 
let’s see about that.” 

I called up the late Bill Sanford and told 
him the situation. He was the lobbyist. He said, 
“Oh, my!” 

The committee had made the request on 
the morning of day one. I called Bill Sanford 
late in the morning on that day. About two 
o’clock on that day I got a call from Los Angeles 
from a gentleman whose name I have truly 
forgotten, but he was the president of such and 
such. “I can’t get a flight up there this afternoon. 
Would tomorrow morning be soon enough?” 

I said, “Yes. We will convene at eight o’clock 
in the morning.” 

He was there! Sanford knew, of course, 
“Somebody’s got to come in.” He knew whom 
to call. 

And he got it rolling. 

He got it done! All right. That’s an 
illustration of a good lobbyist. Bill Sanford, 
incidentally, was a crackerjack lawyer, also. 

What kinds of changes were taking place in 
Nevada at the time? For example, in 1965you 



Nevada and Legislative Counsel Bureau 


23 


did the nuts and bolts of writing up the one 
man, one vote. Tell me about that. 

As Ogden Nash said about “The Purple 
Cow,” I wrote it. [text of poem included here] 

The Purple Cow 
I never saw a purple cow 
I hope I never see one, 

But I can tell you this right now: 

Id rather see than be one. 

Ah yes, I wrote “The Purple Cow” 

I’m Sorry now I wrote it 
But I can tell you Anyhow 
I’ll Kill you if you Quote it! 

But that really, of course, was in response 
to the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision that 
every state legislator in both houses had 
to be reapportioned. One man, one vote. 
Strictly according to population. In my mind 
that was the beginning of the end of the 
good Nevada legislature, because from the 
small counties, when you had one senator 
and one assemblyman from every county, a 
small county would send a couple of leading 
citizens, and they would remember to go 
down there for ninety days, roughly, and 
they would contribute. They would be real 
leaders. 

It really was more of a citizen legislature. 

Yes, it was. Then you got the mechanistic 
one man, one vote. And incidentally, in framing 
that first legislation, we tried to stay as close 
as we could to the concept of having people 
of different interests like ranchers, farmers, 
miners, and so forth, whose interests were 
those of certain communities in the state, still 
represented as best we could, and structured 
the district accordingly. And because, for 
example, many of the legislators from Clark 


County, both senators and assemblymen, live 
close together in certain neighborhoods, we 
had what were called floterial districts, several 
legislators representing a larger population, 
but they could all live on the same block. 

Does that make for a true constituency? 

Yes, because, after all, you don’t have to 
live next door to the fellow you represent, as 
long as you know his general interests. Those 
were gradually gotten rid of. The district court 
said that the legislature did change as little as 
it could to comply with the law. Well, that was 
what we intended to do. 

That was reasonable. 

Yes. But it has grown more and more 
mechanistic ever since, and I leave it to an 
outside observer to judge the effect of law 
quality. 

Another big issue that came up—this was in 
1959—was a law you wrote out that allowed 
corporate ownership of casinos. What kind of 
change did that bring? 

What it permitted was to bring in a much 
wider base of capital to finance the expansion. 
That is what they wanted. I made it clear to 
them that many people, I guess, in Nevada, 
even in relatively high office, still never really 
had it through their heads, that when you 
have an individual or a partnership licensed, 
you can call that individual or every member 
of that partnership up before the Gaming 
Control Board or the Gaming Commission 
to be interviewed for a license. Once you have 
a corporation, yes, you’ve got the officers, 
directors, but you don’t know who owns that 
stock and has the beneficial interest, because 




24 


Frank W. Daykin 


stock can be held in a street name, the name 
of a broker. 

Right. Do you think that led to less control? 

Of course it did! I don’t know that. I have 
no knowledge of any particular instance 
in which that aspect of it led to control by 
undesirable interests, but.... 

But it certainly made them harder to find. 

Yes, it certainly did. In an informal 
session in Paul Laxalt’s office—I remember 
this—we had representatives of some of the 
larger casinos that wanted to go in for this. 
I said, “Actually, the only safe way to license 
a corporation would be that the corporation 
was to be licensed upon such conditions as 
the Gaming Commission establishes in each 
instance and may change as the situation 
requires.” 

Howard Hughes’s representative said, 
“We’ll take that!” 

All the others, “Oh, woo, woo, woo, that’s 
impossible!” 

I said to the governor and the legislative 
representatives, “Well, that’s the only way you 
can have anything even close to the degree 
of control you have now.” So this was made 
voluntarily. 

Looking back, who came up with that law? Who 
wanted to open up the ownership of casinos? 

I can’t really say, individually, but as the Las 
Vegas casinos, in particular, wanted to enlarge, 
they needed more capital than any individual 
or small group had under its control. 

Do you think they actually had a legitimate 
goal there? 


Yes, they did, and it has certainly served its 
purpose. You have those huge establishments 
now, some of them in Reno, too, in contrast 
to individuals like Warren Nelson, who just 
died—I knew him well. Bill Harrah—he was 
a little before my time—and others who had 
actually started their casinos. 

It’s the off-season now, but I’m assuming you 
had a rhythm during the year? 

You did. 

It calmed down somewhat. You were still busy, 
and then it was crazy during the session. 

Yes. Now, the rhythm, of course, was 
biennial. We have a biennial session. We used 
to have special sessions until we devised the 
interim finance committee, and that greatly 
reduced the number of even year sessions. 
There have been a few, but it reduced the need 
for them. 

So, work would go on. What kind of work 
would you do in between sessions? 

Of course, the first thing that had to 
be done after the session was over was to 
marshal all those laws together and publish 
the supplement to the NRS with them in 
it. That, of course, took some while. Then 
you had the study committees during the 
interim, which were beginning to find some 
of the more important legislation for the 
next session. Well before the next session 
convened, you would begin to get requests 
from senators whose terms carried over that 
were finished from the study committees, and 
you’d begin drafting. So it was true that during 
the summers there was a little time you could 
take off. 



Nevada and Legislative Counsel Bureau 


25 


Actually breathe. 

Yes. 

Did you meet with any kinds of opposition or 
obstacles to the work that you were doing? 

There are always obstacles. There are always 
some individual legislators, some outside 
groups, who don’t want to be constrained by 
the process to write sensible law. There will be 
people who want to blather about things that 
are merely desirable. A law, a statute, should 
either command or prohibit or declare the 
law. It has no other legitimate office. You don’t 
declare what its purpose is. You declare what 
is allowed, what is forbidden. 

That’s very basic, very simple. Could you 
describe the most frustrating aspect of your 
job, then? 

The most frustrating aspect of the job was 
to keep competent bill drafters, that is, people 
with patience and intelligence to learn the 
language in which a statute must be written. 

So there’s a fairly specialized language that has 
to be used? 

There’s a rather specialized language. 
The drafter must also have the intelligence 
and the willingness to do the hard work of 
looking up things, making sure things are 
in the right place, and that you have found 
and amended anything contradictory. That 
requires considerable intellectual ability. 

Right. And I guess in today’s terms, “loopholes” 
is what you’re talking about. 

Yes. 


How about the most satisfying aspect of the job? 

Seeing, I suppose, that you were able 
to produce a law that met the desire of 
the legislature and kept that body of laws 
consistent and coherent. That was the 
satisfaction of it. 

After the 1969 session, you returned to Ohio 
and private practice, right? 

Yes, I did. 

What brought about that change? 

I was married at that time to my wife 
Virginia. That was an endearing marriage. 
We were married in 1965, shortly after I 
came out here. She was an Ohio girl, and 
we were married throughout her lifetime. 
She died in 1982, unfortunately for all of us. 
Her parents, of course, lived in Ohio. They 
were getting quite up in years, and Virginia 
thought we needed to be back there to look 
after them. My parents had long since passed 
away, but Virginia was a little younger than 
I was, and her parents were still alive. That 
was the reason for going back. And then, of 
course, being back there, I took hold of the 
farm again and blithely undertook to finish 
the job of clearing it and making it a good 
operating farm. Just about the time I was 
finishing getting the fences rebuilt, along 
came what was then the Cleveland Electric 
Illuminating Company. I knew them well 
from my days on the planning commission. 
They were the utility. They had to build an 
atomic power plant. They had accumulated 
about a thousand acres in the northwestern 
corner of Perry Township. That we knew. 
That was fine. But then their engineers had 
informed them that the only suitable site for 



26 


Frank W. Daykin 


the plant was the very eastern most part of 
that whole area. They had to have my farm 
for a buffer. 

How did you feel about that? 

Of course, we negotiated. I cried all the 
way to the bank. It was taken under threat 
of condemnation, so that I could take the 
proceeds and re-invest them in land, without 
having to pay capital gain, which would 
otherwise have been enormous. 

Now, how many generations had that been in 
your family? 

Actually, only two. My father had 
bought it. It was not the original family 
settlement, by any means. But between the 
time my father bought it and the time when 
I completed selling off the last of it—because 
the illuminating company didn’t take all of 
it—it was a century. 

Of course, I had to do that, and that, of 
course, kind of took the heart out of being 
back there. I came out only briefly during the 
1971 session to explain the evidence code, 
which was the last bit of those studies. Then, 
in 1973, the director of the counsel bureau 
persuaded me to come out and help Clint 
Wooster, who was the legislative counsel. 
Then I came out again in 1975. But, at the 
end of that session, Jim Gibson, for whom I 
had great respect, corralled me, “Frank, you’re 
going to have to come back out here.” 

By that time, both of my wife’s parents had 
died, so, although she would, I’m sure, have 
preferred to live back there, we did not have 
to. I talked to her, and she consented to come 
back. I was appointed legislative counsel as of 
July 1,1975, came out and got the office going, 
but I actually stayed in Ohio, because my son 
Frank was going to Phillips Exeter Academy. 


He was a ringer—he went there only during 
the last year—one of the few ringers who ever 
finished among the top of his class, but he 
did; a very intelligent boy. We let that finish 
before we came out here again. That was the 
explanation of the various timing. 

Now, that same year, you seemed to have 
realized that you were settling into your life’s 
work. That same year you became a member 
of the National Conference of Commissioners 
of Uniform State Laws. 

Yes, that was ex officio as legislative 
counsel. Russ had never bothered with it. 
He never bothered to attend the meetings 
or anything like that, but I decided, “Well, I 
better go and see what this is,” and was in ever 
since very enthusiastically. 

Tell me about the organization. What’s its 
purpose, and how does it function? 

Its purpose is to draft laws on such subjects 
as is suitable for this treatment, which can be 
adopted in all of the fifty states. The Uniform 
Commercial code is, of course, the classic 
product, but there are others. 

So it almost provides a framework to individual 
state legislative counsels. It probably saves them 
a tremendous amount of time. 

It does, to the extent that our work is well 
done, and notice, of course, the qualification 
I put on that. We try, but work is necessarily 
uneven in its ultimate quality. But yes, it 
does give a framework from which state laws 
can be fashioned. They can either adopt the 
uniform act, or they can modify it to local 
conditions, and still they have a product that 
has been worked on from a variety of points 
of view. 



Nevada and Legislative Counsel Bureau 


27 


But the idea, then, is that, for example, the 
Uniform Commercial Code will not vary from 
state to state. 

Yes. You can see in the commercial code 
where that is very desirable because in this 
country most business operates on a national, 
not a local, basis. 

How much influence do the commissioners 
have on the actual wording, then, of state laws? 

Of course, they don’t have a direct 
influence on what is adopted in the states. 
The commissioners from each state try to 
persuade their legislature to consider and to 
enact and to keep it, at least substantively, 
in the uniform track. There is considerable 
differentiation of language. We follow it rather 
closely, but, for example, all this modern 
political correctness—if you don’t use “she” 
and so forth—we do not accept in this state. 
The conference did, and so to a degree, at least 
when I was formulating them for enactment, 
I would re-institute what it was supposed to 
say. 

Now, is there ever a concern in the individual 
states that this National Conference of 
Commissioners for Uniform State Laws might 
almost be a back door to more federalism? 

No, because it’s precisely the opposite. 
We offer the states the opportunity to act 
effectively and uniformly and thus deprive 
Congress of the excuse that this really 
ought to be uniform. Congress enacts much 
unconstitutional legislation. Well, I think 
anyone who really studies the Constitution 
and compares it to legislation enacted would 
say, “Where did they get the authority to do 
that?” They don’t have it, but they enact it 
anyway. We are a counterweight, rather than 


a handmaiden, as it were, of congressional 
influence. 

And then, isn’t there also a mission to educate 
the public? 

Yes, there is. 

Tell me a little bit about that. 

Of course, we don’t try to educate the public 
directly. We try to educate the legislators. Of 
course, to a degree, as individual members 
of the conference are influential in their local 
communities, they build a fire under the 
legislators, as it were, by getting the chairman 
of the board of the principal corporation in 
his district interested in this particular thing, 
[laughter] Let him pick up the telephone and 
say, “Tom, you better get that on the books!” 

Now, when you came back out in 1975, after 
being gone for about six years, what kind of 
changes did you see in Nevada itself in the 
legislature? 

I saw a continuation of the trends that I 
had seen: the influence shifting to the south 
because of the large population and the 
mechanistic apportionment, the tendency 
of the population being concentrated in the 
urban centers. These were all continuations of 
trends that had been going before. Nothing 
was noticeably new. 

Now, as time went on, did the workload 
increase proportionately with staff increases, or 
did you find that the workload increased faster 
than the staff did? 

The workload tended to increase in 
proportion to population. We tried to keep 
up with it from the standpoint of staffing, 



28 


Frank W. Daykin 


and that required more and more delegation 
of drafting work, and even delegation of 
reviewing. That, inescapably, no matter how 
good the people are, tends to mean a certain 
diminution in the uniformity of the product. 

Was any of that slack picked up by the National 
Conference of Commissioners in providing 
almost frameworks? Did they help to take up 
some of that staffing slack? 

I would say no, because the staffing 
growth, as I have explained, is due to Nevada’s 
exploding population. There are other states 
with exploding population, which really, I 
have to say, make no effort to have their laws 
concise or clear. 

Is there a legislative culture within which you 
have to work? 

I wouldn’t say, really, not in this state, 
anyway. 

How hard is it to remain apolitical when you’re 
working within such a polarized atmosphere? 

If—and my deputies and I were always able 
to maintain this—the legislators believe that 
you are non-political they will respect that, 
and both sides of an argument would come 
into my office and explain and be advised, 
knowing that nothing of what they said would 
be told to the other. 

So they both had to trust you to be extremely 
discreet. 

Yes. And, if I may, I will tell you an 
anecdote to illustrate the superiority of a single 
staff over what many states have, which is 
partisan staffs, staffs for the separate houses, 
and so on. I think this was about 1976 or 1977, 


close in there, and I forget the particular topic, 
but it was going to be new. It was relatively new, 
and Nevada was going to have to act on it. I 
thought, “I wonder what New York did about 
this?” 

I went and looked in the New York laws. 
There was a statute on it all right, about so 
long. And at the bottom of it was, “As enacted 
by,” I’ll use Nevada terminology, “Assembly 
Bill so and so.” Then, following, there was 
another one, same length, slightly different, 
“As enacted by Senate Bill so and so.” Then a 
third and a fourth. I called up the gentleman 
whom I knew was head, such as it was, of New 
York’s drafting agency and asked him, “What 
happened?” 

One bill was drafted for one party in one 
house. And, you see, you had two parties in 
two houses. So four bills were enacted. He 
had no authority and no means of observing 
that process or correcting it or telling anybody 
to correct it. That happened to be a classic 
example. It wasn’t usually that bad. I said, 
“Well, which one of them is the law? You tell 
me they’re all law?” The publisher—they don’t 
publish their own statute—has to put them all 
in. The courts will sort it out, eventually. That 
is a classic of the other way to go. I think ours 
is better. 

It certainly sounds like it. 

Difficult as it may be sometimes. 

Now, I have to ask this. What is a “Daykinism?” 

Oh, boy. A Daykinism is a kind of 
language, which is correct English, rather 
than common speech, and something which 
occurs often enough in different bills that it is 
recognized. 

Can you give me some examples ofDaykinisms? 



Nevada and Legislative Counsel Bureau 


29 


I really couldn’t, but people will say, “That’s 
a Daykinism.” Yes. [laughter] 

I’ve heard a lot about shall’s and should’s. 

Yes. All right. Now, “shall” is a command. 
“Is” declares the law. The state treasurer shall 
pay a warrant issued by the controller. A 
will is valid if it is signed by the testator and 
witnessed by two witnesses. 

Didn’t you at one point spend a considerable 
amount of time going back and tightening up? 

Yes, we did, because there’s a temptation 
among legislatures, especially years ago, to 
enact, “A will shall be valid if....” All right, that’s 
is. It’s a matter of law. The will doesn’t have a 
duty to be valid under those circumstances. 
Nor is there any command to anybody that 
it’s valid. It simply is valid, as a matter of law. 
And in the original revision it was enough 
of a task to reconcile the substance of the 
statutes. None of those things were changed, 
but as Russ drafted, and as I drafted, and 
so on, whenever the opportunity presented 
itself, whenever a section was before us for a 
substantive purpose, we would go through and 
correct the language and style. 

I see. Hence, the term “Daykinism.” [laughter] 

Yes. 

Going back to the time that you were head of the 
legislative counsel bureau, how have the issues 
changed from, say, the late 1960s to the 1980s? 

My impression is that—and I’m trying 
to put this back in context—between the 
late 1960s and the early 1980s we had 
gone from the best we could do toward a 
rational apportionment of the legislature, 


notwithstanding the one-man-one-vote 
requirement, to a rigidly mathematical 
apportionment. Every district was supposed to 
have as nearly as possible the same population, 
regardless of whether the constituents of that 
district really constituted any sort of unified 
whole or interest. From that, of course, 
stemmed many consequences. 

And a few conflicts? 

Yes, I’m sure they did. 

Were you consulted in this reapportionment? 

No, I was not. I drew, of course, the 
reapportionment in 1965. We tried to preserve 
a greater representation in proportion to 
population in the rural areas and tried to 
align districts with normal representation. 
When strict arithmetic took over, you had 
monstrosities such as the district of my old 
friend, Senator Jacobsen, being close to home, 
whose district began way down in Douglas 
County and extended north through a swatch 
of Carson City, into Washoe County north of 
Steamboat. I ran into him campaigning up 
there, [laughter] “Good heavens, what are you 
doing up here, Jake?” 

“Well, it’s in my district.” 

No, I was not consulted in any way. 
The research division did the things using 
the census maps and going down to census 
blocks—I think that was the smallest division 
they did—to construct the districts. They 
were influenced, I am sure, though I have 
no personal knowledge of any such instance, 
by legislators as to which particular blocks, 
so that they still lived in their districts, or 
something like that, but, other than that, 
purely mechanical. 

Now, how about some of the issues? In 
1969 Nevada was still a fairly small state, 



30 


Frank W. Daykin 


population-wise, and in many respects still a 
rural state. After the 1970s that really changed. 

That is true. I would not say that even 
in the 1960s it was a rural state, because we 
never did have in Nevada a rural economy. We 
had—we still have—a mining economy. What 
has happened is that the mining economy 
takes many fewer men to produce a ton of 
ore than it did. 

As Nevada grew, for example, the amazing 
growth in the late 1970s, did you see different 
kinds of bills going through the legislature? 

Yes. That is true. In the first place, of 
course, strictly urban legislators, who had 
no concept of what went on in the rest of 
the state, would ask for things. There was 
also more of a tendency toward welfare bills 
and more of that sort of stuff. Nevada is still, 
fortunately, not overboard on this. 

How did the legislature itself change? Did you 
see a shift in the players? 

Yes. Gradually, some of the older legislators 
died off, and many of the most experienced 
were gradually districted out. I would make 
this comment. When we had long, long ago 
one senator and one assemblyman from every 
county, the people of a small county would 
elect maybe a widely-respected farmer, maybe 
a widely-known, respected businessman, send 
them up to a relatively short session, and that 
wisdom and ability was of benefit to the state 
as a whole. When you had to elect senators 
and assemblymen from mechanically-drawn 
districts, it is quite possible to have—and 
I choose not to name names or suggest 
areas—districts in which, quite frankly, in my 
opinion, no resident is really qualified to sit 


as a legislator, not through any fault of theirs, 
but through the kind of people that they are. 

Do you think with the longer sessions and the 
additional requirements that we’re moving 
towards almost a professional legislative body 
as opposed to citizen legislators? 

I profoundly hope not. I don’t think we 
have yet. Of course, we have a nominal limit 
on the length of sessions. Well, we’re not close 
to it yet. That would be a disaster. 

To have professional legislators? 

Yes. Particularly, chosen, as they would 
have to be. I’ve made a legal profession of it, but 
serving as a legislator should not be someone’s 
focus in life. In a representative republic we 
are not supposed to have professional rulers. 
We are supposed to choose from among 
ourselves people who would get together, 
represent us, and go home. 

Going home — that’s the tough part, [laughter] 

Yes. 

In general, who would you say are some of the 
most powerful players in a legislative setting — 
the types of people? Would it be, for example, 
a governor, a long-term legislator, a lobbyist? 
Who tends to carry the most weight? 

Governors would like to. They sometimes 
do and sometimes don’t, depending in part 
on others’ estimate Frank of their relative 
abilities. Long-term legislators—certainly 
so. They came to chairmanships of the key 
committees and general influence over their 
colleagues. Lobbyists in Nevada formerly 
were not overridingly influential. I think with 



Nevada and Legislative Counsel Bureau 


31 


the gradual degradation of the legislature 
that the power of money has come to play a 
greater role. But since I have been out of the 
thing for a while that that may be a jaundiced 
observation, but I fear it is not. 

During the time that you were down at the 
legislature, who are some of the individuals 
who stand out? 

All right. Jim Gibson, Carl Dodge. Well, 
Lawrence Jacobsen, for example, who is 
no longer serving, he of the enormously 
lengthened district. Bill Swackhamer, who sat 
in it. Oh, Norman Glaser and Dean Rhoads, 
who has followed Norman. Elko County has 
sent pretty good people, generally, and they 
manage to hang onto enough population 
to send representatives of the sort. Any 
enumeration, without thinking about it 
longer than this, is bound to be unfair, but 
those are probably the outstanding men that 
I recall. 

Did you have opportunity to work fairly closely 
with some of them? 

Yes, I did. 

What kinds of bills did they bring to you? 

By and large, the ones I have named 
brought in bills that they in their intelligence 
considered to be in the interest of the state. 
They did not bring in self-interested bills or 
bills aimed at a group. I did not name Joe 
Neal as one of the outstanding legislators. 
He certainly was a long-term legislator. And 
Joe was more honest than I would really have 
attributed to the district that he represented, 
but he tended to lean a little more. Maybe he 
thought there’s nobody else to do it. And of 


course corresponding assemblyman, Don 
Mello, I guess, I should have mentioned, too, 
who jinxed the long-term assembly. He was 
chairman of what I used to call “ways to be 
mean.” [laughter] He managed to accomplish 
it. He tried to rein things in. 

What kind of administrative issues did you 
yourself face, particularly as technology was 
changing during this period of time? 

Well, two, of which we tried to let the 
second partly offset the first; I had to keep 
on adding staff, because the number of bill 
requests kept increasing. 

Exponentially. 

Yes, nearly. Technically, before I had 
gone back to Ohio there had been little 
change. When I came back in 1975 we were 
just beginning to try to computerize the 
legislature. Art Palmer was then the director 
of the Legislative Counsel Bureau, and he 
and I tried to work together closely—and 
it took several stumbles along the way—to 
computerize the legislature. However, the 
first session that we used the computers, 
Nevada was—I believe I’m correct in this, 
because I have heard no exceptions to it—the 
only legislature in the country that did not 
have to call a special session afterward to 
repair damage in legislation caused by the 
computers. And there was a reason for that. 
Throughout the session I kept the old Mag 
Card typewriters on standby, so whenever 
the computer broke down we simply drafted 
the legislation on Mag Cards. That was 1977. 

What kind of response did you get from 
the legislators themselves when you first 
introduced computerization? 



32 


Frank W. Daykin 


Oh, they were gung-ho for it. It was 
supposed to be the wave of the future and 
so forth. I think, however, a lot of ours were 
realistic. They knew it was going to take a while. 
They bore with me, bore with the gradual 
transformations. As far as I was concerned, 
they were always generous in supporting 
financially and psychologically what we had 
to do. 

Do you consider yourself sort of a political 
creature? Do you really enjoy the interplay of 
politics, or were you happy to leave the politics 
at the end of the day? 

The latter. I conscientiously, of course, 
as my duty was, refrained from any political 
involvement. I do not believe when I retired 
from the legislature that any member of the 
legislature knew for what party I customarily 
voted. They may have been slightly surprised 
when, after retiring from the legislature in 
January of 1986, I showed up in March of 
that year as a member of the Carson City 
Republican Central Committee, but that’s 
simply because my precinct meeting had been 
trying to get me to sit on it for years and years. 
At last, I could accept. 

What do you think were your major contributions 
to the Nevada legislature? 

One of them—speedily erased—was to 
attempt rationality in the reapportionment. 
Others I think were to move us into the 
computer age without destroying the process. 
Another was—and I hope this is not gradually 
erased—to follow Russ’s lead in trying always 
to improve the language of the statutes. 
Whenever we had to amend something, do the 
substantive thing, we had to improve, polish up 
the language a little bit as we went along. Those 
three, I think, were my principal contributions. 


How much of a jump was it for you to go from 
the Legislative Counsel Bureau back to private 
practice? 

Well, not difficult. I had in Ohio private 
practiced for some fifteen years before I came 
to the legislature. While Russ was legislative 
counsel we were allowed private practice. He 
and I did it. When I came back I agreed that 
I would not engage in private practice nor 
permit any of my deputies or employees to 
do so, but that was only therefore a relatively 
short, maybe a ten-year gap, and then I went 
right back in. 

What made you decide to focus on business, 
probate, and tax law? 

Primarily, the fact that I never liked 
personal injury law or criminal law. I never 
had but the one criminal case, and that was 
assigned to me as a young lawyer when I first 
began in Ohio. Oh, it was a matter of taste. 
Those were my interests. Those were the 
things I was interested in outside the law. 

Did you find that your work at LCB gave you 
a different outlook, perhaps, in these areas of 
practice, or more insight? 

It gave me, perhaps, more tendency to 
look at the statutes first in approaching any 
matter. Now, in Ohio that was not important. 
The whole statutes in Ohio, unannotated, 
were contained in one bound book about four 
inches thick. And therefore, yes, that was the 
Ohio General Code. 

The annotated thing is longer, of course, 
but out here, of course, with the influence 
of the California basic codes, their statutes 
would take twenty feet of shelf space, where 
ours take about four. Anyway, it was more 
important, and because I had worked with 



Nevada and Legislative Counsel Bureau 


33 


the statutes all along, my first thought was, 
“Let’s see if there’s a controlling statute. Then, 
if not, we look at case law.” 

Did you then, as you were working at LCB, ever 
make an attempt to contain the proliferation 
of law? 

Well, I would have dearly loved to do 
so, but I had to draft every new bill that was 
requested. Nobody ever asked me whether we 
could do without a law. 

What kind of an impact does a legal career have 
on a family? I’m assuming you spent some very 
long hours during legislative sessions. 

I did. And my wife Virginia, who was my 
wife during most of my time in that career, 
was very supportive of it. Yes, it is hard, but, of 
course, in the earlier years, the sessions were 
mercifully brief. 

Is there anything I’ve missed that you would 
like to have included? 

I look back on my life’s work as a whole, 
but, of course, a lot of the focus of my life, 
throughout my life, has been outside the law. 
I’ve always had scholarly interests. I never got 
wrapped up in the law so much that it was the 
only interest that I really had. We could do 
other things. I still like to read. 

That concludes our interview. Thank you. 

All right. Thank you very much. 



