Peter C. Petersen: 

Reminiscences of My Work in Nevada Labor, 
Politics, Post Office and Gaming Control 


Interviewee: Peter C. Petersen 
Interviewed: 1970 
Published: 1970 
Interviewer: Mary Ellen Glass 
UNOHP Catalog #039 


Description 

The life of Peter C. Petersen constitutes an American and Nevada success story. Born in Denmark, circa 1898, he 
immigrated to the United States in 1915 and arrived in Nevada in 1919. Petersen has had a full career working as 
a baker (his original trade), being active in union affairs, and serving as president of the State Federation of Labor, 
deputy collector in the Internal Revenue office, on the Nevada Industrial Commission, head of the Reno Post 
Office, and member of the Nevada Gaming Commission. From the 1930s to the 1950s he was a close political ally 
of Senator Patrick A. McCarran. 

Petersen was an immigrant who understood the problems of other immigrants. One gains the impression that 
immigration was one area in which he had his disagreements with McCarran, though his criticism of the senator 
on this point is muted. Although his own path as an immigrant was not unduly harsh, he is sympathetic with the 
problems of the newly arrived. In the post office he had considerable contact with registering aliens, encouraging 
them to become citizens, subsequently helping to build up the McCarran political organization. 

Peter Petersen gives a valuable glimpse of the handicaps under which labor worked in the 1930s. He was president 
of the State Federation of Labor during part of that difficult decade, and he describes well the hard times which 
unions experienced. His description of how labor helped elect, and keep in office, Senator McCarran will also be 
of value to future scholars. 

Petersen claims to have been one of the few who could really get along with McCarran. He gives valuable information 
on the relationship between McCarran and Pittman, why McCarran did not support William S. Boyle for United 
States District Attorney, how McCarran had achieved preeminence in the Nevada Democratic Party by 1940, and 
why the hotel owners in Las Vegas boycotted the Las Vegas Sun. Many of McCarran’s attitudes were shared by 
Petersen, and he was not unproud of being called the senator s “hatchet man.” Thus, Petersen writes off both Thomas 
Mechling and Hank Greenspun as opportunistic carpetbaggers to the state. 

Since Petersen was head of the Reno Post Office for some twenty years (he received the job as a political plum from 
McCarran), he provides information as to the complications of running the agency in a period of unprecedented 
community growth, and through war and rising deficit. He candidly discusses the sagging morale of postal workers, 
as their wages steadily fell behind the rising cost of living. 



Peter C. Petersen: 

Reminiscences of My Work in Nevada Labor, 
Politics, Post Office and Gaming Control 




Peter C. Petersen: 

Reminiscences of My Work in Nevada Labor 
Politics, Post Office and Gaming Control 


An Oral History Conducted by Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1970 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1970. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Introduction xi 

Special Introduction by Professor Jerome Edwards xiii 

1. Early Life 1 

2. Labor Union Activities 5 

3. Political Affairs with the McCarran Organization 13 

1932 to 1938 
1938 to 1944 
1946 to 1954 
Other Political Affairs 

4. The Reno Post Office 37 

5. A Term on the Nevada Gaming Commission 43 

6. Conclusion 45 

Original Index: For Reference Only 47 




Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Peter C. Petersen 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Introduction 


Peter C. Petersen is a native of Denmark, 
born in 1893. His careers as a baker, soldier, 
postmaster, and political figure in Nevada 
are subjects for his memoir. Professor Jerome 
Edwards’s introduction outlines and evaluates 
Petersen’s considerable contribution to 
Nevada life. 

When invited to participate in the 
Oral History Project of the University of 
Nevada, Reno, Library, Mr. Petersen accepted 
graciously. Throughout the three recording 
sessions, all held at his home in Reno, he was 
an interesting and careful chronicler of his 
story. Apparently enjoying the experience of 
recounting some of the events of a busy life, 
he answered questions and added anecdotes 
good humoredly. The result is a document 
which, as Professor Edwards points out, will 
be useful to scholars researching in Nevada 
labor and political history. 

The Oral History Project of the University 
of Nevada, Reno, Library preserves the past 
and the present for future research by tape 
recording the reminiscences of persons who 
have been important to the development of 


Nevada and the West. Scripts resulting from 
the interviews are deposited in the special 
collections departments of the University 
Libraries at Reno and Las Vegas. Mr. Petersen 
has generously assigned his literary rights 
to the University of Nevada, Reno, and 
has designated his oral history as open for 
research. 

Mary Ellen Glass 
University of Nevada, Reno 
1970 




Special Introduction 


The life of Peter C. Petersen constitutes 
an American and Nevada success story. Born 
in Denmark, he immigrated to the United 
States in 1915 and arrived in Nevada in 
1919. Since that time Petersen has had a full 
career working as a baker (his original trade), 
being active in union affairs, and serving as 
President of the State Federation of Labor, 
deputy collector in the Internal Revenue 
office, on the Nevada Industrial Commission, 
head of the Reno Post Office, and member of 
the Nevada Gaining Commission. From the 
1930 s to the 1950’s he was a close political 
ally of Senator Patrick A. McCarran. 

This oral interview will be valuable to 
scholars in many respects. First, it is obviously 
of interest because Petersen himself is an 
immigrant and understands the problems of 
other immigrants. One gains the impression 
that immigration was one area he had his 
disagreements with McCarran, although his 
criticism of the Senator on this point is muted. 
Although his own path as an immigrant was 
not unduly harsh, he is sympathetic with the 
problems of the newly arrived. Not only had 


he gone through the process himself, but in 
the post office he had considerable contact 
with registering aliens, encouraging them to 
become citizens, and thus helping to build up 
the McCarran political organization. 

In the second place, the interview gives 
a valuable glimpse of the handicaps under 
which labor worked in the 1930’s. Petersen 
was President of the State Federation of 
Labor during part of that difficult decade 
and he describes well the hard times which 
unions experienced. His description of how 
labor helped elect, and keep in office, Senator 
McCarran will also be of value to future 
scholars. 

Not the least important part of this 
oral interview is the portrayal of McCarran 
himself. Petersen claims to have been one of 
the few who could really get along with the 
Senator. He gives valuable information on the 
relationship between McCarran and Pittman, 
why McCarran did not support William S. 
Boyle for United States District Attorney, 
how McCarran had achieved pre-eminence 
in the Nevada Democratic party by 1940, and 



XIV 


Peter C. Petersen 


why the hotel owners in Las Vegas boycotted 
the Las Vegas Sun. Many of McCarran’s 
attitudes were shared by Petersen, and he 
is not unproud of being called the Senator s 
“hatchet man.” Thus, Petersen writes off both 
Thomas Mechling and Hank Greenspun as 
opportunistic carpetbaggers to the state. 

Since Petersen was head of the Reno 
Post Office for some twenty years (he 
received the job as a political plum from 
McCarran), he provides information as to 
the complications of running the agency 
in a period of unprecedented community 
growth, and through war and rising deficit. 
He candidly discusses the sagging morale 
of postal workers, as their wages steadily fell 
behind the rising cost of living. 

This is both a fascinating and useful 
interview. This writer’s chief criticism is that 
Petersen chose not to speak at greater length. 
We would like to know more, for example, 
as to how this man rose in the state labor 
organization, and more as to his relationship 
with McCarran. Petersen closes his interview 
on a genial note, considering himself, having 
been born in a foreign country, and having 
done well in the United States, as “extremely 
lucky.” He continues, “I can only say that this 
country has been good to me.” One must 
add that in return his services were highly 
beneficial to the community. 

Jerome Edwards 
Associate Professor of History 
University of Nevada, Reno 
1970 



1 


Early Life 


I was born in a small town in Denmark by 
the name of Thisted. And I grew up in Thisted, 
and I went to school in Thisted. My mother 
died when I was fifteen years of age, and my 
father when I was sixteen. That, of course, 
changed my whole life. Some of the things that 
I wanted to do I couldn’t do because I had to 
take care of myself to some extent, although 
my father did leave enough money where I 
didn’t have anything to worry about. 

Of course the school system in Denmark 
is considerable different from the school 
system in this country. In the first place, the 
hours in schools in Denmark were eight hours 
a day, including Saturday. In other words, 
a kid goes to school for forty-eight hours a 
week, which, of course, changes the length 
of time that it’s necessary for him to get an 
education. 

After graduating from school, I went to 
work as an apprentice in a bakery. Inasmuch 
as my parents had passed away, I had to 
depend entirely on myself and the good will 
of the men, one of whom I was working [for] 
as an apprentice. After [I had] been working 


about three years for him, he was called into 
the Army, and although I was only seventeen 
years of age, I was put in charge of the bakery 
and had some kids that was younger than I 
was to learn the bakery. Apparently, it worked 
out all right because at least the bakery was 
there when he come back. 

I will tell about how this apprenticeship 
was put together. It’s your father that signs 
up the apprenticeship, you know. When my 
father signed me up as an apprentice in this 
particular bakery, you sign an agreement 
where you have to work there for a period of 
four years. And you get a raise in pay for each 
year. In other words, the first year, you get 120 
kroner; the next year 140 kroner; and from 
there on and out for the next two years, you 
get 160 kroner. But you do learn the business 
because you put in in the neighborhood of 
from twelve to fourteen hours a day of actual 
work in the bakery, and you learn it from one 
end to the other one, which, incidentally, was 
a great help to me when I came to this country. 

It has always been my ambition to come 
to the United States. And after I had learned 



2 


Peter C. Petersen 


my trade, I had sufficient money where I could 
pay my passage to come to this country And 
I also helped a friend of mine to pay his fare. 
I came to this country and landed in New 
York City in the first part of September, in 
1915.1 went up to Fargo, North Dakota, where 
an uncle of mine had a large ranch holdings 
some miles outside of Fargo. I worked there 
for approximately four weeks and then went 
into Fargo and got myself a job in a bakery 
in that city; I had a trade when I came to this 
country, too. 

For the first four or five years thereafter, 
I worked in various places in both North and 
South Dakota, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and 
then came out to Salt Lake City and worked 
in a little town by the name of Magna, where 
the copper mills and smelters were located. 

In the later part of 1918, I joined the 
United States Army and was assigned to 
Camp Lewis, Washington. 

Well, I didn’t see a great deal of army 
service. I registered for the army service in 
Stillwater, Minnesota. And then I went to Salt 
Lake City, and had a transfer from Stillwater, 
Minnesota to Salt Lake City. And in the later 
part of 1918, I think it was September—. I 
wouldn t’ve had to go to the Army because I 
come from a neutral country. I decided that 
it would be a good thing for me to do, to get 
into the Army. And I asked the draft board 
to get me in the next quota, which they very 
politely did. And I went up to Camp Lewis, 
and, of course, got into what they called then 
the depot brigade, which was the starting 
point of your military service. And about a 
week or so after I got up to Camp Lewis, I 
was politely transferred down to the school 
for bakers and cooks because they had hardly 
about eight or nine bakers in the whole camp. 
So I was in the school for bakers and cooks 
up to May the thirty-first, 1919. And that’s the 
extent of my military career. 


But on the other hand, it’s the smartest 
thing I ever did. Because first of all, I got my 
citizenship in Camp Lewis after [having] been 
in this country two and a half years. And in 
many other ways, it’s been a remarkable good 
thing down the line, so this [was] one of the 
few smart things that I did. 

What sort of things did I do in this school 
for bakers and cooks? Just to give you an 
idea, we had something like three hundred 
men in that school for bakers and cooks at 
one time or another. And we had one group 
we were teaching field service to. That means 
baking in the field with equipment that they 
will have under conditions when they were 
actually in the war zone. And a company 
had one hundred and two men in one big 
[group]. I think there was fifteen ovens in a 
unit, I remember that. And there was fifteen 
sergeants, a sergeant in charge of everything. 
The rest of them, I don’t remember. But the 
majority of it, of course, was done inside. 
And we used a carload of flour, which was 
something a little better than 600 sacks— 100- 
pound sacks—and half a car load of substitute. 
You know, everybody had to use substitute for 
bread. So that came up to around a thousand 
100-pound bags of flour we made into bread 
every day to feed them. And one thing that 
always used to puzzle me is that the boys that 
had to load the bread into the wagons for the 
various companies had to wear white gloves. 
But maybe the wagons had been used the day 
before to haul manure in, or other things. But 
that’s the way it worked. 

When I was discharged from the Army, 
I went back to Salt Lake City, and made Salt 
Lake City more or less the starting point for 
various jobs. I had jobs up in Idaho. And from 
Salt Lake City, twice I came in to Nevada. But 
for Reno, I came from San Francisco to Reno. 

What kinds of experiences did I have 
on these various jobs? Well, of course, of 



Early Life 


3 


you learn your trade over in a European 
country, you are an all-around man. You 
can handle bread, and you can handle—of 
course, pumpernickel is a great item over 
there, and you can handle, say, rolls of any 
description—hard rolls, soft rolls, Danish 
pastry, puff pastry And you also [have] what 
you call a “conditer” over there (that] you 
can make fancy decoration [with] and so on 
and so forth. But, of course, when you come 
to this country then, then you would start to 
get into—you’re either a cake baker, or you 
are a bread baker. Except when I worked for 
the Sanitary Bakery (now Welsh’s Bakery), we 
had a Swede that was dough mixer, and we 
had a Russian that was a cake baker; and he 
was one of the best cake bakers I ever seen in 
my life, but he was an alcoholic. 

Now, there was a general thing that they 
would call up— one of them would call 
up—and say they couldn’t come to work. But 
once in a while, they would both call up, they 
couldn’t come to work. And I was the only 
one that could take their place. Then we speak 
about the Russian, I could take his place up to 
a certain point, but he was really good. So you 
had to pretty well be real good. It isn’t like it is 
now. I could go down to Welsh’s Bakery, and 
if I had four bakers—however many he has 
there, that’s all I’ll need, take the rest off the 
street and teach them in a few days. Just like 
America, you can pretty well make America 
[laughing] in a very short period of time if you 
get an intelligent boy to work with. 

I came in to Elko in the fall of 1919, but 
I actually was there in 1920. I can tell you 
exact. It was September, 1919, that I come in 
because they had the Elko County Fair and 
rodeo. You know, they had a huge rodeo in 
Elko in those days. And the reason I come 
into Elko, I was actually working up in Weiser, 
Idaho. But I had a friend that was working as 
a baker. And he wrote and told me that he 


needed another man, and he would like to 
have me come. It’s true he needed another 
man, but only for about two or three weeks. 
But somehow or another, I managed to stay 
there. So he decided to leave. And I worked 
there all during 1920.1 worked in the bakery 
in the daytime and worked in a—well, you 
could call [it] a bar, although they didn’t serve 
any liquor there. They sold, you know, “near 
beer, as they call soft drinks and things like 
that. In the evening I worked there. There 
isn’t much to do in Elko, so that worked out 
pretty good. 

Well, when you talk about September 
of 1919, of course, the country just went 
dry. The manufacturing of bootleg whiskey 
was a sort of a half-known factor. Nobody 
knew too much about it. But they were out 
in the boondocks up in there alongside the 
Humboldt River. There was stills in various 
places. And liquor was sold at the rate of 
sixty dollars a gallon. But there was never any 
shortage of liquor that I remember. 

There were some famous bootleggers up 
there. Uh, yes. There were some of them—in 
fact, you know—you have heard about a 
fellow by the name of White that was gassed 
down here in Carson City, one of the first they 
gassed? You know, he was gassed because he 
killed a—or supposed to’ve killed a Greek. 
They never found the body. They found part 
of it. They were fighting over moonshine 
whiskey. They were down in there operating in 
the neighborhood of Deeth. But you could get 
whiskey in pretty near any place downtown in 
Elko. And also gambling. Gambling stuck out; 
there was nobody that was trying to hide it 
too much. In fact, I’m sure that Sheriff Harris 
knew pretty near where every still was. Didn’t 
do too much effort to knock it over. 

We are all smart enough that we knew 
that there was many of ’em that made a little 
money doing [that]. You know—and Kirkley, 



4 


Peter C. Petersen 


see, and—what was his name? Hillhouse. 
They couldn’t help themselves because all you 
had to do was go down in Douglas Alley [in 
Reno] and pretty near every place down in 
there was a bootlegging joint. And that wasn’t 
too difficult. 

Graham and McKay, you know, they had 
the biggest one down there, which is now part 
of Harold’s Club. And incidentally, this made 
Mr. Bill Graham pretty mad at his partner, Jim 
McKay, or rather Scarface Sullivan, because 
Scarface Sullivan gave up that lease. And, of 
course, that wasn’t very smart on his part, 
but he did. Then, of course, they operated the 
Willows out there, which was quite a place. 
It was a very nice place. In fact, a lot of those 
drapes and stuff we used in the Democratic 
Tabor Club, we got from Bill Graham that had 
been used out there, at the Willows. 

And you know this—and it’s true, that 
when the banks closed, Wingfield found 
himself without any cash and had to go down 
to Graham and McKay to get some cash 
money from them. They were the only ones, 
pretty near, to have any cash money. And he 
borrowed $2,000 from ’em in cash. Whether 
it’s true or not, that’s the story. 

And, of course, there was another thing. 
You know, Wingfield never signed a lease 
with anyone. And in all the time Graham 
and McKay and Scarface Sullivan had the 
Bank Club, they never had a lease. And that’s 
how they wound up with the hotel. Because 
somebody had talked Wingfield into selling. 
And this somebody was Norman Biltz, 
incidentally. And Bill Graham was in San 
Francisco when he found out that they was up 
for sale, and he had to come back in here and 
buy the building in order to protect himself. 



2 

Labor Union Activities 


Labor unions have a way of handling the 
membership where you can’t just move into 
any city you want to if there’s already enough 
of the labor craft in that particular city And 
how they handle it is that you join a union. 
Like for instance, we will say in San Francisco, 
the Bakers Union is No. 24; the Bakers Union 
in Reno is 161. you are a member of Local 
Union 24, and you want to come up to Reno 
to go to work. If Reno already has enough 
bakers out of work, they will not accept your 
traveling card. In other words, in order for you 
to travel from one union to another one, you 
must have a traveling card. And the union [in] 
which you want to be a member must accept 
your card before you can anticipate to find any 
work in that city. And in that way, the unions 
regulate their membership so they take care of 
those guys [that] actually had resided in the 
city for a long period of time. And that’s it. 

After [I’d been] discharged from the army 
and worked in Salt Lake City, I went into 
Elko, Nevada, and worked there for a period 
of about a year and a half. Elko, Nevada at 
that time was a complete open city. It was 


predominantly a ranching community, and 
always some of the ranch hands would come 
in to Elko and celebrate. That could happen 
pretty near any day in the week. 

When I first come to Elko, this country 
had just gone dry, and liquor was sold in Elko 
at sixty dollars a gallon. But there seemed to 
be plenty of people willing to pay that price 
for it. I left Elko for San Francisco and went 
back to Salt Lake City, and then went to 
McGill, Nevada. McGill, Nevada, of course, 
is the community town for the Consolidated 
Utah Copper Company. And everything in 
the community—homes and everything— 
belongs to the copper company. I was fairly 
lucky, because not working for the copper 
company, there was no way for them to charge 
me for the room. So I lived rent-free for over 
a year in McGill. You had to have a baker, 
you know. 

I left McGill for San Francisco and was 
hired to come to Reno, Nevada as a baker by 
the Purity French Bakery. I got the job through 
an employment agency that everybody would 
know; Murray and Ready is the name of it. 



6 


Peter C. Petersen 


We went down—and Reagan Street, I think it 
was. I worked in the Purity Bakery for a short 
period of time and then went to work in other 
bakeries, and continued to work in bakeries 
up to the year 1933. 

Shortly after arriving in Reno, I was elected 
the secretary of the Bakers and Confectionery 
Workers Union, and we managed to sign the 
first union agreement with the various owners 
of bakeries in the city of Reno. And Reno was 
considered at that time to be a good union 
city. The wages received in Reno was higher 
than any place on the West Coast. 

In the summer of 1932, I was elected 
president of the State Federation of Labor. And 
as things were tough, a lot of people were out of 
work, and 1932 was an election year. There was 
a lot of the union boys that was pretty anxious 
to elect a new administration in Washington. 
In amongst the labor boys that was out of work 
in that period of time—from 1931 and all the 
way through 1932 and part of 1933—we had 
approximately 1,000 union members living in 
flophouses which were located (1) where the 
Greyhound Bus depot is now, (2) at the Palace 
Club, and (3) in the Fulton Alley. It was quite 
a chore to see that those boys got anything to 
eat, and their diet consisted mainly of coffee 
and stale doughnuts. 

During the so-called Depression days 
in 1931, ’32, and ’33, the membership of the 
various unions in Reno, Nevada, of course, 
wanted changes in many other ways besides 
politics. And, of course, when politics creeps 
into the labor movements, then you find two 
factions—one a Republican faction, and the 
other one a Democratic faction. And I became 
part of the Democratic faction. And as most 
of the members that we had in the flophouses 
belonged to the Democratic party—for 
what reason, I’m not in a position to say 
[laughing] —and inasmuch that I was one that 
was seeing that they at least—they got some 


stale bread and doughnuts to eat, I became 
fairly popular with some of the membership. 

So when convention time came along, I 
was asked to run for president [of the] State 
Federation of Labor. And by counting the 
various unions I knew would be for me, I 
knew that I could win the election. And then, 
of course, I decided to run for president and 
was elected. 

Being an official in the labor movement 
in those days was quite some difference from 
what it is today. Remember, you had to do the 
fighting yourself, all the way down the line. 
With those you work for, you had no labor 
acts of any kind, no Wagner labor laws, no 
unemployment insurance, or any other of the 
many benefits that labor has today. If you went 
out and started a fight for the labor boys in 
those days, it could very easily wind up with 
you without a job in just a few days. Incidentally, 
that happened twice to myself while employed 
in the various baker[ie]s in Reno. Therefore, of 
course, it’s understandable that labor was very 
much interested in a change in Washington. 
Thinking that there was almost a cinch for them 
to improve their conditions as it was impossible 
to make it any worse than they actually were. 

Before my term expired as president, 
I had already gone to work in the Internal 
Revenue office. And then, of course, I only 
took a limited amount of time in the labor 
circles. And as things got a little bit better, 
the labor convention from 1934 was held in 
Ely, Nevada, and I, of course, couldn’t run 
any more, and a new man was elected. But 
for many years, I still took an interest in the 
labor movements. 

Will I tell about how I lost these jobs 
because of my union activity? Well, I’d just 
as soon not because [a] couple of’em are my 
friends now. 

Well, in the labor movement in those days, 
you signed an agreement with management. 



Labor Union Activities 


7 


That, of course, was a great step forward. But 
we signed a lot of agreements in the unions 
which was just purely and simply some 
writing on a piece of paper. And the eight- 
hour work day didn’t mean a thing because 
nobody ever was paid overtime, or at least 
very few were. And that in particular was a 
very interesting thing for me, when, in 1935, 
I went to work for the Nevada Industrial 
Commission. It was part of my job to check 
on the payrolls of the various business 
firms throughout the state of Nevada. And I 
found an awful lot of business houses in this 
community and state who was certainly far 
from paying the workers what the union scale 
called for. But things were tough, and labor 
had nobody to fight for them. And therefore, 
in most instances, he had to take it. 

Well, of course, in the labor movement, 
you had certain ones just like there is today. 
There was the leaders in the things and 
they had to do their work. You had here in 
the state of Nevada a fellow by the name 
of Joe Clinedinst, a fellow by the name of 
George Townsend, and a fellow by the name 
of Bill Burns, and a fellow by the name of 
Nelligan—I don’t know his first name—and 
many like that, that was the whole labor 
movement. And, of course, they had to do all 
the fighting; and the others, they would just 
be members who paid their dues. And that’s 
how it worked. 

You see, there was an easy thing on the 
union meetings to get up and just raise hell. 
But there was an entirely different matter 
to raise hell the next day when you had to 
actually raise the hell with the guy you were 
working for. That’s the way it worked. And 
we were trying to educate people where the 
simple fact, to encourage them to buy the 
goods with the union label on. 

We was used to have an organizer in 
the Bakers Union that worked from San 


Francisco. And he made a statement one 
time that I never forgot. He said, “The easiest 
thing in the world is to get somebody out on 
a strike. But the hardest thing in the world is 
to get that fellow back to work.” And there’s 
an awful lot of truth, or there were, at least, 
in those days. 

Now, you got to remember, when you got 
fired for those reasons, they never gave that as 
a reason, you know. They would always find 
some other reason why you been laid off. Now, 
it was a strange thing with me because I had 
been the foreman for five years in each one of 
the two bakeries before I was fired. So I was 
reasonably sure, the reason for it. 

You hear so much about yellow-dog 
contracts, but I never had any dealings with 
anything like that. That was mostly in large 
concerns, you know, and we never had any 
big concerns around Reno that I remember 
in those days. The Nevada Pack was about the 
biggest one of the plants. 

You had two groups of unions in the 
labor movement; what you call the trades- 
craft and the miscellaneous unions. The 
building trades-crafts, of course, is carpenters, 
bricklayers, and plasterers, and plumbers, and 
the electricians, and so on, all the mechanics. 
The miscellaneous unions is bakers and 
barbers, bartenders, culinary workers, and 
similar unions like that. And, of course, the 
idea of it was that you were all members of 
the Nevada State Federation of Labor and the 
trades Council, the Trades and Labor Council. 
And, of course, if they had any trouble, you 
were supposed to take it up with them, which 
we did. But we were not any better off than 
you were because their man just wasn’t going 
to put his neck out too much, either. You 
know, when you got a family, you’ve got to 
sort of watch out for them a little bit. 

What did they do besides just fire me 
from my job? Did they blacklist me? No. In 



8 


Peter C. Petersen 


fact, with one of them, later on, during the 
war, the beginning of the war, I got his son 
into Annapolis through Senator McCarran. 
Senator McCarran never figured that out, 
how I would recommend a kid whose father 
had fired me some years previous. But that’s 
an actual fact. 

Did the State Federation of Labor then 
have a lobbying organization? Didn’t have 
any money. When I took over as president 
of the State Federation of Labor, most of the 
unions had their money in Wingfield’s bank. 
The only one that didn’t have their money in 
the Wingfield bank was the Bakers Union. So 
when you don’t have any money of any kind, 
you can’t get around anywhere and there’s very 
little you can do. And [in] particular when you 
got a couple of thousand people there that’s 
out of work and living in places where they 
just barely exist. You know, there’s one thing in 
this country. It’s extremely one way or another. 
It’s a possibility [that] it’s the other way now. 

[Joe] Clinedinst wanted to be appointed 
labor commissioner, and he thought that he 
had Mat Murphy and Gray Mashburn on his 
side. But Gray Mashburn was on the fence. 
And Kirman definitely did not want him. 
And so out of it came purely and simply 
that I got the job as traveling auditor for the 
Industrial Commission, and he didn’t get the 
job for Labor Commissioner. And I went to 
Gray Mashburn and told him, I says, “Just 
forget about me for traveling auditor for the 
Industrial Commission. You give him the job 
as Labor Commissioner.” 

And then Mashburn told me, said that 
he wasn’t too anxious to get him, so what’re 
you going to do? This did kind of make a little 
cool feeling between me and Mr. Clinedinst? 
Oh, there’s no doubt about that. There’s no 
doubt about that. You see, the Labor Club 
[Democratic Labor Club], Clinedinst didn’t do 
any work. You know, he had a heart condition 


anyway and couldn’t do any work. So he 
fooled around a lot about politics. And then 
he wanted to start the Labor Club, but you got 
to remember, he couldn’t start a labor club 
unless he had me, because I was the president 
of the State Federation of Labor; and you can’t 
start a labor club unless he goes along with 
you. We started a labor club, and we made 
all the prearrangements, and we elected Pat 
McCarran, there’s no doubt about that, because 
we carried Washoe County for him. Some 
things pay that nobody had ever expected to 
pay. It’s true that a bank helped us. [Laughing] 
But, of course, those things will come out. 

Well, you take all the unions—there was 
some unions in Las Vegas, but not very many. 
Of course, Boulder Dam had just begun, and 
there was a few unions that sprang up. But 
frankly, I don’t know too much about the 
labor conditions in Las Vegas because, you 
know, the unions didn’t have any money, 
and very seldom you traveled on your own 
expense, and particularly if you don’t have 
too much money yourself. So there was no 
reason except at convention time to meet 
with the union boys, say, from Clark County 
or from White Pine. 

But in White Pine County, of course, 
everything there was theirs; they worked in 
the Consolidated Copper mines. And you 
had sheet metal workers and blacksmiths and 
miners, and so on and so forth. All together, 
they may have seven or eight unions. 

But the [Reno] union temple, at that 
time—now, where would it be? It’s either over 
the Nevada Club, or over Harrah’s, one of the 
two buildings; frankly, I can’t remember. But 
that was the union upstairs. I think it’s where 
Harrah’s club is now. And the only union 
at that time that was big enough to have a 
full paid business agent was the Culinary 
Workers’ union. And they had one-half of 
that upstairs part of it as their permanent 



Labor Union Activities 


9 


headquarters. And in the front half, they 
had the bootlegging joint [laughing], run by 
somebody of the Culinary Workers’ union. In 
fact, some of the lady members (there wasn’t 
too many of them) was very, very upset over 
it. It didn’t seem to bother the men so much. 
So many of the unions, they, of course, had 
secretaries which—then the secretary and 
business agent were one and the same person, 
and he’d get paid somewheres from twenty 
dollars to maybe up to as high as seventy-five 
dollars for taking care of the books, and so 
on and so forth. And that’s pretty underpaid. 

Then during the time when I was president 
of the State Federation of Labor, that’s when 
they had the big Culinary Workers’ strike. If I 
remember correctly, there were six restaurants 
involved in it. And after they had gone along a 
very short time, they decided that they would 
set up a committee of three from the unions 
and three from business, and those six would 
meet to pick three others, so there would be a 
membership of nine on that committee. One 
from the businessmen that was on there was 
A1 Caton, you know, that had the Reno Press 
Brick. And Brewster Adams was another one, 
I remember. And I was on for labor, one of 
them. George Townsend was on for labor. 
And a fellow by the name of Anderson that 
was a plasterer. Those was the laboring boys. 

One day when we had a meeting, Caton 
said to me, going out from the meeting, he 
says, “Don’t you think, Peter, that it’s time 
that we get together and get this damn thing 
settled?” And I thought that was a wonderful 
idea. So we thrashed it out, and agreed on what 
we would recommend for salary, which was 
identically what the Culinary Workers union 
had asked for, save and except one thing, and 
that was the busboys and dishwashers. We had 
set the price for them at fifty cents less than 
the union one. And we frankly thought we 
had done a pretty good job. 


We went up into the meeting, gave them 
what we had agreed to, were turned down 
cold. And the strike lasted for a good many 
months from then on. And when they settled 
it, they got a good deal less than we could’ve 
settled it for, three and four months before. 
That’s unions. And from then on, I was very 
reluctant to serve on any committees. We even 
had it in the agreement with all of those that 
had stayed on to work, “scabs,” as they called 
them, would be put out of work, and when 
they settled it, of course, none went out of 
work. That just shows you how stupid union 
people are sometimes. 

Do I think that strike was the one that 
settled the attitudes here in Reno? Well, 
yes and no. I wouldn’t say that Reno was an 
anti-union [town]. Reno was composed of 
people who, if people gave them a reasonable 
argument, they’re pretty easy to get along 
with. I never had any trouble with them. Of 
course, you’ll always find some people say 
they’re against anything. But there was a good 
many places where you had to be a member 
of a union, or you just didn’t work. All the 
building trades was one hundred percent 
union. But you know, you don’t make strong 
unions when you have a depression going on. 
Because I know what the union scales used to 
be—that was general for mechanics—about 
ten dollars a day. But you’ll be surprised how 
many books that I’ve seen when I got into 
the Industrial Commission. They didn’t get 
anywhere close to ten dollars. 

Did I work on union organizing? In some 
places, we done a little bit. But you see, you 
are at a point where there wasn’t anything you 
could do. Nobody had any money. Banks were 
going broke, and the little bit of money they 
had was tied up. So there wasn’t too much 
activity. Naturally, when we could, we helped. 
I remember we helped the Teamsters union; 
we helped other unions. But our biggest 



10 


Peter C. Petersen 


problem in those days was to find enough 
work for them so they could eat. That’s how 
bad it was. 

I mentioned flophouses; I would like to 
tell some more about that. Well, I don’t even 
remember now how we got the— where the 
Greyhound is, there was an empty building. 
And whoever the owners were (and I couldn’t 
tell you who the owners were because I don’t 
know) just gave it to us. That’s all there was to it. 
And it was up to the fellows and us. But [Hugh] 
Red Rauhut and myself furnished them. When 
Isay myself and Red Rauhut, it was actually the 
ones we were working for. I was working for the 
Purity French Bakery and got them [baked] 
food. And that’s what they lived on. And then 
we got them some fishing poles. And there was 
a few of them that was pretty good fishermen, so 
they got a little fish. And we used to buy some 
Chase and Sanborn’s coffee which was handled 
by the Fleischmann yeast company. What they 
called dated coffee, we could get that for twenty- 
five cents a pound after it had been on the shelf. 
So indeed, we got all of it they had. So those 
fellows lived on just coffee and doughnuts. 
Except one group, now that you want to find 
out. We got the upstairs of the Palace Club 
which had been a gambling place operated by 
Scarface Sullivan. And when Sullivan and the 
Bank Club consolidated, went in together, that 
was empty. And Graham, Bill Graham, gave 
us that place with the understanding that we 
had to have one fellow in charge on a twenty- 
four-hour basis, to have full charge of it. On 
top of that, he bought all the fuel—coal— that 
we needed. He bought all the blankets there 
was room for, and gave to us. And he bought 
numerous—hundreds of hams and bacon for 
them up there. So they were sort of living on 
the fat of the land, as things were in those days. 
But Bill Graham done a tremendous amount of 
good for them. He never [wanted it known]. 
There’s nobody that knows about that piece of 


ground he gave to the Catholic church for their 
playground; he gave it to them. 

When the people would come to get a 
place in these flophouses, they came to the 
various unions they belonged to. And we 
had designated somebody in all flophouses 
that was in charge of it. And, of course, all of 
them done a remarkable good job, because 
they had to depend on them. And they knew 
that if they didn’t run it right, there was a good 
possibility that it would be closed up. So we 
had very little difficulty. But in all of them, 
we had a man for a twenty-four-hour basis. 
See, [an] eight-hour shift to each one. They 
had a standing agreement—or we had told 
them—that whenever they had any room, and 
even if they had to crowd them sometimes, 
to put them in. And sometimes, we didn’t 
have cots. We got most of the cots from the 
National Guard. But we didn’t have anything. 
It was much easier to sleep on the floor than 
they were going around town in the cold. So 
we didn’t ever have any trouble with that. But, 
of course, the upstairs were the best ones, the 
ones in the Palace Club. There’s no argument 
with that. Of course, very few people know 
that didn’t have anything to do with it. And 
that’s a good many years ago now. 

Then, of course, the banks started to 
liquidate and people got a little bit of their 
money back now and then. Of course, things 
progressed considerable. 

Well, the Democratic Labor Club was— 
Clinedinst had the idea. Now, I’m not saying 
this is true, but I believe it, because he didn’t 
ever work. And there was four or five other 
old timers, and they wanted a place to hang 
around downtown, I think, more than 
anything else. I’m not saying that as a fact. But 
the first place they had, they rented an office 
and they paid thirty dollars a month over the 
Cal Neva Club, you know. And later on, when 
they got a little [bigger] they got a room over 



Labor Union Activities 


11 


in the E. C. Lyons building, you know. And 
from then on, it branched out. And he got the 
idea, and he spearheaded it. And, of course, 
he was made president. 

And I can remember when I was on the 
board of directors. And then the election 
came along, and it was a good idea, and 
Clinedinst promoted a little money for it. So, 
of course, there was more and more people 
that would come up in there. You know, there 
was no place to go here. And Joe Clinedinst 
was a promoter, there’s no argument with that. 
And the only thing that I’d seen sometimes, 
that he went a little bit too far. And, of course, 
out of that was the big split amongst labor, 
which to a great extent was politics because 
there was the Republicans and Democrats; 
that’s really what it [was). 

But he was also very close to Bill 
Woodburn, Sr. And Woodburn, Sr., would 
give him some money from time to time to do 
a little political work. Not much money, but a 
little. So we started that Labor Club, and as I 
said, it was a good place because nobody had 
any place to go. And pretty near every time we 
had a meeting or a rally or somebody to speak 
(we had Pat McCarran or Jim Scrugham or 
any of ’em), we could always depend on that 
hall being full. And we just moved the cots out 
in the back. And then they could move them 
back in after the meeting was over. It worked 
out pretty good. 

When we went down to the convention 
[in Las Vegas] , of course, all of those that 
went to the convention was also members of 
the Democratic Labor Club. And we managed 
to get over that resolution, I’m pretty sure. I 
mentioned that about Pat McCarran. We got 
real active. And the club had, I would say, 
roughly three hundred members or more, 
which was quite a lot. And the wife [Mrs. 
Petersen] was just as enthusiastic about it as 
anybody else, so that was a pretty powerful 


setup. So between that one and the banks, we 
done a pretty good job for Senator McCarran. 
There’s no argument with that. And we kept it 
alive. It was alive in the 1934 campaign. But I 
think that was the last of it. I don’t think that 
it lasted [past] that. 

But we had such a fellow—well, you 
take—oh, what was his name? He became 
surveyor general. He was a painter by trade. 
He got elected practically with the help of the 
club. And Dan Pranks, if they hadn’t been for 
the Labor Club, I doubt very much [if] he 
would have been elected state treasurer. And 
there’s no doubt about it with Mat Murphy. 

So during that period of time, they were 
listened to, and Clinedist made out. The only 
trouble with Clinedinst—and, of course, 
that’s hard for anybody to say—was his 
own fault, He wanted too much, see, and he 
made himself too many enemies, and they 
just fought like hell not to give him a job. 
Unfortunately, I guess he got the idea that I 
was the main guy. And I can’t prove anything 
right now, but I told Mr. Mashburn and Mr. 
Murphy that I didn’t wanted a job if it meant 
that Joe Clinedinst couldn’t get one. I don’t 
know of anything else I could[‘ve] done. 

Kirman was against Clinedinst from the 
beginning. But Kirman was also against me. But 
that was about as far as I can see, fifty-fifty. Why 
was Kirman against me? Because somebody 
said I drank too much, to give it to you very 
plainly. But then, he done something else again. 
When I went into the post office and Dan 
Sullivan went down to see him about giving me 
a three months’ leave of absence, and Kirman 
said to Sullivan, “You, under no circumstances, 
will fill Pete Petersen’s job until such time that 
he’d been confirmed as Postmaster and asks you 
to do so because he’s the best traveling auditor 
we’ve ever had. And I done him a great injustice 
because I listened to somebody” So that’s my 
experience with Mr. Kirman. 




3 


Political Affairs with the 
McCarran Organization 


1932 TO 1938 

But anyway, let’s get down on our way to 
the Democratic convention in Las Vegas. This 
is in ‘32.1 first met Senator McCarran on our 
way to the Democratic state convention in Las 
Vegas, Nevada in Beatty, Nevada, There both 
his car and the one I was driving in stopped 
for gasoline. He informed me in Beatty that 
he was going to try to get a resolution through 
at the convention in Las Vegas whereby the 
convention would recommend that Senator 
McCarran got no primary opposition, for 
the reason that the then Senator Oddie was 
considered to be from three to five thousand 
votes stronger than the Republican party. I 
was somewhat doubtful that it could be done, 
and incidentally, so was Senator McCarran. 
But we had nothing to lose, so we tried it at 
the convention. And the convention, they 
left it up to the delegation of Washoe County, 
stating that they would be willing to go along 
with anything that the county wanted. We met 
in caucus that night in the Apache Hotel with 
Bill Woodburn, Sr., chairman of the Washoe 


delegation. After a good deal of discussion 
and disagreement and what have you, we 
finally agreed that we would recommend to 
the convention that they would go on record 
not to oppose Senator McCarran with any 
other primary candidate. Strange as it may 
seem, nobody thought that that could ever 
be done. And in fact, the chairman, Mr. 
Woodburn, stated that if anybody had told 
him prior to the caucus that he would go along 
with anything like that, he would’ve told them 
they were crazy. 

Senator McCarran didn’t have any money 
to speak of. But the Democratic party made 
a demand on him for a donation of $5,000 
to the state Democratic central committee. 
Senator McCarran raised the money through 
a loan from the Stack estate. It was put into 
Wingfield’s bank, and two days afterwards, 
the banks closed. So Senator McCarran still 
didn’t have any money. 

The strange part of it was that the outcome 
of this was that in Senator McCarran’s mind, 
there was some talk that the state chairman, 
Mr. William McKnight, knew that the banks 



14 


Peter C. Petersen 


was going to close, and shouldn’t have put the 
money in there knowing that fact. I doubt 
that to be—have any foundation whatsoever. 
But anyhow, what they did was to split the 
Democratic party just a little bit more than 
they had been before. 

But the Democrats went ahead, and 
with, the help of the Republican, George 
Wingfield—by letting the banks go broke— 
we won the election in 1932, electing both 
Pat McCarran for Senate and Jim Scrugham 
for congressman. 

I had known about Pat McCarran for 
some time. I knew him to be a brilliant 
attorney and an excellent speaker. And being 
a Democrat, it wasn’t too hard for me to be 
friendly with Senator McCarran and willing 
to help him in the election. 

With Roosevelt running on the 
Democratic ticket and very, very popular 
with the laboring classes of people, there 
wasn’t too much doubt about their electing 
the Democrats in that particular year. On the 
surface, the Democratic party was in harmony 
with each other, but underneath the surface, 
the leaders of the Democratic party—namely 
Pat McCarran and Key Pittman and the state 
chairman, William McKnight—were not 
getting along any too good. Finally, they made 
an agreement that Pittman was to have all of 
the bigger jobs, such as the Internal Revenue, 
Collector of the Internal Revenue, and the U. 
S. Marshal, and that Senator McCarran was to 
have the U. S. Attorney and the postmaster in 
Reno, plus many of the smaller jobs, as deputy 
collectors in the Internal Revenue office. 

The deputy collectors were to be 
appointed from the ranks of labor for their 
assistance to Senator McCarran during 
the campaign. Unfortunately, there was 
very few of the laboring boys that had the 
necessary qualification to hold those jobs. 
But somehow or another, apparently I must’ve 


had the qualifications because I was appointed 
[deputy collector of Internal Revenue], And, 
of course, that it was an important job is for 
sure, in view of the fact that it paid $127.50 
a month. 

But it was a terrific experience, and I seen 
a good many things in the state of Nevada 
at that time. Because first of all, when the 
country went wet, there was no alcohol tax 
division in this state. And enforcing and 
checking on saloons was given to the Internal 
Revenue office. And I was the first deputy 
collector to check them saloons in this state. 
And believe me, that’s the kind of a job to get 
if you want some votes in an election. 

In those days, the Internal Revenue office, 
of course, had to collect the usual taxes, 
income taxes, and corporate taxes, and was 
also to collect processing taxes, all new taxes 
which had been passed by Congress in 1933, 
such as taxes on hogs, tobacco, cotton, and 
many other things. And they were hard taxes 
to collect, because in many instances when 
you called on a farmer and told him that he 
owed a certain amount in taxes, he wanted 
to talk you into, “Take the pig instead of the 
money,” which is an actually fact in many 
instances. They want you to take their small 
pig instead of paying the taxes. 

During the period of time I worked in 
the Internal Revenue office, I met Senator 
McCarran from time to time. And politicians, 
today as well as then, get a lot of their 
information from calling on the various 
county courthouses throughout the state. 
And many of them take it for granted that 
they know just exactly what goes on in that 
county, which is unfortunately not true in 
many instances. 

Inasmuch as I had a large territory, once 
in a while I went to courthouses, hut most of 
the time got my information from farmers, 
[the] working class of the people. Sometimes 



Political Affairs with the McCarran Organization 


15 


I got an entirely different line of information 
than the others did. And Senator McCarran, 
when we had meetings, was beginning to 
believe that I knew more about politics than 
some of the rest of them, which in many 
instances led him to come to me and ask 
for advice concerning the political affairs in 
certain counties. 

While I worked in the Internal Revenue 
office, another deputy collector by the name 
of Mat Murphy, who was an oldtime mining 
man in the state of Nevada and had been a 
candidate for mining inspector two years 
previous, intended to again run for mining 
inspector in 1934. Mat Murphy had no 
money. He got some money from his friends 
for printing cards and small items like that. 
But he had no money to throw around the 
state. And for that reason, a great deal—in 
fact all—of the traveling he did was with me. 
And he, Mrs. Petersen, and myself started 
throughout the state. And that’s the year that 
checking the saloons in particular paid off. 
Of course, Mat Murphy was elected without 
spending hardly any money, [he] never had 
to spend a dollar in any saloon wherever we 
went. 

And it was the first time that they used 
loudspeakers in the hall. They were just 
coming in. And we put Sammy McCarran on 
a box so he could reach the mike. And then, 
he had memorized the speech that we wrote 
out for him, and he could stand up there and 
talk about Bullfrog, Rawhide, about any of 
the mining camps. 

This was in regards to the mine inspector, 
Mat Murphy, that was elected mine inspector, 
you see. And he could do the same thing for 
his father. He memorized it, and then he really 
went to town. I guess Sam was about thirteen, 
fourteen years old. 

He was a nice young man, nice boy. Very 
nice looking, too. But, oh, I think he (this is 


just between us) got spoiled. He was spoiled. 
You see, in Washington, they can do things 
like these young fellows, and their fathers 
being senators and very prominent—. And, 
of course, they’re spoiled. He got a little 
wild, and he would get in, be picked up for 
speeding or some other thing, and then he 
would say, “I’m Senator McCarran’s son,” and 
he was chairman of the District of Columbia, 
you know. And the cop wasn’t going to have 
anything to do with anybody like that. But 
Sammy’s a good boy. I liked him. 

Did the other McCarran family members 
enter into campaigning? No; you see, both 
Margaret and Mercy was nuns, and they were 
in a position where they couldn’t get free. Mrs. 
McCarran would travel with him, and she was 
good in meeting the social life of it, where the 
wife [entertains] the various people and so on. 
We traveled with them, with Senator and Mrs. 
McCarran, numerous times, many times. [My 
wife] liked Mrs. McCarran very much. [They] 
got along very nicely, always did. She was a 
very attractive woman when I first met her. 
Of course, like many other people, she had 
a temper; but then, you all have one. Boy, I 
didn’t blame her sometimes. Anybody that is 
crazy enough to run for political office must 
be nuts [laughing], to tell you the truth. 

After that election in ’34, Mat Murphy and 
Gray Mashburn wanted me to take the job of 
traveling auditor for the Nevada Industrial 
Commission. And inasmuch as they paid a 
good deal more than being the Collector of 
the Internal Revenue office, I was more than 
willing to accept it. 

Before I get into the Nevada Industrial 
Commission, though, I will tell a little bit more 
about the Internal Revenue. For example, how 
did McCarran’s appointees get along with 
Pittman’s appointees? Well, as far as I know, 
they got along all right. There’s no doubt about 
it in some instances that the deputy collectors 



16 


Peter C. Petersen 


that McCarran had appointed didn’t get any 
choice assignments. But outside of that, Bob 
Douglass, the collector, was fair. There wasn’t 
much he could do about it anyway. But we got 
along good as a whole, 

We didn’t have the kinds of conflicts that 
the two senators had between themselves? 
Well, not in the open. Of course, I could tell 
you a story. 

When we checked on the saloons, they 
sent a fellow up here from San Francisco to 
break us in on it. And he and I went out, and 
Hawthorne was the first place that we stopped. 
And this fellow from San Francisco, he gave 
the fellow in the Hawthorne poolroom an 
unmerciful tongue-lashing for not having 
a [stamp]. And I didn’t exactly like what he 
was doing. But in those days, the Revenue 
stamp was just put on them, and [in] this dry 
climate, they would curl up right off the bottle. 
There wasn’t anything you could do about it. 
You couldn’t fine them for it, at least, not in 
my opinion. 

But after we got out, this fellow said to me, 
he says, “You didn’t like the way I handled him 
in there.” I says, “You could’ve handled [him] 
with a little bit more finesse.” 

And he says, “Do you know why you were 
selected to be the first one to go with me?” 

And I says, “No, but it wasn’t to do me a 
favor, I know that.” 

Well, he says he was scared of me. He 
thought there was political dynamite, and he 
figured this was a good way to “kill you off so 
he could give you the job” [laughing]. 

So even in those days, I had a reputation 
for being McCarran’s “hatchet man?” No, I 
wouldn’t say that in those days. That came in 
later. That came in after I been in the Industrial 
Commission for some time. Remember, we 
traveled a lot, and Mrs. Petersen went with 
me a lot, which was permissible. And you’d 
have to—doing politics in the Industrial 


Commission, you can go about doing politics 
by just being a good fellow. You’re dealing 
with labor, you’re dealing with doctors, 
and you’re dealing with businessmen. And 
remember, when I went out in there, I’d been 
in places where they would tell you, “You are 
the first man we’ve seen from the Industrial 
Commission in—all the way from six to eight 
years.” Not months, six to eight years. Run 
up against that time and time again. And 
then you help ’em. And lots of times, we’d 
run up against cases where a fellow [had] 
been turned down for a claim, and he would 
have reams and reams in the files. And when 
you check up on it and find out, generally 
it was only something like seventy-five or 
eighty dollars difference in what he thought 
he should have and what he had been rated 
for in the Industrial Commission. And I. 
always said it wasn’t worth our while to fight 
the small items like that. Because in the long 
run, they generally had to [have] a guy go 
down there three or four times to try to get it 
straightened out. So I straightened them out, 
and everybody was happy, including Dan 
Sullivan. 

[Dan] Sullivan had been chairman, and 
he was reappointed chairman by Kirman. 
And Tannahill had been on the commission, 
and he was reappointed by Kirman. And 
Fitzgerald was a new appointee by Kirman. 
And Pete Petersen was a new appointment 
by Kirman. 

In the Industrial Commission, you do 
a tremendous amount of traveling, and in 
particular, during the period I was with the 
Industrial Commission, because that was 
during the construction of the Boulder Dam. 
And we had to spend a considerable amount 
of time at the Boulder Darn besides the other 
work we had to do throughout the state. 

Another thing, there was a good deal of 
mining activities in the state of Nevada in 



Political Affairs with the McCarran Organization 


17 


those days to a great extent due to the fact 
that the price of gold had been raised from 
twenty to thirty-five dollars an ounce, which 
made a lot of people go out in the hills and 
try to develop mining claims and old mines 
who had been closed down and could be 
operated due to the difference between 
twenty and thirty-five dollars an ounce. But 
it all meant a lot of work for the Industrial 
Commission. 

And for some unknown reason, they 
appointed a fellow down in the Boulder Dam 
[district], see. But the other fellow, [myself], 
the traveling auditor, he still had the whole 
state of Nevada and occasionally was called 
on to help the fellow in Boulder Dam. 

When the construction of Boulder 
Dam began, there was a lot of people that 
figured that the Industrial Commission fund 
would go up in smoke. But Dan Sullivan, as 
chairman, did, in my opinion, a tremendous 
job in regulating the rates so when the 
Boulder Dam was through, the Nevada 
Industrial Commission found themselves 
with a surplus of better than $200,000. On 
top of that, this was the beginning of the 
increase in population in Las Vegas and 
Clark County. 

In those years, I think that the Industrial 
Commission got on its feet and got themselves 
in a position [so] that when business increased 
in the state of Nevada, they were capable of 
handling the bigger load in claims and [could] 
take care of the new laws which had been 
created for the benefit of working people. 
I was very much interested in the Nevada 
Industrial Commission because it was an 
organization that took care of the working 
people. The allotted benefits that working 
people had never had before were created in 
that short period of time. 

But, of course, we were always looking 
towards doing Senator McCarran some good. 


And we knew that the 1938 election would 
soon be around the corner. When Roosevelt 
made his recommendation for packing the 
Supreme Court, and Senator McCarran, 
with other senators, started to fight it, there 
were some of us that weren’t so sure that the 
1938 election would be a runaway. But it did 
happen that way, and Senator McCarran was 
with a large majority. 

I liked the work in the Industrial 
Commission very much. And I never dreamt 
or believed it, but the Postmaster in Reno, Bill 
Kinnikin, passed away, and a new appointee 
had to be made. And while some of Senator 
McCarran’s friends were giving him various 
names for postmaster, it didn’t work out the 
way that the Senator wanted it, and he did 
not appoint any of them. But one Saturday 
morning in the later part of December [1936], 
I got a telephone call from the senator, and the 
conversation went something like this: 

Senator McCarran: “How about the 
postmastership in Reno?” 

I says, “It’s too bad, and I’m sorry to see 
that Bill Kinnikin passed away.” 

Senator McCarran: “I’m not talking 
about Kinnikin. I’m talking about the new 
postmaster.” 

I says, “Would you mind to tell me who 
he is?” 

He said, “You. I’m coming out to Reno in 
a few days and I’ll talk to you about it.” And 
that’s how I was appointed postmaster. 

Of course, in those days, a political job, 
why—. Take, say, when Roosevelt was elected, 
the Post Office Department got the cream of 
the crop. And the highest paid postmasters 
in those days was $12,000, and that was the 
postmaster in New York and Chicago. And 
they had the best people that was possible. 
Not alone know how to run and take care of 
people, but also knew your politics. You don’t 
get them now, that kind. 



18 


Peter C. Petersen 


1938 TO 1944 

Sometimes in the—the early part—well, 
I will say sometime in May of 1938, I think 
would be better, Senator McCarran and I 
was in Carson City on business. One that Pat 
McCarran wanted to see was Bob Allen, the 
highway engineer. And I didn’t want to see 
Bob Allen. Somebody else I wanted to see was 
Henry Lee. (Incidentally, he’s still alive; he’s in 
his nineties.) He and I had worked together 
in the Industrial Commission. And I ran into 
Henry Lee on the street in Carson City. And 
he said, “Pete, I got some news that I’m sure 
that you’ll be interested in.” He says, “I was 
down at the gasoline service station down 
here on the street, and Mr. Lewis (you know, 
who was Kirman’s partner in something. I 
can’t remember Lewis’s first name) told me 
that Kirman was definitely not going to run 
for governor, and that he would so announce 
later in the evening.” 

I says, “Are you sure, Henry, that he’s not 
going to run?” 

He says, “That’s what Lewis says, and he 
showed me a copy of the announcement he 
was going to give to the papers.” 

I went down and got hold of Pat McCarran 
and told him the news. And we went into 
Reno and into my office and got Mr. Carville 
on the phone. He was up in the third floor. 
And we talked him into running for governor 
at that time. And, of course, he was like many 
others that were reluctant to go, didn’t know 
whether they could be elected or not. We 
assured him that he could. And he came out 
for governor. And, of course, that was quite 
a campaign in ’38 And Pat McCarran and 
Carville got along pretty good except in a 
few instances. 

So in 1938, with Pat McCarran, you know 
they had the “court packing” bill going on in 
Washington. And McCarran was one of the 


men that was spearheading the move against 
the court packing. And he didn’t know exactly 
when he could come out here to campaign. 
And he asked me if I would open up the 
headquarters for him. So we got a place down 
on Second Street in the building, you know, 
where the drugstore is on the corner. I forget 
now. But that had been a dentist’s office, and 
we got it rent-free. And we opened up the 
headquarters of Pat McCarran before he 
ever got up in there. We also helped Carville 
a little bit. 

Why did Pat McCarran want Carville for 
governor? Well, Pat McCarran and Carville 
was very close friends. And Carville had a 
terrific reputation, you know. In fact, he had 
so much of a reputation that Pittman didn’t 
dare oppose him when he—Pat McCarran— 
recommended him the first time. He, of 
course, removed him the second time. So 
everything was going along real good. 

You know, Senator McCarran was not the 
easiest man to get along with. And for some 
unknown reason, I was about the only one 
that really could get along with him. And 
you’d be surprised how many times I been 
called out of bed at night to go down and 
quieten him up for one thing and another. 

I never will forget one time Jim Scrugham 
and him got in an argument, about two, three 
o’clock in the morning. I had to go down and 
quieten them both down. But they really went 
after it sometimes. I don’t mean maybe. 

So after the campaign, why, there was 
beginning to—you had the feeling of a little 
dissension between them. And I found out 
that there was some of Carville’s friends that 
was telling him that he was a bigger politician 
than Pat McCarran was because [laughing] he 
had got more votes than Pat McCarran had. 
So I got hold of Carville up there and got it 
straightened out. But when anything like 
that creeps into it, you can never straighten 



Political Affairs with the McCarran Organization 


19 


it out. There is always that friction there. But 
one thing is for sure. If they hadn’t broken up 
those two gentlemen—they didn’t break up, 
but cooled off a little bit— they would have 
been the strongest political thing you’ve ever 
seen in this state. They had everything pretty 
near their way. 

Then, of course—well, maybe we’re 
getting ahead of ourselves. But, of course, the 
election of 1938 was not a tough election. Pat 
McCarran didn’t have too much opposition to 
them. And about a month before the election, 
he gave us instructions— well, I wouldn’t say 
instructions, but asked us—to concentrate 
entirely on Ted Carville, because he was sure 
that he had the election in his bag, which we 
did; we got it. 

So after Carville was in there and you 
began to hear about the friction between the 
two of them, I talked to Carville, and one of 
the things Carville says to me, “Don’t you 
think that I know my friends?” 

“Oh,” I says, “I’m sure that you know your 
friends, Ted. But do you know who your 
friends hang around with? That’s the thing 
I’m worried about right now.” 

“Well,” he says, “you don’t have to worry 
about it because I’m going to appoint a 
committee of three.” 

And I says, “Well, who is going to be the 
three?” 

“Well,” he says, “I haven’t got them picked 
yet except one. 

I says, “And who is he?” 

He says, “You.” And he says, “nobody is 
going to get a job with the state of Nevada 
unless that you say he’s the right kind of a 
guy.” Well, of course, those things, that’s just 
talk. But anyway—. 

But then, you get down to (Key) Pittman, 
there you’ve got it again. I don’t think that 
it was so much Pittman and Pat McCarran; 
they weren’t friends or anything like that. 


But I don’t think that the friction was near as 
bad if they had been left alone. I think that 
it was Pittman’s friends that was nagging 
Key on. It’s understandable that if they can 
keep them apart, they don’t have to worry 
so much, you know. If they—Pittman and 
Pat McCarran—was friends, you know, they 
might agree on certain things, and some of 
them wouldn’t have as fat a job as they had. 
Those things happen. 

But anyway, poor Pittman died [in 1940]. 
And he wasn’t put in ice in the bathtub or 
anything like that. He just up and died. It’s a 
wonder he didn’t die before. 

Well, I’ll tell you one more thing. Going 
back to the funeral of Key Pittman, you 
know, sometimes you get a laugh, too, even 
in funerals. Dutch Horton—I don’t know 
whether you know Dutch Horton, a attorney 
over in Ely. He had been working, you know, 
for Pat McCarran. And he was working, I 
guess, for the state at that time. I’m not sure. 
Yeh, he must’ve been working for Carville; he 
was working then. But anyway, Pat McCarran 
asked him—he and I—to meet the train up 
in Lovelock— I’m pretty sure it was Lovelock. 
(Now, you see, there’s where the trouble came 
in. I can’t remember. But it’s either Imlay or 
Lovelock.) And behind the train were all the 
senators, I think ten or twelve or fourteen 
of ’em. Well, Dutch Horton knew them all 
because, you know, he had worked with Pat 
McCarran back in Washington. But anyway, 
we were following them in as an escort, had 
all the reservations made for them at the 
Riverside Hotel and got them over there. And 
Mrs. Pittman was standing in the Riverside, 
and, of course, they had to pay their respect 
to her and one thing or another. 

But in amongst the senators was Senator 
Green from Rhode Island. And he’s quite a 
character, see, little fellow. And we took them 
over to the Riverside, and they had quite a 



20 


Peter C. Petersen 


few drinks. And then, they went and paid 
their respects to Mrs. Pittman, and then they 
participated in the funeral, and then they had 
some more drinks, and then they had dinner. 
That’s just about the way it were. 

But this is how Green explained Key 
Pittman’s funeral: He says, “It’s the most 
jolly affair I ever attended. Some gentlemen, 
friends of Senator McCarran, met our train 
up on the line, and escorted us into Reno. 
And then we had some drinks, and then we 
had some food, and then we had some more 
drinks.” He says, “I have never attended such 
a jolly funeral in all my life.” And that’s pretty 
near word for word how he described it. 

So, at that particular time, Senator 
McCarran had the gout. And he and Carville 
were to—after the funeral—get together and 
select a man. And I drove him to Carson 
City every—well, it was for quite a while; it 
was pretty near every day. And I don’t know 
how many names was mentioned for Key 
Pittman’s job. But Jim Scrugham was one of 
the first that was eliminated, which was for a 
reasonable cause, that if they appointed him, 
we would’ve had to have a special election 
for congressman. And then they mentioned 
Thatcher, and they mentioned Woodburn, 
and they mentioned Ed Clark, and they 
mentioned, oh, hell, dozens of others. 

One day, after about eight or nine or ten 
trips down there, and getting nowhere, I said 
to Pat McCarran, “Are you ever given the 
idea that maybe Ted Carville wants that job 
himself?” 

“Oh,” Pat McCarran says, “I don’t think 
so. 

“Well,” I says, “would you have any 
objection if I spring it on him tomorrow?” 

And he says, “No.” 

So I sprung it on Ted Carville, and that’s 
it. That’s what he wanted. And Mrs. Carville 
was in Washington on a Catholic affair at 


that particular time. And it was agreed that 
Ted Carville was going to call her up that 
night and find out what she thought about 
it. And next day, when we seen him, his face 
was pretty long, so I know that Mrs. Carville 
didn’t think much about it. Now, I can’t go into 
the reason why Mrs. Carville didn’t want to 
go to Washington, but there was quite a few 
reasons, apparently. 

So then we was right back to scratch 
again. And I’m the one that sprung Berkeley 
Bunker’s name. And Carville’s secretary, Alice 
Maher, The says, “Well, we need a speaker of 
the Assembly.” 

And I says, “We need a senator a hell of a 
lot more right now than we do a speaker of the 
Assembly.” And that’s where Bunker come in. 

So the night we met in the mansion to 
announce that Bunker was going to be it, 
Carville was so nervous that he couldn’t 
write it himself. Pat McCarran dictated the 
announcement to Eva Adams, who was 
present at that time. I kind of felt sorry 
for Ted. But, of course, Ted Carville was a 
wonderful guy in many ways. And, of course, 
he managed to get in there anyway in the 
last two years of the six, and that’s certainly 
something. 

So going home that night, the roads 
between here and Carson City was terrible icy 
that night. First thing Senator McCarran said 
to me, “Now, we got to find a good secretary 
for Berkeley Bunker.” 

I says, “Well, who do you have in mind?” 
“Well,” he says, “I have in mind somebody 
that’ll keep me advised of what goes on in 
his office. 

I says, “Be pretty hard to find.” 

So we mentioned again hundreds and 
hundreds and hundreds of names, and when 
we got into Steamboat Springs, in or around 
there, he says to me, “But I promised the job 
to Florine Maher.” That was Alice Maher’s 



Political Affairs with the McCarran Organization 


21 


brother’s wife. Bill, of course, got killed in 
the mine. 

“Well,” I said, “what the hell are you 
sitting, asking me for who to make secretary 
when you already picked one?” 

“Well,” he says, “I think she would be the 
best one. She will keep me posted. And she’ll 
keep Eva Adams posted.” 

I says, “I doubt that very much.” I says, 
“I’ve never seen anybody that got a job of that 
kind that isn’t going to be pretty fairly loyal 
to the fellow that they work for. And second,” 
I says, “I don’t know whether Florine Maher 
and Eva Adams is that close. I’ll take that with 
a grain of salt, too.” 

And, of course, it wasn’t very long before 
there wasn’t too much harmony between the 
two groups. 

And then when Berkeley Bunker, of 
course, came up for election two years 
afterwards [in 1942], Jim Scrugham filed 
against him. And here, lo and behold, as 
soon as that happened, I got a telephone call 
from Pat McCarran telling me, said that he 
was going to support Jim Scrugham with 
everything he had. 

Well, that meant a few changes that 
I had to do in a hurry, but we did. And 
Jim Scrugham’s followers got a little over¬ 
confident. And I told ’em, “You guys better be 
on your toes because it don’t look too good 
for Jim Scrugham around the state. In here in 
Reno, it looks pretty good.” And that’s exactly 
the majority he won with, was what he had 
tin Washoe County]. So then, of course, poor 
Scrugham, he passed away, and then Carville 
got to be United States Senator. 

And then, as you know—well, you should 
know all about politics—Berkeley Bunker 
decided to run .against Ted Carville. And 
then Mr. McCarran was for Bunker, strange 
as that it may seem. And I told him, “you’ re 
crazy.” But nevertheless, that’s what it were. 


And you know what happened to Berkeley 
Bunker. People consider him an ingrate and 
all of that. And that was it. 

But incidentally, with Pittman removing 
Ted Carville from United States District 
Attorney, I think is the stupidest political 
thing I ever seen. Carville had already gone 
by on his term, so he was sitting as United 
States District Attorney without a term. Mrs. 
Petersen and I was going back to see her folks 
in Illinois. And he knew we were going, so 
he come down and he says, “What should 
I do now if they decide to remove me while 
you’re gone?” 

“Well,” I says, “I don’t think there’s very 
much that you can do, Ted, if that happened. 
But,” I says, “I can’t conceive the idea that they 
will let you go at this time. With Harley [A.] 
Harmon in the picture for governor, and then 
open it up so you can be a candidate? That I 
don’t think. I think at least he should be much 
smarter politically than doing anything like 
that.” But by God, he did! And if they hadn’t 
done that, Harley Harmon would have been 
governor, not Ted Carville. But that’s exactly 
what happened. 

Then, of course, now we might as well 
follow that, being as much as we’re there. Then 
came the appointment of a new United States 
District Attorney. And, of course, Key Pittman 
recommended Bill Boyle for United States 
Attorney. Pat McCarran wouldn’t go for him, 
for Bill. That, incidentally, was something 
that happened between the women of the 
McCarran and Carville group. Just what it 
is all about, I don’t know, but I do know that 
much. So I said to Pat McCarran one day in 
the office, “Are you so overly anxious to buck 
Bill Boyle?” Bill Boyle and I was fairly good 
friends. 

And he says, “No, really, I’m not. But,” 
he says, “I’m going to have to do it under the 
circumstances.” 



22 


Peter C. Petersen 


“Well,” I says, “couldn’t we figure out 
something that we could work out, maybe, 
that you wouldn’t have to do that?” 

“Well,” he says, “I’ll tell you what I’ll do. 
If you can get word to Bill Boyle that if he 
will come down and see you and say that he 
has absolutely nothing against me and will 
support me and all this, I’ll go for him.” 

I thought it was going to be a cinch, nut, 
by God, sill Boyle wouldn’t do it! Something 
in the Catholic church. Just what it was, I do 
not know. 

Who else was active with me? Who 
did I work with in these campaigns? Well 
[laughing], it was fairly easy, because most 
of them, of course, were close friends of Pat 
McCarran. Many of them had political jobs. 
Many of them, we had done favors to. And 
I had done favors for an awful lot of people, 
foreigners because they had confidence in me, 
and they came around. 

Now, remember that during the war, 
second World War, we had to register all 
the aliens. And the Post Office did the work. 
And it was set up to this extent, due to 
the manpower conditions and hours, that 
I had done at least ninety percent of the 
fingerprinting myself. And we registered 
something in the neighborhood of about 
6,000 foreigners here in Reno. 

Foreigners are funny people. See, they’re 
pretty bashful when they come over here. 
Many of them can’t speak English. And I have 
a pretty fair idea what it is to come to this 
country and don’t understand English. It isn’t 
exactly the most pleasant thing that you can 
get up against. It’s a pretty tough racket. For a 
good, long time, I lived on ham and eggs and 
liver and onions, but they’re the only things I 
could ask for. And that gets to be a tough diet. 

So we could get a lot of them to help 
us. And you’d be surprised at how some of 
those—at least in those days, and I’m pretty 


reasonably sure it was the same as it is now—if 
you can get the right fellow, he can handle an 
awful lot of foreigners. So you have a nucleus, 
but you got to have your key man. 

So we formed another organization. 
And we called that the “Oak-we-no.” That’s 
supposed to mean in Indian, “you’re my 
friend.” Now I don’t even know how you spell 
it. And then we had all kinds of people. The 
Post Office employees, you know, don’t— 
can’t—play politics. But there isn’t anything to 
say that they can’t belong to the Oak-we-no, 
any more than anything else. And then, you 
see, you get many of the United States District 
Attorneys; you have certain ones that you’ve 
got into the Internal Revenue Office; and you 
got some in the Marshal’s office; and you got 
some in this, that, and the other thing. And 
pretty soon, you have yourself fifty, sixty key 
men. 

But where you really do your business, 
you get the registration list down at the county 
courthouse. And in every precinct, you know 
some people. So you get hold of them, and 
you know you can trust them and you make 
them captains in that precinct. And so you get 
enough delegates when you go to the county 
convention, see, that you have enough. Now, 
I couldn’t go to county conventions or the 
state conventions. But they always held them 
in the State Building. And I was over in the 
Post Office, and Mrs. Petersen was always a 
delegate, and she’s pretty good at that. She 
says she just attended meetings like any other 
woman does, and that’s about all, but as I 
stated during our conversation in the political 
setup and attending political conventions, 
Mrs. Petersen was the one that had to do the 
work because her husband was not allowed 
to do politics. So she has been, actually, the 
politician in our family. Well, she was pretty 
good at it, real good in some of it. It’s been 
pretty interesting on that. 



Political Affairs with the McCarran Organization 


23 


One year, a fellow by the name of 
Tom Salter, who was an attorney up in 
Winnemucca, and they referred to him as 
“Judge” Tom Salter (and he was a judge at one 
time, but at that time he was an attorney), he 
had been selected as temporary chairman. 
And there was little difficulties over there 
every so often. We always used a fellow by the 
name of Cliff Devine; he was the main guy. He 
would come over and find out what should 
be done. So the convention lasted a little bit 
longer than the normal [one] did, and this is 
when Tom Salter got up and said—when the 
convention [ended], he says, “I regret that I 
had to hold you people here as long as I did. 
But, you know, there was a few things that 
happened that we had to get straightened 
out. It took us a little time to get across the 
street and get our information from Pete 
Petersen over there.” Pretty raw, but that’s 
what [laughing] —that’s what he did. Oh, you 
can do a pretty fair job if you got the right 
people, and then, when you are taking care 
of them and you help them. 

There’s been an awful lot of people that I 
helped in this country. I don’t knowhow many 
people I got American citizenship to, people 
that would never have been an American 
citizen any other way because they’re scared, 
today, to go. And actually, all they require a 
foreigner to do is that he go to school in the 
evening, at least try to learn. That’s all. That’s 
all it takes with asking. But a foreigner, he 
don’t know that. That really is a way to build 
up a political organization. 

You have to keep track of the registration 
list. Of course, to start it off, in particular, now, 
with the increase in population, you know, it’s 
a little bit tougher now than they were then. 
But you get the first one and you keep them, 
it don’t take much to keep it up to snuff. You 
just get to know hundreds and hundreds of 
people. 


Just to give you an illustration, when they 
buried Pat McCarran, the day of the funeral, 
Silas Ross came to me, and he says, “Pete, you 
better get started on collecting money to build 
a sarcophagus for Pat McCarran.” He says, 
“You know what happened with Key Pittman 
when he passed away and all the difficulties 
that they had in getting the money and the 
length of time it took,” which, of course, was 
a good many years. 

I went over to the office that day and went 
through the lists of names with him, and I 
wrote a letter to a hundred and twenty people, 
I figured, to each give a hundred dollars. And 
we asked straight out for a hundred dollars. 
Within four days, we had every dollar we had 
asked for collected, see—$14,000, just like 
that. Just by taking fellows that you knew was 
friends of his, and people that he had done 
favors for and people—and many of them 
was Republicans. 

Is this the way we raised money for the 
campaigns, too? Well, you do that a little bit 
different. There’s always people like that to—in 
a position where they give up in the thousands, 
you know. But with their collecting [for] the 
campaigns when—I never had anything to do 
with collecting money for a campaign. Just 
collecting people, and seeing that—. When I 
say I didn’t collect the money, I had contact 
with those that did it, yes. Like in the 1944 
convention, Norman Biltz was the financial 
man in that campaign, and I ran the rest of it. 

Well, now, you take with Pat McCarran. 
You undoubtedly heard about the tremendous 
organization he had. He had a good 
organization, but not near as good as some 
people thought he did. And to be frank with 
you, there have been many times that I looked 
for some of those people that were supposed 
to be [good] and had a little difficulty in 
finding them, see. But he had certain ones all 
the time that’ll be right “Johnny-on-the-spot,” 



24 


Peter C. Petersen 


Now, his way of doing politics was that 
he wanted to have control of the county 
organizations and the state organizations. 
And we pretty near know before this election, 
or the delegates to the state Convention, who 
was going to be elected. And we went into 
state conventions all the way down the line, 
and we knew just exactly where we were at. 
And, of course, for quite a few years, up to 
about 1938,1940, we were always on the short 
stick. Mr. Pittman and his gang had it. But, 
of course, there comes a day, you know. And 
in 1940 was the big day, although they didn’t 
lick us in ’38, either. But in 1940, we had that 
convention damn near [laughing] four to 
one. And I’ll never [laughing] forget it. Bob 
Douglass of the Internal Revenue office, he 
come in, and he says, “Pete, let us not have 
any arguments this time. Let’s get together. 
You take fifty percent of the delegates to the 
state convention, and we will take the other 
fifty percent.” 

And I says, “Well,” I says, “I know your 
job. You’re supposed to know all about figures. 
But,” I says, “you know, I can figure a little bit 
myself. And when you say it’s fifty-fifty, you’re 
a little bit off. And [laughing] you’re going to 
be lucky to get anything.” But it was pitched 
in such a way that I was the one in 1940 that 
had to make Key Pittman a delegate to the 
national convention, not his forces. Carville 
didn’t want him. And [laughing] I couldn’t 
blame Carville. And I [laughing] —I says, “Oh, 
Jesus Christ,” I says, “we can’t take the senior 
senator; he’s up for election going in there, 
and not make him a delegate. No, I can’t go 
for that. Pat McCarran won’t go for it either.” 
But Carville, he was ready [laughing] to say, 
“We have the votes.” There’s no argument to 
that. That’s the time when Pat McCarran Went 
against Roosevelt, you know, and Nevada 
voted for Jim Farley. That, of course, was one 
of the strong points, was 1940. 


In the election of 1944, the one where 
Vail Pittman ran against the Senator in the 
primary, you see, there, you had the same 
splits that have always been in the Democratic 
party, maybe a little bit more. And Senator 
McCarran, he had some powerful friends, 
but he also had some powerful enemies. 
And the enemies that year organized pretty 
good and had it all set. And when we got 
into the Democratic convention (it was held 
in Reno that particular year), the McCarran 
forces never had more than [a] seven- to 
eight-vote majority in that convention. And 
Mrs. Petersen, see, because she handled the 
women’s group, had a great deal of trouble. 
Because, you know, when you only have 
a seven-vote majority, or eight, there can’t 
be too many of the women go out of the 
convention. You have to hold ’em there. And 
that’s the way it stayed, from the beginning 
to the end of the convention, seven to eight 
votes. 

And incidentally, Roger Foley, the United 
States federal judge, now retired, but is still 
sitting on the bench on many occasions, got 
his appointment as judge for the simple reason 
that Senator McCarran said he supported him 
in that convention. That’s how Foley was 
appointed federal judge. 

Who were the powerful enemies besides 
Mr. Pittman? Well, you had quite a few of 
them from throughout the country, and 
particularly from Clark County. Clark 
County was beginning to come up and was 
feeling their oats and wanted to get more 
recognition than they thought that they had 
gotten. And they had a fight in their county 
convention down there amongst themselves. 
And apparently, they made some sort of 
compromise down there in the selection of 
the delegates to the state convention. I don’t 
know if there was anyone particularly. [It 
was] so long ago. I know of one fellow I can 



Political Affairs with the McCarran Organization 


25 


remember, Hap Hazard, [who] was one of 
them. But there could have been—well, there 
were many others, of course. But I don’t recall 
their names now. That’s a long time. 

Well, his friends stayed with him all the 
way through. Even the Woodburns became 
his friends before it was all over (of course, not 
in ’44 because they were for Pittman in ’44). 
But McCarran had people like—in Lovelock, 
he had certain groups he could call on all 
the time. The same thing in Winnemucca. 
He had Mrs. Avery Stitser, you know, that 
ran the newspaper; and Roy Pierson there 
was county recorder or something there (he 
was a county official, anyway); Dan Shovelin 
in Battle Mountain; Red Ellis in Elko; C. E. 
“Dutch” Horton in Ely, and so on and so forth. 

But, of course, the biggest trouble in 1944 
was that bill he introduced, you know, about 
the public domain, you know, and that the 
sportsmen in the state of Nevada thought 
was more or less introduced against them. 
And they fought him pretty good. And you 
know, the sportsmen is pretty well organized 
in this state. That had a big bearing on it. Oh, 
yes, he made up with them, later. He made a 
statement to me one day when I asked him 
why he had introduced such a bill. “Well,” he 
says, “I’ll tell you, Pete. Before I get through 
with them, I’ll make ’em understand that I’m 
right and they’re wrong. And then we’ll be 
even with them.” 

“Well,” I says, “what the hell, politically.” I 
says, “We’ll end up with what we were before 
you started to introduce this bill, so we haven’t 
gained anything.” Some small things can be 
blown up, and some small things would be 
taken advantage of by the opposition. 

But then, of course, after the primary 
in 1944, he had no trouble in the general 
election. And do you know who was the 
Republican candidate that year, ’44? Molly 
Malone. So the general election, we had no 


trouble there, and from then on out. He didn’t 
have too much trouble in anything. 

I told you before that ’44 was the first 
time that the Biltz and Mueller crowd got 
into the Senator’s campaign; what was their 
role there? Well, Johnny Mueller was one of 
the best politicians there were in this state. He 
just had a nose for politics. And when Johnny 
Mueller told you anything, you could pretty 
near depend on it, it was so—he didn’t come 
around with any wrong information. Johnny 
Mueller had a host of friends, and influential 
friends. And Blitz, of course, knew so many 
people with money, and money is a very 
important thing in campaigns. So he was a 
sort of finance chairman. Only thing I know, 
whenever we needed any money, I would tell 
him how much we needed, and he would 
come up with it. Then, you see, we didn’t 
pay anything for office rent or anything like 
that. They all helped, you know. And then we 
had the precincts from then on thoroughly 
organized. We found out in ’44 that that was 
very important. 

But in the primary election in “44, there 
was an amusing thing, but I’m not going to 
mention names now. See, [the] Vail Pittman 
forces had their headquarters over in the 
Golden Hotel. Senator McCarran had his 
headquarters in the E. C. Lyons building, 
which at that time belonged to Norman Biltz 
and associates. 

Pittman’s friends had a big celebration 
over to the Golden Hotel when the returns 
first come in because it looked very much like 
Mr. Pittman was going to win. In fact, they 
called me up. I was a little bit leery. I wasn’t 
afraid that we wasn’t going to win, but I knew 
it was going to be pretty slim. So I wasn’t too 
anxious to get down to the headquarters in the 
early stages. But they called me because they 
all figured that by the returns, that there wasn’t 
very much of a chance for Senator McCarran 



26 


Peter C. Petersen 


to be reelected. And then when I told ’em 
to call certain county chairman and other 
leaders in various parts of the state, we got 
a brighter picture. And after we had verified 
that, about thirty minutes—and in particular, 
the way the votes was cast because he was 
leading in Clark County every time we had 
a report. And I knew that he was going to be 
elected, and apparently Pittmans men knew 
that he was going to be elected, too, because 
they left his party over there and come over to 
Senator McCarran’s party. They actually had 
a chance to attend two parties that primary. 

What part did the southern group play 
in winning Clark County that year? Well, A1 
Cahlan in particular—I don’t know if Cliff 
Jones done too much. Senator McCarran 
wasn’t overly fond of Cliff Jones. [Marion] 
Hicks, you know, that was in the Thunderbird, 
he was the one that handled Cliff Jones. And 
Hicks was the one that done all the organizing 
down in there. He and—oh, what’s his name, 
now; he died here a couple of years ago, this 
partner in the Four Queens towards the 
last; can’t think of his name. But they were 
actually the ones that— and Ed Clark did a 
lot of campaigning. In fact, Ed Clark, he made 
a statement that [if] anybody ever told him 
that he would make a door-to-door canvass 
for Pat McCarran, he would’ve told [him] he 
was crazy. But he did. 

Well, they didn’t want Pittman because— 
not saying anything against Pittman and not 
them having any animosity—they figured 
that he wasn’t near as capable for taking care 
of things, and particularly anything that 
involved Clark County. You must remember 
that there they had Basic Magnesium plant 
standing down in there, and there was just an 
awful lot of people that wanted to demolish 
that thing. And if it hadn’t been for Senator 
McCarran, that’s exactly what would have 
happened. And they knew that, and after all, 


that was part of their bread and butter. It was 
Pat McCarran that saved that. 

What sort of an opponent did Molly 
Malone make that year? Well, Molly Malone, 
he had a lot of nice qualities. But to a certain 
extent, he was a sort of lightweight. And he 
could never, it seems like, get himself a head 
start before he got that break. 

I mentioned a few minutes ago that Mr. 
Biltz was the finance chairman. Do I know 
what were the sources of the money, what the 
relationship was there with the gamblers and 
the utilities and the banks and so forth? No. 
As far as I know, Biltz never told anybody who 
he collected from. Of course, naturally, you 
know that he got a certain amount of money 
from [E. L.] Cord. He got some from various 
gamblers, too. But I never asked him; it was 
none of my business where he got the money 
from. But he got it from a lot of Republicans, 
incidentally. There’s no doubt about that. 

Did I ever have to be involved in money 
raising? Oh, I had raised money. In fact, it’s a 
funny thing. I raised money in Clark County. 
But that was purely and simple because a fellow 
that I know real good went along and helped 
us collect the money from the boys out on the 
Strip. How did I do that? Well, you just go in and 
tell them that you need some money and you 
would like to have them help. [That’s] about all 
you can say. Of course, some of them you don’t 
have to “sell” very heavily. They’re easy. Others, 
you’ve got to do a little “sale promotion.” But 
you got to remember, you know, that Senator 
McCarran, in those days, saved gambling down 
in Clark County, too. You know, this was the 
time when gambling didn’t have too good a 
name, and they needed some help. So it wasn’t 
too difficult. There wasn’t too many of them, 
and they wasn’t as powerful as they are now, 
and it didn’t mean as much in taxes as it does 
now. You take now, when the gambling industry 
pays $36 million in taxes, you know. 



Political Affairs with the McCarran Organization 


27 


Did I try to raise money with other 
interests, like with the utilities and the banks? 
No, I never had anything to do, any special 
occasion. Somebody else [was] on it. I never 
did care much. Well, there’s certain people 
that’s cut out for that, so the idea is to use 
them for that purpose. Then you got others 
that’s cut out for something else, try to use 
them where they fit in the best. 

1946 TO 1954 

Let’s see, now, Molly Malone was 
elected first in 1946, isn’t that right? In the 
Democratic primary in 1946, Carville had 
served two years as Senator, the last two years 
of Scrugham’s term. When the primary came 
around, Berkeley Bunker decided to run, 
too, and Carville and Berkeley Bunker was 
in the primary. And Mr. Bunker won, with 
Senator McCarran’s help. And, of course, it 
split the party in two, in a different way than 
it used to be with Pittman and McCarran. 
And, of course, Carville, to a great extent, 
played up the thing that Bunker was an 
ingrate because he had appointed Bunker 
when Pittman passed away. Of course, I 
always took that with a grain of salt because 
I knew how Bunker was elected, was picked, 
that Carville actually wanted it himself. And 
we finally wound up with Berkeley Bunker. 
So while even though he was an ingrate to 
a certain extent, it wasn’t near as bad in my 
mind as it were in some other peoples’ mind. 
But anyway, there was enough to beat Bunker. 

Pat McCarran campaigned for Bunker. 
And Bunker was elected not by too much of 
a majority [2,528], but he was elected [in the 
primary]. And then Molly Malone came into 
the picture, and he got a tremendous support 
from Carville and Carville’s friends. And that 
particular way was what carried the election. 
But outside [of that], there wasn’t too much 


noise in that particular campaign except 
that it got to be more of a—as I remember, 
I didn’t pay too much attention to it, to be 
honest about it. But I do know that it split 
the Democratic party pretty good. And 
McCarran made himself some more enemies. 
Why he went for Berkeley Bunker, I don’t 
know. That’s some of the things that is hard to 
understand. He got Bunker appointed in ’40. 
Senator McCarran went for Scrugham in ’42, 
and then he goes back and supports Bunker 
again in 1946. And that’s what he did. And 
these are the things that is hard to understand 
sometimes. But in that particular [election], I 
didn’t take much part in it in that year at all. 

Well, of course, in the 1950—well, we 
better cover that one, I guess. Well, in 1950, 
Graham and McKay had got their full pardon 
from the President, President Truman. And, 
of course, Senator McCarran was the one that 
got them the pardon. Well, I guess I might as 
well tell how that come about. Let’s see, now, 
there’s nobody that we could hurt. 

Shortly before they got their pardon—this 
was sometimes in ’46 or ’47, I think it were, 
wasn’t it? It was when Truman was there, 
anyway—I was in the Grand Cafe, or rather, 
the Grand Bar, and I overheard two ambitious 
attorneys discussing the possibility of getting 
a pardon for Graham and McKay, and at the 
same time mentioned the amount of money 
they could get to make such a thing possible. So 
I thought to myself, “Now, you two gentlemen 
can’t get anybody a pardon unless you get Pat 
McCarran’s help. And [I] see no reason why 
we shouldn’t get the help from Pat McCarran 
instead of from you two gentlemen.” 

So I got Pat McCarran interested in it. He 
didn’t want to go for it because he says the 
publicity would be bad. 

I says, “That depends on how it is handled,” 
and so on and so forth. “And I don’t think it 
will be near as bad.” 



28 


Peter C. Petersen 


So we picked the ones that had to sign. 
And, of course, inasmuch as it was a mail 
fraud, the postmaster had to be one of them. 
And then we got Bishop Gorman. And then 
we got Judge Foley. And then we got the 
fellow that was Assistant Attorney General at 
the time they were convicted [McGrath] that 
later on became a Senator. And one or two 
others—and it shot right through. We had no 
difficulties, or rather, Senator McCarran had 
no difficulty, and they got their pardon. And 
nobody knew anything about it for years after 
that. That’s how close that was kept. There was 
only those that had signed it and myself and 
two and three others that knew about it. 

So, of course, Graham in particular was 
very friendly because he understood what it 
meant. And, of course, those people that knew 
Graham said they could overlook all of the 
things he had done because he was a terrific 
guy in any other way. 

And so, of course, we got into 1950, and 
we established the headquarters up in the 
Golden Hotel. And, of course, undoubtedly, 
Graham and McKay, both of them also 
contributed, you see, in money; in fact, I 
know they did. 

And by that time, Senator McCarran 
himself was a pretty powerful man. He was 
chairman of the judiciary committee, and he 
was ranking member on the appropriations 
committee. And I don’t think there’s any two 
more powerful committees in the Senate than 
those two. That shows you how smart Senator 
McCarran were because when he was elected in 
1932, he went back to Washington and talked 
them into putting him on those two committees. 
He knew where the [influence was]. 

So in 1950, we ran in the primary against 
[George] Franklin, who is now a Republican 
and district attorney in Clark County. He was 
the fellow we—and he wasn’t very hard to 
beat. But you’ve got to campaign just the same. 


And then in the general election in 1950, 
I can’t think of it right now [election against 
George Marshall]. 

But anyway, we didn’t have trouble. And 
I guess everything died down and things was 
pretty smooth. The Democrats got along 
pretty good, and they had McCarran sitting 
back in Washington, and everything was just 
fine. In 1950, of course, he was stuck back 
in Washington, too. And I again opened 
the headquarters for him. And we had it 
in the Golden Hotel, and we got the rooms 
very reasonably from Bill Graham and Jim 
McKay. And Norman Biltz was the finance 
chairman—he was raising the money, and I 
was doing the organizing. I put Ben Maffi in 
to run the office. And we had trouble finding 
a secretary for Ben. But then my sister-in-law 
came up here from Los Angeles, and we made 
her work for about three or four weeks. Didn’t 
pay her anything, but—[laughing] very little, 
but she thought that was the greatest thing she 
had ever seen. And we ran it. About two days 
before the primary, Eva Adams came back. He 
didn’t come at all himself. And that’s the year 
we won marbles and everything. 

Speaking now of 1952, John DiGrazia 
of Wells’s daughter got an appointment in 
Senator McCarran’ s office. And she met, 
apparently, Mechling in Washington and 
married him. Now, I’m not sure about 
that. Because the first thing I know about 
Mechling was when I heard his name that he 
was out campaigning. And there’s no doubt 
in my mind that Bible thought he could just 
push him over like nobody’s business. And 
while Bible was campaigning, he was only 
campaigning with some of his friends that 
he knew. And he would go up and sit in their 
office and chew the fat with ’em, and didn’t 
see very many people. Anyway, we began to 
be a little bit worried about him. And Senator 
McCarran was coming in from Washington, 



Political Affairs with the McCarran Organization 


29 


and he asked me and Mrs. Petersen to meet 
him in Elko, which we did. And he informed 
me that he was getting some pretty bad 
reports. And I agreed with him, that I heard 
some real bad ones myself. So we decided that 
he was going to get back to Reno whatever 
way he could, and Mrs. Petersen and I take 
it leisurely up on the road and stop in the 
various towns, which we did. And it didn’t 
sound very good to us, what we heard. When 
we got back into Reno, I seen Bible and I told 
him, I says, “This is getting pretty close, and 
you better be doing some campaigning.” He 
says, “I have been campaigning.” 

I says, “Yeh. But you been campaigning 
(and I mentioned the different places) where 
you been sittin’. You haven’t been out seeing 
the people. There’s no use in you calling [that 
campaigning].” 

“Oh, yes,” he insisted he had. 

“Well,” I says, “I’m just afraid that we’re not 
going to make it. But after all, it’s you, not me.” 

The night of the election, we were up 
at Norman Biltz’s house, and the returns 
came in. And then finally came in one where 
Mechling was ahead about four hundred and 
some-odd votes. And Senator McCarran, he 
says, “Well, that don’t amount to anything 
because when the votes come in from Clark 
County, they will more than offset that.” 

I says, “There’s only one thing wrong with 
that.” 

He says, “What’s that?” 

I says, “The votes is already in from Clark 
County, and this is the total. There aren’t goin 
to be any more votes!” So Bible was defeated. 

But then, of course, when that happened, 
Mr. Mechling called me up at the house and 
insisted that I make an appointment with 
Pat McCarran where he and Pat McCarran 
could get together and straighten things out 
amongst themselves. He says, “In fact,” he 
says, “I demand it!” 


I said, “You don’t demand anything from 
me, my friend.” I says, “And I wouldn’t even 
attempt to tell the Senator about it because I 
know he wouldn’t listen to me. And I don’t 
ever go in for anything I think is impossible.” 

But then came the time when Senator 
McCarran had to decide on what he was 
going to do. And it took him quite a while, 
and he didn’t exactly like what he did. But 
finally, he came in to see me. He had his 
offices up on either the second or third floor 
in the Post Office building at that time. And 
he says, “I don’t think that I could possibly 
support Mechling after what he’d been saying 
about me in the primary.” And you know that 
during the primary, he wasn’t fighting Bible, 
he was fighting McCarran; it was McCarran 
all the time. 

“Now,” I says, “if you don’t support 
Mechling, I don’t exactly blame you. And 
[laughing] I want to tell you something. 
Whether you support him or not, I’m not 
going to support him. I don’t think he belongs 
as a United States Senator from any state, leave 
alone Nevada.” 

So he says, “I have made out this 
announcement I intend to make over the 
radio.” And he handed it to me. And that’s 
when he outlined to the people of the state 
of Nevada his reasons for not supporting 
Mechling and urged the support for Molly 
Malone. And with the exception of making 
a few changes in what he had made up as 
his speech over the—well, there was no TV 
then—over the radio, why, that’s the way it 
were. 

And then we managed—what was it?— 
to beat Mechling by just 2,722. But on the 
other hand, that’s the most surprising thing. 
That just goes to show—I don’t think you 
could do it in the state of Nevada now. But 
with the population at that time, if a fellow 
devoted enough time and had a little gift of 



30 


Peter C. Petersen 


gab, what you can talk people into do[ing] 
by just—meet them personally Showing the 
personal contact with people is an important 
thing. And in my opinion, it was a hell of a 
good thing that Mechling never got elected 
United States Senator. He was just as tricky 
as they make ’em. 

And the only part of the whole thing were, 
that the money he used was the money she 
[Mrs. Mechling] earned while she worked for 
Pat McCarran. But that’s [laughing] a fact, 
plus what Johnny DiGrazia could give them. 

Look what he could’ve done if he had 
been elected Senator. And a fellow that had 
the gall—and that’s what he had, pure and 
simple gall—what he could have done, been 
a United States Senator, You know, after all, 
a Senator from Nevada, he has just as much 
to say as a Senator from New York. And if he 
knows how to use that power, he can be an 
awful hard fellow to do business with. 

What did this situation do with the 
relationships between Senator Malone and 
Senator McCarran? Well, of course [laughing], 
Malone gives a little bit more friendly attitude 
towards McCarran. [Laughing] But the truth 
of the matter of it is that I don’t think Pat—in 
fact, I know that Pat McCarran didn’t think 
a great deal of Molly Malone. But that, of 
course, goes back to the olden days again 
when everybody knew him, sort of. I don’t 
think he disliked Molly Malone, but he didn’t 
think that Molly Malone had very much on 
the ball. 

But he had his good points, too. And then, 
of course, he got to serve twelve years for it 
because the Democratic party was split up, so 
that’s not too bad. And then Cannon came up 
and finally beat him. 

And then came 1954. And Pat McCarran 
decided to take a rest. And then we had a 
lot of fun. Some people tried to get Russell 
to appoint various fellows, and, of course, 


he came out and he appointed Brown. And 
then the Democratic state central, committee 
met to choose a candidate for the Democrats, 
which turned out to be Alan Bible. And the 
Supreme Court or somebody come out with 
the decision that there had to be an election, 
that Russell couldn’t appoint somebody for 
a two-year period. So we had an election 
between Brown and Alan Bible. 

Other Political Allairs 

There are several questions that we 
probably should explore as far as the Senator 
is concerned. When he was in his later years 
and at the end of his career, he was regarded 
by some people as rather violently anti¬ 
labor. And yet, he began his career almost as 
violently pro-labor. Can I explain that? Well, 
if he was anti-labor towards the last, whoever 
says that is absolutely wrongly informed. Now, 
if we go into 1932,1 don’t think that Senator 
McCarran had taken a part either for or 
against labor at any particular time. Of course, 
when he got thrown in with the Democratic 
Labor Club and he realized how much good it 
had done him, he got friendly towards labor, 
And labor was friendly towards him. And 
whenever- -for a good many years, when I was 
in the Post Office in the beginning, anything 
they wanted from Senator McCarran, they 
came down and discussed with me. And we 
got Senator McCarran interested. And when 
Senator McCarran found they met in my 
office many times, and he helped them out—it 
was the beginning of all those new laws, which 
the labor boys wasn’t too familiar with, And 
they would get his help, and they would go 
back to Washington as the labor got money. 
And he was always for labor. 

Now we will go into 1944. Well, before 
we get into that, we had something like 
forty some-odd letters of endorsement from 



Political Affairs with the McCarran Organization 


31 


labor unions, international labor unions, 
the big boys. In the 1944 campaign, every 
international union, from Green and on 
down, came with letters, and we had the 
campaign headquarters just flooded with 
them. In fact, I might have a few of ’em here 
somewheres, and yet, I might’ve got rid of 
them. 

And in the convention, the labor 
convention, in 1944, which was held in 
Ely—and I was over there as a delegate—the 
American Federation of Labor sent in at 
least six or seven guys to that convention to 
talk for Senator McCarran. Because it was 
well known that the Republican party was 
using certain ones in the labor movement 
in here to (because it was laid out for that) 
get that resolution through that they tried 
to get, to read Senator McCarran out of the 
Democratic party. And labor fought with us all 
the way down the line. We had them from the 
Teamsters Union; we had ’em, organizers from 
the American [Federation]. And if Senator 
McCarran had done one-fourth of what those 
letters said he had done, he must have been a 
hell of a labor man. So when anybody says that 
he was anti-labor, I don’t think that they knew 
what they were talking about. 

Remember that he had more flowers (the 
flowers mean everything to a funeral) from 
labor organizations that I ever see and ever 
think I’ll see. And all these dealings that I 
know of—and many of ’em was done in the 
Post Office—with labor was one hundred 
percent. And I think that you could still talk 
to some of the labor leaders there are—well, 
about the only ones who—talk to the person 
in the State Federation of Labor, Lou Paley. 
Talk to the fellow that is the business agent of 
the bartenders, Brambila, in Las Vegas. I think 
they’ll all tell you what he’d done for them. 

He was attacked in the state Labor News, 
for example. Some of the labor unions, 


because there’s no doubt about it, that it 
became more a political issue than anything. 
[There were columns by Denver Dickerson 
in the stat e Labor News attacking McCarran.] 
Well, of course, Denver Dickerson’s got a 
personal animosity against Pat McCarran, 
which later on Pat McCarran paid back by 
sending him over to Asia somewheres, and 
wound up in Guam, something like that. 
It was also Denver Dickerson that gave me 
the label of the “hatchet man” for Senator 
McCarran. I’m well aware of some of these 
things. 

Do I know about the Senator’s feelings 
about the Pyramid Lake Indians and the 
controversy there over settling the land 
claims? Well, of course, I guess it’s well known 
to you that he was helping the three or four 
Italian settlers down in there on the lower 
Truckee River, the water rights against the 
Indians. And not knowing anything about 
water rights or land laws in here, his claim 
was that they had in fee simple—I think that’s 
what they call it—had secured that land, and it 
rightfully belonged to them, except one little 
thing that they overlooked, which was the one 
that cost them the land: they was told to pay 
so much money into the land bureau, and they 
didn’t do it. And that put them in areas where 
they quit paying for the land, and therefore, 
they forfeited it to the Indians. 

But, of course, the whole thing came into 
it, that he couldn’t see a particular reason 
that they couldn’t allow those Italians to pay 
that money because the Indians wouldn’t 
do anything with the land if they did get it. 
And all you’ve got to do is drive down where 
that land is, and you will find out that that’s 
correct, all the way through. 

And, of course, maybe we’ll never get the 
Indian votes. [Laughing] I don’t think he ever 
got any from Nixon, that I can remember. 
Maybe a few, but it didn’t seem to affect the 



32 


Peter C. Petersen 


[laughing] Indians in any place else in the 
state, so—. 

Did Senator McCarran ever talk to 
me about political power, about the use of 
power and how you get it? Not that I can 
remember. Of course, I guess that power can 
be understood, Id say, that you lay out your 
plans to win. You got to win before you can get 
any power. Senator McCarran approached it 
where in order to be a successful campaigner, 
you got to have three people: One of those 
three have to know his politics from one 
end to the other one; and the other two have 
to know conditions of the state and what 
the state needs in general and so on, be his 
advisors. And whenever those three would 
happen to agree on a certain thing, how it 
should be carried out, that’s the way it’s going 
to be. And there was going to be no changes 
unless the four [agree]. And in my opinion, 
that was his biggest strength. He had six or 
seven of us. And he never done anything real 
important before it had been discussed at least 
with some of the five or six and been agreed 
to. And everybody knew that, so they worked 
pretty good as a team. 

And he had another thing, too. Supposing 
a fellow had been Senator McCarran’s enemy 
and done everything that he could against 
Senator McCarran, and then he had a son 
that was growing up, and got to be a man 
himself. If he wanted a favor and he’d been a 
nice fellow, he wasn’t a bit bashful for granting 
that fellow [a favor], irrespective of what his 
father had been. Although, even sometimes 
with that, he couldn’t understand certain 
things, see, like—I’ll give you an illustration. 

He come in here to Reno and he told 
me, said that the young fellow that I had 
recommended for Annapolis was a real fine 
young man and was doing real good where he 
was at. And he wanted to find out how long 
I’d known that young fellow. 


Says, “I’ve known him since he was born.” 
I says, “I used to work for his father. And 
incidentally, his father fired me.” 

He says, “You mean to tell me that a fellow 
fired you and then he comes down and asks 
you to recommend his son for appointment 
at Annapolis, and you recommended him?” 

“Well,” I says, “the fellow is a nice fellow, 
and I like him as a person. And he can’t help 
what his father does, so why should we hold 
it against him?” 

“Well,” he says, “I guess that’s a good way 
to do it.” And the fellow is young [George] 
Siri that has the cold storage down here, meat 
market. But that’s the way he functioned. 

You know, Alan Bible, when he went 
back to Washington, he actually went back 
to Washington, was supposed to get an 
appointment from Pittman. And they stalled 
him along back in Washington, and then he 
wandered into Pat McCarran s office, and Pat 
McCarran gave him an appointment. So in 
that way, Alan Bible became the first young 
attorney to be educated in Pat McCarran’s 
office. 

[The Senator had a reputation for being 
pretty vindictive.] Well, of course, I heard 
that, but I’ve never seen any evidence of it. of 
course, he must’ve been a remarkable man, 
because there was always somebody saying 
he didn’t pay his bills, which, to some extent, 
I think is true, but certainly not toward the 
last, by a long shot. And he was this and he 
was that. He was hanging around out here, to 
the Willows, when he should be out better, 
see—all of the things I heard about him. 

Did I know anything about the famous 
boycott of the Las Vegas Sun and his 
relationship there with Hank Greenspun? 
Yeh. I think I do. Well, you know, when 
Greenspun opened that particular paper, he 
started to pick on Senator McCarran right 
from the beginning in his—what was it called, 



Political Affairs with the McCarran Organization 


33 


that column? “Where I Stand,” which I believe 
to some extent was because of A1 Cahlan and 
the other newspaper around there was for 
Senator McCarran. He couldn’t very well be 
for Senator McCarran, so he started, but he 
got to be personally affected. And it hurt the 
Senator. I think that perhaps hurt the Senator 
more than anything I can recall. And not to 
say anything about Eva Adams; she didn’t like 
it at all. And I don’t think that he liked it. And 
I think the ones out on the Strip didn’t like 
it, neither, because he were in a precarious 
position, you know, and they were afraid that 
gambling would be closed up any time, and 
they didn’t want anything to say that. 

But anyway, one of their meetings down 
there, they agreed to pull all of their ads out 
of the Sun. And when they come back—no, 
it wasn’t Senator McCarran that told them to 
[do that] —but when they come back from 
Clark County and told me that, I says, “I think 
you made a mistake.” I says, “I think the idea 
of it is good, and I’d’ve done the same thing. 
But,” I says, “I’d’ve taken ’em one at a time— 
space it over a period, not just pull ’em all out 
like you did, because I think that you can get 
yourself in trouble. I don’t know too much 
about that law, but I think that you can.” 

And, of course, Greenspun isn’t a 
millionaire for nothing, you know. He’s cold 
blooded, and he handles the truth pretty 
careless sometimes. I think he has mellowed 
down a little bit now. 

So, of course, he started it, and an offer 
came that he pay him so much money, which 
was paid by the gambling operators down in 
there. Each put in their share to get him to 
drop that lawsuit. I don’t know exactly how 
much money, but it was over $100,000. Well, 
on the other hand, if they had dropped [their 
ads] over a period of, say, six or seven weeks, 
they would’ve got the same results. And 
nobody could do anything, see, not a thing. 


Sure, it was Senator McCarran that asked 
them to do it. But it wasn’t Senator McCarran 
[that said], “I told you that they made a 
mistake.” You see that. Done it the other way. 
And when I say Senator McCarran was the 
one that talked them into doing [it], that’s 
not exactly correct, either. They offered to do 
it for Senator McCarran. And I guess there is 
some difference. 

So it was really the gamblers themselves 
who engineered that? It was the gamblers 
themselves that offered to do that thing, yeh. 
Because the gamblers knew they needed 
a champion back in Washington. Mr. [J. 
Edgar] Hoover, you know, he was a good deal 
younger than he is now. And he was really one 
to take after them. 

I was telling about when I helped to 
get McCarran supporters by seeing to the 
naturalization of a great many aliens. That was 
very interesting, because Senator McCarran 
was interested in getting immigration 
legislation passed and at least had the 
reputation of wanting to restrict immigration; 
this seemed like a contradiction? Well, I 
think he wanted them restricted. But what he 
thought would make good American citizens, 
he would put himself out, pass numerous 
special bills in order to get them in. But 
unfortunately, in this country, a foreigner, he 
is a little bashful, for one thing, For another, 
he’s scared, afraid, and he don’t want anything 
to do with anything where the word “law” 
is used, or anything like that. And he has 
definitely made up his mind that there is no 
use for him to try to learn English because 
he will never be able to do it; in particular, 
when they get up into their early forties, in 
or around that age. 

So if you can explain it to them, that they 
have schools where they can go up and learn 
the necessary things to become an American 
citizens, and also give them the encouragement 



34 


Peter C. Petersen 


that the authorities, the Immigration Service, 
are more interested in the kind of a life they 
have led and their backgrounds. Because they 
are well aware of the fact, too, that a foreigner, 
he can’t learn the American ways, from just 
being here a few years, or for that matter, ever. 
He will never get around to it, for the simple 
reason they live together and they talk their 
own language, and particularly, the women, 
never, see. So they come down after they find 
out that you are a foreigner yourself—meaning 
me. They will talk to you. They will tell me 
things that they wouldn’t tell to any of the rest 
of them. And then you encourage them, and 
not only that, but you could take them right 
up there because we have arrangements with 
Immigration Service. We encourage them to 
go along, they attend the schools, and nine out 
of ten become American citizens. 

But McCarran didn’t want certain people 
into this country because he figured that they 
would never make good American citizens. 
Now, whether he was right or wrong, that I 
don’t know. I think some of them was very 
good. I think that we’re getting in a lot of people 
in this country now we would be better off 
without. Now, that’s my own personal opinion. 

Was he aware of what I was doing to help 
these foreigners? Yeh, because Bill Kane, 
that was then in charge of the Immigration 
Service, and I had a complete understanding. 
And he was well aware of the fact. 

So the immigration bills were really aimed 
at what he considered undesirable people. 
Now, whether he was right, or they were those 
kind of people, I do not know. But one thing 
I do know is that for years and years, they’ve 
been trying to keep that level out. They haven’t 
managed to do it completely, yet. 

Did he talk to me about the problems? 
What kinds of things did he say about the 
problems of Communists coming in? Well, he 
first of all figured that there was an organized 


movement of the Communist party, and in 
particular, when the so-called “displaced” 
[persons] bill was passed, where all of those 
European and other nations, they were 
supposed to have been displaced during the 
war. [It] was issuing an invitation, practically, 
to come to this country. He maintained that 
the Communist party would take advantage 
of that and infiltrate displaced persons, and 
with their manipulations would be the ones 
that will actually benefit from the displaced 
persons law. That was his greatest thing that 
he was disturbed about. 

Did I notice that he became more disturbed 
about this after his heart attack? Well, of 
course, I don’t know about that because I know 
he had quite a few heart attacks. Of course, that 
could be, because, you know, in that particular 
time, they don’t allow the filibustering, too, at 
the same time. And there was a lot of those 
Eastern senators greatly opposed to it. But, 
you see, first of all, Senator McCarran had an 
ulcer, and a bad one. And then he had his heart 
condition with it. 

Did I notice any changes in his mental 
attitudes or his usual dynamic approach as he 
became older and sicker? No, he tried to take 
a little bit better care of himself, but outside 
of that, I didn’t notice anything. As you 
know, he died in Hawthorne at a Democratic 
rally. And he didn’t have any intentions of 
going to Hawthorne in the beginning. And 
we were discussing it in my office a couple 
of days before; the rally was to be held in 
Hawthorne. In other words, the Democratic 
party was making the swing through the state, 
beginning at Hawthorne. And I asked him 
just one question. I says, “When your term 
is up two years from now, you’ll be eighty 
years of age.” 

And he says, “That’s correct.” 

And I says, “Do you really intend to run 
for Senator again?” 



Political Affairs with the McCarran Organization 


35 


And he said, “Yes.” 

“Well,” I says, “then I think we better get 
a little harmony in the Democratic party, and 
I will suggest that you go to Hawthorne with 
them.” 

“Well,” he says, “you don’t mean to tell 
me that I should go and take the whole trip 
through the state?” 

And I says, “No. But I think that this is a 
good place, to pick the number one spot, and 
first place they appear, and then pick ’em up 
once again somewheres down the line when 
they come around.” 

And that’s what he intended to do, and 
that’s why he was in Hawthorne. If I [had] 
kept my mouth shut, he wouldn’t have been 
in Hawthorne. 

What was the matter with the Democratic 
party right then? Well, the Democratic party 
is a party that always fights. They’re still 
doing it, and chances are they always will. It 
wasn’t anything. A little bit of animosity to 
Mr. Pittman— Vail Pittman in this particular 
instance. Was that kind of a hangover from 
1944? It’s always been a hangover with that 
particular group. 

Alan Bible is a smart boy. Alan isn’t like 
Senator McCarran. Senator McCarran, I think, 
liked to fight, see [laughing]. Bible just backs 
himself away from it. We used to say that was 
the Irish in him. I remember when Bible was 
used to go up in Storey County, he would 
come to the Democratic conventions, and he 
would say to me (it was always in the morning, 
and we had our fight during the night), he 
says, “Pete, here I am with my two delegates” 
[laughing]. Bible is an awful nice fellow. 




4 

The Reno Post Office 


Well, the work in the Post Office is, 
of course, something that you don’t see 
anywhere else but the Post Office. Well, I 
think I mentioned how I was appointed as 
Postmaster. I was called by Senator McCarran 
sometime about in the later part of December 
and offered the Postmastership; in fact, I was 
told that he had just appointed me Postmaster. 

And so, the then Assistant Postmaster, 
Dill Pierce, he contacted me and wanted to 
find out when I could take over the Reno, 
Nevada Post Office. He says, “It should be 
done on New Year’s Eve.” 

Then he started to discuss something that 
he referred to as a “divided account.” Well, a 
divided account didn’t mean a great deal to 
me at that particular time. And I don’t know 
whether you know what a divided account 
means. Well, that means, in the Post Office, 
that you gather, see—it’s broken into four 
quarters, and your account is finished for one 
quarter. And if you take it over the fifth, we 
will say, then they’ve got to make one account 
for the five days, and then another account for 
the balance of the month. And the five days is 


just as tough for them to make out, you see, 
as for the balance of the month. And that’s 
what he wanted to eliminate. But he kept on 
talking so much about a divided account that 
I agreed that we would postpone our New 
Year’s celebration and go down to the Post 
Office and take it over. 

And, of course, when you do that, they 
send a couple of Post Office inspectors, 
persons. You see, we don’t only have to count. 
We’ve got to count all the blank money orders 
and all the blank postal savings certificates 
as they had in those— they haven’t got them 
now—and all the blank savings bonds, as 
they were handling them, and all the savings 
stamps, and everything they have in cash, and 
all the inventory, and all the equipment, and 
the whole shebang. 

So we took over the Post Office. And the 
first year that I was there, we took in $186,000. 
That’s in round figures; I can’t remember the 
[exact] number. Now, they’re doing over four 
million dollars. But anyway, that’s what they 
were doing, and the job was paying $3,700 a 
year, which, of course, was pretty good money 



38 


Peter C. Petersen 


in those days. Now, they pay $17,000. And we 
had, It guess, something like sixty employees. 

Post offices in those days ran themselves, 
practically. They had got a wage increase in 
1926, which paid a substitute sixty-five cents 
an hour, and that’s what he got as long as he 
was a substitute, even if that lasted four or 
five years, which many times it did. And then 
when he became a regular, he started off at 
$1,700 and wound up at $2,100. And now 
they go on strike because they start at $6,300 
and wind up with $8,500. But that’s beside the 
point. We’ll get to that later. 

You don’t have to worry. Nobody quit. 
And when you put on a new man, you just 
bring him out and. introduce him to them and 
get three or four fellows that work with them 
around there, and they break him in. You don’t 
even know you got a new man. And things go 
pretty good. You can get away from there. You 
got a good bunch of people working there, 
and the subs will sit down in the swing room 
waiting to get a couple, three, four hours work. 
You don’t ever have to worry about anything. 
And here in Reno, of course, you had a brand 
new Post Office building to go into. 

And then, little by little, the postal receipts 
goes up. And that was all that was considered, 
insofar as your wages. It was based entirely on 
the postal receipts that you took in. And then, 
all of a sudden, we are in war. And then our 
troubles begin. And believe me, they really 
began then. Lots of our fellows went into the 
Army—Well, more so into the Navy because 
they could get more money in the Navy than 
we were paying them in the Post Office. 

And help, you just couldn’t get. And the 
system we used here in Reno was that I talked 
a lot of the boys that was on the windows to 
go back on the mailing floor and work mail, 
which every one of them did. I never seen so 
good of cooperation from a bunch of fellows 
as I did at that time in the Reno Post Office. 


Another good thing was that this was a 
divorce center. And war or no war, they still 
come in here for divorces. And we picked 
them up, put them to work for six or seven 
weeks, or eight, and then we got ourselves a 
brand new crew again. 

So we had a meeting [with] the postmasters 
from this western area. And at that time, Reno 
was the only one that was considered. Las 
Vegas was just a little bit of [a] town; it didn’t 
amount to much. And Frank Walker was the 
Postmaster General. And we just had to get 
in. He was one of those businessmen that 
wanted things done as cheaply as possible. 
But something drastic had to be done, because 
we couldn’t keep the employees, and the only 
ones we could keep was those that had fifteen, 
twenty years or so, or more, in the service 
for their retirement. That’s why they stuck 
on. And he [Walker] says, “Well, what are we 
going to do?” 

So I suggested that we let the employees 
work on Saturdays instead of letting them off 
like we were doing. And we agreed on that. 
See, that gave them one extra day’s pay. But it 
was cheaper for the Post Office Department 
because for Saturday work, they actually got 
less than they did for a normal day— not 
very much, but twenty-five, thirty cents or 
something like that, less for the day. 

And then we finally got them to give [a] 
ten percent [pay Raise]. Now, just think, the 
Post Office employees there, they didn’t get 
a pay increase before 1945. And up to 1945 
and all during the war, they worked with a 
ten percent increase on $2,100 (that’s $210). 
So that gives them $2,310 plus an extra day 
working on Saturday, which didn’t cost the 
Department anything, you see what I mean. 

And then they talk about the postal 
service. That was the period when the postal 
service started to go down. And it actually 
never regained its feet. 



The Reno Post Office 


39 


But with me getting into the Post Office, I 
was fairly lucky because actually, while I was 
president of the State Federation of Labor, 
the Carriers union contacted Mrs. [Lillie] 
Clinedinst and myself about the appointment 
of a new Assistant Postmaster down at the 
Reno Post Office. And they had a fellow by the 
name of Bill Pierce in mind to recommend. 
And we went up, told them that we would see 
Pat McCarran about it. And he was in town 
at the time. And we went up and we told him 
our story. 

“Well,” he says, “I’ll call Bill Kinnikin right 
away and tell him that’s what you want and 
that’s what you’re going to get.” Now, there, 
you get in again about labor. That was another 
labor case, pure and simple. 

So he called Bill Kinnikin downstairs 
and he told him that he wanted him to 
appoint Bill Pierce as Assistant Postmaster. 
And Bill Kinnikin told him that he had just 
recommended a fellow by the name of Rice, 
Burt Rice, for Assistant Postmaster. 

And Senator McCarran told him, “The 
unions want Bill Pierce, and you appoint Bill 
Pierce. And you tell Rice that he can’t.” It was 
a hell of a thing. I didn’t know before I came 
in there that he had actually had Rice in the 
office and given him the job. 

But that’s what we had to put up with in 
the war. And it was really one of the roughest 
things I ever come up with. And all of us had 
to work. I used to go out on the mailing floor 
day after day and pitch mail myself. You had 
to do it in order to get it out. 

So the personnel question became a 
serious one in those days in making out all the 
forms, which—in government, you still make 
out all the forms that you can think of. We 
didn’t have any of that. But I had a pretty good 
stenographer we picked up. And in order to 
get her to handle the personnel form, I made 
out a dummy copy of every appointment and 


promotion or anything that could possibly be 
made and gave them to her, and numbered 
them as such; I told her what to do. “Now, you 
use number one or number two, whatever the 
case may be. All you got to do is substitute 
the date and the name.” And it worked like 
a charm. But in the meantime, after the war 
was over, we didn’t have Civil Service. We 
appointed them as best we could, whatever 
you could pick up. And you certainly didn’t 
get the best kind of fellows. 

But then in 1945, when everybody else 
was getting six or seven thousand dollars, 
by God, they increased the pay of the postal 
employees by four hundred dollars. And 
actually, it was (Arthur) Summerfield that 
made the first real movement toward doing 
something with the pay increases and so 
on. But, of course, it was way too late. And 
therefore, the Post Office Department has 
always been behind. 

And, of course, on top of that, as the city 
increased, you had more and more people. 
Pretty soon, you are over—. I can remember 
the first Christmas when they had one million 
pieces of mail—now, hell, that don’t mean 
anything, then you went over a million dollars 
in postal receipts, and pretty soon there was 
two million, and it was close to three million 
when I left there; now I think it’s close to five. 
And they have about four hundred employees 
down in there. But those years was tough. And 
we were way up in the ’50’s before they started 
to let up a little bit. 

Another thing, then, when you get those 
kind of people: you haven’t got any you can 
make supervisors of; they’re very scarce. And 
now, of course, they’re beginning to pick up 
again. See, they can get people interested in 
them. But for all of those years, the postal 
employees didn’t have a pay increase, from 
1926 to 1945. And they expected you to run 
Post Offices paying people that kind of a 



40 


Peter C. Petersen 


money, when you could go anyplace and get 
twice that amount of money 

Well, in fact, there was another thing. The 
old established government agencies, like the 
Postmaster and the Internal Revenue office 
and so on, was on the salaries that had been 
created many, many years ago. And then 
when they came in with the WPA and the 
PWA and all those new organizations, they 
were paying them three times as much [as] 
they were paying any of us. And now they are 
trying to pick it up. 

And now something new is coming into 
government service. It’s that you go on strike 
if you don’t get what you can. Now where do 
you think that could lead this country into? 
Just like the other government employees. 
Other postal employees decide that they want 
more money. They know now how to do it. 
They just go out on strike. 

But in those years that I was in, the postal 
service were some of the nicest people I ever 
worked with in my life I found in there, and the 
remarkable cooperation and the spirit there 
were amongst those employees. Naturally we 
had a few sour ones, too. But as an overall, 
we had a pretty good crew, even under those 
conditions, when they weren’t getting [enough 
money]. So I spent twenty-seven pretty happy 
years, more or less, down in there. 

I’ll give you (something about) the 
National Association of Postmasters. For 
many, many years, there has been such 
[a] thing as the National Association of 
Postmasters. But when the Democrats got 
into office, there was only something like 
seven, eight hundred members. And the only 
ones that they wanted in the association was 
postmasters from the fourth- and third-class 
post offices. They didn’t want any of the big 
(ones). 

So, the first convention—well, I wasn’t 
Postmaster then— was held in French Lick, 


Indiana. The first convention that I attended 
was in 1937 in San Francisco. And when I 
come into the Post Office here one morning 
when I come to work, I see a fellow walking 
up and down Mill Street with a derby hat on. 
And you don’t see too many derby hats. And 
pretty soon, he appeared in my office, and it 
was the Postmaster from Salt Lake City. And 
he wanted to get a charter started in this 
state. And I says, “Well, there must be one 
because I see there in the desk where there 
were some old applications from the National 
Association.” 

“Oh, well,” he says, “they’re defunct.” He 
says, “They wish that you would take it over,” 
which I did, and we went down. 

See, the most postmasters there were 
in Nevada was 141; now, 1 think there’s 
about 115, or something like that; all these 
small ones. And we had about 120 some- 
odd members going down, so, of course, 
everybody was happy. Nevada was supposed 
to be the last state that didn’t have any. 

And after a short period of time at the 
convention, I was put on the executive 
committee, and then the war broke out, and 
I stayed there ’til after the war. But, of course, 
the postmasters, you could get—in those days, 
even although there was only two Post Offices 
in the country that paid $12,000 a year, and 
that was Chicago and New York, the highest 
you could get, like in San Francisco, was 
$ 10,000. They had the pick of the crop. Things 
was still tough, you know, in those days. 

But like anybody else, we would all like to 
be appointed politically, but we like to hold 
onto the jobs. And we knew that couldn’t be 
done as a political setup, so we had to get 
Civil Service into [it]. And when we sprung 
that, there was a committee of about eight or 
nine met with Farley about Civil Service, he 
didn’t want no part of it. And the first that we 
asked for there was no confirmation by the 



The Reno Post Office 


41 


Senate, although many of us were skeptical 
that we would ever get that, which we didn’t. 
And that’s where we compromised with giving 
them that particular thing. 

But now, you get into—none of us really 
believed that if there was a change in the 
administration, there wouldn’t be a change in 
postmasters. But due to the fact that the bill 
was passed in 1938, and there was no change 
in the administration to another party before 
‘52, we have been pretty well established. And 
the business people kind of like it. And there 
haven’t been too many postmasters removed 
for cause, that they went over pretty popular. 
We didn’t have any trouble with it. 

And, of course, the truth of the matter of 
it is that Civil Service looked into it. When I 
took the Civil Service examination down here, 
there was seven of us that took it. And many 
of those that was removed was when they took 
that qualifying Civil Service examination; 
they couldn’t make it, and they went out. 

But they get a better class of people, 
although there’s something that’s creeping 
into it. I don’t know whether it’s there yet. 
When you get a postmaster that come from 
the outside, nobody in the Post Office knows 
what he was used to do, except what they read 
in the paper or what they can find out. And 
they have to listen to them a little bit. And it 
seems to have a good effect for them. 

But where they now take them up from 
the ranks, which they did after I left. But, of 
course, one of the reasons they did it, because 
I recommended them both to Bible. But you 
take them out of the ranks, you run into this 
one thing: that the clerks that used to work 
with him says, “Don’t be so cocky. I was used 
to work with you when you were nothing 
but a clerk.” But outside of that, I think it’s a 
good thing. 

And when the post office goes into the 
red, I don’t know anything that could be done 


about it. People are going to have to make 
up their minds whether they want to make 
a business organization out of it or a service 
organization. And if they want to run it as a 
business on the break even, or even making 
money on it, there’s going to be a lot of the 
services that have to be discontinued. And 
they’ve already discontinued a lot. You don’t 
get the service that you did when I first came 
in there, I’ll tell you that. And they have made 
it much tougher to operate a post office now 
than it was then. 

You take, for instance, when we had a two- 
trip delivery or carriers. If a carrier showed 
up [and] he was sick, we had ample [carriers] 
that we could cover him with, by knockin’ out 
the afternoon trips on a couple of routes and 
let them take his mail and go out and deliver 
it. But now, you see, you have no leeway at 
all. See, if a carrier—which they do, and you 
can’t cover them up—then you are lucky if 
you can just give the people, the public, part 
of the service. 

Again, When I first came in there, the 
Reno Post Office didn’t have a post office truck 
of their own. It was all rented equipment. 
There was four trucks which was rented 
from the carriers that operated them. Now, 
they have in the neighborhood [of] about 
a hundred some-odd trucks down in there. 

But it’s a nice place to work, and you meet 
an awful lot of people. You may not make too 
much money, but you can meet a lot of people, 
see, which compensates to your advantage at 
a later date. So, that’s about all with the Post 
Office. And that should take care of the whole 
thing now. 





A Term on the Nevada 
Gaming Commission 


And now we can cover that gambling [in] 
just a few seconds. 

When it was found out that I was going 
to retire as Postmaster, the next day I got a 
telephone call from Grant Sawyer. And, of 
course, had known Grant Sawyer, since he 
was one of Pat McCarran’s boys, too, and 
was a good personal friend of his father’s. He 
called me, and he says, “There’s a job at the 
gambling commission down in here I want to 
fill real badly. He says, “In my opinion, it’s the 
most important commission there is in this 
state, because it’s not alone that you have to 
see about the money end of it, but also that 
the regulations are followed, and so on and 
so forth. I would like very much if you will 
take it.” 

“Well,” I says, “it’s not a steady job, one 
where you have to put in every day on it?” 

He says, “No, it’s only whenever they are 
meeting.” 

“Well,” I says, “I’ll take it.” 

And so I put in about five years in that. So 
that winds up the whole thing, see. I had five 
government—State [and federal]—jobs and 


never asked for any of them. Must’ve been 
able to fool the majority of’em! 

When you get into gambling, you get 
something in this state, in Nevada—I don’t 
know whether it’s good or bad. It’s good to 
the extent [of] the amount of money it brings 
in. But let it someday get away from you—if 
they open it up to corporations and concerns 
where the stock is on the open market, it could 
be dangerous, in my opinion. But in another 
thing that’s bad is that in this state, [we] got 
ourselves in a position which I don’t think 
you can do anything about now— that a big 
percentage of your people, about 35,000, are 
working in the gambling industry. And close 
to fifty percent of the taxes you collect is 
gotten from gambling. In other words, you’re 
getting all your eggs in one basket. And I don’t 
know anything you can do about it now. 

Would I tell about some of the cases 
that I saw come up, and something about 
the personnel in the gambling? Well, the 
gambling, there wasn’t any particular cases 
while I was on it. We issued a license to the 
Caesar’s Palace, the Castaways, the Silver 



44 


Peter C. Petersen 


Slipper. And on license changes, when there 
was a change in the management of the 
Flamingo, Desert Inn, and so on and so forth. 
And, of course, it’s only a matter of—they’re 
handled about the same. There is no difference 
between a guy with a small shop that wanted 
a couple of games or with a big one, except it 
takes you a lot longer time to investigate. Now, 
take in Caesar’s Palace, there was seventy 
some-odd partners in that one. And you got 
to investigate every one of them. That takes 
time. And the only thing that you can do is to 
tell them to get in their application as quickly 
as possible so you can start looking into them, 
which we did. 

Well, of course, we closed up the Silver 
Slipper for not operating as the law provides. 
And, of course, the one that there was more 
talk about than anything was [the] Cal Neva 
club on account of Frank Sinatra. But actually, 
the Frank Sinatra case never came up before 
the Commission. 

That Silver Slipper case was interesting; 
did I see those dice? Well, we seen them, yeh. 
And, of course, it’s pretty hard for a guy, but 
[when] you get into that kind of business, you 
better be on your toes. But then, we had a lot 
of smaller ones, you know, different places 
all over. 

I guess what you actually got in gambling 
is this: that if a fellow operates a gambling 
place, only got a couple of “Twenty-One” 
tables, he can’t afford to let you win. Because 
if you go in and win six, seven, eight hundred 
dollars from him, it will take him a couple of 
months to make it up, if he ever makes it up, 
because he could have somebody else come 
in and win it again. So they are not going 
to let you win if they can help it. And that’s, 
of course, one of the reasons why they are 
not letting too many licenses out for those 
unless their reputations are real good. Human 
nature, the way they are, you’re not going to 


let people take it out of the door if you can 
protect yourself by doing a little cheating. 

But all my dealings with all of the various 
operators, and particularly those in Las 
Vegas—there’s a great deal of difference 
between the operators from Las Vegas and 
here in Reno. And if anything, as an overall, 
they’re far friendlier in Las Vegas than they 
are up in here. It’s a different class of people. I 
never had any trouble with them. And many, 
many times, always, if you talk to them a little 
bit, [they’re] tickled to death and will change 
their operation pretty fast. It’s like anything 
else. 

Of course, there’s always “monkeys.” And 
unfortunately, there is a lot of people—maybe 
not as much now; I don’t think as much now 
as there used to be. But if we could only get 
a gambling license in Nevada, all we need is 
a scoop shovel and a wheelbarrow to haul 
out the money. Now then, you’re getting 
into where we start investing thirty and forty 
million dollars. 



6 


Conclusion 


As a fellow born in a foreign country 
and becoming an American citizen and 
getting positions in both state and federal 
government, I consider myself extremely 
lucky. And I can only say that this country has 
been good to me. And I still believe that when 
I went into the United States Army, [that] 
was the smartest thing I’ve ever done. And 
having those positions of trust and handling 
millions of dollars in some of them have been 
very satisfactory to myself. And that should 
take care of that. 




Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



48 


Peter C. Petersen 


Adams, Brewster, 18 
Adams, Eva B., 43, 44, 62, 
72 

Allen, Robert A., 37 
Anderson, Andrew, 18 
Annapolis (U. S. Naval 
Academy), 70-71 
Army, U. S., 3-4, 95 


B 


Bakers and Confectionery 
Workers Union (Reno), 
10-11, 15 

Basic Magnesium Industries 
(BMI), 56-57 

Bible, Alan, 62-63, 64, 66, 
71, 77-78, 88 
Biltz, Norman H., 8, 50, 

54, 55, 57, 62, 63 
Boulder Dam (Nevada), 

34, 35 

Boyle, William S 
Brambila, Jam 
Brown, E ma^ ig. , 

Bunker, Bea-kepi|&y; , 43, 

44, 45, 
ms, BilK'l3 


Caton, Albert E., 18 
Chase and Sanborn coffee, 
20 

Clark, Ed W., 42, 56 
Clark County, Nevada, 17, 
35, 53, 56, 57, 58, 63, 
64 

Clinedinst, Joseph, 13, 
16, 22-23, 24 
Clinedinst, Lillie, 83 
Communists, 75-76 
Cord, Errett L., 57 
Culinary Workers Union, 
17-19 



6-28, 52, 

, 66 , 6 8, 76 , 

atic Labor Club 
.eno) , 7, 16-17, 22-24, 
67 

Denmark, 1-2 

Depression (U. S.) 11, 20- 
22 

Devine, Cliff, 48 
Dickerson, Denver S., 68- 
69 

DiGrazia, John, 62, 65 
Douglass, Robert L., 32, 
51-52 


E 

Elko, Nevada, 6-7, 9-10 
Ellis, "Red," 53 

J/, jo—< iU, 41, 4Z-4J, 

44, 45, 51-52, 58-59 
Carville, Irma M., 42-43 
Catholics, 46 

Catholic church (Reno), 21 


Cahlan, Albert E., 56, 72 
Cannon, Howard, 66 
Carson City, Nevada, 42 
Carville, Edward P. "Ted," 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


49 


K 


Fargo, North Dakota, 2 
Farley, James A., 52, 87 
Fitzgerald, James, 34 
Foley, Roger, Sr., 52-53, 
60 

Franklin, George, 61 
Franks, Dan, 24 


Kane, William, 75 
Kinnikin, William, 36, 83 
Kirman, Richard, 16, 24-25, 
34, 37 


Gaming Commission, Nevada 
state, 91-94 
Gorman, Thomas K., 60 
Graham, William D., 7-8, 
21, 59-61, 62 
Green, Theodore F., 41-42 
Greenspun, Herman "Hank," 
72-73 


Labor unions, 9-25, 67-69, 
83 

Labor, Nevada State Federa¬ 
tion, 11-12, 15-16 
68, 83 

Las Vegas, Neva 
94 
Lae 
Lee, 

Lewi: iam L., 37 

(Washington), 



Harmon, Harley A 
Hawthorne, 

77 

Hazard 
Hicl^s<" 

Hoover, Jojur Edgar, 73 
Horton, C. E. "Dutch," 
40-41, 53 


Immigrants, 46-47, 49, 

74-76 

Immigration Service, U. S., 
74-75 

Indians, 69 

Internal Revenue, U. S. 

bureau, 12, 28-30, 32-33 
Italians, 69 


Jones, Clifford E., 56 


McCarran, Harriet M. Weeks, 
31 

McCarran, Margaret Patricia, 
31 

McCarran, Mary Mercy, 31 
McCarran, Patrick A., 15, 
16-17, 23, 26-78, 79, 83, 
91 

McCarran, Samuel, 30-31 
McGill, Nevada, 10 
McGrath, J. Howard, 60 
McKay, James, 7-8, 59-61, 

62 

McKnight, William, 27, 28 


M 


Maffi, Ben, 52 
Maher, Alice, 43, 44 
Maher, Florine, 44 
Malone, George W. "Molly," 
54, 57, 58, 59, 65, 66 
Marshall, George, 61 



50 


Peter C. Petersen 


Mashburn, Gray, 16, 24, 31 
Mechling, Thomas B., 62-65 
Mechling, Mrs. Thomas B., 
62, 65 

Mueller, John V., 54-55 
Murphy, Mat, 16, 24, 30, 31 
Murray and Ready employment 
agency (San Francisco), 

10 


N 


National Association of 
Postmasters, 86-88 
Nelligan, Mr., 13 
Nevada Industrial Commis¬ 
sion, 13, 16, 20, 31-32, 
33-36, 37 



Oak-we-no club (Reno) 


Paley 

Petersen, Mary M., 23, 30, 

8, 52, 63 
William, 79, 83 
, Roy, 53 
Pittman, Key, 28, 32, 38, 
40-42, 45-46, 50, 51-52, 
58-59, 71 

Pittman, Mimosa, 41 
Pittman, Vail, 52, 53, 55- 
56, 77 

Post Office department, 

U. S., 36, 82, 84 
Post Office, Reno, Nevada, 
36, 46-47, 48, 79-90 
Prohibition (U. S.), 6-7, 

10, 17-18 

Purity French bakery (Reno), 

10, 20 

Pyramid Lake (Nevada), 69 


R 


Rauhut, Hugh "Red," 20 
Reno, Nevada, 4, 7-8, 9, 
10-11, 14, 17-18, 19, 
20-22, 36, 38, 41-42, 

44, 79-90, 93-94 
Republicans, 11, 50, 54, 
57, 61, 68 
Rice, Burt, 83 
Riverside Hotel (Reno), 41 
Ross, Silas E., 49-50 
Russell, Charles H., 66 
Russians, 5 


. D., 48- 

City, Utah, 3, 

itary bakery (Reno) 

See Welsh's bakery 
Sawyer, Grant, 91 
Scrugham, James G., 27, 38, 
42, 44, 59 
Shovelin, Dan, 53 
Silver Slipper, (Las Vegas), 
93 

Sinatra, Frank, 93 
Siri, George, 71 
State Building (Reno), 48 
S.titser, Avery, 53 
Sullivan, Dan J., 24-25, 

34, 35 

Sullivan, James "Scarface," 
7, 8, 21 

Summerfield, Arthur, 84 
Swedes, 5 


Tannahill, Alex L. , 34 
Thatcher, George, 42 
Thisted, Denmark, 1 
Townsend, George, 13 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


51 


W 

Walker, Frank, 82 
Washoe County, Nevada, 16 
Welsh's bakery (Reno), 5 
White Pine County, Nevada, 
17 

Willows, the (Reno), 7 
Wingfield, George, 8, 15, 

27 

Woodburn, William, Sr., 23, 
26, 27, 42 




