


























My Father’s Son: 

A Gaming Memoir of Pete Cladianos 


Interviewee: Pete Cladianos Jr. 
Interviewed: 2000-2002 
Published: 2002 
Interviewer: Dwayne Kling 
UNOHP Catalog #194 


Description 


Casino gambling (or “gaming,” as the industry prefers) was made legal in Nevada by the state legislature’s passage 
in 1931 of AB 98, the Casino Gaming Act. Initially, the majority of Nevada casinos were small establishments 
containing a few gambling tables, perhaps some slot machines, and a bar. Most operators came from other states, 
where many had run rigged games in illegal gambling joints, but there were some early homegrown entrepreneurs. 
Among them was Greek immigrant and Reno grocer, Pete Cladianos Sr., who opened a “cigar store” (it offered 
gambling) and started a slot machine route shortly after AB 98 was passed. 

Over the next thirty years, with the participation of his son, Pete Jr., and others in the Cladianos family, Pete Sr. built 
a diversified business empire that included bars, motels, hotels, rental properties, and even a mercantile business. 
Most of the Cladianos enterprises had at least one thing in common—slot machines. The slots were prominently 
placed where they would get the most traffic, and they generated a steady stream of revenue that could be used to 
expand Cladianos businesses and acquire additional properties. 

By the mid-1960s, Pete Jr. had taken on responsibility for the day-to-day operations of the family enterprises. His 
father had long dreamed of opening a hotel-casino with unrestricted gaming, and, with the expansion and licensing 
of their Sands Motor Inn just west of Reno’s downtown core, that was accomplished. Under Pete Jr.’s leadership, the 
Sands went on to become one of the larger and more successful operations in Reno and among the first gaming 
businesses in the nation to go public. In the mid-1990s, it also took a near-crippling plunge into the murky backwaters 
of Mississippi dockside gaming. As this is written, the Sands Regent Company has regained its equilibrium and 
appears to be successfully redefining itself in the face of intense (and growing) competition from gaming casinos 
on Indian reservations throughout the West. 



mv ffliwi son 


«(MltK MMM 



mu mars son 


II CJliniHC IMMIIi 

by Pete Cladianos Jr. 


From oral history interviews with Pete Cladianos Jr., 

conducted by Dwayne Kling, 
a narrative composed by R. T. King 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Publication of My Father’s Son was made possible in part by 
the Jack Douglass Memorial Fund for gaming history and 
by gifts from Ken Adams, Sharkey Begovich, John 
Douglass, William A. and Jan Douglass, the Charles N. 
Mathewson Foundation, and the Peppermill Hotel Casino 
in support of the UNOHP gaming history project. 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 324 
Reno, Nevada 89557-0099 
775/784-6932 
ohp@unr.nevada. edu 

http://www.unr.edu/artsci/oralhist/ohweb/oralhist.htm 

© 2002 by the University of Nevada Oral History Program 
All rights reserved. Published 2002. 

Printed in the United States of America. 

All photographs courtesy of Pete Cladianos Jr. 

Publication Staff 
Book Design: Mary A. Larson 
Senior Production Assistant: Linda Sommer 
Production Assistants: Brooke McIntyre, Matt Slagle, 
Allison Tracy, Elisabeth Williams, Kathryn Wright-Ross 


ISBN #1-56475-380-8 


To Kiki, my youngest daughter. 



CONTENTS 


Preface / ix 

Acknowledgements / xii 
Introduction / xv 

1. From the Old World / 1 

2. After the Crash: Dad Gets Into Slots / 15 

3. Family Businesses / 31 

4. Small Town Hell Raiser / 41 

5. Hellenic Reno / 63 

6. Crossroaders and Slot Thieves / 75 

7. Court Martialed! / 85 

8. El Rancho II / 93 

9. Faunching the Sands / 105 

10. Big Bertha and the Electromechanicals / 117 

11. Grinding It Out / 123 

12. Fiquored Up / 133 

13. 1978: Taking a Chance on Expansion / 137 


viii / Contents 


14. “Canadian Friendly” / 147 

15. Franchise Food, No Entertainment / 155 

16. From Arm Wrestling to Cribbage / 161 

17. Going Public / 171 

18. Employee Loyalty / 185 

19. In the Pit / 193 

20. Too Old, Too Slow, Too Litigious / 199 

21. Multi-venue? / 211 

22. Down in Mississippi / 223 

23. 900 Pound Gorilla / 253 

24. “Don’t Want to be Panhandled” / 265 

25. RSCVA: A Creature of the Casinos / 271 

26. Trying to Get Out / 281 

27. Stakeholders and Lobbyists / 293 

28. Marriages and Family / 303 
Glossary / 319 


Index / 327 


Preface 


THE UNIVERSITY OF NEVADA Oral 
History Program explores the remembered 
past of Nevada and the West. Through 
carefully crafted interviews with people 
who are primary sources, the program has 
amassed a useful collection of oral histo¬ 
ries on a variety of subjects, including min¬ 
ing, ranching, Native Americans, federal 
management of public lands, the casino 
gaming industry, and many others. The 
collection currently totals about 4,000 
tapes and 80,000 transcript pages. 

Drawing from this substantial body of 
work, which is heavily used by students 
and publishing scholars, the program pro¬ 
duces occasional books intended for the 
general reading public. My Father’s Son is 
the fifth title in our series on casino gam¬ 
ing in Nevada. Through the memories of 
knowledgeable chroniclers who were di¬ 
rectly involved in gaming over the years, 
this series illuminates the origins and de¬ 
velopment of various enterprises; the re¬ 
lationships between casinos and the com¬ 
munities of which they are (or were) a 
part; the evolution of gaming regulations 
and their enforcement; and other factors 
in the history of the industry in the state. 

Casino gambling (or “gaming,” as the 
industry prefers) was made legal in Nevada 
by the state legislature’s passage in 1931 
of AB 98, the Casino Gaming Act. Ini¬ 
tially, the majority of Nevada casinos were 
small establishments containing a few 
gambling tables, perhaps some slot ma¬ 
chines, and a bar. Most operators came 
from other states, where many had run 
rigged games in illegal gambling joints, but 


x / Preface 


there were some early homegrown entrepreneurs. Among them 
was Greek immigrant and Reno grocer, Pete Cladianos Sr., 
who opened a “cigar store” (it offered gambling) and started a 
slot machine route shortly after AB 98 was passed. 

Over the next thirty years, with the participation of his 
son, Pete Jr., and others in the Cladianos family, Pete Sr. built 
a diversified business empire that included bars, motels, ho¬ 
tels, rental properties, and even a mercantile business. Most of 
the Cladianos enterprises had at least one thing in common— 
slot machines. The slots were prominently placed where they 
would get the most traffic, and they generated a steady stream 
of revenue that could be used to expand Cladianos businesses 
and acquire additional properties. 

By the mid-1960s, Pete Jr. had taken on responsibility for 
the day-to-day operations of the family enterprises. His father 
had long dreamed of opening a hotel-casino with unrestricted 
gaming, and, with the expansion and licensing of their Sands 
Motor Inn just west of Reno’s downtown core, that was ac¬ 
complished. Under Pete Jr.’s leadership, the Sands went on to 
become one of the larger and more successful operations in 
Reno and among the first gaming businesses in the nation to 
go public. In the mid-1990s, it also took a near-crippling plunge 
into the murky backwaters of Mississippi dockside gaming. As 
this is written, the Sands Regent Company has regained its 
equilibrium and appears to be successfully redefining itself in 
the face of intense (and growing) competition from gaming 
casinos on Indian reservations throughout the West. 

The interviews upon which My Father’s Son is based were 
done by Oral Historian Dwayne Kling. Mr. Kling brought forty 
years of gaming industry experience to the project, supported 
by considerable research into the history of the industry in 
northern Nevada. He is an adept interviewer, has a winning 
personality, and was successful in drawing significant memo¬ 
ries out of Mr. Cladianos. The product of their collaboration, 


Preface / xi 


a 1,200 page verbatim transcript of thirty-three tapes, addresses 
a broad range of topics within the context of the life experi¬ 
ences of the chronicler. 

Drawing from the transcript of the interviews, I have com¬ 
posed the book at hand to read as a memoir by Pete Cladianos 
Jr. These are not Pete’s words precisely as spoken or even in 
the order in which they were spoken, but I have recreated his 
speech as faithfully as possible consistent with the aim of com¬ 
posing a readable volume from the elements of the interviews. 
In addition, Dwayne Kling’s questions, which established the 
structure and elicited the detail of the work, have been sub¬ 
sumed into the narrative, and I have imposed a measure of 
chronological and topical order on the whole that was largely 
absent from in the transcript. 

In general, oral origins notwithstanding, the text of My 
Father’s Son reads like that of any other book. However, the 
reader will encounter two unconventional devices that are 
employed to represent important parts of the dynamic of spo¬ 
ken language: [laughter] indicates that the chronicler laughed 
in expression of amusement or irony; and ellipses are meant to 
represent halting speech ... or a dramatic pause. As an aid to 
the reader, we also provide a glossary of gaming terms, which 
can be found at the back of the book. 

Pete Cladianos Jr. read the finished manuscript in page 
proof form and affirmed in writing that it accurately interprets 
the content of the interviews upon which it is based. As with 
all its work, while the Oral History Program can vouch for the 
authenticity of My Father’s Son, it makes no claim that the 
recollections upon which the book is based are entirely free of 
error. This is Pete Cladianos Jr.’s personal history. This is a 
remembered past. 


R. T. KING 
University of Nevada 
October, 2002 



Acknowledgements 


PUBLICATION of My Father’s 
Son was made possible by con- 
tributions from a number of Ne¬ 
vadans interested in advancing 
the work of the University Of 
Nevada Oral History Program 
(UNOHP). The UNOHP’s 
gaming history series is sup¬ 
ported by gifts to a special fund 
established for the purpose of 
collecting and publishing gam¬ 
ing-related oral histories. Prin¬ 
cipal contributors to that fund 
are: Ken Adams, Sharkey 
Begovich, William A. and Jan 
Douglass, the Charles N. 
Mathewson Foundation, and 
the Peppermill Hotel Casino. 
Additional support for this 
work was provided by the Jack 
Douglass Memorial Fund, es¬ 
tablished to honor the memory 
of the pioneering northern 
Nevada gaming figure who died 
January 6, 2002. We are grate¬ 
ful to all whose generous con¬ 
tributions helped make this 
project possible. 



Introduction 


I FIRST MET Pete Cladianos Jr. in 1984 
when I joined the Sands to work on a 
prospective public stock offering. The 
company had a great track record of 
growth and profitability, but it needed 
public capital to expand and liquidity to 
settle sibling ownership disputes. 

My previous experience in the gam¬ 
ing industry was with Harrah’s and In¬ 
ternational Game Technology, two very 
different operations from the Sands. For 
me, signing on with Pete Cladianos was 
like diving into Lake Tahoe in February. 
The Sands was Pete’s life, and he ran it 
the way he wanted to run it. That meant 
odd working hours and an open-ended 
job description: he would come to work 
between 11:00 a.m. and noon each day 
and leave at 2:00 or 3:00 a.m. the next 
morning, taking only a couple of hours 
each evening to play handball at the 
YMCA; he spent most of his time on the 
casino floor, visible to his employees; he 
made virtually every decision himself; 
and at busy times you could even spot 
him checking in guests at the hotel front 
desk or dealing cards to a big winner. 

Pete Jr. is a second-generation patri¬ 
arch of a pioneering Reno gaming fam¬ 
ily. He apprenticed under his father, Pete 
Sr., in the gaming, retail, and hotel-mo¬ 
tel industries, developing his distinctive 
style and a tough-minded approach to 
business. He was also known to be flex¬ 
ible and creative in attracting customers 
to his properties. As CEO of the Sands, 
Pete took advantage of almost every busi- 


xvi / Introduction 


ness opportunity that he could dream up, from making the 
Sands the host hotel for the Reno Gay Rodeo to hosting 
each graduating class of marines from the Marine Warfare 
Center at Pickle Meadows. 

Some in the Reno-Sparks business community may dis- 
like Pete for his tough operating methods, but most have 
great respect for him. To Pete, business is business, and he 
expects people to honor their agreements, whether they have 
made a good deal or a bad one. He is now semi-retired, but 
when he was running his company, he gave no quarter and 
negotiated until he had all there was to get. He measured his 
personal success by the success of his company. 

Pete’s employees, particularly the lower level ones, liked 
him immensely for his common approach and his humble 
manner. He spoke to all and knew most of their names, and 
they felt their welfare was important to him. Equally impor¬ 
tant, he held no double standard, abiding by the same rules 
he imposed on his employees. 

Pete was frugal in his personal life and in his business 
style. As an example, when the Empress tower opened with 
the company’s first health club, Pete furnished it with a two- 
year old Sears exercise hike from his home. It did not dawn 
on him that something good enough for him would not be 
good enough for his guests, and he knew that bringing the 
bike from home would save the company the money it would 
cost to buy a new one. In the same vein, I recall when his 
sister saw a porter placing a hose into the trunk of his car. 
Sure he was stealing a company hose, she called security. They 
reported that the porter was bringing his own hose from home 
to water the hotel flowerbeds because Pete would not spend 
the money for a replacement hose. While most of us saw the 
humor in this incident, it was not lost on us that Pete was 
cost conscious and expected his employees to share his stan¬ 
dards. 


Introduction / xvii 


More than anyone I have known in business, Pete un¬ 
derstood the “time value” of money. When I arrived at the 
Sands, I found that he was keeping two baskets behind his 
desk full of checks written but not sent to company vendors. 
He would hold checks until the vendor was about to stop 
doing business with him, then he would send out one or two 
and the process would start over again. I tried to get him to 
set a procedure for paying our vendors in a logical way, but 
he resisted for several years until the task of personally man¬ 
aging checks became too much. His ability to manage costs 
and control cash was the key to his great margins and success 
in the company. (Pete came to visit me one day after I had 
left the Sands for a stint at a computer start-up company, 
and he was quick to point out the basket of checks behind 
my desk.) 

Pete Cladianos is someone that made a difference in 
Reno. He made things happen, most of the time with the 
help and advice of trusted friends like Art Wood, Chuck Zeh, 
David Wood, his sister Katherene, and others. He is his own 
man, true to what he believes regardless of the strength or 
political power of the opposition. He overcame the infa¬ 
mous “red line” that confined unrestricted gaming to the 
downtown core of Reno when he built a twenty-four room 
tower and connected the Sands Motor Inn to a gaming floor, 
thereby legally pushing unlimited gaming outside the red line. 
Pete has since been quick to weigh in on other matters that 
were unpopular with local business or political interests. In 
most cases he was proven right. 

In my experience, Pete was (and is) the most basically 
honest individual I have ever known. He was true to himself 
regardless of the pressure of popular opinion. He may not 
have wanted to pay you on time, and he may have required 
you to be as tough a businessman as he was to get paid on 
time, but you always got paid. He had the rare ability to 


xviii / Introduction 


listen to all sides on a given business transaction and then 
make a decision and never look back. If the decision went 
wrong, he never looked to place blame on the person whose 
idea it was; he would just say, “That didn’t work, so let’s not 
do that again.” He was always quick to take responsibility 
for decisions he made that did not work—a rare talent for a 
boss. 

As an employer, Pete could be as uninformed and as un- 
fair as any man, but he always let you know how he felt. 
There were never any hidden agendas or feelings. When 
Pete was done with you, you knew where you stood and what 
was expected. You didn’t always get your way, but you ah 
ways got your say. 

Pete was fiercely loyal to those that he trusted and liked, 
and he enjoyed their loyalty in return. From the difficult 
times of employee lawsuits, through the opening of the Dy¬ 
nasty Tower without final approval, to licensing troubles in 
Mississippi, his staff and friends stood firmly behind him with¬ 
out hesitation. 

That is not to say that he has treated all individuals with 
respect—he certainly has not. Much of Pete’s reputation as 
a business tyrant is well earned. I have observed him yell at 
and berate employees, lawyers, vendors, family members, and 
others on many occasions, in most cases using profanity to 
drive his point home. Generally, this had little effect on the 
relationship. People knew that was just Pete being Pete, and 
when it was over, it was over. While I observed this many 
times, I never received that treatment myself. 

Age and time have tempered Pete’s toughness and the 
manner in which he treats people. Many of the business 
leaders of his time have tempered also, and I believe most 
that disliked him in the past consider him a respected peer 
today. I, for one, cherish the friendship and relationship I 
have had with Pete for these eighteen years, and I have enor- 


Introduction / xix 


mous respect for what he has accomplished. I also appreciate 
how much I have learned by his example over the years. 

Readers are sure to enjoy this memoir of a gaming indus¬ 
try legend who, with his father and family, began building a 
successful business long before corporate gaming forever 
changed the operational landscape. This is a story with its 
roots in an earlier, more colorful Reno, one in which fami¬ 
lies and individuals put a personal stamp on their enterprises. 
This is the uncensored truth from Pete Cladianos as he sees 
it. (And yes, he bought a garden hose.) 


JON BENGTSON 
Reno, Nevada 



1 


From 

the 

Old 

World 


I AM GREEK. My family are from Zante 
( Zakinthos), an island in the Ionian Sea 
off the coast of Greece. The home of my 
father’s parents was outside the little port 
city, Zante. (It had the same name as the 
island.) They lived up in the hills and 
were farmers, raising olives, walnuts, 
grapes, and currants. My mother’s family 
lived in town. Her father had a little cof- 
fee-shop kind of place where he sold this, 
that, and the other thing—like an old 
Greek Seven-Eleven store. 

I never got to meet any of my grand¬ 
parents, because they all died during the 
Second World War. When the Germans 
occupied Greece, they systematically 
stripped the country of food for the Ger¬ 
man army, and both sets of my grandpar¬ 
ents starved to death. During the war, my 
father’s parents had moved down from 
their farm into the town of Zante and 
lived with my mother’s parents. There, 
they and some of their children died. 

In those days on Zante, the women 
had lots of children and did all the work. 
Both my father and my mother had step¬ 
mothers, because the women died off at 
an early age. (My mother had eight or 
nine brothers and sisters, only one of 
which was her full brother.) While the 
women worked and raised the children, 
the men spent much of their time in cof¬ 
fee shops. They used to drink black Turk¬ 
ish coffee there and sit and play cards and 
talk politics or whatever the topic of the 
day was. 


2 / MY father’s son 



My daughter Toni stands amidst the ruins of the old Cladianos 
farmhouse on Zante, c. 1971. 


Up behind the Cladianos farmhouse, on a hillside, there 
was a big lime deposit, and my dad, his brother, and his sister 
would dig lime from this pit and put it in sacks and load it on 
donkeys and then walk the fourteen miles to the city to sell 
the lime. The lime was used to make cement. That was one 
of the ways they earned a few drachmas to live on. They also 
cut down trees, bundled up the limbs (they were probably 
sticks about as big around as your index finger), loaded them 
on donkeys, took them down to the little town, and sold 
them for firewood. They also sold produce locally, and oh 
ives. Olives, and the oil pressed from them, are very impor¬ 
tant in Greek life. They use olive oil for cooking; they use it 
as a hand lotion; they make soap out of it. My family and the 
people of Zante did all those things with the olives that they 
grew there. 







From the Old World / 3 


My father didn’t know the precise date of his birth, but 
he was about eighteen when he came to this country in 1912. 
By 1927 he considered himself to be a wealthy man, and he 
felt that at his age it was time for him to settle down and 
have a family. He decided to go to Greece to find a bride and 
bring her back to Reno. What he had in mind was pretty 
much an arranged marriage. 

In those days, when a man wanted to get married, he 
usually talked to his father. He would identify the women 
that he had an interest in, and then his father would go talk 
to their fathers, and they would arrange a dowry. My mother 
was seventeen when she met my father. He and my grandfa¬ 
ther had gone to arrange a marriage between my dad and 
one of her older sisters. After they left, Dad told his father 
that his interest had turned to my mother, not her older sis¬ 
ter. So then they had to go back on another day and sit down 
and talk with my mother’s father about arranging the dowry— 
it was going to be different now, because they were bargain¬ 
ing for his younger daughter. This is part of our family his¬ 
tory. 

Within a two-week period of the time that my father met 
my mother, they were married at a church in Zante. Of course, 
my mother could speak no English. She’d gone through high 
school, so she knew how to write and read in Greek, but she 
knew nothing about English. At first, life in Reno was very 
difficult for her, because she didn’t know anyone. There were 
very few Greeks here, and most of them were men, but she 
was befriended by the wife of a Greek man (John Lougaris), 
a woman who actually was American, but who knew a little 
bit of Greek. 

My father probably was less than an ideal husband at the 
time. He was a gambler in those days—he loved to play cards, 
and he made money playing cards. He also played the stock 


4 / my father’s son 


market and had some 
property, and much of 
the time he was gone 
from home, so my 
mother was forced to go 
through her first preg- 
nancy without much 
support. In the first year 
that she was in Reno, 
she gave birth to a fe¬ 
male child that died 
three days after she was 
born. It was a very dif¬ 
ficult time for my poor 
mother, but my father 
and mother were 
bound and determined 
to have a family, so I 
came along in 1929. 


When my dad had 
come to the United 
States, with help from 
his family, the plan was that he would join his older brother 
Dan in Kansas City. But Dad took ill on the passage across 
the Atlantic and had to be confined in the infirmary at Ellis 
Island. When Dad didn’t show up at the appointed time in 
Kansas City, his brother left without him to take a railroad 
job in Sacramento. Dad wandered around Kansas City until 
he found some Greeks who helped him out. 

My dad’s first job was pushing a cart through the streets 
of Kansas City selling fruits and vegetables. He’d go to a 
wholesale produce market early in the morning and buy fruits 
and vegetables. Then he’d rent a cart and go out and sell 



My father and mother shortly after 
their marriage. 







From the Old World / 5 


them. If he paid a penny for a bunch of radishes, and sold it 
for two cents, then he had made a penny. That’s what he did 
in Kansas City until, eventually, he made contact with his 
brother. He then went to California, where he went to work 
on the railroad where his brother was working. 

My uncle was a big, strong, hardy guy that was used to 
hard work, but my dad was not like that. He was smaller, 
slimmer, and not so strong, so hard work was difficult for 
him. When Dad took up laboring on the railroad, he told his 
brother that if he had to work like this the rest of his life, he 
might as well forget it. [laughter] He talked his brother into 
quitting the railroad, and they went back to Sacramento and 
did various things, including operating a produce pushcart. 

Eventually, down in Old Sacramento, about twelve or 
fourteen Greek men got together and opened a little bar and 
restaurant. Well, everyone knows what had to happen 
They began to fight and squabble with each other, and even- 



Uncle Dan (left) and Dad, c. 1924. 




6 / MY father’s son 


tually my dad and my uncle sold out of that business. Two or 
three different times they got into deals like that in Sacra- 
mento. They had some really bad experiences, and later in 
life they would admonish the family that we should never, 
ever go into business with partners. I’ve seen my father and 
my uncle pass up deals that looked good at the time simply 
because there were partners involved. 

(Jack Douglass mentions in his book [Tap Dancing on Ice, 
University of Nevada Oral History Program] that my dad 
was a loner kind of guy, and that’s true. Because of the expe¬ 
riences that he’d had in Sacramento, all through his life he 
tried to stay out of partnerships. He did make that mistake a 
time or two, but he got out of them real quick, and none of 
the partnerships that he had ever worked out real good. He 
told me to stay out of partnerships, but, unfortunately, I didn’t 
follow that advice at a critical time in my business career 
many years after his death.) 

Eventually, my dad and his brother would set up a stand 
on a busy street corner (in those days they didn’t have to talk 
to the city or anybody else about permits), and, instead of 
pushing a cart around in residential areas, they would sell 
their fruits and vegetables there, and maybe cigars and news¬ 
papers and that sort of thing. They learned that they could 
go outside of Sacramento and buy their produce directly from 
truck farmers and cut out the middle man. Rather than go to 
the wholesale produce people, they bought a cart and a horse, 
and they’d go right to the farmers and buy the stuff, and then 
they’d bring it in and sell it on the street corner. 

Another thing they learned—and they learned it from 
copying other people—was to clean up their fruits and veg¬ 
etables before putting them on display. Many of the old-tim¬ 
ers had simply put out potatoes or radishes without cleaning 
the dirt off of them, but their produce would sell better if the 
vendor would clean it up, polish the apples and oranges, and 


From the Old World / 7 


so on. They did better than some of the other people, be- 
cause their produce looked better. 

Then, for a time, my uncle and my dad split up. My dad 
went to San Francisco. There were other Greek people that 
he knew there, and he worked for a while on a commuter 
train that ran down the peninsula, selling newspapers and 
cigars and candy bars and that kind of thing. It worked the 
same way as the vegetables—he’d have to buy the merchan¬ 
dise, and then he’d get on the train, sell it at a little profit, 
and he’d keep what he made. He didn’t know the language 
very well, didn’t understand the customs, his clothes weren’t 
the best, and people made fun of him. 

One of the things Dad got from that experience was that 
he decided that if he was going to stay in this country, he had 
to learn to speak the language without an accent. He also 
determined that he had to dress like other people did, so 
they wouldn’t look down on him. (Both my mother and my 
father learned to speak English without an accent. There were 
very few Greek people that ever accomplished that. Many 
times my dad said, “It was important.” He worked on it, and 
he was a man that could concentrate, and concentration was 
what you needed to do that kind of thing.) 

Eventually, my dad and my uncle were back in Sacra¬ 
mento doing the same old thing—they had a stand on a cor¬ 
ner in downtown Sacramento—and somebody told them that 
there was an opportunity to do what they were doing at Lake 
Tahoe. So they took the train from Sacramento to Truckee. 

In those days, around 1915, there was a short line that 
ran from Truckee up to Tahoe City. The train went right to 
the pier at Tahoe City, and you got off the train, walked across 
the pier, got on the old Tahoe steamer, and the steamer would 
take you around to the five or six resort areas on the lake. 
There were Glenbrook and Camp Richardson and Chamber’s 
Lodge and Tahoe Tavern and one or two others. My dad and 


8 / MY father’s son 


uncle couldn’t understand why anybody would say that you 
could have produce stands there, because Lake Tahoe at that 
time was just these resorts. It was difficult to get from one to 
the other, and everybody closed up in the winter and left. It 
was only a three-month season. 

Before going back to Sacramento, Dad and Uncle Dan 
took the train down from Truckee to Reno. They walked 
around the town, and they noticed that the grocery stores 
were not merchandising their fruit and vegetables like they 
were doing in Sacramento—the grocers weren’t cleaning their 
vegetables and polishing their fruit before putting them on 
display. Dad and his brother felt they could do some good 
here, so they worked up a plan to retail fruit and vegetables 
in Reno. The arrangement they worked out was that my uncle 
would stay in Sacramento to do the buying, because he knew 
the truck farmers that they had been buying from for their 
stand down there, and he could get the produce at the best 
price. Then, with his horse and wagon, he could take it to 
the train and load it on the train. 

In those days there wasn’t any refrigeration. They’d just 
dump ice on top of the produce, and then it would be shipped 
up to Reno on the train. They rented a little store on Com¬ 
mercial Row, across the street from the train depot, and my 
dad would unload the produce, carry it across the street, clean 
it up, and put it up for sale. He had no refrigeration, either, 
so he had to just stay there, and during hot summer days, he 
would stay as late as he could, so he could sell everything. 
Otherwise, a lot of the stuff would spoil during the night. 
And because he had the best looking produce in town, he 
eventually got the wealthier people and the more prominent 
people to shop with him. 

My dad and his brother called their store the Economy 
Market. In the stories I’ve heard, there were only a few other 
grocery stores in Reno at that time. My dad stayed open seven 
days a week, and many of his sales were in the evening after 


From the Old World / 9 


other grocers had closed their stores. The other grocers de¬ 
cided that my dad was taking too much business away from 
them, and, since they had some influence with the city coun¬ 
cil, they got an ordinance passed that outlawed selling fruits 
and vegetables after six o’clock at night and on Sundays. 

My dad had a lawyer who was a customer of his, a Mr. 
Ryan, and Mr. Ryan told my dad that for seventy-five dollars 
he would challenge the law, even if he had to go clear to the 
Supreme Court. Mr. Ryan felt that it was an unconstitutional 
law, but that my dad was going to have to let himself be ar¬ 
rested in order to start the case. My dad always said it took a 
great deal of courage for him to let the police arrest him and 
take him to jail, because he recalled the days in Greece when 
people sometimes would disappear and wouldn’t be seen 
again . . . but he did it. When he was released, Mr. Ryan got 
an injunction, which allowed my dad to stay open until the 
case was heard. And when the case was heard, he won. The 
grocers chose not to appeal, and then the Economy Market 
could be open any time Dad wanted. 

Dad and my uncle continued in the same business and 
kept that store until sometime in 1923. Many of the promi¬ 
nent citizens of Reno shopped at the store. One man that 
Dad got to know fairly well was George Wingfield, the banker. 
My uncle and my dad hoped to someday own a piece of real 
estate and put up a building of some kind, so they cultivated 
Mr. Wingfield’s friendship. In the meantime, they opened 
up another produce store on South Virginia Street, just down 
from the river. It was a little bigger store, and in 1923 they 
sold both of their stores for approximately $38,000. At that 
time a church had bought a piece of property a little further 
out of the city and built a new church, so the congregation 
wanted to sell their property on the southwest corner of Sec¬ 
ond and Sierra Streets. My dad and my uncle bought the 
property, borrowed $55,000 from Wingfield’s bank, and con¬ 
structed a two-story building on that corner, which is half a 


10 / MY FATHER’S SON 


block long and fifty feet deep—fifty feet on Sierra Street and 
140 feet on Second Street. They called it the Cladianos Build- 
ing. 

The first floor of the Cladianos Building was store rent¬ 
als, and the second floor was walk-up office space. They had 
about twenty-six offices on the second floor. The offices were 
mainly used by attorneys and doctors and dentists. Down¬ 
stairs they had businesses like Harry’s Business Machines and 
the Paffrath Photo Studio, owned by the McElwain family; 
also, an insurance agency, Slingerland and Hartford. We had 
all our pictures taken at Paffrath Studios—they only had one 
backdrop, so you could tell the pictures were taken there when 
you saw the backdrop. On the corner, eventually, they had a 
Hale’s Drugstore, and my dad and Clarence Hale got to be 
good friends. 

The Cladianos Building was a real dream come true for 
my dad and uncle. Those were prosperous times, 1923 through 
1928, and the building was full, and everybody was paying 
rent. Things were going along great, and my dad would spend 
a good deal of his time playing cards and gambling. My uncle, 



MW 

TTfW 


national 


The Cladianos Building (center) as it looked in the 1980s. 














From the Old World / 11 


even up to his last days, would say, “Oh, your father was an 
inveterate gambler, and I was afraid he was going to lose all 
our money, and I worried so much about it. I asked him to 
quit, and he never would, and I was just scared to death that 
all we had worked for was going to go down the toilet.” [laugh¬ 
ter] 

My dad played cards around town in back-room bars and 
clubs. One of the places was in the Petricciani family’s build¬ 
ing on the corner of Center Street and Commercial Row. At 
that time there was a hotel upstairs, and on the ground floor 
there were some stores. The store right on the corner was 
what was called a cigar store. It had a soda fountain and sold 
all kinds of tobacco products, newspapers, candy, those kinds 
of things. . . and there was a little back room where they 
played cards. Of course, that was illegal at the time, but it 
was pretty common. 

My dad’s principal source of income was the rentals from 
the Cladianos Building, but he had lots of free time to play 
cards, and he was playing the stock market as well. The mar¬ 
ket was doing great, so he made quite a bit of money. By 
1927 he probably had three or four hundred thousand dol¬ 
lars, something like that. He had it in his mind that he was 
soon going to be sort of semi-retired. He was going to get 
married; he was going to have a couple of kids. It was a fine 
life, and everything was wonderful. That’s when he went back 
to Zante, married my mother, brought her back to Reno . . . 
and everything continued to go just wonderfully until the 
stock market crashed in 1929. [laughter] 

I was born December 19, 1929. My sister Katherene is 
two years younger than me, and I had a brother named John, 
who was nine years younger. [John Cladianos died in Octo¬ 
ber, 2000.] An older sister died three days after she was born, 
a year before I was born. They never did name her, because 
she was quite ill when she was born. 


12 / MY father’s son 


During the time 
that my dad had the 
produce business, he got 
partially involved in the 
mining business. When 
I say “mining business,” 
I mean he made some 
investments in some 
mining claims. He had 
a claim or two in 
Tonopah and one in 
Goldfield and one or 
two in Silver Peak and 
so on. Those were the 
days before the SEC 
regulations, so there was 
a lot of speculation and 
a lot of stock being sold, 
and there were no guarantees. He lost a great deal in these 
mining ventures, mostly because there was a lot of chicanery 
and dishonesty. People would do things like salt the mines 
and then take some of that ore that they had salted the mine 
with and have it assayed. They’d get a good assay report, and 
then they would run around and tell everybody, “Look at 
this mine! It’s going to produce four hundred dollars a ton,” 
let’s say, in gold or silver or both. Then they’d begin to sell 
stock in a mine with no worthwhile ore at all. 

Dad was an investor only, and to his sorrow, every mine 
that he invested in went bad. In the early 1930s, he became 
associated with Charles Richards, who ran for Congress and 
lost by a very small majority. Then there was another man 
named Charles Myers. Eventually Dad and those two fellows 
bought a mine in Seven Mile Canyon, which is just below 
Virginia City. They poured a lot of money into that mine, 
but they had a lot of water problems there, so they had to do 



Dad, me, and Uncle Dan (left to 
right), 1930. 











From the Old World / 13 


a lot of pumping, and they never made any money. Eventu¬ 
ally, my father wound up with that mine, because the other 
fellows couldn’t or didn’t want to put any more money in it. 
Dad kept paying the taxes on the mine, didn’t work it, didn’t 
do anything except pay the taxes every year. I asked him one 
day why he did that, and he said, “I pay those taxes every 
year to remind to me never, ever go in the mining business 
again!” [laughter] 

After Dad sold his produce business, the stock market 
really was what kept him going until the crash . . . and he 
was a good card player. He made money playing cards—not 
always, but in the long run he made money gambling. So he 
didn’t feel like he had to have a business to go to every day. 

These card games were all around town—places like the 
Wine House, Becker’s, the Pastime Club, the Overland. They 
went on after gaming became legal, but they had been going 
prior to legalization. At 
the Riverside they had 
card games: poker and 
pan ( panguingue ). I never 
did learn how to play pan 
and never had any desire 
to play, but there were 
the addicts that played 
pan. My dad was a pan 
player and also a poker 
player and probably even 
played some dice here 
and there. 

There was one stock¬ 
broker in town, J.A. 

Hogle, down on First 
Street, and they had a 
ticker tape. My dad’d go 



“Dad made money playing cards . . . . 
He didn’t feel like he had to have a busP 
ness to go to every day. ” 






14 / my father’s son 


there every morning and watch the ticker tape and buy and 
sell stocks. He was a speculative kind of guy, and he was look- 
ing for a quick buck. He’d go there and spend the mornings 
at Hogle’s, and then afterward he’d have a leisurely lunch, 
and then he’d maybe play some cards in the afternoon, and 
then he’d come home. Before he was married, he stayed down- 
town pretty much all the time. 


2 


After 

the 

Crash: 

Dad 

Gets 

Into 

Slots 


WITH THE ONSET of the Great De¬ 
pression, my dad and uncle lost a lot of 
tenants, and they got to the point where 
they couldn’t make the mortgage pay¬ 
ment. So, they went to see Mr. Wingfield, 
and they told him that they were in 
trouble. Mr. Wingfield told them that if 
they’d pay whatever they could, then he’d 
go along with them. So they got by. Ev¬ 
erybody was in the same shape that they 
were in, and the bank couldn’t foreclose 
on everybody, so they just paid what they 
could, and the people that they had in 
there as tenants paid them what they 
could, and they just struggled along like 
that. 

Then, in 1930, my dad had an op¬ 
portunity to rent Petricciani’s cigar store. 
And in 1931, when gaming became le¬ 
gal in Nevada, he bought four slot ma¬ 
chines—he paid twelve or fifteen bucks 
apiece for them—and put them right in¬ 
side the door of his cigar store. As a mat¬ 
ter of fact, he put one of them halfway 
out on the sidewalk. The few dollars that 
he was making out of them made the dif¬ 
ference between being fairly profitable or 
just running a break-even kind of an op¬ 
eration. 

Some of my earliest memories are of 
Dad’s cigar store. There was a little 
counter as you walked in, and a big bar¬ 
rel of Lyon’s Root Beer sat on the counter, 
and Dad had ice cream ... I remember 
going into his store, sitting on a stool and 
having root beer floats. He sold cigarettes, 
cigars, newspapers, various other items, 


16 / MY father’s son 


but the slots and the card room in the back were what made 
him a few dollars. 

Dad’s cigar store space was actually a part of the Palace 
Hotel, and with legalized gaming going strong, when his five- 
year lease was up, the Petricciani family took the space over 
again to enlarge their Palace Club casino. Dad looked around 
town for another place to start a cigar store, but he was un¬ 
able to find a spot that he thought was appropriate or a spot 
where he could afford the rent. So he decided to start a slot 
route business. 

During the time that he had the cigar store, Dad was 
approached by slot operators who tried to talk him into al¬ 
lowing them to put their machines in his store. Their selling 
point was that they would service the machines, and that he 
didn’t have to worry about them breaking down. That was a 
big issue, because my dad knew very little about those ma¬ 
chines, and he had to teach himself how to fix them. But he 
felt that there wasn’t any reason to share the money that 
those machines took in with anyone else. It was probably 
only ten or fifteen or twenty bucks a week, or maybe even 
less, but there wasn’t a lot of money around, and so, rather 
than give half of it away, he used his own machines. 

Then Dad began to think that he would try to put some 
machines out in other locations. He felt that he could do 
that, because he’d been in Reno since 1915, he’d been a gam¬ 
bler, and he’d been around all the bars and restaurants in the 
downtown businesses, and he’d met a lot of influential people 
in the community when he was selling fruits and vegetables. 
He had also established a reputation as a man of integrity 
and trust. Many people have said about him that he was a 
hard-nosed business man, but I’ve never heard anyone say 
that he was dishonest. Everyone said his word was his bond. 
If he shook your hand, it was like a contract, and that was 
important in business in those days, because written con¬ 
tracts were not the thing that people did—they just took 


After the Crash / 17 


your word for it, and if you broke your word, it got around. 
Then people didn’t want to do business with you. 

My dad began to call on other businesses in town while 
he was still running his cigar store, and he attempted to get 
some machines placed. He began to pick up a few locations. 
The first one was Hale’s Drugstore on the corner of Second 
and Sierra Streets. That was fairly unique, because most of 
the places that had machines in the 1930s were bars. Most 
grocery stores didn’t start getting machines until much later. 
Hale’s was my dad’s first location outside his cigar store, but 
by the time he lost his lease (around 1935 or thereabouts), 
he had a few other locations. One was the Roundup Bar, 
which was also in his building, a door or two to the west on 
Second Street from Hale’s. 

Before his lease ran out at the Palace Club, Dad began to 
use the basement of the Cladianos Building as sort of a shop. 
There he had a bench and a few tools, and he could work on 
his slot machines. It was kind of his headquarters. What little 
inventory he had, such as slot machine stands and extra 
machine parts, was stored there, and he kept his keys there. 

Dad’s slot machine keys were an interesting situation. 
All slot route operators did the same thing—they had a brass 
chain with many links, and, depending on how many loca¬ 
tions they had, the chain might be eighteen, twenty-four, or 
thirty inches long. On each little link they’d have a brass tag 
that they’d stamp. Then they had the slot keys, square steel 
shafts that were probably about three inches long. On the 
end of each they had a letter or a number—for example, 214 
Lake Street, or whatever you used for that location. When 
they went out to service the route, they had this long chain 
with tags on it and keys, so they knew which keys went to 
which machines. That was long before the days of master 
keys. 

Now, I’ve heard two theories about master keys. Even 
back in those days I remember conversations between our 


18 / MY father’s son 


service people and my father, and some said a master key was 
good, because it was handy and convenient; but if you lost it, 
or somebody took it from you, then they had access to all 
your machines. Those chains were cumbersome, but it was 
very difficult to lose one or for somebody to pick it up and 
run off with it, because it was heavy and it was hard to hide. 
I think that’s the big reason why route operators kept these 
chains. As my dad’s business got bigger, he had different chains 
for different parts of town, so that he’d have maybe one for 
the south side and one for the north side, and then he had 
one for Carson City and one for Yerington, and so on, so 
that you didn’t have to pack the whole thing around. 

Slot machines had a cash box in the bottom, which is 
different from the way things are nowadays, when the money 
drops through the machine into the stand and into a bucket. 
There was a cash box that was built right into the bottom of 
the machine. When the payoff tube filled, there was a diverter 
that came across the top of the tube, and then whenever the 
coins came in, they dropped through the chute right into 
the cash box. There was a lock on that cash box, and those 
keys were on a different chain, so that a serviceman didn’t 
have a key to the cash box when he went out to service the 
machine, and that was an important point. 

One of the things that my dad had to talk to people about 
when he wanted to place his machines in their business was 
the safety of their money, because half of the money in the 
coin box, with the exception of the taxes, was theirs. They 
had to feel that they could trust the operator and whoever 
worked for the operator and know that they weren’t going to 
lose some of their money to theft. 

I remember being with my dad when he explained how 
he handled it. He kept these two chains with his keys to the 
cash boxes locked in his safe. He had a big safe in his shop, 
and for many years he was the only one that would count 
money, or do the count at the location. That really became 


After the Crash / 19 


my dad’s function in the business—to sell new locations, to 
act as a public relations guy, to drop in on these locations 
and talk to them, and to let them know that he was still 
personally interested in them. 

When a location would run short of money, the first place 
they’d tap would be the slot route operator. It was easy for 
them to tell the slot operator, “Say, I need a hundred bucks 
for a couple of weeks. Just take it out of the drop.” You took 
care of your locations like that when they were short of money 
and they needed it. It was a way to keep your locations loyal 
to you, and my dad handled all that kind of thing, as well. 

One of the other things that route operators did was try 
to figure out the best places for equipment. In many places— 
like drugstores, for example—if you could get your equip- 
ment placed next to a cash register, it usually did better. If 
you couldn’t get that spot—and it was difficult to get, be¬ 
cause it was next to a counter, and the location owner wasn’t 
always happy about giving up shelf space for that sort of 
thing—right inside the front door was usually a good loca¬ 
tion, because people going out of the store might have money 
in their hand or might even come in looking for a slot ma¬ 
chine. In bars, the best location was usually where it was 
really handy for somebody to get off a barstool and walk two 
or three steps to the slot machine. 

My dad spent most of his time calling on his locations, 
which meant that the more locations he had, the longer he 
worked. He’d do collections and his public relations work in 
the evenings, and he’d work on weekends. So it was an ardu¬ 
ous job and long. He worked hard. 

I started going around with my dad when I was ten years 
old or so. We counted all the money by hand, and I don’t 
remember him ever owning a coin counter in his slot route 
business. We used to count twenty nickels in a stack, two 
stacks to the wrapper. Then you’d squeeze the wrapper and 
open it up, stick your index finger up there, drop the two 


20 / MY father’s son 


stacks in, then bend one end, turn it around, bend, tap it on 
the table, and that was it. I enjoyed it. 

My dad would always buy a round of drinks... all slot 
operators did this: when he’d come in a location that was a 
bar (they were almost all bars), he’d buy a drink for every- 
body there; and then when he’d leave, he’d buy a drink for 
everybody again. In little towns like Yerington or Carson or 
places like that, they knew his car, they knew when he was 
coming, they knew his location. They’d go right to the bar 
and wait for him, because they knew he was going to buy 
everyone a drink. Of course, I got a Coke or whatever I was 
drinking; and after I finished counting, whatever loose coins 
there were that didn’t fill a wrapper, I’d get. I’d put them in 
my pocket, and that was my pay. I really looked forward to 
that, and my dad took me with him as often as he could. 

When we counted, the owner’d be with us. In some cases 
it was his manager, somebody that he trusted, but it usually 
was the owner. Counting was a real personalized exercise— 
it was a time when my dad could talk to the owner, because, 
when you get experienced in counting money, you can just 
automatically count it, and you can carry on a conversation 
and never make a mistake. 

Dimes were the most difficult coins to count, and I guess 
that’s one of the reasons why dime machines eventually dis¬ 
appeared. By far the majority of the machines we had were 
nickel machines. We had some dimes; we had some quarters; 
but we had very few dollars. Dollar machines really weren’t 
very popular, and I’m sure one of the reasons they weren’t is 
that if a dollar machine ever hit a jackpot, it was like the 
Second Coming of Christ. They were as tight as you could 
get them—there wasn’t any question about it. And people 
didn’t have the money to play dollars anyway, so there were 
very few dollar machines. 

In towns like Yerington or Carson City, we’d have at least 
two or three locations. Now, in Carson City, my dad prob- 


After the Crash / 21 


ably had five or six. The Ship Bar down there had like a 
prow out front, kind of like the Ship and Bottle here in Reno, 
and that was one of his locations. A man named Ken Johnson, 
who later became a state senator, had a bar in Carson. There 
were two or three others. 

Dad had machines in Fallon and Lovelock. He also had 
two or three in Fernley, on the way to Lovelock. Sometimes 
we’d do a swing—we’d do Fernley, Yerington, and Lovelock 
in one day, and that was a long day. It was hard work, but 
that was part of the business. 

Dad operated machines on the California side of Lake 
Tahoe, but only in the summertime. Almost everything at 
Lake Tahoe in those days was open only in June, July, Au¬ 
gust, and maybe a few days in September. He had some ma¬ 
chines in a bar owned by a man named Rose, two or three 
miles inside the California line. Then there was Young’s 
Bijou—two brothers named Young had a market and a bar 
and a little resort, and they called it Young’s Bijou. Near where 
Ski Run Boulevard is now, there was a little bar called Cecil’s, 
and Dad had some machines in there. 

On the Nevada side of Lake Tahoe, the tax for these 
machines, which was paid to the county, was about ten dol¬ 
lars a quarter. It was collected by the Washoe County sheriff, 
Ray Root, for many years. Root would show up, and he’d 
have his little list, and you’d pay him the ten bucks—some¬ 
times in cash. My understanding was that the sheriff was paid 
a very small salary by the county, but by law he got a portion 
of the tax that he collected for gaming. To me, it was a very 
efficient system, because he was the man responsible for 
making sure every slot machine was paid for. He turned the 
money over to the county, if he was honest; and my recollec¬ 
tion is that everyone considered Ray Root to be a very hon¬ 
est man. He took his percentage, and it was simple and easy 
and didn’t cost the county anything. I don’t know whether 


22 / MY father’s son 


you could do that today, but that’s the way things operated 
then. 

Dad even had some machines at Camp Richardson, which 
was quite a ways into California. The way that worked was, 
the Placer County sheriff’s headquarters was in Roseville or 
Auburn, and the sheriff had an undersheriff, a local resident 
who watched the Lake Tahoe shore for him so he wouldn’t 
have to run back and forth through the Sierra. 

When my dad had machines on the California side, the 
undersheriff just took it upon himself (maybe with the sheriff’s 
knowledge and maybe without) to collect a tax on slot ma¬ 
chines on the California side, where slots were illegal. It wasn’t 
a tax; it was really just a fee that he kept. We paid this fellow 
ten dollars in cash for every machine ... it was probably ten 
dollars for the summer, although it may have been ten doL 
lars a month. 

On more than one occasion we got a phone call from the 
undersheriff, and he would say, “Some people are coming up 
from headquarters,” or words to that effect. “We have to put 
the machines away.” So we’d hurriedly drive up to the lake 
and put the machines in the back room or put them on our 
pickup and bring them back to Reno and then wait till he 
called us back and said, “OK, now we can put them back.” 

On the north side of the lake at Buckhorn Lodge, right 
in King’s Beach, a guy by the name of Johnny Rayburn had 
our machines. That was a good location. Buckhorn was good. 
We spent lots of time in there counting coin. Dad had ma¬ 
chines in Tahoe Tavern. The Tahoe Tavern was a good loca¬ 
tion, because there was a hotel there, where a lot of people 
stayed. There were times when he had machines in 
Homewood at Obexer’s. He also had some machines in 
Chambers. 

After Labor Day, Dad gathered up all the machines and 
brought them down to Reno. By that time he had two or 
three men working for him, so he just did the collections. 


After the Crash / 23 


He’d send die guys up to pick up the machines and bring 
them back. A man named Jeff was one of his men, and I 
spent some time with him. 

When I began to work summers and weekends for my 
dad, when he was busy doing other things, I’d go out with a 
serviceman and help him load the machines. Once Jeff and I 
were driving to Lake Tahoe, and there was a young lady hitch- 
hiking right outside of Reno, so we stopped to pick her up. 
When we got to the state line at Verdi, Jeff stopped the truck 
and asked her to get out and walk across the state line. Then 
he drove across the state line, and she got back in the truck. 
I was completely mystified and didn’t have any idea what 
was going on. 

When we got up to Tahoe City, and she got out, I said to 
Jeff, “What was all that about?” 

He said, “There’s a law that if you take a woman across 
state lines for immoral purposes, then you’re guilty of a fed¬ 
eral offense.” 

I said, “Well, I didn’t see anything immoral going on.” 

He said, “Well, you never know.” [laughter] He was a 
cautious man. I used to have lots of fun with him. 

Most of my dad’s locations had three or four machines, 
but in the better ones, like Hale’s, for instance, we got up to 
eight or more. Hale’s Drugstore on the corner of Center and 
East Second Street in Reno became, if not the best, one of my 
dad’s best locations. That was the second store that Clarence 
opened up. That store had eleven slot machines, and they 
did very, very well, and Clarence just kept eliminating drugs 
and adding slot machines, [laughter] He was making more 
money out of the slot machines than he was doing with his 
other things. 

Clarence had a man named Phil, who was a long-time 
pharmacist. Phil would take money out of the cash register 
and play slot machines with it when no one else was around. 


24 / my father’s son 


Not only did Phil play all the money he could take out of the 
register, but he played most of his paycheck, as well. Clarence 
knew what Phil was up to, and he told my father about it. 
“Well,” they agreed, “we know that every nickel Phil gets 
goes in the slot machines, so we’re going to get it back, any- 
way.” They just let Phil keep right on playing. They’d estb 
mate how much he played, and my dad would give Clarence 
a kickback to sort of take care of his losses, because they 
didn’t want to lose Phil’s business. Hale had several stores in 
Reno, and my dad had machines in all of his locations, ex- 
cept for the ones that were just pharmacies. 

When my dad first went into business after he lost his 
lease on the Palace Cigar Store, he called himself Pete’s Nov- 
elty Company. Many people in those days—and some even 
still—considered gaming to be a sin, so he didn’t want any- 
thing in the name of his firm to associate him with gaming. 
In the late 1930s, when he moved from the Cladianos Build- 
ing to the Lake Street location, he changed the name of his 
business to the W.P. Amusement Company, again not put¬ 
ting in the gaming name . . . but there was another reason 
for him to use the word “amusement.” He formed a partner¬ 
ship at that time with a man named Walter Payne. Wally 
was a jukebox route operator. So my dad and Wally formed 
this partnership. My dad put slot machines into some of 
Wally’s jukebox locations, and vice versa. It was a selling 
point—when my dad went into a location, he could say, 
“Well, look, I can furnish you a jukebox, too, and we can 
service it, and we can . . . .” 

There was another man named Willard Wayne, who had 
pinball games, and they became associated with him too. 
They were all associated with this W.P. Amusement Com¬ 
pany, but it didn’t last too long. In 1939 or 1940, when the 
war in Europe broke out, both Willard and Wally joined the 
Canadian air force. My father bought them out when they 


After the Crash / 25 


went off to war, and so he then owned a slot route, a jukebox 
route, and a pinball game route. 

Dad moved his business over to 128 East Second Street, 
which was directly across the street from Benetti and 
Douglass. [A prominent slot route operation located on the 
north side of East Second Street, between Lake and Center.] 
That was around the time Dad acquired the Jennings Agency 
(slot machines) distributorship and changed his business’ 
name to the Rex Distributing Company. Again, he didn’t 
use anything in the name that indicated that he was involved 
with gaming. At that time he also acquired the Rock-ola 
jukebox agency. So he was a distributor for Rock-ola and 
Jennings, and he put pinball games out on location, as well. 
He stayed at that address until he eventually sold his route 
in the latter part of the war years. 

The Jennings slot machine was never a very popular 
machine. The machines simply didn’t do as well as Mills. At 
that time, the Mills machine was the most popular machine, 
and most places—except for Harrah’s and Harolds, that had 
Pace machines—used the Mills machines. Pappy Smith had 
a standing offer that he’d pay ten bucks for any Pace ma¬ 
chine that you brought him, no matter what condition it 
was in. When my dad would acquire Pace machines, he’d 
just take them over and sell them to Pappy Smith. 

My dad eventually gave up the agency, because people 
just didn’t want to buy Jennings machines. When you had a 
location, and you had a Jennings next to a Mills, the Mills 
almost always made more money than the Jennings machine. 
Mr. Fitzgerald, for whatever reason, decided to fill his Ne¬ 
vada Club casino with Jennings machines, and I’m sure he 
did fine with them . . . just like Harolds and Harrah’s did well 
with Pace machines. 

My dad’s locations had almost all Mills machines. He 
bought some machines from somebody in Virginia City— 
Bucket of Blood or something like that—and they were Caille 


26 / MY father’s son 


machines. They were upright with a handle, and they had a 
wheel that spun around, and then a finger that came down 
and stopped the wheel. My dad bought ten of those and 
brought them to Reno to that 128 East Second Street loca¬ 
tion. They stood up five feet high, and they were about three 
feet wide. They had a metal front on them, but the sides and 
the back and the frame were oak, and somebody had painted 
the oak and the metal. Some of them were silver, and some 
were gold. 

I worked very hard, along with an old man named Joe, in 
the back room of a shop with paint thinners and scrapers, 
getting all that paint off of the beautiful oak wood. Then my 
father had somebody come in and lacquer the oak, and he 
put those machines out on location. Possibly because they 
were a novelty, some of them did very well. They were mostly 
quarter machines. In those days, machines were machines. 
They were not like it is today, where every month, IGT has a 
brand new machine that nobody else has. 

Back in those early days it was a fifty-fifty cut between 
the guy who owned the location and the owner of the slots. 
That was a pretty standard deal. The operator paid the li¬ 
cense off the top, and the slot owner had to pay for all the 
parts and all the labor to fix the machines. Once you had the 
license paid, you just split fifty-fifty. 

When I met Si Redd, the founder of IGT, one of the first 
things that he said to me was, “You know, letting a route 
operator come into a business and put his machines in there 
when the owner of the business has to pay all the taxes and 
take care of the business, has to keep the place clean, adver¬ 
tise, and so on . . . it’s just like a license to steal!” [laughter] 
In those days, the gaming operators that ran casinos didn’t 
want somebody in their place with their own machines—it 
was unheard of, as far as I know, until Si Redd and Bally’s 
brought in the electromechanical machine. 


After the Crash / 27 


The two Benettis were slot route operators. Louie Benetti 
was an older fellow, and his son, Louie Jr., came into the 
picture once the old man retired or died. There was a time 
when Louie Sr. was a partner with a man named Lovejoy, 
and he was also a partner with Jack Douglass for a time. At 
some point the Benetti operation was known as AT Supply. 
Bob Douglass, I believe, was a partner in it with Louie Jr.; 
then eventually, A1 Figone ran AT Supply. This was after 
my dad had sold his bigger route but still had a small route. 

Slot route operators furnished slot machines to many 
places, partly because there weren’t any real big casinos like 
we have now. We had the Bank Club and Harrah’s and 
Harolds, but most of the other places were pretty small. All 
the bars and little operations like I’ve described had slot op- 
erators that ran the slot machines in there. So slot routes 
were a big part of the gaming business in northern Nevada in 
the 1930s and 1940s. 

The Fallon navy base [Fallon Naval Air Station] opened 
up early in the war. When my dad learned that it was pos¬ 
sible to operate slots at the base, he called on them, talked to 
them, and found that they were receptive to the idea of him 
operating slot machines in what they called their ship’s ser¬ 
vice building. It was a combination rec hall, soda fountain, 
and ship’s store, the navy’s term for a kind of convenience 
store for navy enlisted men. And the officers had an officers 
club, and slot machines could be operated in the officers club, 
as well. 

So, Jeff (one of my dad’s employees) and I drove out to 
Fallon one day in the summer with six or eight slot machines 
in a pick-up. We installed these machines in the ship’s ser¬ 
vice, right across from the soda fountain bar, and we put four 
in the officers club by the bar. (They served liquor in the 
officers bar.) We coin-tested them, and everything was fine. 
We had a big crowd of sailors around us when we did this in 


28 / MY father’s son 


the ship’s service—the sailors were really excited about these 
slot machines. The officers club wasn’t quite so crowded. 

Well, we left and came back to Reno. The next morning 
there was a call from the Fallon navy base that every ma- 
chine out there had stopped working. My dad told Jeff that 
we must have done something wrong: “Better run out there 
and fix them.” So Jeff and I got in the truck and drove to 
Fallon. Well, when we got there and opened up the machines, 
we found that they had put so many coins in these machines 
that the cash box had filled up, the chute had run over, and 
the machinery was all jammed with coins. I’d never seen 
anything like that happen. We cleaned them out, but my 
dad had to send another man out with a key to the coin 
boxes, because we didn’t have it with us. 

We counted all the money, and we left, and we had the 
same call next morning—jammed up. So my dad got on the 
phone and talked to whoever the manager of the club was 
and said, “We better send some more slot machines down 
there.” So we sent down another truckload of slot machines, 
and we eventually wound up with about fourteen slot ma- 
chines in that ship’s service, and we switched a lot of them 
over to quarters instead of nickels. There wasn’t any more 
room, or we would have put even more machines in there. 
That’s all we could put in. 

That was the best location ever! The officers club did 
very well, too, but not nearly as well as the ship’s service. 
There eventually came a time when the navy decided that 
they weren’t going to allow machines in the service club 
anymore. (I believe they allowed them in the officers club, 
but they made us take them out of the ship’s service club.) 
But until then, it was a wonderful location. We had to send a 
guy to Fallon to count those machines every two or three 
days. 

My dad had some machines out at Stead for awhile, too. 
It was called Reno Army Air Base at the time. There was a 


After the Crash / 29 


Greek fellow out there that ran the officers club. I think at 
the Reno Army Air Base our slots were only in the officers 
club. They didn’t allow the enlisted men to play them. 

My mother used to have parties from time to time at home 
for Greek men in the service that were stationed at the Army 
Air Base and the Fallon navy base. She would introduce them 
to other Greek people in town, and we’d have parties at our 
house, and I remember them as wonderful, joyous occasions, 
where there’d be a great deal of laughter and dancing and 
singing, and much of it Greek. We made a concoction that 
we called a French Seventy-Five, named for the famous ar- 
tillery piece. We had a big, huge punch bowl, and we filled it 
with champagne and then poured brandy in it, and it really 
helped to make for a wonderful party. 



3 


Family 

Businesses 


A SLOT ROUTE operator would some¬ 
times actually acquire a location. Most 
locations were leased operations, where 
the location operator was leasing the pre¬ 
mises from the owner of the building— 
most of them were three-year or five-year 
leases. So when a location went broke or 
closed up or whatever, the slot route op¬ 
erator—I saw my dad do this, and I’m sure 
other operators did the same thing— 
would acquire the lease to that property, 
and he would open it and run it. My dad 
did that with the 116 Club, which was 
the forerunner of the Stein on Center 
Street. He did it with the L&L Bar in 
Yerington. He did it with Lovelock Mer¬ 
cantile Company in Lovelock. He did it 
with the Ship Bar in Carson City for a 
short time—maybe one or two others. 

The idea was to operate a place till 
you could lease it to somebody, with the 
proviso that whoever you leased it to 
would agree to keep your machines in 
there. The real aim was to be in the route 
business, but in order to help your route 
business, you’d take over these places. 
Sometimes the man who you loaned the 
money to would give you his lease as se¬ 
curity, so when he couldn’t pay, you’d 
wind up with the lease. Dad got the El 
Rancho Bar out on South Virginia Street 
that way in the early 1940s or late 1930s. 

The buildings that became the El 
Rancho Bar were known as Farley’s Dude 
Ranch when Dad acquired the place— 
about twenty-five to thirty motel units 
that had been converted from stables. 


32 / MY father’s son 


Originally, the buildings were stables for George Wingfield’s 
racetrack. Wingfield had a practice track just east of where 
these buildings sat, on Gentry Way. When Wingfield sold all 
his horses or moved them, Farley converted the stables into 
single-story motel rooms. Then Farley lost the property to 
the bank, and my dad bought the property from the bank. 
He had been operating machines in the bar, and he bought 
the whole property. He became the landlord of the El Rancho 
Bar. 

Swede Oleson and a guy named Jack were leasing the bar 
when my dad became the landlord. He became the lessor, as 
well as the slot machine operator in that bar, and he began 
to run the place as a motel, rather than as a dude ranch like 
Farley had been operating it. Dude ranches were very popu¬ 
lar in those days. It was a well-known fact that you could get 
a divorce in Reno in six weeks. Most people that came for 
divorces didn’t have much money, but a lot of wealthy women 
came, and many of them stayed in dude ranches, which were 
really nothing more than a few units and some horses and a 
cowboy or two to keep the ladies satisfied, in terms of enter¬ 
tainment and so on. 

There were a couple of locations that my dad wound up 
with that became quite significant in his life and mine. One 
of them was the 116 Club on South Center Street. Dad leased 
it to a man named Dalrymple, who everyone called Dal. As 
you walked through the bar, you came to the restaurant, and 
the restaurant was leased to Willi Brueckner and Marcel Pe¬ 
ters. They’d been around Reno for quite some time in other 
restaurant operations. They ran a wonderful dinner house. I 
went there with my mother and father on occasion, and the 
food was absolutely wonderful. The first time I ever tasted 
avocado was there .... 

Whatever happened, my dad eventually bought 
Dalrymple out, and then he ran it himself. He continued to 


Family Businesses / 33 


lease the food operation to Willi and Marcel, and he open 
ated a roulette wheel, a crap table, two twenty-one games, 
and about ten or twelve slot machines. It was during the war, 
and there was lots of business from Stead Air Force Base, 
which at that time was known as the Reno Army Air Base. 
Plus, local people would come in there because of the restau¬ 
rant. 

On busy weekends there, I learned how to rack chips 
behind a roulette wheel. I was maybe thirteen or fourteen. 
There was no question that we were breaking the law—it 
was just that anybody over eighteen that wasn’t crippled was 
away at the war . . . and the sheriff, Ray Root, was the guy 
that was responsible for taking care of any law breakers, and 
he wouldn’t bother us. My dad did it to try to teach me a 
little bit about the operation. He wanted me around, because 
he was spending less and less time in Reno because of all the 
other businesses that he was running. 

Towards the latter part of the war, around 1944, Dad got 
involved in the Lovelock Mercantile business. Lovelock 
Mercantile was a huge general store in Lovelock. Half of the 
main street on one side was the building that the Lovelock 
Mercantile owned. They sold everything from brassieres to 
tractors. They had a grocery store; they had a soda fountain; 
they had a clothing store; they had a furniture store, a hard¬ 
ware store, and so on, but they didn’t do very well. Most of 
the people in Lovelock, when they wanted to make big pur¬ 
chases, would drive to Reno. Plus, there was bad manage¬ 
ment and what have you. 

In the corner store of the Mercantile, on the corner of 
Main Street and Highway 40—the main transcontinental 
route at that time—was a soda fountain and a little coffee 
shop kind of operation. Because parking was real handy and 
easy, a lot of tourists stopped there in the summertime to get 
a soda or what have you. So it was a pretty good slot location 


34 / my father’s son 


in the summer, and I remember my dad would increase the 
number of slots there in the summer and cut them back in 
the winter. 

Dad loaned those Lovelock Mercantile folks money, and 
they never could pay him back, and eventually he acquired a 
majority of the stock in the company that owned the build- 
ing. He had control of the company, and he operated the 
corner store, and eventually, somehow, he acquired the whole 
company. Now he had this huge operation in Lovelock. He 
tried to run it with managers, but he just kept losing money. 
The slot machines would make money, but the rest of the 
store would lose more than he would make. 

Dad had his slot route, he had the 116 Club, he had the 
Mercantile, and he had the El Rancho on South Virginia. 
He was doing very well, but he was working too hard. He 
also had loaned money to some of his slot locations. . . and 
in not all cases were the locations able to pay him back. In 
some instances it was a situation where he’d give a guy a 
hundred bucks, and the guy’d pay him back; and then the 
next time, he wanted two hundred, and he’d pay that back; 
but at some point, he couldn’t pay you back. So something 
had to give, and he sold part of his slot route to a man named 
Williamson. Williamson came from California, the Vallejo 
area. He had “acquired” a great deal of cash, and he needed a 
way to legitimize this cash. He bought Dad’s business so that 
he could treat his cash as slot income, pay taxes on it, and 
thereby launder it. He made payments to my dad once a week 
in cash, and my father would march over and put that cash 
right in the bank, because he wasn’t hiding it. 

In the deal between my dad and Williamson, there was 
no caveat that my dad had to get completely out of the busi¬ 
ness, so he continued in a small way in the route business. In 
all the places that he owned, he operated his own machines, 
and Clarence Hale stayed with him, because they were still 
friends. When he sold the route to Williamson, he said, “Look, 


Family Businesses / 35 


certain of these locations are mine. They’re going to stay 
with me. I’m not selling them; I’m just selling you these oth- 
ers.” The Roundup Bar, for instance, went with him. He 
cherry picked them, so to speak, and kept the good ones. 

I helped Dad more and more with those places, and I got 
to where I could, for instance, meet with Lena Jacobs, who 
was running the Roundup Bar, and sit down and count the 
coins with her. I could go in with Clarence Hale and his son, 
Jim, who was my age (we went to school together), and Jimmy 
and I would count the money. 

I was able to help my dad in that regard while he was 
heavily involved in the Lovelock Mercantile, trying to ex- 
tricate himself from it. He began to spend three to four nights 
a week down there. He’d move down there on a Monday 
morning and stay there until Thursday. After he sold most of 
his route, he was able to devote more time to the Lovelock 
Mercantile store. He also sold the 116 Club, but he did have 
the El Rancho, which was doing a tremendous amount of 
business. Around 1944 or 1945, Jack and Swede left the El 
Rancho. Dad took over the bar and put in a crap table and a 
couple of blackjack tables. He ran those and eight or ten slot 
machines. 

Dad gave up on the Lovelock mercantile after a couple 
years and began to close it up department by department. 
The first department he closed was the meat department. 
Then he closed the grocery store, and so on. One summer he 
sent me down there to work, so I could get some experience. 
I would work there for three days a week, and then I’d come 
back to Reno and work at the motel and in the slot route 
business. 

The company that had owned the mercantile store also 
owned an alfalfa ranch, and my dad sent me out to the ranch 
to work on it at the end of one August, during the harvesting 
time for alfalfa. I worked there two days, and that was an 
experience I’ll never forget. I had to run behind the baling 


36 / MY father’s son 


machine, or walk really fast, and pick up bales—which prob¬ 
ably weighed eighty to a hundred pounds—and throw them 
on a truck bed. (This was called “bucking bales.”) I did this 
from sunup to sundown, and it was hot, and the alfalfa stuck 
in my hair and in my ears and everywhere else on my body. 
At the end of a day I’d feel whipped. I did that for two days, 
and I said to myself, “I’ve got to figure out a way that I don’t 
wind up having to work like this, because I can’t stand it. I 
can’t handle it.” Many is the time through the years that I 
thought about that, especially when I was going to college, 
and said, “If I don’t beat these books and get my degree, I 
may wind up behind a baling machine again, and I don’t 
want to do that.” 

The El Rancho was a good gaming and bar operation, 
because of the divorcee trade and local trade, and the motel 
was a help to the business of the bar. Then World War II 
broke out, and things got even better. The motel-hotel busi¬ 
ness was a great business to be in during the war. Since the 
government had ruled that there would be no new civilian 
construction, there were no new hotels or motels being built 
anywhere in the country. Yet, industry was operating day and 
night, seven days a week, producing goods for the war. The 
country had become very prosperous, with a great deal of 
travel going on—some business related, and a great number 
of service people—but with the same number of accommo¬ 
dations. 

Accommodations were extremely scarce. The govern¬ 
ment, in order to stop people from profiteering, had estab¬ 
lished an office of rent control. Everybody that operated a 
motel or hotel had to show the government what rates they 
were charging in the years 1937 and 1938, which were De¬ 
pression years. The government only let you charge a cer¬ 
tain percentage over that amount. In my father’s case, he 
was allowed to charge $3.50 a night per room; but the way 


Family Businesses / 37 


the regulations read, it was per occurrence, so that if you 
rented a room to somebody for two hours or eight hours or 
ten hours, you could rent the room again to somebody else 
in the same twenty-four hour period for $3.50. It wasn’t “hot 
sheet” business—there were just so many people traveling 
and looking for rooms. I recall being out there and seeing 
three or four cars parked in front of the motel with people 
sleeping in the cars, waiting for a room to come available. 
People were traveling across the country, going from town to 
town, needing a place to sleep and needing to shower and so 
on. So instead of $3.50 a day for a room, motel owners were 
getting seven to ten bucks a day for a room. 

I worked with the housekeeping crew, the two or three 
people that my father had out there, and we’d run in and 
change the sheets and sweep out the floor and wipe up the 
shower a little bit, and then usually the new tenant would be 
standing right by the door, wanting to rent it. One of the 
people I worked with said, “In this business the motto is, 
‘There’s two good sides to every sheet.’” I never forgot that. 
We usually put new sheets on the bed, but every now and 
then, we’d run out of sheets, so we’d just flip them over, [laugh- 
ter] 

Ten dollars a day in those days for a motel room was a lot 
of money. You didn’t spend a lot of time fixing them or clean¬ 
ing them or anything, so the labor factor wasn’t very high. 
People were being paid seventy-five cents or a dollar an hour 
to clean rooms. For amenities, we didn’t have to worry about 
anything except soap and a couple of towels. 

The bar operation at the El Rancho was making a great 
deal of money. A lot of folks would spend time in the bar 
waiting for their room to become vacant, and people that 
were interested in a little extramarital affair and needed a 
place to go to do that, would spend time in the bar, waiting 
for a room to open up. We were also the first motel that you’d 
hit on the way down from Virginia City, where there were 


38 / MY father’s son 


three or four whorehouses, and those girls, when they were 
off during their time of the month when they couldn’t work, 
would come down and spend time at the Rancho Bar. That 
was good for business, because men would come in there be¬ 
cause of the women. 

The operation was very successful, and my father was 
working very hard with long hours. He found somebody to 
lease the El Rancho Bar to, with a proviso that he operate 
the slot machines in the bar. He was not a live-game guy at 
that time—when he ran the bar, he had a man named George 
Brazil in there who ran the gaming for him. Dad understood 
and knew the games, but he didn’t want to get involved in 
them, even though the live table games were the big money 
makers. My father always felt that slot machines were the 
place to be, and that’s what he concentrated on. He liked 
them because they were not labor intensive; there was prob¬ 
ably less chance to be cheated; and for various other reasons. 

Dad leased the bar to a man named Kenny Kendall, who 
was married to Ella Mae Morris, the singer. Kenny’s brother, 
Babe, tended bar for Kenny, and the place slowly changed 
over from the popular local spot that it was and became a 
hangout for slot cheats, gaming cheats, crossroaders, and that 
kind of element. The El Rancho took on a bad name. My 
dad still owned the place, and he suffered some fallout from 
that. He tried to make it clear to everyone that he had noth¬ 
ing to do with the operation, other than running the slot 
machines in there, and when Kenny’s lease was up, he re¬ 
fused to lease to him again. 

There was even a murder at the place. Somebody got 
shot and killed in the men’s room, and whoever killed him, 
tore the window out of the men’s room and jumped out the 
window and got away. When the police came to investigate 
the killing, they found three guys in the bar: Carl Wheeler, 
who was a crossroader; a man named Goody, who always car¬ 
ried a pistol with him, and when he’d get drunk he’d lay it up 


Family Businesses / 39 


on the bar; and Joe Reed, who was tending bar in the place. 
There were also three or four others in the bar, and no one 
admitted that they’d heard a shot or any noise whatsoever! 

With Kendall gone, my dad leased the place to Guy 
Meyers and George Stone, and they ran a clean operation. 
They turned it back into the popular place it had been be- 
fore. They hired a guy named Jackson, who was a piano player 
who had played at the Townhouse downtown. Jackson was a 
great guy. He was going blind, but he could drink shots of 
whiskey for eight hours a night and still be able to play the 
piano and not fall off the stool. He was a popular entertainer. 

The years of Kenny Kendall’s being a lessee at the El 
Rancho Bar were interesting years for me. I got to know that 
there was another life besides the normal, run-of-the-mill 
kind of life that most people live. 



4 


Small 

Town 

Hell 

Raiser 


MY FATHER was the dominant person 
in the family. Absolutely—wasn’t any 
question about that! We thought that 
that was the way it was supposed to be. (I 
think my mother did too for a long time, 
but after twenty-five years of marriage, 
she decided that it shouldn’t be that way, 
and things changed a great deal.) During 
my youth it was unheard of for any of us 
to dispute anything my father would say. 
He had a very commanding presence. 
Even though he wasn’t a big man—he 
was only five foot eight—when he came 
in a room, everyone recognized that he 
was dominant. It wasn’t until I was in my 
late teens that I ever even thought about 
disputing anything that he said to me. 

We had dinner every night together 
as a family, but when I was young, family 
affairs were rarely discussed in front of the 
children. My mother and father would 
decide between themselves if we were 
going to go on a vacation, or if one of 
the children was going to have surgery, 
or go to a summer camp, or what have 
you. We could make our requests, but we 
were not included in the deliberations on 
these matters. If we were going to buy a 
new home or a new car, those kinds of 
things were never a part of the children’s 
life, because of the old Greek tradition 
that children were to be seen and not 
heard. And if there was a dispute between 
my mother and father, we were always 
kept away from that kind of thing. The 
conversations at the dinner table were 
pretty much about how we were doing in 


42 / MY father’s son 


school, what we were going to do over the weekend, how we 
dressed, whether we were behaving or not, what punishment 
might be meted out if we weren’t behaving, and that kind of 
thing. 

My dad felt that I should begin to work and earn some 
money at an early age. I was around twelve years old or so, 
maybe a little younger, when I got my first job selling Sun- 
day newspapers. My mother would take me down to a little 
news and magazine agency on Third Street, and we’d buy 
our papers there. The owner, Mr. Saul, had the town sec- 
tioned out into areas, and he gave me the area where I lived. 

My folks had moved in 1938 to 125 Circle Drive, on the 
corner of Monroe and Circle Drive in the Southwest part of 
town, so I had the area from Mount Rose Street to Califor¬ 
nia and as far west as Plumas. I would knock on all those 
doors and ask people if they would like a newspaper deliv¬ 
ered on Sunday; and if they did, then I’d make a note of the 
address, and on Sunday mornings I’d bring them a newspa¬ 
per, and they’d pay me. It would take me all morning. I’d 
start out pretty close to daybreak to get my papers. I had a 
little cart that Mr. Saul furnished, and I’d put the papers in 
it—the San Francisco Examiner and a local paper. I’d buy them 
from Saul for, say, twenty cents a paper, and I’d sell them for 
twenty-five, so I’d make the nickel. If I had any papers left 
over, I ate the loss. Saul didn’t want them, because they were 
history, so the idea was to keep hustling and to keep selling 
until you got rid of all your papers, because you weren’t going 
to get your money back for any of them. 

My mother was a very gentle woman, and one of the 
things that she tried to instill in me and her other children 
was that we should not ever participate in any violence of 
any kind. We should be courteous; we should be polite. She 
tried to train us in that manner to the best of her ability, and 
she was vigilant in that area. If we would show bad manners 


Small Town Hell Raiser / 43 


or wouldn’t use a napkin or talk with our mouth full, she 
corrected us. I think she instilled honesty in us, because she 
was a very honest person; and whatever courage we had came 
from her as well as my father. And, of course, she went to 
great pains to make sure that we did attend church when we 
could and observe the religious holidays and know about the 
Greek religion. 

Within our family, the division was that our mother raised 
the children, and my father ran the business without any 
input from her. She was happy enough to do it that way, and, 
anyway, she had her hands full with three kids. 

We always had everything we wanted, but we weren’t in 
a situation where we were spoiled or where we had much 
more than we needed. Everything was adequate, and it was 
good quality. We Greeks love to eat, and we had the best 
food. My dad knew about the produce business, and my uncle, 
who used to come and stay with us, made sure we had the 
freshest produce and the best meats, because eventually he 
got in the meat business, as well. We ate very well, and we 
lived in a very fine home. 

When I was born, we lived at 622 1/2 Ryland Street, 
which was a little house in an alley about a block west of 
Wells Avenue. Shortly after I was born, we moved to a house 
at 737 West Fifth Street. It was a brick home that had two 
bathrooms and three bedrooms, and it was a pretty decent 
home for those days. That was probably in 1931, and we lived 
there until 1938. In 1938 my father bought a fine home at 
125 Circle Drive for $17,000. It was brand new with hard¬ 
wood floors and tile bathrooms, built on two lots. 

We had everything that we wanted, but, when it was time 
for me to get a car, I got a Chevrolet. We had nice clothes, 
we had food, but everything was always given to us in a way 
that we understood that we should be grateful for it. We 
shouldn’t ask for anything more than what we really needed, 
and we should begin to think about trying to work for it. 


44 / MY FATHER’S SON 


One of the things that my dad made it a point to tell me 
was, “Look, you are the oldest male child. When I die, you’re 
going to take over.” He started talking to me about that when 
I was really young, in my early teens, maybe even earlier than 
that. It was pretty much handed down to me that my brother 
and sister were my responsibility, and that I needed to be 
cognizant that, because I was the oldest one, I had these spe- 
cial responsibilities. 

I was told that in everything I did, I should keep my 
brother and sister in mind. And all the things that we ever 
did in business together, even though I was the president of 
the company, we shared alike—one third, one third, one 
third. I got that from my father. He said to me, “You don’t 
want to have arguments about money. The way to prevent 
that is by treating everybody alike. And you, because you’re 
the oldest person, have to take the bull by the horns, and 
even though you do more work and have more responsihih 
ity, you need to share everything with your brother and sister 
evenly.'’ I did that for most of my life. We did have some 
extenuating circumstances when my brother became ill, but 
the family came first, absolutely! Religion and family were, 
and are, the most important things in my life. 

From the earliest time I can remember, my dad talked 
about college for all of us, and if any of us ever said, “Well, I 
don’t know why I should go to college,” we were instantly 
silenced. It’s only because of my father that I did graduate 
from college. 

My father was quite a role model. He had the greatest 
willpower of any man I’ve ever known. Around 1940 or so, 
he just decided he was going to quit gambling, so he did. 
And about two years later he decided to quit smoking. He 
smoked one more cigarette, and that was the end. I wish that 
I could be like that. It took me eight years, for Christ’s sake, to 
stop smoking cigarettes! [laughter] 


Small Town Hell Raiser / 45 


I started grammar school (there was no kindergarten) 
at the Mary S. Doten school. At first, Mother sent me to 
school in a pair of short, black, velvet pants. All she knew 
about school in Greece was that children should be dressed 
nice to go to school. Most of the kids in Reno came to school 
in overalls or some such informal attire, but my mother felt 
it was important that we learn to dress properly. So here I 
was, a really shy child at that time, coming to school in short, 
black, velvet pants! [laughter] 

I would wait until the bell rang, because I could hear it 
from the front lawn of my house, and when I heard the bell 
ring, then I’d run to the school. That way I could keep from 
being harassed by my classmates. I had a great deal of trouble 
over these clothes, and I wound up in some fights, forced to 
defend myself. I’d come home on occasion with a bloody nose 
or scraped hands or elbows or black eyes. 

My folks were wondering why I was having all this trouble, 
and I would try to explain to my mother that it just wasn’t 
going to work —that I couldn’t go to school in black velvet 
pants. Sometimes she would relent, but other times she still 
felt that it was her duty to make sure that I looked nice. 

At the end of first grade, I was held back a year. The 
school said it was because I couldn’t yet speak English well 
enough to keep up, and they were right. But I think there 
was also another reason. I was always thinking about how I 
was going to escape when the school bell rang and class was 
over—how I was going to escape these bullies and get home 
without getting my head knocked off. I was worried more 
about that than I was about trying to learn anything. 

There may have been other factors. My brother was born 
in 1938, and he had pneumonia, and they thought that he 
was going to die. My mother was also quite ill, because he 
was thirty days late in coming. (The doctor gave my dad his 
choice about whether to save the mother or the child, and 


46 / MY father’s son 


he said, “Well, I have to save my wife, because I have these 
other two children to take care of.”) My brother lived, but 
he was very ill. 

We were living in this small home; I was having trouble 
at school. . . and my father could afford it, so he sent me 
away to military school when I was eight years old. The school 
was in San Rafael in Marin County, California. When I went 
in September, I didn’t come home until Thanksgiving, and 
then for Christmas vacation I came home. Then I came home 
for Easter, and I was in San Rafael until the first part of June. 
I was lonely and sad. It was a long time to be all by myself 
without my family . . . without my mother, especially. And 
my dad, of course—I had love for him, as well. 

I only went a year that first time, but I went back later. I 
came home after a year, and during the time I was gone my 
family had moved from West Fifth Street to Circle Drive, so 

when I returned, I be¬ 
gan school at Mt. 
Rose. Then I went to 
Billinghurst for junior 
high school, and then 
on to Reno High. 

I had some of the 
most wonderful times 
of my life as a student 
at Reno High. It was a 
carefree time. We used 
to cut school once in 
awhile. There was only 
one truant officer in 
town. His name was 
Neil Scott, and I got to 
“I was lonely and sad. It was a long time know him intimately. 
to be all by myself without my family . . . [laughter] 










Small Town Hell Raiser / 47 


Just before you got to Lawton’s on West Fourth Street, 
there was a cave. We just called it the cave, and everybody 
knew what we were talking about. We had beer busts out 
there, and we’d go out there and sit around and smoke when 
we were playing hooky. It was quite a popular place with the 
high school group. Also, there was sort of a sand pit out at 
the end of Seventh Street at that time, and we’d go there 
and see whose car was fastest from a dead stop to a spot two 
or three hundred yards up a paved strip, and we’d try to see 
how much rubber we could lay. That was another one of our 
recreations, [laughter] 

Lawton’s was run by Mark Yori. The Yoris were an old- 
time family here. They owned Yori Land and Livestock, and 
they made a great deal of money in the ranching business. 
At Lawton’s they had a casino, a restaurant, a meeting hall 
(sort of a banquet hall), and a huge swimming pool. There 
were natural hot springs out there. They had two or three 
diving boards, and they had a high board. One of my first 
experiences in swimming was diving off of that high board— 
first jumping off and then learning how to dive off that board. 
That was quite an accomplishment for me, because I wasn’t 
really a good swimmer. Also, Lawton’s was a place for high 
school graduation parties and that sort of thing. 

The proms were held principally in the gymnasium of 
Reno High or Huskies Haven, which was a building on the 
corner of South Center Street, right where the Washoe 
County Library is now. It was an old two-story building that 
must have been supported by city recreation money. They’d 
have dances there, and it was a place that we could go after 
school. Huskies Haven was open after school up till prob¬ 
ably seven or eight o’clock. Usually, Friday night and Satur¬ 
day night, they’d have dances. Kids would bring their records 
there and play them, and on big occasions, like a graduation 
dance or something like that, they’d have live music. But 


48 / MY father’s son 


most of the time it was just an old Victrola. I didn’t have a 
whole lot to do with Huskies Haven. 

I had peculiar ideas about dating and about girls in those 
days. I’m not quite sure how that all came about. I think I 
had a certain shyness—more so than other boys—when it 
came to talking to young girls that I attended school with, 
and I had very few dates. Instead, I fell in with some older 
boys who frequented little bars around town where women 
hung out. These women were at least twenty-one years old, 
and many were casino workers. I had a better rapport with 
them. 

I was friendly with many of the girls that I went to school 
with, but they were just like buddies, really. I didn’t consider 
them to be objects of a romantic association. The females 
that I was thinking about in those terms were ladies that I 
met in these little bars around town. 

There was a place called the Bluebird Club on Commer- 
cial Row, between Virginia Street and Sierra Street, and it 
was a place that didn’t really care how old you were. I was 
tall for my age, and I didn’t have a great deal of difficulty 
being served there. There was a shortage of men, so it made 
it easy for those of us that were of high school age to go in 
and strike up a conversation with the ladies. A great many of 
these women were looking for some male companionship, 
and once I learned the ropes, so to speak, I pretty much kept 
away from high school girls, other than the friends that I’d 
made. 

From time to time the guys I hung out with would go up 
to the Virginia City houses of prostitution. A group of us 
would drive up there, maybe four or five of us, but none of us 
ever had very much money. At that time, it cost three dob 
lars to have sex with a lady in the house. As we wouldn’t 
have enough money for all of us to go in, we’d draw straws, 
and if we had six bucks, then the two guys with the longest 


Small Town Hell Raiser / 49 


straws got to go in. The 
rest of us would wait out 
in the car and think of 
all the things that were 
going on inside, [laugh- 
ter] 

There was prostitu¬ 
tion in Reno, but the 
cribs in the red light 
district were pretty well 
policed by their own 
personnel (not the po¬ 
lice department), and 
they wouldn’t let us in. 

Virginia City, because 
it was so out of the way, 
didn’t seem to care too 
much. If you had three 
dollars in your hand, you could get through the door real 
easy. 

At Reno High, I attended a speech class taught by Roger 
Joseph, who helped me get over my shyness. He would as¬ 
sign us certain subjects, and then we would write out a three- 
minute speech and deliver it before the class. It was a very 
difficult thing for me to do. I was extremely nervous about 
speaking to the class, and I would be apprehensive and have 
a very difficult time delivering a speech. Roger Joseph was a 
wonderful teacher, and he could see that I was nervous about 
all this, so, at his suggestion, I’d come in after class, and he 
would help me in my delivery. He also helped me to get over 
my shyness. 

There were two or three other people at Reno High that 
were very important in my life, because of the examples they 
set and because of their dedication to teaching young people. 











50 / MY father’s son 


One was Bud Beasley, an extremely devoted man. Anybody 
that went to Reno High School in the last fifty years or so 
knows Bud Beasley. He’s influenced many lives. One of the 
things that Bud did for me, as well as for other boys like my¬ 
self, was instill in me the idea that even though much of the 
time in sports you might sit on the bench, you were still im¬ 
portant. You didn’t have to be a star. You could still play, you 
could still be an athlete, you could do your part. 

I didn’t play much in organized sports during my high 
school and junior high years. I was an uncoordinated boy, 
who had a great deal of medical problems, including broken 
arms and legs and ankles and that kind of thing. I partici¬ 
pated in athletics only because Bud encouraged me. He made 
me understand that I didn’t need to be a star, but that it was 
important that I learn team work. He also led me to under¬ 
stand that individual sports, like wrestling and tennis, were 
important and something that I should learn. Teamwork is 
one thing, but you need to depend on yourself in certain 
instances, and Bud would force us to wrestle and box during 
physical education classes. 

Our principal was Roger Corbett, a gentleman who ran a 
strict ship; but when you were a disciplinary problem, you 
were first confronted by Vice Principal Gallagher, who was 
in charge of discipline. Gallagher would mete out the pun¬ 
ishment, which generally consisted of being barred from cer¬ 
tain social events if you had too many absences or played 
hooky or were late to school or scuffled in the hallways or 
disrupted the classroom. If Gallagher couldn’t calm you down, 
then you had to face Roger Corbett, and Roger Corbett would 
stare holes right through you. He was a very fair-minded man, 
but we all pretty much accepted that his word was law, and 
he kept us from straying too far. After he retired from the 
school system, he went to work for the district attorney’s of¬ 
fice as an investigator. 


Small Town Hell Raiser / 51 


Herb Foster was the football and basketball coach at Reno 
High. He was a gruff, outspoken militarist, and he brooked 
no nonsense. The little bit that I played on the football team 
taught me that Herb Foster didn’t put up with any foolish- 
ness. If you wanted to play, if you wanted to practice, if you 
were serious about it, Herb would allow you to do so. If you 
fooled around, and you weren’t interested in it, Herb would 
cut you. 

I made some lifetime friends in school. One was Roy 
Torvinen, who became a district court judge here. He was 
also a member of the legislature, and he was city attorney in 
Reno and probably one of the most honest men that I ever 
met in my life. I spent many years trying to get him to be not 
so honest—he took honesty to a length that was probably 
too much. Every time I wound up in Roy’s court, he’d see 
that I was removed to another court, because he didn’t want 
anybody to say that because of our friendship he would do 
anything untoward. That worked to my disadvantage. 

On several occasions, especially in the case of my mother’s 
estate, I was thrown into the court of a judge who was infe¬ 
rior. Some judges simply were not the type that Roy was. 
They didn’t view things like he did, and they didn’t have the 
honesty that Roy had. So, because of our friendship, I some¬ 
times wound up before judges that were less than the judicial 
type of person I could have had. When Roy ran his election 
campaigns, I helped him with money and with work, and I 
used to say to him, “Roy, your opponent is attacking your 
character. You need to do the same thing to him.” He abso¬ 
lutely refused to do anything along those lines. He always 
said his record would be the thing he’d stand on, and he would 
never stoop to attacking anyone’s integrity. He never lost an 
election that I can recall, so he probably did the right thing 
in not paying attention to what I told him. 


52 / MY father’s son 


Harry Rovetti was the most aggressive of my friends. 
While still in high school, he started two or three businesses, 
and for a short time I worked with him in one—draining 
septic tanks at Lake Tahoe. Harry was the glue that kept our 
group together: Roy, Bob Moore, Frank Sala, myself, and 
Harry. He was the guy that would get us together. We learned 
to scuba dive together. We water skied for many years to- 
gether—he got us interested in that. (We bought a boat to¬ 
gether after we got out of college, and we all learned to ski 
together.) We’d go on trips together to Mexico, to Hawaii, 
and Harry would organize all this stuff—he was a guy that 
just couldn’t sit still. 

Unfortunately, Harry died about twenty years ago from 
cancer, and we have drifted apart more than I would want 
to, but without Harry there was no glue. We are still in touch, 
but I know that if Harry was here, we’d be in touch a lot 
more. These are the folks that I went on to college with, that 
were instrumental in making me understand, along with my 
father, that college was important. 

The other group of people that I became friends with 
was somewhat more adventuresome. I had a great deal of 
freedom. The old Greek tradition is that the oldest son takes 
over for the father and inherits everything. Then it’s up to 
him to see that his brothers and sisters are taken care of. In 
my case, that wasn’t true. My father always treated the three 
of us equally. We inherited equally from him, and he paid us 
equally . . . but he did give me a great deal more freedom 
than my brother and sister; especially my sister, and she is 
only two years younger than me. 

I had a job that allowed me to get out of the house al¬ 
most every night—I was a janitor at the Cladianos Building, 
and I cleaned the offices on the second floor nightly. That 
allowed me to be out, because I couldn’t start until after they 
all closed. And the fact that I was out put me in touch with 


Small Town Hell Raiser / 53 


other boys that were out a lot. Among that group was a Greek 
boy whose name was Angelo Anastasakis. His father owned 
a little restaurant down on Commercial Row (I believe it 
was called the Popular Cafe), and my dad had a couple of 
slot machines in his restaurant. He was a man who worked 
all the time, and Angelo also had a lot of freedom. 

Angelo had an older brother named John who was away 
in the army, so Angelo had inherited John’s car. He was only 
fourteen years old or so, but he had transportation, and that 
was the reason we could do a lot of things that other kids 
couldn’t do. It was hard to get around if you didn’t have your 
own automobile. 

In our group of boys, there was one named John Burns, 
who came here from back East. His mother worked at the 
Riverside Hotel as a waitress, and her husband worked in the 
gaming industry. They both worked swing shift, so John had 
a great deal of freedom too. That was one reason we banded 



Lounging with John Burns (right) next to the V&T Railroad tracks 
near South Virginia St. and Gentry Way, 1946. 





54 / my father’s son 


together. We remained friends until he passed away a few 
years ago. Unfortunately, John was one of so many in my 
generation who succumbed to alcohol and cigarettes. He just 
wouldn’t stop either one, and they killed him. 

We had in our group a guy named John Meckes, whose 
folks owned a little convenience store off of North Virginia 
Street, up near the university. They were open in the eve- 
nings, and John had a lot of free time, so he was also out 
there with us. 

I never have been a joiner, and although there were clubs 
in high school, I didn’t belong to any except an informal, 
unauthorized fraternity known as Gamma Eta Kappa. We 
were called “Geeks” after the initials. There was another fra- 
ternity with more boys in it, but the fellows that I was ac- 
quainted with were members of the Geeks. Since these were 
not really schoobsponsored fraternities, we were not able to 
hold events at the school, but we would hold them other 
places . . . pretty much what we’re really talking about here 
is beer busts! [laughter] That was the extent of our social 
events. 

In my second year of high school, my father became aware 
that I was drinking in bars, dating older women, visiting Vir¬ 
ginia City brothels, and occasionally committing petty 
thefts. . . and other things. He became quite disturbed. The 
last straw was when the police called him to come down¬ 
town and get me out of the drunk tank. So, in my second 
year of high school, I was sent back to the San Rafael Mili¬ 
tary Academy. It was an altogether different experience than 
I had had the first time. 

San Rafael Military Academy was composed of, essen¬ 
tially, two kinds of students. There was the student from a 
very wealthy family that wanted its child to go to a private 
school. Then, there were other students that attended be- 


Small Town Hell Raiser / 55 


cause they were disciplinary problems or had been asked to 
leave public schools. 

At San Rafael Military Academy, life was regimented, 
discipline was severe, and physical training and athletics were 
mandatory. It was a wonderful experience. My year there 
taught me that I was responsible for my failures, whatever 
they might be, and I had to pay the price. Through my father’s 
wisdom in sending me there, I was able to learn that lesson. 
I also made one or two life-time friends at that place, and I 
learned a different culture. 

At the end of my year at San Rafael, my father wanted 
me to stay another year. I promised him that I’d learned my 
lesson, and that I could be trusted to come back to school, 
and that I wouldn’t engage in the activities that had caused 
me problems before. So he gave me that chance; he allowed 
me to come back. Unfortunately, I didn’t keep my promises. 
I still had some difficulties, but once he allowed me to come 
back, it was too late for him to do anything about it, and I 
graduated and went on to college. 



Company C, San Rafael Military Academy, 1944.1 am third from 
the left in the back row. 







56 / MY father’s son 


When the United States entered World War II, there 
were a couple of Japanese kids in my school, and they moved 
them and their families down to Inyokern to the internment 
camp. It was really foolish, but I guess the government didn’t 
know what the hell was going to happen. I guess it couldn’t 
be helped. The father of one of the kids, Mr. Fuji, had a nurs- 
ery on Wells Avenue, Nevada Nursery. We had a kid named 
Buster Chikami, and they moved his family, also. 

There weren’t very many Japanese in Reno then. And 
we had only one black student in Reno High, Ken Hyliger. 
(He wasn’t a Negro that was descended from slaves that they 
brought over here—he was an immigrant that came from 
England, and I got to know him pretty well.) We did have a 
few Chinese families, and we had some American Indians. 
But most of the kids at Reno High were Caucasian, so we 
simply didn’t have the kinds of problems that existed in the 
East and other places. 

When I was growing up, we had a few Indians in Reno, 
and there was prejudice by the white folks against them. I 
felt that the Indians were kind of inferior. We had two or 

three that attended 
school with us. There 
was Phelan Sampson, 
his brother Floyd, 
maybe one or two oth¬ 
ers. We treated them 
like they were one of us, 
but downtown we would 
see Indian men that had 
had too much to drink, 
staggering along a street 
or sitting in a door¬ 
way—not a great num¬ 
ber of them, but once in 
awhile. 



Ken Hyliger and I have remained 
friends. (1997 photo) 





Small Town Hell Raiser / 57 


The feeling was that Indians simply couldn’t handle ah 
cohol, and I guess that’s why the government didn’t allow 
them to drink. We took advantage of that, and that’s an- 
other way that we raised a few dollars when we needed it to 
go to Virginia City or what have you. We would go to a li¬ 
quor store and buy Indians a quart of beer or a bottle of whis¬ 
key. They’d give us the money, and we’d charge them fifty 
cents or a dollar to buy the alcohol for them. We did have 
some prejudice against Indians. Blacks, no. And I think the 
reason is, there simply weren’t that many blacks here. 

I didn’t experience any prejudice against Greeks, but my 
dad told me many stories about it. When he first came to 
this country, not only was there prejudice against Greeks, 
but there was prejudice against Polish people and people from 
Czechoslovakia and Turks and so on and so forth; but when 
I grew up in old Reno, we didn’t really have that kind of 
problem. 

Back then, before the casinos took over, there were a lot 
of businesses downtown. There was a place that we used to 
go called Wilson’s Drugs. It was on the corner of First and 
Virginia Street, and it had a soda fountain. We’d go to there 
after school, and the big rage in those days was a chocolate 
Coke. They’d give you a glass of Coke and put a dollop of 
chocolate in it, and then you’d stir it up. 

Sears and Woolworth had stores in downtown Reno. Herz 
Jewelry was on Virginia Street, and the I. Magnin women’s 
clothing store was there. Sunderlin Shoes was there. Many 
stores were along Virginia Street, most of them on the west 
side of the street. The east side of Virginia Street, between 
Commercial Row and Second Street was pretty much res¬ 
taurants and casinos. The Monarch Cafe was between First 
and Second, and there was a Victory Cafe on the corner of 
the alley, where the Primadonna was built later. And then, 
across the alley, there was Southworth’s Cigar Store. 


58 / MY father’s son 


“Pop” South worth, as he was known, was a councilman 
and one of the civic leaders of the town for many years. He 
was very friendly with the gaming interests, and he essen¬ 
tially represented them on the city council. One of the rea¬ 
sons he took care of them is that he had the cigarette con¬ 
cession in most of the gaming establishments. It sort of went 
hand in hand—they gave him all the cigarette concessions; 
he made sure that they were well represented on the council. 

In the middle of the block between Center and Virginia, 
on the north side of First street, there was a brokerage house 
called J.A. Hogle. My dad spent a lot of time in there, play¬ 
ing the stock market. They had a ticker-tape machine, and 
they would flash the tape up on a screen on the wall and 
enlarge it. Folks would go in there and read the tape, look for 
their stock, see the trades going across, and watch the price 
of the stock fluctuate. My dad would spend two or three hours 
in there every morning, and, of course, there were press re¬ 
leases and that sort of thing that came in there, too. You got 
all the latest financial news in J.A. Hogle’s, and it was the 
only brokerage house in town for many, many years. 

On the northwest corner of Second and Center Street 
was Hale’s Drugstore. That was one of my dad’s best slot route 
locations. He had six or eight slot machines in there. Hale 
was doing pretty well with them, so he threw out some drugs 
and added more slot machines. There was a club on Center 
Street called the Inferno. We used to go there to look for 
girls. The Ship and Bottle on Center Street was one of my 
dad’s slot locations, so I didn’t hang out in there, but when I 
was working for my dad, I’d go in there with his service men 
to fix the machines or count the money. 

There weren’t many real restaurants in the town center. 
Most of those places were just bars, but there were some ex¬ 
ceptions. In the 116 Club, my dad leased out the restaurant 
to Willi Brueckner and Marcel Peters. The food was wonder¬ 
ful there, and they had a great reputation. The Club Fortune 


Small Town Hell Raiser / 59 


had a restaurant, and they had a pretty good reputation. The 
Trocadero in the El Cortez Hotel was quite a famous night 
club locally, and they served food. (The casinos didn’t serve 
any food in those days.) A lot of these places were really just 
gin mills. They were just bars. I mean, you just went in there 
for one thing .... Well, two things: ladies and alcohol, [laugh¬ 
ter] 

When I wasn’t in school, I used to meet my dad for lunch 
in the Golden coffee shop or the Overland coffee shop. When 
the Mapes opened, we’d eat in the Coach Room a lot. At the 
116 Club, they didn’t serve lunch, but we used to eat dinner 
as a family in the 116 Club. In those days in Reno, it was 
unusual for families to go out to eat—it was usually a special 
occasion. 

When I was going to school, we didn’t have a cafeteria, 
so, once we had wheels, we’d go to the drive-ins. Lee’s Drive- 
In was on North Sierra Street, between Fourth and Third 
Streets on the west side of the street. Then, around the cor¬ 
ner, there was a drive-in for a time called the Boys’ Drive-In. 
The rougher element in town hung out there, so I was there— 
not because I was a rough guy, but because I liked to hang 
out with the few guys that rode motorcycles and so on. 

There was a great number of servicemen in Reno during 
the war years, because troop trains used to pull into town 
and stop and let the servicemen off for an hour or two. You’d 
see a lot of service guys, mostly army people, walking up and 
down the streets and in the casinos. Everybody liked service 
people, because we knew that they were putting their lives 
on the line for us and for the country, and we were all patri¬ 
otic folks. It wasn’t like the later wars when there were some 
dissenters. 

As teenagers, if the war lasted long enough, we would 
have to go to war ourselves, and we used that as a method to 
get things that we wanted. Sometimes we’d go into a bar to 


60 / MY father’s son 


buy a drink, and the bartender would ask for our I.D., and we 
would say, “Look, we’re not twenty-one years old, but in a 
year or two, we’re going to be drafted, and we’re going to go 
to war and fight. You mean to tell me that you’re not going 
to give us a beer?” And it worked pretty good. We also used 
that when we talked to older ladies, ladies that were over 
twenty-one. We’d say, “You know, maybe I’m only eighteen, 
but don’t forget, I’m going to be out there laying my life down 
for you.” It was a pretty good line. 

During the war, they rationed gas. We had coffee ration- 
ing. We had sugar rationing. We had butter rationed, and 
also meat. (You needed red points to get meat, and you could 
only get so much meat.) To help put food on the table, my 
brother and sister and I, with my mother’s help, had a Vic¬ 
tory Garden: carrots, tomatoes, potatoes, green beans. Be¬ 
cause there was a shortage of food, the government urged 
everyone to grow their own vegetables, so that commercially 
farmed food could go to the armed forces. Greek people like 
to eat a lot of greens, so we grew different greens, and we’d 
also pick dandelion greens. My mother would boil the greens 
and put olive oil and lemon juice on them. 

Later on in the war, my folks expended a great deal of 
effort and money for Greek War Relief. The Greek War Re¬ 
lief was organized by AHEPA, the American Hellenic Edu¬ 
cational Progressive Association. It was organized in the early 
1920s to help Greek people in this country network with 
each other, learn the English language, understand the cus¬ 
toms of this country, and so on. For Greek War Relief, money 
was donated to them, as well as clothes, shoes, hats, that sort 
of thing. It was for the people in Greece that were being 
starved by the German occupation army, because the Ger¬ 
mans took away everything. We were closely involved with 
it. We felt we were helping them in the only way that we 
could. 


Small Town Hell Raiser / 61 


I began to follow the progress of World War II shortly 
after Pearl Harbor. My mother could see that I had quite an 
interest, and she bought me two or three big scrapbooks. I 
would cut articles and pictures out of the paper and paste 
them into the scrapbooks. The Pacific theater was pretty 
much all in one book, but the European theater was two or 
three different books. When the Italians invaded Greece, I 
started a book, because we were very interested in the war 
between the Italians and the Greeks. We were quite proud of 
the Greek nation and the Greek army, because the Italians 
suffered defeat after defeat after defeat. Then Hitler decided 
that he had better get into the war, and he turned the Ger¬ 
man army loose on the Greek army, and then they didn’t 
have a chance. 



5 

Hellenic 

Reno 


IN BIGGER CITIES, the Greek church 
was usually the focal point for the Greek 
community. Most of the time, there 
would be a Greek school associated with 
the church, so that Greek-Americans 
could learn to speak, read, and write 
Greek. Since there wasn’t a Greek church 
in Reno, we didn’t have that opportunity 
when I was a kid. Although my mother 
taught my sister to write some Greek, I 
never learned; but I did learn to speak it, 
because the first language in our home 
was Greek. 

My sister and my mother and I 
learned English out of the same book for 
a few years when my sister and I were 
going to grammar school. I had to repeat 
the first grade, because the teacher felt I 
didn’t understand what she was saying. 
It was probably true—I didn’t know 
enough English to understand what was 
going on. When I was held back, my 
mother decided that we were going to 
have to speak more English in our home, 
and that she was going to have to learn 
to speak it. My dad had long ago decided 
that he had to learn the language as well 
as he could; and so, for all of these rea¬ 
sons, we all tried to speak English more 
than Greek. So we lost a lot of our abil¬ 
ity to speak Greek, and I never did learn 
to write the language. 

Greek Easter is a week-long event 
with church services every day, and since 
there was no church in Reno, there were 
several times when I was young that we 
went to Sacramento and spent a whole 


64 / my father’s son 


week there going to church. At other times we’d only go 
down for the last two or three days, for the weekend, because 
there’s a big service Friday night and a big service Saturday 
night. Then, Easter Sunday, there’s a short service in the 
morning followed by a big celebration where the Greek tra- 
dition is to barbecue a lamb. Of course, you’ve been fasting 
all this time, up until the day of Easter; then you get to eat 
barbecued lamb and all the things that you had given up. 
Greek Easter was a very important time for us—a religious 
time and a holiday time—and we did keep that tradition. 

The other tradition that we kept up was celebrating name 
days. I don’t think they do this anymore, but when my par- 
ents lived in Greece, they didn’t celebrate birthdays. They 
only celebrated their name days. For example, my name is 
Pete, so I would celebrate St. Peter’s Day, which is August 
15. We began to celebrate both our name days and our birth' 
days in this country, because the American custom was to 
celebrate birthdays. We had friends who celebrated their 
birthdays, so my mother felt that it was important that we be 
able to celebrate our birthdays as well as our name days. 

There may have been thirty to forty Greek families in 
the Reno area when I was young. A few were from the island 
of Zakinthos —Zante—that my folks were from. One man who 
was here when my father got here was a man named John 
Lougaris. He had fought in the First World War in the U.S. 
army, and he’d been gassed, so he was collecting disability. 
He was partially disabled, but you wouldn’t know it. Lougaris 
was a friend of my dad’s, a tenant in the building downtown 
that my dad and my uncle had built in 1923. He lived to be 
ninety-seven or ninety-eight years old, and the Veteran’s 
Administration Hospital here in Reno has a wing named af- 
ter him. 

Lougaris became a lawyer without going to law school. 
He studied under a judge up in Virginia City, and he used to 


Hellenic Reno / 65 


buy fresh vegetables and fruit from my father’s store and take 
them up to Virginia City to the judge. My dad and my uncle 
always said that they were responsible for John becoming a 
lawyer, because it was the only way the judge could get fresh 
fruit and vegetables up in Virginia City! 

There was also a Pappas family in Sparks that became 
very important in my life. James and Catherine Pappas had 
three sons and a daughter. Jim worked on the railroad, and 
Catherine was a housewife. One of their boys, Gus, died as a 
teenager, drowned in Washoe Lake. He was out there with 
his brothers trying out a boat that they had put together. 
The other two brothers attended college, went in the army, 
came back after the war, and started a little business called 
Nick and Paul’s Service. It was a gas station and repair shop 
located at 40 B Street, and it was the last business on the east 
end of Sparks at that time. They stayed there over forty years. 
N ick married a lady named Vaslie Argeres, and they had four 
children. One was named Althea, and she’s now my wife. 
Little did I know, many years ago, that someday I’d marry 
one of the Pappas kids. I remember when my wife was born— 
she is twenty years younger than I am. 

Another Greek family in Reno was the Angelides fam¬ 
ily. Angie Angelides was a wonderful person. She started the 
only Greek school that we ever had here in Reno. For many 
years, she, with some help from some other Greek ladies, 
taught the younger children how to read and write Greek. It 
was after I had graduated from college and gone in the army, 
and so I never got to attend that school, but my wife did, and 
it was one of the ways that some of the young folks learned 
to read and write Greek. If it hadn’t been for Angie, that 
never would have happened. Her husband was a supporter of 
the Greek church and Greek organizations in Reno. 

Danny and Perry Varzos were also staunch members of 
the community. Danny Varzos was an entertainer in his youth. 
He was a piano player, but he also learned the food business. 


66 / MY father’s son 


He became a restaurant manager, and he worked for my fa- 
ther for awhile in the early 1950s. 

There was a family in Sparks called the Lemberes family. 
The lady’s name was Stella—she came over here from Greece. 
Her husband died when her children were very young, prob- 
ably in the 1930s. Her brother, Nick, lived with them and 
worked for the railroad. He stayed single all of his life, and 
he helped her raise her four children—three boys and a girl. 
The girl’s name was Dula, and she became a very close friend 
of my mother’s. For years and years, until she became crippled 
and in a wheelchair, she always went to the cemetery on my 
mother’s birthday and left flowers for my mother. 

My folks were very close with the Lemberes family. The 
youngest Lemberes boy, Alex, went to West Point with my 
dad’s help. My dad knew a senator and a congressman, and 
when Alex applied, they helped him get an appointment. 
Alex retired from the army with the rank of full colonel, and 
he now lives here in Reno. 

Another man who was very important in the Greek com¬ 
munity at that time was a man named Angelo Pappas—same 
name as my in-laws, but not related. (Pappas is a name that 
is as common among Greek-Americans as Smith is in En¬ 
glish. It’s really a shortened form of a lot of Greek names.) 
Angelo was a detective on the Reno police force for thirty- 
five, forty years, maybe. If any of the Greek folks got into any 
difficulty with the Reno P.D., Angelo would come to their 
aid and help them out, especially those Greeks that didn’t 
speak English well. Angelo was married to a lady named Rose, 
who is not Greek, but she also became a strong supporter of 
the Greek community and church. 

In the early 1930s, when the country was in a depression, 
there were some Greek families in Reno that were having a 
very difficult time. They were quite poor, and they were re¬ 
ally having some trouble feeding their families. During this 
time people like Bill Pappas, Angelo Pappas, my father, John 


Hellenic Reno / 67 


Lougaris, and other folks that I’ve probably left out, went to 
great lengths to see that these families were fed and clothed. 
They actually gave money out of their own pockets in a coh 
lective effort to make sure that Greek folks in this commu¬ 
nity wouldn’t suffer. That, of course, pulled the community 
together and made for a pretty solid group. 

My parents were friendly with some Greek people that 
lived in Portola. There were two brothers up there, Tom and 
Gus Nichols. (In Greek, Tom’s first name was Athanasi.) 
Tom, who became my godfather, operated a bar and a restau¬ 
rant in Portola, and his brother operated a laundry and had a 
little trucking company. We would many times go to Portola 
and spend a day, maybe go on a picnic at Beckwourth, or 
they would come down and spend a day with us. 

Tom had six children. The oldest girl was a girl that I had 
a crush on. Her nickname was Kiki, and I always have thought 
that was a unique name. I christened my youngest daughter 
with the name Kiki before she was born. (Her real name is 
Leslie, but I always call her Kiki, and all of our family calls 
her Kiki.) 

Another man that was important to the Greek commu¬ 
nity was Chris Kakouris. Chris worked at the Washoe Gen¬ 
eral Hospital in the surgery department. He was an orderly, 
and when Greeks wound up in Washoe Hospital, he’d do 
little favors for them. He’d make sure that they got the kind 
of food they wanted—within limits, of course—and he’d do 
everything he could so that they’d be comfortable in the 
hospital. (I was a patient at the hospital on several occa¬ 
sions. When I was young, I had a problem with breaking my 
legs and my arms, and I’d wind up in the hospital. When I’d 
start playing team sports, I’d wind up with a broken leg, and 
that was the end of my season!) 

Peter Demosthenes and family were old-time Reno resi¬ 
dents that had come from Greece, probably in the early 1920s. 
Mr. Demosthenes started an ice-cream creamery that he 


68 / MY father’s son 


called the Velvet Ice Cream Company. The building still 
stands just past the police station on Second Street, very close 
to Wells, and there’s a sign around on the east side where 
you can still make out the word “creamery.” Mr. Demosthenes 
produced what we thought was the best ice cream in the 
world. He became quite wealthy. He dabbled in real estate, 
and he was a great supporter of the Greek community, as 
well. 

There was another man who was important in my younger 
life, who is dead now. His name in English would be Rose, 
but in Greek it’s a long name with many syllables 
(Triantafyllo ), so let’s just call him John Rose. John Rose was 
in the army with Mr. Lougaris during the First World War, 
and he was also gassed. He was a close friend of John Lougaris 
and my father, and many times I would go down to meet my 
dad in the Cladianos building, and John Rose would be there. 
Everyone smoked cigars at the time, and I remember the smell 
of the cigars and the big brass spittoons in those offices and 
how they would chew their cigars and spit out pieces in the 
brass spittoons. Later in my life, as a teenager, I became a 
janitor, and I used to clean those offices up on that second 
floor, and the whole place smelled like cigars. 

These men were all very nice to me. They used to buy 
me candy and sit and talk to me and tell me about Greece 
and about their experiences in the war, and how difficult it 
was for them when they came to this country, how difficult it 
was for them to learn the language, and how important reli¬ 
gion was in our lives. Unfortunately, John Rose died fairly 
young. He had been wounded more severely than Lougaris— 
he was unable to work at all, had a limp, and he walked with 
a cane. 

Most Greek men belonged to the AHEPA, the Amerb 
can Hellenic Educational Progressive Association, and at 
their meetings they would raise money or use their dues to 


Hellenic Reno / 69 


bring a Greek priest to Reno at least once a month. Because 
we had no church, the services were held in the same hall 
that the AHEPA met in, a place called the Pythian Building 
on North Virginia Street. The meeting hall was on the sec- 
ond floor, and we would have our church services there ah 
most monthly. Sometimes they’d be held on a Saturday, be¬ 
cause the priest would usually come from Sacramento, and it 
would be the same priest that would do the services in Sacra¬ 
mento on Sunday. There were even times when my father or 
other Greek men would drive to Sacramento and pick up 
the priest and bring him here and then take him back. 

Sometime in the late 1930s or early 1940s, the women’s 
auxiliary to the AHEPA was formed. The national group 
eventually started a 
chapter here in Reno, 
and the name of that 
group is the Daughters 
of Penelope. My 
mother and Vaslie 
Pappas, my future 
mother-in-law, were 
charter members of 
that group—they both 
served as president and 
held many other of¬ 
fices, as did my father 
and Nick Pappas, my 
future father-in-law in 
AHEPA. 

The ladies’ auxil¬ 
iary was very support¬ 
ive of the church, and 
one of their main func¬ 
tions was to try to get a Dad is wearing his AHEPA fez, and 

Greek Church in he has put one on me. 







70 / MY father’s son 


Reno. Eventually, both of these groups were successful, but 
not until 1964 or 1965 was a Greek Church built in Reno. 

My mother and father had to teach themselves English. 
It was a big step for them to take office in an organization 
and have to deal with the city council and other govern¬ 
ment groups, but they didn’t lack the courage to do that. 
They stepped up to the plate and did the things that needed 
to be done, and I think their example was a great inspiration 
to myself and my sister and brother. We knew that if we just 
followed their example, we could be successful. 

The AHEPA and the Daughters of Penelope started a 
fund so they could have the regional and national conven¬ 
tions for both of those groups in Reno. They hosted those 
conventions and made money with them. My father was a 
chairman of one of those conventions. I remember him put¬ 
ting in very long hours, but it was all to raise money to even¬ 
tually get a Greek church. They also did a great deal of work 
during the Second World War, raising money for Greek War 
Relief. 

The AHEPA bought a lot on Lakeside Drive that was 
zoned for churches, probably around 1960. It was an acre lot, 
and they paid $10,000 for that acre. They continued to raise 
money, and, around 1964 or so, some of the more substantial 
members of the community, including my father and my fu¬ 
ture in-laws, the Pappases, signed a mortgage at the Security 
National Bank and borrowed enough money to build a 
church. The church was opened in 1965. 

Unfortunately for my family and myself, my mother’s fu¬ 
neral services were the first ever held in that church. She 
was fifty-four years old, had a heart attack, and passed away. 
Because my father and mother had been so helpful in raising 
and giving money for the church, they named the church St. 
Anthony’s Greek Orthodox Church in honor of my mother, 
whose name was Antonia and whose saint was St. Anthony. 


Hellenic Reno / 71 


Later on, there was an addition to the church that my father 
donated $38,000 to help build, and they named that wing 
after him—the Pete Cladianos, Sr. Social Hall. It’s a large 
hall that’s big enough for a basketball court. It has a kitchen 
in it, and a lot of Greek affairs and Greek holidays are ceh 
ebrated there. 

One of the most important days for Greeks, outside of 
Easter and Christmas, is Greek Independence Day, celebrated 
on March 25 every year. The Turks ruled Greece for some 
400 years, but 300 years ago or so, the Greeks finally were 
able to rid themselves of the Turks on March 25, and that’s 
the day that we still celebrate. Those celebrations were held, 
before we had the church, in the Pythian Hall, and many of 
the young folks, like myself and my sister and my brother, 
would take part. 

Many pageants were religious. Some were based on the 
war with the Turks. When I was probably between nine and 
twelve, my mother sent away for an authentic Evzone cos¬ 
tume, a uniform that the Greek soldiers wore—a big white 
skirt with many ruffles in it, a velvet jacket, a velvet fez with 
a long tassel on it, and pointed shoes with a tassel at the 
turned-up point of the shoe. I dressed in that costume and 
appeared in several little skits and plays until I outgrew it, 
and then I passed it on to my brother. My sister had her own 
costume, as many of the other young girls had, and they would 
participate, as well. 

My dad encouraged me to join the AHEPA. I was proud 
to join, and as soon as I joined, I got elected or appointed to 
the job of secretary-treasurer of the local chapter. It was my 
job to make sure dues were paid. Once in awhile there’d be a 
member that would be a little slow in paying dues, and I 
would have to go after him—it afforded me the opportunity 


72 / MY father’s son 


to have conversations with older Greek men and to hear 
about the struggles they had coming to this country and liv¬ 
ing in this country—and a lot of success stories, as well. 

My mother was noted for her cooking. One of the things 
that I have not been able to find since she passed away is 
somebody who cooks as good as she does, although my 
mother-in-law, Mrs. Nick Pappas, is right up there! My 
mother would cook for special events at home and then bring 
her dishes to the church for special events like Greek Inde¬ 
pendence Day, Greek Easter, and Christmas. One of my fa¬ 
vorite dishes was a dish called pastitsio. 



The Cladianos family, c. 1950. Left to right: John, Katharene, me, 
Mom, and Dad. 







Hellenic Reno / 73 


There were other things that my mother used to cook 
that were very tasty, and one of those items would be a dish 
the Greeks called horta. Horta means “grass” or “greens.” 
Greens come in different varieties, and one of the varieties is 
a dandelion green. I recall going down to the Lemberes farm 
in Sparks and going out in the pasture with my sister. We 
had a little hand trowel and would dig up dandelion greens 
and put them in a sack or a pan. In the pasture there were 
cows and sheep and so on walking around, and many times 
these dandelion greens had manure on them, but my mother 
would wash them thoroughly. My father and my uncle just 
loved these greens. It took me a long time to get used to 
them, but once I did, I really liked them. Some of them are 
quite bitter, but when they’re boiled and drained well, and 
you put lemon juice and olive oil on them, they’re good. 
Many times the poor Greek people would eat them as their 
main course—or the only course that they had—with some 
bread. Bread is a big staple in the Greek diet, and we put 
olive oil on bread. 



6 


Crossroaders 
and Slot 
Thieves 


WHEN I WAS YOUNG, I hung out with 
a rough crowd. Some were crossroaders, 
some were thieves, some were .... I look 
back on my life, and I reflect that at any 
time, I could have been caught in some 
criminal activity, and my whole life 
would have changed. My dad wouldn’t 
have been able to get me out of some of 
these things. Of course, he didn’t know 
what I was up to. It was a life that was 
exciting—there were so many varied 
things that we were involved with. We 
drew the line, however, at strong-arm 
robbery. 

It was a good time. We never stopped 
and said, “You know, I don’t think we 
ought to be doing this, because we might 
get caught.” We just lived under some 
kind of a lucky sign. 


Jim Owen went to military school 
with me. His father had died when he 
was young, and Jim lived with his mother 
and his Uncle Mack. Mack was involved 
in the gaming industry in Havana, Cuba, 
and he would go down there in the win¬ 
ter time and work in that industry and 
send Jim away to military school. Jimmy 
and I have been close friends ever since 
meeting at San Rafael. He even worked 
for me for awhile at the Sands as head of 
my engineering department. 

After a hitch in the navy, Jimmy 
returned to Reno and started dealing in 
clubs. When he got fired from one for 
reporting some dishonesty among his 
crew, he became disillusioned. It seemed 


76 / MY father’s son 


to him that honesty might not be the best policy, after all. 
He turned to his uncle, and his uncle taught him how to 
make a good living as a crossroader. 

Jimmy started out in the crossroading business as a man 
who would do what’s called cold-decking. He would slip a 
deck into a twenty-one game that was sorted out so that the 
first twelve hands out of the deck would be winners for the 
players and losers for the dealer. It’s interesting how this 
worked: 

Crossroaders need to work in crews, because it takes sev¬ 
eral people to do this kind of thing, and it works much better 
when you have the dealer in on the play. The dealer’s job is 
simply one of placing her deck out at the appropriate time in 
front of the man who’s going to slip the cold deck into the 
game. These folks spend many hours out there courting deal¬ 
ers into helping them in this kind of a venture, and the logic 
they use is, the dealer doesn’t have to do a thing. Usually, it’s 
a woman dealer, and she doesn’t have to handle any marked 
cards. All she has to do is place her deck out there at the end 
of her shuffle for a cut when the man with the cold deck 
walks up to the table. 

The first thing these folks do is fill a table with their crew. 
They sit there and play the minimum until the appropriate 
time, and many times one of the crew will engage the pit 
boss in a conversation as far away from that table as he pos¬ 
sibly can—a man has a dispute about something, and he wants 
the pit boss to settle the dispute, and once the pit boss’s at¬ 
tention is away from this game, then the man with the cold 
deck can put it in the game. 

In Jimmy’s crew, he was almost always the man with the 
cold deck. They would take a blue deck and a red deck, and 
they’d arrange winning hands. Sometimes in the first hand 
out, there would be four deuces and four nines and then a 
couple of blackjacks, so that in six spots on the table, there’d 
be six winners—four double downs and two blackjacks. And 


C rossroaders and Slot Thieves / 77 


next hand, there’d be threes and eights, so they could double 
down; and the tens would come along after that, so they’d 
win the double-down hand, and the dealer would break or 
have a low point total. 

The crew would come up to the game, and when they 
got close to the game, they’d see what color deck the dealer 
was using, and the man with the cold decks would get the 
appropriate deck out of his pocket. He’d hold it in his right 
hand, with a jacket or a sweater over his arm, covering up his 
hand, so people couldn’t see that he had a deck in his hand. 

When a crossroader crew walked up to a game, hopefully 
there’d be an open spot where they could make a bet. If there 
wasn’t an open spot, they’d simply make a bet between two 
spots. 

They’d time it so that the dealer was shuffling the deck 
when they walked up. At the end of the shuffle, the only 
thing required from the dealer was that the dealer would place 
the deck in front of the man that was going to cold deck the 
game. The cold-decker, instead of cutting the deck with his 
left hand, would pick the deck up off the table and put it in 
his pocket; and with his right hand, he would place the cold 
deck down. The dealer then would pick the deck up and 
begin to deal. 

During the time the cold-decker was doing this, the play¬ 
ers in his group that were on the game before he put the deck 
in would get up and leave. Two new players would come in, 
and each would play three hands apiece at $500 a hand, or 
whatever the limit was, and they’re the ones that would win 
the money. Their goal was to win twelve hands. They’d win 
double downs on eight of them, and they’d do it as quickly as 
they could before anybody noticed. Many times they were 
interrupted, but sometimes they got off a play like that, and 
then they’d get up and leave. 

This was back in the days before Harolds Club (and oth¬ 
ers) began to keep a record of the serial number on the ace of 


78 / MY father’s son 


spades on every deck as it went on the game. Harolds began 
doing this after they realized that their games were being 
cold decked. 

Crossroaders would do this only in the bigger clubs. You 
couldn’t do it in a small place that only had two or three 
games, because you’d be noticed too quickly . . . and many of 
those games could have been crooked games, as well, so it 
was much more difficult. The large clubs were the targets. 
From time to time, Jimmy’s group would drive to Las Vegas 
and spend a few days down there and do this same kind of 
thing in the bigger clubs in Las Vegas. 

Then clubs began to take a lot of measures that made it 
much more difficult. Harolds Club installed bells at every 
table. If there was a bet over $100, the dealer would ring the 
bell to get the pit boss’s attention. So, no matter what the pit 
boss was doing, if a bell or a light went off, the pit boss would 
pay close attention to that game. Dealers also began to holler 
out the bets. If there was $100 or some figure more than that, 
the dealer would holler to get the pit boss’s attention if he’d 
been distracted. But the crossroaders did have a heyday there 
for awhile. They did very well with it, Jim said, and when it 
got too risky, he turned to cheating slots. 

There was a great deal of money to be made in cheating 
slot machines, so Jim decided to learn that. Some of Uncle 
Mack’s friends taught Jim how to cheat slot machines. In 
those days it was done with a gaff through the escalator, down 
in the machine. The idea was to stop the fan on the clock on 
the old mechanical machines, and also to line up the reels. 
Sometimes they had to use two gaffs or two wires, one to 
stop the clock, and one to line up the reels, and they would 
ratchet (manipulate) the handle on the machine so that you 
could move the reels around and get the bars lined up. Once 
you got the bars lined up, you’d let the clock begin the run 
again; and then you’d hit the handle real hard and the jack- 
pot would set. 


C rossroaders and Slot Thieves / 79 


The man that was doing this would walk away from the 
machine quickly, and his associate, who would be very close 
by, would walk up to the machine. (Those people are called 
collectors.) The collector would holler that he had a jack- 
pot, and he’d stand there and collect it. 

Collectors were just people they would pay to do the one 
job; ordinarily, collectors were not part of the gang. They 
were innocent people that didn’t know anything about cheat- 
ing a slot machine, because the less they knew the better. 
The gangs would recruit these people, and they’d simply say 
to them, “You don’t need to do a thing. You just walk up 
when you get the signal, holler ‘Jackpot!’, stand there, col¬ 
lect the money, and then we’ll give you a hundred bucks,” or 
a piece of the pot. They’d have a prearranged place to meet, 
and that’s when they’d split the money. It was important that 
these collectors be different people, because there weren’t 
very many big clubs in town. You couldn’t use the same per¬ 
son all the time, because pretty soon the clubs would get 
wise to what was going on. 

Jim told me that the Golden Hotel was a favorite place 
for them to practice when he was learning, because the 
Golden paid the least amount of attention to their slot ma¬ 
chines. He would go in the Golden and practice on their slot 
machines for hours on end, for many days in a row, so that he 
could be proficient in setting up jackpots. But he never once 
collected a jackpot from the Golden during the time that he 
was doing this, because he didn’t want to bring any heat on 
himself. He just used it as sort of a laboratory. 

Cheating slots is very difficult, and you need extreme 
concentration. Jim has said time and again that there were 
many people that tried it and couldn’t do it. He told me that 
you couldn’t go in and do this if you were going to be con¬ 
cerned about whether you were going to be caught. When 
you did this, you had at least two associates. The best set-up 
would be when you had a machine with machines on either 


80 / MY father’s son 


side, so you could have one of your confederates playing the 
machine on one side, and one on the other. They’d watch 
behind your back and to your right and to your left, and they’d 
warn you if someone was coming. They would cover for you. 
That was the most ideal setup. 

If you were one of three guys, then you could focus on 
what you were doing. Your whole mind could be set on get- 
ting those gaffs or wires in that machine, getting them set up 
for the pot, and then walking away. As soon as you were able 
to set the machine to pay, you passed your tools off to one of 
your associates, and they would quickly leave the casino. You 
would be clean. The person that actually did the work 
wouldn’t have anything on him. 

Jim’s group didn’t carry any I.D. They had no car keys in 
their pocket. Their procedure was, if anyone questioned them, 
to say, “I don’t know what you’re talking about. I don’t know 
anything about cheating slot machines. All I did was play 
that machine and walk away.” They had nothing on them if 
they were asked to empty their pockets. There was no proof 
of where they lived. They simply said that they were from 
some other city, and they didn’t have anything on them, and 
they came up here on the bus. On many occasions Jim, and 
people like him, were questioned, but because of the fact 
that he took these precautions, he was only caught once. 

There was a four-reeler there in Sparks that was so easy 
to do. [laughter] Some machines were harder, and some were 
easier, and they tested the machines by testing the handles. 
Handles on the machines had to be somewhat loose, and if a 
handle was a tight handle, and they couldn’t walk the reels 
with the handle, they’d leave the machine alone. So they’d 
walk around the clubs, and they’d test these handles. 

There was a four-reeler at the Nugget in Sparks that had 
a twelve-hundred'dollar jackpot that they took off at least 
ten times in about three months. The Nugget was getting a 
little bit disturbed, and they were sure that there was some- 


Crossroaders and Slot Thieves / 81 


thing going on, so they notified the Sparks Police Depart- 
ment. The next time that J im did that machine, as he walked 
away from it—he had already passed his tools to his confed¬ 
erates—a couple of folks that worked for the Nugget grabbed 
him. They called the Sparks P.D., which took him over to 
the police department. They questioned him for an hour or 
two, but he denied everything. He had nothing on him. They 
asked him how he got to Sparks, and his story was that he’d 
walked from Reno. They asked him where he lived, and he 
gave them his uncle’s phone number, because he knew that 
his uncle would know exactly what was going on. So they 
called his uncle, and they asked his uncle about Jim and if he 
had a car and if he lived there. His uncle said no, he had no 
car, and yes, he did a lot of walking for exercise. So they 
really didn’t have anything on Jim, and they let him go, but 
they had a record of him. They took his picture. 

J im told me that during his career, he knew that Harrah’s 
had his picture and the Nugget had his picture. I’m not sure 
in those days that the clubs cooperated too much with each 
other when they found these crossroaders. In later years, they 
did cooperate, because they found it was to their advantage 
to cooperate when they found a thief, or somebody that might 
be a thief, and then they’d share that knowledge with other 
clubs to try to eliminate that sort of activity. 

From time to time Jim’s crew would go to Las Vegas and 
do some crossroading there. One of the things that they did 
down there is they would, with the aid of confederates on 
the inside, get a set of mis-spotted dice in a game. The ones 
that they liked the best were dice that only had threes, fours, 
and fives on them. They would get the dice in the game and 
make some big bets and then get them out of the game and 
walk away. They were quite successful in doing this until one 
particular night in the Silver Slipper. 

They found the Silver Slipper to be a wonderful place for 
cheating of all kinds, and they made two or three plays over 


82 / MY father’s son 


a period of a few days. One night they were attempting to 
put a cold deck in a game. They got the deck in, but the pit 
boss noticed that they had $500 bets out there, and he came 
across the pit and told the dealer to stop dealing the cards. 
They knew they had been found out. 

Jim, who had walked away from the game after getting 
the deck in, heard the commotion and came running back 
and scooped the chips off the table—that was their bankroll. 
He stuffed all the twenty-five-dollar chips that he could in 
his pockets and ran out the door and across the Strip. Of 
course, people were chasing him, but he eluded them. Even- 
tually, he got to the Desert Inn Golf Course. It was fenced 
off, so he climbed the fence, chips dropping out of his pock' 
ets. Once over the fence, he began to run across the golf 
course, and it was so dark that he didn’t see a water hazard 
and ran right into it. [laughter] He had his alligator shoes on 
and his Kupenheimer suit, and he ruined them and lost a 
bunch of quarter [$25] chips in the water. On the other side 
of the golf course, he had to climb another fence, and then 
he called a confederate to come get him. 

Jim finally got back to the hotel where the group was 
staying. He had avoided being apprehended, but he’d lost 
quite a few chips. Then they had a problem trying to cash in. 
The Silver Slipper had altered its method of operation. When 
Jim’s group sent a guy into the club with one of the chips to 
test them out, the minute he put it down to cash it, the cash- 
ier summoned somebody. The guy they had sent ran out, but 
it was clear that it would be very difficult to cash these quar¬ 
ter chips in, so they gave them to some guy in Las Vegas that 
was straight. 

They had lost their bankroll. They had to put together a 
new one. Usually the way you did that was you borrowed it 
from somebody and had to pay a usurer’s interest rate. In 
Jim’s case, he was able to get another bankroll from his uncle, 
because his uncle understood the situation. 


C rossroaders and Slot Thieves / 83 


At some point when Jim was a slot thief, he believes his 
group managed to win the first $25,000 keno ticket that was 
paid in northern Nevada. They convinced a writer at Harvey’s 
that he should help them win this big ticket. He practiced 
concealing eight numbered balls up his shirt sleeve until, 
without being detected, he could get them into the tube in 
place of balls from the basket. The first eight balls in the 
tube would be these eight balls, and the eight, of course, cor- 
responded with the number that they would play on the keno 
ticket. That’s how they won the $25,000. Harvey’s never knew 
the difference, and nobody else ever found out. 

Some crossroaders were beaten up when they were caught. 
Larry Moss had that trouble, and I think that was one of the 
reasons Larry began to carry a gun. In J im’s crew that never 
happened. Jim stopped this kind of activity around the early 
1960s and tried to sever his relationships with these folks, 
because he decided that that life didn’t have a future. 

During the time that Jim was involved in these activi- 
ties, he made it a point to distance himself from me, and I 
didn’t know about him. I went in the army in 1953, and Jim 
came back here from his navy hitch at about the same time. 
When I came back, Jim was quite distant, and he rebuffed 
me on several occasions, and I didn’t understand why. I 
thought maybe our friendship had come to an end, but he 
did that because my father was in the gaming business and I 
was involved in the gaming business, and it wouldn’t be good 
for anyone to know that we were friends—for either him or 
me. So all of the things that I’m relating, I learned after the 
time that Jim decided to quit crossroading. 

J im’s reason for quitting this was that no one seemed to 
be getting ahead. First of all, you had to have a bankroll to 
do this thing: if you were going to cold-deck a game, you 
needed several thousand dollars to make the bets, and you 
needed to sit there and play till you were ready to put the 
cold deck in. So you tried to be very careful to keep your 


84 / my father’s son 


bankroll together. Once you took off a game—you made a 
score—then you cut up the money, and Jim noticed that most 
everybody that was involved in the thing took their share 
and immediately spent it in riotous living and drinking and 
gambling on their own. A lot of these people played horses, 
and they played keno. They had other activities that caused 
them to go through that money really fast, and then they’d 
want to get a piece of the bankroll to play themselves. Jim 
was the guy that was in charge of the bankroll, and he had to 
fight off a lot of attempts to take the bankroll. 

What motivated these people to keep doing what they 
did was that, when they did make a score, they’d go through 
their money so fast that they’d have to make another score 
real quick, because they were out of money. After a few years 
of that, it didn’t take a very smart man to figure out that this 
didn’t have much future. Jim was one of the very few who 
decided early on to get out, but he didn’t have any other way 
to make a living. He cast around for some kind of job that 
would offer him some security, and he wound up working for 
Ray’s Heating and Sheet Metal, an old-time Reno firm owned 
by the Scolari family. He saved whatever money he could, 
bought a piece of property in Carson City on Hot Springs 
Road, and went partners with a man named Clore in starting 
a business called the Desert Sheet Metal Company. 

Jim got married, and he and his wife wanted to have chil¬ 
dren. Then it turned out that he and his wife were not able 
to have children, so they adopted two. From time to time 
after he quit, Jim was beseeched by people in the crossroading 
business to come back, but he wouldn’t. He didn’t want to be 
in a situation where he could go to jail and have a small 
child at home. He said it was fortunate that he had these 
children, because he might have been lured back into the 
business. There was so much easy money . . . but he never 
crossroaded again. 


7 


Court 

Martialed! 


WHEN I ENTERED the University of 
Nevada in 1948, it was almost ordained 
that I would follow in my father’s foot¬ 
steps after graduation. Then, in my last 
year or two of college, my father began 
to talk about me doing something on my 
own. He and my mother both encouraged 
me to think about a profession. They 
would say, “You don’t want to be known 
as somebody who succeeded just because 
his father had a business and he took over 
that business. You want to do something 
that you can say, ‘I did this on my own. I 
accomplished this.’” 

I didn’t know what I was going to do. 
The degree itself was the only thing my 
friends and I were thinking about when 
we started college. What we would get it 
in really didn’t matter. As we progressed 
and got towards the end, we began to 
think, “Well, what am I going to do when 
I get out?” That caused me to do some¬ 
what better after an awful rocky start. My 
intention became to go to law school 
with my friends; but, although I got ac¬ 
cepted to two schools, it didn’t come 
about. 

My first year in college was just 
playtime. I wasn’t serious about anything; 
I didn’t study; I didn’t care whether I 
made good grades or not. I was having a 
wonderful time. I had moved out of the 
house when I became eighteen years old, 
lived out at the El Rancho on South Vir¬ 
ginia Street. During my first year of col¬ 
lege I was still helping my dad with his 
slot route and helping at the motel, and 


86 / MY father’s son 


I had a great deal of freedom, but I did not use that freedom 
productively. Consequently, I flunked both semesters of my 
first year at the University of Nevada. 

My father was livid. He was adamant—I would get a cob 
lege education. Trying to figure out what do, I thought about 
Jim Piculas, a friend whom I’d gone to military school with. 
Jim was attending the City College of San Francisco. At that 
time it was a two-year college. He told me I could go to San 
Francisco, not mention that I had already been to college for 
a year and had flunked both semesters, and register at that 
school. So I told my father I had a situation that would work 
out for me, and I moved to San Francisco, enrolled at City 
College of San Francisco, and lived with Jim. 

I spent three semesters at City College, and my grades 
were good. My father was pleased, and I was pleased with 
myself. The professors were interesting people, whereas that 
had not been true at the University of Nevada. 

Another reason I did well in City College was that I had 
become involved with Leona Bruce, a woman who was ten 
years older than me. Leona had once worked for my father, 
but when I met her, she was a twenty-one dealer working out 
at Carson Hot Springs. We were romantically involved dur¬ 
ing the time that I was going to college in San Francisco. 
Our relationship helped me stay focused on my schoolwork, 
partially because I didn’t have to spend a lot of time search¬ 
ing for a girlfriend, as I did when I was at the University of 
Nevada, and as many young college boys do. I had this steady 
woman, and she was a good influence on me. 

Leona had not had the opportunity to get a college edu¬ 
cation, but she knew the value of one. She encouraged me to 
continue my education and get a degree. Coming from some¬ 
one I was romantically involved with, that was a powerful 
message. She also encouraged me to go straight and be hon¬ 
est in all I did. Even though she was a crossroader herself, 


Court Martialed! / 87 


and would deal seconds 
and cheat her custom- 
ers, she could see there 
was no future in that 
kind of life. 

As I look back on 
my life, for a long time 
I was torn between two 
divergent value systems. 

One was represented by 
my mother and father 
(and, for a short time, 

Leona), pushing me as 
hard as they could to¬ 
ward getting an educa¬ 
tion, being an upright 
citizen, and making a 
success out of my life. 

On the other side were 
the friends and boyhood pals to whom education didn’t mean 
a thing. They looked for the easy way out, and there was a 
lot of dishonesty. It was a life that seemed to have a lot of 
good times and no hard work . . . and you didn’t have to go 
to school. I seesawed back and forth with this for several 
years until I was finally able to put it to rest and decide that, 
as my friend Jim says, “You can do a lot better on the square 
than you can any other way.” 

After three semesters at San Francisco City College, I 
returned to Reno and again enrolled in the University of 
Nevada. I had the grades to get back in, and Leona was 
there—I could see more of her if I came back. I was so in 
love with Leona that I wanted us to be married, but she knew 
that it wouldn’t work, and she resisted. My dad was also op¬ 
posed. Fearing that I would not let go of the idea, Leona left 









88 / MY father’s son 


town to end our relationship. I later learned that she had 
gone on the square and married a guy over in California. 

My second go ‘round at the University of Nevada was 
kind of a mixed bag, but my history grades were great, be¬ 
cause I liked history and had some professors I liked. One in 
particular was Wilbur Shepperson, who was one of the best 
professors I ever had. I got to know him well. He was a won¬ 
derful teacher and a wonderful person. I also joined the His¬ 
tory Club, and that helped me with Professor Hutchinson. 
(The rumor was that he gave better grades to students that 
belonged to the History Club—he was the Club’s faculty 
adviser.) I also took some courses from Professor Russell R. 
Elliott, another dedicated professor. 

I got my degree in history in June of 1953. My friends—Bob 
Moore, Roy Torvinen, Frank Sala—applied to go to law school, 
and my father encouraged me to do the same thing. I applied 
and was accepted at Georgetown University Law School and at 

George Washington Law 
School—the two law 
schools that my friends 
had applied to. 

While I was in col¬ 
lege, the U.S. went to 
war with Korea. Frank 
Sala and I joined the 
naval reserve to get a 
deferment so that we 
would not be drafted. (If 
you were in a reserve 
unit, you’d be allowed to 
finish college as long as 

I was a college student, and I had a y° u kept your grades 
right to look like one. up.) The naval reserve 



Court M artialed! / 89 


had a chapter in Reno, and once or twice a year we’d have to 
report to active duty in San Diego. On three different occa¬ 
sions I had to go to San Diego for two to four weeks, and on 
each occasion we went through sort of a shortened boot camp. 
Frank and I had some experiences in San Diego at the navy 
boot camp that were really disagreeable to us and eventually 
led to my leaving the reserve. 

I’d never been a violent person, never precipitated any 
fights, but I had gotten into two fights in San Diego and hit 
somebody before I even realized what I had done. So I sus¬ 
pected that I wasn’t going to do well in the military. None¬ 
theless, I applied for the Reserve Officers Corps. Then they 
changed the rules and told me that if I accepted a commis¬ 
sion, I would have to go in for four years. I wouldn’t do that, 
and I resigned from the naval reserve. About three weeks 
later, I received my draft notice. 

I’d been accepted to law school before I got my draft no¬ 
tice, but that didn’t matter to the draft board. My college 
graduation ceremonies took place on the eighth of June, 1953, 
and I was to report to the Oakland army induction office on 
the ninth. It was a bittersweet graduation. I felt wonderful, 
and my folks were proud and happy that I had graduated, but 
we had this pall over the whole ceremony. I was proud that 
I’d finally managed it after all the times I had decided to give 
it up, but I was on my way to Oakland. 

After basic training, I became a clerk-typist and eventu¬ 
ally wound up as an instructor for clerk-typists. Then an op¬ 
portunity came along for me to be assigned to the Presidio at 
San Francisco. I liked what I was doing, but I decided to go. 
Sometime around the first of 1954, I was assigned to person¬ 
nel under the adjutant general’s corps. I worked in the mail 
room of the personnel section and lived in a barracks and 
pulled K. P. and guard duty and so on. I wasn’t satisfied. I 
wanted an easier life. 


90 / MY father’s son 


I knew that a married man could live off post, so I went 
one day to the first sergeant, and said, “Hey, Sarge, the last 
time I went on pass I got married. I’d like to live off post.” 

He said, “Here, sign this,” and he stuck something in front 
of me, and I signed it. Then he gave me—and I didn’t realize 
what it was at the time—a request for separate rations. He 
said, “Sign this, pack your stuff, and get out of here.” 

A couple of other fellows and I rented an apartment off 
post on Arguello Street. One of the big reasons we wanted it 
was so we wouldn’t have to pull K.P. or guard duty anymore. 
Things were great for awhile, but eventually I got caught. 

I had received separate rations under a ruse, so they 
charged me with embezzlement. But I was getting just thirty 
dollars a month! [laughter] I had collected this thirty dollars 
a month for eight or nine months, and for that I was charged 
with embezzlement, which was a general court martial of¬ 
fense, and I was tried and convicted. The worst thing about 
the whole affair was that I had to tell my folks about it. When 
they came down for the trial, my mother was in tears. . . and 
it was all because I couldn’t get over the belief that I should 
have everything I wanted whenever I wanted it, and that 
“good” wasn’t good enough. I had to have the best of every¬ 
thing. 

My dad hired a lawyer for me, a retired army officer that 
had been in the JAG corps. But it was a cut-and-dried affair, 
and there wasn’t any question about it. I was sentenced to a 
year in prison and a bad conduct discharge. That was really a 
blow to my folks, because after I’d graduated from college 
and had been selected for law school, it looked like I was 
going to be a success. Then this came along. I was sent to the 
stockade at the Presidio. 

After a month or six weeks, my kind of case was auto¬ 
matically reviewed by the commanding general of the Sixth 
Army, and I happened to have a friend, Alex Lemberes, who 
was an aide to the commanding general. (He was the Greek 


Court Martialed! / 91 


whom my father had helped get an appointment to West 
Point.) Lemberes was a captain, and he interceded with the 
commanding general and told him that I didn’t intend to 
steal any money from the army—that my intent was to just 
live off post, and that’s what caused me to do what I did; that 
I came from a good family; and so on and so forth. The com¬ 
manding general reduced my sentence to six months, and 
my bad-conduct discharge would be remanded if I served the 
rest of my time in the army without incident. 

Before my court-martial I had met a beautiful WAC 
named Pat Cox, and we had become romantically involved. 
She remained loyal to me throughout my time in the stock¬ 
ade, and when I got out, we lived together off post. I think 
we were in love .... After six weeks or so, I succumbed and 
married her in February, 1955, even though my parents were 
adamant that I shouldn’t. 

I married Pat without my mom and dad being present, 
and it was a difficult decision. But lo and behold, after we’d 
been married for a month or so, they came to visit us along 
with my sister Katherene. She had been divorced, sympa¬ 
thized with our situation, and prevailed upon them to give 
in and allow me to marry Pat. They came up there to give me 
their blessing, and I had to tell them that I was already mar¬ 
ried! 

I was married to Pat for sixteen or seventeen years, and 
those were good years. It was a good marriage. We had two 
children: a boy, Pete III, and a girl, Antonia. Our marriage 
eventually ended because Pat’s whole philosophy of life 
changed. She got involved with the women’s liberation move¬ 
ment, and her outlook on life and her whole demeanor 
changed. She was not the same person that I had married. 
She had been a kind, gentle, loving, wonderful human being 
that had feelings, and a great wife and mother. 

After getting married, I applied for early discharge. The 
time that I had spent in the stockade did not count towards 


92 / MY father’s son 


my service time, so I had to do that time over again, and I 
did. But the army had an early discharge program—if you 
applied to a school that the army recognized, they’d discharge 
you early to enter this school. So, even though I already had 
my degree, I applied for summer school at the University of 
Nevada in 1955, and the army released me early. 


8 


I HAD IT IN MY MIND to go on to law 
school. . . but in 1954 my father had built 
and opened an eighty-unit motel on East 
Fourth Street that he called the El 
El Rancho II Rancho Number Two. He was still run¬ 
ning the business in Lovelock; he had the 
motel on South Virginia; he had the 
Cladianos Building downtown; and he 
had the El Rancho Number Two. The 
sum and substance of the whole thing is 
that he got exhausted, went to a doctor 
in Reno, and was told that he had a bad 
heart. Well, it turned out that the doctor 
didn’t know what he was talking about, 
but there’s no question that my father was 
exhausted. (As it turned out, he had a 
strong heart. When he finally died at 
eighty-nine years old, his doctor at the 
time said that his heart was the toughest 
part about him.) 

My dad still wanted me to go to law 
school, and so did my mother. But I felt 
that maybe I had been the cause of my 
dad’s supposed bad heart. Because of my 
court-martial and all the other problems 
that I’d made for my parents, I felt I owed 
it to Dad to take the load off him at a 
time when we all thought he was quite 
ill. I did not go to law school. I stayed in 
Reno, and I think I did a fairly decent 
job of looking after Dad’s business. 

When I took over the management 
of the family businesses, Dad and mother 
went to Greece for several months, and 
he recovered his energy. After that, he 
and my mother would go to Hawaii ev¬ 
ery winter for a month or two, and that 


94 / my father’s son 


helped him, also. It wasn’t that I could step in and run these 
businesses as well as he could, but with his guidance, and 
with him there to mentor me when I ran into a problem that 
I didn’t know how to handle, I was OK. Everything worked 
out for the best. For many years I thought that it was a shame 
that I had not attended law school, but I found that my friends 
who had gone to law school all wound up in business. 

Dad started thinking about doing a hotebcasino project, 
but he was also thinking about acquiring motels in other parts 
of the West. In those days a lot of our motel customers were 
people that would be doing a big loop around the West. Most 
were from the Midwest or the East, and they’d load their 
family in the car for a trip that would be two or three weeks 
long. They’d come out old Highway 40, which was the road 
that went through Reno at that time, and stay overnight in 
Reno. Usually, they’d go from here to San Francisco, then to 
Yosemite. From Yosemite they’d go to the Grand Canyon .... 

My dad’s thinking was that if he could have a motel in 
each of the spots tourists were visiting, he could refer them 
from one to the other, and it would be good business. Hoik 
day Inns did that kind of thing, and he was thinking along 
those lines. But we never did get involved in that kind of 
business. We kept gravitating back to gaming, because the 
gaming business seemed to be getting better and better all 
the time. We knew the business, Reno was doing better all 
the time, and it appeared that our best bet would be to get 
something established in the way of a hotebcasino in the 
Reno area. My dad used to say, “Don’t play the other man’s 
game, if you can help it. If you know your game, play your 
game.” 

Outside of the brief ownership of a drive-in theater in 
Richmond, California, and, of course, Fovelock Mercantile, 
Dad concentrated on the Reno area. He eventually traded 
the Fovelock Mercantile property for an apartment house in 


El Rancho 11 / 95 


Reno. It was a seventeen-unit apartment house on Court 
Street called the Crest Apartments. The apartment business 
was similar to the motel business, except you were renting 
units by the month. With my dad’s guidance, I became the 
manager—we had an on-site manager that lived there, but I 
supervised her. The trade for the apartment house was a good 
way for us to get out of Lovelock. Lovelock was really a drag. 
We weren’t making any money; in fact, it was costing us 
money. We had spent twenty years running that place just to 
pay off the mortgage—which we did. 

My dad wanted us to learn the construction business, 
because he knew that there was a great deal of profit in con¬ 
struction. He didn’t want us to be in the construction busi¬ 
ness, but he wanted us to understand it so we would be able 
to do projects of our own without having to depend on con¬ 
tractors. We began to do little upgrading and remodeling 
projects out on South Virginia Street, because it was an old 
building. In those days, you could do that. We’d just hire a 
carpenter or a brick mason or whatever we needed, and my 
dad would direct them as to what he wanted to do, and he 
would have me there, whenever possible, so that I could learn. 

I got some more knowledge in the construction field build¬ 
ing my first house out at the end of Canyon Drive. My dad 
had contacts with people that sold furniture, carpeting, 
drapes, and that kind of thing, because he’d just gone through 
all that with the El Rancho on East Fourth Street and the 
addition to the El Rancho on South Virginia Street. My sis¬ 
ter Katherene was involved in decorating and purchasing 
furniture and fixtures for the El Rancho on East Fourth Street, 
and she picked up that kind of knowledge and did a splendid 
job on that sort of thing for us on all the other projects we 
got into afterwards. 

All this time I was working in the apartment house, run¬ 
ning the two motels and the slot route, and acquiring prop¬ 
erty. The next building project that we got into was on a 



“The whole operation had different addresses for its different components.” The El Rancho Motel on East 
Fourth Street, 1960. 















El Rancho 11 / 97 


piece of property on the comer of East Fourth Street and 
Wells Avenue adjacent to our El Rancho Two. My father 
wanted to build a restaurant, a cocktail lounge, and a lobby 
area for our motel. 

My dad didn’t know anything about the food business, 
and he didn’t want to operate the restaurant himself. Fortu¬ 
nately, on a trip to Los Angeles, we met the principal owners 
of the Denny’s chain and got them interested in opening a 
restaurant in Reno on our property. We would construct the 
building so it looked like a Denny’s, but our lobby would be 
on one side and a cocktail lounge would be accessible from 
our lobby and from Denny’s. Denny’s would be our tenant on 
a twenty-year lease. When we began to construct that build¬ 
ing in 1959, we allowed some room for slot machines. Our 
aim was to put in some table games also, but it turned out 
that we didn’t have the room. 

Eventually, we wound up with about twenty slot ma¬ 
chines. We had fifteen in the lobby area, allowed by ordi¬ 
nance. Then, because technically the whole operation had 
different addresses for its different components—the lobby 
area in the motel was 777 East Fourth Street, and the Denny’s 
was 795 East Fourth Street—we were allowed slot machines 
in the restaurant. We had two to four in there, and then the 
balance were in the bar, because the bar entrance was on 
Wells Avenue, and it had the address of 425 North Wells. 

We opened the restaurant in the spring of 1960. We knew 
before it ever opened that it was going to be successful, be¬ 
cause once we put a sign up and began to build, we had innu¬ 
merable people stop and say, “Well, when are you going to 
get open?” Even though East Fourth was a major thorough¬ 
fare back then, there were no restaurants anywhere near. The 


98 / MY father’s son 


closest were in downtown Reno. We opened that restaurant 
at noon on a Thursday. (Denny’s would always open a new 
restaurant in the middle of the week on a day that wasn’t 
quite so busy.) We had had a sign out there, and Denny’s had 
done some advertising that they were going to open on this 
particular day at noon. A line began to form out in the street 
at about ten thirty in the morning. When they opened the 
doors, the restaurant immediately filled up. We had many 
people waiting to get in, and our slot machines began to hum 
pretty good. We had started out with just eight or ten slot 
machines in the lobby, because we didn’t really know how it 
was going to work out, but it was a huge success! 

In the midT950s, we had a situation that broke out in 
the motel business that related to price signs. In those days 
all the major gaming attractions were in downtown Reno, 
and motels and hotels that were close to the gaming did the 
best. Places that were further out didn’t do so well. Those 
places that were way out on the periphery began to hang out 
little price signs to attract guests. They’d put out a ten-dollar 
sign, so that people would stop to get a ten-dollar room. At 
first we weren’t concerned about it, but as it went along, more 
and more motels would put these signs out, and eventually 
we got in a situation where sixty to seventy percent of the 
motels had a sign out. It was unsightly, and it also began to 
turn into a bait-and-switch hustle. When you had a bunch 
of ten-to-twelve-dollar signs, somebody would put out a nine- 
dollar sign; and then somebody would put out an eight-dob 
lar sign. Pretty soon, you had signs out at five and six dollars, 
and people were coming into motels and saying, “I want a 
five-dollar room.” 

And the clerk would say, “We don’t have any. We just 
ran out, but we do have an eight-dollar room,” or words to 
that effect. It was giving Reno a bad name. Las Vegas was 
having the same difficulty at that time. 


El Rancho II / 99 


Reno had a local motel association that we belonged to, 
and I began to attend those meetings and got elected vice 
president. The major topic at the meetings was these signs 
and what we were going to do about them. We were con- 
tacted by the Las Vegas Motel Association, and they told us 
that they had the same trouble, and they had an idea of what 
could be done. 

Their idea was that the state legislature should be 
lobbied to allow the lodging industry to create a commission 
to control lodging facilities in the state of Nevada, and this 
commission would have the power to forbid price advertis¬ 
ing on billboards or on any other signs outside of the pre¬ 
mises. (It would allow properties to post a sign inside their 
office.) We had the support of the gaming industry on this 
issue. They wanted to attract higher-income people as gam¬ 
ing customers, and all these cheap price signs did was attract 
people with lesser incomes. 

Rodney Reynolds owned the Silver State Lodge, a mo¬ 
tel-type facility on West Fourth Street, just west of Keystone 
Avenue. The old buildings are still there. Rodney was a state 
assemblyman, and he advised us how to best approach the 
legislature. Before we did that, however, we met jointly with 
the Las Vegas group, and we formed a state motel associa¬ 
tion. A man named Henry Bridgeman became the president, 
and I became the regional vice president for northwestern 
Nevada. We got the state motel association behind the idea 
of this commission, and we sold it to the gaming industry, 
and then we began to lobby the legislature. In the late 1950s 
we lobbied two different legislatures, and we came within 
two votes of getting this lodging-commission act passed, but 
we failed. I spent a great deal of time in that effort, and I 
learned much deal about the workings of state government 
and the workings of the legislature. 

I eventually became the president of the state motel as¬ 
sociation. After failing to get a commission established, we 


100 / MY father’s son 


were successful in getting an ordinance passed in Reno, 
Sparks, and Washoe County to eliminate price signs. 

Not only did we have that problem here, but it spread to 
other parts of the country. When these ordinances began to 
get passed everywhere, chains looked for a way around it by 
putting the rate in their name. Motel 6 and Super 8 said, 
“Well, we’ll just make our name ‘Motel 6,’ and then you can’t 
do anything about it,” which is true. You couldn’t, [laughter] 

In the 1950s, as I recall, Fitzgerald was the first man to 
put a restaurant in a casino in Reno. He had such great sue- 
cess that Harolds and Harrah’s and others followed suit, be- 
cause they could see that restaurants kept people in their 
casinos, and when you could do that, it made you more sue- 
cessful. When Denny’s opened in our East Fourth Street prop- 
erty, my father suggested that this was an opportunity for us 
to learn the food business. 

Denny’s was a lot like fast-food places, only a little bit 
more elaborate. They had guidelines for everything, and one 
of Denny’s secrets was portion control. The food cost was, in 
Denny’s guide, somewhere between 25 and 30 percent. If you 
could hold it under 30 percent, you were doing a good job. 
Denny’s also had their jobs broken down, and they had a 
labor cost attached to every item. So we learned that a harm 
burger had a certain amount of labor cost as well as a food 
cost. If you could come up with a labor cost and a food cost 
combined that was under 50 percent, then you had 50 per- 
cent left over to go towards rent, utilities, and the other ex- 
penses that you have when you run a restaurant. Denny’s at 
the time, if I recall correctly, had a gross profit somewhere in 
the 20 percent range, so they were very a profitable opera- 
tion. 

Another thing we learned is that food business becomes 
more profitable when you have high volume. Your food stays 
fresh, because if you’re moving a lot of food, it doesn’t spoil. 


El Rancho II / 101 


And with the high volume, your waitresses and bus boys and 
so on make more tips, so you tend to get better employees— 
they look for jobs where they can make more tips, because 
the food business historically has been a very low-paying job, 
and those people exist on their tips. So we learned the basics 
of the food business, and I’m really just talking about a coffee 
shop operation. We certainly didn’t feel qualified to run a 
gourmet dinner house, but we did feel that we knew a little 
bit about running a food operation. 

In the 1950s, Harolds Club had one of the first packages 
in Reno. It was called the Reno Super Tour. Pappy Smith, 
with Roy Powers’s help, started this package that was sold 
only in Canada, principally in Vancouver. Pappy realized that 
Canadians were an especially good market. Canadians are 
pretty conservative, generally speaking, but they love to play 
slot machines. The Reno Super Tour was essentially a pack¬ 
age that Canadians could buy only during the off season. For 
twenty-five dollars, a couple would get a room for two nights 
and breakfast both mornings. Pappy began to sell his pack¬ 
age October through April or May, and it was very successful 
in bringing people down here during the off times. Maybe 
Reno’s weather isn’t so good in the winter, but it certainly is 
a lot better than British Columbia’s! 

Pappy originally had his package customers staying at the 
Pony Express Lodge on Prater Way, which was owned by 
Harolds Club, but the package was so successful that he ran 
out of rooms. Then he contracted with other motels in town 
to furnish rooms for his package. We were one of the motels 
that was contacted. Most of that business was done at our 
East Fourth Street motel, because Pappy wanted his people 
to stay near Harolds Club. He had a bus that traveled from 
Harolds Club to the Pony Express Motel, and it went right 
by our door, so it was easy to pick our people up and take 
them to Harolds Club. It was off-season business, and it was 


102 / MY father’s son 


weekday business, and it worked out great for us, even though 
the package room rate was very low. That was our first expe¬ 
rience with Canadian customers in big groups 

We learned that there were also bus tours that came from 
Canada. Beginning in October, as the season in Reno was 
beginning to slack off, they’d come in on Sunday and leave 
on Thursday morning, here for four nights. At first, the Ca¬ 
nadian bus groups were staying at motels further out of town, 
because they were the only ones that would take bus busi¬ 
ness. Most of these tours were a mom-and-pop type of opera¬ 
tion. There might be a lady who was married to a bus driver, 
and she’d sell a group; or maybe it was done through a gar¬ 
den club or a trailer court or an apartment house or a co-op 
or something like that. Harolds Club sent people up to 
Vancouver, and they’d go to apartment buildings and trailer 
courts and so on, and give these people matches and litera¬ 
ture and ashtrays, and show movies of Harolds Club, and 
give them coupons. It was a wonderful promotion on Harolds 
Club’s part. Other casinos may have gotten involved, but 
Harolds Club was the leader, the founder of this kind of busi¬ 
ness. 

We began to book these buses into our motel on East 
Fourth Street. It became a big part of our business there in 
the wintertime, because we were one of the closest motels to 
downtown that would take these buses. We took them for 
the room revenue, and our own few slot machines would get 
some play . . . nothing big, just grind action, but those ma¬ 
chines were sitting there, and if our motel rooms weren’t full, 
we didn’t have any players. We’d always get some players 
from the Denny’s and maybe a few from the bar, but when 
that motel was filled up, we noticed a difference in those slot 
drops. 

We learned that the public relations aspect of the busi¬ 
ness was important. Customers like to feel at home. They 
like to be talked to. They like to feel important. They like to 


El Rancho II / 103 


be recognized. So, because we worked right there and checked 
people into their rooms, we had a lot of repeat business. Hu¬ 
mans love recognition. We learned how important that was, 
and it became a keystone of our business. 

In many of the clubs downtown, dealers could not talk to 
the customers, because the bosses felt that it would take their 
minds off of their dealing. They also didn’t want them to 
open up a situation where there might be collusion between 
the dealers and the customers. My father felt that was a poor 
way to run a business, no matter what business it was, and he 
preached to us to recognize the customer and make him feel 
at home. We carried that philosophy into our first casino 
operation, and it was something that really helped. Many of 
our customers made comments that our club was friendly, 
and they felt comfortable there, and they liked it much bet¬ 
ter than bigger clubs downtown that had more gaming and 
other things to offer than we did. 

Back then, Bill Raggio was district attorney of Washoe 
County. I was acquainted with him and with many of the 
lawyers that worked in the city attorney’s office and the dis¬ 
trict attorney’s offices, and I would have lunch with them 
and stayed in close contact with them. Some were high school 
buddies of mine who had gone on to law school. 

Raggio had a problem with a man named Joe Conforte. 
Conforte was operating houses of prostitution in mobile 
homes, and when he wanted to evade the law, he would move 
them so that it was difficult for the officials to pin him down. 
Prostitution was legal in the small counties around Reno, 
but he would violate other ordinances, and there was a move 
afoot to rid the area of these mobile homes that were houses 
of prostitution. 

There is a place down around Fernley, near Wadsworth, 
where the county line between Washoe County and Lyon 
County is the middle of the Truckee River. The river had 


104 / my father’s son 


shifted course several times, so there was kind of a never- 
never land in there—neither Washoe County nor Lyon 
County was sure whose land it was. (Actually, Storey County 
was involved in that, as well, because the Storey County line 
was in that area.) Joe would move his trailers back and forth 
down there, and no one ever really knew what county the 
trailers were in. 

My friend, Bob Moore, was the D.A. of Storey County, 
and Raggio was the D.A. of Washoe County, and Tom Ross 
was the D.A. of Ormsby County. The D.A.’s would form pos¬ 
ses, and they’d have deputies from each county go with tow 
trucks to wherever Joe had those trailers, empty the trailers 
of people, arrest the girls, and tow and impound the trailers. 
They needed a lot of personnel to do this, and they didn’t 
have that many; so, because I knew all these people, they 
deputized me on a few occasions, and I went along on raids. 

Conforte began taking the wheels off his mobile homes 
and removing them from the site. The first time we showed 
up at a site where he didn’t have wheels on the trailer, we 
were really stumped. We couldn’t tow it away. So we started 
taking spare wheels and tow-trucks with us, and we would 
put the wheels on and tow the trailers to an impound lot. 

Eventually, Joe opened a house somewhere down in the 
Wadsworth area, and Raggio, as D.A. in Washoe County, 
got a court order to burn it down. I went along on that mis¬ 
sion with Raggio. We went down there with a group of depu¬ 
ties, emptied the house out, arrested the girls, and Raggio set 
fire to the place. Raggio and Conforte fought with each other 
like that for many years. It’s all a matter of history, and that 
was my small part in it. 


9 


Launching 

the 

Sands 


MANAGING the two motels and the 
Cladianos building was a full-time job, 
but I liked what I was doing. Business was 
good. Times were good in Reno in the 
late 1950s and early 1960s, and we were 
growing. My dad had an active mind, and 
he was always thinking about new 
projects, and he began to acquire prop¬ 
erty up on North Virginia Street, between 
Sixth and Seventh Street. He found a 
piece of land there that somebody had 
for sale, that he thought was a good bar¬ 
gain, and he bought it. It was where the 
Circus Circus garage is now. His idea was 
to build a hotel-casino. 

For many years, Dad had looked for 
property in downtown Reno within the 
red line, but the existing casinos had sort 
of checker-boarded that area—Harolds 
Club and Harrah’s and others had bought 
key pieces of property within the red line 
in order to stop anyone from coming in 
and building a place that might be a ma¬ 
jor competitor to them, so he was sty¬ 
mied. Dad couldn’t get within that red 
line, so he decided to acquire property 
outside it. He wanted to build a big place, 
a place like the Sands is now. 

Dad had the vision to see that he 
shouldn’t get boxed in with a small piece 
of land and not be able to grow, so he 
began to acquire property up on North 
Virginia with the idea that someday he’d 
build a hotel-casino there. The down¬ 
town area is chopped up pretty bad in 
small lots—fifty-foot lots, even some 
thirty-foot lots in there. So it was a long, 


106 / MY father’s son 


drawn-out process. You had to acquire land pretty much lot 
by lot by lot. He concentrated on that block, because he was 
able to buy three lots in the middle of it in one purchase. 
There were buildings on these lots. One was a cleaners and 
one was a liquor store owned by a Swedish fellow—Viggo 
Peterson was his name, and the store was called Viggo’s. Viggo 
would sell you whiskey, no matter how old you were, as long 
as you had the money, [laughter] But he was a good old guy. 

After he bought the property, Dad kept those stores. It 
became my responsibility to keep them rented. We had an 
apartment house, the Coronet Apartments. We had the dry- 
cleaners. We had the liquor store. Then, over on Sierra Street, 
he acquired other property, and Carlisle’s Printing was rent¬ 
ing a store from us there. 

Dad bought these properties with the cash flow from the 
motels and the Cladianos Building. His long-term idea was 
to get into the hotel-casino business. He knew he was ca¬ 
pable of doing it, because he knew the hotel business and he 
knew the gaming business. (The only thing he didn’t know 
and didn’t care about was the food business, but we could 
lease out the food business, and when we built the Sands, he 
leased it to Denny’s. And it worked! It worked great. That 
was Dad’s idea, and it worked at the Sands for a long time.) 

As it turned out, we never had a casino there. We sold 
the property on North Virginia to Circus Circus when the 
Silver Legacy was being built. What happened was, as Dad 
was acquiring that property, he was at the same time acquir¬ 
ing property in other areas, and the motels and everything 
we had were doing very well. He’d acquire these properties 
with a down payment and assume a mortgage or borrow 
money on them, and so the interest payments were deduct¬ 
ible from our income, and that made it easier to acquire them. 
He acquired several properties around our El Rancho Two 
motel on East Fourth Street—across the street and behind 


Launching the Sands / 107 


it. He acquired properties behind the El Rancho Number 
One on South Virginia Street, as well. 

Dad ran onto three couples that had a piece of land where 
the Sands sits now. The land had 150 feet of frontage on 
Arlington Street and 220 feet of depth running along Aus¬ 
tin Lane, an alley that ran through the middle of the block, 
from east to west. At any rate, my father purchased this piece 
of land, and because the North Virginia properties that he 
was acquiring were not in one big parcel, he said, “We will 
build a motel on this piece. We can borrow the money for it, 
it’s a project we can do, and it’s closer to downtown.” The 
key in the motel business in those days was to be within walk¬ 
ing distance to downtown, and this property was closer to 
the city center than the North Virginia property. 

The property north of Austin Lane was owned by an old- 
time Reno family named Austin. On it there was a little motel 
called Will’s Motel, consisting of eleven little cottage-like 
units. It was as deep as our property, and it had 200 feet of 
frontage on Arlington, so it would be a great piece of prop¬ 
erty for us. . . but the Austin family didn’t want to sell it. 
Period. They didn’t care. They were well off, and it didn’t 
matter. 

There were two brothers named Christianson, who lived 
in Los Angeles, where they owned a well-to-do house paint¬ 
ing and decorating business. They liked to gamble, but they 
didn’t like Las Vegas. They liked Reno. They were frugal, 
and they used to take the bus to Reno for a weekend to 
gamble. They felt that the motel rates were too high, so they 
began to acquire property to build their own motel. Each 
had a son, and they were going to have their kids run the 
motel. So they began to acquire property in this block that 
we were in, but they started in the middle of the block facing 
Third Street. Several homes along there were on fifty-foot 
lots, and the Christiansons started to buy these lots and hang 


108 / MY father’s son 


on to them. They bought right up to the back of our motel, 
and they didn’t want to sell, so we were landlocked. 

Finally, the Austins got in a situation where they were 
amenable to selling their property, and that was a break for 
us. We couldn’t afford to buy the whole piece, but Union Oil 
wanted the corner, so we made a deal with Union Oil—they 
bought the whole thing, and then they sold us the piece where 
we built the original casino that we opened up in 1970. Later, 
we added twenty-four rooms and the building that had the 
Denny’s and the little casino in it. 

We had opened the Sands Motel in 1965. My dad’s idea 
was to build more units and get a little casino started, so the 
next step in his program, when he was able to acquire the 
Austin property, was to put up a building that had a restau¬ 
rant in it—and he leased that to Denny’s—with an area that 
could be the beginning of a little casino, and the motel of¬ 
fice would be in that, also. We called it the Sands Motor 
Inn. 

The first phase of the Sands Motor Inn was the eighty- 
unit motel that we built on the original piece of property 
that we purchased in 1963. We had a contractor from Las 
Vegas, a man named Ben Davey, and I worked with him on 
an eight-to-ten-hour-a-day basis, five days a week. My brother 
and sister took over the management of the motels, and I 
spent the entire construction period, nine months or so, 
working daily with the superintendent of the construction 
company, so we were able to bring the project in at quite a 
substantial savings. My sister helped us save a lot, too—she 
picked out all the furniture, fixtures, wall coverings, and in¬ 
terior finishes, so we had no need to pay a decorator. 

My father had contacts with people that he had done 
business with in the Lovelock Mercantile Company, most of 
them being in the Bay area. From them he had bought car¬ 
peting, drapes, furniture, mattresses, and so on, because he 


Launching the Sands / 109 


used to sell most of that 
stuff in Lovelock when 
he had the store down 
there. These contacts 
were very helpful in us 
being able to purchase 
the furniture and fix¬ 
tures at the best price 
possible. We had a very 
good quality of furnish¬ 
ings. 

To build the Sands 
Motor Inn we got a loan 
from Union Federal 
Savings. We were able 
to get that loan because 
we had a strong balance 
sheet and because there 
wasn’t any gaming at¬ 
tached to our project. 
On paper, it was strictly 
a motel project, otherwise, they wouldn’t have loaned us the 
money. Our projections were based on what we had done in 
our other operations, and we felt that the operation at the 
Sands would do much better, because we were much closer 
to town. 

We had learned in the years that we had been in the 
motel business that people liked a room that was large. Most 
hotel and motel rooms in those days were built on a twelve- 
foot module, so the rooms were twelve feet wide. We built 
the Sands on a fourteen-foot module. That two feet doesn’t 
sound like a lot, but it makes a great deal of difference in a 
hotel room. We had previously built some rooms fourteen 
feet wide and some twelve feet wide, and we learned that the 
fourteen-foot rooms would bring us more revenue, because 



Building the Sands Motor Inn, 1965. 
I spent the entire construction period 
working daily with the superintendent 
of the construction company. 










110 / MY FATHER’S SON 


people would pay more money for that room. We were one 
of the few places in town that had a fourteen-foot-wide room, 
and people would come to us for that reason. It was more 
expensive to build, but it worked out in the long run, and 
after we built that first section of the Sands Motor Inn, we 
never built a room any smaller than that. As a matter of fact, 
we also went from a twenty-five-foot' long room to a thirty- 
foot-long room, and that’s still one of our key features. If not 
the biggest, at least we’re right up there in the size of our 
rooms, and that has been a factor in our success. 

We opened the Sands in February of 1965. I then re¬ 
sumed my position as manager of the other motels, as well as 
the Sands. Nineteen sixty-five was a wonderful year for us, 
because the Sands was an instant success. Unfortunately, in 
September of that year, my mother had a heart attack and 
passed away. She was only fifty-four years old. 

Mother had diabetes; she had high blood pressure; she 
was overweight. Today, it would be simple for cardiologists 
to recognize that she was a prime suspect for a heart attack, 
but they didn’t know that. Her sudden death was an extreme 
blow to us. For several days, I was unable to do anything at 
all. My father was devastated, as were the rest of us. Fortu¬ 
nately, we had loyal friends and employees who took care of 
our business for us until we could pull ourselves together and 
go on. After my mother’s funeral, the priest said, “My son, 
life is for the living. You need to go on, even though this 
happened.” Eventually, that got through to me, and I de¬ 
cided to get started again and get back to the things that we 
were doing. 

In 1970 we opened another building with an additional 
twenty-four units, because we needed 100 units to get an 
unlimited gaming license. (We had eighty units on this side 
of the alley.) We built a five-story building on the north side 
of the alley, and it had twenty-four units in it, so that gave us 


Launching the Sands / 111 



The first addition on the Sands going up. 


a 104 units, so we got over the hundred-unit mark. That was 
the red line stipulation. You had to have 100 units to get an 
unlimited license. Otherwise, you were stuck with only op¬ 
erating fifteen slot machines. 

We applied for a gaming license during construction of 
the building on the north side of Austin Lane, and the city 
council turned us down. They said that we didn’t have 100 
contiguous units. Their interpretation of the law was that 
they needed to be “contiguous.” We didn’t read that in the 
law, and our attorney didn’t read that in the law. I don’t think 
that really was the law, but the casinos in downtown Reno— 
principally Harrah’s, Harolds, the Primadonna, and the 
Mapes—had their minds set on keeping gaming within that 
red line district. The casinos backed their councilmen, and 
they made it their business to ensure that the council voted 
the way the casinos wanted them to. 

When our application came in for an unlimited gaming 
license north of the railroad tracks and outside of the red 
line district, the big casinos didn’t want it. As we can see 
today, the center of gaming eventually shifted north of the 









112 / MY FATHER’S SON 


railroad tracks, so they were right to be concerned—once 
gaming got out of that downtown area, it was probably going 
to move, because gaming is a business that has to expand. 

If you don’t expand, you die. If you look around Reno, 
you see that. That’s one of the things that happened to the 
Mapes. They weren’t able to expand the Mapes, so eventu¬ 
ally it died. Riverside, the same thing. If you haven’t got the 
land to expand, you’re going to die. If you look at all the 
other operations around here that are doing well, they were 
all able to expand. Look at the Atlantis and the Peppermill. 
In our case, if we hadn’t been able to acquire this land and 
expand, we’d be closed by now. 

Anyway, when we first applied for an unlimited license, 
they turned us down. So I conceived the idea of tying the 
two buildings together, making them “contiguous.” As re¬ 
gards my method, it came to me when I drove by a school 
that was being built and saw that the roofs of the buildings 
were sheet-metal forms about twenty-four feet long by four 
feet wide. They were hollow, square tubes, and they’d lay 
those tubes on top of the buildings and then put roofing on 
top of them, so the airspace acted like insulation. 

I bought four of those hollow tubes, and we hung them 
across the alley and tied the two buildings together with them. 
We painted them the same color as the buildings, and then 
we reapplied for a gaming license on the basis that we had a 
“contiguous” building. My dad and I both had to lobby all 
the council people over a several-month period to get them 
to understand and agree with us that this was a project that 
was legal under their ordinance. We even brought them over 
to the Sands during one of their sessions, and they walked 
around and looked at our property. We explained that what 
we wanted to do was going to better the town, because even¬ 
tually our program was to acquire more property and make 
something that the town could be proud of. 



Our “contiguous” buildings, tied together with hollow, sheet-metal forms. This came to be known as “Pete’s 
Passover.” 






















114 / my father’s son 


Marshall Guisti and George Carr were two of the conn- 
oilmen. Another fellow on the council was Charlie Cowen. 
He was a nice guy, but Fitzgerald fed him free lunch every 
day at the Nevada Club, and he voted against us, as I recall. 
At any rate, we finally got approved, even though there were 
a lot of questions about the purpose of this thing we had 
hung across the alley—you couldn’t walk through it or over 
it or under it or anything else. We finally got our license, and 
we opened with forty slot machines in the spring of 1970. 
On my wall I still have the original first registration card. 
The first room that we rented was on February 21, 1970. 

When we built the Sands, the big casinos had downtown 
Reno pretty well tied up through their clever practice of ac¬ 
quiring small parcels in checkerboard fashion. Harrah’s did 
this to a great extent. Harolds, of course, bought all of Com¬ 
mercial Row and little pieces all up and down the street. If 
they couldn’t buy it, they’d lease it. Cal-Neva did this in 
that block they were in. They eventually wound up owning 
the whole block where they are now, and they bought it up 
piece by piece by piece. 

The big boys made it very difficult for anyone to open a 
new casino downtown. Most new casinos were small. The 
only big one that got started down there was the Sahara (later 
the Flamingo Hilton). They bought the property from Ernie 
Primm, who had been putting it together for many years while 
he was in business in the original Primadonna on Virginia 
Street. He moved over to Sierra Street and began to buy up 
that property, and then he went through his big hassle with 
the city council to get that included in the gaming district. 
Then the Sahara came along and bought it from him. All 
the other operations that started out down there were small 
operations. 

My dad simply couldn’t put enough property together 
down there to get an operation started. That’s what prompted 


Launching the Sands / 115 


him to start putting together property in other places that he 
thought would work. We even looked at property in Las Ve¬ 
gas. We looked at some stuff on the Strip; we looked at some 
stuff downtown; but we didn’t ever get a foothold in Las Ve¬ 
gas. 




Big 

Bertha 

and 

the 

Electro- 

Mechanicals 


EACH TIME MY DAD would do a 
project, he’d set up a corporation. He had 
one for the El Rancho on South Virginia 
Street and another for El Rancho Num¬ 
ber Two on East Fourth Street. The 
Lovelock Mercantile Company was a 
corporation, and he had a partnership 
with his brother for the Cladianos Build¬ 
ing downtown. So he had three corpora¬ 
tions and a partnership by the early 
1950s. Later, as he set up a new corpora¬ 
tion, he’d loan his three children the 
money to buy stock in the company, and 
then the company would get funded, and 
we would draw salaries from the company 
and pay him back the loans. 

We set up a new corporation when 
we built the Sands Motor Inn—it was 
called Sands Motor Inn, Inc. We even 
set up corporations to be operating cor¬ 
porations. We had a corporation that 
would own a property, and then we’d 
have an operating corporation. We had 
the El Rancho operating company. 

All these corporations consisted only 
of members of my family—essentially, 
they were my brother and my sister and 
I. My dad even began to give us stock in 
the existing corporations that he had, the 
two El Ranchos and the Lovelock Mer¬ 
cantile Company, through an annual life¬ 
time exclusion gift program that the IRS 
permitted. Every year he’d give each of 
us stock in those companies, so we even¬ 
tually became the sole stockholders in 
them, as well as in the new ones that he 
set up. When my mother died in 1965, 


118 / MY FATHER’S SON 


she owned half of the stock in these companies, because when 
he set up these original companies, it was community prop- 
erty. We inherited the balance of the stock—what he hadn’t 
already given us—from my mother when she died, and that’s 
how we became owners. 

From very early on, Dad made us officers in those corpo¬ 
rations. I was usually the president, and my sister was the 
vice president, because she was only a couple years younger 
than me, and our brother was usually secretary-treasurer. My 
father didn’t hold offices in these companies, but he directed 
us, and under his guidance we ran these companies. Dad 
wanted us to get the experience of being officers in corpora¬ 
tions and understanding the responsibility that was involved 
in running a business. 

When our first expansion of the Sands opened in June 
1970, it contained twenty-four rooms giving us a total of 104, 
a Denny’s restaurant, the lobby area, and a bar and cocktail 
lounge. We also put in forty slot machines. 

We bought the machines from Bally Distributing Com¬ 
pany, at that time being run by Si Redd. We also put in a 
Bertha machine, which was a percentage machine. (A per¬ 
centage machine is a slot machine where the profits of the 
win are split by the owner of the machine and the owner of 
the casino.) It was owned by Bally, and we had a dice ma¬ 
chine that Bill Pennington, the Circus Circus co-founder, 
owned. He had a little route with those dice machines. The 
rest of the machines we owned, and they were all Bally elec¬ 
tromechanical machines. They cost about $3,500 each, and 
it didn’t matter what denomination they were. 

When Bally came out with that electromechanical, it 
pretty much knocked everybody else out of the market. 
Harolds and Harrah’s were still running Paces, and Fitzgerald 
was running the old mechanical Jennings, but everybody else 


Big Bertha / 119 


went to Bally’s, because they were a far superior machine in 
terms of the drop. 

I guess Harolds and Harrah’s customers were satisfied with 
their Pace mechanical machines, because they held off for a 
long time before they bought any new ones. There were cus¬ 
tomers that didn’t play anywhere except at Harolds and 
Harrah’s, because of the Pace machines—they were used to 

them. Plus, it was a big expense for a casino to switch over to 
Bally’s, and I’m sure that Harolds and Harrah’s thought long 
about that. They hung on to their Pace machines for a long 
time, but they had to give in eventually, because there wasn’t 
any question that the new electromechanical machines and 
the machines that came along after them did four or five 
times what the old mechanical machines would do. Bally’s 
had control of the electromechanical slot machine market 

then. If you wanted a good machine that would make you 
money, you didn’t have anywhere else to go. 

Si Redd ran the Bally office for northern Nevada, head¬ 
quartered in Reno, and I believe he had an interest in the 
company, as well. Si was great for spending money on re¬ 
search and development, and he wheedled as much money 
as he could out of Bally’s. He had his people in Reno work¬ 
ing on developing a video poker machine. Si had the vision 
to see that video poker was going to be huge; Bally couldn’t 
see that. As far as that goes, there weren’t a lot of us around 
that could see that. And we didn’t visualize that anybody 
would play a video machine after having had reel machines 
all these years. 

Si felt that video poker was going to work great, but Bally’s 
wouldn’t produce it. So he eventually left Bally’s. They bought 
him out of their stock that he owned, and he resigned as 
their agency manager here. Si took with him the concept of 
the video poker machine. Si also bought the rights to the 
Bertha somewhere along the line, but somebody else had 


120 / MY FATHER’S SON 


come up with that Bertha idea. If Si saw a competitor that 
had something better than he did, he’d buy him, if he possb 
bly could, and if he couldn’t buy him out, he’d run him out of 
business. He’d sue him. He’d tie him up in court. Si was a 
pretty ruthless guy, but he was very shrewd, and he had a lot 
of vision. 

When Si left Bally’s, he formed a company called 
SIRCOMA. SIRCOMA soon came out with a video poker 
machine. It looked like a regular slot machine, only it had a 
video screen. You put them on stands, just like regular slot 
machines. It took a little while for the customer to get used 
to them. The real growth in video poker came when some¬ 
one, and I think it was Si, decided to install them as bar-top 
machines. Then, they did very well, indeed! Initially, they 
met some resistance from bartenders, who got up in arms 
because they thought that their tips would all go in the video 
poker machines. That turned out to be really shortsighted. 
The video poker machine came to be the bartender’s best 
friend, because it gave him the opportunity to talk to the 
player. The customer bought change from the bartender, and 
the bartender touted him on the machines, and bartenders 
made more money than ever, once the video poker machines 
got placed in the bars. 

Si wouldn’t sell a poker machine. He was smart enough 
to keep them and operate them as a route operator. So if you 
wanted poker machines, you had to do a percentage deal with 
Si Redd. Si would lease anyone any kind of machine, and he 
would help people who were getting into business and were 
short on up-front money. You could bring operators in, and 
Si would bring the equipment in. You didn’t have to buy it, 
but when you got enough money together, then you could 
buy the machines. 

For a long time Si wouldn’t sell video poker, because he 
had too good a thing there, but eventually he began to sell 
the machines. The first time we found out that he was sell- 


Big Bertha / 121 


ing a video poker, the price was twelve thousand bucks! It 
was an unheard of price, but Si didn’t care whether he sold 
them or not, and he put the price up so high that not very 
many people bought them. He was just as happy that you 
didn’t. He did the same thing with the Big Bertha machine. 
The first price on a Bertha was $40,000. Well, Bertha was a 
machine that was probably the most profitable single machine 
around, but you couldn’t run a bank of Berthas. You couldn’t 
have thirty, forty, fifty Berthas, but you could have fifty video 
pokers. That was the difference between Berthas and video 
pokers. 

You could have, depending on the size of your club, one, 
two, three, four Berthas, and they’d do great; but if you had 
fifteen, they wouldn’t do that good, because they were an 
impulse machine. If you put them in a high-traffic area, people 
would see this big machine, and they’d put a dollar or two or 
three in it, just simply because it was an oddity. Big Bertha 
was probably somewhere between seven and eight feet tall, 
and it was probably four to five feet wide. It was a huge rep¬ 
lica of a slot machine. It had huge reels and a big reel glass 
and a huge handle on the side, just like a regular slot ma¬ 
chine, and so it was a curiosity. 

Customers would stand around and watch a Big Bertha 
being played. The best place to have them was right inside 
the front door, or wherever there was a heavily traveled lane. 
You’d put it there, and if somebody was playing the machine, 
you’d stop a whole lot of people, and they’d stand around 
and watch. Then, of course, some of those spectators would 
come up and play the machine. 

Si made sure that the Bertha had a lot of loud bells on it. 
If it had a payout, everybody would look around to see what 
happened. These were dollar machines and had a big payout 
tray at the bottom, and the silver dollars would fall in there 
from up high, so they made a lot of noise. 


122 / MY father’s SON 


You had to have room for Big Bertha—you had to have 
the ceiling height. They took a lot of space, but they made a 
lot of money. My recollection is eighty dollars a day was a 
pretty decent drop for a slot machine back then, but Bertha 
would probably do $300 a day. 

Si and Bally’s fought it out in the courts over video poker, 
and eventually Bally began to produce a video poker ma¬ 
chine. However, they decided to tilt the screen. IGT 
(SIRCOMA had become IGT) machines were flat on the 
bar—you looked through a glass surface at the monitor and 
watched your cards come up on it. Bally’s tilted theirs. Up to 
that time, all video poker players were used to IGT machines, 
and this was a different animal. Eventually Bally figured that 
they had better make their machine look as much like IGT’s 
as they could, so they made a flat one that went into the bar 
just like the IGT machine. When it was harder to differenti¬ 
ate between the machines, then Bally’s started to do better. 



Grinding 
It Out 


WE PRETTY MUCH SETTLED on the 
CaENeva’s operation as a model for the 
kind of club we wanted to run. We didn’t 
want to be a high-end operation. We felt 
that there were far more people out there 
that would like a “grind action” kind of 
casino, so we’d have a much bigger audi¬ 
ence to draw from. 

It was apparent that the better cus¬ 
tomers for us would be tourists, as opposed 
to locals, because we knew the hotel busi¬ 
ness and were going to have a hotel con¬ 
nected with our gaming operation. If we 
had a bed base, or a room base, that was 
big enough, we’d have a built-in clien¬ 
tele. Anyway, we couldn’t find a place to 
build in downtown Reno, and the locals 
were concentrated downtown. The down 
side to concentrating on tourists, of 
course, is that when tourism is down, you 
don’t have good business. (The local cus¬ 
tomer is good year round, except maybe 
for the month of December, when every¬ 
body is Christmas shopping.) 

We were able to maintain a high oc¬ 
cupancy rate, around 92 to 95 percent, 
most of the time that we ran lodging busi¬ 
nesses, because we also courted business 
travelers. They were good for us in the 
off season, because they only stayed with 
us Monday through Thursday, and then 
they were gone. That left our weekends 
open for weekend gamblers from the re¬ 
gion and package business. 


124 / MY father’s SON 


We put in our first table games in the 1972-1973 time 
frame. We also kept adding more and more slot machines, 
and we expanded the building we were in. The building had 
parking in the front, off of Arlington Avenue, and we added 
on to the building and pushed it out all the way to the street 
to give us more floor space. With the floor space that we 
added, we installed more slot machines. 

We were doing so well with the slot machines that my 
brother suggested that we put in a live table game, a twenty- 
one table. My dad said, “Sure, but what do you guys know 
about operating a blackjack table?” My dad was sort of semi- 
retired by that time, since my mother had passed away, but 
we used him for his experience and his knowledge in the 
business whenever we needed him, and this was an occasion 
that we needed him. We told him that we’d grown up in this 
business, and we knew a little bit about it. We certainly 
weren’t experts, but we were just going to run a low-limit 
game, and it would be good experience for us. Dad said, “Fine. 
Why don’t you guys go ahead and get your feet wet.” 

It took two or three months to get a license for the game. 
We kept thinking that we were going to hire a dealer, but we 
never did get around to it. Two or three days before we were 
to open the game, my brother and I and Jerry LaCroix began 
to practice dealing. We’d been downtown and watched deal¬ 
ers, and we practiced a little bit, then opened up the game 
one day . . . and we still hadn’t hired any dealers. 

We just kind of took turns dealing. Well, it didn’t take 
very long before we could see that that wasn’t going to work, 
so we hired one day shift dealer and one swing shift dealer. 
We were only open two shifts, but we’d stay open at night as 
long as we had business, and then we’d open again at ten 
o’clock in the morning. We would break the girl, so we got 
our experience dealing and watching the game in that man¬ 


ner. 


Grinding It Out / 125 


Ed Weiss, a fellow I went to high school with, had been 
in the business almost from the time he got out of high school. 
He started as a dealer, and he worked as a pit boss at the Cah 
Neva Club for many years. He came over several times and 
gave us some tips. He watched our dealers and was very helpful 
to us. My brother and Jerry also knew people in the business, 
and they also got help from their friends. 

It was only a few months before we put in another table. 
Then it filled up too, and we put in a third one. Of course, 
we had to hire more dealers. Between LaCroix and I, we split 
the swings, and my brother worked mostly all days. I worked 
the swing because I had a lot of other things to do during the 
daytime—I was responsible for three motels, an apartment 
house, and some other properties that we had been acquir¬ 
ing up on North Virginia Street, mostly rental properties. 

My brother and Jerry and another fellow named Tom 
Piculas and my sister and her husband, Mark Latham, would 
do the drops and service the machines and act as change 
people. We didn’t hire a change person for the longest time, 
probably a year or so after we opened. We did all of that 
ourselves, and we did it from the point of view that we wanted 
to learn the business, and we wanted to meet the customer. 
We wanted to be there. Those were hard and long days, but 
it was exciting. We were making money. 

We had formed a little partnership called CC&J, which 
stood for Cladianos, Cladianos, and Johnson (my sister’s name 
from her first marriage.) As CC&J, we leased the casino from 
the Sands Motor Inn, Incorporated, which was a corpora¬ 
tion that my dad had set up. For tax reasons we formed this 
partnership and leased the casino and paid rent to the Sands, 
and then the partnership ran the casino. 

Our motel had 103 units at the time, but also we began 
doing a lot of local business in our casino. We were getting 
people from St. Mary’s Hospital. We were also getting a lot 


126 / MY father’s SON 


of black-and'whites (dealers and people that worked in other 
casinos), because they would park on the streets near the 
Sands and stop in after their shift. 

We had a Denny’s Coffee Shop at the Sands, just as we 
did down on East Fourth Street. We built a portion of the 
first expansion building specifically for Denny’s. They put 
the fixtures in, and we leased them that part of the building. 
Our Denny’s helped the entire operation, because they were 
doing very well. There were several motels up and down West 
Fourth Street and across on Arlington and on West Street, 
but there weren’t any other restaurants nearby. Before we 
put in our Denny’s, you had to go down to one of the casinos 
to eat. Denny’s had a good reputation, so a lot of people would 
come in and eat. 

Between 1970 and 1978, our growth was pretty rapid until 
the building wouldn’t accommodate more. We topped out 
around 1976 at 185 slot machines and eleven table games. I 
think we had nine blackjack tables, a crap, a wheel, and a 
keno game. Carrol Rippy was our first keno manager. We 

didn’t know anything 
about keno, at all. We 
did know that it was a 
game where you had to 
have somebody who un¬ 
derstood the game run 
it—it wasn’t like getting 
a deck of cards and deal¬ 
ing twenty-one. 

Our first pit manager 
was John Oliver. John 
had been in the business 
many years, working at 
Harrah’s Club, Harolds 
Club, and some other 
Carrol Rippy was our first keno manager, clubs before he wound 






Grinding It Out / 127 


up at the Palace. We hired him when we got up to five black' 
jack games. If we were going to take the next step, we needed 
to get professional help. We were doing well with the five 
games that we had, but customers were leaving us because 
we didn’t have a crap table or a wheel. 

When George Karadanis opened the Sundowner across 
the street from us around 1975, their operation was slanted 
towards pit play. They opened up a whole pit—crap tables 
and a couple of wheels and blackjack games and so on. So it 
was easy for our customers to walk out of the Sands and over 
to the Sundowner to play craps or the wheel, if they wanted 
to. We’d lose customers because of that, but it was sort of a 
wash, because when Karadanis opened up his 400 rooms, that 
put another 800 potential customers a day just across the 
street from us. 

Karadanis’s slot operation was not as good as ours, be- 
cause he didn’t buy Bally’s. He bought a competitor’s ma¬ 
chine because he got them a lot cheaper. They made him a 
good deal, and his knowledge of the slot machine business 
wasn’t deep enough for him to understand that Bally was a 
far superior machine in terms of the drop that you could get 
out of one. So slot players would leave the Sundowner and 
come over to our operation because we had Bally machines 
and it was an easy walk. 

We saw a tremendous increase in our slot business when 
the Sundowner opened, but we also saw a deterioration in 
out live game business. The Sundowner was doing a better 
job of attracting that kind of business, partially because of a 
policy put in by their casino manager, Chuck Clifford. Chuck 
allowed his dealers to keep their own tips, whereas our deal¬ 
ers pooled their tips and then split them up on a shift. When 
Chuck allowed the dealers to keep their tips, he got some 
good dealers from around town that had a following, and 
many players followed their dealer friends to the Sundowner 
and played with them. We spent a lot of time at the 


128 / MY father’s SON 


Sundowner to see what their operation was like, and we saw 
dealers were very outgoing and friendly to the players, and 
they had a great pit operation. We were going in that direc¬ 
tion too, but we learned from the Sundowner that we had to 
go stronger and further—we had to have a real friendly place 
where employees, especially the dealers, would talk to the 
customers. 

We never went for letting dealers keep their own tokes. 
There’s a down side and an up side to that idea. The down 
side is that if a dealer keeps her own tokes, she can kind of go 
into business for herself, and that type of dealer is not neces¬ 
sarily the best thing you can have in your casino. What we 
tried to do was develop a loyal team of employees, with the 
idea that if we all made money, they’d make money. We were 
right there working with them all the time, and we’d go out 
and have drinks with them after work; but we also tried to 
retain some distance between us. On some occasions we went 
too far, but we did have a great rapport with our employees, 
especially our dealers, and I think it contributed a great deal 
to our success. 

Competition from the Sundowner showed us that we 
needed to have a full casino; and if we were going to have a 
full casino, we had to have professional people. We didn’t 
know a lot about craps or the wheel, and the crap table was a 
place where we could get hurt. We were raising our limits all 
the time, because we’d lose customers if our limits weren’t 
high enough, but we didn’t want to get too high, because 
then we’d be subject to a possible heavy loss. So we got up to 
around five hundred dollars as a maximum limit. That was a 
pretty good limit for us, and we attracted players that wanted 
to play at that rate. Karadanis was pulling good players to 
the Sundowner, so there were a lot of those kinds of players 
in the neighborhood. If they felt their luck was bad at the 
Sundowner, or they wanted to try something else, they’d fall 


Grinding It Out / 129 


out across the street, come right over here, and play with us. 
So competition from the Sundowner pushed us into becom¬ 
ing a full casino. 

We began to try to learn the crap game, the roulette 
wheel, and keno. We’d spend as much time as we could in 
the pit with John Oliver and our keno manager, and we 
wanted LaCroix to have that knowledge and Tom Piculas, 
who was working for us then, too. We wanted everyone on 
our staff to learn everything there was about a casino opera¬ 
tion. 

We were being guided and pushed by my dad. He could 
see that we were doing well and that there was a great oppor¬ 
tunity here. He had the vision to see that we could become a 
fair-sized hotel-casino, and he had a lot more vision than we 
did. If we had been left to our own devices, we might have 
just stayed small and run this successful, little casino. 

I would come down to the Sands at ten or eleven in the 
morning every day. I had a little office upstairs in the casino 
building, with a part-time secretary, and I’d dictate letters 
and take care of whatever business had to be taken care of, 
and then I would visit the other properties that we had, and 
I’d try to see my dad. We’d have lunch together lots of times. 
After that I would spend the rest of the day pretty much on 
the floor of the casino. If I had phone calls, I’d take them on 
a phone in the pit. We also had one hanging on the wall by 
the registration desk, so I could conduct business and still be 
out there on the floor, interacting with our customers. I could 
watch our help. I could pay attention to the pit. 

In addition to this, three to five nights a week, I’d work 
the swing shift from 6:00 pm to 2:00 am. I’d work in the pit 
with another pit boss who was experienced, or I would even 
work shifts by myself when it was slow. Sunday night was a 
slow night, so some Sundays I’d just run the pit. I had a lot of 


130 / MY father’s son 


confidence in our crap dealers—I really didn’t know that 
much about craps, but John Oliver had hired them and said 
they were trustworthy. 

I’d spend time in the pit kind of acting as a box man, 
trying to learn the odds and trying to learn the game, but I 
never did get to where I could actually deal craps. I did it on 
occasion when things were slow, but I never became an ex- 
pert crap dealer. Same way with roulette. First ball I ever 
tried to spin on a wheel went clear across the room! I limited 
myself to stacking chips on a roulette wheel when we were 
busy. 

There were a lot of days that I worked fourteen or six- 
teen hours. I got carried away. I’d go home at one or two or 
three in the morning, and I’d be back in the casino at ten. I 
worked six days a week and took most Sundays off. My friends 
and I owned a boat together, and we liked to go water-skiing, 
so we’d go to Pyramid Lake with the boat and spend all day 
out there on Sunday. However, there were times when we 
were so busy that I’d come to work at ten or eleven o’clock 
Saturday morning, and we’d stay busy until three or four in 
the morning. By that time I hadn’t eaten anything, and I was 
hungry, so I would decide to grab a bite to eat and then go 
home. 

I’d sit down in Denny’s to have something to eat, and by 
the time I got through eating and talking things over with 
the bosses, we’d start to get busy again, because a lot of people 
like to get up early. On many occasions I didn’t get home 
until Sunday afternoon, somewhere between 1:30 and 3:30. 
I missed some water-skiing because of that. . . but the big¬ 
gest result was that I wound up getting a divorce. 

All of our dealers were females, except for the crap deal¬ 
ers. In our experience, the luckiest dealers that we had, and 
the best dealers, were the ones that we taught and broke in 
ourselves, and so it became our habit to hire inexperienced 
dealers that were probably not any older than twenty-one or 


Grinding It Out / 131 


twenty-two. We hired pretty nice-looking girls, attractive 
girls, because that was good for business—many of our cus¬ 
tomers were men, and they liked to play with attractive young 
ladies. We trained these young women to deal the way we 
wanted them to, and they were beholden to us, because we 
gave them the opportunity to make a lot more money than 
they’d ever made in their lives. 

When you had a pit full of attractive girls, and your wife 
knew it, and you were spending a great deal of time there, 
and you had a strong rapport with these girls, and you were 
working such long hours, it really wasn’t good for a marriage. 
I separated from my first wife in the 1973 to 1974 time frame. 
I had two children at that time that were still very young. 
One was around eight or nine, and the other thirteen or four¬ 
teen, so I kept trying to make a go of the marriage. Even 
though we lived separately, I refused to get divorced, because 
of the children, and because I still cared for my wife. I wanted 
to try to make the thing work, but it didn’t work out. Even¬ 
tually, my wife got an attorney and divorced me. It was a 
thing that happens to you in the gaming business. The gam¬ 
ing business is just hard on marriages. That’s all there is to it. 




Liquored 

Up 


IN THE I970S we opened a liquor store 
on our property. We were aware that 
many people came to Reno for other rea¬ 
sons besides gaming, or they made trips 
that were combination trips—they 
wanted to gamble or go to Lake Tahoe, 
but another thing that many wanted to 
do was to buy liquor. Liquor was priced 
much cheaper in Nevada than it was in 
adjoining states, especially Oregon and 
Washington. British Columbia had a 
forty-ounce limit on how much alcohol 
you could take back across the border, but 
many of our Canadian customers didn’t 
care. They’d take back several cases. The 
only time they got caught was if they were 
stopped at the border, but very few people 
ever got stopped. 

Many people would drive to Reno, 
stay here and gamble, and then buy sev¬ 
eral cases of liquor before they went 
home. A lot of people (we later learned 
from talking to our customers) would 
come down with shopping lists from their 
friends. They’d drive their pick-ups down 
with a camper on the back, and they’d 
load up with liquor and take it back and 
re-sell it to their friends. My brother 
thought that if we had our own liquor 
store, it would help our business, and it 
would be another reason for people to 
come here. 

We started out by bringing in case 
lots, putting them on the floor of the 
cocktail lounge area, and selling liquor 
by the case, not by the bottle. Business 
boomed. We had wholesale liquor deliv- 


134 / my father’s son 


eries here daily, and we really started selling! We’d have a 
display with several cases of different kinds of liquor. Vodkas 
were very popular, and the least expensive vodka was the 
thing that sold the most. So we would shop around the dis- 
tributors and find the least expensive vodka and maybe mark 
it up 5 percent, or sometimes we even sold it at cost for a loss 
leader. We tried to break even on the sale items and then 
make some money on the related stuff. 

Our gaming revenue took another jump because of the 
liquor business, and it helped our hotel business, too. It be- 
came a pretty important thing to us, even though we didn’t 
make any money in the liquor business itself. However, we 
did run into some difficulty: 

We had a group of Native Americans come down from 
Washington. They had smoke shops and sold liquor on their 
reservations in the Seattle area. They used to come down 
here and buy whole truckloads of liquor from us, and we’d 
charge them whatever our retail price was, and they’d pay us 
in cash. We were aware that they were reselling it, but we’d 
checked with our attorney. He’d told us that as long as we 
were not acting as wholesalers, as long as we were selling 
that liquor to them at the same price we sold it to everyone 
else, we were within our rights to do so. 

This was good business in the casino as well, because when 
the Indians came down here to buy liquor, they would come 
in a group of ten or twelve people and stay around for several 
days, and they gambled a lot. We also found that people from 
their tribes and related tribes would come down on their own, 
and, because they were making a great deal of money on this 
smoke shop and liquor store, the tribal members all had con- 
siderable funds. They liked to gamble, and they became very 
good customers of ours. 

The federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms 
was investigating Indians’ sales of liquor and cigarettes on 
reservations, and on one occasion they followed our custom- 


Liquored Up / 135 


ers when they brought down a couple trucks to buy liquor. 
They got the whole transaction on film—where we loaded 
their trucks out in the alley, and so on and so forth. Then the 
federal government charged us with selling liquor without a 
wholesale license. We had to go to court, and we were fined 
because of it. We had to talk to the Nevada gaming control 
board, and we told them that this didn’t have anything to do 
with our gaming business. We had not done anything that 
Gaming considered reason to fine us or terminate our license, 
but we did have to stop selling liquor to these Indians. 

We continued about our business, selling liquor to any- 
one else that came through. Eventually, we partitioned off a 
portion of the cocktail lounge and made it a liquor store. We 
leased that portion of the building to a man named Collins 
and sold him the business and the inventory, and he ran the 
liquor business for several years. We were glad to get out of 
running the business. It had been a lot of effort, and we weren’t 
making any money on it—the money we were making was 
from the gaming end of it. Collins had to be real competitive 
on his prices, because the liquor business was very competi- 
tive. 



13 

1978 : 
Taking a 
Chance on 
Expansion 


NINETEEN SEVENTY-EIGHT was a 
major turning point in the history of 
Reno gaming, with the opening of the 
MGM, the Circus Circus, the Reno Sa¬ 
hara, the Money Tree expansion, and the 
Comstock. That was a diverse group of 
casinos. The MGM had a thousand 
rooms, and it was by far the biggest ca¬ 
sino in Reno. It was outside of downtown, 
and the only other big operation that was 
successful outside of Reno at that time 
was John Ascuaga’s Nugget in Sparks. 
(The Peppermill was growing, but it was 
still small. The Atlantis had yet to open.) 
Boomtown was open, and it was doing 
well, and you could say that they were 
outside the downtown area, but it was a 
little different—they pretty much lived 
off the highway and truckers. They had 
a special clientele that they catered to. 
Those truckers wouldn’t have been busi¬ 
ness for Reno, anyway, because they 
couldn’t park their rigs in town. So they 
were a little different case. 

Dick Graves, when he opened the 
Nugget in Sparks, originally with a little 
coffee shop and so on, was probably one 
of the smartest men I’ve ever met. He 
could create promotions in the gaming 
business as well as or better than anyone 
I’ve ever known. The other thing that 
he had was good food. The little town of 
Sparks had nothing in the way of gam¬ 
ing until Graves started his Nugget, but 
it’s grown to a big operation. 

The Nugget was already doing well, 
when along came MGM, built this huge 


138 / MY father’s son 


thing out there all by itself, and put in a lot of convention 
space. From my observation, what happened to MGM was 
they were used to doing business in Las Vegas, but it’s en- 
tirely different to do business in northern Nevada than it is 
in Las Vegas—was then, and still is. I’ve seen this happen in 
other casinos here. You need to be more personable. You need 
to have a closer contact with your customer. You need to be 
not quite so splashy, not quite so dramatic as they are in Las 
Vegas. 

MGM was a huge departure from what existed in Reno 
at the time, and many of the customers that came to Reno 
and tried out MGM did not go back there. They came back 
to those of us that are still successful in Reno, because they 
didn’t like that Las Vegas atmosphere. That’s one of the rea¬ 
sons they were coming to Reno in the first place. A lot of 
those people had money to make a choice—they could have 
gone to Las Vegas or Reno, and they were coming to Reno. 

The fact that MGM was willing to come to Reno and 
spend hundreds of millions of dollars caused other people in 
the gaming business, people like Circus Circus and Del Webb, 
who built the Sahara, to say, “Hey, Reno may be a place where 
we could do well.” There was a lot of opportunity here, and 
the Sahara and the Comstock and Circus Circus opened in 
this same period. 

It was unfortunate that everyone opened at once, because 
there was some fallout from that. The tremendous amount 
of casino space and gaming positions and rooms that were 
added to the market all at one time created a difficult situa¬ 
tion. You had all this added capacity, but you didn’t have the 
advertising and introductory promotions that should have 
been done at the time, because some people thought all you 
had to do was open your doors, and you’d do well. So the 
little places—the Comstock, and the Money Tree were the 
two smaller places that opened up—simply said, “Well, we’ll 
just open our doors, and we’ll be OK.” 


1978 / 139 


Because of Reno’s red line, most gaming people felt if 
you were going to be in the gaming business, you had to be in 
downtown Reno, or real close. The Comstock and the Money 
Tree folks felt they had to be in downtown Reno; and in- 
deed, up till that time, that was certainly the case. But the 
large casinos had tied up a lot of downtown land, and it was 
difficult to buy a piece big enough to build a casino that had 
the amenities you really needed to be successful. Even Del 
Webb’s Sahara didn’t really have enough room to build the 
casino they should have built to be successful. Small casinos 
like the Money Tree or the Comstock didn’t have a big se¬ 
lection of restaurants, and that was another reason why people 
wouldn’t go to those places. Maybe they’d go to the MGM or 
one of the larger places, Harrah’s or Harolds. All this is hind¬ 
sight, of course .... 

Parking became a very big issue. The Money Tree had no 
parking at all, and the Comstock had parking only in the 
basement of their place, with not enough spaces, and the 
Sahara the same thing. The Mapes also was experiencing a 
problem because of parking. The Riverside had changed 
hands two or three times, and they also had problems with 
parking and with being an old facility. Parking became im¬ 
portant because, with all these casinos opening up in 1978, 
the business became highly competitive; whereas, before this 
time it had not been. Now you had this added capacity in 
the market, but you probably had about the same number of 
people coming to Reno that you had before. People make 
choices, and when you had a difficult time parking some place, 
you went somewhere else. 

Slowly, the gaming business was gravitating to the north¬ 
ern end of the city, whereas the former center of gaming was 
somewhere around Second and Virginia. The Sands was prob¬ 
ably one of the factors that made it move. Then Circus Cir¬ 
cus and the Eldorado opened up on the northern end of town, 
and, like ourselves, they had some parking. But these other 


140 / MY father’s son 


places that opened, except for the MGM, really didn’t have 
the proper kind of plant that they should have had. They 
needed more restaurants. They needed parking. They needed 
more room, and, ultimately, that’s why they failed. 

In the long run, the 1978 expansion probably was good 
for Reno. In the short run, it wasn’t. There were a lot of 
casualties. 

Las Vegas has never felt that they had to cater to the 
customer. Their high rollers, yes, but as for the average guy, 
they felt he was privileged to come into their casino, really. 
MGM brought that philosophy with them to Reno, even 
though they hired a lot of local Reno people. They didn’t 
want their dealers talking to people. They wanted them just 
to do their jobs and go on their breaks and come back and 
keep to themselves, keep their mouths shut and pay atten¬ 
tion to their dealing. 

Customers in northern Nevada, both locals and tourists, 
were simply not used to that kind of thing. They expected to 
see smiles and friendly faces, and they expected pit bosses to 
walk over and talk to them. The Las Vegas style is to have 
the pit boss stand out in the middle of the pit with his arms 
folded and a big frown on his face. It worked down there for 
them, and it still works, but it just didn’t work in Reno. 

Essentially, you had three Las Vegas operations in Reno. 
You had Circus Circus; you had the Sahara; and you had 
MGM. The Sahara, to my knowledge, never made any money. 
After it became the Hilton, Ferenc Szony, the man who is 
president of our company, ran the place, and he made money 
over there, but he was the only one. The MGM lost money 
for years—that’s one of the reason’s they sold it to Bally’s. 
Bally’s didn’t do any good over there either. That’s the rea¬ 
son they sold it to Hilton. 

The big Hilton out at the old MGM property made money 
only when Ferenc left the downtown Hilton, the Flamingo 


1978 / 141 


Hilton, and went out there. He turned the place around. 
Ferenc got them back into the convention business. Even 
though they had a large convention facility, and they could 
do well, their main concentration was gamers and high rolb 
ers, and that just didn’t work. When they got back into their 
convention type of business, they made a profit. Of course, 
they had to spend a lot of money. Ferenc spent sixty million 
dollars when he was out there—new restaurants and addi¬ 
tional convention facilities. 

The biggest problem out there is that the casino is so 
huge that you’ve got to get several hundred people in it be¬ 
fore you look busy. Ferenc had to figure out a way to lower 
the ceiling and try to compartmentalize the casino area so 
that in certain areas it looked like you had business. He cre¬ 
ated some new restaurants to bring people in. He brought a 
couple of franchises in, and we’ve done that here at the Sands. 
There is a place for those franchises, and they help. You can’t 
rely on franchises, but if they bring people in, they help. 

The Hilton has 2,000 rooms now that have to be filled. 
It’s a challenge, and the conventions have become their 
mainstay. The Sahara didn’t have that kind of a chance, be¬ 
cause they had very little convention space—they just didn’t 
have the room for convention space, so they left it out of the 
building. I think they’ve only got ten or twelve thousand 
square feet, which is nothing for a hotel-casino. Even in our 
case, we’ve got seventeen or eighteen thousand square feet, 
and we never even thought about being a convention hotel. 

In the first few years they were open, the newer major 
casinos weren’t making any money, and yet the smaller casi¬ 
nos were being knocked out of business. The large casinos 
had huge overheads, so even when they stole a lot of busi¬ 
ness from the little guys, they weren’t able to make money. 
In the short run there was a lot of dislocation and a lot of 
problems. 


142 / MY father’s son 


The King’s Inn was a smaller casino that didn’t have the 
proper plant, and management wasn’t good, and they didn’t 
last very long. But while they were operating, we experienced 
somewhat the same situation with King’s Inn that we had 
with the Sundowner. Their slot floor was not well organized, 
and they had a lot of Aristocrat slot machines on it, as well 
as Bally’s. People were unhappy with the Aristocrats. And 
they only had one restaurant and did a poor job in the food 
business. We began to experience more growth once the 
King’s Inn opened. The King’s Inn and the Sundowner were 
a great help to us, because they brought that many more 
people to rooms within a very short walk of our casino. 

When all this was happening—the smaller casinos were 
closing, et cetera—we did all right. The two Christianson 
brothers from Los Angeles had been acquiring property be¬ 
hind the Sands along Third Street with the idea of building 
a motel. Then they changed their minds, and in 1977 they 
put the property up for sale. It was a sizeable piece of land, in 
the neighborhood of two hundred by two hundred feet. Their 
realtor told us that the property was for sale, and we already 
knew we needed to expand or be stuck with a little casino. 

We bought the property from the Christiansons. That 
gave us a huge piece of land adjacent to our motel operation, 
but not adjacent to our casino, so we had to decide what we 
were going to do. The project that we envisioned was the 
biggest thing that we’d ever tackled. We felt we could sup¬ 
port another three hundred hotel rooms and a casino of fif¬ 
teen or sixteen thousand square feet more than we already 
had. We thought we could compete in the Reno market be¬ 
cause of our management style and our operational policies, 
even though there was a glut of rooms and more gaming than 
the town could support. 

The question was: how were we going to finance a project 
like that in light of what was happening to other casinos in 
Reno? Fortunately I made the acquaintance of Art Wood, a 



The Sands grew up just to the west of the downtown gaming core. It occupies a sizeable piece of land. (The 
location of the property is indicated by the arrow.) 








144 / my father’s son 


man who, after my dad, is the second smartest man I’ve ever 
known. Wood was an accountant who came to Nevada from 
Oklahoma City, originally, to get a divorce, and he was sue- 
cessful in several different businesses. 

Art had secured financing for the MarnelbCorrao Con- 
struction Company when they built the Maxim Hotel in Las 
Vegas. It was off the Strip, but they had designed it, built it, 
and they were operating it successfully. When I made ap¬ 
proached Marnell-Corrao about doing our project, I indi¬ 
cated that I didn’t have the financing. They introduced me 
to Art Wood. I gave Art our statements and showed him 
what we had done and how we operated, and he became 
convinced that we could be successful. 

Because Art had always been successful in his projects, 
he could give us entre to the highest levels of First Interstate 
Bank. He knew everybody from the top right on down. He 
took my dad and me to the Las Vegas offices of First Inter¬ 
state, where we talked to the president, and Art convinced 
them that we had a good project. All we had to do was come 
up with a million dollars in cash, pay off the land, and then 
they would loan us five million dollars. With that, Marnell- 
Corrao told us we could build our 300-room tower and our 
casino. The building would have two restaurants and about 
seventeen or eighteen thousand feet of convention space, 
plus the same amount of casino space, and we had enough 
land for surface parking. 

We began construction in 1978, and it took us about a 
year to build the place. We had had to scratch around to get 
the million dollars together, and that’s when we sold the Crest 
Apartments and picked up three hundred thousand dollars. 
After we got the million put together, Art Wood, through a 
leasing agency, got us a deal to acquire all our slot machines, 
furniture, and fixtures on a lease-purchase kind of a contract. 
We put very little cash up. We made payments, and at the 


1978 / 145 


end of die time period, we paid the leasing agency a dollar, 
and everything belonged to us. Art had created a very ad- 
vantageous financing package for us. 

Art insisted that we get a competent controller for our 
business. We had a bookkeeper, and we had an accountant, 
but Art knew that we had to do better than that, because he 
came from an accounting background himself. So we hired a 
controller, and he really didn’t do a good job for us. Fortu¬ 
nately, Art realized very quickly that he was not doing a good 
job, so we got rid of him, and, with Art’s help, we hired some¬ 
one else who did much better. We eventually hired Dave 
Wood (no relation), who became our chief financial officer 
once we went public—he was our controller prior to that. 
Dave Wood is still our chief financial officer. 

We got Dave when the Gaming Commission required us 
to get an audit by an outside accounting firm. We retained 
Barrett and Smith to do it, they sent their man Dave over, 
and he asked so many penetrating questions that he became 
difficult to deal with. He knew his business, and he was re¬ 
lentless. Finally, I told everybody, “This fellow ought to work 
for us. We need him on our side.” We hired Dave Wood, and 
we haven’t been sorry. 



14 

“Canadian 

Friendly” 


WITH OUR ADDITION of 300 rooms, 
we became a 400'room property. It was 
important to fill those 400 rooms, be¬ 
cause, if the hotel was full, our gaming 
would do well. The package business for 
gaming operations and charter air tours 
was in its infancy. Harolds Club had a 
good package. Another that the cham¬ 
ber of commerce had put together was 
sold by Durkee Travel in conjunction 
with United Airlines. It was the major, 
all-inclusive package coming into Reno 
at the time, if not the only one. Jud Allen, 
executive director of the chamber, told 
me it would be a good package for my 
new property to get into, and that was 
the first all-inclusive package that I be¬ 
came a part of. They needed hotels, and 
because I had a brand new one, and my 
rooms were larger than almost anyone’s 
in town, we did very well in that pack¬ 
age. Reno has always had about 60 per¬ 
cent repeat business, and so it didn’t take 
long for word to get around that we were 
new, had nice, large rooms within walk¬ 
ing distance of downtown, and had our 
own casino. 

I knew Vern Durkee, of Durkee’s 
Travel Agency, very well. We played 
handball together, and I learned about 
the workings of the package. Essentially, 
Durkee was a wholesaler. He had a block 
of seats on United Airlines flights com¬ 
ing into Reno from different cities. Most 
were from the West Coast at that time. 
United was flying from Seattle, Portland, 
San Francisco, L.A., and, I think, Den- 


148 / MY father’s son 


ver. On their flights that were routinely not full, they would 
give him a deep discount—late night flights, for example, or 
flights during mid-week, and if he took more seats, he’d get a 
deeper discount per seat. 

Just as Vern could get cheaper seats from the airlines dur¬ 
ing the week, he could get cheaper rooms from the hotels, 
because mid-week was when our hotels had a lot of empty 
rooms. It was really a tailor-made kind of thing for Reno— 
when the airlines needed the seats, we needed the rooms; 
and when they didn’t need them, we didn’t need them, be¬ 
cause we had all this drive-up traffic coming up from Califor¬ 
nia on weekends. 

Vern would put his profit in the price, so if a package 
with rooms and seats on the airline cost him a hundred dol¬ 
lars, he’d put twenty-five or thirty bucks in the price for him¬ 
self, maybe more. But it was an attractive package, even if it 
cost a hundred and thirty or forty or fifty bucks, because it 
was a good deal all the way around. 

Eventually, other wholesalers decided to come into Reno. 
There was a big one from back East named Funjet. A guy by 
the name of LaMacchia was one of the leaders, and he still 
operates that business. LaMacchia was working with United 
Airlines and Western Airlines, running packages to Las Ve¬ 
gas. I flew to Wisconsin and talked with him. I had my bro¬ 
chures and showed him our place. I got him interested, and 
within a few months of our opening, I started our Funjet pack¬ 
age. It was the same kind of deal Durkee had, only we were 
getting people from the Midwest. It was one of the first ef¬ 
forts Reno made to try to tap that big, Midwestern market 
that Las Vegas had had all to themselves. 

Almost simultaneously with the time we opened, a gaso¬ 
line shortage hit the country, and that stopped cross-country 
auto traveling almost dead in its tracks. So here we were— 
just opened 300 new rooms, and our cross-country travel had 
dried up. Fortunately for me, a man named Devereux came 


Canadian Friendly / 149 


to see me about putting together a charter air flight from 
Vancouver, British Columbia, to Reno. He had an option on 
a lease for a Boeing 737, and he wanted a place for these 
people to stay in Reno. I had never participated in anything 
like this, but he showed me how it was done. It was set up on 
what they call a twice-a-week rotation. A flight would come 
down on Sunday night, and it would land at the airport, and 
they’d bus them right over to your hotel. Then the plane 
would pick up a load of passengers that they’d brought in on 
the previous trip, and they’d take them back to Vancouver. 
So every Sunday night and Thursday night they’d bring down 
a new load and take the people back that had come on the 
previous flight. You’d have more natural demand for the week- 
end package, but you could push people into taking that four- 
day package by selling it for the same price as the three-day 
weekend flight. We’d give Devereux some really good rates 
for a weekday, and then we’d get better rates from him for 
the weekend. 

Devereux brought down a full load the first time he came, 
and it looked wonderful to us. Right at a hundred people, a 
full load was about fifty hotel rooms. Most of them would be 
couples, and they all liked to gamble. That’s what they came 
for. Maybe they’d see a little entertainment, but a lot of those 
people never even left our casino. They were just wonderful 
business. 

The problem with Devereux was he was a slow pay. [laugh¬ 
ter] I started out by saying, “You have to pay me in advance,” 
because I was pretty leery about this whole thing. I’d never 
had any experience with it, and I thought, “Well, if I’m go¬ 
ing to sit around here and hold fifty rooms for this guy, and 
he doesn’t show up, then what do I do?” So it went along 
that way for awhile, and then one day he sent a flight down, 
and he had neglected to send a check. So I called him on the 
phone, and I said, “What’s going on here?” 

He said, “Oh, gee. I just forgot. It was an oversight.” 


150 / MY father’s son 


Well, this kind of thing sort of snowballed and kept go¬ 
ing, but it was in our slow season, and these people were, for 
us, pretty good gamblers. They weren’t $500 players, but they 
were $25 players, and for us that was good. As a matter of 
fact, we liked $25 and lower players, because they didn’t give 
us any trouble. We beat them. They couldn’t win. They didn’t 
have the bankroll we did. So it worked out great, and they 
liked our place. 

We understood Canadians. In those days they hardly ever 
tipped, so initially we had a hard time with our dealers, but 
John Oliver was great about that. He started our people out 
right, and that was another reason we liked break-in dealers: 
they weren’t used to making a lot of tips. Canadians, if they 
gave you a buck, they really thought they were doing some¬ 
thing. A lot of times they’d tip fifty cents or nothing at all. 
The break-ins weren’t used to making tips, so Oliver told 
these people, “You just smile and be nice to people, and even¬ 
tually we’re going to teach them how to tip.” That’s exactly 
what happened, and they’re much better tokers today than 
they were then. 

At any rate, I might not get paid for these rooms, but 
these customers were good for our casino, and my rooms would 
have been empty, anyway. So I just went along with Devereux 
and waited for the money, and then a lot of times the check 
would bounce. One time I flew up there on his charter to see 
him, because I hadn’t been paid for two or three weeks, and 
when I went to his office, he was very nice to me. He took 
me to his chief financial officer, a Chinese fellow, and they 
wrote out a check for me, and I said, “Look, this is all well 
and good, but is there money in the bank?” 

And they said, “We’ll just call the hank and let you talk 
to somebody.” 

So I took up the phone, and the guy said, “Yes, that check 
will clear.” 


Canadian Friendly / 151 


So we went out to dinner, and the next day I flew back to 
Reno with the check in my hand, sent it to the bank, and it 
bounced! [laughter] By the time I got to the bank, not only 
were there not enough funds, but it needed two signatures 
and only one of those guys had signed it. I knew that old gag. 
It had been pulled on me many times before, but this guy was 
a salesman. He was a soft-soaper, but he was having more 
problems as time went by. 

One thing led to another, and eventually Devereux’s pack¬ 
age business wound up in the hands of Canadian Airlines. 
After Canadian took over, they began to fly bigger and big¬ 
ger airplanes. We were getting more and more people, and 
we had to furnish more and more rooms, and we couldn’t 
furnish all of them. So I went around to some other hotels 
close to us and procured rooms. Canadian would send me a 
list of requirements for rooms, and I’d take what I wanted, 
and then I’d farm out the rest of them. I was using the Colo¬ 
nial across the street. It was brand new at that time. I used 
the Hilton, the Comstock, and one or two other places. 

For a few years I controlled the room end of the business 
in Reno for Canadian Airlines, and it worked out well for 
both of us. I’d help them negotiate the rates for these other 
places, because I knew when the slow seasons were and when 
they could get better rates and so on. So the thing really 
grew. 

Right after we opened our second tower, Canadian Holi¬ 
days, with our help on this end, began to fly a DC-10 to 
Reno. We were the first, and, I think, the only, charter air¬ 
line that ever flew a DC-10 into this town. Then we flew 
747’s for two or three years. The DC-lO’s would bring around 
380 people at a time, and the 747’s would bring about 450, so 
you had a lot of rooms on those planes. Silver Wings was 
flying a much smaller plane at the time, probably a 737, so 
Canadian Airlines had a real hold on the market, and the 


152 / MY father’s son 


Sands became synonymous widi Canadian Holidays in the 
Vancouver area, because we were one and the same, really. 

One of the things that I negotiated out with these char- 
ter people was that they would do the advertising for the 
package, but I reserved the right to see their advertising and 
to help them decide where to place it. We’d do things like 
give them a special rate for Easter, because Easter was a hard 
time to move people. We’d do a special gamblers’ flight on a 
real slow time, like the end of the month. (The end of the 
month would always be slow, maybe because government 
checks and welfare checks come out after the first of the 
month. The last few days of the month, a lot of people are 
short of money.) So, we’d look ahead and find these soft spots 
and plan different promotions. Our room occupancy was 90 
percent because of those charter airlines coming down here, 
and that’s damn good in the industry. 

We were probably getting fifteen to eighteen percent of 
our total business from Canadian Airlines charters, and thirty 
to thirty-three percent of our total business was Canadian 
business—that would have been the Super Tour and all the 
other tours that we had. We got established in Vancouver 
well ahead of any other hotel-casinos in Reno. I saw to it 
that the ads that Canadian Holidays placed up there always 
had our name prominently displayed, and it worked well for 
them, too, because we had a nice hotel. 

We had a first-class hotel. Canadians enjoyed staying with 
us, because we were “Canadian friendly.” As a matter of fact, 
we used to take their money at par, whatever the exchange 
rate was (usually below the American dollar), and that was a 
really big deal. It cost a little, but it was well worth it. We 
learned what Canadians liked. They liked tea and toast for 
breakfast, so we had a little special in the restaurant for them, 
our “Canadian breakfast” special. One of the complaints you’d 


Canadian Friendly / 153 


hear from them all the time was, “Well, I went down to so- 
and-so, and they didn’t have any tea.” [laughter] 

The Canadian dollar started to drop in the mid-1980s. 
Up until then, it was usually within four cents of the Ameri¬ 
can dollar. Then they had some problems in Canada, their 
dollar fell, and we couldn’t absorb the difference. Then, we’d 
give them a special discount on the exchange, so they’d gain 
a little bit, but we began to get competition around town. 
Cal-Neva started to ape what we were doing, so if we were at 
10 percent, they’d go to 8 percent. They were tough. They 
pulled a lot of our Canadian business out of here. 

The Canadians got to where they’d take advantage of 
you. They’d come down, and they’d just change that money 
at the casino and stick it in their pocket and walk out. Cur¬ 
rently, the Canadian dollar is down to sixty-seven cents, and 
that’s one of the reasons that Canadian business has really 
dried up. Besides the casinos that are now up there, and all 
the other things that are happening, the declining value of 
the Canadian dollar has really hurt gaming business in Reno. 
In 2001, our Canadian business is 12 or 13 percent, as op¬ 
posed to the 33 percent that it used to be. 

We still fly this charter, but it’s no longer owned by Ca¬ 
nadian Holidays, and we only get fifteen or twenty rooms off 
that charter. Indian casinos in Oregon and Washington have 
hurt the Canadian business, also. And there’s some gaming 
in Vancouver, as well. It isn’t much, but it’s year round, and 
it’s right in the city. 

The way it developed was Calgary and Edmonton be¬ 
came the Vegas market, and Vancouver became a Reno mar¬ 
ket . . . although Vegas made some hig inroads up there, too. 
For a time, with Canadian Airlines, we had to resort to a 
two-drop kind of thing—when we were flying those big 
planes, we sometimes couldn’t fill them, so they’d sell some 


154 / my father’s son 


seats to Vegas. They’d have to sell a sufficient number to 
justify the plane dropping a load in Reno, going to Vegas, 
dropping a load, and then turning around and doing the same 
thing going back. We did that, and I worked with the West- 
ward Ho there on that kind of a situation. 


15 

Franchise 

Food, 

No 

Entertainment 


OUR SO-CALLED “RESEARCH” led us 
to believe that we could run a casino 
without entertainment, thereby doing 
away with that overhead. We knew that 
for many, many years Harolds Club had 
done it, although later they did have en¬ 
tertainment. Cal-Nevahas almost never 
had any entertainment, and they were 
very successful . . . and we were copying 
Cal-Neva in a lot of other ways, too. We 
gave out as many free drinks as we possi¬ 
bly could—anybody that was gambling 
didn’t have to buy a drink. That’s pretty 
normal these days, but back then, it 
wasn’t. 

We built our business around keep¬ 
ing overhead as low as we could. If you 
didn’t have entertainment, it was a cost 
you didn’t have. If you didn’t have a mar¬ 
keting department, which we did not, 
that was a big expense eliminated. So we 
succeeded for many years without enter¬ 
tainment. But the business changed so 
much and became so competitive, that 
we in the late 1990s we started putting 
entertainment in. When the Silver 
Legacy opened up, a whole lot of things 
changed in Reno gaming. 

Entertainment is not nearly the drag 
it used to be, because almost all places 
now practice what they call “four-wall¬ 
ing.” They charge admission now, where 
years ago, it was either free, or you just 
bought a drink or had something to eat, 
and you saw the entertainment. Now the 
entertainer gets the ticket revenue, and 
the hotel-casinos get the drink and food 


156 / MY father’s son 


revenue. All the casino has to do is furnish the room and do 
the advertising. Whatever tickets they sell, the money goes 
to the entertainer, and that absolves the casino of paying the 
entertainer. That’s really about the only way you’re able to 
get big-name entertainers nowadays. 

In the entertainment business now—because of televi- 
sion and these big shows where they pack in a lot of people 
in places like Lawlor and big exhibit halls—an entertainer 
can work two nights and make as much money as he used to 
make in one week. It’s hard to get entertainers to come in 
and work a whole week, and when you do, it’s very costly. 

Four-walling has taken over the entertainment industry, 
but from the customer’s standpoint it’s not nearly as attrac¬ 
tive. In the old days, when you used to go to the Riverside 
Hotel, you’d have a nice dinner, and you could sit around 
the table. You weren’t jammed in there! [laughter] You paid 
for your food, and the price wasn’t exorbitant, and you had 
great entertainment. I don’t go to shows anymore, because I 
don’t like the idea of sitting there all jammed in. It’s just 
ridiculous. But the public has gotten used to that, because 
they can’t find it any other way. They don’t have a choice, if 
they want to see those entertainers. We don’t have that kind 
of facility at the Sands, so we’re not going to have big enter¬ 
tainment. 

We now have three food franchises in our property. We 
have Tony Roma’s, we have Arby’s, and have a Mel’s Diner. 
We had Winchell’s Donuts, but we did away with the fran¬ 
chise. We had learned how to make donuts just like 
Winchell’s does, so we still produce the donut, we just don’t 
have to give Winchell’s the override. We don’t have a 
Denny’s, anymore, and we also got rid of Baskin-Robbins . . 
for the same reason that we got rid of Winchell’s. We also 
got rid of Orange Julius. We had a snack bar and a donut 
shop, and we wanted to start a bingo parlor, so we moved our 


Franchise Food, No Entertainment / 157 


snack bar over to where the Orange Julius was. That gave us 
space for a bingo parlor, which has been quite successful. 

With Denny’s, we found that they satisfied the food re¬ 
quirements of our customers, and we didn’t have to run the 
food business. Almost all casinos lose money in their food 
operations—that’s been true from day one, and it’s still true, 
and because we’d had the positive Denny’s experience on 
East Fourth, when we went into the casino business, it was 
our deliberate idea to leave our food to franchises of restau¬ 
rants that were well known all over the country. But it wasn’t 
that easy. 

In planning the Regency Tower, which we opened in 
1979, we hoped to get a food franchise or two to come in, 
but we learned that franchises were leery about coming into 
gambling places. We had to have a restaurant, so we put in a 
coffee shop and got someone else to operate it. It took me 
years to convince any franchiser that a casino would be a 
good place to have a franchise. 

Our coffee shop, the Palm Court, was located on the sec¬ 
ond floor. We ran the snack bar on the ground floor, oppo¬ 
site the casino, because we had to have some kind of food 
facility where we could send our customers to get a sandwich 
if we wanted to comp somebody. We had a comp setup with 
the Palm Court operator, as well, but we had to pay him, and 
it was not as good a situation as we wanted. He didn’t do 
very well up there, and within a year and a half or so, we had 
to take over the operation of the Palm Court. 

I was not successful in attracting a franchise operation 
until we opened the Empress Tower in 1984- The first one, 
which we had to buy ourselves, was the Baskin-Robbins. We 
always wanted the franchise holder company to either oper¬ 
ate the restaurant or franchise it off to a third party. When 
we couldn’t do that, we would buy the franchise and operate 
it ourselves, but we tried to keep removed from the food busi¬ 
ness as much as we could. 


158 / MY father’s son 


The Baskin-Robbins parent company did not want to 
operate a Baskin-Robbins store, and they couldn’t find a fran¬ 
chise holder to take one in the Sands, so we bought a fran¬ 
chise and operated it. We put it right on the casino floor. In 
the beginning, it was a wonderful thing. We had some of the 
biggest days that a Baskin-Robbins store ever had when we 
first opened, because it was a real novelty. People were buy¬ 
ing ice cream, playing slot machines . . . they were dripping 
ice cream all over the place, but we were just happy as hell to 
clean it up! 

Shortly after that, we bought a Winchell’s Donut fran¬ 
chise, and we had the same experience as with Baskin- 
Robbins. We operated the Winchell’s Donut Shop, and it 
was a great success. Fresh donuts in a casino were very novel. 
We made money with them. Even though it was a food busi¬ 
ness, it was one which was much simpler to operate than a 
coffee shop. 

When you bought a franchise, you got a set of instruc¬ 
tions in minute detail. We could take untrained people, and, 
because their job procedures were broken down into such 
small segments, we were capable of running the operation, 
even though we didn’t have much food experience. We 
learned the manual ourselves and then trained our people. 
We did try to hire an experienced person to head the opera¬ 
tion—you tried to hire somebody from another franchise that 
had experience. We were fortunate enough to get some of 
those people, and we had one running our Winchell’s and 
one running our Baskin-Robbins. 

Tony Roma’s was very reluctant to come into a casino, 
but I felt that Tony Roma’s would be a fantastic addition to 
our hotel-casino. (As a matter of fact, it was and still is. It’s a 
big hit.) We bought the franchise for Tony Roma’s. We 
couldn’t get it any other way. Fortunately, Tony Roma’s is 
operated much like a fast-food operation, with only a lim¬ 
ited number of items. When you have a limited number of 


Franchise Food, No Entertainment / 159 


items, a restaurant is a whole lot easier to run. You can break 
your jobs down into simple, little tasks (except for the guy 
who actually cooks the meat), because you got this manual 
to go by. Not only have you got a manual, you got all these 
big pictures, and you put them up on the wall. Therefore, we 
can hire a lot of non-English-speaking people, which, nowa¬ 
days, is a big advantage, because most of the people that are 
looking for jobs in the food business are immigrants, and they 
don’t know the language. You just give them the pictures 
and tell them, “Here’s what you got to do.” 

Our Mel’s Diner is a company store. In other words, we 
don’t operate it, and I’m happy for that. Mel’s pays us a floor 
rent, and instead of us paying a percentage to the franchise 
holder, Mel’s is going to pay us a percentage of their gross 
business. We get a rent plus an override after they reach a 
certain level. That’s the same deal we worked out with Arby’s. 
Our Arby’s is a company-owned store, and they pay a floor 
rent and give us a commission. 

Either way you do this franchise thing, it’s a tremendous 
advantage in costs in a hotel-casino, and it worked out for us 
just as we envisioned it. Not only do they give you the in¬ 
structions, but they also send inspectors around on a peri¬ 
odic basis, and if you’re not doing things the way they want 
you to do them, they correct you. They show you how they 
should be done, and it’s really good for us, because we want 
them to be run in the proper manner. If we fall down in the 
management—which you do, no matter how hard you try— 
then somebody from the company comes in and helps you. 
They also have mystery shoppers that come around and pur¬ 
chase a meal, and they make reports. Most of those compa¬ 
nies really keep close tabs, and it’s good for us, because it 
keeps us on our toes. 

If you have an outfit like Arby’s or Mel’s Diner, they’re 
sitting there paying rent, giving you a percentage on their 
override, and you don’t have a thing to worry about, as far as 


160 / MY FATHER’S SON 


the food business goes. But if you get a poor manager, and 
the quality of the operation goes down, it reflects on the hotel- 
casino, because they’re in the Sands. You get the blame if 
the franchise doesn’t perform well. 

Another franchise in the Sands is Pizza Hut. We had to 
buy that franchise and operate it, but it’s a real simple opera¬ 
tion. It’s a Pizza Hut Express, so we only have six different 
kinds of Pizza. It’s a great little operation, and we do very 
well with it. 

We set the pace with food franchises in casinos in Reno. 
I am proud of that. We were copied, and the sincerest form 
of flattery is to be copied. The big guys copied us... . But I 
think it’s run its course. What seems to be more popular to¬ 
day are hotels that have developed a great food department 
on their own, like the Nugget or the Eldorado. Now, these 
big, new, billion-dollar places they’re building down in Las 
Vegas are bringing in the famous names like Wolfgang Puck 
and Emeril. 

When Ferenc Szony, our CEO, was at the Reno Hilton, 
he brought in Johnny Rocket’s, which is pretty much the 
same thing as a Mel’s Diner. It’s a 1950s kind of operation, 
and they did really well there. Ferenc was sold on the fran¬ 
chise idea. He converted the Hilton’s big coffee shop into a 
Chevy’s Mexican restaurant, and that’s almost unheard of. 
He got them to sell breakfast, and it worked out very well for 
him. The Hilton used to lose lots of money in their coffee 
shop, but since he converted it over, Chevy’s pays the Hilton 
rent, so they took that loss and turned it into income. The 
customers are just as happy, and that was the theory that we 
used here for so many years. 


16 

From 

Arm 

Wrestling 

to 

Cribbage 


IN 1979, when we built the Regency 
Tower, one of the things we did to fill 
those rooms was to bring in different 
kinds of events at slow times. We started 
arm wrestling competition the first win¬ 
ter after we opened the Regency Tower. 
We had a couple of people working for 
us that were arm wrestlers, and it was Jerry 
LaCroix’s idea that we try the arm-wres¬ 
tling competition. We slated it for the 
first or second weekend of January, be¬ 
cause January is usually one of the worst, 
if not the worst month of the year for the 
whole town. It wasn’t real big when we 
started—we had, maybe, a hundred and 
twenty people. We rented only forty or 
fifty rooms, but since we were probably 
running at a thirty or forty percent occu¬ 
pancy at that time, that represented a 10 
percent jump. We also had some people 
walking around the place. 

There were arm-wrestling competi¬ 
tions around northern California, Or¬ 
egon, and Washington, and we put out 
handbills at them to let people know 
about the Reno competition. Reno 
worked really well, because people knew 
they could gamble a little bit while they 
were here and have a good time. We 
didn’t make a lot of money with it, but it 
showed us that we could bring people in 
at a slow time. 

One of the two arm wrestlers that 
worked for us was a woman. Her name 
was Pam, and she became the northern 
California champ. We’d sponsor her to 
go to these tournaments, and she’d help 


162 / MY father’s SON 


us advertise by wearing a Sands T-shirt. The arm-wrestling 
tournament eventually drew three or four hundred people, 
at least. I think we even hit five hundred one time. There 
wasn’t a lot of money to be made, but it really filled our place 
up, and we made it look lively. We cast around for other 
things, and I think the next competition we hosted was a 
nine ball (pool) tournament. Later, we had eight ball and 
nine ball, both. 

We were still running the El Rancho on East Fourth Street 
and doing the same thing there that we were doing at the 
Sands. We catered to what we called commercial people dur¬ 
ing the week, and we went to the local businesses and talked 
to the secretaries and the sales managers, and we even gave 
commissions to people that would send us business. A lot of 
salesmen coming into Reno drive in here from California, 
and we got a lot of those people to stay with us. We gave 
them a good room rate and tried to take care of them, and we 
were very successful at it. 

Two of the men that stayed with us for many years were 
Gene Stary and Hank Pericle. They would come to Reno 
once every three weeks and stay for four days. Pericle sold 
welding equipment, and Gene sold auto parts. Gene and 
Hank got interested in competition for pool players. They 
developed a handicap system and a rating, like golfers are 
rated, and they gave each player a handicap. They put this 
system in effect in a large number of California and Oregon 
pool halls, and they began holding little tournaments in these 
pool halls. The players would come in, pay a little fee, and 
get into the tournament. Everybody could play, because they 
were all handicapped, so a poor player could compete with a 
good guy. 

Gene and Hank started talking about doing a pool tour¬ 
nament in Reno. Gene said, “You know, if you guys put up 
five thousand bucks, that would be huge for a prize, and we 
could get you four hundred players.” 


From Arm Wrestling to Cribbage / 163 


I said, “That sounds like a great deal to me.” All we had 
to do was figure out how to get the tables. Gene had a sup- 
plier that decided it would be good advertising for his tables, 
and then he knew another guy that sold the cloth that went 
on the tables. Gene worked out a deal where we got the tables 
at a real good rate, and then somebody else furnished the 
balls. The big ballrooms that we had could hold fourteen to 
sixteen tables, but they were really jammed in there. Later 
on we cut down the number of tables. We had two rooms, 
one on either side of the hall. 

Gene ran the tournament, and Hank ran the scoreboard. 
It was a big success from the start. We held our first pool 
tournament in December, because the first three weeks of 
December, before Christmas, are just as bad a time as Janu¬ 
ary. Even the weekends are slow between Thanksgiving and 
Christmas. Gene said, “You’re not going to get a lot of people 
unless you do this thing on a weekend, because these people 
all work, and they just can’t come up here.” So we scheduled 
our first pool tournament the first weekend of December, and 
it was a big success. We drew four hundred people, or so. 

These were people that were gamblers, and there were 
even some hundred-dollar players in the group. In this pool 
business, most of the players don’t have a lot of money, but 
there’s guys that back them because they’re good players. If 
you saw the movie The Hustler, the one that Paul Newman 
played in, you know that a backer will find two or three good 
pool players, and he’ll back them. And, of course, there’s a 
lot of side bets made on these guys, and so we did get some 
pretty-good money players. 

The guys liked to gamble, and our pit play just sky-rock¬ 
eted. Real quick, we went to a whole-week tournament (we 
found that players would take a week off from work), and we 
included two or three different kinds of games. We had eight 
ball. We had nine ball. We had some other kind . . . three- 
ball, I think. I never did get the hang of it. 


164 / MY father’s SON 



Paying off a winner in one of our pool tournaments. 


I was so happy to have all these people around that I 
wasn’t paying a lot of attention to the pool tournaments. I 
was down at the pit, that’s where I was! They were tough 
players, so a lot of times they’d beat us—I mean, they weren’t 
easy, because they were gamblers. But it was great business to 
have in December. 

Then, we decided that we could hold two tournaments a 
year. We held our second one right after Memorial Day, be¬ 
cause, historically, as soon as Memorial Day ends, Reno goes 
into a real slump for two weeks. We planned a pool tourna¬ 
ment for as soon as the Memorial Day crowd left, and that 
worked very well for us, too. We’ve had those tournaments 
for twenty years, and they still bring a lot of people, and we 
still make a lot of money with them. 

Gene and Hank still run the tournaments for us. Any 
number of casinos in town tried to steal those tournaments 
away from us, but because of the rapport that I’ve developed 
with Gene and Hank, and because we’ve known each other 
for so many years, no one’s ever been successful in doing that. 







From Arm Wrestling to Cribbage / 165 


Arm wrestling, after fifteen or twenty years or so, just sort of 
fell apart. I don’t think anybody else picked it up—it just 
died out. 

Once people discovered that we were doing these tour- 
naments (and we were the only ones doing tournaments at 
this time), we would have people come to us and say, “Look, 
how about doing a tournament for us?” We did some bridge. 
Bridge wasn’t a real big success. We did it in December, and 
we tried it in November, but those people really aren’t big 
gamblers. That led us to cribbage. 

Barbara Woodward was selling banquets and meeting 
space and so on for us. She took over a lot of the details of 
putting on tournaments. She was my right-hand person in 
the tournament business, and she was out there actively call¬ 
ing different associations and raking people up. Our cribbage 
tournaments started when Barbara got together with Bill 
Irons, a local World War II vet and a cribbage player. Bill 
had done a few local tournaments around town, so Barbara 
asked him about doing a regional cribbage tournament. 

We do about three cribbage tournaments a year now, but 
we are in danger of losing the biggest one. We do the na¬ 
tional tournament in the last week of January, first week of 
February. Cribbage players are gamblers. We get a lot of hun- 
dred-dollar players in our cribbage tournament—a lot for us. 
We’ve got one fellow that comes from Milwaukee, and when 
be doesn’t show up, you can see it in the drop. This guy’s 
name is Warren. We pay his fare out here, and he’s got a 
standing invitation to come out any time he wants. He never 
rests. He says, “I can sleep when I get home.” So he’s a great 
player. Cribbage has been really good for us. 

From cribbage we got to shuffleboard, the indoor, table¬ 
top variety. We have two types of shuffleboard tournaments. 
We have what’s called the bar shuffleboard, which is a shorter 
table—same rules, but it’s simply just a shorter table, devel¬ 
oped for bars that don’t have room for a long table. We have 


166 / MY father’s SON 


one of those tournaments, and we have a regular shuffleboard 
tournament that uses the longer tables. There’s a shuffleboard 
association, and we’ve got an arrangement with them. We 
put up the prize money, and they bring in the tables, set them 
up, and take them down. They’re pretty good gamblers, too. 
They’re not the hundred-dollar players, but they’re OK, and 
they like to drink a lot. Most shuffleboard players learn their 
game in a bar, so we sell a lot of booze! [laughter] It’s been 
real good. 

Scrabble is good for us, too. Barbara raked up the Scrabble 
people. Now, they’re not gamblers, but we bring them in at a 
slow time, and they fill up the rooms, and they stay right 
here. They don’t go anywhere else. They eat here. Whatever 
gambling they do, they do right here, because they’re really 
into that Scrabble game. 

Barbara is good at talking to people, and she is really ag¬ 
gressive at that. She eventually got married and had two chil¬ 
dren, and she didn’t want to work full time, but we made an 
arrangement that we contract this work with her, so she can 
do a lot of this work at home and take care of her two little 
children. Barbara was also instrumental in developing the 
Reno balloon races. She and Candy Pearce came up with 
the idea with one or two other people. 

Bill Robinson, the fellow that ran Canadian Holidays, 
was a balloon enthusiast, and when he learned that Reno 
was talking about doing a balloon race thing, he really got 
excited about it. He’d bring down two or three plane-loads 
of balloon enthusiasts from Vancouver for the Reno balloon 
races. They came down for the first one, and they really helped 
make the Reno balloon races. He made sure he had room in 
the luggage hold to bring a couple of Canadian Holidays bal¬ 
loons to fly in the Reno balloon races. It was a big party week. 

The first two or three years of the balloon races, they’d 
show up here on a Thursday, and it was a party until they left 


From Arm Wrestling to Cribbage / 167 


on Sunday night. In those days we’d go to Sierra Sid’s in 
Sparks to buy propane for the balloons’ burners, and we’d 
buy tanks of compressed air from Sierra Oxygen. Then we’d 
have to rent a couple of trucks and put the balloons on them 
and the baskets and the oxygen and the propane. We’d spend 
all night Friday getting all these preparations made, and then 
it was time to fly. [laughter] So in the first two or three years 
of the balloon races, we all flew without any sleep and plenty 
of booze. 

They always break out champagne at the end of a bah 
loon race, and anyone who has gone up for the first time gets 
champagne poured on his head. I went through that initia¬ 
tion, and we really had some fun times. The balloon races 
just grew and grew, but when Robinson left Canadian Holi¬ 
days, they quit bringing down their balloon. By that time, 
Barbara had raked up a guy in Idaho, whose name is Curt 
Pengally. He owns his own balloon, loves to fly. We hang our 
Sands banner on his balloon. We sponsor a balloon every 
year. It’s been a great promotion, and Barbara had a really 
big hand in that. 

We have chess 
tournaments. They 
come every year in the 
off season, so we fill up 
a weekend there. We 
did have backgammon 
in here for a time, but 
it didn’t do that well, 
and I’m not quite sure 
exactly what hap¬ 
pened. I think that was 
a promotion that was 
stolen from us by 
Hilton or somebody 



“. . . we all flew without any sleep and 
plenty of booze.” 




168 / MY father’s SON 


else. Backgammon was one of the very few promotions that 
we were not successful with. 

Another promotion we have is darts. A man named 
McNamara, executive secretary of the National Dart Asso¬ 
ciation, contacted us. So we set up a dart competition, and 
it’s a good tournament. Dart players usually learn to play darts 
in a bar, so they drink a lot, and gambling and drinking goes 
together. They’re not big players, but we’re filling up rooms. 
One of the things that we tell these guys is, “Look, you got to 
come here. We want you.” They’re happy to get somebody 
to put up the prize money that they never had before, and to 
come to a place that we turn into a dart player’s hang-out 
when they’re here. They meet all their friends here, people 
they know from other places and from their work. 

Our first tournaments were played with what are called 
“hard-tip” darts, which I didn’t know at the time. A guy called 
me up one day and said, “I want to do soft-tip darts.” 

I said, “Well, what the hell is that?” [laughter] 

It turns out that a soft-tip dart is what you throw at an 
electronic board. They have a soft tip on them, and you throw 
them at this board, and wherever they stick, the machine 
brings up a score for you. So, now we have a soft-tip tourna¬ 
ment, too. 

We also have a bar table pool tournament. Bar table pool 
is played on a much smaller pool table—usually, they’re coin 
operated like shuffle board tables. There’s an association of 
players that specialize in bar table pool. We had an inquiry 
about that, and Barbara handled it, and we have those people 
in here for a tournament once a year. It’s mildly successful. 
We don’t turn out as many people as for some other tourna¬ 
ments, but again, these people learned to play this game in 
bars, so they’re our kind of customers. 

Many people that come for these tournaments come to 
Reno at other times during the year, and when they think 
about Reno, they think about us. Tournaments have always 


From Arm Wrestling to Cribbage / 169 


been one of our mainstays. It really isn’t a big percentage of 
our total business, because we bring them in at a slow time, 
but what you need to look at is what we’d have in here with- 
out those people. We’re not going to bring them here in the 
middle of August or the middle of July, because we don’t need 
them. If they want to come then, they’ll just have to go some¬ 
where else. 



17 

Going 

Public 


DOWN THROUGH THE YEARS, my 
father was very active in the stock mar¬ 
ket. He bought stock in a lot of different 
companies, because he was a speculator. 
He’d buy and sell, and he got familiar 
with a large number of public companies 
in the country. Because of his vision and 
his experiences, he felt that if we ever 
had the opportunity to go public, it would 
be a wonderful thing for the company. 
He never dreamt that this would happen, 
because in the climate that he was asso¬ 
ciated with, small companies like us nor¬ 
mally didn’t get to go public, but it would 
be a great source of financing, and financ¬ 
ing was always a very difficult thing for 
casinos to obtain. 

Even the banks in Nevada didn’t 
want to loan you money, and for many 
years, until Harrah finally broke the line, 
they wouldn’t loan you any money. We 
had to resort to all kinds of strategies . . . 
like for example, we’d build a hotel and 
leave the ground floor empty, and we 
wouldn’t tell them we were going to put 
a casino in. We’d say, “This is just a ho¬ 
tel.” So we’d have to do a pro forma state¬ 
ment and show them that the hotel 
would stand on its own and make money. 
They really knew what we were doing, 
but as long as we could show them that 
we could pay the debt service with just 
the hotel revenue, we would get the fi¬ 
nancing. 

If you were a public company, you had 
other options open to you. You could float 
bonds. You could sell stock, and you 


172 / MY father’s SON 


didn’t have to be dependent on local banks. (There weren’t 
any out-of-state banks that would do financing for you ei¬ 
ther.) One of the reasons that Vegas grew so fast and so well 
is because they had access to Teamsters Union money. The 
Teamsters had huge pension plans, and they loaned money 
from them to the hotel-casinos, because some of them were 
mobsters and had been in bed with those casino owners for a 
long time. The only Teamster loan, to my knowledge, that 
was ever made in Reno was to the Riverside Hotel. 

The first public gaming company was Harrah’s, and they 
went public in 1971. When that happened, we knew it could 
happen for us. The next one was IGT, and so we began to 
think about it, but we weren’t yet big enough. When we built 
the Regency Tower in 1979 we had 400 rooms, and when we 
finally started the Empress Tower in 1984, we had a story to 
tell. That’s what you need when you do a public offering. 
You got to get people to believe that you’re going to grow, 
that you’re going to prosper, and your stock price is going to 
go up. So we had a story—we were getting ready to build 
another 280 or 300 rooms and grow to 700 rooms. 

I’d gone to military school with Drake Delanoy, who be¬ 
came a lawyer for Bill Raggio in the district attorney’s office. 
He had gone on some of those raids on Joe Conforte’s houses 
of prostitution when we used to pick up those trailers. Later, 
Drake moved to Las Vegas when a law firm there offered him 
a very lucrative position. Drake’s law firm represented the 
Golden Nugget, which was Steve Wynn’s first place, and 
Clyde Turner was the liaison between his firm and the Golden 
Nugget. Clyde was the chief financial officer of the Nugget 
when the Golden Nugget went public. (They were, I think, 
the third gaming company that went public.) 

Drake, Clyde Turner, and another lawyer from Drake’s 
firm bought a condo at Lake Tahoe right next to the Hyatt 
on Lakeshore Drive, and Drake would come up here quite 
frequently. We’d go waterskiing together. I began to talk to 


Going Public / 173 


Clyde about the feasibility of taking my company public, and 
Clyde said, “Sure. Let me see your last four or five year-end 
statements.” I gave him the statements and brought him down 
to Reno and showed him the property. He said, “I think you 
can do it. You got a great story to tell. It would be wonderful 
for your company, and you could raise a lot of cash. The value 
of your ownership of this company will probably increase five¬ 
fold.” 

I began to look for an investment banking firm that might 
be interested in taking us public. We were still pretty small, 
but there were three gaming companies that had gone pub¬ 
lic, and their stock was doing well, so there was an appetite 
out there for more gaming companies. It was a good time, so 
I started to make the rounds. 

The way it shook out, it was going to be about a fifteen- 
million-dollar stock offering, and the investment bankers that 
had taken these other companies public were not interested 
in a deal that small. Eventually I was sent to a firm in Los 
Angeles, and they wouldn’t do the deal, either. But they 
hooked me up with a fellow that worked for DLJ (Donaldson, 
Lufkin, and Jenrette). I talked to the Los Angeles office, and 
then I was to go to New York and talk to the people in their 
headquarters, and by that time it looked like it was a doable 
thing. 

Clyde and everyone else advised me that I needed to hire 
somebody who had had experience bringing a company pub¬ 
lic, so before I went to New York, I hired Jon Bengtson. Jon 
was working for George Drews at IGT then. My friend, Chuck 
Zeh, a lawyer here in town that I used to play handball with, 
introduced me to Jon, and Jon was ready to leave IGT. Jon 
had been working for Harrah’s when they had their public 
offering. He’d earned a master’s degree at Stanford in busi¬ 
ness administration, and he had a minor in accounting. 
Harrah’s had hired George Drews from an investment bank¬ 
ing firm to help them in their public offering, and so Jon 


174 / my father’s son 


began to work with George, and he worked directly with 
George Drews in the Harrah’s public offering. 

When Si Redd, who owned IGT, decided to go public, 
he hired George Drews from Harrah’s to help him in his of- 
fering. George brought some of his staff along with him to 
IGT, and Jon was one of those folks that he brought over 
there. So Jon had two public offerings under his belt by the 
time I started talking to him about it. 

Jon fit right in with our company. Jon is a man that gets 
along great with people. He’s a wonderful people guy, and 
he’s smart and intelligent. The first thing you have to do 
when you go public is sell yourself to an investment banking 
firm. In order to do that, you got to talk their language, and 
I definitely didn’t talk their language. Without Jon, I’m sure 
we would not have been able to accomplish it. 

Essentially, there are two kinds of offerings; they’re called 
a “guaranteed” offering and a “best-efforts” offering. If you 
can get an investment banking firm to do a guaranteed offer¬ 
ing for you, it means they believe in you to such an extent 
that they’ll buy whatever stock doesn’t sell on the public 
market. In other words, if only half your stock sells, they’ll 
buy the rest, because they believe it’s a good investment. 
Usually, when an investment banking firm thinks you’re that 
good an offering, your stock is over-subscribed, so they don’t 
have to buy any. 

Other firms that might not be as professional, or might 
not believe in you so much, do a best-efforts offering. On 
that basis, nobody guarantees you’re going to sell all your 
stock, so you might go through that whole procedure—and 
it’s costly—and find out you don’t sell enough stock to do 
you any good. I knew nothing about these things. I had to 
learn from Jon and Clyde Turner. 

We hoped DLJ would do a guaranteed offering for us, but 
before they would give us that kind of guarantee, we had to 
educate them in our business from scratch, and that took 


Going Public / 175 


time and effort and expense. We had to bring them to our 
property, and they spent many days and nights with us learn- 
ing our business. They couldn’t afford to take the chance 
that they’d be hoodwinked or that they didn’t really have 
the whole story. (You see that nowadays in these “dot.com” 
public offerings. They’re in such a rush to do it that they 
don’t get the whole story, and there may be some shadows in 
the background that they don’t know about.) DLJ sent two 
investment bankers out, and they spent two or three months 
here. One was a man named Oliver Cromwell. Fred Cohen, 
from the law firm of Latham and Watkins, represented us, 
and Doug Tanner represented DLJ. 

Investment bankers are very quick and sharp. You don’t 
have to tell them something more than once, and they really 
learn fast. They knew our business as well as we knew it by 
the time they got through. They did a narrative so it would 
sell on Wall Street, and then they took it back to their bosses 
and said, “Well, here’s what these guys are doing. We think 
it’s going to be a good stock and make money, and here’s why 
we think we should guarantee it.” 

Those bankers all get a piece of the action. They get a 
salary, sure, but they make their real money on a piece of 
every offering. They’re out there hustling like hell, working 
long hours and weekends, because they get a pretty good 
chunk when a place goes public. The higher the stock price 
you get and the more stock you move, the more money they 
make. They even get some shares at no cost to them, which 
they turn around and sell, and they make money on those. 
That’s part of the deal, and they’re up-front about it. 

When DLJ decided to take this project on, they didn’t 
tell us that they were going to take us public. They said, “OK, 
we’ll spend some time on it. You will pay all our expenses.” 
We paid a hefty fee up front, and then we paid for everything 
associated with their study of our business and the eventual 
issuance of stock; but it was still a period of six, eight months 


176 / MY father’s SON 


that were tied up in the project, and that’s why a small offer- 
ing is difficult to get financed. They could do the same amount 
of work for a $150 million offering, so I’m not sure why they 
decided to take us on. It may be because we operated so very 
differently from other casinos of the time. 

The report to the main office spelled it all out: how we 
had started our business; the fact that we didn’t have enter¬ 
tainment to pay for, where most other casinos did; the fact 
that we didn’t lose money on food—we made money on food. 
(Other casinos—and they looked right at Harrah’s—all lost 
a lot of money on their food operations, and their entertain¬ 
ment costs were very high.) When they did pro formas on 
our company, it turned out that we had like a 35 to 38 per¬ 
cent profit margin, and that was a huge margin. One reason 
we were able to keep our costs so low was that we didn’t have 
to hire upper management. We had myself and my sister and 
Dave Wood and Jon Bengtson. (My brother got sick in 1981, 
and after that he didn’t work anymore.) The guys who stud¬ 
ied us could go back to New York and say, “Look, these guys 
got a 38 percent profit margin! And they’re getting ready to 
add another 280 rooms, so their revenues are going to go 
up.” 

We showed steady growth right from day one. When I 
read things nowadays where people like Amazon.com say, 
“We’re losing money for the first three or four years. . . .” 
Well, I just have to laugh. We never opened a business that 
lost money from scratch, except, maybe, the Lovelock Mer¬ 
cantile Company. We even made money in Mississippi for 
the first few months. And in all of our expansions—every 
time we’d add a new tower or add a new portion to our com¬ 
plex—we made money from day one. 

We looked really good, and DLJ said, “OK. We’ll do it.” 
But the thing about a successful public offering is, you’ve got 
to hit the market at the right time. There has to be an appe¬ 
tite for IPO’s, Initial Public Offerings. When we went pub- 


Going Public / 177 


lie, there had already been three successful gaming offerings, 
and it was our good fortune that everybody was anticipating 
that the next one would be as successful as the others, even 
though it might be a little smaller. 

DLJ finally said, “OK. We’ll do this, but there’s one more 
thing you got do, and that is what’s called a road show.” It’s 
important in stock sales to sell institutions (pension funds or 
retirement programs, primarily) on buying your stock, and 
the way you sell institutions is you go out and call on them 
and do a “dog-and-pony” show. So Bengtson and I and the 
investment banker, Oliver Cromwell, did two or three trips 
around the country. 

We were successful in our efforts. Our initial public offer- 
ing was two million and some odd shares at twelve bucks 
each. The institutions helped us out by buying a lot of our 
stock, but if institutions own too much of your stock, you 
don’t get much “float.” You don’t get much trading in the 
stock, and that’s not good, because you need a certain amount 
of trade volume. That might have hurt us a little bit in the 
beginning, but our stock never did drop below twelve dol¬ 
lars ... or if it did, it wasn’t by very much. 

After we built the Empress Tower, our stock really began 
to climb. We eventually did a two-for-one split. The old price 
was, I think, twenty-eight dollars, the highest we ever hit. 
With the split, the stock wound up at fourteen dollars a share 
after the split—but there were four million some odd shares, 
and that stock went up to twenty-two dollars. Unfortunately, 
it’s now three dollars! [laughter] 

Our operation, unlike many other casino operations, had 
never had to borrow money to get through a winter. We al¬ 
ways made sure we had the cash to get us through. Even so, 
going public made our financial position much more secure 
than it had been. We now were largely free of having to go to 
banks and lenders for funds, but we were still dependent on 
them when we had capital projects to do. 


178 / MY father’s SON 


This arwounee/nenf is neither an otter to sen. nor a solicitation ot an otter to buy. 
any ot these securities The otter is made only by the Prospectus 


February 1.1985 

1,000,000 Shares 

THE SANDS REGENT 


Common Stock 

Price $12 Per Share 


Copies ot the Prospectus may be obtained in any State horn such ot the undersigned as may 
legatty otter these securities m compliance wirn the securities taws ot such State 


Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette 

Securities Corporation 


Alex. Brown & Sons 

Incorporated 

PaineWebber 

Incorporated 


Bear, Steams & Co. 

E. F. Hutton & Company Inc. 

L. F. Rothschild, Unterberg, Towbin 
A. G. Edwards & Sons, Inc. 

Thomson McKinnon Securities Inc. 

Advest, Inc. Butcher & Singer Inc. 

Ladenburg, Thalmann & Co. Inc. 

Moseley, Hallgarten, Estabrook & Weeden Inc. 
Wheat, First Securities, Inc. 

Josephthal & Co. 

Incorporated 


Hambrecht & Quist 

Incorporated 

Prudential-Bache 

Securities 

Salomon Brothers Inc 


Oppenheimer & Co., Inc. 
Tucker, Anthony & R. L. Day, Inc. 
Interstate Securities Corporation 
Legg Mason Wood Walker 

Incorporated 

Neuberger & Berman 
Herzfeld & Stem Inc. 
Scott & Stringfellow, Inc. 


We used the money from our public offering to retire our 
debt, and so here we were, essentially a debt-free company 
with cash in the bank and a great cash-flow. Our cash-flow 
was probably fifteen, sixteen million dollars a year, and so 
money was no problem at all. We just had to spend it and 
invest it wisely. That was a big change, and that was really 
one of the major reasons why we went public. It raised our 
stature with the local banks, as well. The fact that we were a 
public company made it easier for us to borrow from them. 
As a publicly-traded gaming company, we were part of an 
elite group. Our employees from the bottom up—the por- 



Going Public / 179 


ters, the maids, and the line people—would tell people that 
we were a public company. It made diem proud to be a part 
of our company, and it was good for our esprit de corps. 

My sister and I and our board of directors and our execu¬ 
tives, Bengtson and Dave Wood, also had that spirit. I felt 
really good that we were able to accomplish a goal that Dad 
had set years back. It made me feel that I had done some¬ 
thing worthwhile and important that was durable and last¬ 
ing. 

In 1987 the Sands Regency was named by Forbes maga¬ 
zine as one of the top 200 small businesses in the United 
States. That was as big an accomplishment in my mind as 
our going public. Forbes monitored all the public companies 
through information they received from the SEC. Some of 
the key things that they looked at were how much debt the 
company had in relation to its income and what its execu¬ 
tives were getting paid. In a lot of instances companies over¬ 
pay their CEO, their chief financial officer, and other execu¬ 
tive positions, in relation to how much money the company 
makes. In our company, we were always very careful, because 
we didn’t want our employees or the public to think that we 
were lining our own pockets with big salaries when maybe 
we didn’t deserve it. So our salary ratios were low, and that 
was an important thing as far as Forbes was concerned. We 
were also paying dividends on our stock. Many companies 
don’t pay dividends. We began to pay dividends to our share¬ 
holders, because when we were doing well, we thought the 
shareholders should benefit. Our PE ratio was excellent, in 
the four or five range, which is very good for a public com¬ 
pany. 

We came in at number 107 out of 200 companies on the 
Forbes list. I had no idea. I got a call from the Reno Gazette - 
Journal, and the reporter said to me, “Do you know that you’ve 
been named on the Forbes 200 list?” 

I said, “I don’t even know what the Forbes 200 list is.” 


180 / MY FATHER’S SON 


He explained it to me, and so I went out and got a copy 
of the Forbes magazine, and, sure enough, there we were! 
There has not been a gaming company listed since, nor was 
there one prior to that. We still hold the distinction of being 
the only gaming company that ever made that list. 

The SEC stipulates that prior to going public you have 
to disclose how much stock the original owners are going to 
keep and how much they’re going to sell. They want to know 
who’s going to control the company and how they’re going 
to control it. They have special regulations for companies 
that are closely held. (My family owns 46 percent of the Sands 
Regency stock.) You must have at least two outside directors 
on your board, and your board must have at least seven 
people—and the larger your board, the more outside direc¬ 
tors you must have. They want outside directors to be people 
that have no stock in the company and people that are fa¬ 
miliar with the industry and/or have had experience with 
public companies before. We had to find some people and 
name them before we could go public. One we chose was 
Maurice Sheppard, who’d been president at Harrah’s and was 
retired. During the time Jon Bengtson was at Harrah’s, he 
had worked for and with Maurice. Maurice became very help¬ 
ful to us. 

Maurice Sheppard came up through the ranks at Harrah’s. 
I think he started either in the cashier’s cage or in the ac¬ 
counting department, and eventually he became president 
of Harrah’s. When he came on board, he looked over our 
accounting department and our cashier’s cage and gave us 
some tips—he found some weak spots, showed us where we 
could do some things better. He reviewed some of our em¬ 
ployees and talked to them, and he found some that were 
not doing their job as good as they could have. He was in¬ 
strumental in helping us find other people, so we were able 
to build a good, strong cashier’s department, as well as 


Going Public / 181 


strengthen our accounting department and our procedures. 
Harrah’s had been very strong in security procedures, and we 
borrowed a lot of things that Harrah’s did, things that Shep 
knew about. He went above and beyond the call of duty. We 
only paid him to be a board member, and this was really not 
his function, but that’s the kind of guy he was. He wanted 
the company to succeed. He was willing to put in time and 
effort, and he’d give us all he had, even though it wasn’t 
required of a board member. 

Maurice was on the board for many years. He finally quit 
when his health began deteriorating. It was a great loss. He 
was somebody that we could talk to, because almost any in- 
cident that we had, or any problem that we had, Harrah’s 
had faced many times before, and he gave us insight into 
how Harrah’s had solved those problems. . . not that they 
were right every time. 

The other outside director on our board when we went 
public was Jack Stratton. We were neighbors when we were 
kids, and I knew Jack and his brother down through the years. 
Jack was always an honest, straight-forward guy who spoke 
his piece, and he knew his business. 

Jack started out with the Nevada Tax Commission, which 
was the entity that originally collected gaming taxes. When 
the Gaming Commission and the Gaming Control Board 
were formed in the 1950s, Jack transferred over to the con¬ 
trol board, and he was with them about twenty-five years. 
He had recently retired from the control board about the 
time we went public, and so I asked him to serve on our board. 
He graciously agreed. 

Jack was another fellow who went out of his way to en¬ 
sure our success. On his own volition he monitored our com¬ 
pliance with Regulation Six, the regulation that pertains to 
the protection of company assets. Regulation Six is all about 
the security of your bankroll, and that’s important to the ca¬ 
sino, as well as being important to the state. Jack picked up 


182 / MY father’s SON 


some weak spots that we had and showed us where we could 
do things better. It was good to have him in our board meet- 
ings. He was experienced in the regulation of gaming, and 
he could help us head things off. Consequently, we never got 
into trouble with Gaming (the Gaming Control Board), and 
we were never fined. (Actually, we were involved once in a 
money laundering incident, where we didn’t report a $10,000 
transaction—one of our cashiers didn’t follow regulations.) 
Our relations with Gaming have been excellent all the years 
we’ve been in business, and one of the reasons was that 
Stratton was on our board. 

Stratton and Sheppard left the board at about the same 
time and for similar reasons. Joe Fanelli replaced one of them. 
Fanelli was a man who’d had years of experience working in 
food service at Harrah’s. Food is always a difficult thing, and 
Fanelli was instrumental in getting some good chefs for us 
that had worked for him. He helped us in our buying proce¬ 
dures, too. He showed us how we had been negligent in not 
inspecting the food that was coming in. Once you get a repu¬ 
tation with your wholesalers that you’ll accept whatever they 
send you, then they’ll have a tendency to send you whatever 
they have. They keep the better stuff for the guy who checks 
and inspects it. 

We hired somebody who inspected everything when it 
came in, and we weighed everything. That was another thing 
we hadn’t been doing, and Joe said, “It’s important that if 
you order thirty pounds of stew meat, you weigh it when they 
bring it to you, because they might give you twenty-eight. . . 
or they might give you thirty-two. We found that was hap¬ 
pening, and a lot of it was just human error. The guy that put 
the meat together just threw it on the scale and didn’t pay 
that much attention to it, and so it was a pound or two off. It 
doesn’t sound like a lot, but you have to control your food 
and labor costs to succeed with a restaurant. 


Going Public / 183 


Now as one of our outside directors, we have Lou Phillips, 
who worked for Harrah’s for many years and actually ran their 
casino at Lake Tahoe for four or five years. He has the Harrah’s 
chair up at the University of Nevada now, and he’s one of 
our outside directors. The other one we have is a man named 
Larry Tuntland. Larry was with the local First National Bank 
(which eventually became FIB, which then became Wells 
Fargo) for many years here in Reno. Then he was transferred 
to Las Vegas and worked there for years. We feel fortunate to 
have those two folks on our board. Jon Bengtson is still on, 
even though he doesn’t work with us anymore, and my sister, 
my son, Dave Wood, and Ferenc Szony make up our board. 
That’s been our board now for two or three years. 




Employee 

Loyalty 


WE BEGAN PROFIT SHARING and pen¬ 
sion plans in die middle 1960s, and here’s 
how they came about. My dad had a 
friend, Chris Georgiadas, who sold life in¬ 
surance. He was a Greek man from 
Zakinthos, who had lived in Reno and 
worked for New York Mutual Life Insur¬ 
ance, then had moved to southern Cali¬ 
fornia. My father had stayed in touch 
with him. 

At the time my mother passed away, 
Chris put us in touch with a law firm in 
Los Angeles to handle her complicated 
estate. (She died without a will, and there 
were a lot of tax issues.) As I was the ex¬ 
ecutor for my mother’s estate, I traveled 
to Los Angeles quite frequently. I’d usu¬ 
ally see Chris when I’d go down there. 

Chris not only was helping people 
with estate planning, he was also doing 
pension and profit-sharing plans for dif¬ 
ferent businesses. He showed us the ad¬ 
vantage to such plans—they gave em¬ 
ployees an inducement to stay with their 
employer. We decided to start such a plan 
for our people. 

After an employee had been a cer¬ 
tain time in our work force (I think it 
was six months before you were eligible), 
the company would begin putting an 
amount equivalent to 10 percent of his 
salary in the pension plan and 10 percent 
in the profit-sharing plan. The employee 
didn’t have to put in any at all, but he 
had the option to do so, and some of our 
employees did. My father invested that 
money in conservative investments, 


186 / MY father’s SON 


which he didn’t care to do for himself; but for the plans, he 
thought that was the thing to do. He bought a lot of utilities, 
for instance, and over the span of the years that the plan was 
open, those utilities probably quadrupled in their stock prices, 
because it was a period of growth in the country. 

It took our employees a little while to realize what was 
going on. One wouldn’t really see the growth until after he 
was in the plan for a few years. After you were in the plans 
for ten years, you were fully vested—if you left after ten years, 
you got everything that was in your plan, both the money 
that the company put in and the earnings from that money. 
If you left any time within the first ten years, then it was pro¬ 
rated. For example, if you left after five years, you only got 
half the money in the plan and half of the earnings, and the 
other half was distributed to the rest of the people in the 
plan. 

It was a great incentive, and we built a very loyal force of 
people, especially in middle management. (We didn’t really 
have any upper management, because we did that ourselves.) 
We had many happy folks who stayed with us fifteen or twenty 
years. 

One night I was on my way home. It was late, and I was 
exceeding the speed limit by quite a bit, and I’d had a few 
drinks. A state trooper stopped me. I gave him my license, 
and when he read my name, he said, “Are you the man that 
owns the El Rancho Motel on East Fourth Street?” 

I said, “Yes.” 

He said, “You’re going to follow me to make sure that 
you get home and that you don’t get in an accident. My 
mother worked for you folks for eighteen years.” His mother 
was Marian Donnelly, our housekeeper over there. When 
she retired she got a big pension for a working person. He 
said, “I think you guys have done a marvelous thing for 
people.” 


Employee Loyalty / 187 


Pension and profit-sharing plans weren’t heard of back 
then in our business. From our standpoint, however, the plans 
were deductible, and since it was a high tax bracket we were 
in, much of the money that we put into the plans was paid 
for by the government. Another thing is that my brother 
and sister and I were all employees in these companies, so we 
also participated in the plans. It was another way for us to 
get money out of the company without having to pay big 
taxes. 

We carried that plan over to the Sands when we opened 
up, and we kept the plan until the late 1980s, when we suf¬ 
fered a spate of lawsuits. One of the things that they were 
suing us for was that we were terminating people in order to 
get them off the plan, so that we ourselves (the Cladianos 
family) could benefit. It was a spurious charge, and it was 
never proven to be true. But in order to protect ourselves at 
the time and to stop people from suing us—because we had 
to go into court and defend ourselves on each one of those 
lawsuits—we fully vested everybody in the plan, no matter 
how long they had been there. (We said, “OK. Everybody is 
completely vested, just as if they were here at least ten years.”) 
Then we liquidated all the investments of the plans, and we 
paid off everybody. I’ve sorely missed those plans ever since, 
because we used to have a great deal more loyalty than we do 
now. However, since we developed a bonus system for our 
middle managers and upper managers to sort of take the place 
of that plan, it’s helped a lot. 

Our bonus plan is based more on profitability than the 
length of service. We do have a little length of service plan 
where anybody that’s been with us for a year gets a bonus, 
and those are for line employees. After one year, you get one 
hundred dollars twice a year; after two years service, employ¬ 
ees get two hundred dollars twice a year; after three years, 
etc. . . . We give people that bonus as long as they work for 


188 / MY father’s SON 


us, and it kind of works like the pension and profit-sharing 
plan. In some ways it’s even better, because they get the money 
right away. A lot of people in this business are shortsighted. 
They say, “I don’t want the money when I retire. I want it 
now.” So that works out, in some cases, even better than 
pension and profit sharing. 

My father had several employees who stayed with him 
for many years. Gladys Cox started with him when he was 
on Lake Street. She was his first bookkeeper-secretary type 
person. She moved with him when he built the El Rancho 
Two on East Second Street; and when he sold the majority 
of his slot route, she moved out to the El Rancho Motel on 
South Virginia Street as secretary-bookkeeper until she be¬ 
came ill and had to retire. Gladys was a very loyal, hard¬ 
working employee. She learned the motel business with my 
dad—neither one of them knew anything about it when he 
bought the place. She wound up being the manager, really, 
right under my dad’s supervision. 

When Gladys left, Dad hired a lady named Etta Kruckow. 
Etta came from the Lovelock Mercantile store. She was a 
bookkeeper-secretary in Lovelock, and when my dad finally 
disposed of the store there, he moved Etta and her husband 
to Reno because she was such a loyal employee and such a 
good, hard worker. She went to work when Gladys left, and 
my father got her husband, who was a pharmacist, a job with 
Hale’s Drugstores through his friend, Clarence Hale. (Etta’s 
husband had worked in the pharmacy for my dad in Lovelock, 
as well.) 

When Etta left, Dad hired a lady named Ruth Blanchard, 
and she took over the job that Gladys and Etta had had. She 
turned out to be a very loyal, hard-working employee, and 
she was with us for many years, as well. Eventually, we wound 
up with the executive secretary that we have now, Teri 
Wallace, and I think we’ve been blessed. These women have 


Employee Loyalty / 189 


been the mainstay of the administration of our business and 
a tremendous help to myself and my father through all the 
years. 

Other folks that that did wonderful jobs for us and were 
very loyal include a lady named Tina Kopp, who still works 
for us. She runs our health club, and she’s probably worked 
for us for forty-five years or so. She started as a chambermaid 
at the El Rancho on East Fourth Street, shortly after we 
opened in 1954. Eventually she became our head house¬ 
keeper—she ran our chambermaid crew. When we converted 
the El Rancho to a weekly rental operation, we moved her to 
the Sands, and she became the head housekeeper here. When 
she lost a part of her leg, and her ankle and foot were ampu¬ 
tated, she couldn’t work for a few years, but we kept her on 
the payroll. She now works for us running our health club. 
When Tina Kopp left, we hired Marian Donnelly to be our 
head housekeeper, and she was also an extremely loyal per¬ 
son. 

Cheryl Jensen has been with us for many years also. She 
started as a reservations clerk for us in 1979 or 1980, became 
our hotel manager, and worked for us until just last year. She 
was a loyal, hard-working person. David Wood, our chief fi¬ 
nancial officer, came to us in 1980 or 1981. 

Mickey Meredith was a room clerk that worked for my 
dad at the El Rancho on East Fourth Street, and she worked 
for a short time at the El Rancho on South Virginia Street. 
Many times, my father tried to get her to become front desk 
manager, but she refused. Mickey was a hard-working, loyal 
person, but she didn’t want the responsibility. She was middle- 
aged, and she just wanted to work for a salary and not have 
to be concerned about any administrative duties. 

My brother developed a bad cardiovascular condition in 
his right leg, and in 1981 he had two or three operations to 
open the arteries. The doctors told him it would be best if he 


190 / MY father’s son 


stayed off of his leg. He was really our principal pit and slot 
guy at the time. 

When my brother had to quit working, it created a little 
hole in our operation, so we hired a guy named Bruce Dewing 
as our assistant slot manager, or something like that. He had 
started in the industry at the Mapes Hotel, probably as a 
change person, but he advanced quickly, because he wanted 
to learn. The Mapes transferred him to the Money Tree when 
it opened, and he worked there as a mechanic. He also worked 
as key man and learned how to do slot percentages. Bruce 
was probably in his thirties when we hired him, and we ah 
ways liked younger employees. 

Youth worked great for us in a lot of cases, but not neces- 
sarily in all cases. In room clerks and housekeeping, we found 
middle-aged ladies to be our best employees. And we had a 
number of dealers that were middle aged, and eventually we 
had pit bosses and shift managers that were middle-aged la¬ 
dies. 

At the time we hired Dewing, we also hired our first ho¬ 
tel manager. (Up until then my sister and I had done the 
hotel managing.) I hired a man by the name of Mike Pickens, 
who had worked for a few big hotel chains, so he had good 
experience. Pickens took a little of the load off me by run¬ 
ning the hotel, and Dewing stepped in to help fill the role of 
my brother. 

Pickens and Dewing became close friends, and Dewing 
made it his business to learn the hotel operation. He wanted 
to learn about operating the hotel so that someday he could 
be of greater help to the company. I thought that was a good 
idea, and I began to introduce Dewing and Pickens to our 
wholesalers, our charter operator, and the Canadian people. 
It took a little load off of me, because if one of those people 
called and I wasn’t available, they had somebody else they 
could talk to. 


Employee Loyalty / 191 


Pickens was smart and knew the business, and he was 
hard-working, but it seemed that he had an alcohol problem 
that he couldn’t beat. Eventually, I had to let him go, but by 
that time Dewing had learned quite a hit about the sales and 
marketing of the hotel. My sister was doing the actual run¬ 
ning of the hotel, so we didn’t need any help there. Eventu¬ 
ally, we made Dewing our general manager. 

After my brother left, the pit more or less returned to 
me. I worked a lot in the pit, and Dewing knew the two ma¬ 
jor parts of our business, the hotel and the slots. We always 
were essentially a slot house, but we did make money in our 
pit. We certainly never chased high rollers around, but be¬ 
cause of the people we’d hired, starting with Oliver and the 
people that he brought in, we always had a good, efficient pit 
operation, and we ran right at a 20 percent win. 

Dewing did a good job for us, but there were some things 
we didn’t see eye-to-eye on. Eventually that led to my let¬ 
ting him go. We had just agreed to disagree, and I gave him a 
letter of recommendation when he left. 

Carrol Rippy started our keno operation for us. Carrol 
had been in the business for many years, came from the Pal¬ 
ace Club, and he knew the keno business. He did a good job 
for us, and when he left, his assistant, Don Byerley, took over. 
Don became a very good keno manager, actually better than 
Carrol. He was a department head whom I could depend on 
to be innovative, and he spent a great deal of time going 
around town looking at other keno games, looking at differ¬ 
ent tickets, working out the percentages on tickets to see if 
they’d be a good ticket for us to try, watching to see what was 
popular in town, and going to Las Vegas on his own to look 
at keno operations down there. 

For a small game, our keno game did very well. And as 
far as I know, it was operated honestly ... I don’t think we 


192 / MY father’s son 


were taken off any more than usual! [laughter] You can’t ever 
think that you’re not going to get hurt there once in awhile, 
but Byerley ran a good game for us for many years. He was 
also a great addition to our executive committee, because 
not only did he pay attention to what keno was doing, he 
would also watch our competition to see what other promo¬ 
tions were going on in their pits and slot areas. 

Unfortunately, Don’s wife became really ill, and Don was 
torn between his job and his wife’s health, and he eventually 
left us. We appointed his assistant, Carol Wilson, whom he 
trained just like Rippy had trained him. She’s now our keno 
manager, and she’s doing a good job ... so all of this came 
down from Carrol Rippy. 



In 

the 

Pit 


WORKING IN THE PIT is a unique ex¬ 
perience. When I first got involved with 
live gaming, I didn’t believe there was any 
such thing as luck—it was just something 
people talked about. But when you spend 
years in the pit watching people gamble 
and seeing what occurs, you have to think 
that there certainly is luck in this world. 
People will come in who know nothing 
at all about gaming, and they’ll consis¬ 
tently do things wrong and yet win. On 
a twenty-one game they will consistently 
hit eighteens and nineteens and come up 
with twos or threes. That’s a highly stress¬ 
ful situation for a pit boss, because one of 
the things you’re concerned about is 
whether everything is on the square. 

In the gaming business, if everything 
is on the square, in the end the house is 
going to win. It’s up to the pit boss to 
determine whether everything really is 
on the square. When you see a customer 
who almost appears to know the next 
card coming off the deck, or what the 
next roll of the dice is going to be, you 
say to yourself, “Well, how could this 
happen?” You begin to look for something 
that may not be quite on the level—a 
move that doesn’t look like a normal 
move by a hand or an arm. 

Most of the time, everything really is 
on the square. So you stand there watch¬ 
ing your dealers get whipped horribly, and 
you’re worried about the results of your 
shift. Everybody that runs a shift always 
keeps in his mind how much his shift is 
going to drop and how much they’re go- 


194 / my father’s son 


ing to win or lose. When people come in and beat you un- 
mercifully, you know that you’re going to wind up losing, no 
matter how the other games are going. You might have a 
$70,000 drop and still lose $40,000. It’s a highly stressful job. 
And most of the people that did that job when I used to do it 
would smoke a great deal and would drink a lot of coffee, and 
that made it even more stressful. Physically, it’s a demanding 
job. 

When I first started doing pit work in the little casino, I 
used to deal when a dealer took a break. One night a couple 
came in that had been drinking heavily. We had a twenty- 
five dollar limit game, and before I knew it they were win¬ 
ners—two or three thousand bucks. I had used all my deal¬ 
ers; I’d changed decks; I had done everything I knew to change 
our luck. I’d asked the dealers to stand on one leg. I’d sent 
them to the restroom and told them to turn their pants 
around. Finally, I said, “If anybody is going to lose any more 
money in this place, it is going to be me!” So I went in and 
started dealing to these people, but it was one of those cases 
where they just couldn’t do anything wrong. That was the 
dumbest thing I could have done. I wound up losing about 
eight or nine thousand bucks that night on a lousy twenty- 
five dollar limit table, [laughter] All during this time, I am 
trying to figure out what kind of edge these people have. But 
I am sure they didn’t have an edge—they were just lucky! 
That is the frustrating kind of thing you face. 

Wayne Stokes was a local man, and it seemed like every 
time he came in, he would beat us. We looked at Wayne 
Stokes every way we possibly could. He lived in Reno, and 
everybody knew him. We asked around and found that other 
places didn’t have that experience with him, but when he 
came into our place, he just beat us. I came close to asking 
Wayne Stokes not to ever set foot in our casino again . . . but 
everything told me that he was as square as we were. Eventu¬ 
ally, Stokes lost his whole bank roll at some other place—we 


In the Pit / 195 


never got a chance to get even with him. We had a lot of 
smaller players like that. 

The few times I gambled, more often than not, I was un¬ 
lucky. No matter what I did, I lost. I believe in luck, and a lot 
of people in our business are like me. Sometimes you’ll change 
dealers, or you’ll change decks, or you’ll tell your dealer to 
stand on one leg, and then things change, and you say, “Well, 
it worked!” But we don’t really know whether that’s why it 
worked or not. 

Certain dealers were consistently more lucky than oth¬ 
ers, and some were not. We pretty much always found that 
break-ins were luckier than experienced dealers. When we 
had a player that was betting some serious money, we would 
try to put our lucky dealer in there. You couldn’t really blame 
the dealer if she was losing—she was just doing her job. You 
were there looking at her, and you could see that everything 
she was doing was fine, but it just seemed like she was un¬ 
lucky more often than some other dealer was. 

Managing a pit is challenging, and every time you turned 
in a winning shift, you felt good about it. You felt like you 
had accomplished something. That’s what kept you in there 
doing it and kept you interested in what you were doing. 
Fortunately, you usually had a lot more good shifts than bad 
shifts, but when things went bad, it seemed they all went 
bad. If the blackjack tables were losing, than the crap tables 
lost; and then somebody would hit you on the wheel; and 
then the whole house would collapse, [laughter] 

Because we were only going to have a 20 percent win, we 
expected some people out there to win, and that was fine— 
as a matter of fact, we wanted to keep our customers happy. 
But you were torn between two conflicting goals, really: you 
had to beat some people, because you had to turn in that 
winning shift; but you didn’t want to beat everybody that 
walked into your place, because that would be bad for busi¬ 
ness. You had to send out some happy people. 


196 / MY father’s son 


In the years when I worked in the pit, when everything 
was going along pretty smooth—and the house was winning 
some money, but not a great deal—you sort of got into a 
rhythm, and there was kind of a hum throughout the casino. 
It made you feel that everything was wonderful. Much of the 
time that’s the way it was, but every once in a while, the roof 
would fall in, and the hum wasn’t there anymore. Anybody 
that’s been in the business and worked on the floor has expe¬ 
rienced that kind of thing. 

In the end, the customers always lose money. The house 
wins for two reasons: it has the odds going for it, and it has 
the bank roll. The house can outlast losing streaks, whereas 
when the customer’s luck turns, he doesn’t have enough 
money to outlast a losing streak. Yet, I’d see these people 
that work for me go right out and start playing the minute 
they got off shift. I guess they thought that they were going 
to be the exception to the rule, [laughter] If anybody knows 
anything about gaming, it’s those people that work in gam¬ 
ing and sit there watching it all day, day after day after day. 
For them to go out and gamble their money away until they 
have no more is ridiculous. 

There was so much stress on pit bosses and shift manag¬ 
ers that a lot of them had health problems. There was heart 
trouble; there were early retirements. But some stayed with 
it for the long haul. There were individuals that were able to 
live through it, but whiskey and cigarettes killed a lot of those 
people. At the end of a shift, you really needed a drink, and 
most everybody I knew had one as soon as they got off shift. 
Many times those few drinks led to a few drinks too many. I 
was fortunate that I never became addicted to alcohol, but 
many people in this business are, and many have a problem 
with nicotine. 

We always gave our employees a free drink after a shift, 
and we allowed them to gamble in our house, just not in 
their own departments. The pit, for example, could play the 


In the Pit / 197 


slots, and the slots could play in the pit, and so on. We 
changed our policy a time or two, but we found that when 
we stopped our employees from gambling in our casino, they 
just went right across the street and gambled in the other 
guy’s casino. We couldn’t stop them, so we thought, “Well, 
we’ll just stop them from gambling in their own department.” 
That way they wouldn’t be gambling with some dealer that 
they knew, so there’d be less chance for collusion. 

My experience has been that people are going to 
gamble—you can’t stop them. It’s just like people that drink 
and smoke. Until people come to an understanding, like I 
did. ... I quit smoking twenty years ago when I finally reab 
ized that it was going to kill me, and I cut way back on alco¬ 
hol for the same reason. I never really had a gambling prob¬ 
lem, but I could have easily wound up with a drinking prob¬ 
lem. 

When you, as a shift boss or pit boss, are getting your 
brains beat out, losing right and left, if you’re going to do 
your job right, you make the customer believe that you’re 
not “sweating” the game. You can’t let the customer know 
what’s going through your mind, and that’s quite a balancing 
act, because you’re walking around in that pit, watching your 
money go out the door. The customers are all having a good 
time, and they want to talk to you, and you want to be nice 
to them, because that’s your job. 

Customers prefer to play in a place where people don’t 
sweat the money—where if you beat the house, the house is 
still nice to you. We succeeded in creating an atmosphere 
where our pit bosses didn’t get all upset and allow the cus¬ 
tomer to see that we were having a difficult time because we 
were losing money. I think that was another important part 
of our success. 




Too 

Old, 

Too 

Slow, 

Too 

Litigious 


OUR PIT SUPERVISORS were old-tim¬ 
ers that had been in the business for a 
long time—John Oliver was responsible 
for hiring most of them. John had brought 
in old-timers who knew the business well, 
who knew the mechanics of the game, 
who could tell if the house was being 
cheated, but who didn’t understand what 
we called the “new ideas of gaming.” 
They were the kind of guys that used to 
stand around with their arms folded, and 
a smile never crossed their face. We 
brought those people in and told them 
that ours was a different house. Yes, they 
would have to protect our games. Yes, 
they had to make sure that we weren’t 
being cheated, either by our employees 
or by our customers; but they had to act 
as public relations people, as well. They 
could not just stand in the middle of the 
pit and glare at everybody. When we’d 
find a fellow that couldn’t work that way, 
that just couldn’t change his ways, we’d 
have to get rid of him. 

One of the things we tried to do in 
our pit, and one of the reasons we were 
successful and made money, was that we 
tried to get a lot of hands out. The more 
hands you get out, the more money you’re 
going to make, because you’re going to 
have more bets. Now, there’s a limit— 
you can’t rush your players too much— 
but a good, efficient dealer can move a 
game along and get those hands out and 
make the house more money. 

A man named Charles Kennelly 
worked for us many years as a pit boss, 


200 / MY father’s son 


and eventually I made him our pit manager. He was doing a 
good job. Then he hired a man by the name of Don Dennis, 
and Dennis had a difficult time trying to change his method 
of operation from the old-timer’s ways to what we wanted 
him to do. 

Sometime around 1987, Kennedy decided that there were 
two dealers that weren’t able to do what we required of them 
with the speed of their game. Firing somebody is a difficult 
thing to do, however, and many people duck the responsibil¬ 
ity and assign it to somebody else when it’s really their job. 
Kennedy never wanted to fire anybody. Don Dennis had been 
made our swing shift manager, and Kennedy told him these 
two ladies had to be let go. Don didn’t feel the way Kennedy 
did, but Kennedy directed him to do it. 

I was not aware that Kennedy and Don had had these 
conversations. It was a Saturday night, and I came in and 
walked the pit for awhile and then sat at a dead game and 
talked to Don and Chuck. When the shift ended, I left. 

Don had told the two dealers that he wanted to talk to 
them. They waited outside the pit, and he walked over and 
said, “I’m going to have to let you two ladies go.” 

They said, “Why?” 

He said, “Well, you’re just too old and too slow.” 

One of them knew that this was way out of line, so she 
flagged a couple of our other employees and asked them to 
stand there for a minute, and then she looked at Don and 
said, “Would you repeat that please, so these other folks can 
hear it?” 

Don said, “You’re fired, because you’re too old and too 
slow.” So the two ladies had their witnesses. 

I didn’t know all this had happened. When I came to 
work Monday morning, I was told that these two ladies had 
been fired because they were too old and too slow. Immedi¬ 
ately, I called our lawyer, Chuck Zeh, who was with the firm 
of Leeder, Sferazza and Zeh. He had started out working for 


Too Old, Too Slow, Too Litigious / 201 


legal aid, so he had represented a lot of these folks on the 
other side. 

Chuck said, “Send telegrams to those two telling them 
that they’re on the schedule. Give them a date to report back 
to work. Tell them to ignore whatever happened to them on 
Saturday night, that the company still wants them to be 
employed.” So we did that, but they didn’t answer the tele¬ 
grams, and they didn’t show up for work when we had them 
scheduled. (We had scheduled them right away, on Monday 
or Tuesday night.) 

One of the fired dealers had gotten in touch with a law¬ 
yer, Erica Michaels, and her partner, Warren Goeddert. 
Michaels advised them not to report for duty, that she would 
file a lawsuit. So within a week or two, they had filed a law¬ 
suit against the company alleging that they had been fired 
because of age discrimination. 

We felt that we had done everything in our power to 
reverse the terminations, that it was not a policy of our com¬ 
pany, and that we were not guilty of age discrimination. We 
had innumerable other people who worked in the same de¬ 
partment, on the same shift, that were older than these la¬ 
dies. We didn’t fire them, and more importantly, we didn’t 
hire younger people to replace the two who had been fired. 
The people that eventually replaced them were as old, or 
older, than they were. If, in fact, we fired people because 
they were too old, and then hired somebody younger, we 
might have been guilty of age discrimination; but we were 
not, in our view. 

We felt comfortable that we had a good legal position, 
but it’s always easier to settle these matters than it is to go to 
court. You don’t like the publicity; legal fees are usually heavy; 
and a lot of time is spent getting ready for trial. So we at¬ 
tempted to settle these cases. All the time we were trying to 
settle, we continued the invitation to these ladies to come 
back to work, but to no avail, and they were not interested 


202 / MY father’s son 


in talking to us about any kind of settlement. They and their 
lawyers felt that they had a great case and could not only 
prevail but exact punitive damages from our company. Puni- 
tive damages can be a very heavy penalty, because when dam- 
ages are assessed, the plaintiffs can bring forth evidence of 
how much the company is worth. The whole idea of punh 
tive damages is that they need to hurt the company, so you 
might take 10 percent of its worth, or 20 percent. That would 
be a pretty big hit for a $50 million company, and that’s what 
these people were thinking about. That’s why we couldn’t 
settle. 

We prepared for trial, because it appeared there wasn’t 
any way out. We deposed a number of our dealers that were 
over the age of forty or forty-two. When you get over that 
age, then you are considered old enough to be eligible for a 
possible age discrimination suit if you are terminated. We 
had many dealers and other employees that were of that age, 
and we deposed them, so we could prove that age discrimi¬ 
nation was not one of our methods of operation. Don Den¬ 
nis was also deposed, and in his deposition, Chuck Zeh got 
him to say on the record that he had not used age as a crite¬ 
rion to fire these two women. He said he felt they were stale 
in their jobs and weren’t producing, but age was not a factor. 

There was a huge volume of work to do to prepare for the 
trial, which Zeh was going to try alone. Fortunately, our in¬ 
surance company was involved, because those were the days 
before there had been a lot of these lawsuits, and insurance 
companies had not yet excluded these kinds of suits from 
their policies. In other words, they would pay on these kinds 
of claims, and they would pay on punitives, as well. We were 
insured, and the insurance company was paying for our legal 
defense. 

It was a jury trial, because plaintiffs had asked for one, 
and during the trial they called forth me and Kennedy, Don 
Dennis, Bruce Dewing, Jon Bengtson, and most of our ex- 


Too Old, Too Slow, Too Litigious / 203 


ecutive staff. They grilled us about how we felt about people 
over forty, whether we intended to do this, and so on. They 
also brought up the matter of our pension and profit sharing 
plan. The plaintiffs had been with us for several years and 
were about to be vested in our pension and profit sharing 
plan when they were fired. Their contention was that one 
reason we fired them was that we did not want them to be 
vested in the plan, because then their unused contributions 
would be split among those people that were still part of the 
plan. The executives, because their pay was much higher, 
were a big part of that plan, and that was one of their big 
arguments, which they thought they could make stick. 

Initially, the trial did not go well for the plaintiffs, and 
their testimony was not good. It looked like we were going 
to be able to win that lawsuit. Obviously, they thought so, 
too, because they went out and hired a very fine trial lawyer. 
They even got a recess, as I recall, because when they brought 
in the new lawyer, he had to be brought up to speed. His 
name was Peter Durney, and he was a very eloquent, young, 
forceful attorney, who was experienced. When he took over 
the trial, things changed and went the other way. A pivotal 
factor was that Judge Schouweiler mysteriously sustained an 
objection to our getting it on record that Don Dennis had 
sworn he had not fired the plaintiffs because of their age. 
Durney swayed the jury, did a great job, and the jury brought 
in a verdict that we were guilty. 

They awarded the two ladies about $1.6 million, which 
was reduced on appeal to about $300,000. The court dis- 
missed the punitive damages, because we had done nothing 
wrong, but because these ladies had been out of work for two 
years or so, the court agreed that they should be compen¬ 
sated for the tips and pay that they had lost. I think they also 
gave them some money for the shame they had been through 
because they had been fired and so on. 


204 / my father’s son 


The insurance company paid the awards, and they paid 
all our legal expenses. However, it had been a big drain on 
our time. It was an important case for us, and we had to do a 
lot of work on it. Mr. Zeh did a great job for us. We hired a 
lady, Fran Forsman, a lawyer in Las Vegas who specialized in 
this kind of work, and she did the argument for us at the 
supreme court level. There were briefs as well as oral argu- 
ments at that level. Zeh wrote the briefs and the argument, 
and we won that lawsuit. 

We had fired Dennis and then filed a suit against him. 
Then he counter-sued us for age discrimination! [laughter] 
That’s what happened, but the whole thing was settled out 
of court. The insurance company paid Dennis a few thou¬ 
sand bucks, and he dropped the suit against us, and we 
dropped the suit against him. 

There’s a lawyer in Reno who specializes in termination 
lawsuits and harassments: sexual harassment and sexual dis¬ 
crimination, age discrimination lawsuits. He became inter¬ 
ested in our company because of the dealers’ lawsuit and 

thought that maybe 
there were other oppor¬ 
tunities to sue us. So my 
understanding—I don’t 
know this for a fact—is 
that he began to inves¬ 
tigate the company to 
see if he could find 
some potential clients. 
How it came about that 
he represented some of 
our employees, I am not 
sure, but it did come 
Chuck Zeh (right) did a great job de- about. He filed several 
fending us against possibly ruinous lawsuits on behalf of 
suits. some. One was a law- 






Too Old, Too Slow, Too Litigious / 205 


suit that had to do with our bartenders.... We had bar¬ 
tenders suing us. We had cocktail waitresses suing us. We 
had our sales manager, an attractive thirty year old lady, su¬ 
ing us, and maybe one or two other people. 

In this period our human resources director left our com¬ 
pany and went to work for the lawyer representing these 
people. We don’t know this for a fact, but we have to assume 
that she gave the lawyer several leads on disgruntled em¬ 
ployees. He would go after these people and talk to them 
about hiring him to sue us, leading to some kind of settle¬ 
ment, because he usually settled out of court. 

We had several different things going on at the same time. 
The bartenders sued us because they said that we didn’t al¬ 
low them to take the breaks that they were entitled to by 
state law. They were supposed to have a break in the morn¬ 
ing and a break in the afternoon, and they said that we told 
them they couldn’t have their breaks. In actuality, what re¬ 
ally happened was this: 

When bar poker machines first came on the scene, bar¬ 
tenders found that their tokes were heavier than before, be¬ 
cause people had money in their hands, and if they won, 
they’d tip the bartender. Bartenders were very happy with 
the bar pokers. As a matter of fact, they were so happy that 
they didn’t want a relief bartender coming in and giving them 
a break, because they felt that while they were gone the re¬ 
lief bartender would get a few tokes that would rightfully 
belong to them. So they talked our bar manager, Vic 
DiMaggio, into allowing them not to take their breaks. Now, 
they’d take a break if they had no players; but if they had 
players that were toking, they’d stay, [laughter] 

Nonetheless, a group of them got together, and this at¬ 
torney filed a lawsuit that claimed we had not given them 
breaks. When the suit was filed, I brought Vic in my office 
and said, “OK, what’s going on here, Vic? Tell me about this.” 


206 / MY father’s son 


He said, “Here’s the deal. Here’s what happened: they 
didn’t want their breaks.” 

I said, “Well, that’s fine, Vic, and when the time comes, 
you can testify that they did this on their own accord.” 

Well, I believe Vic was subject to a great deal of pressure 
from the bartenders, because he knew what the real story 
was. Whatever the reason, he quit and got this lawyer to file 
a suit against us on his behalf. It wasn’t wrongful termina- 
tion, because he quit on his own; but sometimes they’d sue 
you for wrongful termination, saying they’d been harassed so 
bad they had to quit. We wound up settling for $30,000 or 
less. 

Then we had a suit by a cocktail waitress. Then we had 
the head of our sales department, a lady around twenty-eight 
or thirty years old that claimed sexual discrimination and 
wrongful termination, as well. The cocktail waitress had been 
with us for quite awhile. She was in her thirties, and she 
worked the pit most of the time. As in any organization, es¬ 
pecially in the gaming business, we had male supervisors who 
would treat females differently than males. They might al¬ 
low the female employee to do things they wouldn’t allow 
males to do, because the age-old sex thing was there. Maybe 
they were thinking if they did some favors for a female em¬ 
ployee, the female employee might do a sexual favor for them. 
There was a lot of this going on between the pit supervisors, 
the pit manager, and the cocktail waitresses, dealers, and 
bartenders, and so on. No more than is normal in casinos, or 
maybe even any other kind of business. I think this is just a 
normal.... Women were sometimes given better stations 
or better schedules or better sections to work, and they were 
allowed to do things that the guys couldn’t do. 

In the suit by our cocktail waitress, she pretty much got 
what she wanted. We had a period of time there when we 
were talking about new cocktail waitress uniforms. Uniforms 
were important to cocktail waitresses, because their tips could 


Too Old, Too Slow, Too Litigious / 207 


depend on their looks and their revealing costumes or uni- 
forms. It was important to them to have uniforms that re¬ 
vealed their legs and a lot of their breasts and so on, because 
they made better tips. Well, the cocktail waitress who sued 
us got in an argument with our seamstress because she didn’t 
like the uniforms we were proposing the cocktail waitresses 
wear. She made many trips downstairs to the seamstress’s of¬ 
fice and got in a big hassle with her. Her pit manager and 
some of the other pit people protected her and didn’t repri¬ 
mand her for this kind of activity. Somebody at the execu¬ 
tive level finally became aware of this hassle and the fact 
that she was being treated differently, the fact that she was 
taking a lot on herself. She was trying to get the seamstress 
to make uniforms the way she wanted them, rather than the 
way the company had instructed the seamstress to do it. So 
she was fired. 

She hired the same lawyer as the others and filed a law¬ 
suit against us alleging everything under the sun. She claimed 
she’d been sexually harassed by my sister’s husband, who 
worked at the Sands for many years and never had a problem 
in that regard. It was simply a red herring; that was never 
true. And Dewing and I and any number of other people .... 

The case went to trial—she wouldn’t settle. It went to 
trial before judge Robin Wright, who had recently been 
elected to the district court. The case dragged on for years, 
with the cocktail waitress changing attorneys and so forth, 
and finally it ended with her being awarded $250,000. Then 
Charles Zeh threatened to appeal to the state supreme court, 
and the plaintiff accepted a smaller settlement. Our insur¬ 
ance company paid the settlement and our lawyers’ fees. 

The bartender cases were filed as a class-action suit. Then 
we had two or three dealers that filed suits. We had a couple 
of maids that filed. All these cases were pretty much going 
on at the same time, and a lot of this, we’re fairly sure, was 


208 / MY father’s son 


the result of the fact that our former personnel manager had 
left us and gone to work with the attorney who was filing 
them. He represented all these people. 

The bartenders’ suit was filed as a class action, but we 
filed a motion to split the suit into individual suits, each bar- 
tender against the Sands. Our legal advice was that we could 
better defend the suit if it was individual cases, because then 
we could deal individually with each bartender and make a 
settlement with each one. One guy might settle for ten thou- 
sand; the other guy might want fifteen or twenty or some¬ 
thing. Anyway, we won that motion, and we got rid of the 
class-action suit. 

With the bartenders, the issue was how much time had 
they really worked when they should have been on a break, 
and whether, in fact, they had really told DiMaggio they didn’t 
want that time off. Unfortunately, we found out that the com¬ 
pany was in the wrong even if they had told their supervisor 
that they didn’t want their breaks. It was up to the company 
to make sure they took their breaks, so the company was in 
violation. What essentially happened was, we took each bar¬ 
tender, calculated how long he worked, and negotiated with 
him about how many breaks he’d missed. Then we paid them 
for the time that they had worked when they should have 
been on break. Most of those cases were settled for some¬ 
where between five and ten thousand dollars apiece. 

The attorney for the plaintiffs in all these cases made 
every possible effort he could to implicate me personally (or 
Bruce Dewing, Jon Bengtson, Dave Wood, or my brother-in- 
law) in a termination case. He dug into every possible thing 
that he could. He hired investigators, and he finally found 
out that I had been court-martialed when I was in the army. 
He spent two or three hours talking to me about why I was 
court-martialed in a deposition. And at the end of the depo¬ 
sition, I said to him, “Jack, you’re in real sad shape if this is 
all you can find that I’ve done wrong in all these years.” 


Too Old, Too Slow, Too Litigious / 209 


One of the things that happened is that the lawyer alien- 
ated a lot of our employees. A lot of our employees didn’t 
like the idea that he was suing us every day. It wasn’t good 
for our business. 

We had a lot of bad publicity that came out of the litiga¬ 
tion. Probably worst of all was testimony from a cocktail 
waitress in the famous “penis colada” case. She told the court 
that when a customer was dissatisfied with his drink, and she 
brought it back to the bar manager to mix him a new one, 
he’d pour a drink and stir it with his penis and send it back to 
the customer. That testimony came out in one of those tri¬ 
als. 

In the paper you’d see articles about this suit and that 
suit and the other suit. Fortunately for us, we didn’t do a lot 
of local business. If we had been a hotel-casino that did a lot 
of local business, it would have hurt real bad. In our case, it 
didn’t bother us that much, but we were members of the com¬ 
munity, and everybody knew us, and we didn’t feel good about 
that. 

We took a lot of criticism. Plaintiffs’ attorney just loved 
it, and he kept after us and kept after us. . . but one of the 
reasons he couldn’t find much of anything bad is because a 
lot of our employees came to our defense. The lawyer and his 
investigators and our ex human resources director were talk¬ 
ing to our employees and trying to dig up dirt on me and our 
executives, and many of our employees got disturbed about 
that. They viewed that as an attack against our company, 
and that helped us a great deal. Other cocktail waitresses 
testified for us in the case of the one who had brought suit, 
and that’s pretty much unheard of. Usually, when something 
like that happens, employees don’t like to testify against each 
other. 

If any good came out of all this litigation, it was that we 
had been involved in a couple of landmark cases that estab- 


210 / MY father’s son 


lished some important precedents. In the case of the two 
women who had sued us for age discrimination, the Nevada 
Supreme Court established that where there is a liquidated 
damages provision in the statutory framework, such as the 
Age Discrimination in Employment Act, an employee is lim¬ 
ited to liquidated damages and cannot obtain punitive dam¬ 
ages on top of them. The rationale was that Congress had 
spoken on the nature and quantity of relief that might be 
obtained, and thus had established limits. In this case, the 
available relief expressly did not include punitive damages. 

The other landmark case within this flurry of litigation 
involved the state’s “at-will” doctrine regarding lawful ter¬ 
mination of an employee’s services. (“At-will” meant essen¬ 
tially that an employee could be terminated without cause, 
at the will of the employer, so long as no law was broken 
through the action.) We fired a woman who worked for us as 
a tour bus coordinator or something like that; I can’t remem¬ 
ber why we fired her, but we did. She then sued us on the 
grounds that our employee handbook contained language that 
protected her from at-will termination. When the case even¬ 
tually reached the Nevada Supreme Court, the court ruled 
that the mere fact that an employer has an employee hand¬ 
book does not, in and of itself, alter the at-will employment 
relationship. Furthermore, the court concluded that there 
was no exception in the Sands’s handbook to the at-will 
employment relationship, and that the handbook was in gen¬ 
eral so vague that no employee could use it as a defense. I 
think the case pretty well established that Nevada employ¬ 
ers need not be concerned that in-house procedural hand¬ 
books somehow give their employees protection against at- 
will termination. 



Multi-venue? 


IN MAY OF 1990, the Dynasty Tower 
opened. It had 260 rooms, giving us a 
total of 940. We built that tower so that 
we had a porte-cochere that opened up 
on Fourth Street. That was the first di¬ 
rect access that we ever had to our prop¬ 
erty off of West Fourth Street. Before we 
built that tower, we had a driveway from 
Fourth Street to our lobby area, but the 
new tower extended our entire image 
right up to West Fourth Street. We im¬ 
mediately noticed a big increase in busi¬ 
ness, and some of it was local, because 
we had a bigger presence on Fourth Street 
than we had before. 

Until we built that tower, during our 
busy times we found ourselves short of 
rooms. We had to cut off the sale of our 
packages in some instances, because we 
couldn’t provide enough rooms. We had 
to curtail some of our bus charters, be¬ 
cause we were at a maximum. Until we 
opened that tower, we had six hundred 
and some odd rooms, and between the 
packages and the tournaments and the 
buses, we were running 95 or 96 percent 
occupancy. That was why we could add 
280 more rooms and fill them. As a mat¬ 
ter of fact, we maintained that middle 
nineties annual occupancy rate, and we 
had additional casino space on the 
ground level. 

One factor in our continued success 
was that airline deregulation went into 
effect. About thirteen airlines flew into 
Reno, some them regional ones. We gave 
Royal West Airlines a hig block of rooms. 


212 / MY father’s son 


They flew in from Southern California and Arizona. They 
were only around for a couple of years or so, but we became 
their principal package hotel, and they sold a lot of low-cost 
tours, and they helped us a great deal. Of these airlines flying 
into Reno at that time, many were coming from the East 
Coast. TWA, Northwest, and Delta had a lot more flights 
than they do now. Our big supplier was Funjet, out of the 
Midwest. There were a lot more seats coming to Reno, and, 
because of deregulation, fares were very reasonable. That 
helped a lot of hotel-casinos in Reno, but it probably helped 
us more than anybody, because we were so big in the package 
business. 

Because of the extra rooms that we had, we could also do 
more bus business. Bus operators would tell us how many 
rooms they needed on which dates, and we’d take whatever 
we could handle. If we couldn’t take them all, we’d go out 
and find rooms for them at other properties. When we had 
that position with the bus operator, he gave us first call on 
rooms, and we controlled the rate, so that also helped us a 
great deal. 

We also began doing convention business. We became 
known in the military reunion business, and in the 1980s 
you began to have the forty-year reunions of people that had 
been in the Second World War. Barbara Woodward, who 
did a lot of our tournaments, and Bill Irons, a veteran of the 
Second World War who is still doing some cribbage tourna¬ 
ments for us, got involved in one or two reunion groups. We 
were probably one of the first casinos to aggressively market 
those reunion groups. Reno was a fairly easy sell for reunion 
groups, because a lot of them liked going to gaming destina¬ 
tions. 

We had 15,000 square feet of meeting space, and with 
our little sales department, we started to cultivate sales to 
regional groups. We belonged to the Sacramento Sales Man¬ 
agers Association, and when they’d have their monthly meet- 


Multi-venue? / 213 


ings, our sales department would go there and meet with them 
and get leads. A lot of California groups like coming to Ne¬ 
vada. 

In those days, the downtown casinos pretty much didn’t 
go after meeting groups. They were interested primarily in 
gamblers, and they overlooked this segment of the market. 
Until the Legacy opened, conventioneers were a bad name 
in some of the downtown casinos. But because we were one 
of the largest hotels, and we had meeting space, we weren’t 
quite as busy as some of the leading casinos, and it worked 
for us. Conventions were actually discouraged by many casi¬ 
nos. That was an unfortunate thing that happened in Reno, 
but now it’s changed, and conventions are encouraged. 

In Sparks, John Ascuaga decided that, because of his lo¬ 
cation and the fact that he had to compete with Reno, con¬ 
ventions would be his niche. The only real convention ho¬ 
tel in Reno was the Hilton, and even the Reno Hilton for a 
long time discouraged conventions to go after gamblers. John 
Ascuaga realized that there was a big need out there, and 
that he could fill it, so he built a big convention facility, and 
it’s done relatively well for him. If we had a bigger facility, we 
could have done better ourselves, but with the facility that 
we had, we did pretty good. Everything went fine for us until 
the Silver Legacy opened. 

Conventions, reunions, tournaments, bus tours, and air¬ 
line packages account for about three quarters of our busi¬ 
ness. We also get a certain amount of local business and what 
we call F.I.T. business—free, independent travelers. A lot of 
that is people coming in from California, Washington, Or¬ 
egon, or Canada. 

In 1952 the Sands Hotel in Las Vegas opened, and my 
dad and I went down there for the opening. It was as big an 
event then as when the Bellagio opened recently, and we 
went there to see it. I thought I was in the presence of great- 


214 / my father’s son 


ness when I saw that place. I said to my dad, “If we ever open 
a casino, we ought to use a lot of the ideas that these folks 
have here.” When it came time for us to build our hotel- 
casino, we had a long discussion about whether we should 
name it the Tropicana or the Sands, and we eventually settled 
on the Sands, because we liked the logo better and it was a 
shorter name; it was easier to remember, easier to put up on 
signs. We actually copied their sign—the sign that still sits 
out on Arlington Avenue is a smaller version of the sign that 
the Sands had in front of their place in Las Vegas. 

We actually named our place the Sands Motor Inn, be¬ 
cause at first all we had was rooms, and the Las Vegas Sands 
never bothered us. Nobody ever said a word. So we got known 
as the Sands. Well, in the early 1980s, Howard Hughes bought 
the Sands in Las Vegas, and after a year or two we got a letter 
from his law firm in saying that we were using the name in 
an unauthorized fashion. We were shocked. We went to our 
attorney, and there was a question about whether or not 
Hughes had the right to force us to quit using the name. We 
negotiated a deal with Hughes’s people—we added the name 
“Regent” and called it the Sands Regent, and that satisfied 
them. They let us keep the signs that we had, but any new 
signs and any new printing that we did, we had to add the 
word Regent. 

We thought we were over that problem. Then, about the 
time we went public, or just after we went public, we got a 
letter from the Regent Hotel chain, [laughter] And the Re¬ 
gent chain had pretty much the same thing to say to us as 
Howard Hughes. They said, “You can’t use Regent. That’s 
our name, and we got it registered.” I didn’t want to go to 
court. I’ve never wanted to go to court, and it was easy enough 
for us to change our name to Sands Regency, and that satis¬ 
fied them. The public corporation that we registered with 
the Securities and Exchange Commission is stilled called the 
Sands Regent, however. 


Multi-venue? / 215 


All the Regent people were concerned about is what we 
were advertising ourselves as being. Their story was, “Well, 
suppose we come to Reno and build a Regent Hotel?” They 
never did. 

In the late 1980s and the first years of the 1990s, it be- 
came apparent to me that our business was not going to con- 
tinue to be as good as it had been in the last several years. 
The signs were in our monthly, quarterly, and annual state¬ 
ments. One of the major trends that I picked up was that for 
several years we had been unable to raise our average room 
rate. (In our business we call it the ADR, the average daily 
rate.) In business, even a minimal two percent increase in 
costs, or inflation, on an annual basis means that unless you’re 
able to raise your prices or increase your revenues more than 
that, you’re falling behind. What I saw, and I’m sure other 
people in business in northern Nevada saw this too, was no 
increase in ADR. 

We had an abnormally low ADR, anyway, because our 
business was based on a very reasonable rate for our rooms, 
the idea being that if people stayed with us, they gambled 
with us... or at least we got two shots at them: in the morn¬ 
ing when they got up, and in the evening when they came 
back to their room. 

We had built our business on the idea that you could stay 
with us for less in a superior room close to the other down¬ 
town casinos. Overall, you’d have the best value in down¬ 
town Reno. When the other hotel-casinos didn’t raise their 
rates, we couldn’t do so and remain competitive. With our 
package and our charter tours, we were in the same situa¬ 
tion. In order to fill our charters, to be the lead property, we 
had to have the best value for the money. We had to main¬ 
tain low room rates, and we were charging thirty-one to thirty- 
three dollars a night. Costs were creeping up, but hotel rev¬ 
enues were stagnant. 


216 / MY father’s son 


Gaming revenues were fairly stagnant, as well. We were 
getting into the multi-coin machines and poker machines, 
which have a lower hold percentage, so our gaming revenues 
were still somewhat stagnant. Another thing was that wages 
were creeping up, and we were caught in that squeeze. We 
were not keeping up with annual inflation; or, if we were, we 
weren’t doing any better than that. We were still very profit¬ 
able, but we did see our profit margins going down. 

Another thing that was happening was that there were 
other states in the United States that were opening up gam¬ 
ing. The Indian casinos had just started, and we could see 
that Nevada no longer was going to have a monopoly on 
gaming. We had lived with Atlantic City for many years, but 
Atlantic City didn’t hurt northern Nevada at all, because it 
was far enough away that it had no effect, but now there was 
a different situation, and from what we could learn, it looked 
as if several states were going to have gaming. 

One day I had lunch with Jon Bengtson, probably in 1990 
or 1991, and Bengtson said, “Where do you think gaming is 
going to be in ten years?” 

I think I responded, “You know, gaming’s going to be all 
over the country. So what should our company do about that?” 

In our board meetings and with my family and my execu¬ 
tives, we had long discussions about the matter, and we de¬ 
cided that we had different courses we could take. One would 
be to just sell the company and get out of the gaming busi¬ 
ness. Another would be to aggressively stay in the gaming 
business. We, at that time, still had no marketing depart¬ 
ment, still had no slot club, still had no computerized system 
to recognize our best players. We were still relying on the old 
shotgun approach where we tried to be nice to everybody 
and hoped they would all came back. That was no longer 
working too well. Our competition, especially the Eldorado, 
were taking away some of our better customers. We found 


Multi-venue? / 217 


that even the Nugget in Sparks was taking away some of our 
good customers. 

In consultation with our investment bankers, DLJ, we 
decided that it was time for us to exit the business, but that 
first we should maximize the stock price for our shareholders 
and ourselves. DLJ laid out a plan for us. That plan was as 
follows: 

The most successful publicly traded gaming companies 
at that time were multi-venue operations. And if you had 
operations in three or four states, the market liked that even 
better. The plan that DLJ laid out for us was that if we could 
acquire at least one other operation, preferably in another 
state, then there was a very good possibility that we could do 
a secondary offering. In that secondary offering, my family 
and I could divest ourselves of a large portion of the stock 
that we owned in the company. We might become minority 
shareholders or sell out altogether, depending on which fam- 
ily members wanted to be out and which ones didn’t. 

I still wanted to work in the business. I still felt that I had 
something more to contribute. I didn’t want to retire. I didn’t 
really want to start a new career. I was in my early sixties, 
and I never had any desire to retire at sixty-five, like a lot of 
people do, but some of the other members of my family would 
have been happy to sell out. We had a loan from First Inter¬ 
state Bank (FIB) that the family had taken out to maintain 
control of the company, and with this secondary offering that 
we wanted to make, we could have paid FIB off. Then we, as 
a family, would be free to do whatever we wanted with our 
shares. 

We talked a great deal about being more aggressive in 
our business, and what that would entail, and hindsight says 
we undoubtedly should have done that, but it would have 
meant we’d have had to hire a marketing director, and we’d 
have had to start a marketing department. We’d have had to 


218 / MY father’s son 


put a slot card system in—all things that eventually we did, 
but at that time we thought, “Well, let the new management 
do that kind of thing.” That wasn’t our style of operation. 

We began to look for opportunities. In May of 1992 the 
Sands made an offer to IGT to buy the Silver Club, the Trea¬ 
sury Club, the El Capitan, and the King’s Inn Casino in the 
Bahamas. The story with that transaction was that IGT had 
co-signed on mortgages for Karl’s Silver Club, the Treasury 
Club, the El Capitan, and the King’s Casino. The man that 
was running those places, Roger Elton, had trouble paying 
IGT, but IGT didn’t want to foreclose, because they didn’t 
want to be in the casino business—they didn’t want to be in 
competition with their customers. When he couldn’t keep 
up payments, IGT wound up with his Silver Club and other 
properties. They wanted to get out, so they were casting 
around for somebody to buy these casinos. 

IGT also had somebody who was talking to an Indian 
tribe in Iowa, and they told us that this Indian tribe had the 
ability and the approval from the Bureau of Indian Affairs in 
the state of Iowa to open a casino. The casino that they were 
going to open was about eighty miles north of Omaha, Ne¬ 
braska, and it would have been the only casino that was in 
operation in that area at the time. (It was the Kickapoo In¬ 
dian Tribe. I thought that was a joke, but it actually was 
Kickapoo.) 

The way IGT presented the deal to us was, “You take 
over the mortgages on these properties here in Nevada, and 
we’ll give you this Indian casino.” Well, we didn’t really want 
these properties, especially the Silver Club. We didn’t like 
the Silver Club, and we didn’t like the Treasury Club. The El 
Capitan was OK. (The El Capitan’s always made money. It’s 
the only casino in Hawthorne, and it still makes money.) 
But we thought if we could get that Indian casino in Iowa, it 
might be worth taking on these others. We didn’t have any 


Multi'venue? / 219 


idea what was going on in the Bahamas or wherever the King’s 
Inn Casino was. 

It appeared that the Indian casino was the big prize at 
the time, so we flew back there and opened up conversations 
with the tribe. They had an old building where they were 
running a bingo game, and they wanted to convert it into a 
slot emporium. It looked like it was pretty well located, and 
we could have put five or six hundred slot machines in that 
hall, so that was the basis of the whole deal. We were trying 
to wrap up our deal with the Indians, and we were dealing 
with the state of Iowa, as well, to make sure that we’d be able 
to operate. They had a Racing and Gaming Commission in 
Iowa, and we determined that the licensing procedure wasn’t 
going to be very tough, because we were a public company 
and were licensed in the state of Nevada. At least, that’s what 
they told us. Then we got our first taste of dealing with Indi- 
ans. 

It’s not that Indians are difficult, so much as it is their 
way of doing business is altogether dissimilar to our way of 
doing business. Each Indian tribe is a sovereign nation, so it’s 
like dealing with another country, except you’re dealing with 
the chief and the tribal council. There’s a lot of turmoil and 
turnover, at least with the Indian tribes that I’ve heard about 
and the ones that I’ve negotiated with, and I think we may 
have gotten caught in that kind of a situation. 

We had about three different meetings with the chief 
and some of the executive officers of the council, and we’d 
hammered out a memo that outlined all the facts, and we 
had an agreement. We were going to remodel the building, 
put in 500 slot machines and give them a percentage of the 
profits. After we drew the agreement, we faxed it to them 
and talked to them on the phone. They said, “OK, we’re 
ready to sign. There’s only two or three little problems that 
we’re sure we can iron out.” 


220 / MY father’s son 


So we told IGT, “Fine. We get these guys signed up, we’ll 
go for this deal.” IGT was really anxious to do this deal, so 
they flew us out there in their jet, and we had an appoint- 
ment with the chief for eleven o’clock in the morning. When 
we landed at the closest airport, we drove to the tribal head¬ 
quarters and told the receptionist we were there, and she 
said, “Fine. I’ll tell the chief, and I’m sure he’ll call you.” 

We sat out there for about an hour and a half and didn’t 
hear anything from the chief. I finally went back to the re¬ 
ceptionist. I said, “You know, we’ve flown all the way out 
here, and the chief said he was going to talk to us so we could 
wrap this thing up today. We’d really like to get out of here 
this afternoon so we don’t get stuck here.” 

She said, “Well, I’ll go tell him.” She came back, and she 
said, “He suggests that you go have lunch.” [laughter] 

So we went and had lunch. Then I went back to see her, 
and I said, “What can you tell me?” 

She said, “He’s busy.” 

The long and short of it is, we sat around there for about 
four hours that day, and they never called us. We didn’t know 
exactly what to do, so we told the receptionist, “Look, we’re 
going to get on the plane and fly back to Reno. When the 
chief gets ready to talk to us, he’s got our phone number. 
Have him call us.” 

We came back, a few days went by, and nothing hap¬ 
pened. We tried to call the chief. He was unavailable. The 
upshot of the whole thing was we never heard any more from 
the Indian tribe, and IGT kept bugging us about doing the 
deal with them. We wouldn’t. We told IGT, “Look, the only 
reason we got involved in this deal is because of this Indian 
casino.” IGT found somebody else to buy their property, and 
the Indian casino, we understand, never got off the ground, 
for whatever reason. 

But, there was an unforeseen consequence of that 
Kickapoo deal. Carter Lake, Iowa, is a suburb of Omaha, right 


Multi-venue? / 221 


across the Mississippi River. Carter Lake was kind of in a no 
man’s land, because the river had changed course there, form¬ 
ing the lake after which the town is named, so Carter Lake 
could decide which state they were in, depending on what 
they wanted to do. 

While we were going back and forth with the Kickapoos, 
Jon Bengtson introduced us to a man that he had met when 
he was with IGT selling gaming machines. He put us in touch 
with the mayor of Carter Lake, and the mayor took us to the 
state Racing Commission, and when we talked to them, it 
appeared as if we could float a casino on Carter Lake. We 
made a deal with the mayor and city council, and we talked 
to a ship builder in Texas that had a ship we could buy. It was 
like a river boat, probably 200 feet long, but we figured we 
could get about 400 slot machines on it, and everything was 
going along great. Then there was an election, and the mayor 
lost. The new mayor was against gambling and talked the 
city council into canceling the deal. That was the end of our 
Carter Lake deal, [laughter] 

Then we looked at a casino in Wendover. Even though 
it was in the state of Nevada, Wendover is really an alto¬ 
gether different market than any other place in Nevada. Af¬ 
ter talking to DLJ about it, they felt that there was a possibil¬ 
ity that a Wendover casino might work, but they still pre¬ 
ferred an out-of-state casino, so we passed up a very good 
opportunity in Wendover. It was the Nevada Crossing, the 
one that Bob Berry had started. It was a truck stop with a 
casino and a little motel. 

Actually, a lot of the reason we passed on Wendover was 
my fault. I looked at that operation, and I said, “There’s no 
direct flight to Wendover.” It was an eight-hour drive across 
the state to get there, or you had to fly to Salt Lake City and 
drive for an hour. It was a limited market. Salt Lake City was 
the only place you could look at for business, and if you did 
get more competition there, it would not be a good opportu- 


222 / MY father’s son 


nity. What eventually happened was that they did not get 
more competition, and the place that we were looking at 
buying expanded and prospered. The truck stop was rebuilt 
and more rooms were added; so, as it turned out, it was a very 
bad mistake on our part that we didn’t go into that project. It 
would have worked . . . but this is all hindsight. 

We looked at one or two other opportunities. There was 
a river boat that was going to be moved to Sioux City, and 
we looked at that, and we made an offer on that, but we 
couldn’t make a deal with those folks. There were other pos¬ 
sibilities that failed to pan out. 

Then, late in 1992, we were approached by Stanley 
McDonald. He and his son owned the Copa, a dockside ca¬ 
sino in Gulfport, Mississippi. (Mississippi permitted that kind 
of gambling.) The Copa was a converted cruise ship that no 
longer had power and had been towed to Gulfport and moored 
at the dock as a floating casino. Si Redd had once unsuccess¬ 
fully operated the ship as an offshore casino. 


22 

Down in 
Mississippi 


STANLEY MCDONALD had a deal for 
us. He’d been a stockholder in our com¬ 
pany for several years, and our company 
had been paying dividends and doing 
very well. His stock had been going up, 
so he had every reason to believe that 
we were good operators. He wanted us to 
go in with him on his dockside casino, 
the Copa. His offer seemed almost too 
good to be true, and we should have re¬ 
alized that it wasn’t. Here was our dream. 
Here was what we wanted. We needed a 
venue in another state, and this man 
walked through the door and had this 
thing ready to go. 

Rick Carter and Terry Green were to 
be his operators. They’d been born in 
Mississippi. They’d had experience op¬ 
erating an offshore gaming ship. Al¬ 
though there wasn’t any licensing proce¬ 
dure for that, there was every reason in 
the world to believe that those folks could 
get licensed in Mississippi. 

When McDonald sat down and ex¬ 
plained the whole deal, he said that he 
wanted a partner. The word “partner” 
really grated on my nerves, because my 
dad had said many times, “You don’t need 
partners.” That was a big hump for me to 
get over, to decide that our company 
should be a partner, but our thinking at 
the time was, “Well, this is all part of our 
grand exit strategy to enhance share¬ 
holder value in the Sands. We’re going 
to get this casino open. It’s going to do 
well. It’s going to complement our in¬ 
come. Our stock is going to go up. All 


224 / my father’s son 


our shareholders will benefit by getting a huge increase in 
the stock price. The Sands will have a huge increase in earn- 
ings. We’re going to do a secondary offering. We’re going to 
pay the bank off. We’re going to be free to start divesting 
ourselves.” At any rate, I insisted that the only way that we’d 
go into the deal was if we ran it, if we controlled it. 

We didn’t argue much about the money. McDonald told 
us that he would sell us 40 percent interest in the project for 
$6 million. He would agree that that $6 million would be 
used only to finish out the casino remodel on the ship, and 
that we could direct the casino remodel and build the casino 
the way we wanted it, because we were going to operate it. 
We probably could have shaved some money off of that, but 
our key aim was to be in control. 

So we worked out a deal with McDonald where we’d be 
the managing partners, and we’d run the business, but on 
any other major decisions, we’d have 50 percent of the vote. 
For example, if it came down to selling the business or mov¬ 
ing the ship somewhere, some major decision like that, then 
he had an equal vote to our vote, but we were to be allowed 
to run the business as we saw fit. On that basis, I agreed to 
the partnership. 

We knew what was going on in gaming in Mississippi, 
and it looked like a tremendous opportunity for us, because 
at the time there were only four casinos in operation on the 
Gulf Coast. The Mississippi Belle was run by a man that had 
been in the restaurant business in Texas, who had no casino 
business experience at all. He came there because Carter and 
Green had told him what a great opportunity there was there. 
He had a little river boat with very low ceilings. It was smoky 
and crowded, and by no stretch of the imagination was it any 
kind of a casino; and yet, people were lined up, actually pay- 
ing an admission fee of a few dollars to go aboard the ship to 
gamble. 


Down in Mississippi / 225 


Each ship had its own complement of passengers that 
could be allowed, and the fire department was counting the 
people getting on board. They were only allowing a certain 
number of people on. Then if five people got off, they’d let 
five more board. On a Saturday night you had a line a block 
long, and the other three casinos were the same way. 

Another casino was the President Casino operated by a 
man named Connelly. He had operated passenger ships with- 
out gaming up and down the Mississippi River, so he knew 
the passenger ship operation, but he knew nothing about 
gaming. He just took one of those river boats and brought it 
down there, found a site, docked it, put some slot machines 
on it, and it was just like the Mississippi Belle. 

A third casino operator was a man named Goldstein, who 
had also been a river boat operator like Connelly, and whose 
operation was similar to the Mississippi Belle. He called his 
operation the Isle of Capri. 

The fourth operator was Marlin Torgeson. Marlin oper¬ 
ated the Casino Magic. After Marlin lost his contract with 
the Indians, he was looking for another opportunity. He felt 
that gaming was going to be legalized in Mississippi, so he 
bought an old, small-boat harbor that was in bankruptcy and 
was located way back at the end of a bayou at a place called 
Bay St. Louis, fifteen miles west of Gulfport. This harbor was 
connected to a series of bayous that eventually reached the 
Gulf, but it was way back in the swamps. In order to get to 
this operation, you had to drive down some little, old, two- 
lane road that had no curbs and gutters. The main virtue of 
his operation was that it was the closest casino to New Or¬ 
leans. 

When we went down there with Loran Schmidt, he took 
us back to show us Marlin’s operation, Casino Magic. I 
couldn’t believe a man would have the nerve to go back in 
the swamps like that and spend millions and millions of dol- 


226 / MY father’s son 


lars, but he did, and it turned out that he was extremely vi¬ 
sionary. He was the first operator, to my knowledge, to build 
a casino on a barge. As a matter of fact, he floated four barges 
back in there, tied them together, and snugged them right 
up to the shore. Because it had been a smalbboat harbor, 
they had a bulkhead built along one side of the harbor, and 
he just tied these barges right up to this bulkhead, and when 
you walked in, you had no idea that you were on anything 
that floated. 

Marlin’s casino was a prototype of what happened in 
Mississippi. Most all the other casinos copied him. You’d put 
a building on land. You walked into that building, and it was 
like a big entrance hall, and when you walked from that build- 
ing onto these barges, you had no knowledge that you were 
on a barge. The knowledgeable folks knew that you were on 
a barge, because there was a ramp there, because of the tide. 
This ramp went up and down, but it moved very slowly, so 
you didn’t notice it. So when they tied those barges to the 
land, they looked just like casinos look in Nevada. 

Jon Bengtson and I went down there with Bengtson’s 
friend, Loran Schmidt, and we spent three or four days, and 
we came away with our mouths hanging open. All they had 
there were quarter and dollar slot machines. No nickels. No 
dimes. There wasn’t any table game less than a five-dollar 
minimum, and most of them were ten, twenty-five, hundred- 
dollar minimums. 

It occurred to us that possibly there were going to be more 
casinos, so we tried to figure out how many casinos were go¬ 
ing to be allowed there. We knew a couple of folks that worked 
for the Mississippi gaming commission, that had previously 
worked for the Nevada gaming commission, and so we talked 
to them, so that we could get all the knowledge that we would 
possibly need before we went into business down there. They 
identified for us a total of eight sites on the Gulf Coast that 
they said were all the possible sites that could ever, ever be 


Down in Mississippi / 227 


developed as floating casinos under the regulations. After 
we acquired ours, there were only three more sites left. A 
total of eight casinos in that area, within a two-hour drive of 
30 million people, sounded just fine. 

We then looked at the seven-year lease that the 
McDonalds had with the port, because the port was going to 
be our landlord. One of the things we found that disturbed 
us was that it was a standard lease that was used for other 
purposes besides casino ships, and it had a clause that gave 
the port the right to move our ship after seven years if their 
maritime business required it. That bothered me, so we talked 
to the port director, and the port director said, “Don’t worry. 
We have never moved anyone.” 

We talked to Carter and Green’s lawyer, a man by the 
name of Hugh Keating, who had helped negotiate that lease, 
and he told us that, yes, it’s true they had that clause, and it 
was also true that that clause could not be changed. But in 
all the years the port had been in operation there, they’d 
always lost money, and there wasn’t any reason to believe 
that the port would want to fool with somebody that could 
make money for them. Not only was our lease over $41,000 
a month, if we had any month that we took in more than 
$2.5 million gross gaming revenues, then we would pay them 
5 percent of anything over that. With approximately eight 
hundred slot machines and twenty-four table games, includ¬ 
ing craps and a couple of wheels, in that 30,000-square-foot 
casino, our forecast was that we would do somewhere be¬ 
tween four and five million a month, average; and because 
for the first seven years they couldn’t move us, the risk ap¬ 
peared to be very small. So we agreed to accept the lease like 
that. 

We made our deal with McDonald, and we actually signed 
it on New Year’s Eve, 1992. Our conversations with Gaming 
down there led us to believe that there wasn’t going to be 
any difficulty at all with licensing for anyone concerned, es- 


228 / MY father’s son 


pecially Carter and Green, because they were born in Mis¬ 
sissippi, and as far as we knew, had never been involved in 
any activity that would warrant them not being licensed. It 
never occurred to us that they could not get licensed. It was 
a lapse, no doubt, in our judgement, but we felt that speed 
was important, because these four other casinos were doing 
so well, and we wanted to be one of them. We even felt that 
our forecasts were low, from looking at what the other casi¬ 
nos were doing. So speed was what we were interested in. 

Another thing that was attractive about Mississippi was 
the cost of construction labor. They were paying carpenters 
twelve bucks an hour. In Reno we were paying thirty-five 
dollars an hour. Plumbers and other building trades, such as 
electricians, were getting wages in Mississippi that corre¬ 
sponded to the carpenters’ wages, so the cost of construction 
was extremely reasonable. We ran a crew twenty-four hours 
a day to do the remodeling on the ship, because we could 
hire people to work the other two shifts for the same wages 
that we hired people to work the day shift. There wasn’t any 
differential between shifts, and there was lots of labor avail¬ 
able. We thought we’d be open for business by May at the 
latest, maybe even April. The only other casino that was 
scheduled to open that year was the Grand Casino in 
Gulfport, which was on the port property just west of the 
two piers, up on the highway. 

The downside to the Copa was that we were way out on 
the end of the east pier, and customers had to wind around 
through the port and go through a gate with a guard to get to 
us. The guard didn’t stop you or anything—he was just there; 
but it did discourage some people from driving in. And entry 
to the Copa was very poor, because you had to drive around 
a lot of trucks. 

The main business of that port was bananas. The two big 
banana companies, Chiquita and Dole, were the main users 
of the port. They brought bananas up from Central America, 


Down in Mississippi / 229 


loaded them on trucks, and the trucks then transported them 
to wherever they were going. So these refrigerated trucks were 
parked all over the port. The big truck parking lots were very 
unsightly. The Grand, because it was on the west end of the 
port, didn’t have that problem. It was bad for our business, 
but it appeared as if we were going to do so well for at least 
two or three years that it was worth the risk. 

The Mississippi project was so important to our company 
that I decided that I would move there. I’d recently married 
my third wife, and we had a child in 1991. Nevertheless, we 
moved to Gulfport so I could push that operation and get it 
open as soon as possible. It would be worth millions and mib 
lions of dollars to us to get the thing going, and rather than 
trust somebody else to do it, I thought that it would be best 
for me to be there. Jon Bengtson and Dave Wood were left 
in charge of the Sands. Actually, Bengtson pretty much ran 
the place. My son was working under Bengtson, and he was 
picking up more responsibility all the time. Also, Bruce 
Dewing was still with the Sands, and those are the folks that 
I left in charge. 

I was probably the one in our company that knew the 
most about construction. I knew nothing about ships, but 
the structural stuff had all been done. It was now the fin- 
ishes, and that was important. We had to lay out the count 
rooms, the executive offices, the restaurant area, and things 
that I was familiar with doing. The McDonalds had an ar¬ 
chitect who had experience doing passenger liners. He had 
done work for them when they had the Princess Cruise Lines. 
He also had done a lot of private yachts and was a qualified 
architect. 

The casino looked very, very nice. The McDonalds had 
given the architect his head and let him do pretty much what 
he wanted, but my style was to work a lot closer with archi¬ 
tects and the construction crew than the McDonalds had 


230 / MY father’s son 


ever worked, and probably closer than most people. I wasn’t 
there very long when I found myself in conflict with both 
the contractor and the architect. 

We had our offices in a building at the end of the east 
pier that we were leasing from the port. You just walked out 
of the office and went across the pier, and the ship was right 
there. So we were on site, and I began to take part in con- 
struction meetings. It appeared to me that we were spending 
money needlessly in certain areas, so I put a halt to it. Well, 
the architect got ahold of McDonald, and then they got ahold 
of me, and we had our first “bust-up,” you might say. 

I said, “The deal we made is I’m in charge down here, 
and this is the way I see it, and this is the way it’s going to 
be.” 

The next little problem that we had right in the begin¬ 
ning was I got a call from Immigration. They said that the 
Swedish structural engineer working on the job didn’t have 
a green card, and if he continued to work for us, we were 
going to be fined. I was familiar with the green card situa¬ 
tion, because we have all these people that work for us in 
Reno that are from Central America and Mexico that have 
to have green cards. So I knew what they were talking about. 
I got ahold of this fellow and said, “You have a green card or 
not?” 

He said, “No, I don’t have a green card.” 

I said, “Well, how is it you’re here in this country?” 

He said, “I don’t know. You’ll have to ask the McDonalds.” 

So I got hold of Kirby McDonald, and he said, “We’ll 
fight the Immigration Service. We want this fellow here.” 

I said, “Look, I don’t have time to be doing things like 
that. You ought to go out there and fire him. I’m not going to 
have this guy on the job, because I don’t want to be fined.” 
So I asked the Swede to leave, and the McDonalds became 
disturbed over that, and we didn’t really get off to a good 


Down in Mississippi / 231 


start. I brought in a guy we had worked with before to finish 
the job. 

Kirby McDonald was associated with a company called 
Ogden Services. Ogden Services’ principal line of business is 
furnishing all the foodstuffs, the labor, and the material for 
oil platforms. Kirby wanted us to contract with Ogden to do 
that same kind of thing for our casino down there, and I told 
him that I didn’t think we needed Ogden’s services—we had 
experience doing that in Reno for many years. But I didn’t 
want to be at cross purposes all the time with our partners, 
and I knew that it was going to wind up hurting the opera- 
tion if we were arguing with each other about every issue 
that came along, so I finally asked Bengtson to work with 
Kirby, and we hammered out a contract with Ogden. 

Ogden furnished a lot of our foodstuffs and the plates 
and dishes for the restaurant that we were going to have, 
which really was just a glorified snack bar. Later on we did 
build a buffet restaurant, but in the beginning we started out 
with just the snack bar. We also contracted with Ogden to 
run our human resources department. The best deal we could 
strike with Ogden cost us forty or fifty percent more than if 
we would have done it ourselves, but in order to maintain 
the best relations I could with the McDonalds, I agreed to it 
for a twelve-month basis. At the end of that twelve months, 
we’d examine it, and if it was costlier, then we could get out 
of the deal. I thought, “Well, OK, for the first year, in order 
to get this thing opened and get going, instead of having a 
lot of problems, I’ll do it like that.” 

In seventy-eight days Vic Tilly completed the remodel. 
That was by working around the clock, six days a week. The 
cost was much lower than it would have been in Nevada, 
because the labor costs were so much lower, but it chewed up 
most of that six million bucks that we had given McDonald. 
There would have been a great number of cost overruns, but 


232 / MY father’s son 


after I got there, I started changing things, and it came in 
right about where we thought it was going to come in. That 
was in April. 

Earlier we had filed our applications with Gaming in 
Mississippi. Bengtson and Dave Wood and I were the respon¬ 
sible people that had to be licensed. We hoped that the Mis¬ 
sissippi Gaming Commission would pretty much rely on the 
investigations that the Nevada Gaming Commission had 
done and not go through the whole rigmarole all over again, 
and we had indications that that’s what they would do. 

Well, by April there had been a big exodus from Gam¬ 
ing. In Mississippi (unlike Nevada) you could walk out of 
the Gaming Commission and join a gaming company the 
same day. All the people that we knew in Gaming when we 
went down there went to work for private gaming compa¬ 
nies, and Mississippi was having an awful time filling their 
Gaming positions. 

The man that wound up running Gaming was somebody 
they brought in from another state, who had been a race¬ 
track regulator and really knew nothing about gaming. Many 
of the people that investigate you for being licensed had been 
hired away, as well. They wound up using some ex-Missis¬ 
sippi state troopers for investigators, and, unfortunately, our 
investigations fell to one, a man named North. He or some 
member of his family had had some difficulty with Carter 
and Green, and I think it had something to do with a bank¬ 
ruptcy. North made it his business to do whatever he could 
to keep Carter and Green from getting licensed. 

We didn’t know at the time what was going on. All we 
could get out of Gaming was, “Well, you know, we’re work¬ 
ing as hard as we can, as fast as we can. You’re going to get 
licensed. Things are coming along.” Then they ran across 
the fact that I had been court-martialed in the army, and 
even though I was licensed in the state of Nevada and had 
been for many years, they made an issue out of it. The inves- 


Down in Mississippi / 233 


tigator called me and discussed the matter, and it appeared 
that he wasn’t going to license me because of my court-mar¬ 
tial. We were in an awful fix, and it just made us sick, be¬ 
cause we could see all these other casinos making money 
hand over fist. 

Well, we got over my licensing problem, but it added 
another thirty to sixty days to the procedure. The attorney 
that was representing the Copa knew an attorney who prac¬ 
ticed law in Gulfport and had been in the Judge Advocate 
General’s Corps in the U.S. Army. He knew the army regu¬ 
lations, and so we hired him. After some research, he con¬ 
vinced the Mississippi deputy attorney general that was han¬ 
dling gaming matters that just because I had had a court- 
martial in the army didn’t mean that I had committed any 
felony. So eventually I got licensed. 

By that time it was June, and Carter and Green still hadn’t 
gotten licensed. There had been another change in the di¬ 
rectorship of the Gaming Commission. We eventually got a 
sit-down meeting with this new man, and he told us that it 
appeared highly unlikely that Carter and Green were going 
to get licensed; or, if they did get licensed, the procedure was 
going to take another eighteen months. That was a disaster, 
of course. 

Things had come to a head. We needed to get Carter and 
Green out of the business so we could go forward; but when 
we negotiated our deal with the McDonalds, we had agreed 
that we wouldn’t try to buy the stock of any shareholder in 
their company. Since they had a closely held company, they 
didn’t want an outsider being able to buy Carter and Green’s 
stock . . . which would have been the right move for us to 
make—just buy their stock and get them out of there. Carter 
and Green were in the driver’s seat. They had stopped our 
whole operation, and they were very difficult to deal with, 
but the McDonalds just didn’t want to pay them what they 
wanted. 


234 / my father’s son 


The negotiations between the McDonalds and Carter and 
Green took the whole summer. It wasn’t until sometime in 
September that the McDonalds and Carter and Green 
reached an agreement that allowed the McDonalds to buy 
them out for some cash and a series of notes that were to be 
paid off over a few years. No matter how hard we argued and 
how much we pleaded with the McDonalds, we couldn’t get 
them to do it any faster. I’m still puzzled as to why it took 
them so long. They were really penny-wise and pound-fool¬ 
ish. I know that Carter and Green were irresponsible in their 
demands, but the five casinos that were in operation at this 
time were doing so well that the McDonalds would have made 
it up, even if they would have had to pay them a little extra 
money. But it was just not in their nature to give in. They 
cost us millions and millions of dollars. . . and themselves, 
too, as far as that goes. 

In the meantime, we had brought our key people down 
to Mississippi and had begun to train dealers. There was a 
shortage of housing down there on the Gulf Coast, so it was 
a lot easier to hire and train people that were already living 
there, rather than bring somebody in. You’d bring some key 
people in, and then you’d train slot mechanics, dealers, and 
other folks that you needed for your operation. 

We had a casino manager named John Brevick, who had 
worked at the Reno Cal-Neva for many years. He was al¬ 
ready there when we came on board, and we kept him. We 
set up a pit in the building where we had our offices, and we 
trained dealers. But there was a problem: we’d get these people 
marginally good enough to deal, and when they felt that they 
were competent enough, they’d just run off and get a job. So 
we just kept on training dealers. We must have trained half 
the dealers down there on the coast! [laughter] It was cost¬ 
ing us money. 


Down in Mississippi / 235 


Our deal was that once the ship opened, if we had a short- 
fall or needed extra cash, the McDonalds would have to share 
fifty-fifty—but first we had to get the ship opened. What 
had looked so promising was becoming a looming disaster. I 
found myself in the most difficult position I had ever been in 
in my business life, and I wasn’t handling it very well. So I 
prevailed upon Jon Bengtson to go to Gulfport and run the 
operation there, and I moved my family back to Reno. Jon 
did a better job of holding things together there than I would 
have done. It was good of Jon to go down there and do that, 
because summer down there is like being in a steam bath all 
the time. 

I had worked out some marketing ideas when we knew 
that we were going to go into business in Gulfport. Our plan 
there was based pretty much on what it was here, and that 
was buses and airplanes. There was a brand new regional air¬ 
port in Gulfport, about three miles from the ship, and they 
had a new terminal that had second level loading for at least 
six airplanes at the same time. Boeing 737’s and the other 
normal jet airplanes that all the airlines flew and the charter 
people flew could be handled out of this brand new terminal. 
No major airline was flying in and out of Gulfport, so it was 
a beautiful setup for charter business. 

The Canadian Holiday Company that I dealt with in 
Reno had a very extensive charter operation from eastern 
Canada to cities in Florida. Through Bill Robinson, the man 
that I had done business with in Reno, we began working on 
an arrangement with Canadian Holidays to fly people di¬ 
rectly from Toronto, Montreal, and so on, to Gulfport. 

We had no rooms, but there was a string of motels up and 
down Highway 90 right close to our ship. Those folks had 
been in a depressed state of business, and we had done some 
preliminary work and knew we could line up rooms for the 


236 / MY father’s son 


charter passengers. We had to put everything off when we 
couldn’t open, but the charter business looked like it held a 
lot of promise if we could get it going. 

We felt we could get side trips out of the hundreds and 
thousands of people that Canadian and other charter people 
were flying into Florida. We could sell an add-on package to 
all those people that were going to Orlando and Fort Lauder¬ 
dale, and if we had a charter operator that could fly them 
from Florida over to Gulfport for a couple nights, it would be 
great. We tentatively set that up with Canadian and a couple 
of other operators, so it looked real promising—if we got open. 

Another thing we did was contact Frontier Travel, which 
is owned by a man named Lippencott. Frontier is one of the 
biggest movers of bus passengers in America. We made an 
agreement with Lippencott that he would furnish us with 
bus customers, and we’d pay him a commission. We gave 
him an office in the complex that we were renting from the 
port. He put his own phones in and began to line up buses, 
but we had to send them to other casinos, because we couldn’t 
take care of them. 

When we finally got open and got into the off season, we 
needed buses badly, and I wasn’t satisfied with what we were 
getting from Lippencott, so I instructed our general manager 
to go into the bus business ourselves. Then we got into a 
lawsuit with Lippencott. . . but it was important to do that 
to get that business. I still to this day never understood why 
Lippencott wasn’t able to produce. He does so well up in the 
Reno-Tahoe area. 

We opened the thirtieth of September, 1993, and we 
should have opened no later than May. So we lost that sum¬ 
mer when there would have been no more than five casinos 
open. Just to give you an example of how it could have gone, 
there was a casino called Splash that opened in Tunica, about 
thirty miles from Memphis. After a week or two, Gaming 
closed them down, because they couldn’t count the money 


Down in Mississippi / 237 


fast enough. When Gaming showed up over there, they found 
rooms full of uncounted money, mostly coins, so they closed 
them, brought in a “Big Eight” accounting firm, made them 
count everything and start over again. Then they let them 
reopen. 

The Grand, right next door to us, was a huge operation. 
Lyle Berman owned it. He really knew his stuff, and he had 
the land and the room and the money, and he opened up 
with 2600 slot machines. He did the same thing that Marlin 
did in Bay St. Louis. He tied four barges together, and then 
he built a sea wall, tied the barges up to this sea wall, and 
built an entrance building on land, so it looked like you were 
walking into a Nevada casino. He had two floors and a huge 
parking lot out in front. He hit the jackpot. 

We were paying $18,000 a month all the time we weren’t 
open. And we were paying wages to key people and training 
dealers, so by the time we opened, we had invested eight or 
nine million dollars in the place. 

When we opened, we were ready to make some money. 
We had 840 slot machines and twenty-four tables, and our 
slots were all quarters and dollars, like everybody else at the 
time. But we quickly found out that it wasn’t going to work. 
Within a few months after we opened, at least four other 
casinos opened. We had been told that there could only be 
eight casinos licensed in the area, but there was a tremen¬ 
dous amount of pressure on the state government of Missis¬ 
sippi to create new sites, so they gave in. Eventually, there 
were fourteen casinos where we thought there would be no 
more than eight. 

There was a big bay called Back Bay, and it was suppos¬ 
edly off limits. One day we woke up, and the Gaming Com¬ 
mission had decided to allow casinos in Back Bay, so three 
casinos opened there. The center of the casino business in 
the Gulfport-Biloxi area is in Biloxi, because the shrimp-boat 


238 / MY father’s son 



center was in Biloxi, and that’s where there was a chance for 
them to build more casinos. Gulfport really only had the Port 
of Gulfport and one centralized shrimp-boat harbor that the 
port ran; and that’s where all the shrimp boats were parked, 
so there wasn’t room for a casino there. 

The port authority of Gulfport had a big change during 
the first few months that we were there. When we came, a 
man named Bill Edwards was the port director. He was the 
man that Carter and Green and McDonald had negotiated a 
lease with. Bill Edwards had seen the port lose money for 
many years. At every legislative session, the port used to have 
to go to Jackson, the state capital, and ask the legislature for 
more money. Edwards was sick and tired of doing that, and 
he was on the verge of quitting, but when he found that the 
Grand and ourselves were going to pay him the kind of rent 
that we were forecasting, he knew that he didn’t have to go 
to the legislature anymore—his port could make money. 

It was Bill’s idea to turn the port into as many gaming 
sites as he possibly could, and he drew up plans in that re- 










Down in Mississippi / 239 


gard. He talked to Carter and Green about it, and he talked 
to us, and our initial reaction was that we thought that it was 
going to be bad for us, because it would be too many sites, 
too many casinos. Then we began to think that it would be a 
good idea, because we’d create a center, and, as we knew in 
Reno, people like to move from one casino to another. So 
we think if Bill Edwards had been able to follow his plan, we 
would have been much more successful. Instead, the port 
authority, a five-member board with Bill as the executive 
director, decided that they wanted to make the Port of 
Gulfport as big a commercial port as New Orleans or Mo¬ 
bile. When they got this promise of money coming in from 
gaming, their thinking was not to create more casino sites, 
but to create a bigger, better port. So there was a tussle going 
on between the authority and Bill Edwards, and they fired 
him. 

We got caught in the middle of that argument and lost 
and didn’t even know it was going on until later. They then 
hired a new director from the West Coast. His name was 
Anthony Terroamina, and they gave him instructions that 
the port was to grow—not gaming, but the port. He came up 
with the idea that he would develop the port into what’s 
called intermodal transportation, or container shipping. This 
intermodal plan required that the site the Copa was on be 
eliminated. They began to try to get rid of us even before our 
seven-year lease was up. 

Probably the worst situation that we had was with their 
Gaming Control Board. (They called it something else, but 
it was akin to Nevada’s Gaming Control Board.) They had 
three commissioners. One of the commissioners was a man 
named Ingram. (They called him Captain Ingram.) Ingram 
had an interest in a stevedoring company that did business 
on the port, unloading mostly bananas. It was to Ingram’s 
interest that the port lean in the direction of being a port 


240 / MY father’s son 


and handling freight so his stevedoring company could get 
that business. It took us awhile to figure it out, but we came 
to believe that Ingram would do everything in his power to 
keep us from being successful. 

Shortly after we opened—and I’m fairly positive this was 
at Ingram’s instigation—the Mississippi Gaming Commis¬ 
sion retroactively decided that all casino barges and ships 
had to comply with a regulation stipulating that ships must 
be anchored to withstand 155 mile per hour winds. A couple 
of decades before, hurricane Camille had come ashore in the 
Gulfport area and actually thrown some ships across High¬ 
way 90; but those vessels were, to my understanding, some¬ 
where in the hundred-and-fifty to two-hundred-foot length. 
All the casino barges and ships in Mississippi waters in 1991 
were much bigger than that. Our ship, for example, was 500 
feet long. But Gaming just said all the dockside casinos had 
to comply, period. 

The barges had a much easier time of it than we did, 
because they were anchored in very shallow water. Most had 
a draft of only about six or eight feet, and they pretty much 
were in water of eight feet. The truth is that a lot of those 
barges just sat on the bottom! [laughter] But some of them 
had six inches or a foot of water underneath them. Our ship 
had a draft of twenty-eight feet. The port had dredged a chan¬ 
nel out to thirty-two feet, and that’s how we were able to get 
the ship in there. Where we originally anchored on the end 
of the east pier, we were deep enough, but we had to dredge 
out our permanent anchorage. 

In order to comply with this regulation, we consulted two 
or three engineering firms. The best that they could work 
out for us was that we had to have three anchors on each 
side of the ship and one in front and one in back, and they 
had to be out on an angle that put them beyond our leased 
area. The port, because they saw that this was a way to get 
rid of us, wouldn’t give us the right to put these anchors in. 


Down in Mississippi / 241 


They caught us between the regulations and our leased pre¬ 
mises, and it was a deliberate act on their part to get us to 
leave. 

Gaming drew an arc six hundred miles south of our site. 
Any tropical storm or hurricane that came within this arc 
forced us to call two tugboats from New Orleans to come to 
Gulfport and stand alongside to tow us out of the harbor if 
Gulfport were threatened by the storm. We were forced to 
retain the services of a tugboat company in New Orleans. 
Those tugboats cost nine hundred bucks an hour apiece, but 
every time there was a hurricane in the Caribbean, we had 
to call for both of them. That’s the only way we could stay in 
business. 

Hurricane season runs from June to November, but the 
bulk of the hurricanes usually come between August and Oc¬ 
tober. September is probably the heaviest month. Almost 
every year we had at least one, and sometimes two. One year 
we had three hurricanes. So every time we’d hit one of those, 
it cost us two or three hundred thousand bucks, and we had 
to stop operations. No gambling. We were the only ones down 
there with a ship like this. Everyone else had a barge. This 
was worse than a thorn in our side—it was almost a disaster. 

After we were in business a few months, we weren’t mak¬ 
ing anything near what we thought we were going to be mak¬ 
ing, and we attributed that to the fact that we had a lot more 
competition that we had planned on. Also, our location was 
the worst location on the coast at the time; but I guess we 
got what we paid for. These other people were spending up¬ 
wards of a hundred million dollars or so to get good locations 
and bring in their barges, and we were in there for ten or 
eleven million dollars. Nonetheless, it became imperative 
that we get a better location. 

There was an area in the port called the Horseshoe, the 
land between the east pier and the west pier. The port had 
no use for it, and they dumped a lot of timbers and other 


242 / MY father’s son 


debris there; but it was the area closest to Highway 90, and 
the port had built a road directly from Highway 90 to this 
site. Evidently, they had planned to develop it at some time 
in the past, so they had built this wide, twodane road that 
could accommodate huge trucks. The lanes were twelve feet 
wide, but the road was hardly used at all. 

In our lease, we had the right to move to this site. In 
order to dock the ship there, we would have to build a pier, 
but that was our plan, and the McDonalds agreed that after a 
year or two, when we had acquired enough money through 
the operation of the business, we’d move the ship up to the 
Horseshoe site. The port also wanted us to move there, be¬ 
cause if (when) we left, the pier we had built would belong 
to them. We would have to make it a deep-water anchorage, 
because our ship drew twenty-eight feet, and if we left, it 
could be used by the port to bring in banana boats or other 
big cargo ships. We made an agreement with the McDonalds. 
They would put up half the money, and we’d put up the other 
half, and we’d build a pier at the Horseshoe, pave the park¬ 
ing lot, and move the Copa there. Then we would be at the 
end of a road, only about a quarter mile from Highway 90. 
We negotiated a lease with the port that gave us the road as 
part of our premises. It included a plot of land where the 
road met Highway 90 where we could put up a sign. Prior to 
that, we didn’t have a sign on the road, because we couldn’t 
find a location to put one up, but we had billboards along 
Interstate 10, the main traffic mover east and west. We used 
the slogan: “Gamble on the only luxury cruise ship on the 
Mississippi coast.” 

The ship was an old ship, but it had good lines, and its 
interior was really nice. We painted it white, so it looked 
like a luxury cruise ship. Out on the pier at the new site, we 
built elevators to its main deck. It wasn’t like entering a ship— 
you’d go in a building, get on an elevator, go up a couple of 


Down in Mississippi / 243 


flights to the casino level, and then the elevator would open, 
and you’d just walk right out into the ship, so it was real 
handy to get off and on. It was almost as good as the barges. 
We were limited in our space, however, because at the wid- 
est point, our ship was only eighty feet wide, and it narrowed 
down at each end, especially in the bow. 

Our revenues increased at the new location, but not 
nearly as much as we thought they would. We spent $7.5 
million to build the pier. When we started building it, we 
made two payments to the contractor, then the McDonalds 
said, “We’re not going to help fund this thing, because we 
don’t like the way you operate.” (We’d had arguments about 
a lot of little things.) That left us in a situation where we 
either had to buy them out, sue them, or go into bankruptcy. 
So we filed suit against the McDonalds to force them to put 
up their share of the money, and we discovered that they had 
made provisions for this kind of a situation. They had set up 
a series of corporations and partnerships, and they’d insu¬ 
lated themselves from being financially responsible. All we 
had were two or three dummy corporations or partnerships 
that we could go up against, who had no assets. We found 
out in our lawsuit that unless we were able to “pierce the 
corporate veil,” which is a legalism for getting to the source 
of the money—which is difficult to do—we weren’t going to 
be able to force them to put up that money. 

We had a partnership, and each partner is responsible by 
law for his partner’s debts. We had already contracted with 
Tilly to build this pier, and . . . literally, the McDonalds forced 
us to buy them out. We had to stop construction until we 
negotiated some kind of a buyout, and it was a very difficult 
process. It took several months, because they were unrea¬ 
sonable. 

I was fully prepared to put the Copa into bankruptcy, 
and I hired two bankruptcy attorneys, one in Nevada, and 
one in Mississippi. I put the Chapter 11 reorganization pa- 


244 / my father’s son 


pers through the bankruptcy attorneys and sent a copy to the 
McDonalds that told them that this was my answer to their 
actions, and it brought them around somewhat. We negotb 
ated a deal where we would pay them $3.5 million, which is 
the amount of money that they had in the deal, giving them 
$1.5 million of stock in the Sands Regency as part of the 
purchase price. They also insisted that we buy their corpora- 
tion, Gulfside Casino, Inc., and if we bought the corpora¬ 
tion, we would obligate ourselves to make the payments to 
Carter and Green that they had negotiated in order to get 
Carter and Green bought out. So we would have that liabil¬ 
ity, as well. That was originally $6 million, but probably down 
to five million by then—they’d made some payments. 

I was alone at the time. Bengtson had left me again, be¬ 
cause he had an opportunity to do something that was better 
than what he could do with us, and I had absolutely no idea 
which way to go. I took my family and went to Maui and sat 
on the beach for several days and took walks and tried to 
figure out how to extricate myself and my company from this 
terrible problem that we had. In the end, because our com¬ 
pany had cash, I went ahead with the deal. Our company in 
Reno was still doing as well as it had before. This was in 
1994, and although the future didn’t look good, we still had 
a cash flow of eight to ten million dollars a year. I had to 
build the pier and move the ship, because I was convinced 
that we couldn’t ever be successful without it. 

What finally tilted the balance for me to go in that di¬ 
rection was that I had just completed negotiations for a sale 
of property just north of Circus Circus on Virginia Street, 
property that my father had begun to acquire in the 1960s, 
when he was thinking about building a casino there. We had 
never done anything with it, and we had practically a whole 
block between Sixth and Seventh Street, and between Vir¬ 
ginia and Sierra. When the Legacy project was put together, 
Circus Circus felt that they needed additional garage space, 


Down in Mississippi / 245 


and I was able to complete a deal with Clyde Turner, who at 
that time was president of Circus Circus. I sold that property 
to Circus Circus for $6 million cash. 

We could have had a huge tax hill on the sale, because 
five million of it was capital gain, and we would have had to 
pay 20 percent of that as tax. However, our tax attorney 
showed us how to take that six million and invest it in Mis- 
sissippi, and we didn’t have to pay that 20 percent tax. So, 
partially because we had that $6 million sale, and we needed 
to save the tax on it, I decided to go ahead with the project 
in Mississippi. That meant, with all of our costs and expenses 
combined, we were by then into the project for about $24 
million. 

We weren’t doing as well as we should have, so Bengtson, 
while he was still down there, hired a man named Dennis 
Connally, who did a very creditable job of managing the place 
for us. Also, I finally broke down and hired a marketing di¬ 
rector, Neil Narter, who’d been in the marketing department 
at Fitzgerald’s. Even before we bought out the McDonalds, 
he got a good bus program going for us. We never did get our 
air charter off the ground. 

We decided that we had to be a local casino. It was very 
hard for us to appeal to tourists, because there were all these 
other casinos on Highway 90 and in Bay St. Louis. Our whole 
thrust, except for the buses, had to be towards local people. 
Neil understood that, and he created a number of programs. 

Gulfport was an area that had a large number of retired 
people, a lot of ex-government employees. Mississippi has a 
number of military installations, and a lot of military people 
retired there, because it was a very reasonable place to live. 
Because of all the retired people living there, Neil started 
some senior-citizen programs, and they helped a great deal. 

One of our most successful programs was one where, three 
days a week, anybody that was fifty-five or older would get a 


246 / MY father’s son 


free breakfast. We had enlarged our snack bar dining area, 
and we had also taken another portion of the ship and put in 
a buffet line. There was a huge kitchen on that ship, but it 
didn’t meet the code—the ceilings were too low. However, 
we were able to go out in the community and find restau¬ 
rants that had big enough kitchens where we could prepare 
food, bring it on board the ship, and serve it. We contracted 
with two or three different restaurants, and that’s how we 
ran our buffet. The buffet wasn’t costing us any money, and 
we weren’t losing any money on the snack bar, either, so we 
were able to maintain the food operation. 

We used that senior-citizen promotion to get people in. 
Three or four hundred seniors would come in three days a 
week. We started serving about eight o’clock in the morn¬ 
ing, because most of those people got up early, and a number 
of them would stay after breakfast. We’d do little bingo games, 
and we stole an idea from John Ascuaga’s Nugget—we did 
house giveaways, because you could buy a house on a lot down 
there for about forty-five or fifty thousand. The house give¬ 
aways worked out good. We did car giveaways, but the other 
casinos started to do a lot of car giveaways too, so they weren’t 
quite as popular as our house giveaway. 

Neil came up with a program that we’ve used at the Sands 
a couple of times, and we’re going to continue to use it, and 
that is the “Bye-Bye Landlord” program. The way that works 
is, first of all, you have to join the slot club. Then, every time 
you buy change or hit a jackpot or go to the restaurant or 
make any number of transactions in the casino, you get a 
ticket, and that ticket is deposited in a drum, and then there’s 
a drawing. Usually, you have a drawing every sixty to ninety 
days, and the winner of that drawing gets a year’s free rent. 
We pay a year, up to some maximum amount, or we make 
the winner’s house payments for a year in that program. Neil 
instituted that program down in Gulfport. 


Down in Mississippi / 247 


We continued to be harassed. We had a clause in the 
lease that said we couldn’t sit on the bottom. Mr. Terroamina, 
the new port director, decided that our ship was sitting on 
the bottom. He hired divers without our knowledge to go 
down and check it from time to time, then he’d come up 
with a report and say, “On such and such a time, your ship 
touched bottom, so you’re going to have to dredge out from 
under the ship, or we’re going to cancel your lease.” 

Worse than that, Terroamina would call up Ingram and 
say, “Look, they’re sitting on the bottom.” 

Ingram would go to the gaming board and say, “Take their 
license away. They’re sitting on the bottom.” 

So we continually fought that battle. I can’t tell you how 
many times we had to bring in dredging outfits to dredge out 
under the ship, and they’re not cheap. If I remember right, to 
dredge out from under a ship while it’s sitting there cost some- 
thing like thirty or forty dollars a yard; and if we had to move 
the ship, we had to close the gaming operations while we 
moved. 

Then they resorted to a strategem .... Chiquita Bananas 
had the pier just to the west of us, and the freighters that 
came in there to unload bananas had what they call side- 
thrusters on them. When they’d come up to a pier, they’d get 
within thirty or forty feet of the pier, and then they’d turn 
their side-thrusters on. They were kind of like a jet on the 
other side of the ship, and the thrusters would just push their 
ship over to the pier, and then they’d tie up. When they used 
those side thrusters, they would churn up a lot of the bot¬ 
tom; and at Terroamina’s suggestion (we believed), they’d 
come in and use those side-thrusters sooner than they needed 
to, and we’d get a lot of silt piled up under our ship. 

We continually fought that battle. We were getting ready 
to file suit against the port, and the port knew, because 
Gulfport was a small community, and you couldn’t keep any- 


248 / MY father’s son 


thing secret. So the port beat us to the punch. They filed a 
suit against us, asking for us to be evicted because we were 
sitting on the bottom, and various other charges that were 
not true. 

They wanted to file a suit first, because they wanted to 
get us into what in Mississippi is called a chancery court. A 
chancery court is supposed to deal only in disputes that have 
to do with equity, and in Mississippi the judges in a chancery 
court do not even have to be lawyers. Anybody can run for 
the office. Through our legal firm in California, Latham and 
Watkins, we were directing our Mississippi lawyers in how to 
handle the legal problems we had in Mississippi. We hired 
PhelpS'Dunbar, a national law firm that had headquarters in 
Jackson, Mississippi, at the urging of Latham and Watkins, 
because they said we needed good counsel. So we wound up 
at one time, sad to say, with fourteen lawyers on our payroll 
because of the various problems that we had with Gaming, 
with the port, with Carter and Green, and with the 
McDonalds. 

In chancery court the judge didn’t care about the law. He 
just looked at it and said, “Well, this is what I think.” Every 
time we went to chancery court, we lost. Eventually, Carter 
and Green sued us in chancery court. The port sued us in 
chancery court. Some subcontractor that did a job for us that 
we weren’t satisfied with sued us in chancery court. 

Then the Army Corps of Engineers made us take all our 
dredgedmp bottom to an approved dumpsite, because they 
said it was contaminated. The trucking company that we 
hired charged us to take the materials to an approved 
dumpsite, but they dumped it somewhere else, and the corps 
found out about it, and they sued us. [laughter] Then we sued 
the trucking company, and then the trucking company sued 
us, and we wound up in chancery court again! So we had a 
series of lawsuits to contend with, besides everything else 
that was going on. 



Down in Mississippi / 249 


The port won its suit against us in chancery court, but we 
knew there was at least one way to keep them from forcing 
us out of there. Our Los Angeles attorneys advised us to put 
Gulfside Casino, Inc., which was the corporation that we 
had bought from the McDonalds, into bankruptcy. Going 
into bankruptcy would keep us sitting where we were until 
we went through the reorganization procedure, and the port 
could not evict us, because every time we’d lose a case, we’d 
appeal it. We thought that once we got up to a court that 
was run by real judges, we might win one of those suits. . . 
but the appeal process takes forever. Months and months and 
months went by, and we were hanging by our thumbs, so to 
speak. 

Once in bankruptcy, we said Gulfside Casino, Inc. didn’t 
have the money to pay Carter and Green, and we stopped 
paying them what we owed them. They sued us in chancery 
court. Their note was against Gulfside, Inc., and we had 
bought out that corporation and put its assets into our en¬ 
tity, Gulfside Casino Partnership. Gulfside, Inc. had no as¬ 
sets, but chancery court still ruled that we owed Carter and 
Green their money. Not only did we owe them that money, 
but the ruling was that after we paid all our expenses at the 
end of every month, whatever loose cash we had, we had to 
give it to Carter and Green until we paid them off! [laugh¬ 
ter] 

We resorted to a strategy of charging the partnership with 
services that the Sands was performing. We also made a deal 
with the tugboat operator over in Louisiana, and we trans¬ 
ferred a million dollars earmarked for tugboat rental to a bank 
in Louisiana, so we kept from having to pay Carter and Green 
anything. 

There was always something you had to be concerned 
about, and we spent more time working on all these prob¬ 
lems than we did running our business. The first general 


250 / MY father’s son 


manager that Jon Bengtson hired, Dennis Connally, wanted 
to move back to Nevada after he was in Mississippi a year 
and a half, and Neil was doing such a good job with market¬ 
ing that I decided to make him general manager. Neil kept 
the place together for us. He did a great job. Without Neil, 
we’d have been in bankruptcy. (Come to think of it, we were 
in bankruptcy.) We kind of kept him isolated and tried to 
keep him focused on running the business, and he reported 
directly to me. I gave him a lot of latitude. I could see he was 
doing a good job. 

The only good thing that came out of Carter and Green’s 
business was their slot manager, John Mott. He was a very 
conscientious, hardworking slot manager. He knew the slot 
business, and he created good relationships with the major 
slot suppliers, IGT and the other companies down there. 

We had started with quarters and dollars, but we had to 
get a whole bunch of nickel machines in there and get rid of 
most of our dollars, because with our local play we needed 
mostly nickels and quarters. We didn’t have a lot of video 
machines, and as videos became more popular, we had to 
bring in video equipment. So we had this huge shift in the 
gaming area. 

We also had to cut down the number of table games, and 
I think we wound up with about sixteen rather than twenty- 
four. We had to lower our limits, and we had to get rid of 
John Brevick. John and I had several disagreements, because 
he felt that we should be aiming for high rollers and we should 
have high limits. Well, it just wasn’t going to work. I was 
sure it wasn’t going to work. All the other casinos quickly 
had to shift their whole focus also. It’s not a real high-roller 
area. 

I don’t know why anybody would take a summer vaca¬ 
tion there, but we found that July was our best month. There 
were two good months down there, February and July—Feb¬ 
ruary because of Mardi Gras. Every little town has its own 


Down in Mississippi / 251 


Mardi Gras celebration, and Gulfport has one. New Orleans 
has the big one. Fat Tuesday is the biggest day of the year. 
All the businesses close, and they have a parade down the 
middle of the main street. Leading up to the Mardi Gras they 
have these huge parties and dinners. It’s just a huge event 
that we knew nothing about before we went down there, but 
we took advantage of it. It’s great for the gaming business. 

In the end we wound up doing twenty-four or twenty- 
five million dollars a year in gross gaming, but our nut (our 
overhead) was about fifty thousand a day, so that’s a million 
and a half dollars a month. If we hadn’t had to fight all the 
legal battles, and if we hadn’t had Carter and Green to fight, 
and if we didn’t have the problems with the Gaming Com¬ 
mission because of Ingram, we would still be there. It wouldn’t 
have been a really good investment, but we would have made 
a return on our money. We made a niche for ourselves. It is 
still one of the best local casinos down there, and they’re still 
doing the same amount of money that we were doing. 

We sold out in 1998. New Year’s Eve, again, was the day 
we made the deal. A man named Harvey, a retired air-force 
general, became head of the Gaming Commission. Carter 
and Green appealed to him through some friends of his that 
it was unfair that they were denied a license. He allowed 
them, even though they were not actively running a casino, 
to become licensed. Once they became licensed, then we 
were able to talk about selling the casino to them, because it 
became apparent to us that our troubles were almost insur¬ 
mountable. It looked like the best thing to do would be to 
get out of Mississippi. 



23 

900 

Pound 

Gorilla 


AFTER FERENC SZONY came on 
board with the Sands Regent, he looked 
at the Copa and said, “This is not good 
for the company. It has depressed the 
stock. It’s a no-win situation, and we 
should try to make a deal with somebody 
and try to get rid of this thing.” So we 
sold the Copa to Carter and Green. They 
didn’t have enough money to pay for it, 
but it was obvious to us, because of all 
the political problems that we had, that 
local people had to own that casino, so 
we made a deal with them. They pay us 2 
percent of the gross gaming revenues on 
a monthly basis. They have to send us 
the form that they file with the state of 
Mississippi, so that we can verify their 
gross gaming revenues. We have a mini¬ 
mum payment coming from them of 
about $8.5 million, based on that 2 per¬ 
cent figure, with a maximum price of 
twenty million, depending on a certain 
number of factors. As long as they stay 
in business, they pay us. Ultimately, it 
would end once we got $20 million, but 
it could end sooner. 

It just shows you what can happen 
when you’re a native of a state and have 
access to public officials. Mississippi li¬ 
censed these two fellows, even though 
they had no operating casino, and nei¬ 
ther Nevada, to my knowledge, nor Mis¬ 
sissippi, nor any other state, ever licensed 
anybody who didn’t have an operation! 
[laughter] So these guys were licensed and 
ready to go. They knew all the players. 



254 / PETE CLADIANOS 


Our original reason for going to Mississippi was so we 
could have a secondary stock offering of a multi-venue op¬ 
eration. Our investment bankers were telling us a couple of 
good quarters were all we needed, and we could do an offer¬ 
ing. We could get that stock price up to the mid twenties, 
maybe even more than that, and all shareholders would ben¬ 
efit. That did not come about, because the Mississippi opera¬ 
tion didn’t do well. If we’d have been able to open in May or 
June like we planned, we’d have been all right. I liken it to 
reaching for the brass ring and falling off your horse, [laugh¬ 
ter] It was a real shocker to us, and it was so difficult, because 
we were so very, very close to success. 

Sometime in 1993 the Eldorado and Circus Circus jointly 
announced that they were going to open a project on the 
land that the Eldorado owned between them and Circus Cir¬ 
cus facing Virginia Street, between Fourth and Fifth Street 
and as far west as West Street. The initial announcement 
was that they were going to build a themed casino, and it 
sounded like it was going to be something that would help 
Reno a great deal. As I recall, the theme was going to be 
Spanish conquistadors and feature Spanish galleons, maybe 
something floating in the water, similar to what Steve Wynn 
had done down in Vegas. Everybody was encouraged, because 
we could see that Reno was falling further and further be¬ 
hind. Las Vegas was getting fabulous casinos out on the Strip, 
there was gaming spreading all around the country, and we 
knew that Reno had to do something to stay competitive. 

Our business in Reno had started to erode somewhat, and 
our feeling was that the big reason was because the town 
generally was eroding. In our case, in retrospect, what we 
found out was that our competitors were taking away our 
best customers. Many of them had put in slot card systems, 
and they had slot clubs. They were promoting their best cus- 


900 Pound Gorilla / 255 


tomers, and some of their best customers were ours, because 
a lot of customers are not loyal to just one casino. 

We didn’t have a slot club, and we were not promoting 
like other casinos were and identifying our best players, so 
they were taking our best players away from us. The Eldorado 
was probably the biggest culprit, but it took us awhile to re¬ 
alize that, because we were so heavily involved in Missis¬ 
sippi. The Copa took my mind away from our situation in 
Reno. 

Looking back on it, we were kind of in a fool’s paradise. 
We kept thinking, “Boy, they’re going to build this beautiful, 
themed casino between the Eldorado and Circus Circus, 
within walking distance of our place. They’re going to create 
so much business that they’re not going to be able to handle 
it, and here we are, so close to them. It’s just got to rub off on 
us.” 

Circus Circus was committing three hundred and fifty to 
four hundred million dollars, and New York New York, a 
hugely successful casino on the Strip was built for that 
amount, so we felt that we were going to get something like 
that here in Reno, and it was going to be great for everybody. 
Our thinking was, “Let them build that and see how things 
go, and if it works out like we think it will, then we’ll expand 
our place, and maybe we’ll try to turn our place into a themed 
casino, as well.” (We knew that was the direction that the 
gaming business was going in.) 

Then we started hearing that Circus Circus and Eldorado 
might do some other theme. They weren’t sure what it was 
going to be, and then they began to talk about a mining 
theme. When I heard that, I said, “Well, that sounds to me 
like something that’s been done and overdone so damn many 
times. It’s just a Western theme.” And Western has been just 
beat to death, especially in the state of Nevada. I was really 
disappointed when I heard that. 


256 / PETE CLADIANOS 


They had started construction, as I recall, before they 
really knew what kind of a theme they were going to have. I 
can’t look into their minds and see exactly what happened, 
but we were hearing that they had started the foundation, 
and they were putting the steel up and so on, but they still 
didn’t know what they were going to do. 

Building the infamous “skyways” over Fourth Street re¬ 
quired special permission from the city. The Silver Legacy 
partners got their lawyers to work, and they went far back in 
the city’s records. I don’t know whether this is true or not, 
but the story that they came out with, and the city attorney 
agreed with, was that the “air rights” over the streets around 
their properties had never been deeded to the city. They ar¬ 
gued that the air rights over the streets running between their 
three casinos, the Tri-Properties, were theirs, because air rights 
belonged to adjoining property owners. The city attorney 
bought it, and they got the city council to agree. 

The Silver Legacy represented that they merely wanted 
to build crossovers—they said, “Look, the Sands, the Fla¬ 
mingo, and Harrah’s have crossovers.” Well, it’s true. We have 
one across Third Street, but we actually own the air rights 
over Third Street. 

When we bought the property from the railroad just south 
of the tracks, they sold us the air rights over Third Street— 
they owned the air rights over Third Street and over the 
railroad tracks, besides the real estate. Because we purchased 
those air rights, we can build across there all we want. So we 
had paid for our air rights, but the Tri-Properties had not. 
But that’s not the real issue. 

The real issue is that the city allowed them to build across 
the city streets with not just a crossover like we have, or like 
Harrah’s has, or like the Flamingo has. They built over prac¬ 
tically all of adjoining Sierra Street and Fourth Street. They 
paid nothing for the air rights, and they pay no rent, and they 


900 Pound Gorilla / 257 


have restaurants, and all sorts of facilities—stores, and what 
have you. That above-street construction tied all three of 
these properties together, so once somebody gets into one, 
it’s easy to go from one to another without having to go back 
out on the street. Studies have shown that the average num¬ 
ber of casinos that people visit when they come to Reno is 
about three, so once they get somebody in there, it almost 
means that no one else in town gets any of that business— 
especially in the wintertime, when we need business the most, 
because people hesitate to go out if it’s cold or snowing or 
inclement weather. 

Because the city allowed them to do that, that gave them 
a clear and distinct advantage over the rest of us in down¬ 
town Reno, and it really hurt. What hurt even more than 
that, though, was this mining theme that they came out with. 
I’m sure they didn’t do this on purpose, because they wanted 
it to succeed even more than we did, but Sam Fairchild and 
whatever he’s supposed to represent—his silver legacy and 
so on—all just fell flat on its face. The mining rig itself fell 
flat on its face. If you look at their advertising and promo¬ 
tions, they don’t even talk about that anymore. You got to 
give them credit. It didn’t take them long to realize that they 
were barking up the wrong tree, and they just forgot all about 
Fairchild and the mining rig. 

The Silver Legacy did very poorly when they first opened. 
When they saw that their themed casino wasn’t working, 
they began to go for whatever business was available, as 
quickly as they possibly could. What they could snatch 
quickly was the charter bus business, the charter airplane 
business, and the package business—all three of the busi¬ 
nesses that we depended on for 60 percent of our business. 

Here was this brand new place with seventeen hundred 
rooms and eight restaurants, or whatever they had, and I 
thought, “Well, they’re the nine-hundred-pound gorilla.” 
When they got into that market, it didn’t matter what rate 


258 / PETE CLADIANOS 


they had to quote. They went out and got all that business. If 
we were quoting, say, a twenty-doliar rate, and they came in 
at an eighteen-dollar rate, or even a twenty-dollar rate, where 
are you going to stay? A brand new place, or our place? The 
guys that operate charter businesses are interested in selling 
as many people as they can. So if they can come in and offer 
a customer a room in a hotebcasino that’s brand new, for the 
same price or a lesser price than an older casino, nine times 
out of ten, the customer’s going to take the new one. 

I believe our drop in revenue resulted from the fact that 
the Silver Legacy didn’t have a workable theme, and they 
did not bring any new people into town to speak of. There- 
fore, all they did was rob the rest of us, and when they did 
that, every hotel-casino in downtown Reno really felt it. 

It took them two to three years or more to figure out how 
to overcome that, but they finally got into the entertain¬ 
ment field in a big way, and they do have some real good 
entertainment, which Reno hadn’t seen for a long time. They 
put a lot of extra stuff on weekends that works, but the amount 
of people that come to Reno today is about the same as it 
was five years ago. 

We’ve had an erosion of people that come to Reno, be¬ 
cause Indian gaming and Las Vegas are hurting us so badly. 
To counter some of that erosion, the Tri-Properties and the 
two guys down on South Virginia Street, the Peppermill and 
the Atlantis, are bringing some new customers in, but Reno 
still doesn’t have an increase. So, yes, we’ve covered the ero¬ 
sion that happened, but we’ve only come back to where we 
were. I think we’re getting about five million people a year, 
and that’s the same number we’ve been getting all these years. 
We haven’t made any headway. 

When they were bringing this project in, the Silver 
Legacy people did the same thing that all of us in Reno have 
done in the past. You work very closely with the city attorney’s 


900 Pound Gorilla / 259 


office to get them on board first, and then you ferret out the 
councilmen on a one-on-one basis, and you sell them on your 
project. There’s nothing wrong with that, except the coun¬ 
cil fails to recognize that there’s other businesses in town 
that need to be considered. The Eldorado and Circus Circus 
have much greater resources than the rest of us, and they 
directed all their efforts towards that council person to get 
their project passed. No one is there to represent the rest of 
the community. 

MGM did that, as well. I know this is true, because I’ve 
talked to people that were at a meeting held at the Palace 
Club. (I think Silvio Petricciani knew somebody.) MGM 
brought Cary Grant up here, and he sat with the city coun¬ 
cil, and it was a wonderful thing for those guys to be able to 
sit there and talk to Cary Grant. 

What the Legacy did was simply overwhelm the council 
with “facts” about how this was going to be wonderful. They 
sold it, and they sold us, too. We said, “Well, this huge, 
themed casino is going to be wonderful.” 

Almost everybody was taken off guard by the Silver 
Legacy’s “passageways” over the streets. They didn’t really 
describe exactly what they were going to do. If the council 
had asked some questions and tried to put some parameters 
on the thing and were thinking about the rest of the town, 
they might have said, “Well, look, how many of these are 
you going to have, and how big are they going to be?” But 
once the Silver Legacy got their theory across, and the coun¬ 
cil accepted it, then it was just a question of schmoozing the 
building department. The city attorney was sold already. 

When the Silver Legacy opened in 1995, they quickly 
found out that their theme just was not working, and they 
jumped into our line of business—charter planes, packages, 
and buses. It was very difficult for us to fight back, because, 
you could only cut your room rates so far. They also had a 


260 / PETE CLADIANOS 


great advantage in the food business, because they bad so 
many more restaurants than we did. 

Once the Silver Legacy got customers into their place, 
we never saw them at all. Our fiscal year closes June 30, and 
the year that began July 1, 1995 and closed June 30 of 1996 
was the first in our history that we ever had a loss for the 
year. We lost several million dollars. Before the Legacy 
opened, we had an occupancy of close to 90 percent, but 
were down to 82 percent in the year that ended June 30, 
1996. Worse than that, in trying to compete, our average 
room rate dropped three or four dollars, down to around 
twenty-eight dollars average daily rate. Lower occupancy also 
made our gaming revenue go down. And then we were caught 
in this situation where our major competitors had slot card 
systems and slot-promo programs, where they were market¬ 
ing directly to their better players, whom they had identified 
through their slot club. 

It became apparent to us that if we were to survive, we 
were going to have to get a slot card system, begin a cus¬ 
tomer database, get some of our old customers back, and cre¬ 
ate new customers. We were going to have to get new busi¬ 
ness to replace those customers that we’d lost to the Legacy 
and to Circus Circus, and there was only one type available: 
that was local business. 

It had been my practice in past years not to pursue local 
business, but now it became apparent that the best source of 
new customers would be local people. They would be new 
customers, because we had always had such a low profile in 
Reno that a lot of local people had never really known we 
existed. We began to make some moves in that direction as 
quickly as we possibly could. 

We got a slot club established, and we got a slot card 
system. Those things take time and they’re very expensive— 
you can spend a million dollars or more. Then, once you 
have everything up and running, you have to build your da- 


900 Pound Gorilla / 261 


tabase, so it’s not very effective for quite some time. It takes 
a while before you can market to those people in your data- 
base that are your good customers, and if you wind up with 
fifteen or twenty percent of the total base being good cus¬ 
tomers, you’re lucky. 

One of the things that attracted me to Ferenc Szony was 
he had done this kind of thing at both Hiltons. He’d started 
from scratch and developed a local business, so he knew how 
to do it. Ferenc came to work for the Sands Regent in De¬ 
cember of 1997. He and I had long conversations about the 
problems that the Sands had and how to solve them. We 
were just being outgunned in the tourist business, and Reno’s 
tourist business was really flat anyway. 

Ferenc felt that the first thing we had to do was some¬ 
thing I didn’t see—that was to “fix” our parking. We had 
adequate parking in our property, because we’ve got eight 
acres, but it was a little parking lot here and a little parking 
lot there, and our parking garage entrance was difficult to 
find. We’ve also got two and a half acres just south of the 
railroad tracks with a crossover to walk into our casino, but 
it’s really not handy, and it’s difficult to find. The public 
doesn’t want to have to look around for things—they want 
things to hit them right in the face. 

Ferenc said, “We have to create a big parking lot, and we 
have to put it at our front door.” Our front door is really 
Arlington and Fourth Street, and so that meant tearing down 
those buildings over there, the original motel and the origi¬ 
nal little casino that we had broken into pieces and leased 
out: we had a cocktail lounge there, a Blimpies, a liquor store, 
a Denny’s, and so on. It was difficult for my sister and me to 
swallow, because these buildings were still making us money, 
and we still had a lot of call for our motel rooms. Many people 
prefer to stay in a motel. They like the idea of parking their 
car right in front of their rooms, or the fact that they don’t 
have to go through a hallway or up an elevator. We had a 


262 / PETE CLADIANOS 


swimming pool there too, and we had customers that had 
been coming to the Sands for years and liked the fact that 
their room was adjacent to the pool. It took a great deal of 
courage to say, “Well, we’re going to tear all this stuff down.” 
They were all generating revenue, and we had to really do 
some soul searching before Ferenc swung us around to his 
view. 

We finally bit the bullet and tore them down. Now, of 
course, we’re happy as hell that we did. Now we have this 
huge parking lot that’s easily accessible, where local people 
can come in and out. All the advertising that we might have 
done, and all the ferreting out of our database and finding 
good customers, would have come to naught if they weren’t 
able to just drive up and park. Surface parking always beats 
garage parking. You can paint parking garages, light them up 
good, make wide aisles, and so on, but there’s still a great 
number of people that just don’t want to park in a garage, if 
they can park on the surface. 

Then we did a lot of direct marketing, where we sent 
direct mail to our good customers, which is what most major 
hotehcasinos do nowadays. We’d invite them to special 
events, and we tiered our customers. We have A, B, and C 
customers. Our A customers, just like in almost any other 
major hotebcasino, are comped completely, and the B cus¬ 
tomer gets a little less, and the C customer gets a little less. 
We had to develop that whole system, and we had never 
done that before, but Ferenc had done it twice, once at the 
Flamingo and once at the Reno Hilton. He had also worked 
with the Hilton in Las Vegas, and they’d done it, so he had 
that experience in his background. That’s how we slowly 
began to pull ourselves up by our bootstraps. But our hotel 
still suffered, because here’s this 900-pound gorilla, the Sil¬ 
ver Legacy tied to the Eldorado and Circus Circus, with all 
these rooms, with second-level, block-long bridges. 


900 Pound Gorilla / 263 


The City Center Pavilion also helped the gorilla. It gave 
them a place to do a lot of exhibits and other types of things. 
It’s the building on Fourth and Center Streets. That helped 
them, because once they realized that entertainment was the 
way they were going to get people in their place, they began 
using their Grand Exposition Hall as an entertainment venue 
and the City Center Pavilion for expositions and other things. 
Then, as they grew slightly less competitive in room rates, 
we got some of the room business back that we had initially 
lost. 

The year that ended June 30, 1995, our company showed 
an eleven million dollar loss, but it wasn’t due to business at 
the Sands in Reno. Our operating profit in Reno for that 
year was still pretty good, because the Legacy hadn’t opened 
yet. We took that big loss because of Mississippi. The follow- 
ing year’s loss was due to losing so many customers to the 
Legacy and others. 

I would like to say that 1995-1996 was the worst year we 
ever had, but the next year probably was just as bad, maybe 
even a little worse. We had two really bad years. But by 1998 
we had started to turn it around. Ferenc came to work in 
December of 1997, and we showed a pick-up after he was 
here just four or five months. 




“Don’t 
Want 
to be 

Panhandled” 


WE HAVE THIS ongoing problem that 
just becomes worse and worse. Several 
years ago John Cavanaugh, who owns the 
Gold Dust Motel on Fourth and Vine, do¬ 
nated to the Catholic Church a piece of 
property just to the west of us on Third 
Street, between Ralston and Washington 
Street. It’s just a couple of doors down 
from the southwest corner of our prop¬ 
erty. On that piece, St. Vincent’s has built 
a soup kitchen, where they serve break¬ 
fast and lunch at no charge to whoever 
walks up. All the homeless people in 
town are fully aware that they can get a 
free meal there. 

We’re the casino that’s affected the 
most by what happens when they serve 
breakfast, around seven or eight o’clock 
in the morning. There’s this huge stream 
of literally hundreds of homeless people. 
Some of them are belligerent types, and 
all of them, almost without exception, are 
dressed in a fashion that puts fear in 
people, especially middle-aged ladies, 
which is a good part of our clientele. They 
stream down Third Street to the west and 
line up across the street. Many times the 
line extends over to our side of the street, 
and they sit on cars in our parking lot 
that belong to our guests, and then, after 
they finish, they stream back on Third 
Street. It starts again around eleven- 
thirty or so in the morning, when they 
come over for lunch. So we have that 
kind of disruption .... Besides that, on 
the corner of West and Third Street, 
there’s a place that’s called the Gospel 


266 / MY father’s son 


Mission, and there they serve dinner, and it’s a gathering 
place in the evenings between four and five o’clock, when 
the same homeless people gather to eat dinner. 

The shortest way for our customers to get to the down- 
town center is down Third Street, and that means that most 
of them pass all these homeless people. We have been put- 
ting up with this situation for years and years. The council 
has made several attempts to alleviate this problem, but I 
don’t think it’s been uppermost in their minds, to say the 
least, [laughter] Not only is that bad for us, but it’s bad for 
the whole downtown area, because these people, when they’re 
not walking back and forth to eat or to sleep at the Gospel 
Mission, are wandering around town. These are the same 
people that you’ll find up and down Virginia Street and on 
Center Street and along Second Street and sleeping in the 
parks. It is a problem that has really hurt downtown Reno, 
and it is probably one of the reasons why the Peppermill and 
the Atlantis and maybe the Nugget have done so well in 
locations away from downtown. We have comment cards, 
and innumerable times people will write on a comment card, 
“Well, we really like your place, and we like downtown Reno, 
but we just don’t want to be panhandled. We don’t like look- 
ing at these bums, and we fear for ourselves and for our safety 
much of the time.” So we’ve lost people, and we continue to 
lose people to this problem. 

We’ve done everything under the sun, and so have the 
Hilton and the Eldorado and Harrah’s, the CabNeva, and 
other places. All of us have tried in every way we could to 
get the council to solve this problem, and the council has 
simply failed. In my view, the reason they’ve failed is that 
they just don’t have the guts, and they haven’t had the guts— 
not only this council that we have now, but for the last ten, 
fifteen years. You’ve got to make a decision that these people 


Don’t Want to be Panhandled / 267 


are going to be moved to some particular site, and you have 
to stand the heat of residents of that area of the city, when 
ever it is you’re going to put them, because no one really 
wants this group in their part of town. 

Las Vegas established a facility out in North Las Vegas, 
about a mile away from downtown Vegas. They bought an 
old Safeway store that was closed, and they created this drop- 
in center. They have beds; they have showers; they have tele¬ 
phones for these people to use; they have newspapers there. 
They can come in and take a shower; they can get some clean 
clothes; they can call from there and get a job. People that 
want to help themselves have a place to go for help, because 
when you think about it, if you’re looking for a job, and you 
don’t have a permanent address or a phone number that you 
can leave, how are you going to find a job? 

The business people in downtown Reno have been urg¬ 
ing the city to do something like Vegas has for many years, 
and the city has yet to do it. One reason that this has not 
happened is the St. Vincent’s Society. From what I know, St. 
Vincent’s reports their philanthropy to the Catholic Church, 
and they tell them how many people they have fed every 
day; and the more people they feed every day, the more suc¬ 
cessful they look. They get a good portion of their funding 
from the Catholic Church. 

I’ve had many conversations with city officials and with 
the city council about St. Vincent’s kitchen. St. Vincent’s 
has been the real stumbling block in trying to get one loca¬ 
tion where the Gospel Mission would go, where St. Vincent’s 
would go, where you could have a drop-in center, so that the 
homeless people would have a better facility. They have just 
simply not cooperated, and if you were going to put this drop- 
in center some place—Sage Street, or anywhere you want— 
and you still had St. Vincent’s over here, you’d only have the 


268 / MY father’s son 


problem half solved. A lot of homeless people simply wouldn’t 
go to the remote drop-in center, because it’s easier to walk to 
St. Vincent’s. 

The city attorney has been less than helpful in this prob¬ 
lem. Her big fear—at least from my observation—is that the 
city is going to get sued if it takes action. She has always 
come down on the side of the homeless: “Well, you can’t 
arrest these people. We don’t have any place to put them, 
and we don’t want to send them to jail.” If we had a drop-in 
center, it’s been her position that the police could insist that 
they go to the center, and she would give them more author¬ 
ity to do that kind of thing. As it is now, the police usually 
do not bother these people unless they become really obnox¬ 
ious. I know they roust them out of the parks once in 
awhile .... and the problem just festers. 

Mr. Pilzner, a city councilman whom I backed, promised 
the business people downtown that he would help with this. 
We had the Sage Street site for a homeless center, and it 
appeared that we were going to be able to put that plan to¬ 
gether, but we needed the vote of the council. Pilzner orga¬ 
nized enough opposition on the council to kill the Sage Street 
site. 

Then there was the Project Restart program. That group 
was trying to get a drop-in center, and maybe they ruffled 
some feathers. I’m not quite sure what happened. All I know 
is that every time you try to put this center some place, the 
council simply can’t stand up to the opposition. They’re tell¬ 
ing me now that they’re going to take another run at the 
Sage Street site. 

St. Vincent’s is still as intractable as ever. What I get 
from third parties is that if they agree to move their facility, 
they are demanding a brand new kitchen and a much bigger 
facility. I’ve offered in the past that if they would move, our 
company would buy their current property. I also offered a 


Don’t Want to be Panhandled / 269 


site, the old El Rancho Motel down on East Fourth Street 
that we owned for many years. I said, “Here, I’ll give you this 
site if you’ll just move these people down there.” But some¬ 
body across Wells Avenue, a Realtor who’s had that property 
for sale for years, went down to the council and told them 
that he had a big project all set to go there, and the council, 
just like they did with the crossovers for the Legacy, simply 
took the man at his word and said, “OK, fine. We don’t want 
to put a homeless shelter here, because it will ruin this hig 
project.” The project never happened. 

That is an area where this drop-in center would work. In 
the early 1950s, the first urban renewal area in Reno was 
bounded by Wells Avenue to the west, Seventh Street or 
Eighth Street to the north, as far east as Morrill or one of 
those other streets down there, and Fourth Street to the south. 
Urban Renewal went in and bought most of that land up. At 
that time it was a lower-class residential area. There were 
little homes where people lived, and they tore them all down 
and put the land up for sale, just like has happened down¬ 
town with redevelopment. Eventually, with help from the 
federal government, low cost housing and stores were built 
in this area. 

Those people that are customers at the casinos in the 
downtown center that might want to come over to the Sands 
are intimidated by all the homeless people along Third Street. 
Once they start walking down this way and see all these home¬ 
less people .... In many cases we’ve talked to people who’ve 
on other occasions stayed with us, who said, “Look, I was in 
Reno, and I wanted to come down and see you guys, but 
when I started walking down towards your place, and I saw 
all these homeless people and bums, I just turned around and 
went back.” 

It’s hurt us a great deal with out-of-towners who might 
want to stay at our place but walk downtown to visit others. 


270 / MY father’s son 


It has also meant less business for us from people staying at 
other hotels who might otherwise walk over to the Sands to 
play with us. Fortunately, our local customers are not both- 
ered by the homeless. They can just drive into one of our 
parking lots or our parking garage and enter our casino with- 
out ever setting foot on Third Street. 


25 

RSCVA: 

A Creature 
of the 
Casinos 


JUD ALLEN, who was head of the Reno 
Chamber of Commerce for twenty-four 
years, started marketing conventions 
through the chamber. He made reserva¬ 
tions and did a lot of the things on a very 
small budget, funded only by the cham¬ 
ber of commerce. Jud believed that the 
use of tax revenues encourages far more 
waste and inefficiency than when you 
operate on a limited budget. You’ve got 
this flow of tax money coming in, and 
the issue becomes, “How do we spend it?” 
Redevelopment, for instance, wound up 
building that theater on the river that 
gets fewer people per screen on a daily 
basis than any other theater in northern 
Nevada, because they had to do some¬ 
thing. They fiddled around for so long 
that, whether it was right or wrong, that 
they had to spend that money on some¬ 
thing. The RSCVA has been guilty of 
that, too. 

Jud Allen knew a lot about what was 
going on. He was on the city council him¬ 
self. He was one of those individuals that 
was a retired person that didn’t need the 
job, that didn’t take the job for the 
money, but he did it, because he wanted 
to do a good job. Reno was his home. He 
was a conscientious kind of guy. He’s the 
kind of man you need in these positions 
that we’re talking about, and there’s so 
few of them around. If we could get those 
kind of people, we could do a much bet¬ 
ter job in the public agencies. 


272 / MY father’s son 


One of the reasons Reno has been so divided and has not pro- 
gressed as well as it should, is because the gaming industry has almost 
never spoken with one voice. When you have a proj ect to do, you’re 
down there talking to those councilmen by yourself. You’re not in- 
terested in Reno as a community. That’s not necessarily true with all 
of us, because many of us realize that Reno has to do well if we’re 
going to do well. But some people in town don’t diink that way. 

Jud Allen made the observation that when Harolds Club wanted 
to do something, they thought about the community first. They 
said, “If it’s good for die community, it’s good for Harolds Club.” But 
a great many folks since Harolds Club say, “If it’s good for me, if it’s 
good for my casino, then it’s good for die community.” That’s die 
kind of thinking that has caused the rest of us so much difficulty. 

I tried every way I could to create an association that would 
represent all the gamers in Reno, and we’ve made a couple of differ- 
ent starts at it. The NRA, Nevada Resort Association, is composed 
mostly of Las Vegas Strip properties. A few properties in northern 
Nevada belong to that association, but we never joined. We thought 
die association just simply wasn’t going to do the job that we needed 
to do here in Reno. So the Northern Nevada Gaming Association 
was formed, and we got most everybody together to do that. When 
we began it in the early 1990s, we were trying to create a situation 
where die industry in northern Nevada would speak with one voice. 

There are outlying properties like the Atlantis, the Peppermill, 
Boomtown, and Ascuaga’s Nugget, that are in many instances op¬ 
posing the downtown properties. For most of our history, all we had 
was the downtown casinos, with the exception of the Nugget and 
die MGM. You could set diose people aside and let them do what 
diey wanted to do, and dien you could get all the downtown people 
together, and you could deal widi your problems. 

If I had to do it all over again, I would establish close personal 
contacts with politicians at all levels, such as Ascuagadid widi Laxalt 
and the Caranos have done widi die city council, the county com¬ 
missioners, and Bill Raggio. 


RSCVA / 273 


The Reno'Sparks Convention and Visitors Authority, the 
RSCVA, started out as the Fair and Recreation Board twenty- 
five or thirty years ago. That’s when the room tax was initi¬ 
ated. The legislature gave Washoe County the right to put a 
room tax in effect, and that money was earmarked for this 
Fair and Recreation Board. It was a creature of the casinos, 
and it was one issue where the casinos were somewhat 
united—they felt that we needed this Fair and Recreation 
Board to collect the room tax. In order to sell it to the legis¬ 
lature and the residents of the county, the plan was to use 
the room tax not only for the establishment of a convention 
center, but also for the establishment of recreation facilities 
for the citizens of Reno. This was so that you could get the 
support of the community, but the real aim of the Fair and 
Recreation Board was to get a convention facility for the 
city of Reno for the benefit of the casinos. Also, the rest of 
the business people in town and the rest of the community 
would benefit from convention business, because when you 
bring convention business into town, it helps everybody in 
town. 

There was a big hassle about where this facility was go¬ 
ing to go, and eventually some deals were made that sort of 
compromised the thing. Harolds Club owned the land where 
the convention center is now, and they wanted to get rid of 
it at a good price; and because Harolds Club had a lot of sway 
with the council, they were able to sell the property to the 
Fair and Recreation Board. In order to mollify the down¬ 
town interests that didn’t want the center way out there, the 
Pioneer Theater Auditorium was also conceived. There was 
a building there called the State Building, and I think it was 
county property. It was pretty old and due to be demolished, 
anyway; so, as a compromise, in order to get the thing worked 
out, they built the Pioneer Theater. Supposedly the down¬ 
town properties would be able to use that, and then the whole 


274 / my father’s son 


community could use this building way out on South Vir¬ 
ginia. The flaw in that thinking, of course, is that at that 
time there were just a few motels out there, and there were 
very few rooms. There was nothing out there that could be 
considered a convention hotel or motel facility. The Con¬ 
vention Center should have been built where the rooms were, 
and the rooms at that time were all in downtown Reno, al¬ 
most without exception. And the Pioneer Theater became a 
facility without parking, which in itself is idiotic! 

That is how the RSCVA started. Within a few years, they 
dropped the Fair and Recreation Board name and took up 
the name Reno-Sparks Convention and Visitors Authority 
in order to direct all the money they possibly could towards 
building and maintaining tourist-type facilities. The Pioneer 
Theater Auditorium never really helped the tourist business 
at all, but it was helpful to local patrons of the arts, because 
they have plays and operas and that sort of thing. Even though 
parking is nonexistent, it works, because in the evening the 
downtown area is so dead north of the river that there’s usu¬ 
ally parking on the streets. 

The convention authority is composed of four represen¬ 
tatives from the gaming industry and four local politicians. 
The city council has two people on it; the county commis¬ 
sion has either one or two. And then there’s representatives 
from some of the other major businesses in town. The mayor 
is one of the two that represent the council, I think. So it’s a 
board of eleven or twelve people. They have more political 
types on that board than business people, but it’s really a 
business that they’re running. These people are politicians, 
trying to do something that they don’t really know anything 
about. That’s one of the reasons we’ve had such an awful 
record out there. 

They didn’t get the hall completely built, and it’s never 
been fully utilized. They have some rooms that could service 
conventions, but if you have a convention big enough to fill 


RSCVA / 275 


that hall, the Peppermill and the Atlantis aren’t going to 
give you enough rooms to take care of these people. So the 
conventioneers have to stay in some other hotel, some dis- 
tance away. What’s happened is that, generally speaking, the 
Nugget, the Reno Hilton, and the Atlantis really kind of 
dominate the business of that convention center. They keep 
abreast of the RSCVA’s convention book, so they know when 
that hall, or a portion of it, is empty. If one of these opera- 
tions has a group that they can book, and they don’t have 
enough meeting space or exhibit space, then they use the 
convention center. There’s nothing wrong with that, but it’s 
just not a good situation. 

The convention center should be in a place where there’s 
several thousand rooms nearby. Downtown Reno doesn’t have 
much convention space. Because the center is not in our 
vicinity, when we go out to sell large groups to come to Reno, 
we have to tell them we’re going to have to put them all over 
town. That means you got to bus people out to the conven¬ 
tion center and back. 

The absurd Convention Center location was a political 
decision. We still have a board that really doesn’t understand 
the business. Only three or four people, the industry repre¬ 
sentatives, on that board understand tourist and convention 
business. Politicians are concerned about getting re-elected, 
so they don’t want to take an unpopular stand, and you get 
things like the awful debacle that happened with the bowl¬ 
ing stadium. 

Hotel and gaming interests on Virginia Street in down¬ 
town Reno wanted to see the bowling stadium placed very 
close to where the major gaming places are, Fitzgerald had 
some property in that location that he wanted to sell. Our 
company owned a piece of property just north of Circus Cir¬ 
cus, fronting on Virginia Street, almost a complete square 
block. I offered to sell the RSCVA that property for twenty- 
five to thirty dollars a square foot, but they bought Fitz’s prop- 


276 / MY father’s son 


erty for paid fifty dollars a square foot, which was an outra¬ 
geous price to pay. 

Unfortunately, the RSCVA has been blessed with a num¬ 
ber of seemingly incompetent executive directors. One of 
them was a man named Milligan, whose experience in run¬ 
ning convention authorities was nil. A group of casinos be¬ 
came concerned about Mr. Milligan’s ability and about what 
was happening with the convention authority, so we had a 
meeting at Bill Thornton’s Donner Lake Lodge facility. All 
the major properties were represented, and some of the mi¬ 
nors. As a group, we decided to request the RSCVA board to 
relieve Mr. Milligan of his duties and find a new director. 
Most of us just felt that he wasn’t the right man for the job. 
However, Gary Carano said maybe we should not be so rash, 
even though we had been thinking about it for quite some 
time. 

The Eldorado and two or three other major properties 
finally decided they wanted to give Milligan another chance. 
They saved his job. Well, we know what happened: Milligan 
was the director when the bowling stadium was built, and 
some of these major properties wound up with free advertis¬ 
ing signs in it, as well as other perks. 

Milligan was one reason we had such a huge cost overrun 
in the property. He’s the one that approved the wine cellar, 
the cocktail lounge, the private meeting room. He worked 
in conjunction with the architect, Mr. Wilday, to put in all 
the frills that we didn’t need. The budget practically became 
unlimited—no one watched the extras. It was Mr. Milligan’s 
job to do that, but one thing lead to another, and we had 
huge cost overruns. And not only that, but the facility isn’t 
even finished. If you drive over there along the tracks, you’ll 
see the exposed beams that are coming down from the sec¬ 
ond floor. They simply ran out of funds, didn’t even finish 
the facility. 


RSCVA / 111 


Finally, the community became aware that much of what 
had happened there was the fault of Mr. Milligan and the 
RSCVA boards, because they did not oversee the architects, 
and they did not pay any attention to the cost overruns and 
the change orders that were signed. Too late, we finally were 
able to rid ourselves of Milligan, but the job was done then. 
That’s not to say that the bowling stadium is not good for 
Reno. It is. Unfortunately, it cost twenty or twenty-five mil¬ 
lion dollars more than it should have, which is money that 
the RSCVA could have spent in other places. 

After Milligan, we had a guy in there three or four months, 
who went right to work taking men and building materials 
out to his house, and he began to build a deck around his 
house, [laughter] He didn’t waste much time at all. He re¬ 
minds me of Phil Keene, but he was quicker than Keene. He 
didn’t last long. 

There were several people in there between Milligan and 
Keene. One had been with Western Airlines. His big idea 
was to do a sales blitz on southern California. It was a huge 
market, but Los Angeles has always been a Las Vegas mar¬ 
ket, and it was not a good idea for us to try to compete against 
Las Vegas when our air service was not as good, when it was 
more expensive to come to Reno than it was to go to Las 
Vegas, and when the perception was that all you had in north¬ 
ern Nevada was the same thing you had in Vegas, just casi¬ 
nos. Why should you go to Reno? It was a complete waste of 
money. But for a couple of years the convention authority 
wasted hundreds of thousands of dollars trying to market 
southern California, and that didn’t work. 

This is what happens when you’ve got an RSCVA board 
with no business people, no tourist-oriented people. The 
majority of the members are politicians that really know noth¬ 
ing at all about what we’re talking about and what ought to 
be done. They’re easily led, and in spite of the fact that you 


278 / MY father’s son 


would think that they would listen to the business people 
and the tourist people on the board, it appears that what’s 
uppermost in those political minds is whether they’re going 
to get re-elected or not. They’re concerned about how they’re 
going to be perceived by the public, instead of trying to make 
hard decisions as to where and how this money should be 
spent and what we should do to further the tourist industry 
in Washoe County. 

After Kevitt’s short tenure, Fred Boyd took over as tem¬ 
porary executive director while the RSCVA board conducted 
a search. They hired a firm to find a qualified director, and 
whatever they paid them was a complete waste of money. 
You would think that if you hired a search firm, you’d come 
up with decent finalists, but the candidate that the RSCVA 
board picked was Phil Keene, and he lasted only a little more 
than two years. He was being paid more than $150,000 a 
year, and after his first year there he got a fifteen or twenty- 
percent raise. Phil, as we know now (and many of us sus¬ 
pected this shortly after he first came to work), probably took 
the job just for the pay. At least, that’s my view of it. Then 
he began to charge things on his credit card. 

The RSCVA under Milligan’s tenure had built a wine 
storage room in the bowling center, where the temperature 
is maintained at a certain level. They bought thousands and 
thousands of dollars worth of fine wines, justifying it by say¬ 
ing they were going to entertain group meeting planners and 
try to sell them on the fact that Reno was a good place to 
bring their business. Probably, what really happened was that 
most of the wine was used by Milligan and people like him 
for their own purposes. Keene fell right into place and de¬ 
cided that that was something that he wanted to do, as well. 

One thing the RSCVA did was help us with airline reser¬ 
vations. With their help, we’d go to reservation centers and 
give presentations to the agents. We’d do things like offer 


RSCVA / 279 


them commissions, because a lot of times you get a situation 
where travelers are just looking for a getaway, and if they 
aren’t able to get an accommodation that they want, then it 
is up to the agent to sell them on some other destination. 
Reno (unfortunately, we’re usually the ones that have avaib 
ability) was easy to sell. These trips that RSCVA arranged to 
reservation centers were one of the more effective things that 
they’ve done. We had some success, and the industry really 
pushed RSCVA in that direction. 

The other area where the RSCVA has been somewhat 
successful is with the charter airplane people and the air- 
lines. They would organize what’s called productdaunch par¬ 
ties. We did a lot of this in Canada with Canadian Airlines 
in conjunction with RSCVA. The Canadian Airlines sea¬ 
son would start in September. In August, they would pull 
together the travel agents that they worked with and the 
hotel-casinos that did business with them. We would go to 
Vancouver, Calgary, Edmonton, Regina, and Toronto. We’d 
have hors d’oeuvre parties with cocktails, and we’d talk about 
our properties, and Canadian Airlines would make their pre¬ 
sentations about their new product. Other airlines do the 
same thing, and RSCVA has facilitated it. 



26 


Trying 

to 

Get 

Out 


IN 1995 WE WERE APPROACHED by a 
couple of men from Las Vegas, one of 
whom had been a banker for many years 
in Idaho and in southern Nevada. He had 
formed a little investment company com¬ 
posed of three or four different individu¬ 
als, one of whom had hotel experience 
and one of whom was an attorney who’d 
had some gaming experience. Another 
individual was a wealthy man who had 
recently sold a chain of movie theaters 
in the Northwest, principally in Oregon 
and Washington. He had owned the real 
estate, as well as the businesses, and he’d 
sold them to some chain, so he’d gotten 
quite a sum of cash. It was in the neigh¬ 
borhood of a hundred and sixty million 
dollars, so they were looking for a place 
to invest this money. 

These men were the sole owners of 
Tara Corporation, which had some real 
estate investments in southern Nevada 
and California. They became interested 
in hotel-casino acquisitions, and we were 
one of the properties that they thought 
about purchasing. We were a public com¬ 
pany, and their thinking was that they 
could put all of Tara’s holdings in the 
Sands Regent, the public company, and 
thereby they could become a public en¬ 
tity themselves. 

We were not thinking about selling 
at the time. It probably was a good time 
to do it, but I had been involved so long 
in the business that I couldn’t visualize 
not being involved on a twenty-four- 
hour-a-day, seven-day-a-week basis. It 


282 / MY father’s son 


had never dawned on me that maybe it was time to sell. 
However, when we got the proposal, I got to thinking. 

My sister had had cancer; my brother was very ill; and 
my daughter Toni was never interested in working in the 
business. She always wanted to do something on her own, so 
that people wouldn’t say that she was successful just because 
she went into her father’s business. She was very indepen- 
dent that way, and I encouraged that in her. My son was 
working in the business, and he was very diligent. He worked 
hard, and he would have gone on and stepped into my shoes, 
but I sensed that he wanted to do something else. At any 
rate, we talked to these Tara folks, and we came to an agree¬ 
ment with them. 

Our stock price had deteriorated somewhat because of 
the problems in Mississippi, and the sale price that we ar¬ 
rived at was seven dollars a share. For stockholders like us, 
that had bought the stock before it split, that meant four¬ 
teen dollars a share for the old stock. We had gone public at 
twelve dollars, so it wasn’t a big increase, but it was enough, 
as we weren’t trying to squeeze the last dollar out of the com¬ 
pany. We were more interested in an exit strategy that would 
leave the company in good hands—we had formed the com¬ 
pany, and we didn’t want to walk away from it and see it fail. 
We wanted it to grow and prosper, and we wanted to protect 
all outside shareholders, as well. 

Along those lines, because Tara didn’t really have the 
necessary expertise, they asked me to stay on and be the presi¬ 
dent and CEO for a period. After that I was going to stay on 
the board and still be involved, but not be the CEO, which 
appealed to me. It would give me something to do and allow 
me to do what I could to make it successful. It seemed like it 
was going to be a good fit. There was only one more thing, 
and that was the licensing issue; but we had done extensive 
preliminary work on the background of these folks, and we 


Trying to Get Out / 283 


didn’t find any reason to believe that they could not get li¬ 
censed. So we made the deal, and they applied for their li¬ 
cense in Nevada. They also had to apply in the state of Mis¬ 
sissippi, because we were in business down there, as well. 

Unbeknownst to us, after the deal was made, and after 
they’d made their applications in the state of Nevada, they 
had some internal discussions as to whether, in fact, they 
wanted to go through with the deal. They had put up half a 
million dollars that was non-refundable if they backed out, 
but for some reason they became reluctant to submit the ap¬ 
plications for their Mississippi license. They kept telling us 
that they were having some trouble filling them out, and 
time went on. They had paid their fees to the state of Ne¬ 
vada, and Nevada had started their licensing procedures, but 
they never did turn in an application to the state of Missis¬ 
sippi. 

Several months went by, and it was becoming more ap¬ 
parent to us all the time that there was a problem. We finally 
asked for a face-to-face meeting to try to determine exactly 
what the situation was. The best I could get out of it was that 
the man with the money, the man who had sold those the¬ 
aters, either found a better place to invest his money or de¬ 
cided he didn’t want to be in the gaming business or decided 
that he didn’t want to go through the licensing procedure. 
That does happen. As much as you warn people about how 
stringent the procedures are for a gaming license, I don’t think 
anybody is really ready for such an in-depth examination of 
one’s background. There may have been something in one 
of their backgrounds, but I don’t know, so I shouldn’t specu¬ 
late. I never did find out what the real situation was. 

That half-million-dollar deposit stayed in escrow for 
awhile, and when they did not become licensed, we got the 
deposit, and that’s pretty much the end of it. We didn’t hear 
much more from Tara after that, and we didn’t feel that bad 


284 / my father’s son 


about it. We weren’t actively out there trying to sell the com' 
pany, anyway, and we got the half million. That was the end 
of the Tara deal. 

Our situation in Mississippi kept getting worse. The worth 
of our company, because of the Mississippi situation, was de- 
dining, and our stock price had declined. We thought that if 
we could straighten Mississippi out, then our company’s stock 
price would climb back up again, and we could sell our shares 
in the company for a lot more money. However, before things 
had improved any, we were contacted by a man named Shawn 
Scott, whom I had met one of the times that I had gone to 
Las Vegas to meet with the Tara group. 

Shawn was an acquaintance of the Tara folks and had 
done business with them. He was essentially a real estate in- 
vestor who had started a couple of little casinos in Henderson, 
Nevada. They were small operations, but he had been li¬ 
censed by the state, so he had gotten over the licensing prob¬ 
lem. Shawn was acting not only for himself, but as a broker 
for a group of investment bankers in New York that had done 
a couple of gaming deals. Shawn had also gotten them into a 
deal with the Ormsby House in Carson City, trying to bring 
it back from the dead. The SEC could give me no reason to 
believe that they’d ever been anything other than above 
board, so we talked among the family. Even though the stock 
price had dropped dramatically, I was a couple of years older, 
so we got to thinking more and more that maybe it was time 
to sell. 

We knew that if we sold, we were not going to make the 
kind of money that we would have made with the Tara deal, 
because the stock now was worth three dollars instead of 
seven. However, all of my family have enough money to live 
on and then some, and it was never our desire to be wealthy 
just for the sake of being wealthy. We felt that our life and 



Trying to Get Out / 285 


our time here on earth were worth more than a few extra 
dollars, and that was the feeling of my children, as well. 

My son’s real desire was to go to law school, and he wanted 
the freedom that would come with selling. (Pete was always 
a great help to me, somebody that I could depend on and 
rely on. He was honest, and he’d been working in the busi- 
ness ever since he graduated from college.) Also, I had re¬ 
cently remarried and had a child, my third, born in 1991. At 
my age, I wasn’t going to be around as long for her as I was 
for my older two children. I wanted to spend more time with 
her, and that was quite an incentive for me to go into the 
deal. 

It looked like it was going to work. We again asked for a 
half-million-dollar, non-refundable deposit. The investment 
bankers began to buy our stock, as well, and that encouraged 
us, because we thought these folks not only like our com¬ 
pany and are willing to finance this sale, but they see a future 
for the company. We thought this deal would certainly go 
through, and the outside shareholders would be protected, 
as well. I was to stay with the company, because Shawn 
wanted somebody to stay and help him run the company, 
and I was amenable to that. I had an open-ended deal, so 
that if I decided I wanted to stop working, I could. So we 
went down that road, and it looked very promising. Then 
the Ormsby House deal that Shawn was brokering for the 
investment bankers fell apart. 

Shawn had also gotten the bankers involved in the fi¬ 
nancing of the Reno Ramada sale, and the Reno Ramada 
loan also went bad. Several deals that Shawn had put them 
into were turning sour, and they began rethinking the idea 
of whether they really wanted to finance him in the pur¬ 
chase of our stock. They sent a letter to Shawn and myself 
where they agreed the purchase price was six million dollars, 
and they agreed to put up five of the six million that was 


286 / MY father’s son 


required, but either my family was going to have to take a 
million dollar discount, or Shawn or someone was going to 
have to come up with that other million. I disagreed with 
that and said we were not going to discount our stock. It was 
way too cheap as it was. We had the deposit, and we had 
done everything that we had committed to do, so if the deal 
didn’t go through, Shawn would forfeit his deposit. 

Well, essentially, the deal did not go through, but the 
investment bankers had bought 8 percent of the Sands stock. 
(I think they eventually got it under 5 percent so they 
wouldn’t have to be licensed.) We made a settlement with 
Shawn Scott on the $500,000 deposit. We felt rightfully that 
it was ours, but because we didn’t want to get involved in a 
lawsuit, we agreed to keep some of that money and let him 
have some back, so that we could settle the whole matter 
without having to go into court. It left a bad taste in our 
mouth. But in another sense, we thought we were just going 
to have to keep this company going on! 

Well, along in March or April of 1999 I had a call from a 
man named Judah Hertz. Mr. Hertz had been referred to us 
by Wells Fargo Bank, because the mortgage that we had on 
our property was held by Wells Fargo. Because of our prob¬ 
lems in Mississippi, Wells Fargo was becoming somewhat 
uneasy about the mortgage, and they were asking us for some 
advance principal payments to be made on that loan—we 
had some covenants with them that if our cash flow dropped 
below a certain level, we needed to reduce the loan by a 
certain amount of money. I was resisting, because I felt that 
it was unfair, even though it may have been written up like 
that. They also wanted to increase our interest rate, which 
they had the right to do, according to their loan agreement, 
but as a public-relations matter and as a matter of taking 
care of a good customer, I didn’t think that it was proper. 

Wells Fargo had done business with Judah in southern 
California. Judah lived, and still lives, in southern Califor- 


Trying to Get Out / 287 


nia, and he’s a very wealthy man, worth in the hundreds of 
millions of dollars. He became attracted to us after the owner 
of the Colonial Motor Lodge, which is right across the street 
from us, put an ad in the Wall Street Journal to sell his place. 
Judah came to Reno to look at the property, and he almost 
made a deal with Bob Hallahan, the owner. Then, in the last 
minute, they had some kind of a falling out. During his trips 
to Reno to talk to Hallahan, Judah took the opportunity to 
walk around town and look over other properties. His method 
of purchasing properties down through the years was always 
to go to the lender when he was interested in a property. So 
he went to Wells Fargo, because Wells Fargo had most of the 
loans in downtown Reno. In his conversations with them, 
he found that they had had an ongoing disagreement with us 
about our loan. Also, a similar kind of situation was going on 
over at the Comstock. 

The Comstock had approximately an $8 million mort¬ 
gage with Wells Fargo, and Wells Fargo sold the mortgage to 
Judah Hertz for $5 million. (This is what Judah told me—I 
never discussed this directly with the bank or with the 
Douglass family that owns the Comstock.)He bought the 
place at a really reasonable price, because the Comstock has 
300 rooms, and if you just rough that out at $5 million for a 
300-room hotel, I think you come out at $17,000 a room, or 
something like that, which is extremely reasonable. If you 
were to build one like that today, it would cost you fifty, sixty 
thousand a room, at least. Judah also got all the casino equip¬ 
ment, and he made a deal with the Douglass family to lease 
it all hack to them so they could run it, because, of course, he 
was not licensed. 

Judah applied for a license to be a landlord, and then, 
just to show you the kind of operator he is, he turned around 
and got a mortgage from a bank back East for three million, 
so he was only in the place two million himself, and he was 
getting $40,000 a month rent from the Douglasses. So it was 


288 / MY father’s son 


a great deal, and that’s the kind of deal the guy has made in 
his business career—he described deals to me like that that 
he’d done in other cities, as well. 

My family owns 46 percent of the Sands Regent’s stock. 
In may of 1999, we agreed to sell Judah Hertz all the stock 
that we owned in the company if he could arrange refinanc¬ 
ing of the $11.5 million balance on a loan we had with Wells 
Fargo that was coming due. If he wasn’t able to accomplish 
that in a specified period, the sale wouldn’t go through. The 
agreement further called for him to put up $1 million as a 
deposit, $300,000 of which was to be used to buy 100,000 
shares of our stock, should he be denied a license. Because 
we had had difficulty with the previous buyer, we also had a 
clause in the contract that said, should Judah withdraw dur¬ 
ing the licensing procedure, or should he not diligently pur¬ 
sue licensing, then he would forfeit the entire million dol¬ 
lars. He agreed to that, and we signed that agreement. 

Judah was a frequent visitor to Reno, and I introduced 
him to Ferenc and to Dave Wood, our chief financial officer. 
He would talk to us about other deals that he was looking at 
and about his ideas for the company, and he kept us updated 
on his efforts to refinance the company. His idea was to use 
our public company, once he became the major stockholder, 
to acquire other gaming properties and put them into our 
company and get stock in the company for these properties. 
He looked at the Flamingo Hilton, across the street from us, 
and made them an offer. It was exciting for our company, 
because even if we were going to sell all our stock, we still 
wanted the company to grow. 

Judah asked me to stay on as a consultant if the deal went 
through, because I had a lot of experience in the business, 
and he felt I’d be helpful. He didn’t know anything about 
the gaming business, and he had developed a great deal of 
confidence in Ferenc and Dave Wood, and he didn’t want to 


Trying to Get Out / 289 


change management, at all. As a matter of fact, he named 
Ferenc to be his key gaming employee for Sapphire Gaming, 
the entity that he was going to use to acquire all these other 
properties and merge them with Sands. 

It was a real exciting thing for the company, so we coop¬ 
erated with him, and we went to Las Vegas and looked at 
two or three different properties there that were for sale, to 
give him our ideas on them. We also went to Los Angeles 
and looked at a poker parlor he was thinking about buying, 
and we looked at two or three properties here in Reno. He 
had applied to the Gaming Commission for his license, and 
he hired one of the best gaming attorneys in the state of 
Nevada, Frank Schreck. 

Eventually the investigators went to look through Judah’s 
books. They spent several weeks in Los Angeles at his office, 
going through all his books and records. We had talked at 
length about the licensing procedure, and I had questioned 
him as to whether he knew that he had to show them all his 
personal checks and his bank accounts and the contents of 
any safety deposit boxes. I wanted to make sure he under¬ 
stood how difficult it was to get licensed, because I didn’t 
want to go through what we’d gone through before. I didn’t 
want to have happen what eventually did happen! [laugh¬ 
ter] And I was sure, knowing Frank Schreck’s reputation, that 
Frank had advised him of all these matters and told him ex¬ 
actly what he had to go through. 

We proceeded in this manner for several months. We 
were looking at properties, and we did a lot of pro formas on 
the properties, and our company did a lot of studies on these 
properties, especially the Flamingo, to show the savings that 
we could make in operating them by using our department 
heads and by all the synergies that we could develop when 
we folded these properties into our company. I think the 
Douglasses had a short-term lease at the Comstock, and Judah 
talked at length about when the Douglasses’ lease was up, 


290 / MY father’s son 


that the Comstock would be folded into the Sands, and so it 
looked like a great future for our company. 

In the meantime, we talked to several lenders that Judah 
had contacted on our behalf. He felt that there was a good 
opportunity for us to be refinanced by Lehman Brothers. They 
had a type of loan that’s called a CMBS, Commercial Morn 
gage Backed Security. They bundle up a bunch of real estate 
loans, and then they sell them on the market. Lehman Broth- 
ers was working on a bundle of lodging loans, and our con¬ 
versations with them were directed to a situation where they’d 
put us in one of these bundles of hotel loans and buy out our 
loan and pay off Wells Fargo and then loan us back the same 
amount of money. It would be a ten-year loan, and the inter¬ 
est rates were very reasonable. However, the gaming end of 
our business really caused a problem there, so we never were 
able to get into that package. 

We talked to several other companies, and eventually 
Judah got a major amount of interest from a mortgage com¬ 
pany called Foothill Capital. Ironically, Foothill Capital is a 
subsidiary of Wells Fargo Bank, but it seemed as if those people 
didn’t really talk among each other. Foothill had done some 
other gaming loans, so they understood gaming. They even¬ 
tually agreed to do the loan for us, but there were some con¬ 
tingencies. One was that Foothill only wanted to put up $8 
million of the loan, so Judah agreed to personally put up the 
other $2 million. He gave Foothill $2 million of his money, 
so the loan was paid down to $10,800,000. Then, the Sands 
paid off $800,000, Foothill made the $10 million loan to the 
Sands, and we bought Wells Fargo out. That all happened 
right at the beginning of 2000. 

So Judah had fulfilled his first contingency. We got refi¬ 
nanced for a five-year loan, and we had every reason to be¬ 
lieve that he was sincere. In the meantime, he was going 
through the licensing procedure, and we thought that about 


Trying to Get Out / 291 


June 2000 he would be coming up for licensing. All through 
the spring, we felt fairly confident that Judah was going to 
get licensed. From time to time we’d ask how his licensing 
procedure was progressing, but his lawyer told us that it was 
just going to take some time. 

In June of 2000, Judah’s lawyer wrote a letter to Gaming 
asking to withdraw his application for a license. He didn’t 
tell us until the latter part of July or early August. We said to 
Judah, “What’s the meaning of all this?” 

He told us at that Gaming wanted to go to Israel to talk 
to some of his business connections there, and that the people 
that Gaming wanted to talk to did not want to talk to Gam- 
ing, and that was the major reason that he wasn’t going to 
get licensed. So it appeared as if, from what he was telling us, 
that it wasn’t his fault. He said, “I’m sorry about all this, but 
this is the way it looks, and so I guess we’re just going to have 
to withdraw.” 

Months passed with a lot of legal maneuvering over 
whether Judah had forfeited his deposit with us. In the midst 
of this, he resubmitted his application for a gaming license, 
then again he tried to withdraw. We pressed Gaming to pro¬ 
ceed with a hearing anyway. 

Eventually, Gaming set a hearing for December 2000. 
We did not attend that meeting, but we do have a copy of 
the transcript. The chairman, Mr. Ducharme, said that Mr. 
Judah Hertz had not met his burden. Then they went on to 
say that there was “a magnitude,” and I’m quoting here, “of 
negative information in respect to this applicant, and we do 
not believe that he should be allowed to withdraw.” That 
fact “prohibits him from contracting with other gaming lic¬ 
ensees within the state.” And there they were talking about 
the Comstock Hotel situation, where the Douglasses were 
leasing from him. So what they were saying to him was, 
“You’re not even qualified to be a landlord. Therefore, you 


292 / MY father’s son 


have to give up the lease that you have with the Douglasses 
at the Comstock.” Even though the board had asked Judah 
to appear personally, he did not show up. 

Judah appeared to have potential tax-fraud issues with 
the government. So the Gaming Commission’s action in this 
matter was to deny Mr. Hertz’s application for a license and 
deny it with prejudice. What that means is that he’ll never 
be allowed to apply for a gaming license in the state of Ne¬ 
vada again. 

We believe that the fact that Reno is growing at such a 
great rate will help the local business, and a great deal of our 
competition has gone away, closed its doors. You’re getting 
fewer and fewer casinos in Reno, and you’re getting more 
and more local business. 

I have heard of no plans at all for any existing casinos to 
expand. Growth in the hotel-casino business seems to have 
come to a standstill in Reno, and for good reason—we don’t 
know what’s going to happen with Indian gaming. The weak 
guys have pretty much been weeded out, but there may be 
one or two more out there. 


27 

Stakeholders 

and 

Lobbyists 


IN THE LATE 1990S, the Atlantis and 
the Peppermill, on South Virginia near 
the convention center, began booking 
more conventions into their hotels. 
(John Ascuaga’s Nugget and the Hilton 
had long had conventions as an impor¬ 
tant part of their business strategy.) That 
business was growing, so these folks— 
principally Mr. Farahi, who owns the 
Atlantis right next to the convention 
center—felt that it would be very help¬ 
ful to their business if the convention 
center were expanded. They got their 
lobbyists to work, and in 1999 Senate Bill 
477 was introduced by the government 
affairs committee, supported by the city 
of Reno and the county of Washoe. As 
originally proposed, the idea was to raise 
the room tax enough to pay for bonds to 
expand the convention center, approxi¬ 
mately doubling its size from what it was 
at that time. 

In the beginning it appeared that the 
bill was going to pass without a problem, 
but strong opposition developed, espe¬ 
cially from four major hotel-casinos in 
downtown Reno: the Circus, Silver 
Legacy, Eldorado, and Harrah’s. These 
folks had powerful lobbyists in the legis¬ 
lature, and the bill reached an impasse. 
It looked as if it might not pass, so nego¬ 
tiations took place between the lobby¬ 
ists and the lawyers that represented these 
different interests, and a compromise was 
reached. The downtown . . . the four ho¬ 
tel-casinos that I’ve just named, who later 
became known as Newco, agreed with 


294 / my father’s son 


the outside casinos that they would put in this hill a mecha¬ 
nism to also create funding for a Downtown Reno Project, as 
they called it, to promote tourism business in downtown 
Reno. It would have to be located in the narrow downtown 
police district that runs roughly from Arlington to Lake and 
from Sixth down to the river. When that sort of language 
was inserted into this bill, Newco agreed to support the bill. 

From my point of view, what’s insidious about the whole 
matter is that you’re really just helping Newco and those 
four casinos. The rest of downtown Reno gets very little help, 
because when you put this project within a block or two of 
these four casinos, they’re the ones that are going to be the 
major benefactors. And once people get into one of these 
casinos, the rest of the town never sees them. This was really 
a mechanism to help these four major downtown casinos, at 
least in my view, and wasn’t something that all of downtown 
Reno would benefit from. But because of the powerful lob¬ 
bying and the agreement with the outside property owners, 
there was very strong support for this hill to be passed. 

The rest of us at that time really didn’t understand the 
full import of this bill, because we did not know what kind of 
a project was planned for downtown Reno. And in effect, 
neither did anyone else, because all the bill says is that it’s 
some kind of project that would help downtown Reno. So it 
was a wide-open thing at the time, and we were all hopeful 
that in the end it would be something that would help every¬ 
body in downtown Reno. 

SB477 set up the Truckee Meadows Tourism Facility and 
Revitalization Steering Committee, to decide where and what 
the project was going to be in downtown Reno. It was funded 
by a portion of the 3 percent increase in the room tax that 
the hill set up. This committee later became known as the 
Stakeholders Group. It was set up by SB477, “to consist of 
three persons appointed by the board of directors of the 
RSCVA, one of whom must be a member of the Nevada 


Stakeholders and Lobbyists / 295 


Resort Association.” All four of the Newco properties were 
members of the Nevada Resort Association, as were the 
Hilton and the other out-of-town casinos: the Nugget and 
the Atlantis and the Peppermill. 

Besides those three persons, you then had three mem¬ 
bers from the Reno Redevelopment Agency, which would 
be appointed by the chairman of the agency to be members 
of this board; and, as we know, Reno Redevelopment Agency 
is really the city council. So that means three members of 
the council and three persons appointed by the Nevada Re¬ 
sort Association from its members whose properties are in 
the designated district. Those were the Newco properties. 

So, although it didn’t name them by name, the way the 
bill was written, the Newco properties would be on this Stake¬ 
holders Group. All of them would be represented, but there 
couldn’t be any other people from downtown casinos on the 
board, because you had to be a member of the Nevada Re¬ 
sort Association and you had to be in the police district. These 
four downtown hotel-casinos have seen fit to support the 
city council financially and also have their lobbyists very 
closely in touch with the members of the city council. And 
so, because they had good relations with the city council, 
and because of their financial support, once the committee 
was put together, they pretty much had control of it. Well, 
let’s not say “pretty much”—they definitely had control, 
[laughter] They had their three votes, and they had the three 
council votes on a board that totaled nine members. 

During the Stakeholder deliberations the Newco group 
said they were going to put $20 million of their own money 
into the project. They said that $5 million each from these 
four Newco properties would go into the project, but they 
didn’t say whether it was an equity infusion or a loan . . . 
whether they were supposed to be repaid or what the terms 
really were. But they talked a great deal, and initially they 
may have even believed that it was going to be a public/ 


296 / MY father’s son 


private project, and the private part was the $20 million they 
were going to put in. 

They then began to talk about where the site would be, 
where this thing would be located. Quoting the steering com- 
mittee, the Stakeholders Group were “mandated to develop 
a master plan which identifies proposed capital improvement 
projects that the committee determines to be advisable to 
promote tourism in Washoe County in methods pursuant to 
which proposed capital improvements will be financed and 
where it will be located.” And “these capital improvements 
must be located” in this police district that was earlier de- 
scribed. That was a very small area of downtown Reno. It 
pretty much mandated that this thing was going to be built 
very close to these four properties. 

Just outside that mandated strip, there is a large amount 
of property that’s in the redevelopment district. Most of Si¬ 
erra Street and most of the area along First Street and along 
the north bank of the Truckee River has been torn down or 
closed or abandoned, and Redevelopment owns it. There was 
a parking garage built down there, and a logical place to build 
this thing would have been somewhere along Sierra Street 
and First Street, somewhere in that area there. All those 
buildings down there are vacant and you already had a park¬ 
ing garage sitting there partially empty most of the time; but, 
of course, Newco didn’t want it to go there. Newco wanted 
it to go where it would benefit them. 

Another feature of the plan supported by Newco was to 
build a shopping center in the designated district, anchored 
by a tenant like Nordstrom’s or someone of that stature. This 
project would be placed between Center Street and Virginia 
Street, and between Commercial Row and Sixth Street. And 
then, of course, across the street, you had three of the Newco 
properties, and just to the south you had the fourth property. 

When you looked at that whole thing, what you really 
had was an area with a shopping facility, a convention cen- 


Stakeholders and Lobbyists / 297 


ter, and a bowling center that were all within walking dis- 
tance of, and would almost specifically benefit, these four 
hotehcasinos. But the selling point used by Newco people 
on the city council (like Mayor Griffin, who was fully in fa¬ 
vor of this) was that, “Oh, it’s going to help all of downtown 
Reno.” 

The gaming industry in northern Nevada knows, because 
many surveys have been taken, that tourists, or even local 
people who come to downtown Reno, will visit normally a 
total of only three casinos. So if you get people in this, one 
way or the other, the probability is very high that they’re 
only going to visit three hotel-casinos. Therefore, the vast 
majority of the business that this was going to create would 
accrue to these four hotel-casinos, and the rest of us simply 
would help pay for it. 

In the end, very little came off as planned. Several hun¬ 
dred thousand dollars were spent by the Stakeholders Group 
for plans that David Cordish developed for a shopping area 
attached to a convention center, whatever it was going to 
be. Then, after a couple of years, Cordish left the scene with¬ 
out going forward with any of this stuff. 

As designed, the facility was placed just north of the bowl¬ 
ing center. It was a two-story structure, and it went from 
Fourth Street to Sixth Street and from Center to Lake. No 
parking was ever designed into the project, and I thinkNewco 
was part of this. They may have said, “We’ve got lots of park¬ 
ing in our structures, and eventually the City of Reno is go¬ 
ing to build a parking structure somewhere over on Lake 
Street, so that’ll take care of the future problem.” There was 
a lot of talk about moving the RTC, the bus station, from 
where it is to some other location and then maybe putting a 
parking garage in there. 

SB221 was introduced on February 21, 2001, by the com¬ 
mittee on natural resources in the senate. That bill was to 


298 / MY father’s son 


authorize the city council of the City of Reno to “increase 
tax on rental transient lodging and levy special assessments 
to pay costs of certain capital improvements.” So the idea 
was to not only raise room taxes, but to levy a special assess¬ 
ment in order to help finance the bonds that would under¬ 
write this project. Under the hill, the mandated district could 
be expanded by four blocks in any direction that the council 
approved, and those properties that were closer to the down¬ 
town convention center would pay a bigger assessment than 
those properties that were further away. There was an effort 
to create assessments based on this benefit ratio, and there 
was a lot of controversy about what the ratio should be and 
how far out you should go with it beyond the police district. 
There were people that argued that they had no benefit. 

George Karadanis, from the Sundowner Hotel-Casino, 
and I started a group that we called the “No Taxation With¬ 
out Benefits Committee.” We sent out a mailer to all the 
downtown property owners, except the major hotel-casinos, 
and asked them if they cared to be assessed both room tax 
and a special assessment to pay for this convention center. 
Out of the 120 or so letters we sent out, we got back eighty 
that said they did not wish to be taxed for this project be¬ 
cause they didn’t feel it was going to be that beneficial for 
them. That was my feeling, as well, and George’s feeling. We 
argued strenuously that this room tax and this assessment 
district ought to be confined maybe to a block or two either 
side of Virginia Street, from about Sixth Street down to Sec¬ 
ond Street, or maybe even to First, because that was defi¬ 
nitely the only area that was going to benefit from this project. 

Eventually, Newco agreed in writing with Mr. Karadanis 
that they would pay $700,000 of the $900,000 that was to be 
collected in the property-tax-assessment district. That tells 
you pretty much that the assessment district was extremely 
important to Newco. They needed it. 


Stakeholders and Lobbyists / 299 


Once SB477 got passed, and the Stakeholders Group got 
set up, and Cordish was brought in, and the project was de¬ 
fined as to where it was going to be and what it was going to 
be, the four big hotel-casinos that were not downtown be¬ 
came very uneasy. They could see that what was going to 
happen was you were going to have a competing convention 
center - competing not only with the South Virginia con¬ 
vention facility, but also with their own convention facili¬ 
ties, the Nugget’s and the Hilton’s especially. When they 
could see the way things were going, they then banded to¬ 
gether, hired a lobbying firm, and actively began to oppose 
these plans. 

This committee that George and I formed, the commit¬ 
tee for no taxation without benefits, could have been influ¬ 
ential in the whole downtown convention project. Unfortu¬ 
nately, the committee agreed to the payment of $700,000 by 
Newco, on an annual basis, of the $900,000 in total property 
tax assessments that were going to be collected. With the 
payment, the committee agreed to support the project. Once 
that happened, these eighty property owners were on record 
as supporting the project as Newco espoused it. Therefore, 
our strength went right out the window. 

I argued with George and two or three of the other mem¬ 
bers of the committee that we needed to hold out. We had a 
strong group, and we could have played a prominent part in 
the whole thing, and we could have done a job that would 
have been very helpful to the rest of downtown Reno prop¬ 
erty owners. 

While I was away in Maui for a couple of months, the 
folks on that committee saw fit to sign this agreement with 
Mr. Francovich, who represents Eldorado. In that signed, 
written agreement, they agreed to support the project. It’s 
unfortunate that that happened. Eventually the hill was 
passed by the legislature and signed into law. 


300 / MY father’s son 


If the Stakeholders Group proposal was approved by the 
city council, Washoe County, and RSCVA, Newco would 
operate the downtown convention facility. What they in- 
tended at the time—and they told everybody—was that they 
would actually turn the facility over to a professional operat¬ 
ing group that operated other facilities like this around the 
country. But they wanted control of it, and their commit¬ 
ment of $20 million was tied up in that situation. 

Newco said in the beginning, “Well, we’re going to put 
in $20 million. We’re going to operate it. We will get this 
professional group to operate it, but. . . .” They made no 
bones about it: Newco would control it, and they could put 
in whatever events they wanted, when they wanted them. 
They said, “Well, we will allow other people to bring events 
to us.” For example, if the Sands or the Sundowner or some¬ 
body had an event, we could go to them and say, “You know, 
we have an event. We want to do it on x date. Is it open?” 
But that was a highly unlikely situation. 

About that time the RSCVA hired a new director named 
Beckelman. He kind of got into the middle of it, and he came 
up with a proposal to help solve the matter, wherein RSCVA 
would operate and maintain this downtown convention cen¬ 
ter, as well as the one out on South Virginia. They would 
have control of it, rather than Newco. Newco eventually 
agreed to that proposal, but they said, “If that’s the way it’s 
going to be, then we hereby withdraw our offer of a $20 mil¬ 
lion loan.” (It was to be repaid from the receipts of this cen¬ 
ter with 6 percent interest.) 

When it came to light that all Newco had intended to 
do was loan the money, and expected to be paid back, even 
though it was after the bonds were paid for, there was a big 
uproar. Newco hadn’t necessarily misrepresented what they 
were going to do initially, they simply were vague about it 
until they had to say how they were going to do it. 


Stakeholders and Lobbyists / 301 


As it turned out, the City of Reno is going to float these 
bonds, and the City of Reno will own all of this stuff, and the 
City of Reno is going to be behind this $100 million bond 
issue. So if something happens and room tax doesn’t get cob 
lected or whatever, taxpayers of the City of Reno are going 
to pick up the tab. 



28 

Marriages 

and 

Family 


My second wife and I were married 
in the spring of 1981. This coincided with 
my father’s stroke, which led to his death. 
He was in Honolulu. It was his ritual to 
go to Honolulu for the winter. Usually, 
he’d leave around Thanksgiving and 
come back in March. In 1981 he was 
there with his second wife—he’d gotten 
married three or four years after my 
mother passed away—and he had a 
stroke. His right side was paralyzed, and 
he lost his ability to speak. He was eighty- 
seven years old at the time. 

Although Dad was in very good 
health for a man his age, he didn’t last 
much longer. We didn’t have any reason 
to believe that he was going to go then, 
and it was a tremendous shock to us. . . 
maybe even a bigger shock to me than 
my brother and sister. I had worked for 
so many years under his tutelage. He was 
my mentor, and we had done so many 
things together. Because we had come so 
far, and because we had fulfilled his 
dream, and because his dream had be¬ 
come my dream, I missed him terribly. 

When the realization hit me that I 
would no longer have him to fall back 
on when I needed him, I was depressed. 
Many years before I had reached an adult 
understanding of things and an adult ca¬ 
pacity to keep myself from getting in dif¬ 
ficulties: I knew what the right path was; 
I knew right from wrong. I knew that I 
ought to do right, and, essentially, that’s 
what I’d been doing for many years, but 
without my dad I was afraid that I could 
lose my way again. 


304 / my father’s son 


I was around fifty years old at the time. The mid-life cri¬ 
sis is real, and I went through it. Maybe not everybody goes 
through it, but I know that I went through it, and it was 
complicated by my dad’s death. I had been divorced from my 
first wife since 1977. We had separated in 1972, and I had 
attempted for three or four years to heal the marriage and 
put it back together, because I did have two young children 
that I was concerned about. I knew that divorce wouldn’t be 
helpful as far as they were concerned, and usually it’s the 
children that suffer in a marriage when there’s a divorce. Well, 
my first wife took it upon herself to force the divorce, and I 
got the decree. We were divorced in 1977. 

During the time that I was separated from my wife and 
living apart from her, I met Patty Sakelaris, a lady who was 
in the same situation as I. She was separated from her hus¬ 
band, and she had children, and we had similar problems. 
She was married to a Greek fellow whom I knew, and I had 
known her before they separated. We became attracted to 
each other for more reasons than just the fact that we were 
in similar situations. Both of us, because of our failed mar¬ 
riages, and because of the children involved, pretty much 
agreed that we did not want to be married. That was not an 
answer, especially in our situation. When we both got di¬ 
vorced, we liked each other enough that we decided to live 
together, rather than be married. Our children got along very 
well, and that helped us, because we had a family situation 
that we and the children were happy in. 

Patty had graduated from college in California, and she 
wanted to become an audiologist; but she had three chil¬ 
dren, and it was difficult for her to do that. She had an aunt 
who was not working, who was real good with children, and 
we arranged for her aunt to watch the children, and she be¬ 
gan to work on her speech therapy and audiology degree at 
the University of Nevada. Her children were four, five, and 
six, or somewhere in that area—maybe even a little younger 


Marriages and Family / 305 


than that. Her two daughters became close friends with my 
daughter, Toni, and they’re still friends. 

I agreed to help Patty go to college and on to graduate 
school. Then, when my father passed away, there was this 
huge void in my life, and I settled on the idea that the way to 
fill it was to get married. So I talked Patty into it, and we got 
married in 1981. Looking back on it, if we had not gotten 
married, we probably would have lived together for a long 
time without a great deal of difficulty, but we got married for 
the wrong reasons. If I had waited awhile, I would have reab 
ized that no one could fill the void caused by my father’s 
death. It was going to have to heal itself. But we did get mar- 
ried, and it wasn’t too long before we realized that we had 
done it for the wrong reasons. 

My first wife and I had joint custody of our children, and 
they spent much of their time with us. The older they be- 
came, the easier it was for us to see that the children really 
weren’t going to suffer as much as we thought they were. My 
second marriage lasted approximately three years, and we 
mutually agreed that it was probably better for everyone con- 
cerned that we get divorced. It was an amicable separation. 

I am happy that I was instrumental in Patty getting her 
degree as a speech therapist and her certification as an audi- 
ologist. I was also helpful in getting her to understand that 
audiologists are professional people that do the testing, but 
the real money to be made in the hearing industry is in selh 
ing hearing aids. I’m proud that she went on and got into 
business with the financial help I gave her during the di¬ 
vorce, and she owns the Reno Hearing and Balance Center 
in Reno. 

My son Pete was born in November 1958. My daughter 
from that marriage was named after my mother, Antonia, 
but we call her Toni. Neither gave me anywhere near the 
trouble that I gave my folks. 


306 / MY father’s son 


Pete III went to the University of Colorado, and he gradu¬ 
ated with a degree in business. After graduation, Pete came 
to work for us at the Sands. Over the years, he was given 
many different responsibilities and did an outstanding job in 
each of them. Eventually he was made a vice president and a 
member of the board. Pete left the Sands in September of 
1999 to enter McGeorge Law School. 

In 1958, when my son was born, we built a home out on 
the end of Canyon Drive, and we lived in that home until 
1971. Toni was born in 1964, so she attended Roy Gomm 
School, where her brother went, and then she went on to 
Swope, and then she also went on to Reno High, just like 
Pete III did. I had very little difficulty with Toni. The usual 
things—the drugs, the girlfriend and boyfriend problems— 
simply didn’t happen to either one of my children. If they 
experimented with marijuana and other kinds of drugs, it 
wasn’t very much, and Toni was very selective in her choice 
of boyfriends. I was spared all those problems, and I’ve been 
so thankful for that. 



The Three Petes at Harrah’s Steak House, 1975. Right to left, my 
dad, Pete Sr.; my son, Pete III; and me, Pete Jr. 








Marriages and Family / 307 


Toni was a little bit 
more independent than 
my son. I wanted her to 
go to the University of 
Nevada, but she wanted 
to go to the University 
of Colorado. So I agreed 
to let her go, and she 
went for a year and a 
half, maybe two, and 
then her independence 
came out again. 

Toni dropped out 
and lived in Boulder for 
awhile, working as a 
waitress. Then she went 
back to the University 
of Colorado and got a 
teaching degree. After 
graduation, Toni re¬ 
turned to Reno and taught at the Sparks Middle School and 
the Mendive School. She later got a degree in counseling 
and is now working on a Ph.D. in educational psychology at 
the University of Nevada. Toni has one child, whose name 
is Hannah. 

I’ve been married to my third wife since 1989. Her name 
is Althea. She was born in Reno, and her parents, N ick and 
Vaslie Pappas, are Greek. Althea was bom in 1949. Her grand¬ 
parents and her parents were friends of my parents, and I 
remember all of them from my youth. We were in the AHEPA 
together. We attended the Greek church together, and we 
used to celebrate the Greek holidays together, along with 
the rest of the small Greek community. Both her mother and 
father were leaders in the Greek community, and her mother 



Antonia “Toni” Cladianos. “Toni was 
a little bit more independent than my 
son.” 






308 / MY father’s son 


was a charter member of the Daughters of Penelope, along 
with my mother. I knew her family very well. 

When it came time for Althea to go to college, she de- 
cided to go to Chicago. She has relatives in Chicago, and it 
was a natural place for her to go. She attended Lake Forest 
College, graduated with a degree in American Studies, and 
was awarded a teaching certificate. She taught in the Chi' 
cago area for several years and then she got a job selling life 
and health insurance and worked at that for a few years. 

In 1987 Althea had been home for Christmas to visit her 
family, and she was returning to Chicago. I was on my way to 
Chicago, as well, for a meeting with some travel agents. When 
I got on the airplane in Reno, she was sitting in a seat in one 
of the first seven or eight rows, and the seat next to her was 
empty, so I sat down next to her and talked with her all the 
way to Chicago. She told me about her life, what she’d been 
doing all those years, and asked me to meet some of her cous¬ 
ins, who I had never met. We got together, and we went to 
some great Greek restaurants, which I enjoyed immensely, 
because good Greek restaurants are difficult to find. And I 
met her two aunts, who I knew from our younger days in 
Reno, and I found them to be wonderful people. 

I came back to Reno. At the time we were trying to de¬ 
velop a package business from the Midwest, because we had 
some pretty good airline connections in those days. (That 
was right after deregulation.) We were doing a lot of market¬ 
ing in that area, and I was flying back there a lot. I’d make 
the initial contacts, help create the package with the whole¬ 
salers, and then I’d turn it over to other people. Chicago was 
a fairly new market for us, because after deregulation there 
were so many airlines flying back and forth. Althea had a 
wonderful knowledge of the Reno-Tahoe area, and she liked 
it a lot. She’d come back whenever she could to visit. It oc¬ 
curred to me that she would be a great sales lady for the Reno- 


Marriages and Family / 309 


Tahoe area, because she was very knowledgeable and enthu¬ 
siastic about it. 

One of the problems that we faced when we went into a 
new market was that hardly anybody knew anything about 
Reno. When you’d mention Reno, a lot of people would say 
to you, “Well, where’s that?” They had no idea, and most of 
them didn’t know that Reno was so close to Lake Tahoe, or 
that we had the mountains and all the other wonderful things 
that we have to do here. You had to sell Reno. If you could 
sell Reno, then they’d come. Saying, “Well, you know, I have 
a hotel-casino; why don’t you come visit me?” simply didn’t 
work. It worked a lot better to sell Reno first and all the 
attractions that Reno had, and then you could say, “And by 
the way, we have gaming, and we have a hotel-casino, and 
we have these packages.” 

I broached the subject with Althea about being our rep¬ 
resentative in her area. We did shows in cities that were close 
to Chicago: Milwaukee, Cleveland, Toledo, Toronto, and 
Minneapolis. I thought if we had a representative, then that 
rep could go to these shows and sell Reno and at the same 
time pass out our brochures. It would be less expensive for 
us, and it would take a lot less of my time. Somebody enthu¬ 
siastic like her, I felt, would really be good for our company. 

Althea’s job wasn’t a nine-to-five kind of job. She was 
out on the road most of the time. She didn’t have to be at 
work any particular time, and she worked on a commission. 
She was very interested in my idea, and her boss agreed, be¬ 
cause a lot of this work took place on weekends. We worked 
out a deal with her to do these shows, and I went back there 
for the first few times and did the shows with her. I tried to 
train her in how I wanted her to do these shows, and because 
of the time that I spent with her, I got to know her very well. 
Then I became very fond of her . . . but I liked her ability, as 
well. She was doing a wonderful job for us, and I got her 
working with Canadian Airlines. 


310 / MY FATHER’S SON 


I got to where I found myself making excuses to spend 
time with Althea. She was very attractive, and I was happy 
that she was doing such a great job for our company and that 
I liked her so much. Eventually, I proposed marriage to her. 
We talked about it for quite awhile before she eventually 
agreed to marry me and return to Reno. Althea and I have a 
good marriage, and my in-laws are all wonderful, so I’ve added 
them to my family, and I feel good about it. 

It was our plan right from the beginning to have at least 
one child, if not two, and I was excited about it, because I’ve 
always loved children. I knew that I was at an age that hav¬ 
ing children may not have been the wisest thing to do, espe¬ 
cially for the child, because I might not be around for long, 
but Althea wanted it, and I agreed with it, and so we planned 
it. I was dubious from the beginning that it would happen, 
but I was hopeful that it would. 

Lo and behold, in 1991 we had a baby girl that we began 
calling Kiki even before she was born. Her given name is 



“I found myself making excuses to spend time with Althea. She eventu¬ 
ally agreed to marry me .... ” 




Marriages and Family / 311 


Leslie, but I call her 
Kiki. My godfather’s old- 
est daughter was nick- 
named Kiki. I always 
liked the name. 

My brother John was 
born in 1938. He was 
nine years younger than 
me. He was born a 
month later than he 
should have been, and 
the doctor had to deliver 
him by cesarean opera- 
tion. When he was born, 
he had a broken collar 
bone and contracted 
pneumonia. He was very 
ill when he was a baby. 

In the 1930s childbirth was a lot more difficult than it is 
today. The doctors didn’t know nearly as much as they do 
now, and my mother had a very difficult time for a year or 
two. 

Because of the difference in our ages, John and I never 
got to go to the same school together. I never really got as 
close as I wanted to, and then I began my college career; 
and, looking back on it, I should have been a better brother 
to him. I think I was a little too self-centered. I don’t think I 
gave it the kind of effort that I should have, and my brother 
had even more difficulty with my dad than I did in certain 
matters. 

After high school, John went to UNR for a year, and 
then he went to Arizona State University at Tempe for a 
year or so. Then he just dropped out of school and wouldn’t 
go back, and it caused a problem between him and my dad. 



Kiki at age six. 







312 / MY father’s SON 


That all healed over eventually, and he came back and went 
to work in the business with us, and he was a wonderful help. 
He took to the business very well, and he liked the gaming 
end of the business. He learned it, and he worked hard at it, 
so I was able to pretty much relegate the slot machines and 
the pit to him. 

Slot machines about that time were changing. The old 
mechanical machines were going out of existence. The new 
electromechanical machines were coming into play, and so 
the slot machine that I knew, that I had grown up with and 
knew how to operate, was disappearing. My brother came 
along just at the right time. He learned a great deal about 
the new machines, and I concentrated on trying to run the 
overall business. It was a wonderful situation for all of us, 
because he had a place that he liked and was good at, and I 
could depend on him. 

At my brother’s urging, we put in live games, because he 
could see that it would make us a real casino, rather than just 
a place with some slot machines. As we grew and prospered, 
my brother and I saw eye to eye, and we became great friends. 
We used to water-ski a lot together. We hunted together, 
and we became the companions that I had wanted earlier in 
my life. 

Unfortunately for my brother, he inherited my mother’s 
genes. My mother died when she was fifty-four years old, and 
she had a great deal of cardiovascular difficulty and diabetes, 
and my brother wound up with a blocked artery in his right 
leg. He had to have an operation in 1981, and the doctor 
told him he was afraid that at some point in the future he 
might lose that leg. Eventually, he did lose his leg. He must 
have had over forty operations over a period of twenty years. 

When we went public in 1985, John sold some of his 
stock, so he was able to retire, and he moved to Hawaii. He 
bought a fishing boat, and he and a couple of partners were 
taking people out deep-sea fishing. But he did not take care 


Marriages and Family / 313 


of himself as he should 
have done. He needed 
to diet stringently and 
quit smoking and cut 
down on alcohol, but he 
just had this idea that 
what was going to be was 
going to be. We lost him 
in October of 2000, and 
he suffered mightily be- 
fore he died. It was for- 
tunate, I think, that he 
finally let go, because 
the pain that he went 
through was simply ter- 
rihle. 

When John passed 
away, he had been mar- 
ried over twenty years to 
his second wife, Sandy. He had previously been married to a 
lady named Linda, and they had two children, Adrienne, 
who died of cancer at the age of thirty-eight, and Jonathan, 
a doctor in New Orleans. Jonathan and his wife have two 
boys who are two and three years old. John was very proud of 
his family. 

My sister, Katherene, is only two years younger than I 
am, so I was, in a sense, closer to her for a longer time than I 
was to my brother. We were a lot closer to the same age, and 
we had some of the same experiences, although she did have 
a much different experience than I did growing up. My fa¬ 
ther was an old-fashioned Greek, and amazing as it seems 
today, he wouldn’t let her date when she was in high school, 
[laughter] When she entered the University of Nevada, my 
dad still had this same idea. She began to date, anyway, and 



Right to left: John, Katherene, and 
me, 1995. 








314 / MY father’s SON 


didn’t tell him about it. It was a very difficult position for 
her, and it was her feeling that eventually my dad was going 
to find a “nice Greek boy” to marry her, and she was afraid 
that he was going to try to force her into an arranged mar- 
riage. I understand exactly why she would feel that way, be¬ 
cause of the way things had gone. It took a great deal of cour¬ 
age for her to do what she did. 

The only way that Katherene could see out of that whole 
situation was to run off and get married. Now, there may 
have been another answer, but that was her answer. She was 
eighteen years old. It came as a great shock to all of us. My 
mother understood, but my father and I didn’t. My dad re¬ 
fused to speak to her for two months, but my mother finally 
prevailed, and that situation changed. The marriage wasn’t 
the best marriage in the world, and after a few years they 
divorced. She had one child whose name is Deborah, who 
lives here in Reno and has two children of her own, so my 
sister has two grandchildren. 

During the years that we grew up as children, looking 
back on it now, I feel guilty that I didn’t treat Katherene 
better than I did. She was my younger sister, and it’s hard for 
me to put this in words, but I didn’t want to be bothered 
with her. I guess that’s the feeling I had. My mother would 
say to me, “You have to look out for your younger sister.” 

And I’d say, “Ah, gee, Mom. Do I have to do that? You 
know, I got my friends, and I have things I want to do, and I 
don’t want to be concerned about her.” 

But my mother and father did instill strong family feel¬ 
ings in me, and even though I resented it, I tried to do the 
best I could. I’m sure I could have done a better job. I’m 
positive I could have done a better job. 

Katherene is a very talented person. She always made 
very good grades in school. She’s a person who has deep pow- 


Marriages and Family / 315 


ers of concentration, and she’s been a tremendous help to 
me and to our business. She began to work in the business, 
just like my brother and I did, after she’d gotten divorced. 
She did a variety of things, but she was particularly talented 
at furnishing and interior and exterior decoration. 

Katherene is married to Mark Latham, who also has 
worked for us for many years. Mark was a construction engi¬ 
neer, and when he retired he wanted something to do, so we 
brought him into the business to work for my brother. Mark 
is a great host, and he knows many of our customers. 

By 1997 it was apparent to me that the gaming business 
in northern Nevada was becoming increasingly dependent 
upon attracting locals to its casinos. I had no experience in 
local business—my success had come through appealing to 
tourists, charter groups, and others from out of town. Also, I 
was approaching 70, and I had a young daughter with whom 



Right to left: My son, Mark Latham, me, and four Alaska Salmon. 










316 / MY father’s SON 


I wanted to spend more time. It was time to step down and 
get someone else to run the company. As luck would have it, 
Ferenc Szony became available when the Hilton, which he 
was running, got sold. 

Ferenc took over from me as president and CEO in Janu¬ 
ary, 1998. He’s done a great job. The year that ended June 
30, 2000, was the first profitable year for the Sands since 1995. 
We added a new restaurant, Mel’s Diner, so we were able to 
close our Palm Court Restaurant on the second floor. (Mel’s 
Diner took its place.) Mel’s is on the ground floor, which is 
always good in a casino, because restaurants on the second 
floor are difficult for people to get to; and, because it’s situ¬ 
ated on Fourth Street, it pulls a lot of people in off the street. 
Not only are they able to service our customers, but they 
actually pull people into our casino. We’ve noticed a decided 
increase in the slot play in the area adjacent to Mel’s. 

In the last several 
years, our company has 
had an amazing turn¬ 
around with Ferenc at 
the helm. Since 1995, 
we’ve gone from a com¬ 
pany that was losing as 
much as $2 million or 
$3 million in a year to 
one that is showing a 
healthy profit. Our pros¬ 
pects for the future look 
good. We’ve changed 
the direction of the 
company. The company 
now has a large local Ferenc Szony. “We had an amazing 
business, and it’s grow- turnaround with him at the helm." 




Marriages and Family / 317 


ing all the time. Ferenc has developed a team of people that 
are motivated and that are doing a great job. 

My sister Katherene is still chairman of the board, and 
my son Pete III is treasurer and sits on the board. Together 
with Ferenc, they are providing the leadership and vision we 
need to prosper in a changing operating environment. A re¬ 
cent step toward further diversifying and building our busi¬ 
ness outside of downtown Reno was our June, 2002 purchase 
of the Gold Ranch Casino and California Lottery Station on 
the state line at Verdi. 

My father was a penniless immigrant who couldn’t speak 
the language when he got off the boat in Ellis Island in 1912. 
From that start, for our family to have gotten to where we 
are today is amazing. I consider myself extremely lucky, far 
luckier than I am smart. I am my father’s son. He gave me 
opportunity, direction, and guidance; and he forced me, in 
some cases, to do things that I needed to do. I was very lucky 
to have my mother and dad there for me. 

I’m proud that I had a hand in building what my family 
has now, and I hope in some way that both my mother and 
father can see where we are today. Even though we had some 
difficulties, we’re on our way back up, and I have confidence 
that we will continue to achieve great success in our busi¬ 
ness and in our personal lives. 



Glossary 
of Terms 


THE GAMING TERMS in this glossary 
were defined by Dwayne Kling. When using 
the glossary the reader should keep in mind 
that these terms have evolved informally 
from within the gambling subculture. Their 
meanings are often imprecise; they may have 
meanings not listed here; and their use may 
be idiosyncratic or specific to certain times 
and places in the history of gaming in 
America. 

This glossary is meant for general use. In 
addition to defining terms that appear in My 
Father’s Son, it includes many others widely 
used by people associated with the gaming 
industry. 

agent, n. A cheater working with a dealer to 
cheat a casino. 

bill acceptors, n. Devices built into slot and 
video poker machines that accept paper cun 
rency (e.g. $1, $5, $20, and $50 bills). 

blanket roll, n. A controlled roll of the dice 
made on a blanket or a bed. 

bottoms, n. Mis-spotted dice. Normal dice 
are spotted so that opposing sides add up to a 
total of ten, but this is not the case with 
mismarked dice. (See also “tops.”) 

box man, n. A person who supervises the 
craps game and is responsible to the pit boss. 

breaking card, n. (Twenty-one) A card that 
will give a player or a dealer a total over 
twenty-one, thereby causing the player or 
dealer to lose. 


320 / PETE CLADIANOS 


brush games, n. (Keno) A game in which the keno writer marks 
the ticket with a brush in the traditional Chinese style (as op- 
posed to the method currently used by most casinos in which the 
writer marks the ticket using a black crayon). 

bust-out man, n. A cheater who specializes in switching crooked 
dice in and out of a game. 

card counter, n. A twenty-one player who tracks, by suit and by 
number, the cards that have already been played in a game. 

catwalk, n. In early casinos, an area in the ceiling above the ca¬ 
sino floor, usually concealed by one-way mirrors through which 
one could observe the games. In most casinos this type of observa¬ 
tion has been replaced by video surveillance. (Also called a “look¬ 
out.”) 

clean up, v. To take illegal dice out of a game. 

coin bank, n. A cabinet with drawers in which a change person 
stores the portion of his/her bankroll that is not currently in use. 

come bet, n. (Craps) A bet on the next roll of the dice after a 
point has been established. 

conditioning, n. (Keno) The procedure of inscribing, on the right- 
hand side of the ticket, the total price of the ticket, the number of 
ways, and the price of the ways (i.e., it describes the player’s wa¬ 
ger). 

crimp, v. To mark cards by bending them slightly to allow identi¬ 
fication of a card. 

crossroader, n. A person who cheats casino games. 

daub, v. To mark cards with coloring to allow identification of a 
card. 


Glossary of Terms / 321 


daybook, n. A daily report in which supervisors enter anything of 
importance that happens in a twenty-four-hour period. 

dead game, n. A game that is open but has no players. 

deuce dealing, n. A form of cheating in which the top card of the 
deck is not dealt, but rather the second card, or deuce, is dealt. 

do side (to bet on the), v. (Craps) To bet the dice will pass (or 
win). 

doing something, v. Cheating a game. 

don’t side (to bet on the), v. (Craps) To bet the dice will not pass 
(or win). 

double odds, n. An “odds bet” taken by a player at twice the 
original bet. 

draw, n. 1) A keno ticket with the winning numbers punched out 
for a given game, used as an overlay by keno checkers to deter¬ 
mine winners and payoffs; 2) A specific keno race, game, or draw¬ 
ing. 

drink stamp, n. An instrument used by a pit boss to authorize free 
drinks at the bar. 

drop, n. 1) The total amount of cash handled plus the markers 
drawn at a game during a given time frame; 2) The amount of 
money emptied from a slot machine. 

drop box, n. A receptacle under a gaming table in which cur¬ 
rency used to buy chips or tokens is deposited (or “dropped”) by 
the dealer. 


eighty-six, v. To ban from a casino. 


322 / PETE CLADIANOS 


end play, n. A wager made with very few cards left in the deck, 
when a card counter could have an advantage. 

eye in the sky, n. An observation post (or person in that post) 
used for purposes of monitoring casino activity. 

field bet, n. (Craps) A bet that covers the numbers 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 
11, and 12 and pays double on 2 and triple on 12. 

flat, adj. Illegal or crooked (relative to casinos or particular games). 

flat bets, n. A bet that pays even money. 

flat dice, n. Dice which are not true cubes (i.e., crooked dice). 

floor man, n. A person who supervises a specific area of gaming 
(e.g., slots, pit games). 

from the shoulder (to bet), adv. To make a high first bet. 

full comp, n. A situation in which every item is complimentary 
(i.e., there is no charge to the customer). 

going for the money, v. To cheat someone out of his/her money. 

hard eight, n. A roll of the dice consisting of two fours, one set of 
fours on each die. (A hard six would be a roll involving two threes, 
a hard ten would have two fives.) 

heat, n. Pressure from authorities or customers. 

heavy, n. A person who engages in an illegal action during a game. 

high roller, n. A bettor of high and consistent action. 

hit a keno ticket, v. To win on a keno ticket. 


Glossary of Terms / 323 


hitting into stiffs, v. (Twenty-one) Taking a card when one’s cur¬ 
rent total is 12 or over. 

hold, n. The amount of money won by a slot machine or a table 
game. 

horn bet, n. A one-row bet on the craps table covering the num¬ 
bers 2, 3, 11, and 12. 

juice, n. Connections with important people. 

key man, n. A person working on the casino floor who performs 
minor repairs on slot machines and in some cases pays jackpots. 

lammer, n. 1) A small disc used to indicate the amount of credit 
extended to a player; 2) A disc used to designate the value of a 
chip or a check, usually on a roulette wheel. 

layout, n. The cloth covering on a gambling table. 

lookout, n. (See “catwalk.”) 

marker, n. An instrument used to extend a certain amount of 
credit to a player. 

mechanic, n. A dealer who manipulates the tools of the trade 
(e.g., dice, cards) in an illegal manner for the express purpose of 
altering the outcome of a game. 

Megabucks, n. A dollar-operated, progressive slot-machine game, 
linked via network to casinos throughout Nevada. 

microfilm, v. (Keno) To make a film record of tickets as they are 
written to discourage cheating. 

muck, v. To illegally enter extra cards into a deck. 


324 / PETE CLADIANOS 


number one, n. (Keno and pit games) Person who is in charge of 
a department for an eight-hour period (comparable to a shift su¬ 
pervisor). 

on and off bets (to pay), v. (Craps) To use a dealer’s shortcut 
method of paying a player’s come bet that is coming off a number 
at the same time that the same player’s new wager is going on that 
number. 

one dice, two dice, etc., n. Table numbers for the various crap 
games in a pit set up. 

peek, v. To sneak a look at the top card of the deck. 

point, n. (Craps) A number established by the shooter on the first 
roll of the dice. 

progressives, n. A group of two or more slot machines electroni¬ 
cally linked to share a single, common j ackpot payoff amount. The 
payoff “progresses” as coins are inserted into any of the linked 
machines. 

proposition bets, n. (Craps) One-roll bets or bets on the “hard 
ways” (i.e., on numbers 4, 6, 8, and 10). 

Quartermania, n. A quarter-operated, progressive slot machine, 
linked via network to casinos throughout Nevada. 

read the table, v. To count the bankroll, or the total amount of 
chips, on a table. 

reel strips, n. Strips, usually made of plastic, which are attached 
to the reels on slot machines. The arrangement of various sym¬ 
bols on the reel strips (e.g., cherries, bells, and bars) determines 
the payoffs on the machine and therefore affects the percentage of 
the slot machine. 


Glossary of Terms / 325 


repayment, n. The paying back of a credit marker. 

sand, v. To mark the edges of playing cards with sandpaper. The 
location of the sanded area allows the cheater to know the de- 
nomination of a card. 

score, v. To win a lot of money. 

shift manager, n. The individual in charge of an entire casino for 
an eight'hour shift. 

shift supervisor, n. The individual in charge of a particular de- 
partment for an eight-hour shift. 

spotting, v. Marking the numbers on a keno ticket. 

squares, n. Legal dice. 

station-operated game, n. A keno game for which bets can be 
taken at an annex or “outstation”. 

stick man, n. The dealer who calls a craps game and moves the 
dice to the shooter. 

stiff, n. (Twenty-one) A hand that could go over twenty-one if a 
player or dealer takes a hit. 

store, n. A club or casino. 

take and pay, v. (Twenty-one, craps, and roulette) A procedure 
in which a dealer collects the losing bets before paying the win¬ 
ning bets. 

third base, n. The last position on a twenty-one game. 

tokes, n. Tokens, monies, or chips given to dealers by players as 
gratuities or tips. 


326 / PETE CLADIANOS 


tops, n. MiS'Spotted dice. Normal dice are spotted so that oppos- 
ing sides add up to a total of ten, but this is not the case with 
mismarked dice. (See also “bottoms.”) 

totaling of payoffs, n. (Twenty-one, craps, and roulette) The 
procedure in which a dealer, when paying a player who has won 
more than one wager on a single decision, pays one total amount 
rather than paying each wager individually. 

track, v. To keep records on the amount of gambling action re¬ 
ceived from particular customers. 

unit, n. (As in “unit bet” or “unit deal”) A fixed amount through 
which bets are made (e.g., “He bets in five-dollar units.”). 

way tickets, n. Keno tickets with the spots grouped so that two or 
more arrangements are bet on by the player. 

whip the dice, v. (Craps) To send the dice back quickly. 


A 


Index 


Allen, Jud, 147,271-272 

American Hellenic Educational Progressive 

Association (AHEPA), 60, 68-71, 307 

Anastasakis, Angelo, 53 

Anastasakis, John, 53 

Angelides, Angie, 65 

Arby’s (Reno, Nevada), 156, 159 

Ascuaga, John, 213, 272 

Atlantis Casino Resort (Reno, Nevada), 272, 

275, 293, 295 

Austin family, 107-108 

B 

Bally Distributing Company, 118 
Bally’s Hotel-Casino (Reno, Nevada), 119, 
122 

Baskin-Robbins (Reno, Nevada), 157-158 

Bay Saint Louis, Mississippi, 225, 245 

Beasley, Bud, 50 

Beckelman, Mr., 300 

Benetti and Douglass, 25 

Benetti, Louie Jr., 27 

Benetti, Louie Sr., 27 

Bengtson, Jon, 173-174, 176-177, 179-180, 
183, 202, 208, 216, 221, 226, 229, 231, 232, 
235, 244-245, 250 

Billinghurst Middle School (Reno, Nevada), 
46 

Blanchard, Ruth, 188 
Bluebird Club (Reno, Nevada), 48 
Boomtown Hotel-Casino (Verdi, Nevada), 
272 

Boyd, Lred, 278 
Brazil, George, 38 
Brevick, John, 234, 250 
Bridgeman, Henry, 99 
Bruce, Leona, 86-87 
Brueckner, Willi, 32-33, 58 
Buckhorn Lodge (Lake Tahoe), 22 
Bums, John, 53-54 
Byerley, Don, 191-192 


328 / Index 


C 

Cal-Neva Club (Reno, Nevada), 114 
Canadian Airlines, 151-153, 279 
Canadian Holidays, 151-153 
Carano family, 272 
Carano, Gary, 276 

Carlisle’s Printing (Reno, Nevada), 106 
Carr, George, 114 

Carter, Rick, 223-224, 227-228, 232-234, 238-239, 244, 248-249, 
251,253 

Casino Magic (Bay St. Louis, Mississippi), 225-226 

Cavanaugh, John, 266 

Cecil’s Bar (Lake Tahoe), 21 

Chikami, Buster, 56 

Christianson brothers, 107, 142 

Circus Circus Hotel and Casino (Reno, Nevada), 137-139, 244- 

245,254-255, 259-260, 262,275,293 

City Center Pavilion (Reno, Nevada), 263 

Cladianos, Adrienne, 313 

Cladianos, Althea (nee Pappas), 65, 307-310 

Cladianos, Antonia (nee Gourgouras), 1, 3, 4, 7, 11, 29, 41-43, 

45, 60-61, 63, 69-70, 72-73, 87, 90, 110, 117-118, 131, 185, 308, 

312,317 

Cladianos, Antonia “Toni,” 91, 305-307 

Cladianos Building (Reno, Nevada), 10-11, 17, 24, 52, 64, 68, 

105-106, 117 

Cladianos, Cladianos, and Johnson (CC&J), 125 
Cladianos, Dan, 4-11, 15, 64-65, 73 

Cladianos, John, 11, 45-46, 72, 108, 125, 176, 189-190, 311-313 
Cladianos, Jonathan, 313 

Cladianos, Katherene, 11, 63, 71-73, 91, 95, 108, 125, 176, 179, 
282,313-314,317 

Cladianos, Leslie “Kiki,” 67, 310-311 
Cladianos, Linda, 313 

Cladianos, Pete Sr., 1-41, 43-44, 54-55, 58, 64-66, 69-73, 75, 85- 

87,90-91, 93-95,103,105-108,110,112,114, 117,129,144,171, 

179, 214,303,305-306,313-314, 317 

Cladianos, Pete III, 91, 229, 282, 285, 305-306, 315, 317 

Cladianos, Sandy, 313 

Clifford, Chuck, 127 

Cohen, Fred, 175 

Collins, Mr., 135 

Colonial Motor Lodge (Reno, Nevada), 287 


Index / 329 


Comstock Hotel and Casino (Reno, Nevada), 138-139, 287, 289- 
292 

Conforte, Joe, 103-104, 172 
Connally, Dennis, 245, 250 

Copa Casino (Gulfport, Mississippi), 222-223, 228, 233, 239, 242- 
243,253 

Corbett, Roger, 50 

Cordish, David, 297, 299 

Coronet Apartments (Reno, Nevada), 106 

Cowen, Charlie, 114 

Cox, Gladys, 188 

Cox, Pat, 91, 304-305 

Crest Apartments (Reno, Nevada), 95, 144 

Cromwell, Oliver, 175, 177 

D 

Dalrymple, “Dal,” 32 

Daughters of Penelope (Reno, Nevada), 69-70 

Davey, Ben, 108 

Delanoy, Drake, 172 

Demosthenes, Peter, 67-68 

Dennis, Don, 200, 202-203 

Denny’s (Reno, Nevada), 97-98, 100, 102, 106, 108, 126 
Desert Sheet Metal Company (Reno, Nevada), 84 
Devereux, Mr., 148-151 
Dewing, Bruce, 190-191, 202, 207-208 
DiMaggio, Vic, 205-206, 208 

Donaldson, Lufkin, and Jenrette (DLJ), 173-177, 217, 221 

Donnelly, Marian, 186-189 

Douglass, Bob, 27 

Douglass family, 287-292 

Douglass, Jack, 6, 27 

Drews, George, 173-174 

Ducharme, Mr., 291 

Durkee Travel Agency, 147 

Durkee, Vern, 147-148 

Durney, Peter, 203 

E 

Economy Market (Reno, Nevada), 8-9 
Edwards, Bill, 238-239 

El Rancho Bar and Motel (Reno, Nevada), 31-32, 35-39, 85, 95, 
117,269 


330 / Index 


El Rancho Number Two (Reno, Nevada), 93, 95, 97, 102, 106- 
107,117, 162 

Eldorado Elotel and Casino (Reno, Nevada), 139, 254-255, 259, 
262,276, 293 
Elliott, Russell R., 88 

F 

Fair and Recreation Board (Reno, Nevada), 273 
Fallon Naval Air Station (Fallon, Nevada), 27-28 
Fanelli, Joe, 182 
Farahi, John, 293 

Farley’s Dude Ranch (Reno, Nevada), 31-32 

Fitzgerald, Fincoln, 25, 100, 114, 275 

Flamingo Hilton (Reno, Nevada), 140, 256, 261-262 

Forbes magazine, 179-180 

Forsman, Fran, 204 

Foster, Herb, 51 

Frontier Travel, 236 

Fuji, Mr., 56 

Funjet, 148 

G 

Gallagher, Mr., 50 

Gamma Eta Kappa (fraternity), 54 

Georgiadas, Chris, 185 

Goeddert, Warren, 201 

Gold Dust Motel, 266 

Gold Ranch Casino, 317 

Golden Hotel (Reno, Nevada), 79 

Golden Nugget (Fas Vegas, Nevada), 172 

Grand Casino (Gulfport, Mississippi), 228-229, 237-238 

Graves, Richard F., 137 

Greek War Relief, 60, 70 

Green, Terry, 223-224, 227-228, 232-234, 238-239, 244, 248-249, 

251 253 

Griffin, Jeff, 297 

Guisti, Marshall, 114 

Gulfside Casino Incorporated, 249 

Gulfside Casino Partnership, 249 


Index / 331 


H 

Hale, Clarence, 10, 23-24, 34-35 
Hale, Jim, 35 

Hale’s Drugstore (Reno, Nevada), 10, 17, 58 
Hallahan, Bob, 287 

Harolds Club (Reno, Nevada), 78, 100-102, 105, 111, 114, 119, 
139 272-273 

Harrah’sClub (Reno, Nevada), 100,105, 111, 114,119,139,172- 

173, 176, 180,182-183,256, 293 

Harry’s Business Machines (Reno, Nevada), 10 

Harvey’s Resort and Casino (Lake Tahoe), 83 

Hertz, Judah, 286-292 

Herz Jewelry (Reno, Nevada), 57 

Huskies Haven (Reno, Nevada), 47-48 

Hutchinson, Professor, 88 

Hyliger, Ken, 56 

I 

I. Magnin’s (Reno, Nevada), 57 
Inferno Club (Reno, Nevada), 58 
Ingram, Captain, 239 

International Gaming Technology (IGT), 122,172-174, 218, 220- 

221 

Irons, Bill, 165, 212 

Isle of Capri Casino (Gulfport, Mississippi), 225 

J 

J. A. Hogle (brokerage firm), 13, 58 
Jacobs, Lena, 35 

Jensen, Cheryl, 189 

John Ascuaga’s Nugget (Sparks, Nevada), 137, 246, 272, 275, 293, 
295 

Johnson, Ken, 21 
Joseph, Roger, 49 


332 / Index 


K 

Kakouris, Chris, 67 

Karadanis, George, 127-128, 298-299 

Keating, Hugh, 227 

Keene, Phil, 277-278 

Kendall, Babe, 38 

Kendall, Kenny, 38-39 

Kennedy, Charles, 199-200, 202 

Kevitts, Mr., 277-278 

Kickapoo Indian Tribe, 218, 219, 221 

King’s Inn (Reno, Nevada), 142 

Kopp, Tina, 189 

Kruckow, Etta, 188 

L 

LaCroix, Jerry, 124-125, 128, 161 
Lake Tahoe, 7-8, 21-23 
LaMacchia, Mr., 148 
Latham, Mark, 125, 315 
Lawton’s Store (Reno, Nevada), 47 
Laxalt, Paul, 272 
Lemberes, Alex, 66, 90 
Lemberes, Dula, 66 
Lemberes, Stella, 66 
Lippencott, Mr., 236 
Lougaris, John, 3, 64-66, 68, 72 

Lovelock Mercantile (Lovelock, Nevada), 33-35, 94-95, 108-109, 
117,176 

M 

McDonald, Kirby, 230-231 

McDonald, Stanley, 222-224, 227, 229-231, 233-235, 238, 242- 
245, 248-249 

MGM Grand Hotel and Casino (Reno, Nevada), 137-140, 259 
Mapes Hotel (Reno, Nevada), 111-112, 139 
Marnell-Corrao Construction Company, 144 
Mary S. Doten Elementary School (Reno, Nevada), 45 
Meckes, John, 54 

Mel’s Diner (Reno, Nevada), 156, 159 
Meredith, Mickey, 189 
Meyers, Guy, 39 
Michaels, Erica, 201 


Index / 333 


Milligan, Mr., 276-278 

Mississippi Belle Casino (Gulfport, Mississippi), 225 

Monarch Cafe (Reno, Nevada), 57 

Money Tree Casino (Reno, Nevada), 138-139 

Moore, Bob, 52, 88, 104 

Morris, Ella Mae, 38 

Moss, Larry, 83 

Mott, John, 250 

Mount Rose School (Reno, Nevada), 46 
Myers, Charles, 12 

N 

Narter, Neil, 245-246 

Nevada Resort Association, 272, 295 

Newco, 293-296, 298, 300 

Nichols, Gus, 67 

Nichols, Kiki, 67 

Nichols, Tom, 67 

Nick and Paul’s Service (Sparks, Nevada), 65 
North, Mr., 232 

Northern Nevada Gaming Association, 272 
Nugget (Sparks, Nevada), 80, 137 

O 

Obexer’s (Homewood, California), 22 
Ogden Services, 231 
Oleson, Swede, 32 

Oliver, John, 126-128, 130, 150, 191, 199 
One Sixteen Club (Reno, Nevada), 58-59 
Owen, Jim, 75-84, 87 

P 

Paffrath Photo Studio (Reno, Nevada), 10 

Palace Club (Reno, Nevada), 16-17, 259 

Pappas, Angelo, 66 

Pappas, Bill, 66 

Pappas, Catherine, 65 

Pappas, Gus, 65 

Pappas, James, 65 

Pappas, Nick, 65, 69, 307 

Pappas, Paul, 65 

Pappas, Rose, 66 


334 / Index 


Pappas, Vaslie (nee Argeres), 65, 69, 72, 307 

Palm Court Coffee Shop (Reno, Nevada), 157 

Payne, Walter, 24 

Pearce, Candy, 166 

Pengally, Curt, 167 

Pennington, Bill, 118 

Peppermill Hotel Casino (Reno, Nevada), 137,272, 275,293, 295, 

Pericle, Hank, 162-164 

Peters, Marcel, 32-33, 58 

Peterson, Viggo, 106 

Pete’s Novelty Company, 24 

Petricciani family, 15-16 

Petricciani, Silvio, 259 

Phillips, Lou, 183 

Pickens, Mike, 190-191 

Piculas, Jim, 86 

Piculas, Tom, 125, 128 

Pilzner, Mr., 268 

Pioneer Theater (Reno, Nevada), 273-274 
Pony Express Lodge (Sparks, Nevada), 101 
Popular Cafe (Reno, Nevada), 53 
Powers, Roy, 101 

President Casino (Gulfport, Mississippi), 225 
Primadonna Club (Reno, Nevada), 57, 111, 114 
Primm, Ernie, 114 
Project Restart, 268 

R 

Raggio, William J., 103-104, 172, 272 
Rayburn, Johnny, 22 
Redd, Si, 26, 118-123, 174 
Reed, Joe, 39 

Reno Army Air Base (Stead, Nevada), 28-29, 33 

Reno Chamber of Commerce, 271 

Reno High School (Reno, Nevada), 46, 49-50 

Reno Hilton (Reno, Nevada), 140-141, 261-262, 275, 293, 295 

Reno, Nevada, 3, 8 

Reno Redevelopment Agency, 295 

Reno Sparks Convention and Visitors Authority (RSCVA), 271- 
279 

Reno Sparks Convention Center, 274-275 
Reno Sparks Gospel Mission (Reno, Nevada), 266-267 
Rex Distributing Company, 25 
Reynolds, Rodney, 99 


Index / 335 


Richards, Charles, 12 

Rippy, Carrol, 126, 191-192 

Riverside Hotel (Reno, Nevada), 112, 172 

Robinson, Bill, 166-167, 235 

Root, Ray, 21, 33 

Rose, John, 68 

Ross, Tom, 104 

Roundup Bar (Reno, Nevada), 17, 35 
Rovetti, Harry, 52 
Ryan, Mr., 9 

S 

Sacramento, California, 5-8 

Sahara Hotel and Casino (Reno, Nevada), 114, 137-141 

Saint Anthony’s Greek Orthodox Church (Reno, Nevada), 70 

Saint Vincent’s Society (Reno, Nevada), 266-269 

Sakelaris, Patty, 304-305 

Sala, Frank, 52, 88-89 

Sampson, Floyd, 56 

Sampson, Phelan, 56 

San Rafael Military Academy (San Rafael, California), 46, 54-55, 
75 

Sands Motor Inn (Reno, Nevada), 108-110, 117-118, 214 

Sands Regency Casino and Hotel (Reno, Nevada), 105-106, 114, 

139, 141, 144, 161, 172, 180, 214, 256, 290 

Sapphire Gaming, 289 

Saul, Mr., 42 

Schmidt, Loran, 226 

Schreck, Frank, 289 

Scott, Neil, 46 

Scott, Shawn, 284-286 

Sears Roebuck (Reno, Nevada), 57 

Sheppard, Maurice, 180-182 

Shepperson, Wilbur, 88 

Ship and Bottle Bar (Reno, Nevada), 21, 58 

Ship Bar (Carson City, Nevada), 21 

Silver Legacy Resort Casino, 106, 244, 256-262, 293 

Silver Slipper (Las Vegas, Nevada), 81-82 

Silver State Lodge (Reno, Nevada), 99 

Slingerland and Hartford Insurance (Reno, Nevada), 10 

Smith, Raymond I. “Pappy,” 25, 101 

Southworth, “Pop,” 58 

South worth’s Cigar Store (Reno, Nevada), 57-58 
Sparks, Nevada, 137 


336 / Index 


Splash Casino (Tunica, Mississippi), 236 

Stakeholders Group, 294-300 

Stary, Gene, 162-164 

State Building (Reno, Nevada), 273 

Stokes, Wayne, 194 

Stone, George, 39 

Stratton, Jack, 181-182 

Sunderlin Shoes (Reno, Nevada), 57 

Sundowner Hotel-Casino (Reno, Nevada), 127-128, 298 

Szony, Ferenc, 140-141, 160, 183, 253, 261-163, 288-289, 316- 

317 

T 

Tahoe Tavern (Lake Tahoe), 22 
Tanner, Doug, 175 
Teamsters Union, 172 
Terroamina, Anthony, 239, 247 
Tilly, Vic, 231, 243 

Tony Roma’s (Reno, Nevada), 156, 158 
Torgeson, Marlin, 225-226 
Torvinen, Roy, 51,88 
Tri-Properties, 256, 258 

Truckee Meadows Tourism Facility and Revitalization Steering 
Committee, 294 
Tuntland, Larry, 183 
Turner, Clyde, 172-174, 245 

U 

Union Oil, 108 
V 

Varzos, Danny, 65 
Varzos, Perry, 65 

Velvet Ice Cream Company (Reno, Nevada), 68 
Victory, Cafe (Reno, Nevada), 57 

W 

W. P. Amusement Company, 24 
Wallace, Teri, 188 
Wayne, Willard, 24 
Webb, Del, 138-139 


Index / 337 


Weiss, Ed, 125 

Wendover, Nevada, 221 

Wheeler, Carl, 38 

Wilday, Mr., 276 

Williamson, Mr., 34 

Willis Motel (Reno, Nevada), 107 

Wilson’s Drugs (Reno, Nevada), 57 

Winchell’s Donuts (Reno, Nevada), 156, 158 

Wingfield, George, 9, 15, 32 

Wood, Art, 142, 144445 

Wood, Dave, 145, 176, 179, 183, 189, 208, 229, 232, 288 

Woodward, Barbara, 165-168 

Woolworth Store (Reno, Nevada), 57 

World War II, 1,36, 60-61,70 

Wright, Robin, 207 

Wynn, Steve, 172 

Y 

Yori Land and Livestock, 47 
Yori, Mark, 47 

Young’s Bijou (Lake Tahoe), 21 
Z 


Zante, Greece, 1-2, 11, 64 

Zeh, Chuck, 173, 200-202, 204, 207 



