James B. McMillan 




FIGHTING BACK 


A LIFE IN THE STRUGGLE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS 



Fighting Back: 

A Life in the Struggle for Civil Rights 

Interviewee: James B. McMillan with some additional material from Marie McMillan 

Interviewed: 1993-1995 
Published: 1997 
Interviewer: Gary E. Elliott 
UNOHP Catalog #173 


Description 

James B. McMillan was born in 1917 in a small town in racially segregated Mississippi. In that year the U.S. Supreme 
Court ruled that ordinances compelling residential segregation of the races were in violation of the Fourteenth 
Amendment. Gradually, over the next five decades, most of the legal foundation of racial discrimination in America 
was brought down, but McMillan’s life is confirmation of C. Vann Woodward’s observation that “there was more 
Jim Crowism than Jim Crow laws.” 

In 1922 James McMillan’s mother took her child and joined the swelling flood of blacks migrating to Northern 
industrial cities. They were fleeing continued segregation, violence, and the knowledge that African-Americans 
remained outside the protection of the law in the South. Moving first to New York, then to Philadelphia, to Detroit, 
and finally to a relatively stable life in Hamtramck, Michigan, the two experienced poverty, racism, and de facto 
segregation everywhere. They were also introduced to the color-blind power of political patronage, and to the 
economic opportunities of illegal enterprise for those shut out of the mainstream economy. 

McMillan learned from his mother to be outspoken and to work hard in school, and in high school he became a 
reasonably good student and an outstanding athlete. He was awarded an athletic scholarship to the University of 
Detroit, where he was the only black on the football team; but in his junior year, for reasons associated with race, 
he lost the scholarship and could afford to continue his studies only by working full time in an automobile factory. 
Persevering, he went on to earn a degree from Meharry Medical College’s School of Dentistry in 1944. 

Following service in the U. S. Army in World War II McMillan started a dental practice in Detroit. He was recalled 
to service at the end of the Korean War. After being discharged, he and his wife relocated to Las Vegas. McMillan 
liked Las Vegas from the beginning—it was a twenty-four hour town, with lots of live entertainment, gambling, 
sunshine, and money—but he encountered the same types of racial discrimination there that he had lived with all 
of his life. He would not put up with it. Within a year of his arrival he was speaking out and attacking segregation 
in Las Vegas with such passion and vehemence that he was elected president of the local branch of the NAACP. 
Under his leadership, and following the example of civil rights activists in the South, the branch was soon taking 
direct, confrontational action to end overt segregation in Las Vegas; and in 1960, end it they did, in dramatic and 
surprising fashion. 

Fighting Back is James B. McMillan’s memoir of a life spent fighting racial discrimination in its many forms. His 
story is personal, but it is representative of the experiences of thousands of other African-Americans who struggled 
to transform the Constitution from a document concerned primarily with property rights and federalism into a 


(Continued on next page.) 


Description (continued) 


charter for equality. Although the fuse had long been smoldering, the black Americans who took to the streets in 
1960 ignited a legal and constitutional revolution that eventually benefitted all disadvantaged groups in American 
society 

As the doors to full participation slowly began to open, many African-Americans who had marched for civil rights 
in the late 1950s and early 1960s sought new ways to advance the cause of racial equality. McMillan stepped down 
as president of the Las Vegas NAACP in 1961, but for over forty years he has continued to speak for the interests of 
the black community. He was appointed to the State Board of Dental Examiners, the Board of Directors of Health 
Plan of Nevada, and the Economic Opportunity Board Health Committee; and he served as a member of the 
Small Business Administration Advisory Council, chairman of the Governor’s Commission on Minority Business 
Enterprises, member of the Board of Directors and Editorial Board of KVBC Television, and director of the Clark 
County Boys’ Club. McMillan even ventured into election politics, and in 1992 he was elected to the non-partisan 
Clark County School Board. 

Although McMillan acknowledges that since the 1950s tremendous progress has been made toward what his wife 
Marie calls his great passion—’’the betterment of his people”—he worries that those gains will be wiped away by 
a rising tide of conservative reaction similar to the one that doomed the first reconstruction era. His unwavering 
support for affirmative action and majority-minority voting districts is a reflection of that concern. As in 1960, 
McMillan will not back down when the issue is equality—and the struggle continues. 


Fighting Back 




Fighting Back 


A LIFE IN THE STRUGGLE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS 


From oral histoiy interviews with Dr. James B. McMillan 

conducted by Coxy E. Elliott 
a narrative interpretation by R. T. King 


University of Nevada Oral Histoiy Program 



Publication of Fighting Back was made possible in part 
by gifts from Robert D. Faiss and the John Ben Snow Trust. 


Copyright 1997 
University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Reno, Nevada 89557 


All rights reserved. Published 1997 
Printed in the United States of America 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data-. 

King, R. T. (Robert Thomas), 1944- 

Fighting back : a life in the struggle for civil rights / from oral 
liistory interviews with Dr. James B. McMillan ; conducted by Gary E. 
Elliott; a narrative interpretation by R.T. King, 
p. cm. 

Includes index. 

ISBN 1-56475-374-3 (cloth) 

1. McMillan, James B., 1917- . 2. Afro-American civil rights 

workers—Nevada—Las Vegas—Biography. 3. Civil rights workers— 
Nevada—Las Vegas—Biography. 4. Afro-Americans—Segregation— 
Nevada—Las Vegas—History—20th century. 5. Las Vegas (Nev.)— 
Race relations. 6. Civil rights movements—Nevada—Las Vegas— 
History—20th century. I. Elliott, Gary, 1941- . II. McMillan, 

James B., 1917- . III. Title. 

F849.L35K56 1997 

979.3'135—dc21 97-38446 

CIP 


Publication Staff-. 
Production Manager-. Kathleen M. Coles 
Production Assistants: Danny K. Howard, Linda J. Sommer 

Jacket Photo by Dave Duarte 


Contents 


Preface vii 

Introduction xi 

Mother Was My Closest Companion 1 

My Dad Had His Numbers Routes 9 

Becoming Somebody 17 

This Type of Problem ... 25 

“Remember This” 31 

Not a Communist 35 

FDR 41 

“Mac, Don’t Start Any Trouble ” 45 


A Fresh Start 


63 



VI 


Conteri ts 


Soon Somebody Nominated. Me 77 

Thirty Days to Respond. 91 

They Worked. So Hard. and. Risked. So Much. 99 

The Height of Our Strength. 107 

Thank God. For Lyndon. Johnson 117 

“What Did You Do .. . ?” 127 

IVe Don’t Want to Live With the White Man. 137 

Marie is Caucasian. 155 

Follow Your Heart: Marie’s Story 159 


Index 


175 



Preface 


I-IROUGH TAPE-RECORDED interviews of people 



with historically significant experiences, the 


-L University of Nevada Oral History Program 
(UNOHP) is exploring the remembered past. The 
program’s 60,000 page collection of transcripts is rich in 
information about the twentieth-centuiy histoiy of 
Nevada and the American West, presented in a way that 
captures the human dimension which is so often absent 
from other forms of documentation. In addition to its 
transcripts, which are heavily used by researchers, the 
UNOHP occasionally publishes refined, narrative inter¬ 
pretations of oral histories selected for the depth of their 
contents and the breadth of their appeal to general 
readers. Fighting Back is the most recent of these. 

The African-American population of Nevada was 
statistically insignificant prior to World War II, when 
large numbers of Southern blacks moved to Clark 
County seeking employment in war industries such as 
Basic Magnesium, Incoiporated. Most were segregated 
into an outlying area of Las Vegas which came to be 
known as die Westside. They were not inclined to accept 



Preface 


viii 


second-class citizen status. Some began an effort to 
secure their civil rights, and by the 1950s they were 
taking organized, collective action. In 1986 the UNOHP 
conducted an oral history with Lubertha Johnson, who 
was an early arrival on the Westside and who became a 
leader of the community. Mrs. Johnson’s was the first in 
a series of oral histories that are intended to document 
two linked subjects: the history of the Westside, and the 
African-American struggle for civil rights in Nevada. To 
date six other oral histories have been completed on these 
subjects. Fighting Back arises from one of them. 

Between December of 1993 and August 1995, 
Dr. Gary E. Elliott, a historian on the faculty of the 
Community College of Southern Nevada, conducted 
sixteen hours of oral histoiy interviews with Dr. James B. 
McMillan and his wife, Marie. This book is crafted from 
the 600-page verbatim transcript of those interviews. 
Remaining faithful to their contents, and adhering as 
closely as possible to the McMillans’ spoken words, I have 
composed the narrative published as Fighting Back. The 
McMillans have reviewed my work and affirmed that it 
is an accurate interpretation. Readers who desire access 
to the unaltered oral histoiy are invited to visit the offices 
of the UNOHP, where the tapes of the interviews may be 
heard by appointment. 

As with all of its oral histories, while the UNOHP can 
vouch for the authenticity of Fighting Back , it makes no 
claim that die recollections upon which the book is based 
are entirely free of error. This is personal histoiy; this is 
the past as remembered by James and Marie McMillan. 
It is also a powerful story that reveals much about 



Preface 


IX 


human nature and race relations in twentieth-century 
America. 

R. T. KING 

University of Nevada 




Introduction 


J AMES B. McMILLAN was bom in 1917 in a small 
town in racially segregated Mississippi. In that year 
the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that ordinances 
compelling residential segregation of the races were in 
violation of the Fourteenth Amendment. Gradually, over 
the next five decades, most of the legal foundation of 
racial discrimination in America was brought down, but 
McMillan’s life is confirmation of C. Vann Woodward’s 
observation that “there was more Jim Crowism than Jim 
Crow laws.” 

In 1922 James McMillan’s mother took her child and 
joined the swe llin g flood of blacks migrating to Northern 
industrial cities. They were fleeing continued segregation, 
violence, and the knowledge that African-Americans 
remained outside the protection of the law in the South. 
Moving first to New York, then to Philadelphia, to 
Detroit, and finally to a relatively stable life in 
Hamtramck, Michigan, the two experienced poverty, 
racism, and de facto segregation eveiywhere. They were 
also introduced to the color-blind power of political 



Introduction 


xii 


patronage, and to the economic opportunities of illegal 
enterprise for those shut out of the mainstream economy. 

McMillan learned from his mother to be outspoken 
and to work hard in school (he was always better at the 
former than the latter), and in high school he became a 
reasonably good student and an outstanding athlete. He 
was awarded an athletic scholarship to the University of 
Detroit, where he was the only black on the football 
team; but in his junior year, for reasons associated with 
race, he lost the scholarship and could afford to continue 
his studies only by working full time in an automobile 
factory. Persevering, he went on to earn a degree from 
Meharry Medical College’s School of Dentistry in 1944. 

Following service in the U. S. Army in World War II 
McMillan started a dental practice in Detroit. He was 
recalled to service at the end of the Korean War. After 
being discharged, he and his wife relocated to Las Vegas. 
McMillan liked Las Vegas from the beginning—it was a 
twenty-four hour town, with lots of live entertainment, 
gambling, sunshine, and money—but he encountered the 
same types of racial discrimination there that he had 
lived with all of his life. He would not put up with it. 
Within a year of his arrival he was speaking out and 
attacking segregation in Las Vegas with such passion 
and vehemence that he was elected president of the local 
branch of the NAACP. Under his leadership, and fol¬ 
lowing the example of civil rights activists in the South, 
the branch was soon taking direct, confrontational action 
to end overt segregation in Las Vegas; and in 1960, end 
it they did, in dramatic and surprising fashion. 

Fighting Back is James B. McMillan’s memoir of a life 
spent fighting racial discrimination in its many forms. 



His story is personal, but it is representative of the 
experiences of thousands of other African-Americans 
who struggled to transform the Constitution from a 
document concerned primarily with property rights and 
federalism into a charter for equality. Although the fuse 
had long been smoldering, die black Americans who took 
to the streets in 1960 ignited a legal and constitutional 
revolution that eventually benefitted all disadvantaged 
groups in American society. 

As the doors to full participation slowly began to 
open, many African-Americans who had marched for 
civil rights in the late 1950s and early 1960s sought new 
ways to advance the cause of racial equality. McMillan 
stepped down as president of the Las Vegas NAACP in 
1961, but for over forty years he has continued to speak 
for the interests of the black community. He was 
appointed to the State Board of Dental Examiners, the 
Board of Directors of Health Plan of Nevada, and the 
Economic Opportunity Board Health Committee; and he 
served as a member of the Small Business Administration 
Advisory Council, chairman of the Governor’s Commis¬ 
sion on Minority Business Enteiprises, member of the 
Board of Directors and Editorial Board of KVBC Tele¬ 
vision, and director of the Clark County Boys’ Club. 
McMillan even ventured into election politics. He was too 
outspoken to have much success, but in 1992 he was 
elected to the non-partisan Clark County School Board, 
and for die next four years he spent his free evenings and 
weekends poring over the mountain of paperwork 
associated with school board affairs. 

From start to finish it took almost four years to 
complete the project which has led to this book. During 



XIV 


Introduction 


that time I got to know Dr. James B. McMillan well, to 
respect him, and to admire what he has done with his 
life. His friends call him “Mac”; I call him Mac too, 
because it seems natural to do so, and I hope he counts 
me among his friends. What I like most about Mac is that 
his approach to life is the antithesis of what is commonly 
referred to today as “politically correct.” He would be 
more at home among professed bigots, arguing against 
their stereotypes and fallacies, than in the company of 
polite society with its thinly disguised petty politics and 
hollow conversation. 

Although McMillan acknowledges that since the 
1950s tremendous progress has been made toward what 
his wife Marie calls his great, passion—“the betterment of 
his people”—he worries that those gains will be wiped 
away by a rising tide of conservative reaction similar to 
the one that doomed the first reconstruction era. His 
unwavering support for affirmative action and majority - 
minority voting districts is a reflection of that concern. 
Mac has made a few concessions to age (he walks slower 
and has less energy) but the fire still burns. He is always 
up for a good argument, and we have had a few, always 
good natured; but as in 1960, Mac will not back down 
when the issue is equality—and the struggle continues. 

GARY E. ELLIOTT 

Community College of Southern Nevada 



1 


Mother Was My Closest Companion 


RANDMOTHER OPHELIA REDMAN came out of 



slavery in the West Indies and somehow made her 


way to Aberdeen, Mississippi, where she met and 
married Sam Gay, a white veterinarian who had a big 
farm or plantation .... Well, they weren’t really mar¬ 
ried, I guess: my grandmother was Sam Gay’s concubine. 
But their relationship wasn’t a secret—she lived on his 
land and she took his name, and the three children from 
their marriage lived with her. My mother, their only 
daughter, was born on April 27,1896. They named her 
Rosalie. 

After Mr. Gay had these children with my grand¬ 
mother he married a young white woman and produced 
another family of three girls; but it was public knowledge 
in Aberdeen that my mother and her brothers were Old 
Man Gay’s children, and he protected them all his life— 
as long as he was living they didn’t have any worry about 
trouble from whites. Mr. Gay was about six feet three 



2 


Fighting Back 


inches tall, with the typical shaip face of a white south¬ 
erner, what we’d call a “cracker.” Some of my earliest 
memories are of him coming to visit—he’d ride up on his 
white horse with his boots shined, tie the horse to the 
post and just step over the fence, he was so tall. I’d be 
playing in the yard, and he’d pick me up and cany me 
into the house where he and my mother would sit and 
talk awhile; then he’d leave. 

Old Man Gay had given our family almost three 
hundred acres of land, but when my mother and I later 
left Mississippi no one continued paying taxes on it, and 
we lost it. There were other Caucasian men who took care 
of their black concubines and their children that way. My 
mother told me about a relative in Mississippi who lived 
with a Caucasian who had six or seven hunched acres of 
land, and they had four or five children. As those chil¬ 
dren grew up, he gave each of them some of his land 
according to the way that they married. When one of his 
girls married a real light man, he gave her maybe a 
hundred acres of the land; but when one of his boys 
married a real dark girl who was clearly negro, he gave 
him only twenty-five or thirty acres. You didn’t want to 
be too dark. 

My fadier, James Milton McMillan, was born in West 
Virginia. He taught some school there, then traveled to 
Mississippi and became a farm laborer—cotton, peanuts, 
other crops. His marriage to my mother was his second, 
and his son, Theodore McMillan, was my half brother. I 
was born January 14, 1917. My father died during the 
great flu epidemic of 1918, so I don’t remember him, but 
Mother would always tell me that he was a very neat and 
orderly man. After I got older—sixteen, seventeen, 




“Grandmother Ophelia Redman came out of slavery .. . . 









Mother Was My Closest Companion 


3 


eighteen years old—she would say, “Your shoes aren’t 
shined and you don’t take care of yourself and you don’t 
dress well. Your father would really have jumped on you, 
young man! You should be glad he isn’t here.” 

Our house sat up on a little knoll in Aberdeen, and 
you could look down from it into the center of town. 
Grandmother Ophelia lived with us. When she came 
down with pneumonia, they put one of those tent-type 
things over her bed and put steam under it so she could 
get enough air in her lungs, and that’s the way she died. 
I remember her dying, but not complaining—she was just 
there in the bed, under the tent, and I’d be in the room 
with her; I’d come in and watch her. She lived about a 
week and then she died. 

Behind our place there was a gambling joint, and on 
weekends Caucasians used to walk through our yard to 
get to it—I’d be in the back yard playing, and they’d 
walk through and go into this garni)ling house. Later my 
mother would find coins in my pocket—she just didn’t 
understand where diat money was coming from. She told 
me that one day when I was out playing she saw these 
white men come through the back yard and rub my head 
and put some money in my pocket, so she went out there 
and said, “What are you doing to my child?” They said, 
“Oh, nothing, Rosalie. We’re just nabbing his head for 
luck and putting some money in his pocket.” Rubbing 
the little black boy’s head for luck . . . this wasn’t 
unusual in the South. 

My mother was outspoken and proud. She was very 
light skinned, and since she was Sam Gay’s daughter she 
thought that she didn’t have to kowtow to any of the 



4 


Fighting Back 


Caucasians or to the customs of segregation in Mississippi. 
She would go anywhere she wanted, such as downtown 
shopping or what have you; but when my grandfather 
Gay went blind shortly before he died, he couldn’t 
protect her anymore, and she got into some trouble 
downtown with a Caucasian man and woman. They 
called her “nigger” and other names and hit her. She hit 
back. A couple of days later white men came to our 
house in Ku Klux Klan robes, with their faces covered. 
They took my mother out and tied her to a post down¬ 
town; stripped her blouse off and gave her fifteen lashes 
across her back with a whip. From the front porch of our 
house on the hill I could look down and see this. I 
couldn’t understand why it was happening to my mother, 
but there was nothing I could do, and I just cried. Then 
some people brought my mother home—she was crying 
and angry and her back was bleeding. I was five years 
old. 

In the next few weeks my mother got well, but she’d 
decided that we would get out of Mississippi, get out of 
the South. Trains to New York, Chicago, or St. Louis 
were the three main routes that black people took going 
north, and I can remember being all dressed up and 
going to the train station, where there was a big engine 
with steam popping out. We got on the train to New 
York, and when we got there, New York was where we 
stayed, just my mother and I. It was a one-parent family. 

My birth certificate says that my mother was a 
domestic, but she’d gone to school, and she was a prac¬ 
tical nurse. She could also sew, and she got work as a 
seamstress in garment factories in New York—that’s how 



Mother Was My Closest Companion 


5 


she made a living. We had a little apartment in Harlem, 
and at first she’d leave me with people when she would 
go to do sewing in the factories. As I got older, I would 
walk to school and she’d go to work, and in the evening 
I’d be back home waiting for her to come home from the 
garment factory. 

I was still quite young when we moved again. My 
mother was interested in getting married, and she’d met 
a gentleman and they’d started dating and going 
together. He wanted to go to Philadelphia, so we left and 
moved there. He’d fought in World War I, winning a 
medal in the Battle of the Argonne Forest, and he was 
quite a guy. In Philadelphia my mother and her man 
were just kind of living together, they weren’t married, so 
she sent me to a Catholic boarding school for a year. At 
night the nuns would read to us —Robin Hood and all of 
these different stories. (I’d never had that in my home. 
My mother had to spend her time pacifying her man and 
she didn’t read to me.) Soon I almost had those stories 
committed to memory. When I came back things were 
pretty good at first, but my father . . . well, he wasn’t my 
father—this gentleman got busted for making bathtub 
whiskey. You could smell the mash all over the neighbor¬ 
hood, and he got busted. That really upset my mother. 

We had a nice little house, but my mother never did 
many this guy. They broke up over the episode with the 
whiskey, and after Mother separated from him we moved 
to another black neighborhood. Philadelphia was really 
a segregated town: when I was eight years old I was 
working on a milk truck with a white fellow, and he 
would leave me outside the gate of the big Girard Board¬ 
ing School when he went in to deliver milk to it. Not only 



6 


Fighting Back 


could blacks not go to that school, they couldn’t even set 
foot on the campus. 

My mother had joined the Catholic church when she 
left Mississippi, and I can remember us going to church 
every Sunday. When I was seven or eight years old she 
wanted to make me an altar boy. I tried, but I’d rather 
fool around with the other guys back behind the 
church—we used to steal wine out of the sacristy and 
drink it with the guys out back. My mother went to 
church eveiy Sunday, all the holidays, but she wasn’t a 
fanatic with religion. She was just a good woman who 
believed in promises, and she practiced her faith and 
made me practice it. 

Eventually, when I was about ten years old, my 
mother married a man named Emery Philpot. Mr. 
Philpot was from North Carolina, and he’d been raised 
by white people, Quakers. He was a real stern, ethical 
man. When we ate breakfast everybody sat down to the 
table; everybody had to be home and eat dinner together 
after work; and he demanded certain things and types of 
behavior from me. My mother seemed to be very happy 
with him, and she shared many of his views. She was an 
ethical woman who was true to her word, and she raised 
me to be that way. 

My mother didn’t: chink strong alcohol, but she’d 
have a glass of wine. My stepfather did chink whiskey, 
and he participated in gambling, a game they called 
“numbers.” But he would always make sure that he had 
a job. He was a cement finisher, what they called 
Gunite—a mixture of cement, sand and water that would 
be blown onto buildings through high pressure hoses. 




“We liad a nice house and I was going to school.... 
James B. McMillan, Philadelphia, Easter, 1926. 













Mother Was My Closest Companion 


7 


He’d be up on die scaffold with that big hose working on 
those tall buildings in downtown Philadelphia. 

My mother was my closest companion as I grew up, 
and she taught me things like how to dance and how to 
ride horses, but our family life really started with her 
marriage to Mi'. Philpot. We had a nice house, and I was 
going to school; and my mother bought a piano, and I 
took piano lessons. She always impressed upon me the 
need for an education. The weak point in my education 
was that she didn’t have time to spend an hour or so with 
me every day on school work because she had to work 
and make a living, and she had to keep the family happy. 
I was kind of a tough kid for her to keep in shape, but 
she did—she was a strict disciplinarian. I had to conduct 
myself decently and act properly. My stepfather was a 
disciplinarian also, but my mother wouldn’t let him 
spank me. She made it a rule that, “If anything happens 
and my son has to be disciplined, let me know and I will 
do it.” And she did. 





My Dad Had His Numbers Routes 


T N THE 1920s HENRY FORD had recruited blacks 
throughout the South to come to Michigan to work 
in his automobile factory for two dollars and fifty 
cents a day. (He later raised that to five dollars a day.) 
My mother’s brother, Dunbar Gay, and her half-sister, 
Nancy Tymms, moved to Michigan to get jobs and raise 
their families. Then in the midst of the Depression my 
stepfather found himself out of work, and we moved to 
Pontiac, Michigan, to stay with Aunt Nancy. My mother 
could almost have passed for white, but Aunt Nancy was 
Afro-Ameiican to the greatest. She was a child that my 
grandmother had had in a marriage with a black man. 
Uncle Dunbar, however, looked exactly like his father, 
Master Gay: he had blue eyes and blond hair, and even 
though he wasn’t trying to pass, no one could tell him 
from a white man. (My uncle Sam Gay, named for his 
fadier, had stayed in Mississippi. He could pass for white 
too, but he got in trouble. A white man knew of his 



10 


Fighting Back 


background and called him a nigger; then they got in a 
fight, and he killed die guy and left Mississippi and went 
to Alabama to hide.) Uncle Dunbar had a job in the 
Fisher body plant, where they would design automobiles 
and stuff. He kept that job for thirty years. He was a 
good worker, but when Friday came he would stop by 
the liquor store, buy a quart of whiskey, and be drunk 
Friday night, Saturday, and Sunday until five o’clock. 
Monday he was sober and worked his five days and never 
missed a day. 

We lived with my Aimt Nancy’s family in Pontiac for 
three or fom* mondis, and when we ran out of money we 
gave our piano to my aunt, to help pay our bill. From 
there we moved to Detroit. My stepfather figured he 
could find some construction work, but he couldn’t, so 
we moved to Hamtramck, where we got a one bedroom 
apartment with no bathtub and an outdoor toilet, and 
my stepfather continued looking for a job. For weeks we 
were on welfare, which is what they’d call the Red Cross 
at that time. They were giving out rice and beans and 
maybe some butter, and my dad woidd have to go stand 
in line to get this so we could eat. Fie soon got tired of it 
and embarrassed, and he says, “I’m not going to do this 
anymore.” So he became a numbers runner. 

In New York, gangsters used to run illegal gambling 
games called the “numbers.” They didn’t have the 
numbers in Detroit; instead they had what they called 
“policy,” which was different. (Policy was like keno is in 
Nevada—they would pull twelve numbers out of a basket 
and write them on a slip of paper.) While he was on 
welfare Dad met a black guy named Buddy Charity who 
had a policy thing going, and Dad said, “Hey, man, we 



My Dad Had His Numbers Routes 


11 


can do better than this. Why don’t we do the numbers 
like in New York?” Buddy Charity drove a green 
Cadillac, wore a derby hat, and smoked cigars, and he 
weighed about two hundred and sixty pounds—he 
looked like Andy in die “Amos and Andy” show. He was 
a wheeler and a dealer, and he got with the mob and 
started this numbers racket with my dad. 

As a runner, my dad would go around from house to 
house in Hamnamck, telling people, “Hey, here’s a book. 
Why don’t you write some numbers?” He’d get ten cents 
for eveiy dollar he took to the big fellows that backed the 
numbers, and he made a good living. He was soon doing 
so well that we moved into a house down the block. This 
was a real house. It had a living room, two bedrooms, a 
kitchen, and a backyard. We bought an Atwater Kent 
radio, and evenings the family would sit around the radio 
in the front room and listen to “The Lone Ranger,” “Jack 
Benny,” and all of those old programs. 

Mother was religious, but she didn’t disapprove of 
my dad running numbers. She’d say, “Well, you know, 
we got to make a living.” But I kept telling her, “I don’t 
see why he has to take all this money and give it to 
someone else. He ought to back these numbers himself.” 
She’d say, “No, that’s too risky. We can’t do that.” But 
they could expand what they were already doing. One 


Especially in northern cities, the “numbers” or “policy” rackets 
offered blacks access to social prestige and economic opportunity 
equivalent to that enjoyed by the professional class. It has been 
estimated that in Chicago in the 1930s, there were as many blacks 
employed as numbers writers, runners, clerks and checkers as there 
were African-American doctors, lawyers, dentists, teachers and social 
workers. Numbers or policy kings often became community leaders who 
exerted political influence and supported philanthropic causes. 




12 


Fighting Back 


clay they drove out of Hamtramck with Buddy Charity 
and me in his Cadillac, and we went to Pontiac and 
stalled another numbers route there. All of my family in 
Pontiac were strong Baptists, “Holy Rollers,” and a 
couple of them were preachers. My mother contacted a 
preacher who was a relative, gave him a book and 
stalled him wilting numbers. So the preacher is running 
numbers for us, and he’s turning two thousand dollars a 
day. He’d never seen so much money, and he got in 
trouble—he decided that he was going to bank it himself 
one day, and he had a hit, and he couldn’t pay off. So he 
lost that big book. 

When my dad had his numbers routes he used to go 
to Pontiac (it was about thirty miles) and pick up all this 
money and bring it back to Hamtramck. He was making 
a lot of money. During the Depression he was making a 
tremendous amount of money. But he was drinking 
pretty heavy, too, like my Uncle Dunbar. He’d take a 
fifth of whiskey when he was picking up these numbers, 
and sip on it all day long and not really get drunk. And 
he liked women and spent money on them, playing 
around. He liked to gamble too. He’d go to the pool 
rooms and shoot craps with those guys. Sometimes they’d 
beat him out of his money; sometimes he’d bust them 
and dien pass dieir money back around, and they’d start 
the game again so he didn’t have to go home. And he’d 
actually give his numbers money away—meet some poor 
guy on the street, didn’t have any money, and he’d say, 
“Here’s a hundred dollars. Do something for yourself.” 

My dad just squandered that numbers money. Still, 
we got so affluent on what he brought home that when I 



My Dad Had His Numbers Routes 


13 


was in high school my family bought a house in a white 
neighborhood, on Carpenter Avenue up in the northern 
part of Hamtramck. I was working in the Plymouth 
Motor Car Company then, and the day we moved I left 
for work from our segregated neighborhood on Denton 
Avenue. While I was at work my family moved into the 
new house. My mother and my stepfather being light 
complexioned, I guess the neighbors didn’t really know 
what race they were when they moved in; and when I 
came home that night from the factoiy to our new house, 
I walked through the neighborhood and it caused a little 
stir. People stared at me as if they wanted to know what 
this black kid was doing there. That was a Friday, the 
last day of work. Saturday someone had written on our 
house, “Niggers, move out!” Mother was furious and I 
was too. 

We were the only black family for fifteen or twenty 
blocks around. My mother had found this house through 
a white councilman from Hamtramck who lived on the 
street. She had worked for him in a political campaign, 
so he knew us well. Shortly after we moved in he came to 
our house to let people know that he knew us, I guess, 
and as a sanction to let us live there and not to cause any 
disturbance. But I had already fought with the Polish kid 
next door—I had to give him a black eye to let him know 
we would not tolerate anything like the words that had 
been written on our house. It was our house, and they 
could respect the fact that we lived there and stay away 
from our property. 

We were doing so well on my dad’s numbers thing 
that we had two cars: we had a Chrysler, and by then I 



14 


Fighting Back 


was in high school and had an old Model A Ford. And 
Mother was already into politics. She’d gotten involved 
when we were still living in the ghetto on Denton 
Avenue. She used to hold Democratic Party precinct 
meetings at our house, and that led to a job for her as a 
clerk in the city welfare department—her man had won. 
It’s a good thing she had this job, because in 1937, after 
making all this money, my dad finally got caught. He 
was working with the Purple Gang at the time, and the 
FBI had been following him for a long time, which he 
didn’t know. We had bought this house, and I thought 
that we were top middle class people. My mother did too. 
It just got the best of her when they found out that she 
was working in the numbers with my father. 

When the FBI caught my dad and took him to court, 
they had all the books in the house that they’d raided. 
They knew how much money my dad’s route was 
producing, and it came out in court, and my mother was 
sitting there listening. She got madder than hell when she 
learned that his business was producing about thirteen 
hundred dollars a week. Fle’d been giving her two 
hundred a week, and she was working as a clerk in the 
welfare department and had gotten raises to a hundred 
dollars a week, so she was getting three hundred dollars 
a week, and that was big time. We had new cars and this 
house and furniture, and we had put central heating in. 
We were living high and mighty, and my mother had 
been satisfied that we were doing real good until she 
found out just how well we should, have been doing. 

My step dad owed Internal Revenue a lot of money, 
but they just convicted him and dismissed him. There 
wasn’t any point in pursuing him for back taxes and 




“My mother had been satished that we were doing real good 
until she found out how well we should have been doing.” 








My Dad Had His Numbers Routes 


15 


fines—he probably owed fifty thousand dollars in income 
taxes, but we didn’t know anything about income tax at 
that time. When he came home after they released him 
my mother was so angiy with him that she told him, 
“Get out of this house! You’ve been making enough 
money for the last three or four years for us to be 
wealthy, to have a home on Boston Boulevard, for my 
son to be going to college, for us to have everything we 
want.” 




Becoming Somebody 


W HEN WE FIRST MOVED to Hamtramck we lived 
in a segregated neighborhood. In fact, all 
housing was segregated in the Detroit area. 
Even Dearborn had always been a racist town—although 
Henry Ford sent recruiters to the South to bring blacks 
up to work in his plant, he had no housing for them that 
was not segregated. A lot of black auto workers moved to 
places like Hamtramck and Highland Park, but those 
were all segregated communities too. White people in the 
Detroit area simply didn’t want blacks to live in their 
neighborhoods, and you couldn’t go to court to make 
them—there was nothing you could do to force these 
people to let you live in decent housing. Blacks had to 



18 


Fighting Back 


live in crowded, rundown old duplexes and fourplexes 
and cold-water flats. 

In grade school I would hang out with the other 
black kids. We had something in common, the same 
dialect and what have you, and you figured that if white 
kids were going to jump you, you’d have your buddies. 
All us black guys hung out together, and we got into a lot 
of fights and had a lot of disciplining. There was this guy 
they called Black John, and we were buddies. One day 
when we were on the playground he was going to fight, 
but die other guy said, ‘'"Well, I’m not going to fight you. 
You have a knife in your pocket. You’ll cut me.” So 
Black John took his knife out and threw it to me. I 
opened the blade and I’m standing there with the knife 
while they’re fighting, and the principal sees me. He took 
me into his office and spanked me. The next day he 
called my mother in to see him, and he told her about the 
trouble I’d been in and what he’d done about it. She said, 
“Don’t you ever spank my kid again. Call me and I’ll do 
the necessaiy business,” and she took me across her knee 
and spanked the hell out of me right in front of him. 
Then she took me home and spanked me again. She said, 
“I want you to be in school, and I want you to follow the 
rules and regulations and study. Don’t you ever let me 
hear aJiout you doing these things again.” 


In the 1917 case of Buchanan v. Warley the United States 
Supreme Court had ruled that municipal ordinances prohibiting blacks 
from moving into white neighborhoods were unconstitutional. However, 
private agreements were not covered by the court’s ruling, and the 
practice of establishing and preserving racially segregated neighbor¬ 
hoods remained widespread even in parts of the country that prided 
themselves on their racial tolerance. 




Becoming Somebody 


19 


I hung out with the black kids, and I talked their 
talk, but when I came home I tried to speak well. I also 
tiled to be a good student; but I wasn’t, and the teachers 
knew that I was a trouble maker. I got in trouble with my 
music teacher. She was having me sing “Do, re, mi ... ” 
and I couldn’t. She thought I was acting up, thought I 
was being smart, and she put me out of the class; she put 
me into a little room by myself for that peiiod for the rest 
of the term, and I learned how to do basket weaving and 
potteiy in that room. Half a semester of baskets and 
pottery! 

My education in the ghetto schools in Philadelphia 
had been very poor, and in first through fourth grades I 
had missed out on a lot. We spoke the English language, 
but we weren’t learning to spell, to build a vocabulary, or 
to write well. Early on after we moved to Hamtramck, I 
realized that I had to get some type of learning. I knew 
what my deficiencies were and I learned how to compete 
within the system. In grade school I tried to spell; I’d go 
off to a spelling bee and I’d get bumped out when I 
misspelled a word, but that was OK—I would commit 
the word to memory. I knew that I had to learn the 
multiplication tables, so I sat down one Saturday and 
memorized them so that I would remember them the rest 
of my life. (My dad didn’t have an education, and he was 
working in the numbers. He could do percentages; he 
knew how much money he had coming. I didn’t realize 
it was just moving the decimal point, but he could do 
that.) 

I learned to work within the system. I did well in 
geometry and history and things that I could commit to 
memory, and I had a terrific geometry teacher. She 



20 


Fighting Back 


taught me to know the rules, to memorize them. And I 
did: I knew eveiy rule that we had to know in geometry, 
and I got A’s in it. When I moved on to high school we 
had a deal where you could take a test to get a C in the 
course and then you could do extra work for a B and 
extra work for an A. I did that, and when I finished high 
school I had a B average even though I was an athlete, 
because I’d learned how to use the system. Later in 
college I would still try to figure out the system. I studied 
the professor; I knew what he liked and what he didn’t 
like, and I knew what lecture notes I had to take. I took 
two semesters of German and got a C+, but I couldn’t 
speak a word of German. It’s just knowing the system. 

We didn’t have a junior high school—we would go 
through the eighth grade in primary school, and then 
over to the high school to start the ninth grade. In the 
ninth grade I continued to be a ruffian. There was a 
white kid, a Polish kid named Kowalski, whose father 
owned a factory or something, and Kowalski would wear 
blue serge suits and white shirts and ties and stuff. I 
couldn’t stand him. We’d fought all through grade 
school, and it continued in high school. One day in 
geometry the teacher called Kowalski up to the black¬ 
board. As he passed me I thought, “Here’s this blue serge 
suit; here’s this eraser with white chalk on it.” I picked 
up the eraser and hit him on the butt, and then we 
stalled swinging at each other. The teacher grabbed me 
and said, “I know you, McMillan. My sister told me about 
you.” (Her sister taught at the grammar school I’d come 
from.) “You’re going down to see the principal.” 



Becorn ing So me bo cly 


21 


It was the first time I was in trouble in high school. 
Not much came of it, but I knew I couldn’t go on like 
this. I began to think about what I wanted to be. I saw all 
of these other kids that were big in school, and I saw the 
discipline of the school, and I said, “I’ve got to do some¬ 
thing. I just can’t be in this school and not be 
somebody.” The night after my fight with Kowalski I 
went to a foodtall rally. There was a black kid who 
played football; he was six two and he weighed over two 
hunched pounds and he was muscular. He was the star 
of the team. All the girls would put their arms around 
him and kiss him, and they sang these songs and had 
bonfires and everything, and I thought, “That’s what I 
want to be. That’s going to be my role in this high 
school.” 

I decided to change my way of acting, go out for 
athletics and take a college prep course. I knew that I 
could get a scholarship to college by playing football and 
running track, so that’s what I set out to do. Also, 
athletics made me somebody in the community. I was 
happy with it; people knew me. And probably my love of 
athletics spurred me to do other things, because I knew 
that there were no black professional athletes. Blacks 
weren’t making any money in sports, so after college I 
would have to do something else to make a living. I had 
to become a teacher or doctor or lawyer or an undertaker 
to make some money and be “respectable.” Those were 
the only professions that were open to blacks at that 
time. (My mother had absolutely put her foot down—I 
was not going to be involved in the numbers or in the 
rackets.) 



22 


Fighting Back 


I had never played football, but I made the team in 
my freshman year, and eventually I made All State and 
All City playing end—at that time we played both ways, 
defense and offense. (This other black kid had played left 
end, so I played left end also.) I developed into a star on 
the foodDall team and a star on the track team, setting 
city and state records in track. I won letters in all sports 
all four years. I won more letters, I guess, than anybody 
in the school, but in my junior year I hurt my rotator cuff 
and had to have an operation on my shoulder. When 
foodDall season came around in the fall I could barely lift 
my arm. They put me in and let me play even though 
they figured I couldn’t live up to my reputation, but I 
did—I ended my high school football career by catching 
a pass one handed with twenty-six seconds to go to win 
the championship game. 

We had foodDall banquets every year. The year 
before, a Caucasian boy, a co-captain, had gotten up and 
spoken so well that die superintendent of schools said, “I 
withdraw my speech, because you really make mine look 
second class. I want to congratulate you.” To me that 
was a gi’eat accomplishment, so the next semester I took 
public speaking and I learned how to give speeches. My 
senior year I was a co-captain, and our other co-captain 
was a Polish guy who couldn’t talk or speak at all. That 
left me to make the speech at the banquet. My thing was 
to duplicate the young man who had spoken the year 
before, and to make the superintendent say the same 
thing that he had said to him. And I did. 

Back then teachers weren’t any easier on you just 
because you were an athlete, and I wanted to play so bad 



Becoming Somebody 


23 


that I made myself study, just to make sure that I stayed 
eligible. That gave me focus. I got all my assignments in 
on time and made sure that I studied enough to get a C 
or better. Then I’d work toward a B, then an A. I was 
able to get a good education, and when I graduated one 
of the scholarships I got was for being the athlete with 
the highest grades. 

About a third of our high school graduating class was 
black. We had a little integration, but diere was also a lot 
of prejudice. My buddy George Jackson and I kind of 
hung out together—there was a corner where all the 
black kids hung out, and we had to protect our turf. We 
had fights with Polish kids until they respected us and we 
respected them, and then we got to be buddies ... or at 
least we tolerated each other. George and I would 
sometimes take the streetcar and go downtown with 
some girls from our school. Being athletes meant we had 
certain privileges, and being a captain of the track team 
and co-captain of the football team gained me respect, 
but you had to be careful about who you went out with. 
If you were with a white girl the police would stop you 
and question you about it. 

There’s a lot made about athletics being the great 
equalizer; that once you put on a football uniform and go 
out on the field, nobody really cares what color you are. 
That’s true. It’s a team effort, a team sport. As football 
players we depended upon each other to do the job, and 
all through high school, after I’d established that I was 
the star on the team and they needed me, they accepted 
me. But I was so naive that I thought that meant I was 
accepted in general. A week after graduation I went 
downtown one day to the bowling alley. It’s all white. 



24 


Fighting Back 


When I walk in the door there’s one of our track stars, 
and he looks at me and says, “What are you doing in 
here? We don’t allow no niggers in here.” We’d been on 
the track team together! When he said that, we went to 
it. I knocked him down and we had a fight, and the 
police were called and they took me off. So there’s a 
condition: people accept you for what they need from 
you. 


By the time they divorced a couple of years later my 
mother and my stepfather had been together almost 
twenty years, and all of that time I never said more than 
good morning or good afternoon to him. We just did not 
get along. I respected him, but we didn’t lose any time 
talking to one another. Sometimes he’d put his aim 
around me and say, “Son,” you know, but that was it. It 
was just my mother and me, and she shielded me from 
him, made sure that he didn’t put a hand on me. When 
they got divorced it was nothing to me. We had a little 
hard time, but then the war started and my mother got 
hired by the Chrysler Motor Coiporation and started 
working in their factory. She had a little numbers route, 
too, helping me out. By that time I was in dental school. 
I figured soon I would be in the army or practicing 
dentistry and I could take care of her. 



4 


This Type of Problem . . . 


I GRADUATED FROM high school in 1936, a year 
before my stepfather got busted for running 
numbers. In the spring of ’36, after a track meet at 
Ann Arbor, I began writing my application to the Univer¬ 
sity of Michigan. I wanted all the words to be spelled 
right and all the punctuation to be right, so it took me a 
couple of days, and I just had it done when these 
recruiters from the University of Detroit came to my 
house. Larry Bleach was a basketball player, an out¬ 
standing All American who was the only black student at 
the University of Detroit at that time. He and an assistant 
coach had come to recruit me to play football and run 
track. They talked to me: “Hey, well give you a free ride; 
well buy your books . . . . ” 

I said, “Well, this sounds pretty good. Ill come out to 
look at your school.” But first I took my application up 
to Ann Arbor, to the University of Michigan, and turned 
it in. It was accepted and I was admitted to Michigan on 



26 


Fighting Back 


a football scholarship. They were allowed to have just 
one black player on the football team at a time, and 
Willis Ward was a senior, and he was graduating, so I 
would have been the next; but I only stayed two weeks. 
They had Tommy Hannon there and Forest Evaschevski, 
and Tommy Hannon and all the white football players 
stayed in the frat houses; but fraternities wouldn’t accept 
blacks, and blacks couldn’t stay in a dormitory at the 
University of Michigan, so they were going to put me in 
a room in the gymnasium. They wanted me to live in the 
gym! The coach told me, “Our black player either has to 
stay here in the gym or room in the city with a black 
family.” But I figured that at the University of Detroit I 
could live at home and go back and forth to school, so I 
left Ann Arbor, went home and enrolled at Detroit. There 
my athletic scholarship paid for my books, tuition and all 
that stuff, and I was given a job on campus. They called 
it the NYA, the National Youth Administration—some 
type of federal program that gave me spending money. 
And in the summer the university got jobs for us at Ford 
Motor Company; all the athletes would work in a group 
at Ford. 

The University of Detroit was a Jesuit university, a 
Catholic university like Villanova, Duquesne, Boston 
College, Santa Clara, Notre Dame. We had to sit out our 
freshman year—we could only play three years of college 
athletics at that time—but although we couldn’t play in 
games, our freshman team scrimmaged against the 
varsity. The priests would watch us practice. In one of 
our scrimmages a Hispanic guy out of New York was the 
varsity quarterback. I ran him down and tackled him for 
a loss two or three times, and he got angiy about it. He 



This Type of Problem . . . 


27 


got up and screamed, “You black son of a bitch . . . . ” 
He didn’t have time to finish what he was going to say, 
because I was on him. We fought right there on the field. 
As we fought I was using pretty foul language, and a 
priest separated us and said, “Now, stop this!” So I went 
into the dressing room. I took off my shoulder pads so I 
could swing; took off my football shoes and put on my 
tennis shoes so I wouldn’t slip, because I knew that when 
the quarterback came in we were going to continue the 
fight. But he walks through the door and says, 
“Mc Mil lan, I didn’t mean to call you those names. No 
hard feelings.” I said, “OK. I just want you to remember 
that every time you do that we’re going to mix it up. 
We’re going to have at it.” You had to protect your turf. 

I had other problems that first semester. George 
Jackson and I got in trouble with our grades and for 
dating the wrong girls. I began paying less attention to 
the ladies and more attention to my studies, but raising 
my grades wasn’t easy. They were low because I hadn’t 
learned die college system yet. It was simple: you have to 
conserve your time. But I was taking Chemistry and 
English, and I was carrying eighteen credits and prac¬ 
ticing foodiall. To be in college with all this glamorous 
stuff around you, it’s tough if you don’t arrange your 
time right. And I hadn’t. I got a couple of Cs and a 
couple of Ds and an F and eventually they kicked me off 
the team; but diey gave me die next semester to make up 
my grades. I made them up and then I could play the 
following year, but George Jackson left and went to 
Morehouse College, where he competed in athletics. 



28 


Fighting Back 


I think I was the second Afro-American to enroll in 
the University of Detroit and be in the athletic program. 
I know I was the only Afro-American playing on the 
football team, but I had a camaraderie with my team¬ 
mates and the other students in my classes. There wasn’t 
any real social prejudice that you could see—I would go 
across the street with my friends to the bars and to the 
German Club and what have you. Prejudice came to the 
surface in another form. 

As a sophomore I was a starter on the football team. 
We played southern foodtall teams, and the university 
wouldn’t let me go into the South with the team. Afro- 
Americans in Oklahoma and North Carolina and Texas 
clipped news stories out of their local newspapers and 
sent them to me. The week before a game with us on 
their tui’f, it would be in all the papers that the University 
of Detroit had a negro on its team and he would not be 
allowed to play in the game. I kept the clippings and 
thought about what they meant. Even when southern 
teams came to Detroit, the coaches had second thoughts 
about letting me in; but our newspapers played it up so, 
and there was so much controversy about it that they 
relented. I played against southern teams at our stadium. 

The first time something happened was when we 
played against Purdue down in Indiana. Hell, Indiana 
isn’t even in the South, but Indiana is southern racist; it’s 
not just the states of the Old Confederacy. When we got 
to the South Bend hotel where the team was staying, its 
manager didn’t want me there. The coach came to me 
and said, “You can’t stay in the hotel. We’re going to let 
you stay across town with a nice colored family.” 




At the University of Detroit, 1937: 

“I was the only Afro-American on the football team.” 
















This Type of Problem . . . 


29 


“Well, Coach, I’m not going to do that. Either I stay 
in the hotel with the team and play in the game or you 
can send me home. ,, 

So they talked and they negotiated with the hotel 
owner, and some of my teammates gathered around me 
and we discussed it, and they let me stay in the hotel. I 
played against Purdue, but the coach wouldn’t take me 
with die team on southern trips from then on because he 
knew that they’d have this type of problem. But I didn’t 
let it bother me, and in 1938 I made Honorable Mention 
on the Catholic All-American Foodiall Team. 

My junior year 1 was openly going with a Caucasian 
girl. We spent time together on the campus. 1 was on the 
practice field one afternoon during the spring term when 
the dean of the college of Arts Sc Science, a Jesuit priest, 
called me into his office. I got dressed and went in and 
sat down. He said, “Well, McMillan, your grades don’t 
suggest diat you are really a college level student. You’ll 
have difficulty in life if you don’t do better, so I’m not 
going to let you play foodiall your senior year.” That was 
a shock! I was just a slightly below average student 
playing foodiall and track and laying to get an education. 
And I was a liberal arts major, but my grades were as 
good as some of these other kids that were playing right 
next to me who were majoring in commerce or physical 
education or what have you. I felt that the dean and the 
college were discriminating against me because I was 
black. I said, “Well, I appreciate your being interested in 
my education, but I want to play. Next year is my last 
year - , and I believe I can make All American.” The dean 



30 


Fighting Back 


said, “That may be, but I can not condone you walking 
around the campus holding hands with Mary_ 

Maiy_was a stunning young lady with long red 

hair. We were just good friends (maybe because I was a 
football star), but it looked like we were really going 
together when we were seen on the campus under the 
trees, talking and holding hands and spending time 
together. I wanted it to be something more than friend¬ 
ship, but it wasn’t—it just looked bad. When it got back 
to Mary’s family, who were big donors to the university 
and vexy prominent people in the Detroit area, they 
called Father Quinn. He said, “This will stop!” 

I said, “Father Quinn, you mean to tell me that 
you’re going to put me out of school?” I said, “You’re a 
priest sitting behind that desk with that collar turned 
around, and I’m a Catholic, and you make diat statement 
to me?” 

He said, “Look, McMillan, I know you. You’re pretty 
foxy, but you’re not going to make me feel bad about it. 
You asked, and that’s what it is.” 

Remember what Lincoln Continentals used to look 
like when they first came out? The first model was a 
phaeton—it looked like a convertible, and the top would 
come back. Maiy had a Continental. She would come to 
my house and pick me up in this open convertible, and 
we’d go for a xide and the police would stop us. When 
she showed them her driver’s license they knew who she 
was, how important she was, and they’d let us go. The 
university just did not want this to happen. I’ve never 
seen Maiy_since. 







“Remember This ” 


T WAS KICKED OFF the football and track teams and 
stripped of my athletic scholarship. I stayed in 
school, but I had to start paying my own way, so I 
started working at the Ford Motor Company from four 
o’clock until midnight, going to classes in the daytime. 
Back then you could go to college for two years and two 
summers and get enough credits to be accepted in a 
medical or dental school; you didn’t have to have a 
bachelor’s degree. I decided to tiy to get into a dental 
school, and I took biochemistry and biology and other 
courses to make up for deficiencies and raise some of the 
grades that I had that were below par. It took me a 
couple of years more at the University of Detroit to get 
prepared, but I succeeded. 

I had been partially inspired to go into dentistiy by 
the example of Dr. Haley Bell, a black dentist in 
Hamtramck. He had a nice office and he was a big show 
guy—big ling and big cars—and he had all the white 



32 


Fighting Back 


practice. He was known in Hamtramck; he was veiy 
important. There were a couple of other black physicians 
in the community. One was an OB-GYN guy who got 
involved in abortions. He made plenty of money. The 
other physician was Dr. Houston, who worked for the 
city. He was a decent, honest physician, and a good man. 

Dr. Bell was not only a successful dentist, he was also 
the bag man for the mayor of Hamtramck; the numbers 
people would bring the money to him in his office. Say a 
runner picked up a thousand dollars on his route—the 
runner’s thing was 10 percent of that, and he turned over 
the rest of it to the house, to the guys who were backing 
the game. These guys, the Mafia or the underworld 
people, had to pay off the mayor, so they would give that 
part of it to Haley Bell, and he would take it to the 
mayor. Eventually everybody got caught, but my mother 
saved Dr. Bell from going to jail with her political 
connections. She went to the prosecuting attorney and 
told him, “This man is important in the black 
community. You can’t send him to jail. I worked for you 
and got you elected with the black vote, and I need this 
favor from you.” They set him free. 

In their medical practices the black physicians and 
the dentist were inspirations to me. I had also learned 
something about: life from the Dutchman who owned the 
house we had lived in in the ghetto. He taught me how to 
do plumbing and he taught me about finances and the 
work ethic as well: When we first moved to the ghetto, 
we couldn’t even afford to pay rent. This Dutchman 
owned ten or twelve houses. One of them was vacant and 
in disrepair, and to keep it from being tom apart by poor 
people who wanted the wood for their cooking fires and 



“R e rn ember Th is ” 


33 


heat et cetera, he was astute enough to let us live in it. 
We agreed to dig a basement under it for him and paint 
the house and do these things to live there for free until 
my dad got a job and we could pay rent. There was a 
vacant lot next to that house on Denton Street, and a 
factoiy was behind it. As we were digging the basement 
we put the dirt out on this vacant lot and smoothed it 
around and didn’t think anything of it. Then the factoiy 
started hiring people, and they were looking for parking 
spaces. I didn’t know whose lot it was, but I started 
parking cars on it and charging people fifty cents a week. 
I’d been doing this for three months when one day I went 
out to collect the money and the people told me, “We 
don’t have to pay you any more. This is not your lot. We 
paid the Dutchman. He owns this property.” I ran into 
die house and told my mother. She didn’t say anything. 

The Dutchman came that afternoon and I jumped on 
him. I said, “Why did you ruin me? Why did you take 
my business and take all my money?” The Dutchman 
was always talking to me about how I should work and 
be industrious and go to school and study; he would tell 
me about his houses and how he was living well in the 
Depression. But he said, “Look, let me tell you one thing, 
yoimg man. You must realize diat you can’t take people’s 
property. This is my lot. You didn’t come to me and ask 
to rent it so you could make some money, so I just kicked 
you off of it and I’m taking all the money. Remember 
this.” I did. 




6 


Not a Communist 


B EFORE WORLD WAR II the Communists were 
going around giving picnics for the black people 
and inviting them to these picnics, telling them 
they were going to have white girls out there so that these 
black men could go with them. We’d go out to the picnics 
and eat their food and bullshit with them, and they 
wanted to sign us up for the Communist party against 
the United States. And the Germans had rallies in 
Madison Scjuare Garden talking about the destruction of 
the United States, and the Italians and the Japanese had 
their secret service people going throughout the United 
States in black communities trying to recruit us to turn 
against our country. I went to all of the picnics, the 
commie picnics, the German picnics, the Japanese 
picnics—food, ice cream . . . you know. And the United 
States was letting this crap go on. 

At that time my mother took in a black man that was 
down and out, and we fed him and gave him a little 



36 


Fighting Back 


money and he did a lot of things for us. Elijah 
Muhammad was just getting the Black Muslims started in 
Detroit. They recruited this man who lived with us, and 
he finally joined them. They changed him 100 percent— 
he started washing his face, shaving, working. They gave 
him a push cart and he was collecting papers and stuff. 
The Muslims had a warehouse in the middle of our street, 
and this guy worked there every day for a while, but he 
finally drifted away from the organization. One day, long 
before Pearl Harbor, I ran into this guy, and we were 
standing there on the street talking when a Ford 
Trimotor airplane flew over. The guy fell down on his 
knees and said, “Oh, please don’t bomb us.” He thought 
that the plane was Japanese. I went on my way, but it 
stayed in my mind that the Japanese were in the United 
States recruiting blacks to overthrow this country, telling 
them what was happening and what was going to 
happen. 

In the summer of 1942 I was working at the Ford 
factory to earn money to pay for my fall tuition. At Ford 
I was a committeeman for the UAW in the foundry. I 
kept track of all the union people to make sure that the 
company followed the contracts, to make sure that 
everybody was getting the right amount of money. While 
doing this and working with black people I kept talking 
about the segregated military—“Blacks can’t fight and 
die for our country in combat like every other citizen. 
Instead they segregate us in service units, make us truck 
drivers and so forth. I say it’s a shame, and I’m not going 
to war if I can’t be an infantryman or run a tank or fly 



Not a Communist 


37 


an airplane. If I’ve got to chive a truck or handle garbage 
or something, I’m not going to go.” 

“Well, you pledge allegiance to the flag, don’t you?” 

“Hell no! I’m not going to stand and pledge 
allegiance. Why should I pledge allegiance to a god¬ 
damned country that doesn’t even want me to go to war 
and die for it?” It was known throughout the factory 
what type of hot head I was, I guess. The foremen knew 
it, and I talked to everybody. 

Ford had developed a way to make magnesium out 
of magnesium oxide. They built six big furnaces with 
retorts diat ran through big round tubes to a gas furnace. 
We loaded these things with magnesium oxide, closed 
them up and put the vacuum on them so that they were 
in vacuum atmosphere, and heated them until the 
magnesium came out of the oxide. Then we drew it to the 
end of the tube and cut it off and took it out, and we had 
solid magnesium. I had two responsibilities: I had to read 
the pyrometer to make sure that the gas temperature was 
right, and I had to make sure that all the men on these 
six furnaces did the job that they were supposed to do. 
They had all black guys on this. This was skilled work, 
and they were making high wages. 

This operation had been in the glass plant, it’s where 
they had started it, and one day a bunch of white guys 
from the glass plant came over, and the foreman took my 
men off the furnaces and put the white guys on. My men 
were put to doing low-paid manual labor. The white 
guys were union people too, and I said, “What are you 
guys doing over here?” 



38 


Fighting Back 


“Well, they came over and got us from the glass 
plant and told us to come over here and work on these 
furnaces.” 

I said, “You know you are violating the union 
contract. Now get off of this job and go back to what you 
were doing or I’m going to see that you get put out of the 
goddamned union!” I said, “These black guys been here 
a long time and they should have the shelter of 
seniority.” So the guys said, “OK, OK. We’ll go.” They 
walked off the furnaces and went back to the glass plant. 

So now here’s the foreman. The black guys are still 
doing the manual labor job they’ve been assigned, and 
the furnaces are unattended. The foreman says, “You 
made those white guys leave the furnaces; now put these 
black guys back to work on them.” 

I said, “I can’t put anybody back to work. I’m a 
committeeman and I’m talcing care of union business and 
doing my job. If you want somebody on those furnaces, 
you put them on. I don’t give a shit if they burn up or 
not.” 

He said, “Well, I’m not going to.” He wouldn’t put 
anybody back on the furnaces, and they burned up. He 
finally went around and cut off the gas (they were gas 
fired), but it was too late. All those retorts, tubes . . . just 
melted up! 

Harry Bennett came out. Bennett was head of 
security at Ford, and he had tried to take over the 
company when old man Ford got senile. He brought his 
security people and army people in uniforms, and they 
all came out and saw these burned up furnaces. So the 
FBI and Harry Bennett took me back to the big Ford 
office complex and accused me of sabotage and of being 



Not a Communist 


39 


a communist. They kept interrogating me and accusing 
me, and I kept saying, “I’m not a communist. I want to 
volunteer to go into the army. Hey, I’ll go in the army 
tomorrow if you’ll put me in the infantiy or in the Army 
Air Coips. I want to fight for my countiy. I think this is 
the greatest countiy in the world. And I’m a Catholic, 
and you’ve never seen Catholics that are Communists. 
Look at my histoiy and you’ll see I went to a Catholic 
school.” So they let it go. They didn’t have a case against 
me anyway. 




7 


FDR 


T HAD BEGUN TO DEVELOP some interest in politics 
when I was still pretty young. Before we moved to 
Michigan we had an old crystal radio set, and I 
remember sitting with my mother and stepfather in our 
living room listening to the results of the national elec¬ 
tions of 1928 when A1 Smith ran against Herbert Hoover. 
They were talking about Smith being a Democrat and 
what a nice guy he was—that his election would help 
black people and poor people. By the time Franklin 
Roosevelt ran for president in 1932 I was a dyed-in-the 
wool Democrat. I didn’t know that in the South any 
number of blacks were Republicans. When I found out, 
it was really an enigma to me; but Lincoln freed the 
slaves and he was a Republican—why shouldn’t black 
people be Republicans? 

My mother was veiy active in politics when we lived 
in the ghetto down on Denton Avenue, and when I was 
in the sixth, seventh, and eighth grades she would hold 



42 


Fighting Back 


political meetings at our home. 1 would hear her talk 
about how this councilman was going to run, and who 
was going to am for mayor of Hamtramck. I knew all of 
these people by name because I would go with my 
mother to some of the meetings or they would have them 
at our house. Political patronage was important to us: it 
got my mother a job as a clerk in the welfare department, 
and we would get favors down in the city, and politicians 
respected her. I knew that. 

I lost money when the banks closed. I’d played a 
policy number and won, and I wanted to buy a bicycle; 
never had a bicycle in my life. My mother had bought me 
a pair of roller skates, and that was the only thing that I 
had to get around on, but she said, “Don’t buy a bicycle 
with this money. Put it in the bank and start a savings 
account.” 

I said, “Oh Mom, no. I don’t want to do that; I want 
a bicycle.” 

And she said, “No, we’re going to start life out right 
for you; we’re going to deposit this money in the bank.” 

After we had this big discussion I went up to the 
bank with her and we deposited the money, and a week 
later the banks folded. I said, “Can I get my money out 
of the bank?” She said no, and I said, “You see—you 
made me lose my money.” When FDR opened the banks 
and started bank insurance, I thought he was the savior 
of the country. And Social Security and all of the other 
diings that the Democratic Party did: the New Deal made 
me a solid Democrat for the rest of my life. 



FDR 


43 


Before the CIO came in and started the United Auto 
Workers, when blacks went to work at the Ford Motor 
Company we didn’t have a steady job. We were hired in 
August when the new model was started, and we worked 
until that model was finished, and then they laid us off 
until it was time to build the next year’s cars. Now we 
didn’t have any money coming in. If you hadn’t saved 
while you were working, you would starve. You didn’t 
get vacations and you didn’t have any health insurance 
and you didn’t have a steady job, but you would go back 
to the plant in the fall and go through the employment 
line and hope and pray that you would get your job 
back. There was no middle class—there were just rich 
people and die rest of society. The unions, in my opinion, 
are the only reason that we got a white middle class— 
they made middle class America. I was vexy active in the 
autowoi’kers union, and when we sti’uck I was locked 
into die Ford plant and had fights outside and that type 
of thing. But Hemy Ford gave in to the unions and gave 
us raises and 100 percent union membership—the 
company would deduct our dues from our wages and 
turn them over to the union, so evexybody belonged. 
Roosevelt and the Democrats stood for the ordinaiy, 
common working guy, and they supported organized 
labor, respected the unions. 

I began to lose my fascination with FDR when the 
war stalled. The military was still segregated and he was 
doing nothing about it. The army had segregated black 
units, and the NAACP and politicians and others were 
saying, ‘‘Hey, Roosevelt could change this if he wanted 
to.” But he didn’t, you know. So I lost respect for him . . . 



44 


Fighting Back 


kept it for his wife and the Democratic Party. But after 
the war the Dixiecrats out of the South were all Demo¬ 
crats and they controlled Congress and they weren’t 
decent to black people, and I just didn’t understand that; 
I was messed up in that. 



8 


“Mac, Don’t Start Any Trouble ” 


M Y DRAFT NUMBER came up in January of 
1941. I was still at the University of Detroit, 
and I was also working at the Ford factory. 
When I flunked my physical (for a condition I prefer not 
to go into), they gave me a few months to get my health 
back. I finally went in as a second lieutenant in the army 
reserve because I was still in school and had almost three 
years of college . . . stayed in civilian clothes; you didn’t 
have to put a uniform on. That year a big civil rights 
thing happened: A. Philip Randolph, head of the Pull¬ 
man Porters Union, threatened to march on Washington 
to get equal employment rights for blacks, and he forced 



46 


Fighting Back 


the government into talcing some action. There was a lot 
of discussion of this among my friends. 

In the fall of 1941 I was admitted to the Mehairy 
School of Dentistry in Nashville, Tennessee. I was still in 
the reseives, but after Pearl Harbor we were all to go into 
ASTC, the Army Specialized Training Corps—the mili¬ 
tary would pay for our books and tuition and eveiything, 
and we would go into the army as dentists when we 
graduated. At first I couldn’t get into the ASTC, but all 
the other students at Mehairy were accepted. They 
passed the physical examination; I didn’t. To earn 
enough money to return to school in the fall, I worked at 
Ford again in the summer of 1942. Later I did pass the 
physical and finished my dental studies in the ASTC 
program. 

While I was at Mehairy I kept close to the civil rights 
movement as far as conversations went, but I wasn’t 
active except when something pertained directly to me. 
There was always talk about the NAACP trying to make 
things better and about the need to fight the Ku Klux 
Klan, which was rampant throughout the South, and 
other stuff. . . but I was too involved in trying to stay in 
school and do my thing. 

My last year in dental school I got married to Doleeta 
Moore, a student at Fisk University, right across the 


In the spring of 1941 trade unionist and civil rights leader 
A. Philip Randolph threatened to lead thousands of blacks in a march 
on Washington to protest employment discrimination in defense 
industries and federal bureaus. Shortly thereafter President Roosevelt 
issued an executive order barring such discrimination and creating the 
Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC). Randolph called off the 
march, but the FEPC proved to be relatively ineffective. 




“Mac, Don’t Start Any Trouble” 


47 


street from Meharry. Doleeta had been adopted. Her 
stepfather was a physician in Oklahoma City, had an 
Afro-American hospital there. Her mother was part black 
and part Indian, but her natural father was Caucasian, 
and she looked as if she were a Caucasian girl. Nashville 
was a segregated city, but Doleeta was so light she could 
go downtown to the theater by herself and sit downstairs, 
whereas the Afro-Americans had to sit up in the balcony. 
We started going together, and in March of my senior 
year we got married. 

I graduated from dental school in 1944. They had 
accelerated our studies—we went all year round for the 
last two years, so that we finished in three rather than 
four years. After graduation we were given another 
physical exam before being commissioned lieutenants in 
the Army Dental Corps. I flunked again. This time the 
guy said, “You’ve got flat feet, and you can’t lift your 
arm above your head. You’re a limited service man. 
We’re not taking limited service people in the army at 
this time.” So I’m out of the army again. 

I’m a dentist now, and I beat it back to Detroit where 
I get an interim license to practice from my dentist 
friend, Dr. Bell. (This will let me practice until the board 
exam is offered again.) I order my equipment from the 
dental supply house and go out to Inkster, where the big 
aiiport is now in Detroit. Rent a place and get ready to 
practice dentistiy—figure there’s a shortage of dentists 
and I can make a foxtime before this war is over. I spend 
the day tiying to get the place together and waiting for 
the guy to deliver my equipment (he never did), and 
when I get back home my mother says, “You got this 
letter.” It was an “immediate action” letter from the 



48 


Fighting Back 


United States Army in an envelope with a big red border 
around it. It said I was to report to Carlisle Barracks in 
Pennsylvania within twenty-four hours under punish¬ 
ment of being court martialled. I was back in the army: 
apparently they had decided that diey could use a dentist 
with flat feet and a bad shoulder. I told my wife, “I’ve got 
to go,” and I caught the train and reported to Carlisle 
Barracks. 

The town of Carlisle was still segregated. Here’s how 
bad things were: they had German prisoners of war 
working on die base, and they could date American girls; 
they had free run of the base; they could go into town 
and go to die dieater and sit in the first floor seats where 
the white people sat, and all black people who came into 
the theater had to sit in the balcony. It was obvious that 
blacks were unwelcome in Carlisle, so we’d catch the bus 
and go into Harrisburg to the black community, and find 
girls and fellows that we could associate with. Going 
back to base one night I get on the bus, and after about 
half an hour we stop to change drivers. (This was an 
army bus; they hired civilians to chive them.) I’m sitting 
in a front seat, and the new driver gets on the bus and 
looks at me and says, “Boy, you can’t sit up here. You 
got to get in the back.” 

I’m a first lieutenant on my way overseas to fight for 
this country. I said, “You must be out of your cotton¬ 
picking mind.” 

He didn’t start the bus. He said, “I’m not going to 
move this bus until you sit in the back.” 

“No way!” 

He said, “If you don’t sit in the back, I’m going to 
throw you off the bus.” 




Carlisle Barracks, Pa., 1945: “I was back in the army. 
Apparently they had decided they could use a dentist with flat 
feet and a bad shoulder. - ” 










“Mac, Don’t Start Any Trouble” 


49 


I said, “Yeah? Try it!” So he got up to throw me off, 
and I put my foot in his stomach and pushed him out the 
door. Then I jumped out and let him have it. 

The police came and took me to the base and turned 
me over to the MPs. I stayed in a cell overnight, and the 
next morning they took me to the general’s office. He 
said, “Lieutenant, I’m surprised at you. You have to be 
an officer and a gentleman. What were you doing 
fighting and hitting an employee of the base?” 

I said, “Sir, not with any disrespect, but I’ll fight and 
kick him again. He had the nerve to tell me that I’d have 
to sit in the back of that bus, and he called me a nigger. 
It’s a good thing that I didn’t kill him, sir.” 

“What?” 

“Yes sir, that’s what happened.” 

The general said, “Release this man.” And that 
afternoon he called the whole camp to attention, turned 
them out. He said, “I’ve learned of an incident that I will 
not put up with at this base. As long as I’m in command 
here, this type of thing will not happen. There will be no 
difference between x*aces. We’re all American soldiers and 
we’re doing a job for our countiy and we’re going to do 
it together. And by God, if you are on this base you’ll 
respect every person as a human being.” And he dis¬ 
missed us. 

After six weeks training at Carlisle Barracks I was 
assigned to Ft. Huachuca, Arizona. I decided to take my 
wife to her home in Oklahoma City before reporting for 
duty. The trip turned ugly when we got into the South. 

Doleeta had lived in the black community in 
Oklahoma City, but her family was real prominent, and 



growing up she had had things her way, really—her 
stepfather was associated with some of the white physi¬ 
cians diere, and she had free run of the city; and she was 
so light skinned diat outside of Oklahoma City she could 
go anywhere she wanted to go, because people didn’t 
know whether she was black or white. Since Doleeta 
wasn’t accustomed to rigid segregation, we had difficulty 
traveling together. She would get me into trouble by 
running her mouth. I would say, “You know, you’ve got 
to realize what you’re saying.” We got as far as Chicago 
all right, but from Chicago to Oklahoma City the train 
was segregated. We had to change trains in Memphis, 
and while we were waiting we decided to leave the 
station and walk around a litde. A policeman drove up to 
the curb and said, “Come here, boy!” 

I was the only man on the sidewalk, but I walked 
over to the car and said, “Yes?” 

“What are you doing with that white woman?” 

“That happens to be my wife, sir, and she’s not 
white.” 

He looked her over and he said, “Well, she damn 
sure looks white.” Then he says, “Well, I know that 
you’re not from Memphis, because around here no 
niggers get up this early in the morning. You either have 
to be a preacher or an undertaker, and .... What are 
you doing out on the street at this time of night, nigger?” 

“Oh, we’re waiting for the train to Oklahoma City.” 

“OK, you go back in that station, back in there 
where the niggers stay, and don’t you come out until you 
get your train.” 

I said, “Yes, sir.” 



“Mac, Don’t Start Any Trouble” 


51 


When it came time to board we were a little late 
getting to the platform, so we started running to get on 
before die train left die station. My wife was ahead of me, 
and the conductor reached out his hand and helped her 
on the train. I’m right behind her and I get ready to step 
up and he says, “No, nigger, you go to the next car.” 
Doleeta says, “That’s my husband!” So he pushes her off 
the train too, and we have to inn up to the next car to get 
on. 

Stuff like that happened all the time. It hadn’t been 
too bad in Detroit, but in die South it was awful. Military 
police would come up and harass you and want to know 
what you were doing with that white woman and that 
type of thing, and you had to put up with it because you 
didn’t know when they were going to hit you over the 
head with a stick or lock you up. 

Ft. Fluachuca, Arizona, was where the 7th Cavalry 
had been stationed, and the 10th cavalry, the Buffalo 
Soldiers, the black soldiers. That’s where the army 
formed up to fight Pancho Villa and the Mexicans. 
Pershing had his black cavalry there. During World War 
II all black soldiers were sent to that base—the 92nd and 
93rd divisions and all the medical personnel, hospital 
people . . . that’s where they sent us to stage us before 
they shipped us out to different places. We were being 
formed into hospital type units—from there you would 
either be assigned to a battalion or you would to go a 
hospital or you’d go to a dental clinic somewhere. 

We had fifteen to eighteen thousand black soldiers in 
Ft. Fluachuca at times (first time in my life I’d ever seen 
a black colonel), and tiiere may have been three hundred 



52 


Fighting Back 


white soldiers. On the base was a white hospital and a 
black hospital. The black hospital had black physicians 
and dentists and staff, and the white hospital had whites. 
Black physicians and dentists couldn’t work on white 
soldiers or white families anywhere in the army then; 
they could only work on black people. But white doctors 
could work on bodi races, and a white major was head of 
our dental clinic, which had all black dentists. The two 
hospitals must have been five miles or more outside the 
main gate of Ft. Huachuca in a litde town called Nogales. 
Some town . . . but they had a big beer garden, and the 
soldiers would go there and girls would come and dance. 
(A white general stationed at the fort owned that bar.) 
We also had an officers club where things could get 
pretty wild. 

Four of my classmates from Meharry were at Ft. 
Huachuca with me, and we just raised hell. We’d go to 
Mexico, buy rum and put it in the cooler and have 
parties. These older black soldiers, majors and captains 
and what have you, had their wives there, and we’d go to 
the officer’s club and dance with their wives and raise all 
kinds of hell. One night when I was having a particularly 
good time the colonel sent somebody over to my table to 
take me to him. “You are a disgrace to the United States 
Army Officers Corps,” he said. “You’re supposed to be a 
soldier and a gentleman, but here you are drunk and 
cavorting and carrying on. I’m going to see to it that you 
get shipped out of here, shipped so far around the world 
from the United States that if you take one more step 
you’ll be back in this country!” 

Two days later I got orders for Calcutta, India; so did 
my classmates. But first we had to go through some 



“Mac, Don’t Start Any Trouble” 


53 


additional training at Camp Shanks, New York. I was to 
be the officer in charge of 126 black soldiers, enlisted 
personnel who were going to India with us, plus eleven 
other black officers that were with me. So I was the 
commanding officer, and this kind of detached me. These 
enlisted men had been in an army jail for three years in 
North Carolina where all they had done was march and 
work, I guess. These guys could march! So 1 took them 
and the officers who were assigned to me to Boston to 
board a ship and go overseas. There were also 135 
American Red Cross women on the ship. They were 
treated as officers, and four or five of them were black. 

The enlisted soldiers were kept down in the hot, 
smelly hold of that ship, puking and vomiting while the 
Red Cross women and us officers were all upstairs where 
it was cool and we could breathe fresh air. These kids 
wanted to mutiny. They wanted to break out, but 
marines travel on these ships to enforce law and order, 
and the marines had their guns on them and were going 
to shoot. The army commander of the troops on the ship 
called me and said, “I want you to go downstairs and see 
if you can keep these men from rioting. If you don’t, 
they’re going to get killed.” 

I said, “You’re going to send me down in there after 
you’re treating these people this bad? They’ll kill me. If 
I’m going down there by myself to talk to them about 
being nice, you’ve got to change the rules and 
regulations. You’ve got to let these soldiers come up on 
the deck for air during the day, and feed them and treat 
them decently. If I get that kind of commitment from you 
I’ll go; if not, I won’t.” 



54 


Fighting Back 


He said OK, so I went down and these guys said, 
“Oh, you think you’re a big shot coining down here?” 
And I said, “Wait a minute fellows. Listen to me.” I went 
on and told them what the offer was, and they finally 
accepted it. 

When we were in die Mediterranean the weather was 
nice and the girls would come up and put on their shorts 
and sun bathe. They would come out and sit all over the 
deck, forcing us twelve black officers to stand around the 
sides; there was no place for us to sit. After dinner one 
night I said, “We’re going to stop this bullshit. We’re 
going to get out there first and we’re going to get in the 
middle of diat damned deck and let’s see what happens.” 

The guys said, “Oh, no. You’re going to get us put in 
the brig.” 

I said, “Well, if you guys won’t, I will.” 

The next morning I got up and went out and sat 
right in the middle of the place. There was nobody else 
on the deck. Shoitly the girls started coming out and they 
would sit at the edges, around and away from me, this 
black speck sitting out there in the middle. Finally, when 
there was no other place left, the late arrivals began 
sitting near me. Up on top I could see the army com¬ 
mander and the commanding officer of the Red Cross 
women, and they looked madder than hell. The next day 
I did this again, and the colonel called me into his office. 
He had the Red Cross commanding officer there, and he 
said, “Lieutenant, we don’t like what we see out there. 
You’re sitting amongst all these Red Cross women who 
are scarcely clothed, and you’re looking around at them, 
and we don’t want you to sit out there any more.” 



“Mac, Don’t Start Any Trouble” 


55 


I said, “You mean to tell me that I can’t sit on the 
deck, sir?” 

“No, you can’t sit on the deck amongst all these 
white women.” 

I said, “Well, I guess the only other place you have 
for me is in the brig, because eveiy day I’m going to come 
sit down.” He let it go, and then the other black officers 
came out and sat on the deck and they started talking to 
the girls. He couldn’t do anything about it, I guess; he 
could, but he didn’t want to. So everything went well 
from there until we landed at Calcutta. 

We got assigned to Kanchurpura, which was about 
sixty miles east of Calcutta. The 49th Ordnance Battalion 
and a general hospital were on that base. The 49th was 
a battalion of black soldiers with no black officers—the 
highest ranking black man in the outfit was a master 
sergeant. They stored all of the ammunition for the navy, 
the army and what have you. Our group of replacements 
included a black ordnance officer for the 49th, a black 
provost marshal (military police), and us two dentists. 
The black military policeman was put out in the field to 
be head of all the security, and he replaced a white 
captain who commanded the detachment of Gurkha 
Rifles that was guarding the post. The Gurkhas were 
Nepalis and they were tremendous fighters—they carried 
these damn bull knives and they’d cut your head off in a 
minute—but they wouldn’t give our military police guy 
any respect. 

Before we arrived, the dental clinic at Kanchurpura 
was staffed with two Jewish officers and four white 
enlisted men, and the medical clinic was staffed with a 
white medical officer and four white enlisted men. So two 



56 


Fighting Back 


black dentists took over the dental clinic. Our job was to 
do the simple tilings— f i llin gs, extractions, cleanings, that 
type of thing. We hadn’t had any postgraduate work at 
that time, so if there were any real difficult problems we 
would take our patients over to the general hospital 
where they had only white officers. These white dentists 
had been practicing for years in the army, and they had 
the plush jobs and they did the surgery and a lot of the 
other things. Surgery was the biggest thing. 

The white officer who ran the medical clinic was our 
commanding officer. When we reported he sent the two 
of us down to live at the dental clinic instead of putting 
us in the bachelor officers quarters. I looked over where 
we were going to stay, and I said, “Man, I tell you, this is 
bad and getting worse. We’re going to stay in the BOQ or 
else.” 

My friend said, “Mac, don’t start any trouble.” 

I said, “Hell, I’m not going to stay down here.” 
Really, that was the best place to stay because you were 
close to the work, but I said, “Nope. I think they’re being 
unfair to us.” 

We went down to the mess hall and they didn’t have 
us segregated there at all. We sat at a table with a 
southern second lieutenant, two captains (one from 
Harvard and one from Yale), and there was another 
white guy from New York. When we sat down, this 
southern officer (he was from Florida; had been some 
kind of a judge back there), he got up and moved and sat 
at the next table. Tilings went along OK for a while, and 
then all of a sudden he started up and you could hear his 
voice all over the damn mess. He was going on about 
what dirty people niggers were, and how he treated them 



“Mac, Don’t Start Any Trouble ” 


57 


in his court; talking about how the police would drag 
them in drunk, and he’d sentence them, and they’d be 
dirown in a cell, kicked around. No respect for any of us. 

I told the two captains at my table, “Fellows, I’m 
tired of this. This has to come to a stop.” 

One said, “Mac, don’t get yourself in any trouble. 
He’s not worth it.” 

I said, “It’s worth it to me. I’m a first lieutenant in 
the United States Army, and I think I should have the 
respect of that position. If that fellow don’t like me, at 
least he should respect the uniform.” 

“What are you going to do?” 

“I’m going over there and shut his mouth.” 

He said, “You’ll get in trouble if you hit him. You’re 
his superior, you know; you’re a first lieutenant and he’s 
a second.” 

“I don’t care. I’m going to go over there and stop 
him.” So I got up from the table and went over there and 
told him, “I’m tired of your conversation about negroes, 
or ‘niggers’ as you say. I don’t want to hear it any more.” 
And I pushed up to him and got right in his face and 
egged him on, and he was angiy and upset and he drew 
back and hit me. That’s what I wanted him to do—hit 
me so I could shut him up for good. 

The major from the outfit called me in to his office 
the next morning: “I understand you had a fight in the 
mess hall last night.” 

“Yes sir, I had a fight. Your lieutenant hit me. I 
figured I had a right to protect myself, and I knocked 
him down and that stopped him.” 

“He hit you first?” 

“Yes, he did.” 



58 


Fighting Back 


He said, “You’re smart enough to incite that, aren’t 
you?” 

“Not me, sir. I don’t know that much about army 
law. I’m a dentist working in the army, and I don’t know 
all this other stuff.” 

So he said, “Well, I know you’re a little smaller than 
that. I understand that you want me to move you into the 
BOQ. You don’t want to stay in the dental clinic; you 
thought that we put you there to segregate you. You’re 
wrong. All of the white officers who served in your 
position stayed down there too. We thought that this was 
more convenient, and that’s why I decided to put you 
guys there. Now we’re going to move you up into the 
barracks. Be careful. Don’t get into any more trouble.” 

I said, “OK. Thank you sir, but I want you to tell 
certain people to respect officers, to watch their mouths.” 

He said,“I will,” and that ended all the problems. 

India blew my mind. The caste system existed there, 
and Anglo-Indian people in Calcutta had all the plush 
jobs. They worked in the post office; they worked in 
offices with telephones and all that, and dark Indians 
had the filthy, dirty jobs. I couldn’t understand why the 
American army would segregate its own people in a 
black country. The first time we went into Calcutta on a 
pass we discovered that the American Red Cross had 
tents in two places about a mile apart. They had black 
girls working in an American Red Cross tent for blacks, 
and white girls working in a separate one for whites. 
Signs in front of the tent for whites read, “No niggers or 
dogs allowed.” 



“Mac, Don’t Start Any Trouble” 


59 


I was there about a year and we had only one 
accident on the base. A company of black soldiers was on 
its last detail; they were scheduled to go home the 
following day. They were taking ten trunks of Chinese 
gun powder out to destroy it—put it in a revetment and 
throw a grenade into it. These fellows were all riding in 
the back of the truck, and some guy that didn't know 
what he was doing was fooling around and he hit one of 
those cans of gun powder with a pick and ignited it and 
killed them all instantly. That was the first time I had 
seen a mushroom cloud like an atomic bomb; that’s the 
way this thing went up. The army assigned all black 
soldiers to that type of duty—chiving trucks, laboring, 
moving loads . . . service. That was what their job was 
until Patton took die 25di Regiment into the Battle of the 
Bulge, where he used them as soldiers. 

I got promoted to captain while I was there. They 
brought a black medical officer down and made him 
commanding officer of our place, and I told him, “Hey, 
I’d like you to put me in for captain,” and he did and I 
got promoted. Shortly after that they began moving 
troops out of India and into China to get ready to invade 
Japan. We were at a staging area getting ready to go, but 
after we had gotten our stuff together the orders for all 
the black emits were changed. Some were to go to Korea, 
but most were being sent back to the States. The white 
units were still on for China, and the white officers 
couldn’t understand it. Why did they have to get ready 
to invade Japan while blacks went back to the United 
States to get discharged? It puzzled me too. 



60 


Fighting Back 


I had some connections with the vice president of the 
American Red Cross in India, a Caucasian woman that I 
had been complaining to about segregation. We were 
pretty good friends, and I told her, “You know, we’ll be 
leaving India, but we’re not going to China with every¬ 
body else. I don’t know why, but our orders were 
changed and now we’re going home.” She said, “You 
haven’t heard? I got it from a first class source that the 
orders for the negro soldiers were changed because 
Madame Chiang Kai-shek didn’t want any blacks in 
China.” And that was the truth. So we came back to the 
United States and all the white guys went up the Burma 
Road to China. 

I had a lucky thing happen. My buddy and I had 
orders to board a plane to return to the States, but the 
night before we were to leave we went out and got 
plastered and overslept and missed our plane. That 
airplane crashed and killed all aboard somewhere in 
Turkey. So we got on another airplane, a C-54, and we 
went through Saigon, the Philippines, Guam . . . . 
Landed and went through customs in Hawaii, and then 
came on into San Francisco. 

My orders directed me on to Chicago to get 
discharged. I told my buddy, “Hey, man, we don’t have 
to catch the train until tomorrow morning; let’s go to the 
officers club.” We started up to the duly and just as we 
got to the door we ran into the general. He looked at us 
and said, “Where you boys going?” 

We said, “We’re going to the officers club.” 

“Don’t you know we don’t allow negroes in here? ” 

“Well, this is an officers club on an army base.” 



“Mac, Don’t Start Any Trouble” 


61 


“Yeah,” he said, “but this is the permanent club. We 
have that officers dull there in that tent for you colored 
boys.” 

I said to my buddy, “Forget it. We’re too close to 
getting out and getting back home to have more 
troubles.” So we left and the next morning we caught our 
trains—I was going to Chicago and he got on a train 
going to Nashville, Tennessee. It took me about a week 
to get cleared out of Chicago and come on back home. 
My experiences with racism in the army had made me an 
angiy young man, and I stayed angiy for a long time. 




A Fresh Start 


M Y LOVE, MY DAUGHTER JERI, had been born 
while I was overseas, but when I returned 
Doleeta and I separated and thought about 
getting a divorce. I took the state board examinations to 
make sure that I could practice dentistiy, and then I had 
to decide where I was going to practice. Housing was 
haixl to find after die war, so I moved in with my mother 
in Hamtramck and started practicing there. Eventually 
my wife and I changed our minds and got together again, 
and she got pregnant with my son James, who was born 
in 1947. We’d been married for about four years when 
Doleeta decided that she was going to leave and take the 
two children. It was a veiy hard thing. She brought the 
two youngsters to my office and we had a discussion 
about the separation, and she got angiy and walked out 
of the office and left them with me. We were living in an 
apartment in a project at that time. Housing was hard to 



64 


Fighting Back 


get ahold of, and it was out in a little Afro-American 
community in Detroit, what we called Eight Mile Road. 

Doleeta was actually a very fine person. We just 
disagreed. When we got divorced in 1949 she went to 
Washington, D.C., where she got into the entertainment 
business, working in night clubs as an exotic dancer. 
Since I spent eveiy day at my office, I had to make 
arrangements to have the children taken care of. I rented 
a house for an elderly woman and paid her to take care 
of them. Paid for her food and stuff, and 1 lived in the 
basement while my youngsters had bedrooms upstairs. 

Doctor Charles West was the person who discovered 
Las Vegas for me. He was a Dartmouth graduate, a 
medical doctor who helped me get started in my dental 
practice in Detroit after the war; we practiced light 
across the street from each other. His father was a 
professor of anatomy at Howard University, and his 
mother was superintendent of schools, and his sisters 
were all teachers. They were first class people back in 
Washington. 

Dr. West was married to a young lady, but he got a 
divorce, and I got divorced. His brother had served in 
Africa in World War II . . . stayed there and was in 
business in Liberia—he had an ice cream factory and a 
grocery and had a little hospital going. We had nothing 
else to do and we wanted some adventure, so we decided 
to go to Africa to practice medicine and dentistiy 
together; but before it could happen Dr. West met this 
woman from Los Angeles and married her. They used to 
drive back and forth to visit her family, and one year 
they ran into storms and had to come through Las 



A Fresh Start 


65 


Vegas. Dr. West knew a lot of the entertainers, and he 
liked die night life, and his wife liked the night life, so he 
decided to move to Las Vegas. “It’s in Nevada,” he said. 
“They have gambling and the town stays open twenty- 
four hours a day. And all the entertainers . . . . ” I said, 
“OK, I’m sorry to see you go. This means we won’t be 
going to Africa.” 

One winter morning after Dr. West left I dug my car 
out of the ice and got to my office, and the heater was 
bad and people were tracking snow and mud into the 
waiting room, and it was just awful. Didn’t do much for 
your frame of mind. Nothing else was going right in my 
life either, and I wanted out. When I got my mail there 
was a postcard from a friend in Phoenix, Arizona—it had 
a big orange on it and the sun was shining. My son had 
a chest type thing when he was two years old, and the 
doctor had said, “You need to move your son to Arizona 
if he’s going to outgrow this thing.” Well, I couldn’t just 
leave and go to Arizona, but Dr. West was in Las Vegas 
practicing, and I knew he would help me get started 
there. I called him and said, “Doc, what’s the tempera¬ 
ture in Las Vegas?” 

“It’s seventy-five degrees.” 

“I’m coming out.” 

I went out for a visit, but I couldn’t just make a 
permanent move. First I had to straighten out my affairs 
and get some money together. And I wanted to pass the 
Nevada boards before I relocated my family. 

A couple of years after my divorce the Korean War 
started. As a captain in the reserves, I was called back 
into the army. I resisted going—I had these two young- 



66 


Fighting Back 


sters to take care of, but the army said that wasn’t its 
problem; that I must do something with the children and 
report to Camp McCoy in Wisconsin. We negotiated this 
back and forth for over two years. Finally I decided to go 
ahead and sell my practice and go back in the army. 

I wanted to leave the children with my mother, but 
she was getting married again, and she said, “No, I’m not 
going to take care of them. You better make other 
arrangements.” So I arranged for this elderly lady to 
continue taking care of them, and I negotiated with the 
army to send me to Fort Benjamin Harrison near 
Indianapolis so that I could go back and forth to kind of 
monitor them. By this time the war was over, and the day 
before I was supposed to leave I got a telegram from the 
medical corps in Chicago telling me I didn’t have to go. 
But I had sold my practice and made all my arrange¬ 
ments, and I had my mind set; I just put that telegram in 
my pocket and ignored it. Very early the next morning I 
got in my automobile and drove down to Ft. Benjamin 
Harrison. 

I got to the base at 7:30 a. m., showed the officer of 
the day my original orders, and signed in. He says “We 
don’t open till eight o’clock. Come back then and we’ll 
start processing.” So I came back at eight o’clock and a 
captain was there. Ide says, “McMillan, you’re not 
supposed to be here. Your orders were cancelled.” 

I said, “Nobody told me they were cancelled. I’ve got 
my orders here and I’ve signed the book. I’m in the army. 
That’s what you guys wanted, so here I am.” 

The captain called Chicago, and this major that I 
had been negotiating with told him, “Put Captain 
McMillan on die phone.” I got on the phone and he said, 



A Fresh Start 


67 


“What in the hell are you doing there? I sent you a 
telegram cancelling your orders.” 

“I didn’t get any telegram. Maybe it’s somewhere, 
but I didn’t get it. I assumed that I had to report for duty, 
and I came here and signed in.” 

He says, “Well, you got me in a pickle now.” 

“Tough,” I said. “I’m in the army and I’ll stay.” 

I just had to get the hell away from Detroit, change 
my life. Everything was going bad. The divorce . . . and 
I was running around boozing and chasing women—not 
the life that I should have. Also I was half way busted, 
didn’t have much money, and selling the practice for the 
little I got hadn’t helped. Going into the army would give 
me a chance to get straightened out. It was part of my 
plan for a brighter future: I’d save my army pay and use 
it to get a fresh start in Las Vegas. 

While I was still in the army, I flew out to visit Dr. 
West. Leaving the Las Vegas airport I got a rude 
awakening. I got in a cab and told the driver I wanted to 
go to Wyatt Avenue. He says, “Wyatt Avenue; I don’t 
know where that is.” So he gets on his radio and calls the 
office. He says, “I got a passenger. I’m trying to find 
Wyatt Avenue. Gan you tell me how to get there?” The 
dispatcher says, “Yes, that’s in the Westside, over where 
the niggers live,” and she gives him directions. He 
apologized for what she had said, and then we drove off. 
We got to the corner of “D” Street and Bonanza, which 
were unpaved. The dust was flying up from cars chiving 
by, and people were hanging out there in the dust outside 
a bar. We drove on to Wyatt Avenue, which was paved. 



68 


Fighting Back 


The only medical care available to black citizens in 
Las Vegas at that time was in the county hospital. There 
wasn’t a doctor’s office on the Westside until Dr. West 
arrived. He had bought two houses on Wyatt Avenue, 
and he had an office in one. When I got there he was 
busy, so I sat in his waiting room for a while. It was just 
crowded with people. At the twelve o’clock break he had 
a call to go to the Moulin Rouge, and he said, “Come 
with me. I want to show you a place.” We went up to 
the Moulin Rouge to this fellow’s room, and learned he 
had partied all night and had a big hangover. Doc 
examined him and gave him a shot to stop his headache. 
The guy says, “Hey, there are some chips on the dresser. 
Take your fee in chips.” Dr. West went over to the 
dresser where there was a stack of chips several inches 
high. He picked up just four of them. 

I said, “Is that it? Is that your fee?” 

“Yes.” 

When we got out to the car I said, “Well, what are 
these things worth?” 

“A hundred dollars apiece.” 

I said, “You mean to tell me you were paid four 
hundred dollars on this house call?” 

“Yes.” 

I said, “This is the place for me!” 


The Moulin Rouge, at 900 Bonanza Road, was located within the 
predominantly black Westside neighborhood. When it opened in 1955 
it was the first major hotel-casino in Las Vegas to be interracial. For a 
variety of reasons the Moulin Rouge came to occupy a central place in 
the history of civil rights in Las Vegas. See Earnest N. Bracey, “The 
Moulin Rouge Mystique,” Nevada Historical Society Quarterly , 39:4 
(Winter 1996), 272-288. 




A Fresh Start 


69 


While I was at Ft. Benjamin Harrison I started going 
with a young woman who worked in the hospital in 
Detroit, and we decided to get married. Her name was 
Magnolia Rutherford, but I called her Micki. She was a 
model, modeled clothes for Ebony —a beautiful woman 
who looked like she was anything but Afro-American. 
She was very light, had long hair down her back. We got 
married in Las Vegas. I was talcing thirty days leave from 
the army, and we drove out and took out our marriage 
license and got married in the Moulin Rouge. Sammy 
Davis Jr. was there, Billy Eckstine ... Ed Sullivan 
happened to be in the Moulin Rouge at that time, and 
Billy Daniels sang the wedding song for us. These people 
were just there for the entertainment. That was the only 
integrated hotel in town at that time, and all of these 
people .... Betty Hutton, the wealthy heiress, was there. 
And when we had the wedding, all these people just 
came out and had a party. 

At that time West Las Vegas was really growing. It 
had the Louisiana Club, Town Tavern, El Rio .... All 
of these places were doing good business, so some white 
people from Los Angeles, one was in the restaurant 
business, had built the Moulin Rouge to get in on the 
action. It was the only integrated hotel in Las Vegas, a 
tremendous hotel, and all types of people visited it. Afro- 
American chorus girds came out of Atiantic City and New 
York to perform there, and most of the prominent black 
entertainers came to the Moulin Rouge to perform. Part 
of its appeal was diat the entertainment went on all night 
long. The hotels on the Strip had only two shows, one at 
about eight o’clock and the other at twelve. After the 
second show there was nothing really doing on the Strip 



70 


Fighting Back 


except the gambling, so all of the cocktail waitresses, 
entertainers, pit boss people and so forth from the late 
shift would come to the Moulin Rouge and just have a 
ball from about two o’clock until dawn. 

The Moulin Rouge was a tremendous success and an 
immediate asset for the West Las Vegas area. Too bad 
that the owners couldn’t get along. When the hotel closed 
a few months later it wasn’t because of not having any 
business; it closed because the partners just couldn’t get 
along and they decided not to pay any more bills. It was 
rumored that each of them would go into the boxes and 
put money into their pockets at the end of the night, and 
finally they just closed down. They didn’t want anything 
more to do with it because they couldn’t trust one 
another. 

I had passed the Nevada board exams, but I didn’t 
get my notification from the board for almost two and a 
half months. Then I finally received my state license, and 
after my discharge from the army we moved to Las 
Vegas. Dr. Quannah McCall was an Indian who was a 
dentist, and he was on the state board. (His daughter 
Connie is still practicing.) When I opened my office, he 
came to congratulate me and wish me well. We sat and 
talked for a while, and I asked him why it had taken so 
long for the board to award me my license. “Well, Mac,” 
he says, “they weren’t going to pass you. You’re a black 
man, and they don’t want any blacks practicing dentistiy 


Hie Moulin Rouge re-opened under new ownership in 1957, but 
it never achieved the potential it had demonstrated during the first 
months of its operation. 




A Fresh Start 


71 


in Nevada. Your grades were eighty-five and above in all 
of the operations that you did, higher than all but one of 
the other applicants. In my book you are a qualified 
dentist, and I told them that if they didn’t pass you I was 
not going to pass another applicant as long as I was on 
the board.” They had to have a unanimous vote at that 
time, and that meant that nobody would be getting a 
license ... so they passed me. 

I set up my practice at 812 West Bonanza Road, at 
die comer of Bonanza and “H” Street. It was in the black 
community, what we would call the Westside. Dr. West 
and I had bought houses on Wyatt Avenue in the new 
Berkeley Square subdivision. Unlike much of the rest of 
the Westside the subdivision had paved streets and lights 
and sewers and all that. Dr. West built a swimming pool 
behind his house and I built a pool behind mine. 

My office was right next to the Moulin Rouge in a 
building with Dr. West. There was a restaurant next 
door, and a barber shop and an architectural firm. 
(Years later I bought the building.) After I opened I sat 
there for thirty days without having a patient, because 
everybody was going to other dentists, most of whom 
would only see blacks after hours. Dr. Faust was a very 
fine dentist, a Gentian who had his office on Main Street. 
He would see blacks at any time and he would bill them. 
Other Caucasian dentists would take black people only if 
they had cash, and then diey would overcharge them . . . 
and diey’d only take them after hours. They wouldn’t let 
them in the door when white patients were in the waiting 
room. 

Well, to get business I started staying open until 
seven o’clock at night. One night a Caucasian called me 



72 


Fighting Back 


from downtown. She had a severe toothache and needed 
immediate attention, so I told her to come in and I 
treated her. She was the secretary for the electricians 
union- she was so happy with the treatment she received 
from me that she took some of my cards and put one up 
on the board down there at the union office. A lot of 
people in the electricians union worked out at the nuclear 
test site, and after the secretary recommended me I 
began seeing many of them. They would get through 
with work at four, and by the time they would drive 
down to Las Vegas it was too late to go to another 
dentist. 

Eventually I worked up a large clientele, and many 
of them were Caucasians. Some white patients would 
come in, and when they discovered that I was black they 
would say, “Well, I don’t know whether I could have a 
black man put his hand in my mouth.” I would think one 
diing, but I would say, “Fine. You have a right to spend 
your money where you want. This is America.” I still get 
some of that. We service three or four dental insurances, 
HMOs and PPOs and that type of thing, and these people 
come in and they find out that two of us are Afro- 
Americans. When they come in, they see all the Caucasian 
people in the waiting room and they sit down and wait. 
Finally they go back and see that the dentist or hygienist 
is black, and some of them say, “Well, I’m sorry. I can’t. 
I don’t want you to work on my teeth.” 

It cuts the other way too. One time I had a patient in 
the chair when I was called to the phone. The guy was 
one of the largest paying patients I’d ever had—about six 
thousand dollars worth of dental work involving root 
canals and crowns and stuff. My phone was just to the 



A Fresh Start 


73 


back of the room, and he could overhear my end of the 
conversation. At that time I was president of the local 
NAACP, and we were working hard on the civil rights 
thing. I really got agitated on the phone, talking about 
integration and how bad white people were, and this and 
that. When the call was over the guy said, “Wait a 
minute, Doc. Just wait a minute. I must he stupid; I don’t 
understand.” He said, “Here I am sitting in your chair, 
paying you thousands of dollars, and you get on the 
phone and talk about how evil and dumb white folks are. 
What’s your problem?” 

I said, “I, ah . . . well 

But he couldn’t just get up and walk out. He said, 
“OK, go ahead and finish the work.” 

Evidendy Las Vegas was much less segregated before 
the Hoover Dam project and BMI attracted large num¬ 
bers of blacks from the South seeking jobs. Black people 
lived downtown and there were black businesses on 
Second Street. They could go into some of the clubs, and 
they could shop and go to the movies. Some blacks even 
owned property downtown. In fact, the building the post 
office was in was owned by a black person who leased it 
to the postal service. But that all changed. For some 
reason Mr. Clark and the people who ran things in town 
decided to force the blacks out, harass them, get them to 
move over to the Westside. And that happened. 

By the time I got to Las Vegas, it was rigidly 
segregated. You couldn’t get into any of the places 
downtown to eat. You could go into the stores, but if you 
tried on clothing you couldn’t put it back on the rack; 
you had to buy it. You couldn’t go into any of the gaming 



joints. The only black people who worked in the hotels 
were porters, and you couldn’t live anywhere other than 
the West Las Vegas area. Some black people bought 
property far outside town to the west, three or four acres, 
and they built houses out there, but it was difficult for a 
black person to rent a house anywhere in Las Vegas 
except on the Westside. 

A Mrs. Shaw had kind of a little motel on the 
Westside, just north of Jackson Street, and she took in 
many of the visiting black entertainers; and Jodie 
Cannon, the fellow that owned the Cotton Club, had 
another house next to where he lived east of D Street, 
and die Mills Brothers and some of the important enter¬ 
tainers would stay with him. When I came to Las Vegas 
they were still doing that. Dr. West had two houses in 
Berkeley Square. Lie lived in one and rented the other out 
to black entertainers who were performing in segregated 
hotels on the Strip. I did the same, and that way I got to 
meet people like Joe Williams and his family . . . Lena 
Home rented the house from me, and Count Basie. Duke 
Ellington and his band liked it because it had three 
bedrooms and a kitchen, and they could do their own 
cooking. You needed a kitchen, because restaurants all 
over town had signs up that they would not serve blacks. 
The only place where we could eat on die Strip was a deli 
named Foxy’s, across from the Sahara Hotel, where the 
owner had a couple of booths for his black patrons—he’d 
let you come in and have sandwiches and things. But we 
had restaurants and businesses on the Westside, and two 
or three gaming joints. We had the Town Tavern, the 
Louisiana Club, the El Rio, the Cotton Club. And Oscar 



A Fresh Start 


75 


Crozier had a small club over there, the El Morocco, that 
was doing great business. 

Oscar Crozier had owned another joint, just a little 
hole in the wall which I had visited the first time I came 
out to Las Vegas; then he built the El Morocco, which 
was a big-time gaming joint. Oscar made the mistake of 
closing his first operation down before he had completed 
construction, thinking he could just reopen and keep 
operating as usual. But that violated the gaming law. If 
you close, you forfeit your license and have to go back 
and get pennission to open again. C. D. Baker was mayor 
at that time, and when Oscar closed down, C. D. Baker 
kept him closed for three and a half to four years. Finally 
he let him reopen the place. I guess Oscar had gotten on 
the wrong side of some people. 




10 


Soon Somebody Nominated Me 


T GREW UP WITH THE BELIEF that you had to fight 
for your rights and speak up and demand respect 
and equal treatment. As a boy I had been to polit¬ 
ical meetings and rallies with my mother, who was quite 
an activist, and I had heard her blast whites and every¬ 
body else. Then at the University of Detroit I got involved 
with the NAACP, and I’ve been a member ever since. 

My mother had tallied about conditions in the South, 
and I experienced them firsthand when I attended 
Meharry Medical College. When we went to the movies 
we had to sit in the balcony, and in general we were just 
segregated out of being able to do a lot of things, so we 
stayed on campus and read about how bad white folks 
were and about black folks being lynched and that type 



78 


Fighting Back 


of thing. And then my stint in the army, facing all the 
segregation that the military had at that time .... I 
decided to actively try to change things; decided that was 
what to do. 

In Detroit after the war I resumed my association 
with the NAACP. My friends were involved too, and we 
demonstrated and did other things in the city, because 
segregation was in Detroit’s system. Charles Diggs, Jr. 
was a leader and a friend of mine. He had been in the 
civil rights movement at Fisk University while I was at 
Meharry Medical College. (Fisk is right across the street 
from Mehany in Nashville.) Diggs lived in the black 
community in Detroit, where his father owned one of the 
largest mortuaries in the city, and he was later elected to 
Congress from that district. He became a forthright, 
courageous representative who tried to do all he could to 
get civil rights legislation passed. 

I was the second black professional to come to the 
state of Nevada; Dr. West was the first. Shortly after my 
arrival I started attending local NAACP meetings. Dave 
Hoggard was president when I joined. Woodrow Wilson 
had been president before that, and Mrs. Lubertha 
Johnson had been president before him. Back before her, 
Aithur McCants was instrumental in stalling the NAACP 
in Las Vegas by wilting about die difficulty black people 
had getting jobs at the Boulder Dam project. He helped 


Many whites are unaware that lynching of blacks by white mobs 
was a frequent occurrence well into the twentieth century. In 1952 the 
Tuskegee Institute reported no lynchings for the first time in seventy- 
one years. For a more detailed analysis see W. Fitzhugh Brundage, 
Lynching in the New South: Georgia and Virginia, 1880-1930 
(Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1993). 




Soon Somebody Nominated Me 


79 


organize an NAACP branch to tiy to get jobs for blacks 
at the dam, and it just went from there. Dave Hoggard, 
Woodrow Wilson, and Mrs. Johnson did a great job of 
fighting for the rights of blacks. Then there was Donald 
Clark, who was just out of the army and was an assistant 
pastor of a ministry church. And we had Emoiy Ward, 
who was a brother school teacher at that time, and Dr. 
West, Bob Bailey, and Clarence Ray, who was a real old 
timer ... tiiose were the most prominent members in the 
organization. 

We also had about: ten or twelve white members, and 
some of them were on the executive board. George 
Rudiak was a Caucasian attorney who belonged to the 
branch—he’d been in the state assembly and was one of 
the first to introduce a civil rights bill and a fair housing 
bill. George Brookman’s wife, Eileen, was also a Cauca¬ 
sian member of our executive board, and she was later 
elected to the legislature; and we had a Caucasian fellow 
on the board who was an insurance agent. 

I was elected president of the Las Vegas NAACP 
after attending only a few meetings. I’d been talking and 
carrying on about all the segregation in Las Vegas, and 
soon somebody nominated me to be president of the 
branch. Boom! That was it. I served three consecutive 
one-year terms and two two-year terms. (When I was 
first elected we had a one-year term and then you got re¬ 


in 1953 Assemblyman George Rudiak introduced A.B. 248, “An 
act concerning the rights of citizens in places of public accommodation 
or amusement.” The assembly voted to indefinitely postpone the bill, 
which would have made discrimination on the basis of race, color or 
creed punishable by a fine of $100 or imprisonment. 




80 


Fighting Back 


elected; then the national office changed the term to two 
years.) 

Our executive board during the 1950s could number 
as many as twenty people. The president and the board 
met eveiy week to go over issues and plan fund raisers. 
Mi’s. Lubertha Johnson and her husband had a little 
vacant building right next to their grocery store, and at 
first we would meet in there; then a federal credit union 
was established on the Westside and we would meet 
there. Monthly meetings of the general membership were 
rotated from one church to another. 

At the monthly meeting the president would bring 
reports before the general membership on issues and 
proposed actions, and request them to give us their 
support to do these things. We would also elect delegates 
to the annual meeting of the national NAACP. After my 
election we decided that a boycott of two local dairies 
would be our first project. (They were selling a lot of 
milk on die Westside, but they wouldn’t employ blacks.) 
Then we started a campaign to get the NAACP into the 
churches. Churches in the black community are the 
largest groups of assembled people, and we would send 
members out to the churches to speak to them and raise 
issues. 

We kept abreast of national issues by reading the 
black newspapers. The Pittsburgh Courier , which was an 
outstanding newspaper, was shipped all over die country; 
and there was one from Baltimore, and there were others 
that we subscribed to. We started our own black news¬ 
paper around 1957 and called it The Missile. David 
Hoggard and I published it out of the NAACP office—the 
money to run it came out of our pockets and from the 



Soon Somebody Nominated Me 


81 


NAACP treasury. Our paper wasn’t just about civil rights 
issues; it carried a lot of news about what was going on 
in the community. 

We published The Missile once a week, on Saturday. 
One difficulty we had was that when we tried to get 
advertising from the Caucasian stores on the Westside, 
they wouldn’t give it to us, because they wanted their ads 
to go in on Wednesday. We would reprint articles or 
exceipts from the national black newspapers, add local 
stories, paste it all up, and then we had to send it out of 
state at first to have it printed. Finally the fellow who 
had the Valley Times started printing our paper for us. 
We did this for about a year and a half, and then we just 
couldn’t do it anymore—couldn’t keep giving it the time 
and money that it required. 

Dr. West took over The Missile and changed its name 
to The Voice. He could write off the paper’s expenses, 
and he had enough money to hire people to do the work. 
Dr. West kept The Voice for six or seven years. When he 
got sick before his death he sold it to a fellow named 
Brown, another Afro-American, and he and his wife ran 
it for a while. Now someone else has it. It’s real good 
now. 

The burning issue was segregation in jobs and 
housing and public accommodations, and the first thing 
I took on after I became president was a jobs issue. 
Anderson Daily and Highland Dairy were delivering milk 
to die Westside—Caucasians delivering milk in the black 
community. We asked them if they would hire blacks to 
deliver in our area and diey said no. So we had a meeting 
and decided that we had to pick one of those dailies to 




82 


Fighting Back 


serve us so we could boycott the other one. Anderson 
daily was the larger one, so we attacked Highland Daily 
first, and all of the people on the Westside who were 
buying milk from Highland discontinued the service. We 
kept that boycott on until they went out of business. And 
we got Reverend Clark the job of chiving the Anderson 
Daily truck that delivered milk in the black community. 

We also boycotted some gaming clubs in West Las 
Vegas that were owned by whites and a Chinese fellow 
named Louie. The Louisiana Chib, the Rio, and .... We 
wanted them to hire more blacks and pay them the same 
as their white employees. The boycott was pretty effec¬ 
tive, and then some white dealers asked me to be the 
executive director of a union for them. They wanted to 
negotiate with the casinos to get higher wages, medical 
benefits, and that type of thing. 1 said I would. They 
offered to have each of the dealers pay me five dollars a 
month. I said, “That’s fine. But you know, in order to 
have a union you have to have some backbone. Now, if 
I call a strike, you guys have to walk out; and you have 
to give me some type of protection as your executive 
director, or I’m going to wind up in Lake Mead some¬ 
where.” 

They said, “We can’t go out on strike.” 

I said, “Well, hell. You don’t need me as your 
executive director then. Forget it.” 

After a couple of years we felt that we had done as 
much as we could do through boycotting and brow¬ 
beating people to give us jobs and that type of thing. We 
decided to move into politics, figuring that we needed 
political muscle to get what we wanted. The NAACP 




Tlie first Freedom Fund banquet, Las Vegas Convention Center Gold Room, 1958. 
Left to right: Dr. James B. McMillan, Terea Hall Pittman (regional director ofthe 
NAACP), Dr. Charles I. West presenting an award to Woodrow Wilson. 











Soon Somebody Nominated Me 


83 


couldn’t be involved in partisan politics, so Dr. West and 
I formed the Nevada League of Voters. (This was mostly 
an Afro-American organization, but whites belonged to 
it too.) Our first attempt at election politics came in 
about 1958 or so. We ran Helen Lamb Crozier for the 
state board of education. We selected her because she 
had the Lamb middle name, she was a light-mulatto type 
lady with Indian type hair, and she looked good on the 
posters that we put up. Lots of voters thought that she 
was related to the politically powerful Lamb family. To 
my knowledge she was the first Afro-American elected to 
a position on the state board of education. 

We also ran Reverend Leo Johnson for the hospital 
board. Since he was a minister we figured that he would 
probably get elected too, and he only lost the damned 
doing by ten votes. And we ran Dr. West for a seat on the 
city council. He made it through the primary, but he lost 
in the general. Joe Neal also ran for an office at that time, 
his first stab at politics. We had a big old wagon on the 
Westside, and all our politicians came up on the thing 
and made speeches, and people came to hear them. 

In doe 1958 mayor’s race Oran Gragson was running 
against Wendell Bunker, a prominent Mormon. Some of 
the older black people knew Bunker; they had had some 
access to him. He had never done or said anything to 
make anyone believe that we would benefit from his 
election, but we supported him anyway because of some 
bad information: Oran Gragson was a southerner, and a 
rumor went around that he had named his dog “Nigger”. 

All of the people in the NAACP were members of the 
Voter’s League, so we just changed hats and we had a 



84 


Fighting Back 


meeting. We decided to back Bunker. Then Gragson 
contacted our organization and said he wanted us to 
support him. He said he would be a good mayor and he’d 
help black people and he responsive to some of the things 
that we wanted. I went over to his house with a dele¬ 
gation, Bob Bailey and some others, and I turned him 
down. I said, “I’m sorry Mr. Gragson, the League has 
voted to support Mr. Bunker, and this is what we’re 
going to do. I just wanted you to know where we stand, 
keep everything above board.” He was sorry to hear this, 
but he said he understood. 

The election came around and we voted solidly for 
Bunker. Gragson got only about three hunched votes 
from our district, but he won the election. The next day 
Oran Gragson went up and down Jackson Street shaking 
hands with black people, saying that as mayor he was 
going to be responsive to the black community and we 
would really understand what type of gentleman he was 
and how he was not a segregationist and was not 
prejudiced. (It turned out that he did have a black dog, 
but its name wasn’t Nigger.) He even appointed some 
black people to positions in city government. In fact, he 
was the supporting power behind William Pearson being 
appointed to the city commission. 

Gragson proved to be a good mayor, particularly in 
his first term. The big time politicians in the city told him 
there were things that he just couldn’t and shouldn’t do, 
but he was always responsive to the black community, 
had black friends and made sure he did not exhibit any 
type of prejudice. Oran was eventually inducted into the 
Black Hall of Fame at the Moulin Rouge. After knowing 
him over thirty years, I don’t think there was any preju- 



Soon Somebody Nominated Me 


85 


dice in him. His administration was good for the black 
population of Las Vegas. 

We did eveiything we could to influence white 
politicians to do the right thing, but there weren’t many 
of them like Oran Gragson. We invited Senator George 
Malone over to talk to the NAACP—questioned him 
about civil rights and about his position on Senate Rule 
22, the one to stop filibustering. He was a bigot who was 
playing politics with the southerners in the Senate. That 
was his game. Senator Alan Bible was a diplomat, a 
gendeman who talked out of both sides of his mouth and 
never did anything for us. We had him come over to 
meetings and he would pacify us and promise different 
things, but nothing ever happened. Walter Baring was 
conservative to the bone; there was just nothing that we 
could ever get him to do for black people. He came over 
to the Westside, wrapped himself in the flag, talked 
about what an American he was. We fought him to the 
end. We talked to him, talked about him, talked against 
him, and voted against him, but never could we move 
him at all. 

And Howard Cannon .... Before I came to Las 
Vegas the NAACP had drawn up a resolution asking for 
the elimination of discrimination. They wanted Howard 
Cannon as city attorney to put it before the city council, 
but he wouldn’t do it. He tore it up. He was just one of 
the “good old boys,” and he never did do anything for 
civil rights or for black people that was visible. Cannon 
was elected to the United States Senate in 1958, and 
during his first term he skirted a vote about desegre¬ 
gation of schools; he wouldn’t vote on it. Years later 



86 


Fighting Back 


Harry Claiborne and I ran against him for his senate seat 
in a primary, and my position was that he was a 
segregationist. Claiborne took up the banner also, and we 
both got defeated. The odd thing about it is that I 
received more votes up north and in the cow counties 
than I did in Las Vegas, and I don’t know why—maybe 
it was because I had answered questionnaires from those 
people about desert land and ranches and these things, 
which I think they wanted to hear. We had a pretty nice 
campaign going, but I didn’t have any money: I had 
homemade signs and Cannon had all the money in the 
world. 

Lack of money was the biggest weakness in all our 
campaigns . . . that and not fully realizing the extent to 
which money chives politics. Since we couldn’t afford 
paid advertisements, we would try to entice television 
stations to report on our candidates, tiy to get a stoiy on 
the radio and that type of stuff. With our white friends 
we’d go to white churches, and the white people who 
belonged to die NAACP would invite us to speak to their 
organizations. The Jewish synagogue would invite you to 
talk- the unions would help. We would solicit the culi¬ 
nary union and beg and borrow money to make some 
signs up. In the end we didn’t win many votes, but our 
participation in the elections had a positive influence on 
some of the victors. 

In 1958 most of our campaigning was done in black 
churches and out in the black community. Ninety 


For a more sympathetic treatment of Senator Howard Cannon’s 
record on civil rights see A. Costandina Titus, “Howard Cannon, the 
Senate and Civil Rights Legislation, 1959-1968,” Nevada Historical. 
Society Quarterly 33:4 (Winter 1990), 13-29. 




Soon Somebody Nominated Me 


87 


percent of the churches supported our political agenda— 
they worked religiously with us to tiy to get our people 
elected, and even though we lost most of the elections, 
the community was together. As the years went by, 
however, and issues got more critical, and we started 
talking about picketing places in the cause of ending 
segregation, some of the ministers and their churches 
began pulling back. They thought the Ku Klux Klan 
might come in and burn up the community. They 
thought that maybe the white people would gather 
together with guns and come over to the Westside 
fighting, and a lot of people feared for their safety. Civil 
rights workers must do like Martin Luther King did: 
when they march, although they say it’s non-violent, they 
have to know that they’re going to get arrested or hit 
over the head, and somebody may die. Those are 
possibilities that active people in the community must 
accept for progress in civil rights, and a lot of people are 
afraid to do that. They may support you from the 
background by donating money or doing other things to 
help, but they will not participate or march. 

When I came to Las Vegas Mike O’Callaghan was a 
Henderson school teacher. He had lost a leg in combat in 
the Korean War, and he was a popular person. I had 
known Mike for several years when he invited our 
NAACP branch to meet a group of concerned citizens— 
Christians and Jews, blacks and whites—that used to 
meet at the YMCA to try to do something about segre¬ 
gation and unequal opportunities. Mike was president of 
diis particular group, and he had a folder that he let me 
look at that listed the names of the officers and the board 



88 


Fighting Back 


of directors. Many of them were connected to hotel- 
casinos. I touched Dave Hoggard on the arm and showed 
him die list. He laughed. I said, “Well, we’ll fix this damn 
thing.” 

When the meeting started I spoke up and said, 
“Mike, I think you’re wasting our time here. You’re the 
executive director of this organization and your board of 
directors includes the presidents of the Sands, the Desert 
Inn, and other segregated hotels. Instead of having these 
meetings and talking about civil lights and eliminating 
discrimination and prejudice in this city, all you’ve got to 
do is call your board together and say, ‘Hey, this is 
wrong. Just stop this discrimination and let everybody go 
into your hotels.’ Until you do this,” I said, “you’re 
wasting our time.” 

Mike said, “Well, I don’t think I can do this. I mean, 
these are people who . . . blah, blah, blah.” Same old 
verbiage. 

I said, “Come on fellows; let’s go.” So all the black 
people got up and walked out of the meeting. 

From that time on, I never had any more conver¬ 
sation with Mike until we met at a dinner when he was 
running for lieutenant governor. That was ten years later 
and we kind of worked for him at that time. When he 
became governor, he was decent with us. He appointed 
blacks to positions and he was responsive to the NAACP. 
Mike’s an honorable man who would make a decision 
and stick to it. He wouldn’t hide; he wouldn’t finesse 
you. He’d say, “I don’t like this bill and I’m not signing 
it, period.” 

Mike O’Callaghan was a tough guy and he still is, 
but you could talk to him. He’s a hot-tempered fellow, 



Soon Somebody Nominated Me 


89 


and we had confrontations all the time. He’d let me know 
what was on his mind, and as rough as he was, maybe he 
gave the wrong impression sometimes. He didn’t have 
any prejudice in his heart; but, you know . . . white 
people in politics, they have to work both sides of the 
fence. 




11 


Thirty Days to Respond 


I T WAS 1960. Oran Gragson was mayor and I was 
president of the NAACP. We had the Voter’s 
League. Throughout the countiy there were sit-ins, 
and in the South people were fighting to eliminate 
discrimination. The national NAACP office sent out 
correspondence to the presidents of all the branches 
saying that each branch should do everything possible to 
eliminate all vestiges of discrimination in its region. As I 
read it I asked myself, “What can we do to really start a 
movement here to eliminate segregation?” 


On February 1, 1960, four African-American students from the 
North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College in Greensboro, N. C., 
protested segregation at the downtown Woolworth department store by 
taking seats at the lunch counter and refusing to move. This protest 
touched off similar demonstrations in nearly two hundred cities. On 
March 19 San Antonio, Texas, became the first major southern city to 
desegregate its lunch counters. 




92 


Fighting Back 


Dave Hoggard and I got together that night and 
talked about it. I said, “Dave, we’re going to write a letter 
to the mayor, tell him we’ve received instructions from 
national headquarters to take action against segregation 
in this community. I’m going to give him thirty days to 
respond, thirty days to tell us what he can do to help 
eliminate discrimination in the city of Las Vegas.” We 
wrote the letter and I sent it to the mayor’s office. I didn’t 
expect an immediate response, but I thought that the 
tone of the letter might shake up white people, get them 
to think that we were stirred up and that we might 
actually do something this time. Three or four days later 
Alan Jarlson, a reporter for the Sun who worked city hall, 
was in the mayor’s office. He saw the letter and called me 
and said he wanted to use it as the basis for a story, to 
get the news out. I said, “Well, good. Be my guest.” 

At that time most of the newspaper people and the 
television and radio people were tight with the establish¬ 
ment in this town. Nothing got out that would rock the 
boat. Hank Greenspun, the editor and publisher of the 
Sun , was the exception, and he was our early salvation. 
Greenspun loaded his “Where I Stand” columns with 
civil rights issues. In contrast the Review-Journal, which 
John Cahlan and his brother A1 ran, never had anything 
good to say about blacks or eliminating segregation; in 
fact some people believe that the R-J went so far as to 
deliberately cover news about blacks in a negative way. 
We were lucky that there were two papers. If it hadn’t 
been for Hank Greenspun and his son we wouldn’t have 
had a chance to get anything in front of the public. 
Greenspun ran Jarlson’s stoiy the next day, and all of 
Las Vegas knew that the NAACP was threatening a 



Thirty Days to Respond 


93 


boycott if something wasn’t done immediately to end 
discrimination. 

There was a national radio program broadcast from 
the Fremont Hotel, and this guy took the newspaper 
stoiy and put it out that night on the radio: “The NAACP 
threatens a boycott on the Las Vegas Strip in thirty days 
if there is no response to their request to negotiate a 
desegregation agreement.” When that went out on radio 
throughout the United States, all hell broke loose. Radio 
and television stations and newspapers everywhere 
picked it up. This was a tremendous stoiy, to have this 
type of tiling happen in Las Vegas, the convention city of 
the United States. Our local politicians had to start doing 
something. 

I was dumbfounded by what had happened. Who 
would ever have thought that our letter could cause this 
much trouble? I was just as happy as I could be, and 
most of the black community was happy, walking 
around talking about it on their jobs and what have you. 
But some people were frightened and some of the min¬ 
isters were frightened, saying that if we went and started 
a disturbance on the Strip, our side of town could wind 
up being burned down. But I stayed forceful, and the 
common people didn’t want to hear that crap even if 
their ministers were speaking it. The ministers were 
saying, “Go easy, Mac. Go slow,” but they did work with 
us from die veiy beginning. We even had meetings in the 
churches to plan our tactics, and this went on for several 
weeks. 

Shortly after the news broke I had a meeting with 
Oran Gragson and Reed Whipple in my office. They tried 
to convince me to call off the demonstration, saying that 



94 


Fighting Back 


it wouldn’t be good for the city and the county, and they 
promised to be much more responsive to the black 
community in the future with city jobs and so forth. Reed 
Whipple, who was with the First National Bank at that 
time, said he would see to it that blacks could get loans 
to buy houses and start businesses and this and that. But 
they claimed they didn’t have the power to do anything 
about segregation in the hotels and casinos and 
elsewhere. I turned them down. The demonstration was 
still on. 

After die mayor and Whipple met with me there was 
no other movement to solve this thing. I’m wondering 
what in the hell I’m going to do now. I was getting death 
threats, telephone calls, letters, Ku Klnx Klan people . . . 
my kids would answer the phone and they would wake 
up screaming at night because people threatened to 
throw bombs in the house. Bob Bailey and a group of 
men in the black community walked and stood guard 
around my house for ten days to make sure that we 
didn’t have any fire bombing or shooting or anything like 
that. 

After I turned down Gragson and Whipple, I had just 
ten days left to organize the demonstration. I’m threat¬ 
ening to have people picket with signs, people walking on 
the strip, blocking traffic, going into hotels, being 
arrested precisely thirty days from the date I had sent the 
letter. It didn’t look like we could pull it off. We were 
having pep rallies in the churches, and the press and 
television people would cover these—we would make 
inflammatory statements about what we were going to do 
and how bad it was going to be. But that was all I had 
going for me. I didn’t have any plans made for the 



Thirty Days to Respond 


95 


march; I didn’t have any groups volunteering to go into 
the hotels and get arrested and maybe get hit over the 
head .... I’m hanging. I’m about to be out there with 
nothing covering my naked ass. I’m thinking I might 
have to leave town, because I’m going to fall on my face: 
“This isn’t going to happen. These people are not going 
to march, and we’re going to be mined forever in this 
town.” The only thing that I had going for me was that 
the Caucasians had not faced this type of thing before 
and they really didn’t know what was going to happen. 
They were afraid. 

Then we got a break. Oscar Crozier called me up. 
He’d been in touch with some of the underworld people 
that was involved in running the Strip hotels. He said, “I 
want to talk to you, man.” 

I said, “OK, come on by the house.” 

Oscar told me that the people who owned some of 
these hotels had flown in to Las Vegas and had a 
meeting: “They said they want to know what you’re 
about—this boycott, this marching and all of this. They 
told me to tell you to cool it or you might be found 
floating face down in Lake Mead.” 

I said, “Oscar, they can’t get off that easy. Tell these 
people that I’m not a gambler. I don’t have any money. 
I’m not trying to cut into their business. All I’m trying to 
do is make this a cosmopolitan city, and that will make 
more money for them. You tell them that and let me 
know what they say.” I was almost ready to throw in the 
towel. If he had come back to me and said, “Man, they 
said no. You better cut this crap out,” I would have 
peeked at my hole card. 



96 


Fighting Back 


A couple of days later Oscar called again. “Mac,” he 
said, “it’s OK. They’re going to make their people let 
blacks stay in the hotels. They’re going to integrate this 
town. You can make the announcement that this thing 
has been settled and that there will be no more discrimi¬ 
nation in public accommodations. Black people can go 
into restaurants and stay at hotels and gamble and eat 
and everything else.” He told me that what I had to do 
was call the Desert Inn and ask for Mr. Taylor, who was 
running the place for Moe Dalitz at that time. “He will 
tell you that they have given you the final OK.” 

I said, “I’m not going to make any announcement 
until a couple of days before the deadline we gave the 
city.” 

Oscar said, “That’s OK.” 

After I got the information from Crozier, three 
ministers came into the office and said, “Mac, we just 
can’t support you any longer. You’re going to get our 
town burned down. You have to call off this march.” 

I said, “You mean to tell me you’re going to leave me 
hanging out here like that?” 

They said, “We don’t care, we don’t want you to 
march. We can’t support you.” 

These were prominent men in the community, but I 
had lost all respect for them. I told them, “Well, I want 
you guys to know that you don’t have to wony about 
your town being burned down. It’s all settled. Don’t say 
anything about it until I tell you to.” 

Everything Oscar Crozier told me came true. I 
phoned Taylor and said, “I’m supposed to call you in 
regaixl to dtis march and demonstration that we’re going 
to have. And you’re supposed to tell me that I don’t have 



Thirty Days to Respond 


97 


to have the march, and that you have accepted all the 
terms that we have talked about.” 

Slowly he said, “Yes, that’s correct. It’s been settled. 
We have accepted your terms.” 

Hank Greenspun had been working behind the 
scenes with some hotel owners, and he and I called a 
meeting at the Moulin Rouge to announce the settlement. 
There were churches in West Las Vegas where we 
probably could have met, but I suggested that we should 
meet at a neutral site. The place wasn’t fixed up or 
anything for it—chairs were all stacked up in the hall, 
and we just moved them around and pulled the table out 
and had the meeting. David Hoggard, Woodrow Wilson, 
Bob Bailey, Donald Clark and I were there for the 
NAACP. We had the justice of the peace, the sheriff, 
Governor Grant Sawyer, Oran Gragson ... all of these 
people came, and the press was there. We announced 
that there would not be any demonstrations, because 
discrimination in hotels and public accommodations on 
the Strip had ended. The following day we formed teams 
of NAACP men and women to go out to the hotels to test 
them. And all the hotels accepted them. They could go to 
the tables to gamble; diey could go to the restaurants and 
eat; they could make reservations for rooms. 

Years later the Moulin Rouge was named a historic 
site because that’s where we supposedly met to sign the 
agreement that segregation would be ended in the city of 
Las Vegas. But there was nothing signed, and politicians 
had nothing to do with it. Governor Grant Sawyer was in 
Washington talking with the Kennedys or whatever when 
this damn thing busted in the papers. He got on a plane 



98 


Fighting Back 


and flew back here quick, and I met with him and told 
him it had all been settled. Other politicians were at our 
meeting to announce the agreement, but they had done 
nothing. All of their hand wringing and all of their 
rhetoric didn’t mean anything: they didn’t own the 
hotels; they didn’t own the gaming joints; they didn’t 
own the restaurants. This thing was settled by Oscar 
Crozier and a handful of powerful hotel owners, and 
politicians played almost no role in it. 

The hotels had settled because it was good business 
to settle. They knew that some southerners wouldn’t 
want to gamble at an integrated casino, but they also 
knew that they needed to make sure that the convention 
business stayed, and that white people would not boycott 
Las Vegas. Money moves the world. When these fellows 
realized that they weren’t going to lose any money, that 
they might even make more, they were suddenly 
colorblind. 




“The hotels settled because it was good business to settle.” 

The March 1960 meeting at the Moulin Rouge to end segregation on the Las Vegas Strip. 
Dr. James B. McMillan is at the head of the table, 
flanked by Mayor Oran Gragson (1.) and Hank Greenspun (r.). 













12 


They Worked So Hard and 
Risked So Mach 


W E HAD NEGOTIATED a settlement with the 
hotels on the Strip and most of the hotels and 
casinos in the downtown area. I say “most'” 
because the Sal Sagev and Binion’s Horseshoe Club 
weren’t included—they didn’t cooperate. We felt that this 
was really an affront to the NAACP and our agreement, 
and we decided to make an issue of it at the Sal Sagev, 
which was a white dub on the corner of Fremont and 
Main Streets, owned by a man named Abe Miller. Dave 
Hoggard and I took Mr. Nolan Sharp down there. Shaip 
was a paraplegic in a wheelchair, and supposedly a 
veteran if I’m not mistaken. Surely they wouldn’t refuse 
service to a poor black paraplegic veteran in a wheel¬ 
chair! We figured that accompanying Mr. Shaip would 
get Dave and me in the club, and maybe that would do 
something for the cause. But the owner was hard nosed. 
They threw us out—threw the wheelchair and Dave and 



100 


Fighting Back 


me out of the club and told us not to try to come in 
again. 

Benny Binion being the strong man that he was in 
the community, the situation with his Horseshoe Club 
was different. And Binion had a black bodyguard, a man 
who had grown up in the woods with him in Texas. This 
guy was six foot six inches tall and weighed three 
hundred pounds. A rough, tough, bad cowboy! He had 
saved Binion’s life back in Texas, and they were lifelong 
friends. Him being a security guard there and 
working ... we felt that we just couldn’t challenge 
Binion at that particular time. We let that alone. Binion 
took his own time hiring black people, and he took his 
own time letting black people in. 

After we were thrown out of the Sal Sagev, Dave and 
I filed a complaint with the state Equal Rights Commis¬ 
sion, which subpoenaed the owner. He refused to appear, 
and eventually the district court ruled that the commis¬ 
sion didn’t have subpoena power. We were frustrated, 
but we knew that the commission didn’t have the power 
and we knew that they didn’t have enough money to 
really pursue these things. What we were hoping was 
that the press would pick up on it and put a big picture 
in die paper and do a writeup about how ridiculous and 
inhumane this was. Over a year’s time we kept fiddling 
with it, trying to make these things happen, but they 
never did. 

Jimmy Gay was on our executive board; he was one 
of die first real important blacks in the community. I told 
him, “As NAACP people we need to have a meeting with 
the culinary union. This is getting ridiculous. All these 



They Worked So Hard and Risked So Much 


101 


black people that belong to the union, and we don’t have 
black waiters and maitre d’s and what have you. Well, 
we’re going to find out why.” So Jimmy arranged a 
meeting in our little office on Jackson Street. A1 Bramlet 
was there (he was the big wheel in the culinary union), 
and Sarann Knight and two or three other people, and 
we had a confrontation about hiring blacks. I told 
Bramlet what a racist he was, and we really went to it. 
But I never could get them to move on making blacks 
maitre d’s. Sarann Knight had power in that union, but 
although she and Bramlet were real close friends, I guess 
she never could pull it off. 

I kept heckling A1 Bramlet all the time from then on. 
He finally had someone ran a background check on me 
in Detroit, and he found out about the incident with the 
magnesium furnace at the Ford factory. Everybody back 
there knew about it. It was on my record. So when he 
had me investigated, that came back. Then Bramlet 
started calling me a commie; he put it out that I was a 
communist. 

In Nevada the two most prominent NAACP branches 
were in Beno and Las Vegas. Our civil rights movement 
in Las Vegas was more significant than the one in Reno, 
which wasn’t doing anything. We got ours going first, got 
things settled, and then we went to Reno to see if we 
could help them. It was a tough task because Reno was 
so tight at that time, and some black Republicans up 
there wouldn’t get behind us. Black Democrats and the 
NAACP people were staunch, dedicated workers, but the 
black Republicans would always say we were just outside 
agitators. They resented our presence—resented us if we 



102 


Fighting Back 


went up to Reno, and resented us if we didn’t, because 
they had their own agenda, and it was different from the 
NAACP’s. 

In the 1960s workers in the NAACP were dedicated 
and together, and there was never any friction between 
the Las Vegas and Reno groups. Eddie Scott and Joe 
Williams were quite active in Reno. Then there were the 
Woodards, husband and wife. He worked for the bus 
company; Bertha Woodard was president of the Reno 
NAACP for a while. The Reno people joined with us to 
attend meetings of the legislature and to picket the 
capitol and tilings like that. And they would send people 
down to Las Vegas to help us out on our local projects. 
Eddie Scott, Joe Williams, the Woodards, one of the 
ministers up there . . . they all worked to tiy to get it 
going in Reno, but it really didn’t happen until years 
later. Finally it just slowly evolved politically, and now 
(1995) we have two black people elected to the legisla¬ 
ture from the northern part of the state, both of them 
state senators. 

Reverend John L. Simmons was veiy active in the 
cause in Las Vegas. He had a church on the Westside; in 
fact he has a street named after him. He also had a 
church in Hawdiome, and he used to go up there once a 
month and work with Sarann Knight and the local 
NAACP people. Black churches historically have been in 
the forefront of helping black people achieve equal 
rights. The churches were places where blacks could 
come together in numbers to seek protection and help. In 


Bernice Martin Mathews and Rev. Maurice Washington. 




They Worked So Hard and Risked So Much 


103 


the old days ministers would educate them and raise 
issues about discrimination and segregation and 
resistance, and there were some good ministers that went 
out and sacrificed their lives to help do this. Other 
ministers maybe had some different beliefs about politics 
and politicians .... 

White politicians running for office would say to the 
black ministers, “OK, I need your support. I want to 
come to your church on a Sunday and talk to your 
congregation about my campaign, and I’ll make a nice 
donation to your church.” Some ministers would accept 
that donation but would still work with the NAACP and 
civil rights activist groups in the community. Other 
ministers felt that the politician could help the commu¬ 
nity more than the NAACP, and that they would have 
entree to him if they supported him and let him come to 
their church. If a politician came to a church and spoke 
to the congregation about his campaign and gave only 
fifty or a hunched dollars, the minister may have had a 
lot of demand on that politician. 

The way I see it, it wasn’t a matter of buying black 
ministers and their congregations. People decide for 
themselves whether they’re going to be active in this 
political movement or on that political issue, and civil 
rights groups have to act even if they don’t have all of the 
ministers behind them. While I was president of the 
NAACP I had tremendous cooperation from most of the 
black ministers, but there were some that did not agree 
widi the tilings we were doing. We just had to go on and 
do our thing, and if those people didn’t want to work 
with us, that was fine. 



104 


Fighting Back 


There were the ministers and Dave Hoggard and 
Lubertha Johnson and so many others who contributed 
to the success of the NAACP and the civil rights move¬ 
ment in Las Vegas . . . Charles Kellar, the second black 
attorney to pass the bar and start a practice in Las 
Vegas. After my last term in the 1960s as branch presi¬ 
dent, Kellar and Donald Clark worked together on the 
civil lights bill, and they did the suits on the schools and 
what have you. 

Jimmy Gay, James Gay III, was already a very 
important man in Las Vegas when I arrived. He worked 
for the hotels. Whites thought very highly of Mr. Gay, 
and he could get blacks jobs. He did a lot of things for 
the black community. Jimmy was with our NAACP and 
the Valley View Golf Club when we were going to build 
a golf course. Some white people wanted to give us some 
land for the course, but we couldn’t get enough money 
together to build it. 

Aaron Williams worked at the test site and was active 
in the Democratic party in North Las Vegas. He and I 
had been in Detroit together. Williams was the first black 
elected to the Clark County Commission—served four 
years. In the end, when he didn’t get re-elected, he made 
the statement that he was too light to be black and to 
represent black folks. He was a real light fellow, but he 
was an active worker in the community. He did a nice 
job. 

We named our senior citizens project after Arthur 
McCants, who had initiated the first NAACP branch in 
Las Vegas during the days when blacks were having 
difficulty getting jobs on the construction of Boulder 
Dam. He was quite a man, quite an activist. So were the 




Officers of the Valley View Golf Club, 1958. Left to right: James Gay III, 
Henry Moore, Jim Roberts, Andy Breuner, unidentified. Dr. Janies McMillan. 















They Worked So Hard and Risked So Much 


105 


many others, men and women alike, who worked so hard 
and risked so much to end segregation in our city and 
state. 




13 


The Height of Our Strength 


D URING HIS CAMPAIGN for governor of Nevada 
in 1958 Grant Sawyer and the people who were 
working for him met with us on the Westside. 
Sawyer and his supporters were being called the “Young 
Turks” by the press at that time. They had those flat-top 
haircuts. I thought Sawyer was a sincere young man who 
would help in any way that he could with issues of the 
NAACP and civil rights, so I signed on to support and to 
work with him. From then on evexy time he was in the 
southern part of the state we would ixieet and I would get 
a chance to talk with him about his strategy and plans. 
Later he even became a patient of mine, came to my 
office to get his teeth cleaned and get an examination and 


For Grant Sawyer’s recollection of his role in the struggle for civil 
rights in Nevada, see his oral history, Hang Tough! Grant Sawyer: An 
Activist in the Governor’s Mansion (Reno: University of Nevada Oral 
History Program, 1993). 





108 


Fighting Back 


X-rays. By going to the only black dentist in the state he 
was showing people that he lived what he believed and 
talked. 

Grant Sawyer was a good man, but he wasn’t really 
a flaming liberal for civil lights. I think he figured that if 
he was to become governor of Nevada there were some 
tilings that he shouldn’t do; but he did what he could for 
civil rights and still get elected and stay in power. Ralph 
Denton was Sawyer’s campaign manager, and he did a 
terrific job. When Grant Sawyer was elected the first 
time, we got on the phone to tell him we wanted to meet 
to discuss the things we’d talked about during his 
campaign. He said OK, and we met with him at the 
Capitol shortly after he took office: Woodrow Wilson, 
Dave Hoggard, Don Clark, Andy Bruner and me. And 
the things that he had said he was going to do while 
campaigning, he did, starting with outlawing discrimi¬ 
nation in state agencies in 1959. Then he proposed the 
creation of a Nevada Commission on Human Relations to 
investigate complaints about segregation in businesses 
and public accommodations. Now, that died in the 
senate. It got nowhere in 1959. But he tried his best. 

In 1961 Governor Sawyer tried again—he asked for 
the creation of an Equal Rights Commission. This time 
he succeeded, but the bill that finally emerged from the 
senate created a commission with veiy little power to 
actually do anything. At the beginning of the legislative 
session we demonstrated at the state capitol in Carson 
City in support of Sawyer’s bill and in protest of con¬ 
tinuing segregation and employment discrimination in 
the private sector. We also had some productive meetings 
with the governor, made some recommendations about 



The Height of Our Strength 


109 


how he could better use the power of his office to push 
civil rights. I mean, the gaming commission reported to 
him. Hotel-casinos were the biggest sources of racial 
disciimination in the state, and the commission regulated 
them and controlled their licensing. Governor Sawyer 
began using that power to good effect. 

Bert Goldwater, a white Reno attorney, was named 
the first chairman of the Equal Rights Commission. 
When Goldwater resigned in the spring of 1962, Sawyer 
replaced him with Bob Bailey. Bob and I often talked 
about what was going on. He lamented that he couldn’t 
get any subpoena powers, and there was nothing, really, 
that they could do but tiy to biing social pressure against 
the places and people that were still discriminating. 
Several years later, I believe it was in Governor Sawyer’s 
second term, Charles Kellar and Donald Clark had 
grown impatient with the slow pace of desegregation. 
They wrote another civil rights bill that was introduced 
in the legislature. (I wasn’t involved. By then I had 
resigned the presidency of the Las Vegas NAACP; I 
wasn’t even on the executive board.) Kellar’s bill would 
have created a civil rights commission with the power to 
seek injunctions against businesses that refused to 
desegregate—a violation would be a misdemeanor 
punishable with a fine and possibly imprisonment. That 
bill died in committee for lack of a sponsor, of course: it 
was too potent for the politicians. And the Equal Rights 


Gov. Sawyer and civil rights advocates had high hopes for this 
approach, but they were to be disappointed. In August, 1963, Nevada’s 
attorney general, Harvey Dickerson, issued an opinion that the governor 
could not legally order the state’s gaming regulatory agencies to 
establish nondiscriminatory policies. 




no 


Fighting Back 


Commission never did accomplish anything until it got 
subpoena power and the federal EEOC came out. Then 
it started to get some action. 

The El Capitan in Hawthorne was notorious for 
unyielding segregation and discrimination against blacks, 
but it wasn’t alone; it just happened to get in the papers. 
All over the state there were blatant segregationists who 
didn’t think that they were doing anything wrong at all. 
They felt that their establishments were their own, and 
that they could do what they wanted to whoever came in. 
Reno was particularly bad—segregation and discrimi¬ 
nation were much worse there than in Las Vegas. 

The 1960 Winter Olympics at Squaw Valley was a 
big boon for Nevada in terms of publicity and money. 
The Reno branch of the NAACP took the opportunity to 
demonstrate, calling attention to the fact that all the 
hotels, restaurants and casinos in Reno and at Lake 
Tahoe were still segregated. Governor Sawyer wanted to 
prevent bad publicity for Nevada, so he persuaded the 
northern hotel people to take black guests during the 
games, and the restaurants to serve blacks. But the 
agreement was meaningless: there were no blacks 
participating in the winter games—no black skiers or 
skaters or bobsledders on the American team, and the 
African countries didn’t send any teams. And most of the 
spectators were from the countries that participated. So 
the hotel and restaurant people didn’t do anything 
courageous, because practically all of the people were 
white anyway. But they made this big thing of it ... . 
We didn’t care. Black athletes or no black athletes, we 
didn’t think an international event of that magnitude 



The Height of Our Strength 


111 


should be held in a state that practiced racial 
discrimination. We continued to object to them having 
the winter games here. 

In 1960 the state Democratic convention was held in 
Ely. This was an important convention for the Afro- 
American community. In Clark County for the first time 
we had elected all black delegates from our own 
precincts. We gathered together most of the ministers in 
the community, and we had Sarann Knight of the 
culinary union and A1 Bramlet, and they were all there to 
support us. I think we had twenty or thirty votes, and 
there were some black delegates from the north as well. 
That gave us real voting power. When there’s a conflict 
over issues, with whites disagreeing and splitting their 
vote, and we have a solid black vote, we can do our 
thing—Nevada’s version of a black caucus. By voting as 
a group we supported Governor Sawyer and helped 
defeat cpiite a few motions that could have slowed the 
momentum of civil rights in Nevada. That was the height 
of our strength in the Democratic party and our 
movement at that time. 

For the sake of solidarity at the convention I did 
something that turned out to be one of the biggest 
mistakes of my life. Ralph Denton had been elected to 
the state Democratic Party Committee, but he told me, “I 
think it’s time to have an Afro-American on this 
committee. I’ll resign and we’ll appoint you.” Initially I 
said OK; but Dr. West had been named a delegate to the 
national convention in California, and with my pending 
appointment to the state committee some of the brothers 
thought that we were trying to hog everything. To keep 



112 


Fighting Back 


the black coalition together I decided to turn the appoint¬ 
ment down and give it to Reverend Prentiss Walker, a 
black minister. That was a mistake. 

Reverend Walker really didn’t know how to handle 
the position. He was as radical as I was, and no one to 
mess with, so he was good for the things that we were 
doing in Las Vegas; but there are times that you have to 
be smooth and there are times that you have to negotiate 
with people to get things done, and he didn’t do us any 
good. I should have said yes. That committee passed 
on eveiy appointment going to Washington, eveiy 
appointment going to the political conventions, eveiy 
appointment coming to Las Vegas from out of the 
national office .... 

When I say that Grant Sawyer was a man of his 
word, he was. But when we got to the banicing thing .... 
During the campaign we told Sawyer that we blacks 
needed to be involved in financing black housing and 
business and so forth, because white banks weren’t doing 
it. We needed a savings and loan, a bank, a thrift asso¬ 
ciation so we could do all of these things. And he said, “If 
I get elected you can be sure that I’ll give you the full 
cooperation of state agencies and state government to get 
started.” The governor appointed the members of the 
state banking commission, so when he sent us a letter 
authorizing us to tiy to start a bank, we figured the 
banking commission would OK it too. 

You had to be capitalized for half a million dollars 
before you could get your certificate to open up. I didn’t 
think we could raise half a million dollars, but whites 
and blacks alike bought stock in our bank, and we did it. 



The Height of Our Strength 


113 


We were jubilant. Tom Foley was our attorney, and we 
met in his office with the banking commissioner and our 
board of directors. We thought we were going to be given 
the certificate. The commissioner said, “OK, fellows, 
you’ve done a nice job. Tell you what I’m going to do: 
I’m going to demand that you raise another half million 
dollars because I don’t want you to fail.” 

Now, the Nevada State Bank had gone into operation 
with half a million dollars capital. (They were a bank 
before us.) We had the same requirements, but Sawyer 
wouldn’t force this man to give us our certificate. But I 
wouldn’t give it up. I said, “OK, we’ll go out and do it,” 
and I went out to St. George, Utah, and borrowed half a 
million from a hank dtere at 6 percent interest. When we 
had this deal together we called the banking commis¬ 
sioner hack down to Las Vegas. He looked at all our 
papers, went through them and said, “That’s OK, that’s 
OK, that’s OK. You got a million dollars . . . . ” The last 
thing he looked at was die contract dtat we’d signed with 
the bank in St. George. He threw that thing down and 
just raised hell. He said, “They charged you 6 percent for 
this money!” 

I said, “Yes.” 

He said “Well, this deal’s illegal. I’m not going to OK 
it.” He turned the St. George bankers in to the federal 
bank people, and one of those guys was put off the board 
of his bank and damn near went to jail. We never did get 
our bank open. In the end we were unable to raise 
enough money to organize a savings and loan or a 
mortgage company either, nor could we work out part¬ 
nerships that would enable us to do these things. That 



114 


Fighting Back 


was in 1962 or ’63, and we still don’t have an Afro- 
American bank. 

The bank thing was veiy important to us, and our 
failure to get something started has held our people back. 
In order for any race to survive, they have to deal with 
money—they must have capital, or access to it, to build 
a strong community. Civil rights were being advanced 
nationally and here in Nevada, but we were acting like 
fools, talcing our money from the Westside and spending 
it downtown and in casinos, and we had nothing. If we 
could have started a bank controlled by blacks, not only 
would we be making loans to other black people, we 
would also be making loans to whites and making money 
from them. It wouldn’t be just a one-way deal anymore. 

When you’re a mover in the world of banking and 
finance, you’re accepted and you’re a part of what’s 
happening. But it’s always been only Caucasians in 
finance in this country. Know that! And the thing is, that 
keeps black people or Mexican people from being able to 
develop their communities. If we’d succeeded in estab¬ 
lishing a bank and savings and loan and maybe a 
mortgage company, we could have financed construction 
and improvements on the Westside. We could have built 
good motels and casinos, and competed with many of the 
properties that white people had. Black tourists could’ve 
come to the Westside and stayed in first-class hotels, and 
we would have built businesses in the community. In 
fact, if we’d had access to capital, it’s possible that the 
black Westside would be part of this mega-Strip business 
that’s going on now. But we couldn’t accomplish these 
things because the white establishment, the people that 
control the money, they knew that this was a bad thing 



The Height of Our Strength 


115 


for them. You know: “Black people can have these civil 
rights . . . they can do this and they can do that, but 
don’t let them get involved in finance and be able to have 
capital and make money, because we’ve really got a lion 
by the tail if that happens!” 

After the integration of Las Vegas, and with federal 
funds coming into the state and the city, a lot of black 
businesses were developing. Several of us belonged to the 
Las Vegas Chamber of Commerce, but we felt that we 
would have more recognition if we formed a black 
chamber. That way we could tackle black issues without 
embarrassing Caucasians, and then we could take them 
to the Las Vegas chamber. To be effective we had to 
have a large membership, so we decided to open our 
chamber to school teachers and professionals as well as 
business people. 

Sarann Knight and myself, Bob Bailey, and two or 
three others got together and incorporated the Nevada 
Black Chamber of Commerce, which is still in operation. 
It gives assistance to black businesses and it used to 
handle a lot of the federal grants and things that came 
into the city for minorities. The Latin Chamber of 
Commerce and the North Las Vegas Chamber of 
Commerce were formed later. I came to believe that we 
didn’t need all these chambers, really; we could have 
accomplished more by being in the Las Vegas Chamber 
of Commerce than we did by being independent. 




14 


Thank God For Lyndon Johnson 


HE 1948 DEMOCRATIC national convention was 



of great interest to all blacks who were concerned 


JL about civil rights. A couple of big things 
happened. Hubert Hmnphrey’s speech introduced a civil 
rights platform, but the southern segregationists split 
from the party and formed the Dixiecrats. The Dixiecrats 
would join with the Republicans over the years and 
defeat every type of civil rights legislation that came 
forward. Strong sentiment grew in the community for 
blacks not to be Democrats, because the national party 
was not really supportive of the vote that we gave them 
in the elections. 

I never did leave the party, but I was often very 
disappointed with the Democrats, because even though 
they had the majority in the Senate and in the House, 
they weren’t corning together to help us in our civil rights 
fight. Some northern Democrats were brave enough to at 
least mouth civil rights things and say to people that we 



118 


Fighting Back 


need civil rights, but the southern senators were strictly 
racist. They’d been in the Senate for years, and through 
their seniority and positions as committee chairs they 
controlled the Senate; they knew how to manipulate it to 
defeat anything that the northern senators wanted. 

In 1956 Eisenhower was reelected and got a 
surprisingly large number of black votes. There was a 
perception that he supported civil rights, but that 
Southern Democrats, and by extension the Democratic 
Congress, did not. Of course the Republicans weren’t too 
happy about civil rights, either, but I think that 
Eisenhower, being in the army, seeing black soldiers 
serve their country, and seeing the rest of the world .... 
At least he tried to be a decent man and support the 
Constitution of the United States by sending troops to 
Little Rock in 1957. However, he didn’t do much more. 
Knowing politics, knowing that he could not get it done, 
he just let it go. He was a non-entity, I think, in the black 
community; we were just living through his adminis¬ 
tration, hoping that somediing good would happen for us 
later. 

Students at black colleges in the South had come to 
the realization that they had to do something, take some 
kind of action to get dignity 7 and respect in society. In 
1960 black students staged sit-in demonstrations at 
segregated lunch counters in Greensboro, North 
Carolina, sitting at the counters and demanding service 
and refusing to leave until they got it. They gave some 
drive to the civil rights movement. The Southern 
Christian Leadership Conference people gained energy 
from that, and things moved on. It got so tremendous 



Thank God For Lyndon Johnson 


119 


that whites in the South fought the movement viciously 
with clogs and fire hoses and things. In the North, in 
Chicago, the Polish community was veiy opposed to 
renting houses to black people. They were just as bad as 
Southerners. 

Everywhere in the country a black movement had 
started. Both national parties saw the trend. Congress 
may have been controlled by southern Democrats who 
were racists, but the rest of the Democratic party didn’t 
share their views, and in the 1960 campaign they made 
civil rights a national issue. At the national convention 
they even went with a plank that asked for intervention 
by the Justice Department in civil rights cases. John F. 
Kennedy, who had identified himself with civil rights, 
was the party’s nominee for president. During the 
campaign, as a political tactic, he wanted to intervene on 
behalf of Martin Luther King, who was in jail in Atlanta, 
and over a million pamphlets were printed to get the 
word out to black communities about Kennedy’s 
support. Nixon and the Republicans didn’t do anything 
similar, and maybe that kind of contrasted the two 
parties—it certainly put many black people on the side of 
Kennedy. Nixon may have been in touch with civil rights 
here and there, but there was nothing to make us think 
that he’d be better than Kennedy. Here’s a guy from 
Boston, a Catholic; he’s talking about morals; he’s a 
good-looking guy; and the Democratic party had moved 
forward with younger people coming in and talking 


In October 1960, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., was incarcerated 
at the Reidsville, Georgia, state prison, for his actions in a sit-in 
demonstration at Rich’s department store in Atlanta, Georgia. 




120 


Fighting Back 


about civil lights. In 1960 blacks had no other place to 
go but the Democratic party. 

The election was a cliffhanger, and a veiy narrow 
victoiy for John F. Kennedy. By then the mood of the 
countiy was changing, and whites were beginning to 
march in demonstrations with black people. Finally the 
president had to say, “Well, hell, the Democratic party is 
really onto something. I’ve got to stay with this thing.” I 
believe his commitment to civil rights was also strongly 
influenced by his brother. Bobby was in there walking 
around in the White House .... Bobby once said he was 
reluctant to be appointed attorney general, because then 
the president could say, “Well, I don’t want you to do 
these things for civil rights.” But we asked for him, and 
finally he was appointed, and this man was a tiger. 

My recollection of John Kennedy, both as candidate 
and later as president is ... I never did get the sense that 
this man would fight for civil rights. He was a tremen¬ 
dous speaker who talked about moral issues; but unlike 
his brother Bobby, he never said how we should make 
things happen. To me it seemed that he would go only as 
far as talk would take him—I didn't think he would 
control the Democratic party in Congress, get them to 
support civil rights legislation and actions. I think I was 
right about Kennedy, but during his brief time in office 
at least he was talking the good talk, and we had a 
national movement. At the same time television was 


In May, 1961, the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) sent 
groups of civil rights activists calling themselves Freedom Riders into 
southern cities to protest the continuation of segregated rail and bus 
facilities. These had been declared unconstitutional the previous 
December in the U. S. Supreme Court’s decision on Boynton v. Virginia. 




Thank God For Lyndon Johnson 


121 


exposing the awful things that happened to blacks who 
protested segregation—Bull Connor’s dogs savagely 
biting and ripping at protesters, and black churches 
burning, and angiy people .... The white man would 
see these things on his TV and say, “Well, this isn’t our 
country. This can’t be. This shouldn’t be.” 

Lyndon Johnson played politics when he was in the 
Senate, and he voted against some civil rights measures. 
That way he became a leader among the southern 
senators, who had great power: they were always 
reelected by their constituencies, and their longevity in 
the Senate meant that they chaired the committees and 
made committee appointments. They could stop pro¬ 
posed legislation at the committee level, and they could 
pressure northern Republicans—wouldn’t put them on 
their committees and give them privileges if they didn’t 
support the Dixie agenda. That’s how the southern 
Democrats, and diose people that they could convince to 
support them, ruled the country all of my life; and 
Lyndon Johnson was initially a leader in that whole 


From April through July, 1963, Birmingham, Alabama, was the 
site of massive civil rights demonstrations that led to confrontations 
with police. Eugene “Bull” Connor was the public safety commissioner 
of Birmingham, Alabama, and as the intensity of demonstrations 
escalated, Connor employed police dogs and fire hoses to drive back the 
protestors. Graphic photographs and television coverage produced 
national outrage at the police violence. One of those arrested in the 
demonstrations was Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., whose “Letter from 
Birmingham Jail” further galvanized public opinion. On August 28, Dr. 
King delivered his stirring “I have a Dream” speech to over 200,000 
peaceful demonstrators in front of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, 
D.C. 




122 


Fighting Back 


southern Democrat thing. After Brown and Little Rock 
we really thought that the Justice Department would be 
our salvation—that on a lot of cases they’d just issue a 
i*uling that our civil rights were being violated—but that 
didn’t happen. And Lyndon Johnson played a part in 
keeping it going that way. Lie was not good for civil 
rights when he was in the Senate. 

When Johnson was running for the Democratic 
nomination for president in 1960 he came to Las Vegas 
to campaign. (Dr. West and The Voice were supporting 
John F. Kennedy at the time: he was going to be “the 
savior of the black community.”) The Nevada Voters 
League was there to meet him, Hank Greenspun was 
there, Dave Hoggard and myself were there, and two or 
three other Afro-Americans. I was president of both the 
Nevada NAACP and the Nevada Voters League at the 
time. So Johnson was there with his entourage. This 
gentleman comes over and introduces himself. He says, 
“I’m from Dallas, and I’m the press relations man for 


In its 1954 decision in Brown v. The Board of Education (of 
Topeka, Kansas), the Supreme Court ruled that racially segregated 
public schools were inherently unequal and thus unconstitutional, 
thereby overturning the “separate but equal” doctrine which had been 
legal bedrock for segregationist practices since Plessy v. Ferguson 
(1896). Although Brown was a watershed decision, its consequences 
were uneven, and resistance to its application was initially effective. For 
example, at the insistence of Sen. Richard Russell (D-Ga.) the Civil 
Rights Act of 1957 did not give the Justice Department the power to 
seek federal injunctions in civil rights cases. Nonetheless, on September 
24,1957, President Eisenhower ordered federal troops to Central High 
School in Little Rock, Arkansas, to enforce a federal court desegregation 
order. 




Thank God For Lyndon Johnson 


123 


Senator Johnson. What are your views about supporting 
him for the presidency?” 

I said, “He’s the most bigoted bastard that I’ve ever 
known, and I wouldn’t support him for dog catcher. You 
can go back and tell him that.” Then I turned away to 
talk to some other people. 

Shortly someone came up and touched me on the 
back. I turned around, and it was Lyndon Johnson. He 
stuck out his hand as he did—he had that type of 
handshake that when he shook your hand he wouldn’t 
let it go until he’d made his point. He took my hand and 
he said, “I’m Senator Johnson, and I understand that you 
don’t like me; that you said that I’m a bigot. I want to 
talk to you about that.” 

Here’s this big fellow, over six feet tall standing there 
looking me in the face, gripping my hand. I said, “Well, 
that’s fine. Yes, I said those things. I’ve followed your 
career in the Senate, and you voted against every civil 
rights issue that we had. You’ve done everything you 
could to see that black people stay second-class citizens.” 

“Yes, but I’m a changed man,” he said. “I’m running 
for president of this great countiy. I think that I’m the 
person to lead it, and I’ll tell you this—I will support the 
constitution of the United States and work for equal 
lights for eveiy citizen of this countiy.” 

“How can you do that? You’ve been a bigot all your 
life.” 

He said, “Being president of the United States is 
bigger dian anything else that I’ve ever attempted, and I 
will not do anything that is bad for this countiy. I tell 
you, I would be the best president diat black people have 
ever had.” 



124 


Fighting Back 


He went on like that for some time, and I was 
flabbergasted. He must have spent half an hour telling 
me how great he would be and how honest. He wanted 
me to understand that as a senator he sometimes looked 
like a bigot because he had to play politics to get what 
was best for his constituents, but I would be happy with 
what he would do for civil rights if he were elected 
president. The man was so sincere. It made sense to me 
that he could have one role as a senator and another role 
as president. He convinced me that he was funda¬ 
mentally honest and ethical. 

Of course Kennedy was elected president, and 
Johnson became his vice president. Some time in 1961 or 
early 1962 President Kennedy invited all the civil rights 
leaders throughout the countiy to Washington. In the 
reception line at the White House I met a friend of mine 
who had been appointed to the World Bank. He said, 
“McMillan! How are you? I heard you were a big civil 
rights man down in Las Vegas. You been raising hell?” 

I said, “Well, you know, you hear the stoiies.” 

He turned to the vice president, who was standing 
next to him and said, “This is Dr. James B. McMillan, 
who now lives in Las Vegas. He’s an old friend of mine 
from Detroit. We’ve known each other for years.” 

Johnson stuck out his hand. “Yes, I remember Dr. 
McMillan. We talked when I was in Las Vegas. Dr. 
McMillan,” he says, “if I am ever elected president you 
will see the things happen that I promised you would 
happen.” 

Even after Brown , we hadn’t seen the principles of 
equality and integration applied to accommodations, 
jobs, housing, loans and that type of thing, and I didn’t 



Thank God For Lyndon Johnson 


125 


foresee Afro-Americans getting to be real citizens in my 
lifetime. But when Johnson became president after 
Kennedy’s assassination, he lived up to his promises. 
Most people hate him, I guess, but if it hadn’t been for 
the Vietnam War this man would have gone down in 
history as one of the greatest presidents that we’ve had. 
He was surely the greatest president that black people 
ever had, because he went beyond Brown to pass civil 
rights legislation that other presidents didn’t have the 
guts to fight for. Thank God for Lyndon Johnson! 


Most notably the 1964 Civil Rights Act; the twenty-fourth 
amendment to the U.S. Constitution eliminating the poll tax; the Voting 
Rights Act of 1965; executive order 11246 authorizing federal agencies 
to enforce the 1964 Civil Rights Act; and the 1968 Civil Rights Act. 





15 


“What Did You Do... P” 


T OFFERED MY RESIGNATION to the NAACP after 
we had integrated the city. For personal reasons 
and because I needed to pay more attention to 
making a living, I decided that maybe it was just time for 
me not to be so involved anymore, so I resigned as 
president. But it was weird; I really didn’t want to do it. 
I wrote a letter and brought it to an executive board 
meeting, opened the meeting and accepted the minutes 
and everything, and then I said, “Gentleman, I think that 
I should step down as president of our NAACP branch 
for the time being. I have a letter of resignation 
here . . . . ” I figured that the board would refuse the 
letter, that diey would say, “Oh, no, we want you to stay. 
We’ll just tear this up.” Well, Dave Hoggard, my best 
friend, said, “OK, Mac. We’ll accept your resignation.” I 
was shocked, but after making this gesture I had to 
resign. Donald Clark, the vice president, became presi¬ 
dent of the branch, and that’s how he got involved in 



128 


Fighting Back 


meetings with Governor Sawyer and all the rest of it. And 
Charles Kellar and Dr. West were on the executive board. 
There must have been hidden resentment against me in 
that close group. It just happened .... In your mind you 
think, “Why?” Then you think, “Just forget it and go 
ahead with your life.” 

Dave and I stayed friends and continued to work 
together, but the reasons for the board accepting my 
resignation remained unspoken. I may have been run¬ 
ning a little roughshod over them. 1 didn’t consult with 
them very much, and I would do these confrontational 
things, and I guess I just went wild with it. I was really 
angry back then, and I’d been angry for a long time. For 
a very long time. Most people who saw me on television 
and read my statements in the Las Vegas papers thought 
I was a bad man, and the way I talked, I guess hotel- 
casino people and gangsters thought I was trying to 
wreck their businesses. Maybe I should’ve had more fear 
of the possible consequences of getting the white com¬ 
munity stirred up. On our board Charles Kellar was an 
attorney and he could protect himself, but Dr. West had 
many Caucasian patients in his practice, Dave worked at 
the school district, Donald Clark had a job, and 
Lubertha Johnson and her husband had a grocery 
store—these guys may have been a little timid, a little 
afraid to do certain things and afraid of the trouble I 
might cause. They were probably relieved when I 
submitted my resignation. 

Donald Clark succeeded me as president of our 
NAACP branch and Jim Anderson was the chairman of 
the labor and industry committee. In 1963 they had been 



“What Did You Do . . . ?” 


129 


negotiating with the powers that be about jobs, but there 
was no movement at all. Mr. Anderson came up with the 
idea that we should threaten to demonstrate and picket 
around the convention center where the Liston-Patterson 
heavyweight championship fight was to be held. This 
would let people from out of state know what our 
condition was. We got our groups together and went out 
to the convention center and actually formed our lines, 
but Hank Greenspun and Gov. Sawyer helped us nego¬ 
tiate a settlement before anything happened. We never 
did picket. We got some jobs, a few cocktail waitresses, 
dealers and things like that, but not enough. 

Clark stayed several years as president and then 
Charles Kellar came on. He was an attorney and he 
started the movement of attacking the unions, trying to 
get jobs. He went to the National Labor Relations Board 
and accused the culinary union of being racist and not 
giving black people jobs. Later he forced the Nevada 
Resort Association to sign a consent decree and give the 
NAACP $75,000 to help train blacks to go into these 
jobs. Well, the $75,000 got lost somewhere. I mean, 
money just did not go into training and it was not 
accounted for, and we never did get any more coopera¬ 
tion from the hotels. 

Las Vegas was still not very large back then, had 
only a couple of high schools, and they had to bus 


On June 4, 1971, the United States Department of Justice filed a 
complaint charging various unions and casinos with violation of the 
1964 Civil Rights Act. On the same day the organizations charged in the 
complaint signed a consent decree agreeing to refrain from engaging in 
activities that violated the law. None of the organizations admitted 
guilt. 




everybody to those schools. But all black students, 
kindergarten through sixth grade, were being taught in 
our community. To get things started toward federally 
mandated integration we negotiated with the school 
district and superintendents of the schools, and we had 
three black teachers from our district go into white 
schools and teach so that white people would get used to 
us—we sacrificed three of our best teachers to let them 
teach white kids. Then when Charles Kellar became 
president of the NAACP branch, he filed suit in federal 
court to fully integrate the Las Vegas school system. 
(Kellar was very inventive.) While we negotiated, the 
whites got all up in arms, and they came up with what 
they called “sixth grade centers” to tiy to pacify us, get 
rid of the suit. They decided that if they shipped all white 
kids in the sixth grade into West Las Vegas for one year, 
then they could go back to their neighborhood schools 
the next year. At the same time they started busing some 
black students in grades one through five out of the 
community, out of their neighborhood schools to white 
schools, but they didn’t bus white kids in the same 
grades into black schools. 

Now we have what we call “prime six schools.” Most 
black children go to those six schools that were in the 
segregated area; so they stay in neighborhood schools, 
the black kids. The black community agreed to that 
situation as an alternative to busing everybody out. 
We’re also now using five magnet schools in the black 
community to help desegregate the system. A magnet 
school offers special subjects, special opportunities to 
attract students who wouldn’t otherwise attend it. (For 
instance, the Academy of Performing Aits is a magnet for 



“What Did You Do . . . ?’ 


131 


Las Vegas High.) In Las Vegas, the grade school magnet 
schools are part of a federal program to entice whites into 
the black community. White people ship their kids in to 
attend these schools because they feel that they get a 
better education. The teachers get $2,000 more, and 
they’re supposed to get more books. 

A-Tech is the new scaled-down high school on the 
Westside. It has only 750 students, and they do com¬ 
puters and pre-law and a whole lot of other things like 
that. And the Mabel Hoggard School, which was a sixth 
grade center, is a computer school, first through sixth 
grade. The federal government says that you can only 
have thirty-five percent minorities in those schools. Sixty 
percent of the Las Vegas population is white, so that’s 
the breakdown that the government decided on to 
integrate these magnet schools. It’s a plan. I don’t think 
it really does the thing that we need it to do, but at least 
it does integrate the school systems to that extent. 

I continued to be elected to the executive board of 
our NAACP branch for another ten to fifteen years after 
my resignation, and I was again elected pi’esident for a 
two-year term around 1970 and another in 1982-83. But 
for a long time after I resigned I didn’t attend a lot of the 
meetings, and I didn’t go to Carson City with the others 
to put pressure on die governor and the legislature. I had 
only met with Grant Sawyer light after his election when 
we asked for a bank charter and a savings and loan 
charter and a person to be put on the boxing commission. 
He put Jimmy Gay on the boxing commission. Then we 
asked for the establishment of that Equal Rights Com¬ 
mission, and Governor Sawyer established that; and then 



132 


Fighting Back 


he crossed us and made a Caucasian the executive 
director of it. 

In the early 1960s I ran for a seat on the Clark 
County Commission. We figured this was the most 
powerful part of local government, and it was time for us 
to have representation, so we decided to take a shot at it. 
I just chose the wrong spot. I filed against Harley 
Harmon. In my race we had myself, Harley Harmon, 
Paul Christensen’s father, and an ex-FBI officer. Hannon 
was the most powerful man on the commission, but we 
were trying to knock him off—I don’t know where we got 
the idea that we could; we thought maybe lightning 
would strike and we’d have a shot. Harmon’s people met 
with the ex-FBI agent and made some type of deal with 
him and he resigned from the race. That left me and 
Harley and Christensen. 

Then a guy came around to my office and offered to 
put twenty-five hundred dollars in cash on my desk if I 
would withdraw from the race. I told him, “This is not 
enough money. If I do this and it gets out, I’ll have to 
leave town. I’d just have enough money to buy me an 
airline ticket to the Virgin Islands with a little left over. 
I wouldn’t have anything to live on.” I said, “I’ll need a 
lot more money to pull out of this race!” 

He knew I was pulling his chain, and I knew that I 
didn’t have a chance to win. I contacted Harley and told 
him, “You know what I’m in the campaign for: equal 
lights and jobs for black people. If I lose the race, I hope 
you’ll consider hiring black people for some of these 
county positions.” He said he’d do that. He won that 
election, and three days later he appointed an Afro- 
American girl to a job in the county building, the first 



“What Did You Do . . . ?” 


133 


Afro-American to work there. Harley went on to appoint 
a couple of other blacks to positions, but my campaign 
against him was the major part of his civil rights 
motivation. 

I served on the Nevada State Board of Dental 
Examiners for twelve years. Governor O’Callaghan 
appointed me, and I served during his two terms and 
List’s one term. I also served as the executive director of 
a committee that Governor List appointed to examine the 
reasons why blacks and other minorities weren’t able to 
get small business loans and bonding and that type of 
thing. We went throughout the state holding hearings, 
and we submitted a report to the governor, and nothing 
ever happened. 

In 1982 I was once again elected president of the Las 
Vegas branch of die NAACP and served a two-year term. 
The most notable thing we accomplished during that 
term was developing and building a 115-unit housing 
complex for the elderly and handicapped. Located at 
Harris and Eastern Avenues, it was sponsored by the 
NAACP National Housing Corporation, the Housing 
Authority of the City of Las Vegas, and the NAACP 
Nevada Housing Development Coiporation in coopera¬ 
tion widi the San Francisco Area and Regional Offices of 
the Department of Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD). We named it the “McCants Senior Citizens 
Apartments” after the Arthur McCants, the first presi¬ 
dent of the NAACP in Las Vegas. 

In 1991 I ran for the city council seat that was also 
being sought by Frank Hawkins, among others. That was 
a hotly contested election. The police union and their 



184 


Fighting Back 


people backed Hawkins. He had a big war chest, and 
they really got to me again. They did not want the two of 
us to go into the general election; they did not want both 
McMillan and Hawkins to run in the general election. 
John Moran campaigned hard against me. I spent 
$25,000 of my own money and got six hundred votes. In 
fact, I spent more money dian I raised, so you know they 
had the pressure against me. 

In all of the races, in all of my campaigns, I probably 
raised no more than a thousand dollars. I was spending 
my own money most of the time because I never did have 
a campaign manager who could go to the hotels and ask 
for support. During the council race I think Silver State 
gave me five hundred dollars and Bob Stupac gave me a 
thousand dollars, and that’s about it. After I lost that 
race I ran for die Clark County school board in 1992 and 
was elected. In that race I spent thirty-five hundred 
dollars and got eleven diousand votes. All out twenty-five 
cents a vote is what it costs to be elected to the school 
board. 

The school district has a policy of naming new 
elementary schools after people in the community-—white 
and black, Indians, school teachers, what have you—who 
have either done something for education or helped the 
city in other ways. People submit names to a committee 
which decides who will be honored. A few years ago they 
named one for me. The James B. McMillan School is on 
Lake Mead and Highway 95, just over in the white 
section of town. I think we have four schools named after 
African-Americans—McMillan, Hoggard, Parsons, and 



“What Did You Do . . . ?” 


135 


Cox. Pm the first person to serve on the school board to 
have a school named after him. 

When the school naming ceremony was held I was 
mingling among the students at the reception. One young 
man came up to me and said, “This school is named after 
you?” 

“Yes, it is.” 

He said, “Well, what did you do to have a school 
named after you?” 

Pm stunned. I don’t know what to say. I said, “I 
can’t tell you,” and he laughed and we had our picture 
taken together. This was a veiy intelligent young man. It 
was sobering to have a youngster that age look me in the 
eye and ask that question. 

With the tremendous growt h in the population of Las 
Vegas, McMillan Elementary School soon had over a 
thousand students. It was overcrowded, so on the other 
side of the school grounds they built the Edith and Lloyd 
Katz Elementary School. The Katzes and I were some¬ 
times in opposition during the civil rights movement, and 
now here we are, living together as schools. 




16 


We Don’t Want to Live With 
the White Man 


T ’VE LONG WONDERED whether I did the right 
thing by turning down the offer Mayor Gragson and 
Reed Whipple made when we were threatening to 
demonstrate on the Strip in 1960. We had momentum, 
but the mood of the country at that time would have 
given us integration anyway in three or four years. By 
insisting that it happen now , I lost a great opportunity to 
get red lining stopped, and to be given loans and 
mortgages and jobs to placate us. That could have been 
the right way to go . . . opening up the city, eliminating 
segregation, didn’t do anything but help the white 
establishment make more money. No economic benefit, 
nothing for black people. I thought that with a desegre¬ 
gated city, blacks would still go to black businesses and 
spend their money; but I soon saw how mistaken I was. 

You can have all the civil rights you want, you know. 
You can get a job sweeping the floor downtown in a hotel 
or be a cocktail waitress, but if you don’t have capital in 



138 


Fighting Back 


your community .... I hate to say this, but in Las 
Vegas, through the success of the civil rights movement 
and our NAACP actions, we actually hurt the black 
population. When blacks were confined to the Westside, 
that’s where their money stayed: we had five black 
gaining joints and two Chinese joints in our community 
that would hire black people, put them to work. All the 
money was going into black hands where we could 
develop the community—restaurants, stores, gaming, 
and things. Then when we got civil rights, and we could 
eat, shop and gamble anywhere, all this business moved 
to the white man. Before desegregation Jerry’s Nugget 
was just a slot joint on the hinge of the black community, 
and now it’s .... Jerry’s Nugget didn’t give us a damn 
thing. They got a lot of black business, but they only 
hired two or three black dealers for the whole operation. 
Here’s how we lost all our money, all our capital: we 
were OK (sad to say this) as long as white people forced 
us to stay in our community, but when we solved that 
problem and tore the barrier down and could take our 
money and go, that’s what we did. I’m saying that black 
businesses went under when we got our civil rights. 

When desegregation finally came, and blacks began 
taking their money elsewhere, white businesses on the 
Westside were hurt too. The Westside had two clubs that 
were owned by Orientals, and it really didn’t hurt my 
conscience at all that they lost all of their black business. 
In fact, I was happy. They hadn’t been doing anything to 
help blacks anyway except hiring a few, and they were 
taking the money and sending it to San Francisco or 
wherever it was. They weren’t putting anything back in 
the black community. The black clubs were the ones that 



We Don’t Want to Live With the White Man 


139 


I felt sorry for, and the grocery stores and little shops. I 
thought that desegregation would make the town dif¬ 
ferent, and the atmosphere would be better if we could 
go anywhere we pleased. But for thirty years after we 
won our battle I didn’t see any construction going on in 
west Las Vegas. So there’s a downside to integration. 

Jewish people throughout the United States were 
very close with Thurgood Marshall when he was on the 
Supreme Court. Working with him they formed the 
NAACP legal defense fund, which has millions of dollars 
at the national level. We generally hired local lawyers to 
advise us on what we could do. George Rudiak did good 
work for us at one time. He was Jewish, born in Russia, 
and his family came to the United States and finally 
moved to Las Vegas. He took the bar exam and passed 
it and was doing well here. Then he got involved in 
politics and was elected to the legislature. He was active 
with the NAACP and with other civil rights groups, and 
he submitted one of the first civil rights bills in the 
histoiy of the Nevada legislature when he was elected. 
His bill lost by one vote, and then he was politically dead, 
because white people wouldn’t support and elect him 
again. He was also instrumental in building Valley 
Hospital in later years. 

Jews had long suffered from discrimination too. They 
had enough money to fight it and win, and Las Vegas 
had some outstanding Jews who were interested in 
helping blacks achieve desegregation. But Caucasians are 
funny people. I mean, when it comes to putting the 
leather to the road, they stumble. Hank Greenspun was 
friends with black entertainers and what have you, and 



140 


Fighting Back 


when we started the integration movement he got on 
board. He wrote good articles for us, but .... 
Greenspun was a big wheel in this town. He was in with 
all of these big hotel owners on the Strip—the guys who 
owned the Desert Inn, the Sands, the Sahara—and he 
was respected. Long before the events that led up to the 
Moulin Rouge agreement he could have said to these 
guys, “Hey, this is stupid. It’s time to integrate.” Like the 
Sands Hotel: he was in with its operators, who did a few 
litde things, but they wouldn’t accept integration into the 
Sands. And there were others. Greenspun knew what was 
happening with me and the pressures that I had on me, 
and he never did say, “Hey, Mac, come on. Let’s go meet 
Moe Dalitz or Wilbur Clark or Jack Entratter, and we’ll 
sit down and talk about it.” 

The Jews that owned the hotels and things could 
have helped us end dtis segregation years before. All they 
had to do was let the banners down, let everybody in and 
treat everybody as equal citizens. But that didn’t happen. 
Jack Entratter was a nice guy. He was lenient and would 
let black people he knew into his place—Dr. West and 
some of the entertainers would go in. I guess you could 
call Entratter a liberal type guy, but there was no force- 
fid movement from the Jewish community to hold hands 
with blacks, marching and doing this type of thing. 

Nowadays, with the advent of Black Muslims in this 
community, with their agenda, there’s been a rift 
between blacks and Jews; but people shoidd stand up 
and support the Muslims, because they’re taking young 
black men and teaching them pride and the work ethic 
and how to dress . . . and they’re no-nonsense people. 
Loins Farrakhan has made some harsh statements about 



We Don’t Want to Live With the White Man 


141 


the Jews that may be wrong; I don’t know. Maybe that’s 
the only way to get these people’s attention. But I do feel 
that the Muslims are doing things that are necessary to 
achieve equal rights in this country. They’re doing one 
hell of a job, and in support of them I went to 
Farrakhan’s first meeting in Las Vegas and sat on the 
stage with him. Some of my Jewish fiiends didn’t like 
that. Too bad. If we’re going to follow the constitution, 
we give every person the right to free speech. Just like 
Farrakhan’s people are talking about Jews and whites, 
Jews and whites can talk about Farrakhan. They both 
have that opportunity. That type of speech lets me see an 
individual for what he is, and I don’t think that his 
speech can hurt me. Tie’s not hitting me with his fists; 
he’s not lynching me. And I think that intelligent people 
can look at him and say, “He’s nuts. Forget him.” 

Bob Bailey was a Republican, Woodrow Wilson was 
a Republican, Dave Hoggard’s wife was a Republican, 
and Reverend Clark was a Republican; but all were more 
dedicated to the civil rights movement than most other 
blacks in our community. These people joined the 
Republican party a long time ago—I guess their parents 
were Republicans. In Mississippi the Republican party 
was the party of choice for black people right after the 
Civil War, the party of Abraham Lincoln. In Las Vegas 
black Democrats and Republicans alike knew that unless 
we were together, we had no chance at all. We discussed 
issues, analyzed our chances . . . but Afro-American 
Republicans couldn’t do anything that would threaten 
their party. They met with us, marched with us, sup- 



142 


Fighting Back 


ported us, and then they’d go to their Republican meet¬ 
ings and tiy to do what they could. 

Black Republicans me a source of strength, and they 
can be veiy good for our interests. I mean, that lets 
people know that both parties are effective in the com¬ 
munity: the Democrats can’t just take us for granted, and 
the Republicans can see that they have a chance to pick 
up some votes. But black Republicans have to let the 
party know that being a Republican doesn’t mean that 
you treat poor people bad or talk bad about black 
people. 

I disagree with intelligent blacks like Clarence 
Thomas and some of these black newspaper columnists 
who have used the civil rights movement to go through 
Yale or Harvard and get degrees, but who sit down and 
write about how bad black people are and how good 
conservative white people are! They can’t be that 
ignorant; that just blows my mind! And it blows my 
mind that Thomas gets on the Supreme Court (and he’s 
supposedly an excellent lawyer), and something comes to 
him that denies the rights of blacks, and he votes for the 
white people. I don’t understand that. We have these 
younger blacks that have gotten excellent educations, 
and they think that they did it by themselves. Poor black 
people marched and suffered and were beaten and jailed 
to make things better, and these guys don’t realize that 
they should now contribute something back to us. I just 
don’t understand it. 

And I don’t understand why people don’t realize 
what the unions have accomplished for this country. 
People say, “Well, the unions are taking advantage of 
people. They want to redistribute the wealth,” and that 



We Don’t Want to Live With the White Man 


143 


sort of thing. Beginning in 1935 I worked in factories for 
five dollars a day, no vacation, no sick leave, no retire¬ 
ment, not sure of a job . . . fired at the end of every car 
year* and hired back at the beginning of the next. And to 
see the difference when I joined the union, to see wages 
at Ford go from five dollars a day to seven dollars an 
hour, to have job security, to have a vacation .... 
Unions made the American middle class. 

The civil rights movement changed Afro-Americans 
in this country. It gave us pride. It gave us a chance to 
stand up and be seen, and to let people know that we 
were not going to take this treatment anymore; we were 
going to do something! This is the important part. And 
around 1960, with all the attention that segregation was 
getting, we began to see some change in many whites. 
They were ashamed. They felt it was wrong for United 
States citizens to be treated this way, and this is what it 
took to end segregation. We had to have Caucasians go 
into the South and participate in the marches; we had to 
have white priests and bishops and politicians take a 
stand and make a statement. That turned pul)lie opinion 
to help the movement. But the biggest thing that hap¬ 
pened was that the civil rights movement got blacks to 
stand up with pride, to say we’re doing something for 
ourselves and we’re doing something to right the wrongs 
and injustices in this country. The march on Washington 
and Martin Luther King’s freedom speech . . . these were 
some of the greatest things that ever happened in this 
country. 



144 


Fighting Back 


I also appreciated Black Power. That movement had 
a lot to do with getting blacks to stand up and take pride 
in themselves. It made black people wear their hair in 
Afros instead of trying to pattern after white folks and 
put grease on your hair and wear a stocking cap and pull 
it back straight. We used to think that white people’s 
hair was perfect and god-given: we didn’t know that 
white women had to use hot irons to make their hair 
curly; we didn’t know that white men had to put spray 
on their hair to keep it in place. Among blacks, straight¬ 
ening the hair was known as “conking.”^ I never did 
conk, but when I was growing up I cut my hair short and 
put grease on it, and I used to wear a stocking cap to 
bed. I’d grease my hair up and pull it back under that 
cap—that made it straight, and it would stay that way 
the next day. Then you had to do it all over again. Some 
men still do that—I have a friend who’s eighty-three 
year’s old and he still wears a stocking cap at night. The 
grease makes your hair slick but neat, I guess. 

When “Afros” came in, you could comb your hair 
forward, cut it short, put grease on it, and it just stood 
up. You didn’t have to worry about it, and it was beau¬ 
tiful for our women. In the old days they had these 


In 1960, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) 
was organized at Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina. Its name 
notwithstanding, SNCC soon took an aggressive stance in demanding 
civil lights for blacks. Two of its chairmen, IT. Rap Brown and Stokely 
Carmichael, became leaders of the emerging “Black Power” movement, 
which departed radically from the non-violent tradition of Dr. King and 
the NAACP. 

Tor an excellent analysis of “conking” and related behavior see 
Alex Haley, The Autobiography of Malcolm X. 




We Don’t Want to Live With the White Man 


145 


damned straightening combs that Madam Walker came 
out with. These were hot combs that blacks would use to 
try to make their hair look like a white person’s—they’d 
pull their hair straight and put that hot comb to it, and 
it looked like hell. At the same time Caucasians were 
wanting their hair curly. It’s just that type of thing. 

It was a shock to me when I first started seeing black 
women with their hair cut short or wearing it in an Afro, 
proud of it and walking proud. And black men wearing 
Afros and saying, “Yes, I’m black.” We stopped saying, 
“My mother is white and my father was black,” or, “I’ve 
got some white in me.” We started saying, “I’m black.” 
We were proud to use the word. When I was coming up 
in high school and college and in the army that didn’t 
happen, but when the Black Power movement came, the 
black race stood up and looked white people in the eye 
and said, “Yes, I’m black. So what!” 

I respect all die different approaches to getting rights 
for black people. We needed each of them, and we need 
them still. The Christian Leadership movement, based in 
the South, motivating its congregations to get out and do 
something .... The NAACP used a different approach: 
a non-violent movement led by lawyers who understood 
what the system was, understood the law, understood 
how to go to court to get the things we needed. And 
Black Power reached out to other blacks to say, “Hey, 
I’m a human being and I want to be treated like a human 
being. Until that’s understood, I have to stand up and 


Tile Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) was 
organized in 1957 by Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Ralph Abernathy, 
and others. 




146 


Fighting Back 


support and protect myself.” Caucasians began to see 
that the Afro-American was not going to be submissive 
anymore; they would not be able to run over him. 

The Black Power movement gave us pride in our¬ 
selves and in our race, but I disagreed with the fringe 
people who were talking about killing whites. They were 
like these militia groups that white people are doing 
now—no difference. When blacks were doing this stuff, 
J. Edgar Hoover spent millions of dollars tapping our 
phones and chasing us; now the government’s not doing 
anything to these white militia people, even though 
they’re much more vicious than we were. But it all comes 
around. And there’s a big difference between radical 
Black Power groups and these militias: the militias are 
saying that the federal government is bad. We didn’t say 
that the government was bad; we just said, “Well, we’ll 
beat it in the street.” We thought that the United States 
of America was the greatest place in the world, and we 
wanted to participate fully in all that it had to offer. 
These militias now are saying that the United States is 
bad and that we’ve got to tear it up or rewrite the 
constitution or some such crap. They blew up the federal 
building in Oklahoma City. That’s what these people do 
to make their point. 

You can have family values without having economic 
security. In the South, black Southern Baptists living in 
shacks and eating soup were still honest, open, and 
straightforward . . . not robbing people, not cheating 
them, and not doing anything wrong. My stepfather may 
have run a numbers game to support us, but you can 
operate a gaming business and not kill anybody and not 



We Don’t Want to Live With the White Man 


147 


cheat anybody and not steal anything and be honest. 
Nowadays, people are peddling dope and running 
prostitutes and robbing and killing each other, and the 
whites are hollering about black criminals. Well, the 
black criminals are killing black people. Does that make 
any sense? The white person says, “These black people 
are criminals. They’re doing this, they’re doing that, 
they’re shooting people.” Well, we’re not killing white 
people. I mean, black criminals may be robbing whites, 
but that’s a different ball game. 

And the riots . . . it’s stupid to have a riot in your 
own neighborhood and burn up all of your businesses. If 
we were going out into our neighborhoods and burning 
up the Caucasians’ stores and tearing them down because 
they didn’t have black people working in them, I could 
agree with that. That may be wrong, but I can agree with 
it. We have a right to cleanse our neighborhoods. But if 
you want to make a statement, go into the white commu¬ 
nities and tear them up! If you’re going to get out of 
seiwitude and get out of slavery, you can’t do anything by 
burning up your own places. You got to do something to 
hurt the other guy, the one that’s putting you in slavery. 

Maybe peaceful demonstrations can do it as well. 
Mahatma Ghandi did it in South Africa; but Jesus, look 
what he went through! All of the demonstrations and 
civil rights activities that I was involved in were 
peaceful—we never burned anything; nobody was ever 
hurt, nor did we ever intend to hurt anybody. We 
would’ve protected ourselves from being hurt, but we 
never even had to do that. Other people have pushed 
forward by blowing up places. People say, “Hey, we 
better do something here—what’s happening now in this 



148 


Fighting Back 


country is awful.” You can’t just stand by and say, “I’m 
only going to do peaceful demonstrations” while Bull 
Connor puts the dogs on you and beats the hell out of 
you and throws you in jail. Maybe you can gain your 
freedom by taking abuse in demonstrations until the 
white man’s conscience gets the best of him, and he says, 
“OK, we’re not doing this thing right.” But that’s a hell 
of a price to pay. Mahatma Ghandi and Martin Luther 
King didn’t believe in fighting back. I believe in fighting 
back. 

Politicians, and particularly Republicans, don’t give 
a damn about the poor, but poor white people go for 
their game. If the poor white people and rednecks would 
get together with Mexicans and blacks, we could rule the 
country. We have the votes. 

Since the abolition of slavery, the greatest thing that 
has happened for the Afro-American is the passage of the 
Voting Rights Act. At the time it took effect there were 
no black elected politicians in the South—no city 
commissioners, no mayors, no policemen, no firemen, no 
blacks on school boards. Today we have almost four 
thousand black elected officials, all stemming from this 
voting rights act and from the presidency of Lyndon 
Johnson. In fact, and it’s something I never would have 
believed could happen, we now have a black mayor of 
Dallas. At a time when whites are claiming to be victims 
of “reverse discrimination,” and affirmative action is 
going all to hell, white people get together with black 
people to elect a black mayor in Dallas. I don’t under¬ 
stand this. 



I'Ve Don’t Want to Live With the White Man 


149 


And Colin Powell: I never thought I’d see the day 
that Caucasians would say that a black man would make 
a good president of the United States. They turned 
against Phil Gramm because he has an Asian wife, but if 
Powell is ever elected, the first lady of the United States 
of America will be black. I don’t understand it. Colin 
Powell looks good, but he wasn’t all that great in the 
Gulf War and he didn’t do a hell of a lot of fighting in 
Vietnam. He didn’t go to West Point; he came through 
the National Guard—he played the system, and I give 
him credit for that. He knew how to play the system. I’d 
he glad for white people to put him on the ticket. If he’s 
elected I hope he’s got enough sense to be a good presi¬ 
dent and not let white folks txick him. 

I’m confused about what’s really happening in this 
country: black Republicans elected, and black commen¬ 
tators writing for the papers, speaking against blacks, 
against affirmative action, getting it all mixed up. I’ll be 
a Democrat the rest of my life, because I believe in 
human rights and ecfuality. I believe all people in this 
country have the right to make a living. Republicans 
believe that too, but they’re a little bit more selfish than 
Democrats—they’re in the business of business, and 
black Republicans hurt their own kind by holding down 
wages and having white people make small wages too. 
Nonetheless, I think Afro-Americans should put more 
black folks in the Republican party. 

Clarence Thomas is a Republican, and he’s certainly 
black. That’s what hurts. He’s a house nigger, an Uncle 
Tom to the fifth degree, and I hope that he’ll hurry up 
and get the hell off the Supreme Comt some kind of way. 



150 


Fighting Back 


How can a man from Yale, educated in the Catholic 
faith, be against affirmative action and quotas in the 
schools when he got his education and his position 
through affirmative action? Guys like Thomas have the 
wrong idea . . . maybe they can’t be real, blacks when 
they’re in the Republican party. They don’t join the party 
and say, “Hey, you Republicans are wrong. You’re 
discriminating against blacks.” No, they have to get up 
and mouth what the white Republicans tell them to say, 
and turn against their own race. 

There’s no way in hell that Clarence Thomas sits up 
there on his court bench and thinks about his poor 
people in Georgia. And he should. He should think about 
how the white people treated his mother and father in 
Georgia, “and that was wrong and I want to remedy that 
wrong.” His position should be, “I’m an educated black 
man and Tin going to read the law right, but I’m not 
going to degrade my black people just to make me a big 
man.” But as far as the Anita Hill charges went, I think 
the sexual harassment thing is bullshit. It’s getting out of 
hand, and not just with what happened to Clarence 
Thomas. There was also Senator Packwood, charged 
with doing things twenty years ago. That’s ridiculous. 
Now they’re talking about President Clinton, about 
something they say he did in Arkansas when he was 
running for governor years ago. Our public officials are 
wasting our time and our money trying to get rid of 
Clinton, tiying to get rid of Packwood, trying to get rid 
of Clarence Thomas instead of concentrating on social 
security, health benefits, retirement benefits for 
people .... And then there’s the environment, which is 
being wrecked. Why will white people of intelligence, 



We Don’t Want to Live With the White Man 


151 


from the best schools and supposedly with the best 
education, make such stupid decisions about the 
environment? Money? 

Affirmative action is what the Afro-American 
community and all minorities need. Affirmative action 
does the job. How in the hell can white males be com¬ 
plaining when they’ve got 98 percent of the jobs? 
They’re going to object when a few people who aren’t 
white get moved up in the system? That’s stupid. The 
lawyers use the phrase “reverse discrimination,” and it 
makes no sense to me. I mean, my reasoning is poor, I 
guess. I can’t understand what they’re talking about, 
“reverse discrimination.” You’ve got a fire department 
with 100 percent whites, and you get a qualified black 
and a qualified white applying for the job, and the man 
says, “I’m going to let this black man have this job 
because we don’t have any blacks working in the depart¬ 
ment . . . . ” That’s discrimination? No, that’s affirma¬ 
tive action. 

We should follow the constitution, just that simple. 
If we follow the constitution, that eliminates all of this 
other stuff—whether you’re black or brown, male or 
female .... Now some people are saying that affirmative 
action and quotas are unconstitutional, but Caucasians 
should not have all the benefits to themselves, and the 
only reason they do is that they have barriers against 
minorities getting those jobs. That makes the difference. 
When those barriers no longer exist, we won’t need 
affirmative action. We’ll be equal, and that means that if 
I meet the criteria to be accepted into West Point, I get 
in; and once I’m in, the West Point people don’t give me 



152 


Fighting Back 


the silent treatment the way they did Benjamin Davis. 
Equality under the law means being treated like anyone 
else. Let me be able to compete with everybody else for 
jobs, for housing, for education. Equality should be an 
individual thing, and if individuals are equal we don’t 
even have to think about groups. 

Busing initially served the puipose of getting Afro- 
Americans in schools with Caucasians and letting those 
two people see one another and see that they weren’t 
savages or people that they couldn’t get along with. The 
only reason that we needed busing was that in the South 
and in some of the larger cities black children couldn’t 
get an education if you didn’t bus them to the white 
schools where all the money was, where all the books 
were, where all the good teachers were. Once it started 
we had a lot of obstacles to overcome, because a lot of 
the Caucasian teachers treated black students poorly. In 
Las Vegas we were busing grades one through five to 
white schools, and the Afro-American kids would get off 
die bus and die white teacher would come to a white kid 
and put her aims around her and let the poor little black 
kid . . . he’s lost trying to find his way in. 

Busing served its puipose, but we’ve had a real 
turnabout now. A lot of blacks are saying, “I don’t need 
integration if I can get the schools, money, and proper 
teachers to educate my kids.” The thing that we’re faced 
with on the school board now is that black people are 


In its 1971 decision in Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of 
Education , the United States Supreme Court had ruled that busing 
children to distant schools to achieve desegregation is constitutional. 




I'Ve Don’t Want to Live With the White Man 


153 


saying, “I don’t want my kids bused. I want them to get 
an education.” I mean, we don’t want to live with the 
white man. We don’t want to join his clubs or visit him 
in his house. All we want is to be educated the same as 
everyone else. The same thing with housing: we don’t 
care about who lives next door. It’s a human being—we 
respect him, we want him to respect us. And we don’t 
want to integrate as far as marriages are concerned. (Of 
course, I’m married to a white woman, but that’s nothing 
to do widt race. She’s an individual, a person—we didn’t 
see color when we met and fell in love with one another.) 

I’ve tried to live a decent life and do a good job as a 
professional man and as a community activist; tried to 
overcome my failures and accept my successes as things 
that were earned, things that I worked hard to do. I made 
some mistakes along the way, no doubt about it, and I 
have no great legacy to leave behind. I’ll just be happy if 
the city of Las Vegas knows that Jim McMillan came 
through and did his best. Since our Moulin Rouge 
agreement, you can see the progression, the forward 
movement in this city. There’s still some segregation, 
some prejudice, but now we have many black profes¬ 
sionals in Las Vegas: we have forty or fifty black physi¬ 
cians, and most of them are specialists; we have black 
people as vice-presidents of banks; and we have black 
lawyers. (In America it makes a difference when you 
have fifty black lawyers who can go to court to solve your 
problems . . . and we do.) We have sLx or seven black 
millionaires. We have blacks on the big golf courses, 
living in gated communities, belonging to all the clubs. 
That’s the way it should be. 





17 


Marie is Caucasian 


M ICKI (my SECOND WIFE) and I divorced 
around 1962. Long after the Moulin Rouge 
Agreement, and after I had gotten the divorce, 
I went out to the Desert Inn with a friend of mine, a 
Mexican woman. We sat down in the lounge and ordered 
drinks. No problem. Then this guy came over to where 
we were sitting. He said, “Dr. McMillan, I’m Moe Dalitz.” 
“Oh, it’s a pleasure to meet you.” 

He said, “You think you’re a pretty smart guy, 
huh?” 

“No,” I said, “what do you mean?” 

“You’re pushing your luck. You make us integrate 
the place, and then you come in here with a white 
woman. I don’t understand what you’re trying to do.” 

“Well, I wanted to make sure that you guys were 
living up to your promises. As long as I’m being treated 
as just another citizen, there’s no problem.” 



156 


Fighting Back 


Dalitz had been joking and we were friends after 
that. When he later took over the Las Vegas Country 
Club, I’d go out to play golf, and if he was there we’d sit 
down and have a drink and talk and laugh. He was 
always a gentleman. 

It wasn’t long before I was married again. My third 
wife, Marie, was a patient of mine. Her husband was an 
engineer, and she worked as an administrative assistant 
out at the nuclear test site. One time she came in to see 
me for some dental work, and we flirted a little. She was 
weaiing a Chinese-type chess, slit up one side, and as she 
walked down the hall to leave I let out a whistle and said, 
“Woo!” She laughed. After Marie got a divorce we 
started dating. We had things in common. She had a 
Jaguar and drove race cars, and I had a Corvette; and I 
had an airplane and she had an airplane. We went to 
ground school together, taking instruction to leam how 
to fly, and we flew aiiplanes together, danced, dined, 
went to shows, golf tournaments, horse races .... After 
about a year of this exceptional relationship, one night 
we slipped down to die Clark County Marriage Bureau at 
about two o’clock in the morning (it stayed open twenty- 
four hours a day) and picked up a marriage license. 

Marie is Caucasian. Being married to a white woman 
could have caused me problems in the black community, 
but we just decided to get married and do it our way, and 
I wouldn’t accept any problems. I just went on doing my 
job and being an activist, fighting for black rights and 
equal treatment. My patients were both white and black; 
I hired both black girls and white girls for my office; I 
went about my business. I knew that there was some 




“We had things in common. She had a Jaguar and drove race cars, and I had 
a Corvette.” Marie Stever-Daly (above) and Dr. James McMillan (below), 1963. 



















Marie is Caucasian 


157 


cloud over me, that there was talk, but I didn’t pay any 
attention to it. My wife knew it also. And she’d be around 
other whites who would talk about black people, not 
knowing that she was married to a black man, and she 
had to be able to overcome that and live with it. 

Recently a black activist called me. She said, “You 
married a white woman. You got white kids. Your kids 
are dating white girls, and you don’t want to do anything 
in the black community.” First time I ever heard 
that—they may have been saying it behind my back all 
along, but it’s not true. I must say that as long as we were 
in die black community they respected me and my wife, 
as we respected them. What happened after we left, I 
don’t know. My wife had some very good friends in the 
black community, but she didn’t spend a lot of time there 
because we had some business ventures when we first got 
married. We owned six apartment buildings and a trailer 
court, and she quit her job at the test site to help me run 
the trailer court and manage the apartments and stuff. 
She knocked on an apartment door one day to collect the 
rent, and the woman who opened it said, “You white 
bitch. Get out of here,” and tried to pour hot oil on her. 
But we went about our business, doing our thing, not 
making a big issue of our marriage. 




18 


Follow Your Heart: Marie’s Story 


R. JAMES B. McMILLAN wed Marie Stever in 
1964. Marie remembers the early, difficult years 
of their interracial marriage and offers some 
insight into the indomitable character of the man. she 
calls McMillan: 


D 


My father and his twin brother were born on a large 
farm or ranch in Missouri. Their family farmed, but their 
father (“Old Benton” Stever) also bought horses and 
mules for the U. S. Army and delivered them to Fort 
Riley, Kansas, which at that time was the army’s main 
cavalry post. Sometimes he took die boys along with him. 

My Dad joined the army and fought in France in 
World War I, and after the war he migrated to 
California, where he had relatives in the San Joaquin 
Valley. Fie met my mother, Eva Marie Cash, at a high 
school football game—she was a cheerleader, known at 
that time as a “Rah-Rah Girl.” (Mother went to high 





160 


Fighting Back 


school with the mother and father of Robert List, who 
was governor of Nevada from 1979 to 1983.) Because it 
was located in the midst of such rich agricultural land, 
Exeter, their home town, had more millionaires per 
capita than any other town in California back then. 

My Mother’s great, great grandmother, Hannah Cole, 
was named the “Pioneer Mother of Missouri.” There is a 
bronze statue of her in St. Louis, commemorating her 
status as the first Caucasian woman to cross the 
Mississippi River by covered wagon. After McMillan and 
I were married, my mother and Mac used to have heated 
discussions about their ancestors—his coming from 
slavery and hers coming from the Midwest where the 
Cashes, Coles and Youngers were cowboy bandits. They 
had lots of laughs about that. 

I’m a Leo. I was bom August 1, 1926, in Exeter, 
California, and I led a marvelous, marvelous childhood. 
We rode horses, hiked, camped, traveled, et cetera. My 
two brothers, Jim and Bob, were born after me. With his 
knowledge of refrigeration my father developed a meat 
market and deli in Carmel-by-the-Sea, and that’s where 
I grew up—in a two stoiy log house near the Mission San 
Carlos Borromeo where I sang in the choir. The market 
was so successful that Dad put another one in Salinas, in 
what they called a “chive-in market,” which was a 
forerunner of modern shopping centers. During the 
Depression I can remember other people not having 
anything, but we always did, and it seemed like we had 
the best times of our lives. 

Dining World War II we moved to San Leandro. My 
father worked at the Naval Supply Depot, doing refrig¬ 
eration on the big ships carrying food overseas to our 



Follow Your Heart: Marie’s Story 


161 


military operations, and my mother worked at the 
Caterpillar tractor company, where tanks were built for 
the war effort. I graduated from Hayward High School 
and went on to the University of California at Berkeley, 
where I led quite a sheltered life. The dormitories were all 
full at that time, and my parents wouldn’t let me live off 
campus, so I rode back and forth from San Leandro to 
Berkeley with a professor of optometry. In 1945, after 
about a year and a half at Berkeley, I got married to an 
engineering student. We had two children, a daughter, 
Michelle, born in 1946 and a son, Jack, born in 1947. 

While my children were young I continued to go to 
school and became a licensed audiometrist. Then we 
moved to Livermore where I was an administrative 
secretary for the University of California Radiation 
Laboratory. My husband was an electrical engineer 
there. Eventually he took a position with Edgerton, 
Germeshausen & Grier (EG&G), a company that did 
high-speed film photography for the radiation laboratory 
at Livermoi’e and timing and firing of nuclear devices at 
the nuclear test sites in Nevada and at die Pacific proving 
grounds. For several years during the testing program we 
would visit Nevada. Then in 1959, when a position 
opened up with Holmes & Narver, Inc., the engineering 
and construction firm that ran the Nevada test site, I 
went to work there as an administrative assistant for Pat 
Ryan, the resident manager. I thought I was only going 
to be there for a year, but life changes, and I ended up 
marrying McMillan. Eve been in Las Vegas ever since. 

Out at die test site our company had a great number 
of survey crews, a lot of people working for them, and 



162 


Fighting Back 


someone would always have some sort of a dental 
problem. I’d heard diat there was this McMillan fellow in 
Las Vegas who was a veiy good dentist, and who was the 
only one who stayed open late so that people out at the 
test site could get in to see him after work. (The test site 
was geared up to full activity at that time, and we 
worked about eighty hours a week.) If someone asked if 
I knew of a dentist, I would always tell them about 
McMillan. During that time my brother Jim was staying 
with me, and one day he had a toothache. I recom¬ 
mended McMillan. He made an appointment with him 
and saw him and came back and said, “You’re right; he’s 
a good dentist. Why didn’t you tell me he was black?” I 
said, “I didn’t know he was black.” Nobody had told me. 
They had just said how good he was, and how accom¬ 
modating. 

While I was working for the engineering fimi my 
husband and I divorced, and then he died and I sent my 
children away to school in Europe. I’d long wanted to get 
a pilot’s license, and finally about 1963 I had enough 
time off from my work to prepare for the FAA flying 
exams. I went to ground school out at the North Las 
Vegas Air Terminal, which at the time was called 
Thunderbird Field, and who should I meet out there but 
McMillan? He was studying to be a pilot too. The first 
time we saw each other, everything clicked; we just were 
in tune with each other’s thoughts. We did wind triangles 
together and we talked about airplanes, and we liked 
cars. Of course, McMillan was from Detroit and he liked 
to talk about Detroit cars. I thought Detroit cars were for 
the birds, and I told him so—I called them “Detroit 
barges.” He drove a Corvette, and I drove an XKE 



Follow Your Heart: Marie’s Story 


168 


Jaguar, and we’d go out and race in the desert after 
ground school. We just had the most marvelous time 
together, really enjoyed each other’s company. Nobody 
ever hit it off like we did. 

We started dating right away. Of course this was 
1963, so when we were out together in public we drew 
lots of stares and strange looks. McMillan was always 
very careful about how we would enter restaurants and 
things, and I wasn’t accustomed to that. He still has a 
tendency sometimes to . . . oh, he always uses the front 
door, but he’s looking around to see who’s there and how 
many blacks are working. I think he was trying to be 
protective of me. He had been married before, and I 
think they had had some problems with disapproving 
people. He didn’t want me to go through any of that, and 
I never did. A lot of things happened to me out in public, 
but nothing that I couldn’t handle myself—strange looks 
didn’t bother me at all, because I really wasn’t aware 
diat he was black. Nor did I know he was so prominent. 
Every place we would go he would know everyone, and 
I was pleased that he would introduce me as his fiancee. 

McMillan would take me to shows and horse races 
and championship boxing matches. I had never been to 
a big heavyweight fight before, and he always had the 
best seats, the best of everything, and we’d sit right down 
front in these marvelous seats. The first time he took me 
to one we went early and sat down, and I could watch 
eveiybody come in. At that time it was not like it is now: 
everybody dressed up to do things in Las Vegas. People 
had come from overseas and from New York and Detroit 
and Indianapolis, and there were all these black men in 
what looked like zoot suits. One would be dressed in light 



164 


Fighting Back 


purple and one in pink and one in yellow, with big hats 
on and with girls on their arms. Well, it was the best 
show I had ever seen! I just couldn’t get enough of it. It 
was like going to a stage show. McMillan didn’t care 
much for my enthusiasm, but t hat was the first time after 
we got together that I was conscious of race. I was just 
brought up differendy. It was exciting to see how the rest 
of the world lived. 

I had been around other races, but not blacks. I’d 
been raised, of course, in the San Joaquin Valley, around 
Armenians and Japanese and Mexicans and other people 
who were not Caucasian, but I had never known any 
blacks. I just thought everyone was an individual. Before 
I met McMillan, I’d taken in a roommate named Everleen 
Ford. She happened to be black, but I just thought 
nothing at all about it. We worked together, and I guess 
I was accustomed to Everleen. We worked so hard and 
such long hours that I really didn’t have much time, 
except for flying, to do other things, and we didn’t do 
much together; I really didn’t think of her as black, 
either. 

McMillan and I got married on June 20, 1964. He 
wanted to get married on a Saturday night to conform 
with ethnic tradition—he said that’s the night when 
people go out and celebrate. When we started talking 
about getting a marriage license he wanted to go over to 
the marriage license bureau about midnight, and that 
struck me as strange. Why would anybody want to go at 
twelve o’clock to get a marriage license? Well, it was so 
nobody would be around to see a black man with a white 
woman, because there was a miscegenation law that said 



Follow Your Heart: Marie’s Story 


165 


that blacks and whites could not many. Mac used to be 
veiy, veiy careful. We would chive to Los Angeles so he 
could attend the conferences of the Urban League, and 
he was always veiy careful about where we would stay 
and about getting a reservation. (He used to kid me 
about: the federal “white slavery” law and transporting 
white women over state lines.) I understood why he 
thought he had to be so cautious, but I didn’t believe it 
was necessary. 

McMillan’s previous wife had friends in the black 
community, and he didn’t want me to have the same 
friends and die same experiences. Of course, I was always 
busy working, so the only time that I would meet black 
people and his friends was when we’d go to meetings or 
social events or something, and I never had any problem. 
I didn’t know them veiy well, and I didn’t have much 
time to spend in the black community, actually. I didn’t 
have much free time to pursue anything like that. I can 
remember the first political club that I joined—it was a 
women’s Democratic club, and the majority of the 
members were Afro-Americans. At that time we wore 
hats and gloves and things, and the women were veiy 
pleasant and veiy accepting of me. Now that I look back 
on it, I suppose they didn’t have any choice, but I loved 
to meet them and they loved to meet me. 

McMillan would get threats. People would call him 
and threaten him, and I got a few calls at the house. 
They’d say, “Stay away from that nigger,” you know. 
“What are you doing with that black guy?” I’d just hang 
up. McMillan would say, “Don’t worry, don’t pay any 
attention to it,” but he would get calls at the office that 



166 


Fighting Back 


concerned him. He would tell me, “Now, I want you to 
take care because I had a call today.” He might say, “I 
want you to be careful about starting the car,” or some¬ 
thing like that. He’s always done most of his NAACP 
business at die office, and he would get these calls. Then 
the car of my attorney, Bill Coulthard, was blown up, 
and after that I was veiy concerned for myself and began 
to be afraid that someone would do something. My 
brother, Jim Stever, taught me how to check my car 
before starting it. I still do. 

After we’d been married a while, people just 
accepted us, I guess. We did things that eveiybody 
wanted to do, but nobody did but us. We always drove 
sports cars, and we were both pilots, and we took a lot of 
trips to interesting places. We’d fly everywhere; we’d fly 
down to Cabo San Lucas for weekends, to Catalina 
Island, to Acapulco, the Bahamas .... We went every¬ 
where and did everything we wanted to do, and after our 
son Jeff was bom we always took him with us —I would 
never leave him. So we did all of these things, and 
eveiybody just loved to hear what we did and how and 
where we did it. 

After about ten years or so of marriage, I started 
getting a different sort of call—calls from both white and 
black women about mixed marriages. Young people 
wanting to get married, and they had heard about our 
marriage . . . young women wanting to know if I had 
had any problems, and asking me to advise them 
whether or not they should get married. Then I really 
knew that we had something different. And it was 
different. The first time one called, I said, “How did you 
get my name?” She said, “Well, I was down at the 




“After we had been married awhile, 
people just accepted us, I guess.” 











Follow Your Heart: Marie’s Story 


167 


funeral home, and they said I should give you a call. 1 am 
very much in love with this black man, and everybody 
tells me that I have to be careful.” I told her to follow her 
heart. I did what my heart told me to do, and Eve had 
the most wonderful marriage that anybody could have. 
I kept thinking that they would call me back later to tell 
me what had happened, but I never heard from any of 
them again. 

In 1969 we went back to Nashville to attend the 
twenty-fifth anniversary reunion of McMillan’s gradu¬ 
ating class at Meharry Medical College. We also spent a 
day in Memphis just so he could show me the deep 
South. He said, “I want you to know.” He wanted me to 
see how they had had separate drinking fountains ... all 
the apparatus of segregation. And I saw “sugar hill.” 
That was where affluent white people lived, and when 
blacks made it professionally or financially, they moved 
to “sugar hill.” 

Even after we married I did not spend much time on 
the Westside, but McMillan knew very interesting black 
people all over the country, and the people I saw at 
meetings in Los Angeles, San Francisco, Atlanta, Detroit, 
Nashville, and who came to visit us in Las Vegas were all 
educated people, professionals. We fit right in with them, 
and I loved all of them. We just got along famously. 
Things have changed in the last thirty-five years: now 
there are many black professional people in Las Vegas, 
but there were only a few back then. 

When we married in 1964, each of us had two 
children from previous marriages. Then we had a son 



168 


Fighting Back 


together in 1966, Jeffrey Bernard McMillan. All 
McMillan’s children were JBMs. His name is James Bates 
McMillan, and he named his first son James Bates 
McMillan, and his daughter was Jarmilla Bernadette 
McMillan. So when we had a son, he had to be a JB. Our 
kids never had any problems due to our interracial 
marriage that I knew about. Of course we always lived in 
the same house and they went to the same schools. 
Perhaps Jeff has had a few problems, but he hasn’t 
talked about them to me. He may have talked to his dad 
when I wasn’t around. 

When we were first married, the civil rights struggle 
occupied a large part of McMillan’s life. He handled most 
of it from his office, but he didn’t keep me out of it, and 
as we had people come over I became more and more 
aware of what was happening. I’d be there when he and 
Dave Hoggard were planning how they were going to do 
things, and I’d try to interject my thoughts. I don’t know 
how much diey listened to me—at the time they thought 
that only blacks should have a say in these things. (Of 
course, any meetings they had with the mayor or any¬ 
body else in power had to be integrated if they were 
going to get anything done.) They didn’t listen to me on 
the bank issue, and I think they were not successful 
because they wouldn’t accept my advice. 

After the Moulin Rouge agreement, McMillan very 
much wanted to start a bank to be controlled by blacks. 
He wanted black entrepreneurs and businessmen to have 
access to capital—a black bank and savings and loan 
company would ensure that they wouldn’t be discrimi¬ 
nated against through redlining, which had occurred in 
so many other institutions. But after you get a charter 



Follow Your Heart: Marie’s Story 


169 


you have to raise so much money to open a bank, and I 
suggested that he make it an integrated bank. He said, 
“This needs to be controlled by blacks.” Well, it’s 
impossible to raise that much money without getting 
whites involved, so in the end the stockholders were 
integrated, but the bank never happened. There have 
been several other things that I’ve seen go that same way. 
When you have black pride, you want to ensure that 
your people are protected, but it won’t work without 
integration. I would say to him, “Look, you and I are 
integrated. Isn’t this good?” 

“Oh yes, but that’s not the same.” 

It is the same, and I still think so. But he still thinks 
his way is best. 

Over the years Mac’s taken at least five other dentists 
into his dental office to relieve the burden of his practice 
so he could get some time off; but instead, he stays there 
and they take a vacation and he has to cover for them. So 
he never gets a vacation. Then they open their own 
practice, and he gives them half of his patients. Then his 
patients build up again because he’s honest and is a good 
dentist, and he gets a full house again, so he’ll take 
somebody else in. He works harder and harder, and I 
say, “Now’s the time to quit.” But he won’t. 

McMillan has the biggest, kindest heart of anyone 
I’ve ever met, except our son Jeff. He’s a softy. But he’s 
very strict with his family—he thinks it takes a strong 
father to make a good family. McMillan raised his first 
two children almost by himself, and he had to be 
involved. But there’s a difference between how fathers 
get involved and how mothers get involved. When we 



170 


Fighting Back 


were first married, James and Jeri were in high school, 
and I went to every debate that James was ever in. He 
was a tremendous debater—I can remember when he 
debated with Frankie Sue Del Papa, who is now our 
attorney general. I’d say, “McMillan, you have to come 
hear James speak.” And he’d say, “No. Mothers do that.” 
He had meetings planned and things to do ... . He’s a 
strong family man, but he thinks differently about his 
family than I do; there’s just a difference. Perhaps it’s the 
way we were brought up. He was brought up by his 
mother, who was a strong person, and I believe that he 
thought that as long as I was involved, I was the main 
person to take care of the family. 

I was so proud of James B. at that time—he would 
introduce me to people as his mother. We were so close 
when he was in school, and I was so proud of him. Jeri 
graduated the year McMillan and I were married, and my 
friend Everleen and I designed and made her senior ball 
gown. It was pink and strapless, and I just tried to outdo 
myself to make the most beautiful senior ball gown that 
any young girl ever had. 

Sometimes I don’t think I’ll ever get to what I want 
to tell you about. At that time, you see, we had to keep 
two houses .... We had the most terrific married life 
that anybody ever had, but we kept two houses for years. 
Mac was a veiy strong family man, but it was in a way 
that was different from the way most Caucasians would 
think. It was different. And it appears to me now that 
this is different about black people. When we met, Mac 
lived on die Westside at 524 Wyatt, and I lived where we 
live now. Fhs mother was sick with Parkinson’s disease, 
and she and her husband lived with him and he sup- 



Follow Your Heart: Marie’s Story 


171 


ported them. Then when we married he moved in with 
me, and his mother and stepfather stayed in his house on 
Wyatt. My children were away at school in Europe, but 
his children were with him, and I wanted us all to live 
like a family; but he wanted one of his children to stay 
with Granny all of the time. That was just one of the 
stipulations he made—that was their duty. So they took 
turns staying with us: Jeri would stay with Granny for a 
while, and then James would stay with Granny for a 
while. But they didn’t like to stay with Granny. I think 
they thought that I was the one that didn’t want them 
with us, but I always wanted a large family. I loved 
children, especially them. 

My children were named Jack and Michelle. Michelle 
died in an automobile accident at age twenty-four in 
Connecticut. She was Mac’s favoiite; he was just crazy 
about her. She had an IQ in the genius class, she was a 
swimmer, and I don’t know ... he and Michelle just hit 
it off and he always loved her. She was going to be a 
linguist. She went to school in Switzerland, and she 
spoke French, Italian, and Spanish, and she could pick 
up languages easily. Jeff speaks Spanish and has that 
talent also. When he was bora I was forty years old and 
McMillan was almost fifty, and we discussed many times 
how unfortunate it was that we weren’t married earlier, 
because I think we might have had twelve children. He 
would have liked that also, and we would have had a 
strong family, because I would have been a strong 
mother. I always insisted that we all have dinner 
together, and we would talk and discuss books and 
people and travel and things like that. But one of his 
children always had to stay with Granny. 



172 


Fighting Back 


Mac was a strong father and he took care of disci¬ 
plining James and Jeri. He was always very strict with 
them. I guess he thought he had to be because I wasn’t so 
strict. He’d been through all of this civil rights stuff, 
trying to raise children at the same time, so they hadn’t 
had an ideal home life. I could see that, and I tried to 
make up for it. Mac wanted them to go to church, be 
clean, go to school; but other things, like saving .... 
Mac was pretty easy with money. I’ve heard people tell 
him, “You wouldn’t have a dime to your name if it 
weren’t for Marie,” but McMillan and I’ve put money in 
lots of things that went bad. We spent more money than 
most people ever earn in their whole lives. We’ve thrown 
it away, given it away, loaned it and done fun things with 
it, and we could die tomorrow and we wouldn’t care. 

Mac likes independent women. Of course, he knows 
I will always do and say die right thing; he’s sure of that, 
so he lets me do what I want and he supports every one 
of my projects. But he’s a male chauvinist. Although he 
loves his home, he would never do anything around, the 
home. He has no idea whatsoever what that consists of. 
He’s always busy, always has meetings, and he simply 
doesn’t have time; and he knows I’ll do it or call someone 
to have it done. I’ve never asked him to lift a hand. Mac’s 
just from another era. On the other hand, people think 
I’m the luckiest woman in the entire world because I can 
do anything I want and he is veiy encouraging. They’ll 
say, “Well, my husband won’t let me do that.” 

Together, we made a formidable team. McMillan had 
these forward-thinking plans and he could predict how 
diey would or could affect the situation. I, in turn, could 




Christmas 1967, Marie holding Jeff, 
flanked by Michelle (1.) and Jeri (r.). 



Jack (holding Jeff) and James, 1968. 

















Follow Your Heart: Marie’s Story 


173 


cany out projects, write, and take care of the details and 
paperwork. One such project was our acquisition of land 
for fanning in California. Mac had gone there with his 
football team in college, and he’d seen the orange groves, 
fruit trees and farm land and told himself that one day 
he would own some. When we would fly over to visit my 
family, we began to acquire orchards and raw land in 
plots that were adjacent to one another, and eventually 
we ended up with a large farm. Managing the farm 
became my job. 

One time we bought an orange grove that was next 
to some land that we owned. In the center of the grove 
was a lake with an island in the middle. Pine trees grew 
on it, and we called it Christmas Tree Island. There was 
a small cabin on it which became the center of operations 
for our properties, and that was where I stayed. We 
developed our acreage and planted over ten varieties of 
plums, two varieties of nectarines and two varieties of 
oranges. Eventually we had so much fruit that it became 
difficult to transport it to an outside packing house, so 
our son, Jack, took a year off to help me develop and 
build a packing house on the property. After that, 
McMillan Ranches packed their own fruit. This was just 
one of the ideas that McMillan tried. 

McMillan has to be the greatest man I have ever 
known, and die expression, “born thirty years too soon” 
is 100 percent accurate in describing him. When I first 
met him, I could see that he wanted something bigger 
than most of us can even envision. He still does. He’s still 
veiy concerned about: civil rights and improving the lives 
of black people in this country, but he has been frus- 



174 


Fighting Back 


trated by the slow pace of change. Many of the hopes and 
ideas that he had for his people more than thirty years 
ago, and the ways to implement them, are just now being 
tiled and going into effect. He was just born too soon for 
his time. Few people think like he does now—most just 
aren’t concerned about what’s going to happen to blacks 
and other minorities. That saddens him. If McMillan 
doesn’t do it, I don’t know who will; and he doesn’t have 
the time left to do it. 



Index 


A 

A-Tech High School, 131 
Aberdeen, Mississippi, 1, 3 
Academy of Performing 
Aits, 130 

Afro-American Bank, 
112-115, 168-169 
American Red Cross, 10, 
53-54, 58, 60 
Anderson Dairy, 81-82 
Anderson, Jim, 128-129 
Aim Arbor, Michigan, 25- 
26 

Army Specialized Train¬ 
ing Corps, 46-48, 52 


B 

Bailey, William H. “Bob,” 
79, 84, 94, 97, 109, 
115,141 


Baker, C. D., 75 
Baptists, 12, 146 
Baling, Walter S., 85 
Battle of the Bulge, 59 
Bell, Haley, 31-32, 47 
Bennett, Harry, 38-39 
Bilile, Alan, 85 
Binion, Lester B. “Benny,” 
100 

Billion’s Horseshoe Club, 
99-100 

“Black John,” 18 
Black Muslims, 36, 140- 
141 

Black Power, 144-146 
Bleach, Larry, 25 
Boulder Dam. See Hoover 
Dam 

Bramlet, Al, 101, 111 
Brookman, Eileen, 79 
Bruner, Andy, 108 
Bunker, Wendell, 83-84 



176 


Index 


C 

Cahlan, Albert E., 92 
Cahlan, John F., 92 
Calcutta, India, 52-55, 58 
Camp Shanks, New York, 
53 

Cannon, Howard W., 85- 

86 

Carlisle, Pennsylvania, 
48-49 

Cash, Eva Marie, 159-160 
Catholics, 6, 26, 29, 39, 
119,150 

Charity, Buddy, 10-12 
Cliiang Kai-shek, 

Madame, 60 
Chicago, Illinois, 60-61, 
119 

China, 59-60 
Claiborne, Harry, 86 
Clark Comity Commis¬ 
sion, 132 

Clark County School 
Board, 134-135 
Clark, Donald, 79, 82, 97, 
104, 108, 109, 127- 
129, 141 

Cole, Hannah, 160 
Communists, 35, 39, 101 
Connor, Eugene “Bull,” 
121,148 

Crozier, Helen Lamb, 83 
Crozier, Oscar, 74-75, 95- 
98 


D 

Dalitz, Morris B. “Moe,” 
155-156 

Dallas, Texas, 148 
Daly, Jack, 161, 162, 171, 
173 

Daly, Michelle “Shelly,” 
161, 162, 171 
Dearborn, Michigan, 17 
Del Papa, Frankie Sue, 
170 

Democrats, 41-42, 43-44, 
101, 104, 111, 117- 
118, 119-120, 121, 
141-142, 149 
Denton, Ralph, 108, 111 
Detroit, Michigan, 10, 17, 
47,51,64, 67, 78 
Diggs, Charles, Jr., 78 
Dixiecrats, 117 
Dutchman, 32-33 


E 

Eight Mile Road, 64 
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 
118 

El Capitan, 110 
Entratter, Jack, 140 
Evaschevski, Forest, 26 
Exeter, California, 160 



Index 


177 


F 

Farrakhan, Louis, 140- 
141 

Faust, Dr., 71 
Federal Bureau of Investi¬ 
gation, 14, 38-39 
Fisk University, 46, 78 
Foley, Tom, 113 
Ford, Everleen, 164, 170 
Ford, Hemy, 9, 17, 38, 43 
Ford Motor Company, 26, 
31,36-39, 43,45, 46, 
143 

Fort Benjamin Harrison, 
66, 69 

Fort Huachuca, Arizona, 
49,51-52 

49th Ordnance Battalion, 
55 

Foxy’s, 74 


G 

Gay, Dunbar, 9-10, 12 
Gay, James III “Jimmy,” 
100-101, 104, 131 
Gay, Sam, 1-4, 9 
Gay, Sam, Jr., 9-10 
Ghandi, Mahatma, 147- 
148 

Girard Boarding School, 
5-6 

Goldwater, Bert, 109 


Gragson, Oran K., 83-85, 
91, 93-94, 97, 137 
Greensboro, North 
Carolina, 118 
Greenspun, Herman M. 
“Hank,” 92, 97, 122, 
129, 139-140 
Gurkha Rifles, 55 


H 

Hamtramck, Michigan, 
10-13, 17,31-32, 42, 
63 

Harlem, New York, 4-5 
Harmon, Harley, 132-133 
Harmon, Tommy, 26 
Hawkins, Frank, 133-134 
Highland Dairy, 81-82 
Hoggard, David, 78-79, 
80, 88, 92, 97, 99-100, 
104, 108, 122, 127- 
128, 141, 168 
Hoggard (Mabel) School, 
131 

Hoover Dam (also known 
as Boulder Dam), 73, 
78, 104 

Hoover, J. Edgar, 146 
Houston, Dr., 32 
Humphrey, Hubert, 117 



178 


Index 


I 

Inkster, Michigan, 47 


J 

Jackson, George, 23, 27 
Japanese, 35-36 
Jarlson, Alan, 92 
Jerry’s Nugget, 138 
Jews, 139-141 
Johnson, Leo, 83 
Johnson, Lubertha, 78-79, 
80, 104, 128 

Johnson, Lyndon B., 121- 
125, 148 


K 

Kanchurpura, India, 55- 
59 

Katz (Edith and Lloyd) 
Elementary School, 135 
Kellar, Charles, 104, 109, 
128-130 

Kennedy, John F., 119- 
120, 122, 124-125 
Kennedy, Robert F. 

“Bobby,” 120 
King, Martin Luther, 87, 
119, 143, 148 
Knight, Sarann, 101, 102, 
111, 115 

Korean War, 65-66, 87 


Kowalski, Mr., 20-21 
Ku Klux Klan, 4, 46, 87, 
94 


L 

Las Vegas Review-Journal., 
92 

Las Vegas Sun , 92 
List, Robert, 133, 160 


M 

McCall, Connie, 70 
McCall, Quannah, 70-71 
McCants, Arthur, 78-79, 
104, 133 

McCants Senior Citizens 
Apartments, 133 
McMillan, Doleeta (nee 
Moore), 46-47, 49-51, 
63-64 

McMillan, James Bates, 

Jr., 63-66, 168, no- 
172 

McMillan (James B.) 

School, 134-135 
McMillan, James Milton, 2 
McMillan, Jarmilla 
Bernadette “Jeri,” 63, 
64, 66,168, 170-172 
McMillan, Jeffrey Bernard, 
166, 168, 169, 171 



Index 


179 


McMillan, Magnolia 
“Micki” (nee 
Rutherford), 69, 155 
McMillan, Marie Stever- 
Daly, 153, 156-174 
McMillan, Rosalie (nee 
Gay), 1-7, 9, 11, 13-15, 
18, 21,24, 32,35,41- 
42, 47, 63, 66, 170-171 
McMillan, Theodore, 2 
Malone, George, 85 
Meharry School of 
Dentistxy, 46-47, 52, 
77-78, 167 

Memphis, Tennessee, 50- 
51, 167 

Miller, Abe, 99-100 
The Missile , 80-81 
Moran, John, 134 
Moulin Rouge, 68, 69-70, 
71, 84, 97, 140, 153, 
155, 168 

Muhammad, Elijah, 36 


N 

Nashville, Tennessee, 46- 
47 

National Association for 
the Advancement of 
Colored People 
(NAACP), 43, 46, 73, 
77-112, 122, 127-131, 
133, 138, 139, 145, 
166 


National Youth Adminis¬ 
tration, 26 

Nevada Black Chamber of 
Commerce, 115 
Nevada Board of Medical 
Examiners, 133 
Nevada Commission on 
Human Relations, 108 
Nevada Equal Rights 
Commission, 100, 108- 
110, 131 

Nevada League of Voters, 
83-84, 91, 122 
Nevada Resort Associa¬ 
tion, 129 

Nixon, Richard M., 119 

O 

O’Callaghan, Mike, 87- 
89,133 

Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma, 49-50 
Orientals, 138 

P 

Pearson, William, 84 
Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, 5, 19 
Philpot, Emery, 6-7, 10, 
12-15,24 

Pontiac, Michigan, 9-10, 

12 



180 


Index 


Powell, Colin, 149 
Pullman Porters Union, 
45-46 

Purclue University, 28-29 


Q 

Quinn, Father, 29-30 


R 

Randolph, A. Philip, 45- 
46 

Ray, Clarence, 79 
Redman, Ophelia, 1, 3 
Reno, Nevada, 101-102, 
110 

Republicans, 41, 101-102, 
117-118, 121, 141-142, 
148-150 

Roosevelt, Franklin 
Delano, 41-44 
Rudiak, George, 79, 139 


S 

St. George, Utah, 113 
Sal Sagev, 99-100 
Sawyer, Grant, 97-98, 
107-113, 128-129, 
131-132 

Scott, Eddie, 102 
Sharp, Nolan, 99-100 


Shaw, Mrs., 74 
Simmons, Rev. John L., 
102 

Smith, Alfred E., 41 
South Rend, Indiana, 28- 
29 

Southern Christian 

Leadership Conference, 
118-119, 145 
Stever, James, 162 
Stever, “Old Renton,” 159 


T 

Thomas, Clarence, 142, 
149-150 

Tymms, Nancy, 9-10 


U 

United Auto Workers 
(UAW), 36-39, 43 
University of Detroit, 25- 
31,45 

University of Michigan, 
25-26 


V 

Valley View Golf Club, 
104 

The Voice , 81, 122 
Voting Rights Act, 148 



Index 


181 


W 

Walker, Prentiss, 112 
Ward, Emory, 79 
Ward, Willis, 26 
West, Charles, 64-65, 67- 
68, 71, 74, 78, 79, 81, 
83, 111, 122, 128, 140 
Westside (Las Vegas, 
Nevada), 67, 71,74, 

80, 81,83,85, 87, 102, 
107,114, 130-131, 

138, 170 

Whipple, Reed, 93-94, 
137 

Williams, Aaron, 104 
Williams, Joe, 102 
Wilson, Woodrow, 78-79, 
97, 108, 141 
Winter Olympics, 1960, 
110-111 

Woodard, Beitha, 102 
World War II, 45-61 




Fighting Back 


Camera-ready master composed and printed 
at the University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Bauer Bodoni, using WordPerfect 6.1 for Windows 
and a Hewlett Packard LaserJet IHSi printer. 



