Arthur Bernard: 

Nevada Mine Inspector and Prison Warden 


Interviewee: Arthur Bernard 
Interviewed: 1999 
Published: 2004 
Interviewer: Victoria Ford 
UNOHP Catalog #196 


Description 


Art Bernard was born in 1910 in Italy to American parents and first came to the United States at the age of five, in 
1915. He lived with his mother and stepfather in Utah and learned a variety of languages early in his childhood. By 
the age of eleven, he decided to strike out on his own and work in a sheep camp. 

From then on, Art’s life is the story of Nevada during the 1900s. He worked in several of Nevada’s major industries, 
starting as a camp tender for a sheepherder, and then served a stint as a ranch hand. When he discovered that mining 
paid more than ranching, and even though he was still underage, he finagled a job in the Bristol underground mine 
at Pioche, Nevada. Along the way he became a prizefighter with a reputation as the Nevada boxer to beat—in or 
out of the ring. Later he traveled the state, first as a deputy inspector of mines and later as the head of the agency 
charged with overseeing mining safety. 

Art rubbed shoulders—or more accurately hunted, fished and mined—with some of the top political figures in the 
state. Most became his friends. When his friend Charlie Russell was elected governor, Art accepted an appointment 
as warden of the Nevada State Prison. Although the position started out as a temporary favor for a friend, the 
prison’s problems proved to be an interesting challenge, but no match for the Nevada miner with a common sense 
approach to finding solutions. 

Art Bernard agreed to give his oral history in mining as part of the university’s statewide mining oral history project. 
However, his life covered much more of Nevada’s history beyond mining. Art is an experienced storyteller, and his 
descriptions of various small town mining characters at Pioche are laced with humor and compassion. Bar-room 
brawls, mucking contests, and mining accidents without nearby medical aid—all gave way to stories about some 
of the inner workings of Nevada politics in the 1950s and 1960s. 

If there is a stereotype of a true Western gentleman in Nevada, Art Bernard fits the mold. He is an independent 
thinker, a man of courage who still meets life straight on and learns from every experience. He was the Nevadan who 
hunted deer and ducks, taking along his dogs and friends every autumn. He measured other men by his own high 
standards of hard work and honesty. Art is also a family man, who is devoted to his wife, children, and grandchildren. 



Arthur Bernard 






V -V ’ 

_ 


Arthur Bernard 

(Photograph courtesy of Special Collections, 
University of Nevada-Reno Library) 






Arthur Bernard 


NEVADA MINE INSPECTOR 
AND PRISON WARDEN 


From oral history interviews 
conducted by Victoria Ford 

Edited by Kathleen M. Coles 


University of Nevada 
Oral FIistory Program 





Copyright 2003 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 2003. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 

Director: R. T. King 
Assistant Director: Mary A. Larson 
Production Manager: Kathleen M. Coles 
Text Designer: Linda Sommer 

Production Assistants: Beth Opperman, Kathryn Wright-Ross 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface vii 

Introduction ix 

1 Growing Up in Utah 1 

2 Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 9 

3 Inspectingthe Mines 45 

4 Prison Warden Appointment 81 

5 Executions 87 

6 Drugs and Escapes 101 

7 Conflict with Labor Unions 115 


8 


Riots 


121 



VI 


Contents 


9 

Inmate Work Program 

133 

10 

Court of Last Resort 

157 

11 

Bank-Robbing Barber 

175 

12 

A Warden's Philosophy 

183 

13 

Boxing Program 

189 

14 

Falsified Evidence 

195 

15 

Drunk and Disorderly 

213 

16 

Murderers 

221 

17 

Stool Pigeons and Trustees 

233 

18 

Finnegan 

241 

19 

Lumber Yard 

251 

20 

Nevada Industrial Commission 

257 

Index 


271 



Preface 


S ince 1965 the University of Nevada Oral History 
Program (UNOHP) has been collecting an eyewit¬ 
ness account of Nevada's remembered past. While there 
is no standard chronicler profile nor rigid approach to 
interviewing, each oral history plumbs human memory 
to gain a better understanding of the past. Following the 
precedent established by Allan Nevins at Columbia Uni¬ 
versity in 1948 (and perpetuated since by academic 
programs such as ours throughout the English-speaking 
world) these manuscripts are called oral histories. Some 
confusion surrounds the meaning of the term. To the 
extent that these "oral" histories can be read, they are 
not oral, and while they are useful historical sources, 
they are not themselves history. Still, custom is a power¬ 
ful force; historical and cultural recordsthat originate in 
tape-recorded interviews are almost uniformly labeled 
"oral histories," and our program follows that usage. 

This transcript has been lightly edited for readabil¬ 
ity. The UNOHP uses certain editorial conventionsto add 



Preface 


viii 


context to written representations of the spoken word. 
Amusement or laughter is represented with [laughter] at 
the end of the sentence; and ellipses are used, not to 
indicate that material has been deleted, but to indicate 
that a statement has been interrupted or is incomplete . .. 
or there is a pause for dramatic effect. For readers who 
are interested in examining the unaltered records, cop¬ 
ies of the tape-recorded interviews can be accessed by 
appointment at the UNOHP's reading room in Reno. 

As with all oral history projects, it should be noted 
that Art Bernard has recorded his remembered past, and 
whilethe program can vouch that this is a true represen¬ 
tation of his recollections as provided to the interviewer, 
memory is never flawless. Readers should exercise the 
same caution used when consultinggovernment records, 
newspaper accounts, diaries, and other primary sources 
of historical information. 

UNOHP 

December 2003 



Introduction 


A rt Bernard's ability to learn a variety of lan¬ 
guages early in his childhood predicted two 
important character traits of a westerner—a quick mind 
and a willingness to meet challenges head-on. Born in 
Italy to American parents, his father deserted the family 
soon after Art was born. Art fi rst came to the Un ited States 
at the age of five, in 1915, and lived with his mother and 
stepfather in Utah. By the age of eleven, he decided to 
strike out on his own and work in a sheep camp, but 
without mentioning it to his mother. 

From then on, Art's life is the story of Nevada during 
the 1900s. He worked in several of Nevada's major in¬ 
dustries, starting as a camp tender for a sheepherder, 
and then served a stint as a ranch hand. When he dis¬ 
covered that mining paid more than ranching, and even 
though he was still underage, he finagled a job in the 
Bristol underground mine at Pioche, Nevada. Along the 
way he became a prizefighter with a reputation as the 



X 


Introduction 


Nevada boxer to beat—in or out of the ring. Later he 
traveled the state, first as a deputy inspector of mines 
and later as the head of the agency charged with over¬ 
seeing mining safety. 

Art rubbed shoulders—or more accurately hunted, 
fished and mined—with some of the top political figures 
in the state. Most became his friends. When his friend 
Charlie Russell was elected governor, Art accepted an 
appointment as warden of the Nevada State Prison. 
Although the position started out as a temporary favor 
for a friend, the prison's problems proved to be an inter¬ 
esting challenge, but no match for the Nevada miner with 
a common sense approach to finding solutions. 

Art Bernard and I first met at his ranch-style home in 
Carson City in August 1999. He agreed to give his oral 
history in mining as part of the university's statewide 
mining oral history project. Tall, trim, and alert at 89, 
Art's life covered so much more of Nevada's history be¬ 
yond miningthat we spent many pleasant afternoons on 
the sun porch at his home taping his first-hand experi¬ 
ences of Nevada from nearly nine decades of living here. 
Art proved to be an experienced storyteller, and his 
descriptions of various small town mining characters at 
Pioche are laced with humor and compassion. Bar-room 
brawls, mucking contests, and miningaccidents without 
nearby medical aid—all gave way to stories about some 
of the inner workings of Nevada politics in the 1950s 
and 1960s. 

Ifthereisastereotypeofatruewestern gentleman in 
Nevada, Art fits the mold. He is an independent thinker, 
aman of courage who still meets life straight on and learns 
from every experience. He was the Nevadan who hunted 
deer and ducks, taking along his dogs and friends every 
autumn. He measured other men by his own high stan- 



Introduction 


XI 


dardsof hard work and honesty. Art is also a family man, 
who is devoted to his wife, children, and grandchildren. 
This oral history is his story. 

VICTORIA FORD 
December 2003 




_1 

Growing Up in Utah 


1 /ictoria ford: Today is August 16,1999. My name 
w is Victoria Ford. I 'm here wi th Art Bernard in his 
home in Carson City. Art, let's start and have you tell 
mejusta littlebitaboutyour background. Tell me where 
you were born and raised. 


Arthur Bernard: I was born in Italy on April 27, 
1910. 


And how did you come to be in Italy? 

Well, my mother and father were married in a place 
called Delzell, Illinois, and his folks lived in an area not 
far from a place called Rocca Corneta, which is about 
fifty mi les from Bologna. They were very wealthy people. 
They owned practically all the countryside. It was on 
the Reno River in Italy, and I'm tryingto figure out what 
the name of that little town is. 



2 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Well, it might come back to you, then. But they owned a 
lot of land in that area? 

Oh, much land. Much land. There were six boys and 
two girls in the family, and none of them ever worked. I 
don't know which ones were the last to die, because I 
was never close to the family. My dad left my mother. I 
was born shortly after they went to Italy and visited with 
his folks. And then he got a cockamamie excuse that he 
had to come back, that he was called into the service, 
and she never saw him again. He left her there, and we 
were there until I was five before we could make arrange¬ 
ments to get back. When we got back to Illinois in this 
same town, Delzell, she divorced my father. 

So, if you were there until you werefive, Italian must be 
your native language, then? 

I spoke Italian fluently. When my mother married my 
stepfather in Salt Lake City, Utah, we were continually 
moving from one mining camp to another, and most of 
the miners were foreigners: Italian, Mexican, Serbian, 
Swedes, Cousin J acks, Englishmen—every nationality. I 
naturally went to school and associated with all these 
foreign kids, and we visited from home to home. Most of 
these kids didn't want to speak their parents' tongue, for 
some reason. Never bothered me. I used to like to talk 
with their parents, and in their language. And I got so I 
knew practically every one of these foreign languages. 
Today, I can still remember a few words in various lan¬ 
guages, but not too well. 

There were Italians. In fact, my folks—after my 
mother married my stepfather who was also Italian— 
spoke Italian in the home amongst themselves. I got so I 



Growing Up in Utah 


3 


could speak Italian as well as they could. After I began 
working in the mines, everywhere I went, there were 
Italians as well as Swedes and all the other nationalities. 
I spoke Italian with these Italians, and they were so im¬ 
pressed with the fact that I could speak Italian that they 
helped me all they could. I mean, getting fluent in Ital¬ 
ian, again, was nothing. I got to the point where I not 
only spoke Italian—the fluent Italian language—but I 
knew every dialect of the Italians in Italy, and there's a 
lot of them. People in those days, from a town ten miles 
or so away from where they lived—they all spoke Ital¬ 
ian, but a different dialect. Some of the people in this 
one particular town had never been as far as the other 
town, and when they left, they came to America or to 
Australia or to South America, wherever they were going. 

I got to where I enjoyed speaking Italian. I knew every 
dialect. 

You learned it from the other miners? 

From the other miners. From the Tuscans, the 
Bergamasks, the Venitians, every dialect I knew. And they 
so enjoyed me speaking their dialect with them. They 
really thought this was something; they'd laugh and laugh. 
And I learned every song. I could sing it, I could read it, 
I could write it, I knew every dirty joke, [laughter] I thor¬ 
oughly enjoyed speaking, not only Italian, but the other 
languages that I learned, particularly when I was in 
Bingham, Utah, during World War I and going to school 
there. Most of the foreigners there were Serbians and 
Austrians, and I got pretty good at those languages, but I 
can't remember any of that anymore. As I say, I can speak 
a few words in one or another. 



4 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


In 1920, my stepfather, who was a mechanic and a 
miner, got a contract to drill an irrigation tunnel from a 
place known as Sanpete County. A man there, a rancher 
named Chris Larson, had thousands of acres of land but 
no water—I mean, not enough water to irrigate them. He 
somehow obtained water rights on the other side of the 
mountain and almost to the top of the mountain 
where .... Oh, I couldn't think now. The vertical dis¬ 
tance from one valley to the side that came down into 
this valley. But the tunnel length was .... I couldn't 
remember that exactly, either, but it was about a mile. 
He got a contract to drill a tunnel through there to pick 
up the water on one side and bring it into the other side. 

I think it took him better than a year to do that. 

By then he had made so many friends, and he was 
quite a mechanic on anything. Automobiles were com¬ 
ing along about then, and he was interested in working 
on automobiles. He got a job as a mechanic in the 
Hupmobile garage. That is not the name of the garage, 
but they had the Hupmobile agency. 

Did they sell Hupmobiles, too? 

Yes, they did. That and Model-T Fords. I grew up with 
the people there in Ephraim. We were the only gentiles 
in town. The rest were all Mormons, solid Mormons. I 
associated with those kids, whose families were either 
Swede or Danes or Norwegians. There, again, in visiting 
in their homes, the old folks spoke their language. The 
kids didn't want to. I would speak with their parents and 
enjoyed it, and 11 earned those languages. But in thistown 
of Ephraim, there was very little work. The only work 
was ranching, and I got into it. The kids there, when 
they were big enough to sit on a plow or drive a team of 



Growing Up in Utah 


5 


horses, they worked. Seeing a seven or eight or nine- 
year-old boy out drivingateam plowingwasnothing.The 
horses knew what to do, and all the boy had to do was sit 
on the plow, and the horses took care of the rest. But 
everyone had to work. 

And where did your mom and stepdad get married? 

They married in Salt Lake City. 

But they met in a mining town? 

They met at the mining camp of Ophir, Utah. 

How old were you when you started working on the 
ranches? 

I was about ten. When I was eleven, I decided to leave 
home, and I got a job as a camp tender at a sheep camp. 

I forgot to tell my mother that I was leaving, and I left 
and went up to this sheep camp. I had quite an experi¬ 
ence. If you read my book, I described that. I was going 
upthere with a stringof seven pack horses. Oneold mare 
had a colt, and he was scurrying around and bothering 
her. We were going up a steep side hill at an elevation of 
about ten thousand feet, and he pushed his mother off 
balance, and she rolled down the mountain. Well, the 
horses were tied nose to tail, and I had a whole mess of 
horses scrambling around trying to get up, and all the 
rock salt and groceries I had on those horses was scat¬ 
tered around the mountain. I was eleven years old. I was 
riding a very, very cool, calm horse, and he saved the 
day. I gathered what I could and packed up. I found this 
sheep camp where I was goingto, and I don't know how, 



6 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


but I managed it. I was there that time, I think, eleven 
days, and I got a spot of dysentery, and I had to go home. 
And that's the first time my mother knew where I'd been. 

I did some awful things to my mother when I was a kid. 

You were adventuring, yes? 

Yes. Anyway, I worked every summer on ranches. I 
herded sheep. When I was thirteen, I had an entire band 
of sheep, and I lambed it all alone while living in the 
camp wagon. I was the help. The boss's son was sup¬ 
posed to stay there and do the work, but he was busy 
chasing girls. He found out I could do the work, and I 
practically lambed a thousand head of sheep. I had sheep 
in the camp wagon, under the bed, in the bed, in the 
oven, anythingto keep them from freezingto death—for 
the lambs that the mother died. They were called "beeter" 
lambs. I don't know what that ever meant. I never tried 
to figure that out. But I did that, and I followed threshing 
machines. I pitched hay. I did everything in connection 
with ranching, but the pay was not much—if you got 
paid. They didn't always pay, the farmers you worked 
for. If you worked in the spring, they paid you when they 
sold the crops in the fall. If you worked in the fall, they 
paid you when they sold the lambs in the spring. It was 
kind of a vicious circle. And we, of course, knew that 
there were ranchers who were working in the mining 
towns, and they'd come back with fabulous stories about 
gettingfour and five dollars a day, and all of them with a 
new Model-T Ford. 

And how much were you making on the ranches? 



Growing Up in Utah 


1 


Oh, I got as high as thirty dollars a month as a camp 
tender, but the sheepherders themselves made from fifty 
to seventy-five. Labor around the farms was two to two 
dollars and a half a day for grown men. 





Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


S o you could make almost twice as much in the 
mines as at farming? 

Oh, yes. At least twice as much. But they couldn't all 
leave and go to the mines. Most of the men got married 
when they were very young, and they started having their 
children right away. They couldn't leave the farms. But 
myfriend Ray Nielson, whom we called Swede—his father 
was the town constable—and I sold our bicycles. I think 
we got ten dollars apiece, and we hitchhiked back to 
where I'd started school and where my mother met my 
stepfather. And we went there because I remembered 
the town and how to get there. 

So, Swede and I hitchhiked, and it was pretty tough 
in those days. There were very, very few automobiles 
and very, very few roads. Roads i n those days were mostly 
just wagon roads. Cars weren't very plentiful at that time. 
But we made it, and we finally got to Ophir, Utah. And 



10 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


we went to the collar of the mines in the morning. That's 
where they do the hiring. And to make it short, they told 
us to come back in about five years. So we had to leave 
Ophir, and we didn't have much money left. We'd been 
subsisting on stale donuts—we could get three or four or 
five for a nickel—for some time. And we got back to 
Stockton, Utah. There was one big mine there called the 
Honerein. From Ophir to Stockton was about fourteen 
miles. We walked it all. Never got a ride that time, and 
we got thereabout dusk. We were cold, very cold—it was 
in October. So we wound up down to the mine, and they 
had a big stable with horses and mules—they used horses 
and mules to draw their ore cars back and forth into the 
mines. 

Even though there were cars at this point, there were 
not engines and rails underneath in the mines yet? They 
were still using horses and mules? 

In many mines. Not all mines. Only in mines where 
they could get the animals into. Some mines, they did 
takethem underground and put them on a skip, which is 
a mine elevator, and takethem down to lower levels, but 
most of the animals were used on tunnels that started at 
the surface some place. 

So, about dark, we wound up . . . we knew that it was 
taboo to go into a barn, but we were cold. We had to do 
something, and we went in, got behind the mangers, and 
covered ourselves with hay. And we spent a very unrest¬ 
ful night. About five o'clock in the morning, an employee 
came in to feed the horses, and he found us. Naturally, 
he told us we were not supposed to be in there. It was 
strictly prohibited for anybody to be in the barnsfor fear 
of fire. In those days, hobos did a lot of traveling, and 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


11 


they slept wherever they could, and they all smoked. 
Many a barn went up in smokethen. So this was frowned 
upon. We told him of our problems, being short of funds, 
very short of funds, hungry, cold. He was an understand¬ 
ing young man, and he said, "Well, I'll tell you, I won't 
report you. You just stay here. And at seven o'clock, the 
boarding house will open." And at seven o'clock it was 
still pretty dark. He said, "You just walk in with all the 
miners. Don't act like you're a stranger. J ust go in with 
them, sit down. Nobody will notice you or pay any atten¬ 
tion to you. Get yourself a good breakfast." So we did 
that. Then he said, "And then, when you go to the office 
to rustle, don't tell them that you had breakfast." So we 
did that. We went in, and when they started bringing out 
the food, we thought this was our first trip to heaven. 
There was bacon, eggs, sausage, hot cakes, potatoes, big 
vats of coffee; and we loaded up. 

T h en after breakfast, we were goi n g to th e offi ce, an d 
I said, "The fellow told us not to tell them that we had 
breakfast, but I think we ought to thank these people, 
whether they knew we were having breakfast or not." 

Swede says, "No," he said, "let's do what we were 
advised and not get in trouble." 

We went into the office, and I assume it was the mine 
foreman sitting at his desk. There was a very handsome, 
big man talkingto him. He had English riding breeches, 
English riding boots. He was a man who I later knew. He 
was six feet high and weighed 190 pounds, had a black 
moustache. Very handsome man. We asked thisforeman, 
or whatever his title may have been, about a job, and he 
smiled and told us the same thing that they told us up in 
Ophir, "Come back in about five years. You kids are too 
young." I was fifteen and Swede was seventeen, but I 



12 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


looked the oldest, and I was the biggest. So he said, "We 
just couldn't hire you, but come back when you're older." 

We thanked him, and I said, "And I'd like to thank 
you for breakfast. We were hungry, and we went in with 
the miners, and we had breakfast. We can't pay you, but 
we might do you a favor some time." 

He said, "Think nothing of it, son." He said, "Glad to 
feed you." And as we were going out, this tall young man 
tapped me on the shoulder. 

He said, "J ust a minute." And he asked why I wanted 
to go to work in the mine, and before too long, he had 
my history. He said, "Well, I can't do any good for you 
now, but if you're still in the mood to work in a mine a 
year from now, and if you ever happen to be around 
Pioche, Nevada," he says, "you look me up. My name is 
J ack Beuhler." And he got a piece of paper and wrote it 
down. Hesays, "I'm goingdown thereto takeover a mine. 
I'll give you a job." 

So the foil owing year, I didn't fool around with Swede. 

I accumulated what money I could, and I finally hitch¬ 
hiked and made it to Caliente, Nevada, between 
automobiles, walking, and side-door Pullmans. And I got 
to Caliente, and it was the day before Labor Day, which 
didn't mean athingto me at that time. I learned that the 
train from there went to Pioche the following day, and I 
thought, "I don't know what I'll do here tonight. Maybe 
somebody's going to drive there. You can't tell." So I went 
into a saloon, one of the biggest ones I could see. It was 
called the Buckaroo Saloon, and it happened to belong 
to the county sheriff, a man named Charlie Culverwell. 
So, when I got up nerve enough to go up to the bar and 
ask the bartender, I explained my predicament, and I 
says, "I'm tryingto get to Pioche, and I was wondering if 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


13 


you know of anyone that's going to Piochethat I could go 
with." 

"Well," he says, "you're lucky." He said, "There's a 
fellow right here now, standing over there, and he has a 
cleaning department. And he comes down here and gets 
clothes and takes them back to Pioche and cleans them, 
delivers them back here. He'll begoingback pretty soon." 
The bartender called the man over, says, "Hey, there's a 
young fellow here looking for a ride to Pioche." 

"Sure," he says, "I'll take him." So, he turned to me 
and said, "I'm goingto be a few minutes yet gettingthings 
ready and getting these clothes piled up, and then we'll 
take off and go to Pioche." So we did, and he had a Star 
automobile, Star Touring. In those days, they were known 
as "High Gear, All Year." Snappy little car. It was so snappy 
that over this wavy, winding, dirt road to Pioche, I had to 
push it most of thetime up the grade. It didn't have power. 
It wasn't running very good. This car, if it had been in 
good workingcondition, would have sailed up those I ittle 
grades, but it didn't. Took us a longtimeto get to Pioche, 
and in the meantime, he was a man about thirty-five or 
so, and he got all my history, too. He said, "Tomorrow is 
Labor Day." He said, "You can't get a place to stay in 
town. There's absolutely no rooms, and it would be even 
hard for you to get in a restaurant to get something to 
eat. I'll see that you get something to eat, and I've got a 
room in the hotel there. If you want, you can sleep with 
me." 

"Well," I said, "that'sfine." So when wegotto Pioche, 
he told me where his room was in the Wyoming Hotel. 


And what was this fellow's name? 



14 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


His name was Pete Wadzagar. They called him 
Haywire Pete, and he was a character. I didn't know it 
yet, but I learned in years to come. His cleaning estab¬ 
lishment was a little corner in the Sagebrush Saloon, 
owned by a fellow named J ohnny Valente, with whom I 
became very well acquainted in years to come and had 
business dealings with. His cleaning outfit was a five- 
gallon can of some kind of fluid, and he'd dip the clothes 
in there, shake them around a little bit, wringthem out, 
hang them up to dry, and press them. He had a wood 
stove there with a big iron and an ironing board. Very 
primitive, but he did a pretty good job. But anyway, he 
says, "I'll be busy here. You go on down to the Wyoming 
Hotel." He showed me where it was, and he said, "My 
room is number eleven. You just go on up there, and I'll 
be down after a while when I get time, and I'll see that 
you get something to eat." 

So I went to the Wyoming Hotel. It was a big frame 
building, as all of the hotels in Pioche were and in most 
mining camps. I found the stairway—all the rooms were 
upstairs. I went up, and I found room number eleven, 
and I opened the door and went in, and I'd hardly got in 
there when someone else came in the room, and it hap¬ 
pened to be the landlady. She wanted to know what the 
hell I was doing in that room, and I told her that the 
fellow that rented the room told me that I could sleep 
with him that night until I could make arrangements to 
go to work. I was looking for a man who had promised 
me a job in a mine. She exploded. She says, "That bum 
hasn't paid his room rent for weeks and weeks! I should 
have kicked him out a longtime ago." I could tell by her 
accent that she was Italian. She was a woman, at that 
time about thirty-five, a very plain-lookingwoman, a very 
efficient-looking woman. I started talking Italian with her, 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


15 


and she sat and looked at me with her mouth open for a 
while. I gave her my history, and I told her that I had 
been promised a job, and that I needed a place to sleep, 
so Pete Wadzagar—I didn't know his name, but I knew it 
was Pete; the Wadzagar and Haywire Pete, I hadn't learned 
yet—had told methat I could sleep with him. I explained 
that I'd come to Piochewith him, hitchhiked with him. 
She says, "Well, you can't sleep with that guy. He's no 
good. I'll give you a room to yourself." 

I says, "I can't pay for a room." 

She says, "Nobody asked you to pay for it. You just 
come, and I'll show you where you're goingto sleep." All 
I had was a little kind of a knapsack bag in which I had 
what few things I had with me. 

When I saw Pete later on, I told him what had hap¬ 
pened, and I said, "I may have got you in trouble. I don't 
know." 

He says, "Oh, don't pay any attention to her. It's just 
her bark isworsethan her bite. She'sa good woman. She 
isn't going to throw me out," and she didn't. 

So I found out then that her name was Amelia 
Meselod, and that she and her husband owned and ran 
this so-called hotel. Her husband, at thetime, was in jail 
in Carson City. He had been caught bootlegging. Every 
once in a while, the bootleggers were expected to get 
caught and do a littletimeto makethe sheriff look good, 
who always advised them when the Prohies [Prohibition 
Agents] were coming, so there would be no booze around. 
But in order to allay suspicion, they all had to take their 
turns doing six months in jail. So her husband, at the 
time, was in jail. She had two daughters. The next morn¬ 
ing, I went uptown to explore. The town was just bulging 
with people. 



16 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


How many were there at that time? Do you know ? 

The population? I have no idea. There were probably 
2,000 people running around there, but not just from 
Pioche, from the surrounding country. They all came to 
Piochefor the celebration. This was Labor Day, and Labor 
Day is the day in mining camps. They have boxing con¬ 
tests or races, tug-of-war, anythingyou can think of. The 
two big events are the mucking contest, the drilling con¬ 
test, and the prize fights. So I went in, kind of slithered 
along with the population into the Sagebrush Saloon, and 
I found a place to sit inconspicuously on a bench along 
one of the walls. In fact, all the walls were lined with 
benches. In the back of the place was Pete Wadzagar's 
cleaning establishment and a restaurant. I sat down at 
this bench trying to figure out what all the hullabaloo 
was about, and what I was going to do, and when I was 
going to do it, and how I was going to do it. A little bit of 
a man camecripplingover—helooked likehehad a spring 
in his one leg. And he says, "Hello, kid." He said, "You 
hungry?" 

So I said, "No, not really." 

He says, "Thirsty?" 

"No," I says, "I'm not really." 

"Well," hesaid, "I'm Sport Watkins, and I've got cattle 
in the bank and money on the range, and if you need 
anything, you just call old Sport." He says, "Let me buy 
you a drink." 

"No, no," I says, "I really don't want to drink." 

"Come on," he says, "get in the groove of things." 
And he grabbed me. He looked like my little bit of a 
brother, and he had this little springy step. He took me 
over to the bar and says, "Give this kid a drink." 

The bartender says, "What will you have?" 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


17 


I says, "I don't know." I didn't dare ask for an orange 
or something. 

"Yes," he said, "try some of this." He got out a bottle 
of home brew, poured some in a glass for me. 

Sport says, "Put that on my tab." 

The guy says, "OK, Sport, no problem." Sport left, 
and this bartender told me, he says, "He hasn't got a 
nickel." He says, "He's never paid for anything. He can't 
pay for it, but we all humor him. We like him." 

Well, I learned then, as time went on, that Sport was 
quite a character. Years before, he'd been a famous jockey 
and a horse thief, and he'd been caught stealing horses. 
Halfway between Pioche and Ely was a seep called Pony 
Springs, and there was a grove of cottonwood trees there 
in this seep, which made a pretty good puddle of water. 
The stage from Piocheto Ely and back would stop at this 
Pony Springs to water the horses, but there was no facil¬ 
ities there at all. Sport had been caught rustling horses, 
and they took him to Pony Springs there. They happened 
to be near there, and they took him over there to hang 
him. They brought him on his own horse; they tied his 
legs under the horse, put him under a tree and were get¬ 
ting the rope ready to put around his neck, and they 
made the mistake of leaving Sport with his own horse. 
He was a phenomenal horseman, according to history, 
at the time, and he knew his horse just like he knew 
people, and he got away. He got that horse in a lope, in a 
gallop, and by the time they got their horses, he had a 
little distance. They started shooting at him, and they 
hit him in the knee, but he got away. However he got his 
hands and feet untied, no one will know, and he never 
told. But somebody must have found him and helped him. 
His knee had rotted without medical care, and it had 
just got to a point where it was just a mass of cartilage. 



18 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


He could walk on it, in a sense—he looked like he was 
dancing all the time. When they got him back, with the 
fact that he'd pulled this awful disappearing act and got 
away from them, they decided they wouldn't hang him, 
and he became the town character. 

So ti me was marchi ng along then, and the events were 
about to start. Another miner there had kind of taken 
me over. His name was Tony Argento. He was one of the 
miners in town to celebrate. I unloaded and told him all 
my problems and that I'd met this man named Jack 
Beuhler who said if I got to Pioche, he'd give me a job. 

"Oh," he says, "that's my boss." He says, "I work at 
the Bristol Mine. Sure," he said, "he's coming in." 

I said, "Will you see that I meet him?" 

"Oh, yes," he says, "No problem." He said, "Let's go 
watch the fights." 

The crowd was gathering around the ring built in a 
sort of an amphitheater behind the Standard Service 
Station, and here was this ring, and the ring was sur¬ 
rounded with people. Up in the ring was a man walking 
around. He had on a pair of pants, but no shirt. He was 
the meanest looking thing I've ever seen. J ust to look at 
him frightened me, and he was just a mass of tattoos all 
over his body. You couldn't tell where his nose started or 
where it ended. His eyebrows were masses of scar. He 
had a flat nose and mean-looking eyes. And this guy's 
name was Iron J aw Slade. He was one of the principal, 
main-event fighters, and he was pacing around this ring 
all by himself. They soon learned that his opponent, 
whatever his name may have been, didn't show up. So 
they didn't have anybody to fight, and after the crowd 
was getting exasperated, the announcer said whatever 
his name was is not going to show. "Iron J aw will meet 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


19 


anybody in the crowd. Anyone that can stay with him 
for two rounds gets twenty dollars.” 

There was a lot of excited talk around, going back 
and forth, and my friend Tony said, "You a fighter?" Tony 
was an Italian and spoke with an accent. 

"No," I said, "I wrestle, but I don't know a thing about 
fighting." Asa kid around thisfarmingcommunity, wres¬ 
tling was th e sport of everybody, an d I was pretty good. I 
could throw anybody my age and size and could even 
handle a lot of the older teenagers and men. But I didn't 
think I was really in the condition to wrestle with any¬ 
body, so I just told him that I was not a boxer, but I knew 
a little bit about wrestling. 

"Hey!" he says, "My friend there will take him on!" 
And he started to push me up into the ring, and he got 
three or four fellows around him. They all helped him, 
and I found myself up in this ring. Here was this brute of 
a man. I didn't know what to do or what to say, and I 
don't remember if I said anything, or anything else, but 
the people who were promotingthisfight, or running it, 
came over with a pair of boxing gloves and put them on 
my hands, and I was so frightened, I didn't know ... I 
couldn't resist. They gave me all the instructions about 
what I was supposed to do, which didn't mean a thing. 

They took me over to the center of the ring, and here 
came Iron J aw. He didn't say anything; he just looked at 
me. And then I was told to go to my corner, which was 
strange to me at the time, but I know now what they 
meant. "Come out at the bell!" The referee had given us 
a lot of instructions, which I didn't pay any attention to. 
My mind wasn't there. Nothing was there. From the cor¬ 
ner, the bell rang, and here came Iron J aw right across 
the ring, looking at me and his hands in a fighting posi¬ 
tion. When he got near me, I was so frightened, I don't 



20 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


know what I did, except I jumped all over him, and I 
screamed and scratched and probably kicked and bit. I 
don't know what happened, except that Iron J aw slipped 
to the floor. He was down. The referee came over and 
counted to ten. Iron Jaw didn't move. People started to 
surround me. One guy had put a twenty dollar bill in my 
pocket, which was the biggest bill I'd ever had. [laugh¬ 
ter] And they took me out of this ringand headed mefor 
theSagebrush Saloon to buy me drinks. Bythetimel got 
there I thought, "Maybe I did whip that guy." What actu¬ 
ally happened, he was as drunk as his opponent, who 
didn't show up, and when I jumped all over him, he just 
couldn't stand up. He just fell down. 

So you hadn T actually knocked him out? 

I don't remember. I never hit him. I probably just 
grappled him to the floor. After a few drinks, I felt that 
maybe I did whip him. And I had twenty dollars in my 
pocket, and I didn't offer to buy any drinks. Somebody 
asked me if I was hungry, and I said, "Yes, I am." So we 
went back to this restaurant, and there was a man cook¬ 
ing and a nice looking, worn-out type of a woman that 
was a waitress. So she came over to ask what I wanted, 
and I didn't think to look at a menu. I said, "Gee, I don't 
know." 

"Well," she said, "we've got some good pork chops." 

I says, "That sounds good." 

And she, for some reason, started mothering me right 
then. She brought me the pork chops, and when I got 
through, she said, "How about some dessert?" 

"No," I said, "I'm doing fine here." 

She says, "I've got some nice lemon pie. I'm going to 
bringyou a piece of lemon pie, and it's not goingto be on 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


21 


the bill." So she brought me the lemon pie. I ate the lemon 
pie, and I think the cost was forty or fifty cents for this 
meal of pork chops. I paid it with my twenty dollar bill 
and got the change. I later became well acquainted with 
her and with the cook. The cook was the deputy sheriff's 
son, but already near middle aged. And the woman was a 
worn-out prostitute, and they were living together. As 
time went on, I got very friendly with her, and I never 
forgot how nice she was to me when I first came. Her 
husband and I became very good friends. In fact, the 
whole family and I became very good friends, and two of 
the boys and I became bosom buddies—hunting part¬ 
ners and everything else. But at that time, I didn't know 
the cook or the waitress. Anyway, everybody took care 
of me. I guess I just looked like I needed taking care of. 

Toward evening, Tony looked me up, and he said, "Mr. 
Beuhler's in town." 

So I went, and I saw him, and I says, "You may not 
remember me, but I . . . ." 

He says, "I remember you. You stopped in last year. 
You came for that job." 

I says, "I did." 

He says, "I'm glad to have you." He says, "We'll be 
going home right soon, because I've got my two little girls 
with me, and I've got just a little business to do, and we'll 
go back." So I stayed, and I made sure he didn't leave 
me. I kept track of him, and when he got ready to come, 
we got in his car. He had a big Master Six Buick. Gee, big, 
beautiful car. And he had two little girls. One was about 
six, and one was, maybe, eight or nine, I don't know. We 
drove out this dirt country road twenty-five miles to the 
Bristol Mine, which was way up at a pretty good eleva¬ 
tion of about 7,000 feet. This was an old mining camp, 
and lots of the wooden cabins were empty, and the mine 



22 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


had shut down. Everybody went into Pioche for Labor 
Day, and he said, "Do you know anything about fire¬ 
works? " 

I says, "No, not really." 

He says, "I promised the girls. We couldn't stay in 
town for the fireworks, and I bought a few things. I guess 
it's kind of simple," he said. "While I'm putting things 
away," he says, "why don't you set these off?" We were 
in this sort of a canyon. His house was here, the garage 
was there, and there were houses all around the surround¬ 
ing hillsides. He says, "Set off these fireworks." 

So, I looked, and it was obvious how you do it. You lit 
them and put them down, and they exploded. I did that, 
and the first one, it exploded and fell on the sides. You 
know how our hillsides are now, full of cheat grass and 
brush? That's the way it was this September night, and 
fire started all over. There were just he and I; all the men 
were in camp. And his wife was somewhere; she wasn't 
there. So he and I were very, very lucky. We got all those 
fires put out by ourselves, but it was a job. Then he 
showed methevariouscabins, and when the store opened 
thefollowingday or whenever, they would have blankets 
and everything for me to sleep on. I didn't have any blan¬ 
kets with me, but there were these empty beds in these 
cabins, so he found me a couple of blankets to sleep on. 
And that was how I came to Pioche and how I started 
working in the mines. 

You were under age to work in the mines. Is that right? 

I was under age, but nobody paid too much attention 
to it. As they told me later, when they asked me to regis¬ 
ter to vote, I said, "I'm too young." 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


23 


They said, "You're big enough. If you're big enough, 
you're old enough." And that's the way it was working in 
the mine. 

What's the first job that he put you on, then ? 

I was a top-car man. 

And what is that? 

That is the hoist. The skip, loaded with minerals, 
comes up out of thetop, and it dumps into an ore chute. 
There's two ore chutes, or a big ore chute separated in 
two. There's a wingthat separates the two chutes. When 
they bring up the ore, they swing the gate one way, and 
it goes into one chute, and when they bring up the waste, 
they shift the door, and it goes into another chute. So, at 
this particular mine—and mostmines of that size at that 
time—they have a man who runs the top car. He has a 
steel car that holds a yard of material. That's anywhere 
from a ton to a little more to a little less, depending on 
what the material is. The top-car man, when he's load¬ 
ing, when he's taking ore out of the ore bin, takes it over 
and dumps it over a grizzly where two men—or one man, 
depending on how much work there is to do—sort the 
ore. They throw the waste out of there, and the ore goes 
down into another bin, which, in this particular instance, 
was put into tram cars and hauled over a mountain to a 
place called J ackrabbit, where the train from Pioche, a 
little dinky narrow gauge, took it from there to Pioche. 
When they had the waste all out, he trammed the waste, 
and he put that over the dump. The dump, at this par¬ 
ticulartime, was hundreds of feet deep, and if you weren't 
careful, you could dump the ore. If you didn't open the 



24 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


gate in time on the ore car, it went over the dump. And 
getting it back up was quite a job, because it had to be 
taken down to the bottom, put into a truck, and hauled 
up around the mountain. Top-car men were not supposed 
to let that ore car get away from them. It's one of the first 
things that happened to me. I was in a big rush, and I lost 
the ore car. 

But anyway, make a long story shorter, I became, 
probably, the champion top-car man in history there. 
God, before that, they'd oftentimes had to put someone 
on the night shift, because the top-car man couldn't 
handle it. I never had enough to keep me busy, and I 
made quite a reputation as a top-car man. I stayed with 
that as long as I had to, but I got twenty-five cents a day 
less than the muckers in the mine, and they got twenty- 
five cents a day less than the miners. The miners, at that 
particular time, were getting five dollars a day, the 
muckers $4.75, and being on top in the fresh air—I was 
the top-car man—I only got $4.50. I wanted to get into 
that big money, and I was very popular with all the bosses, 
because I was a hard worker. I asked if I could go down 
in the mine and be a mucker. "No. God, no. You stay on 
this top car. This is the best job." 

"I need that twenty-five cents a day." I chiseled and 
chiseled till they finally put me down there mucking, 
and I was the best mucker in the mine. I did that for 
quite a while, and then I wanted to be a miner. 

"Well," they said, "kid, you've got to graduate. You've 
got to learn to mine, and if you're a miner, you've got to 
handle the powder and blast your round." 

I says, "I've watched them. I can do it." 


How old were you by now? 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


25 


I was now about seventeen. 

So you went through these jobs pretty fast, right? 

Oh, yes. So I talked myself into being a miner, and I 
became probably one of the best miners. Whenever they 
had tough ground to blast anywhere, the shift boss would 
always say, "Get Art." Here I was, a snot-nosed kid doing 
mining work that old-timers couldn't figure out. But I 
was a natural. I could tell the geology of the veins, howto 
put in my holes to make them break. And underground 
when I mucked, I was just so much better than anybody 
else, I always did more work, and I got quite a reputa¬ 
tion. 

So, the following year when I was eighteen, some¬ 
body suggested I should enter the mucking contest in 
Pioche. I says, "Oh, God, no. I couldn't. I couldn't com¬ 
pete with those. Those guys are good! The best in the 
country!" 

"Oh, hell," one of those old miners says, "I've seen 
them all." He says, "Nobody can beat you with a shovel." 
There was one guy, and hisfirst name was Frank—I can't 
remember his last name. He was about thirty-five, a husky 
man from St. George, Utah, and he won it every year; he 
was unbeatable. 

I knew about him. I said, "Hell, I couldn't beat him." 

"Oh, you can beat him." So he talked me into enter¬ 
ing, and I was then not quite as bad as when I went into 
the ring against Iron J aw Slade, but I was very nervous. I 
didn't know what was going to go on. But anyhow, this 
particular year, the contest was to move a yard of mate¬ 
rial. They had a yard of material in a box that sat there 
and a wheelbarrow. We pushed the wheelbarrow there, 



26 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


loaded it, and took it out, and dumped it in the other 
one. The fellow that did it the fastest won the prize. 

So I registered in the mucking contest, and the 
entrance fee was five dollars, a day's wages. All the 
entrance fees went to the winner, plus a little prize that 
they had: twenty-five or thirty or fifty dollars, whatever 
it happened to be. It was different every year. The win¬ 
ner of the first prize was good for anywhere from two to 
threehundred dollars. This was fabulous money. Myturn 
was about third or fourth—I can't remember—but I'd 
mucked before this champion came up. His number was 
back in eight or nine or somewhere in there. When they 
gave my time, the crowd says, "That's the winner. No¬ 
body going to touch him." And they didn't. The master 
from St. George did his best, but hell, he was a minute 
behind my time! I was all alone. Nobody ever equaled it. 

I won that mucking contest every year I entered, except 
two years during the war they didn't have it. 

The last time I entered, it was 1941. I was deputy 
inspector of mines, and I had no intention of entering 
that mucking contest, but my youngest brother was en¬ 
tered. He registered, and they had a deadlinefor registry. 
If you didn't register by this deadline, you couldn't com¬ 
pete. By deadline, only four had registered. My brother 
was one of them, and three others. Well, then they held a 
meeting and decided, "We're goingto open it for another 
five minutes." 

There were several muckers who knew I wasn't 
entered. "Since Art isn't in there, let's enter." 

When they all got through entering, I went up to a 
fellow named Rex—I can't think of his name at this 
minute—who was in charge of it. I said, "Rex, I think I'll 
enter." 

"Well, you promised you wouldn't." 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


27 


I said, "I didn't promise I wouldn't. I just said I wasn't 
goingto register, but then you were not supposed to open 
it." I said, "Now, since there's a pretty good pot there, 
I'm goingto get in it." I figured, "Well, they did this just 
to keep my brother from winning," because he was pretty 
good. He wasn't as good as I was—a lot younger—but not 
as good. So I won it all by myself again. That's the last 
time I ever mucked. 

What kind of times did you get on mucking? 

Oh, it would depend. Every year, it was different. 
Sometimes they went down through rocky material in a 
box and shelled it out. Other times, they did it the way 
we did it the first time, and they were always changing, 
but my time was from three to five minutes, and the oth¬ 
ers were much longer. 

Well, anyway, after my first experience in the ring 
with I ron J aw Slade, everybody had the idea that I was a 
good boxer. I thought nothing of it, except that any time 
anybody's supposed to be good at something, somebody 
wants to beat him. Every time I went to town to a dance 
or something, and I was around the saloon or out, some¬ 
body always picked a fight with me. The fights never 
lasted very long; when I hit them, they stayed hit. Well, 
that went on until one night, I got my finger broken. I 
was loading cars, like I told you about that top car, only 
this was years later, and I had my hand on the edge of 
this steel car and barring with this hand, and the rock 
came down and hit me there, and it broke this finger, 
and it was just hanging by a thread. The bone was bro¬ 
ken. The only car in town to take me to a doctor was a 
fellow—I forget his name now— a little, roly-poly guy from 
some town near Coalville, Utah. He had a Model-T Ford 



28 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Coupe. I was on the night shift, which went on in the 
afternoon, and I came out of the mine, and they dressed 
it up, but they had to get me to a doctor, and nobody had 
a car except this kid, and he was on duty, too. So the 
foreman made a deal with him that they'd let him off 
work and pay him his wages if he'd take me to town to a 
doctor. We went down to this Model T. All the four tires 
were flat, and you had to pump them up by hand. We 
finally got started, and we went to town. 

There was only one doctor in town; his name was 
Hastings. I hadn't changed clothes. I had put on cleaner 
clothes, but just more overalls and blue shirt. So we went 
over to Hastings, and he wasn't there. Something had 
happened. He was out delivering a baby or some damn 
thing. He was out of town. So we had to go over to the 
Sagebrush Saloon and have a drink. We had a few drinks, 
and I forgot all about the thumb. There was a dance in 
Caliente twenty-five miles away, and so somebody in the 
saloon unwrapped my hand and went and got some tape, 
taped it up, and did a fairly good job, and decided I ought 
to go to Caliente to see Doctor McCall. So we took off in 
his Model T, and we went to Caliente, and Doctor McCall 
was out. Couldn't find Doctor McCall. 

So we were going to go over to a saloon on the other 
side of the tracks, and we stopped and parked the car by 
the theater. There was a big sign out by the theater where 
they used to put those things that advertise the show, 
you know, pictures of Clark Gable and whoever else. We 
were standing there, my partner and I, and a guy came 
along, and hejust jumped all over my partner and started 
beating him up. I says, "What the hell are you doing here, 
anyway?" So hetook after me, and I hit him and knocked 
himthrough this billboard, andthat wastheend of him. 
What had happened, somebody had taken out his girl, 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


29 


and he thought it was my friend. He'd made that mis¬ 
take, and then he made the mistake of taking after me. 
His name was Ed Keele, and he was a bigger man than I 
was—not any taller—but just as tall, and ten, fifteen 
pounds heavier. 

So I never did see a doctor. We went back to Pioche, 
and that finger eventually healed just as good as it was 
new. For many years, it was a very noticeable scar there. 
It's almost gone now. 

I went into another dance in Pioche one Saturday, 
and when I was up in the dance hall, all dressed up danc¬ 
ing, a guy came up, and he says, "I'd like to see you 
outside." I went out. He says, "You made a sneak punch 
on my brother." He says, "Now you're going to have to 
settle with me." 

I said, "Who the hell are you?" 

He says, "My name isJ igs Keele." Rung a bell. It rang 
a bell again, because the name Keele was familiar. The 
Intermountain heavyweight champion's name was J ake 
Keele, and he was well known. He was six-foot-two and 
weighed 210 pounds, and he was twenty-four years old. 
J igs was about twenty-two then, and Ed had been about 
twenty. I was eighteen. So he said, "You want to go out¬ 
side?" We were out in the dance hall. He said, "You want 
me to flatten you out in here?" 

I says, "Let's go outside." We got outside, and he made 
a swing at me, and he missed me, and I made a swing at 
him, and I didn't miss. I knocked him into a tree, this 
cottonwood tree, and he hit it with his head, and he was 
out. 

While we were there, a lady came up, and she called 
me every name she could think of. She says, "You pick 
on my brother!" By the way, this J igs Keele was bigger 
than I was. He was bigger than Ed. She said, "You pick on 



30 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


them. You're a big bully." I weighed 170 pounds. I was 
smaller than any one of these. She says, "I've got one 
brother that can handle you, and he's going to come and 
do it." 

I says, "You better bring the whole family, because 
from what I've experienced so far, it's goingto take more 
than one." That was along in the fall. On Christmas Eve, 
I was all ready for a dance, and it was cold, and I had a 
brand new suit on—thefirst time I'd worn it—tailor made. 
I was in J ohnny Valente's Saloon in a high poker game. I 
was sitting like this. The dealer was over here; the res¬ 
taurant was over there. The front of the saloon was back 
here, and somebody came over and tapped me on the 
shoulder. I looked up. I knew who that was. That was 
J ake Keele. 

He says, "Are you Art Bernard?" 

I said, "Yes, I am." 

He says, "I gather you had some problems with my 
brothers." 

I says, "I did." 

"And I gather you told my sister that she'd have to 
bring the whole family along to take care of you." 

I said, "I think I madethat remark," and I knew I was 
in for the beating of my life. 

"Well," he said, "step out here a minute." I stepped 
out. Two or three guys followed me. One was named Bill 
Adir. He was working up at the same mine I was, and it 
developed that he was a shirt-tail relative of the Keeles. 
He followed us out. Outside it was cold, and the streets 
in Pioche are on a pretty good grade. At that time, the 
street was dirt, and there was a gutter on each side—no 
curb or anything. The cars came along and headed into 
this gutter, and there they were at half-cock, one here 
and onethere. The street wasjust nothing but ice. So we 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


31 


got outside, and he says, "I understand my brothers. 
They're not all that innocent." He said, "I think they prob¬ 
ably egged you on a little bit, but," he said, "I don't like 
that remark about having to send the whole family up 
hereto take care of you." He said, "If you want to apolo¬ 
gize, we'll forget it." 

I said, "I see no damn reason to apologize. Your broth¬ 
ers picked a fight with me. I defended myself. They're 
not as tough as they think they are, and I don't intend to 
apologize to you or anything else for anybody." 

"Well," he says, "that leaves me no alternative." He 
says, "I'm going to have to beat the hell out of you." 

"Well," I says, "all right." I started taking my coat off, 
because the first thing I thought of was this nice white 
shirt and my new shoes, and I'm going to be beat to a 
pulp and nothing but bloody. Here goes this nice new 
shirt. I turned around. A big crowd had collected. I said, 
"Will somebody hold my coat?" Nobody wanted to hold 
my coat. They didn't want to get in trouble with Jake 
Keele. 

This Bill Adir says, "I'll hold your coat." I found out 
later he was shirt-tail relative. So we went out in the street, 
and this man was experienced. He made it a point to be 
on the upper grade, uphill on me all the time. He out¬ 
weighed me forty pounds, and he was six years older. He 
was a fully formed man, and I was just getting there. I 
was fighting uphill all the time, and by the time we got 
up there, opposite the Norris Drugstore, I'd got uphill on 
him. I'd beaten my way up above him, and I hit him and 
knocked him down, and he slid under an Oldsmobile 
Touring Car that was parked in the gutter. And there he 
lay. They pulled him out; he was unconscious. He was 
beaten to a pulp. I couldn't believe it. They hauled him 
into the drugstore, took him back of the prescription 



32 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


counter and laid him on the counter. I told you about 
Norris the other day, a little. He was justice of the peace, 
later became state senator. He owned a drugstore and a 
ranch, and his daughter, Edna, was married to Art Acord, 
the old cowboy movie actor. That's long before your day. 
You probably never heard of Art Acord. Norris's son was, 
through his daughter and son-in-law, a bit player in the 
movies. Anyhow, he had this drugstore, and he was also 
a bootlegger. He sold bonded stuff, Four Roses and that 
sort of stuff, that he could get from the government, and 
then he passed it out only to special friends, which by 
that time, I'd made the grade, and I was getting some of 
that high class whiskey. Norris and I were good friends. 

I went in and looked at Jake Keele, laid out on the 
counter there. I don't know how I did it, but I damn near 
massacred him. He was just beaten to a pulp, and they 
sent for Doctor McCall. Doctor McCall came down, and 
he said, "Well, there's nothing wrong with him that a little 
liniment and some rest will . . . ." He said, "He's just 
exhausted and beat up." Oh, they made quite a to-do 
about it. 

I don't know what they thought of me, but everybody 
was trying to help. The barber was there, and he says, 
"Come on. I'll open the shop and clean you up." My shirt 
was full of blood. My coat was all right. Bill Adir had that. 
Blood didn't get on my pants. 

The fellow that owned the haberdashery, named J oe 
Cohen, said, "What size shirt do you wear?" 

I said, "Sixteen and a half." He went down, opened 
the store, and come up with a nice, new shirt. The bar¬ 
ber took me in and gave me a facial or whatever. He put 
me in good shape. The only mark I had on me, besides 
my fists being so sore that I could hardly move them, 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


33 


was I had a chipped tooth. I had just demolished the 
Intermountain Heavyweight Champion. 

Was this the beginning of your boxing career? 

From then on, I fought the main event of every fight 
that came to town, and I don't know how long it took 
before there was nobody left to fight. Everybody decided 
I was world-championship material, and they talked me 
into going to San Francisco, and I did. When I got down 
there, through a lot of luck, I got taken over by Larry 
White in his fighting stable. He, at the time, was man¬ 
ager of Young Corbett, the welterweight champion of the 
world, and he had two contenders. I had quite a lot of 
interesting fighting experience, boxing experiences, but 
I never did fight—two or three exhibition fights—for more 
reason than one. One, Larry didn't encourage me to fight, 
because he told me, "It's going to take years for you to 
mature," and he says, "You haven't got the patience." 
This was after he watched me work out in his camp. But 
he liked to keep me there, because he couldn't drive, 
and he had a Moon Roadster, and every time he wanted 
to go somewhere, I did the driving. He had a beautiful 
young wife—well, not young, but younger than he was— 
named Sheila something. She was a redheaded, Irish, 
wonderful woman. As long as I was with Larry, she felt 
safe. She felt that he wasn't going to chase any chippies 
around, because Art would be with him. I met the best 
fighters in the world, became friendly with a lot of them, 
and I had some wonderful experiences, but I never pur¬ 
sued the boxing game. I came back and went to mining. 

I knew more about mining than boxing. 



34 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


So you were gone for a while from Pioche, then, right? 
You went down to San Francisco for a while? 

Well, I was in and out. I'd go down and come back 
and down and back. 

But L arry Whi te wasn T ready to put you i n the ri ng yet? 

No, no. I never did. I had to tell him. I had the ability; 
I could have. But I just didn't want to do it myself. I saw 
what those fighters looked like and what they had, and it 
just wasn't for me. The training is like going to jail, I 
guess. You go to bed at a certain time; you get up, and 
you run at a certain time, and you run so many miles, 
and then you get in the ring, and you train there, and 
then you go rest a while, and then you go in the ring, and 
train again a few hours later. It's a miserable life, and it 
goes on for months and months. And all thistime, you're 
not makingany money. You're lucky if you makeenough 
to help out a little bit. And everybody that gets into the 
situation I was, where you're not making enough money 
to live, to subsist, you've got to get a job to help out. With 
my connections being in Larry's stable, I got a job with 
one of the most important bootleggers in town. The boot¬ 
leggers are always kowtowingto what fight managers got 
that they want. A man managing a group of fighters is 
one of the most popular guys around, because he can get 
these people seats to a fight. He can get them here; he 
can get them there. And there's no end of favors he can 
get. Through Larry, I went to work for the chief bootleg¬ 
ger in San Francisco, and I made a hell of a lot more 
money than the boxers were making. 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


35 


But boxing kind of goes with the mining camps. Like 
you mentioned, wrestling went with the ranching com¬ 
munity. 

There was always boxing and ball games—baseball- 
in the mining camps. 

Baseball. Really? 

The two popular sports. 

Did you play baseball too? 

No, I didn't. I never was interested in baseball. 

The boxing was more interesting to you? 

Well, it just came along, and once I started knocking 
these guys out, it was like a disease. I couldn't stop. 

So whether you wanted to or not, you had the reputa¬ 
tion. 

Yes, and I had to defend it. 

So when you went back from San Francisco and de¬ 
cided not to go into boxing but to stay wi th mining, what 
happened then? What job were you on then? Were you 
underground mining? 

I was underground mining, yes, from then. I wentfrom 
mines in Utah. Mostly, it was around Lincoln County and 
Pioche, because there's where I had connections, and 
there's where Mr. Beuhler made sure that I became a 



36 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


mining magnet, so to speak. He kept pushing me up the 
ladder, and he always used to explain this ladder. Every 
time I'd leave, he'd give me that story about the ladder. 
But you'd crawl up that ladder, and you get higher and 
higher, and then all at once, you fall. You've got to start 
all over again. This he would tell me, "You're here at this 
station. Now you quit, and you've got to start all over 
when you come back." 

And is that what he did? When you would take oft he 
would start you back at the beginning again? 

When I'd come back, he'd start me again, and he made 
me a mine shift boss, and he made me a mine foreman. I 
was the son he'd never had. He had two daughters, three 
daughters. One was born after I got connected with him. 

How old were you when you were the shift boss? 

Nineteen the first time. 

That's pretty young. 

I was awfully young. 

Was that unusual? 

It was quite unusual. It might have been because the 
fellow that I was a shift boss for, a leaser up in Stockton— 

I went back to Stockton in the Honerein Mine in later 
years— made me the shift boss, probably because he knew 
that I would stay sober and take care of things, because I 
know that most of the men that worked under me were 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


37 


as good of miners as I was, probably better. They had 
more experience. 

But you were more responsible at nineteen? 

I was more responsible. 

What was your favorite work underground? Did you 
likeitwhen you got promoted to shift boss or minefore- 
man? 

Well, yes. It was an advancement, and naturally, more 
money, but what I enjoyed about mining was the actual 
work. I took great pride in being able to do what others 
were failing to do, and I took great pride in timbering. I 
was an excellent timberman. I never worked for a boss 
that didn't have the greatest confidence in me and never 
worked for somebody that didn't give me more responsi¬ 
bility than my job called for. Mining, to me, was very, 
very interesting. I didn't think I'd ever do anything else. 
It's the most interesting thing I ever did until I went to 
prison. 

Went to prison ? 

And that was really a challenge! 

[laughter] And by saying you wentto prison, you'retalk- 
ing about your job as the head of the prison? 


Head warden, yes. 



38 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


We'regoing to talk a littlebitabouttheBristol Minenow, 
and maybe about some of the equipment and mining 
methods that you saw there. 

Well, the equipment used underground at the Bristol 
Mine was strictly jackhammers for regular drilling, to drill 
to blast ore, which at this particular mine came in large 
ore bodies, and mounted jackhammers of different kinds 
that you used for driMing tunnels, which we called drifts, 
and stoping machines, which you used to run raises. 

Did you have power, electric power, in the mine to run 
the jackhammers? 

No, they were all run by air. There was a compressor 
on top that made the air that was piped underground. 

Did you have the carbide lights? 

We had carbide lights, and when I started mining, we 
had caps that held our lamp, and they were cloth caps. 
And very few miners, particularly six feet or more such 
as I was, never had any skin on their head from hitting 
their head on the top of the drifts. 

That's all the higher they were, was six feet or less? 

And in the olden days before my time, men were 
smaller, shorter, and particularly, those called "Cousin 
J acks," or Welshmen. They were very good miners, but 
they were ... a giant would be about five foot six, or 
something, and so they ran these drifts accordingto their 
size. Miners got taller later, and they were always hitting 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


39 


their heads on the top of the drifts. And when they started 
running drifts, they were higher: six feet and more. 

But your cap was a cloth cap? 

J ust a cloth cap. There's no protection at all. It was 
made of canvas with an apparatus in front. I wish I had 
one to show you. I've given them all away. It held your 
carbide lamp. Later, hard hats came into effect, and they 
were cumbersome things to start with, but they finally 
improved. The modern one is not much worse to wear 
than a hat, a regular hat that you wear. Later, electric 
lights came, battery lights came, and you carried them. 
Gee whiz, I left it. I had a real nice set-up, that I left at 
my house when we sold it this spring, out at Bristol. I 
carried it around all these many years. It's a battery that 
is in a pouch, and you wear it on your belt, and the light 
comes around over your shoulder and into the light on 
your cap. 

A cord that attaches there? 

That was a great improvement over carbide. Today, I 
doubt if there are any carbide lamps used anywhere, 
anymore. 

Now, that was an old mine, you said, the Bristol was? 
And were you mining gold there? 

Gold. The material there contained gold, silver, cop¬ 
per, and zinc. 


And was there a mill nearby? 



40 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


No, there was not at the Bristol Mine. That was not 
milling ore. That was oxide ore, and it was shipped to 
the smelter at Tooele, Utah. There were various smelt¬ 
ers. I forget all the towns, but they were all around the 
Salt Lake City area. 

So you shipped it out by rail? 

We sent it across the mountain on a tramway and 
took it to Pioche on the narrow gauge, and then from 
there on Union Pacific, regular railroad. 

So you used the jackhammers, air powered jackham¬ 
mers, to drill the holes. 

Yes. 

And then wereyou using regular dynamite for blasting? 

Dynamite, yes. Giant powder. 

Giant powder? Was that the brand name? 

That's dynamite. There's several brands, which I can't 
remember too much now. Every miner handled his own 
powder, but some mines, they have a powder monkey 
that handles the powder. But at this particular mine, and 
practically every mine I ever worked in, I handled my 
own powders. All of the other miners did. 

So you made your own determination how much to put 
in the hole? 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


41 


Yes, how much to put in the holes and when to shoot 
them and what sequenceto shoot and whatnot. And how 
you drill these holes, regardless of whether you're run¬ 
ning a drift horizontally, a raise vertically, or sinking a 
vertical shaft, knowing what your powder will do and 
how to place it and how to drill the holes is very impor¬ 
tant. That's the difference between a good miner and a 
poor miner. 

How did you learn that? Did some of the other miners 
teach that to you? 

Oh, yes. They showed me how to drill the holes, and 
they explained more or less the different powders, the 
30 percent, 40 percent, 50 percent, the different per¬ 
centages of the explosive capacities of the various 
dynamite and how it worked. And then, of course, you 
get good by experience, by drilling holes in various ways 
in various strata, and how they break with so much pow¬ 
der, and you get so you know. You kind of feel your 
ground. The rock seems to talk to you and tell you what 
you have to do to break it. Some miners are just abso¬ 
lutely good at it, and others never do learn. 

At the time that you were working there, were there 
people like geologists who were telling you where to 
mine, or were you just kind of turned loose? The ore 
body was there, and you were turned loose? 

There was always a geologist and an engineer who 
mapped the country and determined where to go. They 
were not always right. One particular experience was in 
the Bristol Mine, and it was the last time I mined. I and 
another group of men had taken a lease on the fifteen- 



42 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


hundred level, and we had ore that we mined, and it was 
a partnership with the company. They gave us a three- 
month lease, and what it amounted to was a three month 
clean-up. Any time they wanted to take this lease away 
after three months, they wouldn't renew your lease. How 
long they let you work depended on who you were, and 
you will realize what I mean. There were six of us that 
had this lease, and I was the head leaser, and this was in 
1940. I was married, and I'd gone through three or four 
mines that I told you about before that I'd had leasing 
options with a fellow named Owen Walker. One was the 
Half Moon, one was the Highland Queen, one was the 
Mendah. We'd never taken up any of those options. I'd 
gone back to Bristol as mine foreman and it really didn't 
pay a hell of a lot of money. I was the second in line, but 
the wages were very low at that time, and I had to buy a 
certain amount of the stock, and it was taken out of my 
salary. That was considered part of your pay. In other 
words, I had to buy stock, but the price of the stock was 
kept out of my salary, and I accumulated the stock. I 
accumulated a hell of a lot of stock and paid no particu¬ 
lar attention to it, because I never thought it would be 
worth anything. So I really wasn't makingenough money, 
and I went in this lease with my five fellow miners. We 
paid the mine a 50-percent royalty. We did all the min¬ 
ing, they furnished the material that we needed on 
exploration work. If we were mining ore, we had to buy 
the material. The powder and timber and whatever we 
may need, we had to buy it. But if we were exploring, we 
furnished the labor and they furnished the material. So 
we had an ore body down there that we were working 
on, and we were doing pretty good. It gradually depleted 



Mining, Mucking, and Boxing 


43 


itself, and we were out of ore. So we had a very good 
engineer there named Paul Gemmill. 

I s this the same Paul Gemmill who was later attheuni- 
versity? 

I think so. He worked for the mining. Well, it had to 
be the same one. There was only one Paul Gemmill. He 
died here about eight or ten years ago, and his wife just 
died three or four years ago. 

If we wanted to look for new ore bodies and then were 
not getting any material out, they furnished the powder 
and the material—if they thought there was any chance. 
If they didn't think it was a good gamble, they said, 
"There's no prospect there at all, so we won't partici¬ 
pate. If you want to go in there, you've got to do it 
yourself." 

So I was on a little streak of ore there that I thought, 
"This has got to make." And the company, which actu¬ 
ally was Gemmill, because he was the engineer and 
geologist, said they would not participate. If I wanted to 
go in there, then we'd have to pay our own way. 

My partners figured that he was a hell of a lot smarter 
than I was, and they said, "If Paul said they're not going 
to pay, we're not going to pay, either." So there we are. I 
knew there was ore back there, and I was very commit¬ 
ted to this mine, more so than Paul was. I had been there 
a lot longer, and I'd done every type of work in that mine, 
and I'd seen how various ore bodies had been located 
before and the mineralogy behind it. 

So there was one fellow there, one of my partners, 
named Tom Grassi. One day I said, "If you guys don't 
want to pay for the powder, I 'll buy it myself." 



44 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


And Grassi says, "And I'll help you." He said, "If you 
think there's ore there, let's go." 

So then, the others said, "Well, all right, then we will, 
too." And I kept drilling, drifting in on this. It was just a 
sliver when I started, and it got to about two inches wide, 
and the next round I put in, it got about four foot wide, 
and it was high grade. You could eat it. We had a fortune 
there. 



3 

Inspecting the Mines 


J ust about then, I came through Carson City, and 
Matt Murphy and I got talking about the deputy mine 
spector, who was getting sick, and jokingly, I said, "Well, 
if J ack dies, give me a ring. I'll take his job." 

And who was Murphy? 

Matt Murphy was the state inspector of mines. Now, I 
knew hisdeputy mine inspector, because he came around 
the mines where I was. And his name was Jack—can't 
think of it right now. It'll come to me. And he was sickly. 
He had the "jackhammer laugh." That's dust on the lungs. 
You cough your lungs out. Silicosis. 

So I jokingly said, "If Jack dies, give me a ring. I'll 
take hisjob.” Thought no more about it. And then I drilled 
into this vein, which developed to be about four feet the 
last time I was there, and we took the samples up, and 
you could eat it. It was just fabulously rich. 



46 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


I got up, and I found a telegram from Matt Murphy, 
"Come down to Carson City and be sworn in as deputy 
inspector of mines." 

I told my wife, I says, "Now it would come. I can't 
take it. We've got a fortune down there." 

She says, "I want to get out of here," says, "I don't 
want my kids to grow up here with one leg shorter than 
theother walkingaround thesesidehiMs," because I'd be 
located in Ely. She said, "We've got school there for the 
children." We only had one child at the time. 

I said, "I think you're right." 

So now, from the time you started until this job came 
up, about how many years were you in mining? 

Fourteen years. Went from 1926 to 1940. 

That's when you took over as deputy mine inspector? 

Yes, September of 1940. Anyway, we had a deal 
amongst ourselves that if any one of us ever wanted to 
quit or for any reason leave the lease, they'd hire some¬ 
body in our place and pay them wages, and then divide 
whatever it was. In other words, after we paid him his 
six dollars a day, then the average that came over that, 
we divided it. It came to so much a day, and each man 
had so many days, and he got his share of the pot, and he 
paid off whoever he had working for him. So I hired a 
man, and I think there were thirteen days left in Sep¬ 
tember, because I told them, I says, "I'm going to be 
deputy mine inspector, and I'll hire Louie Lazarini to 
work for me." And during those few days, he made me a 
couple of thousand dollars there of profit, and that was 
that. But this stope developed into the biggest, most valu- 



Inspecting the Mines 


47 


able pot of ore that had ever been found in the Bristol 
Mine. They let my partners work until the end of their 
lease, and then they cut them out. They'd all made over 
fifty thousand dollars a piece. It killed two of them; they 
drank themselves to death. And if I'd have been there, 
they wouldn't have cut us off, because Mr. Beuhler was 
the general manager, and they would at least have given 
me another three- months option. But in not much more 
than a month, the six of them made around fifty-thou¬ 
sand dollars each, and then the company took the lease 
back. They operated that for years and years and years. 
Every time I went back to inspect that mine, I'd go see 
my baby and the millions of dollars that I'd passed up, so 
that my son wouldn't have to get one leg shorter than the 
other going along the sidehills. 

So did your part of the partnership end after Septem¬ 
ber? You didn't get the fifty thousand? 

No. I was out. I just got whatever they got in the rest 
of September. In the rest of the month. 

Art, I'd I ike to go back and have you talk a littlebitand 
describe some of the characters you met when you were 
mining in the early days as a youngster. 

Well, unfortunately, I can't remember most of the good 
ones on short notice. One character we had in Pioche 
was named Dirty Curly. He was called Dirty Curly because 
he always appeared to be dirty, but he actually wasn't 
dirty. He just was unkempt. I forget Curly's name now, 
and I shouldn't forget it, because one of his brothers was 
a very prominent doctor in Cedar City, Utah. I went to 
him when I began to get cauliflower ears, and he took 



48 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


care of that, and I didn't get the cauliflowers. Curly came 
from this very well-educated family, as I just mentioned. 
One brother was a doctor. Others were professional men. 
Curly was a musician, and "John Barley-Corn" got the 
best of him, and he finally wound up on the streets of 
Pioche. Curly had built himself a littlecabin upthereto 
live in down at the local garbage dump, made out of boards 
and whatever scrap he could find, and he found various 
beds. Actually, he had some pretty comfortable quarters, 
from his point of view. Wherever you saw him—and he 
was the friendliest person, very well spoken, very well 
educated—he was always well dressed. Hehad suit pants, 
white shirt, always a tie and a coat and always a hat. 
They were never pressed and not too clean, but. . . I 
won't say "not too clean," because he did wash his clothes. 
He just looked unkempt. When he met a woman on the 
street—and he knew the name of every woman in town— 
he bowed, and he greeted them by their name and passed 
the time of day and was happy to see them. The ladies, I 
think, all of them would have liked to have taken him 
home and dressed him up with nice clothes, but, of 
course, that wasn't to happen. And the men all liked 
Curly; he was just so friendly and so well accepted. He 
loved to play the piano, and he was an excellent pianist. 
Probably, in his day, he was what we'd call a long-haired 
piano player. 

He liked the classicals? 

Yes. There were pianos in some homes in Pioche in 
those days, but any saloon that was worthwhile, worth 
its name, had a player piano. He'd go in on occasions 
when there weren't too many people and ask if he could 
play the piano. Naturally, the owner or bartender, who- 



Inspecting the Mines 


49 


ever was in charge, said, "Certainly!" Everybody liked 
to hear him play. The reason they didn't want him to 
play when the place was full was because they were in 
the business of selling food, and if Curly was playing the 
piano, everybody was around the piano. So that was the 
only way he'd get to play the piano. 

We'll go back a little. At the Bristol Mine, they had a 
school, and they got a new schoolteacher every year. The 
school board was composed of three of my dancingfriends 
who were young married women, and, in fact, it was quite 
a congenial, young married group there of which I was a 
member, but I wasn't married. But every year, they'd get 
a schoolteacher, and knowing that she had to be enter¬ 
tained and taken to the dances, as there was nothing 
else for her to do in this lonely mining camp, they would 
just assume. . . sort of expected me to squiretheteacher. 

I was the only . . . well, I wasn't the only eligible young 
man, but the only one that was associated, in a sense, 
with this young group. So when the applications came 
for the coming school year, and they got the applications 
from the various applicants, they'd show me the picture 
and say, "Which one do you want?" and I'd pick the girl 
that looked the best or that I thought would be more fun. 
This particular year, 1934, they showed me the pictures, 
and one of them stood out. 

I says, "Get that one." And they got that one, and 
when she came, a revolting development occurred. She 
was engaged to be married. That didn't make any differ¬ 
ence, with the exception that she might not want to go 
to the dances with some strange man. It really didn't 
bother me. I didn't intend to jump anybody's claim or 
attempt to. But she was invited to the various parties, 
and I was invited. And it was only natural, I assume, and 
particularly going to dances, because she was a beautiful 



50 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


dancer, and I had a reputation, and we got alongfine. In 
fact, in those days, at the end of the dance, they'd have a 
prize waltz. That would be the ending of the dance. And 
the best waltzers always entered the contest. The couple 
that always won this prize-waltz dance were named Albert 
and Della Delmu. And they were great friends of mine, 
too. They were ranching people. They owned the Delmu 
Ranch about eight or ten miles out of town. It was quite 
a ranching family. When my wife and I (who wasn't my 
wife yet) attended these dances, we began getting into 
this prize waltz, and as time went on, we were the only 
two couples left on the dance floor. We'd wi n it one week; 
the Del mu's would win it the other week. The judge would 
say, "You two really won, but we've got to be fair about 
this." 

Your wife to be, what was her name? 

Naomi Bremenkampf. Good German name. She was 
engaged to a very nice young man who would graduate 
as an attorney. And he did and became a district attor¬ 
ney and, unfortunately, he passed away as a young man. 

Naomi was a piano player. During a dance or right 
after a dance, this young group that I associated with 
would usually go somewhere or other and have a cock¬ 
tail before starting out for our home mine, which was 
twenty-five miles from Pioche. The only placestogo were 
in the saloons, and some of them had a nook back some¬ 
where, where you couldgoand have a friendly drink. My 
wife didn't want to be associated with any bums that went 
into saloons, and the group was going into the saloon 
right next to the dance hall. Naomi said no, she didn't 
want to walk through there. We told her that there was a 
place in the back where they'd serve us, and she didn't 



Inspecting the Mines 


51 


have to be bothered with any bar stoops or anything. To 
get there, we could go in the back door, and she wouldn't 
have to go through the crowd, so we did. And toward the 
back was where the player piano was, and as we went in, 
Dirty Curly happened to be playing the piano. My wife 
just stopped, and she was just shocked that Curly was 
playingoneofthose long-haired tunes that nobody under¬ 
stood, but everybody liked. Music is music, and if you 
like music, it comes out. And she just. . . she was just 
stymied. She said, "Oh! Who's playingthat piano?" And 
we told her about Dirty Curly. She later became 
acquainted with Dirty Curly. And he was very, very cour¬ 
teous, and he told her that he heard that she was a 
wonderful piano player. Curly died, and when he died, 
he had the largest funeral of anyone I've ever seen in 
Pioche. High mining officials, high politicians, none of 
them ever had a funeral like Dirty Curly. 

-o- 

Let's go back now. I'm interested in how you and your 
wife ended up together. 

Well, the school teacher was furnished a cabin, but 
she had no running water. She had to go to the nearest 
water supply to get water. Right across the street from 
her cabin was the home where my mother and family 
lived, so she used to come over there and get her water. 
If I was around, she made conversation. One day, going 
toward late fall, she said, "I understand you're quite a 
duck hunter." 

I said, "Yes, I am. They call me the old duck hunter." 

"Oh," she says, "I just love to hunt ducks." 

I perked up my ears. I says, "Not often that one hears 
a woman likes to hunt ducks." 



52 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


She says, "Oh, I just love to get out and watch the 
dawn break and listen to those ducks come in to the 
decoys, their wind whistling." Oh, I could tell that she 
was an experienced duck huntress. 

I said, "Gee whiz!" 

She said, "If you could arrange it, I'd certainly like to 
go on a duck hunt. I miss duck hunting." 

I said, "Oh, hell, that can be arranged," because there 
were ducks all over that country—that is, not close, but 
within an hour or two of Pioche. I knew every duck spot, 
and I was the old duck hunter, and I was good at it, and I 
worked at it. So I made an appointment. "Oh," I said, 
"What kind of a gun do you shoot?" 

She said, "Oh, any kind. Don't matter." 

I says, "Well, would you like a twelve gauge or a six¬ 
teen or a twenty?" One's lighter than the other. I did 
know some old women that did like to hunt ducks, these 
old-time women. They could take a double barrel, and 
they mostly had hammers in those days. She said, "Oh, 
any kind," and she says, "I can handle anything." 

I said, "Well, is a twelve gauge too much for you?" 

"Oh, no," she says, "I can handle a twelve gauge." So 
I had three or four guns, extra guns, and I decided to 
take her to a place in Pahranagat Valley. There were sev¬ 
eral lakes down there of various sizes, and the ducks, in 
those days, were just plentiful. There were ducks all over. 
So on this day, I didn't have a dog, and I picked out a 
place by a cliff that was a good flight line for ducks. The 
lake had kind of dried up a little, and for the first hun¬ 
dred yards from this ledge was kind of thin mud. Since 
we didn't have a retriever, I didn't want to drop any ducks 
down there, because it would be too much trouble to get 
them. 



Inspecting the Mines 


53 


So I told her, I said, "Don't shoot anything over that 
mud flat, because we can't get them.” And jokingly, I said, 
"If you drop a duck over there, you go get it." The first 
thing she did was drop a duck over there. I said, "Go get 
it." It was a big bull sprig. 

She says, "Oh, well, you'll get it." 

I says, "No." And I didn't. "I told you don't drop a 
duck over there, or you'll go get it. You're going to go get 
it. I don't kill ducks for anything else and leave them. If I 
shoot it, I'll eat it." She finally went and got that duck. 
She was pretty muddy when she got back, and she was 
pretty aggravated, too. Before we left, I'd bought a pint of 
rum, and the brand was Lazy Bones Rum. After we got 
through hunting, during which we didn't speak too 
often—she didn't get over that, having to retrieve that 
duck—we got in the car, and I had a brand new Dodge 
sport coupe, and we had a few drinks. I'd taken lunch: 
sardines, crackers, whatnot. And we stopped by the side 
of the road and had lunch, and we didn't have much to 
drink. I hadn't thought about taking anything to drink, 
so I drank a few slugs of rum, and she didn't drink any 
rum. But by thetimewe werethrough lunch, we were on 
a talking basis again, and we decided to go on home. I 
hadn't gone very far until I ran off the road. You may 
think you know what you're doing when you're driving 
under the influence, but you really don't. It wasn't seri¬ 
ous, except I couldn't get back on the road. And there 
was very, very little traffic in those days. I knew some¬ 
body would come along eventually, and eventually 
somebody did, and it was a friend of mine who worked 
for the highway department. He had a big truck, and he 
stopped, and only a matter of a minute to get us back on 
the road. We started back for Pioche, and by thetimewe 
got to Pioche, we'd had a lot of serious talking and con- 



54 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


versation. One thing and another, and darned if we didn't 
start just kind of going together a little bit more, and 
before you knew it, we decided to get married. 

We had one complication: this was during the 
Depression, and married women were not hired to teach. 
If a single teacher married during her school year, they 
let her go. J obs were too scarce to have a married woman 
doing the teaching. So we thought we'd better get mar¬ 
ried, because things were getting serious, but nobody 
must know about it. So one morning, bright and early, 
we got in my car, and we drove over to Parowan, Utah, 
which was a distance of about 130 miles. We went to the 
courthouse—by then it was late in the morning—and I 
bought a marriage license, and we asked for whoever did 
the marrying, I can't remember. If I could remember the 
justice of the peace .... I found out where his office 
was, and I went in, and this justice of the peace was also 
the county assessor. He had a couple in there with him, 
and they were in an argumentative mood. They were talk¬ 
ing loudly back and forth to each other, and we stood in 
the doorway there kind of lost. He finally looked out and 
says, "What do you want?" 

I said, "Well, we want to get married." 

He says, "I'm busy." 

"Well," I said, "we've come a long way, and we'd cer¬ 
tainly like to get married." 

He says, "Do you have a license?" 

I says, "Yes, we do." 

"Do you have any witnesses?" 

"No, we don't." 

"Well, come on in." We went in, and he says, "Let's 
get this over with." He introduced this couple. I can't 
remember their name, of course, but I guess it's on our 
wedding certificate. He married us without any niceties 



Inspecting the Mines 


55 


about it. He wanted to get it over with, and he says, "All 
right, you're married." And he just ignored us. 

I said, "Well, how much do I owe you?" 

He said, "Not a damn thing. J ust get out of here. I'm 
busy." And it developed that this couple that were there 
were large sheep owners, and he'd assessed them what 
they thought was too much, and they were objecting. So 
that's the history of our marriage. 

And did you keep it quiet? 

Well, we kept it quiet as long as we could— probably a 
week or more—buttherewasa woman lived right below, 
her cabin and my mother's house, and she had to know. 
Her name was Susie—itslipsmenow, herlastname. Her 
husband was the mine carpenter, and she was a very good 
cook. She knew everything that went on, and she saw 
me sneaking out of that schoolteacher's cabin about four 
o'clock one morning. Before anybody got in trouble, we 
had to admit that we were married. 

We'd asked, when we were married, that this not be 
given out to the press. And he said, "Yes, that's all right. 
We'll take care of that." He probably didn't even know 
what we were talking about or paying attention to it. But 
anyway, along about the time Susie decided there was 
something wrong with the schoolteacher, the Salt Lake 
Tribunecame out, and there was our marriage. I tried to 
say, "Well, that isn't me. There's got to be another Art 
Bernard." 

But they said, "Maybe there is. But there's not another 
woman with that name, Bremenkampf." [laughter] 


[laughter] So there you have it. 



56 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


So we've been happy ever after. 

o 

Now, I would like to go back to talking about some of 
the mining characters. You told me earlier about one 
named Stumpy. Would you tell me that story again? 

Yes. He was a little one-legged fellow, missing his right 
leg at the knee, and he was a very small man. I don't 
think he'd weigh over 125, 130 pounds. He was about 
five foot five or something. You really wouldn't expect 
that he could do a day's work in a mine, because mining 
is hard work, but he did, and he was a very well spoken 
man, very intelligent. For some reason or other, he didn't 
get along too well with the other miners. He just wasn't 
the kind that went to town and got drunk or anything, so 
he didn't have very many friends. I liked him, and I'd 
spend as many evenings as I could with him out on the 
mine dump. There were beautiful sunsets from this alti¬ 
tude where we were, and we could see hundreds of square 
miles of desert below us. He just loved to talk, and he 
evidently knew quite a bit about geology. Hetold me many 
times that one day there would be gold mined in this 
state, all over this state. He says, "You can go down on 
that flat anywhere and dig a hole and pan it, and you'll 
find gold. You'll pan some gold. It may be so infinitesimal 
that you can't see it, but it's there." He says, "Some day, 
they're going to figure out some way to mine that infini¬ 
tesimal gold, and there's going to be a big boom in gold 
mining in Nevada." I'll never forget that, because it came 
to pass about twenty years ago; the open-pit mining 
started in this state twenty-five years ago. I don't know 
how much gold had been mined since those days, but as 
I mentioned to you the last time, when I was mine in¬ 
spector, I wrote a paper for the American Mining Congress 



Inspecting the Mines 


57 


in Denver. I had done a great research and had the pro¬ 
duction from every mining camp in the state. The 
Comstock had produced something a little over one and 
a half billion dollars in gold and silver, and I often won¬ 
dered how much has been produced in these open pit 
mines since that time. 

I'm surethat's a small amount compared to what they're 
doing right now. 

I would imagine. I'm very interested. I'd liketo know. 

When I went to work as a deputy inspector of mines 
in 1940, and we had the episode at Pearl Harbor in 1941, 
gold mining as such came to a stop in Nevada. They 
passed a law in the Congress to eliminate the mining of 
gold, because the gold was not necessary. Strategic min¬ 
erals were, and the material was unavailable. The gold 
mines couldn't get anything. Labor became scarce. Ev¬ 
erybody that could be called to the army went to the 
army. 

When theJ apanese attacked Pearl Harbor and L-208 
came out of Washington, and the materials for mining 
became not only scarce, but practically unattainable, gold 
mines ceased to operate. The few that were still limping 
along on the Comstock had to close down. But mining 
copper got a shot in the arm, which started a boom in 
the Rio Tinto at Mountain City and, of course, in Ely, 
which was a large copper deposit anyway. My job, then, 
was just to inspect mines to the best of my ability and 
see that the mining laws were not violated due to loss of 
material that may have been necessary for safety reasons. 

So all your inspections were focused on safety, were 
they? 



58 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Yes, but I got along good with all the mine operators. 

I gave them a lot of good advice in my inspections. When 
I'd find something in a mine that was more or less detri¬ 
mental to the safety of the men, that may not have been 
in the mining laws, I'd make suggestions. I found that 
every mine operator in the state was most cooperative. 
They were as interested in the safety of their men as . . . 
in fact, much more so than the men were themselves. 
Practically every accident that occurred was due to min¬ 
ers themsel ves bei n g carel ess an d n ot observi n g th e I aws 
that were enacted to protect them. 

What were some of the safety measures that you looked 
for back then ? We talked about how some of the early 
hats were just cloth hats and so on. Did you have hard 
hats by now, steel-toed shoes, other safety measures? 

Bythistime, all those things were coming into effect. 
In practically every mine, by then, the miners wore hard 
hats. Not as good as they are today, but they were an 
improvement over the soft hats. 

Any other equipment that was for safety? 

Well, I can't remember anything in particular. Wejust 
looked for safety measures, like make sure that there 
were cables and ropes around ore bins where the miner 
had to tie himself, so that he couldn't be sucked into the 
ore chute. Various things, just common sense. 

Now explain that to me a little bit: tie himself so he 
wouldn't be sucked in. How does that work? 



Inspecting the Mines 


59 


Well, around every mine or mill, there are chutes— 
and in the mines too—that are full of muck. Muck is the 
substance, the dirt, that the ore and everything is in. It is 
pulled out of a chute down below and either on belts or 
by car somewhere and taken to the mill or the smelter. 
And this material, being packed together, creates a little 
hole up through the center and hangs up. Somebody has 
to get up on top and start it down with a bar or however 
they have to do it. Many ways that they can getthismuck 
started again. And when they do, it caves in, and if a 
man is on there without protection, he's sucked right 
into the middle of this mass of muck and ore. 

Like a funnel , pulled down with it? 

Right. And I'll bet you that 50 percent of the fatalities 
in the state are due to men being sucked into these cave- 
ins in the chute. So the law requires that there be a cable 
with a harness attached, and the cable attached to some 
safety measure. The guy that's doing the work is sup¬ 
posed to put on this harness, tietherope safely, so that if 
the muck goes out beneath him, the rope will stop him, 
and the harness will stop him before he gets into this 
maelstrom that's going out. If they do that, they're safe. 
But most men—and I myself did the same thing when I 
was mining—think, "Well, I'll watch it." Fortunately, I 
never got caught. Some of my friends did. But various 
little things like that and being careful with dynamite 
and blasting and making sure that ladders were safe and 
in good condition, checking the ground and the stopes 
an d th e areas wh ere th ey were getti n g out th e ores to see 
that they were well timbered and that. There's just so 
many things that an inspector looks for. It isn't always 



60 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


necessarily a law that is written, but common sense. And 
years of experience. 

What was it about the job that interested you? 

Oh, it was very interesting. Mining is one of the most 
interesting methods of making a living I've ever found. I 
never thought I'd ever want to get out of mining. 

When you inspected , you lived in Ely. Did you inspect 
only a certain area, or all over the state? 

I had half of the state. I had what was called the north¬ 
ern part, which was about 80 percent of the mines. I was 
traveling practically at all times, and my areas included 
all the mines in Pioche, everything north: Mountain City, 
the Victoria. I can't remember all the mines now. The 
Nevada Massachusetts up in Humboldt County, the 
Cordero Mine north of that, Ely. Everything north of 
Tonopah. I was on the road continuously, and I thor¬ 
oughly enjoyed it, not only because I enjoyed inspecting 
the mines and enjoyed meeting with the mine operators 
and the miners and listeningto what they had to tell me, 
but I got a lot of information from the miners themselves 
of what was going on in this one particular mine. 

Everywhere I went, I had to cross a creek, a duck 
marsh, sage hen country, or pheasant country. I always 
had a gun in the car, and I always had a partner riding in 
the back seat. 

Your partner—meaning your dog? 

My partner had four feet. 



Inspecting the Mines 


61 


So this was one of the si de benefits of your job, right? 

Yes. 

You got to do plenty of duck hunting. Well, OK, and so 
you were deputy mine inspector for about how long? 

A little over six years. In March of 1947, Mr. Murphy, 
Matt Murphy, the state mine inspector, died, and I was 
appointed state mine inspector. Then I had the whole 
state under me. I still made many mine inspections my¬ 
self, but I had two deputies. One took over my territory, 
and the other one took over the southern end of the state, 
which didn't amount to anything. All there was, was two 
or three little one- or two-men operations around Clark 
County and the big pit at Gabbs. 

This was after the war, 1947. Was gold mining coming 
back then ? 

Not yet, no. 

What was happening in mining around the state? 

It was slowly dying. Most of the underground mines 
curtailed, and eventually, most of them went out of busi¬ 
ness. They just couldn't.... Mining continued to be 
more expensive: material cost more, labor cost more, 
but the price of minerals went down. So, eventually, the 
only mines that were working were the pits in the Ely 
area, Gabbs, and a reoccurrence of pit miningin Virginia 
City. But mining was on a very small scale. Ely was cop¬ 
per, and Gabbs was magnesium. Virginia City, there was 



62 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


still the old gold and silver, but they were now pit mining 
where they'd mined underground before. 

So pit mining was starting as early as I ate 1940s, early 
1950s, but not on a huge scale? 

Well, yes, gold pit mining. I'd say it was about the 
1960s before the gold really got started in the state. 

Now, were you still mine inspector then in the 1960s 
when that all happened? 

No, I was a state mine inspector until the end of 1950. 
Three and a half years. Then I went down and took over 
the prison. 

You mentioned a couple of people that you knew who 
are famous to Nevada, and that's Wingfield and GetchelI. 
Could you describe those two and your relationship with 
each of them? 

Well, George Wingfield, of course, has been . . . 
everything that you can think of has been written about 
him, good and bad. My relationship with George Wingfield 
and Noble Getchell was that they owned the Getchell 
mine and mill, north of Golconda. On one of my first 
inspections there, I found it very sloppily controlled. They 
were just violating pretty near every mining safety law 
in the state. I found a young man there, a superinten¬ 
dent and one that was a foreman. Our personalities 
clashed, and I'd told him what I wanted done, and they 
didn't do it. Thefirst thingthat happened after that, I got 
a call, and they had a fatality, and when I went up, it was 
one of those ore chute deals. I told them to put a cable 



Inspecting the Mines 


63 


and a rope and a harness, and they hadn't done it. A guy 
went in there and was killed. So we had a hell of a set-to, 
and I gave him strict, rigid instructions on what to do 
and how damn soon to do it. I said, "If you don't do it, 
I'm going to shut you down." So I went back right soon 
and made another inspection without giving them too 
much time to fool around, and they weren't doing it, so I 
just gave them orders that we'd stop those operations, 
which, of course, then they got very serious. Their chief 
engineer and geologist was named Roy Hardy, very im¬ 
portant mining man, famous in this state. Noble Getchell 
and George Wingfield were the owners of the mine. So 
they called up Matt Murphy, and, of course, they believed 
their superintendent, everything he said. 

They wanted Murphy to fire me. Murphy says, "I 
wouldn't fire Bernard. He's the best damn deputy inspec¬ 
tor we've ever had in this state." 

It was Getchell and Wingfield that called Matt Murphy 
and wanted you fired? 

Yes. Well, I don't know who called. It was probably 
Hardy, because he was in charge; he was the manager. 
Matt said, "No way." He said, "I want a meeting up at 
your mine." He says, "I'll bring Bernard, and I'll come 
with him, and I want Hardy upthere. Let's see what went 
on and what we're going to do." So we did. To make a 
long story short, after we got through inspecting the mine 
and what I had ordered done and what they hadn't done 
and why they hadn't done it, Roy Hardy and I became 
the very best of friends—one of my best supporters dur¬ 
ing all the years I was warden, and a very prominent 
man. I had never met either Wingfield or Getchell, but 



64 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


over that escapade, I did, and we became the very best 
friends. They were two of my greatest supporters. 

Wingfield was a man that was—I don't know how to 
describe him, exactly, but if you've ever met George 
Wingfield, you knew you were meeting a great man. He 
had a magnetism. Whatever has been said of George 
Wingfield, I found him to be a man, if he gave you his 
word, that's all there was to it. You didn't have to have a 
contract or anything in writing. His word was actually 
good. I later got in a mining partnership with him, and 
all we had was a word—my word and his word—and he 
never violated it. 

Where was your mining partnership? Did you have a 
mine together? 

Yes, we did. He and I and Matt Murphy. And Jim 
Greenen wastheminingengineer. It wasatalc minedown 
out of Lida. We had information that there was gold and 
silver there, and we went looking for it, and we found it, 
but it was just too small, and it didn't develop into any¬ 
thing, but I got very well acquainted with George 
Wingfield. 

And what about Noble Getchell. Did you get to know 
him, too, through this process? 

Oh, very well, yes. I was a guest at G etc hell's quite 
often. In fact, while I was warden of the prison, and, of 
course, before, while I was still state mine inspector, I 
used to go in and have lunch with him as often as I could. 
They had a famous place there in the bank building, 
across from the Mapes on the corner. They had a lun¬ 
cheon spot there that reserved for them and their guests. 



Inspecting the Mines 


65 


For years, I went over and had lunch with him when I 
could make it. I found Noble Getchell to bejust as good a 
man of his word as George Wingfield. He, too, has been 
called a big crook and everything else, as most people 
who are successful are called crooks. They don't get there 
unless they're crooked. Doesn't matter how smart they 
are or how hard they work. The average person figures if 
they got anything, they stole it. 

So you've read some of the things that have been writ¬ 
ten aboutNobleGetchell andGeorgeWingfield. You don't 
agree with them? 

A lot of it before I knew them, and a lot of it after I 
knew them. I don't agree with them, at all. I knew that in 
their days when they were young, they did what they 
had to do. I found them to be honest and honorable. 

You became life-long friends with them, did you? 

Oh, yes. Life-long friends. 

Roy Hardy—you mentioned he was a very important 
mining man. Tell mea littlebit moreabout him. I know 
he was in charge of the Getchell Mine. Is that right? 

The mine and the mill. He was in charge of all their 
operations. Gosh, I don't know what to tell you about 
Roy, except that he was a very good man, a very smart 
man, a very important man, and a great engineer and 
geologist. 


He knew a lot about mining? 



66 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Oh, yes. He was involved in mining from the early 
days of Tonopah and on until he retired. He became in¬ 
volved with Wingfield and Getchell in the early days, too. 

Onceyou got into being a warden, did you stay involved 
in mining at all? Did you have mining claims? 

No, I didn't. I got entirely out of mining. That prison 
took up all my time. I was on duty there twenty-four 
hours a day. 

Completely changed your life then, right? 

Yes. I got involved with the convicts and penology 
and all the things that they told me I couldn't do, and I 
did. 

I had another question about mining. Was the Nevada 
Mining Association organized when you were a mine 
inspector? 

It was organized before I was mine inspector. 

And wereyou involved with them at all? Did you go to 
any of their meetings? 

No, except that I was friendly with all the officials, 
and at any meeting that they had, I probably attended. I 
can't remember them to any extent. 

And what about the Mackay School of Mines. Did you 
have any connection with the university? 


No, I didn't. 



Inspecting the Mines 


67 


Now, you Ve told me about one project that you got in¬ 
volved with even after the state mine inspector and the 
prison, and that was with the Nevada State Museum. 
Tell me about that project. 

Well, when I moved to Carson City, I was friendly 
with J udge Guild [Clark J. Guild] at the museum. Any¬ 
way, the museum was his baby. He started it. And there 
had been talk about having a mining exhibit, and when I 
came along, it gavej udge Guild an opportunity to discuss 
it, a mining exhibit with me. They had just hired a new 
museum director, I guess, and his name wasTony Green. 
J udge Guild got the two of us together and told us what 
he would like to do, and he told Tony, he says, "Work 
with Art, and between thetwoofyou, come up with some¬ 
thing that we can have a mine exhibit." Colonel 
Fleischmann was one of the directors of the museum 
who had put up a lot of money and a lot of help for Guild 
and was deeply involved in improvingthis museum. Bill 
Donovan from Silver City had a mill and a mine, and he 
was on the board. There could have been somebody else, 
but I can't think of it now. But anyway, they turned over 
this mine exhibit to Tony and me. So Tony and I got 
together, and we decided, more or less, that we would 
build a replica, almost as exact as we could. And we 
checked our area downstairs and wherever we could, for 
whatever we could, and we decided on just exactly what 
they've got there. Now, we wanted to make it as natural, 
as authentic as possible, so he would go with me on my 
inspection trips throughout the state, and we'd visit the 
various mines with the different mining methods. We'd 
tell the operator what we wanted, and then what help we 
could get, so everybody was cooperative as they could 
be. For instance, we had a place down in the museum 



68 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


where we thought we could have a certai n type of a stope, 
and we'd try and get the exact material that was in place 
in the actual mine, but that wasn't used anymore, and 
we took that material—the timber—numbered them, and 
hauled them down to Carson City, and put them in place 
just as they were. We marked them. We needed tuggers 
and scrapers. The museum didn't have any money to 
spend, so through my friendship with the operators, they 
agreed to give us anything that they possibly could at no 
expense. So everything you see down there has been 
donated by some mining company. We put the actual 
workings in exactly as they should be, and we set up that 
man drilling in there and the hoist and everything. 
Absolutely to scale as they were in whatever mine that 
we got the equipment out of. And all the mining equip¬ 
ment on display was donated. I donated some myself, 
personally, that I had from my mining days. 

Did you help actually build it, too, or did they havesome- 
body that did that work? 

We hired what we could, and I actually worked, and 
so did Tony, on a lot of it. Actually, Tony and I did that 
mine. I'm the last living man that was connected with 
that at the time. J im Calhoun came after Tony Green. 
But the mine replica was already built by then. And that's 
a favorite with the school kids, too, to show them what 
mining's all about. 

When I was mine inspector, I had a wonderful collec¬ 
tion of ores, various type of minerals, and I donated them 
to the Carson schools with the history. I imagine they're 
still around and being discussed. 



Inspecting the Mines 


69 


Now, you haveoneson. Hewasn't interested in mining, 
was he—or did you want him to be? 

Well, I didn't want him to be, and he was interested 
in banking. I wanted him to be a lawyer, and I sent him 
to law school at Denver. He lasted a year, and he called 
me one day from Denver. He says, "Dad," he says, "I just 
don't like this, and I'm never goingto be a success at it. I 
hate to waste your money." 

I said, "What do you want to do?" 

He says, "I want to get into banking." 

"Well," I said, "let's take care of that." So I called a 
good friend in Reno who was in charge of the First 
National Bank at that time, Jordan Crouch. Anyhow, I 
could hear him over the phone say, "Oh, God, here's 
another one that 

I started out with, "I have a son who wantsto get into 
banking." 

"Well," he says, "I don't know what we can do. Has he 
got a background? Is he goingto college?" 

"Oh," I said, "he graduated from college, and he just 
had a year of law school in Denver, but he wants to get 
into banking." 

He says, "He's had a year of law school?" 

"Yes." 

He said, "Send him over." He told me, he said, "Send 
him over, and just have him ask for me." So I sent him 
over when he got here, and they put him right up in some 
department with a lot of responsibility. 

You didn't want him to go into mining because it's a 
hard life? 



70 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Oh, it's a hard life. It's moving from here to there. 
Even if you're good, when you just about get your family 
settled, you get sent to another mine, another country, 
another state. You're always getting moved. But it's better 
than not having a good job. 

So there were some hardships on your family, then, from 
moving around? 

Well, yes. Yes. 

But you managed, with going on to the state jobs, you 
managed to stay put for periods of time and to stay in 
Nevada. So that's a littledifferentthan some of the tramp 
miners. 

Well, I was state mine inspector. When the war 
started ... tin is an essential product in whatever tin is 
used in, in war. And during the war effort, they needed 
tin. Our sources in South America were gone, and they 
were looking for tin. Someone learned that there was a 
deposit up in Rabbithole, that they'd found tin. 

Now where is that, Rabbithole? 

Here's Lovelock, there's Gerlach, here's Winnemucca, 
and Rabbithole is right in the middle of that triangle. It's 
a desert. It actually could be called part of the Black Rock 
Desert. There was some gold mining and some mercury 
mining in that area—quite a bit of small stuff. So, natu¬ 
rally, the government was looking for tin, and Senator 
Scrugham, J ames Scrugham, and I had been friends for 
many years. He was one of the first men I met when I 
came to this state, and he was campaigning for reelec- 



Inspecting the Mines 


71 


tion as governor—he was governor at that time. In those 
days, the various candidates traveled in groups. All the 
Democrats got together, the governor, or the mine in¬ 
spector, the state treasurer, and everybody, they'd have 
a big group, and they'd travel the state campaigning. 
They'd try to make every mine, and I was real new at the 
Bristol Mine yet at that time, and it was built on a dump. 
The bigger the dump got, the bigger the camp got. So the 
candidates would come up there. They had their envoys 
from every county who were familiar with the county 
politics and knew where to take them, be their guide. 
And they'd come up, so the county chairman of the 
Democrats would get all the state officials and bringthem 
up to the mine in the evening when they could meet 
most of the miners and other people, if there were any 
around. At that time, it was during prohibition, and all 
the candidates had their particular lackey that stayed 
with them. They'd have a box of cigars and a gallon of 
whiskey, and they'd meet the potential voter, and they'd 
give him a cigar, and they'd give him a drink, either or 
both. And, of course, "Vote for me. I'm the best man, 
blah, blah, blah, blah." I was just a kind of a scared kid 
yet, and I didn't stay in the group with these people, be¬ 
cause I knew I couldn't vote. So, I was over leaningagainst 
the boarding house on the dump, sort of leaning against 
it, and a fellow came over, a little dumpy looking fellow, 
and he had a box of cigars, and he says, "How you doing 
there?" 

I told him, "All right." 

He says, "Have a cigar." 

I said, "I'm sorry, I don't vote." 

He said, "I didn't ask you if you vote. I asked you to 
have a cigar." He said, "Do you smoke?" 

I says, "Oh, yes." 



72 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


He said, "Have a cigar." I had a cigar. He says, "My 
name is J im Scrugham." He said, "I'm campaigning for 
reelection as governor." He said, "I'm sorry you can't vote 
for me, but maybe some day you will." 

I said, "Well, I'll keep you in mind," you know, just 
talk is cheap. And by George, as time went on, Jim 
Scrugham and I became very good friends. I was always 
a great hunter, and I always managed to get into the best 
hunting places with the best hunting people. This family 
that I told you about, the Delmus, had ranching interests 
out north and east of Pioche, and they had one ranch up 
in the mountains about thirty or forty miles from town. 
It was an old homestead, and they had a nice meadow. 
Whoever homesteaded this, many, many years ago, built 
a home as good as they could and corrals and barns. Of 
course, they couldn't make a living. They went broke, 
and eventually the Delmus bought it for a summer pas¬ 
ture. It was good deer country, so we used to go up there 
and shoot deer every fall, and the particular group, 
everybody could do something. We eventually built a new 
ranch house, and it was actually a hunting lodge, but it 
was nice. Every fall, we'd go up, and we'd take friends 
that any of us had. Scrugham happened to be a friend of 
Joe Delmu. I met Scrugham two or three years after I 
originally saw him, and we got reacquainted, and hejoked 
about thetimethat he came up, and I said, "I can't vote." 
We became life-longfriends. Every year, if he could make 
it, Scrugham came up and hunted deer with us. 

So in 1941, after Pearl Harbor, they were looking for 
tin, and the word got out that they had this tin deposit 
up in the Rabbithole. Scrugham decided to go up and 
check it out. Hetook two of the best brains in the Bureau 
of Mines, both geologists and engineers, to check this 
out. One of them I knew; his name was J im. Anyway, I 



Inspecting the Mines 


73 


met them at this little town out between Winnemucca 
and Lovelock. There's a little town in there, and I just 
can't remember it. It was an old railroad station many 
years ago. Anyway, the road to this area that we were 
going to, took off there, so Scrugham had a driver take 
him to Ely, and then from Ely, I took him in my car, and 
we went up to the Rabbithole and met all these others 
who came in with a guide to investigate this tin deposit 
that this prospector had. Sure enough, in the various 
canyons at the bottom of the canyon .... I n the olden 
days, there were quite a few little mines around; there 
were still cabins here and cabins there and cabins up 
here. The two geologists from the Bureau of Mines had 
somebody with them who was an expert at determining 
whether this gravel had tin and how much, by some kind 
of a method he had with some acids and whatnot. So, by 
this time, we had quite a group of prospectors that came 
that knew this was going on. And we'd go to this canyon 
where this old prospector said there was tin, and we'd 
take up a sample. And this guy used some kind of a solu¬ 
tion with zinc in it or something. Anyway, I think they 
called it the zinc test. And it had so much tin, not good 
enough. Not enough value in it. And we'd go up higher, 
which the tin was supposed to come from the top, come 
down, be washed down. That's why you found gold in 
the bottom of a canyon, and you went up, and the higher 
you went, the more valuable it got. But in this tin case, 
the higher we went, the worse it got. And when we fi¬ 
nally got up to a certain elevation, there was no sign of 
tin at all. Go over to the next canyon, find the same thing. 
In the next canyon, find the same thing. Spent all day 
there. 

The crew was supposed to break up, and Scrugham 
was going back to Washington, the two engineers were 



74 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


going back to Washington, all the old prospectors were 
going back to their cabin, and I was going to take 
Scrugham backtoOreana, and someone would meet him 
there and take him to Las Vegas. Scrugham called the 
group together; he says, "Now," he said, "why do we find 
values at the bottom of the canyon, and the higher we 
go, the worse they get, and the values are supposed to 
come down?" 

I didn't say anything. That was out of my scope. He 
nailed the two engineers. He was a very smart man. I 
was involved with him in a deal where he was the engi¬ 
neer of a mining company from New York, called the New 
York Mining Company, with some other initials there, I 
can't remember, and they took a lease and option on 
someclaimsthat we had a lease and option on, and noth¬ 
ing developed from them, but Jim and I got well 
acquainted, and I liked him, and he was a very smart 
man. He singled out these two men. He says, "Now," he 
says, "you are engineers and geologists. Explain this to 
me." Well, they just couldn't figure it out. He turned to 
me, he says, "Art, what do you think?" 

I didn't know what to think. Christ sake, they're the 
best brains in the country, and they don't know what. I 
sat there, and I thought, "Well, you know, I've talked to a 
lot of geologists in my time," and I thought for a minute, 
and I says, "Well, I'll tell you what, my impression isthat 
it didn't come down. It came up." 

He said, "What do you mean, it came up?" 

I said, "One time this land was all covered with an 
ocean. There were undercurrents. The undercurrents 
wash and wash, and they washed ashore. They washed 
ashore, and they'll move anything. They'll move gravel, 
they'll move big boulders, they'll move anything in their 
way." I remembered old miners telling me these things 



Inspecting the Mines 


75 


about the desert, you know, guys like Stumpy. Once this 
was all covered with water. The more I talked, the more 
they were all listening, the more encouraged they got, 
the more encouraged I got, and I says, "And I think that's 
what happened. I think if we go down right in the middle 
of this flat anywhere and sink a shaft, well find tin." I 
says, "It might be too deep to go after, but that's where it 
came from, the bottom." 

Scrugham turned around, and he says, "I bring the 
best brains in Washington, and a miner from Pioche has 
to tell me what's happened." So I took Jim back, and 
when we got to Oreana, he says, "We're in the middle of 
a serious war." 

And I said, "Do you think so?" 

He says, "I think so." He says, "In fact, I know it." 
And he says, "We're losing ground all thetime, and we're 
losing mines in the Philippines. We're losing railroads in 
France." He said, "Pretty soon, we're going to stop run¬ 
ning, and we're going to come back, and we're going to 
start takingthose things again." He says, "We're goingto 
need somebody to run the mines; we're going to need 
somebody to run the railroads." And he says, "That's 
where you come in." He said, "I'll get you a commission 
in the army starting out as a major." He says, "Major. 
That's a good start." And he says, "Within two years, you'll 
be a general. I'll see to that." 

I said, "God, I've never even been a Boy Scout." 

He said, "You don't have to be." He says, "You don't 
know what we're commissioning in this army." He says, 
"The dumbest clucks on earth are getting commissions 
in this army." He says, "We need men like you, because 
we're going to be taking back those mines in the 
Philippines, and we're going to need men to run them, 



76 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


and that's what you're going to be: one of the men that 
runs them.” 

"Gosh," I said, "J im, I don't know." My oldest daugh¬ 
ter was just about to be born. 

He said, "I'll be in Las Vegas," and he gave me his 
address. "You tell me." 

I said, "I'll talk this over with . . . ." I thought, you 
know, this isn't goingto be bad. Being a general ain't too 
bad. I went home all enthused, and my mother-in-law, 
who lived in Reno, happened to be visiting her daughter, 
because time was getting close. 

I told them that I was going to be a general in the 
army, and Scrugham had labored it out. I was goingto be 
a major, and then you have to be in so long before you 
can be promoted again, and so long before you can be 
promoted again. He figured it would take two years to go 
from major to general. He says, "I'll see that that 
happens." 

Well, my wife started thinking about, "What am I go¬ 
ing to do here with one child and one to come?" 

And my mother-in-law laid in. She says, "All you want 
to do is go in and wear a uniform and show off, while my 
daughter is here on the verge of death." And so, I 
didn't.... Oh, Scrugham had told me, he says, "You're 
not too old. You could be drafted, be a G.l." So I called 
Scrugham andtold him I couldn't take the appointment. 
And it's a funny thing. Along came a time when I got a 
notice from my draft board in Pioche to report to Salt 
Lake, Fort Douglass, to be examined for the army. I was 
thirty-four years old, I had a bad back, I had a nose I 
couldn't breathe through yet, then—I had it operated on 
since. I went on a bus with other inductees that picked 
me up in Ely, and they called me Grandpa before we got 



Inspecting the Mines 


11 


to Salt Lake. They were all eighteen, nineteen, twenty- 
year-old kids. 

I was there two or three days, and I went through the 
mill. Half of these kids didn't make it. Christ, I passed 
100 percent, and they had a lot of army officers and navy 
officers—doctors doing the inspecting. And the fellow 
that inspected my back was a lieutenant colonel in the 
army. I said, "God," I said, "I've got a bad back," and I 
did at that time. I was under industrial commission care, 
and I had more damned harnesses than a twenty mule 
team that they'd bought me. 

"Oh," he said, "you'll get over that." The next one 
that checked me was my nose. He was some damn thing 
in the navy, big high ... I don't know what the navy 
commissions are yet. He wasn't an admiral, but he was 
pretty high. 

I says, "I can't breathe." I noticed they'd been pass¬ 
ing guys that couldn't breathe, guys with bad backs. 

"Well," he said, "you're doing all right now." 

We were sitting on a bench, a long bench, and just 
one after another after another after another. I was sit¬ 
ting there, and beside me was a young fellow about five 
foot five and five foot five around. J ust a blob of a young 
man with white skin and varicose veins as big as my fin¬ 
gers. One of these officials from the army was coming 
along and hitting us on the knees and checking our re¬ 
flexes. Hit me on the right knee, hit me on the left leg. He 
hit this guy on the right knee, nothing happened. He hit 
him harder, nothing happened. He hit him hard enough 
to break his knee, and nothing happened. He went on. 
He passed. 


With a broken kneecap, right? 



78 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


[laughter] Damn near had. Anyhow, I passed with fly¬ 
ing colors, and then I thought, "Well, now I'll call 
Scrugham and get that commission." 

I called Scrugham; I couldn't get ahold of him. I 
couldn't make connection, but I got his chief of staff who 
knew me, and I told him what the problem was. He said, 
"Art, J im can't help you." He says, "This is not supposed 
to get out." He says, "Please keep it under your hat." 
And he says, "He's going to die in a day or two." And he 
was. Somebody had him hidden out some place around 
Las Vegas. He says, "He's in very bad shape," and he did 
die two or three, four days later. So I'm about to go into 
the army as a G.I., and I had a job as a deputy mine 
inspector. God, all I had to do was say I don't want to go, 
and I would have got a deferment. In fact, Joe Cohen, 
that brought me the shirt when I fought J ake Keele, was 
thechairman ofthedraft board, and alongwith this notice 
to appear was a note, "Art, if you want a deferment, just 
whistle." 

And my wife says, "Well, that takes care of that." 

I says, "No. By God, I'm going to go." 

So I went to Salt Lake, I'm cleared for induction, and 
I got back to Ely, and the word got out that I was on my 
way to the front. I'd known the superintendent at some 
little mine in Osceola. He was superintendent of a small 
mine and mill, Ray Wimberly. He had been a captain in 
the reserve during that time, and now he'd been called 
in. He was headed for Italy to do something, I don't know 
what. They were invading Italy at the time, and he said, 
"Art, I understand you're to be inducted." 

I said, "Yes." 

He says, "You speak Italian, don't you?" 

I says, "Fluently." 



Inspecting the Mines 


79 


He says, "God, I need you as an interpreter." He says, 
"I'll make arrangements that you're going with me as my 
interpreter." 

I says, "That's just as good as any, as far as I'm con¬ 
cerned." And before he was called in, the war was over. 
So I missed going into the army. 

I'm curious about one thing. I want to go back to your 
time in Pioche before you went to Ely. Did your mother 
eventually move to Pioche from Utah? 

She moved from Utah to Illinois, and then I got my 
stepfather to come back and work at the Bristol Mine 
where I was, and my mother then moved the family to 
Pioche. 

So your whole family was there, then, for a period of 
time? 

Well, she moved to Pioche, and my stepdad moved to 
Illinois to a place called High wood, and I went back there 
with him and stayed the summer, but I couldn't stand 
that flat country and various things connected with the 
union, mainly. I came back, and a year or so later, I got 
my stepdad in as blacksmith and mechanic at the mine. 
And then my mother and family came back to Pioche. 
They stayed in Pioche until they built a house for them 
at the Bristol Mine. 

Compare Pioche to Ely. What did you I ike about the two 
of those? 

Well, Ely, of course, was a much bigger town than 
Pioche. By the time I got to Pioche, Pioche was not the 



80 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


hell-roaring camp it used to be back in the olden days. It 
was a typical mining camp. A bunch of houses stacked 
up on the sidehill in a canyon. Ely was about the same 
thing. Main town in onecanyon, another town called Ruth 
in another canyon, and another town called Kimberly in 
another canyon, and that made the Ely area. I liked both 
towns. I'm always happy where I'm making a living. And 
I was young. The weather didn't bother me in those days 
like it does now. It gets awfully cold. 

Of course, you were on the road a lot. 

Yes. 




Prison Warden Appointment 


u 

f f 01 / 1 / did you end up being at the prison ? 

Well, that's a long story. When I was "paroled" from 
mine inspector, I naturally . . . that was my game, and I 
made arrangements to go to work. 

How did you get "paroled" from mine inspector? Was it 
a political thing? 

Political thing, and I was defeated in the general elec¬ 
tion. It was an elected position in Nevada. My opponent 
was an assemblyman, and he was tied in with labor, and 
labor decided to elect him, which is political, and they 
did a good job. 

So you had to run a campaign and everything? 



82 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


I had to run a campaign, and I got in a jackpot with 
my fellow Democrats. While I was mine inspector, the 
various state officials made out their budget every other 
year, and the budget that I was working on had been 
Matt Murphy's budget. When the new budget term came 
along, I had thousands of dollars left that I hadn't spent. 
So I just let them revert. And the governor, Vail Pittman, 
called me in his office one day—and the budget director. 

I had known Vail Pittman for many years, in fact, had 
lived next door to him in Ely. They told me that I couldn't 
let this revert. I said, "Why not? I don't need it." 

"Well, if you let that revert, it'll look bad for the other 
departments." 

I said, "What am I goingtodowith it? I can't spend it. 

I don't need anything." 

"Oh, buy some typewriters. Buy a car." 

"I just bought a car." 

"Buy another one." 

I said, "No, I just won't do that." So they called me in 
a little bit later, and to make a long story short, they told 
me that I was not cooperating, and that at the next elec¬ 
tion, which would be in 1950, they had the hatchet, and 
they were going to cut me down. I said, "Well, you cut 
me down, you're going to need a double-barreled axe," 
because I knew I sat pretty good with the miners and the 
mine operators. I knew that the union would be against 
me, but I didn't realize how many union workers there 
were in the state. I didn't realize that these hotels had 
thousands of employees—each hotel had as many em¬ 
ployees as most of these mining towns had—and that 
they were all union. 

So it wasn't union workers in miningthatwereagainst 
you—it was unions in general? 



Prison Warden Appointment 


83 


No, the unions were all in restaurants and the casi¬ 
nos. So when the votes were counted, I was beaten by 
more than 5,000 votes in Clark County and by almost 
5,000 in Reno, which amounted to about 10,000 votes. I 
lost the state election by 700. All the mining camps sup¬ 
ported me, and the mine unions, everybody in the mining 
camps. 

So I made arrangements, then, to go to work at where 
they h ave th i s bom bi n g ran ge i n L as Vegas [ M ercu ry Test 
Site]. When the Democratic machine beat me in the pri¬ 
maries, I went in, I told the governor, I says, "You did 
what you said you weregoingto do. You cut me down." I 
said, "Now, I'm going to cut you down." I says, "You beat 
me in the primary, I'll beat you in the general." 

Governor Pittman says, "You go ahead. Be my guest," 
in effect. 

Charles Russell, a Republican, was also an old friend 
of mine and a very good friend. In fact, we were lodge 
members in Ely for years together, belonged to the same 
service clubs, went out socially together. He was a little 
older than I, but not much, and we got along very well. I 
knew Charlieto beoneofthefinest men I've ever known, 
absolutely honest. I knew that if he were elected gover¬ 
nor, he would be one of the most honest in history. 

So I put the word out amongst all my friends in the 
miningcampsand had afew columnists in thestatethat 
took it up, and when the votes were counted, Charlie 
Russell won by 10,000 votes, and the mining camps who 
were registered almost solid Democrat voted almost solid 
for a Republican. And that was all my mining friends. 
They all came to talk. And I thought nothingof it, except 
I was very happy that Charlie had been elected. I did my 
best for Charlie, and he was elected by a huge majority, 
and most of the places he carried were predominantly 



84 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Democrat. And he, as a Republican, carried those towns 
and counties by huge percentages, and those were the 
counties that I was campaigning in. After the election, 
many of the political V.l .P.s contended that Art Bernard 
had elected Charlie Russell. Of course, Art Bernard 
hadn't, but couldn't stop tongues from wagging. 

During the time of election, in November and in the 
coming January, I had made arrangements to be con¬ 
nected with other mining ventures. I had one son in high 
school and two girls in grammar school. They would be 
moved in the middle of their term, and that bothered me 
a little bit, but it had to be done, and my wife and I were 
making preparations to go to where I was going to work. 

I think it was the third of J anuary, I got a call from 
Charlie [Russell], and Charlieasked if I could comedown. 

I said, "Sure, you bet." 

I went down, and he said, "What are you going to do 
now?" 

I told him where I was going mining, and I also told 
him that I was sorry to go, because my kids were in school. 
However, this job I was going to was paying me a lot of 
money, more money than I had been getting, so there 
was recompense. 

Charlieasked me, "What do you want out of this elec¬ 
tion?" 

I said, "I don't know what you mean." 

He says, "What kind of a job do you want?" 

I said, "Well, I hadn't given it a thought. I'm a miner." 

He says, "Yes, I know you're a miner," but he says, 
"I'd like you to go to work for me." 

I said, "Doing what?" 

He says, "Take over the state prison." 

I said, "Charlie, I don't know anythingabouta prison. 
I've never even visited one. I don't know the first thing." 



Prison Warden Appointment 


85 


But I knew that this prison had been making the news 
for years. They had all kind of troubles, too numerousto 
mention. That had been a sore spot for years and years— 
things that were allegedly going on—and the place was 
always running out of money. The legislature was always 
havingto re-fund something, because they were running 
out. All the back alley talk about what was going on at 
the prison—I'd paid no attention to it, because it was 
none of my business, and I knew nothing about prisons, 
anyway. There's always tales coming out of prisons in 
the papers, whatnot. 

He says, "Well, I know you don't know anything about 
a prison," but he says, "I know you, and you're a pretty 
sensible man. You've got a lot of horse sense." He says, 
"You'll figure out what's wrong pretty quick." 

I said, "Charlie, you'll just get in trouble." I said, "Hell, 
here you are a Republican, just been elected, and I'm a 
Democrat. You're appointing a Democrat to the state's 
political plum?" Because wardenship has always been 
considered the political plum of state appointees. 

"No," he said, "I don't think so." 

I said, "When the Republican hierarchy finds out that 
you're trying to appoint a Democrat, they'll kill you." 

He laughed, and he says, "No," he says, "I'm way ahead 
of you." I knew these Republicans, too—they controlled 
most of the mines. We were good friends, but I didn't 
think we werethat good of political friends. Hesaid, "I'm 
way ahead of you." He said, "Everybody that ever gave 
me a contribution or anybody that did anything for me 
or claimed they did, has got a friend they want to be 
warden." He says, "I know most of these people they're 
advocating. They should bein prison, but not asthewar- 
den. They're bigger thieves than some of the guys that 
are there." And he says, "But I just don't want to hurt 



86 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


their feelings." He said, "So I thought about you, and I 
thought about everything you just said, and I talked it 
over with Wingfield and Getchell," and he says, "You're 
their first choice." 

I said, "I still don't think I could do it, but I'll do any¬ 
thing. I'll do you a favor if you want. You can appoint me, 
and after a month or so when things kind of cool down, 
I'll submit a nice resignation, and you can make an 
announcement to the press the following day that Art 
Bernard retired, and you have appointed so-and-so, and 
that's all there will be to it." 

He says, "All right." So I went to the prison, and I 
found such a complicated mess and so many things that 
didn't make sense to me as a layman that I decided to do 
something. What I ran into was so interesting that they 
couldn't have got me out of there with a shotgun from 
then on! 

Everybody that knew anything said, "You can't do 
that." For one reason or another or another, I can't do it. 
Hell, I'm in charge of this place. So things just got. . . 
within a month, I was in my element. I did everything 
they told me I couldn't do. I became a famous warden 
throughout the state. I could show you some of these 
write-ups I got. 

That's an interesting twist on your career. You probably 
never thought you would stop mining. 

I thought I never would. I found that being in charge 
of the prison, in charge of the greatest con artists on 
earth, was one of the most interesting things. I just had 
so many interesting challenges, and I beat every one of 
them. I got famous, as I say, all throughout the United 
States. I got lots of commendations. 



_ 5 

Executions 


S o, tell me what it was I ike when you started at 
the Nevada State Prison. 

Well, it was very political. There were a matter of 
twenty-eight or thirty personnel. All of them expected to 
be fired. All of them resented me, assuming that they 
would be fired, and none of them were very helpful. I 
took over the prison on a Monday, and on that following 
Friday, five days after I assumed the wardenship, I had 
an execution. Here I was, and the law plainly stipulated 
that the warden perform the execution. The warden, Bill 
Sheehy, whom I succeeded, had told me about this exe¬ 
cution coming up, and he says, "You can't do it," he said, 
"I know you can't do it." He said, "It's the worst thing in 
the world." He said, "You just won't have time. You've 
got to live into these things." He says, "I'll come back 
and do it for you." 



88 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


I says, "No, this is my baby, and I'll raise it. I'll get by 
with it some way." I'd heard from Bill before, during our 
years, and we were both members of the same clubs, 
and whenever there was an execution down there, he'd 
get on a drunk, and you wouldn't see him for a week. 
J ust. . . it was hard on him. 

So, it was nice of him to volunteer, but I figured I can 
do this. "If I'm going to be in the kitchen, I'll take the 
heat," to quote Truman. 

I started questioningthe help, and all I could get was, 
"Well, the warden did it. We don't know what he did." I 
had to have something to go on, because I didn't know 
anything about the eggs and the acid. 

Finally, one guard, who later became one of my very 
best officers, named Blake, said, "Warden," he says, "I 
know that you're in a jackpot herewith this execution." 
And he says, "I'll help you all I can." He says, "I've been 
in on most of them, and I can tell you what to use and 
how to use it and to the best of my ability, at least as 
good as ... . I can do everything that Sheehy did." 

So, we went to visit the gas house, which was a little 
stone building back of the cell block, in the old building 
that they converted to the execution chamber. You can't 
believe what you .... They had this chair in this little 
stone building, air tight, with a hole, something like a 
toilet. Underneath the seat was a receptacle, and in this 
receptacle, they put acid, and then there were the pills. 
The cyanide pills were about the size of a pigeon egg, 
and you put a certain amount of them in a cloth bag, tied 
it under theseat, and you had three strings runningfrom 
thisseat uptotheceiling, where there was a little pulley. 
The strings went out through the wall into another little 
area, and there was a window on this little area that you 
could look in through and see the patient in his seat, 



Executions 


89 


strapped in.Thethree strings came down, and they were 
tied in three different places. I would go in, and I would 
tie the three strings from the bag to the three positions 
out in the other room, and only one of the strings held 
up the bag with the pellets in it. The other two were blank. 
So then, I'd have three officers, each with a pair of scis¬ 
sors, clip a string, and neither of them would know which 
onehad cutthestringwith theeggson, for their peace of 
mind. This was very crude, but it was very efficient. It 
worked. 

Were you one of the three? 

No. I had three officers. I just did the tying and gave 
the order to cut. So, you might say that I was just as . . . 
more responsiblethan the others, because I knew which 
string I'd tied the bag on, but I didn't know which one of 
those three strings was cut. 

In this little office with the window would also be the 
doctor. Standing back a little ways, but who could also 
see into the building, were the witnesses, whoever was 
allowed to be there. The press, of course, would be there, 
and the prosecuting attorney, if he wanted to be there; 
the relatives of the murder victim, if they wanted to be 
there. There was also a fan in the buildingthat blew out 
the gases in the building, and the deceased would betaken 
out, and the doctor would check his heart and pronounce 
him dead. 

Were these held at midnight, I ike you always hear? 

I held it at six o'clock in the morning. J ust about day¬ 
light. And that chamber we used, I can't remember, for 
several times before the new one was completed, and 



90 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


that was practically the samething, but modern and elec¬ 
trically controlled. I tied the eggs under the chair, and 
there were three switches in another room, where you 
could look through, as in the old one. I got three guards; 
each of them would pull a switch, and one of those 
switches was connected with thestringthat held the eggs, 
and that was the only difference. I think I did my duties 
on that sort of not too pleasant occurrence more than 
any man before my time or since—more executions. 

You had lots of people on the death row at that point? 

Yes. Not more people on the death row at that time, 
but I served in more executions over the years, than any 
of my predecessors or anybody after me. I conducted 
the executions. It was over a dozen men that were exe¬ 
cuted during my term in office. 

What was your reaction to that first one? 

Well, it wasn't pleasant, but it'ssomethingthat had to 
be done. After a while I began experimenting. This first 
man that they took out, if it was today, would have been 
probably found guilty of second-degree murder, no first 
degree, and certainly not the gas chamber. The second 
one, the same way. The third one, the same way. They 
were all . . . they had taken a life, but they weren't kill¬ 
ers; they weren't murderers. One was a police officer in 
Reno and a very good man. He had a brother that was a 
police officer in Carson City, another good man. He and 
his wife were divorced, and they had the usual . . . you've 
all heard and read about the aftermath of divorces. Some 
people lose their. . . they lose it. This young man, who 
was a very nice young man and a good police officer, 



Executions 


91 


visited a house where his wife—still wife, but under 
divorce proceedings—was staying, and whatever hap¬ 
pened, he shot her. 

There were others that didn't bother me at all. I per¬ 
formed the procedure over men who were vicious, dirty 
murderers, and I told them so. When I'd talk to them, I 
didn't mind saying, "I'm not goingtofeel bad puttingyou 
away. You deserve it. This should have happened long 
before." 

I had one man, who'd been on death row for almost 
three years. The publicity he'd got over being in prison 
for this many years was phenomenal. Now, it's nothing. 
They're in there for fifteen, twenty years. At that time, 
he'd been there less than three years, and people were 
just getting tired of him being on death row. He'd com¬ 
mitted a vicious murder in Clark County, and after he'd 
been convicted and was here, it was learned that 
California had been looking for him. He made a very 
vicious murder in California, too. What was keeping him 
alive, he was one of seven boys in a family—very promi- 
nentfamily in the Midwest—and all theother six brothers 
were professional men, doctors, lawyers. One, I under¬ 
stood, was a priest. They had plenty of money. This was 
the youngest and the black sheep of the family, and no¬ 
body ever came to see him, but they did pay the legal 
bills. But hefinally lost it. And at that time, and probably 
yet, you have to keep twenty-four-hour guard on any¬ 
body on death row. So, I had him and another young 
fellow that was condemned to death for killing his girl¬ 
friend in Sparks. Twenty-four-hour guard, three men 
twenty-four hours a day to watch somebody to keep them 
from killing themselves, just seemed absolutely stupid 
to me, because at that time we didn't have money to 
throw around like they have nowadays. Three men on a 



92 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


payroll, twenty-four hours a day, week after month after 
year, was just stupid. So, I took these two men out of 
death row, and I put them in the yard. I figured the guards 
can watch them there just as well as they can sitting 
outside of their cell. 

And thisone— I'm not goingto name names, because, 
as I say, they come from a very prominent family—well 
just call him Red. He had nice red hair. He was a young 
man in his early thirties, a very handsome man, slightly 
over six feet, 200 pounds, a personality that you 
couldn't... he should have been a professional man 
like his brother, because he had everything. But I took 
him out in the yard, and he and I became quite friendly, 
and at that time we had what we called the bull pen, 
where our gambling tables were. Gambling was legal in 
Nevada, so I assumed for that reason, they considered it 
was legal in prison. Whether they could do it openly or 
not, gambling goes on in every prison, as much as was 
going on in the state of Nevada, only it was illegal. They 
bet on anythingthey could. They had places where they 
gambled—I know from experience after I started visiting 
the other prisons. They all had gambling, except it wasn't 
legalized, and they couldn't control it. I could control 
mine, because once I went in there, I changed the rules. 
Before I took over, whoever was the strongest, had the 
most clout or the most money, or could hire the most 
help, controlled the gambling. I changed all that. The 
prison officials took it over, and whoever had the con¬ 
cessions to run a table, did it just as the state does, as 
the gambling commission. They had to show that they 
had a bankroll. They had to have good conduct. They 
could have nothing in their background—prison viola¬ 
tions of any kind. If they passed the muster, we allowed 
them to control the game, and as long as they controlled 



Executions 


93 


it honestly, they could keep it. The minute they started 
cheating, we'd hear about it, and we took away their privi¬ 
lege. This Red, his conduct was good. It couldn't have 
been bad; he'd been on death row. He kept his nose clean, 
and I have letters that I want you to read from him. He 
kept his nose clean, and he asked me if he could run a 
twenty-one game. He had money. He had all the money 
hewanted. His brothers sent him enough money to bank¬ 
roll a game in a regular gambling casino, if necessary, if 
he'd had the opportunity. He did a good job. He never 
violated his trust. 

I was the sort of a warden that every morning, every¬ 
day, I went through my yard, and I knew who the 
troublemakers were, because I kept track of what went 
on there. I used to walk through the yard, talk to the 
men. I'd go up and go through the cell blocks every once 
in a while. I'd go up through the mainline kitchen. I went 
all over that prison. At first, my guards were so shocked, 
they were scared to death that I was going to be attacked 
and held hostage. I says, "Don't worry. I'm only one man. 

I know what I'm doing. And I don't think these guys are 
going to take me." 

So, I'd go through this bull pen just practically every¬ 
day, unless something had happened that I couldn't go 
through the yard. I'd go back. I'd started a rock quarry to 
make rocks. Everybody that came in, had to go out on 
this rock quarry and make a certain number of rocks, 
and then they were replaced by incoming "fish," as we 
called the new prisoners. I'd go out and check that. And, 
as I say, I'd go in the bull pen to show them that I was 
interested, and I was going to keep track of that, too. 

During my years in Pioche, I had a very good hunting 
partner named Bill Garvey. A very nicefellow, and a good 
hunting partner. In fact, he had a Labrador dog. That's 



94 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


the first Labrador I've ever seen, and they became my 
favorite dogs. In fact, I wrote a book on, mainly, Labrador 
dogs. Bill and hisstepdad ran the biggest casino in Pioche, 
called the Navajo. And when I left and moved to Ely as 
Deputy State Mine Inspector, he and his stepdad ceased 
operating the Navajo. They sold out, and they moved to 
Las Vegas. Las Vegas was beginning to be gambling on a 
big stage, and they had big casinos. One was the Pioneer 
Club—the biggest at the time. Bill got a job as one of the 
main events there. I can't remember what his position 
was, but he had a lot of clout and a lot of friends. He was 
still an avid duck hunter and actually attracted avid duck¬ 
hunting friends. Whenever they wanted to go on a 
duck-hunting trip—money was no object to him—he'd 
give me a ring and say, "I've got so many men, and this is 
who they are, and they're all nice fellows, and they'd like 
to come up and hunt duck. Can you arrange a hunt?" 

"Sure." I was a member oftheCanvasback Gun Club 
at the time. The Green head Club was a big club, and you 
didn't have to be a member there to hunt. You could go 
in and just pay your daily fee. So, I could just be nice 
and take care of any amount that wanted to come up. He 
called me onetime and said he had three or four friends, 
whoever they were. Could he bring them up? 

I said, "Sure. We'll takethem out." I could also arrange 
for a guide for them, to take them out to wherever the 
ducks were. So, they came up and hunted a day or two, 
and then they all went back with Bill. And he says, "I'll 
stay an extra day and visit." He had a sister here. She 
was working in welfare. And he says, "I'll visit Hazel a 
day or two." Hesaid, "I'd liketo go through your prison." 

I said, "Sure. Be glad to take you." So, the day he 
came, I took him all through the prison, and I took him 
into the bull pen. Now, Bill was a big wheel in the Pioneer 



Executions 


95 


Club, which was the gambling place at the time in Las 
Vegas—in charge of all the games. I introduced him 
around. We came to the twenty-one table, and here is 
this Red—good, handsome man. I introduced him, and I 
didn't tell him what Red was in for or anything, but I 
said, "Red here is quite a dealer." 

And he said, "How good is he?" 

I says, "Well, how good are you, Red?" 

He says, "Pretty damn good." 

Bill says, "Deal me a blackjack." 

He dealt him an ace and a king. Unbelievable! I don't 
know myself how he did it, how this guy did it, because 
he didn't have any preliminary prompting or anything. 
He didn't know who was coming. 

Garvey says, "My God!" He says, "When does he get 
out?" 

I said, "I don't think he's going to get out." 

He says, "Why? I thought everybody got out." 

I says, "Well, he's going to get out, but he isn't going 
to be any good." I said, "He's due to be executed." 

I'd talked to Red I ike this before. I'd told him, "When 
I gasyou, Red, it isn't going to bother me at all. You should 
have been dead long before this." 

He said, "I know. I agree with you. I just can't help 
it." 

Anyway, I told Bill that he was to be executed. 

"God," he said, "you can't do that!" He said, "You got 
to let him out and send him to me. We need him in Las 
Vegas." 

Everybody laughed, because they could all hear it, 
and they all knew that I joshed with Red every time I 
came in about, "Well, two more months, and I got you." 

I finally did get Red, and when I put him in the chair, 
he said, "Warden, gee, you've been a good guy." He said, 



96 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


"I like you." He said, "I'm going to come and see you 
tonight at midnight." 

I said, "I'll be waiting for you, Red." 

Well, Red never showed up. 

One of the things I wanted to ask you is, to give a little 
perspective, what was happening with death penalty 
laws when you took over as warden? 

Not much at the time. There was the usual hullaba¬ 
loo in the press about the antis and the pros, and, in fact, 

I was called to a panel on the death penalty. I can't re¬ 
member the date. I was the pro capital punishment, and 
they had someone else as the anti. We both presented 
our views and why. This capital punishment was going 
on here and there, and so the news media instituted this 
panel. And those of us who were pro gave our reasons, 
and I had just conducted another execution in which I 
executed two men at the same time for a dirty, beastly 
murder. One of them was the instigator. The other guy 
paid the price, because he was with him, and he was an 
ex-convict, but not on a murder charge. One of them 
had conducted a vicious murder in some other state—I 
forget which one now—and had not got the death pen¬ 
alty, and had been paroled after the usual amount of time. 
At that ti me you could figure a first-degree murderer could 
do ten years, more or less. Some states were worse than 
others. I mean, when I say worse, they kept them longer, 
which may be better, instead of worse. 

This one fellow had been paroled and had picked up 
with this other guy and stolen a car, got up here on 1-80, 
which was Interstate 40 at the time, had some kind of 
trouble with the car, and they pulled off the road, and a 
do-good motorist stopped to give them a lift. His body 



Executions 


97 


was found—I can't remember where it was found. The 
burned automobile was found in Texas. But they got the 
two. There was a good job of detective work done. I used 
that examplewhen I was testifying on this panel. We were 
questioned. Somebody questioned me, and they said, 
"Why wouldn't you want to release somebody, just be¬ 
cause they had committed a crime? They may never do 
it again." 

I said, "I'm glad you asked that question. I just con¬ 
ducted an execution of a man who'd been paroled for a 
dirty, vicious murder and was guilty of another one 
shortly after he got out." And that was usually our stance 
from the pro side: as long as they commit a vicious mur¬ 
der and are executed, they'll never commit another one. 
Because many of them do, when they get out. You read it 
every day. 

But during the entire time that you were a warden, the 
death penalty was in effect? 

Yes, I think that they abolished it in the 1970s. I'm 
not really sure when it was. It was after my term as war¬ 
den. 

You saidyou did threeexecutions within that firstmonth 
that you were warden? 

Three weeks. I had one the first Friday, onethe second 
Friday, and one the third Friday. 

Was that unusual? 


Oh, I'll say it was! 



98 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


That didn't happen again? Itjustwasa coincidence? 

It never happened again, no. That was my indoctri¬ 
nation. As I told you, the first execution I had, when 
they pulled the victim out, his face was very red—just 
not normal looking. I asked my friend, Dr. Petty, one of 
my very best duck-hunting partners and club members, 
"What caused this?" 

And he said, "The acid." 

I said, "Well, what do you mean, the acid caused this?" 

He said, "Well, I can't explain." He says, "I never made 
a study of it myself, but I imagine that the more acid 
that's in there, the more it's going to affect the com¬ 
plexion." 

So, I talked to my friend, Sergeant Blake, who'd given 
me what information he could—the only one that helped 
me. He was the fellow that I had taking care of the eggs. 
I said, "The next execution, I'm going to cut down two 
pills." And I did. And he wasn't nearly as burned as the 
other one. So, the next time I cut it down two more. I 
finally got it where the cadaver looked just as normal 
when he came out of the gas chamber as when he went 
in. I had decreased the number of those eggs by three 
fourths, and still was absolutely effective. I mean, they 
died just as fast as they had before with all the eggs. I 
found out later that my predecessor, the one that was so 
disturbed about these executions, that he wanted to be 
sure they were dead, that he was the one who'd started 
using all this big bag of eggs. 

So, you just kind of experimented with how much you 
could decrease it? 



Executions 


99 


I just experimented, and I was very proud of thefact, 
my results looked just as good after they were dead as 
they did before. 

You made a comment that Sergeant Blake was the only 
one who would help you. Did you have some serious 
personnel problems, then? 

No. No. I worked them all out. Once they determined 
that I wasn't going to clean house, everyone became 
cooperative. We got along pretty well, and, in fact, I think 
that all my guards were very happy with me. They were 
all very sad when I left, as were a lot of inmates. I have a 
letter I'm going to show you from one of the inmates. 

Did this fellow get out and get reformed? Tell me what 
you remember of him. 

Well, he was our student, my student. 

You called them students? 

I referred to them as my students, and I call myself 
when I write: the Superintendent of Graystone U. I refer 
to the inmates as my students. How good they did or 
how bad they did. 

And whatdoyou remember of the fellow that wrote that 
letter? He's working as a salesman, so he must have 
gotten out? 

Oh, yes. He was paroled, but he was paroled after I 
left. I thought maybe I better tell you how I began to 
learn my prisonology. 



100 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Yes. Because you had no background. You came from a 
background of mining. 

That's right. When I first went down to the prison I 
just didn't know anything about it, but one thing I was 
interested in was the finances. Where did the money 
come from? Where did it go? All the years that I was in 
politics here, as I mentioned, the prison was always run¬ 
ning out of money, and they always had an escape or 
two. And they had riots. I'm very proud of my record in 
riots. 



_6 

Drugs and Escapes 


et's talk about how you learned your job. 

I n the daytime, as I said, I walked through my yard. I 
checked everything, just to getthefeel of the place. Nowa¬ 
days, wardens don't live at penitentiaries anymore. They 
all live away from the prisons. During my day, every war¬ 
den lived at the penitentiary. He was furnished a house. 

With your family? 

With your family. And they all got along fine. I don't 
know of any family that was ever bothered in history, 
never heard of it, if it was. If you got it in you, if you're 
not afraid, you can smell what's going on in that prison. 
You can tell by the sound whether everything is running 
smoothly, whether there's anything wrong, and you can 
almost determine how much, how bad, or how serious it 



102 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


is. And you can tell—if the prison is going on as smooth 
as can be, you can tell it. Every warden that I talked to 
during the many years that I attended the conferences 
told me the same thing. They could smell it, and they 
could feel it. And I certainly could. I had the best pipe¬ 
line in the prison that anybody could. 

But in the daytime I went through the yard, and I 
smelled and listened. And at night I'd go over to my office 
all alone, nobody else around but the night guards, and 
I'd have my bookkeeper give me the statements of the 
bills that were paid, what was bought, how much it cost, 
what it was for. And God, I'd go in with sheaves every 
night. I'd go through this, and here was clothes, so much. 
Here was this, so much, and so much for this, and so 
much for this. And some of them were pretty hefty bills. 
Some of them were small. Anything that could be bought 
locally was bought locally. I knew every business in town. 

I saw one, and I read it, and then I put it off to the side, 
then went on and on. Pretty soon I came to this bill again. 

Same bill? 

By God, it's the same bill. So, I reached back, and I 
got it. This one was dated a week before this one, but 
they was damn near. . . could have been twins. And 
they were for around a hundred and fifty dollars each. 
They didn't say what the hell it was. It was all numbers— 
letters and numbers. It was all Greek to me. It didn't 
make sense. I didn't know what it was. I went through all 
the monthly bills. I found four of them that month, all 
around a hundred and fifty dollars, all of them numbers 
and nothing else. So, I put them off to the side. Next day, 
I called thefellowthat knew what these things were, any¬ 
way. Bills. And I said, "What the hell is this?" 



Drugs and Escapes 


103 


Well, he says, "You know what it is." 

He was one guy that took a little bit longer to get along 
with than the others had. Later, he became very good. 
He kept me supplied in goat meat. 

I said, "If I knew what the hell it was, I wouldn't ask 
you." 

He told me what these letters were. 

I said, "That don't make . . . that's all Greek to me. I 
don't know what they are. What the hell is it? What do 
you do with it? Do you eat it? Do you drink it? What the 
hell do you do with this?" 

Well, he says, "That's narcotics." 

I says, "How the hell do I know it's narcotics?" And I 
says, "Narcotics! What do you mean to tell me? That 
we're buying narcotics for these convicts?" 

Well, he said, "Certainly." He said, "That's on doctor's 
orders." He said, "There's quite a few of them here that 
has to have it, or they'll die.” 

"Oh, bullshit," I said. "I got to investigate this pretty 
damn carefully." And I said, "This is dope." 

He says, "Yes." 

And it all came from the drugstore—one of my good 
friends in Carson City, Ike Cochran. So, the next day the 
doctor visited. Once a week he made his calls, or in emer¬ 
gencies he showed up—Richard Petty. I called him. I said, 
"Dick, can you come down to the prison." 

"What for?" 

I says, "I got a problem. And I don't want to talk to 
you over the phone. I want to discuss it." 

Well, he says, "Can't we do it on my next call?" 

I says, "No. You got to do it today." 

So, he showed up, and I had these bills, and I says, 
"What the hell is this?" 

"Oh," he says, "That's narcotics." 



104 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


I says, "You mean to tell me, we're furnishing dope 
for these goddamned convicts?" 

He says, "Oh, yes." He says, "There's some that they 
have to have it." 

I said, "What do you mean, they have to have it?" 

He said, "If they don't, they'll suffer, and they'll die." 

"Oh, come on. For Christ's sake," I said. "What? You're 
talking to the old warden now. You're not talking to a 
little schoolteacher from Santa Barbara." 

"No," he said, "that's right." 

I says, "Well, that's going to stop right now." 

He says, "It won't stop." He says, "You can't stop." He 
said, "There's certain men," and he named them, and he 
said, "They just got to have it." He says, "I've got them 
just as low as they can go." 

Well, I says, "They're going to go lower than that. 
They're going to go without." 

He said, "No." He said, "You can't do it." He said, 
"That's my department." He says, "You're running the 
prison, but I'm running the health." And he said, "The 
first thing that happens to any of those men, I'll call a 
news conference, and I'll tell them why it happened. I'm 
not going to take the heat for that." 

I said, "You don't have to. This is my kitchen. I'll take 
th e h eat. No more goddamned dope !" 

Well, he said, "You're going to be damn sorry, I'll tell 
you that." 

Well, I said, "Maybe I will, but it don't make a damn 
bit of difference to me whether I . . . ." 

Oh, he says, "The public will crucify you. They'll get 
you out of here. You'll be out in a week." 

I said, "If I'm out in a week, I can get a job." I says, "It 
doesn't happen. One thing about you doctors. You don't 
get any patients, you don't live, because you don't know 



Drugs and Escapes 


105 


how to go to work. I can do anything, and I've done it. 
So, this doesn't bother me a damn bit." 

So, I put outtheword tothecaptain. Thecaptain was 
named Fletcher, Harry Fletcher. Very experienced law¬ 
man. When I told him what I was goingto do, hetold me 
what the doctor said. He said, "You can't do it, Warden." 
He says, "I've had a lot of experience with it." He says, 
"They've got to have it, or they'll go crazy. They'll riot, 
and they'll die." And he says, "J esus Christ, the country¬ 
side will crucify you." 

I said, "They're goingto crucify me, because, by God, 
this stops. There'll be no more of it." And I told the pur- 
chasingagent, "Letmenot seeonemoregoddamned dime 
about dope!” 

The captain again told me, he says, "Warden, I know 
you mean well, but you just don't have the experience. I 
have." 

I says, "By God, Fletcher, I'll get the experience, but 
there's going to be no more dope." 

He says, "They're goingto die." 

I says, "Tell me who's goingto die first." So, I got out 
my pen. 

So, hetold me. He says, "Barry Finch is the first one 
to go." 

Well, I knew who Barry Finch was, because he'd come 
in from Lincoln County, my old stomping ground, on a 
murder charge, and he was a real con artist. The first 
trip I made through that yard, he corralled me, and he 
told me he was glad to see that I'd been appointed war¬ 
den. He knew I was going to be the best. He'd heard all 
about me. It just took me by surprise, you know. He was 
a little, scrawny-looking guy with a thin face. He was in 
his fifties. He looked 110. Weighed 115 pounds. And he 
wasthefirst one who was goingto die. Hetold me on two 



106 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


or three occasions, when he'd talk to me about his medi¬ 
cine, he said, "I need more medicine. They're not giving 
me enough medicine." I didn't know what the hell he 
was talking about, and I paid no attention to it, except 
when the doctor told me he was going to die. I remem¬ 
bered Pappy Finch talkingto me about his medicine. Now 
he tells me he's the first one that's going to die. 

So, a couple of days before that we had a prison shake- 
down. A shakedown is when the guards go through the 
cells and everywhere, and they find all the contraband- 
knives, anything that can be used as a weapon. You get 
guns; you get knives. Those guys in there are craftsmen. 
They can make things out of nothing that they can kill 
you with. And amongst this stuff—and God knows I've 
lost it over the years; I should have kept it all—was two 
razors where the blade was made out of a file. And if 
you've seen a file—a big, heavy file that you sharpen axes 
and various things with— it's a hell of a weapon. The blade 
was made out of a file, and the handle of this razor was 
made out of a rib bone out of a steer. By God, they were 
works of art! They were that long and heavy, because 
the file is thick and heavy, and they were ground down, 
and you could shave with them—they were actually that 
good—or you could cut down a tree. There was two of 
them, along with everything else that they had—little 
knives made out of wire and all the things. 

So, Barry Finch isthefirst onethat's goingto die. He 
was known as "Pappy" Finch. So I told the captain, "Get 
Pappy and bring him in my office, and you come in with 
him." I had a desk therewith three drawers on each side 
and one in the center. In one of these on the side I had 
everything that was taken in that shakedown, along with 
all the stuff I'd inherited from shakedowns before I came, 
which included two or three guns and various stuff that I 



Drugs and Escapes 


107 


can't really begin to describe. I had these two razors in 
here, and I took them with me when I moved out in the 
valley, and they gradually disappeared. Anyhow, captain 
came in with Pappy Finch. Captain satin the chair there, 
and Pappy sat in the chair there. I had another desk over 
there, and then there was this big blue ... all the pic¬ 
tures of everybody's been executed. I said, "Pappy, I got 
good news for you." 

"What's it about?" 

I says, "About your medicine." 

"Oh, thanks. Thanks," he said. 

I says, "I don't think you're going to need anymore. 
You're cured." 

He says, "Well, what do you mean?" 

I says, "I mean, you're cured. There's going to be no 
more dope. You've had it." 

And his face started to change. He said, "What do 
you mean?" 

I says, "I mean, there's no more dope. It stops. You 
get no more." 

He says, "You can't do that!" 

I says, "You want to bet?" 

He said, "The doctor prescribes that for me. I got to 
have it." 

I said, "That's what the doctor told me. I think he's a 
goddamned liar, and you're not going to get it." 

He said, "You're crazy!" And he added a few more 
words that I won't repeat. He said, "You can't do that." 

I says, "I've done it." 

He says, "I'll kill myself!" And he grabbed his shirt 
like this, and he pulled it out, and the buttons flopped 
off—pretty near hit me in the face. He says, "I'll kill 
myself! I'll kill myself!" 

I let him get all worked up. I said, "Sit down." 



108 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


He sat down, and I opened the drawer, and I took out 
one of those razors. I says, "I'd hate to see you kill your¬ 
self, Pappy, but if you do, I want you to do a good job. I 
don't want to go clean up any mess anywhere. By God, 
you take this razor, and when you start slashing, you do 
a good job. Do it up here. Don't do it here." 

And you're motioning to your neck, not your wrists. 

"Why you dirty so-and-so-and-so," he says. "I think 
you mean it." 

I says, "I am serious as hell." I said, "Captain," and I 
told him which cell to put him in. It was way up on the 
fourth floor and out in the corner. I says, "Nobody will 
hear you, and nobody will bother you. And try and stay 
in one place when you bleed, just as a favor to me, be¬ 
cause I don't want to clean up any more than I have to. 
And take this razor. Now, the captain will give you this 
razor when he puts you in the cell." 

He says, "I'll kill myself!" 

I says, "That's what you've been telling me, and I'm 
trying to help you." I gave the captain the razor and 
briefed the captain, "No matter what I said, you either 
agree with me or shut up." I gave him the razor. 

H e says, "Warden, 111 see th at h e's put away, an d th at 
nobody's going to hear him. When it's all through," he 
says, "I'll tell you." 

Now, Pappy screamed and moaned and groaned, and 
finally he said, "I can't stand it. Put me in the hole." 

I had two dungeons. One was under my office, and it 
was kind of damp down there, and I had one out in the 
yard, and it was dry—in a cave. "All right," I said. 

He said, "That's the only way I . . . otherwise, I'll kill 
myself!" 



Drugs and Escapes 


109 


"Now," I said, "you're not going to kill yourself, and 
you're not going to die, either." 

He says, "I think I will. I think I will." 

I says, "Well, can't put him down in the one under 
the office." We put him down there in the cave. I says, 
"Pappy, when you get ready, send me word, and I'll let 
you out." 

The next day, nothing. I asked the captain, "How're 
we doing with Pappy down there?" 

And he says, "He's quiet." 

"Is he screaming, doing anything?" 

"No. No. He's just quiet as can be." 

I says, "That must not be bothering him too much, 
not to get that dope." 

"Well," he said, "he hasn't said anything." 

Because he should have been going through withdrawal 
by now, right? 

Yes, he should, and you've heard all about this with¬ 
drawal, and so have I. 

How horrible it is. 

Now, this is Pappy, who was the first one that was 
goingto die, accordingto the doctor himself, who knows 
all about these things. Thesecond day, nothing. Thethird 
day, I got a message from Pappy, "I'll come out." 

So, I had him brought in, and I said, "You didn't die." 

He says, "You don't know what I'm going through, 
Warden." 

I said, "No, I don't, because I've never gone through 
it, but you're goingto go through it, and you're not going 
to get any more narcotics. By God, as long as I'm here, if 



110 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


I can stop it, and I think I can stop it, neither you nor 
anybody's going to get any narcotics. By God, the tax¬ 
payers of this state are not going to furnish dope fiends 
with dope!" 

So, I kept track of Pappy, and he got over it, and I 
kept track of the others, and it was quite a chore with 
these. I'm not going to go into the effect of what some of 
the others did, and one guy had a seizure in his cell one 
night. He got the whole mess out there, and they had to 
call the doctor. And he was one that was going to die. 
The doctor told me, he says, "He's not going to make it." 

I says, "Doc, the quicker the son-of-a-bitch dies, the 
better off the taxpayers are going to be, and the better 
off he's going to be." 

And, you know, he didn't die. In fact, when he found 
out he wasn't going to get it, he got up and went to his 
cell. But anyway, Pappy's the bad one. About a month, 
and Pappy is the happiest guy I've ever seen. He started 
to call me "Dad." Dad! Christ, he could be my father. 
And my wife, he called "Mother." I've got letters in here. 
He never forgot her birthday. He never forgot our anni¬ 
versary. He never forgot Christmas. We got a card from 
him, a loving card, on every occasion. He just kept get¬ 
ting better and better and better. And a year later, he 
said, "Will you get me mugged again, re-mugged?" 

I said, "Yes, I will. It's about time." 

I had his old mug in my drawer, and while he was in 
there, I took it out, and he says, "You know, I look like a 
hound dog barking at the moon." 

I says, "You sure do." He looked awful. He weighed 
115 pounds. That was his height, weight, and everything. 

I said, "I'll send you out and get you re-mugged." 

And that means a new picture, right? 



Drugs and Escapes 


111 


New picture, new weight, and everything. They 
brought in this picture of this kindly-looking, old, grand¬ 
father type. He was then ... I don't know whether he 
was sixty yet or not, but he looked about his age then, 
and he weighed 165 pounds, from 115. He'd gained fifty 
pounds in a year! And he was just as healthy as he could 
be. He was the greatest advocate I had. No matter who 
came in there and wanted dope . . . and they just came 
one after another and after another on dope. And I had 
experiences with all of them. I'm not going to go into 
them, because we just don't have the time. 

But Pappy said, "Can I have one of those pictures?" 

I says, "You sure can." I gave it to him. 

He says, "This ... I cherish this." And he says, "Do 
you think I'll ever get out of here, Warden?" 

I says, "If I last longenough, you will." And I did. I got 
him paroled to somebody in Chicago that needed gar¬ 
deners and all that sort of stuff, and they took him, placed 
him there as a gardener. I never heard from him after 
that. I hope he made it, but I'm sure he didn't, because 
once he could get it, he ... . Before he left, I says, "Prom¬ 
ise me that you won't go back on that medicine." 

He says, "I give you my word." 

But I didn't believe him. 

Did your tactics in dealing with the narcotics get out 
into the public? 

Oh, God, yes. 

And what was the response? 

The response was—you can't believe it. You ought to 
talk to Dr. Petty. If you get a chance, call him and ask 



112 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


him, just for the hell of it: What about the narcotics, when 
he told the warden that if they don't have it, they're go- 
ingto die? Hesaid, "Thefirst onethat dies, I'm goingto 
call a press conference." Yes. I brought that up to him, 
and he enjoys telling about it more than I do. "By God, 
he was right!” he says. 

So, it did get out in the press? 

Oh, yes. 

And what was the public response? 

Well, nobody paid a hell of a lot of attention to it. But 
when I read about these dopes, I know better. I know 
better than anybody that they just don't die. And they 
just get better. They may have withdrawal symptoms, I 
don't know. Pappy said he did, but he didn't act like it. 
He didn't go into throws or everything like this one guy 
did in the cell block—faking death. I know damn well 
that every one of them can stop it, and they can stop it 
cold. I did it. I got the proof. 

Let's talk about a couple of the other things that you 
mentioned: escapes and riots. The prison had a history 
of escapes, did it? 

Oh, yes. And I had some while I was there, too, but a 
fewer percentage than any before and any after, and I'll 
give you reasons for that, I think. 

Let's talk about the escapes, first. What is the reason 
that that was a lower percentage? 



Drugs and Escapes 


113 


Well, probably because I was more careful in putting 
them out, and I had lots of trustees out. I had more trus¬ 
tees working. They built the bull pen. We completely 
rebuilt that. 

Talk to me about the trustees. What was your philoso¬ 
phy on the men in prison? Did you setup some system 
there, for working with them? 

I looked at the conduct. I talked to them. And I made 
damn few mistakes. They say that when you escape, 
you're going rabbit. And I just was lucky, I guess, but I 
had very few escapes. 

Now, tell me about the trustees. Was that a system that 
was already in place? 

Oh, yes. This trustee system was in place, but not 
like I had it. 




_ 7 

Conflict with Labor Unions 


I /1 what changes didyou make at the Nevada State 
V V Prison? 

The changes I made is when I went down there, I 
knew all the work that had to be done. And there was 
no . . . thewholeinstitution needed to berewired. Every¬ 
thing was falling apart, and there was no money to do 
anything, and nobody could .... If they had had the 
willpower to fight the public to use prison labor, they 
didn't have the ability, or the guts, I don't know what. 
But I decided to do all that work, and I found out that I 
couldn't, because organized labor wouldn't allow it. And 
I says, "Well, to hell with organized labor. They beat me 
as mine inspector. They're not going to beat me as war¬ 
den." And some interesting things would arise out of that. 
What brought all thisabout is, oneofthefirst men I found, 
an inmate—a student in my college—was a man that I 
had met many times inspecting mines. He was the chief 



116 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


electrician at the tungsten mine up in Winnemucca, 
Nevada Tungsten. He was a good one. My God, I run into 
him face to face. "What are you doing here?" 

And he told me. The mine had shut down or some¬ 
thing. He'd been out of work, so he went to work in 
Lovelock. One of the great politicians in Reno, Norman 
Biltz, a very good friend of mine, had bought a big ranch¬ 
ing interest in Lovelock—I mean, thousands of acres. He 
was rewiring everything he had. And he was doing it. He 
got to gambling and drinking, and he forged a check on 
his employer, and he came to prison. "My God," I said, 
"that's awful! My God, your talent wasted." I said, "How 
long have you been here?" 

He told me, "Several months." 

I says, "As an electrician, you naturally have seen all 
the problems at the prison." 

"Oh, God, yes," he said. "I'd just love to tear into 
them." 

I says, "You're going to." I had carpenters of equal 
ability. I had plumbers. The best brains in labor, I had at 
the prison, doing time for nothing, and anxiousto work, 
anything to do to pass the time away. So I told the cap¬ 
tain, "We're goingto rewire this whole place. We're going 
to rebuild everything." And we started, and sure enough, 
labor sent word to me to stop it. I didn't pay any atten¬ 
tion to them, so one day the captain came in and he . . . 
the captain had kind of got used to me, and he was en- 
joyingme, becauseanythingthat he'd liketodo, or would 
have liked to do, and he knew he couldn't get away with 
it, I was getting away with it, and I was doing it. 

Hesaid, "There's a group of gentlemen out here would 
like to talk to you." 

I said, "Who and what?" 



Conflict with Labor Unions 


117 


He says, "A bunch of labor leaders. And what, I don't 
know." 

But he knew, and so he sent them in, and there were 
twelve of them. They represented every trade, and they 
sat down, and they told me how the cow ate the cabbage. 
I was not going to use any prison labor. Anybody that 
came down there to work would be a union man, and 
that was it. 

I'd asked them to sit, and I said, "I don't have enough 
seats for all of you, but I'll get some." 

"No," he said. "No, this won't take long. This won't 
take long. We'll stand." 

When they got through I said, "Well, I'll tell you, no 
S.O.B. is going to come down here and work and pass a 
file into my place, as a plumber would do. No S.O.B. is 
going to come in here and pass hacksaw blades, like an 
electrician would do. No S.O.B. is goingto come in here 
and leavea hatchet. Nobody isgoingto bringanythingin 
here, and nobody's going to bring in any dope or any 
liquor or anything. And I'll tell you, that's it. You can 
either like it, or you don't like it. And since you said you 
didn't want to sit down, because it wouldn't take long, 
it's finished." I said, "You can leave, and if you need any 
help, I'll try and do it. And you may get dinner, but I'll 
get a lunch while we're at it." They filed out. 

That night the governor called me and said, "Can you 
come up in the morning, about nine o'clock." 

I says, "Yes, I can. What's the scoop?" I knew what 
the scoop was. 

"Well," he said, "your friends, the labor leaders, came 
in today, and they want a meeting with me tomorrow at 
ten o'clock." 

I started telling him what went on. 



118 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


He said, "Don't tell me. Just come up here at nine 
o'clock, and we'll talk it over before they come in." 

So, I went up at nine o'clock, and I told him, and he 
grinned all the time. I told him that I had said, "The 
meeting is over. Please leave, and if you don't want to 
leave, I'll try and help you. You wanted to help me. I'll 
help you. You might get dinner, but I'll get a lunch." 

And he was tickled to death. I didn't know what he 
was going to do, but he was tickled to death. Nine o'clock, 
we talked, shot the bull there for a while. We went in at 
ten o'clock and sat down, and he told the clerk, he said, 
"When they show up, just bring them in." In the mean¬ 
time, he and I went in. He had a big, long conference 
table in his office. He said, "You sit up at that end, and 
I'll sit down at this end." He told the girl, "When they 
come, just send them in." 

So, here they came marching, the whole bunch of 
them. When they saw me, it was like somebody had 
thrown a tub full of water in their face. They didn't ex¬ 
pect me. They expected to come in and tell him what 
the score was, and that they wanted Bernard fired, and 
that was it. And here I am. 

"Come in, gentlemen," he said. "Sit down." He told 
them that he had enough seats for everybody. He says, 
"You were complaining about Art and his conduct. I 
thought it no more than fair that he be here to defend 
himself." 

They sat down. Not a word was spoken. Not a word. 
"Art," he said, "tell me what went on." 

I told him just exactly what went on. He'd nod, nod. 
Hesaid to them, hesaid, "Was th is truthful or not? What's 
your version?" 

Well, they went on, and they told him they .... He 
just took the sails right out of them. They said, "Well, we 



Conflict with Labor Unions 


119 


feel that as taxpayers, the union members should have a 
chance to go to work, and it's not fair for a convict to 
take the bread out of the mouths of honest working people 
and their families." And they gave him a good story- 
song and dance. 

He said, "Art, what's your answer to that?" 

I says, "Well, I don't want to take the bread out of 
anybody's mouth. Don't intend to. But we don't have 
money to do that. You know that, and they know it. It's 
thousands and thousands of dollars, and we just don't 
have appropriation." I said, "God, we're livingfrom hand 
to mouth. I'm runningthat prison cheaper than it's ever 
been run before, and it's costing ninety cents a day a 
man to keep that." Keep that in mind, ninety cents a 
day, then. That's costingthousands of dollars a year nowa¬ 
days to keep a man in prison. In my time it was five 
hundred dollars a year, more or less. I said, "All that work 
has to be done for the best interest of the taxpayers, and 
I've got labor down therethat these guys don't have. They 
haven't got an electrician like I have, that's rewiringthat 
whole penitentiary. I've got craftsmen down there in 
every . . . any way you want, anything there is to be 
done: carpenters, plumbers, anything. And they're in, at 
the taxpayers expense. We're supportingthem. Why, the 
hell shouldn't they do something?" And left it. "And an¬ 
other thing. As long as they're busy, their minds are . . . 
they're not scheming to escape or to hurt anybody." I 
said, "I think that's the best way to run it." I said, "If that 
isn't satisfactory with labor and with the governor, you 
can have my resignation right now." 

The governor says, "I really don't think so." He said, 
"What do you guys think?" 



120 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Well, they said, "We can see where the wind is blow¬ 
ing." And they got up and left. I never heard another 
thing from labor. A/evar. 



8 

Riots 


|/|/e wanted to talk a little bit about riots. How 
If If did you prevent riots? 

Well, when I took over I was told by the personnel 
that soon we were going to have the annual spring riot. 

It happened every year? 

It happened every year. They said, "And don't worry 
about it. It'll blow over. It'll just blow over, and then 
everything goes back." 

I said, "You mean to tell me, they break up all the 
furniture in the kitchen and dishes and everything, and 
it just blows over?" 

He says, "What else you goingtodo? They're goingto 
do it, anyway. You just as well let them do it." 

I says, "When is this going to happen?" 

"Well, it usually is right around May or J une." 



122 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


I said, "Is there any way I can tell when it's going to 
happen?" 

"Well," he says, "we can kind of tell." 

I says, "J ust before it happens, I want to know." I'd 
found several people that I knew in there, boxers that I'd 
been well acquainted with. I'd go in there, and I'd find 
some of my old ring friends in there, and they're just as 
friendly as they can be. And they weren't criminals. They 
werein therefor bad checks or something. But they were 
the best stool pigeons in the world. They'd tell me any¬ 
thing I wanted to know. Through them I had the best 
pipeline into a prison that anybody could have. I knew 
damn-near everything that was going to go on. So, I put 
out the word with one of my friends, a stoolie. One of 
them had been there during one of the riots. The others 
hadn't, but they all know what's going to happen. So, I 
said, "Give me a week's notice, if you can, or a day or 
two, or whatever you can." 

He says, "All right." 

I'd gone through this Pappy Finch deal already by 
then. And one day one of my officers came in, and he 
said, "That riot is getting close. We will try and give you 
the date." They did. 

I said, "And I want to know." I says, "I don't know 
what I want to do, but I want to know." 

In the meantime, the next day, one of my pigeons 
came in, and he told me when it was going to happen. 
So, on that day it was going to happen at four o'clock, 
when they served dinner. They go in at four o'clock. 
There's a guard station there, guards in there. There's a 
gate here that you go in and out of, and this guard is 
armed. You'd think he could stop a riot. He's got guns 
and everything. But he never had. Anyway, when my stool 



Riots 


123 


told me it was going to happen, I went up, I come to the 
gate, and I says, "Open it. I want to go in the mess hall." 

"You can't go in there, Warden." 

I says, "Why can't I?" 

"Because you can't go in there." 

I said, "J esus Christ, I'm the warden! I want to go in 
there! Open the gate!" 

This guard is scared to death. Hejust don't know what 
the hell to do. 

I says, "Open the gate. And when I'm in there, you 
close it." 

So, everybody's seated at tables by then. And Pappy 
Finch is there. He's one of the inmates, and he'd been 
cured by now. So, there's quite a bit of silence, but still 
some mumbling here and there. They didn't know what 
the hell was going on. So, I walked over by one of the 
seats. And they didn't have too many tools. We didn't 
allow knives or forks. They had to eat with spoons most 
of thetime. I picked up a spoon, and I rattled for. . . and 
I got the attention, and they are as quiet as they can be. 
I told them, I says, "I understand that you're going to 
riot. You do it every year. You break up the dishes. You 
break up the pans. You throw them out through the bars 
i nto the warden's yard," because my house was right over 
there. I said, "I understand that that's sort of an accepted 
prison practice, at least around here. But," I says, "it's 
going to stop, because I'm not going to have the taxpay¬ 
ers of this state buy any more forks, knives, spoons, or 
plates, because you destroy them and throw them out. 
Or stoves or parts of the stove." And I said, "You've got 
to eat. And when you've torn up the tables, I'm going to 
have the floor. And that's a pretty good-looking concrete 
floor." And it was smooth. I said, "We'll just have to wash 
that floor up slick and clean, and you can eat it down 



124 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


there, because that's where it's going to be. I am not go- 
ingto buy any more tools." I said, "Some of you may not 
believe it, but that's the way it's going to be. Now, you 
can either eat it off the floor, or you can eat it off the 
dishes that you got. It's your choice. Be good." And I 
started walking out. Not a . . . you could hear a pin drop. 
Pappy Finch got up, and he started to clap for me, and 
before I got to the gate, there wasn't a soul that wasn't 
standing up and clapping. And we never had a riot. 

The whole time you were there? 

Well, we did have another one, but it was a real . . . 
in the middle 1950s, we started getting prison riots. If 
you remember—if you're old enough to remember—all 
over the country prisons were rioting. They had lists of 
grievances that they wanted taken care of, and they 
wanted a conference with the governor. They had to see 
the governor, and the governor caved in. They'd give him 
a list of all their grievances with this bad, bad prison and 
the terrible warden and the horrible guards. And the gov¬ 
ernor, to stop the riot, would concede to all they want. It 
was going on all over. Every governor was meeting and 
conceding. I told my crew, I says, "We're going to get it. 
It's going to come here. I don't know when, but it's com¬ 
ing." I said, "And by God, I'm going to take care of it." 

So, it went on and on. They didn't use good judge¬ 
ment. They tried to pull it in late fall. It was getting colder 
than hell at night. Oh, before this, when I took over the 
prison, my stooliesweretellingmethingsthat my guards 
weren't, so I realized that they weren't feeding me the 
good information of what was going on and what was 
wanted and what should be done, that really would have 
been beneficial to the institution, as well astheconvicts. 



Riots 


125 


Your guards weren't telling you? 

They just didn't think that I needed to know. They 
were protecting me. And so, at this particular point, they 
came in, and they said, "Warden, we got a problem." 

I said, "What's the problem?" 

Hesaid, "Theconswon'tgoin. Chow time, thewhistle 
has blown, and they said they're not going in." 

I said, "What do they want?" 

"They've got a list they want." 

And on account of these guards not telling me every¬ 
thing, I had them. I said, "I want to appoint three men to 
represent those convicts, and they're goingto elect them, 
and I'm goingto meet with them. If they've got anything 
they want to bring up with me, I want to see them." And 
I said, "You send them in. I don't mean that I'm goingto 
concedeto their demands or anything, but I wantto know 
what the hell they want, because it might be all right. It 
might be beneficial to all of us." That didn't go good with 
the guards, but they're not going to argue with the war¬ 
den. And so, we got a three-man commission, and one of 
them you'll hear about later. So, whenever they had any¬ 
thing that they wanted, they asked to see me, and I saw 
them. And if I wanted to know anything, I sent for them. 
We got along fine, very agreeable. There are a lot of things 
they wanted that made sense, and I agreed to them. Lot 
of things didn't. Lot of things they told me was beneficial 
to me. They thought that it would be good if I knew it, 
and I wasn't getting this information. They saw I should 
get it. 

Was that representative of some problems between the 
guards and the inmates? 



126 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


It did, but I took care of that. I says, "This is between 
me and them. It's between me and the inmates. It's got 
nothing to do with you. They want to see me. I am run¬ 
ning it. I want to talk to them. 

But anyway, I said, "Bring my three wise men in." I 
used to refer to them that way. When I wanted the com¬ 
mittee, I'd say, "Bring my three wise men in." So, they 
brought in my three wise men. I said, "What the hell's 
going on?" 

Well, they told me. They said, "The men have a list 
that they want." 

I said, "Is it in writing?" 

"Oh, yes, but. . . ." 

I said, "Go out and get it for me. And hurry!” 

So, they went out, and they came back in with a list. 
They wanted to get rid of the doctor. They didn't want 
the doctor. They didn't want two or three of the guards— 
they named them. They wanted better food. They wanted 
this. They wanted that. Oh God, they had more things 
than you could imagine. And they wanted to see the gov¬ 
ernor. They had to seethe governor. So, I read them, and 
I said, "Well, you go out and tell them that they've got 
five minutes to get in line and go in. None of these are 
going to be considered, not a damn one of them. And 
when this is over, I'm taking away a lot of the privileges 
that I've given them. You can tell them . . . be . . . frankly, 
but one thing I want you to tell them. If they're not in 
when they're called, they're not going in." 

They said, "What do you mean?" 

I said, "J ust that. If they don't go in, they're not going 
in. If they don't want to go in, I agree with them. I'm 
going to let them stay out." 

So, they went in, and they told them. And the time 
came and I had the doors locked. Now, they thought 



Riots 


127 


they'd figured this all out. They'd cleaned the prison store, 
where they buy candy and everything else— peanuts and 
everything. They'd cleaned that out. I'd got a little suspi¬ 
cious, and so had the guards. "What the hell are they 
doing?" Bought all the crackers, all the candy bars, every¬ 
thing, you know. They figured they were going to go out 
in the bull pen. They had plenty to eat and plenty to 
drink, and they were going to beat me. So, when they 
didn't go in, I locked the doors, and they're out. They 
went to the bull pen, where it was going to be nice and 
warm, and the heat was turned off. It was late in the 
fall—no heat. I didn't turn the water off, because I didn't 
want a mess in the bathrooms, but there's no heat. 

Of course, the press had already been ... I mean, 
they knew it within five minutes, and they were there, 
"What are you going to do?" 

Well, I said, "They didn't want to go in, so they're not 
going in." 

"What do you mean?" 

I said, "That's just what I mean. They're going to stay 
out and cool their heels, until they decide to go in, and 
it's going to get pretty goddamned cold pretty quick. And 
they don't have any heat. They got water. If I could turn 
off the drinking water, I'd turn that off, but I can't turn 
just the drinking water off." 

"What about the governor? What does he say?" 

I says, "Hell, I don't know what the governor says. I 
don't know where the governor is. He ain't here." 

"Aren't you going to call him?" 

"Hell, no! I'm not going to call him. I'm running this 
prison. The governor isn't running the prison. He sent 
me down here to do it." 

So, pretty soon I get word from the news media, "The 
governor is in Las Vegas." 



128 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


I said, "So, he's in Las Vegas." 

"Well, what are you going to do?" 

I says, "I'm not goingto do anything. I'm runningthis 
prison, and I'm keeping those convicts out. They're not 
going in." 

So, the press was tel ling you where the governor was. 

They said, "He's in Las Vegas. What are you goingto 
do?" 

"I'm not going to do anything." 

"Well, we'll get in touch with him." 

I said, "Be my guest." 

Thefirst thing I did, when I told theguardsto lock up 
the doors and keep the prisoners out, I called my friend 
Bob Clark, chief of the highway patrol. Bob was a good 
man. We were very close, and very good friends. I ex¬ 
plained what had happened. "Bob," I said, "I'vegot a riot 
started down here. My students don't want to go in to 
their rooms. I don't know what's goingto happen, but I'd 
like you to send several men down here, if you can spare 
them, and put them up on top of the cell block, looking 
down into the yard, because that's where they're going 
to be." 

He said, "How many do you want?" 

I said, "Oh, four or five is enough, one on each corner." 

And they came down, all armed with their rifles and 
everything, and I had the guards take four or five or six 
mattresses up on top of the roof, and blankets, because 
it was goingto get chilly that night, and I wanted them to 
be comfortable. My instructionswere, "J ust pay no atten¬ 
tion to them. Let them do anything they want, unless 
they try to go over the wall," which I knew they weren't 



Riots 


129 


going to try to do. They couldn't. It was too high. We'd 
gone through that before. 

How high was it? 

About twelve feet and wire on top. I'd gone through 
that with the doctor with the dope. He said, "They'll go 
over the walls!” 

I said, "By God, if they do, I'm going to get some new 
marksmen around here." 

But I said, "The sight of those patrolmen up there are 
going to keep those guys pretty well controlled." 

Bob changed the men every once in awhile. And the 
second day came. By then, my three wise men are com¬ 
ing in pretty often. "Warden, a lot of the guys want to go 
in." 

I said, "They can't go in. They either all go in or none. 

I told you that before." Because I'd told them, I says, 
"Anybody that wants to go in, can go in. If they don't go 
in, they're not going in. And tell them that." 

So, they said, "What are we going to do?" They're 
telling me about the older men that this was beginning 
to get to them. They was cold and miserable, and they 
really didn't want to riot. They were happy. They always 
had been happy. 

I said, "They had a chance to go in. They didn't. You're 
all going in, or nobody's going in. Take a vote out there. 
When they all want to go, they go. And until they all 
want to go, don't bother me. They're staying out." 

I knew, as the other guards knew, that there was a 
core in there of troublemakers, and we knew who the 
main was one—young man about in his late twenties or 
early thirties, handsome, good-looking, big, strong man, 
six feet, 190 pounds, and atypical bully. He bullied every- 



130 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


body. As long as he didn't hurt them, we didn't bother 
him too much, although he had been in cell detention 
two or three times. But we knew he was, if not the main 
instigator, one of them. Let's say this is our prison yard, 
and here's where they went in the cell block. Over here 
was the bull pen. And over here was a graveled walkway 
there and there. In the center, with the crosswalk in here, 
was all lawn. We didn't want anybody to go on the lawn. 
That was part of our beautification of the yard. On each 
corner of the lawn I had a piece of a half-inch pipe about 
that longwith a point and a sign welded on, "Do not tres¬ 
pass on grass," and they were stuck down one in each of 
thefour corners. Alongwith thistypical bully that every¬ 
body has, we had the typical mouse that's always picked 
on, and this guy was about five foot five, a hundred and 
twenty, thirty pounds, kind of young, nineteen or twenty, 
and he could be pushed around. And by God, this big 
bully was pushing him. 

About thethird day, there was an incident in theyard. 
From what I gather, the little guy just couldn't contain 
himself, and he went up and he told this big bully type, 
who was the instigator, "God damn you! On account of 
you, we're out here freezing to death!" 

So, hetook after him. Hesays, "I'll wringyour neck!" 
or words to that effect. What he said, I don't know, but 
the little guy started running, and the bully started chas¬ 
ing him. The little guy came around, cut off a corner of 
the lawn, and slipped, and grabbed one of these pieces of 
iron with the "Keep off the grass" metal sign to hold him¬ 
self, and it came out of the ground, and here he is with 
this thing in his hand, that's a lethal weapon. He got up, 
and here's the guy right on him, and I guess he felt like I 
did when I was pushed into the ringwith Iron J aw Slade. 
He went crazy, and he just started beating, just started 



Riots 


131 


whipping, and he was hitting the guy every time. Pretty 
soon, he's chasingthe big guy. And he never quit. I guess, 
from what the guards told me later, he was screaming 
every foot of the way after him and beating him. And the 
big bully just took it. Hejust ran. Finally, one of the guards 
called down—they all had foghorns—and told them to 
stop. So, they stopped, and they went in, and they picked 
up this big guy and took him to the hospital. He was beat 
up. And the next day, the riot was all over. The three 
wise men came in and said, "Everybody will go in. They 
want to know what the repercussions are." 

I says, "I don't know yet. They're going to lose a lot of 
privileges. How many, I don't know till I see how they 
react, because this isn't over yet, until everything smooths 
out." 

By God, we never had another... we never had a 
blurb. They went in. And this made national news—all 
over. 

Because they didn T get to see the governor? 

Oh, I forgot to tell you. The press went to the gover¬ 
nor, and they caught him in Las Vegas. They said, "There's 
a prison riot! What are you going to do?" 

He said, "Prisoners are rioting? What am I going to 
do? Hell," he says, "I don't know whether I'm goingto do 
anything. I got a warden up there is taking care of that." 

"Well, aren'tyou goingto tell thewarden . .. . ? Aren't 
you goingto meet with them?" 

"Hell, no! I'm not going to meet with them. I'm not 
runningthe prison. Thewarden is runningthe prison." 

"Aren't you goingto tell him what to do?" 




132 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


He says, "Nobody tells Art what to do. He's running 
that prison." This came out in the Nevada paper and 
papers all over. 

What you're showing me here is a big blown-up picture 
of a cartoon, an editorial cartoon, is that right? 

This was in the Omaha World Herald. And it was 
titled, "A Setback to the Cause." 

It says, "Carson City, Nevada, prisoners give up, re¬ 
turning to their cells." 

And the prisoner is sitting there saying, 'This is an 
outrage. They just undone months of painstakin' 
campaignin'." 

And then, I guess, down here, underneath that pris¬ 
oner, it says, "Society for the Advancement of Comfort 
for J ail birds. "And they wrotean articleto go with this? 

Oh, a big, long article. And it went on to tell about 
how it took a little state like Nevada to show the prisons 
around the country how to conduct themselves. H.C. 
Barrow was the cartoonist that made this, and he sent 
me the original that he gave to the paper. 

And he signed it, "Congratulations to Warden Bernard, 
by H.C. Barrow." 

So, that was the two riots that I almost had. 



9 

Inmate Work Program 


/ wanted to talk to you a little bit about the work 
program that you started at the prison. Would you 
describe how that came to be? 


With all the skilled labor that we had at the institu¬ 
tion and all the work that needed to be done—I noted 
that one of our main problems was lack of anything for 
the inmates to do. With time on their hands, they had 
nothing to do but plan and scheme how to thwart the 
guards, escape, and whatever you can think of. I decided 
that one of the best things I could do was get as many as 
possible to work, so I started the rock program in the 
quarry. The prison is in a natural rock mountain, and 
getting stone is no problem at all. In fact, years back 
they quarried stone there for, I believe, the State Capitol, 
as well as many other buildings in Carson City. So, I 
started what we called "the rock gang." 



134 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Every incoming inmate was held for a week or ten 
days in what we called the "fish tank" till we got a result 
of their health problems, whether they had this disease 
or that, or so we could train them. When they were clean 
and well fed, they came out, and their second day out, 
they had to go to their work on the quarry gang. It could 
only take so many men, so they had to take their turn. I 
kept them there until they completed an x amount of 
rocks—finished building stone. I can't remember now 
how many it was. But it was not much problem. It would 
take them probably two weeks to make this amount of 
stone. Then they would come back into the yard. In the 
meantime, we had an idea what kind of temperament 
the particular inmate had—whether he was trustworthy, 
whether he was a problem, a troublemaker or whatnot— 
and hewas replaced with anew fish.That's theincoming 
inmate. All of them were actually, I think, anxious to get 
to work, to get out of the yard, but some of them just 
refused to work. They said, "I wasn't sent here to work. I 
was sent here to do time." 

I said, "Well, that's fine. You can do your time. If you 
don't want to work, I'll see that you rest," and I put them 
in cell detention. They were there all alone, and all they 
had to do was rest. Some of them never got tired of rest¬ 
ing, but most of them did. And so, therethey are back in 
the rock quarry making stone after stone after stone, and 
the stones are building up, and I wondered what I was 
goingtodo with them, eventually. We had so many things 
to build, and I wracked my brain what to build and how 
to build, because we had no money for material. So, as 
the stones were stacking up, and asweweremakingthese 
finished stones, we naturally got a lot of excess rock and 
material. I talked it over with some of my inmates who 
had experience in stonework, and who were anxious to 



Inmate Work Program 


135 


work, and who knew howto make stone walls. Before we 
started a building program, we used this crud stuff to 
make dry walls. Eventually, we had that prison property 
surrounded with dry wall, and they were nice. We capped 
them off with pieces of concrete that I gathered up wher¬ 
ever they were tearing up a concrete highway or building 
or floor or anything. We squared off these blocks of con¬ 
crete, and that topped off our wall, and that wall would 
bestandingtoday in perfect condition, if they had main¬ 
tained it, but they didn't. So in many places it's just 
crumbled and disappeared, and some places it's still the 
way it was constructed. 

We needed a lot of buildings built out at the ranch, 
like machine sheds, pig pens. Anything that could be built 
with wood, we could build with stone a lot cheaper and a 
lot better. A stone corral is something that no animal 
could go through, so I can't begin to tell you how much 
building we did. I went through my crew, and through 
their records, and found out who was a good stonema¬ 
son, who was a good carpenter, who was a plumber; and 
I got started. I decided to build nice, modern cottages for 
the guards. I thought that would be a better way to keep 
a good person on the payroll, and I started buildingthem 
on the west end of the prison. We had a two or three- 
acre space there. I happened to havea black inmate who 
was one of the best bricklayers I've ever seen and a very 
good stonemason. He had a record of getting out of one 
prison and into another. His record didn't show any prob¬ 
lems or anything. He was just habitual inmate, nothing 
serious in any of his crimes—oh, bum checks, small bur¬ 
glary, anything—usually to get money for whiskey. His 
name was Bell. After he did a little work, I realized how 
good he was. I asked him where he learned his trade. He 
spent most of his life in prison. He was then about forty, 



136 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


in his early forties. He says, "I learned it from my uncle. 

I worked for him when I was a kid." 

Well, I said, "You couldn't have learned everything 
you know when you were a kid with your uncle." I said, 
"You're good. You could go out and make top wages any¬ 
where.” 

"Yes," he says, "and usually when I get out, I do that 
for a week or two, and then something happens." 

Anyway, he was really a good stonemason, a good 
bricklayer, a good concrete man. So I had him in charge 
of the building crew. I learned early that if I sent trustees 
out with guards, they did everything they could to figure 
out how to get away from that bunch and escape. If they 
were out with an inmate watching them, they didn't go. 
They were more afraid of being brought back to face the 
inmates than they were of being brought backtofacethe 
guards that they'd escaped from. So, I had him in charge 
of a crew. We started building, and things were going along 
fine. We had to have materials, so I put out the word 
throughout the territory, you might say, that anybody 
that had a buildingthatthey wanted destroyed or a barn 
or whatever, get in touch with me, and I'd do the work 
for the material. I couldn't imagine how many buildings 
there were that people were glad to get rid of. At the 
Stewart Agency [Stewart Indian School] they had entire 
buildings. One was a hospital. They were glad to get rid 
of them. They just didn't have the money to destroy them. 
They weren't interested in the material. And there I had 
everything. I had plumbing, kitchen stoves—everything 
that you needed for my project. The manager and I were 
very good friends, and he was more than cooperative. 
So, in a small way with a small crew I started salvaging 
material from here and there. Tore down big barns. I got 



Inmate Work Program 


137 


all kinds of big timber material, any kind of planks I 
wanted, as well as finishing lumber. 

And to think, while I was campaigning for mine in¬ 
spector I was defeated by organized labor! They worked 
real, real hard. In fact, a group of these ladies visited my 
mother-in-law. They didn't know, of course. They just 
were going house to house. And they told her why they 
were there and what a good man my opponent was and 
how much better he was than the incumbent. She lis¬ 
tened to them and said, "Well, you know, I'm sorry. I'm 
not going to vote for that good man of yours, because the 
incumbent mine inspector is my son-in-law." She says, 
"I never saw anybody move so fast to get out of that 
house." [laughter] 

One of the unions was holdingtheir annual meeting 
in Ely, and one of the members of the commission, the 
labor representative of the commission, wanted me to 
speak at this meeting. I said, "Oh, hell. What's the use? 
They're supporting my opponent, and I don't want to 
embarrass anybody, and I don't want to be embarrassed 
myself." 

"No," he said, "I think you should." And he said, "It 
might surprise you. There's just a lot of these labor men, 
union members, that are not going to vote the way they're 
told." And that was true as far as the mining unions were 
concerned. I carried all those myself, all alone. 

But anyway, I agreed to meet at this union meeting 
and give my little spiel. And after the dinner meeting, 
my friend, Baciagalupi from Reno, the commission labor 
member, said, "Well, there's a fellow I want you to meet." 
He took me over to a man about medium sized, but very 
husky, and he said, "Art, I want you to meet Ralph Alsup. 
Ralph, this is Art Bernard, the mine inspector." 

Alsup said, "Yes, that's the man we're going to defeat." 



138 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


I said, "Well, thank you very much." When I was in¬ 
troduced to him, I remembered then, that I'd read all 
about him. He was the crack labor leader in Las Vegas, 
and always making the headlines. He was tough on in¬ 
dustry. He was a feared labor leader. And so, the election 
came, and they worked, and they did their stuff, and they 
defeated me. In the meantime, I went down and became 
warden of the prison. 

Along about a year or two after I was appointed, but 
when my program was just getting going good, we had 
big headlines from Las Vegas, big shooting scrape. Ralph 
Alsupwasin charge of the plumbers' section of the union. 
There was a lot of plumbers down there. He'd got in a 
scrape with the man in charge of one of the other sec¬ 
tions of the union. The man pulled a knife on him, and 
he pulled out a gun and shot the man. Didn't kill him. 
They tried to quieten it down, and nobody wanted to 
bring any charges. The fellow that pulled the knife and 
got shot didn't want to prefer any charges. They wanted 
to keep harmony in the unions and not get any bad vibes, 
but the district attorney was incensed. They didn't like 
Ralph Alsup anyway, so they prosecuted him for assault 
with a deadly weapon, and he got one to five years. And 
that made the news all over. Of course, all the news me¬ 
dia remembered the past campaign, when organized labor 
beat the state mine inspector. Now, the state mine in¬ 
spector was the prison warden, and Alsup was on his 
way to prison. What was going to happen? One news¬ 
man would write an articlethat Alsup was goingtocome 
to the prison and organize the prisoners. Another one 
would concoct a story that Alsup was going to come to 
prison, and the warden was going to throw him in soli¬ 
tary confinement and leave him there. Then, they 
wondered if he would have a special car take him to 



Inmate Work Program 


139 


prison, or whether he'd have to ride like the ordinary 
criminals. 

In fact, the guards were a little worried about this 
coming up. They heard all this, and they knew my per¬ 
sonality by now, and they thought they knew Ralph 
Alsup's personality. They figured this is going to blow; 
it's got to blow. So, when it came time to bring him up, 
the captain said, "What are you going to do with Alsup." 

I said, "What do you mean?" 

He said, "Well, we got to bring him up here." 

I says, "Well, what the hell. They're all coming up 
here. Bring him along with them." 

He says, "You want to just send him in the regular 
paddy wagon?" 

I says, "Who the hell does he think he is? Or who do 
you think he is? Of course, he's coming in the paddy 
wagon." 

So, he came up with the paddy wagon. That got head¬ 
lines. "Ralph Alsup goes to prison in the regular paddy 
wagon." Now, what's going to happen when he gets to 
prison? So this was on the mind of the captain and all 
the guards. What are we going to do with Alsup? What's 
going to happen? 

The captain says, "How do you want to handle Alsup?" 

I said, "Like you handle all the . . . he's an inmate 
here. That's all. Handlehim likeyou do the rest of them." 

Well, hesaid, "Goingto send him out in thequarry?" 

I says, "Of course! He ain't going to get no special 
favors. He's going out to the quarry just like everybody 
else." 

So, they put him out in the quarry, and they watched 
him, and they kept me advised. I said, "You don't have to 
report on Ralph Alsup. J ust treat him like anybody else. 
He does his rocks, and he's through." 



140 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Well, they had to tell me that he was a very industri¬ 
ous worker. He didn't speak to anybody. He just put his 
head down, went to work, and he was making more rocks 
and better-looking rocks than anybody else. 

"Well," I said, "That's fine. When he gets his quota, 
put him in the yard." 

So, they did. After a while they begin going back to 
do rocks—we were running out of fish. The old-timers 
were goi ng back. Alsup went back, and the same old story. 
He did more rocks, and better than anybody else. I'd 
been thinking about Alsup. I knew by now that he was a 
natural leader of men, that he had to be to get where 
he'd been in this union. I could tell that people didn't 
give Alsup any guff. Like when the new fish comes in, 
they try you out. Nobody tried Alsup out. I needed some¬ 
body in charge of all these crews I had, taking care of 
everything, because it was quite a job. It's like an institu¬ 
tion, you know. I didn't have time to go around and take 
careoftheplumbingand everything else. I needed some¬ 
body that was a natural leader and who knew what he 
was doing, so I thought, "That's my man." 

I'd never talked to Alsup. So, I had him brought in, 
and he thought, of course, he was heading for solitary or 
somewhere. But he came in, stood at attention, and I 
asked him to have a seat. He sat down. I made a few 
trivial remarks about this and whatnot, and then I said, 
"The reason I asked you to come in Ralph," and I said, "I 
know you, and I don't have a deep friendship from years 
gone by, but I've been watching you, and I know that 
you're a very skilled man. You're a natural leader of men. 
I'd like you to take over a very important job." 

He says, "I'll do my time in the rocks like everybody 
else. I don't want any special privileges at all. Forget it." 



Inmate Work Program 


141 


"No," I said, "That isn't it. I don't want you to have 
any special privileges, but I need somebody to take care 
of everything in this institution. The boiler room, the 
cell blocks—everything needs work. I want you to be in 
charge of everybody—the electricians—just take it over 
as if you were superintendent. And if you'll do that, it'll 
be a special favor to me. You don't owe me a favor, but 
it'll be a damn sight more pleasant than having nothing 
to do and making rocks." 

Well, he said, "Under those conditions, I'll take it." 
But he says, "I don't want any special privileges from 
you now or at any other time. I was sent here to do my 
time, and I'm going to do it. And I'm not going to foul 
up." 

I said, "That's fine." So I said, "Now, you're going to 
be in charge of a lot of men, and I'm not going to pick 
them for you. You've been out in that yard. You know 
men probably better than I do. You pick your own crew. 
If you have any doubt about any of them, come in and 
talk to me about it. Otherwise, you pick them yourself. 
You know more about those men out there than I do." 

Well, to make a long story short, it wasn't long till 
Ralph was practically running that prison. He was effi¬ 
cient as he was as president of the plumbers union. I put 
him in charge of all thecrews that were out tearing down 
buildings. I couldn't have hired a better man if I'd had 
unlimited resources and access to the best workers 
around the country. He never did take advantage of me, 
and I never took advantage of him. Every day I went out 
and watched his crew. He was the one that dismantled 
the hospital out at Stewart, as well as many other build¬ 
ings. When he wrecked a building, every salvageable 
board was saved. There was nothing broken, nothing. 
The furniture was saved, and I just don't know how to 



142 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


describe the value of that man. He built the six houses. 
They're still down there. They're just as nice as anything 
built during those days, and a damn sight better con¬ 
struction. The best labor you can imagine went in there. 

Ralph just took over everything. Anybody that went 
with him, worked. They didn't fool around. If they didn't 
do what he figured was their utmost and the best they 
could do, they were off. They were replaced. Then, they 
soon knew to be in Ralph's crew is the A-l, but you bet¬ 
ter work. You better not cross him up. So, that went on 
till he was ... he did his time. He didn't want any parole. 
He didn't want any supervision or anything. He did his 
time, and with good credits and everything, he did some¬ 
thing like two years. Before he left, he sent word he'd 
like to talk to me. He come in. 

"Well," I said, "Ralph, I hate to see you go." 

He said, "You know, I hate to go myself." He says, 
"This has been some of the most pleasant time I've had. 
I've enjoyed my work." He says, "I've enjoyed doing it 
for you. And I want to tell you, I thought many a time of 
the first time you and I met, and what I said. I could have 
cut my throat. I wish I'd known you before I said that." 
He says, "You're a hell of a man." He says, "I hope you 
stay herefrom now on. And if you ever come to Las Vegas, 
don't you fail to call me. I want to repay some of this." 

"Now," I said, "Ralph, hell, I'll call you when I come 
to Las Vegas. You're a good man, and you're a hell of a 
good worker." 

So, Ralph left. Sometime after that I had to goto Las 
Vegas, and I took my son with me. He was just eighteen. 
And I called Ralph. In the meantime he'd married. He 
married a woman he'd been going with for some time 
and hadn't married. She was some wheel in organized 



Inmate Work Program 


143 


labor, too. Nice lady. I called him. I said, "I just thought 
I'd call and say hello and see how you're doing." 

In the meantime he'd got back and was president of 
the plumbers'union again. Hesaid, "Whereareyou stay¬ 
ing?" I told him. Hesays, "Tonight I wanttotakeyou out 
to dinner." He said, "I want you to be my guest." And he 
said, "Where would you like to go?" 

I said, "Well, if you're taking me out to dinner, you 
decide where you want to go. You know these clubs bet¬ 
ter than I do." I says, "I got a problem. I have an 
eighteen-year-old son, and he's not going to be allowed 
in any of the gambling casinos." 

He says, "Have no fear. We'll pick you up." And sure 
enough, he and his lady, his wife, showed up, and I forget 
where we went, but he had a choice table. Anywhere he 
went in those clubs, he had choice whatever. As we were 
having dinner one of the security men came up, and he 
didn't know who was at this table, but he saw an under¬ 
age person, and he wanted to know who he was, his age, 
and we didn't lie. We told him. 

Hesays, "Well, I'm sorry, but he'll have to leave." 

Alsup never said a word till that point. He says, "You 
go get so-and-so," whatever his name was, "and tell him 
that Ralph Alsup is at this table, and he wants to see 
him." 

When he said Ralph Alsup, it rang a bell for the guy 
and for the security guard, too. So he left, and pretty 
soon the manger came up. 

They shook hands. Ralph said, "This is Art Bernard, 
the warden of the prison. That's his son. They're my 
guests, and they want to seethe show and have dinner." 

He says, "That's fine. That's fine." And he said, "No¬ 
body will bother you anymore." 

So, I came back and ran the prison. 



144 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


The prisoners were working out in the community, is 
that correct? 

All over the country. I told you about the building. 
But I had farm hands. Anybody that wanted a farm hand 
could come and get them, tell me what they wanted. I 
had good workers and dependable workers. I never lost 
one. I never lost anybody out of one of these work pro¬ 
grams. 

They never tried to leave? 

They took off from the ranch. They weren't my 
trustees that were out. They were regular ranch hands— 
inmates under the jurisdiction of the ranch foreman. I 
had them take off from guards, but I never lost one from 
a work crew, never. Ralph wasn't the only inmate that I 
had in charge. If we have time, I'll tell you about others 
that were in charge of inmates. I had others. Butthefarm- 
ers I sent to the farms—they wanted some hay-bale 
buckers, I furnished them. And they paid me. They gave 
me credit for whatever the going rate was. They were 
just glad to get the men. They weren't trying to save 
money. They wanted dependable help. And I sure as hell 
had it. If they were paying hay buckers five dollars a day, 

I got five dollars a day worth of credit, and I took it in 
hay. They delivered the hay. If they were digging pota¬ 
toes, I took potatoes. If it was something else, I took 
something else. I maintained our ranch. I got all the hay 
we needed. Potatoes, I got by the hundreds of tons. Grow¬ 
ing potatoes in those days was quite profitable. They had 
big potato farms in Dayton, big potato farms in Carson 
Valley, and on down into Yerington and Smith Valley. 
They raised potatoes by the carloads. They needed to 



Inmate Work Program 


145 


pick these potatoes, and they couldn't have any potato 
pickers. I had the potato pickers. They needed to cull 
these potatoes. They had no potato cullers. I had them. 
This was during the time that they were picking them in 
the fall. Then, as the season went on, all these potatoes 
in these big potato cellars needed care, because some of 
them were rotting. They had to be moved. I had the potato 
movers. And I had trucks with potatoes coming to our 
prison farm. We fed our hogs cooked potatoes continu¬ 
ally, and we had so many potatoes, I even started cooking 
them for the milk cows. They loved them. And I just 
don't know how many millions of dollars we saved, but I 
suppose, practically, we didn't buy any meat. We didn't 
buy any milk. 

I took their wages in trade. If I had sixty dollars com¬ 
ing from this rancher for so much work, I took sixty 
dollars worth of hay at the prevailing price, so we both 
gained. And the farmers were just tickled to death. They 
came to the prison in the morning, got the man, and 
brought him back at night. J ust tickled to death to get 
them. 

Did the prisoners get extra credit for doing this kind of 
work? 

They got work time. They didn't get any money, but 
they got, I forget, how many days a month work time. 
Between the work time and their good conduct time, they 
could do a year in about seven or eight months. They 
were all anxious to get out. And I had very, very few 
shirkers. 

I'm going to finish on Alsup. I never saw him again 
from the time that he took us to dinner. I went back to 
Vegas, but I didn't call him anymore. In the meantime, 



146 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


he got to be president of the plumbers union again, and 
he was having problems again. Paul Laxalt ran for gover¬ 
nor, and Bill Sinett, his campaign manager, was an FBI 
man that Charlie Russell brought in when he instituted 
the gambling commission. But anyway, Bill . . . God, I'd 
see him. He was a very good friend of mine. Tall, lank 
fellow. Came to me, and he said, "Do you know Ralph 
Alsup?" 

I says, "I surely do." 

He says, "Well, he's killing us in Las Vegas." 

I said, "Why?" 

"Well, he's working against Paul." 

I said, "Let me see what I can do." 

So, I found some business to do in Las Vegas. By now, 
I wasn't the warden anymore. I was in private business. I 
was a real estate broker and building contractor for a 
couple years. Anyway, I took time off, and I went to Las 
Vegas and called Ralph. Ralph wasn'tin. Hewas out hunt¬ 
ing deer. I said, "When can I expect him?" 

"Well, it depends on when he gets a deer." 

Gee, I hated to wait till somebody gets a deer. Some¬ 
times it takes all season. But I thought I'd wait a day or 
two, because I have sisters that got married down there 
and family. Fortunately, I can't remember whether he 
got a deer or just decided to come back, but he came 
back early. I broached the subject, and I said, "I gather 
you're campaigning against Laxalt." 

"Well," hesaid, "he's a Republican. We support Demo¬ 
crats." 

"Well," I said, "I thought that was it, but I just thought 
I'd mention it. Paul's one of my best friends, and he's a 
good man, one of the best. I sure wish you were support¬ 
ing him instead of his opponent." 



Inmate Work Program 


147 


He says, "Art, if you want me to support Paul Laxalt, 
consider it done." Hesaid, "You tell Laxaltthat I'm in his 
corner. And you can almost depend on the plumbers' 
vote." 

Well, I said, "Why don't you come up and tell him? It 
would sound better coming from you." 

He says, "I will. When should I come up?" 

I said, "Any time you want." 

He says, "I'll be up Friday." 

So, I got hold of Paul, and I told him that Ralph Alsup 
was coming up to talk to him Friday, and I said, "Arrange 
a lunch somewhere." 

So, hedid. Ralph came up. Wewentto lunch, and he 
told Paul, he said, "Art came down and asked me to sup¬ 
port you, so I decided to come up and tell you I was 
going to support you. You can depend on the plumbers' 
vote." 

Well, Paul wasn't... he was surprised, but not dis¬ 
appointed, and we depended on Alsup's support. But 
about a week later, somebody walked up, rang Alsup's 
doorbell. He opened the door, and they poked a shotgun 
in his chest and pulled the trigger. They never did find 
out who shot him. But he didn't get to work for Paul. 

The unions were that violent in the 1950s? 

They were violent. Yes. They played rough. And I think 
they still do. Maybe not as flagrant as they were during 
that era, but if you read the papers, they're getting in 
trouble. 

Well, to get back to our building now. Ralph left be¬ 
fore the buildings were finished, so I putthisfellow Bell, 
the black one, in charge. 



148 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Long before that, shortly after I had taken over the 
prison, we had a burglary in Reno, and you may have 
heard about it. It was the number one burglary of the 
century—the Redfield burglary. Did you ever hear of 
LaVere Redfield? He was a very famous man. He had 
millions of dollars. He owned the whole east side of Mt. 
Rose. Hundreds of acres of timber in there. He had a 
nice home on Mt. Rose Street in Reno. He had a base¬ 
ment, and in this basement he had a safe, and he kept 
hundreds of millions of dollars—between silver and dia¬ 
monds and rubies and jewels—in his safe. He loved to 
gamble. He'd go to the Riverside or the Mapes in those 
days, and anybody that would see him, would think he 
was just a farm roustabout. He wore old Levis, faded, 
patched, and he looked just likeatwo-dollar-a-day handy¬ 
man. He had millions. Anyway, he had a wife. And he 
had a woman that did something with him, and she was 
his girlfriend. She knew everything about that house. She 
knew where everything was. 

All at once, this safe was robbed. The safe was carted 
away! Nobody know's how they got this heavy safe out of 
the basement. News pictures showed this narrow, steep 
stairway going down into the basement where he kept 
the safe with all this fantastic loot in it. How they got it 
out of there. . . there were no marks on the stairs of 
dragging or anything. 

So, they caught three of them. There were six of them 
involved, and one was the girlfriend. She masterminded 
the whole thing. She was a crook from a way back, with 
a good head on her. And she got a fellow from Reno, who 
was a bartender, and he involved his brother, who was as 
innocent as could be. And she imported three gangsters 
from Wisconsin. One of these gangsters was named J ohn 
something, and I forget it. He was a dandy from a way 



Inmate Work Program 


149 


back. He was about five foot eight or nine, and weighed a 
hundred and fifty-five, sixty pounds, well built, dark com¬ 
plexion, handsome, conceited. He was accustomed to 
having everything he wanted and giving the orders. The 
three I got for the state prison were: the bartender, his 
brother, and one of the guys from Wisconsin. The others 
were caught across the state line. They were fleeing east. 
The girlfriend got caught over the state border. She and 
the other two went to federal prison. One of the three 
from Wisconsin had served on a murder charge back 
there, and while he was doing time here, they had a re¬ 
cap of his crime. Anyway, he'd been working on it when 
he got caught here, and he was found not guilty on that. 
They reversed the decision. So, when he did his time 
here, he was going out. He was free. The other two came 
here to Nevada, and I'm walking through the yard after 
they were all sentenced. God, who do I walk into? Young 
Firpo, for God's sake! A light heavyweight that was fight¬ 
ing when I was fighting. He was from Idaho, and he was a 
big middle weighter, light heavyweight. He was around 
170 pounds. He was too big to be a middle weight, and 
too light to be a light heavyweight, but he was good. He 
was a contender. He won the Pacific Coast light heavy¬ 
weight title, and I knew him, not too well, but I knew 
who he was, and he sure knew who I was. And do I come 
face to face with Young Firpo? I'm not going to tell you 
his name, because his brothers might still be in Reno. I 
don't know. But Young Firpo will do it. He fought under 
the name "Young Firpo." Many fighters took the name of 
somebody that was famous, and Louis Firpo was a heavy¬ 
weight who knocked Jack Dempsey clear out of a ring. 
Sothisguy wasfightingas Young Firpo. YoungFirpo now 
is not any taller than he was, but he was square, and he 
weighed around two hundred and two or three pounds, 



150 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


and he was all muscle, all man, strong as a bull, and just 
as friendly as he ever was. I said, "What the hell did you 
do?" 

He says, "I carried the safe. Don't you read the 
papers?" 

Firpo was nottoo smart. Hewasn't dumb. Hewasjust 
naive. And when they were planning this burglary they 
had to figure out how to get this safe out of his basement. 
He said, "I got a brother could carry that safe." They 
made a harness for him. They got him down there, and 
they got that safe on his back. That safe had to weigh 
300 pounds, and Firpo staggered up those stairs with that 
safe on his back, and they put it in a car, and they went 
somewhere north of Reno, some old minethat they found 
up there, and they blasted the safe open, got everything 
out of it, and shot the safe down in the hole. They recov¬ 
ered most of thejewelry and money. Anyway, that's how 
I got Young Firpo, and more about Firpo later. 

We'll get on to the building program again. We were 
on J ohn from Wisconsin, who was one of the three rob¬ 
bers that came to my prison. He refused to go out in the 
quarry and work. He says, "I wasn't sent here to work." 

Well, the warden will decide, so I told John, I said, 
"Everybody makes rocks here when they come. You'll 
make rocks. If you want to rest, I'll put you where you 
can rest. Nobody will disturb you." 

He says, "That's all right with me. I'm doing no rocks. 
I'm not going to get my hands blistered." 

So, I put him in detention. I said, "When you decide 
to go make rocks, send word." 

It was the next day he sent word. So, he went out, but 
before he went out, he says, "I can't work. I've never 
worked in my life." He says, "I don't know how to work. 

I have no intentions of working." 



Inmate Work Program 


151 


"Well," I said, "you'll find out how it is there. They'll 
give you a hammer out there and chisel, and you'll see 
how the boys are doing. You'll learn." 

Well, he went out. Some of them couldn't do a very 
good job, but they had to do their work, so they'd buy 
rocks from somebody that was good at it, and they'd pay 
them five cents or ten cents a rock. This guy would do 
his rocks, also four or five extra, or six, whatever he 
needed, for this other guy who would pay him. Fifty cents 
was a lot of money to these guys, so he'd make five rocks 
and get fifty cents, took care of J ohn. He started hiring 
his rocks built, and he had plenty of money. He could 
call for whatever amount he wanted. He had access back 
in Wisconsin. So, I heard about that. I called him in, and 
I said, "You're going to have to make your own rocks. 
You just can't buy them. I don't mind somebody buying a 
few rocks, if they're hurt, or for whatever reason, but I'm 
not going to stand for somebody buying all their rocks. 
Now you're going to learn to make rocks." 

So, he went out, and then I had them watch him very 
carefully, and he started making rocks, but not very good. 
So the next time he took a turn out there he was a little 
bit better, and they told me, "J ohn's doing pretty good. 
He's making passable rocks. They're not as good as the 
others, but they can be used to fill in." 

So, he never complained again, and he went on mak¬ 
ing rocks, and then he asked if he could get a job as a 
trustee. Well, they came and asked me. The guards said, 
"His conduct's been good, and he's been doing the best 
he can. He'd like to get out of there and be a trustee." 

I said, "It's all right. He's earned it." So, we put him 
out on the lawn detail, cutting lawn and whatnot. 



152 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Getting on Ralph Alsup's crew, as I told you, was the 
epitome of success. One day John came in and said, 
"Warden, can I get on Ralph's crew?" 

I says, "I don't put anybody on Ralph's crew. He picks 
hisown men. Ifyou can talk him intotakingyou, you're 
welcome." 

Well, hedid it. I don't know what he . . . maybeRalph 
decided to give him a chance, a crack, or something, but 
he took him. And that J ohn became a dedicated worker. 
He'd never had so much fun as he did when he learned 
to build. So, he got on the plastering crew, when they 
were building these six houses. They were all lath and 
plaster—no sheet rock there. The very best was none 
too good for us. When they were about halfway through 
the plaster job, the plasterer quit. He was released. 

So, I put J ohn in charge of the plastering. That was 
better for him than robbing a bank back in Wisconsin, if 
that's what they did. He got his parole date. His parole 
request came up, and he was granted parole and release 
on a certain day, and there was a house they hadn't fin¬ 
ished. So, he came to me, says, "That house isn't 
finished." 

Well, I said, "Some of the other guys will finish it." 

He says, "Nobody can do it right." 

"Well," I said, "I don't know what the hell they're go¬ 
ing to do." 

He said, "Can I stay and finish the job?" 

I says, "How long will it take?" 

He says, "A good week, if I work hard." 

I says, "You spent I don't know how much money 
trying. . . ." When they first came in, he had lawyers 
from all over hell trying to get the sentence reduced. I 
says, "I don't know how much money you spent trying 
to get out of here. Now you want to stay?" 



Inmate Work Program 


153 


He says, "I don't want anybody to ruin my plaster 
job." 

I says, "All right, John, you can stay." 

He stayed six days, finished his plaster, and took off 
again for Wisconsin and the gangs. 

You're talking about people who really made changes 
in their li ves by being allowed to work and being trusted 
to work. What kind of public response did you get to 
this program, to having the trustees out? 

Well, the only way I could answer that was if you'd 
have been here and read all the news media I have, and 
the report from the senate and assembly committee that 
came down. They couldn't believe what I was doing. When 
I started building these houses, I wanted to build five 
houses. I built six, because I had extra material—sinks, 
and stoves, and everything—and I wanted to use them. 
Five was the original. And there were some things I just 
couldn't buy, so I asked the senate committee for $15,000 
to build five houses. They came down. They were all 
prominent men in those days. Some of them were good 
friends of mine. Some I'd never met. They came down, 
and I showed them plans of what I intended to do, and 
they said, "You want fifteen thousand dollars for that?" 

I said, "Yes." 

"My God, you can't get started for $15,000. That's a 
project!" 

I says, "I know it is, but I'll do it for $15,000." 

"You can't do it. You just can't do it. No matter how 
good you are, you can't do it." 

Well, I said, "Give me the fifteen thousand." 

"Well, we'll give you more. You just need more money. 
We'll give you more money than that." 



154 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


"No, I don't want more. I want to do it for $15,000." 

So, they gave me the fifteen thousand, and by the 
time I had the five houses practically constructed, and I 
had the rest of the material, I built another one. So, I 
built six, and I still hadn't spent the fifteen thousand. 
They knew that. They came down, and it was not only 
publicized, but... . If you had time to read all these 
letters of what the warden's doing. I just read one now 
about when Sawyer was defeated, they wondered .... I 
submitted my resignation, and Sawyer didn't accept it, 
so some newsman wrote an account, a nice little column 
there. I can't tell you what it is. You'd have to read it. It's 
not very long, if you want to read it. 

You were getting positive publicity from the news¬ 
papers? 

Oh, yes, and from the people, from the legislature. 

I have a question about the guards and their relation¬ 
ship to the inmates. You talked about how, when they 
wereouton thework crews, the inmates wouldn't try to 
getaway from each other, but they would try everything 
to getaway from theguards. I'm just curious about what 
the relationship was. 

It wasn't that they didn't like the guards. It was the 
fact that the guards were watching them and guarding 
them, and it was a challenge to get away from them. Any 
time you challenge an inmate... or when you chal¬ 
lenge somebody like with all these shootings, school 
shootings, and guys going amuck with a gun, and passing 
more gun laws, more gun laws, more gun laws. It's these 
gun laws that are creating the problem, because you're 



Inmate Work Program 


155 


challenging somebody, telling them that they can't do 
that. "Well pass a law. You can't do that." They'll show 
you they can, and that's what these convicts would show 
that guard that they could get away, could outwit him. 
They could get away with it. They didn't want to do that 
from one of their own, because they were on their honor 
to work there. If they violated that, they were violating 
the trust that one convict who was in charge of the crew 
had over the other men. They just didn't want to violate 
that trust, because they weren't getting away from the 
establishment, so to speak. They were violating a code 
of their own. 

I never lost one, out of those. And I had hundreds 
and hundreds over the years. I don't know how many 
men went out. Never lost one. 

Did you ever have any cases where you saw the guards 
being unfair to the convicts? 

Never. Never. I watched that very carefully. I never 
had a guard that would deliberately torture anybody. 
There were guards that just had no use for the inmates, 
and the inmates knew it. There were guards that were 
friendly with the inmates, and that led to some prob¬ 
lems, more problems than those that weren't friendly 
with the inmates, because any timethe guard got friendly 
with an inmate or two, they started taking advantage of 
him, of the guard. But I never had any sadistic guards. I 
had some that were more pleasant than others, but I never 
had a case where a guard was abusive to an inmate. 




10 

Court of Last Resort 


/ 'd like to have you explain who Erie Stanley 
Gardner was. Let's talk about some of his articles 
and your relationship with him. 

Well, Erie Stanley Gardner was one of the most pro¬ 
lific and famous mystery writers of all time. I can't 
remember all the millions of books he sold and what coun¬ 
tries they were sold in, but he was the tops in his field, 
and probably still is. I was an avid reader of Erie Stanley 
Gardner, because he wrote the kind of stories I like. And 
then he started this "Court of Last Resort." 

Tell me, was he trained as a writer? 

No, no. Erie never graduated from high school. He 
learned his law, so to speak, working in a lawyer's office. 
And when he passed the bar and got his license, he started 
working in Ventura, California. 



158 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


So, he was a qualified attorney? 

And developed into one of the most true. In those 
days a young attorney didn't get many cases, and the 
only cases he got were the when the judge appointed an 
attorney to somebody that couldn't afford it. He was a 
court-appointed attorney. Or somebody that could afford 
a little bit and might not pay it. So, he started getting all 
these cases, and a lot of them were Chinese. It got to the 
point where he was winning every case. He was likeJ ake 
Erlich. In fact, I'll have to talk to you about J ake Erlich. 

J ake Erlich wrote a book, A/ever Plead Guilty. It was 
a bestseller.] ake Erlich was the most prominent, famous 
criminal attorney in the San Francisco area for many 
years, in fact, till his death. 

And so, Erie would win these cases, but he never got 
any money, so he decided . . . some of them were very, 
very interesting, these cases and how he got them off, so 
he started writing these stories. In order to eat, so to 
speak, he decided he'd have to write up some of these 
interesting cases and see if he could sell them. Well, he 
sold one or two, but it wasn't anything that was going to 
go over too big, but he got interested in writingthen, and 
he started creating fictional characters. He concocted 
an apparatus that is now called an RV. A self-contained 
trailer, camper. He built this on the back of a pick-up 
truck, big enough to maintain a stove, a little table, a 
typewriter. And he'd head for the desert, so that nobody 
could bother him. He'd get no telephone. Out in this 
desert country, all over southern California, it wasn't 
populated like it is now. A lot of places that are cities 
now were nothing but wildernesses in those days. And 
he got acquainted with a lot of characters, who later got 
in trouble, committed, not murders, but killings, most of 



Court of Last Resort 


159 


them in self defense, and were sent to prison. They didn't 
have any money to hire a lawyer, and if they did, they 
never got a good one. But they happened to be friends of 
Erie's, and when he heard that they were in prison, he'd 
investigate, find out that they had been railroaded, so to 
speak, and he'd give of his time, and eventually, I think, 
he never missed one. He got them all out. 

He was a great friend of Harry Steeger, who was the 
editor of Argosy magazine. Well, Erie was getting a lot of 
requests that he couldn't handle, so hetalked it over with 
Steeger, and they decided that between Erie's legal work 
and Steeger's magazine, they'd start something, and they 
called it the Court of Last Resort. 

On a trip to southern Baja California on a camping 
trip, they discussed all these innocently incarcerated men 
and decided that, if they could get a group of men to¬ 
gether who would work, who would donate their time, 
and pay their own expenses, they'd take as many of these 
cases as they could, and they called it the Court of Last 
Resort. 

And who were these volunteers? Were they experts of 
some type? 

Oh, yes. They were doctors and attorneys and inves¬ 
tigators, who were so good that they could afford to work 
for nothing on special cases. And right at this minute, all 
the men that were involved don't cometo my mind. Some 
of them do: Dr. LeMoyne Snyder, famous pathologist; 
Marshall Houts, former FBI agent; Alex Gregory, world 
famous polygraph expert; Park Street, legal specialist from 
Texas; and, in later years, Art Bernard, penologist. 

Steeger publicized this in the Argosy magazine, and 
then they began getting requests from near and far, and 



160 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


they had to be very careful. The only failures they had 
were where they could get absolutely no cooperation from 
the state officials. For instance, on onefamouscase back 
in the Midwest not only would the prison not cooperate 
with them and gave them absolutely nothing, but the 
governor sent word for them that they better leave the 
state, that they weren't wanted. Aside from that, some 
cases were not quite that bad, but no cooperation. Every¬ 
where where they got cooperation from the state 
institutions, they got the man off, and it's a long, long 
story. They put out two issues of the Court of Last Resort, 
and in one of them he tells of many of these cases. 

Did they approach you to work with them? 

Well, they did eventually. After I got with Gardner, I 
served on the court. I was responsible for getting a couple 
of guys off. Also, in working with Gardner, while at the 
prison, I started interviewing murderers on why they 
committed the murder they did and why they hid the 
body where they did, because they would commit a mur¬ 
der in a place and take the body three or four hundred 
miles away. I had a hunch why they were doingthat, but 
I wanted it right from the horse's mouth. And sure enough, 
when they committed a murder, it happened to be wher¬ 
ever it happened to be. Then, they had a body to dispose 
of, and they didn't know what to do or where to put it. 
They'd wrack their brain, and they were very familiar 
with some out-of-the-way place, and they'd go there and 
hide that body. Almost inevitably, that's what happened. 

There was a journalist with one of the big papers in 
San Francisco. Ed Montgomery was his name. He and I 
were very friendly, and he was very friendly with Erie 
Stanley Gardner. I made tapes of all these interviews— 



Court of Last Resort 


161 


hundreds of them. I'd send them to Gardner, and 
Montgomery was one who read every one of them. He 
used my material to find a body that had been hidden in 
Northern California. Everything that I had in these 
records led him to this body hidden in a grave on a side 
hill where no one would have suspected, because the girl 
weighed 115 pounds, and this suspect weighed 135. He 
was a veteran, and he'd had various illnesses and no 
strength—he almost couldn't carry his own pants. After 
they found the body, following my recommendations and 
interviews, then they had to prove that he could do this— 
whoever had murdered thegirl. They found thegirl buried 
on the side hill. Whilethepress were describingthis story, 
they had her buried on a side hill that was full of downed 
timber and trees—impenetrable. In fact, some of them 
said it's hardly possible for a deer to get through there, 
let alone a man carrying a body. That he kept up, kept 
trying and trying and trying . . . and hetold me later, he 
says, "I think it was those interviews with you. I knew 
that had to be there." 

He finally traced him by his gasoline trail up there. 
Hisfolkshad a summer cabin up there on this creek that 
was good fishing. And he'd go up there and stay all night 
and think. One night he was there, and he thought he 
smelled something that reminded him of a dead body, 
but he couldn't tell where it was coming from. There was 
a trapper lived down the canyon, and he knew where he 
was, who was a bear hunter, and he had some blood 
hounds that he used to track bears. At one o'clock in the 
morning, he went down and hired this fellow, got him 
out of bed, and said, "There's a smell. There's a body 
smell, and I want to find it." 

This guy came up with his dogs, and they circled 
around there, and just about daylight the dogs found . . . 



162 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


there was one little foot sticking out of the ground. They 
found it. He hadn't buried her too deep. And naturally he 
couldn't. He was up there probably without tools. Any¬ 
way, in the passing of three or four months, the ground 
had settled, and there was one foot sticking up, and just 
that little foot made the smell that he smelled and that 
the dogs smelled later. 

So, at this point, when you were doing these interviews, 
did you already know Gardner at that point? 

Oh, yes. I was doing these interviews and sending 
h i m the tape. M ontgomery an d oth ers h ad access to th ese 
tapes. Gardner, any friend that he knew that was an in¬ 
vestigator, he'd say, "Come, listen to these tapes." And 
they did. Those tapes are now in the University of Texas, 
in the Erie Stanley Gardner Room. Before he died, Erie 
Stanley Gardner willed his office, intact, with everything 
in it, to the University of Texas, and when he died they 
moved everything. They rebuilt his office down there, 
and everything that he had in that office went to the 
University of Texas, except that rocking chair that's in 
there. That was his favorite rocking chair, and when he 
died, his wife J ean called me and said, "Erie loved that 
rockingchair, and I know he'd want you to have it, if you 
want to come and get it before they come and take pic¬ 
tures of the office inside," because he had it in his office. 
She said, "I'll take it out, and you can come and get it, 
and it's yours. I know Erie would want you to have it." 
So, I drove down, got the rocking chair, and I have been 
sitting in it for years now, when I watch TV. 

Let's go back to how you first met Gardner. 



Court of Last Resort 


163 


All right. You're familiar with the case of Emma Jo 
J ohnson? In Las Vegas in theearly 1950s, probably 1952, 
there was a lot of information in the papers of a murder. 
Some young woman was accused of attacking an older 
woman with a can opener and beating her to the ground 
and causing a blow to the head that caused her death. 
One read the paper and knew that this was a vicious 
young woman with a blood lust. She was convicted of 
second-degree murder. So, when she was scheduled to 
come to the penitentiary, my wife and I happened to be 
in Las Vegas, so we decided to take her and save a trip 
with the state paddy wagon. I put her in the back of my 
car, and I didn't handcuff her or anything. I wasn't afraid 
that she was going to take off. She was a nice, clean-cut, 
young lady, and as we traveled along, she and my wife 
talked back and forth, and it developed that she was a 
military bride. She and her husband were stationed in 
the Hawaiian Islands. They didn't get along, and she came 
back, moved to Las Vegas, duetotheshort waitingperiod 
for divorce, and she went to stay at a place that catered 
to divorcees. When she got there she found that every 
occupant was a divorcee. The owner of this place—we'll 
call her J ones. It developed that she was an old madame. 
She'd get these young divorcees, and she'd send them 
out on call, on a percentage. When she broached this to 
Emma J o, Emma J o revolted and left the place, went and 
lived somewhere else, and left a forwarding address. She 
never got any mail. She'd call in, and Jones would say 
there's no mail for you, nothing. And that went on for 
weeks. 

Finally, Emma J o met one of the inhabitants down 
there, who was gettingalongwith Jones and goingouton 
call. She said, "There's a lot of mail down there for you. 
There's a stack of mail for you." So, she barreled down 



164 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


there to get her mail, and she got in and saw the mail 
before J ones came in and stopped it. J ones tried to stop 
her from picking up her own mail, and they got into a 
hair-pulling match, and J ones fell down on thefloor. She 
was unconscious. They sent for an ambulance, and they 
took her off to the hospital. Several days later she died. 
They tried Emma Jo on a first-degree murder charge, 
and they convicted her on a second-degree murder. And 
that's where we came in, and we were taking her to the 
prison. 

She was a clean-lived, well-spoken, well-educated, 
youngwoman. She was not a . . . well, you can't tell what 
a murderess is, but shetold usher history, and, of course, 
everybody's innocent when they come to prison. I hardly 
paid any attention to it, but she and my wife went on 
and talked and talked. 

When we got to the prison, we put her in where they 
go for the first two or three days, and my wife told me, 
she says, "That's a nice young lady. I don't think she 
killed anybody." 

I said, "Well, I'll read her transcript." So, a day or two 
later I read her transcript. It just didn't make sense to 
me. I could tell that it was not really a true transcript, 
that they'd left off a lot in places and put something else 
in places, but reading between the lines, I couldn't see 
where she could be guilty of murder. The lady fell down, 
and then the doctor report said that she died from a sub¬ 
dural hematoma. 

And the prosecutor said, "Could this have caused her 
death?" 

He said, "Yes, it could." 

And various other questions that led me to believe 
that the doctor was helping the prosecutor, whether he 
realized it or not. And this doctor happened to be a doc- 



Court of Last Resort 


165 


tor that I'd known years ago in Piocheand Caliente, when 
he came out of medical school. In fact, he treated my 
wife, when my first son was born. I always considered 
him a friend. He got in a jackpot, selling narcotics to 
help out when he started his practice, and he was on his 
way to prison when I intervened. Atthattime, I had quite 
a bit of political pull in Lincoln Country, and one thing 
led to another, and the charges were dropped agai nst him. 
So, whether he knew it or not, or realized it or not, he 
owed me one. 

So, I thought, thefirstthingl'm goingtodo isgodown 
and talk to the doctor. And I did. I said, "I read that tran¬ 
script, and it just don't make sense. It seemed like you 
were helping the prosecutor intentionally." 

Well, he said, "I didn't intentionally." 

I said, "They asked you if this hematoma could have 
caused her death, and you said, 'Yes, definitely.'Why did 
you put that notation on it, 'definitely'?" 

"Well," he said, "I was told before the trial that I 
needed my license renewed, and that if I wanted that 
license renewed, I better play ball." So he said, "I just 
answered the questions to the best of my ability, the way 
I think they should have been." 

I told him what I thought of him and whatnot, and I 
left. I started investigating further and further, and I was 
gathering a lot of information, but hitting a stone wall 
with my head. I got a call from a doctor, and I forget his 
name. He said, "I know you're around here investigating 
the Emma J o case." He says, "I can tell you a lot about 
that." 

I said, "Well, I'd like to hear it." So we made an ap¬ 
pointment and met. 

He said, "She didn't kill that old J ones bag." He said, 
"I was treating her for that subdural hematoma for a 



166 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


month before she died—before they had the altercation. 
And the way she got it, she was drunk, and she fell back 
and cracked her skull. I'd been treating her ever since." 

I said, "My God, why didn't you say somethingto the 
officials?" 

Well, he says, "I did. I went to the prosecuting attor¬ 
ney, and he told me to mind my business, and he told 
me that I needed my license renewed, and if I wanted it 
renewed, I better take care of my medicine practice and 
leave the prosecuting to the district attorney." He said, 
"I just couldn't get over it, so I went to her attorney." 

Her attorney was the next prosecutor, who I knew, 
who had railroaded a man on a murder charge and had 
deliberately manufactured the evidence that they sent 
to the FBI, and had an FBI man testify. That was a sad 
case. Anyway, he was now the defense attorney, and this 
doctor said, "I went to him, and I told him, and he told 
me the same thing. He says, 'You better watch it. This is 
none of your business. Keep your nose out of this case, 
and take care of your medical practice. Don't you inter¬ 
fere, or you're going to be without a license.'" He said, 
"This was from her defense attorney!" So, he said, "I 
figured that's all I can do, until I heard that you were 
investigating it, and I thought I'd tell you." 

I said, "I got all the information I could." 

So, you asked him if he would testify then? 

Oh, yes. By then I knew that Emma J o was absolutely 
innocent. 

Did anybody threaten you when you started 
investigating? 



Court of Last Resort 


167 


No. No. I was above being threatened. I didn't have 
anything that anybody could take away from me, and 
there certainly wasn't anybody goingto attack me physi¬ 
cally. In those days I could still handle damn near any of 
them. And then, I began to think, "What am I going to 
do? What? I can't investigate in the police department 
any more. I can't investigate in the prosecuting depart¬ 
ment. I'm dead, unless I can . . . ." I thought oftheCourt 
of Last Resort. "God, if I could just get that case in the 
Court of Last Resort, in front of those experts." By then, 
I knew who they were and how they worked. "If I could 
just get a hold of Erie Stanley Gardner." Gee whiz. Get a 
hold of a famous person like that. Even with being a war¬ 
den of a prison and writing wouldn't do any good. I'd 
have to meet him. And by God, just about then I picked 
up a Nevada paper, and he was goingto be the speaker at 
the American Bar Association. It was going to be in the 
Riverside Hotel. "How the hell am I going to meet Erie 
Stanley Gardner?" So, I found that Clark Guild J r. was 
in charge of the meeting, and Clark and I are very good 
friends, so I called him, and I told him my problem. I 
says, "I've got to meet Erie Stanley Gardner." 

Well, he says, "I'll see that you meet him. I'll get you 
at the head table, as my guest." So that happened, and 
finally the opportunity came after the speech, to meet 
Erie Stanley Gardner. Clark took me over, and he says, 
"Mr. Gardner, I want you to meet Art Bernard. He's a 
very special friend of mine. He's the warden of the Nevada 
State Prison, and he has a problem." 

I took off, and I told him my problem. I did my best, 
and he said, "I'm sorry." He says, "I'll . . . give me the 
information." He says, "Write me the information, and 
we'll do the best we can." He says, "I can't come to the 



168 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


prison." He says, "I'm pushed. I'm pushed for time. I've 
got to get on a plane at 11 o'clock tonight." 

I said, "I just can't get this information to you in a 
letter. You've got to meet this girl. You've got to meet this 
girl and talk to her and read the transcript." 

Well, he said, "Mr. Bernard, I'm sorry about that." He 
says, "I just can't do it." 

I thought, "God, I'm dead." And I just walked away a 
little bit, and three or four women converged on him. 
They'd been waiting to get a chance at him, and I didn't 
know it then, but a group of women just confuse Gardner 
till he don't know how to act, how to argue with them. I 
could hear him mumblingand mumbling, and they were 
all tryingtotalk at once. I walked back, and I said, "Ladies, 
I'm sorry, but Mr. Gardner has an appointment with me, 
and we're late now." I grabbed him and started taking 
him away. 

When we got a little ways away, he says, "Well, you 
son of a bitch! How did you do that?" 

I said, "It just came to me." 

"My God," he says, "you really want me to go to the 
Nevada State Prison." 

I said, "You can bet your boots." I says, "I'll drive you 
over." I looked at my watch. I said, "If we hurry, I can get 
you back to catch that plane." 

"Well," he said, "There'll be another one shortly there¬ 
after." He says, "All right. Let's go." 

I went out to get my car. I had a DeSoto, big DeSoto 
sedan, and it wouldn't start. I dashed back in, and the 
first guy I run into was Miles Pike. He was the U.S. 
Attorney General in Reno at the time. I said, "Miles, I'm 
in a jackpot. I've got Erie Stanley Gardner. I've got to 
take him to Carson, and my car won't start." 



Court of Last Resort 


169 


He says, "Use mine." He says, "It's a Lincoln." And 
he told me where it was parked. I went out. The car was 
there. It started. We came to Carson. And Miles had told 
me, he said, "Don't bother about bringing the car back." 
He says, "I can get a ride home. And you don't have to 
bring it back till some time when you come over." 

I left my car there. I made arrangements to have that 
taken care of. And we got to the prison about 10:30 that 
night. I'd called my wife in the meantime and told her to 
have Emma J o dressed and ready. I said, "He can't stay 
long, but I want him to talk to her." 

Well, he came over. Emma J o was there, and before 
he left he knew Emma J o was innocent. He says, "I just 
felt it." And he read that transcript fast and says, "We'll 
take it from there." 

In the meantime, I'm in Carson, and he's got to be in 
Reno, and I said, "Could you possibly stay here and be 
my guest tonight? And I'll take you to Reno in the morn¬ 
ing." 

"Yes," he said, "I really didn't have a plane to catch." 
He says, "You've got to be ready to catch a plane when¬ 
ever you're in a tight hold." He says, "I can stay here." 

So, by the time he left. . . by the time I got him at a 
plane the next day, we were buddy-buddies. From then, 
we became hunting and fishing partners. We were the 
very best of friends. I visited him at least once a month. 
We'd go on camping trips, investigations. I began work¬ 
ing with the Court of Last Resort. He was married at my 
house. I distributed his ashes over Mexico when he died. 
We were as close as you could get. And he was one of the 
sharpest men I've ever known and one of the best. A 
good man. He done more good in this world than a lot of 
men with a lot more authority. 



170 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


What did he do for Emma J o? 

Oh. We interviewed everybody I'd talked to, got them 
on tape. We called a meeting of the board of pardons and 
parole, and they commuted her to time served. By the 
fact that the Court of Last Resort had taken her case, 
she got national publicity. Ralph Edwards, who was in 
charge of This is Your Life— he was a red-headed fellow— 
he contacted me and Erie, and we made arrangements 
to put her on This is Your Life— EmmaJ oj ohnson. And 
you're familiar with how they do that? They get you in 
the audience, and you don't know a thing about what's 
going to happen. Everybody's in the back that's going to 
be part of the show—myself, Gardner, the doctor who 
treated Jones for the hematoma. I think that's all. I think 
there were just the three of us. We were facing the audi¬ 
ence i n theback, and when Ralph Edwards gave this spiel, 
he said, "This isyour life, Emma J o J ohnson." And there's 
Emma Jo down there, and, of course, they had their 
people ready. They brought her up on stage, and she was 
so confused, shejust didn't know what had gone on. She'd 
been given this ticket to be there. It had all been pre¬ 
arranged. And she didn't know what happened until she 
saw me. Then shejust let out a scream. And they went 
on. Oh, they had her mother there and a woman that 
had taught her in school. 

Anyway, everybody was let out one at a time, and 
when I came out and was introduced in front of the mike, 
she asked Ralph Edwards, "Can I kiss him?" 

He said, "If he don't mind, I don't mind." 

She just threw her arms around me, and she said, 
"This is the happiest day of my life." 

She, by then, had gotten married. I heard from her 
for years, and then, I heard just from J ack, her husband, 



Court of Last Resort 


171 


and then I gradually . . . whatever happened to her, I 
don't know. But she was a nice person. She was the one 
that got me on the Court of Last Resort. 

So then, you were working with your friend, Erie, on 
different cases? 

After that, yes. I'd never met Erie, of course, until I 
pulled that faux pas in Reno and got him away from those 
women. For years and years, every time we'd be at a 
meeting somewhere, he'd tell them how we met, and how 
I saved him from these women. He said, "This guy had a 
brainstorm." He'd always tell them how we met. Never 
failed, whenever there was a meeting. I don't know 
whether he worried about somebody's worry of how we 
met or not, but he had to tell them. 

Wer ether e other people I ikeEmmaJ oj ohnson, that came 
through the prison, whose cases became pretty famous? 

Oh, yes. There was a school teacher named 
Ensinspranger. I forget his first name—big, handsome 
man, over six feet, two hundred pounds, all-American 
boy. He was a school teacher in Oakland, California, and 
a coach of whatever sports they had. He was a profes¬ 
sional football sports nut, and during the football season 
he liked to go to Las Vegas and play the odds on football 
games. That was his hobby. He'd save his money. And 
so, on this particular year he did that. At that time, and 
probably still now, before you board, they take your bag¬ 
gage, and they weigh your suitcase. They weighed his. 
He had a small bag with just what clothes he would need, 
extra shirts, and socks, and drawers, and whatnot. Any¬ 
way, it weighed twenty-two pounds. There was a record 



172 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


of that in Oakland when he boarded. Something hap¬ 
pened to the flight, and instead of going straight to Las 
Vegas, they had to go to Los Angeles, and they docked 
there. Then he got another plane and went to Vegas, but 
he didn't get his bag. They didn't get the baggage. They 
told him his bag would come to Las Vegas on the next 
flight. So, all he's got on is the clothes he had when he 
got off the plane and boarded the other one to Las Vegas. 
He had the reservations in Las Vegas, but he didn't have 
any money, except what he had in his pocket. He had 
checks in his bag—traveler's checks. 

So, the next day he went down to the station ... to 
the airport, and his bag didn't show up, and he began to 
get worried. He needed his clothes. The next day it didn't 
show up, and the next day—and he's frantic. He just 
couldn't leave, and he didn't have any money. He was in 
a terrible predicament. It went on for eight days. Finally, 
on the eighth day they asked him his name, and they 
had him show proof that this was his bag. They handed 
it over to him, and the minute he took it in his hands, 
two officers, one on each side, from the ATF—that good 
old ATF, or what ever the agency is, the narcotics 
agency—took him in tow. [Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, 
and Firearms] His bag didn't have his clothes in it. They 
had a dirty pair of socks and a dirty pair of shorts, and it 
was plumb full of marijuana. 

The baggage, fortunately for him, weighed eight 
pounds. Somewhere along the line, it had lost fourteen 
pounds. He said, "This is not mine. These are not my 
things. I had all my clothes in here." 

Well, what had gone on at that time in narcotics, the 
gangs in Los Angeles or Chicago or wherever, were in 
cahoots with a another gangfrom another town, and they 
were shippingdopefrom here to there. And how do they 



Court of Last Resort 


173 


do it? They put it in somebody's bag—shovel everything 
out of there, and fill it with dope, and send it to its desti¬ 
nation. There it would be picked up by someone who 
knew, who would take the narcotics out, close up the 
bag again, and when the owner came and asked for it, he 
got his bag, but there was nothing in it. There was no 
dope in it either, but this time they got it before the gang 
could get the dope out of it. And it was a frame-up job. It 
had to be. 

Well, he pled innocent, of course. He got a defense 
attorney from the office of the public defender, and one 
of the head men of the narcotic division named White 
said that the man couldn't be guilty, because he said that 
his suitcase was weighed in Oakland and weighed twenty- 
two pounds. When it got to Las Vegas, it weighed eight. 
He said, "All these clothes have disappeared. He can't be 
guilty." But they weren't gong to take any of that guff. 
They got a jury, and they convicted him. And I forget 
what. . . they sent him up for how much. 

Anyway, this White—God bless him—made so much 
noise. There again, you had to have somebody with some 
authority, an attorney that he couldn't afford. J ake Erlich 
was approached, and he said he'd be glad to, but he 
wanted to investigate first, and see what the scoop was. 
He called me, introduced himself, and told me that he'd 
been asked to represent Ensinspranger, and what did I 
think of it, and what reception could he expect, if he 
accepted this case? 

I told him, I said, "You can expect the national guard 
to come out and greet you, because that man is abso¬ 
lutely innocent. I know it. He knows it. And the narcotics 
division knows it." 

Jake said, "I'll be there." So, he came up the next 
day, and he was my guest as long as he was here. I have 



174 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


his autographed book and nice letters from him. Jake 
and I got to be palsy-walsy, just like I did with Gardner. 
When we gave this information to the pardons board, 
they released Ensinspranger to time served. But in 
Nevada, they won't give anybody a pardon, because then 
that gives them an opportunity to sue the state, which 
they don't want to pay. So he had no recours. He got out 
of prison, but he's always goingto be an ex-convict. He'll 
always have that record. 

He got back to Oakland. They fired him. They knew 
he was innocent, of course, but he was an ex-convict 
now, and they couldn't keep him on. So they ruined this 
man's entire life—a nice, young fellow, twenty-nine years 
old, he was. That's what some of our justice departments 
do. I could sit here all day and give you instances of people 
who were railroaded. The only ones I had were from Clark 
County. 

/ 7 n curious then, for Emma J oj ohnson, she wasn 't par¬ 
doned either, correct? 

No. No she wasn't pardoned. She always was an ex¬ 
convict, too, but it wouldn't bother her. I mean, it wouldn't 
bother her livelihood. 

Where it affected the school teacher's career. 

Yes. God knows whatever happened to him. He prob¬ 
ably never got another job teachingschool. That's terrible. 



_ 11 

Bank-Robbing Barber 


I n the middle 1950s sometime they had a case in 
Sparks where two couples, two young couples, had 
robbed a bank in California, had escaped across the line 
into Nevada, and they were pinpointed to have got to 
Sparks, and information that they got led the police to a 
motel. When they introduced themselves as police offic¬ 
ers, the door wasn't opened, so they broke in. The two 
alleged bank robbers . . . and it developed that they did 
rob the bank . . . one pulled a gun and started shooting, 
and instead of hitting the policeman, he hit his partner 
and killed him. So we've got one dead bank robber, one 
live bank robber, and their two wives. They were nice 
girls, nice-looking girls. They came to prison in Nevada 
on the murder charge, and the girls on bank robbery. 

Then, when they served their time here, the federal 
system had a hold on them, because bank robbery is a 
federal crime. So this young man's name was—we'll call 
him Don—and his wife's name was Ann. I don't remem- 



176 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


ber the name of the man that was murdered. It's beside 
the point. I don't remember his wife's name either, but 
she served time there. 

This Don wasa problem. Hewasgettingin troubleall 
thetime, and hewasuncontrollable. Hewasjust unman¬ 
ageable. The rest of the inmates all tried to help him, by 
telling him that the guards made all the women up in the 
women's prison, and his wife didn't need him anymore, 
because she had the guard. He was just crazy, insanely 
jealous, and believing all his stuff. And no one knew, cer¬ 
tainly the guards didn't know what was creating these 
problems. He was always in cell detention. He hated all 
authority. God, he just hated authority. And one day the 
guards came to me, and they asked what were they going 
to do with Don? They found him, and somebody ... he 
painted a sign on hisstomach, "Intercoursethewarden." 

I said, "Well, nobody's going to do that. Just clean 
him off, and let's forget it. He's got problems. I don't know 
what his problems are, but he's got problems." 

A little at a time, we got him settled down to the point 
where I found out he was a barber, and we could always 
use barbers. We had two barber shops. One was in the 
mainline, in the main yard, and they barbered the con¬ 
victs. The other was out in front, and they barbered the 
personnel, including the warden. So, as time went on I 
had them put Don—since he was a barber, and figuring 
that this might calm him, if he had somethingto do—in 
the mainline barbershop and watch him. So they did, 
and time went on, time went on. He was a good barber. 
When the reports came out, he was a good barber. 

The reports also came out that he had one dream, so 
to speak. He wanted to get the warden in his chair. "And 
for God's sake, Warden, don't ever get in around that 
barbershop." 



Bank-Robbing Barber 


111 


I listened to all that. And you know, to kill a man and 
cut his throat takes a whole hell of a lot of nerve. Some¬ 
body could say, "I'll shoot you. I'd like to shoot you," or 
"I'd like to do this, I'd like to do that." 

He'd like to cut my throat, which is what he meant, 
"If I get him in the barber chair, he's gone." 

One day, I decided I'd have a little fun and grinned a 
little bit. I'd just been told by a guard again, "For God's 
sake, don't get in that barber chair." 

Because I used to go visit all the barbers. Everywhere 
in the prison I visited, includingthe barbershop. I was a 
barber once upon a time, and I was a good one. I decided 
I'd go in and have Don shave me. Therearetwo chairs in 
the mainline shop. So, I walked into the mainline, and I 
started down. I asked the guy on seven post, Lieutenant 
Peck. I said, "Is Don working in the barbershop today?" 

He says, "Yes." 

I said, "I think I'll go get a shave." 

Jesus, the place exploded. "God, you can't go in 
there!” 

I says, "Why can't I go in there?" 

"My God, he'll cut your throat." 

I says, "I don't think so. It's my throat. I'll take a 
chance." 

"Oh, Warden, you can't do that! You can't do that!" 

"Hell," I said, "He isn't going to cut my throat." 

"Oh, you can't go in." They were creating excitement 
in there that the convicts couldn't be in seven post, but 
they could look, and the talk was so loud, they could 
even hear it out there. 

Anyway, I says, "And don't anybody come in there. 
Don't anybody come in and interfere or interrupt." I 
walked in the mainline barbershop. As the newest bar¬ 
ber, Don had the back chair. The best barber and the 



178 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


oldest barber always gets the front chair by the window. 
He had a guy in there, an inmate, he was shaving. The 
guy's laid down, had a towel over hisface. I said, "Howdy, 
fellows." Geez, I says, "Don, I understand you're a hell of 
a barber and put out a goddamn good shave. I'm in the 
mood for a good shave." I sat down in the chair, and I 
said, "Have at it." 

The guy in the other chair threw his apron off, grabbed 
his towel, and threw it on the floor, and he went out the 
door, and the barber followed him. That left just Don 
and me in there. 

Don was so frustrated and ill at ease that he was shak¬ 
ing, actually shaking. 

I said, "Don, I want a shave. I'm just flesh and meat, 
just like anybody else, and it's hard to get a good shave 
around here. I'm an ex-barber, and I'd really enjoy a good 
shave." 

He didn't say anything. He leaned me back. He lath¬ 
ered my face and put a hot towel on. I kept talking to 
him. "Don't get nervous. Hell, I'm just a man, just like 
anybody else. My whiskers cut off just like others. In 
fact, they're softer than most. You'll find that I shave easy." 
And by God, he never said a word. He shaved me, and he 
was nervous, but he never cut me. When he got all 
through, I looked in the glass. I said, "That's a pretty 
good shave. You're going to get better, too." 

He says, "You're coming back?" 

I says, "Yes. This is the best shave I've had in quite a 
while. And when you're not as nervous as you were to¬ 
day, you're going to be a good shave." 

So, I went in three or four times after that, and he got 
so he wasn't very nervous, and he got talkative. I said, 
"Don, I'd like you to come in and have a talk with me 



Bank-Robbing Barber 


179 


one of these days, whenever you can, whenever you feel 
like it." 

He says, "What for?" 

I says, "Oh, there's just a lot of things I'd like to know. 
Onething I'd liketo know is why a good barber like you 
is in prison. You could make a good living out." 

So, he says, "Well, I'll come in any time you say." 

I says, "All right. I'll give you a jingle. So, the next 
day I called him in. I says, "Now I want you to give me 
your history. Don't hold anything back on me. I want to 
know what the hell caused you to go haywire." 

"Well," he said, "what caused me to go haywire in 
here is all the stories about all the guards making my 
wife." 

I says, "That's not true. You ought to know better than 
that." 

"Well," he says, "I know that goes on in prisons. I 
talked to all these prisoners." 

"Well," I said, "This a different prison. There's only 
four or five women, and my wife istakingcareof them. I 
won't allow that. It just isn't allowed in here. You don't 
need to worry about your wife. If that's worrying you, 
just get that out of your head. But something caused you 
to rob a bank and kill your partner. I know it was acci¬ 
dental, but you did it anyway, and it's going to be with 
you for the rest of your life. Don't be embarrassed to talk 
to me. I've heard everything. I really want to know what 
caused you to go haywire." 

Well, he says, "Warden, is this going to get any 
farther?" 

I says, "No. It's not going to get any farther. It's just 
between you and IOf course, I didn't know that I was 
going to tell anybody about it, but it doesn't matter. 



180 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


"Well," he said, "I was raised by my mother and grand¬ 
father, and I never did know my father." He said, "I like 
my grandfather. He's always good to me." He said, "I went 
to school, and I learned the barber trade, and I got a 
job." He said, "One day I went home, and I heard my 
mother and grandfather arguing. Warden, I found out that 
my grandfather was my father. I found out that my grand¬ 
father had intercourse with my mother when she was 
fifteen, and I'm the result of it." He said, "I went crazy. I 
don't know what I did after that, because I just got into 
the wrong group. I just didn't want to live with myself. I 
didn't want to ever see my mother again. I didn't ever 
want to see my grandfather, who was my father. And I 
don't know what I'm going to do for the rest of my life," 
he says. "But I just couldn't stand ... I just couldn't put 
up with that." 

"Well," I said, "you got married to a nice girl." 

He says, "Yes. And that's another thing that's been 
bothering me." He says, "I love her. I just. . . I can't live 
without her. And here I am in prison, and I don't know 
how long I'm going to be here. And then I've got to leave 
here." He says, "I know I've got to go to a federal prison. 
And she's going to go to a federal prison, if she's out. I 
don't know what's going to happen to us." 

"Well," I said, "I'll tell you what. I don't know what's 
going to happen to you either, but I know if you settle 
down and decide that you're here ... . You've been con¬ 
victed. You're incarcerated. You're going to be here until 
you're paroled, and when you're paroled, you're goingto 
a federal prison. When you get to a federal prison, you're 
goingto run into the samethingyou are here. Your wife 
is goingto be paroled to a federal prison, and she's going 
to run into the same thing. The two of you are not going 
to be together for many years, but you've got a long, long 



Bank-Robbing Barber 


181 


ways to live. You're a young man." He was twenty-four 
then. She was about the same age. I said, "You're a good- 
looking young man." He was a very handsome man. You 
could say he's handsome as a movie actor. There's a lot 
of movie actors that are homelier than hell, but a movie 
actor is considered to be a handsome man. He was just 
absolutely perfect. He had nice, square jaws, nice hair, 
well-built. One might say he had good breeding, [laugh¬ 
ter] Even if it did kill him. Then I said, "Your mother 
couldn't help what happened to her. It happened. And it 
just didn't happen to your mother." I said, "It's happened 
to hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of women 
through the years. And sometime they can't help it, and 
sometimes they could." I says, "It might surprise you to 
know that a lot of women tease their fathers. I've heard 
that from you guys, too. Most of the time it's the father 
that takes advantage of the girl. But in your case, your 
grandfather, who was your father, had something good in 
him, because he stayed with your mother, and he raised 
you. And, evidently, he did a good job till you found out 
your background. So, you've been here now a couple of 
years, and you're going to be paroled shortly. I'm going 
to see to that. And I'm going to see that your wife is pa¬ 
roled at the same time, because I've got a pretty good in 
to the parole board. And we'll get you both out of here at 
the same time. When you hit the federal prisons, you're 
not goingto be in the same one. She's goingto Alderson, 
Virginia, and I don't know whereyou'regoing. But they'll 
let you keep in touch, oneway or the other. You may not 
get out at the same time, but whichever one of you get 
out first, wait for the other one, because you're a pair. 
You're crazy about her, and she is about you, too. I know 
that. Shetalksto Mrs. Bernard. So figure, you're goingto 
do here not very much longer, about, let's say, less than a 



182 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


year. You're goingto a federal prison, and you've already 
served time here. They're goingto take that into consid¬ 
eration, depending on your conduct. You might do two 
or three years and be lucky and get out. When you get 
out, they know your wife is in; they may work on her the 
same way. And you might get outthesametimeor 

Don said, "You know, I've never talked to anybody 
likeyou before." Hesaid, "You makeit sound likeit could 
happen." 

I said, "It could. It's all going to depend on you and 
Ann now." 

Well, when he was released, the next time the parole 
board met, I gave them the circumstances, and I told the 
parole board about his background. I told him I'd never 
tell anybody, but I did. And they all felt as bad as I did. 
They said, "Let's get him out of here. Let's get him going, 
and get his wife out." So they let his wife go. They let the 
other one go, too, because they couldn't let one go with¬ 
out the other. He asked to see me, when he came in before 
he left, and he was actually crying. He damn near had 
me crying. I don't know what happened to him, but I 
hope they made it. Those are circumstances that make 
some wardens feel pretty good. 



12 

A Warden's Philosophy 


Y 


ou really allowed the men to come and talk to 
you. 


Right. That's one of the first things that I told my 
officers, all of them, the captain, the lieutenant, every¬ 
body. Any time anybody came to talk to me, it was 
somebody that the guard sent, and the word pretty soon 
got to me, that nobody got to see the man unless they 
could get through Seven Post first. 

So I called them in, and I said, "Anybody that wants 
to see me, anybody that comes in to say, 'I want to see 
the warden,' you make damn sure he sees the warden. 
And don't ask them what they want, because they want 
to talk to me. They don't want you to know what they're 
going to tell me. It might be something against you. I'll 
use my own judgement. But you see damn well that they 
get in here." I told the captain, I said, "You make damn 
sure that that happens. And I don't care who it is. If he 



184 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


wants to see me, he comes in. All I want you to do is 
announce him first, and if it's somebody that I've seen 
several times, I'll know what he wants, and I don't want 
to talk to him anymore. But anybody that wants to see 
me, you send him in." And they always came. That word 
got out. 

When you were a warden, were there prison psycholo¬ 
gists at that time? 

With me—I was the doctor; I was the psychiatrist; I 
was the father-confessor. I was the dean of men, as I 
always referred to that as Graystone U, and I was the 
dean of men. I did it all. I was the absolute brains of it. I 
even did the purchasing. I had a purchasing agent, and 
he had the authority to buy whatever we needed, but if 
there was any expenditure that wardens don't have any 
authority or whatever they don't, I wanted to know, be¬ 
cause I wanted to know where every damn dollar that 
went out of that appropriation that I got, and I never 
ended a year without returning fifty thousand or so to 
the general fund, and that was quite a chunk, because I 
didn't get much. I wasn't getting millions of dollars. I was 
getting two or three hundred thousand dollars a year to 
run that prison. I always, always turned money back. 
And that's another thing, that even the senators on the 
institutions committee would say, "You goddamn fool, 
spend it! If you had it appropriated, spend it!" 

"I don't want to spend it, if I don't have somethingto 
spend it for." 

"Well, by God, you're different." 

And I was. That's how I got in trouble originally with 
the governor who said, "We're goingto get you. We'll chop 



A Warden's Philosophy 


185 


you down," is because I had an excess in my budget, and 
I tried to turn it back. 

They wouldn't accept it. "Buy a new car. Buy stuff- 
typewriters. Buy something. Spend that money. Don't 
spoil it for everybody else." 

You had a particular philosophy that you developed 
about working with the convicts. Did you have meet¬ 
ings with other state wardens? 

Oh, yes. Twice a year, we had meetings. Once a year, 
we met with the American Wardens Association, and the 
next year we met with the Western Wardens Association. 

I was president, as quickly as I wanted to be, became 
president of the Western Wardens Association, and turned 
down the presidency of the American Wardens Associa¬ 
tion, because I didn't want to take the time. And then, I 
finally agreed to become vice president. While I was still 
vice president, is when I got paroled. 

Were you learning from them? Or were they learning 
from you? 

No. There wasn't a damn one of them that knew any 
more than I did. A lot of them thought I was half crazy. 

They didn't agree with your philosophy? 

Oh, no. When I told them that I chose a committee of 
three men, and I called them thethreewisemen,tocome 
in and meet and complain to me, anything that they 
wanted to talk about, they could come in and see me: 



186 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


"Well, you goddamn fool! That's like organized labor, 
the union telling you what to do. They come in and tell 
you what to do." 

"No, they never told me what to do. They told me 
what was going on and what they'd like to see done and 
what was going on and what could be improved. They 
told me a lot of things that I approved of, and I did it. It 
was beneficial, not only to the convicts, but to the insti¬ 
tution." 

"Oh, hell." 

You were kind of out there by yourselfwi th some of these 
new methods that you were trying? 

Yes, but I'd been in charge of men all my life. I started 
young. Dr. Petty, my old hunting buddy and the doctor 
at the prison, called me the poor man's psychiatrist and 
the canine psychologist. 

Now, for canines, that's because of your love of dogs? 

Yes. My love of dogs. I've had a lot of them thrown at 
me, that other hunters just couldn't handle. And I take 
that dog, and I take him huntingtwo or three times, and 
he's talking to me, doing everything I want him to do, 
like he read a book. And this guy wants me to do this and 
this, and in a certain way, and they'd do it. My hunting 
partner never did get over it. They'd have a dog that they 
couldn't control, and I'd say, "I've got to take him. He's 
got to go with me and live with me." And it wouldn't be a 
week till that dog was working good. Give them back to 
their owner—same thing happened. 



A Warden's Philosophy 


187 


So, did you come to some of your philosophies just by 
studying people? 

Well, it just... I don't know how to explain that. I 
guess, just by living with people, because I started young. 

I ran away from home when I was eleven years old. I've 
been among men ever since. Boy, you can't be around 
every type of man that I was, without learning some¬ 
thing. I can meet a man and know damn near right now 
whether he's good or bad, whether he's trustworthy, 
honest. I make very few mistakes, or have made very 
few mistakes. I'm not going to have much chance any 
more. But when I was appointed deputy mine inspector, 
the deputy mine inspector and the mine inspector were 
two men that all the mine owners hated to see come 
around. They knew it was going to be trouble. When I 
first started going around, I could smell that. By the time 
I'd been in six months, I'd get calls from various mine 
owners in the middle of the night, "Hey, when are you 
coming around here again?" 

"Oh, I don't know. Hell, I was there just two weeks 
ago." 

"Well, we got a problem. You might be able to help us 
out with it." 

"Well, if it's that serious, I'll make arrangements to 
come up." I never passed up a chance to go somewhere 
on call, because everywhere I went, I passed a duck slough 
or a fishing creek, and I always had a dog and a gun in 
the car, and we could always stop and catch a fish or 
shoot a duck or something. But there was no mine op¬ 
erator in this state that didn't trust me and like me. Oh, 
they called me on things, and I'd say, "God, any jackass 
could figure that out. Why run me up there?" 

"Well, we just wanted to get your opinion." 



188 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


So, building trust seemed to be a really important part 
of what you did, both in mine inspecting and being a 
warden? 

I never lied to anybody. The convicts at the prison 
used to say, "If the warden tells you a piss ant can pull a 
plow, hook it up and start plowing." If I told them they 
were going to hit the hole if they did a certain thing, they 
hit the hole. And if I told them I'd do something good for 
them, if they did the same thing, I did it. My officers got 
to the point where they knew that they were treading 
very carefully. They must not operate like they had be¬ 
fore. Things had changed. And no problem at all. 

So, you di dn't haveto changeyour security guards. They 
changed to follow your policies? 

That's right. Well, they had to. I had the payroll. Like 
the convicts. They'd say, "They'll go over the wall." 

"They can't go over the wall—I got the guns. And I 
got the keys. I'm in full control. I've got everything." So, 
how are you going to argue with somebody who's got the 
gun and the keys? How are you goingto argue with some¬ 
body that signs the paychecks? 



13 

Boxing Program 


rt, one of my questions is about your boxing 
M 1 career. It seems to me like that must have been 
an important thing for you as a prison warden. 


Well, it was, in away, because practically every prison 
has a boxing or sports program, and boxing is very im¬ 
portant. Some of the most famous fighters of our time 
have come out of prison. They learned their fighting in 
prison. One of them became one of the toughest heavy¬ 
weight champ ... in my opinion, the hardest punching 
heavyweight champion of all time. Sonny Liston. He 
fought Mohammed Ali. In fact, he gave the title to 
Mohammed Ali. 

So, when I went in, I started a boxing program. Before 
I started this program, one of my first travels through 
the prison yard, to see what was going on and how the 
inmates reacted, I saw a face that was very familiar, and 
the man looked at me steadily and kind of smiled. I 



190 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


thought, "Gee, I've seen that man before, but it can't be. 
He wouldn't be here, and he wouldn't be that young." 

So, a day or two later, I came face to face with him 
again, and he smiled, and he said, "How's Kid Bernard?" 

Well, that was the name I fought under, and I said, "I 
can't place you, but I think I knew your father." 

He says, "No. You knew me." 

I says, "You can't be Bull Powers." 

He says, "I'm Bull Powers." 

I said, "You'd be as old as I am, and you don't look 
over twenty or twenty-one, as you did when I knew you." 

He says, "Oh, I'm your age, and this is how I look. I 
can't help it." 

So, a few days later, I called him into my office, and, 
"Bull," I said, "I was glad to see you, but not pleased. I 
just don't like to see anyone that I knew in a place like 
this, because I know you've broken the law to get in here. 
What caused you to fall by the wayside?" 

He said, "Well," he said, "when the war broke out, I 
joined the army, and we were sent overseas. I was in 
many of the battles." He named them, and he said, "We 
were stationed in England and went back to England for 
R&R at various times." He says, "I was just like every¬ 
body else. I could get anything anybody else got—white 
women—anything. I was treated just like everyone else 
was treated. When the war was over, I came back to the 
United States, and I was the 'N' word again." He said, "I 
couldn't get a job. I couldn't make a living." He says, "And 
I couldn't box anymore, so," he said, "I started burglar¬ 
izing. And that's got me here." 

So, I knew Bull from back in the olden days, and he 
was not only a good fighter; he was a good man. So, as 
long as Bull was there, and I needed a chauffeur, I used 
to let him drive thecar, and he was tickled to death. And 



Boxing Program 


191 


then, I started a boxing program. We made the license 
plates for the state cars there at the prison. It was a two- 
story building. The license-plate factory was on the 
bottom, and the upper story was just a big, huge room. 
Eventually, I started having movies up there, and I rigged 
up a good training room for boxing with punching bags, 
and built a ring and everything. 

I did the best I could with teaching my boys what I 
could from what I knew. I developed some pretty good 
fighters, in fact. Another of my old friends was Archie 
Moore, and whenever Archie came up around the Reno 
area—and he did quite often; hefoughttwo orthreetimes 
around here and came up for other reasons—he'd come 
over to the prison and go through my program with me. 
In fact, at onetime I had three good prospects. One was 
a light heavyweight. One was a welterweight. And one 
was a lightweight. I forget their names now, but Archie 
took all three of them, sponsored them, took them out. 
We had them paroled to Archie, and the three of them 
went sour. The light heavyweight never got to San Diego 
to Archie's training camp. He stopped in Las Vegas, and I 
can't remember whether they shot him or cut histhroat, 
but he died. And the other two, Archie got two or three 
fights for them, and they were doing pretty good, and all 
at oncethey disappeared. Some of them just can't behave. 

Let me ask you a question. Did you ever get Bull Powers 
to help with the fighting program? 

No. He was released before we got started well. Bull 
had been in for some time before I got there, and the 
board released him before my boxing program got started. 

We had another boxer there, we'll call Punchy Norton. 
Norton was from one of our neighboring states, and at 



192 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


one time he nearly became a contender. He got in a few 
scrapes and had fouled up his boxing career. Punchy was 
a student when I took over. He didn't come in after I did. 
He came in on some robbery or something from Sparks, 
along with two or three other guys. Eventually, we sent 
Norton out to the ranch, and he got tangled up with a 
bull in his chute, and it broke his hip, or did something 
to his hip. He walked with a limp from then on, but he 
was still good enough that he could whip most of the 
boys. He had enough experience that they didn't man¬ 
age to hit him very much. Punchy helped me out with 
the boxing program, and we had, as I've mentioned be¬ 
fore, a driver that drove from the ranch to the prison 
and took supplies out there, brought the milk and every- 
thing back from the prison. And we discussed the 
narcotics program, didn't we? And thefact that I stopped 
narcotics cold? 

Right Yes. 

Just nothing ever came into the prison. In fact, an 
FBI agent came in from Denver, Colorado, to talk to one 
of our inmates who had a serious narcotics problem and 
had it when he come in. He was supposed to have died if 
hedidn't get narcotics, too, but hewas, at this point now, 
very healthy. This FBI agent wanted to talk to him about 
some cases that he might be able to help him on. After 
he talked to this inmate, he came into my office with a 
grin, and he says, "I just got to tell you this." He says, 
"There's no narcotics getting into your prison." 

Well, I said, "I know that." 

He says, "But everybody else doesn't." He said, "I 
talked to," and he named the fellow. "And I asked him 
where hewas getting his narcotics, and he said, 'Nothing 



Boxing Program 


193 


comes in here. That dirty so-and-so,' expletive deleted, 
'has got this place so tight, you just can't get anything 
in.'" 

I was very proud of that. So, we never had any nar¬ 
cotics problem. We had problems that started like all 
others. I had visitors that tried to bring stuff in, guards 
that did, but we always caught them in time. But every 
week Punchy used to come in from the prison driving 
thetruck on a Friday. On Saturdays, we'd get six or seven 
inmates high on drugs—marijuana. We wracked our 
brain, "How in the hell is that getting in? Who could be 
bringing marijuana into this prison?" And after the first 
day or two of these guys being high, they were back to 
normal. The following week, we'd have a repetition. 
They'd get high on marijuana. Who's bringing it in, and 
how are they bringing it in? And finally, we caught him. 

Punchy was bringing it in, and it was a weed called 
Indian tobacco when I was a kid. There's kind of a red 
seed, and we called it Indian tobacco, and we kids tried 
to smoke it. It didn't smoke very good. But it was grow¬ 
ing wild out at the ranch, and when the seeds got ripe, 
you could crush them. And Punchy was getting this Indian 
tobacco and crushing it, and then he'd bring it in, in his 
Levis. He'd rolled his Levis up on the bottom and cram 
them full of this Indian tobacco, and come in. He's ped¬ 
dling to the inmates, and they'd smoke it and get high. 
That shows you how much influence the marijuana, or 
whatever you're smoking, really is. If you think you're 
getting high, you're getting high. One's as good as another. 

Because the I ndian tobacco really di dn't get people high ? 

No. It was just another weed, an innocent, harmless 
weed. But Punchy made it pay until we stopped him. 



194 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


But he also helped you with your boxing program then, 
a little bit? 

Yes, he did. Punchy was a pretty good boxer. A very 
good defensive fighter. 

You mentioned another young man's name, Young Firpo. 
I wanted to hear about him. 

We've got Firpo on tape on the Redfield robbery. I'd 
lost all track of Young Firpo. I didn't know hewasin Reno. 

Where did you first know him? 

I first knew him in San Francisco when I was boxing. 
That's where I knew Bull Powers, too. Anyway, Firpo car¬ 
ried the safe out of the basement for the crooks. Fie was 
no more crooked than I was. Fie was just an absolutely 
naive, friendly fellow. And, of course, when he came in, 
and he heard who the warden was, he figured he'd come 
home. Of course, he knew that I'd know he was there, 
and we got together. Firpo, who was one of my great 
supporters, was a character. 




Falsified Evidence 


A t the time I had an inmate that was serving life 
on a murder charge from Clark County. The man 
shouldn't have been serving on a murder charge. He 
should have had a citation for eliminating the man he 
did, which was strictly in self-defense. Anyway, he was 
arrested on a murder charge, and the way it happened, 
he was working for Benny Binion. Benny Binion had at 
that time operated the Las Vegas Club. It was one of the 
top gambling casinos in Las Vegas. Benny was famous 
from his days in Texas, when he was in charge of the 
state gambling there, which was illegal. Later, I got very 
well acquainted with Benny Binion, and found him to be 
a man of his word. If he told you he was going to shoot 
you, you better watch, and if he said he wasn't, you knew 
he wasn't goingto. Hewasa man of hisword, absolutely. 
If he told you something, you could go to the bank on it. 

Binion owned a big ranch in Montana, and this fel¬ 
low, Helms, had worked for him on the ranch. Helms 



196 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


was an ex-rodeo-performer, and an ex-world-champion, 
and one of the best men I've ever known around horses. 
I've never known anyone that could do with a horse what 
he could. Helms was working in the Las Vegas Club for 
Binion as a security officer, and Clark County deputized 
the security officers, so they were legally deputy sheriffs. 
They wore a badge, and they had the authority to arrest 
anybody. 

Previousto Binion'sdaysin Las Vegas, he was in part¬ 
nership with another man in gambling back in an Eastern 
state, New J ersey or somewhere. He had a man working 
for him that he was very fond of, and the man had been 
in prison on a rape charge. He did his time, got paroled, 
and came out. Then he killed somebody, so he was sent 
to prison on a murder charge. When he came out, he 
came to his old boss for help, and his old boss couldn't 
help him, but hesaid, "I haveafriend in Texas who might 
be able to help you." 

So, he called on Benny, and for old-time's sake, Benny 
said, "All right. I'll give him a job." In the meantime, 
Benny had moved to Las Vegas and had the Las Vegas 
Club. So, he gave this fellow a job as a shill, and money 
started going south. They started missingamounts. They 
didn't know who was taking it or how it was getting 
exploited. 

A shill does what in a casino? 

A shill is someone who takes the casino's money and 
gambles, like a decoy duck. Someone sees him gambling, 
and they figure, "Let's get into the game." Sometimes 
they'll have two or three shills at the same table, to make 
it appear that there's a game going on, and this attracts 



Falsi fied Evi dence 


197 


someone else, who wouldn't want to gamble alone, but 
will gamble if he sees somebody else do it. 

So, Benny told Helms, he says, "See if you can't find 
out where the hell this is going." Helms is pretty sharp. 
He had a good head. And he did. Helms found out that 
this fellow was stealing the money, so Benny .... All 
they do—those gamblers—they don't make any fuss or 
anything. They just get rid of them. Sometimes they get 
rid of them permanently, but other times they just fire 
them, get rid of them. So, they called the man in and 
told them how disappointed they were. Binion says, "I 
don't want you around anymore, but I'm going to buy 
you a ticket back to New Jersey," or wherever it was. 
"You get the hell out of town. Stay out of my joint." 

So, he took the money for this ticket and got good 
and drunk around town that night, and he was picked up 
and taken to jail. The sheriff was a good friend of mine, 
and most of his help were people that I'd grown up with 
around Lincoln County and the mining camps and the 
farming units around there. There was one family of 
Stewarts, and the entire family got into politics in Las 
Vegas. One of the boys was a big, handsome man. We 
called him "Soup," because he always liked to eat. He 
was an under sheriff. When I was investigating Helms, I 
read the transcript from the district attorney on the court 
proceedings. And when I got readingthat, I just couldn't 
understand how they ever arrested Helms. Anyway, this 
man was arrested, taken to jail, and it was drunk and 
disorderly. The sheriff's office knew that he'd been fired 
from the Las Vegas Club and had been given money to 
buy a ticket back East. They said, "When we turn you 
loose, you get on the train and get going." 

He says, "Before I go, I want to kill Cliff Helms." 



198 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Soup said, "I personally told him, I said, 'You forget 
Cliff Helms. Get on that train and get out of here. You're 
in enough trouble as it is, without trying to kill some¬ 
body.'" 

So, he promised then that he would; he'd get on the 
train and go, and they just turned him loose. Instead of 
goingupand buyingaticket, which he couldn't buy any¬ 
way—he'd spent his money—he went back to the Las 
Vegas Club, and Helms was on the floor. He said, "Cliff, I 
want to talk to you." 

He says, "All right. Go ahead and talk." 

They'd already had quite an argument. He called Cliff 
a stool pigeon and everything else for reporting him. 

He says, "Let's go back in the boiler room. This is 
private. I don't want anybody to hear." 

Helms says, "Well, we don't have to go to the boiler 
room." He said, "J ust don't speak so loud." 

"No," he said, "let's go back to the boiler room." 

So, the boiler room was connected with the casino, 
and they went back to this boiler room, and the man 
pulled a knife and attacked Cliff. Cliff had a tie. These 
security men at that time all wore fancy silk ties. He 
slashed at Cliff's chest and sliced his necktie. Itwashang- 
ingon oneside. Cliff pulled hisgun. Hehad a .38 special, 
and he had eight rounds in it. He pumped eight rounds 
into the man's chest, and the man turned around, stag¬ 
gered, and Helms fired the last shot. The bullet grazed 
his neck. It wouldn't have been noticeable, but it was 
fired from the back, which was an important point dur¬ 
ing his trial. 

The minute the shots sounded, people came in from 
the casino, because the boiler room was connected there. 
Helms was there with a smokinggun in hishand. One of 
their people that came in happened to be a deputy sher- 



Falsi fied Evi dence 


199 


iff, and we had his testimony. It was seconds after the 
shooting started until they were there, and Helms ad¬ 
mitted that he shot him, and he shot him, because he 
tried to attack him with a knife to kill him, and he'd cut 
his necktie. So, they arrested Helms and took him to the 
station right there and took his gun. Oh, and he had a 
pocket knife in his pocket. All cow men and riders in 
those days carried a knife. All of them carried a knife, 
and they kept that knife sharp enough to shave with. 
They did everything with that knife. I do that myself yet. 

So, they took his gun, and they took thetie, and every¬ 
thing he had, in fact. This was evidence. Duringthetrial 
an FBI man was a witness, and it developed that they 
had sent this Helms's knife. . . the prosecution con¬ 
tended that Cliff had shot the man dead, and to make it 
appear that it was self defense, he cut his own tie with 
his own knife. Hell, they took the knife out of his pocket 
in clear view of everybody around there. So, it was im¬ 
possible for him to have cut that tie, but this FBI agent 
testified, and truthfully, that they had found pieces of 
that tie embedded in where the knife closes. That's 
another stupid thing. How would a thread get in there, if 
you were just cutting the tie? It just didn't make sense, 
not to me, and I'm familiar with knives and what you 
can do with them. 

So that and other things made me just curious. I just 
couldn't figure why they . . . how they had convicted 
Cliff Helms. I read the name of the jurymen, and I knew 
half of them. In those days I knew practically everybody. 
There was only a hundred thousand people in the state, 
and in my political travels and everything, I knew practi¬ 
cally everybody. So I went down, and I found one of these 
jurymen, who was a very good friend of mine, and I said, 



200 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


"How in hell did you convict Helms on that murder 
charge?" 

"Well," he says, "I don't know how everybody else 
felt." Hesays, "That littleSOB came to court every morn¬ 
ing in a brand new suit, Western suit." Cliff Helms just 
liked the best clothes and had plenty of money, and he 
bought them. He says, "A brand new Western suit, fancy 
cowboy boots. And he looked at us as if we were dirt, 
like we were dirt under his feet." He says, "I didn't like 
it." 

Well, I said, "You didn't convict him on that." 

"No," he said, "but we convicted him on the knife, 
and the fact that he used his own knife to cut his tie, and 
then tried to make it self defense. That's what clinched 
it." 

Well, they had that piece of evidence from the FBI. 
You couldn't refute it. And if he did do that, which it was 
impossible for him to do, it was no longer self defense. 
And it worried me. 

A few months later they instituted the board of par¬ 
don and parole. They never had a board of parole. The 
board of pardon and parolethey called it then, but it was 
actually just a parole board. The question was, who do 
we get to head this board of parole? Again, I knew prac¬ 
tically everybody around. And various names came up, 
and I said, "Well, I think Ted Cupid would probably be 
the best man we could get. He's had a lot of law enforce¬ 
ment experience, and Ted is honest. He'd make a good 
man." 

So, they went along with it, and they hired Ted Cupid. 
So Ted Cupid is my parole officer. He knew how he got 
thejob. Heliked me anyway, and we got alongfine. When¬ 
ever he had anybody to supervise, he always wanted my 
experience in regard to what he should do with him. When 



Falsi fied Evi dence 


201 


I'd talk about Helms, inevitably I'd say, "There's some¬ 
thing fishy about that. Cliff Helms didn't cut that tie 
himself." 

Every time I mentioned that, he'd get a funny look on 
his face, and he'd get off the subject. And the next time 
I'd bring it up again, because Helms was a prominent 
inmate down there—he practically had his run of the 
outside. I had him in charge of the stables. He broke my 
horses. He used to take my kids riding, took my wife and 
her friends riding. I just have to say, he was a special 
character, and the other inmates held it against him, 
because he was in so good with the warden, but I couldn't 
help it. I knew that he'd been railroaded. And he was 
honest. I would have sent him to Texas with my family 
and a checkbook and signed a bunch of checks, and when 
he came back they'd have been absolutely correct to the 
last nickel, and I know that nothing would have happened 
to my kids and my wife. He was just that good a man. 

I began to think about the way Ted acted, when I got 
on that Helms, that he knew something I didn't know, 
and I should know it. One day I told him cold turkey, I 
says, "Every time I bring up Helms, you get off the sub¬ 
ject. Ted, you know something that I should know." 

He says, "I spent many a sleepless night wondering if 
I should tell you, because I know if I tell you, it's goingto 
raise hell." 

"Well," I said, "I think you should tell me, because 
Cliff is innocent." 

"Yes," he says, "I know he is." He says, "I'm goingto 
tell you, but I don't know what's goingto happen. I've got 
a brother-in-law that was on thepoliceforce in Las Vegas 
at the time, and I don't know how much trouble he's going 
to get into." 



202 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


I says, "Tell me the story, and well determine. But 
the man's in prison—unjustly convicted, framed, rail¬ 
roaded, doing life." I said, "This is not something we can 
play with." 

So, he told me about his brother-in-law, who was on 
the police force, and he said the assistant prosecutor, 
who prosecuted the case, wanted a place to hold a meet¬ 
ing for two or three people. And it's very secretive. 
Nothing was ever supposed to get out about it. They had 
a lot of discussions." He said, "So my brother-in-law 
agreed to furnish the house." He says, "And what they 
did there, they took Cliff's knife, and the tie from the 
court house, where it was supposed to be under lock and 
key. They stripped some threads out of thetie, and they 
put it in the knife, and they sent that to the FBI. And 
that's how that information got in his trial." 

And who headed that meeting? 

It was a prosecutor. I said, "Well, I'm going to go from 
there." 

So, I went down, and I talked to this brother-in-law. 
He said, "I haven't had a good night's sleep since that 
happened." He says, "It was my job, and I was asked to 
furnish the Niemann place, and I did it." He says, "I just 
haven't had a good night's sleep since." He says, "I don't 
know. I'll do anything to get this out of my head." 

I said, "Would you go to court?" 

He says, "Couldn't we do it without me going to 
court?" 

I says, "All right. In your own handwriting, you write 
me a report of what you did, and sign it, and give it to 
me." 



Falsi fied Evi dence 


203 


So, he did. And the board of pardons at the time was 
composed of three people only: the governor, the attor¬ 
ney general, and the chief justice of the supreme court. 
And the chief justice of the supreme court was named 
Badt, and he was one of the finest men I've ever known. 
He had one problem. He just could not believe that an 
attorney could do anything wrong. When they took an 
oath to uphold the law and order, they did it. If they 
didn't, there was something caused them not to do it. 
But he just couldn't believe that an attorney was not the 
epitome of everything that was honest and good. 

So, when I got this and came back, I had to go to the 
board of pardons, and the chief justice of the supreme 
court was the most important one of the three. I gave 
him this, and I told him what had happened, and, of 
course, we had the name of the prosecutor. It just about 
killed old Badt. He said, "I just don't believe it." 

I says, "Well, you got it there." 

He says, "I know. I know it happened, but I just can't 
believe it. I hate to see every attorney in this state have 
to suffer for one bad apple." 

Well, I said, "We got a man in prison there, doing life, 
and he's innocent. He was railroaded! Are you going to 
let one bad apple . . . ?" 

He said, "Art, give me that paper. Let methink it over, 
and I'll see that justice is served one way or another." 

I said, "All right. I trust you." 

Nothing happened for quite a while, and I asked the 
judge two or three times. He says, "I'm still thinking. I 
haven't forgotten." 

In the meantime, Captain came into my office one 
day, about noon, and he said, "Warden, there's some¬ 
thing wrong with Cliff Helms." 

I says, "What's wrong with him?" 



204 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


He says, "I don't know. He's sitting out in the chair." 

I had somebody helping him out in the stable, cleaning 
the stables and whatnot, and he brought Helms in. 

I went out. Helms was sitting there. I said, "What's 
the matter, Cliff?" 

"I don't know." He said, "I was ridingj ack, and that's 
all I remember." 

Jack was a registered quarter horse that George 
Wingfield had given to my son as a gift—beautiful roan 
stallion. Hewasfast, and Cliff thought that hecould win 
a lot of quarter horse races, and he was training him. He 
was down in the corral training him. I talked to the man 
that brought him in, "What happened to Cliff?" 

He says, "I don't know. He was riding J ack around 
thefigureeight, and all atoncehefell off, just laid on the 
ground. And I went over, and he couldn't talk, sol picked 
him up and brought him in." 

Anyway, I picked Cliff up in my arms, and I took him 
out and put him in my car and drove to the hospital. I 
said, "I want the best medical attention you can get." 

They didn't have any surgeons in Carson at the time, 
but Fred Anderson was in Reno, and Fred was a very 
good friend of not only mine, but our doctor Petty, who 
was the prison doctor. I'd called Petty in the meantime, 
and he says, "Well, let's get Fred Anderson over here." 
Fred Anderson at that time was the most famous sur¬ 
geon in thestate. Las Vegas was still a little country town. 
Fred came over, and Cliff had a subdural hematoma. 
These can be caused by falls, or they can just be inher¬ 
ited. And that's what had happened to Cliff. His father 
had died, and one brother had died of the same thing. 
Cliff was around forty-eight at the time, and Anderson 
operated on him, but it didn't do any good. He died. 



Falsi fied Evi dence 


205 


So, Badt didn't have to do anything with the report 
that I'd given him. But that's what could go on. That's 
what I was getting. And not only that, but Emma J o and 
various many ... like Ensinspranger from Las Vegas. 

Anyway, I've got Cliff in prison, and he's always got 
that knife that you can shave with. I was having trouble 
with my homosexuals—queers, as we called them. We 
didn't call them gay. They're not gay. I was a gay one. I 
was young. I was considered gay. 

Di fferent terminology now. 

Yes. And so, I'd made up my mind that I was goingto 
stop this homosexuality. And they said, "Warden, you 
can't do it." 

I said, "I'm goingto give it a forty-dollar try." I knew 
who the bad ones were. I didn't care if grown men had 
intercourse with each other. That didn't.... But when 
a young kid came in, those wolves would attack him and 
rape him. And that I couldn't go along with. So, I made 
damn sure that when a young kid came in, those guys 
didn't get around him. And if there was any semblance 
that they would even look at a kid that just came in, I 
told them, "Don't do it, because I'm goingto put you in 
cell detention. I just won't go for this." 

A lot of those homos were good workers, and one of 
them, I kind of liked. We were on friendly terms. I had 
one of them tell me, "Warden, if you ever have sex with 
a man, you'll never look at another woman." And he was 
serious about it. 

Anyway, I was putting these guys in cell detention, 
and once I got a young fellow in there, and he'd come out 
of a reform school, and he was as bad as a lot of those old 
guys. But that didn't make any difference. I wasn't going 



206 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


to let them get to him, either, not under my jurisdiction. 
The word got around, that the warden was really pissed 
off about this. So, one day, the captain came in, and he 
had a smile on his face. He says, "A couple of your favor¬ 
ite students want to talk to you." 

"Well," I said, "Send them in." 

And here came Helms and Firpo. Firpo says, "Chief," 
he says, "me and Cliff can take care of your problems." 

"What problem do I have that you can . . . ?" 

"Them queers! Them queers! If you tell us, I'll hold 
them, and Cliff will cut them." 

I said, "Firpo, that sounds good, and I'd even like to 
let you do it, but it's against the rules. We'rejust goingto 
have to let those guys keep their organs." 

But they were serious, "If we just had the permis¬ 
sion, we'd take care of those guys." And Firpo was sort of 
disappointed that he didn't get permission, because he 
figured that would really take care of those queers. 

You've named several instances of people being framed 
or setup and going to prison. Generally, nowadays the 
public doesn't think that that could happen. Do you think 
it's changed over time? 

Well, it's still happening, but maybe not as much as it 
used to. Because people are getting more rights. Crimi¬ 
nals are getting more rights, and they're getting too many 
rights in my opinion. They're being allowed to visit pri¬ 
vately. They're being allowed to use telephones 
indiscriminately, and at state cost. I never would allow 
that, never. You just as well not have a man in prison if 
he's goingto get on a telephone and have private conver¬ 
sations with every crook out there and plan on how to 
have somebody meet him at a certain place. Stupid, stu- 



Falsi fied Evi dence 


207 


pid. And have visitors come in that are not checked and 
get to go in a room for sex. It's been proven all over. Even 
here, some woman brought a gun in for her husband after 
I left. She had one of these Afros or whatever in hell. She 
hadthegun hidden in that. They can bringdopein, every¬ 
thing. They've got too damn many rights. I believe that 
they should be treated fairly and honestly, but I don't 
believe that they should be helped to carry on from prison 
what sent them to prison in the first place. And now, 
convicts can sue the state, so a lot of those nefarious 
ways that they used to railroad people to prison are no 
longer.... 

Can't happen anymore with the new system? 

It is happening every day, but not nearly as much. 
When you hear that they had a big bust of policemen in 
New York, and what they did was terrible—as bad as 
things I've told you—you think, "Gee, how can that hap¬ 
pen? And how can they get away with that?" A couple 
months later you hear the same thing happened in 
Chicago. The next month it's in Philadelphia. It's still 
going on, but it's exploding now, wherein the olden days 
it wasn't. Once the bar was closed, you'd had it, and what 
went on behind those prison bars, many times, it just 
wasn't prison. 

Then, I've had interesting ones. I had a nice guy sent 
up from Las Vegas, and he was accused of sexually rap¬ 
ing two women, two young women—one was a doctor's 
wife, and one was a lawyer's wife. He had sexually raped 
them ten times each in the back of a hotel out on the 
Strip. There weren't as many hotels then. But he never 
cametotrial.They never had atrial, butthewomen had 
told the officers that he made one of them stand guard 



208 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


out in front of the hotel, while he raped the other one. 
Then she'd go stand guard while he raped the other one. 
Then she'd stand guard, and they were each raped ten 
times, if you can imagine that. By God, I can't. I was a 
pretty athletic young man when I was young, and there's 
no way I could rape a women ten times and then try 
another one ten times. But they wouldn't take him to 
court. These were very prominent women, and they were 
not going to have to testify in court, which they would if 
they'd had a trial. And they didn't want to. What I think, 
is that they concocted this excuse to lie to their hus¬ 
bands about why they hadn't been home all night. They 
had caught this guy up there. There was a club in Las 
Vegas owned by some band leader, and I forget the name 
of it, and I can see it so plain. Somethingto do with four- 
leaf clovers. And the name had the band leader's name. 
Anyway, they were at this place. All the big hotels weren't 
on the Strip yet at that time. This was up in town. The 
man told methat he was drunk, no question about it. He 
lived in a place near Temecula, California. There's a lake 
there, and I forget the name of the place. He was a truck 
driver, and he had heard there was an openingfor a driv¬ 
ing job in Las Vegas, and he'd come up to apply for it. He 
had a white Pontiac roadster. He was gambling, and he 
said these two women approached him. He was drunk, 
but not drunk enough not to realizethat they were attrac¬ 
tive, young women. They struck up a conversation with 
him. After a while they wanted to know if he had a car, 
and he said he had a car. 

They said, "Let's go for a ride." 

He said, "I remember getting in my car, and after that 
I can't remember anything." He says, "I woke up the next 
morning. I was sick, had a hangover." He didn't get the 
job. He got in his car, and he got down around Barstow, 



Falsi fied Evi dence 


209 


when he was stopped by the highway patrol, and there 
was an APB out in Las Vegas. They wanted him on a rape 
charge, so they brought him back and threw him in jail, 
and they wanted him to admit that he'd raped these two 
women. 

He says, "Hell, I don't even know who they are. All I 
remember, they talked me into taking them in my car, 
and I don't know where we went." 

But they had the story of the women. They went down 
to one of the places that was on the Strip—there were a 
few of them down there then—and concocted this ter¬ 
rible story. 

Well, he wanted to go to trial, but they wouldn't try 
him. They kept putting it off. They wanted him to con¬ 
fess. If he'd confess, they'd make it a trivial charge like. . . 

I forget what they sentenced him on. They'd send word 
to the parole board that they should release him right 
away. Now, he didn't want to do that. He says, "God, I'm 
not guilty of raping one woman, let alone two, and ten 
times each. I'm just not that good." 

They wouldn't take him to trial, and they had him 
there in jail for nine months, never would take him to 
trial, never would get him an attorney. And they didn't 
have at that time the public defender. All they had was, 
the judge would appoint somebody to defend him, and 
the judge was always in cahoots with the prosecution. 
So, he hadn't been appointed an attorney. He was just 
being kept in jail, and the only way he was going to get 
out was to confess to something, because they should 
know damn well they didn't have anything they could 
convict him on. 

So, he finally confessed to some kind of a trivial 
assault, and they sent him up. And there again, I looked 
at his transcript, and this just didn't make sense. It just 



210 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


didn't make sense. The man doesn't live that can rape 
two women ten times each, and one of them stand out 
and stand guard while he does it to the other one. It's 
just silly. Once she got out there, she could go scream 
rape to anybody and get a policeman down there. It just 
didn't make sense. 

But anyway, there was no way I could help him out, 
except to see that he had a good trustee job and to get 
him out as quick as I could. He lost his car; this nice, 
white Pontiac was repossessed. He was engaged to be 
married when this happened, and, of course, she didn't 
want a rape-o in the family, so she broke the engage¬ 
ment. And he didn't have a dime when he got out of 
prison, except the twenty-five dollars that the state gave 
him. His clothes were not very good, so I went over in 
my wardrobe. He was a little shorter than I. Otherwise, 
everything fit. I fixed him up with a suit of clothes, and I 
thought that's the end of this. 

He went to Hemet, California. He went back there 
and eventually got a job, eventually got another girl, and 
eventually got married. He wrote me the first few letters, 
and then she took over. She wrote me a letter every 
Christmas to tell me how well they were getting along 
till, I can't remember—probably wrote the last one after 
I'd left the prison. Every year at Christmas she wrote a 
letter and thanked me for being so good to J oe Blow, or 
whatever his name was, and what I'd done for him. 

So, you did see a number of cases where the person in 
prison was framed, then, because you've told me four 
or fi ve of them here. 

Lots of them. Lots of them. I never found one from 
Reno. Mostly from Clark County. Clark County was start- 



Falsi fied Evi dence 


211 


ingto attract different types of people then, but it wasn't 
the different type of people they were attracting. The 
people who were not honest were the officials. 




15 

Drunk and Disorderly 


Y 


ou mentioned that you had some Native 
Ameri cans, some I ndi a ns? 


I had quite a few Indians. They all came in—very, 
very few of them on serious charges. There was usually 
drunk and disorderly. They practically lived on the ranch. 
We sent them to the ranch first. They were not escape 
risks, and if they did, all they did was go home, and all 
you had to do was go get them and bring them back. 
They were good workers, but you just couldn't get any- 
thingout of them. They didn't know anything. They didn't 
know anything. "I don't know." 

If you asked them questions or asked them what was 
going on? 

"I don't know." They were all pretty good workers, 
and they'd come, and they'd do their seven, eight, nine 



214 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


months, and go home, and then they'd come back. Some¬ 
times, I think they were glad to come back. They got all 
they could eat, and all they had to do was work, anyway. 
They had to do that when they were out, and at that 
time there was no minimum wage, and when they went 
out to work for a farmer, they got just about what they 
got in prison—board and room. So, with the exception 
that they couldn't go out and run around and dance and 
raise hell, they were better off in prison than they were 
at home. 

The farmers didn T have to pay them an equi table wage? 

No. No, they didn't. They'd just pay them whatever 
the guy agreed to work for. And someti mes he might agree 
to work for it and then never get it. 

You had mostly white men in jail? 

The majority were white. We had quite a few blacks. 

I think our black population would hold with the per¬ 
centage of population between blacks and whites. I think 
it run, at that time, around twenty percent. I think that's 
about what we had. 

o 

A guard came into my office and said, "Look what I 
found." He told me where he got it, and it was hidden in 
a cell. 

And you're holding a book that's labeled "Records" on 
the front. 

Yes. And it's a diary of one of the inmates. He started 
it when he came to the prison. 



Drunk and Disorderly 


215 


I can seethe dates—1951,1952. 

Well, let's see here. He's got a little of his own history 
here first. April of 1952, he arrived in the prison. 

/ see some dates back in the 1940s. He went back and 
put his recollections in here. It's also very neat hand¬ 
writing, I noticed. And so, what was the importance of 
finding this diary? 

Well, we don't allow anybody to have anything, any¬ 
thing that's illegal, and a diary is certainly illegal. 

Why is that? 

Well, because we don't know what he's going to do 
with this diary. He could write things pertaining to their 
manipulation of the prison, the operation of the prison, 
and smuggle it out. 

They'd just had this shakedown, and night sergeant 
broughtthis in. Hewanted to know how I wanted to pun¬ 
ish this guy for violatingthe rules, and I went through it, 
and I said, "Can you get that thing back without him 
knowing that you've taken it?" 

"Oh," he says, "I guess I could." 

I says, "Put it back where it was, and don't you bother 
him. Let him keep that as long as he wants." I read what 
he had up to then, which was quite a bit, and he wasn't 
very kind to the guards, but he wasn't vicious about any¬ 
thing. He wasn't too impressed with the warden, either. 

Then I said, "You just let him have that." 

"How long you going to let him have it?" 

"Well, we'll see what he does with it as time goes on." 



216 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


So, he took it back, but I knew who the man was 
then, and I looked up his rap sheet. He was sent in from 
Winnemucca, and he was drunk and disorderly. In the 
meantime, I looked at his rap sheet from the FBI. There 
was just page after page: drunk and disorderly, overnight 
in jail, and released the next morning. Never committed 
a crime or anything, just drunk and disorderly. In 
Winnemucca a night watchman was walking down the 
street and looked in the Eagle Drugstore which was well 
lit up, and the liquor counter was in full view, and there 
was a man lying down in front of the liquor counter, evi¬ 
dently asleep. So he tried to get in the door. The door 
was locked. Ran around the building, tried all the doors. 
All the doors were locked, so he called the owner and 
said, "There's a guy sleeping in your drugstore, and I can't 
get in. The doors are all locked." So, the man came up, 
and hewent in, and here was this fellow sleeping—drunk. 
Along side of him was a half gallon wine jug that had 
been up on the shelf, and he'd drunk the half a gallon of 
wine. He was passed out. And how he'd got in was he'd 
come down through the skylight. 

Anyway, he cameto prison, and that's what I had here. 
So, I told you that I'd had three wise men appointed, and 
he finally got on that committee. He was quite an inter¬ 
esting committeeman, and he had quite a bit of horse 
sense. He used good judgement. He realized that he didn't 
like what was going on in prison. He didn't like what these 
guys were doing. He describes it, and it's not nice. He 
just couldn't imagine that anybody would act like these 
fellows did, but they did. We got along fine. In fact, we 
got to the point where he was quite helpful at various 
times. He knew that some of those prisoners may not 
have liked me. They all trusted me. If I told them some¬ 
thing, my word was good. 



Drunk and Disorderly 


217 


Time went on, and he served out his one to two years 
for a burglary, and he was paroled. All he had was the 
clothes he came in: an old, dirty pair of pants and a 
Hawaiian sports shirt. We cleaned whatever clothes they 
came in with. We laundered them and ironed them and 
whatever, but that's all they had at that time. Then they 
were given twenty-five dollars. So, he asked if he could 
see me, and came in, and he had this. He said, "Warden, 
I've got something, and I'd like you to have it." 

I said, "What have you got?" 

"Well," he says, "It's a diary that I've kept all the time 
I've been in here." He says, "You may not like some of it, 
but you're a pretty broad-minded guy, and I don't know 
what to do with this, so I thought I'd just give it to you, 
and you could do what you wanted with it." 

"Well," I said, "J oe, that's something maybe you ought 
to take with you, so you 

"No." He said, "I'm going to forget everything that's 
in that diary." 

I looked at his clothes. He didn't look very good. I 
says, "J oe, would you be embarrassed if I gave you some 
better looking clothes than those to wear out?" 

We had given him his twenty-five dollars. He had 
bought a ticket out of his twenty-five dollars to Salt Lake 
City, and then he was going to take it from there. "No," 
he said, "I'm just going to take a bus, and this is what I 
came in on. That's all right." 

"Naw." I says, "Aw, let me get you something." So I 
got him a better pair of pants and a shirt. 

He said, "I'm not proud of the fact that I came to 
prison, although it wasn't all that bad." He says, "But 
there's one thing that I'm never going to have to live 
down." He says, "I had never stolen a penny in my life." 
He said, "I know I'll be branded an ex-convict, but I hate 



218 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


to be called an ex-thief. I've just never stolen anything in 
my life." 

"Well," I said, "I know what you came in, J oe. I read 
the transcript of your trial. What you did was took a half 
a gal Ion of wine. It was white wine." I said, "You drank it. 
You drank it right on the premises. So, I don't think you 
took anything away. I'll tell you what you do. You're go¬ 
ing to Salt Lake City, and you're going to go through 
Winnemucca. You stop in Winnemucca and go up to the 
Eagle Drugstore. You tell them who you are, and they'll 
remember you, or somebody will remember you, because 
it hasn't been that long—probably the same man still 
owns it—and tell him that you bought a half a gallon of 
wine on credit, and they charged it, and that you've come 
back to pay it. You pay him for that wine, and you're 
absolutely free of debt. You are not an ex-thief. You never 
stole anything." 

He just looked at me, and he started to smile. He says, 
"By God, I'll do that." 

I says," And make them give you a receipt." 

He says, "I'll do that." 

I thought no more of it. J oe left. Couple of days later, 

I got a letter in the mail with the receipt from the drug¬ 
store. And here it is. Here's the letter he wrote me. He 
says, "Warden A. Bernard: Sir, I am not much for 
words .... Having had a few beers, but sir, I wish to say 
that I did stop in at the Eagle Drugstore and pay for the 
half gallon of wine I stole from them nineteen months 
ago. I feel clean. I feel square. I will always look upon 
you as a good guy." And he signed it, and enclosed the 
bill of sale, [laughter] "Paid cash for winetaken in 1952. 
One dollar and seventy-three cents." For that he served 
pretty near two years in prison. 



Drunk and Disorderly 


219 


He probably was lucky that he came to prison with 
me, instead of somewhere else where he wouldn't have 
had the opportunity and the trust that he had at the 
Nevada State Prison. 




16 

Murderers 


y 


ou mentioned Fitch Shampoo and theClearys. Do 
you want to tell me those stories now? 


While I was still mine inspector, it was in all the news¬ 
papers about a murder in Las Vegas by a scion of a famous 
family—Fitch shampoo. Richard Fitch had murdered 
someone who he caught in bed with his wife and was 
sent to prison—a life sentence. It was discussed at great 
length, that a famous character like that be involved in a 
murder. When he came to prison, he didn't wait very 
long till hewanted an interview, and hecamein. Hewas 
a very handsome, young man, six foot three or four, two 
hundred pounds, well built, and very, very intelligent. 
He'd been in the army, and I'm going to try and figure 
what that department is. I think they were probably 
draftsmen, and their business was to draw war tanks and 
war planes—design them. I saw some of his work. It was 
real brilliant. And after he'd got into prison, shortly after, 



222 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


hetook up painting. Naturally, he wanted every privilege 
that he couldn't have, but we got along pretty good. What 
had happened was he was in the service and living in 
some town on the Pacific Coast somewhere. It wasn't 
Santa Barbara, but it was near a military installation. His 
wife was having an affair with some other man, and finally 
she took off with this guy. The husband made the mis¬ 
take of bragging that he was going to find the guy and kill 
him, and that they could do nothingto him, because . . . 
what do they call that, when you kill somebody that's 
having an affair with your wife? There's a nice term, nicer 
term than I'm thinking of. Anyway, this has been going 
on for years and years, and when a husband caught some¬ 
body in bed with his wife, and he killed the pair of them, 
that was.... 

Oh, a crime of passion or something like that? 

A crime of passion, but he was entitled to do it. And 
they had a term for it that I can't think of. But this hap¬ 
pens on the spur of the moment. When you find your 
wife in bed with some other guy, you lose all control of 
yourself. You pull out a gun, if you have it. You shoot 
him. Or, if you don't have a gun, there's a hatchet handy, 
you scalp him. He'd made the mistake of telling all his 
friends, "I'm goingtofind him. I'm goingto kill him." Kill 
him, not the wife. "And they're not goingto do anything 
to me," on this legal term that I can't think of. He bragged 
about it. 

So, it wasn't spur of the moment anymore. 

It wasn't spur of the moment. He located them in a 
motel, and it was somewhere out of Las Vegas, maybe 



Murderers 


223 


Henderson. The place had just started growing. He just 
shot him. And he didn't try to escape or anything. He 
just figured he was home free. But they fouled him up. 
They got the witnesses that testified that he said, "I'm 
going to kill him, and they're not going to do anything to 
me on account of it.” So, they sent him to jail with a life 
sentence. And there he was. He'd drafted a line .... I 
guess to stay in tune with the time or his vocation, he 
had pictures, stacks of them, of various model planes 
that we hadn't seen yet: tanks, futuristic tanks, and all 
things connected with battlefields and wars. As I say, he'd 
taken up painting, and he was famous. Every once in a 
while, some woman would come and visit, and he just 
had something they couldn't resist. He had a corps of 
women coming in that had no business visiting. They 
weren't relatives or even friends. They were just curi¬ 
ous. The officials didn't like that. It was a bother to have 
all these women come in and identify themselves, and 
they couldn't give a reason why they wanted to see him. 
So I stopped it. I told Richard, I said, "Anybody that 
comes in that has a reason to see you, that's fine—male 
or female—but I'm going to stop this curiosity. This has 
got to end. 

"Well", he said, "I don't send for them. I don't know 
who they are. They're just curious. And they all want to 
get familiar." 

"Well," I said, "you won't be bothered any more." 

His conduct was always good, and he had paintings, 
Western scenes. I've seen a lot of Western paintings from 
the best. And I won't say that he was a Remington, but 
I've seen a lot of fairly expensive Western scenes that 
weren't as good as his. He had no place to work. He'd 
make a frame out of whatever material he could find, 
and they looked pretty good. And time went on. He never 



224 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


did think that I was fair with him and gave him the privi¬ 
leges that hethought heshould have. On theother hand, 
he realized that I wasn't all that bad, either. When he got 
paroled . . . and I was responsible for getting him pa¬ 
roled, because he was not going to be dangerous to 
anybody else. If he just hadn't said, "When I kill him, 
they're not going to be able to do anything to me." He 
never had a traffic ticket before or anything. So, when 
he'd served his minimum, I began talking to the parole 
board, and after a year of so, we turned him loose, back 
to his family, and there was no danger of him being a 
burden to the public anymore, because he had a lot on 
the ball. Richard Fitch was a very intelligent man. But he 
brought all his pictures in, and he said, "I don't know 
whether you can use these, or whether you want them, 
but I'd like you to have my pictures." 

I says, "Well, I'll take them." All his paintings. Quite 
a few. There were at least twenty. I have only one left. 
I've given all the rest away. I had eight or ten left in the 
valley before we moved here six, seven months ago. I 
gave the remainder to my grandson. 

o 

Shortly after I took over as warden, we had a very 
vicious murder in Reno. The lady that was operatingthe 
Western Union in Reno was viciously murdered. She was 
stabbed seventeen times. The murder weapon was never 
found, but it was ascertained that it must be a long screw 
driver. At the desk where she was sitting, the paper de¬ 
scribed it, and it resembled an abattoir. There was just 
blood all over the floor, blood all over everything. Pools 
of blood. Blood spattered everywhere. 

There were some people coming by that place at the 
approximate time of the murder, and they said they saw 
a well-dressed man run out and get into a white Lincoln 



Murderers 


225 


convertible, and make a U-turn and head back east toward 
Fourth Street. There happened to be a policeman right 
close, and he got on his radio, and they described the 
automobile and the general direction, and sure enough, 
a couple of cars up on Fourth Street picked him up and 
gave him the siren. He didn't stop. I forget the name of 
the streets now, although I was familiar with all of them 
at the time. You go east on Fourth Street to a certain 
place, and you turn right. It takes you down to the rail¬ 
road tracks, and you can either cross the tracks, or you 
can go up on the north side of the track, where you can 
cross thetracks and go up on the south sideofthetracks 
a couple of blocks, and then you can turn left and cross 
the tracks again, and get up on Fourth Street. They fol¬ 
lowed him and got up on Fourth Street, and they cornered 
him in Sparks someplace, and there he was. There was a 
white Lincoln convertible, and there was this driver all 
alone—handsome man, and he was about thirty, thirty- 
one years old, with a dark blue suit on, patent leather 
black shoes, silk cuffs on his shirt, out from under his 
coat sleeve—nattily dressed. His name was Cleary. They 
picked him up and took him to court, and they took all 
his clothes: suit, shirt, cuffs, socks, underwear. Every bit 
of clothing he had on, they sent to the FBI. And they 
built up a case, and they tried him. The FBI agent who 
was the witness said that they'd gone through everything 
that they'd sent: the white silk shirt, cuffs, the suit, the 
black tie, and the patent leather shoes. They never found 
a spot of blood anywhere, not on the shoes, not on the 
sole. Nowhere did they find a spot of blood. And here 
this woman was killed, and the place looked like an ab¬ 
attoir. Somebody had stabbed her seventeen times. And 
not a spot of blood! 



226 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


My friend Bill Raggio was a deputy district attorney, 
and he prosecuted Cleary's case. They never found a 
murder weapon. The evidence they had when they con¬ 
victed him was the fact that somebody had seen him 
come out and get in a white Lincoln convertible and drive 
away, and the patrol had picked him up immediately and 
eventually stopped him. He admitted he'd been in the 
Western Union, and he'd come out. He was from some 
town in Illinois, and he owned a tavern, and he'd come 
to Reno with his fiancee and her son, who was about six 
years old at the time, to get married. While he was here, 
he had her parked in a hotel, and he was gambling, and 
he lost his money. So he'd gone back to Western Union 
to wire somebody for money, and he'd gone back there 
to see if the money came, and when he walked in, he saw 
thiswoman lyingin a pool of blood, dead. Hesaid, "I just 
decided to get the hell out of there." And he left. This 
made sense to me. And it must have made sense to six of 
the j ury, because the fi rst counti ng of the votes it was six 
for guilty and six not guilty. They voted again and again 
and again. This went on. Finally, they got nine for con¬ 
viction and three for not guilty. They were going to stay 
there, I guess, till they starved to death, so they all voted 
guilty, but no death sentence. So that's why he wasn't 
sentenced to death over a brutal murder like that. Six of 
those jury men never were convinced that he was guilty, 
even though they did votethat hewasguilty. So, hecame 
to prison. He was a very handsome man, over six feet, 
two hundred pounds, handsome, and no dumbbell—well 
educated, well spoken. 

At the time I had a female dietitian who didn't work 
out. She just couldn't handle being around a bunch of 
prisoners. She wanted to feed them fruit salads and all 
the little tea biscuits. Itjust didn't fitwith a penitentiary. 



Murderers 


227 


But I liked her. She finally decided she'd leave, and I 
decided that I was going to operate the kitchens with 
inmates. I had peoplethat were good cooks, and we were 
getting along fine, and I had good butchers. 

Cleary came in, and it wasn't longtiII he asked to see 
me. Hetold me how innocent hewas, and wasthereany- 
thing I could do for him? How could I help him? 

I said, "I gather you owned a business in which you 
served food?" 

"Oh, yes," he says, "I'm a good cook." 

I says, "I'll just let you run the mainline kitchen." 

And he did. I couldn't have hired anybody better. I 
just couldn't. He was efficient, frugal. Nobody tried any- 
thingon him, nobody. Of course, we kept in close contact. 
Every week or two he'd come in and report what he might 
need and what improvements we could make. In the 
meantime, between the fact that I was raising my own 
meat and getting my own potatoes and everything, and 
with the good help that I was getting from Cleary, my 
expenses were very low. I appreciated him and did the 
best I could for him, and we discussed his case many 
times. "Warden," he says, "I'm just not guilty." 

I says, "Did you go near that body?" 

He says, "I didn't go near it." 

I could believe it, because he never had a speck of 
blood anywhere on him or around him or anything. I've 
dressed enough wild game to know that, even if I just cut 
something's throat, I get full of blood, let alone stab him 
seventeen times. By then, I got into the Court of Last 
Resort. He wanted me to get the Court of Last Resort to 
come in and take his case, which was no problem. I knew 
I could do it. But I wasn't going to bother anybody until 
he knew exactly what he was facing. I told him, I said, "I 



228 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


can get the Court of Last Resort in. First, I want you to 
tell me if you killed that woman, or if you're innocent." 

He says, "Warden, before God, I'm innocent." 

I says, "I'll get the Court in." 

One of the members of the court, who runs a poly¬ 
graph, is one of the best in the world. They send for him 
from Europe. He's gone all over—Alex Gregory from 
Detroit. He was an ex-officer from the Detroit Police 
Department, and he was their polygraph expert. 

I says, "If you're lying, he'll know it. You can't beat 
him. And Joe, if you're lying to me, and you're guilty, 
you will never get out of this prison as long as I'm here. I 
doubt if you ever get out after I leave, if you're guilty. So 
be sure you know what you're doing. If you're innocent, 
you've got a damn good chance of getting out. If you're 
guilty, Alex will tell me." 

He says, "I'm innocent." 

So, I got Gardner, and we went through his case. They 
agreed to come. I n the meantime, we started getting pub- 
licity, and Raggio found out about it. And oh, God, he 
was not happy. He was the district attorney. He wasn't 
happy with me for getting the Court in. But they came, 
and with great fanfare and publicity. And present were 
Marshall Houts, an ex-FBI man; Park Street, one of the 
most expensive attorneys in Texas; Alex Gregory, poly¬ 
graph; Erie Stanley Gardner. So, we set up the polygraph 
test in my office. Everybody got out, and I said to Alex, 
"I really want to know if he's innocent." 

He says, "If he's innocent, I'll tell you." 

So, we all waited outside, waitingfor the verdict, and 
finally somebody rapped on the door, and Alex said, "I'd 
like to see Mr. Bernard." 

I went in. Alex said, "Your friend is guilty." Joe didn't 
bat an eye. 



Murderers 


229 


"Well," I said, "That's it." 

So they took Joe away, and the word went out: he 
was guilty. I talked later to the D.A. I said to Raggio, "Well, 
it turned out pretty good for you. Now you don't have to 
worry about sending an innocent man to prison," I said, 
"because he had me fooled, and that's going some. I just 
can't understand how anybody could commit that and 
not have a speck of blood." 

And I'd got Joe. I'd called him in, and I says, "You 
remember what I told you?" 

He says, "Yes." 

I says, "As long as I'm in this prison, you're not going 
to leave. You'll still be the cook." I said, "You're not going 
to lose any privileges. I don't know whether to feel bad 
about you lying or not. I told you what was going to hap¬ 
pen. Why did you want to take that test?" 

He says, "I thought I could beat it. I really thought I 
could beat it. I've heard people beat that." 

I says, "They don't beat with Gregory. I told you that. 
He's the best there is. Where did you throw that screw¬ 
driver? And was it a screwdriver?" 

He says, "Yes, it was." 

"And where did you throw it?" 

He described how he made the first turn and crossed 
the railroad tracks. He says, "I threw it out when we were 
crossing the tracks." 

I said, "They were right behind you, and they didn't 
see it." 

He says, "I can't help it. That's where I threw it out." 

I said, "Where did you get the screwdriver?" I knew 
where he got the screwdriver, because, though the screw¬ 
driver couldn't be found, the wounds had to be made by 
a screwdriver, because they werejust thin, deep holes. A 
workman had been intofixaslotmachinethey had there, 



230 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


and he'd had this long screwdriver, and he'd forgotten it 
and left it there. Joe come in, and this developed over 
testimony, that this is not the first time he'd been in there. 
He'd sent for money, went in and got it, then lost it. He 
came back and wired another friend for money. The 
friend sent the money. He got it. He lost it. Every time 
he'd come in to get his money, she'd open the drawer 
where she kept the money, and there was a whole mess 
of cash in there that she used to pay off all these. So, he 
came back, wired for some money. This time it was longer 
coming, but he finally got it, and he went back and lost 
it, too. The last time he sent for money, it didn't come. 
And he kept going back and forth, back and forth. She 
finally got irked, and she said .. . I assume that she said, 
"Don't come back here anymore." He didn't tell me that, 
but he told me that she said, "Now, don't bother me any¬ 
more." 

He says, "I'd seen that money there," he said, "so all 
I wanted was the money, and I went back to get it. She 
just jumped on me and attacked me. And there was this 
screwdriver, and I just... I picked it up unconsciously, 
and I stabbed her. Once I'd stabbed her once, I couldn't 
leave her alive." He says, "I killed her." He says, "You 
don't know how sorry I am." 

But anyway, naturally his fiancee didn't marry him. 
And if I'd have been in prison yet, he'd still be there, but 
shortly after I left, they paroled him. He stayed here, and 
he went to work for J oe Conforte. J oe Conforte started a 
fancy restaurant up in Gold Hill. He called it the Cabin 
in the Sky. All the important people went up there to 
eat. I had invitations to come up and eat on the house, 
and I never did go up. I never went to see Joe. I just 
didn't want to see him anymore. But he was there enjoy¬ 
ing prosperity and fame as a chef for a considerable length 



Murderers 


231 


of time, and he finally disappeared. I don't know if he 
stayed there until they closed the Cabin in the Sky, or 
not. 

You had a pretty good sen sea bout your prisoners. Were 
you surprised that this one could fool you about his 
innocence? 

I was surprised, because he didn't have a speck of 
blood anywhere, and it made sense to me. He admitted 
that he was in there to get money, and he said, "I saw 
her. She was layingthere in a pool of blood. I figured I'd 
better get the hell out of here." I would have felt the same 
way. Or I might have . . . being who I was, I would have 
called the police or somebody immediately. But he was a 
stranger. And for a stranger, a tourist, to get caught there 
with a dead person just might not be so good. So he fig¬ 
ured I better get out of here. "Nobody knows I've been in 
here." And if he'd have walked out of there normally and 
got in that white Lincoln, even though it was a white 
Lincoln, nobody would have probably paid any atten¬ 
tion to it, but he came out of there running and jumped 
in the car and made a U-turn. He attracted all the atten¬ 
tion he could, or that would have been an unsolved crime. 
And that's how he had me fooled was, no blood. What he 
told me, if there'd have been a speck of blood on him 
anywhere, I'd have known he was guilty. But I felt, and 
so did six jury men feel, they just couldn't figure it, and I 
couldn't, either. 




_ 17 

Stool Pigeons and Trustees 


Y ou've talked about your three wise men and that 
group thatworked with you. Did theother prisoners 
consider them stool pigeons? Or was that a whole 
different thing? 


No, no. They were not stool pigeons. No, they were 
well liked and well trusted, and they never went back 
with any misinformation, and they never gave me any 
misinformation. 


Did you have stool pigeons that worked with you? 

Oh, I had stool pigeons coming out of my ears, but 
nobody knew who they were, not even my guards. That's 
why I knew everything that went on, as much as I did. 

You really protected their identity, all the way around? 



234 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Oh, hell, yes. And they weren't doing it to get mean 
to anybody or report them or anything. They just didn't 
want any trouble, and they figured if I could stop any¬ 
thing, they were all better off, including the agitators. 
And none of them ever asked for anything special or 
nothing. We got along fine. And, in fact, there were people, 

I'm sure, that hated my guts there, especially these queers 
that I socked away, because I was pretty tough on them. 
When they violated any rules, they knew ... I wastough 
on them. 

One time my wife and I went somewhere, and we 
were gone all day, and we left our girls at home, and I 
think Emma J o took care of the girls that time. We had 
four or five women inmates who were nice. One was a 
prostitute, and she didn't get out too much, but even she 
wasn't bad. But the others were just check kiters. 

I got to tell you about Don's Roving Mike, a young 
Labrador that I had. My youngest daughter Patti, was 
about seven or eight years old. I told you about Wingfield 
getting the prize bitch and breeding her to my Blue of 
Arden. And Mike was the progeny. He just grew up with 
Patti. Wherever Patti went, Mikewaswith her. And I don't 
know if I told you, but I made a swimming pool at the 
prison, and my kids and their friends would come down 
and swim. Patti would get out in the middle of the pool, 
and I'd tell Mike to fetch her. Mike would smash in. She 
wore braidsthen. He'd grab a mouthful of braids and tow 
her to shore. They just had a ball—that dog and Patti. 

One day, this day that we left, they got playing kind 
of recklessly. All the outside trustees were almost like a 
family. They liked my kids. They liked my dog. They 
were all interested in watching the dog grow up. They'd 
ask me how he was doing with the ducks. And Patti was 
running on this particular day. I never did get the details 



Stool Pigeons and Trustees 


235 


why she was running, but Mike came up and grabbed 
her. We'd just bought her a brand new coat, and my wife 
was very particular about this coat and looked for it and 
picked it out carefully. The dog grabbed the coat, and he 
just tore it off of her. And there she is. And there's the 
warden and his wife gone. There's Patti with a torn coat, 
and there's Mike—he's going to get the blame. 

The convicts and the guards began conspiring. They 
found an old fellow who was a queer, but he was old; he 
wasn't an active one, and he was a tailor. We had a tailor 
shop, but at that time we didn't have a tailor, but the 
word got out. He heard what had happened. He asked 
the captain. He said, "If you let me out, and get me the 
material," he says, "I guarantee I'll make that coat look 
like new. They'll never know the difference." 

Well, they'd do anything, so they took him out, and 
he needed a certain colored thread. They sent uptown, 
sent him uptown with a guard, and went through all the 
stores. He found what he wanted. He went back. And we 
didn't know about this. We didn't hear about it for months 
and months. Nobody told us. They just absolutely . . . 
none of the inmates squawked, none of the guards, noth¬ 
ing. We didn't know that Patti had had that coat torn. 

That old tailor stayed there till I left. He was still there 
when I left. He was a good one. In fact, he made two or 
three suits for me while he was there. I'd get the mate¬ 
rial. He was good, very good. And here we had a tailor 
shop and no tailor, because nobody bothered to get a 
tailor, and here we had the best in the business just in 
the yard. 

I devised a huntingjacket, and I had him maketwo of 
them for me, and I've kicked my rear end ever since. I 
should have patented that jacket. I've never seen any- 



236 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


thing like it, and everybody for years and years that saw 
my hunting jacket, "Where did you get that?" 

"I had a tailor make it for me." 

"Could I get one?" 

"No." 

God, I should have patented that thing, and I'd have 
been a multi-millionaire. The remnants . . . my son wore 
his out and threw it away. I wore mine out, and it's still 
hanging up in the duck shack down at Stillwater at the 
Canvasback Gun Club. 

Sometime after I took over, a fellow by the name of 
Mark Donnelly was serving on a murder charge. He had 
a lot of ability, and he was a guitar player. He'd play us 
the Hawaiian guitar, you know. I liked those Hawaiian 
guitars, electric guitars. He said, "Warden, a group of the 
boys have asked me to see you and see if we couldn't 
have music here again. 

I says, "Hell, music here again? Why the hell, you 
can have all the music you want, as far as I'm concerned. 
What's been holding you up?" 

Well, he said, "They won't allow anybody to have an 
instrument or even a harmonica or anything. It's abso¬ 
lutely taboo in this place." 

I says, "I can't believe it!" 

"Well, that's right." 

So, I said, "Well, you can sure as hell have music, and 
I'll find out why you can't." 

So, I asked one of the guards that had been there a 
longtime. I says, "Why can't these boys have music and 
play guitars, sing, whatever they want. We've got plenty 
of places for them." 

"Well," he said, "Warden, at one time they had an 
orchestra, and they had a piano player. And one day they 
went up, and they were all drunk. Somebody had brought 



Stool Pigeons and Trustees 


237 


a bottle of whiskey in, and they hid it in the piano. And 
the warden said, this is the end of all music, orchestras, 
and everything else. So, the piano was put away, and 
they have never been ableto singor play any instrument 
or anything since." 

"Well," I said, "Hell, it just don't make sense to me." 

I said, "Where's the piano?" Because I'd go around and 
I'd never seen it. 

They said, "It's up there in the day room." 

We found the piano, and it was just covered with the 
accumulation of crapthatyou find. You havetofind some 
place to put it, so you put it on the piano. We had to dig 
this out. And so, it was naturally out of tune—hadn't been 
used for years. I got a piano tuner to come in, and when 
he got back in there to tune the piano, there was the 
bottle of liquor—that was empty now—but they'd hid it 
back in the piano, and the authorities had found it, and 
didn't even remove it. They left it. The bottle was Old 
Fiddler whiskey. I'd never heard of Old Fiddler. So, we 
got the piano out, and the bottle was a funny-shaped 
bottle. It was shaped like a fiddle. I took it down in my 
office, and there it sat. It didn't mean a hell of a lot to 
me. It was just another bottle of whiskey. There was vari¬ 
ous shapes. Anyway, so we went from there. 

This Donnelly concocted an orchestra with trumpet 
players. We put out a plea for instruments from anybody 
that wanted to donate, because we didn't have money to 
buy them, and they didn't have money. We got every- 
thingwe wanted. We had fiddles. We had guitars. We had 
trumpets. We had trombones. We had drums. We had 
everything. And we had a hell of a good orchestra. I used 
totakethem out and play for peopleall around thecoun- 
try. They were good. This Mark was exceptionally good. 
So, this orchestra got famous. And they were really good. 



238 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


I'm not just bragging, because they were my orchestra. 
They were good, as well as, we had a baseball team that 
weregood, and they beat everythingaround thecountry. 

One day, Erie Stanley Gardner came up and was in 
my office, and he happened to see this whiskey bottle. 
"Oh, my God," he said, "Where did you get that bottle?" 

I told him about it. He says, "You've got a . . . you don't 
know what you've got there!" 

I says, "Why?" 

He says, "That whiskey's been out of manufacture for 
years and years, and a bottle, an Old Fiddler bottle, is 
worth a fortune." 

"Well," I said, "my friend, you've got a fortune, be¬ 
cause if that bottle's that good, it's yours." And I gave it 
to Gardner. 

He hated to take it. He says, "You don't know what 
you're giving me." 

"Well," I says, "What I'm giving you is with my bless¬ 
ing. Have it on me." 

So, he got Old Fiddler. I don't know whatever 
happened to that bottle. 

You'vetalked a lot about building trust with theinmates. 
It sounds like there may have been some who disliked 
you, but that you had the trust of quite a number of 
them. 

Most of them trusted me. Even those that didn't like 
me, trusted me. They knew I wasn't goingto lie to them. 
In fact, they admitted it. In fact, I told you what they 
said about the warden, "If he told you a piss ant could 
pull a plow, hook it up and start plowing." They didn't 
like me, but it wasn't because I wasn't fair and square 
with them. I had a great advantage over most of the war- 



Stool Pigeons and Trustees 


239 


dens. One was my personality and nature. One was my 
fearlessness, because I was never afraid to go in that yard 
with anybody. My guards were scared to death until they 
got accustomed to me. A lot of the other wardens, when 
I told them what I did, they just couldn't believe it, "You're 
just takingtoo many chances." But it's because my prison 
was so small that it was like a family. I knew most of 
them. And with the exception of the two-bit thieves that 
just burglarized this or that, I knew what their crime 
was. It just made a big difference. Association ... I don't 
know what term I'd like to use, but I associated with 
them, not because I was trying to get friendly or any¬ 
thing, but just to know them. The better I knew them, 
the better I could run that prison, because I knew who 
might be dangerous, who might want to start something. 
And if I didn't figure it out myself, one of my stoolies did. 
Hetold me. I had that, because of the number ofinmates 
I had, which were so few that I could get acquainted with 
them. 

What was the population? 

It would run from 300 to 550. And the parole board 
met twice a year. The prison was way overcrowded at 
550, way overcrowded. It would hold comfortably 400. 
So, anyone that was safe to turn loose, we turned loose 
and got down to 250, which wasa minimum. We wouldn't 
start to get crowded agai n ti 11 al most the next parole board 
meeting. Now the parole board meets continually. They're 
always in session. 

Your family lived right there. Were you ever afraid for 
your family? 



240 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Never. Never. I think that's the safest place. It's the 
safest place I could raise a family, because nobody was 
goingto bother my children. There were enough inmates 
there in strategic places that if anybody ever tried to 
bother one of my kids, they were dead. 



18 

Finnegan 


W hen i took over the prison, my predecessor 
explained what I could expect. I had a cook and 
a houseboy and chamber maids and whatever—car 
washers. I had personal attention. One fellow took care 
of my cars—damn near wore him out, you know, just 
keeping them shined up. He says, "You got a good cook, 
Finnegan, and he's an old con, and he's very particular, 
and he told me that he wasn't going to work for any new 
warden. So you'll have to get a new cook." 

Well, I said, "I imagine however you got a cook, I'll 
get one, too." 

So the day my predecessor left and I moved in, I went 
in, and I says, "Well, you're Finnegan, the cook." 

"Yep." 

I says, "I gather that you'd like to terminate your ser¬ 
vice as a cook." 



242 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


"No. I didn't say that. I told Dick that I might not 
want to work for anybody else, but I'll stay, if you want 
me." 

I said, "If you want to stay, you've got good recom¬ 
mendations." 

So, that was our start with Finnegan. He was a tall 
man, typically Irish. Typical convict—he'd been in every 
prison you can think of, and he was a good cook. So, 
naturally, he started telling me about why he was in prison 
and what he'd do if he ever got out again. He was never 
going to touch liquor again, and that was his problem, 
alcohol. When he got drunk and went broke he did any¬ 
thing he could to get money, short of murder or mayhem 
or harming anybody. He got it. And he had a personality 
that few people have. With his personality he could have 
been successful at anything. And my kids—I think they 
thought a lot more of Finnegan than they did about their 
dad. He'd regale them by the hour about his experience. 
He'd tell them, he said, "Your dad's a damn sissy. Take it 
from me. I know. He don't know how to run a prison. He 
don't know how to treat a convict." He said, "The only 
way you can treat convicts: be tough, tougher than they 
are. Why," he says, "I've hung up by my thumbs with 
water dripping on my head, my big feet barely touching 
the floor, for days and days at a time, but I never broke. 

I never broke." And he'd concoct these stories, and they'd 
just eat them up. He was just the toughest convict, and 
he went through more tortures. He got beat up, beat out. 
He thought the world of those kids. And he's one, if 
anybody'd ever tried to take advantage of one of my kids, 
they had Finnegan on, and he was no cream puff. There 
was many others I could name—Firpo, Bull, and others— 
many that I can name. They'd like to have had an 
opportunity to do that. My wife just thought he was . . . 



Finnegan 


243 


she knew he was a convict, but she believed him. And 
went on. I had his history. He just couldn't stay out of 
prison, but he promised me faithfully that if he ever got 
out, he'd never fall again, never. Never fall again. 

In the meantime, I bought him several things. We 
didn't pay anybody, but any trustee that did anythingfor 
me, like the car washers and everything, I'd slip them a 
dollar or two worth of brass. You couldn't give them cash. 
We had prison brass that they could buy things from the 
commissary with. So, I was pretty good to Finnegan. I'd 
got him radios. I got him all fixed up with pretty near 
everything. We kept talking about when he'd get paroled, 
when he'd get paroled, and I was going to help him. So, 
finally, I recall when I was pleading my case for Finnegan 
to the parole board, and one of them mentioned, "God, 
with that record, how do you ever expect him to stay 
out?" 

I says, "Well, I think he's turned over a new leaf, and 
I'm goingto help him." 

I had a friend in the construction business named 
J ohn Savage, Savage Construction. When I went to prison, 
hetried to talk me into going into the construction busi¬ 
ness with him. He said, "If you'll come in with me, I'll 
give you a better salary than you're getting now and put 
you on a partnership basis. And all the profits you make 
will buy into your half of the construction company." He 
thought I was probably a better engineer and surveyor 
than I was, but anyhow, I didn't go in with him. I went to 
prison instead. But we were good hunting partners. We 
shacked together. We had a house together down in 
Stillwater. And he had this construction company, and 
he had a job going on down in Yerington, a road job. He 
told me several times he had aconveyancethathehauled 
around with his crew, and it was a kitchen. He could 



244 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


feed eight or ten or fifteen men, whatever he had, in this 
moveable kitchen. And he says, "I'd just love to have a 
cook that could handle that." 

I says, "I've got a cook that can handle it. He can't 
stand liquor. Hejust can't stand alcohol. If he gets a drink, 
he's done, and you're done. If you'll just absolutely keep 
that alcohol away from him, you'll have a hell of a man 
there. He's a good cook. He's conscientious, and he's hon¬ 
est. He won't steal from you. He won't fudge on any bills 
or anything." 

He says, "Boy, I'll do it." 

So, I told Finnegan, I says, "I got a job for you with a 
good friend of mine, and don't foul me up." I told him 
what the job was, and I says, "I told him not to give you 
any whiskey, and don't you put him on the spot or any¬ 
thing. This is a friendship between me and him that he 
trusts me and I trust him, and now I'm trusting you." 

He says, "Warden, I won't let you down." 

So, weturned Finnegan loose, and beside the twenty- 
five dollars that the state gave him, I gave Finnegan a 
hundred dollars. He'd get a payday within a week any¬ 
way. So we turned him loose. I kept track of him with 
J ohn. Every time I'd see him, and we'd go hunting every 
weekend, "God, Art, that's the best thing you've ever done 
for me. That man is . . . ." And he'd tell me what a hell of 
a man Finnegan was. "God, hejust is such a good cook 
and such a nice guy and such a nice personality. All the 
men like him." 

"Well," I said, "By God, maybe Finnegan had finally 
made it." 

And a couple of nights later, about four o'clock in the 
morning, I got a telephone call from the sheriff in Lyon 
County, one of my best friends. He says, "Art, I got a guy 
in jail, and his name is Finnegan. He's been cooking for 



Finnegan 


245 


J ohn Savage." He says, "I thought I'd call you before I do 
anything. In case you want me to cover this up, well do 
it." 

Well, I said, "What happened? What the hell's the 
scoop?" 

"Well," he said, "I got a call this morning. There was 
a rumpus down on the line. I went down, and this guy— 
he says he's your cook—was just tearing up everything 
and drunk as a skunk. When I brought him in, he said, 
'Please get in touch with Mr. Bernard.'" The sheriff's name 
was Clyde. 

I says, "I'll be right down. I'll be in Yerington within a 
couple hours." And I was. I said, "What have you got 
against him? What? Did he cause any damage or any¬ 
thing? Did he hurt anybody?" 

"No." He says, "He's just drunk. I've got him in on 
drunk and disorderly, but I don't wantto charge him with 
anything, because it's not serious. And the way he talks, 
he's something special." 

"Well," I said, "He's special to this point. If you don't 
wantto prefer any charges against him, turn him back to 
me, and I'll take him back to prison, and we'll just figure 
he violated his parole, because that's what he did, and 
we don't have to go any further." 

He says, "You go ahead." He says, "Take him with 
you." 

So, I put Finnegan in the car. By then, he'd kind of 
sobered up, not quite yet. And he didn't have anything. 
He'd hocked his radio, and he'd hocked everything I'd 
given him. I took him back and put him in the yard. 

He told me, he says, "Savage asked me to take a drink. 
He says, 'J ust one drink won't hurt you, Finnegan. J ust 
take one.'" He says, "I just took one, and then I saw where 
he put the bottle." 



246 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


Then I got a hold of John. I says, "What the hell? I 
told you not to give him a drink!" 

"Art," he says, "I couldn't help it." He said, "Some 
buyer or somebody came through late at night—after 
hours anyway—and they couldn't get anything to eat, 
and I said, 'Hell, I've got a cook, and he'll fix you up some¬ 
thing.'" He said, "Finnegan was nice. He came and he 
cooked a nice meal for this guy, and the guy is tickled to 
death, and it was good for my business. I was just happy 
as hell, and I was happy with Finnegan. I just thought, 
'Well, hell, just onedrink.'" So hesaid, "I said, 'Finnegan, 
let's have one drink.'" 

Hesaid, "Finnegan says, 'No. I promised the warden.' 

I says, 'What the hell? One drink won't hurt you.'" 

And I says, "That's it. One drink wouldn't hurt you? 
One drink sent Finnegan off." 

Anyway, I had Finnegan back. So, first chance I got, 
when the cook I had was paroled, I got Finnegan back. It 
was like a homecoming. He was good for quite a while. In 
fact, he was good, as long as he was there, but he told 
me, he says, "I'd never made it back here, if J ohn hadn't 
given me that one drink. Damn it! Spoiled everything." 

Finally, he'd served enough time, and he promised 
faithfully that if he ever got out, he sure as hell wasn't 
going to take that one drink from anybody, so I got him 
paroled again. I forget now where I paroled him to, but it 
was out of town. The next thing I knew, I got a letter 
from Finnegan, and he was in the Wyoming State Prison, 
and he told me the sad story that he got drunk, and he 
wound up in prison. He wanted to know if I'd write to the 
warden and give him some recommendations and tell 
him how good .... He says, "I'd like to get out to that 
ranch and cook." And he says, "But there's so damn many 
ahead of me." 



Finnegan 


247 


Well, I wrote him. I said, "I'll write to the warden and 
tell him what a good man and a good cook you are. I 
don't know what I'm going to do with all those guys that 
are ahead of you." 

Now, I knew the warden. I knew all the wardens. We 
got along fine. The fact that my wife was a pianist, that 
very few professionals can touch her—when we'd go to 
these conventions, she and I were the life of the party. 
We played the piano. We sang, and we did everything. 
We were the most popular couple of all the institutions. I 
got along good with all the wardens. We were all very 
friendly. 

So, I wrote him a letter, and I told him about Finnegan. 
And I said, "He can't take liquor, but he is a hell of a 
cook. He's economical. He'll do you a good job, and any¬ 
thing you can do, I'd appreciate." 

I got a letter back from the warden within a week. He 
says, "I sent your cook out to the prison. He'sdoinggood." 

And pretty soon I got a letter from Finnegan telling 
me how much he appreciated it. He was sure I was the 
best warden he'd ever served under. This guy that he 
was under now was a pretty good guy, too, but he sure 
appreciated what I did for him. 

And things went on. I got a letter from South Dakota 
from my very good friend, warden in South Dakota. He 
and his wife and I were always together when we were 
on these conventions. His wife died; he married another 
one, and she took up where the other wife had left off. 
Anyway, my friend Finnegan's in prison in South Dakota, 
and he wanted to know if I'd write to the warden and 
give him my recommendations. He'd sure like to get out 
to that ranch and be a cook. So, I wrote to J ameson, and 
he wrote back. He says, "I took care of your cook." 



248 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


I got a letter from Finnegan. He thanked me. I was 
the best warden he'd ever served under. I was like a father 
to him, and if anything happened to him, he wanted me 
to know it. He was getting along fine, and everythingwas 
going good. 

I got a letter from Finnegan. He was in prison in 
Montana. The warden in Montana and I weregood friends, 
but we just were different people. He and his wife were 
old-fashioned, but nice people, and we weren't on friendly 
basis, like I was with everybody else, that I knew if I 
asked them for a favor, they were apt to do it. But I wrote 
and asked him, and Finnegan got out to the prison farm 
as a cook. 

Things went on. I never heard anything for a while. 
And early one morning, I got a telephone call from a lady, 
and she gave me her name, which I can't remember; and 
she gave me her title, which I can't remember; but she 
worked at the Montana State Penitentiary. She says, "We 
have one of your relatives who passed away, and we 
wanted to know what you want to do with the body?" 

I says, "God, I don't think I have any relatives in 
prison." 

"Well," she said, "It doesn't say relative. His name is 
J ames P. Finnegan. And what we have on our records is, 
in case of death or anything, to notify A.E. Bernard in 
Carson City, so we assumed he's a relative." 

I says, "No, he isn't. He was at Nevada what he is in 
Montana. He was an inmate, and he was my cook. And 
he was almost part of the family, but just do whatever 
you do with your dead inmates up there." 

She says, "Well, then we just take care of them." 

I says, "That's fine. Take care of Finnegan." 

So, I finally got rid of Finnegan. He had put, "In case 
of death or accident, notify A.E. Bernard." I think it's the 



Finnegan 


249 


only family he ever had. My kids, he just was crazy about 
them. 




19 

Lumber Yard 


til Ihat happened when your time as a warden 
lr w came to an end. Was it a change in 
administration? 

Yes. A new governor was elected in 1959, Grant 
Sawyer. I tendered my resignation, and he didn't accept 
it. One thing and another, my being there created quite 
a bit of havoc with a lot of his supporters, who were not 
very enthusiastic with Bernard beingthere. Politics were 
playing their best, so I submitted my resignation again, 
and he didn't accept it that time. Then later, he did. So, 
I was four or five months getting out of the prison. 

I'd bought some acreage out in the Washoe Valley, 
and I had plansof buildinga nice big home out there. I'd 
done a lot of building in my time, and I was very familiar 
with tools. I knew this was going to cost a lot of money, 
maybe more than I had. I started buildinga guest house 
at the home that I had in Carson City, and I started buy- 



252 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


ing a lot of lumber at one of the lumber yards. I found 
out that an employee of the lumber yard got material at 
cost, and I thought, if I go to work for a lumber yard, and 
I got my material at cost, I could save some money build¬ 
ing my home in Washoe Valley. I had no connections 
with that lumber company, but I went up and applied for 
a job. They knew of my reputation and whatnot, and 
they thought it was kind of stupid for me to go looking 
for a job in a lumber yard. I didn't tell them why I was 
looking for a job in a lumber yard. But when the word 
got around to the owner of the yard, he says, "Get Bernard 
there." 

So, I went up. In the meantime I was studying, be¬ 
cause I was going to be a real estate broker. After I'd 
been at the lumber yard three or four months, I passed 
the test, and I went into business with one of my part¬ 
ners that I owned a building with. I'd become quite a 
valued person at this lumber yard. I'd created a job for 
myself, going around and talking to the builders every 
morning, checkingwhatthey might need, and seeingthat 
they got special attention. I was bringing in a lot of busi¬ 
ness. So, I told them that I was retiring, and I told them 
why, actually. I was truthful. I didn't like the way the 
yard was being run, and we won't go into that, because it 
would take too long, but I said, "I'll stay until you get a 
replacement." 

They said, "Hell, what you're doing, we can't replace." 

I said, "Well, I'll stay," and I gave them a deadline. I 
don't remember how much it was—a month, or maybe it 
was two months, because I had plenty of time to do real 
estate and work with the lumber yard, too. So, when the 
date came that I had said would be my last day, the man¬ 
ager said, "I was told to offer you the job of assistant 



Lumber Yard 


253 


manager with a bonus, with commissions, if you want to 
stay." 

I said, "All right, I'll stay." So, I stayed with the lum¬ 
beryard, and I built my house, and it was quite a building, 
and it didn't cost me very much. I stayed till they sold 
the lumber yard, and the new buyers wanted me to stay, 
and I told them the same thing. I agreed to stay till they 
could replace me, which they did. 

I'm curious. After you left the prison, were you sorry to 
see that job end? 

Not really. I've never been sorry to see any job end. If 
it's the end, that's it. Get on to something new. You've got 
to live. Get a new job, and do the best you can with it. 
I've never had a job that I wasn't successful with. 

Did you maintain friendships with any of the other 
wardens? 

No, I didn't. The man who succeeded me, asyou might 
suspect by now . . . I'd built all these buildings and fences 
and everything, and on each one was A.E. Bernard, 
Warden, 1952, 1953, 1954. My name was everywhere. 
The new warden got so tired of seeing that name and 
hearing what a hell of a man Bernard was and what 
Bernard did and what Bernard built, that he had all these 
buildings torn down, except thesix cottages that I'd built. 
Those he couldn't tear down, but everything else, he did. 
Aside from that, I got along with the other wardens that 
succeeded him. We belonged to the same service clubs, 
and we got along all right. They never got along at that 
prison like I did. I was the youngest man ever appointed 



254 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


warden, and I was warden longer than any man before or 
after. 

It's usually a short-term job. Is that right? 

They change politically. You can almost bet on it. 
That's one plum that an incoming governor has to put 
out. 

It hardly seems I ike a plum, [laughter] I mean, it's such 
a hard job. 

Well, it is. 

Why is it so hard? 

I don't know how to express it, but you're either a 
good warden, or you're not. If you're afraid, don't go near 
a prison. Because the minute you get in there, they know 
you're afraid, and you're done. You're lost. My predeces¬ 
sor was that way. He didn't know what was going on in 
that prison, and when anything happened that had to be 
taken care of, he'd get drunk and let somebody worry 
about it. 

So, the job of prison warden was a plum? 

Well, it was the pay. The pay and the prestige. But 
not everybody can be a successful warden. You got to 
have the personality for it. You can't be afraid of any¬ 
thing. And I was never afraid of anything. I'm just flesh 
and blood like they are, and they arejust flesh and blood 
like I am. I had a great advantage. I was an experienced 
fighter. I was an experienced fighter, because I wastough. 



Lumber Yard 


255 


There's tougher men than I am, but while they're getting 
dinner, I'll get a lunch. And so, nothing scares me. Physi¬ 
cal abuse doesn't bother me; a beating doesn't bother 
me, because I've been beat up so bad that I had to lean 
up against a light post after a fight for two weeks, so I 
could breathe naturally. When I went into this barber¬ 
shop to get a shave, because the barber had said he'd 
like to get the warden in his chair, I knew it takes a lot of 
gutsto cut a man's throat. You just don't know how much 
guts. And for him to be there and have me there and 
think of it—have no reason to cut my throat. I knew he 
wasn't going to do it. I would have bet half a million dol¬ 
lars to forty cents that he wouldn't do it, but that's my 
personality. Others are scared to death. 

And others just don't enjoy .... To me it was a chal¬ 
lenge. Everything was a challenge. The dope was a 
challenge. Everything was a challenge. They say, "You 
can't do that." 

"Why?" 

"It's never been done." 

"By God, it's going to be now." 

Then, that's like a red flag to try to fix it. 




20 

Nevada Industrial Commission 


E very job i've had was a challenge. Years later, I 
needed some time to finish my twenty years 
retirement with the state, and my friend Dr. Petty was 
now the Industrial Commission doctor. I had to go ask 
somebody for a job for three or four or five months to get 
in . . . I had a year and some time to go. So one other of 
my very good hunting partners was J ohn Bawden, who 
was the State Highway Engineer, and he heard that I 
needed some work, and he said, "By God, we can use 
you." He said, "We need to know what we've got in all 
our outlying districts, and we need an appraisal. 
Everything's got to be reappraised." He says, "You're just 
the man to do it," but he says, "If you start it, you got to 
finish it. You'll have to stay till you're finished," because 
I only had this short time to go to ... . 

"Oh, hell," I said, "if I start it, I'll finish it." So, I went 
to work on that, and I killed all thetime I could, because 
I found out when you work for the highway department, 



258 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


you're not supposed to do anything. For Christ's sake, if 
you do something, they've got to fire half of the crew. So, 

I did it as slow as I could, and it still took me about a 
third of the time that he suggested that it was going to 
take. 

"Well," he said, "hell 

I said, "I'll have to find something else to do, because 
I'm through. 

"Well, hell," he said, "you've got an office and a seat. 
Sit there! Your salary will go on as long as you want." 

I said, "I can't do that. It just isn't. . . ." And I thought, 
"I'll go see my friend in the N.I.C." That was the Nevada 
Industrial Commission. 

So, I went in and saw the chairman, whom I'd known 
for a long time, and I said, "I need about three months 
work." 

"God," hesays, "I'm glad you camein." Hesays, "You 
know what?" He says, "We've got a hell of a problem. 
We're sending checks out," to all the recipients they had 
from accidents—widows and orphans and those who were 
hurt and were getting compensation. He said, "So, many 
of those checks are being lost. The recipients aren't get¬ 
ting them, and yet they're coming back endorsed. We're 
paying them off." 

I said, "Can't you tell by the signatures, whether this 
was the endorsee or not?" 

"Yes," he said, "they look pretty good to us." He says, 
"Any way you want to work it," he says, "you go ahead, 
however you want to start." He says, "I'll have to have 
the blessing of the other two commissioners," because 
this was a special job, and he called them in, and, God, 
here comes one of the . . . the labor commissioner was 
one of my friends who'd come in to the office down there 
at the prison to protest my inmate work program. 



Nevada Industrial Commission 


259 


One of the guys that was trying to get you to hire orga¬ 
nized labor? 

Speed Hutchings, the commissioner, started intro- 
ducingme, and when hecametoJ ohn,J ohn says, "Hell," 
he says, "I knew him before you did." He says, "I had 
quite an experience with him. And I'm tickled to death 
he's coming to work for us." He said, "By God, he'll do 
the job." And I did. And it didn't take long, and I found 
out what was going on. 

In my investigations, I found that there was a lot of 
skulduggery going on among families. The check would 
be made out to a certain woman, and her cousin, or one 
of her relatives, would get the check. With the payee's 
permission, they would endorse it. They knew her signa¬ 
ture, or his signature, very well, and they traced it. They 
got by with it. Then, they cashed the check. They had 
the money. She reported, or he reported, that they didn't 
get the check, and they were sent a duplicate. They 
cashed it. Both checks were cashed. And so, this solved 
the whole thing. They took care of that right away. 

I almost had my time in. And I'd told them when I 
went to work—I think it was in April—that I was going 
to quit by September 1, when the hunting season opened. 
I said, "Nothing can interfere with my hunting season. 
And the dove season opens September first, so I'm going 
September first." Well, this was supposed to be a long, 
drawn-out job, but it came so easy and so simple that I 
finished it in late J une or early J uly. So, I jokingly men¬ 
tioned to Keith McKay, the chairman of claims, who was 
my boss, that I was going to have to go look for someone 
else to finish out my time. 

He said, "My God, you're a miner." He says, "We've 
got a claim down in Hawthorne for a mining company, 



260 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


and it's going to cost us a million dollars." He said, "Our 
investigators have accepted it. It bothers me. There's 
something that don't seem right, but I'm not a miner, 
and I don't know what the hell is going on. But let me 
give you the reports herefrom our investigator." He gave 
me the report of these two investigators, who, as I went 
on working there, I found out were not absolutely hon¬ 
est themselves, either, and damn poor investigators. I 
read these reports. Something didn't click to me, either, 
but the claimant was working for a mining company 
that. . . two guys owned this mining company, and I 
knew them well from years gone by. So, I went down. 
The minute I went in their office, I smelled something 
wrong. They knew who I was, but they didn't know I was 
working for the N.I.C. till I told them, because I was in¬ 
vestigating a claim and told them which one. To make a 
long story short, this fellow was on their payroll as their 
employee working for the Industrial Commission. But 
he was moonlighting, and hewasdrivingatruckfor some¬ 
body else, and he was loading in Mina. He loaded this 
truck in Mina from a loading ramp, and the stuff was 
chalk coming from Mount Montgomery, an operation up 
there. I forget what this chicken scratch was . . . mate¬ 
rial is what it was. As he was loading a truck, somebody 
appeared mysteriously, just beat him to death, almost to 
death, and stole his money, and just beat him up seri¬ 
ously. And his eyes . . . they blinded him. He was blind. 
He couldn't see any more, and he had brain damage, and 
he had just been really worked over. I started digging 
into that, and it was really comical. What had really hap¬ 
pened, there was a fellow from—I think it was either 
Arkansas or Oklahoma. I can't remember which, but he 
was an Okie, anyway. He had a sixteen-year-old daugh¬ 
ter, and he was having intercourse with her. She was a 



Nevada Industrial Commission 


261 


good-looking girl, and she got a boyfriend, and shestarted 
goingout with theboyfriend, and I suppose she was doing 
naughty-naughty with him, too. The father that got 
robbed and beat up told this guy, her boyfriend, that if 
he showed up again, he was going to shoot him, and he 
locked the girl up. Well, sometime after dark, the boy¬ 
friend came to the window, and she opened the window, 
and the old man was waiting. He barged out there with a 
gun, and, naturally, he scared the kid. The kid was twenty 
years old—big, husky, young fellow, good-looking—I 
found out later, and he took off. The old man jerked the 
girl back in the house. Either that night or the next night, 
the father drove down and was loading his truck again, 
when this young man showed up. He was wearing gym¬ 
nasium shoes, because his tracks were all over. I guess 
he just damn-near beat this guy to death. He didn't rob 
him. He just worked him over. 

Well, he turned in the claim to his employers, who 
were carrying him on the N.I.C. and getting paid from 
the chicken-scratch company for their portion of the 
N.I.C. They were all violating the laws. That's why my 
two miner friends were worried as hell when I started 
investigating, and they found out what.... Anyhow, 
naturally, it was reported to the sheriff. The sheriff was 
Hefty Sanderson. I'd known Hefty all the years I was 
prison warden. He was sheriff. Well, Hefty was quite a 
con artist. And so, I thought, "I'll go to the sheriff's office 
and get a report of the investigation, because when a 
man is almost beat to death, and he's lost his eyesight, 
and brain damaged, and everything else, he's got to have 
a report. 

So, I went up to the office, and Hefty wasn't there, 
but the woman at the desk was a deputy sheriff. I forget 
her name. I introduced myself, and I told her what I 



262 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


wanted. I wanted a report of this various incident. She 
went through everything and says, "I can't find it." 

"No," I said, "you've got to have it." 

I could tell that she knew where it was, but I wasn't 
going to get it. I said, "Well, you can't very well lose that 
in the sheriff's office. I mean, who was the deputy that 
investigated it?" 

"Well," she said, "He isn't here." 

"Well," I said, "who is he, and where does he live? I'll 
contact him." 

"Well," she said, "I think he's on vacation." 

I said, "We better get together here on this. I want to 
see that report." 

She just didn't know what the hell to do or what to 
say, and just then, Hefty Sanderson walked in. If he'd 
known I was in there, he'd have never showed up, be¬ 
cause even if he didn't know what I was there for, he'd 
have got suspicious, but he was trapped there. So, I turned 
around, and I said, "I'm here trying to get a copy of a 
report," and I told him what. I said, "Seemed like it got 
lost or misplaced someplace, but I want it." 

"Well," he said, "I think we did investigate that. Didn't 
amount to anything." 

"You mean to tell methattheguy was beat up, and he 
lost the sight of both eyes and brain damaged, and it 
didn'tamounttoanything?" I said, "Hefty, youthinkthis 
is a little, old school teacher from Santa Barbara? This is 
the old warden talking to you." I said, "I want that re¬ 
port. I hope, the hell, I don't have to go get a court order 
to get it." 

He says, "Come on. Let me talk to you." 

"Ah, no." 

He went on. He says, "Now look, Art." He says, "That 
thing is all done and past." And he told me the story. He 



Nevada Industrial Commission 


263 


says, "The kid's from a good family. Some of our most 
prominent people. We just don't want.... The old son 
of a bitch got what was coming to him, so why don't we 
just forget it?" 

I said, "We're not going to forget it, because this is 
going to cost the taxpayers in one way or another. It's 
going to cost the Nevada Industrial Commission, from 
what I can gather, maybe a million dollars. And we just 
can't afford that." 

Well, he said, "I really don't think we've got a report 
on it, to be honest with you. I'll give you all the informa¬ 
tion to settle it." 

I said, "That'll do." 

So, I went back with the information, and we called 
this fellow into a hearing, and everything was ready to 
pay for all these medical bills and everything. We told 
him what we'd found out, and we said, "We'd like you to 
withdraw this claim," which would be the easiest way to 
go. He withdrew his claim. 

So, that took me two or three weeks, and I'm getting 
pretty close to September 1. By God, we got another 
mining accident. 

When I went to work for the Nevada Industrial Com¬ 
mission, it was a temporary job. I needed three or four 
months for my retirement. I had to work up until J uly, 
and by the time that came along, I'd finished the job I 
was hired for, and I'd accidentally got into investigations. 

I investigated that case down in Hawthorne that saved 
them half a million dollars. And the minute that was over, 
they had one up in Gerlach—a mine explosion. They 
had a man in the hospital that's supposed to be all blasted 
to pieces, and the N.I.C. investigators had investigated, 
and it was a valid claim, and this was goingto cost them. 
The man's eyes were blown out. His brain was gone. This 



264 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


was going to cost them half a million dollars or more. 
She says, "Will you go up and check that out?" 

I said, "Yes, I will." And I went up. To make a long 
story short... oh, first I went to the hospital. The man 
was still in the hospital at St. Mary's, and I looked at his 
face, and I knew he'd never been in a mine blast, if he'd 
been in a mine at all. So, I barreled up to Gerlach, and I 
had a few acquaintances around there. I found out that 
he got drunk at one of the joints, and at four o'clock in 
the morning somebody beat the hell out of him and threw 
him out in the gutter. The N.I.C. investigators that had 
been up there investigating before, had only talked to 
his friends, nobody else. And so, there again, I can't 
imagine how much money I saved there. 

He had an attorney named J im. He was district attor¬ 
ney in Churchill County, one of my very good friends. 
He was now in private practice. And he came over to 
represent this guy. When he talked to me, he went over 
to his client, and he said, "You need a new attorney. I'm 
quitting." 

The man said, "Why?" 

He says, "I talked to Bernard, and he told me what 
happened." 

Well, he said, "Aren't we going to have a meeting." 

He said, "No. If Bernard said that happened, that's 
what happened. I don't want any part of it." So he didn't 
either. 

So, now September the first was just around the cor¬ 
ner, and that's when the hunting season starts. That's 
the dove season. So, I went to Keith McKay, the claims 
manager, and I says, "Well, Keith, it's been nice working 
with you guys. I've enjoyed it. I've enjoyed the type of 
work I had, and I enjoyed being successful at it, but I've 
got to leave. I've got my time in." 



Nevada Industrial Commission 


265 


"Oh," he says, "you can't quit." He says, "You just 
stay right here with us." 

I says, "No. Nothing is goingto interfere with my hunt¬ 
ing and fishing. And I don't need the money. I don't need 
a job." 

He says, "You've earned your money for the next fifty 
years. Your salary is . . . you've earned it for the next 
fifty years." 

I says, "Send me a check every month." 

He says, "No, you've got to be on the payroll to get 
it." 

Well, I said, "I just can't do it. And nothing's going to 
interfere with my hunting." 

Hesays, "You can go huntingand fishinganytimeyou 
want. We'll put your dog on per diem. You won't have to 
feed your dog." He says, "You're smart enough to know 
that you're going to be an investigator. You're going to 
have a certain amount of claims to investigate. You can 
do them any time you want, as you want them or where 
you want them. They're going to be all over the state. 
You're goingto be in duck country. You're goingto be in 
fishing country. You just as well be doing it on salary and 
on per diem and on expenses." 

I says, "I don't know how anybody could turn that 
down." So, I stayed on, and I had more interesting cases 
and saved them millions more. Guys that just—nobody 
but me could have done it. They had one casein Pocatello, 
Idaho, where a man was working for Harolds Club and 
went around and fixed up all these Harolds signs. They 
had "HaroldsClubor Bust" signsall over the country. He 
had a crew of men driving a well-equipped truck all 
around doingthis repair work. Harolds gave this lead man 
a whole chunk of money, four or five thousand dollars, 
how ever much he'd need to make the circle back, and 



266 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


they'd be gonefor a month. He got in thistown in Idaho, 
and every night he used to have to call and give a report, 
so he got on a pay phone to call, and while he was in 
there, a big African American, six foot six, 250 pounds, 
came in there, beat him, almost killed him, broke both 
jaws, and stole all his money—Harolds' money. Naturally, 
they hauled him to the hospital. Harolds was insured for 
this money. I mean, they had insurance that would cover 
this money loss, the stolen money. So, they sent an inves¬ 
tigator up there, and they couldn't come out with 
anything. They couldn't learn anything that had hap¬ 
pened. In the meantime, this guy's got broken jaws. 
They're healing, and his claim is coming up before the 
N.I.C., and this is going to bean expensive one. The insur¬ 
ance company hired some investigators from Reno, and 
I can't think of their name now. They're both ex-sheriff's 
officers, and they went up, and they couldn't find out 
anything, and we're stuck with it. McKay—he called him¬ 
self McKigh—is pretty well acquainted with my method 
of operation. He says, "Why don't you go up there and 
look into that. See what the hell you can find out." 

So, I went up, and I took my wife—she insisted on 
going, because we'd heard about this not being able to 
investigate anything. She wanted to go along and protect 
me, and to keep her quiet I said, "All right, you can come 
along for the ride." 

We got up there, and I got all the history I could, first. 

I found out what motel he was staying at, and he had his 
helper. So, I went up, and I started at the motel, and the 
information I got from there led me to his helper. The 
information I got from there was that, he didn't know 
what had happened, but he had all this money, and he 
wanted to go to a whorehouse, a black whorehouse. He 
was in the mood for a change, I guess. And he never saw 



Nevada Industrial Commission 


267 


him again. He said that night he was all beat up. So, I 
went from there. 

Well, a man beat up that bad, we've got to have a 
police report. So, I went to the police department. It was 
a pretty good sized police department. I told them who I 
was and what I was there for. He says, "You're wasting 
your breath. We can't get a thing. We can't get a thing." 
They've got a big black district down there, and there's a 
big mafioso running it. I mean, the big black—you can't 
get anything out of him. The cops had gone down there, 
and they'd run into nothing but stone walls. Nobody 
would tell them anything. Well, but they did know that 
this big black had been arrested, but he'd never been 
tried. 

And I said, "Well, I'll go down there and smell around 
myself." 

"Oh, you can't go down there. You can't go down there. 
It's dangerous." 

"Oh," I says, "Hell, I don't know why it would be 
dangerous." 

"Our men go down there in pairs. We'll send some¬ 
body with you, but you can't go down alone." 

I says, "I'm going down. I'm going down alone. That's 
the only way I can investigate." 

So, I told my wife where I was going to go, and she 
had a fit. She wanted to go along. 

I said, "You can't go into a black whorehouse!" I finally 
agreed that she could stay in the car outside while I went 
in. "Lock the doors and don't open them for hell or high 
water." I knew that I had to find this black mafioso boss. 

I went in, and in my days as mine inspector, mine opera¬ 
tor, I always referred to anybody as "boy." A group of 
them, "How you doing, boys?" I didn't know that you 



268 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


didn't say, "How you doing, boys?" to blacks, as much as 
I'd been around blacks and had black friends. But any¬ 
way, I parked my wife in this new Chevrolet out there by 
the curb, walked across the street, walked in, and there 
was a whole group of young blacks at a bar. I said, "Howdy, 
boys," as friendly as I could be. You could have heard a 
pin drop. I said, "I'm lookingfor the man who isthe pro¬ 
prietor of this building, and one of them pointed that 
way, and I went in, and I saw an office with a black girl, 
and I could see a big man through a window in another 
office. And so, I told this lady that I wanted to see the 
manager, and I was talking loud. I know this guy is lis¬ 
tening. I told her who I was, and I told her that I was 
investigating a claim, and I told her what the claim was, 
and I said, "It don't make sense to me, and I'd really like 
to find out what happened. I think that this man could 
tell me. What is his name?" 

She said what it was, and she said, "He's there. "He's 
in there." And he's already on his way out. 

He says, "What can I do for you?" 

I told him what I wanted and why I wanted it, and 
that I didn't think that he'd been beaten up by a black 
man, but I wanted to know for sure. 

He says, "I wasn't here when it happened, but," he 
says, "I know exactly what happened. He came in here 
with a lot of money. He started throwing his weight 
around. He started buying drinks for everybody in the 
bar. He started horsing around with the boys." And he 
named their names. I had the name of this guy that broke 
his jaws. "And he wanted black girls." 

He took me upstairs, talked to one of the black girls, 
and shesaid, "Hecamein, and he had all thismoney. He 
just kept throwing it around, and he was too drunk to do 



Nevada Industrial Commission 


269 


anything anyway, but he left. By the time he left, he left 
all his money." 

He'd been trading hats back and forth with one of 
these big blacks, and he got away with the black's hat 
when he left. The black followed him, because he wanted 
his hat. He went up to a pay phone and went in, and the 
black went in there and told him, "I want my hat." 

He says, "Get out of here, you goddamned expletive 
deleted. We made our trade." 

"And he started punching me," he says, "I just put 
out a fist, just to protect myself. I caught him right on 
the chin, and his jaw just broke." 

So, I had all this, but I talked to several people, and I 
found out that the judge was suspicious of this whole 
thing, and that's why he didn't hold a trial. I went up to 
the hospital to get a report on the man, because he had 
to go to the hospital, and they wouldn't give me the 
records. I said, "If I've got to go get a court order to get 
those records, I'm goingto get them. I want to know what 
the hell happened and what condition he was in when he 
come in here." So I got the records. He was maudlin 
drunk. They couldn't do anything but set his jaws. And 
anyway, I came back. I settled that. 

Thetwo insurance companies whose investigators had 
gone up there to investigate this, wanted a copy of my 
report, because they didn't have anything. And for their 
own benefit. McKay wouldn't let them have a copy of my 
report. He said, "By God, if they haven't got good enough 
investigators to do what you did, they're not entitled to 
it." 

That's just another exampleofhow you were not afraid 
of any kind of situation, which is whatmadeyou a good 



270 


ARTHUR BERNARD 


warden. I want to thank you for your work on this oral 
history. 

Oh, it's been a pleasure. 



NDEX 


A 

Acord, Art, 32 
Adir, Bill, 30-32 
Ali, Mohammed, 189 
Alsup, Ralph, 137-147,152 
American Wardens Associa¬ 
tion, 185 

Anderson, Fred M., 204 
Argento, Tony, 18-19, 21 
Argosy Magazine, 159 


B 

Badt, Milton B„ 203, 205 
Bawden, John, 257 
Bernard, Donald, 69,142-143 
Bernard, Naomi (nee 

Bremenkampf), 46, 49-56, 
76, 110, 169, 181, 243, 
247, 267-268 

Bernard, Patricia, 234-235 


Bernardini, Minnie (nee 
Mussatto), 1-2, 5, 79 
Bernardini, Ricci, 1-2 
Beuhler, J ack, 11-12, 21-22, 
35-36, 47 

Biltz, Norman, 116 
Binion, Lester "Benny", 195- 
197 

Blake, Sergeant, 88, 98-99 
Bristol Mine (Pioche, 
Nevada), 18, 21, 38-42, 
47, 49, 71, 79 

Buckaroo Saloon (Caliente, 
Nevada), 12 


C 

Cabin in the Sky (Gold Hill, 
Nevada), 230-231 
Calhoun, J im, 68 
Caliente, Nevada, 12, 28 



272 


Index 


Canvasback Gun Club 
(Fallon, Nevada), 94, 236 
Clark, Bob, 128-129 
Clark County, Nevada, 210- 
211 

Cleary, Mr., 225-228 
Cochran, Ike, 103 
Cohen, J oe, 32, 78 
Comstock Lode (Nevada), 57 
Conforte, J oe, 230 
Corbett, Young, 33 
Court of Last Resort, 157- 
174,227 

Crouch,J ordan, 69 
Culverwell, Charlie, 12 
Cupid, Ted, 200-203 


D 

Delmu, Albert, 50 
Delmu, Della, 50 
Delmu family, 72 
Delmu, J oe, 72 
"Dirty Curly", 47-49, 51 
Donnelly, Mark, 236-237 
Donovan, Bill, 67 


E 

Eagle Drugstore 

(Winnemucca, Nevada), 
216,218 

Edwards, Ralph, 170 
Ely, Nevada, 46, 57, 61, 79- 
80, 83, 137 

Ensinspranger, Mr., 171-174, 
205 

Ephraim, Utah, 4 
Erlich, Jake, 158, 173-174 


F 

Finch, Barry "Pappy", 105- 
112,122-124 

Finnegan, J ames P., 241-249 
Firpo, Young, 149-150, 194, 
206 

Fitch, Richard, 221-224 
Fleischmann, Max C., 67 
Fletcher, Harry, 105, 108-109, 
116-117,139 


G 

Gabbs, Nevada, 61 
Gardner, Erie Stanley, 157- 
162, 167-171, 228, 238 
Gardner, J ean, 162 
Garvey, Bill, 93-95 
Gemmill, Paul, 43 
Getchell Mine (Golconda, 
Nevada), 62-65 
Getchell, Noble, 62-65, 86 
Golconda, Nevada, 62 
Grassi, Tom, 43-44 
Green, Tony, 67-68 
Greenen, J im, 64 
Greenhead, Club (Fallon, 
Nevada), 94 

Gregory, Alex, 159, 228-229 
Guild, Clark J., 67 
Guild, ClarkJ. J r., 167 


H 

Hardy, Roy, 63, 65-66 
Harolds Club (Reno, Nevada), 
265-266 

Hastings, Dr., 28 



Index 


273 


Helms, Cliff, 196-206 
Honerien Mine (Stockton, 
Utah), 10, 36 
Houts, Marshall, 159, 228 
Hutchings, Speed, 259 


J 

J ackrabbit, Nevada, 23 
J ohnson, EmmaJ o, 163-166, 
169-170, 174, 205, 234 


K 

Keele, Ed, 28-29 
Keele, J ake, 30-32, 78 
Keele, J igs, 29 


L 

Larson, Chris, 4 
Las Vegas Club (Las Vegas, 
Nevada), 195-198 
Laxalt, Paul, 146-147 
Lazarini, Louie, 46 
Lida, Nevada, 64 
Liston, Sonny, 189 


Me 

McCall, Dr., 28, 32 
McKay, Keith, 259, 264, 266, 
269 


M 

Meselod, Amelia, 14-15 
Montgomery, Ed, 160,162 
Moore, Archie, 191 
Murphy, Matt, 45-46, 61, 63- 
64, 82 


N 

Navajo Casino (Pioche, 
Nevada), 94 

Nevada Industrial Commis¬ 
sion, 257-270 
Nevada State Museum 

(Carson City, Nevada), 67- 
68 

Nevada State Prison, 81-249 
Nielson, Ray "Swede", 9-12 
Norris Drugstore (Pioche, 
Nevada), 31-32 
Norris, Edna, 32 
Norris, Mr., 32 

Norton, Punchy, 191,193-194 


P 

Parowan, Utah, 54 
Petty, Richard, 98, 103-104, 
110-112, 186, 204, 257 
Pike, Miles, 168-169 
Pioche, Nevada, 12-13, 15-16, 
22-23, 25, 30, 40, 47-48, 
52, 72, 79-80, 93-94 
Pioneer Club (Las Vegas, 
Nevada), 94-95 
Pittman, Vail, 82-83 



274 


Index 


Pony Springs (Nevada), 17 V 

Powers, Bull, 190-191, 194 

Valente, J ohnny, 14, 30 
Virginia City, Nevada, 61-62 
R 


Rabbithole, Nevada, 70, 72-73 
Raggio, William j., 226, 228- 
229 

Redfield, LaVere, 148 
Rio Tinto Mine (Mountain 
City, Nevada), 57 
Russell, Charles, 83-85, 117- 
119, 127-128, 131-132, 

146 


S 

Sagebrush Saloon (Pioche, 
Nevada), 14, 16, 20, 28 
Sanderson, Hefty, 261-263 
Savage, J ohn, 243-246 
Sawyer, Grant, 154, 251 
Scrugham, James G., 70-76, 
78 

Sheehy, Bill, 87-88 
Sinett, Bill, 146 
Slade, "I ron J aw", 18-20, 25, 
27 

Snyder, LeMoyne, 159 
Steeger, Harry, 159 
Stewart, Nevada, 136,141 
Street, Park, 159, 228 
Stumpy, 56, 75 


W 

Wadzagar, Pete "Haywire 
Pete", 13-16 
Walker, Owen, 42 
Watkins, Sport, 16-18 
Western Wardens Association, 
185 

White, Larry, 33-34 
White, Sheila, 33 
Wimberly, Ray, 78-79 
Wingfield, George, 62-65, 86, 
204 

Wyoming Hotel (Pioche, 
Nevada), 13-14 


T 


This is Your Life, 170 
Tonopah, Nevada, 65 



