Robert A. Ring: 

Recollections of Life in California, 
Nevada Gaming, and Reno and Lake Tahoe 
Business and Civic Affairs 

Interviewee: Robert A. Ring 
Interviewed: 1972 
Published: 1985 
Interviewer: Mary Ellen Glass 
UNOHP Catalog #058 


Description 

Robert A. Ring, a native of Missouri, was born in 1913. He spent most of his childhood years in California, attending 
schools in Ocean Park and Santa Monica. Like many of his young contemporaries, Ring sold papers, did odd jobs, 
and learned valuable lessons about the American economy. He became interested in sports and games, first as a 
member of school teams (he was captain of his high school basketball team), and later as a worker with games of 
skill and chance played in the southern California resort areas. 

Just out of his teens and still a college student, Robert Ring met and became acquainted with John and William 
Harrah, father and son entrepreneurs in California’s sporadically-legal bingo parlors. By the summer of 1938, their 
association resulted in Ring following the Harrahs to Reno, Nevada. John and William Harrah had moved the year 
before to the place where games of chance were legal at all times, instead of at the whim of local politicians. Within 
a short time, William F. Harrah, with Robert Ring and a few other employees, developed a gaming business that 
ultimately came to dominate northern Nevada’s tourist industry. The huge resort-hotel-casino-entertainment complex 
grew under Harrahs management—and Robert Ring’s active participation—to be the largest such organization in the 
state. Robert Ring gives his observations and discusses the processes leading to the maturing of the entertainment 
complex and the public offering of stock in the corporations. 



Robert A. Ring: 

Recollections of Life in California, 
Nevada Gaming, and Reno and Lake Tahoe 
Business and Civic Affairs 




Robert A. Ring: 

Recollections of Life in California, 
Nevada Gaming, and Reno and Lake Tahoe 
Business and Civic Affairs 


An Oral History Conducted by Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1985 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1985. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: R.T. King 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 


Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Introduction xi 

1. My Early Life and Education 1 

2. California Gaming Experience 5 

3. Early Days in Reno: Tango and Bingo, and Harrah’s First Casino 11 

Harrah’s First Casino 
A Day in Reno Gaming Operations 

4. Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 21 

Routine Operations of the Entertainment Complex 

Harrah’s Tahoe 

Slot Machines 

Security 

Personnel 

Gaming Language 

State Entertainment 

Harrah’s Automobile Collection 

Sports Promotions 

The Gaming Industry Association 

Philosophical Attitudes on Gaming 



Robert A. Ring 


viii 


5. Civic Affairs 

71 

6. Conclusion 

75 

Original Index: For Reference Only 

77 



Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Robert A. Ring 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Introduction 


Robert A. Ring is a native of Missouri, 
born in 1913. He spent most of his childhood 
years in California, attending schools in 
Ocean Park and Santa Monica, Like many of 
his young contemporaries, Ring sold papers, 
did odd jobs, and learned valuable lessons 
about the American economy Mr. Ring early 
became interested in sports and games, first 
as a member of school teams (he was captain 
of his high school basketball team), and later 
as a worker with games of skill and chance 
played in the southern California resort areas. 

Just out of his teens and still a college 
student, Robert Ring met and became 
acquainted with John and William Harrah, 
father and son entrepreneurs in California’s 
sporadically legal Bingo parlors. This 
association led, by the summer of 1938, to 
Ring’s following the Harrahs to Reno, Nevada. 
John and William Harrah had moved the year 
before to the place where games of chance 
were legal at all times, instead of at the whim 
of local politicians. Within a short time, 
William F. Harrah, with Robert Ring and a 
few other employees, developed a gaming 


business that ultimately came to dominate 
northern Nevada’s tourist industry. The huge 
resort-hotel-casino-entertainment complex 
grew under Harrah’s management—and 
Robert Ring’s active participation—to be the 
largest such organization in the state. (While 
larger in volume and number of casinos, 
Howard Hughes’s corporative arrangement 
lacks the sort of identity that marks Harrah’s 
Casino, Harrah’s Reno, Harrah’s Tahoe, and 
Harrah’s Automobile Collection.) Robert 
Ring’s oral history contains his observations 
and discussion of the processes leading to 
the maturing of the entertainment complex 
and the recent public offering of stock in the 
corporations. Mr. Ring is vice chairman of the 
board of the corporation. 

When invited to participate in the Oral 
History Project, Robert Ring accepted 
somewhat reluctantly. Typically and 
understandably, Nevada’s gaming executives 
often have reservations in discussing this 
interesting and colorful business. Nonetheless, 
Mr. Ring proved to be a cooperative and 
generous chronicler of his life history through 



Robert A. Ring 


xii 


eight taping sessions, all held in his office in 
the Harrah’s executive suite between February 
18 and March 30, 1972. Mr. Ring’s review of 
his memoir resulted no significant alterations 
in the text, and only a few stylistic changes in 
language. 

The Oral History Project of the University 
of Nevada, Reno, Library preserves the past 
and the present for future research by tape 
recording the recollections of persons who 
have been important to the development 
of Nevada and the West. Scripts resulting 
from the recording sessions are deposited in 
the Special Collections departments of the 
University Libraries at Reno and Las Vegas. 
Robert A. Ring has generously donated 
his literary rights in his oral history to the 
University, stipulating that no research access 
is allowed until May 1,1985. 

Mary Ellen Glass 
University of Nevada, Reno 
1973 



1 


My Early Life and Education 


This is Robert A. Ring>s life story. I was 
born in St. Louis, Missouri, in 1913, March 
the fifteenth. My parents were Mr. Harry 
Ring and Johanna Bresnan. I was the third 
of three children, all boys. And my father 
worked for some commercial retail outlet, 
with which I>m not too familiar. And during 
the flu epidemic of 1918, he passed away 
(I think at that time I was five or six years 
old). My mother, through my great-aunt, 
was asked to bring the family out to Ocean 
Park, California, where my aunt owned 
some property, of which one was the Belclair 
Apartments, on Oceanfront. And my mother 
managed this apartment. There was about 
twenty-some units. It was a resort complex 
right on the ocean, and people would spend 
their summers there, and vacations, and it 
was quite an exciting thing for a child to come 
from St. Louis, Missouri to the beaches of 
Ocean Park, which were quite wide, and the 
sand was absolutely white at that time. 

And on leaving St. Louis, one of my earliest 
memories was coming across from St. Louis 
to Los Angeles in a train. I believe it took like 


four days and three nights, something of that 
nature, and it was quite an experience for a 
young boy. And consequently, we arrived in 
Los Angeles, and we were met and brought 
into Ocean Park. 

And as we got acquainted there, we lived 
on the beach, in our bathing suits, mostly, 
year around, and finally got so we were in the 
water, in and out, all day long, and we had 
many experiences where we would had three 
or four bathsuits. And just to be as kids would 
be, smart, well, wed have to run in the house 
and dry off and change to a clean bathing 
suit. Along with our many friends, that 
would track in the sand, which my mother 
was constantly cleaning up, along with the 
twenty-two units. 

And other times, we would maybe just 
lie and get in the wet sand. And we would 
body surf. We also would make our own 
surfboards, which was quite exciting for kids 
at that time. And throughout the year, wed 
play softball, and football, and wed high jump 
off the cement into the sand, and pole vault, 
and things of that nature. 



2 


Robert A. Ring 


One of our great experiences was on 
Saturday, we would go down to the Ocean 
Park Plunge, which was an inside pool. I think 
wed go in the bathers’ entrance for ten cents. 
Wed go in early in the morning, say, eight 
o’clock in the morning; we’d be there ‘til six 
p.m., and just diving, and swimming, and also 
diving for pennies and nickels or quarters if 
possible. 

Various times we’d go out to the Ocean 
Park pier, underneath the rafters, below the 
pier. We had a rope with a Gunny sack filled 
with sand, and we’d use that as a swing. And 
we’d jump off the rafters, and swing it out into 
the water, and then take a dive. It was quite a 
thing for the kids. 

Amongst my experiences while down in 
Ocean Park, I remember very distinctly going 
up to the Pacific Palisades with my mother 
and my brothers and some friends on New 
Yeans Day, and I was attired in a bathing suit 
and a beanie-type cap. And some gentleman 
from England—from London, England, I 
believe it was—had to take my picture. And 
naturally, I didn>t know why, but he asked 
my mother if he could take my picture, the 
reason being that he had to send it back to his 
friends in England to show them how people 
were attired on January the first in California. 

Another experience I had while playing 
in the sand after school one wintens day—a 
friend of mine and I were playing, throwing 
a football, and on looking out into the ocean, 
we saw something which was bobbing out 
there. We didn>t know what it was. But on 
further examination, we thought it looked like 
a body. So this fellow and I decided we were 
curious enough to go out and see what it was. 
And we went out, swam out, maybe two, three 
hundred yards, and here was a fully clothed 
man who had been apparently hit over the 
head, and he had been dead for some three or 
four days. And so, naturally, we towed him in 


to the sand, and very cautiously, we grabbed 
one side, and we were kinda scared to death. 
And we were paddling along. We brought him 
in. Naturally, the authorities were notified. 
That was quite an experience for me! 

On my schooling in Ocean Park, I went 
to Washington Grammar School. From there, 
I went to John Adams Junior High School, 
eventually going to Santa Monica High 
School. And if I may return to my St. Louis 
situation, I remember I didrnt like school 
too much in St. Louis. I was a little reticent at 
going to school. However, I went every day, 
but very reluctantly. 

However, [with] my schooling in 
California, I quickly met a lot of people, and 
I enjoyed it very much. In Santa Monica 
High School, I played a little football, and 
some baseball, and attempted to be a pole 
vaulter in the sophomore class, which was a 
sad experience because [laughing] I>m not a 
pole vaulter. But from thence, I played a lot of 
basketball, I played through the junior high 
school and high school, and our teams won 
the Bay area conferences a couple of years. 
We went on to the semifinals of the Southern 
California championships, where we were 
beaten by another school I don>t remember 
right now. 

While being raised on the oceanfront, 
there, I did try to augment our income by 
selling papers, which my brothers did, also. 
We used to sell afternoon papers on the 
streets, and at times, we used to sell papers 
in the morning up at the railroad tracks, and 
we>d catch the commuters, and sell them 
their morning papers. And on the way by, we 
might stop by a little bakery and pick up some 
fresh doughnuts, which was quite a thing at 
that time. 

One of my experiences on the newspaper 
route was, I had a very small route, and as far 
as papers go, I only had fifty-two papers, but 



My Early Life and Education 


3 


I had to ride my bicycle like five miles before 
I started my route. These fifty-two papers 
were out by Westwood, California, which is 
highly and densely populated at this time. 
However, at that time, they were strung out, 
and I would have to go a quarter of a mile or 
so to each house. 

And one experience I had there in the 
winter rains, which is inevitable in southern 
California. Around the first of the year, one of 
my subscribers insisted that I try to transport 
her daughter across by the two-foot ravine 
of water. I tried to explain to this lady that 
it is tough enough ridin a bicycle through 
two foot of water with a few papers on the 
back, and she insisted that I could do it. And 
[laughing] maybe I>m a negative thinker, but 
I certainly thought I could not. However, 
she had talked me into havin> the girl get on 
the back of my bicycle so we could transport 
her over to her mother. And naturally, I got 
as much speed up as I could before I hit the 
water, the old pedals start draggim a little bit, 
and eventually got about in the middle, and 
we could go no further, and we tipped over. 
And the reason I’m mentioning this is that 
the lady was so adamant afterwards that I’d 
got her daughter all wet, she chewed me out 
pretty good. But that’s just an experience in 
growing up, I guess. 

I remember when we were children there 
on the beach. There was many a setting for 
movie pictures. They used that for location. I 
remember the Sheik ofAraby was one of them. 
I think it was Rudolph Valentino. And they 
had the tents set up there, and it was quite 
exciting to watch. They had a different type 
of—they had no flash cameras at that time, or 
any lighting. They would use kinda like a lead 
foil boards. They used those for reflectors to 
reflect the sun. I remember that Charlie Chase 
used to do a lot of comedy things down there 
at that time. 


And also, when we were growing older, we 
used to work in umbrella stands there in the 
summertime. We’d work for a concessionaire, 
and we’d rent these beach umbrellas, and the 
beach chairs, and backrests, and that, for 
people that would come down and spend the 
day, and we’d have to charge them x-amount 
of the day, or by the hour, or by the week, and 
some of ’em would rent them by the month. 
And then, when the day would pass, we’d have 
to collect all these back, and we’d have to run 
them down, and carry like fourteen of these 
big umbrellas on your shoulders, which was 
kind of an exercise in itself. 

But consequently, I’d be as black as a bear. 
I would wear kind of like a—oh, linen—white 
linen pants, but I’d have the bathing suit top, 
and I’d be black as a bear on the top, and when 
I went swimming later, why, my legs would 
be white, which kinda showed that you were 
doing something of that nature. 

While in California, newspaper headlines 
I can remember—. Oh, I think the Giants 
were playin’ in the 1921 Series, which were 
always headlines. I remember as a child, in 
grammar school, that the Graf Zepelin, or 
the Hindenberg whatever it was, went over 
Ocean Park, and the whole school was let out 
to view it going over. 

Another one of my recollections is the 
round-the-world fliers—I guess that was ’25; 
I’m not sure. Either they took off and landed— 
at least, they landed—at the old Clover Field 
airport, which is now the Douglas Company, 
Douglas airplane company. It was quite an 
experience, and they let all the kids out of 
school to go see that. 

And, of course, the streets at that time 
were all asphalt, had eucalyptus trees along. 
And Wilshire Boulevard, which is—the 
property is, I guess, as great as any property 
anywhere, was about a forty-foot wide asphalt 
street at that time, and it was lined with 



4 


Robert A. Ring 


eucalyptus trees on each side. Occasionally, 
while in grammar school, we would go out 
near Clover Field with our teachers, and 
pick the wildflowers, which were way out 
in the fields. Right now, it’s highly, densely 
populated. 

During 1932, the Olympics were held 
in Los Angeles. The Coliseum was built and 
dedicated. That was quite an event. With 
a couple of friends of mine, we went and 
saw the free Olympics, and the qualifying, 
which was quite exciting. We got on a trolley 
car and went in from Ocean Park into [the] 
Los Angeles area, and then after leaving 
the Coliseum, we went down to where we 
had gotten off the trolley car, and got on 
another trolley car, and were headed home, 
we thought. However, [laughing] there was 
many trolley cars there, and we didn’t read the 
destination of this trolley car. So we went on 
a tour of the Los Angeles area, and we were 
a little late getting home, eventually making 
it, however. 

I went to Santa Monica High School. One 
of my history professors, or teachers, was a 
Miss Ruth Judd, who was quite a gal. She was 
a big, heavy-set woman, very learned, and she 
was blunt and to the point. She mentioned 
that every twenty years or so, we have to have 
a war [laughing] to cut down the population. 
The reason I’m bringing up Ruth Judd is the 
fact that I believe it was her cousin or some 
relative of hers—. I graduated in Santa Monica 
January thirty-first. I had Miss Judd as a 
teacher, I guess, in 1930. And it was shortly 
after that that some relative of hers, Winnie 
Ruth Judd, decapitated two women and put 
them in a trunk, and [they were] later found. 
It was the famed Winnie Ruth Judd murder 
case. I guess since that time, just recently, the 
past few months, Winnie Ruth Judd has been 
released to society as—I guess she’s a caretaker 
for some couple that have custody of her. So 


that was ’31, and now it’s ’71, so she— I believe 
she did escape at one time. I’m not sure. I 
think she did, and she was apprehended. I 
think she’d worked for these people that she 
is now in custody with. 

I graduated from Santa Monica High 
School in January, 1931, the winter class (I 
was vice president of the class), and eventually 
went to Santa Monica Junior College, which 
was quite a new school at that time, it is now 
the City College, and much larger, and in a 
different location. 

I went there just one year, taking a business 
course, and eventually, I went to work for Mr. 
William Harrah in Venice, California, in a 
game which was known as the Circle Game. 
The Circle Game had thirty-three stools. 



2 


California Gaming Experience 


Well, naturally, that was Depression times, 
and things were a little tough. And a friend of 
mine had been working for Mr. Harrah in the 
Circle Game in Venice, California. And there 
was an opportunity for me to go down and 
be interviewed to work for a part-time job on 
weekends and holidays or a relief situation, 
[for] which I was accepted. That was my first 
meeting of Bill Harrah. And I went to work 
in this game on a part-time basis. Eventually 
it developed into a permanent thing. 

The Circle Game was an unusual game. 
First of all, it was legalized in California. I 
think it was under the supervision of the Los 
Angeles supervisors. And it was a licensed 
game. We had thirty-three seats. The Circle 
Game, as the name implies, was in a circle. It 
was a round counter, with thirty-three stools 
around it. And in the middle, there was a kind 
of a roll-down hopper that had a dashboard, 
indicating every card in the deck, the fifty- 
two cards. And the object of the game was, 
you would have a layout like a Bingo board. 
There would be a heart row, a spade row, a 
diamond row, and a club row. And they would 


have a red series, which— all the red series 
were the same. They had a blue series, which 
was different than the red series, but all the 
same colored series were identical. They had 
a maverick series, which was the yellow series, 
and it was kind of a jumbled up situation. 
The object of this game was, you would buy 
cards from the dealers, and you either want 
the red or the blue or the maverick, or you 
could have all three. You could buy from, 
I think it was two to five cards. And these 
cards you received, they would be known as 
your “hole” card. You would mark a black 
marker over these on the series boards, and 
the object would be to get four in a row, and 
it would have to include one or more of your 
hole cards. It was possible to get a pat hand, 
which happened occasionally. 

And the hopper in the center of this circle 
would revolve. After having the cards shuffled 
by a girl in a booth, the dealers would—there 
would be two men dealers, and they would 
work from one side of the booth where the 
girls shuffled. One would work one side, and 
one would work the other, and sell cards to 



6 


Robert A. Ring 


these people. After they received their cards 
and put black markers on the hole cards, 
then they would—wherever the hopper 
had stopped in the previous game, the next 
person would be the initial person to start the 
game. We had a marble; it would roll down 
this hopper, and there would be the fifty-two 
slots for the cards, and they were jumbled—I 
mean, they were not in sequence. And there 
would be a nail on each side of each slot, with 
a rubber covering. And a marble you would 
roll down for your card that would give you a 
case, or else help you win the game. However, 
it was quite a delicate situation. It was a skill 
game, and that’s the reason it was legal. It was 
not a gambling game. 

The marble would go down, it would hit 
one of those pegs, and sometimes you would 
shoot it right through as expertly as you could. 
And other times, it would bounce from one 
or over, and if you were to hit somebody’s 
hole card, and there were thirty-three people 
there (they were kind of a family-type, the 
customers—I mean, they all got pretty well 
acquainted), and they would make some 
comment like, “You cheese eater!” which 
means, “You’re a dirty rat for hitting my hole 
card,” things of that nature. It was kind of a 
fun type thing for the people. 

And as I had mentioned before, this was 
a legalized game; also, Bingo games were 
legal in Venice and Ocean Park. However, the 
method of paying off on these games would be 
that you would pay off in cigarettes—cartons 
of cigarettes— and then you would cash the 
cigarettes in at a cigar stand down at the 
corner, and that was a method of payment. 

From time to time, these games—Bingo 
games—would be legal, and pretty soon the 
city fathers would feel that it was no longer a 
skill game, and they would close them down. 

One instance I remember distinctly was 
that the Circle Game with the thirty-three 


stools at one time was the only legalized game 
in the whole state of California. And it goes 
without saying that it was pretty busy, and 
people were standing in line to get one of 
the thirty-three stools. And it was kind of an 
exciting experience, really. 

Eventually, Mr. Harrah opened some 
Bingo parlors. One was the Plaza Bingo 
Parlor. I think that was owned by Mr. John 
Harrah and a Mr. Jones, I believe. They were 
partners, and eventually, Mr. Jones sold out. 
And I forget how many stools we had there. 
We must’ve had a hundred and five stools. 
That was a Bingo game where you’d throw 
sponge rubber balls into individual hoppers. 
And the object would be to get five in a row, 
just like any Bingo game. 

However, in Ocean Park and Venice, 
Bingo games were known as “Tango.” So they 
were Tango parlors. 

Eventually, we opened another Bingo 
parlor, known as the Vogue. It was a smaller 
parlor and had different—. It was a little 
cheaper to play, and different-size games. I 
forget; I think it was three for a nickel, six for 
a dime on the cards, and I forget the payoffs. 
But the other was, I think, two a dime, which 
is secondary. 

But Mr. Harrah, Mr. John Harrah, had 
the lease on this one building that contained 
these three games. Also, it included a pool 
hall and a little bowling alley. This was right 
on the ocean front and the Venice pier. And 
alongside of Circle Game, eventually, they 
had a roulette game. It was known as a “chip 
game.” It was electrically operated. It was on a 
flasher-type thing (it’s not like the roulette in 
a Nevada casino), and it had multiple layouts. 
And people could lay down bets on maybe 
about eight or ten different layouts. It was 
quite popular. Those were legalized from time 
to time, and also, they were illegal. When they 
were illegal, they’d be closed down, naturally. 



California Gaming Experience 


7 


When we used to close, at midnight— 
wed open, I think, at one p.m. and run until 
midnight—and after that time, well, wed get 
together in the pool hall and polish up our 
cue sticks and learn the fine arts of “snooker” 
and “eight ball” and “nine ball.” From time to 
time, wed go back to the little bowling alley, 
which we would have to set up our own pins 
(wed take turns doing that). And it was a 
manual operation; that was before they had 
the pinsetters. But it was quite an experience, 
and we used to enjoy it very much. 

However, the fact that the games would 
be legal and illegal from time to time, Mr. 
Harrah—Mr. Bill Harrah—came in contact 
with a gaming operator down in Palm 
Springs. I believe this was in 1936. And there 
was a game down there known as the “Baffle- 
Ball Game,” which was individual rolldowns. 
There was about, I believe, sixteen of those. 
And the object of this game was to roll a ball 
down over a little baffle that would deflect 
the ball (which would be a sponge rubber 
ball, I believe), and it would go into a hole in 
the layout (and this also had a flasher-type 
layout above the board, and it shows you 
which lights were lit up), and the object here 
was to get five in a row, same as a Bingo. You 
were playing against the individual people, 
and the first one that would get five in a row 
would be the winner. 

However, this game was not the ideal type 
game for Palm Springs at that time because 
Palm Springs was very small, and to do any 
good in a game of this type, you would need 
a constant, full grind of operation with the 
twelve or sixteen games going all the time. 
It wasn’t long that we realized that. And 
eventually, Mr. Harrah bought out the partner, 
and we took the Baffle-Ball game out, put 
in Skee-Ball games, like they used to use on 
piers, in carnivals and concessions, and resort 
areas. Also, they used them in bars. 


You’d roll nine balls one at a time, and you’d 
try to hit a little small circle with a fifty, and the 
next circle was forty, and a twenty, and a ten 
circle. And the object was to get a high score. 
And as an incentive, to make people want to 
play a little more, we would give premium 
points for high scores. Any score over two 
hundred would receive x-amount of premium 
points, and it would graduate up to—I think 
four-fifty was the most you could get, if you 
had nine balls go in the fifty circle (which I 
became a little adept at) [laughing]. And these 
premium points, we had various prizes that we 
figured. I think the retail value of the premium 
points was a quarter of a cent a point. And 
we had little, flashy items, just many different 
souvenir-type things that people would walk 
out with. And at least they had a little fun, and 
they had a little reminder of the SkeeBall game. 

Amongst my experiences there, there 
was a bowling alley just down the street, 
which we’d spend some time in, and I had an 
opportunity to meet a few movie people of 
that time, I think Patsy Kelly was one of them 
that used to bowl there, and a bit part player, J. 
Carroll Naish. I taught him how to bowl, even 
though I wasn’t the greatest bowler, myself. 
But that’s just a memory. 

And one other experience, I think it 
was about 1936-’37— Marlene Dietrich was 
“downtown,” and at that time she was wearing 
I guess what you would call hot pants at this 
time. And she had those million-dollar legs 
that’re—whatever. And some fellow that 
she was with had, I think it was a ’37 Ford. 
He couldn’t get it started, and he was so 
embarrassed, and she was deriving a lot of 
fun out of it, really. And it did bring a lot of 
eyes looking on Marlene Dietrich, of which 
a couple were mine. And it wasn’t anything 
big, but it’s a memory. 

We used to get out in our shorts and try to 
do a little jogging, get some of the fine Palm 



8 


Robert A. Ring 


Springs sun. And I remember we used to 
run down through Palm Canyon, which was 
very beautiful, and also, Taquitz Canyon, and 
wed run as far as we could, and we thought 
we were gettin exercise, and doin’ the health 
kick. And at the end of I think it was Taquitz 
Canyon, there was a beautiful waterfall, 
which was a setting of, I think where Ronald 
Coleman played in the Lost Horizon. They 
used that as a location setting. 

I remember very distinctly that in the 
afternoons, there was no business in the Skee- 
Ball games, and I’d be sitting there just reading, 
or maybe playing, developing my prowess as a 
Skee-Baller. And occasionally, a person would 
come in, like a Johnny Mercer, or somebody 
of that stature. David 0. Selznickused to come 
in, and John Hay Whitney. There were any 
number of those kind of people who would 
come in. There’d generally be a few followers. 
And I remember Shirley Temple was in her 
heyday at that time. She was quite a—well, she 
was the star. And she’d spend some time there, 
and I’d maybe be sitting there in the daytime 
with nothing to do, and all of a sudden, she’d 
come in, and the place would fill up with forty, 
fifty, sixty people, just because she was—she 
was the thing, you know. And I did know her 
brothers. I went to school with her brother, 
and he played basketball at Santa Monica High 
School with me. I was the captain of the team, 
and he kinda halfway idolized me, I guess. I 
became acquainted with her mother and father 
just chatting through those channels. 

Eventually, I spent, I think, like two 
winters down there. And from time to time, 
I’d go back, and the Bingo games’d be open. 
I think, actually, the reason Mr. Harrah had 
that place down there was just more or less to 
make a job for a couple of us, and he’d spend 
some time there, also. 

And; sometimes on the Venice pier there, 
if the Bingo games were not legal, there was 


the place that another fellow and I worked. 
It was called the “Ham and Bacon Wheel.” 
And they’d have a big wheel with nails in it, 
and you’d spin a ball on this wheel. They were 
numbered from zero to twelve, and people 
could—I think it was either a nickel or ten 
cents— they could play on either the odd or 
the even, or they could pick a number. And 
if they got the number, they would get a ham, 
or a bacon, or they could let it multiply— 
however they wanted. And I worked that 
for one period of time, which was quite an 
experience. 

Well, one of my first experiences with 
John Harrah, who had been mayor of Venice, 
California, in its boom days—. I don’t know 
just when that was; I think it was in the ’20’s. 
And as I referred to in the past, that John 
Harrah had a lease on his complex where we 
had the Bingos, and John was an attorney by 
profession, and he was quite a detail man. 
And I recall very distinctly, I think it was in 
1933, ’34, or ’35, in that area there, when I 
was managing the Plaza Bingo Parlor, that 
Mr. John Harrah spent a lot of time in this 
building complex, and he would occasionally 
pass through the Plaza Bingo, and, being 
a perfectionist and a stickler for details, 
he was always concerned about customer 
convenience and customer comforts. Mainly, 
he was concerned about temperatures. And 
we had a thermostat in the Plaza, which told 
us what the temperature was, and naturally, 
we’d always try to keep it at seventy-two 
degrees. And I lived under a constant fear that 
he’d come in and it might be seventy-three or 
seventy-one. And through this association, I 
did become somewhat a stickler for details 
and temperatures, and I felt that my body was 
a thermostat at that time [laughing]. I could 
feel, or at least I thought I could feel when it 
was a little warm or a little cool, and I was 
instructed, I guess, at that time, through his 



California Gaming Experience 


9 


continual observations, it taught me to be very 
concerned about customer convenience and 
their comfort. 

On reverting back to the Tango games in 
Venice, to be a little more informative, games 
being legal and illegal was a result of being— 
was Tango a game of skill, or was it a gambling 
game? And occasionally, when they decided 
it wasn’t a game of skill, they would be closed 
down. Sometimes the policemen would come 
in and close it down. They took a couple of 
us into the Los Angeles police station, and 
we would be booked. Then we would have to 
have a [trial] —we’d make a test case to see if it 
was legal or illegal, and sometimes you would 
win the test that it was a game of skill, and you 
would be allowed to operate again. But there 
was a nuisance value, and that’s the reason Mr. 
Harrah wanted to get into a legalized gaming 
area like the state of Nevada. 




3 


Early Days in Reno: 
Tango and Bingo, 
and Harrah’s First Casino 


The fact that the games were legal and 
illegal got Mr. Bill Harrah to think that hed 
like something a little more permanent, 
naturally. He knew that the Bingo (well, Tango 
games in Venice) was legalized in Reno, so 
Mr. Harrah journeyed up to Reno, and finally, 
he obtained a location for a Tango parlor, on 
Center Street, which is now the Reno Printing 
[Company] location. I don’t recall the address, 
but—. They opened there in October, 1937, 
October thirty-first, which was Admission 
Day in the state of Nevada, also Halloween. 
(I was down at Palm Springs at this time, 
however.) It didn’t take Mr. Harrah very long 
to realize that it was the wrong time of the 
year, and it wasn’t a very good location to 
operate a Bingo, so they operated like two 
weeks there, and then closed it up. 

However, Mr. Harrah did obtain a lease 
on a place next to the old famous Wine House 
that was on Commercial Row and Douglas 
Alley. It ran from the railroad tracks there 
on Commercial Row to Douglas Alley. It 
was between the Wine House and I believe 
Roy’s Clothiers. And he opened that place 


on July first, 1938, with six employees. And 
I was down in Venice. At that time, I think 
the Bingo parlors were open. And after July, 
August—well, after a month of operation— 
Mr. Harrah asked me to come up and manage 
the place because he wasn’t satisfied with the 
way things were going, and I replaced the 
manager at that time. 

And amongst my experiences on the way 
up—I drove up with a friend of Mr. Harrah’s, 
Fred Vogel, in Mr. Harrah’s car. I was living 
at home at that time, and my older brother 
had passed away. He died in 1928 of [a] 
cerebral hemorrhage, which was the result of 
a football injury, I believe. And I was a little 
apprehensive about leaving home to come to 
Reno; however, it was kind of an experience. 
I mean, I was anxious to get up here, but I did 
have mixed emotions. 

On the way up, Fred Vogel asked if I’d like 
to stop by Lake Tahoe—we drove all night. 
And I’d always had a desire to see Lake Tahoe, 
’cause I remember in grammar school that 
our teachers would come back and would talk 
about summer experiences, and some of them 



12 


Robert A. Ring 


had been to either Yosemite or Yellowstone 
or Lake Tahoe. And I did have a desire, after 
hearing one of the teachers talk about Lake 
Tahoe and all the beauties of it, that I did 
want to see it. 

So we drove up the Clear Creek grade, and 
this was like, oh, nine o’clock in the morning. 
We went to the Stateline Country Club. This 
friend of mine knew a security man there 
that was working for Mr.—I think Mr. Custer 
owned the place at that time. So we went in to 
say hello to him, and naturally, the beauties 
of the lake, I was really impressed. 

So then we came into Reno, went to see 
Fred Brady, who was working in the Tango 
parlor. He and I had worked together down 
in Venice, and we had shot a little pool in 
that pool hall [to] which I referred. And after 
sayin hello and being welcomed, we decided 
we ought to shoot a game of pool. We came 
over to the Block N on North Virginia Street. 
They had a snooker table there, so we played 
snooker. The reason I’m mentioning these 
two incidents is that eventually, they became 
the location of—the one at Lake Tahoe is 
where Harrah’s Tahoe is now, and the South 
Shore Room, which is Harrah’s, of course. 
That was my first place I visited in the state 
of Nevada. And then the first place in Reno 
was the Block N, which eventually became 
Harrah’s Reno. 

Reverting to when I first came to Reno, 
I was impressed by having lived in southern 
California, which was the [laughing] ideal 
climate, bathing suit weather year ’round. But 
I learned to like the four seasons in Reno. I 
thought Reno was very beautiful, and the 
Truckee River, of course, is beauteous. I did 
like the four seasons; [it’s] kind of invigorating. 

At that time, the Hotel Golden was the 
hotel, which is the present site of Harrah’s 
Hotel. That was quite the hangout for 
the legislators, the mining men, and the 


cattlemen, and there was many a deal made 
over that oak bar with a quarry tile floor. 

At that time, the Bank Club and Palace 
Club on Center Street were the gaming 
casinos. There was a Northern Club, which is 
also on the site of Harrah’s, on Center Street 
now. The Overland Hotel was quite a popular 
place. Little bars on the east side of Center 
Street were the Inferno, Ship and Bottle, and 
the Silver Dollar. Eventually, the Dog House 
came into being down where Harrah’s now 
has their business office on Center Street. 
That was quite an operation. The Town 
House, over on First Street, where Penney’s 
is located now, that was the nightclub dining 
area, a little dancing. The Tavern on Fourth 
Street was quite a famous nightclub, dancing, 
and gaming, and dining. Grand Cafe was 
also where Harrah’s is now located. It was on 
Second Street. I think it was opened in 1910 by 
the Petrinovich and the Fusich families. They 
operated there for many years. That was quite 
a familiar eating place, and it had a bar there, 
where many of the cattlemen and mining 
people would frequent, also the legislators. 
Club Fortune was on the present site of Cal 
Neva. It was on the Second and Center Street. 
It would be the southwest corner. That was 
a Bingo parlor, a dining room, dance floor, 
and a bar. And they also had a crap table, a 
roulette wheel, and “Twenty-One” game, and 
slot machines, I believe. 

I went to work in the Harrah’s Tango on 
Commercial Row, I think it was August fifth, 
1938. And our competitors— the Heart Tango, 
which was on Virginia Street, was next to 
Harolds Club—they were telling us that we 
would only last about two months, and as soon 
as the winter snows fell and the ice got four 
inches thick on Douglas Alley, you wouldn’t 
get anybody in there. So we worked pretty 
hard to develop a clientele of customers, and 
we’d try to kill them with kindness, and we did. 



Early Days in Reno: Tango and Bingo, and Harrah’s First Casino 


13 


Well, reverting back to—one of my first 
impressions up here was that some of our 
customers would come in, and they would 
be, in a sense, “high rollers” in the Bingo 
department, because theyd play many cards, 
the maximum (I forget what that was). And 
theyd play for hours at a time. 

Naturally, coming out of California and 
coming to Reno, which was at that time the 
divorce capital of the United States, one would 
assume that all these people—the women— 
were divorcees. And it would surprise you, 
sometime. You wonder where these people 
came from, and the money they would spend 
there. However, they wouldn’t actually spend 
the money—they would win it back, too. But 
the way they spent their money, you’d figure 
they were wealthy divorcees, and maybe you’d 
go next door to the Wine House, and later 
on, you get a cup of coffee or a sandwich, and 
here this girl would be a waitress. There were 
many people here that were local people, and 
it took a little while. I was really impressed 
by the congeniality of the people, and how 
regular they were. And there was no phony 
baloney. They were all really friendly and 
down to earth. 

We used to keep our bankroll in the safe 
in the Wine House. There was a deposit box 
situation. They had a big safe, and we had a 
key like you would have in a bank, and we’d 
transport our bankroll back and forth from 
there. 

I used to frequent the many little places 
along the alley. I’d have meal tickets from four 
or five different restaurants along the alley, 
there. I think you’d get five and a half dollars 
worth of meals for five dollars. But I used to 
go from one restaurant to another, just to get 
acquainted with the people. Then I’d have a 
meal ticket at each one. 

Eventually, the winter was setting in, 
and our competitors thought that we were 


ready to fold up, I guess. So at that time, this 
location was merely a false building. There 
was a roof between the Wine House and Roy’s 
Clothiers, and it had a front and rear wall. All 
we had was gas heat with the blowers, which 
were noisy, and it wasn’t adequate heating. 
But Mr. Harrah decided to put in a first-class 
oil system, and a boiler room, and the whole 
thing, which led our competitors to think 
that we were going to be there for the winter. 

Eventually, Mr. Harrah did make a deal 
with a Mr. Ed Howe, I think it was, who 
owned the Heart Tango, which was just north 
of Harolds Club. We took that place over, I 
think it was September first, 1938. And we 
closed down the other place. 

This Tango parlor was a deal where you 
used a hopper that would go back and forth. 
Now, in Bingo, as it is known, we use a glass 
bown container and air blower, and then draw 
little balls out of the blower. At this time, in 
1938, they had a hopper that you would push 
up and down the center of the pit, or the ring, 
as we called it at that time. And the seating 
would be on the outside of a counter. People 
would take turns throwing baseballs. There’d 
be numbers from one to seventy-five, and 
the object was to throw your own number, 
of course. 

And even at this early time, or even 
the Tango parlors down in Venice, we were 
confronted with people that were kind of 
hustling the game. Naturally, we were trying 
to protect all of our customers. And in this 
type of a game, being a skill game, some 
people were more adept than others, and they 
could throw the ball a little better than some 
middle-aged woman. They had methods of 
signaling across from one side of the counter 
to the other, to let their compatriots know 
what number they would need, and their 
associates would—if they didn’t have what 
was known as a case (one number to go out or 



14 


Robert A. Ring 


to make Tango), they would get a signal from 
their friend that had an opportunity, and they 
would try to throw for them. But we would 
try to discourage that as much as possible to 
make it more square and fair for everyone. 

Eventually, we realized that the name 
Tango was only known on the west coast. 
Bingo was known throughout the country, 
at churches and bazaars and carnivals, so we 
eventually decided to call it Bingo. It’s been 
known as Harrah’s Bingo since then. 

We had a little—I forget how many stools 
we had there. It wasn’t too large. But in the 
alley, on Douglas Alley, there was, I think, 
the Rex Club and some other little club there. 
Eventually, we obtained the lease on these 
places, and we expanded a little bit, and made 
a little larger office. And then we did have a 
doorway into Harolds Club, which made it 
accessible to people that wanted to go from 
Harolds Club to a Bingo parlor. 

One thing which—I’m diverting back to 
our Bingo days, where we had here in Reno— 
it was Tango at the time, I guess, but we used 
to have a promotion there, which was a bank 
night-type operation, where we would have 
drawings—daily drawings, and we would add, 
say, twenty-five dollars a day, and twenty-five 
dollars at night, and it would get up in the 
neighborhood of a couple of thousand dollars; 
that, in 1938 and ’39, was a lot of money. And 
consequently, sometimes, somebody would 
come in for the first time, and maybe play 
the minimum amount of Bingo cards, and get 
one ticket, and they’d win the jackpot, which 
would disturb the local people, the steady 
customers. And it had [laughing] a tendency 
to bother me, too, and some of our employees. 
However, there was no telling what a thing of 
this magnitude or this nature did for the city 
of Reno. I mean, those people would certainly 
go to their home towns singing the praises of 
Reno, and what they did, and there was no 


telling how many people created a desire to 
come to Reno just to see the town, and also 
to benefit like their friends had. And being 
of a high caliber—well, all Nevada’s gaming 
outfits are honest type operations, but many 
years ago, in illegalized—any time there’s 
illegal gambling, I mean you can control the 
wins, maybe. And if a situation like this was 
controlled, one of the better customers would 
be the beneficiary. On the surface, it might 
appear good, for the money would be spent 
here locally, rather than taken out of town. 
However, the value of someone walking away 
with this money and spreading the good word 
of Reno has been good for the economy and 
tourism of Reno. This isn’t one situation. This 
has happened in many instances through 
various Keno games, Bingo games, “Twenty- 
One” wins, and roulette, the whole thing. 
And just like they say, you have to turn out 
winners to take players. The good will that 
goes with it is something that has created a 
healthy situation for the state of Nevada, and 
Reno, and the gaming industry. 

Our experience in Rena, Nevada, with 
our Bingo-Tango game was a touch-and-go 
situation. We were operating on a shoestring, 
as it were. Our bankroll wasn’t too plush, and 
from time to time, different operators would 
move into Reno, and there would be the 
inevitable Bingo war, where everybody tried 
to outdo the other operators in order to obtain 
the Bingo clientele for their own parlors. 

One incident when we finally moved over 
to 242 North Virginia Street, the old Heart 
Tango (we called it Bingo), we were operating 
there, and a very good Bingo operator from 
the Long Beach, California area obtained a 
lease on the premises of the southeast corner 
of Second and Center Street; at this time, 
it’s Don’s Drugstore. And they were very 
good operators; however, it was not the ideal 
location, and after many months of trying 



Early Days in Reno: Tango and Bingo, and Harrah’s First Casino 


15 


to develop a clientele and make a successful 
Bingo operation, they were unable to perform 
that feat. However, they did find a wealthy 
widow who had a younger fellow, a county- 
type Russian. He was very dapper, and he was 
promoting her to buy the Bingo parlor, the 
Rainbow Bingo, which she did, and naturally 
resulted in another Bingo war. This lady had 
an immense amount of money, and money 
was secondary to her, as long as her Russian 
friend had something to occupy his time. And 
I don’t believe she was concerned about the 
balance sheets at the end of the day. She did 
seem to enjoy counting the quarters, and the 
nickels, and dimes out of the slot machines. 
That seemed to fill her needs as being the 
businesswoman. Eventually, they did not 
make a go of it, and consequently, we came 
out with the successful Bingo parlor. However, 
it was a touch-and-go situation at that time. 

The main Bingo parlor when we came up 
here was the Reno Club, which was owned by 
Japanese people. And after the Pearl Harbor 
incident, there was quite a bit of animosity 
there. Eventually, we took over that place, 
which was on the south side of Harolds Club. 
So consequently, we were on both sides of 
Harolds Club, and we ran Bingo parlors on 
both sides. 

Next door to the Reno Club Bingo was 
Jacobs Clothing Store, owned by Mr. Phil 
Jacobs. His son was Murray Jacobs, who we 
knew for a few years that we were here. We 
were quite friendly, and Mr. Phil Jacobs passed 
away, eventually. The clothing business wasn’t 
too lucrative, and Murray thought he might 
use the location for some other business, so 
Mr. Harrah suggested that he put in an off-sale 
liquor store, open up the front, which he did, 
and it was quite popular. 

We leased the rear end of the Jacobs 
Clothing Store from Murray Jacobs, and we 
put in a bar, which we named the “Blackout 


Bar.” The reason for the Blackout Bar, 
everyone was blackout conscious at that time 
due to World War II, and so we made it a dark 
bar, with a little indirect lighting. 

This was our first experience with any 
gaming, other than Bingo. Originally, on our 
Heart Tango deal, we did lease a couple of slot 
machines. And I think this is where we first 
put in our own slot machines. We had about 
eight or ten at that time. We put in a “Twenty- 
One” table, and a one-man crap table. By a 
one-man crap table, I mean it was operated 
by just one man. It was a small table, and he 
used the stick and dice, and the whole thing. 

Incidentally, Mr. Bill Harrah did have a 
bar operation in Venice, California. It was 
known as the Bamboo Hut. He had some 
entertainment, piano-type deal, and he 
had a fellow by the name of Jackson who 
was quite a popular piano player. He was a 
good one. Mr. Harrah brought Jackson to 
the Blackout Bar. And, of course, our piano, 
we had to cover it with black leather to go 
along with the theme of the place, and the 
Blackout Bar was carpeted. It was kind of a 
nice place for Reno at that time, and Jackson 
was exceptionally popular. He used to keep 
that place jumping till the wee, small hours. 
I think that was the advent, or the start, of 
entertainment in Nevada. I mean, there had 
been some—I think maybe over on Center 
Street, they might’ve had a piano place, and 
maybe the Riverside Corner Bar might’ve had 
a piano man at that time. I’m not sure. But 
after Jackson’s popularity in the Blackout, well, 
there was different hotels, I think the Carlton 
Hotel, and different places, that emulated the 
piano-type operation. 

And eventually—I don’t recall any dates; 
we can refer to that later. I think the Heart 
Bingo, that building there, that Harolds Club 
building, and the Harrah’s Heart Bingo, was 
owned by a Dr. Chase, and it was left in trust 



16 


Robert A. Ring 


to his children, and we thought we would be 
there forever. However, I think the fellow that 
was handling the trust worked out something 
whereby eventually, we lost our lease there. 
We still had the Reno Club Bingo. 

Harrah’s First Casino 

In the meantime, Mr. Harrah had obtained 
a lease where the present Harrah’s Reno [is], 
which was the Mint Club, at that time. (We 
can bring the dates in later.) And eventually, 
in 1946, we opened Harrah’s Casino. It was 
“the casino to see!” We had an astrology 
theme, and that was our pitch at that time. 
It was “the casino to see.” It had like a thirty- 
five-foot frontage, and it was a hundred and 
forty feet deep. We had two bars in it, a Keno 
game, a Faro Bank game, I think it was two 
wheels, and six “Twenty-Ones” and three crap 
games, I believe. And we had around forty slot 
machines. This was our first step into casino- 
type gaming. 

Our casino recruited some of the older 
casino employees and pit bosses. And at this 
time, Reno casinos employed shills; I mean, 
you had to have a shill, you had to. We were 
warned by the old school, you had to have 
shills to keep the games going, and this, that, 
and the other. So actually, what we did, we 
followed Harolds Club to some extent. 

We put in Pace machines. (That was the 
trade name of the slot machines.) I think the 
most popular machines of that time were the 
Mills and the Jennings. However, Harolds 
Club was doing most of the slot machine 
business, so I think it was through Mr. John 
Harrah’s thinking that we buy the Pace 
machines and follow success. We made our 
machines more liberal than any of the other 
competitors, and consequently, it’s paid off. 

Going back to the people that operate 
our casino, we did have a horse race book 


in the back end. And we did learn, through 
operation, that it was better not to use shills, 
and we had all men dealers originally (Harolds 
Club did have some women dealers, though), 
we made a breakthrough by finally selling 
our people that were operating the casino 
that they shouldn’t be blind to new ideas—I 
mean, let’s get away from the old theories— 
and consequently, we eliminated shills, and 
hired some lady dealers, and it seemed to be 
more acceptable to the clientele. And so we 
learned many things, of course. 

Eventually, we obtained a lease on the 
Frontier Club, which was immediately north 
of Harrah’s casino. This gave us about [a] 
seventy-foot frontage by a hundred and forty 
foot deep. So that’s the site of the present 
Harrah’s Casino. 

Mr. Bill Harrah, who has very high 
ideals (which John Harrah did, also), is a 
perfectionist number one, in my mind. And 
he’s always been concerned about cleanliness, 
and high quality of employees, and customer 
details, and is always looking for the newest 
ideas and innovations, anything to make 
Harrah’s operations number one. He’s always 
gone first cabin, or first class, as it were. Many 
times, when Harrah’s have done different 
things, promotions, or innovations for our 
customers, it’s always been mentioned that 
only Harrah’s would do it in this manner. I 
mean, it’s a typical Harrah’s operation. So, 
basically, Mr. Harrah thinks big, he thinks 
very big, and I’ve likened him to Cecil B. De 
Mille of the movies. Many times, some of us 
have considered things—maybe Mr. Harrah 
might bring them up, or maybe we might 
bring them up, but we thought maybe the 
fact that they were quite costly, we’d think 
that they were prohibitive, which would react 
very negatively to Mr. Bill Harrah, because he 
didn’t feel that we were the ones to decide it 
was prohibitive. He should decide whether 



Early Days in Reno: Tango and Bingo, and Harrah’s First Casino 


17 


it’s prohibitive or not. Consequently, he’s had 
many of us think big, but not quite as big as 
he thinks, however. 

The original location of Harrah’s, on 
Virginia Street here (I guess it was 210 North 
Virginia at that time), was when it was the 
thirty-five-foot frontage. Originally, we put 
in a rubber tile, inlaid square flooring, which 
was quite the thing at that time. And, of 
course, all our fixtures—I mean our Keno 
games and things, were either real fine oak or 
a mahogany hardwood. Everything was first 
cabin. We utilized many mirrors to expand 
the looks of the operation; I mean, rather 
than look congested, we tried to make it look 
larger. Mirrors work good in many ways—I 
mean, you can see what’s going on for your 
own protection. Sometimes there have been 
many things done with dealers inside and 
outside, which weren’t in the best interests 
of Harrah’s or their customers. And we have 
learned to operate with mirrors. 

In all of our operations, we have put in 
what we call “eye in the sky,” or a catwalk, 
or a one-way mirror where you can observe. 
The reason for this is to observe operations. 
We want to make certain that our employees 
treat the customers in the manner in which 
we would want them treated. 

One instance that Mr. Harrah mentioned 
many years ago was that we should always 
treat a customer, or someone that was coming 
into Harrah’s operation as if they were a 
guest in our own home, which I thought was 
putting it quite clear to a lot of people. As 
I mentioned before, we try to kill ’em with 
kindness [laughing]. 

Referring to the casino at 210 North 
Virginia Street, eventually, we replaced the 
vinyl or rubber tile flooring with carpeting. 
It was fully carpeted, and I believe this was 
the first carpeted casino in northern Nevada. 
We also used terrazzo tile at that time, 


which some people thought was prohibitive 
[laughing]. We put it out in front of Harrah’s. 
We did have a steam pipe underneath it (this 
was our sidewalk), and the steam pipe was to 
create a condition where we wouldn’t have 
icing and snow. It would melt the snow. And 
[we] also used the terrazzo around the bars 
for the foot railings and curbs. Since Harrah’s 
has expanded, we’ve literally used tons and 
acres of carpets in all of our operations, which 
gives a feeling of luxuriousness, I think, for 
our customers. 

And like I say on the Harrah’s, they’ve 
always thought big, both John and Bill, and 
they have been benefactors to many, which 
is—a lot of things are unsung, things that I 
don’t know that I have heard from different 
people from time to time. But they’ve done a 
lot of things behind the scene for people that 
never come to light. 

When we finally got into the casino 
gaining, it was new to us, and consequently, 
we were at the mercy of a lot of the sharp 
people that—some were in our employ. They 
would feel that the money was theirs rather 
than Mr. Harrah’s from time to time, and they 
would pass it to their associates on the other 
side of the games under various and different 
circumstances. 

However, we did eventually eliminate 
the majority of that. And we did have, and 
always have had, some fairly high rolling 
games. However, we’ve always considered 
our operation a volume-type operation, and 
more or less of a “grind.” We didn’t seek out 
the high rollers. We just wanted a volume 
of people that would play for a pastime. 
However, we always were looking for high 
rollers—naturally, that’s our business. 

And from time to time, we’d have some 
pretty touchy situations. Eddie Sahati, who 
is since deceased, was quite a high rolling 
gambling operator. He had the Sahati Stateline 



18 


Robert A. Ring 


Country Club at the south end of the lake 
(which is now Harrah’s, incidentally). And he 
would come in, and I think his favorite game 
was craps, a dice table. And he would come 
in in the evening, say, ten, eleven o’clock, and 
he would cover the layout with many chips. 
He was a high roller, as I had mentioned, and 
he would play for, oh, twelve, fourteen hours, 
and he did have lucky streaks from time to 
time, and it was always a little touchy situation 
when the bankroll wasn’t too large. 

Another incident comes to my mind 
in our Faro table, Faro bank, which we 
eventually did away with. We used to have 
some high rollers play there. The famed “Nick 
the Greek” (Nick Dandolos, I believe his name 
was) used to frequent our Faro tables, and he 
would play maybe twenty-four, thirty hours 
at a time, and he always made a situation 
quite interesting because he was one of the 
most fabulous gamblers in the country. And 
his money would fluctuate back and forth, 
and the outcome would always be in doubt, 
naturally. That’s one incident I do recall very 
distinctly. 

Another situation was in our first casino, 
at 210 North Virginia Street, we had a horse 
book, race book, but also a sports book, 
where we would bet on baseball, take bets on 
baseball games and football games. And we 
were neophytes to some extent in the booking 
business, and football betting was quite a thing 
(this was in ’46, ’47, around there; I’m not 
sure). I believe our man made his own “line,” 
as it were, the point spread on the various 
games, picking the teams, the favorites, and 
giving the line, the odds. And sometimes, they 
might differ with other operators’ lines, and 
there was always somebody around lookin’ for 
an edge. And if they’d see a flaw in our odds, 
they would hop onto that. 

One Saturday, I remember quite well. We 
took, as it were, a “bath,” pretty good, and it, 


again, was a touchy situation there. However, 
we seemed to weather that storm. 

A Day in Reno Gaming Operations 

Oh, I think a typical day, when I first 
came to Reno, was—I forget the hours we 
opened the Bingo. I think we opened around 
one o’clock, one p.m., and we’d run ’til five- 
thirty p.m., and then we’d close down for the 
dinner hour. We’d open again at—the next 
game would open at seven p.m., and then we’d 
go ’til, say, one a.m., or ’til our competitors 
closed. We didn’t like to close and let our 
customers go to the competition, so we 
would always try to run a little longer than 
they did. And we weren’t averse to picking up 
some of their customers, so it was a dog eat 
dog situation there. And as we left that one 
location and went to the location on Virginia 
Street, the old Heart Tango, I think our hours 
were similar. But then whenever we did have a 
competitive Bingo war going on, we’d always 
be the last ones to close. We’d maybe go ’til 
three, four, or five a.m., just that—we didn’t 
want the competition to be operatin’ while we 
were closed. So we put in many hours at that 
time. And, of course, it was not like a casino 
operation, where you operate twenty-four 
hours. I think we would—like I mentioned 
earlier, we’d have the bankrolls, and over on 
Commercial Row, we had the safety deposit 
box, which we kept in this big safe in the 
Wine House, which was next door. We kept 
our bankrolls there. 

Of course, there was some banking to do, 
and I would do the banking, and I paid all the 
bills at that time, checks, and payroll checks, 
and things of that nature, and (laughing) never 
used to take too much money to the bank. But 
I think I probably opened the smallest bank 
account that ever was [laughing], I think 
Darriel Doyle made that remark one time. 



Early Days in Reno: Tango and Bingo, and Harrah’s First Casino 


19 


Had one situation when it was very weak. I 
think Darriel did say the smallest [laughing] 
one was a five-dollar deposit, or somethin’—I 
don’t know. We were on the ropes, like I 
told you before. So when we moved over to 
Virginia Street, we didn’t use the Wine House 
safe deposit box. We had our own little safe. 
We’d keep our bankrolls in our own safe, and I 
would still do the banking and depositing, and 
I guess was the bookkeeper at that time, too. 

I remember one time on that location, 
where we finally picked up a little more 
property, the old Rex Club, and we had an 
office over on that side, right by Douglas 
Alley. And our janitor came to me one time 
and told me that—I think that he had trouble; 
I think he’d been in the penitentiary at one 
time, and he had acquaintances that were 
not averse to knocking over safes, and they 
propositioned him to let them in. He didn’t 
do it, but he made me aware of it. So they 
wouldn’t have gotten any fat cat if they had’ve, 
but, you know, it was the bankroll. I mean, we 
didn’t keep—whatever we had at the time, just 
enough to operate on. But there were some 
seedy characters around. 

And one incident, we got in the Blackout 
Bar, our first slot machine deal there, we had 
seven or eight—about eight slot machines, 
one dollar slot machine. Had a back door, 
went into the Reno Club, and it also had a 
back door, and then the Blackout had a back 
door. And one time [laughing], our dollar 
slot machine was missing. Somebody walked 
out the back door with it. Our bartender 
didn’t notice it, who I think was in on the 
situation. But we finally found out who it 
was, and tried to get it back. And we got it 
back. I remember we went down to the police 
station, Mr. Harrah and myself, and it was one 
of the shady characters around Reno at that 
time. But he was a pretty cool cucumber. Mr. 
Harrah, myself, and the chief of police, and 


this fellow was there, and he could he with 
a straight face. In fact, I felt guiltier than he 
did—I mean—. [Laughing] I think if I’d’ve 
had a little polygraph test, I think I’d’ve been 
the guilty ones But anyhow, we got it back. 
And I think the bartender was in on it. He 
arranged to have his back turned, or be out 
to the boys’ room at the time. 

That’s about the extent of the Bingo 
operation. 

And, of course, when we opened the 
casino, that was all new to us. It was a twenty- 
four-hour operation. We used to work—oh, 
I’d come in, I think, around ten a.m., and we 
used to count the money at that time of the 
shifts. I think I’d take the shift that came off at 
ten o’clock. I would count them, and then the 
shift would change at six o’clock, and I would 
count. By I, I mean myself and either one of 
the managers, the shift managers, or Mr. John 
Harrah, or Bill Harrah, whoever it was. And 
then I’d go home for dinner, and I’d come 
back maybe, oh, nine-thirty, ten o’clock and 
be there ’til maybe—the next shift would go 
off at two o’clock. I would count that. That was 
two a.m. And I’d get home maybe four o’clock 
normally, and so it was—. And that’s the way 
we started out. And maybe I wouldn’t catch 
all three shifts, maybe I’d catch two shifts, but 
we always worked a split shift where you’d be 
down in the daytime and then at night. We 
tried to meet as many people as we could, 
naturally, and see them in Harrah’s. Spend a 
little time around the bars in those days. 

There was never a dull moment then. 
There was always a new experience, and we 
learned as we went along, and try to change, 
always try to get an edge of some type. Like I 
mentioned earlier, about our slot machines, 
we felt that we had the most liberal slot 
machines in the state. And I think our slogan 
at that time was, “Our slot machines pay more 
jackpots per number of plays than any of the 



20 


Robert A. Ring 


machines in the state of Nevada,” something 
of that nature. 

We developed the candles on the slot 
machines to show when somebody required 
service. A light would light if you needed 
change. When the jackpot would hit, it would 
light up. We were trying to merchandise 
our business, I guess. And we were always 
concerned about customer service, and we 
hated to see people standing around with 
lights burning, and wanting to play, and 
not getting a chance to play, and standing 
there with their currency. Maybe change 
personnel might’ve been busy, or if they 
were too busy, then we weren’t scheduled 
properly. We should’ve had more people. So 
we were concerned about customer service, 
and naturally, we wanted the machines going 
as much as we could. 



4 

Modern-Day Operation of an 
Entertainment Complex 


Casino operation is a many-faceted 
operation. I mean, what the public sees on 
first blush, or first glance, is the main floor, 
and that’s it. But there are many support 
services, it’s a twenty-four-hour operation, 
and there’s a lot of behind-the-scenes things, 
such as warehousing and purchasing and 
public relations, advertising and employee 
relation counselors, and industrial relations, 
and it’s a three hundred and sixty-five-day-a- 
year, twenty-four-hour operation, so it’s hard 
to visualize the scope of a casino operation. 

Routine Operations of 
the Entertainment Complex 

Oh, I’ve delved into the temperature 
control—that was prior to air conditioning. 
Up in an area of this type, you have varying 
temperatures, but we’ve always gone for the 
best in air conditioning and heating, and we 
do have periodic checks—or continual checks, 
I should say—on temperatures throughout all 
of our operations, theater-restaurants, casino, 
Bingo, offices, and all areas for customer 


convenience. And I think it’s paid off in lots 
of ways. 

We’ve always had to fight for space in our 
operations. We never had adequate space to 
put as many slot machines, or “Twenty-One” 
games, or crap tables—. It’s a constant hassle 
trying to locate games and keep them, getting 
as many as you would like. And the floor space 
is quite valuable, and constantly, we try to get 
as many slot machines in (or whatever the 
games might be), in the smallest area that it 
will allow. And we’ve been told we’ve done 
quite a very good job in placing them, from 
different operators. 

One fellow from Las Vegas was up here 
a while back, and he says, “I’m continually 
amazed at how many pit games and slot 
machines you get in your areas.” I mean, down 
in Las Vegas, they have, oh, larger casinos— 
not larger, but they seem to have plenty of 
room to spread their games. It’s a different 
operation altogether. 

We design our own, we manufacture 
our own Keno blowers. Like I mentioned 
previously, it used to be a bird cage-type deal, 



22 


Robert A. Ring 


and they’d spin the cage and flip it around, and 
there was a chance for a manipulation from 
a Keno operator. They could palm a ball, or 
they could do this, or they could—. There’s 
a possibility of controlling what balls might 
come out, what numbers. Eventually, we got 
around to what we call the blower-type thing 
we have. It’s kind of a “rabbit ear,” they call 
it, and ten balls will be blown up on one side 
of the rabbit ear, and ten on the other. And 
there’s not any way that can be controlled, as 
long as the balls all go back. And we do take 
pictures of each game, the start of the game. 
We take a picture of the blower, the rabbit 
ear, to show that it has been cleared, and then 
we also have the picture of the game as it is 
drawn. We also microfilm all of the tickets 
that are drawn, in case there is a possibility of 
some collusion, or even a legitimate mistake 
of some type, and we can refer back to that. 
We’ve satisfied many a customer. We have 
satisfied customers in the past from some 
malfunction or some employee error, and we 
have also protected ourselves. 

These’re things that have evolved, I 
mean, through— well, I guess the sayin that, 
“Necessity is the mother of invention,” we’ve 
had reasons to invent [laughing] a lot of 
things to protect our customers, and protect 
ourselves from inside and outside. 

In the Bingo, we have where we draw 
the numbers, and it’s in view of everybody. 
We have a closed circuit TV that shows the 
number that’s drawn so everyone in the room 
can see. If they call seventy-two, they know it’s 
seventy-two. And when a winner is checked, 
someone has five in a row, or a cover-all, 
whatever it is, we have closed circuit TV that 
shows the card that is bein’ called, and shows 
that the numbers are legitimate. 

Many years ago, down in Venice in the 
Tango, there was a cheating method there 
where if someone would be working with 


someone on the outside, they would call a 
false number, say, maybe a seven, twenty- 
three, and maybe they’ll call a forty-seven, 
and a sixty-two. Well, maybe forty-seven isn’t 
on the board, but they hold their thumb over 
it. But they used to just check it in front of the 
player. Eventually, we got around to where 
they’d have to pick up a card and show it to 
another player. And sometimes, they might 
show it to a player [laughing] that was in 
the combine, so consequently, this present 
situation, I think, is quite foolproof. I mean, 
we might be gettin’ fooled, but we’re not 
aware of it. But as I say, it’s for the customer 
protection as well as the house protection. 

There has been continual situations where 
the high roller would have a bunch of money 
out, and it was always quite interesting. Some 
people labor under the impression that all that 
glitters is gold. They feel that every time they 
see a wager go on a table of some type, and 
it goes down in the box they figure that’s all 
velvet, not knowing the cash outs, let alone 
the overhead of a twenty-four-hour operation. 
I think, more and more, it’s coming to light 
that it’s not as creamy as people once believed. 

One interesting part in the evolution of 
casino gaming was originally called “Chinese 
Lottery.” It is now known as Keno. The limits 
on Keno are quite high. It’s a long-shot situation 
where you can mark anywhere from two, three, 
four numbers up to eight and ten numbers, 
and for various prices on these tickets, and 
naturally, the more you play the ticket for 
(twenty numbers called; there’s eighty numbers 
on the Keno ticket), you have an opportunity 
of hitting what is known as a “long shot” 
for an infinitesimal amount of money. It’s 
quite popular with many people, especially 
Orientals. When we first started in the casino, 
we put a Keno game in. I don’t recall now—I 
think our limit at that time—originally, it 
was a five thousand-dollar maximum payoff 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


23 


each game. Eventually it was raised to a ten 
thousand-dollar limit each game. 

However, casino operators always want 
to develop their own clientele, and they’re 
always tryin’ to increase their volume, and 
consequently, there would be, in a sense, a 
“Keno war.” One operator might decide ten 
thousand isn’t the right limit, so they might 
increase it to fifteen. Over the years, it went 
from five thousand, and it is now a twenty- 
five thousand-dollar limit. Although it’s a 
long shot, we’ve paid many, many twenty-five 
thousand-dollar tickets, and some to very 
prominent people, and others to people who 
are operating on a lesser bankroll. However, 
when a Keno ticket of that size, or any large 
Keno ticket is hit and paid off, it does tend to 
stimulate the game so everybody wants to get 
on the bandwagon. 

[What games do I like best?] Well, I 
like [a] crap game, but generally, if I’m 
in some competitive place, maybe a little 
complimentary play, I’ll generally play 
“Twenty-One,” ’cause—maybe I like to sit 
down—I don’t know. You seem to be more on 
your own mostly, there. On a crap game, you’re 
still on your own, but I mean you don’t shoot 
the dice every hand. This way, you make your 
own decisions right at the time. However, I’m 
not a very good “Twenty-One” player. 

Mary Ellen Glass: Do the club managers 
generally play a lot? 

They don’t play in their own establishments. 
There was a time, a while back in Las Vegas, 
where the various owners would go to the 
Strip casinos, and there’d be plenty of high 
rollin’ play, and eventually, they got away 
from it because there was an awful lot of 
money changing hands, and I don’t think the 
Gaming Control Board thought it was in the 
best interests of casino-type gaming. 


As far as Keno bein’ a popular game 
because you can win a bundle on short money, 
it was quite popular. And prior to several years 
back, a Keno player could mark a ticket which 
they would call “long shotting” a ticket. They 
could pay for it in advance, and play as many 
games as they would care to. They could play 
it around the clock, if they so desired, and 
they wouldn’t have to be on the premises. 
They could be down in their place of business, 
or they could be in the theater-restaurant, 
they could be anywhere. They’d start, on, say, 
start on Game One, they could run it for a 
hundred games, if they wanted. And it was 
quite a thing, ’cause people would be in action 
all the time without runnin back to see what 
was going on. However, one of the regulatory 
agencies several years back said it was a no- 
no, and consequently, we had to eliminate 
that particular part of the Keno game. Now 
each winner has to be paid immediately after 
the game is run. We couldn’t pay it after the 
next game started, which was quite hard 
to reeducate people that are in the habit of 
corning back maybe a day or two later, or a 
week later, to pick up their winnings. And it 
was a little hard to indoctrinate them. The 
customers thought that it was something that 
we dreamed up, and it wasn’t very pleasant, 
as far as they were concerned. It did have a 
tendency to lessen the activity of the game. 

[Consults paper] When Harrah’s first 
opened the Bingo parlor in Reno, we bought 
our license directly through the city of Reno, 
and a county license. There was a license on 
Bingo, and also, on slot machines. However, 
at that time, we had no slot machines other 
than on a concession basis. And during 
the year 1945, the licensing, taxation, and 
control of gaming were handled solely by 
the counties and cities until 1945, when the 
Nevada Tax Commission was ordered by the 
legislature to license, tax, and control gaming 



24 


Robert A. Ring 


statewide. This produced an additional layer 
of government activity related to gaming 
because the counties and cities did not 
relinquish their historic position. 

The State Gaming Control Board 
was created in 1955 as an enforcement 
and investigative unit of the Nevada Tax 
Commission. In 1959, the legislature 
transferred licensing, taxation, and control 
of the Tax Commission to a newly-established 
Nevada Gaming Commission, and designated 
the State Gaming Control Board as an 
arm of that body, with responsibility for 
investigation, auditing, and enforcement. 
These events, extending over a period of many 
years, enabled us to offer visitors the assurance 
of an honest deal at the tables, and moreover, 
developed a government and citizenry well 
adjusted to a twenty-four-hour casino-type 
gaming [operation]. 

Any consideration of the economic 
importance of gaming must include 
entertainment and tourism. The gaming 
industry, in overwhelming measure, develops 
these two elements, which become one 
with gaming. And the complex becomes 
an inseparable and integral part of the total 
economy of the state. The gaming industry 
provides lavish entertainment, excellent 
accommodations, and promotional efforts 
beyond estimate, all of which brought more 
than 22,000,000 tourists in Nevada last year 
(that was 1970, I believe). Well, they had 
24,000,000,1 think, in 1971, right? I think it’s 
about 24,000,000. 

Projections for the future show a steady 
annual increase in numbers of visitors, and 
the experts show that more than sixty percent 
of Nevada’s economy is attributed to gaming. 
This means that on the average, more than 
half of the income of every Nevada worker is 
generated as a result of the gaming industry. 
The college professor, clergyman, grocery 


clerk, lawyer, auto salesman, government 
employee, landlord, physician, taxi driver, 
dentists, schoolteachers, et cetera, get more 
than half their income because of [the] 
vigorous, growing, and dynamic gaming 
industry in this state. 

The last twenty-five years have witnessed 
almost unbelievable growth in several parts 
of the state. During this period, almost 
every vocational and professional group 
banded together for the purpose of mutual 
advancement. The list of such trades and 
professions include physicians, teachers, 
lawyers, contractors, truckers, motel 
operators, firemen, retailers, gasoline stations, 
et cetera. 

Harrah’s firmly believed that the changing 
of these laws was a boon to the state of 
Nevada. Harrah’s, always having esteem 
for a high-class operation, feels that it was. 
Consequently, it has proven a point, where 
people feel that they can come to the state 
of Nevada without any qualms as to getting 
a fair shake of the dice, or getting a good 
shot of the long shot Keno ticket. They know 
that they will be paid, and they have very 
strong confidence in Nevada-type gaming 
operations. 

When the accusation was made in 
regards to the possibilities of skimming in 
southern Nevada casinos, there were some 
controls put in by the regulating agencies 
regarding accounting boxes, the drops, and 
various type controls. At that time, it was 
quite complimentary to Harrah’s to be set up, 
in a sense, [as] an epitome of a well-regulated 
operation. And the agencies came to our 
people and our accountants, our CPA firm, 
and we gave them access to our records and 
our procedures in handling the monies, and 
consequently, many of our procedures were 
made a part of a control throughout the state. 
To my knowledge, there never has been any 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


25 


discussion of skimming in northern Nevada. 
However, you hear many things from various 
sources. Some people say there’s skimming 
in all business, some more than casinos, 
percentage-wise. However, that’s not a 
proven fact. But casinos are not the only 
ones that should be criticized in the light of 
skimming. 

One reason northern Nevada has been 
held in high regard in the gaining industry 
is, namely, Harolds Club, which was a family- 
type operation; Harrah’s, [of] which Mr. 
Harrah was the sole owner prior to Harrah’s 
going public recently; and various hotels and 
other gaming establishments basically were 
a family-type operation and sole owners. 
And there was no combines, as such. And 
northern Nevada is becoming increasingly 
more popular; however, Las Vegas has done 
a tremendous job in promoting Las Vegas. I 
remember when I happened to be in Las Vegas 
the night the Sands Hotel opened, which 
was—I don’t recall the year,’50-somethin’. 
And it seemed at that time that they were 
overbuilding [laughing], and many people had 
that feeling. And since then, they’ve continued 
to grow. One of their major reasons for their 
growth is the fact that they have a multitude 
of airlines servicing southern Nevada, and, 
by the same token, northern Nevada is crying 
and has a dire need for more air service. And 
now that we do have an international airport, 
I think it should stimulate, which it already 
has. It’s been strictly cargo now, but eventually, 
we do hope to have passenger service. [In] 
talkin’ to someone just last evening, they 
think Reno is an ideal situation because a lot 
of the coastal areas, San Francisco, mainly, 
also, Los Angeles, they have a tendency to 
be fogged in or socked in, whatever the case 
may be. And I know not only is it disturbing, 
but it’s a touch-and-go situation, you never 
know whether you’re going to make your 


connections if you have to go to the Islands, 
or going East, or wherever. And the feeling 
here is that Reno would be ideal to fly in 
and land three hundred and sixty-five days a 
year—maybe three sixty-four. 

But southern Nevada, as I’ve said, has had 
a multitude of airlines. They have service from 
everywhere, direct lines. And I know many 
people I’ve met, through Texas or Arizona, 
different areas, they say that you just can’t 
get to Reno, “We would like to come see you, 
but it’s just too much of an effort to get there.” 
And even when we do have promotional 
deals, we have some—. Well, we have an 
annual golf tournament at the Lake, and one 
in Reno now. This will be our eleventh one 
this June, and we have people coming from 
forty-some states. And they do have problems 
with their scheduling their air transportation. 
And likewise, I go to various areas, and the 
situation’s in reverse; you have a lot of waiting 
time from different airports, and no direct 
flights to certain areas. However, when and 
if we do get more air service here, I think 
Reno will come on strong as a tourist mecca. 
Many of our people seeing the Lake Tahoe- 
Reno area for the first time just can’t get over 
the contrast between southern Nevada and 
northern Nevada. Many of them say that 
southern Nevada is more or less a lot of glitter, 
or honky-tonk-type operations (and they 
have some fabulous hotels, as you know). But 
they feel that Reno, with the beautiful Truckee 
River, it feels more of a city, and they’re quite 
impressed. And I know that we’ve had people 
from all over the world, namely some of the 
entertainers there at Lake Tahoe, they’ll say 
that they’ve been everywhere—Europe, and 
different resort areas—and they think Lake 
Tahoe is the most scenic place in the world. 
They might be stretching the point to some 
extent, but they are sincere, and it’s equally as 
beautiful as many places. 



26 


Robert A. Ring 


Harrah’s has always tried to operate as a 
class operation, and consequently, we have 
advertised highly in the metropolitan areas, 
and we did go into an extensive highway 
billboard campaign, which Harolds Club 
had done prior to our going into the casino 
gaming business. They saturated the country, 
really And we followed suit to some extent, 
with the quality-type, easy-to-read highway 
board. And we always felt that people driving 
at fairly high rate of speeds, the message 
should be short and easy to comprehend. 
Through our various advertising agencies, 
we spend a lot of money in the Bay areas, 
Sacramento areas, the valley areas, to let 
people know that Harrah’s had a casino, and 
it was a casino to see. And consequently, we 
have always been members of the Chamber 
of Commerce, and different organizations, 
that benefit the city of Reno. And we did 
our utmost to get people to Reno, and 
consequently, with our type of an operation, 
we always have had a clean front on the 
exterior of the building, which— [laughing] 
it’s not only a clean front, we’re clean all 
the way through. But we have tried to do 
the most to keep Reno a pretty city, and 
whatever buildings we do have, we’ve always 
maintained them in a high caliber. We don’t 
wait ’til the paint is peeled off. We have a 
continuing maintenance program. (I’ll be 
digressing into the hotel and the whole thing 
now, but I’m gettin’ away from that.) But 
one thing we do, just in our hotel, we have a 
continual operation there, of maintaining— 
we’ll go floor by floor, just to keep things 
shipshape. And, of course, any emergencies, 
they are taken care of right now. We do have 
a customer questionnaire to tell us about 
where we’re lacking in our services, or where 
we could improve, and any things that are 
in a complaint-type nature or a negligent 
nature, we get on right away, of course. 


But getting back to the highways—I mean, 
we felt that we should make Reno known, and 
make it attractive for people to come to our 
area. And consequently, we feel that we did 
quite a job in bringing people to Rena, as did 
Harolds Club. However, many of the smaller 
clubs that didn’t see eye to eye with us, or—not 
that they didn’t see eye to eye with us, but they 
didn’t have the foresight to advertise, and the 
markets where people were available to come 
to Reno. But when they got on the scene, no 
matter who brought ’em here, they would try 
to exploit them, as it were, by giving them 
tokens and different things, which we thought 
was not of the highest caliber. We try to treat 
people properly when they get here. Well, first 
of all, we try to get ’em here, and then we want 
them to go home singing the praises of Reno 
and the surrounding areas. 

[Do I believe contractors think the gaming 
industry is just fair game for construction 
people ?] Well, I don’t know if that’s the general 
attitude, but I think, just like we were speakin 
earlier, people think that everything in the 
gaming industry is just cream and velvet, 
and they have a tendency to feel that they can 
charge a little more. However, we have what 
we believe are controls. We always have at least 
three bidders on any major construction. On 
anything of an emergency situation—I mean, 
it might be a cost-plus, or “not to exceed—.” 
But on any of our major constructions—on 
all of our construction, really—it’s that we 
bid it out. And we do have local contractors 
work the year around, and they are not the 
type of persons that will gouge us—I mean, 
they’ve made a pretty good living out of just 
being associated. Maybe, as your remark— 
[laughing] we might be one of the pigeons. 
I don’t know, but I imagine [people who say 
that] might be referrin’ to gaming in general. 
Not that I think that we’re a hundred percent 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


27 


perfect, but we do have what we think are 
pretty good controls, and maybe they all get 
together on something. I doubt it, however. 
Maybe they do—I don’t know. 

We’ve learned a lot. And we’ve learned 
to [laughing] control our construction 
department. There’s some highly qualified 
people in it, and we have had turnover in 
that department too. We do expect an awful 
lot. Our construction is different than most 
other people’s construction. I mean, it reverts 
back to Mr. Harrah again. He wants things 
“A-number one,” and certain ways, and we 
go into—we just don’t go and build. I mean, 
we’ll have a mock-up. We had a mock-up of 
the hotel room here, and spent thousands of 
dollars getting it the way we wanted, which 
is money well spent. We also have a mock-up 
of our Lake Tahoe room over here, which— 
this is something, we don’t tell everybody, 
of course. But we find that, better to make 
the mistakes in the mock-up room than in a 
three hundred- or a five hundred-room hotel. 
We multiply it by five hundred. I mean, this 
is something that our competitors might be 
doing, and might never have thought of doing, 
or they might want to follow suit. But I don’t 
think that they would do it with the detail and 
expense that we do. 

I think originally, when we had our 
Bingo parlor on Commercial Row—Tango 
parlor—we had like six employees. And in 
order to familiarize our clientele with our 
Bingo agents, or Tango agents, however they 
were called in those days, we had our names 
embroidered on the pocket, like a “Bob,” or a 
“Bill,” or a “Fred,” or whatever the name was. 
And consequently, our clientele did call us 
on a first-name basis. And I do feel that we 
became personally attached to these people 
through that method. Eventually, we went 
into the casino business, we’ve always worn 
name plates. I think in the casino, we have, 


oh, about twice as many females as we have 
male dealers, and they all wear name badges, 
which— I think some of our competitors 
have utilized this method, and some of ’em 
originally thought they were the first to use 
it. But I think, actually, our first Tango parlor 
in 1938 with our six employees, I think that 
was where it originated. 

[Consults papers] Mr. Harrah has the 
same appreciation for the natural environment 
that he does for authenticity. In 1966, Mr. 
Harrah bought a ranch on the middle fork of 
the Salmon River, and it’s only accessible by 
airplane to a dirt landing strip, a riverboat, 
or a three-day horseback ride. The original 
building on the property was built in 1885 
and was probably a trading post. It, along 
with the rest of the original buildings, has 
been painstakingly restored. Now, customers, 
business associates, and entertainers enjoy the 
ranch and communication with the outside 
world only by two-way radio, which crackles 
all day long in the kitchen of the main lodge. 
Harrah’s executives can enjoy the lodge for 
hunting, fishing, and frequent seminars. 

Once, when the question was raised about 
cutting down a single, big pine which stood 
near the old homestead in this primitive 
area full of trees, Bill Harrah balked. It was 
thought to be diseased, but to be sure, he had 
a specialist flown in. The tree was healthy and 
still stands. 

Even Harrah’s customers benefit from 
his generosity. As I have spoken originally, 
he was the originator of the bus program, 
which brings people to the casinos, and then 
reimbursed them upon their arrival. And 
his theater-restaurants he believes are there 
to entertain good friends of the casino. On 
New Year’s Eve, the best night of the year, 
his theater-restaurants are for invited guests. 
In these ways, he can repay them for their 
patronage by picking up [an] enormous 



28 


Robert A. Ring 


number of dinner checks. And each lady of the 
party receives some memento of the occasion, 
like maybe a cake plate with an engraving of 
the New Year’s Eve, such-and-such a year, and 
starring (the entertainers). And there’s always 
some novel gifts of that type. 

At least one night a year, every motel 
owner in the area is invited with his wife to 
be his guest for a show. It is their support that 
has helped establish the gaming operation as 
the second largest in the world, second only 
to Howard Hughes. Hughes became number 
one only recently by the acquisition of the 
property of a long-time Harrah’s competitor, 
Harolds Club, in Reno. 

About people bein’ addicted to gambling, 
Bill Harrah thinks that very few have a 
problem. A person who has no control over 
gambling has no control over other things, 
often is unable to handle his money well in 
other matters. 

When Bill Harrah was in college, he 
considered gambling a profitable business 
and bought out his father’s interest in a small 
Bingo parlor in southern California (of 
which I have referred previously). He says, 
“I used to change the games to figure out 
new ways to attract people. Now I do it with 
entertainment.” 

As far as his gambling, when he’s in 
Europe, he sometimes goes to the plush 
casinos there, just to keep in touch with 
gaming in different areas. And he’s not a big- 
time gambler, really, but he’s quite amazed 
that, he says he [laughing] wins quite often. 
He doesn’t play any system. He just plays by 
the seat of the pants, I guess, and just hunch 
betting. In Nevada, it’s against the law for an 
owner to gamble in his own establishment. 
However, when he visits other casinos, he 
plays as a courtesy, complimentary play. 

Many of Harrah’s management who have 
been with him almost from the beginning 


like to consult him on major decisions. They 
also know he likes to have something to say 
about little things. Once, when he happened 
to walk by a theater-restaurant, a band was 
rehearsing. “Are we payin’ them to warm up 
like that?” he asked. 

The answer was, “Yes.” 

So he put them to work playin’ dinner 
music before the show [laughing],[Consults 
papers] “That’s an easy twenty minutes, but it 
lets them get warm for the strenuous hour’s 
work playin’ complicated arrangements,” he 
explained. 

Sometimes, the success of his empire 
amazes even Harrah, himself, or maybe he just 
has to stop to grasp it all. Several years ago, 
drivin to his Lake Tahoe casino from Reno 
on the two-lane mountain highway (which 
has since become a modern, four-lane road), 
he was impatient with the traffic. “Then I 
realized where they were all going,” he smiled 
quite wryly. 

Yeah, in retrospect, looking back on the 
little Bingo parlor we had, it certainly has 
changed. And as of 1971, we have, oh, three 
or four airplanes. I think we have a Twin Otter 
airplane that’s used as a cargo-type plane that 
takes supplies into the Middle Fork Lodge up 
in Idaho. And it also transports passengers. 
It’s ideal for this mountainous area and a short 
landing strip. It lands almost on a dime. It’s 
quite an airplane. 

And also, we have a Jet Commander, 
which is a very nice airplane. It seats about 
eight, I believe. And we always have a pilot 
and a copilot on all our planes in case 
something should happen to the pilot—in 
other words, a little insurance there. I think 
the Jet Commander’ll do, oh, five hundred 
and fifty miles an hour, something of that 
nature. And the basis for the Jet Commander 
is that we transport a lot of our entertainers on 
short notice sometimes. I mean, there’s always 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


29 


emergencies coming up, where somebody 
is ill, or can’t make a date, or [might] be 
conflicting dates, and we might have to fly 
to different areas to bring them in, or bring 
a replacement in. And we also use it for 
our better gaming customers; some people 
refer to them as “high rollers.” We transport 
them from time to time, and then on these 
special occasions, like our New Year’s Eve 
guests. We might have to fly some of them 
in. Or any of our promotions, like our golf 
tournament, some of our celebrities—I mean, 
not only entertainers, we have different type 
celebrities that we do entertain, and we bring 
them in and out. And just repeating myself, 
there’s always emergencies where you have to 
maybe fly some entertainer to Los Angeles, 
or Las Vegas, or maybe Chicago, or New 
York, or maybe a Perry Como might have a 
situation where he has to be somewhere, or 
Sammy Davis, or Bill Cosby, or anyone of that 
nature—Mitzi Gaynor, or Petula Clark. 

And along with that, we do have a fleet of 
company cars, plus maintenance vehicles. We 
do have some limousines to transport people 
from, say, the Reno airport, or Tahoe airport 
to Lake Tahoe, or vice versa, to Reno, and Mr. 
Harrah does have the Rolls Royce agency here. 
He’s also the Lerrari distributor for the seven 
western states, or nine western states—I don’t 
know just how many. And I think we have like 
a hundred and forty-seven company vehicles 
in the fleet, which includes street sweepers, 
limousines, executive cars, and trucks of 
every size and dimension. We [laughing] 
have a water truck up at the Lake to sprinkle 
the area when necessary. And we have snow 
equipment, blades, and snow blowers. 

I mentioned this earlier, Harrah’s does 
have a executive health program. I mean, 
we’re always conscious of health and good 
hygiene, and even as far as recommending 
or furnishing people with breath scents—I 


mean, like Binaca, [or] something. We make 
those available to our people, and we certainly 
don’t want any offensive breaths, period, let 
alone bein’ down in public areas. What I 
started to say was that we have a executive 
health program where we send many of 
our department heads, or supervisors, or 
managers and executives to various clinics. 
Some of them have a choice of a clinic 
here in Reno or going to Woodland Clinic, 
which is Woodland, California, outside of 
Sacramento. And it’s an annual deal. Some of 
us go back to Mayo clinic every year. When 
you’re back at Mayo clinic, you have time to 
visit with people from various areas. And you 
mention Lake Tahoe or Reno, it’s surprising 
how many people don’t realize just where it 
is. I mean, it’s hard for us to conceive, but I 
guess it’s if they told us “Lake Winnebago,” 
or somethin’, I wouldn’t know where that 
was, either [laughing]! I think there’s ten 
thousand lakes in Minnesota. You stop to 
realize that we’re not too familiar with a lot 
of various areas, ourselves. But it’s a never 
ending thing to keep promoting, and keeping 
people Harrah-conscious, or not keepin 
’em Harrah-conscious, makin ’em Harrah- 
conscious. We’ve always felt that whatever 
publicity we’ve gotten through columnists— I 
mean, like national columnists—. We’ve had 
Earl Wilson up here, and many, many others, 
not just to be singlin’ him out. But whenever 
there’s a mention in a metropolitan area 
paper—I mean, east coast or west coast, or 
central United States—I think every time you 
maybe get a subliminal reaction to it—we’re 
plantin’ the name “Harrah’s” in the back of the 
subconscious, I guess, and we do want people 
to feel that when they hear the name Harrah’s, 
they have a desire eventually, maybe not just 
get up and take off and head for Harrah’s, but if 
they’re in the area, we’d certainly want them to 
feel that it’s a place to be seen or [to] visit. And 



30 


Robert A. Ring 


I think that’ the way—I know a lot of places 
have affected me—. I mean, just through old 
radio days where you hear “Edgewater Beach 
Hotel,” and somewhere, or different places like 
that—it makes you conscious of the place, and 
when you are in the area, you feel that you 
should see it because it’s a place to be seen. It’s 
the “in” thing, as it were [laughing]. 

And not being able to advertise gaming, 
per se, is what makes it really difficult, isn’t 
it?] Right. Right.* 

Just thoughts and rambling—. In reference 
to the “red line” in the Reno area, I feel that 
it’s something that was definitely needed 
and beneficial to the gaining industry, and 
beneficial to the state of Nevada and the city of 
Reno, as such, the reason being that, had there 
not been a limited area, or a restricted area—. 
You get your honky-tonkers, people come in 
operatin’ on a shoestring, and the town would 
be the worse for it because they would try to 
bleed the customers. They wouldn’t operate 
with the ethics of a major casino. We’ve always 
felt that we’ve tried to upgrade our place, 
and I think other places have followed suit, 
figuring that, well, they like to follow success, 
and I guess we are [laughing] successful. 
And consequently, some of our policies and 
our basic thinking of upgrading the industry 
has rubbed off when people who have been 
employed by Harrah’s have gone to various 
gaming areas, or competitors. I mean, they 
do, which is only natural. I think they try to 
implement anything that’s good elsewhere, 
which we certainly would do. 

I remember a while back, both in Reno 
and Lake Tahoe, where you’d have the outside 
public address systems, where people were 
sellin’ their wares, like at a carnival, or at 
a county fair, and those things all have a 
tendency to degrade the gaming industry, I 
feel. And we’ve felt that things of that nature 
are not to the best interests of the gaming 


industry. Consequently, if there had not been 
a red line (I’m repeating myself, I guess), 
people would come in on a shoestring, and 
maybe they might get a good July and August 
out of it, and then what happens in the winter? 
I mean, your produce people, and your meat 
packing people, and various other peopled be 
left holdin the bag in many cases, which not 
only happens here, it’s happened in a major 
casino [King’s Castle] —hotel-casino at Lake 
Tahoe—just recently. And those things are 
not good for the state, they’re not good for 
the gaming industry, or not good for the 
suppliers. 

Just like in Lake Tahoe I feel, not to be 
in a bragging category, or a braggadocio, 
whatever you say, but I feel that we have kept 
gaming at a high level, and the resort area, 
our entertainment, and everything, has been 
upper crust, as far as we can see, and I think 
that various competitors have upgraded just 
to keep—oh, I think we’ve upgraded the 
industry. And just like on the California side 
of Lake Tahoe, there’s a lot of small, fly-by- 
night little hamburger stands, and things 
of that nature, that the signs’re bigger than 
the establishments, which has come about, 
creating a need for a sign ordinance, which 
is good. But if all were to think big, or think 
properly, it wouldn’t be necessary. Sometimes 
an ordinance is a little tough on some of the 
ones that do things in the high caliber status. 

[Concerning the “red line”], I think 
without that line, like I’d mentioned before, 
that you would come in with some fly-by- 
night operators that could hurt the industry. 
And I’m just referrin back to upgradin’ all the 
time, and this is just the reverse of upgrading, 
I would say. I think the hundred-room hotel 

*Lederal laws have prohibited 

interstate advertising of gaming. 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


31 


thing* is a good idea. I mean, if people want to 
come in and contribute to the economy of the 
state, and come in with an assured bankroll, I 
think there’s nothin’ wrong with that. 

Plans are often announced for someone to bring 
in a hundred-room hotel, but they seem not to 
materialize. What happens to these? 

Well, I think, basically, most of’em are just 
promotional deals. I mean, this promotional 
deal, I don’t know if they are adequately 
financed or not. I think someone gets the idea, 
and then they want to promote, [and] they 
seem to fall through. A lot of these people 
are—well, it’d be people of a lesser caliber 
than those that would come in and finance a 
honky-tonk nick in the wall, if they had an 
opportunity to. And they might be here for 
four or five months, and then leave the local 
suppliers holdin the bag, and they might give 
a black eye to the industry in the way they 
operate. 

What kinds of changes have gone on in the 
organization since Harrah’s went public? 

When we reorganized, I think it was 
handled very well. That’s prior to goin public. 
And there’s been some different positions 
established, and different responsibilities, 
and things that have all been for the good. 
When we went public, I think whoever 
received the prospectus, they all seemed to 
think it was an excellent prospectus, and they 
were very complimentary. And as far as any 
explanations, we haven’t had any problems, 
to my knowledge. 

I enjoy it. Stock is going well, which speaks 
for itself, I guess. When we first went public, 
I think it was the worst possible time. The 
market was down, and things were really bad, 
and from what I gather, it was the worst time 


in the world to go public. And we were very 
well received by the public, and it’s getting 
more so. 

As I mentioned previously, Harrah’s did 
go public, I think on October twenty-seventh. 
And I was reading the Harrah-scope here, it 
says, 

A dividend of eleven cents per 
share on the shares of its common 
stock has been declared by Harrah’s. 

The dividend was announced at a 
meeting of the board of directors 
in Reno on December twenty-first, 
and it was paid on January thirty- 
first to Harrah’s stockholders of 
record, those who held the stock 
until January tenth. The sale of the 
450,000 shares of Harrah’s common 
stock to the public began on October 
twenty-seventh, following registration 
with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission. 

Harrah’s Tahoe 

We haven’t actually talked about Lake 
Tahoe, but when we first went to Lake Tahoe, 
we didn’t know what to expect, and I forget 
how many games we put in—six “Twenty- 
Ones,” and three craps and two wheels, and 
so many slot machines, and we didn’t know 
if we were over-expanding or not. And we hit 
it pretty close to the button. We were really 
busy. But then as winter came along—I mean, 
it was strictly a very short season up there at 


*Reno city ordinances require that 
unlimited gaming licenses maybe granted 
only to hotels with 100 rooms or more, if 
the establishment is outside the downtown 
casino (red line) area. 




32 


Robert A. Ring 


that time, in 1955. And we found that in the 
winters, I think on the graveyard shift, we had 
like only five people workin’ the whole place. 
It was that quiet, you know. Consequently, 
when your summer comes, you have an influx 
of tourists, and that, and you do have a lot of 
turnover in help, and it’s pretty hard. A lot of 
those people are only there for a few months, 
and they bear a little watching. 

But the season has been lengthening 
through various promotions, and 
consequently, our recruiting program 
through the colleges, and that, it’s been a little 
expensive goin’ around and recruiting, but we 
did come up with some high caliber people, 
and we’re also spreadin’ the gospel of the 
beautiful Reno-Lake Tahoe area. There’s a lot 
of intrinsics in there that people write home 
to their folks and create desires to travel. And 
we have something in the Harrah-scope and 
different things that we’ve done on various 
summer help from the different colleges, and 
even the University of Nevada. 

Our first promotion at Lake Tahoe was 
Greyhound Bus. We made arrangements with 
the Greyhound Bus to haul people from the 
Bay area—San Francisco and Sacramento, 
originally— and we’d give ’em a free bus trip. 
I mean, whatever the fare was at that time, 
the people would pay it, and then we would 
refund it to them, and then we’d also give 
them a complimentary dinner and a split of 
champagne. And that was just to get us goin. 
And people thought we were nuts doin’ it, and 
we weren’t so sure we [laughing] weren’t nuts, 
I guess, but it’s a long winter, and it was kind of 
a backbone of the operation there, especially 
in the winter months. And as it progressed, 
we learned what schedules were the best. 

First of all, we got some seedy-lookin’ 
people, amongst other good ones, of course. 
But some of ’em, all they’d want to do is just 
get up and get a free ride up at the Lake 


and back, and have a dinner and a split of 
champagne. Others were drifters that were 
on their way East and they’d ride the bus 
up there, get their refund. I remember very 
distinctly one time, I saw a fellow with a 
bedroll on his back, and he was quite a seedy- 
lookin’ fellow. However, as the program 
developed, and was accepted, and became 
more popular, we cut back the refunds and 
eliminated the meals, more or less. It was 
expensive, but by doing this, we upgraded 
the clientele. We weeded out the seedy type 
people. And consequently, as the program did 
grow, we had many buses coming up there. 
And then we tried to schedule them so we’d 
have people there all winter long, of course. 
But then in the summertime, or as the season 
started to progress, well, we’d—we’d cut out 
the schedules that would arrive at the height 
of our peak business, and that. And we would 
schedule ’em to come in on the graveyard 
shift, or the early morning. So we’d try to hit 
the peaks and the valleys. 

And I remember in talking in one of our 
negotiations with the Greyhound people 
down there, this fellow I used to talk with, on 
this at that time, he was tellin’ me that—oh, 
I don’t know—we were negotiating, and he 
was telling me how good they were doin’, what 
good they were doing for us, and I told him, 
“Geez,” I says, “we’re just building ideally for 
you.” I says, “When your winter season ends, 
you have to let part of your drivers go and 
put your buses in the shops, and it’s a valley 
situation for you. I wish we had that.” I said, 
“When we try to get peak business, I mean, 
we can’t find the people to handle it, you 
know, and we have to let ’em go, and here you 
can kinda level out your whole program by 
our supplementin’ our buses. Instead of lettin 
your drivers go, you have your equipment 
rolling. What we do is that we get a peak 
business, and we hire the people, and then 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


33 


when the business falls off, then we have to 
start shavin ’em back. But it’s really an ideal 
situation for you,” which he agreed, but I don’t 
know if I made too many points [laughing]! 
I think I did, really, but—. So consequently, 
we have spread out from different areas, one 
down to Livermore, and Stockton, and Lodi, 
and areas of that nature. 

Slot Machines 

In referring to our slot machine operation, 
when we first started here in Bingo, we had a 
couple of slot machines put on location at the 
little Heart Tango. And they were set at the 
factory, and they were anything but liberal. 
We had them on a Concession basis, and the 
operator would fix them on a percentage, and 
we would get x-amount for having them on 
the location. However, when we did get into 
the casino operation which I’d mentioned 
previously, we did get into our own slot 
machines—well, first of all with the Blackout 
Bar, as I’d mentioned. And we did liberalize 
the method of payouts so they would be 
constant pays, and people would have a reason 
to play the machines. 

And at one time—or, when we first came 
here, there was quite a reference to “one- 
armed bandits,” which—people still use 
that phrase from time to time, but not as it 
was at that time. Mr. John Harrah was very 
disturbed about that phraseology, feeling 
that our slot machines were quite liberal, 
and they [laughing] weren’t bandits. They 
might’ve only had one arm, but—. So we did 
try to live that phrase down, and we’ve never 
referred to it. And I think, consequently, you 
don’t hear it as much as you had in the past. 
But slot machines have been the major part 
in Harrah’s success, the fact that they do pay 
out, and people know that, and consequently, 
it’s quite a pastime for a lot of people. 


[Do we have trouble with people who try 
to cheat the slot machines?] We try to stay one 
step ahead of them. However, they’re quite 
smart. I remember someone first mentioned 
“rhythm play” to me on a slot machine, 
and I thought they were absolutely nuts. I 
didn’t think it was possible to—. However, in 
watching certain [laughing] rhythm players, 
we were convinced that it could be done, 
and—. However, there’s been many methods 
of cheating slot machines too numerous 
to—not too numerous to mention, but I don’t 
remember all of them. But we do have a man, 
Bud Garaventa, who has been with us for 
many years. And in my estimation, he’s the 
best slot machine man in the country, I’d say. 
And he’s always found these cheating methods 
to be a challenge, and whenever something 
comes to light, and we find out we’re getting 
the business, as it were, well, we naturally try 
to overcome it, and sometimes it takes a little 
longer than some areas, but we always manage 
to lick the problem. And consequently, I think 
that there has been cheating. There’s always 
cheating goin on from the outside, and you 
never know until you catch it. But we feel that 
in our slot areas, we’ve been very capable in 
combating the majority of this. 

[Did I ever get involved in modifications 
of the machines, to make them more liberal, 
or to make the decision on the percentages?] 
Well, I was instrumental at one time in 
setting the slot combinations. And through 
Bud Garaventa and myself, we used to figure 
out many combinations on different type 
slot machines that we have. We have many 
different types. I think we’ve improved on any 
slot machines in the whole state, the reason 
being that I think our combinations are more 
interesting; through the placing of certain 
symbols, I mean, there’s always a very good 
possibility of winning. I mean, some places, 
they—well, they used to have lemons on the 



34 


Robert A. Ring 


first reel, as you’re well aware, and as soon as 
a lemon’d come up on the first reel, you knew 
you were dead, so the other, second and third 
reels, were anticlimactic. And consequently, 
in the thinking that Bud and I would have 
on this, that we’d try to make it interesting. 
I mean, if we had x-amount of cherries, 
oranges, or plums, or bells, or bars, we wanted 
to make sure that there was always a climax—I 
mean, you weren’t shut out on the first reel. 
Some people would have their slot machines 
set with maybe one plum on the first reel, or 
one this, or one that. But we’ve always tried 
to have a multiple selection, and I think it’s 
been very invigorating, as far as the machines 
are concerned. 

[Do we help the manufacturers in 
putting these together?] Well, basically, we 
manufacture our own [laughing]—I mean, 
We’ve bought machines. And there was 
times when slot machines were pretty hard 
to get, and Bud was always—through other 
people—I mean, we’ve had leads, and we’ve 
come up with machines. But basically, we have 
our experimental slot machine shop. We make 
our own slot machines. We have slot machine 
shops on every location where we are, for 
upkeep and maintenance, but whatever 
machines we’ve had, we’ve always— we might 
not have manufactured the machine, but we 
certainly manufactured the interiors, I mean, 
to make it a Harrah’s slot machine. 

We have many different types of slot 
machines. We have some that are all jackpot 
machines; they pay nothing but jackpots. 
There’s no small pays. And we have a “twin 
jack,” and we have, oh, many and various 
types, but—. We have an eight-reel machine 
that pays—I think it pays ten thousand dollars 
if you line them all up. And we try to make 
interesting machines. We’ve [laughing] made 
many machines, some that didn’t go over 
so good, but we didn’t stick with them, just 


because we thought they were good—It mean, 
if the customers didn’t like them, that’s the 
criteria, right there. We have the “Twenty- 
One” machines, and we also have a Keno-type 
slot machine. (I mean machines, plural.) But 
anything that the customer is interested in, 
we stay with them. 

Security 

As far as our security people are 
concerned, we screen them closely, for 
temperament, and things of that nature. We 
were always concerned about eliminating any 
problems before they arise, and we have been 
complimented in the past by people, that they 
feel a man can go about his business and leave 
his wife in a Harrah’s gaming establishment 
without any molestation of any type. And 
it is a compliment, I’d say. But our security 
people don’t carry any sidearms, or things 
of that nature. And we always have them try 
to talk people out of the establishment, if it’s 
necessary, and only as a matter of self-defense 
will they forcibly put someone out of the 
buildings. Then throughout the day, they tour 
the facilities, and they do make head counts as 
to how many people we have at various games 
or facilities, just for our own knowledge. And 
they are most pleasant. They get to know 
our clientele, and they are, in a sense, a host 
in greeting people and treating them as we 
would like them to. And they do kinda keep 
an eye out for any crossroaders. They have a 
book of various people that have been told not 
to frequent Harrah’s establishment for various 
reasons. Maybe they are slot machine cheaters 
of a type, or maybe from past experiences 
on cheating “Twenty-one” games, or just by 
reputation, they’re not wanted throughout the 
state in any gaming establishment because of 
the nature of their method of doing business 
[laughing]. 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


35 


But I remember very distinctly one time, 
when we were neophytes in the gaming 
industry here in Harrah’s Casino, that, well, 
from time to time, people would match up 
our dice? or get our dice and maybe load 
them in some manner. And I remember one 
time where this one local fellow ran some 
dice in on us, and our pit boss was sharp 
enough to catch him. And he just more or 
less gave the fellow a warning not to do 
anything of that nature again. And the very 
next roll, [laughing] he came in with another 
set, and that was all she wrote, as far as he 
was concerned. But as a rule, many persons 
would—after catching them the first time, 
they would be relaxed enough not to suspect 
’em on the very next roll, which this fellow 
was sharp enough to do. 

From time to time, of course, we get foreign 
coins. We used to get Australian coins in the 
slot machines, and different types of coins 
that might operate in the machines. And we 
generally get descriptions of people that had 
been playing ’em. We make our neighboring 
establishments aware, and our Lake Tahoe 
operation. We exchange information back and 
forth from any cheating-type people that are 
in the area, or things that might’ve happened 
in different casinos. And they will go so far 
as to match up our gaming cheques, which 
we use on the “Twenty-One” games and crap 
tables, and sometimes they’re quite hard to 
detect. And there’s a lot of time and effort goes 
into cheating gaming establishments. You 
never know how much you are being cheated, 
I guess, really. Well, there was a remark about 
one of our neighboring establishments] once, 
that they had to win the money two or three 
times before they really had it, because the 
operation was, in a sense, “loose.” 

But it’s a constant challenge, basically, on 
slot machines. Whenever they come up with a 
new gimmick, it takes a little while to be made 


aware, and then when you’re aware, you have 
to find a method to eliminate that particular 
type of cheating. And while you’re doing that, 
they’re [laughing] makin up other ways, so it’s 
a chicken and egg situation, I guess. 

In the past, especially when we were 
neophytes in the gaming business, we had 
situations where people would cold deck us. 
They’d come in when the deck was already set 
up so they could chew us out pretty good, and 
they maybe would have inside information— 
they’d be workin with the dealer, the “Twenty- 
One” dealer. And we’ve also had, I guess, 
any type of cheating goin on. In our Keno 
games, we had rigged Keno tickets, and 
consequently, we did evolve a system which 
I spoke of earlier, about the rabbit ears and 
the blower, rather than the cage, and our 
protective method with cameras, and things 
of that nature. But prior to that, there was 
always somebody out to get you. 

And there’s always been a method of 
“Twenty-One” dealers tipping off a customer 
that might be there, and by a different signal, 
whether she’s going to hit, or he’s going to hit 
(whichever the case might be with a male 
or female dealer). And they have various 
methods in tipping off whether their hole 
card is—if they have a hitting hand or not 
a hitting hand, which would indicate to the 
player that they are either beat, or they should 
stand. So they can either hit or—. It’s a pretty 
good tip-off. 

I was going to bring out at this time what 
when we first started in the casino business, 
people figured if, “Well, [if] you can’t protect 
it, it’s your own fault.” I mean, the old-time 
gamblers, and even some of the dealers, they 
figured, “If you can’t protect your own money, 
it’s not their fault. It’s your fault.” So that was 
kind of a code of some of the dealers at that 
time, and the people that worked on the 
outside with them. 



36 


Robert A. Ring 


Personnel 

One of Harrah’s long suits, and one of 
the reasons for success is to promote from 
within. As I have mentioned previously, we 
had the old school casino men, or gambler- 
type people that were blind to new ideas, 
and consequently, we did have a method 
whereby we trained our own dealers. We 
eventually got around to having year-round 
schools at various times. We have “Twenty- 
One’ schools where we have taken [an] 
accomplished “Twenty-One” dealer, or a pit 
man, or woman, whichever the case might 
be, that instructs these recruits, or people 
that are promoted from within, maybe slot 
change girls or slot key men, or people of 
that type. And we always notify when a 
school is to begin, and anyone interested, 
they would check with their supervisors. 
They are selected on their merits, and they 
go to school for x amount of weeks, both 
in “Twenty-One,” craps, and Keno schools. 
We have had slot mechanic schools and 
bartender schools. Many of our people 
are college graduates. And even our top 
executives now, our president, Maurice 
Sheppard, first went to work with Harrah’s 
in the business office. Lloyd Dyer, executive 
vice president in administration, started 
out in the cashier cage. Rome Andriotti, 
executive vice president in operations, 
started out as a cheque racker on a roulette 
wheel. Bob Martin, our vice president 
[who] handles our construction, is a college 
graduate, also, as are most of them, and 
played football at the University of Nevada. 
He started out at Harrah’s as a security man. 
Holmes Hendricksen, our vice president of 
entertainment, started out in the cashiering 
end of the business. Well, that’s just a sample 
of the many that have come up within the 
ranks. 


Harrah’s has utilized the services of 
business consultants in many areas, more 
or less from our six-employee start to get 
us likened by many writers as business 
people—they figure that we’re similar to a 
General Motors Corporation operation. We 
use business consultants in many fields, and 
also, we’ve used them for clothing and our 
decorators. 

I remember very distinctly, Mr. Harrah 
had mentioned that we all [laughing] thought 
we were pretty fair decorators. And we’re not 
the pros; we’re the amateurs. And by using 
pros, the end results are more appealing, I 
would say. 

Speaking of Mr. Harrah’s ideals, I feel 
that he has been a pace-setter with his 
employees—I mean, to give them the best of 
working conditions, and many benefits, fringe 
benefits, and also establishing employees’ 
cafeterias and relaxation rooms for their off 
hours, or for their breaks. And we’ve always 
tried to be the pace-setters wage-wise, and 
clothing-wise. We have clothing benefits, 
and we try to stay up with the styles, and be 
current. And we try to be pacesetters, and 
consequently, when people do leave Harrah’s, 
some of our competitors are very anxious to 
obtain these employees’ services, feeling that 
they might benefit by the knowledge that has 
been imparted, or they have absorbed while 
working at Harrah’s. Many times, people 
who have left want to come back because the 
pastures are not always as green in the other 
fellow’s yard as they are at Harrah’s. And not 
sayin’ that in a bragging sort of a way, but 
that’s, as I repeat, is one of Mr. Harrah’s high 
ideals, I think. He thinks of people as people, 
not as employees. 

As I spoke of previously, Harrah’s is quite 
concerned about the caliber of people they 
employ. We have a personnel department, 
which an applicant will apply for any specific 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


37 


job in which they feel that they might qualify 
for. Our personnel department interviews 
these people, and then they might send them 
to a department head or supervisor. It might 
be a food department, or it might be in the 
slots department, or gaming. The personnel 
department does not hire. They just refer 
people to a department head, and then it’s 
their prerogative to hire the employee. What 
the personnel department does is screen 
the caliber of employee, then it’s up to the 
department head to find out if they feel 
that the party would be sufficient for their 
department. 

And here at Harrah’s we have what we call 
“You and Your Job.”* It’s a little informative 
booklet that tells the new employees, as well 
as the old [laughing] employees, what it’s all 
about. And I might read the footnote from 
Mr. William Harrah, chairman of the board. 
It says: 

Harrah’s most important asset is 
the people who work here. The good 
reputation and business we enjoy are 
due in most part to our employees. 

So it is always a pleasure to 
welcome a new employee. We have 
provided good working conditions 
and benefits because we want you to 
stay with us and grow with us. And 
we continue to improve. Almost 
every key position at Harrah’s is held 
by someone who worked his way up 
through the company. The president 
of Harrah’s began in the cashier’s 
office. We have four vice presidents 
who were everything from busmen 
to checkrackers. 

My aim has always been to treat 
people as I would want them to treat 
me. Keep that in mind and you’ll go a 
long way at Harrah’s, and the company 


will continue to set the best example 
of service and friendliness in the 
casino/hotel/entertainment industry 
of Nevada. 

Thanks for joining us. Bill Harrah. 

Now here is a joint statement from Bob 
Ring, vice chairman of the board, and M. F. 
Sheppard, President: 

At the height of our tourist season, 
Harrahs has over five thousand 
employees. So of necessity, we do 
things a little more “by the book” 
than most companies. Our rules and 
guidelines for employees are clearly 
spelled out and we think you’ll find 
them practical. We urge you to take 
time now to learn as much as you 
can about Harrah’s and its manner of 
operation. 

If there is any doubt in your 
mind, our business is gaming. It is 
Nevada’s major industry, and, as such, 
is conducted with scrupulous control. 

As a member of Harrah’s team, you are 
working for a leader in the industry, a 
company which is the most respected 
in Nevada. We therefore depend on 
all employees to conduct themselves 
with the highest degree of integrity 
and good taste. There is an espirit de 
corps among all of us at Harrah’s and 
you’ll find that it is contagious. 

We’re happy to welcome you to 
Harrah’s, and we hope you will go far 
with us. It’s a good place to work. 


*Copy of booklet available in Special 
Collections Department, University of 
Nevada, Reno, Library. 




38 


Robert A. Ring 


Bob Ring, Vice Chairman of the 
Board 

M. F. Sheppard, President. 

Then it goes on to tell we’re a growing 
company. This has a little history. It says: 

We’re a growing company. (It 
shows a picture of Harrah’s Reno 
Hotel-Casino.) Bill Harrah opened 
his first gaming business in Reno in 
1937. It was a Bingo parlor with six 
employees, some of whom are still 
with Harrah’s. But it wasn’t until 1946 
that Harrah acquired his first casino 
property. While growing steadily 
with his Bingo parlors, the Virginia 
Street facility was his first opportunity 
to operate a “casino.” This was the 
beginning of the Harrah’s casino/ 
hotel/entertainment complex that 
exists today. 

The next important phase of 
Harrah’s growth was the acquisition 
of the Gateway Club at Stateline, Lake 
Tahoe, in 1955. This was the site of 
Harrah’s first “big name” shows—in 
a showroom that seated a hundred 
and eighty people. In 1956, Harrah’s 
acquired the Stateline Country Club 
across Highway 50 from the Gateway, 
which is the present Lake Tahoe 
casino location. The South Shore 
Room opened in December, 1959. 

In 1970, Harrah’s disposed of the 
Gateway Club and concentrated on 
expanding the present Harrah’s Tahoe. 

Actually, there was two clubs. There was 
Stateline, and the Nevada Club was there. 
That was right on the state line. That would 
be on the east side of Highway 50. And we 
acquired that, and that’s actually the area 


immediately in back of there where the South 
Shore Room is. 

The next giant step was in Reno 
in 1962, with the construction of 
Harrah’s Casino-Restaurant on the 
corner of Second and Center Streets, 
former site of the famous Grand Cafe. 
This facility opened in June, 1963. 

Then in 1966, Harrah’s leased the 
Golden Hotel property on Center 
Street. This was remodeled and 
expanded into the present casino- 
showroom. Harrah’s then began 
construction of a twenty-four-story 
hotel over the facility in 1968. The 
hotel opened in November, 1969. 

There is now an eighteen-story 
hotel under construction at Harrah’s 
Tahoe. Completion of this facility is 
expected in 1973. 

It should be noted that while all 
this growth was taking place in the 
casino and entertainment operations, 
Harrah’s Automobile Collection was 
also growing at a rapid pace. In 1962, 
it was moved into a museum at its 
present location on Glendale road, a 
few miles east of Reno. 

The future holds other exciting 
things for Harrah’s and its people. We 
hope you’ll be with us and to take part 
in the growth ahead. 

But I might mention some of our benefits.I 
mean, this is something we don’t really like 
to be known generally, I mean, as far as 
competition is concerned, but I imagine it’s 
generally known. People take these [booklets] 
and go. We talked earlier [about] that. 

Now, here’s something about “You and 
the Customer.” don’t know if we should go 
into that or not. But in getting acquainted and 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


39 


appearance, that might be good. Or should we 
tell them how we feel about them handling the 
customers? Well, I’ll just read it. 

Harrah’s has no tangible product. 

We sell service to our customers. Our 
type of business is best described as 
“tourism” and it is highly competitive. 
Harrah’s not only competes on a local 
level, but must compete on a national 
and even international scale for 
tourist business. 

Harrah’s prides itself on the quality 
of its “products”—entertainment, 
food, and accommodations. But the 
quality of a tourist business is best 
measured by the quality of service 
rendered by its employees. 

Courtesy and a pleasant visual 
impression are essential in dealing 
with our customers. A smile can do 
wonders in overcoming the most 
difficult situation. Beyond this, 
Harrah’s places great emphasis on 
efficiency—doing your job the best 
way you know how. 

Efficiency is obtained by 
familiarizing yourself from the start 
with your job, your working area and 
those facilities with which you will be 
most concerned. 

You will also be providing an 
excellent service by being able to 
answer customers’ inquiries, even 
though they may not pertain to 
your particular job. You should be 
generally aware of what is going 
on, or at least be able to direct such 
inquiries to the proper person or 
the information center. Make it your 
business to help people. 

If you have any kind of problem in 
dealing with a customer or employee, 


notify your Supervisor, Employee 
Counselor, or the Personnel Office 
immediately. Don’t let problems grow. 

Let us help you take care of them as 
soon as they are evident. 

Then it’s in “Getting Acquainted.” This 
is where we have a sponsor. That’s kind of 
important. But we can reword this later if you 
like. I’ll read it now. 

An important item is getting 
acquainted. 

To help you get started more 
quickly and become familiar with 
your job and surroundings, your 
Supervisor will introduce you to a 
“sponsor” in your department to 
show you around and answer your 
questions. 

If you are in a training program, 
your instructor will explain both the 
details of your particular job and 
anything else you need to know about 
Harrah’s. 

Never be afraid to ask questions. 
You’ll find that your co-workers are 
friendly and eager to help you. 

Most Harrah’s employees wear a 
small, attractive name plate bearing 
their first name. This informal 
identification is a friendlier way 
of getting to know each other, 
and presents a warmer feeling to 
customers. 

Appearance 

Another important factor 
in dealing successfully with the 
public is a neat clean, well-groomed 
appearance. We are particular, but we 
also provide every possible assistance 



40 


Robert A. Ring 


to employees to help them maintain 
our high standards. Restrooms are 
well equipped and maintained. 
Uniforms are properly fitted and kept 
clean. Guidelines are furnished for 
such things as hairstyles. You’ll find 
that these guidelines are up-to-date 
and allow for plenty of individuality. 

We ask that you refrain from 
smoking or chewing gum while 
working on shift, Of course, you 
may do either while on a break and 
out of touch with the public. Your 
department may have more specific 
rules about such things. Food and 
beverage employees, for example, are 
forbidden by law to smoke except in 
designated areas. 

Appropriate clothing is also 
suggested by Harrah’s where uniforms 
are not provided. Your Supervisor 
will explain these rules governing 
appropriate dress. Otherwise, pay 
particular attention to small details 
of good grooming. Hands are keenly 
observed by the customer among 
dealers, waiters, waitresses, bartenders, 
and all other personnel dealing directly 
with the public, and should be kept 
neat and clean at all times. 

Then we go into health and things. Well, 
maybe we might go into health. Then we can 
forget the rest of this. 

Your physical condition 
contributes greatly to your good 
appearance. You cannot adequately 
perform your duties if you are not 
feeling well. Observe simple rules 
of good health, such as eating and 
sleeping properly. Regular physical 


examinations are good insurance 
against illness. Get plenty of exercise. 

Weight also reflects on your 
appearance and well being. Harrah’s 
stresses a trim figure. We have weight¬ 
watching suggestions to help those 
who are overweight to lose unwanted 
pounds. 

Working with many people makes 
us a little more susceptible to viruses. 
Harrah’s provides flu shots annually 
for those who would like to have 
them. Vision and hearing tests are 
available in the Personnel Offices. 

But here’s our group insurance and our 
retirement plan, another thing. I don’t know 
if you want—. Maybe I’ll just read it. Amongst 
many of our fringe benefits, Harrah’s has a 
group insurance plan, which is very beneficial, 
and it’s been used extensively. We also have 
a retirement plan, which makes people 
feel more secure. And we have employee 
counseling. 

When an employee has a problem 
that continues to go unresolved, it 
can affect his work, his morale, or 
the morale of the entire department. 
Should you be faced with such a 
situation, always see your Supervisor 
first. He can help you in most cases 
related to your job. If he is unable to 
help, he may recommend that you see 
Personnel, which can clarify questions 
you may have on policies, or benefits. 

However, Harrah’s also has 
Employee Counselors who are 
available to counsel with you 
concerning problems encountered on 
your job or in your personal life. The 
counselors maybe reached by calling 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


41 


the Industrial Relations at either Reno 
or Lake Tahoe. 

A very good benefit we have is the Board 
of Review: 

Problems which you feel have not 
been resolved to your satisfaction can 
be presented to a Board of Review. 

We have found that this is the fairest 
possible means of deciding a dispute 
involving any job-related problem. 

The Board consists of three 
impartial members: someone from 
Management having no jurisdiction 
over the requesting employee’s 
department; the director of Personnel 
or his representative; and the 
employee representative elected by 
the department of the employee who 
is requesting the Board. 

Any employee who has worked 
thirty shifts or more from the last 
date of hire may request a Board of 
Review. The request should be made at 
a Personnel Office within seven days 
of the incident being protested. 

Board members will listen to your 
testimony and that of any witness you 
may present, plus the testimony of 
the department instigating the action 
which is being protested. 

On the basis of the facts presented, 
the Board will make an impartial 
evaluation and decision. 

That’s also on terminations, or things of 
that nature. And the board has reversed many 
times, which is a healthy situation, and it’s not 
a stacked jury, as it were. 

Then we have “Viewpoints,” which is a 
suggestion box, same thing. And then we 


have free coffee and food discount. We have 
lounge rooms. 

Bulletin boards located 
throughout the facilities to keep you 
informed of important happenings 
of Harrah’s. 

Employees are urged to read the 
bulletin board postings daily. Material 
to be posted on bulletin boards must 
first be approved by the Vice President 
and General Manager. 

Job Openings 

Because of our desire to 
promote from within whenever 
possible, job openings are posted 
on employee bulletin boards. You 
are eligible to request transfer if you 
meet the minimum requirements 
for the job. Positions are filled by 
employees showing the strongest job 
qualifications and job performance. 

If you see a job opening that interests 
you, talk to your Supervisor, who 
will also assist you when openings 
are available if you wish to transfer 
to another Harrah’s facility in the 
same job. 

We’ve had times in the past where a 
supervisor might be reluctant to let someone 
[laughing] transfer because they’re so good in 
that department, and that’s where your Board 
of Review comes in from time to time. And they 
might be treated unjustly because the party’s so 
selfish that they want to keep them in their own 
department, and the Board of Review’s done a 
wonderful job in these situations. And the fact 
that, by past performance, it eliminates future 
things of this nature. 



42 


Robert A. Ring 


We also have training schools: 

If you want to learn to deal ’21’ or 
craps, or write keno, applications may 
be made through your Supervisor to 
attend the schools which Harrah’s 
conducts periodically Attendance is 
on your own time and may be either 
before or after the completion of your 
regular shift. 

The schools develop skilled, 
friendly dealers and keno writers. 
Natural manual dexterity and ability 
to calculate quickly are essential. 
After instruction, selection is made 
according to your merits and as 
additional dealers or writers are 
required. 

Your good performance in your 
present job is a requirement for 
approval to attend a training school 
or for a transfer or a promotion. 

Then this tells about the company 
magazine and employees’ party. 

Harrah has a company magazine, 
a monthly edition, which is called the 
Harrah-scope: 

It’s the employees’ periodical 
published monthly to help you and 
your family keep abreast of the 
news of Harrah’s and its people. 
This publication is mailed directly 
to your home. Harrahs-scopes will 
not be mailed to general delivery 
addresses. Since the Harrahs-scope 
tries to publish as much interesting 
information as possible about 
employees, your contribution of 
news items helps make it successful. 
Harrah-scope news items boxes are 
located for your convenience at the 
cafeteria entrance at Lake Tahoe, 


near the parts department at HAC, at 
Wardrobe, and the Employees’ lounge 
in Reno, or you may contact the editor 
at Industrial Relations, Reno. 

Once a year you will be invited 
to a specialemployees’ party at one of 
our Theatre-Restaurants, and Harrah’s 
will pick up the total check. You may 
bring your husband or wife (or other 
quest) to a cocktail party and attend 
the show, ordering the dinner of your 
choice. 

This is Harrah’s way of saying, 
‘Thank you’ for a job well done. 

Harrah’s also provides no 
minimum charge for employees on 
some cocktail shows. 

Then there’s accidents, lost and found, 
mail contributions, voting. Voting—this’d be 
good, maybe: 

Employees are encouraged to 
register to vote and to participate in 
every election. Information regarding 
registration requirements and polling 
precincts can be obtained from the 
Personnel Offices. 

Harrah’s does not object to your 
holding other jobs, provided there is 
no conflict of interest and your job at 
Harrah’s comes first. Moonlighting 
at other gaming establishments is 
not permitted. Before accepting a 
supplementary job, you must notify 
your Supervisor to enable him to 
determine if there is a conflict of 
interest or if it would adversely affect 
your job performances at Harrah’s. 

[Do we ever have any complaints from 
employees who think the rules are too strict?] 
Oh, probably. I’m not aware. I guess we do 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


43 


have. I think with the mod style hair, and 
in mustaches, and things of that nature, and 
there was, a while back, about the “pork chop” 
sideburns, and things of that nature. We try 
to keep abreast of the times, and there were 
changes as far as our previous hairstyles were 
concerned, but we did want to come up with 
an acceptable selection of hairdos, or stylings, 
and we have permitted mustaches, with 
certain restrictions, of course. I mean, at all 
times, we want them neat and clean-looking. 
We don’t want them too hippie-looking. 

And in our clothing program—I mean, 
people are averse to change. You can’t please 
all the people all the time. And whenever 
we have, maybe, a cocktail waitress, or 
Keno runners, or any time we go into shoes, 
We’ve had complaints from girls, and the 
complaint is always resolved. We always 
have the employees’ interests at heart, but I 
think any change will bring on complaints. 
Some are justified, and some of them are just 
complaining because it’s a change. 

Our quality of items—we always buy the 
best in foods, and they’re supervised, and 
we feel that our food and beverages are the 
highest of quality, and we take special care in 
cleanliness and preparation. And we naturally 
have complaints on food, but I don’t think 
as many as a lot of places have, and we don’t 
ignore the complaint. We check out every 
complaint and see if it’s justified or unjustified. 
We do make an adjustment with the people. 
If they feel the food is overcooked, we will 
supplement another order. Sometimes they 
might want it, sometimes they won’t, and 
from time to time we have taken the entree 
off the price of the check, if that’s what they 
desire. We’ve also had [laughing] situations 
here where people figure that [if] they squawk 
loud enough that we’ll take it off the check. 
But we’ve learned to find out legitimate 
complaints from time to time. 


Our bar pours are—in most places, they 
would be a call liquor—I mean, you would pay 
extra. But we use the quality item bar items. 
And I think that it pays in the long run. 

[Do we have people who stay long enough 
to collect their retirement?] Oh, yes. Our 
retirement plan hasn’t been in effect too long. 
However, we had employees that stayed with 
us that have retired. Here’s a picture here 
[in Harrah-scope] of Bea Collins. We had 
a retirement party for her just last month. 
That was in February, I guess. She retired on 
January twenty-second, after nineteen years 
at Harrah’s. Bea started in change in 1953, 
and then went on to slot cashier, and change 
booth. She served about twelve years in the 
premium booth, and then transferred to 
wardrobe, where she spent the last three years. 
She says, “I’ll miss Harrah’s and all these fine 
people,” during the farewell party held for 
her at the convention center in Harrah’s Reno 
Hotel. “It’s been a wonderful nineteen years.” 

Sam DeBolt was our communications 
consultant, mostly our telephone system. He’d 
been with the telephone company many years. 
He’d also been with Harrah’s many years, and 
he was at one time editor of Harrah-scope, 
might’ve been our first editor; I’m not sure. 
And he was an old car enthusiast. He was with 
Horseless Carriage Club. 

And Bill Ames was one of our original six 
employees here in Reno when we opened the 
Bingo, he retired. I think he was one of our 
first ones that retired. And there has been 
many since. I don’t know just how many. We 
could find that out, if you want that. 

[I mentioned training people and then 
having them go to other clubs, using their 
training in that way. Has that been a very large 
problem?] No, it hasn’t been a large problem. 
It’s just a natural thing, I guess. Oh, you were 
talking about turnover a little while ago. Since 
we have many of these fringe benefits in here, 



44 


Robert A. Ring 


and the retirement, profit-sharing plans, our 
turnover isn’t what it used to be. I don’t know 
just what it is. And, of course, it’s a seasonal 
situation at Lake Tahoe—we hire an awful lot 
of summer employees. In fact, we recruit at 
various universities throughout the country, 
and we have college students that come both 
to Reno and Tahoe, and we also have teachers 
that come out here. And some of ’em work 
several years, and others Ve— I’m not sure, 
but I feel positive that we have had people 
that, after graduation, come right out here 
and [laughing] make a career. They like the 
area. It’s a different world than Oklahoma, or 
[laughing] —. We’ve had some real fine people 
come out of Oklahoma, and Arizona, and 
Texas, and the northwest. 

And, of course, I think the main turnover 
is generally culinary help because they—as of 
their nature, they’re more or less drifters and 
floaters. But we try to get the highest caliber 
of culinary people. 

We did have, under the old Harrah’s Tahoe 
at the Lake, the original one, where George’s 
Gateway was, in the South Shore Room, we 
had a coffee shop there, a restaurant. And 
the kitchen worked both for the South Shore 
Room and the coffee shop. And we had two 
kitchens in one. 

As I mentioned previously—I think I 
did—we have lookouts, or “eye in the sky” or 
one-way mirrors. We decided to put one in the 
kitchen up there, just for observation, to see 
if they were handling the food properly, and 
they were clean in preparation. And I think 
the [laughing] first day we put it in, we lost 
our chef and assistant chef. They objected to 
it. They might’ve had a good reason to object 
to it. But it was probably money well spent. 

So controls are really important, and 
you never know how much you’re losing by 
trusting people without too many controls. 
It’s always your friends that get you; it’s not 


your enemies. I’ve heard so many times in 
the gaming industry that—not so much now 
as it was when we first got into it—’’Well, you 
can turn your back on that fellow. I’ve known 
him for years. He’s all right.” Well, those’re the 
kind of people you couldn’t turn your back on! 

In reference to gaming—I mean, you 
refer to it as “gambling,” and we refer to it as 
“gaming and entertainment complexes,” and 
things of that nature. And we basically don’t 
feel that we’re the “garter-on-the-sleeve” and 
the “green eyeshade” type people, and we’ve 
constantly tried to upgrade the gaming areas, 
the casinos. And like I mentioned earlier, 
in regards to the “one-arm bandits,” and I 
explained to you about how the percentages 
were at one time, when there were “one-arm 
bandits,” or referred to, and by liberalizing the 
slot machine payoffs, I think we’ve overcome 
that. You might hear it occasionally, but you 
don’t hear it like you did before. 

And consequently, throughout the 
organization, we’ve always tried to develop 
better titles. Rather than a “pit boss,” or things 
of that nature, we refer to them as “gaming 
supervisors,” and we’ve—oh, there’s many—I 
can’t think of ’em right offhand, but we’ve 
always tried to upgrade the industry, upgrade 
Harrah’s, to start with, and the industry. 
We can’t control [laughing] the industry, 
of course. But we do like to have Harrah’s a 
little better than our competitors, and I think, 
with Mr. Harrah’s high ideals—I mean, he’s 
upgraded all of us. And consequently, through 
our personnel and our selection of our 
people—well, we look for college graduates 
wherever we can, and people with high IQ’s, 
and people of integrity, of course. And we like 
people to, well, I’m digressing, I guess, really 
[laughing]. But actually, in upgrading, we try 
to upgrade titles, and things of that nature. 

Do they call them “Keno runners” still? 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


45 


[Laughing] I think so. 

That one hasn’t changed? 

Well, I don’t know. It might have, but we 
do have hostesses on the floor. We have female 
hostesses wear a uniform, and they perform 
many duties for our guests. They’ll show them 
where the Steakhouse is, or let them know 
what time the shows are, etc. Just boils down 
to a meeting the other day, of Reno Unlimited. 
It was some kind of a development here, and 
the manager of one of our largest department 
stores—well, we were talking about making 
people feel that Reno is a friendly town, 
and we want them to—we’re talkin’ about 
downtown businesses now. And they want to 
make the tourists and our convention people 
feel at home when they arrive in Reno, and 
how can we better do it? And this one party 
is a manager of one of the large department 
stores here, and he has only been on the scene 
for the last four or six months—I forget. And 
he was quite impressed with Reno, and the 
friendliness of Reno, and he did mention 
that he stayed at Harrah’s Hotel when he first 
came here. And he was impressed with the 
facilities and the cleanliness, and things of 
that nature. But one thing he did bring out 
was about a hostess that we had. He’d met her 
the night before someone introduced them by 
name, and I think the next morning or the 
next day, he was going into one of our eating 
facilities, the Garden Room, I believe it was, 
and this hostess was there, and she called this 
gentleman by his name his first name (I think 
it was Jim), and it astounded him, and he was 
very impressed with that. I think, a few weeks, 
several weeks later, he found out the reason 
that the girl did remember his name, that he 
was the manager of this department store, and 
she had some connection, or— I don’t know 
if she had worked there, or had a relative that 


worked there. And anyhow, she called him by 
name, which impressed him. 

The hostesses greet the people and show 
them how to make reservations for the 
theater-restaurants, and where the Cabaret is, 
or things—I guess—I don’t know how many 
questions they get thrown at them. But it’s 
kinda nice to see a nice-lookin girl there. And 
it’s a plus, I think, for Harrah’s. 

We have executive secretaries, and 
senior artists, and advertising managers, and 
advertising account managers, things of that 
nature, you know, art director. And as far as 
our aviation department, we have chief pilots, 
which is something. And we have a computer 
department where we have our systems 
analysts, data preparation supervisors, and 
program analysts. Those are standard, I guess. 
We have a construction supervisor [laughing], 
construction coordinator, draftsmen, and 
things. We have an entertainment manager, 
and lighting directors, and stage managers, and 
sound supervisors, and stage technicians, and 
cabaret managers, sound console operators. 
These are not any super-duper titles, I don’t 
think. But we have seamstresses, and dressing 
room attendants. 

Our finance and accounting, we have 
controllers and assistant controllers, credit 
managers, and communication coordinator. 

We have a supervisor of Harrah’s garages, 
and master craftsman mechanics, and 
chauffeurs. 

In the automobile collection, well, 
they have many various things. They have 
a research supervisor, and a restoration 
supervisor, engravers and die makers. And, of 
course, we have purchasing supervisors. We 
have lead men on a metal shaper, and a lead 
man upholsterer, a sign painter, and a striper, 
many types of master craftsmen. 

Our industrial relations department, we 
have employee counselors, and compensation 



46 


Robert A. Ring 


managers, and compensation analysts, you 
know, just [to] make sure that we’re up with 
the times. 

We have a safety advisor in our 
maintenance engineering, and we’re always 
cautious of safety and different hazards in 
every department. [Some tourists come in 
here just dying to sue us.] Right. We have 
them for our employees’ safety, too. 

We have a personnel manager, and then 
we have a manpower development supervisor, 
and we have press relations. We have a press 
relations manager, a photographic supervisor, 
publicists for both Reno and Tahoe. We have 
a photographer. 

Our slot repair, we have a manager there, 
and we have an experimental shop, where we 
create our various and different types of slot 
machines. 

Of course, then, we have a wardrobe 
manager, a wardrobe supervisor, and then we 
have a custom seamstress, and different types 
of wardrobe clerks and seamstresses. 

Our warehouse—we have warehouse 
managers, naturally [laughing]. 

And then we have in our beverage—we 
have shift supervisors, and beverage shift 
supervisors. 

Well, we have—Bingo, the same thing. 
Cashiers—we have—well this is repetitious. 
But we do have coin wrappers, and drop box 
counters. 

In our cleaning department, naturally, we 
have a manager and supervisors, and then 
we have the cleaning specialists, you know, 
that handle the different types of machines 
where we shampoo our carpets, and clean our 
sidewalks, and things of that nature, and the 
“spit and polish” boys [laughing]. 

Of course, well, this is an awful lot of 
repetition. But just like any food operation, 
you’d have to have a food and beverage 
manager, and a chef, and we have shift 


supervisors in various categories. And then 
we have—of course, we have to have maitre 
d’s, banquet managers, food accountants, and 
analysts of various types. We have kitchen 
maintenance specialists, along with many 
others. 

Of course, we have all the departments in 
the hotel, naturally, a health club supervisor, 
a masseur and a masseuse, a lifeguard, 
hotel door man, a floor inspectress, PBX 
operators—they do a good job, as a whole. 

We have a Keno runner [laughing]. But we 
have Keno shift supervisors and Keno game 
supervisors. 

And in our maintenance, we have 
electronics supervisors because we have a lot 
of sound things, and that, you know. 

We have a gardener, an electronics 
technician. 

In our pit we have a pit supervisor, rather 
than a pit boss. We have a pit manager, and 
pit shift supervisors, and a pit administrator 
that handles the scheduling. We have pit floor 
men, and also pit floor women. I think we’re 
probably the first with the pit floor women. 
I’m not sure, but I think we were first or one 
of the first. 

Of course, with the hotel, we have 
convention sales managers. 

And we have a security department. We 
have a security manager and security shift 
supervisors, and watchmen. 

And this basically goes through all 
departments—I mean, with your slots, and 
everything else—you know. 

[Do I think this is more or less typical of 
the resort hotel operation, or does Harrah’s 
have a more extensive organization than 
others?] Well, to the best of my knowledge, 
your last question is correct [laughing]. [More 
highly organized?] Yes, definitely. I mean, as 
far as I know, from different things that I’ve 
learned. Oh, I’m not too familiar with all of 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


47 


them, but a multi-casino-hotel complex that’s 
in both areas of the state—I mean, they don’t 
have anything of this nature. 

In reference to a previous discussion 
regarding fringe benefits of Harrah’s 
employees, at the present time, there are no 
unions in Harrah’s organization. At one time, 
the bar are culinary people were unionized. 
And in view of the fact that Harrah’s benefits 
and the treatment of Harrah’s employees, 
the bar and culinary people figured there 
was no need to be unionized. Consequently, 
there was an election called for, and they 
decertified from the union. And consequently, 
since decertification, which was several years 
ago, they have had no reason to feel that 
they should be unionized, and apparently 
are content with the treatment of Harrah’s 
management. 

Gaming Language 

All right. You’re interested in general terms 
and jargon of the gaming industry, and we 
have compiled something here, and some of 
’em you might want to incorporate. [Refers to 
papers] This is more or less alphabetically—it 
says across the board —that’s a win, place, and 
show bet. That would be in horse racing. The 
term ahead means that you’re winning. The 
term cover is to accept a wager, to place a bet. 
A high limit crap game is referred to as speed 
layout — or vice versa, I should say. And here 
at Harrah’s, we refer to logos quite a bit. That’s 
basically Harrah’s Reno and Lake Tahoe in our 
gaming layouts, and wherever we use the word 
Harrah’s, in a swing-type deal [referring to 
arrangement of letters in name used as insignia 
on products which Harrah’s uses—napkins, 
towels, et cetera]. A marker is a numbered chip 
used to keep track of money owed the bank 
by a player during a game. The P. M. wheel is 
a pari-mutuel gaming table. It’s like a big six- 


wheel. In referring to the house, that means 
the operator of the game or games. And the 
wheel layout, that’s a roulette table, felt cover. 
And I believe everyone’s familiar with Bingo. 
It’s a game in which players attempt to obtain 
five or four numbers in a row or diagonally on 
a numbered card. The numbers are selected 
and called by the person running the game, 
and there are numerous variations. 

Bingo is considered to be derived from an 
Italian game known as Lotto. Various other 
names used in the past for the game include 
Beano, Bridgeo, Four-O, Jumbo, Skillo, and 
Tango. The Bingo boards are the numbered 
boards the players use; in other words, they’re 
the Bingo cards. And, of course, the Bingo 
parlor is where the Bingo game is played. 
A blackout, or a cover-all game, is a game 
in which a player must cover all twenty- 
four numbers on his card within a specified 
number of call numbers. In other words, you 
have to complete the whole card. The caller 
is an employee who calls each Bingo number 
as it is drawn from the glass bowl. To cover is 
to place a marker over a number which has 
been drawn or called (that would be on your 
Bingo card). 

And we have various games. I had 
mentioned earlier Four Corners. That’s 
winning a game by covering the four outside 
corners. And a bonus is paid on that. And 
hard way winners — that’s winning on the top 
or bottom row of any card. A bonus is paid on 
that. See, on the twenty-four numbers, there’s 
a free number in the center of the card, and 
anything that includes the free spot is not a 
hard way winner. But if you get five in a row, 
it’d be a hard way. 

Then the markers are the little discs that 
are used by the customers to cover the number 
on the Bingo board. 

A very popular game is the progressive 
cover-all game. It’s a game where the amount 



48 


Robert A. Ring 


of the cover-all advances ten dollars per game 
until the money is won. That’s the twenty- 
four-foot cover-all game. They progress from 
one game to the next. I mean, we might have 
it at, say, three p.m., and five p.m., and seven 
p.m., and nine p.m., and if the game’s not won 
in the specified number—of course, you will 
get paid for winning the cover-all game, but 
then this additional progressive ten dollars 
will go on ’til it gets up to a pretty fair figure, 
and then someone eventually wins it. Of 
course, the regular Bingo is a five-in-a-row 
winner in any direction. And what they refer 
to as a short ball winner —or, we refer to, I 
should say—is when a person wins a game 
on only four, five, or six called numbers, the 
first six numbers out of the drawing. 

We have a Star game, which—we pay a 
prize, and also, we allow the winner of the Star 
game to play fifteen free games afterwards. 
And we also have a three-day, or a night star 
game. These prizes are three days’ or three 
nights’ free play, plus a twenty-five-dollar 
prize. 

And the turtleneck is the tubes extending 
up from the glass bowl where the balls are 
blown to be called or removed by the callers 
after calling. Sometimes they’re referred to as 
a gooseneck. In other words, the plastic balls 
are in this glass bowl, and it’s activated by air 
pressure. And then, as they’re blown up there, 
the caller draws one out. I guess that’s about 
it for Bingo. 

On Keno, it’s a game of number selection 
originally brought to this country by Chinese 
coolies. The player selects numbers, marks 
them on a ticket, and then the house draws 
twenty numbers. Actually, in the Keno layout, 
there is eighty numbers, and out of the eighty, 
the house will draw twenty numbers. 

And as far as the jargon, they refer to an 
add as when a ticket has been marked and is 
replayed by adding a game number onto it. 


See, the next game, say, if you play it for game 
[number] twelve, and you want to play it back, 
you just change the number and make it game 
thirteen, and it saves the effort of marking 
the tickets over again. And that’s pretty good 
when they have multiple tickets. They refer 
to a blank ticket as a ticket without a game 
number. Of course, in the Keno, we have a 
blower, and this is a motor that pressurizes 
the air in the glass bowl, the same as I referred 
to in the Bingo. The Keno balls are forced 
into the tubes— there’s two tubes which are 
referred to as rabbit ears. There’ll be ten balls 
go up one side of the rabbit ear, and then ten 
up the other, out of the eighty. And, of course, 
the Keno balls are plastic balls with numbers 
on them, the same as in Bingo. And the caller 
is an employee who calls the numbers for the 
Keno game. The check room is a place where 
the tickets are sent to be checked for winners. 
We refer to Chinese black ink; that’s the black 
ink that’s used by the Keno writer to write the 
tickets for the customers. The jargon term is 
draw; that’s the tickets that are punched as 
the numbers of the game are called. That’d be 
the twenty numbers. They have a little punch 
that would—say, if they called, “Twenty-two,” 
then the puncher will just punch the hole out 
of there, the twenty-two, and continue ’til 
they draw the twenty numbers. They use that 
as a mask to cover your Keno ticket to see 
which numbers have been called. Then, the 
inside ticket is the ticket that the customer has 
written and presented to the Keno writer. That 
goes into the Keno game, itself. And the Keno 
brush is a device used to make the spots with 
ink on the Keno tickets. Then we have what we 
call a Keno checker, who is an employee who 
performs the checking procedure to determine 
the possible winners, and maintains the 
records, and verifies the call-ins of the payouts. 

The Keno runner is an employee who 
provides Keno game service to customers 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


49 


away from the Keno counter. They might be at 
a restaurant, or sitting at a bar, maybe playing 
another game—’’Twenty-one,” or a crap game, 
or a wheel. We have these runners to provide 
that service. 

We have the outside ticket, that’s the ticket 
the writer has written for the customer and 
given to the customer. The inside ticket we 
take from the customer, and it goes into the 
Keno game, and the outside ticket remains 
with the customer. 

We have a puncher, who’s an employee 
who uses the drill press to punch out the 
winning numbers that are called. And a 
station is a place where a Keno writer site to 
write tickets. We might have, say, ten stations 
at one Keno counter, or eleven. And we also 
have a surveillance camera, a microfilming 
machine, which takes pictures of the rabbit 
ears empty and full. In other words, before 
the game is called, say, it’s game number 
twenty-one, [it] will take a picture of the game 
twenty-one with the rabbit ears empty, and as 
the numbers are drawn, the camera will take 
this picture, and it will show the results of 
game twenty-one. It’s a security measure for 
the house, and we can check back. 

We also have a ticket camera. It’s a 
microfilming machine that photographs the 
Keno tickets before the game is run. In other 
words, we have a microfilm picture of each 
ticket in case there is a question, or if there 
is an error of some type, then we can refer to 
the film. 

We have a thing we refer to as a tube. It’s 
a pneumatic tube in which the Keno tickets 
are sent to the check room, like the old 
department store deal. 

And the pit—the pit games, the casino: 
“Twenty-One” is a card game where players 
attempt to draw cards that total twenty-one 
or come closer to twenty-one than the dealer 
does. They refer to a player sitting on the 


dealer’s extreme right of a “Twenty-One” 
game, the last player to draw a hand, as the 
anchor man, or woman, whichever it might 
be. A blackjack is an ace with a ten, or a jack, 
queen, or a king, an automatic winning hand 
unless the dealer also has a blackjack, in which 
case the player is given a pat. In other words, 
nobody wins. Broke or bust is when a player or 
the dealer draws cards that add up to twenty- 
two or more. Cold turkey is two face cards. To 
cut a deck is to divide the pack of cards into 
two or more packets, and reassemble them in 
different order. A deuce is any two-spot card. 
A double down is a player with a ten or eleven 
total, may double the amount of his original 
bet on his first two cards. If he doubles down, 
then he can draw only one card. And first base 
is the player position on the extreme right of 
the table, the left side of the dealer. That’d be 
the first one to receive a card. And to hit is to 
draw another card. If a player wants another 
card, they may either scratch the layout [the 
felt table cover], or say, “Hit it.” And insurance 
is an option offered players when the dealer 
has an ace showing. Players may spend one 
half of their original bet to insure against the 
dealer having twenty-one. If the dealer has 
a blackjack, insurance is paid two to one. 
If the dealer does not have blackjack, the 
dealer takes the insurance bet, and the game 
continues. A mailman or a crossroader is a 
cardsharp who marks the cards in various 
manners. And they refer to a deck, a Bee deck, 
that’s a pasteboard card (that’s a brand name), 
and they also have plastic cards they refer to as 
plastics. A push is when a player has the same 
total number as the dealer; there is a standoff, 
and there’s no one wins that. A stiff is a hand 
with a twelve to sixteen, which will break 
when hit with a card counting ten. A stand 
pat [is] a hand [the] player doesn’t wish to hit, 
generally when totaling twenty or twenty-one. 
A soft seventeen is any combination of cards 



50 


Robert A. Ring 


containing an ace that totals seventeen. The 
dealer must hit a soft seventeen. To stand, a 
player who wishes no more cards indicates 
this by placing the two original cards under 
his bet, face down. A hole card, that’s the 
dealer’s card, which is face down. 

The pit refers to a gaming area within the 
facility that might include several “Twenty- 
Ones,” craps, and the roulette tables. There is 
usually more than one pit in each facility in 
a large casino. 

Craps is a dice game played in gaming 
houses on a table built for the purpose. The 
French call the game “craps,” which is a 
corruption of the word kraps, the name for a 
pair of ones. An ace is a one spot on a die. They 
bet the dice to win; a player bets the shooter 
will pass. The big six and eight is a section 
of the table layout where a player bets that 
a six or eight will be thrown before a seven. 
The boards are the raised edge around a crap 
table against which the dice must be thrown 
in some games. Most of the time, they call 
this a rail. Boxcars is two sixes on the dice. 
A box man is a supervisor on the crap table. 
A cheque or a chip is a token used for betting 
purposes in place of money. A come bet is a 
bet that the dice will pass; the next roll to be 
considered is the come roll. You can bet that 
any time. Cold dice [is] when the dice are not 
passing. Afield bet is a bet made on a specific 
number or on a group of numbers. A come out 
roll [is] a roll to shoot a natural or establish a 
point. And a crapout is to roll a two, three, or 
a twelve on the first roll of the dice. Craps is 
when two, three, or twelve is thrown with the 
dice. A crossroader is a cheater, a no-good, a 
“no-goodie” [laughing]. 

A deuce is a two spot on a die, and dice 
is two die. A die is one dice. A dice boat is a 
receptacle made of hardwood used to hold 
dice that are not in use, which only have, I 
think, a set of eight dice on the table, and only 


two’d be in use. Sometimes people ask for a 
change of dice, and they’ll come out of that 
boat. A don’t come bet is a bet that the dice 
don’t pass; the next roll to be considered is the 
“don’t come.” The don’t pass line is a betting 
space on the layout. Money placed there is a 
bet that the dice will not pass. And the double 
odds are the odds equal to twice the flat, or 
the maximum bet. (In other words, you can 
put double—say, if you have a ten-dollar bet 
on the front, and the point is established, you 
could bet twenty dollars that that point will 
be made. That would be in addition to your 
original line bet.) Dragging is taking money 
from a bet before the cards are dealt or dice 
are thrown, if people decide they want to drag 
a little off their bet (they may have second 
thoughts). The drop boxes are removable, a 
locked cash box located under the roulette, 
craps, or “Twenty-One” table. The money paid 
by the player for the chips is dropped into the 
box through, a slot in the tabletop. 

An easy eight is an eight point made 
with a combination of numbers that are not 
doubles (in other words, it’d be a six and a 
two, or a five and a three). A hard eight is an 
eight point made with doubles (two fours, in 
other words). 

The field, that’s a section of the table layout 
containing the numbers two, three, four, nine, 
ten, eleven, and twelve. A flat bet is the original 
bet made on the line, or a “don’t come.” The 
floor man is the supervisor over the pit. The 
front line, or the pass line, is the section of the 
layout where a player bets the dice will pass. 
The hard way is the numbers four, six, eight, 
or ten thrown with duplicate numbers. A 
high-low, you can bet on twelve and two aces. 
A horn bet is a single bet covering two, three, 
eleven, and twelve; it’s a one-roll bet. Hot dice, 
where dice are “hot,” that’s when the dice are 
passing. The layout includes all sections of 
the crap table where bets are made. To lay 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


51 


the odds is to bet that a point, box, or a place 
number of four, five, six, eight, nine, or ten 
will not be thrown before a seven is thrown. 
The right bettor, who bets that a point, a box, 
or a place number will be thrown before a 
seven, has taken the odds. A natural is a seven 
or eleven thrown on the come-out roll. And 
to bet on a one-roll situation, they refer to as 
on the hop. It’s a one-roll deal. 

The paddle is a clear plastic square used to 
drop money into the drop box. And the pass 
is a natural on the first roll where a person 
makes an established point. Past post is betting 
after the call of the dice, which is a cheating 
method, of course. A point is any four, five, 
six, eight, nine, or ten a player throws on the 
come-out roll. He tries to make his point by 
throwing the dice again without throwing a 
seven. 

A player throwing the dice is referred to 
as the shooter. Two aces is called snake eyes. 
Single odds is odds that equal but do not 
exceed the flat bet. To sweeten a bet is to add 
money to the bet before the cards are dealt or 
dice are thrown (which is just the opposite of 
dragging, of course) 

A tray or a rack is where the bankroll is 
kept. A tube of silver is one roll of silver in 
the tray. 

Now, in roulette, it’s a game of thirty-six 
numbers plus a single-O and a double-O, 
where the player bets on selected numbers 
on the table which contains a rotating wheel 
with numbered slots. The dealer spins a small 
ball into the wheel that spins in the opposite 
direction of the ball, it falls into one of the 
numbered slots. Those players betting on this 
number are the winners. 

The ball is a small ivory or plastic, varying 
in size from a half inch to three quarters of 
an inch in diameter. [Refers to paper] It says, 
“Black and red is pertaining to the background 
colors behind the numbers, green’s pertaining 


to the background color behind the zero 
and the double zero.” A cheque racker is an 
employee who assists the roulette dealer by 
stacking the cheques in proper colors after 
each bet. And columns are twelve numbers 
from the head of the wheel all the way down 
to the end of the table. Dozens, or sections, 
those are numbers one through twelve, and 
twelve through twenty-four, and twenty-four 
through thirty-six. The layout is the betting 
section of the table where the player [s] place 
their cheques. The main portion consists of 
thirty-six numbers, spaces arranged in three 
long columns of twelve spaces each. The 0 
and the double-0 are called the green bet at 
the head of the table because the spaces are 
green in color in place of the numbers. These 
spaces have a single zero and a double zero. 
The wheel is a solid wooden disk or plate, 
slightly convex, around the rim or metal 
partitions for separators, or frets, with metal 
pockets between them. The wheels bounce at 
the center on a single ball bearing and spin 
smoothly. 

Well, in our security, there’s a different 
jargon. I mean, like bugging a player, is when 
someone is bothering a customer. And they 
refer to a semiconscious person as a faint —I 
mean, that’s when calling security. We also 
refer to a floor patrol, where they check 
all the areas of the casino, for various and 
sundry reasons. Here at Harrah’s, we have 
what is called the show lines. That’s where the 
Headliner Room, and the South Shore Room, 
the cabarets, where patrons line up to see a 
show, and security has to observe that from 
time to time. 

Of course, slot cheaters are persons who 
cheat slot machines. We refer to removing 
the money bags from the slot cabinets as slot 
pull. On slots, we have different jargon, not 
necessarily only at Harrah’s. An agent would 
be a second party of a conspiracy, an outsider 



52 


Robert A. Ring 


tryin’ to defraud the company through an 
employee; that also would go in any gaming 
area. And we refer to a slot cheater who will 
use any or all known methods of cheating as 
a bandit [laughing]. We have an eight-reel 
slot machine, which we refer to as The Big 
Eight. Of course, counterfeit and foreign coins 
used in slot machines are referred to as bogus 
coins. And we have some machines that we 
refer to as bonus machines because they pay 
an additional award on top of the jackpot. 
And a colored light on top of the case of a slot 
machine that indicates a jackpot has been hit, 
we refer to as a candle. 

To provide adequate personnel for 
proper service in the slot machine area is 
what we refer to as a cover. And double his 
coin, that’s a method of cheating, using two 
coins, jamming the slot machines, resulting 
in a free play situation. There is also [another] 
method of cheating; drilling holes in the case 
of a machine to gain access to the inside of 
the machine is referred to the machine being 
drilled. And then, of course, when the coins 
are paid out on a slot machine, they refer to 
that as a drop. Free playing is a method of 
cheating, obtaining plays on a slot machine 
without putting coins in. There is various 
ways to do that. We do have the super-size 
slot machines, which we refer to as the giants. 

An employee who’s in collusion with an 
outside agent, we refer to as an inside man. 
(That happens from time to time.) And the 
slot employee who makes the minor repairs 
to slot machines, we refer to him as a key 
man. And we have lookouts in the casino, 
and that’s a security employee who’s assigned 
the surveillance of gaming areas. And a 
cheating term—if an individual is adept at 
manipulating jackpots by means other then 
normal play is referred to as a mechanic. 

We have some machines we refer to as 
piggybacks. They are two machines in one case 


with one machine above the other, operated 
by one handle. Then we refer to the premium 
points and the coupon form that are paid in 
addition to the money for the jackpots as 
points. 

Well, ratcheting is an illegitimate 
manipulation of pay symbols to obtain a 
jackpot. Rhythm play is a method of cheating, 
the rhythmatic play of slot machines which 
keeps the same symbols on the pay line. 
Training sessions conducted by a bandit to 
teach individuals how to cheat slot machines 
is referred to as a school. A setup is a method 
used by an employee to defraud the company 
by using an outside agent. There are, from time 
to time, people that walk through the place; 
they’re referred to as slot bums, and they’re 
less than a desirable individual that roams the 
slot areas in hopes of finding something of 
value. Slugging is using illegitimate coins for 
playing slot machines. And a smile is when a 
slot machine customer will leave a pay symbol 
on the machine and walk away. Spooning is 
illegitimately obtaining coins from the tube 
of a slot machine (originally, the tool used 
looked like a spoon). Fraudulent methods of 
obtaining funds is referred to as swinging. A 
tool is a piece of equipment used by a bandit 
to cheat slot machines. 

We have slot machines that are referred 
to as twin jacks; these are two machines in 
the same case, sitting side by side, and they’re 
operated by one handle. A yo-yo is a coin on 
a string used to free play the slot machine. 
Undesirable individuals that are barred from 
the use of Harrah’s facilities are referred to as 
eighty-six. 

In the entertainment field, kind of a 
halfway amusing incident was when we 
played the Kim Sisters for the first time. I 
don’t know if they’re Korean. They’re Oriental 
girls, a very fine act. And in our dressing 
rooms, or the entertainers’ dressing rooms, we 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


53 


always had a sign posted there that Harrah’s 
would not—well, I forget how it was worded, 
but—’’wouldn’t tolerate blue material”—or, 
“no blue material.” The Kim Sisters, I guess 
they were reading English, but they couldn’t 
quite understand why they couldn’t wear blue 
material [laughing]. Blue material is risque, 
or off-color, or filthy material, is what it is. 
But that was kind of amusing. I forget how 
it came out. I don’t know if they didn’t wear 
this outfit because it was blue, or something, 
or they—. Anyhow, they questioned why they 
couldn’t use blue material. That’s about that 
for the jargon. 

Stage Entertainment 

Going into entertainment a little 
bit, Harrah’s has come a long way in the 
entertainment industry, and mainly because 
we’ve always tried to have a good show, even 
if it’s not a name entertainer. I mean, we want 
the people to feel that when they come to 
Harrah’s, even if it’s a name that they don’t 
recognize, they know they’re going to enjoy 
fine entertainment. And as Harrah’s did 
evolve, I think our first entertainment was, 
as I’d mentioned before, Jackson at the piano 
in the Blackout Bar. Whether we had lounge 
entertainment in Harrah’s Casino, at 210 
North Virginia, prior to the opening of the 
Lake Tahoe operation, I’m not so sure. 

Harrah’s eventually wound up by booking 
more entertainment than any place in the 
state. Finally, when we got to Lake Tahoe—we 
opened there in June of 1955, at the site of the 
old George’s Gateway and Dopey Norman’s 
[laughing], which was on the west side of 
Highway 50, and right on the state line of 
California. Our first theater-restaurant-type 
entertainment was held in the South Shore 
Room of Harrah’s Tahoe, which was this 
location. We would seat approximately one 


hundred and ninety people for dinner, and 
I think our first entertainers was, the house 
band was Alvino Rey. Our first entertaining 
group there in the South Shore Room was 
the Goofers, more or less a cabaret-lounge- 
type group. Our first breakthrough to “name” 
entertainment was Liberace; that was big-time 
then. Eventually, we booked Jack Benny in 
this small South Shore Room; we played 
George Burns there, played Ernie Kovacs 
and Eydie Adams. (The late Ernie Kovacs 
was a great guy, incidentally.) Played Louis 
Armstrong, Myron Cohen. Eventually, we did 
build a larger South Shore Room on the east 
side of highway 50; we opened a casino-type 
operation there, of which. I will delve into 
later. And prior to opening that, the last act 
in the small South Shore Room was Johnny 
Ray. On opening the large South Shore Room, 
which seats eight hundred people for dinner, 
Red Skelton was our first star that opened the 
room there. 

Mr. Bill Harrah, with his high ideals and 
his being the perfectionist he is, he likes 
everything just right, was the instigator 
in treating entertainers like they’re being 
treated now, in the high class style. Prior 
to this, I’ve heard many things. One time, 
Shelly Berman was up there. He didn’t 
perform for us, but in a kidding vein, he 
says that he couldn’t work there because 
he couldn’t work in those dressing rooms, 
in a tongue-in-cheek situation, because he 
said he’s used to bending over [laughing], 
dressin in a cramped situation. But as I’ve 
said, Mr. Harrah treats people very highly, 
and through our entertainers there, the word 
got out throughout the industry that, “You 
ought to get up to Harrah’s and see how they 
treat the entertainers.” And consequently, 
since then, many places have followed suit 
and have almost reached the style in which 
Mr. Harrah entertains his entertainers. But 



54 


Robert A. Ring 


we always have the finest of dressing rooms, 
suites for the entertainers, and naturally, we 
have security people there to keep people 
from forcing entry just to see a big-time star, 
and we have people that attend their every 
need in the way of their food and drink. Mr. 
Harrah has given access to a Rolls Royce, or 
any high quality type car they might so desire 
to utilize while they’re performing in one of 
Harr ah’s operations. 

I remember Nat “King” Cole was offered 
the Rolls Royce to utilize while he was playing 
a Lake Tahoe engagement, and he says, “Man,” 
he said, “I don’t want to drive that. They’ll 
think I’m a chauffeur” [laughing]. 

And also, Jimmy Durante was quite a sight 
sittin’ behind the wheel of a Rolls Royce with 
a slouched hat and his big nose stickin out 
of the window. 

During the 1960 Winter Olympics at 
Squaw Valley, we tried to book a show with 
international flavor because there was a 
lot of non-English-speaking people and 
European people. We had two different 
engagements there during the Olympics. One 
of our entertainers was Victor Borge, who is 
known quite well in Europe. The following 
engagement was Marlene Dietrich. She was 
quite well known internationally. 

One fallacy people have—everybody’s 
an entertainment director or a booker, and 
wherever they see an act some small, out- 
of-the-way place, they come running to Mr. 
Harrah or someone, saying that they just saw 
a good group. And, of course, they might’ve 
been partial. They might’ve imbibed a little. 
Sometimes, we used to check them out, and 
they didn’t actually come up to the standards. 
In some instances, they did, however. But, 
say, ninety-nine percent of the time, it was a 
particular prejudice or a one-man favoritism 
type thing. We used to continually be asked, 
“Well, why don’t you book a Bob Hope or 


Bing Crosby, or somebody of that stature?” 
and just using those names as a “for instance.” 
They think all you have to do is just tell an 
entertainer that you’d like them to work, and 
pay them some money, and that’s it. 

Well, it’s not as simple as that. I mean, 
first of all, they have to have a desire to work 
a certain place, which Harrah’s is held in high 
esteem by most of the nightclub entertainers 
that have worked here. And people that 
haven’t worked here have heard about the 
treatment Harrah’s gives their entertainers, 
and they do look forward to working an 
engagement at Harrah’s. However, there are 
certain names that—it probably costs them 
money to work—I mean, they’re in such a 
high income bracket. And also, a lot of these 
people do better on one-night concert tours, 
or one-night stands, and things of that nature. 

We have become very friendly with 
many entertainers, and Mr. Harrah is highly 
regarded with many of the top people, and 
they sing his praises throughout the country. 
I have become familiar with a few of them, 
played golf with them. And you get so you 
can rib and [laughing] needle them a little 
bit, which is my nature of talking with people, 
I guess. Any time I can win two dollars 
from Lawrence Welk, I think That’s quite an 
accomplishment [laughing]. 

The first opportunity I had to meet Danny 
Thomas was in Reno. We played golf out at 
Hidden Valley, our entertainment director, 
and Danny’s manager, and myself. I think this 
was like on a Saturday, and Danny was to open 
on a Monday at Lake Tahoe. Danny’s a pretty 
fair golfer, and we had a little game going, 
and I became halfway unconscious. On the 
back nine, I birdied the fourteenth hole, and 
I birdied the fifteenth hole, on the sixteenth 
hole I chipped one in off the green for another 
birdie—that’s three birdies [laughing] in a 
row, which is better than I know how to play. 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


55 


And Danny says, “That’s not customer golf.” 
He says, “I’m not gonna open! I refuse to 
open!” (Strictly a tongue-in-cheek deal.) So 
consequently, he thinks I’m a golf hustler. 

Another instance on the golf course at 
Lake Tahoe, at Glenbrook—I was playing 
golf with Phil Harris, Robert Goulet, and 
Norm Crosby. Phil Harris was performing 
at Harrah’s South Shore Room at that time. 
A year or two prior to that time, we did play 
Robert Goulet for a couple engagements; 
however, at this particular time, he was 
working [at] the north end of the Lake. And 
he couldn’t understand why there were so 
many people at the south end of the Lake and 
just a handful at the north end of the Lake. 
He was tryin to get Phil Harris’s view on it, 
Robert Goulet, that is. He was trying to get 
Phil Harris’s reasoning why. So Phil gave him 
some kind of an answer, which he [laughing] 
had to do. However, on one hole, Robert 
Goulet hit his second shot, and he got right 
behind a tree, and he was stymied between 
the tree and the green. And he hollered over 
to Phil (Phil and I were on one side of the 
fairway, probably in the middle), and Robert 
Goulet says, “Phil, what’ll I do?” he said. “I’m 
stymied! I’m stymied!” 

Phil looked to me, and he says, “He’s not 
only stymied, he’s double stymied. He’s behind 
the tree, and he’s workin the north end of the 
Lake!” [laughing] 

I think we first opened the little South 
Shore Room in June of 1955, and eventually, 
as I have spoken previously, that we did move 
over to the larger South Shore Room. We 
opened that in December, 1959, with Red 
Skelton. Some of the headliners that have 
played Harrah’s—alphabetically, we have 
played Don Adams, Eydie Adams, Eddie 
Albert, Marty Allen. We have played Ed 
Ames, I’m not sure about Paul Anka; I think 
we played him, I’m not sure. Burt Bacharach, 


the Baja Marimba Band. We played Harry 
Belafonte, Tonny Bennett, Jack Benny, They 
Bishop, Pat Boone, Carol Burnett, George 
Burns, Glen Campbell, Vicki Carr, Diahann 
Carroll, Carol Channing, Ray Charles, Petula 
Clark, Roy Clark, Perry Como, Bill Cosby, 
Vic Damone, Bobby Darin, John Davidson, 
Sammy Davis, Jr., Jimmy Dean, Marlene 
Dietrich, Phyllis Diller, Jimmy Durante, Mike 
Douglas, Barbara Eden, Vincent Edwards, 
Jose Feliciano, Jose Ferrar, Totie Fields, 
Eddie Fisher (I believe Eddie Fisher opened 
the Headliner Room here for us when we 
took over in Reno), Tennessee Ernie Ford, 
Ford and Hines, Connie Francis, Mitzi 
Gaynor, Bobby Gentry, Arthur Godfrey, 
Bobby Goldsboro, Edie Gorme’ and Steve 
Lawrence, Frank Gorshin, Robert Goulet. 
We played the Grand OF Opry, Kathryn 
Grayson, Andy Griffith, Phil Harris, Don Ho, 
Englebert Humperdinck, Van Johnson, Jack 
Jones, Danny Kaye, Emmett Kelly (the clown 
who performs for us yearly throughout the 
summer at Lake Tahoe; he does little skits 
prior to showtime, and he also entertains 
the children down in the recreation center), 
Alan King, the King Family, George Kirby, 
Frankie Lame, Peggy Lee, Jack E. Leonard, 
Jerry Lewis, Ted Lewis, Liberace, Guy 
Lombardo, Trini Lopez, Gordon MacRae, 
Ann Margret, Dean Martin, Tony Martin and 
Cyd Charisse, A1 Martino, Ethel Merman, 
Roger Miller. Gary Moore did a special up 
there with Carol Burnett, and I forget what 
it was. Jim Nabors, Bob Newhart, Anthony 
Newley, Wayne Newton, Donald O’Connor, 
Pat Paulson, Juliet Prowse, Debbie Reynolds, 
Dale Robertson, Roy Rogers and Dale 
Evans, Ruvonne, Rowan and Martin, Doc 
Severenson. I believe Allan Sherman played 
there—I’m not sure. Dinah Shore, Phil Silvers, 
Red Skelton, the Smothers Brothers, Kay Starr, 
Barbra Streisand, Ed Sullivan, Diana Ross 



56 


Robert A. Ring 


and the Supremes, Danny Thomas, Leslie 
Uggams, Jerry Van Dyke, Shanie Wallace, 
Lawrence Welk, Andy Williams, Flip Wilson, 
and Nancy Wilson. 

In the co-headliner category, we had— 
actually, Jerry Van Dyke should’ve been in 
there, rather than in the headliners. We’ve had 
Anna Maria Alberghetti, June Allyson, Morey 
Amsterdam, Louis Armstrong, Theresa 
Brewer, Lana Cantrell, George Chakiris, 
Rosemary Clooney. Ella Fitzgerald, Sergio 
Franchi, George Goble, Buddy Greco, A1 Hirt, 
George Jessel, Lainie Kazan, Howard Keele, 
Kim Sisters, Kingston Trio, Don Knotts, Abbe 
Lane, the Lennon Sisters, the Lettermen, Shari 
Lewis, Julie London, Gloria Loring, Sheila 
MacRae, Phyllis McGuire (I should have said 
the McGuire sisters), Sidney Miller, Mills 
Brothers, Liza Minelli, Jane Morgan, Jaye P. 
Morgan. In the headliners we didn’t get Judy 
Garland, did we? We played Judy Garland, 
too. The New Christy Minstrels, Eleanor 
Powell, Joan Rivers, Mickey Rooney, Dick 
Shawn, Keely Smith, Jerry Van Dyke, Paul 
Winchell, Glen Yarborough. 

And we had oodles of supporting acts 
that are too many to mention, but there might 
be a few that we could bring out, like Nancy 
Ames was quite popular at one time. Edgar 
Bergen and Charlie McCarthy, of course. The 
Carpenters. Don Cornell, Billy Daniels, the 
Doodletown Pipers were quite popular. The 
Establishment, and the Everley Brothers, Lola 
Falana. Frank Fontaine played there. David 
Fry, he was quite an impressionist. Gaylord 
and Holiday have always done a good job 
for us. We played the Golddiggers at one 
time. Played Joey Heatherton, and Florence 
Henderson. I think we played Carol Lawrence 
up there once, who’s married to Robert Goulet. 
Rich Little was a very good impressionist that 
we played. Giselle MacKenzie. We played 
Gail Martin, who is Dean Martin’s daughter. 


Played Marilyn Maye, who does some pretty 
good impressions of Judy Garland and Barbra 
Streisand, and those people. Played Carmen 
McCrae. Johnny Puleo and his harmonica 
gang, they’ve been quite popular. We played 
them many times in the past. Ronnie Schell, 
he’s a pretty popular comedian, does some 
commercials now. Gene Sheldon, the old banjo 
artist, brought many laughs. We played Gail 
Sherwood, I guess, with Nelson Eddy. Played 
Roberta Sherwood. Many years ago we played 
the Sons of the Pioneers. We played the Step 
Brothers several times in a dance act. Larry 
Storch, who, to me, is quite funny. We played 
Mel Torme’ and Diana Trask. Played Dana 
Valery. I think she’s the sister of Sergio Franchi. 
She has a very good voice. Played Maymie Van 
Doren. Played Jackie Vernon, Bobby Vinton, 
Senor Wences used to do a good job for us. 

We played “F Troop” once. It was down 
here [Reno] in the Headliner Room. We 
played Gary Morton, a comedian who’s now 
married to Lucille Ball. We played Rosemarie, 
who is on the Dick Van Dyke show, along with 
Morey Amsterdam. I think we played Arthur 
Treacher once, the old English boy. I think 
that’s about it. 

[Which ones do I like best?] Oh, I like 
’em all! Oh, I think Dean Martin’s always 
done a great job. ‘course, we only played him 
a couple of times. And Glen Campbell. And 
Sammy Davis, Jr. is a perennial favorite, and 
he packs ’em in, I guess, as good as anyone. 
And Lawrence Welk always; we played him 
ten years. He’s been a perennial favorite, 
tie draws a different class of people. But he 
converts a lot of people—I mean, the younger 
generation. They figure that he’s strictly the 
waltz king—I mean, the “one and a-two-a” 
bit, but they keep quite current; they have 
something for everybody in their act, really. 

And goin over that list—I forget now, but 
Bill Cosby always does a good job for us. Hate 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


57 


to leave anyone out now. You kinda put me 
on the spot [laughing]. 

One booking we had many years ago, 
we had Andy Williams when he was on 
his way up, I guess you would say, and we 
booked him with Benny Goodman. They did 
a tremendous job. And, of course, we didn’t 
know who the draw was. We found out later. 
I guess it was Andy Williams. But it was a lot 
of nostalgia there with Benny Goodman, too. 

And we played Bobby Darin when he 
was on his way up, with George Burns. One 
combination act we had there was Liberace 
and Barbra Streisand. This was just prior to 
Barbra hittin it as big as she did. And that 
was a tremendous show. Some of ’em really 
surprise you. 

Danny Thomas always does a tremendous 
job for us, and I guess Andy Griffith does real 
well, and Jim Nabors is very, very popular, 
always does a good job. 

Wayne Newton and Wayne’s brother used 
to play in the lounge down here in Reno, 
when they were just youngsters. And Wayne 
Newton, as you know, made it very big, and 
he always does a tremendous job for us. He’s 
a great favorite of ours. 

Vikki Carr always does an excellent job. 
And Eddy Arnold, we played for the first time. 
He does a great job. We just played Sonny and 
Cher up at the Lake for a weekend, and they 
went over excellent. The reservations were 
tremendous. 

Of course, John Davidson does a good job. 
Burt Bacharach always does a marvelous job 
for us. Debbie Reynolds and Mitzi Gaynor are 
always liked by everybody. Totie Fields, to me, 
is real funny—she makes fun of herself, and 
does real good at that. 

[Which ones haven’t lived up to our 
expectations?] Well, I guess Barbara Eden, for 
one. We bought her off. And Ethel Merman 
didn’t do much of a job. She only worked 


one night, I think. Oh, I guess there’s several 
others. I can’t think of them right now. But 
those are two that I know offhand. [Why 
didn’t they do well?] I don’t know. I guess their 
act wasn’t received too well with other people. 
Ethel Merman—she’s an old-time favorite, but 
I guess—I don’t know if it was her—. Well, 
she wasn’t received too well up there. I don’t 
know why, whether it was her screechy voice, 
[laughing] or she was past her prime, or what. 
But that was the public’s reaction, I guess. 

[How do we decide which ones we’re going 
to book?] Well, we have an entertainment 
director and an entertainment committee. 
Mr. Harrah’s been quite influential in the 
entertainment end of it—I mean, he always 
liked it, and he’s followed it closely. We have 
a vice president of entertainment that has 
the entertainment director under him, and 
he has the directors, stage managers of both 
Reno and Tahoe. The entertainment director, 
he does a lot of scouting of acts, and keeps in 
touch with the trends. He knows who’s doing 
business throughout the major entertainment 
areas. The vice president of entertainment 
checks out some acts from time to time. Well, 
you use past performances, I guess, or you 
find out who’s doing what where, and then it’s 
a question of whether you can book them or 
not. They all have their own salary demands, 
and whether we think that they are justifiable, 
or their salary would justify us booking them, 
if they are available, then we book them. But 
some of them are out of the question, by our 
way of thinking. 

[Do I think they ask more from us than 
they would from another organization in 
another town or another state?] In another 
state, yes. I mean, they work for a lot less 
money in various states. But, of course, some 
of them do a tremendous job on one-fighters, 
like I mentioned before. But that’s not a year- 
around thing, either. That’s seasonal. But if 



58 


Robert A. Ring 


they’re doin’ movies or television, or if they 
have their television shows, well, that’s where 
some big money is, naturally 

But just like Lawrence Welk—he does his 
television shows all year long, but he takes a 
hiatus period, and he really enjoys getting out 
to live audiences. I mean, you really feel the 
pulse of the public. You really know if your 
act is being accepted. But if you’re doin’ it 
on a TV set, or something, you don’t really 
know. But he’s voiced that. They really know 
how they’re being received by doing, say, like 
Harr ah’s engagement, he’s been doing it for 
eleven—this’ll be the eleventh year, and I 
think it’s generally a three-week engagement; 
sometimes it’s been four weeks. And then he 
does the one-nighters. He gets around and 
sees his “cult,” as it were [laughing]. But he’s 
quite a guys And he’s always working. He 
treats people like people, or like people like 
to be treated. 

[Is the entertainment age group oriented?] 
Well, maybe in a cabaret-type thing. There’s 
no question about them being age oriented. 
I mean, like Lawrence Welk, he’ll draw an 
older type people, although he draws all types 
of people. But if you get Dean Martin, or 
somebody like that, or Sammy Davis—they 
bring a different caliber of people in. I mean, 
instead of slot machine players, they might 
bring in crap shooters and “Twenty-One” 
players. And that’s the name of the game. So 
naturally, we are always trying to book the 
biggest draw, and not only volumes of people, 
but the kind of people that are good gaming 
customers. 

[Would I like to discuss showgirls? 
They are so much a part of the scene in Las 
Vegas.] Well, it’s not a part of the scene so 
much in Vegas as it was. I don’t recall the 
little South Shore Room, I don’t know if 
we used chorus girls there or not; I don’t 
think we did. But when we opened the 


South Shore Room, the present South Shore 
Room (it seats eight hundred for dinner), 
we had a chorus line there. I think at one 
time, we had sixteen showgirls. And we’d 
change routines every two weeks if it was 
a two-week show. Sometimes it might be 
a three-week show, but it was costuming, 
and rehearsing, and rehearsing of the band, 
and all that. It wasn’t cheap, by any sense of 
the imagination. But eventually, I think Las 
Vegas backed away from the showgirls, the 
chorus lines. They did have the Lidy-type 
shows, or like the French revues, and things 
of that nature. But eventually, they did get 
away from the chorus girls that would open 
the show. Instead, you’d have a comedian, 
or a second act, and then the headliner act. 
But I think, in a sense, they kinda priced 
themselves out of business; I mean, the 
overall entertainment business did. ’cause 
when you’re paying the headliners plus the 
supporting act, or a comedian, or a dog act, 
and your chorus girls, and your orchestra—I 
mean, it’s a pretty expensive proposition. I 
don’t know of any shows in the state that use 
a chorus line any more. It was refreshing to 
see, of course. Some of the costumes were 
quite elaborate, and the routines were very 
good. 

We did have male dancers, too. Well, in 
some shows, like Mitzi Gaynor, or Debbie 
Reynolds, they’ll bring in some dancers with 
them, while they make costume changes, and 
it’s always refreshing to see. They generally 
have male dancers, and it adds quite a bit to 
the show, I’d say. Theresa Brewer used to have 
four fellows with her. And even some of the 
male entertainers, a quartet or a mixed group 
with them, it seems to add quite a bit—I mean, 
singing in the background, and instead of one 
man being out there alone, or one woman, 
whichever the case might be. It rounds out 
the show, I think. 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


59 


[Do I think the revue-type shows, like 
Lawrence Welk, is generally more successful 
than comedians and the kind of people that 
they bring?] Like Lawrence Welk, he has I 
don’t know how many in his group. He has 
so many, and then they have the dancing, and 
the costuming. It is a revue-type show, I guess 
you’d say. I don’t know how you can compare 
them. It’s always nice to have a change of pace. 
And a person like Sammy Davis, Jr. packs 
them in. He’s got so much talent in his little 
finger that people just fight to see him. Danny 
Thomas always does a good job, Bill Cosby, 
and— well, I guess it’s, like I say, “It’s different 
strokes for different folks,” or something. It 
takes all kinds of people, I guess, and some 
of them like Jack Benny, some of them don’t 
like Jack Benny. 

I did mention the Winter Olympics, 
when we had Marlene Dietrich there. Her 
director at that time, her piano man and her 
director (he directed the show and wrote her 
arrangements), was Burt Bacharach. I don’t 
know if I mentioned it or not. That was in 
1960, and right now, well, he’s one of the hottest 
properties in show business, I guess, as far as 
his talents, and his many songs he’s written, and 
musical arrangements, and scores. 

That’s really nice, to see somebody start 
out small. Wayne Newton—I think Jack 
Benny brought him in as a supporting act in 
the South Shore Room (this was, of course, 
after he played the Harrah’s lounge I was 
telling you about). But it was kind of an 
electrifying performance. People felt that a 
star was born that night in Wayne Newton, 
because he seemed to appeal to a lot of 
the people—I mean, like he was their son 
[laughing], or something. And he was such a 
refreshing-looking fellow, and they said, “He’s 
strictly a showman.” 

I know Ann Margret came up there. She 
did a tremendous job. It was a different type 


show. She’s kind of a sex symbol; I should say 
she is a sex symbol. 

I did mention we played some stage shows 
in Reno. I guess we did play Barefoot in the 
Park and The Odd Couple. 

Well, we did play F Troop, for one thing. 
That was the cast of the TV show. We played 
The Odd Couple, with I think it was Dana 
Andrews and, oh, this other fellow. I can’t 
think if his name. He’s in that Navy picture, 
“McHale’s Navy,” that—Joe Flynn, you know, 
the guy with the glasses. He’s real funny. He’s 
tremendous. 

We had Barefoot in the Park. I think Ann 
Sothern played in that, Ann Sothern and I 
forget who else. It was very good. 

At Lake Tahoe in the wintertime, we 
tried during the seasons — I mean, we 
experimented with everything, tryin to keep 
the entertainment going the year round, 
which was an expensive proposition. But 
we did go into one show that was Holiday 
on Ice. It was an ice skating deal, and I think 
we played it like four weeks. It was a nice 
production number. It was a real good show. 
But, of course, that time of the year, it didn’t 
draw too well. It drew well, but I mean, there’s 
only x-amount of [laughing] people up there 
at that time of the year. And it was really a 
good show. 

We played Holiday in Japan, and that was 
another production show that we played for, 
like, four weeks. But we never have gone into 
anything of the Lido-type shows, like some 
in Vegas, where they ran them for a year at a 
time. I don’t know how that would go in this 
area. Some people come up from various 
areas, say, the Bay area, or you know how they 
come out of other than the Reno-Tahoe area. 
They come to see the last act of one show—I 
mean, the last night of one act, say, Sammy 
Davis, and then maybe Jim Nabors would 
open the next night. They’d like to spend a few 



60 


Robert A. Ring 


days there and see two different entertainers 
at our place. I know several people that make 
a habit of that ’cause they like entertainment, 
and they might as well catch two different acts 
during one weekend, or in one week, besides 
other entertainment in the area. 

[Do I think television cuts into our 
business?] Oh, I don’t know. I think if you can 
book a good television personality, it draws 
tremendous. I don’t think so. I mean, like if 
you get a Glen Campbell, or somebody like 
that, or Dean Martin’s on television all the 
time, and their real favorites are Lawrence 
Welk, or—. ‘course, they are people that have 
their favorite shows. I mean, they have their 
own fan clubs, and why, they can hardly 
wait to get to see them in person, you know. 
[So this is one entertainment business that 
television really helps?] Right. 

And there’s lesser people—I mean, just 
like Roy Clark plays here in Reno. And I 
guess he’s on “Hee-Haw” right now, he’s quite 
an entertainer, and he draws fairly well, just 
from television exposure. I mean, he’s a good 
talent. He satisfies people. 

I guess we did play Zsa Zsa Gabor up at 
the old South Shore Room one time. She was 
quite an attraction. 

Well, as I mentioned earlier, the treatment 
that Mr. Harrahhas afforded these entertainers, 
the accommodations, and the luxuriousness 
that he’s made available to them—it’s more or 
less forced others to upgrade their manner. I 
think these people that perform for Harrah’s 
are quite aware that he is a leader in the 
industry, and he’s made it better for not only 
them, but many others. 

Harrah’s Automobile Collection 

But as far as the Horseless Carriage and 
the antique automobile collection, [consults 
papers] I think it started in 1948 when Bill 


Harrah bought his first antique automobile, 
which was a 1911 Maxwell, and he restored 
that. At the present time, it’s the world’s 
largest collection, numbering more than— 
well, numbering 1,400 automobiles, which 
a thousand are on display, and the rest are 
undergoing restoration at the rate of twenty 
to thirty a year. 

The museum is housed in the old ice plant 
a few miles east of Reno, originally. However, 
since that time, there is a new display area—I 
think it’s 80,000 square feet. It has a thousand 
cars on display, and actually, [laughing] 
they’re not jammed in, but I mean, they’re 
not spaciously arranged. So it is quite a large 
display area, but it has many items, as you 
might imagine, along with the Tri-Motor Ford 
airplane (I think it’s a 1932. I’m not sure). 

One of Mr. Harrah’s favorites is a 1907 
Thomas Flyer, which won the New York to 
Paris race in 1908. The winner of that race was 
a Mr. George Schuster. He visited Harrah’s a 
few years ago and saw the restoration of the 
Thomas, even to the scars it received on that 
amazing journey, that—it visibly shook him 
up. Later, Mr. Schuster visited Bill Harrah at 
his home and presented Mr. Harrah with the 
trophy which he had received for the race. 
It was Bill Harrah’s turn to be shaken at that 
time. (Mr. Schuster passed away this year.) 

In reference to the aircraft division of the 
automobile collection, [consulting paper] it’s 
not extensive, but it still contains the kind of 
aircraft that almost everybody recognizes, 
not just airplane buffs. The most recent, as 
I have previously mentioned, is the Ford 
Tri-Motor, restored in a four and a half-year 
process to factory-new condition. Another is 
a P-38, whose distinctive twin fusilage gained 
dramatic reputation in Europe during World 
War II. There is also an ancient Curtis “Jenny.” 

For many years, everyone thought Mr. 
Harrah had a very expensive hobby, but 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


61 


from the beginning, he envisioned it as an 
attraction which could be tied neatly into the 
casino operation. The publicity derived from 
it and the visitors it brings to Reno (there was 
over one million as of last year, I believe), and 
the extra incentive for the casino and hotel 
customers, all of these things are proving 
invaluable in making Harrah’s unique. 

Now the state of Nevada realizes that 
Harrah’s Automobile Collection is bringing 
the state the kind of prestige needs, that 
gaming has built the world’s most important 
automobile collection and the most 
comprehensive research library is indeed a 
milestone for the industry. 

[Consults papers] Reverting back to the 
Harrah’s Automobile Collection and the 
museum, it has been featured in every major 
automobile magazine and trade publication, 
plus such publications as Look, London Daily 
Telegraph, Saturday Evening Post, Playboy, 
United Airlines Mainliner magazine, Atlantic 
Monthly, Holiday, Sunset, Sports illustrated. 
True, Argosy, and TV Guide. It has also been 
the subject of several books and television 
specials, and is a member of the International 
Council of Museums and the American 
Society of Museums. 

The collection’s most recent milestone 
was the first world classic car festival, a 
Japanese exhibit, built entirely around thirty 
key Harrah’s cars in Harrah’s collection, was 
in Tokyo, Nagoya, and Osaka. It was the first 
time exhibit rights have ever been sold by 
Harrah’s. The importance of the event to the 
Japanese people and the involvement of the 
royal family, itself, convinced Mr. Harrah that 
the project would be something in which he 
would want to participate. And Mr. Harrah 
thinks that it’s real irony, that just now, when 
the motorcar is the subject of environmental 
attacks, its apotheosis as a culture (laughing) 
object seems about due to begin. 


He feels that the great motorcar represents 
a rare state of cybernetic equilibrium 
[laughing], the artifacts of man in harmony 
with his machine landscape. That’s the way 
the London Daily Telegraph saw it in a recent 
article published for the United Kingdom. 

[Consults papers] Mr. Harrah also feels 
that America was made what she is more by 
the automobile than anything else. He believes 
that what Harrah’s has preserved for the world 
says more about craftsmanship, culture, and 
the industrial revolution than any other kind 
of museum which attempts to record the 
progress of man. “There is something in the 
development of the automobile for everyone,” 
he reflected this recently while walking down 
a line of cars with a writer, “no matter how 
refined a man’s tastes, or how turned on 
he may be by speed, or engine roar, or the 
smell of gasoline. And there are examples of 
elegance and comfort features that impress 
the most feminine women.” 

The Harrah museum has a whole story, 
from the motorcar’s awkward, sometimes 
ludicrous beginning, through a gaudy, but 
a close examination today, beautiful, age to 
that period of flaunted wealth epitomized 
by magnificent machines awesome in their 
size. Styles and models were not settled 
copies of each other, but were individual 
dreams of designers working oblivious to 
one another. Eventual plans of Harrah’s 
Automobile Collection call for a family-type 
entertainment park, including restaurants, 
theaters, and a complete Pony Express 
museum. 

Bill Harrah spends a few hours every 
day in his favorite world, the automobile. 
He personally tests each car after it is fully 
restored, and it must receive his personal stamp 
of approval. He retains an autobiographic 
intimacy with every car. Today, it is conceded 
by most authorities that whatever it was that 



62 


Robert A. Ring 


possessed Bill Harrah to turn his hobby into 
a serious project for the preservation of the 
history, development, and culture of the 
automobile, it happened just in time. With 
the automobile’s last resting place usually the 
junkyards of the world, the Harrah’s museum 
has managed in twenty years to save it from 
an inglorious fate and restore it to its rightful 
position as an exciting, colorful, and integral 
part of history 

And I think I’d mentioned earlier the fact 
that Mr. Harrah has fourteen hundred cars 
isn’t just to be acquiring cars; there has to 
be a reason for each car. I mean, it has to be 
distinctive or unusual or it has to contribute 
in some way to the automobile industry, 
other than just being a car Harrah’s casinos 
are all tied in together, it brings people from 
throughout the country, and they have their 
little swap booths, like a marketplace-type 
thing, and they all exchange or sell their 
“Wares—their hub caps, or radiator emblems, 
or whatever. I don’t know how many this has 
been, but there’s one coming up shortly, and 
it’s developed as quite a nationally known 
swap meet. 

[Consults paper] Mr. William F. Harrah, 
the chairman of the board of Harrah’s, 
officially opened the classic car festival in 
Tokyo. Amongst the thirty cars that he 
exhibited, there was a 1931 Bugati Coupe de 
ville, a 1932 Bugati Coupe, a 1933 Cadillac 
All-Weather Phaeton, a 1924 Chrysler 
Phaeton, a 1906 Compound Light Touring 
Car, a 1916 Crane-Simplex Touring, an 1899 
De Dion Bouton Tricycle, a 1933 Duesenberg 
Speedster, a 1930 Du Pont Royal Town 
Car, a 1929 Essex Speedabout, a 1909 Ford 
Touring, a 1931 Ford Deluxe Phaeton, a 
1905 Franklin Gentleman’s Roadster, a 1912 
Franklin Runabout, a 1904 Knox Touring, a 
1927 Fincoln Coaching Brougham, a 1923 
Maxwell Touring, a 1929 Mercedes-Benz 


Drop-Head Coupe, a 1913 Mercer Raceabout, 
a 1902 Oldsmobile Runabout, a 1902 Packard 
Touring, a 1930 Packard Speedster Runabout, 
a 1931 Packard convertible sedan, a 1938 
Pierce Arrow Runabout, a 1910 Rolls Royce 
Tourer, a 1938 Rolls Royce Sedanca de Ville, 
a 1909 Stanley Steam Runabout, a 1909 
Stearns toy tonneau, a 1927 Stutz Black Hawk 
two-passenger speedster, and a 1909 Thomas 
Flyabout. 

As you can see, these are no run-of-the- 
mill cars, and one of these two rare Bugati 
Royales was valued at $250,000.1 mean, they 
are quality cars, as you no doubt are aware. 

Sports Promotions 

Snow’s quite a problem at Fake Tahoe, 
not so much in the summertime as it is in the 
[laughing] winter. But we have had problems 
where we’ve had snow in June, and we hold 
our Harrah’s Invitational Golf Tournament in 
June, and we have, on some occasions, had to 
cancel maybe a day’s play on account of the 
snowing. 

I remember one incident very distinctly. 
I think it was the first year the Incline Village 
opened, and I was playing golf with Andy 
Williams, and Joe DiMaggio, and Clarence 
Hinsley, and it was snowing pretty good that 
day, but we all had our foul weather gear 
on, and it was, I think, a shotgun start, and 
I started on number one—our foursome 
did—and when we got around to number 
nine, here it’s snowin’ pretty heavily, and— 
well,, not heavily. I mean big snowdrops and 
snowflakes. Our people that were running 
the tournament there, in charge of the course, 
were standing there waiting, and I said, “Well, 
what’s goin on?” There was quite a few people 
around. 

They said, “Well, we just wondered if you 
want to call off the tournament.” 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


63 


And [laughing] it hadn’t occurred to me 
prior to that time because I was enjoying it. 
But we did call it off that day. 

We give daily prizes at each course. It 
was for low gross and low net at that time, 
plus our foursome prizes. And in the event 
of a cancellation of this type, which was only 
for the day, however, we had a drawing, and 
the low gross is generally the better golfer 
wins that because they’re closer to par. But 
in drawing this one time, I remember this 
Chinese fellow, Dan Lee, that owns Ming’s 
restaurant in, I think, Palo Alto, he was a 
fifteen handicap golfer; he won low gross, and 
that got a big laugh out of everyone. I think 
my name was drawn for a TV set, a portable 
TV set; naturally, I didn’t accept it, but it was 
drawn for someone else, however. 

It did add a little spice and flavor, even 
though there was a cancellation, and people 
did enjoy receiving the awards in this 
manner. J don’t think they would every day, 
however, but this was kind of a break in the 
monotony—not that it’s monotonous, I don’t 
mean it that way, but it is a far cry from the 
usual, I’d say. 

And referring to our golf tournaments, 
it’s one of our major promotions, and we’re 
just getting set up for our eleventh annual 
invitation at Lake Tahoe. We’re playin’ three 
courses up there. At one time, we did use 
Glenbrook, which is a nine-hole course, a 
beautiful little course. However, it’s more 
practical to use the eighteen-hole golf courses. 
When we first started, there was a lack of golf 
courses in the area; however, now, there is the 
beautiful Incline Village golf course, and the 
Edgewood Tahoe golf course, which is right 
across the street from Harrah’s. It’s a beautiful 
course. And now, the last couple of years, 
we’ve been using the Tahoe Country Club, 
which is on the California side, because it is 
an eighteen-hole course. And it expedites the 


play by having eighteen-hole courses rather 
than a nine-hole course. 

Our tournament at the Lake was very 
popular. It’s known as the “Rolls Royce of 
tournaments,” the reason being that if you 
can make a hole in one on any hole, the 
party making the hole in one will receive 
a Rolls Royce, which—we have given four 
away. However, if there should be more than 
one hole in one during the tournament, they 
would determine who wins the Rolls Royce by 
the shake of the dice, which hasn’t occurred 
as yet. 

When we first started, on Glenbrook, it 
has a little short hole; it’s only about sixty 
yards. We don’t try to hide the pin placement 
behind a trap there; we put it in the middle 
of the green, ’cause we like to give the people 
a good chance to make a hole in one. We 
thought that we’d have multiple hole in ones 
in this particular hole, and we didn’t; we never 
have had one in that hole. And we’re not using 
Glenbrook any more. 

I think opening day of Incline Village, 
A1 Reale, from Hayward, California, made a 
hole in one on the eighth hole. It’s a hundred 
and fifty-yard hole, and I think he made it 
with a five iron, And to commemorate the 
occasion, we put a plaque on that tee, which is 
still there. It’s a bronze plaque on the cement, 
a tombstone effect thing. We have given four 
Rolls Royces. 

Recently, since our hotel opened in Reno, 
we’ve had a Reno invitational. By invitational, 
I mean this is by invitation only. I mean, 
there’s quite a demand to play in Harrah’s 
tournaments, and to qualify, a person has to 
be a good casino customer of ours, or else one 
of our entertainers, or celebrity-type people. 
We feel that our casino players, I guess they 
enjoy rubbing elbows with celebrities like a 
Joe Namath, or a Joe DiMaggio, or a Dizzy 
Dean, or Willie Mays, and people of that 



64 


Robert A. Ring 


category. They enjoy meeting with them, 
and it adds quite a bit to it. And, of course, 
we’ve had any number of entertainers and 
footballbaseball celebrity-type people. 

Since our hotel opened in Reno, we felt 
that it [would] be advantageous to have 
a Reno invitational, which we’ve had two 
now. We hold that in October. In our Reno 
invitation, we try to change the format 
somewhat. I mean, basically, the format is the 
same; however, we don’t give a Rolls Royce 
here. We give a Ferrari on a designated hole. 

Our very first tournament, Hack Miller 
(he’s the sports editor, I think, for the Deseret 
Bee, or one of the Salt Lake papers), he made 
a hole in one on the eighth hole at Incline, the 
same one in which A1 Reale had made a hole 
in one. So we have given four Rolls Royces at 
Lake Tahoe, and two Ferraris in Reno. 

But like I say, it has become quite a 
promotion, and it is quite a thing for our 
year-round customers, to mingle with some of 
these entertainers and celebrities. Our format 
was quite successful, and various casinos in 
Las Vegas and the Lake Tahoe and Reno area 
have more or less copied our format, which I 
think—I guess it’s flattering if they think our 
format’s that good. 

[Are these tournaments my idea?] Oh, no. 
I don’t know whose idea they were. I’m the 
golf nut of the outfit, I guess—or originally 
was. I forget how the idea started. Originally, 
we used to put on a little sportswriters’ 
deal at Glenbrook, and we invited a lot of 
sportswriters from the Reno area up there 
for a one-day event, and then we’d take them 
to the South Shore Room for a dinner show 
afterwards. We had some local coaches; area 
coaches, not local, I mean Douglas County 
and Carson City, and things of that nature. 
But we don’t have that any more, however. 

There was a time we used to have a 
Lawrence Welk—when Lawrence Welk’s 


group would perform up there—we had a 
tournament for several years, where members 
of his group would play certain Harrah’s 
people, and it was more or less a fun outing. 
We used to have an annual event like that. 
But those things wear themselves out, and we 
don’t do that any more. 

At one time Mr. Harrah was quite involved 
with hydroplanes. He owned the Tahoe Miss, 
which wound up being the national champion 
one year, and it was quite a promotion. We 
felt that it put Harrah’s name throughout 
the country, and especially being a national 
champion. 

We used to have the hydroplane races at 
Lake Tahoe, which was a beautiful setting. 
Bill eventually got out of that, too. But it was 
quite a promotion, and I think it did make a 
lot of people Harrah’s-conscious throughout 
the country. 

It takes many facets. I mean, everybody’s 
not a golf nut, or everybody’s not a sportscar 
not, or everyone’s not a hydroplane fan, but it 
takes multiple promotions, really, to saturate 
the country. 

One of our earlier promotions—we were 
always conscious of the fact that we had to 
keep our name in front of the public in some 
manner, and maybe even go out of the areas. 
I guess one time, we did sponsor a bowling 
team to go back to the National Bowling 
Congress (and I forget where it was at that 
time; might’ve been the Midwest somewhere, 
Chicago or Detroit, and I don’t think we 
won it [laughing]), but we did get some local 
publicity out of it, and we got some national 
publicity. And also, we used to go in for 
semipro baseball, and Harrah’s sponsored a 
team that won the state crown two or three 
years. And one year we went back to Wichita 
to the—I don’t know what they call it, the 
world series of the semipro. we won a couple 
of games, but we didn’t win it all. And, of 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


65 


course, it was quite an experience, and we 
did make some people aware of Harrah’s, 
which is an ever-continuing job. I mean, 
it’s remarkable how many people think of 
Nevada as a very desolate area, and cowboys 
and Indians, and things of that nature. And 
a lot of people, when they think of Nevada, 
they think of Las [laughing] Vegas ’cause Las 
Vegas has done an excellent job of advertising 
and promoting. 

The Gaming Industry Association 

[Would I like to talk about the Gaming 
Industry Association and its role in casino 
gaming and the entertainment complex?] 
Well, I think the Industry [Association] 
has been a major influence on a lot of the 
entertainment areas. And from time to time, 
there has been, oh, different things, where one 
casino might be doing something that basically 
wasn’t good for the industry, and it might be 
called to the Industry’s attention, generally. 
Like, Chuck Munson was head of the Industry 
originally, did an excellent job, now, Les Kofoed. 
And he’s doing a fine job, and they’re on top of 
anything that might give the industry a black 
eye. And I think they have coordinated, and 
whenever there’s any disturbances between 
different operators, I think they’re the first ones 
to know about it. And they might call in regards 
to what’s going on here, what’s going on there, 
and if there’s any disagreement, there might 
be a meeting of some sort where it’s always 
straightened out. But I think it’s been a very 
healthy situation, and will remain to be. 

[Why was I so interested in organizing 
the industry association?] Well, basically, to 
keep the industry solidified—just so it would 
be operated on a high level, as we feel that it 
should be. The same old thing again. I mean, 
[if] things aren’t done properly, things could 
come to pass pretty quick. 


[Did it take some persuasion to get some 
of the other operators in?] Well, it did. I 
don’t know why. I think I attended the first 
meeting down there, and I don’t know how 
they came about, all to attending the meeting. 
It was through various efforts, I guess, to have 
them come from Elko and Winnemucca and 
all of northern Nevada here. And it was a 
pretty healthy meeting, and all of a sudden, I 
think some of the smaller clubs or casinos felt 
that the major casinos should do above and 
beyond their [laughing] call of duty, I think. 
It’s just like “orchestra wives,” [laughing] 
I guess. But I don’t know—I think they’re 
beginning to see eye to eye. I think they all 
feel that they benefit in some manner. Some of 
the people that are the first to criticize are the 
ones that didn’t want to go along originally, 
and if they have any complaints, they will run 
to the Industry, which is, like I mentioned 
earlier, generally always worked out fine in 
the past—. Well, I shouldn’t say in the past. 
But I think it just keeps things under control 
so people can’t point a finger to the state of 
Nevada (well, we’re talking northern Nevada, 
really). And I think the Industry has done a 
real good job. 

[What do I think is their best specific 
contribution?] Well, I don’t know what it is, 
other than just what I’ve mentioned. I mean, 
they consolidated, and whenever there’s any 
problem, if anyone has a complaints, they go 
to the Industry, and the Industry chases it 
right down. Things could get out of hand if it 
wasn’t for the Industry, and people having the 
confidence in going to the Industry. 

I think that [slot machine] tax rebate 
was quite a thing [achieved by the Industry 
Association]. I think that was a remarkable 
job, and it took a lot of doing, like six, 
seven years—I don’t remember. I think Bill 
Swackhamer did a tremendous job. I guess 
there was two or three people that were on 



66 


Robert A. Ring 


that. But it’s money that should be retained 
in Nevada. 

Philosophical Attitudes on Gaming 

In regard to your question here, on what 
effect does gaming have on development of 
other industries, I think, well, gaming, as 
such—. I think we more or less are a complex, 
really, with tourism and entertainment in the 
theater-restaurants we put on. It’s a multi¬ 
faceted thing. It’s not strictly gaming, I don’t 
think. It’s kind of a tourism complex, I guess. 
I think there’s no question that it has a great 
impact on development of other industries. At 
first blush, or something, I think people would 
hate to move an industry in here, the fact that 
this is [a] twenty-four-hour town. It’s different 
[laughing] than any other town, I guess. And 
they have always been concerned, I think, 
about absenteeism, and I think it’s probably a 
false concern. I would probably feel that way 
if I was coming in, but I think the state or the 
economic development department made a 
study on it. And I think that they found out 
from past experiences and research they’ve 
done that absenteeism was actually less in 
Reno, or in Nevada, than in comparable states. 
I think the tax climate and the physical climate 
is beneficial to people that come in. In fact, I 
think there’s a[n] editorial in the Journal this 
morning [March 30, 19721]—I don’t know 
if you saw that or not. It says, “California’s 
Tax Load Beneficial to Nevada.” Whether 
that refers to this particular instance or not, 
I don’t know. 

It says, “Nevadans often complain about 
how they are overburdened with taxes. 
But when they do, there is often a former 
resident of another state around who can 
tell them that, compared to other states, 
they have it good, real good.” Then they 
give a case in point of quoting the Pacific 


Business Bulletin, published by the California 
Chamber of Commerce in Sacramento. The 
report was an actual case, but they don’t 
bring out any specifics as to what business 
it was, or what county. And the letter from 
the plant location firm in the county says 
that, “We are attempting to provide for XYZ 
subsidiary, a plant to be located in your 
county.” And anyhow, it goes on, such and 
such, and they quoted the rates, and basically, 
it says it intended and anticipated a three 
million-dollar inventory, and the assessed 
valuation of the inventory, based on last year’s 
personal property tax program, would have 
been $525,000, and the cost of the company 
would represent $54,000 annually to personal 
property tax, worth almost a million dollars 
over ten years. It would be a substantial cost 
to the company. 

It said, “In contrast to this cost, Nevada, as 
I understand, does not have an inventory tax, 
and, in addition, Nevada real estate property 
taxes will be much lower.” And the purpose 
of the letter is to bring to us an actual case 
history of the situation that has caused the 
loss—well, it was to this county in California 
of a very worthwhile industry because the 
personal property tax and the rate over the 
areas such as Nevada. And the above letter 
of lament to a California county is one more 
indicator that Nevada has profited by getting 
along without numerous types of taxes found 
in the states. 

So, tax-wise, it is advantageous, even 
in personal property taxes. There’s quite a 
few people, like airline pilots, make their 
home here. And they commute, say, from 
here to the Bay area, and then maybe they’re 
overseas flights. One of my neighbors is a 
Pan-American flier. And I think the reason for 
this is brought out that they like the climate 
basically, and they like clean air, and they like 
the area. Everybody has different hobbies, 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


67 


and there is x-amount of places to go. Like, 
you like to go out in the desert, yourself, and 
other people like to go skiing, and I think they 
had two inches of new snow on one of the 
mountains yesterday And I heard the snow 
reports yesterday, coming downtown, and 
skiing was excellent. And here it is, almost 
April. And, then, of course, the fishing, 
and I think whatever your hobby might be, 
there is access to it here in the state, which 
is beneficial. And, of course, the congestion 
of other areas— lots of times, people will 
question long hours at some—not long hours, 
but people might work a split shift, or they 
might work in various capacities in some of 
the casino areas or management end, and 
people, in discussing [it] with them, they 
think that it’s not an eight-hour day (which 
it basically is). But they don’t realize. Say, in 
the Bay area, the San Francisco area, they 
think that they’re working eight hours, but 
they’re commuting I don’t know how many 
hours, back and forth. I mean, portal to portal, 
or something of that nature is different in 
a metropolitan area than it is in a state like 
Nevada. And, of course, the conditions of 
your air and pollution levels are so much 
better here. So consequently, it should benefit 
the development of other industries, which it 
has, as you know. 

I went down to Lake Havasu on a junket 
with the Reno Chamber of Commerce in 
regards to a McCulloch land development 
deal, and it was brought out down there— 
and, of course, this is in Arizona. But it was 
brought, the same thing [laughing] that 
rid mentioned in regards to airline pilots 
commuting. Several of them have their 
families there—or, more than several, I say— 
that commute to Los Angeles for the same 
reason that I mention here. So they don’t like 
the hustle and bustle of the metropolitan 
areas, and I guess they have free access to 


the airlines—I mean, commuting. I forget, I 
don’t know any details as to their hours, but 
they don’t work a five-day week or a six-day 
week, I don’t think. They kind of concentrate 
their time when they have more leisure time at 
home. And when they’re ffyin overseas, I don’t 
know just how that works, but it is beneficial, 
I think, to have a home in an area where they 
like to raise their family. 

The second question here is what political 
and economic control do gaming operators 
exercise in the state? I don’t think that it’s 
any different than any other state. It’s for a 
major business. I think it would be the same 
situation [for] a steel company, or a motor 
company, or anything of that nature. 

The number three question says, has 
gambling been a factor in the population 
growth? Well, most assuredly, it has, but 
again, you’re talking “gambling,” and we like 
to think of it as what we generally refer to as 
“gaming.” But it is an entertainment complex, 
really. And I think the figures that have been 
used in the past, in a few recent years, I think 
the influx of tourism, your tourists, I think 
we’ve figured in the state of Nevada was like 
22,000,000 each year. So to have 22,000,000 
people stop in or pass through your state, 
it’s got to include more jobs. Or, is that what 
we’re talkin’ about? Well, population growth, 
yes. Someone’s got to man the gas pump, and 
serve the food, and things of that nature. And 
naturally, you have to have more doctors, or 
people to take care of the 22,000,000—not 
that they all require dental services, or things 
of that nature, but I mean, it certainly has 
increased the population of the state without 
question. 

Then here’s, what impact does gaming 
have on the ratio of suicides, divorce, crime, 
mental illness? Well, [laughing] it’s a hard 
one to answer. I think any figures that do 
come out, I think they’re generally on a per 



68 


Robert A. Ring 


capita basis, which isn’t a true figure, as far 
as Nevada’s concerned. I mean, if you have 
22,000,000 peoples and—I don’t know— 
what’s our population, 500,000, or something 
like that?—and I think the FBI figures that per 
capita, our crime is higher than most states, 
or some states, and that’s on a per capita 
basis. And with 22,000,000 people cornin’ 
through, you could use, per capita, we use 
more gasoline, we drink more whiskey, we 
attend more church services, or any number 
of things. So I don’t know if per capita’s a true 
figure or not. As far as suicides [laughing] or 
divorces, I don’t know how you would answer 
that. 

[These are the standard accusations 
against the industry. We might well try to deal 
with them.] Well, I don’t know how to answer 
that, other than your “per capita” again. It’s 
the same old thing. But I think this was kinda 
answered a little bit up above, in this, what 
effect does the gaining have on development 
of other industries. We have more people, of 
course. I don’t know what the divorce rate or 
suicide rate is in other states, but gaming is not 
responsible for all that. Right now, I guess the 
major problem in the country is drugs. And 
that’s not all Nevada. I guess there’s suicide, 
and I guess people do things there that they 
could point fingers at. And, of course, there’s 
gaming in x-amount of states—was it thirty- 
four, or some, other states? I don’t know what 
the divorce rates are there, or if the divorce 
rates in the other states are attributed in this 
manner. Maybe it’s attributed to drugs, or 
maybe it’s attributed to the pressures of other 
types—I mean, metropolitan pressures. It’s 
easy enough to point a finger somewhere, but 
how do they prove it? 

What influence does gaming exercise on 
the nature and level of governmental services? 
I think on this, if we go back to the tourist 
figure again—I mean, 22,000,000 people, 


you have to have more highway patrolmen, 
and maybe more hospital care, or—. Not that 
that’s governmental, but you have to have 
more police people. And I think a lot of this 
reverts back to our tourism-entertainment 
complex deal. It’s not a per capita figure, but 
with that many people coming through, it 
has to increase the levels of different forms 
of government. 

So the influence, I guess, is to increase it, 
really, as far as the level is concerned. 

What is the effect of gambling on the 
total welfare of the state? Well, there are some 
figures on that. We could probably revert to 
those if we have to, but there’s no question, I 
mean, with the tourism again. It all reverts 
back to tourism. 22,000,000 people—it’s more 
jobs; and more jobs, that means more payroll; 
and more payroll means more expenditures 
from the people that are earning the payroll, 
and also, it means more taxes. And I guess it 
all reverts back to legalizing the gaming in— 
wasn’t it ’31, or something like that those kind 
of depression years. And why they legalized 
it, I don’t know. I guess there was some going 
on. They might as well license them and tax 
them. I don’t know who thought of it, or 
how it was brought out, but it was definitely 
a boon to the state. More people means 
more of everything—neon—not neon signs 
because neon’s kinda passe’, but more signs, 
more highways, better highways, and more 
band-aids, more peanuts, the whole schmear. 
So, as far as the effect on the total welfare, I 
think it’s tremendous. I don’t know how many 
employees we have, but I remember like I told 
you, in 1938, we had six employees, and now, 
in the summertime, between here and Lake 
Tahoe, we have around 5,000 with the hotel 
going up there. That’s an impact on a lot of 
things, such as economic growth, and more 
jobs, and a few dollars poured into the steel, 
and cement, and—well, the plasterers, and 



Modern-Day Operation of an Entertainment Complex 


69 


the plumbers, etc. There’s more jobs there. 
Different trades are kept busy. You name it, 
and I guess they’re all involved. 

[What do I think about the general social 
atmosphere? Do I think the people here 
are more active in civic affairs than other 
places because, or in spite of, gaming, or less 
active? Do they depend more on the casinos 
to finance things, or to take care of civic 
problems?] Oh, I don’t know if they expect 
them to take care of civic problems, but 
they certainly come running whenever they 
[laughing] want anything; I mean, that’s got 
to be second nature, which is not fair, really. 
They always want to “go to the clubs.” In other 
words, instead of getting everybody involved 
in x-amount of dollars, if you’re getting twenty 
people at five dollars, they’d rather come 
to the casino and get one hundred dollars 
from them to save a little leg work. I think 
it’s getting to be on a lesser degree. I think 
people are beginning to realize that you can 
only go so far. 

But as far as social events, there’re things. 
I know that many of the people in the gaming 
areas and the entertainment complexes are 
quite involved, and they have a tendency to 
do things properly. I think, in some senses, 
they upgrade them, and they think a lot more 
positive than maybe some smaller business 
might. They think big in a lot of ways. Just 
like, well, putting on the air races, and things 
of that nature. I think those are beneficial, 
and I know that the whole town gets out on 
that one, and the bankers, and the gaming 
people, entertainment people. I’m not saying 
that the entertainment and gaming people are 
responsible for it, but without them, it would 
be a lesser degree. Well, actually, [laughing] 
I think an air raced give people an excuse to 
come to an entertainment capital. They like to 
get into these areas for a little change of pace, 
I’d say. A lot of people like an excuse just to 


have to come to Nevada—I mean, not a[n] air 
race excuse, but a lot of people like to include a 
trip to Nevada if they’re passing through from 
the Midwest to the West Coast, or West Coast 
to the East. And some of them’d like to find 
an excuse just to have meetings in these areas. 

I think Mr. Harrah mentioned just 
yesterday—which has nothing to do with 
Nevada, but we were having a board meeting, 
and—well, that’s beside the point. But anyhow, 
it was brought up, “Where do you think 
most of the board meetings are held during 
the month of May throughout the country?” 
don’t think anyone had the answer. But he 
knew what the answer was. It’s Indianapolis, 
Indiana. That’s where they have the five 
hundred-mile race. If they legally hold their 
board meetings, then they might as well have 
one where there’s something else going other 
than the gray flannel suit business. 

[Do I think that the gaming casinos or 
the entertainment complex as a whole has 
had anything to do with loosening racial 
restrictions, or tightening restrictions?] Well, 
unquestionably, they’ve loosened them. We’re 
a great exponent of the minority group. We 
have many minorities, andpercentage-wise, I 
think that we’re above whatever requirements, 
and not that there is a requirement. We’ve 
always been a leader in that area, I believe. 
There was a time there were restrictions, as 
we all know. Minority groups even coming 
into hotels and casino areas, and things of 
that nature, which is long since past. That 
was something that did evolve, and I think we 
were one of the leaders there. Entertainment- 
wise—I mean, some of our better entertainers 
are of what is called the “minority class.” But 
I think that Nevada as a whole has—I guess 
they’re above the national ratio—I think, I’m 
guessing—I don’t know. 

[Do I recall any incidents that would 
illustrate what I’m saying about the minorities 



70 


Robert A. Ring 


in the casino and in the hotel?] Well, we didn’t 
have a hotel at that time. But I know that there 
were people that objected to “rubbing elbows,” 
as it were, with certain minority groups. They 
would be affronted if they were allowed in 
the casino, and these things don’t change 
overnight. I think they have to evolve, really. 
And I believe they’re evolving pretty good. 

I remember one time when I was on the 
floor of the Casino here in Reno there was 
some female came out of the ladies’ room, 
and we had a maid in there that was one of 
the minority groups. And, oh, this was, oh, in 
the ’40’s, I guess, or early AO’s. And, of course, 
this gal objected to it, and she came out, and 
she wanted to know who was responsible, and 
such and such, for having a certain person of 
that race in attendance there. I was the party 
that talked with her, and I just told her that it 
was a public place, and that she was welcome 
to patronize our place, but she didn’t have to. 
I mean, if she didn’t like the way we operated 
our place, there was other ones up and down 
the street. She could take her pick. No one 
forced her in here. I know she was pretty 
upset. 

[What about the customers? Have we had 
any incidents of blacks, for example, choosing 
Harrah’s as a target?] Not to my knowledge, 
no. [Any incidents of white customers 
objecting to someone who was standing 
next to them, also a customer?] Not to my 
knowledge. I don’t know. There might have 
been, but I’m not aware. But I know that I’ve 
had a lot of the black people compliment us 
on the way they’ve been treated. 

And just an incident yesterday, there 
were some people in the hotel (I’d rather not 
mention their names), the wife of a national 
celebrity, sport celebrity, and she was telling 
she feels so much more at home at Reno 
and Lake Tahoe than she does, say, in the 
Las Vegas area. She knows her way around 


here, and they’ve never been bothered in any 
manner. 

I think I mentioned earlier in our 
discussions that we’ve always felt, regardless— 
well, not always felt, but I mean now, with 
your minority groups participating in the 
fun of the slot machines and things of that 
nature. But we’ve always felt that, you, being 

Mrs._, that you could walk in any 

Harrah’s operation, Mr._could, if he 

had an appointment, or something, he could 
have you make him aware that you’re going 
to be in our Bingo parlor, or playing our slot 
machines, or partaking of a cabaret show, or 
things of that nature. The people that know 
Harrah’s feel that they can go in without being 
bothered. If there should be any need to—if 
someone had been bothered, well, we have our 
hosts and our pit bosses and our supervisors 
in every department that’re alerted to those 
things. And we have security people on the 
floor, and it’s no problem. I think it’s a known 
fact. I know I’ve had so many people tell me 
that they feel that they can bring their wife 
down and let her play slot machines and go 
away, and not even worry about it, which is 
very complimentary, I would say, which is a 
far cry from the eye shade type deal. 

[Would I like to see casino gaming 
develop in other states?] Oh, I don’t know 
if I’d like to see it. I know it would be pretty 
hard to control. Nevada’s done a great job of 
it, and it’s not an overnight thing. And I think 
it would be really hard to control. 





5 


Civic Affairs 


Regarding civic affairs, I have participated 
in various activities. Some of the clubs that 
I belong [to] —like the Elks’ Lodge, and the 
board of directors of the Prospectors’ Club, 
and Hidden Valley Country Club—. I used 
to be active in the Horseless Carriage Club, 
which I haven’t been [to] recently I’ve been 
on the board of directors of the Chamber of 
Commerce. I’m presently on the board. My 
term will expire the first of July. I am on the 
Mayor’s Committee, which is referred to as 
a citizens’ advisory committee. And I’m on 
the board of directors of the Reno Unlimited; 
that’s the organization to keep the downtown 
area stimulated and upgrade the downtown 
area. I’m also currently the president of 
the Nevada State Golf Association. When I 
participate in any of these events, naturally, 
I’m doing this personally (but I guess I’m 
giving my personal thoughts), but there’s 
always in the back of your head that you are 
representing Harrah’s, and naturally, we want 
to do whatever we can. We’re always looking 
out for the welfare of the community, and 
we don’t want to see anything that would be; 


negative to the community, or to Harrah’s, 
either. 

I belong to Our Lady of the Snows parish 
of the Roman Catholic church, but I haven’t 
been very active there. And basically, I’ve 
spent most of my time within the Harrah’s 
organization. I have run [for King of the] 
Mardi Gras. It was a fund raising affair for 
the St. Mary’s Hospital Guild, I think, for a 
resuscitator, or some piece of equipment, 
heart equipment, or lung equipment—I forget 
which. I was in that campaign. I finished 
it close to second, I guess. And it raised—I 
forget the amount of money at this time, but 
it was the most they had raised for the St. 
Mary’s Guild. 

[Which of these do I think performs 
the greatest service in building up the 
community?] Well, I think the citizens’ 
advisory committee, and, of course, the Reno 
Chamber, and Reno Unlimited—I think all 
of those. I guess the Chamber’s basically—it’s 
the oldest committee, and I think it’s—. Well, 
of course, the Reno chambers are nationally 
known, and I think they’ve done tremendous 



72 


Robert A. Ring 


for the city of Reno in many ways—tourism, 
and various and sundry promotions. 

[To enhance this contribution, what do 
I do?] Whatever— offhand, I don’t know 
exactly what it is, but I generally like to put 
my two cents’ worth in, and contribute to 
whatever I can. But specifically, I don’t know. 

I think, basically, my background’s mostly 
been people-oriented and promotion type 
things. And I think wherever I contribute, I 
think it’s from these areas. I reach back, and 
you just absorb a lot of methods through the 
years where you might contribute—it’s just 
kind of a second nature, really. Whenever 
there are projects that come up, there’s general 
discussion, and I think a basic knowledge 
of people, and promotions, and community 
reactions—I think these things come to light 
at that time. 

[What kinds of things would I like to push 
for now, in these various organizations?] Well, 
always upgrading Reno. Specifically, I don’t 
know of any one item, but anything that’s for 
the betterment of Reno and Nevada. And I 
don’t have any specific situations. 

I know one thing that came up at the 
citizens’ advisory committee was this DETRAR 
I also am a member of the Rotary Club of 
Reno. And I think it was John Tachihara, he’s 
very well versed in the situation. And actually, 
I think the drug thing is quite appalling. The 
reason I mention the Rotary Club of Reno, 
John made a presentation there once that 
raised a lot of peoples’ eyebrows, and I did 
have a little—I think my first awakening as 
to the drug situation was two or three years 
ago, I was on the committee that selected the 
Junior Miss for the Junior Miss pageant, the 
Nevada representative. And in doing this, 
we interviewed about fourteen girls. They 
were the finalists for Junior Miss of Nevada. 
In interviewing these girls—they were all 
high school girls, and the question came up 


about the use of drugs. And some of the girls 
said that there was fifty percent—anywhere 
from fifty to eighty percent of high school 
students that have tried drugs, not that they 
were habituals, but I mean, that was my 
first awakening to it. And then when John 
Tachihara presented this at the Rotary Club 
of Reno, he had given various incidences of 
different people that were involved, and how 
they were involved, and what little they had 
to do to combat these things—I mean, it was 
quite frightening. Then John presented the 
citizens’ advisory committee with this same 
pitch, and by that time, I was familiar, to some 
extent. And anyhow, the citizens’ advisory 
committee recommended to the mayor and 
the city council that they become involved 
financially so they would have a facility. There 
was such a lack of facilities to take care of these 
situations, and they did come up with some 
little house up on Fifty or Sixth Street. And I 
think since then, the city council has agreed to 
give $25,000 this year. And I guess the Washoe 
County has matched that fund, and I think 
the City of Sparks now has come up with an 
$8,000 figure. So they seem to be made aware, 
and I guess it’s all [laughing] through John 
Tachihara’s—not all of it, but I mean, he did 
awaken a lot of people. And actually, it is kind 
of frightening, because they’re talking about 
getting not teenagers, but grammar school 
children. They start from there. But that’s just 
one specific item, there. 

Of course, then, the recreation facilities— 
we’re always discussing those. They’re talking 
about inadequate facilities for the youth and 
the teenagers, and I think the citizens’ advisory 
committee, through the council, they make 
recommendations as to different programs, 
and even square dancing, and the whole 
schmear, tennis courts, and baseball, softball 
games, things of that nature. But I think Reno 
does have a very good program, with the ski 



Civic Affairs 


73 


program, the junior ski program, and all of 
these things. It’s many-faceted. There’s more 
than you realize. There’s swimming programs, 
and they’re doing a lot more than the general 
public knows. 

Of course, in the chamber, there’s always 
things coming up, like site locations for 
various areas. [Laughing] Right now, there’s 
a hot one goin’ for a site location for the 
chamber, itself, for the facilities. They do need 
a downtown location, and there’s actually 
nothing—I mean, the committee that was 
looking for a location on it, they’ve been 
looking for a couple of years, and they found 
nothing that was suitable. And if there was 
any suitable location, it’s just prohibitive, 
price-wise. So right now, they’re talking about 
constructing a facility—if it’s feasible—in 
front of the Pioneer Theater, which is going 
to be a hot potato, I guess. 

[Do I think it’s a good plan?] Well, it’s better 
than no plan at all. Whether it’s structurally 
feasible, that hasn’t been decided as yet. The 
main argument there is the aesthetic value 
to some people. But they talk both ways on 
this one. The front of the Pioneer Theater 
there, there’s a mass of cement. They did 
take away the park, and now they are trying 
to incorporate a little greenery in with this 
particular plan, and some of the discussion 
was that during the summer, you can’t stand 
there in front because of the reflection of the 
heat. And it’s not like a park used to be, in 
other words. 




6 


Conclusion 


I’ve been married to Ellen Lucille Watson 
since 1940, June eighth. And she’s originally 
from Salt Lake. And we have one son, Bob, Jr., 
who is twenty-nine years now. He’s employed 
at Harrah’s in the cashiering. And he has a 
son, a ten-year-old son, by the name of Robert 
Ring, III. 

I have enjoyed bein’ associated with Mr. 
Harrah, and all of our many employees, 
and our officers and department heads and 
managers. I think they’re above standard 
caliber people, and I believe they’ve done a lot 
for the gaining industry in the state of Nevada. 
And it seems that we’re only starting to 
move, since we have gone public. And having 
gone public, it opens up various avenues 
for expansion, which I think we mentioned 
earlier, that we are expanding at the Lake, 
Tahoe, with another 250-room hotel, which 
should open in the middle of summer of 1973, 
something that we’ve definitely needed, and 
it’s something that is beneficial to the casino 
and entertainment complex. We’ve noticed 
the growth of our business here since we’ve 
had the Headliner Room there. Lirst, we had 


the Headliner Room, the theater-restaurant 
in Reno, and we built the hotel around that 
casino area there, and since the hotel has 
opened, it’s made a whale of a difference. And 
it’s nice to be able to accommodate people in 
your own environment. 

As far as the philosophy of life, I think the 
Golden Rule is about as good as anything, and 
I’ve always felt that you should abide by that. 
And I feel that you get out of life what you 
put into it. I’ve always felt if you do anything 
good, you will be repaid for it, and vice versa 
[laughing]. 




Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



78 


Robert A. Ring 


Ames, William M. "Bill," 93 
Andriotti, Rome, 80 


B 


Bacharach, Burt, 132 
Bamboo Hut bar {Venice, 
California), 31 
Bank Club (Reno), 23 


Dandolos, Nicholas A. 

"Nick the Greek," 37 
Darin, Bobby, 126 
Davis, Sammy, Jr., 126, 
131 


DeBolt, Sam, 93 
DETRAP (Reno), 165-166 
Dietrich, Marlene, 16, 

119, 132 

Dog House bar (.Reno) , 23 
Don's Drugstore (Reno), 29 
Doyle, Darriel, 39 
Durante, Jimmy, 119 
Dyer, Lloyd, 80 



103-104. See also: Tan¬ 
go; Blackjack, see 
"Twenty-One"; Circle game, 
9, 10-13; Craps, 23, 30, 
32, 36-37, 47-48, 109-112; 
Faro Bank, 32, 37; 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


79 


Gambling games (con-) 
tinued): Ham and 

Bacon Wheel, 18; 

Keno, 32, 44-45, 

46-47, 48-49, 105- 
107; Race books, 33, 
37-38; Roulette, 13- 
14, 23, 112-113; Skee- 
Ball, 15, 17; Tango, 13, 
19, 20, 22, 23-27, 45; 
"Twenty-One," 23, 30, 

32, 107-109 

See also: Gaming 
language 

Gaming cheaters, 26, 34, 

36, 39-40, 44, 45-46, 

73, 76-79, 108, 114, 115- 
116 

See also: Gaming 
language 

Gaming Control Board, 
Nevada, 48, 49-50 
Gaming Industry Associa¬ 
tion of Nevada, 147-149 
Gaming language, 72, 

95, 96, 102-116 
Gaming licenses 
Garaventa, Joseph 'Bud," 


73, 

Golde; 


=n 7 Ho^0, 


(] 


io) , 

Goodman, Benny, 126 
Goofers, The, 118 
Goulet, Robert, 121-122 
Grand Cafe (Reno), 23 
Greyhound Bus Company, 
70-72 


Harrah's Automobile 
Collection, 135-141 

Harrah's Bingo, 27, 31, 

38-40 

Harrah's Casino (Reno), 

32-33, 34-38, 40-42, 55, 

76, 83, 84, 117 

Harrah-eaope (magazine), 

90-93 

Harrah's corporation, 23, 

52, 63, 68, 80-96, 98-102, 
128, 169-170 

Harrah's Invitational Golf 
Tournament, 141-146 

Harrah's Reno (hotel-casino), 
22, 23, 32, 5^<f57, 84, 

97, 144 

Harrah froeVhotel-casino) , 

22, 9-72, 83-84, 94- 

117 - 1 ^/^ 119 , 121 , 122 - 
128, 130, 133 
Tango (Reno), 23-27, 



rris, Phil, 121, 122 
Heart Tango (Reno), 24, 25, 
29, 30, 38, 72 
Hendrickson, Holmes, 80 
Horseless Carriage Club, 93, 
163 

Howe, Ed, 25 
Hughes, Howard, 59-60 


Inferno bar (Reno), 23 


H 

Harolds Club (Reno), 24, 


27, 

30 

, 32, 

33, 

52, 

54, 

56, 

60 





Harrah, 

John, 

13, 

17, 

18, 

32, 

33 

, 35- 

36, 

72 


Harrah, ' 

Willi 

am F 

9 

, 10, 

13, 

14 

, 19. 

20, 

21, 

25, 

30- 

31, 

33-34, 35-36 

, 52, 

57, 

58 

, 59, 

60, 

62- 

63, 80 

81, 

82 

, 96, 

118 

-119 

, 121, 


128, 134-136, 137-138, 139, 
140, 146, 158-159, 169 


J 

Jackson (piano player), 31 
Jacobs, Murray, 30 
Jacobs, Phil, 30 
Jacobs Clothing Store (Reno), 
30 

Japanese, 29-30 
Jet Commander plane, 61-62 
John Adams junior high school 
(Ocean Park, California), 4 
Judd, Ruth, 8 
Judd, Winnie Ruth, 8 



80 


Robert A. Ring 


K 


Kelly, Emmett, 123 
Kelly, Patsy, 16 
Kim Sisters, 116-117 
Kofoed, Leslie S., 147 
Kovacs, Ernie, 118 


Olympic games (Winter, 1960), 
119, 132 

Overland Hotel (Reno), 23 


P 


Labor relations, 101-102 
Las Vegas, Nevada, 44, 
48, 52, 130 
Lee, Dan, 142 
Liberace, Lee, 118, 126 
Lost Horizon (movie) , 

16 


Martin, Dean, 126 
Martin, Robert E 
80 

Mayor's Adviso 
mittee, Re 
164, 16, 

Merm< the |,>'12 7-12 8 

Milil ack, 14 4-145 

Mint (Reno), 32 

Munsc harles, G. 

luck," 147 


N 


Naish, J. Carroll, 16 
Negroes, 160 
Newton, Wayne, 127, 132 
Northern Club (Reno), 23 


Palace Club (Reno), 23 
Palm Springs, California, 
14-15, 16, 20 
Plaza Bingo Parlor (So* 
ern California), 



eno), 29 
-144 

" gaming boun- 
(Reno), 65-66, 67 
no Nevada, 20, 22-68, 
163-164, 165-168 
Reno Club Bingo (Reno), 30, 
31 

Reno, Unlimited, 164 
Rex Club (Reno), 27, 39 
Rey, Alvino, 118 
Ring, Ellen Lucille Watson, 
169 

Ring, Harry, 1 
Ring, Johanna Bresnan, 1 
Ring, Robert A., Jr., 169 
Ring, Robert A. Iir, 169 
Rolls Royce car, 119, 143 
Rotary Club (Reno), 165-166 
Roy's Clothiers (Reno), 20, 
25 

Russians, 29 


0 

Ocean Park, California, 
1 - 8 , 12 

Olympic games (1932), 
7-8 


S 

Sahati, Edmund "Eddie," 36-37 
St. Louis, Missouri, 1 
St. Mary's Hospital Guild 
(Reno), 164 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


81 


i 


Salmon River (Idaho), 58 
Santa Monica High School 
(California), 4, 8, 9, 

17 

Santa Monica Junior Col¬ 
lege (California), 9 
Schuster, George, 135-136 
Selznick, David 0., 17 
Sheppard, Maurice F., 80 
82 

Shills in gaming, 32, 33 
Ship and Bottle bar (Reno), 

23 

Silver Dollar bar (Reno), 

23 

Skelton, Red, 118 

Skimming, 51-52 

Slot Machines, 23, 30, 32, 

40, 41-42, 72-75, 114-116 
See also: Gaming cheaters, 
Gaming language 
Slot Machine tax rebate, 149 
Stateline Country Club (Lai 
Tahoe, Nevada), 21- 
Streisand, Barbra, 

Swackhamer, Will 


Vogel, Fred, 21 
Vogue Bingo Parlor (South¬ 
ern California), 13 


w 


Washington Grammar School 
(Ocean Park, California), 

4 

Welk, Lawrence, 121, 126, 
129, 131, 145 

Westwood, California (south) 

5 

Whitney, John 
Williams, And] 

Wine House pi jb""tReno) 

20 , 2 - 

Women a« f, 33, 100 



165-166 
Tahoe, Lake, 21-22, 54, 66 
ihoe Miss (boat) , 146 
Taquitz Canyon (California) 
16 

Tavern nightclub (Reno), 

23 

Tax Commission, Nevada, 49 
Temple, Shirley, 17 
Thomas, Danny, 121 
Town House nightclub (Reno) 
23 

Twin Otter plane, 61 


V 

Venice, California, 9, 10, 
12, 17-19, 20-21, 22, 




