Warren Nelson: 

Gaming from the Old Days to Computers 


Interviewee: Warren Nelson 
Interviewed: 1977-1978 
Published: 1978 
Interviewer: Keith Becker 
UNOHP Catalog #078 


Description 

Warren Nelson was born in Great Falls, Montana, in 1913. He went to high school and one year of college in Helena, 
Montana. He started his gambling career, a career that has lasted over forty-five years, in Montana. Nelson came to 
Reno at the request of a friend in 1936, and he started a keno game at the Palace Club that year. It was the first to 
be operated by a white man in Reno. He was at the Palace Club until 1942 when he enlisted in the Marine Corps. 
Later, he was part owner of the Waldorf Club for a time, worked at the Mapes for five years, and went back to the 
Palace Club for another eight years. 

In the early 1960s he and some other businessmen bought the Cal-Neva Club in Reno. They also opened the 
Comstock Casino in May of 1978. Warren Nelson also has minor interests in casinos in Las Vegas. He was one of 
the first presidents of the Gaming Industry Association. In his more than forty years in Nevada gaming, he has 
known many famous and infamous people in the gambling business and other walks of life. Warren Nelson is still 
in touch with his gaming origins in Reno, and because of his success, he can afford to give of himself to others today. 



Warren Nelson: 

Gaming from the Old Days to Computers 




Warren Nelson: 

Gaming from the Old Days to Computers 


The production of this oral history was supported in part by the U. S. 
Office of Education, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. 
However, the opinions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect 

THE POSITION OR POLICY OF THE U. S. OFFICE OF EDUCATION AND NO OFFICIAL 
ENDORSEMENT BY THE U. S. OFFICE OF EDUCATION SHOULD BE INFERRED. 


An Oral History Conducted by Keith Becker 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1978 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1978. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Introduction xi 

1. Background, Education 1 

2. Early Career in Gaming in Montana 5 

3. Palace Club, 1936-1942 9 

4. Military Service, 1942-1946 21 

5. Harrah’s Club, 1946-1948 29 

6. Waldorf Club 37 

7. Mapes, 1948-1954 41 

8. Palace Club, 1955-1962 49 

9. Club Cal-Neva, 1962-present 53 


10. Civic Activities, Experiences with Internal Revenue Service, 
Gaming Industry Association 


59 



Warren Nelson 


viii 


11. The Comstock Hotel, Plans for the Future 69 

12. Conclusions 77 

Original Index: For Reference Only 83 



Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Warren Nelson 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Introduction 


Warren Nelson was born in Great Falls, 
Montana in 1913. He went to high school and 
one year of college in Helena, Montana. It 
was in Montana that he started his gambling 
career as a very young man, a career that has 
lasted over forty-five years. He came to Reno 
at the request of a friend in 1936. He started 
a Keno game at the Palace Club that year; it 
was the first to be operated by a white man 
in Reno. He was at the Palace Club until 1942 
when he enlisted in the Marine Corps. Later 
he was part owner of the Waldorf Club for 
a time, worked at the Mapes for five years, 
and went back to the Palace Club for another 
eight years. In the early 1960s he, along with 
some other men, bought the Club Cal-Neva in 
Reno. These same men opened a new casino 
in May, 1978 called the Comstock. He also 
has minor interests in casinos in Las Vegas. 
He was also one of the first presidents of the 
Gaming Industry Association. Over the more 
than forty years that he has been a part of 
gambling in Nevada and Reno in particular, 
he has known many varied individuals, 


famous and infamous, in the gambling 
business and other walks of life. 

Mr. Nelson was very enthusiastic about 
doing this oral history. He was very open 
about all facets and periods of his life, and 
what is contained in this volume is the original 
transcript with only minor changes. The 
taping sessions took place in his office in the 
Club Cal-Neva in Reno from November, 1977 
to March, 1978. His office reflects the nature 
of the man. It is small and unpretentious and 
contains what is important to him. There are 
used Keno tickets that fill up half the room. 
There are awards and certificates from civic 
and charitable organizations on the walls. 
He is still in touch with his gambling origins 
in Keno, and because of his success he can 
afford to give part of his time and of himself to 
others today. He truly is a man who has been 
in gambling from the old days to the age of 
computers. 

The Oral History Project of the University 
of Nevada, Reno, Library preserves the past 
and the present for future research by tape 



Warren Nelson 


xii 


recording the recollections of people who 
have been important to the development of 
Nevada and the West. Transcripts resulting 
from the interviews are deposited in the 
Special Collections departments of the 
University Libraries at Reno and Las Vegas. 
Warren Nelson has generously donated the 
literary rights in his memoir to the University 
of Nevada, and has designated the volume as 
open for research. 

Keith Becker 

University of Nevada, Reno 
1978 



1 

Background, Education 


I was born in Great Falls, Montana, 
January 19, 1913. My father’s name was 
Lawrence Nelson; he was a chef of Danish 
extraction. He had been raised in Oregon. My 
grandfather came over from Denmark and 
joined the Northern army in the Civil War. 
At that time the name was Nelsen, s-e-n, but 
my grandfathers poor English and the lack 
of understanding of the sergeant that enlisted 
him put it down s-o-n, so since then it’s been 
N-e-l-s-o-n. 

Mymother’s name was Bertha Meisenbach. 
Her parents were born in Luxemberger.She 
came out to Montana from St. Louis as a 
young girl and married my father. I had a lot 
of relatives around Montana, on my mother’s 
side all German and Luxemberger extraction. 
I spent quite a bit of time with them up to 
the time I was five years old. At that time my 
mother became ill and died delivering a child; 
the child died too. Since then I have had no 
brothers or sisters. 

After my mother’s death, my father was 
a cook, a chef, in a restaurant there and 
couldn’t take care of me. I have people who I 


call aunt and uncle but who were actually my 
second cousins that took me down to a little 
town called Hysham, in southern Montana. 
Hysham was the county seat of the smallest 
county in Montana called Treasure County. 
It would be hard to believe that this was a 
real wild county in those days, there were 
cowboys who came to town on Saturday night 
with their pistols on their hip, and there was 
a shooting most every week. 

We lived on a one hundred-sixty acre 
ranch outside of the town, about forty miles 
out. The roads were very, very poor and we 
couldn’t drive the car across the creeks so 
we lived on the other side of the creek. We 
lived in a log cabin with no floor, a dirt floor, 
two rooms and a little lean-to on the outside 
where the kids slept. I had six cousins, four 
girls and two boys; I was the youngest. Being 
the youngest I was pretty well spoiled by the 
older ones. But, it was a good life for about 
four years. 

I went to school in Hysham up until the 
third grade, I believe, then went to the little 
town of Eden, Montana, with my relatives and 



2 


Warren Nelson 


went to school in a little county school. Six 
people in the school, five girls and one boy 
Needless to say, I was the only boy Being the 
youngest of the six children I probably took 
quite a bit advantage of the girls and of the 
teacher by bringing mice to school and trying 
to scare the girls all the time. This came back 
on me a couple of years later when my father 
remarried. 

My father married a young girl that was 
nineteen years old, just eleven years older 
than I. She was a very useful person and I 
moved to town to live with them. She had a 
great deal to do with my life. She had had a 
tough life herself. She was born in Oklahoma; 
her maiden name was Loutherback. She had 
a child by a former marriage. My step-sister 
is still alive; I don’t see her very often. She 
was very strict with me, but still very fair. She 
was a great help to me. I was nine years old 
when I moved in with them, but I still went 
every summer and stayed with the people at 
the ranch. I had great experiences as a young 
person on the ranch— helping put the hay 
and getting the cows. I became very fond of 
that kind of life. 

I finished grade school in 1926 I believe. 
I think that was the year that Charles Russell 
died. I remember that very vividly because 
he was a great friend of my father’s. One of 
the great things of my life is that I always tell 
everybody that I knew personally Charlie 
Russell. Charlie was a great man. He brought 
the first fresh pineapple I had ever seen 
from Hawaii and gave it to me. Brought it 
back on a ship because in those days there 
were no planes going back and forth. It was 
quite a treat and something very different. 
I can remember very vividly my father and 
Charlie Russell sitting in front of a still in the 
basement of our home making whiskey. I 
suppose it was pretty good bourbon, without 
the flavoring, because they used to sit there 


and drink this hot whiskey as it came out of 
the still and tell stories about the old days. 
Charlie Russell would bring a couple of illegal 
beaver hides all hooped up on a willow and be 
fletching the meat off them while they were 
drinking. It was a great experience that I’ll 
never forget. 

I suppose I was about twelve years old 
when I started in junior high, not a very 
good student, but got by all the time, full of 
mischief. One of the toughest things in my life 
was to go from a little country school and start 
in working with boys who I had never played 
with or been around. So you can imagine that 
I had a lot of trouble. I’d get punched in the 
nose every time I’d turn around; I had many 
a black eye and many a broken nose before 
I found out you can’t tease boys like you do 
girls. 

Going through junior high and into high 
school I suppose I grew up very fast. As a 
freshman in high school I got to be, I suppose, 
a little wild. Drinking dandelion wine and 
chokecherry wine if we could steal it or buy it. 
I became quite a problem for my parents. My 
father became very unhappy with me. I had an 
argument with him when I was a sophomore 
in high school about drinking and not going 
to school; I was going to get a job and go out 
on my own. I got a job at three dollars a day 
as an electrician’s helper; I worked for two 
days and my step-mother came and got me. 
She prevailed upon me to go to school over 
in Helena, Montana. 

The school that I attended was Carroll 
College; at that time it was called Mount 
St. Charles. Mount St. Charles was a high 
school and a college both. I think there were 
eighty-nine people in the college and about 
forty high school students. We had a football 
team, and I had a chance to do things that I’d 
never done before. I started to learn to like 
athletics and got real hung up trying to be a 



Background, Education 


3 


good basketball player. Although I was tall, I 
was very light. I weighed about one hundred 
thirty-five pounds and I was very awkward. I 
had never had any kind of experience at all in 
any kind of athletics. As a sophomore in high 
school I tried to play basketball, but Id fall 
down about every time Id try to run down the 
floor. I met a man by the name of Sid Smith 
who was a senior in college but who was also 
coaching the high school team. 

He said, “Kid you’re going to break your 
neck.” He then threw me a basketball and said, 
“I don’t want you to do anything but dribble 
this ball.” He would keep me three hours a 
night just dribbling that basketball around 
the floor. Dribbling that basketball gave me 
a sense of balance. I’m certain it had a great 
effect on me because I did it for at least three 
weeks or a month. It really changed my life. I 
learned how to turn and move. I never became 
a good athlete, but an adequate one. It was 
something I liked and there was nothing else 
to do at a Catholic college anyway; we never 
got out at night. It was a twenty-four hour 
thing; we either went to church or to school 
or played basketball and football. We also 
had a handball court, and I became pretty 
proficient at that. 

I had the usual experiences you would 
have in high school. In my senior year I played 
basketball; we had a pretty good team and 
did very well. It was a lot of fun, and I made 
a lot of friends. We did some traveling to the 
smaller towns and finally wound up coming 
in third in the zone basketball tournament in 
Butte, Montana. 

The next year I came back to Carroll 
College in 1930. It was sort of the start of 
the Depression; it really hadn’t hit yet, but I 
guess people could see it coming on. On the 
day of registration there was a new man who 
had come out from Notre Dame University to 
coach the football team. He looked at me and 


said, “Hello son, how are you? You’re Warren 
Nelson aren’t you?” 

I said, “Yes Sir.” 

He said, “How wouldyou like to play 
football for me?” I told him I didn’t think I 
was big enough. He said, “If you’ve got guts 
enough you’re big enough. I think you’re big 
enough; why don’t you come on out? I’d like 
to make an end out of you.” 

His name was Bill Jones. He had been one 
of the linemen for the “Four Horsemen;” he 
was one of the “Seven Mules.” He was just a 
fantastic guy; he gave me confidence that I 
had never had before. He’s still my friend. At 
this time he is the chief judge of the courts 
in Washington, D.C. He’s the counterpart of 
Judge Sirica; he’s now the head judge in the 
District of Columbia. I still see him all the 
time; he still talks about football and talks it 
very well. 

We had a reunion in 1971 of that football 
team. It was forty years since the team had 
been unbeaten, untied and unscored upon. 
I was a third-string end and saw very little 
action, but everybody treated me just like I 
had been the star so it was a great experience. 
My wife and I went; I think there were twenty- 
nine out of the thirty-nine members of that 
team at the reunion. The coach was there and 
all the priests who had a lot to do with me as 
I grew up. 

A priest by the name of Father McCormack 
and the principal of the school, Father Riley, 
were very good to me. They taught me a lot. 
In the middle of my freshman year in college 
I decided to become a Catholic, not at their 
urging, but at their suggestion. 

Sid Smith, the coach of the high school 
basketball team, was my sponsor into the 
Catholic religion. He was a big, tough, strong, 
mean guy as far as athletics was concerned, 
but a very gentle man underneath. He had a 
great influence on my life. I became very fond 



4 


Warren Nelson 


of him, and he certainly never gave me any 
of the best of it; he would make me do things 
that he wouldn’t make other people do. I can 
recall playing football and being an end trying 
to block halfbacks; when I tried to block a two 
hundred pound halfback I broke a thumb. It 
pained me terribly and naturally when I tried 
to block anybody I couldn’t hold them off with 
that broken thumb, so they were pushing me 
all over the field. The backfield coach for the 
team called to Sid Smith and told him to get 
me out of there and send him a tough end. Sid 
came over and asked me what was wrong. I 
said I didn’t know. He asked if I was hitting 
those guys and I said I was trying. 

He then said, “See if you can hit me.” He 
got down in position and tried to block me. 
We got into a hassle, just hitting each other 
around the football field. He was hitting me, 
and I was hitting him, but fortunately me 
being young and he was a coach and not in 
the same condition I was in, it wasn’t about 
ten minutes he was panting and I’d sort of had 
the best of him. He told me to go get a shower; 
I did and went back to my room. 

I was soaking my thumb because it was all 
swollen up when he came in and asked what 
happened. I said I’d broken my thumb, and 
he asked when I had broken it. I said on the 
first play that day. 

He asked, “Why didn’t you tell me?” 

I said, “You didn’t ask me.” We became 
very fast friends and later on he became a 
very religious person and still is in Montana 
and still my very dear friend. 

I went to school that year and part of 
the next year. The freshman came in, and 
they dropped the football team, had an 
appointment to West Point. I was very bent 
on going to West Point, but my background 
in mathematics was very, very bad, so it just 
didn’t look like I could make it. I had the 
appointment to West Point, wanted to go 


and was going to go, and I was taking the 
courses to do it. I went to a class taught by a 
priest who is now the bishop of the Spokane 
(Washington) Diocese, by the name of Bishop 
Topel. He asked me if I had taken advanced 
algebra in high school, and I said no; he then 
asked me what I was doing in this class, which 
was algebra. 

I replied, “Damned if I know.” That 
just about ended my aspirations to go to 
West Point because I just didn’t have the 
mathematical or educational background. 



2 


Early Career in 
Gaming in Montana 


When I left school, probably in November, 
I went back to a job I had had every summer 
for four summers, as a bellhop. I started that 
bellhop job when I was about fourteen and 
worked every summer. It was a very good job; 
I made a lot of money. It was in a hotel that my 
father had been the chef of; the operator was a 
good friend of my father’s and was very good 
to me. I learned an awful lot because in those 
days, the late 1920s and 1930, bootlegging 
was rampant. The hotels had a lot going on 
in them, not crime, but a lot of drinking 
and so on and so forth. I was at that time 
bootlegging—selling whiskey; everybody did 
it, it seemed the thing to do. I made a lot of 
money and spent it to go to school every year, 
so I guess it wasn’t all wasted. 

I learned a lot on that job. In January or 
February of that year (1930), a job that had 
been good for a hundred dollars a day went 
down when the Depression really hit. You 
couldn’t make a nickel a day, and my wages 
were fourteen dollars a month from the hotel; 
there were no tips, the rooms were empty, it 
was like a morgue. 


A friend of my father’s got a man to come 
over from Butte and open a Keno game. A 
Keno game at that time was called “Chinese 
Lottery.” It was a game that was well- 
received in Butte, Montana; and they had 
four or five games there. These games were 
the first to operate in Montana, naturally 
they weren’t legal. They would open and 
close at the whim of the officials that were 
running the state— county attorney, the 
judges, the sheriff. Like any other thing it 
was pretty much of a mess. 

When I heard that they were going to 
open the Keno game I went to my dad’s 
partner—my dad was kind of the guy that got 
it open, the partner was the guy that owned 
the place—his name was Cal Lewis. I went 
and asked him for a job; he said, “Well sure.” 

He put me to work for five dollars a day. 
The first night I worked my father came in 
and asked what I was doing there. I told him 
I worked there, and he told me to get out, he 
didn’t want me in there. His partner came 
over and told him, “Leave the kid alone.I told 
him to go to work and he’s going to work.” I 



6 


Warren nelson 


was eighteen and a half or nineteen then, so 
I stayed there. 

It was a very interesting game; it had a lot 
of mathematics. The mathematics that I didn’t 
have in college or high school, I started getting 
interested in. 

I took a trip over to Helena to talk to a 
priest there by the name of Father Rooney. 
He was the assistant president and had the 
reputation of being one of the world’s best 
mathematicians. In fact, they rated him fifth 
behind Einstein at that time in the United 
States or in the world I suppose. He was a 
very bright man. I told him about the game 
and how it was and what it was. He looked 
at it and said he understood it and that I 
could “do this if you do this” and showed me 
the formulas of what to do. I said, “Well OK 
Father, would you do that for me?” He told 
me to do it for myself. 

“This is how you do it, so do it.” 

This was before calculators and even 
before adding machines that amounted to 
anything. So, I took a roll of butcher paper 
and put it on the floor and started working 
out those formulas. Some nights I would go 
from one end of the room to the other on 
my belly moving backwards, figuring out 
those formulas. It was a great experience, 
and I think it had a lot to do with me in the 
gambling business since because I think I 
got a great understanding of numbers from 
it which is very important. 

We would open and close, back and forth, 
open for six months and close again. One time 
we closed and were out of work for five or six 
months, not having any money at the end. 
Whenever we would close, four or five of us 
young guys would go off hunting or fishing 
until we got open again. We had great times; 
we drank some—not too much—gambled 
some—not too much—but mostly did a lot 
of hunting and fishing and chased a few girls, 


the different things you do between the ages 
of nineteen and twenty-one. 

I guess I was the leader of these people. 
I loved to gamble. I would bet on anything 
at anytime, and I was very, very lucky. I had 
a good mind for gambling besides being 
lucky and wasn’t afraid to bet my money. I 
had a great reputation for being a good card 
player. I don’t think I really was but I had the 
guts to do it and would do it. My father did 
everything in the world to cure me of this, 
including bringing in people to try to cheat 
me, but, I was so lucky that I would even beat 
the people that were supposed to cheat. I guess 
I was supposed to learn the business that way 
instead of the hard way. I never did get to the 
point where I was a bad loser, and I never was 
afraid to gamble and not afraid to bet. 

This went on for four years, off and on; 
at one time I stopped because we got closed 
up. I became a pipe-fitter’s helper. I worked 
at that for eleven months. It was the toughest 
job that I ever saw. If I remember right, I was 
making four dollars a day. we were hanging 
four inch pipe on stringers about forty feet in 
the air. I was working with a little Swede who 
was about five foot tall. We were carrying forty 
foot, four inch pipes up a forty foot ladder. It 
was hard work; when I came in every night 
I was dead tired. I decided then that I wasn’t 
going to become a plumber. 

We opened up again and I went back into 
the gambling business for several months and 
then closed again. 

At that time I went to work in the county 
assessor’s office. I worked there about four 
months and became deputy county assessor, 
a political job. I became interested in politics 
at that time; I was a registered Democrat, and 
I was now twenty-one years old and decided 
I was going to be a politician. I went down to 
register to run for county assessor at the age 
of twenty-one. A lot of people told me I had 



Early Career in Gaming in Montana 


7 


a good chance and they thought it was a good 
idea. I was real happy with it and thought it 
was something of a “big-shot” thing to get 
elected. I put up the thirty dollars to register. 
My dad asked if I was sure this was what I 
wanted to do. I said I thought so. He said he 
could get me a job at the fire department, 
but I didn’t want to be a fireman and sit 
around twenty-four hours a day and wait for 
something to happen. He said I should think 
about security, and I said that was right. 

Within a few days, one of the people who 
was supposed to be a big wheel in the political 
format of Cascade County and Great Falls 
called me to his office. 

He said, “Warren, I’m glad to hear you’re 
running for county assessor. We need young 
fellows like you; I think it’s a good idea, and 
I’d like to see you go ahead with it.” 

This was a big thing for me, and I said, 
“Thank you Sir, that’s great.” 

He said that there was one problem, there 
was a fellow there they had to get rid of, and 
he told me what he wanted me to do. I thought 
it was kind of a dirty trick. 

I said, “Look, this man’s a friend of mine. 
I’ve known him, and I couldn’t do that to him.” 

He asked if I wanted to be county assessor. 
I said yes; he said if I didn’t do that I wouldn’t 
be. I started to say something, but he said, 
“That’s all!” So I left. 

About two days later I got a call from Reno 
wanting to know if I wanted to come down 
and open up a Keno game for a man called 
Francis Lyden. With no hesitation I said yes 
and when did they want me to be there. He 
said tomorrow and asked if I could bring a 
crew. I said I could and how many men did 
he want. He said four. I told him we would be 
there as soon as we could get a bus. 

I went to see my dad and told him about 
what I was going to do. He asked if I was sure 
this was what I wanted to do, and I told him 


I was absolutely positive. I didn’t want to be 
county assessor or have anything to do with 
the political end of it. 

He said, “Well kid maybe you’re right. I’d 
rather have you be an honest gambler than a 
crooked politician anyway.” This is not to say 
that all the politicians I’ve known have been 
crooked, they certainly haven’t; but I do think 
it was a great thing for him to say. The only 
other thing he said was, “Don’t fool around 
with the wrong kind of women when you go 
to Reno. Don’t get carried away blowing your 
money gambling, just use good judgement.” I 
think I’ve followed that pretty well to this day. 




_ 3 

Palace Club, 1936-1942 


I got together a crew to bring to Reno. 
These people are all dead now. One young 
man by the name of Jim Brady was a very 
bright guy about my age or a little bit younger. 
I was twenty-three at the time—1936. A 
young fellow by the name of Clyde Bittner, 
who worked for me at the time of his death— 
he was a shift manager—just a real fine, fine 
man and very knowledgeable in the business. 
Another man named Dick Trinastich came 
with me. He was a big, fat fellow who died of 
a heart attack; he got teased a lot, but he was 
a very good Keno man. 

We arrived in Reno on the twenty-ninth 
of April, 1936. Francis Lyden got us a room 
in a hotel above the Palace Club. Then we 
started getting all the things together to open 
up the game. 

Francis had dealt the game up in Butte, 
Montana with his brother Joe. Joe was an 
electrical engineer. Their stepfather, whose 
name was Pete Notten, was one of the old- 
timers in the gambling business and had 
brought his two step-sons into the business. 
They were very bright, methodical people, and 


knew the business well. I learned a lot from 
both of them. Joe is now in his eighties and 
lives in Las Vegas, and I believe he operates 
the Keno game in the Holiday Hotel. 

On the way through Butte to Reno we 
stopped and talked to Joe Lyden and old man 
Notten; they gave me more advice. 

Getting into Reno, we started to get the 
stuff together. Reno was a very bright place at 
the time; there were things that I’d never seen 
before; it was very, very interesting. 

I met a young lady the first night I was in 
town—the twenty-ninth of April and married 
her on the twentieth of May; her name was 
Clorinda Petricciani, the daughter of the man 
who owned the Palace Club who Francis 
Lyden worked for. This was sort of done on the 
spur of the moment, but we stayed married 
for ten years. It naturally made a difference 
because I got chances through old John 
Petricciani, who was called “Slot Machine 
Johnny,” that I wouldn’t have gotten if I hadn’t 
been married to his daughter. However, I 
think that I learned well and did the best I 
could with that. 



10 


Warren Nelson 


A short time later I had a falling out with 
Francis Lyden. At that time I was going to 
leave, but a man named Vinnie Merialdo 
prevailed upon me to go to work in the pit. 
He put me on the Chuck-a-luck game and 
started to teach me how to deal “21.” He was 
a very good teacher. I really wanted to find 
out everything I could about the business; it 
fascinated me. Id ask questions of everybody 
I talked to. I would walk around town to see 
who I thought was the best dealer, how they 
did it, talk to anybody who would talk to me 
about gambling and how was the best way to 
handle it. 

During that time I lived a pretty good life; 
we partied some—not too much—but most 
of my time was a fascination for gambling. I 
would spend many extra hours—at that time I 
was working all the time, ten, twelve, fourteen 
hours, which wasn’t unusual in those days. 

This went on for two years, until 1938 
when Johnny Petricciani sent me up to Lake 
Tahoe to open a Keno game in the old Nevada 
Club. They never had Keno up there before; 
it was very new to them and it wasn’t very 
successful. We would run one shift a day. I 
spent a lot of time fishing and fooling around. 
I did learn a lot about Lake Tahoe. Almost 
everything up there at that time was a flat 
joint, places that cheated the customer. It was 
nothing like it is today; the gaming was very 
sporadic. There was a place called the Country 
Club Casino; it had great food and all, but it 
was not a very good start for gambling there. 
I was perhaps one of the first to believe that 
Lake Tahoe would one day be what it is today. 

We closed up. for the winter of 1938. 
When I came back to Reno the old man told 
me to come in and deal “21” the next day. 
The next day I came down to go to work—I 
wasn’t getting along too well with the girl I was 
married to—I asked him who I was going to 
work for; he said he had just fired so-and-so, 


and I asked why. He said that the man’s hand 
was all curled up, and he couldn’t deal too 
good anymore. The man was a good friend 
of mine, and I got mad and said, “If you don’t 
want him to work you can’t have me either.” 
So I went out and got a train back to Butte, 
Montana. 

I had ten dollars when I got to Butte. I 
went to a place called “The Arcade” and asked 
a man named “Curly” Darrow for a job. He 
asked where I was from, and I said Reno. He 
said, “Reno, huh,” turned around and walked 
away. I’d already put my ten dollar bill on 
the bar and spent two of it trying to become 
acquainted. 

I went down the street to another place 
after a job dealing “21.” Joe Lyden, whose 
brother I had went to Reno for earlier, owned 
the place. Pete Notten had died and Joe was 
running the place. Joe was sort of deformed 
with a hunchback. He was a very bright guy, 
and everything he did he did right as far as 
dealing was concerned. He said he would 
put me to work dealing the wheel. I said I’d 
rather deal “21.” He didn’t have a job dealing 
“21” and said I should go to work dealing the 
wheel; I agreed. 

There was kind of a catch to it because I 
had never dealt the wheel, didn’t know the 
first thing about it except in my curiosity I’d 
stood across from the wheel and learned to 
roll the ball. I had a good friend in Reno who 
used to shove the checks across the table, 
and I would shove them back; so I had a 
basic knowledge; however, I had never stood 
behind the game and dealt it. It took some 
guts to do it, but with most of my ten dollars 
gone I had to put my backbone up someplace. 

I went to work and fortunately it was 
in the wintertime so there wasn’t too much 
business. I got by pretty well. The first night I 
went to work, there was a young man about 
my age who was to be my helper. I asked his 



Palace Club, 1936-1942 


11 


name which was Pete Seaman. I asked how 
long he had been working there and what 
did he do. 

He replied, “Today I’m check-racking, 
but yesterday I was a dealer, but they got this 
good dealer from Reno and they demoted me 
to check-racker.” 

I said, “Partner, I’ve got some news for 
you; I’m not a good dealer, I’ve never dealt 
this game in my life.” 

He couldn’t believe that because he said 
I rolled the ball good, and I said that was all 
I could do, not anything else. I asked if he 
would help me, and he said yes. He was trying 
to learn, and I was trying to learn so we spent 
all the time dealing to each other, and we did 
learn fast. It wasn’t real easy but the night 
shift manager didn’t know any more than we 
did. If Joe Lyden had been working the night 
shift he would have caught on in a minute 
that we didn’t know what we were doing. We 
innovated; if we got seventeen checks straight- 
up for thirty-five times seventeen, we would 
go into a huddle to find out what thirty-five 
times seventeen was. 

I’d say, “Well ten is three fifty.” 

He’d say, “Seven is two hundred and 
forty-five, so that’s five hundred ninety-five.” 
So we would pay the player five hundred and 
ninety-five. We got by that way, and both of 
us became good wheel dealers and very good 
friends. 

To show what kind of a friend Pete 
Seaman was, at the time I left Reno my wife 
had gotten a divorce right after I left and 
remarried and left her new husband. She 
called me and wanted me to come back to 
Reno. We called back and forth, and I was 
left with a big phone bill that I couldn’t pay. 
I went to Pete Seaman and told him I had a 
diamond ring I’d like to hock and needed two 
hundred dollars. I asked him where I could go. 
He said I didn’t have to hock the ring, that he 


would loan me the two hundred dollars. We 
went up to his little room in a little hotel there, 
and he took a trunk out from underneath his 
bed—a locker—and picked up the top drawer 
and reached down to the bottom and brought 
out a sock full of five dollar bills. He was 
getting five dollars a day, and every other day 
he would put five dollars away. He loaned me 
the two hundred dollars. He’s still my friend 
and still in the gambling business. He is one 
of the many kinds of people I’ve dealt with in 
my life that makes me think that my business 
is a good business. 

I worked there for the rest of that winter. 
My ex-wife came to Butte. In the spring, Joe 
Lyden called me over and told me it was real 
tough then and would have to cut me down 
to two days a week. I said I couldn’t get along 
on two days a week. He said it was all he 
could do, so I had to quit then and try to find 
another job. I had no idea where to find a job 
in Montana because it was pretty tough; even 
in ’39 the Depression was still on. 

When I got home that afternoon I got a 
call from John Petricciani saying he really 
needed me in Reno and would I come 
back and become a pit boss. This was an 
opportunity I’d thought about for a long time. 
I was very happy to do it and went back to 
Reno as a pit boss in the Palace Club. 

It was a tough job.I had two brothers-in- 
law to work with and we did a pretty good 
job of running the place, I guess, because 
it made some money. In the wintertime it 
would fall down and get real tough, but in 
the summertime we’d work like the devil and 
get the bankroll back. It was going pretty well. 

There was a man named Bill Panelli who 
was one of the pit bosses there; well thought 
of, well respected guy. He probably had as 
much to do with my knowledge of the gaming 
business as anybody. Bill had an insatiable 
curiosity about the best way to do things. He 



12 


Warren Nelson 


would sit down and look at the layout of a 
wheel, how the checks were placed, and try to 
figure for hours what would be the best way to 
clean that layout—to do it right with the least 
amount of effort, the least amount of time and 
the smoothest looking way 

He had a real bad habit of every time 
there was a real good game, Crap game for 
instance, when we were working together 
and getting off shift, he would say, “Let’s go 
deal.” So we would go deal Craps for two or 
three hours because the play was good and it 
was good experience and practice. He would 
ask why don’t you do this that way and this 
that way. I think many of the innovations and 
the procedures in gambling came from that 
time—from Bill Panelli and myself trying to 
figure out the best way to put the hole card 
under, what’s the best way to look at your hole 
card on “21.” what’s the best way for most 
anything. 

Faro Bank was the big game at the time, 
and Bill spent a lot of time teaching me Faro 
Bank. I became a pretty good dealer; it’s the 
toughest game in the gambling business to 
deal; it takes a lot of concentration. In fact, 
it always takes two dealers, one to watch the 
other. All the old-timers in the Faro Bank 
games thought they were the elite in the 
gambling business. They would hardly speak 
to a wheel dealer or a “21” dealer; they were 
the top people. 

There was an old man by the name of 
Warren Atcheson who was the dean of the 
gamblers at that time. Warren wore a stiff 
collar and a little string tie. A very austere 
looking man, a severe looking man with 
steel-rimmed glasses, thin. He was like a 
judge for the gambling business. If anybody 
had an argument come up over something, 
they would go see Warren Atcheson. Warren 
would say “this is the way it is” and that would 
be the end of the story. He was the man that 


made all the decisions of what was right and 
what was wrong. Now the Gaming Control 
Board takes that position, but then he was 
the judge and jury of the gambling business. 
He was only a dealer then. 

Starting with these people at the age of 
twenty-three I don’t think I ever acted like 
I was twenty-three at the time. I had a good 
way of saying, “Yes, Sir,” and “No, Sir,” and 
asking questions. 

When I asked a question I’d say, “Mr. 
Atcheson, I saw that you did that this way 
and I think that’s a very good way to do it, 
but would you please tell me why you do it 
that way?” I think it was partly flattery, so 
all these old fellows kind of took me into 
their confidence and would help me all 
they could. They taught me a lot of things, a 
myriad of things. I had a different question 
for everybody everyday that I talked to. Had I 
retained it all, there’s no telling the knowledge 
that I lost, but I think the things I did retain 
have helped me immeasurably through the 
years. 

These people, there were a lot of them, 
were very fantastic people. They were from 
many walks of life. There was an engineer 
by the name of Larry Hazelwood who had 
a college degree in engineering and drifted 
into the gambling business. He was a very 
fair man; principle was the main thing in his 
life. He became a very good friend. He was 
dealing Faro Bank with another gentleman, 
and I was on the floor. Being a pit boss and 
manager and running all these old-timers 
took a lot of diplomacy, and I tried to use as 
much as I could. I never acted like a boss; 
before I would do anything I would ask and 
not act like a boss. I tried to show that I was 
there only because I was there. 

One day Larry asked me to get a new Faro 
Bank box. I went into the office where there 
were four or five other boxes and tried the 



Palace Club, 1936-1942 


13 


springs on them. The cards are put in these 
boxes and come out one at a time. The spring 
had to have tension on it to bring the cards 
out. I felt the springs and found one that was 
better than the others and took it out and 
gave it to Larry. I set it down; he shuffled the 
cards and started to put them in the box. He 
stopped, put the cards down and got up. I was 
standing there and asked what was the matter. 

Larry said, “I quit.” 

I said, “What?” 

He said, “I just quit.” I told him he couldn’t 
do that; he said that he could. I asked what 
was wrong. 

He said, “I’ve never done anything wrong 
in my life, and I’m not going to start now. 
That’s a deuce box; you can deal the second 
card out of that box.” 

I had no idea having never seen one and 
didn’t know what it was. I had to tell him that 
I certainly didn’t know that it was a jimmied- 
up box and that I was sorry and would get 
another one. He sat back down and started to 
deal again. This shows how naive I was and 
the caliber of people we had mostly in the 
business at that time. 

In Reno at that time, the “line” was wide 
open. The girls would come up from the 
“cribs;” the police would let them come up 
after two o’clock in the morning to play.The 
pimps would come with them. It was part of 
our business. At ten o’clock they would have 
to be off the street. 

It was a very strange thing. There was such 
a conglomeration of people in Reno at that 
time. The drug problems of today with young 
people were there then, but in a different way, 
with the older people. There was a certain 
class of people that went down to the different 
houses and smoked opium on Saturday night. 
It was like going out and having a drink. A 
dozen or two dozen men and women would 
go down and smoke the pipe and lay on the 


hip on weekends. Everybody knew it. They 
weren’t thought of any more or less, I guess. 
They were people who were around the 
business. 

The people that came in and out of 
Reno at the time— “Pretty-boy” Floyd was 
supposed to be here; Dillinger came in here— 
these people were protected or were supposed 
to be protected by Graham and McKay. This 
was all common knowledge. Everyday you 
would hear something, somebody would get 
killed every once in a while or other things 
were happening. It all seemed the common 
course of events. Never thought much of it. 
The papers didn’t play it up very much. Reno 
didn’t sound like and I never thought of it 
as a real great crime center. I didn’t think 
it was because there really wasn’t too much 
going on. 

The colorful characters of that time are 
absolutely unbelievable to the people today. 
The nicknames they had were thought 
nothing of then. There was “Cheese-ass Sam,” 
“Popcorn Jimmy,” “Alabam,” “Ragged-ass 
Johnny,” “Gold-tooth Camel,” the “Dago Kid,” 
the “Oregon Apple,” “Titanic Thompson.” 
These people came and went through Reno all 
the time; you knew them, you heard of them. 

There was a story about a rooming house 
that a lady had. A guy came to town looking 
for a friend of his in the gambling business 
named “Gold-tooth Camel.” The man went to 
the boarding house and asked the lady if there 
was anybody living there named “Gold-tooth 
Camel.” She said no. The man said that he was 
supposed to have stayed there. 

The lady said, “Maybe he was supposed 
to, but he didn’t.” 

“But, do you think he’s ever been here?” 
the man asked. 

She says, “Well, I don’t know. I’ve got 
‘Cheese-ass Sam,’ ‘Popcorn Jimmy’ and 
Alabam, but I ain’t got no ‘Gold-tooth Camel’.” 



14 


Warren Nelson 


That was a true story and one I thought 
very funny and very apropos of the time 
because these people, it’s a cliche to say their 
word was their bond, but it was, more or less. 
Most of them would cheat you or beat you 
most anyway they could, but, if they told you 
they were going to do something they would. 

Again my curiosity led me to make friends 
with most of these people. There wasn’t any 
that I didn’t learn something from. I think that 
my reputation was, even at twenty-three or 
twenty-four, in the gambling business that if 
somebody told me something, I wouldn’t talk 
about it a lot. So I used to hear a lot of things. 
People used to tell me things they wouldn’t 
tell anybody else. Especially if somebody 
made a score and just had to tell somebody 
about it because they were so proud of it. 
They would tell me because they were pretty 
sure I wouldn’t say anything about it. I always 
wanted to know how they did it and when 
they would do it. I’d have them come in the 
backroom and show me how they did it, if 
they did it with cards or dice. I wanted to 
know. I never tried to do these things myself, 
but I talked to all these people who were so 
good, that showed me, that I became pretty 
much of an expert in that line of the gaming 
business. People that were dealing seconds, 
people that were switching dice, people that 
were fixing Roulette wheels. There were some 
fantastically great ways that they could take 
the ball of a wheel and make it drop into the 
number they wanted it to. I saw all these 
things, saw them fix them, saw them do it. 
It was a very interesting thing and probably 
something that very few people got to see. I 
saw most all the facets of it. It certainly did 
help me; I found out what was going on and 
how it was being done. 

While I was working on the floor of 
the Palace Club we used to have some of 
the highest rolling short card games in the 


United States. People would come from all 
over the world to play poker. Mostly they 
played Lowball. For those days, they played 
for some very high stakes. Somebody to win 
or lose thirty or forty thousand dollars wasn’t 
unusual. In ’39 or ’40 that was a lot of money. 

Francis Lyden, who had brought me down 
here and later we weren’t getting along, did a 
lot of gambling. My job was to go and take 
the money off the game every hour. I think it 
was six dollars from every player every hour. 
In these high rolling games that was good 
income for the club. I would be very quiet 
and not say anything as I took the money 
off because these people were some of the 
greatest gamblers of all time. I’m pretty sure 
that Joe Bernstein played in those games at 
times. Felix Turillas, the old man, was a great 
poker player and played in them. “Titanic” 
Thompson played. Francis Lyden played, but 
he was a little bit out of his class, but he loved 
to gamble. 

To show what kind of gambler Francis 
Lyden was, there’s this story. I met Francis 
first in Butte when I was about twenty, and 
he was twenty-two. He was one of the coolest 
looking guys I’d ever seen. Clear blue eyes 
with a hat pulled down over them, dressed 
in a tailor-made suit, tailor-made shirts and 
ties, a very smooth guy. He really looked like 
a gambler. I thought it was the greatest thing 
in the world if I could be just like him. Francis 
won ninety thousand dollars when he was 
twenty-one playing cards and the horses. A 
bunch of crooked gamblers found out about 
this and came to Butte and set up a phony 
horse-book. They got him to bet on a horse 
race that was already over and he blew his 
whole ninety thousand dollars. He was with 
a guy named “Pinky” Dugan when he lost it. 
They walked out of the place and down the 
street to a picture show. They sat through 
a cowboy picture twice after losing ninety 



Palace Club, 1936-1942 


15 


thousand dollars. They left, remarked that it 
was a good show and then walked down the 
street. I think that’s cool. 

Later on in a poker game in Reno, that 
Francis was playing in, he asked me to get a 
bet down for him. He gave me six thousand 
dollars to bet on a horse, two, two and two, 
win, place, and show. The horse was about 
eight or nine to one, and I had to hustle to get 
the money down because one book wouldn’t 
take it, but I got all the money down. He had 
six thousand dollars bet, and I think the race 
came off about three o’clock. I was on needles 
and pins wondering what the horse was going 
to do. Finally the race was run; he came in 
third. So Francis just about got his money 
back. I went back to the game to take off the 
vigorish for that hour and Francis never asked 
me how the horse had done. The next two 
times I went in he never asked me how the 
horse had done. He hadn’t been out, but he 
knew the race had been over for two hours. At 
seven o’clock, he came out and walked toward 
the door. When he was about to the door he 
turned back and looked at the race board and 
saw that the horse had come in third and then 
he went in to get a cup of coffee. That’s cool. 

Francis later lost his job there and became 
a gambler and lost all his money. Eventually 
he became a heroin addict and died. It was 
a tragic thing because he was a bright man, 
very smart. He had a wife and a couple of kids. 
What I thought had been a great deal of “cool” 
might have been drugs, but, I don’t think he 
took them when he was young. He did have 
an illness that started him on the heroin. I’m 
sure that he wasn’t a guy that started taking 
heroin for kicks, but I think he took it for pain 
and became hooked on it. 

That was all for the cool things about him, 
but there were other things. When we were 
younger he came over to Great Falls and asked 
me to go out and party. He asked me to get 


some girls. I got a couple of pretty nice girls, 
not for an orgy, but an ordinary party. We 
went to his room, and he ordered champagne. 
This was a big thing for me and for the girls. 
Francis had about a six carat diamond ring on. 

One of the girls said, “Oh, Francis, that’s 
the prettiest diamond I ever saw. Can I try it 
on? 

He said yes, and she put it on. The party 
went on ’til about five o’clock in the morning. 
The girls were going to go home. 

He came to me and said, “Warren, I didn’t 
get my ring back.” I told him to go get it. He 
said, “I don’t know how.” I brought the girl 
over, reached over and took the ring and gave 
it to him. I found out he knew a lot about 
gambling but not very much about girls or 
the ordinary things in life. 

Francis Lyden had a great deal to do 
with my thinking about gambling, probably 
more negative than positive. Bill Panelli was 
probably, in my opinion, the most procedure 
correct gambler—knew more about the nitty- 
gritty than anybody. 

Through 1940 I worked every day in 
the pit, working hard, making money in the 
summertime, losing money in the wintertime, 
but always a little bit more win than lose. I 
enjoyed working for John Petricciani; he was 
a very fair man. He was very stern looking 
man, but a good family man in one way, 
but in another way not. Mainly a fine man, 
very, very honorable. When he said he’d do 
something he did it. He certainly treated 
me very well. He gave me the latitude and 
tools to learn the business. He never tried to 
hold anything back; he let me do just about 
anything I wanted to as far as the Palace Club 
was concerned. 

The Palace Club was one of only three 
places in town then. The Bank Club, the Palace 
Club and about that time a little joint by the 
name of Harolds Club opened up. Everybody 



16 


Warren Nelson 


laughed at Harolds Club because they had mice 
in the window. They were running electronic 
Roulette wheels and mice Roulette wheels 
and didn’t even have a “21” game and didn’t 
know anything about Keno. They were sort 
of the laughingstock for everybody Harold 
Smith was running it at the time; he was about 
my age. He decided that besides running the 
place he was also a player. Harold would work 
all day and make twenty-five or thirty dollars 
in nickels and dimes, then come in and lose it 
playing “21.” I guess he learned about as much 
about the games by playing on the outside as 
he did dealing on the inside. 

The other clubs in town, the hotels and 
the smaller nightclubs were all cheaters; none 
of them dealt on the square. The Bank Club 
and the Palace Club did, also Harolds Club 
because the volume of business carried them 
through; but, the other places were just kind 
of clip joints. We used to go ’round and watch 
them and try to figure out what they were 
doing and how they would do it. This was 
something else I learned about the business, a 
seamy side that I didn’t approve of even then. 
But, nobody ever said anything about it; it was 
an unwritten law that you didn’t go ’round 
saying this guy cheats and that guy cheats,’ it 
just wasn’t done. 

The people in the business mixed back 
and forth with each other. One was as well 
respected as the other. A lot of the people who 
later became real big names in the business 
started that way. 

When I came to Reno in May 1936 and 
opened a Keno game for John Petricciani, 
it was the first one ever run by a white man 
in the state of Nevada. Francis Lyden, who 
brought me down, was a good Keno man and 
knew the business, but he wasn’t working in 
it; he was working on the floor. I had the job 
of running it. I started out at twelve dollars a 
day; in those days that was a good job. 


We started out using what they call a 
“wooden goose.” It was a little, wooden, pear- 
shaped deal about twelve or fourteen inches 
long that kicked out little peas—numbered 
peas—they were called peas, but were really 
markers with one to eighty numbers on them. 
We used that to open the game. 

The Keno game as it was originally run 
and as we ran it in Montana was done with 
little squares of paper with numbers written 
on them. We would take these little squares 
of paper, the original way was to wad them 
up individually then put them in a big pan 
and shake them up. Then distribute them into 
four other pans—twenty numbers in each 
pan. This was the way the Chinese ran the 
game in the early days— about the time of 
the building of the Chinese Wall, supposedly 
that is when Keno started. I believe it is 
probably one of the oldest gambling games in 
the world, except the dice they used to shoot 
craps with for Christ’s clothes; the Chinese 
Wall was before that. The four pans meant 
north, east, west, and south. Each number 
from one to eighty meant something, maybe 
it meant wind, flowers, grass, whatever. 
The Chinese would put combinations of 
the things together. However, when it was 
brought to America just the numbers one 
to eighty were used. The numbers were put 
into the four pans, then somebody from 
the outside would have a drawing with four 
numbers in one pan and pick out which pan 
would be called; then those numbers in that 
pan would be called. 

When we came to Reno and started this 
other way, we would draw twenty numbers 
straight out of the goose instead of putting 
them in four pans. The old-time gamblers said 
we were losing our percentage because when 
you did it the old way right away you were 
eliminating sixty numbers that absolutely 
could not come up. The new way you were 



Palace Club, 1936-1942 


17 


drawing the numbers through the whole 
twenty, so all the time somebody would have 
a better chance to win. This was not true. 
My knowledge of mathematics, from Father 
Rooney, stood me in good stead and has 
many times since because I know that when 
a formula comes up it cannot be refuted, that 
that’s the way it is and there’s no way you can 
change numbers. The percentage was there 
and nobody could change it. 

We ran that way for several months. I got 
an idea about a cage I had seen in southern 
California where they used pingpong balls. 
I thought that would be a lot easier for the 
people to see. I went to Los Angeles and they 
had a cage that they used on the beach for 
bingo. We altered it some and used it. It’s still 
the same way we’re drawing the balls now. 

The limit then was two thousand dollars 
per game; now it’s twenty-five thousand 
dollars. The game has changed and grown so 
much. It’s sort of my baby because that’s where 
I cut my teeth in the gambling business, and 
I’ve always stayed very close to the Keno game. 

The third or fourth day that I worked for 
Mr. Petricciani, he was working on a small 
bankroll and we knew it. The limit was two 
thousand dollars, and we were writing ten 
cent tickets and maybe taking in two or three 
hundred dollars a day. By the time we would 
pay the wages there would be a winning of 
fifty or sixty dollars a day for the first few 
days. It didn’t look that good even though it 
was picking up. 

There was an old Chinaman who worked 
down on the line for the girls—ran errands 
and picked up the towels and things. I can’t 
remember his name; he was a real famous 
guy, laughed all the time. He played a fifty 
cent ticket and got an eight spot that paid nine 
hundred dollars. When I looked at that ticket 
I almost fainted. I thought, how am I going to 
go to this man I barely know and ask for nine 


hundred dollars. I felt that he might think we 
were ripping him off because that was a lot of 
money in those days. 

I finally got up my courage and went to 
Mr. Petricciani and said, “We got hit for a fifty 
cent ticket, and I need nine hundred dollars.” 

He said, “Yes my boy, come on in the 
office.” He took me in and reached in the safe 
and gave me nine one hundred dollar bills. I 
asked if I could have ten dollar bills. He asked 
why, and I said it looked like more money. He 
gave me nine hundred dollars in ten dollar 
bills. I went and got my Chinese friend and 
took him on the outside of the counter and 
counted down—ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, 
sixty, seventy, eighty, ninety and one hundred. 
Did the same nine times. Those bills strung 
along the counter probably looked like ten 
thousand dollars. I think that as much as 
anything else has made the genie go forward 
because from then on it’s been always up; the 
game has gotten progressively better. 

We had a lot of different kinds of tickets 
and learned a lot about it. Nobody else in 
Reno opened a game for about a year. It really 
built up the Palace Club; it came along better 
and better all the time.lt drew crowds and 
nobody else could run the game. Finally, a 
couple of boys from Butte came down and 
opened one in the Bank Club. One opened in 
Harolds Club, but Harolds Club wasn’t very 
proficient and people used to go in there and 
write phony tickets. The people there didn’t 
know how to check so they had quite a time 
running the game. 

However, our end of it was very 
professional. We knew the business well. 
All the people that I brought with me from 
Montana were young people, but they knew 
the mathematics and we were very fast and 
very proud of how fast we could write tickets 
and how fast we could check them; so it was 
really a going thing. 



18 


Warren Nelson 


There was still one Chinese place in Reno 
that ran a Keno game—two games a day. We 
started out running a game every hour. I 
decided we ought to get more action so we 
started a game every half hour, then every 
fifteen minutes, then every ten minutes and 
then every time we got a ticket practically. 
The game became more and more fast. People 
liked to play it because they got the action; we 
were running ten or twelve games an hour, 
sometimes fourteen games an hour. Now 
business is so good you can’t get that many. 

While I was a young floorman there were 
only two joints in town, the Bank Club and 
the Palace Club. Graham and McKay had 
gone to prison and Jack Sullivan was running 
the Bank Club. Jack Sullivan was an old ex¬ 
bouncer, prizefighter, a tough old man. I 
would imagine at that time he was fifty-five 
years old. A big, tall, straight-looking man 
who carried a cane all the time and had a 
reputation for being real tough. Sullivan and 
Petricciani didn’t get along. They did go back 
and forth trying to keep wages straight and 
things like that. One time they were going to 
cut the wages in a bad winter. Sullivan had 
left town; we lowered the wages, and the other 
place didn’t so it created a big hassle. 

I became good friends on a business basis 
with Jack Sullivan. He taught me many things. 
One day he came into the Palace Club, I was 
twenty-three or twenty-four years old. 

He walked up to me, and I said, “Good 
afternoon Mr. Sullivan, can I help you?” 

He stamped his cane down, looked at me 
and said, “What could you do for me!” 

I said, “Well Mr. Sullivan, there’s something 
you can do for me, you can go to hell!” He 
turned around and walked away. 

Later on when I was in the Marine Corps, 
I was up on furlough and went around and 
had a drink or two. He came over and said, 
“Kid, anything I can do for you?” 


I said, “What can you do for me!” 

He said, “This,” and put four one hundred 
dollar bills in my pocket and told me to have 
a good time. 

I gave them back to him and said politely, 
“Thank you Jack, but I don’t need it.” I did 
appreciate it. 

Later on I had a place, the Waldorf Club. 
I was having a real tough time, things were 
going real bad. Jack Sullivan was a pretty old 
man then. He came in one day and asked how 
I was getting along. I said fine, but he said he 
had heard I wasn’t doing too good. 

I said, “Well Mr. Sullivan, you always had 
bad information.” 

He said, “If you’re not doing very good, 
if you-want ten thousand dollars I’ll give it 
to you.” 

I thanked him and said I didn’t need it. 
That wasn’t true; I did need it, but I didn’t 
take it. This shows what kind of people they 
were. As bad as Mr. Sullivan’s reputation was 
on some things, you have to say there were a 
lot of good things about him. 

Another incident happened with him later 
on when I was manager of Harrah’s Club. We 
had a player playing who owed Sullivan fifty 
thousand dollars. The man was the head of a 
big milk company from the Middle West; he 
had come out here and bought Manogue High 
School and did a lot of charity work. He was 
playing Faro Bank one day and Sullivan came 
up to him and tapped him on the shoulder 
and said something to him. He got up, cashed 
in and gave Sullivan two thousand dollars of 
the fifty thousand dollars he owed him, then 
they both walked out. 

This was absolutely unheard of; nobody 
would do that; it was unethical. I guess 
Sullivan couldn’t help himself. I left word at 
the cage that the next time our player came 
in to call me. Two or three days later here he 
came with ten thousand dollars and started to 



Palace Club, 1936-1942 


19 


play. He had played awhile when here comes 
Sullivan. When Sullivan walked in I was 
called. He sat at the bar, hung his cane on the 
bar. I waited about fifteen or twenty minutes, 
watched him and the guy playing. 

Finally, I went over to Mr. Sullivan and 
said, “Jack, I wonder if you realize what would 
happen to me if I came into the Bank Club and 
asked somebody that owed me money to pay 
me while he was playing? What do you think 
would happen?” He just kind of looked at me, 
so I said, “I’ll tell you what would happen. One 
of those big bouncers would come over and 
get me by the ass of the pants and throw me 
out the door.” I told him if he ever bothered 
this man while he was playing that was what 
I was going to do. I was probably thirty-six 
then and he was sixty-five; I’m not sure I could 
have done it. 

He stood up, stamped his cane on the 
floor, looked me straight in the eye and said, 
“Kid, you’re right.” Then he walked out the 
door; that was the last time he ever did that. 

In those days, the limit at the Palace Club 
was fifty dollars. We had quite a lot of play. 
There was a lot of play on the nickel slot 
machines, no play on the quarters, halves and 
dollars. We counted all the nickels by hand; 
there were no money counting machines of 
any kind. The slot machines were very tight. 
Most of the play was on Faro Bank, most of 
the high rolling play was. There was some 
Pan and Poker, “21,” Craps and the wheel of 
course, but the main event was Faro Bank. 
Keno added a great deal to the bottom line 
of the gambling house. I would say in those 
days we had eight “21” games, two Craps 
at the most, one wheel—sometimes two, 
two Faro Bank games, a Keno game and 
about seventy-five or eighty slots. That was 
considered a big gambling house in those 
days. Compared to now it was very, very 
small. 


It was a great deal of fun working at the 
Palace Club. I think that cutting my eye-teeth 
in the business there with Bill Panelli and 
other old-timers taught me a lot and as I went 
along I taught others myself. 

Along with the work, I did a lot of hunting 
and fishing. Duck hunting in Fallon, deer 
hunting all over the state, but, never being 
gone longer than a day. Many a time I’d get 
off work at two o’clock in the morning, get to 
a fishing spot at six o’clock, fish all day and get 
back just in time to go to work at six o’clock 
that evening. Many times twenty-four hours 
without any sleep, but with the fresh air it 
didn’t seem so bad. 

In November of ’41, I was working in 
the pit and got a pain in my side that got 
progressively worse. I couldn’t find anybody 
to relieve me, so I stayed there until the next 
shift relieved me. I went home; the pain was 
bad. I called the doctor who came out to 
look at me. He told me I had appendicitis. 
He sent me to the hospital; I had a burst 
appendix. I was operated on sometime in 
the last part of November. Because of the 
burst appendix I was supposed to have a 
little longer recuperation than an ordinary 
appendectomy. It was duck hunting season, 
and I was real concerned about missing all 
that hunting. 

So, on the seventh of December, four or 
five fellows that I hunted with all the time 
took me hunting out to Fallon. I couldn’t carry 
the gun or decoys, but they carried them for 
me. They took me to the edge of the water 
and set me down; they went further into the 
swamp. It was a good day for hunting. The 
wind was blowing. I sat there between six 
o’clock and eleven o’clock and killed a limit 
of green-heads, all male ducks. Waited for the 
guys to come back, picked up the ducks and 
went back to the car. We turned on the radio 
and found out about Pearl Harbor. You can 



20 


Warren Nelson 


imagine the conversation that went back and 
forth between us on the way back to Reno. 

When we got back to Reno we went 
down to enlist in the Marine Corps. They 
naturally wouldn’t take me because of the 
recent operation. I decided I was going into 
the Marine Corps and started to prepare for 
it. I knew it would take me about a year if I 
used my head. So I started saving my money. 
I finally went to the old man, John Petricciani, 
and told him I was going into the Marine 
Corps. 

He said, “My boy, my boy, you’re kidding.” 
I said I wasn’t kidding; I was going to go. He 
said I didn’t have to go. I told him I would 
have to go sooner or later, and I wanted to go 
now or in the fall. 

One day I came downtown and he called 
me up to meet him in the office. When I got 
there he had some papers for me to sign. The 
papers said that if I didn’t join the Marine 
Corps he would give me twenty-five percent 
of the Palace Club. 

I said, “John, thanks, but I’m going to have 
to go, so I’m going to go.” 

Later I went and that was the end of my 
marriage because my wife didn’t think I was 
going to go, but when she found out I really 
was she said that was the end. It was, and 
another part of my life began. 

I had a friend by the name of Howard 
Keogh. Howard was about eight years younger 
than me. He came to Reno a couple of years 
previous to this with another fellow named 
Hughie Connolly who was also younger 
than me. I put them to work shilling even 
though they weren’t twenty-one and started 
teaching them how to deal. This started a great 
friendship for the three of us, and we’ve been 
together more or less ever since. 

I told them of my decision to join the 
Marine Corps. They said we would join 
together and go together. I thought that 


sounded like a hell of an idea. We were going 
over and make the world safe for democracy 
and kill all the Japs. These boys were both 
unmarried and younger than me; I was near 
thirty. They went all over the country from 
war job to war job—to Hawthorne and then 
to Seattle to work in the airplane factories—to 
keep out of the service until I could get my 
affairs straightened out to go. When I decided 
that I could go, they came back to Reno with 
the draff board breathing down their necks. 
Then we all went down and joined together. 



4 

Military Service, 1942-1946 


We joined in San Francisco. The first thing 
to happen was they wouldn’t take Hughie 
Connally because he had been an amateur 
fighter and had so many teeth knocked out. 
They wouldn’t take him until he had some 
bridges made, so he came in two weeks 
behind us. 

Howard and I went to boot camp together. 
It was a terrible transition for me. I was almost 
thirty years old, had worked in a gambling 
house almost all my life and here I was in 
a platoon with sixty fellows, none of them 
over twenty-one. I could do anything they 
could do, but I couldn’t do it as long because 
I’d wear out. 

These young fellas would come in all 
pooped out at the end of the day and lay down; 
you’d think they were gonna die, and thirty 
minutes later they’d be up playin’ uh—touch 
football or something. When I come in from 
a day, I lay down and couldn’t get up again, 
missed many a meal that way. Although I 
was in pretty fair shape going in, it was very 
difficult for me. 


We got sent to the rifle range, Camp Elliott, 
and while there, I contracted pneumonia, the 
thing they call “cat fever.” I had a temperature 
of a hundred and five and was very ill. Howard 
was real worried about me and went to the 
drill instructor, and he finally sent me to the 
hospital. These guys were so tough, it’d be 
hard to believe the things that they did to the 
recruits at that time. However, I made it to 
the hospital, and I was real lucky I didn’t die. 
I stayed very, very sick for awhile. There was a 
corpsman there who kept changing the sheets 
and moving me from bed to bed because of 
the high temperature and the perspiration 
that I was coming with. Probably if it hadn’t 
been for him I wouldn’t have made it. 

I was in the hospital probably three weeks 
and came out, and I was very weak. I got out 
about Christmas time, and the doctor there 
asked me where I lived. I told him Reno, 
Nevada. 

He says, “Well, you know you can’t go up 
there because it’s out of the bounds, but I want 
to give you a four-day furlough, and if some 



22 


Warren Nelson 


way you should find a way—find yourself up 
there, why I wouldn’t worry about it.” 

Sol went out and hitched a ride and got to 
Reno, spent Christmas here, and at that time 
I found out that I would never stay married 
again that—and that was the beginning of the 
end as far as my first marriage was concerned. 

I went back to the Marine Corps, and 
naturally I’d been split up with Howard and 
Hughie, each went their different directions. 
I suppose that Howard was very, always was 
worried about what would happen to me, and 
we stayed very close, still are. 

When I got out of boot camp, we were 
taken into a new section of the Marine 
Corps; it was called Personnel Classification. 
And this classification consisted of taking 
classification tests and mechanical tests 
and bein’ interviewed as to what you were 
probably best at—what was the best place to 
put you in the Marine Corps. 

The interviewer that interviewed me, his 
name was Killian; he became a friend and I 
still see him once in awhile. But he was an 
older man, older than I was at that time, 
probably in his forties. 

During his interview he said, “Well you’re 
gonna go on light duty now because of just 
getting out of the hospital and everything.” 
And he said, “What would you like to do in 
the Marine Corps?” He’d taken my job—my 
job classification and found out that I was a 
pit boss. 

He said, “What the hell’s a pit boss?” I 
explained it to him. “Well what would you 
like to do in the Marine Corps?” 

I said, “Well of all the jobs I’ve seen, the 
one I like best is yours. I’d like to have your 
job.” 

Well he kind of laughed, and he called a 
man over, a captain and said, “Captain, this 
man would like to have my job. 

And this captain said, “You would?” 


And I said, “Yes.” 

He picked up the card that the man had 
just made out, had all my qualifications on 
it, and said, “Well, that’s interesting.” He says, 
“How long’d you work in a gambling house?” 

I said, “Since I was eighteen,” so that had 
been about eleven years, maybe twelve years. 

And he said, “What is a pit boss?” And 
I told him, give credit, in charge of all the 
personnel. 

This man’s name was Presley. He was a 
captain in the Marine Corps and had been 
brought in particularly for classification. His job 
in civilian life, he was the head personnel man for 
Disney Studios. He was very, very knowledgeable 
about job classifications and that sort of thing 
and knew what he was doing. He talked to me 
for a little while and wanted to know what a pit 
boss was, and I explained it to him. 

He said, “Well that’s very interesting.” He 
said, “I’d like to have you.” He says, “I’d like to 
have you come to work for me, but,” he says, 
“it depends on how you come out on your 
AGCT, your Army General Classification 
Test, and the other mechanical aptitude tests.” 

So we took the tests that day, and I didn’t 
know how I came out on it. I knew it wasn’t 
too good, and I was amazed two weeks later 
when I got out of boot camp that I was called 
in the classification section. I later found out 
that my AGCT test was 113, I believe, and 
you had to be 110 in order to go to officer’s 
training class, but most of the bright people 
were up from 120 to 135. 

I went into the unit with about fifty men. 
They taught us how to interview, how to 
conduct tests and all the other things to make 
us experts in classifying new Marines and 
the Marines that were already in. This was 
new so the Marines that were already in had 
never been classified. This pool of fifty men 
was to travel all over to the bases to classify 
the other Marines. 



Military Service, 1942-1946 


23 


This was something that was very 
interesting. Having been around people as 
much as I had in the gambling business it was 
easy for me to talk to these young fellows and 
draw them out. I was very interested in the 
testing end of it. 

I interviewed people well, and the main 
thing they started to do was having me 
conduct these tests. My voice was always 
good and strong, so I was able to test a good 
many people at one time giving these tests at 
different locations. Actually, I became sort of 
the chief tester and gave 10 tests to as many as 
twenty thousand Marines at one time. That’s 
how fast we were turning them out. 

We started out in San Diego and later 
got split up into two groups, and I traveled 
the Eleventh, Twelfth, and Thirteenth Naval 
Districts for almost two years just catching 
up with the people in the Marine Corps that 
hadn’t had these classification tests or hadn’t 
been classified. 

Captain Presley was a very good man, a 
very nice man and helped me along a lot. He 
was sent overseas and that was my object too. 
I told him to be sure and send for me; he said 
he would. When he got over there he wrote 
back to me and told me there was no reason 
for me to go overseas because I could do a 
better job in the states and for me to stay there. 

I think that two weeks after I got out of 
boot camp, I made corporal; two weeks later 
I made sergeant, and a month later I made 
staff sergeant. And that’s probably as fast a rise 
you’d ever see in the service. However, it was 
in wartime and they needed the help very bad. 
I stayed a staff sergeant for eighteen months 
and then went to tech sergeant. 

I spent four years in the Marine Corps, all 
of it in personnel classification, moved around 
a great deal and wound up in the Department 
of Pacific in San Francisco. I transferred a 
hundred and twenty-nine times, and my 


papers showing my transfers in the Marine 
Corps had to be higher than my head when 
they were stacked up. When I finally got sent 
into San Francisco, I had traveled from Seattle 
down to San Diego as far east as Denver and 
all over the Pacific northwest and southwest, 
as far as that’s concerned. We traveled in a 
group and finally we went to every place they 
had a Marine station, and this included the 
recruiting offices in each little town. Had the 
opportunity to go back into Butte, Montana, 
and Great Falls, Montana, my home town, 
to interview the people there and give them 
the tests that had to be given. It was a pretty 
satisfying job because you were able in some 
ways to help people do what they really 
wanted to do in the Marine Corps which had 
never happened before. 

I finally got sent to San Francisco, and we 
were stationed at Oak Knoll Hospital. I was 
there for quite awhile with a group handling 
people that came back from overseas. It was 
a pretty depressing thing because you’d get 
men come back that had their legs shot off 
and arms shot off; they had to be tested and 
all. And most of them were pretty pitiful. It 
was a job that was real hard to do because of 
the people you had to handle. We also went 
through all the Marine Corps prisons and did 
those people, and that was very depressing 
too. However, the good part of it was that you 
were able to help a lot of young people and 
send them after they came back from overseas 
and send them close to their home towns 
where they wanted to go. So it compensated 
for the depressing part of it, compensated by 
the good things you could do. I became very 
interested in this type of work and thought I 
was really fitted for it. 

I was transferred to San Francisco and 
got a new commanding officer. I became 
very well acquainted with him; his name was 
Bernard J. Alpers; he was also a captain. He 



24 


Warren Nelson 


was a Jewish fellow, one of the nicest men I’ve 
ever become acquainted with. He had worked 
for the government and was the person who 
had written the book on military occupational 
specialties, the MOS booklet. He asked me to 
do this. He gave me some people to interview 
and told me to write job descriptions of them. 
I’m not a very good writer, but I started 
picking apart what these jobs consisted of 
and pretty soon I was making up titles and 
helping him with the book. I think the Marine 
Corps book still says “This book compiled 
by Bernard J. Alpers, Captain, and Technical 
Sergeant Warren Nelson.” I always appreciated 
that and thought at one time I was part author 
to a book. 

We became very close friends. I was a tech 
sergeant at that time, and he was a captain. He 
let me do just about the way I wanted to do, 
and I was able to travel at my own time just 
about wherever I wanted to go on the Pacific 
coast or in the Twelfth Naval District. 

As technical as the job was, Alpers was a 
very fair man and not at all military. His job 
was far from what the ordinary man would be 
doing in the Marine Corps. I was transferred 
many times, but only temporarily. I’d go out 
on a job and meet a lot of opposition to getting 
people tested. The old-time Marine Corps 
officers didn’t believe in it; they thought they 
should be able to put the people where they 
wanted to and not where the classification 
said they should go, that they should make all 
the decisions. So, they would fight it. When 
I’d get one like that, because I was a sergeant 
there wasn’t much that I could do, so I’d just 
say, “Yes, Sir.” 

Then I would call up the captain who 
would call the reluctant officer and say, 
“Colonel, Captain Alpers, Headquarters, 
Department of the Pacific. This just came out 
of Washington; if you don’t want to agree with 
Washington, you say so and I’ll write this up.” 


The next day I would go back and the officer 
would do anything he could for me. I learned 
to do this pretty well and really learned my 
way around the Marine Corps. 

Hawthorne, Nevada was one of the places 
that I went to frequently, and then all the 
Marine bases in and around San Francisco. 
The captain would go for a couple of months, 
and knowing that I lived in Reno would say, 
“Well, Warren, don’t you think you ought to 
go over to Hawthorne and see how the first 
sergeant’s getting along over there?” 

So I’d go over, and my job then was 
instructing first sergeants at the various bases 
on what to do and how to take care of their 
classification records and how to classify any 
new people that came in. It was a lot of fun, 
and I’d come through Reno with a seventy- 
two hour leave going and a seventy-two hour 
leave coming, so I got to see quite a bit of Reno 
at that time. 

I became very interested in what was 
going in Hawthorne, and business there was 
fantastic. The business that they were doing 
was unbelievable. Before the war somebody 
that I haven’t mentioned previously, my 
brother-in-law Pick Hobson, had a brother 
by the name of Joe [Hobson] and we sent 
him down to Hawthorne to open up a small 
gambling house in about 1940.1 was offered 
the job down there at a gambling house by a 
guy by the name of Slim Russell that wanted 
me to come down there and go to work. I 
turned it down, and let Joe take it. 

Joe was down there eighteen months and 
came back, handed me a hundred thousand 
dollars in thousand dollar bills and says, “Here 
kid, put this in the safe for me.” 

About that time, the failure of my 
marriage, a lack of money and other things 
were bugging me. I was stationed in San 
Francisco. A friend of mine asked if I’d like 
to deal Craps on weekends at a place in El 



Military Service, 1942-1946 


25 


Cerrito. I decided that would be a great thing, 
so for a year I worked as a Crap dealer, Wheel 
dealer and “21” dealer in El Cerrito. 

El Cerrito was run by Pechart and Kessel, 
two famous gamblers of that time. I didn’t 
know too much about them, but they really 
had something going; they were making a lot 
of money. 

Tips were fantastic. I’d go to work at seven 
o’clock at night; my Marine Corps job would 
be over at four. I’d travel across the bridge 
with some of the other dealers. I had to wear 
my uniform because you couldn’t take it off at 
that time. I would go into the cloakroom and 
change into a civilian suit that belonged to a 
friend of mine who outweighed me by about 
thirty pounds. It was a double-breasted suit 
and I couldn’t keep the pants up. 

I was pretty scared going to work, scared 
because the Marine Corps might catch me. 
It was a court-martial offense to be out of 
uniform. Also, the gambling wasn’t exactly 
legal; there was always the chance of a raid. 
The money was so good that I chanced it. 
I would easily make two or three hundred 
dollars a week just working Saturday and 
Sunday. If somebody got sick I’d work the 
whole week. I probably learned as much about 
the gambling business there as I had in my 
previous experience. 

The dealers were more or less going for 
themselves; they were really stealing from 
the bosses. I could see this stuff going on. A 
friend of mine came over to me and asked if 
I knew what was going on. I said I did and 
had thought about quitting. He said not to 
worry about it, the bosses knew what was 
going on to some extent and for me to keep 
my mouth shut. I watched what was going on 
and could see that the bosses knew what was 
going on. Everybody was getting just about 
one hundred dollars a day besides their tips 
and wages, was what it amounted to. 


Observing this and seeing how it was 
done has probably given me more insight on 
how to protect myself in the business than 
anything that ever happened before. Many 
of these people are still in the business. Good 
men, I don’t say they are dishonest; I don’t 
think they were really dishonest then. I think 
the bosses sort of said you do this because 
Pechart, Kessel and a man named “Bones” 
Remmer, who ran the place, would not pay 
them more than fifteen dollars a day. Wages 
were higher in other places and these people 
thought they had it coming and they took it. 
“Bones” Remmer, who has been dead many 
years now, was a famous guy at that time. 
The dealers got their fifteen dollars a day and 
tips plus one meal. They had a dining room 
there that fed the players who were mostly 
Jewish people, black-market people with lots 
of money to show around. The players got the 
finest steaks and wine while the dealers got 
pot roast. One night four or five dealers were 
sitting there and one of them was pouring 
catsup on his pot roast. “Bones” Remmer 
came along and saw him doing this. 

He called a waiter over and said, “Get that 
catsup off that table; those are dealers sitting 
there and that catsup costs four bits a bottle 
on the black-market, get it off that table.” 

One dealer looked at another and said, 
“No catsup, huh? How much do you think 
the fine should be?” 

The other dealer said, “How about five 
hundred dollars.” The other agreed, so the 
first thing they did when they got back to the 
tables was steal five hundred dollars and put 
it in the tokes. So that catsup went from fifty 
cents to five hundred dollars. 

The first night I worked on that job I had 
this suit on I had borrowed from my friend. 
My pants would slip all the time. I would 
roll the ball, clean the layout and then when 
I would try to roll the ball again I’d have to 



26 


Warren Nelson 


unbutton the coat, reach down and pull up 
my pants. There was a second dealer on the 
wheel, an old man Id never met before named 
Poffenberg. 

After about an hour of that he leaned over 
and said, “Kid, are you wearing a sub?” I said 
no I wasn’t. He asked if I was sure and I said 
yes. He then said, “God, I was sure you had 
a sub on. I wore one for twenty years and the 
first time I took it off was like going without 
my underwear.” 

A sub is a pocket that fits under your belt 
in the front part of your pants. It was used by 
crooked dealers for years to slip money into 
when nobody was looking. They could slip 
it under their belt into the pocket and then 
cleanup after they got off the table. I think 
this is a good example of the old days in the 
gambling business and the difference between 
things that went on then and now. 

Going back and forth on the bridge every 
night to the gambling house in El Cerrito 
was a great experience. I had a roommate 
in the Marine Corps while stationed in San 
Francisco. We were getting subsistence and 
quarters and living downtown in a hotel. 
The extra money gave me a chance to eat in 
the finest places and do things I ordinarily 
wouldn’t have been able to do. 

I would come up to Reno at every 
opportunity to observe and talk to my friends 
in the gambling business. By this time, 
although not divorced, my marriage was over. 

I was transferred one hundred twenty- 
six times in two years. Temporary duty to 
different places for three days, four days, 
five days, maybe ten days at a time. My job 
was to go into a Marine Corps station like 
Hawthorne or Fallon, it could be anyplace 
in the bay area, Thirteenth Naval District. 
I was to give instructions to first sergeants, 
so I became widely acquainted throughout 
the Marine Corps. I became so interested 


in this work—I was doing interviewing, 
job descriptions, classification work—that I 
thought very strongly of doing that when I got 
out of the Marine Corps. I talked to Captain 
Alpers about this, and he thought it was a 
good idea. He would help me get that kind 
of a job when the war was over. 

The thing that stopped me was that I 
would have to start out as a class three in civil 
service, which was about six thousand dollars 
a year. In the meantime, I had been contacted 
by Bill Harrah to open up Harrah’s Club. This 
was late in ’45 when he first contacted me. 
Right after that was when they dropped the 
bomb on Hiroshima, and the war, to some 
extent, was over. 

The day the Japs quit, there was a little gal 
in Headquarters, Department of the Pacific, 
who was a master sergeant and practically 
ran the whole outfit. I called her Sergeant 
Futter, talked to her a great deal, got my 
orders from her whenever I went out of town. 
I had never dated the four years I was in the 
Marine Corps and was a little hesitant about 
it. I’d arranged to get a divorce and was in the 
process. I asked this girl for a first date and 
we started to go together. I brought her to 
Reno two or three times; then we decided to 
get married. She was a master sergeant, and 
I was a technical sergeant; she outranked me 
by one rank. She had all the juice there was in 
the Marine Corps, she was so well liked. Her 
commanding officer was a major, and there 
was a warrant officer in the office also. These 
people knew my background and were very 
protective of her, wondering why that poor 
little girl was going to marry a gambler ten 
years her senior. What kind of a life would 
she have. I’m sure they did everything they 
could to talk her out of it. 

It looked like I was going to have to stay in 
the Marine Corps, but after being contacted 
by Bill Harrah, she did everything she could to 



Military Service, 1942-1946 


27 


get me out. In fact, I got out four days sooner 
than she did. 

We drove down to Los Angeles from San 
Francisco to meet Bill Harrah to buy some 
new equipment for the impending opening 
of Harrah’s. She and I went to Las Vegas and 
got married on the fourteenth of February, 
1946. It started a whole new life for me as far 
as marriage is concerned. 




_ 5 

Harrah’s Club, 1946-1948 


Pat and I were married in Las Vegas on 
the fourteenth of February 1946 and came to 
Reno. I had already made arrangements to 
go to work at Harrah’s Club. We got here in 
February, and Harrah’s Club didn’t open ’til 
June. So I went to work in the Bonanza Club; 
it’s now where Harrah’s Club is on Center 
Street. 

There was a bunch of old buddies working 
in there, old-timers—Jack Duffy one of the 
fine top people in the gambling business, 
Howard Farris who is still my partner, Eddie 
Margolis who is now dead, but ran the 
place, very nice man and a good man in our 
business, been dead many years. 

Johnny Acuff who I had known before the 
war was working there, and he and I remained 
good friends (and he by the way has also been 
dead five or six years), but he was also a very 
nice man. He and I were splitting tips. I was 
dealin “21,” and he was dealin’ the wheel. Well 
historically a wheel dealer doesn’t make any 
tokes, so I was really carrying Johnny. I only 
worked there about a month, and the house 
changed hands. 


“Sundown” Wells took it over, and 
Sundown was quite an old character known 
far and wide.And he was a good friend of 
mine, but I didn’t care to work for him. And 
so I quit the day he took over just because I 
didn’t want anybody to know that I worked 
for Sundown Wells. This is not derogatory to 
him personally, but it’s just the way I felt the 
way he ran a gambling house. 

I then left there and went to work for 
Harrah as sort of a “clerk of the works,” and 
along with bein’ a clerk of the works and 
helping push the remodeling of the Harrah’s 
Club as it was then on Virginia Street. It was 
thirty-five feet wide and a hundred and forty 
feet long, not a big place by any means. 

When Bill Harrah started to do something 
he always did it right. He really was going 
first class in the way he handled it. I was very, 
very impressed the way he did things because 
everything had to be just so. One of the things 
that he was doing, he was building it using the 
signs of the zodiac as a sort of a—a logo, and 
everything went to that end. One of the things 
that really bugged me is that Bill is a very quiet 



30 


Warren Nelson 


person, and hed come in and ask a question and 
get an answer. But he come in one day, and they 
just finished a bar, and I was very interested in 
the bar because they were covering it with gold 
leaf. And I asked the painter or the man that 
was applying it if that was real gold; he said yes 
and told me how thin it was; but still it was a 
considerable amount of gold being implanted 
on the bar. When they got it laid, then they 
covered it with some kind of resin to keep it 
from peeling, and when it got all done it didn’t 
look nearly as well as I thought it would. 

Harrah came in and looked at it, and he 
said, “Warren, what do you think of that?” 

And I says, “Well, it didn’t turn out just 
the way I thought it would, but it’s all right.” 

He said, “Well, you don’t like it?” 

And I said, “Well, no.” 

He turned to the guy, and he said, “Take 
it off.” 

[I said] “Wait a minute, don’t do that.” I 
said, “That’s gold.” 

He says, “I don’t care what it is, if it don’t 
look good, it don’t look good.” So they put 
some paint remover on it and scraped that 
gold in a bucket. 

I asked the guy, “Could we retrieve that?” 
He says I don’t think so, maybe they could or 
maybe they couldn’t; but anyway that was the 
end of the gold leaf bar. But that was the way 
Bill Harrah did things. 

I worked very, very hard as a laborer even 
getting things together pushing and pulling. At 
that time labor was a problem. It was hard to get 
the people to work, and they’d go off in a corner; 
and I guess everybody was used to doin’ war 
work because it was really a mess the way they 
were doing it. And we were quite a bit behind 
the time that we thought we should open. 
Anyway, I had made a deal with Bill Harrah 
to go in there, and I was to have five percent 
of the Keno. And after I had started working 
around there, and I was the only one that had 


ever worked in a regular gambling house of all 
the executives. There was Bob Ring, Wayne 
Martin and Bill Harrah, so it was more or less 
all up to me; I had to order all the tools, the dice, 
the cards, and the tables. But it was interesting 
and fun and just being out among—as far as 
having a lot of ambition to go ahead and do it. 

A couple of nights before it opened, Bill 
Harrah came to me, and he said, “Warren, I’d 
like to change our deal.” 

And I said, “Uh-oh, this is what always 
happens.” I said, “What’s the problem?” 

He said, “Well, instead of five percent of 
the Keno, I want you to have five percent of 
the whole place,” which sounded very, very 
good to me.We opened on the twentieth of 
June, and the place was an instant success. 

On opening night, a friend of mine by the 
name of A1 Winters from Portland came in. 
A1 Winters was the originator of the Sahara 
in Las Vegas and held the most stock of it 
when it opened. But this is long before the 
Sahara opened. 

A1 came in drunk and came over and said, 
“Warren, Hi. I want to give you complimentary 
play. I’m drinkin, don’t give me more than three 
thousand. I want to make a play” So I gave him 
three thousand, and we had a big limit. Five 
hundred or a thousand dollars worth was an 
immense limit for those days, but Harolds Club 
was dealing that limit so we went along with it. 

The dice started to pass, and in almost no 
time A1 Winters was into white hundred dollar 
chips and had out about twenty thousand 
dollars. The bankroll that Bill Harrah had put 
in there amounted to sixty-five thousand. I 
had told him to begin with, that we needed a 
minimum of two hundred and fifty. He said I 
can’t get that much— what’s the least we can 
get by? And I finally got it down to a hundred 
and seventy-five. But on the night before we 
opened he brought in a satchel with sixty-five 
thousand in it and said this is all I could get. 



Harrah’s Club, 1946-1948 


31 


The money had to be spread very, very thin 
in order to bankroll all the games. 

Bill came in during the play with A1 
Winters and called me over, says, “How much 
are those white checks?” 

And I said, “A hundred dollars a piece.” 

He said, “How much has he got out?” 

And I said, “About twenty thousand.” 

He said, “Close the game.” 

I said, “No, you can’t do that.” 

He said, “Close it.” 

I said, “Bill you can’t. Bill it’s just—it’s 
just— got to do something. 

And he says, “I’m goin downstairs, you 
come on down.” 

I says, “Well let me see what I can do with this 
guy’’ I went over and said, “Al, how you doin’?” 

He said, “Boy, the dice are hot aren’t they 
Warren?” 

I said, “Yes.” 

And he says, “Here,” he says, “can I make 
a bet on six and eight?” 

I said, “Sure.” 

“How much can I bet?” 

I said, “Six hundred.” 

So we placed it for six hundred a piece— 
twelve hundred— and the dice turned and 
started to seven away; and within thirty or 
forty minutes he went downhill as fast as he 
went uphill, and he was broke and owed the 
place three thousand. I quit sweating about 
that time and went down to see Bill. 

He said, “What happened?” 

I said, “The guy went broke.” 

He says, “Look, better change the limit.” 

I said, “Bill, you can’t change the limit 
now. It’s our opening night.” 

He said, “Change it.” 

[I said] “You can’t do that.” 

He said, “Yes, I can. Change it.” So I went 
up and changed the limit. I thought it would 
hurt the business, but it didn’t; it went on, went 
like a bomb. That was very, very good business. 


We had a lot of high rolling play. Different 
people were playing—’’Nick the Greek,” Joe 
Bernstein, Fritz Zibarth who was an old friend 
of mine from before the war. Fritz was the 
electrical contractor for the Hoover Dam, 
made a lot of money and loved to gamble. I 
had met him at the Palace Club prior to the 
war when he came in one day and wanted 
twenty thousand dollars worth of credit. He 
was a big, red-faced, burly guy, had on leather 
puttees, dressed like an engineer. 

He walked up to me and he said, “My name’s 
Fritz Zibarth, and I want twenty thousand 
dollars worth of credit to shoot craps.” I didn’t 
know him, but on appearance I said OK. He 
said, “You’re gonna give me twenty thousand?” 

I said, “Yes Sir.” 

And he said, “Well this is the place I want 
to play. I just came from the Bank Club;” he 
says, “they wouldn’t even talk about cashin 
the check.” Anyway, we became fast friends, 
and he was a terrific player. He loved to play, 
and he was a dangerous player. He played fast 
and played his money well. 

So, when Harrah’s Club opened and he 
came to Reno, he still came and played at 
Harrah’s Club. He was a Faro Bank player, and 
he had a system called “chops.” Chops is merely 
a progression system that you progress up and 
progress down in certain units of money, and if 
you win one more bet than you lose, then you 
are a winner. It’s fairly complicated, but not too 
complicated. It’s easy to play. The increments 
sometimes change going up and down. People 
would sit and play chops for hours and hours 
and not win or lose much either way, but by 
playing low and the limit that we had, kept 
them from either winning or losing a lot. But 
Fritz had been playing chops and winning, but 
the action was too slow because of the limit. 

He said, “If I deposit a hundred thousand 
dollars with you, would he take the limit off of 
the Faro Bank if I play strict chops?” 



32 


Warren Nelson 


And I said, “Well, let me talk to Mr. 
Harrah.” 

I went to Bill and told him the proposition. 
I said, “I’m absolutely sure that this man has 
got to go broke. It might take a month; it 
might take a day or it might take six months, 
but eventually we’re gonna win everything he 
wins when he wins, and we’re also gonna win 
the hundred thousand.” 

He said, “Well leave that hundred thousand 
dollars in the office and all his winnings, so it 
will always be there.” And Bill says, “Are you 
sure this is all right?” And I said sure. 

He started to play, and I guess for maybe 
twenty or thirty days, he’d win a thousand or 
fifteen hundred a day every day, hard to beat 
because of the thing. You have to have a great 
extreme to beat him, and extremes is what 
makes gambling to begin with—extremes of 
winning and losing. If you didn’t have those, 
people wouldn’t play, so there’s so many things 
that can happen in gambling. It’s very unlikely 
and the odds against it are astronomical, but 
you could conceivably roll Roulette and have 
fifty red numbers in a row. I have never seen 
fifty red numbers in a row, but I have seen 
thirty-two. And this was on a square wheel, 
so this shows what—what the odds are, how 
these things can go. And it was the same way 
with this Faro Bank game, that was he had to 
get the extreme because the extreme winning, 
he’d keep making smaller bets. But the extreme 
when he was losing, he made bigger bets, so 
sometime he had to go over and slop over 
and get broke. There was no question about 
it because of the nature of the games. I guess 
for twenty-five or thirty days, he kept winning 
everyday, and he was playing on two games, 
had a little guy called Shorty, a little Italian 
fellow, that played for him, so the two of them 
are playing and created a great deal of interest 
in the town. Gamblers came from all over just 
to watch them play ’cause he’d get up as high 


as betting three or four thousand dollars on a 
card. He kept on going, and he’d give up and 
get in sixty-seventy thousand and get out. 

A boisterous man, he’d say, “I’m gonna 
own this joint and we’re gonna call it Fritz’ 
place.” But all in jest because he was really a 
gentleman, although he was real noisy. 

One day the worm turned, and he got 
carried up to four or five thousand and then six 
thousand. All he had to do was lose about eight 
or nine more bets, and he’s broke; and that 
happened—he went broke. He had promised 
me that he wouldn’t ask us for any more money 
after he lost the hundred thousand because I 
didn’t want him to go too strong, but he went 
to old man Harrah, who was quite a character 
in himself and talked to him, and Harrah gave 
him twenty-five thousand more. 

He started where he left off makin’ these 
high bets, and he probably—he lost within 
ten minutes he lost—or five minutes he lost 
the twenty-five thousand. 

Showing what kind of a gentleman Fritz was, 
he came to me and he says, “Warren, I—I don’t 
have that money, but I will have it in a month 
or so, but I’m going back to Los Angeles and I’ll 
call you.” He called me about a month later and 
said, “Warren I’m coming up tomorrow, and I’ll 
send you that twenty-five thousand.” 

The next morning I got up, and there was a 
piece in the paper that Fritz Zibarth had died. I 
went to Bill Harrah and said what should we do 
about that twenty-five thousand. He said just 
forget it because he wouldn’t take it from his 
widow. That was one of the many nice things 
that Bill Harrah did. I don’t agree with many 
things that— about Bill Harrah, but some of 
the things he was a very generous, good man. 

There was a man that played with us and 
worked for the city, and he would lose ten 
thousand dollars; and the ten thousand dollars 
were fees that he’d collected from the city or 
the state—I forget which. He came to me and 



Harrah’s Club, 1946-1948 


33 


told me what he had done, and I went to Bill 
Harrah and Bill gave him back ten thousand 
dollars to keep him from going to jail. Not 
many gamblers do these sort of things. 

Harrah’s was an exciting place. I worked 
very hard there. I worked ten, twelve, fourteen 
hours a day We had a big play with Nicholas 
Dandolos, Nick the Greek, probably the most 
famous of all gamblers. He was also a Faro 
Bank player and Craps, but this particular 
time he was playing Faro Bank. And he was 
playing with a guy named Joe Bernstein. 

Joe Bernstein, they called him the “Silver 
Fox of Powell Street.” He was from San 
Francisco, but he became a very famous 
gambler. He was probably one of the 
originators that originated counting cards in 
“21.” He was a very, very sharp man. But Joe 
Bernstein would not pay a marker. If he could 
get enough credit and lose, why he wouldn’t 
pay So I had told the people at the Faro Bank 
game never to give him any credit. He and 
Nick the Greek were playing, and they took 
a lot of watching because both of them were 
very, very smart. One little error and you— 
you’d had it because they’d figure out a way 
to win a bet from you that—whether it was 
legal or not, and they’d usually get their way 
So you had to be very careful dealing with 
them. Nick had quite a bit of class, but still if 
he got a chance to steal a bet, it was part of 
his philosophy that if you had to take a little 
investment and you got a chance, you did it. 

But, I came in one day, and Nick the Greek 
was playing. Joe Bernstein told the dealer, told 
the shift manager that he had thirty thousand 
dollars over at the Bank Club and give him ten 
thousand, and he’d go get it. 

I come in, I saw the marker, I said, 
“Whose marker is that?” And they said Joe 
Bernstein. 

I said, “Joe, you got a ten thousand dollar 
marker here, but where’s the money?” 


He said, “Over in the Bank Club.” 

I said, “Well let’s go get it.” 

He said, “Wait ’til I get done playin’.” 

I said, “Joe, I don’t want to wait ’til you get 
done playin’; I want the money now.” I said, 
“This is a cash game.” And we argued. 

He said, “OK, OK. You go get ’em.” 

I said, “OK.” So I wrote out a note, “Please 
give the bearer, Warren Nelson, ten thousand 
dollars “—and gave it to him. He signed it Joe 
Bernstein. I went over to the Bank Club, and 
Bill Graham and Jim McKay and Jack Sullivan 
were sitting in the counting room, counting. 
Walter Parman, the manager, took me in, and 
I handed the note to Bill Graham. 

Bill Graham looked at it, handed it to 
McKay and says, “Is this Bernstein’s signature?” 

McKay says, “I don’t know,” and he 
handed it to Sullivan. 

He says, “I don’t know” 

There was a phone setting on the desk, 
and I picked up the phone, called up Harrah’s 
Club, told the operator, “Get Joe Bernstein on 
the phone.” 

He came to the phone and, “What the 
hell’s the matter? What’s the matter?” 

And I said, “Will you tell these people to 
give me the ten thousand.” I handed the phone 
to Sullivan. 

He said, “What the hell’s the matter? 
It’s my goddamn money, give ’em the ten 
thousand!” He hung up. 

So they gave me the ten thousand. I had 
the money in my pocket, turned around, and 
Walter Parman came in. I said, “I want to tell 
you people something.” I said, “Had Walter 
Parman come over to Harrah’s Club with a 
note from somebody to get ten thousand,” I 
said, “he would have got ten thousand with no 
questions asked. And I said this, “This is not the 
way you’re gonna get treated here.” I thought 
it was very, very poor. So I thought it was real 
unethical and something that I wouldn’t have 



34 


Warren Nelson 


done in the same circumstances. That’s the way 
the things went. There was a lot of competition 
between the different clubs at that time. 

About a year after Harrah’s Club opened, 
Fitzgerald came to town and opened the 
Nevada Club. And we were all enjoyin’ a pretty 
good business. There was a man that used to 
work for me by the name of Emmett Shay 
who ran the Keno game for Fitzgerald. Well 
Fitzgerald was playin’ lucky with the Keno 
game; and it was makin quite a bit of money, 
and he thought maybe the percentage was 
too high on this Keno game. The percentage 
at that time I believe was about twenty—oh 
about twenty-five percent for the house. He 
changed his tickets and wrote up—put a big 
advertising campaign on— “Bonus Keno,” cut 
it down to fifteen percent. I looked and figured 
out the percentages that they were using on 
their Bonus Keno—I discovered that they were 
dealing it at between twelve and fifteen percent. 

I went to Bill Harrah, and I said, “Bill, we 
can’t compete with these people if we keep on 
going the way we are; and if we do the same 
thing they’re doing, we’re not going to make any 
money” I said, “The wages are gonna be nine to 
ten percent, your taxes and so forth will be three 
or four percent, and your paper and equipment 
and supplies will be three or four more. We’ll be 
losing money by dealing Keno this way” 

And he says, “Well I’ve handled these 
things before in Bingo,” and he says, “only one 
way to do this is to fight fire with fire.” He says, 
“Just cut that percentage down lower. 

I says, “How low do you want it?” 

He said, “Make it so that it’s just even 
money—that it’s no percentage against the 
player. 

I said, “We’re gonna lose a lot of money.” 

He said, “Fet me worry about that.” Of 
course this was after we’d been open a year, and 
they got a bankroll together just to begin with, 
and we were dealing with a very short bankroll. 


I sat down and figured out a set of figures 
and the closest I could come was—to the 
percentage that I was tryin to get to that—was 
the player had a half of one percent, the best 
of it. That’s an unknown thing in a gambling 
house. But we didn’t go out and do it on our 
own. I went to the Bank Club, and I went to 
the Palace Club and to Harolds Club and told 
them all what I was going to do. And they said 
well let us talk to Fitzgerald one more time. 
They called, and he wouldn’t budge in what he 
was doing. So we all the next day had Bonus- 
Bonus Keno and dropped it down where the 
player was getting the best of it. Needless to 
say the business picked up. 

The four of us, the Palace Club and the 
Bank Club, Harrah’s and Harolds Club, were 
dealing pretty lucky in not getting hit by any 
big tickets. However, the Nevada Club got 
very unlucky and were losing a lot of money. 
They’d get hit with these big tickets, and it was 
really a sort of a catastrophe for them. They 
lost a lot of money in a very short time. Then 
they came back and decided we should get 
together, the Keno bosses and the bosses—Bill 
Harrah, “Pappy” Smith, Baldy West, and Jack 
Sullivan. These were the heavyweights of the 
gambling at that time, and Fincoln Fitzgerald. 

We were in Pappy” Smith’s office at 
Harolds Club discussing it, and I think there 
were only two underlings there, myself and 
Emmett Shay. Fitzgerald said well I think 
that twenty-eight—whatever the percentage 
was, was too much, and I would like to see it 
down to twenty-three percent or in that area. 
And we kind of worked it out and went on 
that basis. Everybody agreed, and we came to 
an agreement, and I think we put it at about 
twenty-three percent. 

Emmett Shay had been my friend for quite 
a few years. He’d done me some favors up in 
Montana. I was very fond of him. And after 
he came down here and he got to be a boss 



Harrah’s Club, 1946-1948 


35 


of the Keno, I was very unhappy because he 
didn’t tell me when he made this change. I 
met him on the street. 

I said, “If that had been I, I might have 
done that myself; but if I would have done it, 
why I would have told you about it.” 

He said, “Well you run your joint, and I’ll 
run mine, so we weren’t very friendly because 
of this. 

We were having this meeting, and I said 
the rest of them didn’t know anything about 
the game. Emmett had made a statement, 
and I said, “Now that—that’s wrong.” I said, 
“It’s right here in black and white; this is 
what it is.” 

And he said, “You don’t know black from 
white.” 

With that I jumped across Fitzgerald, 
Jack Sullivan, and Baldy West, and punched 
Emmett in the nose. 

Old man Smith said, “Now boys, now boys, 
now boys.” So it was quite a big fight for just a 
few minutes, and it stopped. I thought it was 
sort of an interesting thing that would happen. 

Great rivalry between all the places at 
that time— the limits, what you do or what 
you couldn’t do. But Harrah’s Club seemed 
to come to the top and was doing better and 
better all the time. I was very proud of the 
place. This was in June we opened, and my 
position started to deteriorate [to that] of a 
bookkeeper; and at the end of the first year the 
books showed that above general expenses we 
had made a million and a half, the first year 
which was a lot of money in those days. And 
I figured five percent of that was seventy-five 
thousand, and I had just bought an apartment 
house for my mother and father with the 
money that I was going to get. So I went to 
talk to the bookkeeper about it, and he says 
well you’ve got thirteen thousand coming. 
I said well that’s impossible—I got seventy- 
five thousand. He says after everything gets 


amortized and this and that, he says this is all 
there is. That was my first time I’d ever heard 
the word amortized, and I—I don’t— really 
don’t care if I ever hear it again because all 
I could see was that I got amortized out of 
about sixty-two thousand dollars, as far as I 
was concerned. I just couldn’t see it. 

And in the meantime I had given some 
of my interest to the Faro Bank dealers, and 
I had given some of my interest to the Keno 
dealers. Now I couldn’t pay these people, and 
this bugged me very much because [of] this 
amortization. And to make a long story short, 
it wasn’t very long that I took the money and 
paid up one of the men that I had promised 
to pay, and Bill Harrah called me in, asked me 
about it. told him what I did. 

He said, “You can’t do that.” 

And I put my keys on the desk and said, 
1 quit. 

Bill says, “Are you sure you’re gonna do 
that?” 

And I said, “Yes.” 

Tears came in his eyes, and he says, “Well, 
there wouldn’t have been a Harrah’s Club if it 
weren’t for you.” I believe that because I was 
the only one that did know the basics, but by 
then they had a good crew and Harrah’s Club 
has gone from there. 

I left with no rancor. We have our greatest 
respect for Mr. Harrah. I still haven’t figured 
out whether I quit or got fired. I guess I’d 
have to say I was probably fired. I didn’t do 
anything then for about six months. All I did 
was fish. I fished everyday in the Truckee 
River. I’m a good fisherman, had a lot of fun. 
But then I started to worry. I had the thirteen 
thousand and had to make a down payment 
on the apartment house; my folks had come 
down. Sol was short of money. 




6 


Waldorf Club 


My friend Howard Farris, who by the 
way is my partner now, and he and I worked 
together in the Palace Club before the war, 
and Howard is a varied character in many, 
many ways. He’s always got a business deal of 
some kind, and he was dickering with a little 
fellow by the name of Nick Abelman. Nick 
Abelman was a famous old character from 
Tonopah, had been partners with Tex Rickard 
in Tonopah in a gambling house, and then he 
came to Reno and had the Riverside for years. 
And the Riverside in the old days was what 
we call a “nick joint.” Anytime a big player 
come along, they always took advantage of 
them; and it was a sort of a—just a way of life 
at that time. All the small joints did not deal 
on the square at all times. A big player come 
along, they had somebody that could take 
the money. 

Now Nick was not a dealer himself, but 
he was a very good little businessman. And 
nobody thought any worse or any less of 
anybody in those days, although now it’s a 
heinous crime, and I really believe that too. 
Nick had nothing to do at this time. 


Howard Farris came to me and said, “I got 
a chance to buy the Waldorf. Do you want a 
part of it?” 

And I said, “I don’t have any money.” 

He said, “Well if you can get twenty 
thousand dollars, we can buy it.” 

It looked like a good deal. This might be 
hard to believe, but I started at the Palace 
Club, walked around to the Bank Club 
through Harolds Club and back down in front 
of Harrah’s, and within an hour and a half I 
had borrowed the twenty thousand dollars 
on the street. You better believe I borrowed 
from some pretty tough customers too, some 
people that wouldn’t give anybody anything; 
but it always pleased me very much to know 
that—that people trusted me that much that 
I could go out and borrow that much money 
in that little time. There was no way I could 
have gone to the bank at that time; I had no 
collateral. So I was in business, went down 
and took over the Waldorf. 

It was a mistake from the beginning. I 
had been around gambling houses all my 
life, but I had never been around food or bar 



38 


Warren nelson 


business, never tried to operate it; and I did 
know how to run one “21” game and a poker 
game and ten slot machines, but I was just 
used to bigger things. I was used to havin’ a lot 
of people coming through and going through 
and handling people when they’re there. You 
get a few local people, and you cater to them 
back and forth. And none of them would play 
very high; there wasn’t any chance to win any 
money, so it was a very, very bad situation 
for me. 

In the meantime, Howard, my partner, 
was handling some big business deals 
overseas. He was buying whole islands of used 
war materials; the war was just over. And he 
had got a hold of quite a bit of money and 
bought up a couple shiploads of old iron— 
scrap iron tanks, tractors, and things; and 
they got into San Francisco bay, and a dock 
strike came, and they sat there for twelve or 
thirteen months, and the value went down, 
and Howard more or less got broke. 

I had some interesting experiences in the 
Waldorf. It was a tough—tough place to work 
in. Everybody would come in, come on have a 
drink, and I got to drinkin’ coffee royales, and 
one day I woke up, and I thought my God, I’m 
an alcoholic. So needless to say I quit drinkin 
coffee royales. Only reason I drank was to get 
fifty cents in the till when I took a drink. 

Had a man named Patterson come in, a 
gentleman. I’d known him quite awhile, and 
he liked me, and he was quite a wheel. I had 
a very small bankroll and was real worried 
about dealin any kind of a limit. I had ten 
dollars for the number limit; you could win 
three-fifty on one roll of the wheel, but anyway 
Mr. Patterson was very unlucky and got in five 
thousand dollars. Five thousand dollars was a 
lot of money to me then. I just couldn’t believe 
that that could happen—I could be that lucky 
to win that much money, and I needed it so 
bad to put the bankroll up and would take all 


that pressure off of me. Mr. Patterson—about 
this time it was three o’clock in the morning, 
and the place was closed except the gambling. 

He said, “Warren, bring me a check, and 
I’ll pay you.” 

I brought the check. He started to write 
the check, fell backwards, had a heart attack. 
What little I knew about first aid sure came 
in good stead because I sure started workin 
on Mr. Patterson. I rubbed his wrists, and I 
didn’t give him artificial respiration, but I did 
everything else but, and got a drink of brandy 
in him and got him straightened out. And 
finally he came to and he signed the check. I 
didn’t ask him, but he signed the check. In the 
meantime I called an ambulance. I took him to 
the hospital. He didn’t die, but I’ll tell you that 
I was sure worried. Anyway, the check cleared, 
and I was in better shape than for a time. 

In the meantime as it went along, it 
became more and more desperate, and as far 
as I was concerned I just couldn’t see how I 
could make any money in there. And finally 
Howard had borrowed some money from 
Nick Abelman who we talked about before. 
And so Nick took over his end of it. He come 
in; he says you stay as my partner, instead of 
half of it I’ll give you thirty percent, and I’ll 
remodel the place. Well Nick came in and put 
up a bankroll—I didn’t have to worry about 
that anymore—and spent about ten to fifteen 
thousand dollars remodeling the place. And 
when we opened it up, he made it look like 
the old Riverside and wanted to to do it the 
same way. And we had no business. 

And finally one day I said, “Nick, I’m 
gonna get out of here. 

And he says, “You don’t have anything 
comm.’ 

I said, “I know that.” I probably did, but I 
walked out and went down to the Mapes Hotel 
and asked Bernie Einstoss for a job. And I’ve 
dealt with Bernie many, many times. 



Waldorf Club 


39 


I’ll go back to Harrah’s Club, a story about 
Bernie. Bernie was about my age and about 
my size and about my coloring. Many times 
people mistook us, we being about the same 
size and being around the gambling business 
and so on and so forth. But anyway, I’ve 
known him from the old days in the Palace 
Club and in Harrah’s Club. One time about 
a year after Harrah’s Club was open, why he 
came in with Ruby Mathis and Sam Rubin. I 
believe A1 Winters was with them. And we 
had raised the limit back up to the Craps— 
they were two hundred and four hundred I 
think—but anyway they were playin’ Craps, 
and Bernie lost ten or fifteen thousand. 

Bernie said, “Give me thirty thousand 
dollars worth of credit payable tomorrow. 

So I said, “OK, Bernie.” 

While we were dealing, Howard Farris’ 
brother was one of the dealers, and this was 
a real big game. The dice were workin’ like 
trained pigs, as they do sometimes; they had 
one of those streaks I spoke about earlier, and 
it was all for the house. The dice were really 
choppin’ the players up. There were three or 
four bets cornin’ off and on on a “come” bet 
every time, and Bernie had a bet of two and 
four on four, and the payoff was eight hundred 
and two hundred, a thousand dollars when 
the dealer set it out. And Bernie picked a 
thousand dollars up, his pay. In the meantime 
one of the dealers got mixed up and come 
back and paid it again. Well when he paid it 
again, Bernie grabbed the money, put it in a 
rack; so he now had in effect picked up a bet 
that wasn’t his for a thousand dollars. And I 
started to say wait a minute, and I decided, 
no, I’m gonna leave it go because there’d 
be an argument I know. Once he got the 
money in the rack, it’d be pretty hard to win 
an argument. So anyway, in a few minutes 
the same thing happened again. Now he’s in 
twenty thousand to thirty thousand dollars 


worth of credit plus fifteen thousand—he’s 
in thirty-five thousand, and I thought I don’t 
want to mess the game up. So I let it go again. 

To make a long story short, within a short 
time he’d used up the credit and said, “Thanks, 
Warren,” and left. Next morning called me, 
he says come over to the Bonanza which was 
there across the alley, and I’ll pay you. And 
I went over. 

He said, “Boy kid,” he says, “you got me 
pretty good.” 

I said, “Yeah, Bernie, the dice were 
choppin real good.” 

“They sure were.” He says, “I never got 
beat so fast in my life.” 

I said, “Wellwasn’t too bad, though; 
you got a couple of bets you didn’t win.” I 
said, “You might have got even on that two 
thousand you picked up.” 

He said, “What two thousand?” 

I said, “The two thousand you picked up 
off the layout.” 

He said, “I didn’t pick up two thousand.” 

I said, “Bernie.” 

“God damnit, did you see that?” [he said]. 

And I said, “Sure I saw it.” 

He says, “Why didn’t you stop it?” 

I said, “Well the dice were workin’ so 
good, I knew I was gonna beat ya.” He kind of 
laughed, and I think that really made a friend 
out of him for me because I don’t think he 
ever forgot that. 

So I went down and asked him for a job. 
He said, “Warren, I’m sorry. I don’t have a job, 
but,” he said, “Mapes needs a man.” 

He and Mapes were partners, but each 
hired their own bosses. So he says go see him, 
so I didn’t know Charles, but I went up to see 
him. Howard Farris was workin’ there, my old 
partner, so Howard spoke to Mapes for me, 
and I went up and talked to Charles. This was 
in 1949, I think in September. And Charles 
said, “Well come back and see me Tuesday.” 



40 


Warren nelson 


I went back to see him, and he said, “Come 
here and sit down.” 

He said, “You’re just the kind of man I 
want, Warren. I’ve been inquiring around, 
you’ve got a good knowledge, you know 
people. I’m glad to have you.” He says, “And I 
heard a lot of good things about you, too, but,” 
he said, “I did hear some bad things.” 

[I said] “You did?” 

He said, “Yes.” 

I said, “Well Mr. Mapes, I’ve heard a lot of 
bad things about you.” 

He said, “What did you hear?” 

I said, “Well, what did you hear about 
me?” That ended the conversation. Anyway 
I went to work. 



7 

Mapes, 1948-1954 


Business was excellent, and I think I did 
a good job. I took care of the place and took 
care of everything. Bernie Einstoss was very 
good to me. 

The Mapes was a real nice place to work. 
I worked for Charlie Mapes for five years, 
and he never questioned anything I did. And 
Einstoss never questioned anything I did; I 
was more or less on my own. And it was a fun 
job—a lot of high rolling play, a lot of exciting 
play, things that I like. 

It was there I first met LaVere Redfield. 
We immediately called him “Mr. R.” Redfield 
was a very amazing man, and I, because he 
was a good customer, cultivated his friendship 
and became a very good friend. And I could 
see many good things in Mr. Redfield. He 
was tougher on a buck than anybody I ever 
saw, and I’ve never seen anybody that liked 
money as well as he did. But he was a very 
interesting man, and some of the things he 
did were absolutely fantastic. 

He kept a hundred thousand dollars in the 
office and played against it. And like Zibarth 
who we talked about before, he was a system 


player on the wheel. System players that have 
got unlimited money are hard to beat; you’ve 
got to beat them in the end, but sometimes 
it takes time. He was playing for—again the 
same amount as Zibarth, a hundred thousand 
dollars in the office he played against. He’d 
come in everyday, maybe miss one day a week, 
sit down for three or four hours and grind 
out a thousand and maybe two thousand 
dollars and maybe five hundred, but he did 
this everyday. 

This went on for about thirty days, and 
one day Mapes, Einstoss and Frank Grannis, 
who was also a partner there and Frank was 
one of the old-timers, one of the dear men in 
our business. He was a gambler all his life. As 
a kid around the docks and everything, he was 
shootin’ dice, shootin’ tops, a little, thin, frail 
man, but well thought of, and he’s still alive 
and one of the good people in our business. 
He’s been retired for many years. 

But they were discussing a play, and finally 
Bernie says, “Well we can’t beat this guy.” He 
says, “Cut him of f. Don’t give him that big 
limit anymore.” 



42 


Warren Nelson 


The limit we were giving him was two 
hundred and fifty dollars to a number, five 
thousand on a two to one shot, and ten 
thousand on the even money, black and red, 
odd or even. This is an unbelievably high 
limit, but he very seldom ever got that high 
unless he was losing. So, hed start out with 
a dollar, and really youd be playing to five 
and ten dollars to a number, but when he got 
carried over, hed go up—he could go up as 
high as two hundred and fifty dollars. 

Bernie said, “Cut him off.” 

I said, “God, no, don’t. Give me another 
chance. Don’t cut him off now,” I said. “Give 
me another week.” 

“Oh, you’re not gonna beat that guy.” 

I said, “Bernie, we got to beat him.” 

He said, “All right, you—I’ll give you 
another week.” 

“No,” Frank Grannis said, “Bernie, Bernie, 
let him have it. Let him have another week.” 

So I think it was four days later, the thing 
turned, and I carried Mr. Redfield up where 
he was bettin two hundred and fifty dollars 
to a number. He did this four or five times. 
Now his hundred thousand dollars was about 
gone; and as I remember it, he had probably 
about eleven thousand dollars bet. He had two 
hundred and fifty dollars on every number 
in the first column and every number in the 
third column, leaving the middle column 
empty. And he played that way so you had 
to beat him on a two to one shot to get the 
money, and he’ll also bet five thousand in each 
column. Anyway, all his money was on the 
layout. The ball was rolling; he reached over 
to call the money on the inside column and 
push it over to the middle column. The dealer 
had given the ball a good hard roll, and it 
takes about a minute to drop. When I saw him 
do that, I looked up in the mirror so I could 
see the head of the wheel and the ball. And I 
could see where that—closed my eyes for just 


a second and I knew that ball was going in 
number three. Now this has happened quite 
a few times to me in the gambling business; 
and so in a certain way, in certain conditions, 
I believe in ESP in the gambling business. This 
is very rare, but every time it’s happened, it’s 
happened in very crucial things—something 
it meant to me, and I knew ahead of time what 
was going to happen. I—I truly believe it, and 
I’m certainly not superstitious. I can’t stand 
superstitious people in the gambling business, 
but I think this is different than superstition. I 
think ESP is knowing something that is going 
to happen, and I think that to the ordinary 
person it happens very rarely; but if it 
happens, we know that that’s what happened. 
Anyway, the ball did go in number three, and 
Mr. Redfield was wiped out. 

He was writing the numbers down as they 
came; and when that number three came, he 
took his sharp little pencil that I gave him 
when he started to play everyday and made 
the three. And when he come to the end of the 
three, he left the pencil on the table and set 
there with his head in his hand, never moved. 
He sat there for forty-five minutes. I tip-toed 
around him. As you can well imagine, there’s 
not very much you can say to a man that’s just 
lost a hundred thousand dollars in the way of 
condolences; and I’m sure you don’t tell him a 
joke. So I walked around very carefully. 

He finally got up and folded his little 
book, handed me back my pencil, and said, 
“Warren, I want to thank you very much for 
the grape juice.” 

I had brought him over a glass of grape 
juice when he first started to play. I think this 
shows that Mr. Redfield was a gentleman, even 
though he did like money. All you had to do 
was give him one little thing—the best of it, 
he had you because he—he was so sharp and 
so quick. But he again had a lot of class. He 
truly believed he could beat the wheel, and I 



Mapes, 1948-1954 


43 


used to sit with a paper and pencil and tell him 
what the percentage was and tell him why he 
couldn’t beat it. And the more I told him, the 
more convinced he became that he could—so 
by telling what the right way— what the right 
thing was didn’t deter him one bit. He was a 
player ’til the time he died. He did some very 
strange things. 

He come in one day with a check for forty- 
seven thousand, four hundred dollars and 
four cents, and said, “Warren, I want to leave 
twenty thousand here, and I want the rest in 
change. Would you cash the check for me?” 

I said certainly. It was from Munsing 
Underwear. It was a dividend check. So I 
very carefully counted out twenty thousand 
and put it in an envelope for him and then 
gave him the rest of his change, twenty-seven 
thousand, four hundred dollars and four 
cents. We kept a lot of thousand dollar bills 
because that’s the kind of currency he liked 
to deal in, and so I brought out twenty-seven 
thousand-dollar bills and four hundred-dollar 
bills, and counted them down very carefully. 

Finally he said, “Twenty-seven thousand, 
right?” 

“Yes, Sir. Twenty-seven thousand, four 
hundred, is that right, Mr. R.?” 

“No. Sorry, that’s not right.” 

I said, “Not—I’m sure now I put twenty 
thousand away, twenty thousand—twenty- 
seven thousand, four hundred.” 

He says, “Warren, you forgot the four 
cents.” 

I says, “My gosh, I forgot about it. I’m 
sorry, Sir.” And I said, “You’ve got a little bit 
the best of it. We don’t have any pennies in the 
office. I’ll have to give you a nickel.” 

He says, “That’s fine. I like a profit.” He 
meant that truly. 

One time, in this same period of time, he 
came in and lost part of his—he did this two 
or three times—played against his hundred 


thousand dollars, and he lost a certain amount 
of it; and he wanted to take some down, and 
he had about a hundred and some thousand, 
but he wanted to pick up twenty thousand— 
whatever it was. And so he started to count the 
money, and I was counting it very carefully. 
And I get one, two, three, four, and he’d reach 
over and take one of the bills and set it up— 
and so I’d hesitate and then I’d go ahead. 

He said, “Are you in a hurry, Warren?” 

“No, Sir.” I’d start to count more; he’d 
pick another bill out and set it off to the side. 
These were the bills that he was gonna take 
in change. 

Finally he says, “Sure you’re not in a 
hurry?” 

I said, “No Sir, I got plenty of time.” So this 
happened maybe five or six times with five or 
six different bills. 

Finally he says, “You know, Warren, you 
don’t mind if I put the dirty ones aside do 
you?” He said, “I like to have the nice, new 
bills.” And he says, “Will Mr. Einstoss mind?” 

I said, “Mr. Einstoss, if it’s a thousand 
dollar bill, he don’t care if they use them for 
toilet paper. He’ll be glad to have them.” So, 
but that was the kind of a man he was, that’s 
the way he handled himself. 

He was playing the wheel the time he 
got robbed. I think it was three hundred and 
some thousand in silver dollars. And he came 
in the next day after being robbed, and again 
intuition, whatever, I knew who robbed him. 
The guy who robbed him was a guy who was 
a porter, and another guy was an ex-fighter 
and there was a gal in on it. And I had just 
seen them on the perimeter of the thing. I 
knew that they were in on it. There was also 
a guy named “Buck” in on it. Buck had been 
picked up years ago for robbin a stagecoach 
over around Ely; you can see that the chief 
was no chicken. But anyway I never saw Buck 
again. I don’t know whatever happened to 



44 


Warren Nelson 


him, but I think two or three of ’em did time 
for robbin Redfield. 

Mr. Redfield played with me wherever 
I went. Later on when I was at the Palace 
Club and later at the Club Cal-Neva, Mr. 
Redfield always came in and played and talked 
although his play, that changed quite a bit. 
When we first opened Cal-Neva, we didn’t 
deal as high a place so I didn’t get that much 
business from him, but he was still a tough 
player, but a nice guy to be around. I learned 
a lot about the business from him. He told me 
how he got started and a lot about his wife. He 
was very, very open with me. I think he was 
one of the most interesting men, as far as the 
gambling is concerned, in the state. 

The state has had some great ones as far 
as gambling is concerned—I think Nick the 
Greek, Nate Jacobson who had opened up 
the Caesar’s Palace in Las Vegas and King’s 
Castle at Lake Tahoe, now out of business, 
was another high rolling player who I had 
dealt with many, many times, and will come 
to maybe again later on in the story. Nate 
probably lost as much gambling as anybody 
that ever came to the state, maybe— maybe 
more, although Redfield may have tied him. 
So now with all we’ve talked about, Carl 
Laemmle who said he lost two million dollars 
playin’ Faro Bank; Nate Jacobson, I know 
who lost three or four million dollars shootin 
Craps; Nick the Greek—uh—who God knows 
how much he lost—not all of his own money, 
but in the millions; and LaVere Redfield; and 
Fritz Zibarth, I think. Of course I don’t know 
about the southern part of Nevada, but in the 
northern part of Nevada these people were 
the famous gamblers of all time, all of them 
friends of mine and all of them characters in 
their own right. 

The five years I spent at the Mapes gave 
me a great deal of knowledge in the business 
that I wouldn’t have had having that type of 


people. I enjoyed the work, I enjoyed working 
for Charles Mapes. Charles was easy to work 
for, for me, and in all the time I worked for 
him he never criticized me or asked me why 
I had done anything. I got along with him 
very well. 

The Mapes was an amazing place. You 
could stand there and feel that you didn’t have 
any business at all, and somebody would come 
in and start to play and you’d wind up with a 
real good shift and maybe win a lot of money 
and sometimes lose. But it was an amazing 
place. There were many, many instances in the 
Mapes that probably wouldn’t have happened 
anyplace else, but we accepted in a place like 
that we were dealin with just a few people at 
the time. 

We had an Italian from New York by the 
name of DeGiacomo who came out here and 
was like Mr. Redfield, absolutely certain that 
he could beat the Crap game by playin’ system, 
a progressive system and also by the way he 
threw the dice. Mr. DeGiacomo had a decided 
Italian accent and talked mostly about opera 
and things like that. But he was a very haughty 
man, and he made all the help very angry with 
him. He was such a good player and had so 
much money that he was treated with kid 
gloves, of course, and he would play Craps 
everyday and win maybe five hundred or a 
thousand. And he was playin’ progression in 
the field. He had an idea by rollin’ the dice 
only a toot or two against the table that he had 
the best of it, and this was a fallacy which I was 
sure of. But it is a general practice of making 
people roll the dice the full length of the table. 

One day Mr. DeGiacomo got to playin’ 
and he got stuck, and I let him—nobody’d let 
him stand there and throw the dice six inches 
to a foot—and beat him out of about sixty-five 
thousand dollars. Mr. DeGiacomo was not 
what you’d call a good loser. He liked money 
very well, and he went back to the restaurant. 



Mapes, 1948-1954 


45 


The maitre d’ back there was also Italian, and 
his name was Dino. 

I went back and I said, “Dino, take care 
of Mr. DeGiacomo.” Just having lost sixty-five 
thousand, Mr. DeGiacomo was a little upset. 

Dino said, “Mr. DeGiacomo, can I take 
your order?” 

He said, “Bring me a glass of wine and 
leave me alone.” 

He set there, and I looked up and Mr. 
DeGiacomo had his hands on his head and 
over the glass of wine, and the tears were 
drippin down his face into the wine. 

I called Dino over, and I said, “Dino, 
what did you say? What did you say to Mr. 
DeGiacomo?” 

I knew he hadn’t said anything, but I was 
kidding him because he was pretty upset with 
him the way he treated him in the past. 

I said, “How could you make that man 
cry? What did you do?” 

He says, “I told him Caruso was dead.” 
Things like that are the things that make the 
gambling business savory to me. I enjoyed 
every minute of it, still do. 

One of the great things about the gambling 
business and I think it happened at the Mapes 
more than anyplace else, if somebody come 
in and was the sort of a person that Mr. 
DeGiacomo was, it was hard to get along 
with, I worked particularly hard to gain their 
confidence and show them I wasn’t gonna 
do anything wrong to them and be so nice 
to them that they eventually would have to 
be nice to me. I do believe that I have had as 
much to do with changing over players and 
makin good guys out of bad guys as anybody 
because I use patience, and I think that’s 
one thing that made the gambling business 
interesting to me because these people that 
did like to be haughty and not treat people as 
well as probably they should, eventually if we 
treated them right, why they eventually had to 


treat you right. And if they stayed and played 
which most of them did eventually, their losin 
the money would pay for the way they acted 
to begin with. 

But I think that most people that gamble, 
that’s one of the things that has bugged me 
for a long time—you talk about compulsive 
gamblers; I think that one gambler out of ten 
thousand is a compulsive gambler. I think that 
most of them are just looking for something 
for nothing, and that’s understandable. 
Everybody would like to have something for 
nothing, I suppose.However, the gambling 
changes more and more especially in the 
different places that I’ve worked, the Palace 
Club, Club Cal-Neva, Harrah’s Club, where 
more and more all the time why it becomes 
where people are using it as a fun thing. It 
does not mean that they’re gonna lose all 
their money. I have a figure that I use—it’s 
off the top of my head, the average person 
in a gambling house loses three dollars an 
hour. With inflation in the last year, I’ve 
raised that to five dollars an hour. Well if 
you’re in a gambling house and playing and 
having fun and you’re average cost is five 
dollars an hour, I don’t think that’s absolutely 
expensive. There’s many other things that cost 
more than five dollars an hour. You can see 
professional football games and many other 
things now. So, it is and I would like to see 
it be, an entertainment feature and not a life 
and death thing for somebody trying to win a 
jillion dollars. I think one of the great things 
that happens now is that you can win big sums 
of money for a small amount. I don’t say that 
this is easy. The odds against us are so high 
that you would think they’re non-existent. 

However, big jackpots—these big wins on 
Keno and slots do happen. People have won as 
high as a quarter of a million. I’ve had jackpots 
for thirty or forty thousand, and now there’s 
some that we are paying that pay as high as a 



46 


Warren Nelson 


hundred and sixteen thousand. We have two 
jackpots that pay fifty thousand dollars and a 
thousand dollars a month for the rest of your 
life. These machines could be hit tomorrow, 
but if they reach their cycle and it was as it’s 
supposed to be, it might be five years. Now 
this doesn’t mean that you’re taking in every 
nickel of that money or every dollar because 
of dollar machines; it simply means that that 
top prize is hard to get, but there are so many 
small prizes that it still is not a tight machine 
or a machine that’s actually rippin’ the people 
off. However, the people that gamble are bein’ 
ripped off to some extent because there is that 
certain percentage that goes against them. 
That will never change, and the thing about it 
in the business is that percentages cannot be 
changed from the Crap games, one and forty- 
two hundredths on the front line and one and 
forty-one hundredths on the back line. It’s 
been that way for over a hundred years. There’s 
no way you can change that percentage, so it’s 
not like sellin hats in a haberdashery where 
you can raise your prices, We can’t raise our 
prices, but we do try to get a dollar player to 
bet two dollars to make up for that deficit. 

My stay at the Mapes amounted to 
five years. They had a lot of high class 
entertainment while I was there and dealt 
with a lot of these people. Most of them 
were pretty easy to deal with and some not. 
I can recall Phil Silvers, the television star of 
“Sergeant Bilko,” was in the Sky Room of the 
Mapes as a top entertainer and comedian. 
The room was not suited for Mr. Silvers. His 
brand of humor did not go over there. Maybe 
it was just the local people that didn’t think he 
was funny, but he absolutely died. He just was 
someone that people had never heard about. 
They thought it was a lousy show, so we were 
very short of business. 

Bernie Einstoss ran the gambling for 
Mapes and was his partner in the gambling 


business. Bernie bought his contract up, but 
he had to keep him two more days. He was 
supposed to be there three weeks, and he 
had about five days. When he came in, his 
manager left word that Phil Silvers was not to 
get any money because he was a compulsive 
gambler. Awhile ago I said there was one in 
ten thousand, he was one in the ten thousand. 
Phil loved to shoot Craps. So when he found 
out that his contract was bought up, he was 
gonna get the full price, and in those days 
I think for three weeks he might have been 
gettin’ thirty thousand or thirty thousand 
five hundred, maybe twelve thousand five 
hundred a week. 

It was a sizeable sum for those days; but 
whatever it was, he came to me and he said, 
“I want my money.” 

I said, “Well we’re not supposed to give it 
to you, Mr. Silvers.” 

He says, “I don’t care what you say. I want 
my money. The eagle flys today.” 

I said, “Phil, I am sorry the boss said not 
to give it to you.” And he pestered me and 
pestered me, and finally I called Mr. Einstoss, 
and I said, “Silvers wants his money. He won’t 
let me alone.” 

He said, “Well give it to him.” 

I gave him the money, and he started to 
play. It took about five or six hours and he got 
broke—to lose the whole amount, whatever it 
was, about thirty thousand dollars. 

It was about five o’clock in the morning 
when he went broke. It was time to close the 
Sky Room. We closed it, and Silvers wouldn’t 
leave the room. He just stood there. It was my 
job to count the money. So we took the money 
out of the Crap game, spread it on the Roulette 
wheel and started counting. About that time, I 
looked around, and the elevator was supposed 
to be closed to the public then, but the elevator 
operator who come on didn’t know and here 
come two drunks. They came up to the top 



Mapes, 1948-1954 


47 


floor, walked over and looked at this pile of 
money—maybe forty, fifty thousand stacked 
in neat piles on the wheel. 

One guy nudged the other one; he says, 
“My God, what’re they doin’?” 

Phil Silvers had tears in his eyes; he says, 
“They’re counting my money” Well that was 
the end of Mr. Silvers. 

We had a lot of very fine people. I recall 
very well when Sam Giancana, who was 
murdered awhile back by the Mafia, had 
left Chicago and came and stayed at the 
Mapes Hotel in Reno. His nickname was 
“Moonie.” Mr. Giancana was a mild acting 
man, tall, bald-headed, very quiet-spoken; 
and somebody told me who he was and he 
had two bodyguards. They were Italians, as 
was he. The bodyguards had to be six foot five 
and weighed two-fifty apiece. And Giancana 
would come up and shoot Craps, just play 
very quietly, a hundred dollars every roll of 
the dice on the back line and not say anything 
one way or the other. And he was passing 
time, not really gambling. 

Well we had a guy that was a wild gambler 
that I had quite a few different run-ins with 
him. He was real outgoing when he got to 
gambling. He’d scream and holler and tell 
other people what to do. He was playing and 
bettin two or three hundred on the front line 
and taking the odds. Moonie was betting one 
hundred dollars on the back line, playing 
against each other. 

The guy kept sayin, “Oh come on, get on 
the front line with me; I’m hot.” 

Moonie wouldn’t say anything, and finally 
this guy got more and more outspoken. I 
tried to hush him up, hush him up, keep still. 
Moonie’s reputation was such that I didn’t 
think he was gonna get very far pushin him 
around, and every time—the louder this guy 
got, the closer these two bodyguards would 
get. And I’m tryin’ to shut the guy up, tryin’ 


to straighten it out. Finally I had to get the 
guy and pull him over to the side and tell him 
you’re gonna have to shut up or else. 

Giancana come over and said, “Warren, 
don’t worry about it; he don’t bother me.” It 
was kind of an amazing thing that to have a 
person—a soft-spoken person like Giancana; 
and that was at the time of the Kefauver 
investigation. And he was out here just 
keeping a low profile. And at that time the 
state had no rules about who could play and 
who couldn’t play. And his money was as good 
as anybody else’s. 

Around that same time, Virginia Hill 
came in very frequently. She was supposed 
to be the gal that moved the money for the 
mob different places. And she was sponsored 
by a man by the name of Ike Epstein. I think 
all these people are dead now. Epstein was a 
quiet-spoken person. But they all gambled 
and all played, makes the Mapes sound like 
a haven for gangsters which it wasn’t really. 
These people behaved themselves while they 
were there, didn’t bother anybody, and spent 
their money like anybody else. And were 
certainly not trying to do anything in Reno to 
further the Mafia, whoever they represented. 

In the business you meet all kinds of 
people and that’s one of the kinds. I’ve met a 
lot of those people. When they gamble and 
when they play, they’re probably a lot easier to 
deal with than a lot of people who have been 
regular businessmen. 

I stayed at the Mapes for five years. There 
I met Walter “Bill” Pechart. Well Bill had been 
the man that took care of all the gambling in 
the Bay Area during the war. He had a partner 
by the name of Dave Kessel. Well they were 
both very personable men, and I had worked 
for them although I didn’t know them when 
I was workin’ for them when I was in the 
Marine Corps on weekends in El Cerrito— 
deal Craps, wheel and “21.” I knew them by 



48 


Warren Nelson 


reputation and sight, but had never met them. 
When I met them they were very nice to me, 
and I enjoyed bein’ with them. They did a lot 
of gambling, but especially Dave Kessel. Dave 
would kind of hold himself down, but one day 
he lost twenty thousand dollars. 

“Well Warren, I’ll go get the money. I’ll 
pay you back next week.” 

So next week he brought me twenty 
thousand dollars in ten dollar bills. It was all 
wrapped in newspapers and smelt just like 
fresh dirt. And that’s where they had been— 
buried someplace. I don’t know if it was in 
Dave’s backyard or where, but they were dug 
up to pay off the gambling debt. Dave was a 
very personable fellow—treated me nice. 

In the meantime, Pechart was tryin’ to 
get the Palace Club, and he said I want you to 
come over there; I’ll give you an interest in it. 
By that time a report came out that Pechart 
couldn’t get a license, he didn’t get the Palace 
Club, but later on when I left the Mapes, he 
went to work and ran the gambling for Mapes 
after Bernie Einstoss left there. 



_8 

Palace Club, 1955-1962 


About this time one of my partners, 
Howard Farris, who I have worked together 
with since 1937, we have been very close. 
Howard was a promoter; he was always 
getting something going. He and Harry Weitz 
and several other people gathered a group 
together and were tryin to buy the Palace 
Club. They finally got this on, and I wound 
up with three percent of it. I didn’t have 
the money to pay for the three percent, but 
Harry Weitz paid my end of it, and later on 
as we made money I paid him back. It was a 
great opportunity for me, and I moved over 
there from makin maybe seventeen, eighteen 
thousand a year to about thirty-five or forty 
which in—I think this was in 1955—was a big 
step upward for me. We moved into the Palace 
Club, and I ran one shift, took care of one 
shift, ran the Keno and helped with the slots. 
We had quite a few partners in there, Harry 
Weitz, Frank Cohen, two Jewish fellows. We 
had Padilla, oh—the Hornstein brothers are 
two from San Francisco had a piece of it. But I 
think about ten or fifteen people and Howard 
Farris and myself, and Harry Weitz. 


I can give you a little background on Harry 
Weitz. I’d met him down in San Francisco, 
dealt Craps with him for Pechart and a guy 
named Dave Kessel out at the 21 Club during 
the war, and he came up and was workin at 
the Mapes when I went there. Harry was a 
very sharp little guy, a bookmaker, gambler 
all his life. We became very close friends. 

I think that at the present time he’s the 
only man in the gambling business that 
doesn’t speak to me. Harry is a nice little 
fellow, however he’s alienated himself from 
so many people. It’s a shame because he’s a 
knowledgeable, good man in many ways. He 
did me many favors and I feel that I learned 
a lot about the business from him. But on 
the other hand I think that he probably 
learned a lot from me. We worked along 
good together for about four or five years, 
and then things started to disintegrate. He 
was very good to me all the time I was in the 
Mapes, [and] another fella by the name of 
Dick Greenberg who was a very sharp guy. 
I found the Jewish fellas that I dealt with in 
the gambling business, the sharpest and as 



50 


Warren Nelson 


reliable as anybody—Einstoss, Greenberg, 
Weitz, great people, great friends. 

I’ve always hoped that someday I could 
get back and talk to him on a basis where he 
would know for sure that I felt strongly that I 
think he’s a good man. Harry burnt himself up 
just because of the way he lived and the way 
he felt. His wife was a dear friend of mine, but 
unfortunately she was an alcoholic and this 
drove Harry to do things he probably wouldn’t 
have done. She later died, but she was a very 
kind, sweet person except for the problem that 
she couldn’t stay away from liquor. 

His personal life shouldn’t probably be 
brought into it, but tryin’ to explain a little 
bit why he has been like he has been the last 
few years. I’m sure [there’re] very few people 
he speaks to anymore; he just became bitter 
with the world, and it is a shame because 
the gambling business lost a good man just 
because of the way he felt about things. He 
should be a big boss in some place. Of course 
now Harry’s too old, he’s in his seventies, 
but fifteen years ago he should have went 
ahead and done real well. But Harry was a 
gambler; he loved to play, and I’m sure that 
he dissipated whatever money he had just 
by shooting craps. And it’s a shame because 
he’s—like I say, a good person. 

The years at the Palace Club were again 
very, very fruitful as far as money and 
knowledge. I tried to learn as much as I could 
about slot machines, and at that time I took a 
hold of the slot machines as much as I could. 
We had a partner by the name of Iacometti 
who was a slot machine man. He was an old, 
old school man. He’d worked for Graham and 
McKay at the Bank Club and believed that 
everything should be so tight. And he really 
throttled the business; however, we took good 
care of customers and made money all the 
time we were there. 


I was there eight years, I believe; and 
the Palace Club was a grind joint and I had 
something happen that was very unusual, 
I’m sure. When I went in the Palace Club I 
had three percent and went down, tried to 
get on the license. Now everybody [that] 
went on the license had to be OK’d by the 
Petricciani family in this way, and the head 
of the Petricciani family was Mrs. Petricciani 
and because her son wasn’t in there, she didn’t 
think that I should be on the license. So she 
refused to give permission for me to go on the 
license. I went to Carson City, and I believe at 
this time it was Governor Sawyer—or maybe 
it was before Sawyer. Anyway I wanted to 
explain this to the Gaming Commission the 
reason that my name wasn’t on the license. 
And they more or less overlooked it, so I 
had the three percent without bein’ on the 
license. I did that under three governors, and 
I believe that this has never been done before 
or since. When Laxalt became governor 
he was apprised of the thing that had gone 
along smoothly, and nothin’ was ever said. 
However, I talked to Phil Hannifin about this 
a couple of years ago, and I said what would 
have happened if I’d come up with this deal 
when you were the head of the Control Board? 
He says, “You wouldn’t have got a license.” 
Phil’s one of my best friends, but I’m sure I 
wouldn’t have got a license if that’d been the 
case. However this was just something that 
Mrs. Petricciani didn’t believe in. Because her 
son wasn’t on the license, I shouldn’t be. So it 
wasn’t a big thing, and I never felt bad about 
it in any way. 

At the time of the Palace Club I was tryin’ 
to build Keno up, and I’m sure we built it 
up ’til we had about the best game in town. 
I worked hard all the time I was there, we 
tried to treat the customers good, and the 
place made money in spite of itself. One of 



Palace Club, 1955-1962 


51 


the problems was that there were so many 
partners and they were all at loggerheads. 

At that same time, the same partners and 
a few extra ones went up to the Lake [Tahoe] 
and bought a place and built a place called 
Tahoe Plaza. We built it up and started it, I 
think with twenty partners, and this finally 
got to the point that it wouldn’t work. We 
had it for two years, I believe, and it was 
really messed up; all the different partners, 
everything that had happened, it wasn’t very 
much of a success, although it was a great 
location. I never went up there. Several of my 
partners were running up there, but it just 
wasn’t doing any good. 

We had a meeting and decided to sell it. 
Harrah’s was gonna buy it, and we were gonna 
sell it. I forget the exact price, but they’d had 
an offer. And I said well you can sell your end 
of it for that price, but I won’t sell mine; and I 
called up Harrah’s Club and got an additional 
five hundred thousand dollars. So we sold it 
that May. It probably was a good thing. I got 
about between twenty and thirty thousand 
dollars out of the deal. And that money was 
the money I used to buy into Club Cal-Neva 
where I am now. 

The dominating partners were Harry 
Weitz, Louie Iacometti, Louie Rosasco, my old 
partner Howard Farris. Howard and I grew up 
about the same way in the gambling business 
and have pretty much the same backgrounds. 
He came out of Wyoming; I came out of 
Montana. Howard had a little more education 
than I, and although we differ in many, many 
ways, our lives have been pretty parallel. 
We’ve remained good friends; we’ve had a 
lot of differences in how business should be 
handled. However, Howard is one of the fine 
people in the business and knows it well. He’s 
older now, and Howard has been a builder. 
He’s always tryin to get something new and 


different, and because of this trying he’s 
helped me several times. We’ve had failures 
and successes; right now he is my partner in 
the Cal-Neva which is a great success. I’m sure 
that had he and I run the Palace Club together 
it would have been much better than it was. 
However, it was a good place and it was very 
good to me. I made enough money there to 
keep on going and get bigger and better I 
hope. It was a great experience because of 
the different partners and the way things 
were handled, not at all like a gambling house 
should be. But it just was one of those things 
that that’s the way it had to be the way it was. 

My other partners in there were very 
unknowledgeable about the business. Except 
for Howard Farris and Harry Weitz, the rest 
of them have very little experience if any with 
the exception of Jack Guffy, and Jack Guffy 
had worked at the Bank Club for many years. 
And Jack was pretty knowledgeable, but Jack 
retired after he left the Palace Club, is no 
longer interested in the business. But Jack 
was a hard worker and did have knowledge 
of the business. 

We were in there eight years and made 
some money every year. In fact, quite a bit 
as far as I was concerned, probably put me 
up into about a thirty-five or forty thousand 
dollars a year bracket. And eighteen years ago, 
nineteen years ago, twenty years ago, this was 
good money, and I lived well and enjoyed it. 
I spent a lot of time—at that time I had more 
time and learned to enjoy myself more, did a 
lot of hunting and a lot of fishing, and along 
with the work; but it was a lot of fun to work 
at the Palace Club. I’m sure that my knowledge 
took a hold there. I think I knew the games 
and the Keno well before I went in there, but 
I became very interested in slot machines. 
And the partner that was running slot 
machines was an old-timer that worked for 



52 


Warren Nelson 


Graham and McKay, and they believed that 
those slot machines should be so tight, and 
consequently we never came anywhere near 
the potential that they would have reached 
if I had been able to do some of the things I 
wanted to do. But because I couldn’t do them, 
I became more interested and studied more 
and more what a slot machine could do and 
what I thought it could do as far as having 
a loose percentage for the player. That is 
essential, and everybody in the business that 
is doing any good at all now has learned that. 

We had many ups and downs at the Palace 
Club, but it was strictly a grind joint, made 
money every year. One of the things that 
pleased me at the Palace Club was I was able 
to handle a lot of young people and put them 
to work. At this time it was a little tougher 
to get jobs, and the people that worked for 
me at that time have now gone on to bigger 
and better things. It’s amazing what some 
of these young men have done, and they’re 
not young men anymore. Phil Hannifin was 
one of them, is now president of the Summa 
Corporation. Noel Manoukian was another 
who is now supreme court judge in Nevada; 
and a boy named Jacobson who went to 
work on the space program, became a big 
man in it. Another man that went ahead is 
Roger Ferguson who is now an M.D., but 
a research M.D. for the University of Utah, 
one of the bright people in, I believe, cancer 
research. Some of the others were Walt Ryals 
who went ahead and is now working for the 
newspaper, the Gannett Newspapers now 
in Visalia, [California]; Ron Einstoss, who 
passed away, was an editor of the local paper 
here; Dave Mathis, now a lawyer; Joe Bliss, 
who still works for me, but going to the 
University at that time and was the collegiate 
world champion lightweight fighter, an Indian 
boy who is one of my top men in the Keno 
now and with his college education, why he’s 


been a great help to me. Ad Tolen, my present 
partner, was one of the pit bosses in there, and 
knowing him was another thing that helped 
me a lot at that time. He was a very good man 
in the business, broke in when he was real 
young, has been in it close to fifty years, and 
broke in down in Mexico and on the—and in 
Los Angeles, came up here, went to work in 
the ’30s and was a real well-thought of man 
in the business. Ad, as we’ll see later, went 
with me to the Cal-Neva, and at the wish 
of Howard Farris and I, still owns a small 
portion; he still is a partner and doing well 
in the Cal-Neva. 

We had a lot of non-working partners, the 
Hornstein brothers from San Francisco and 
their brother-in-law, and a man named Frank 
Cohen who passed away while we were in 
there, all men that couldn’t contribute much 
to the business because they hadn’t been in 
it always, but they did put up their money. 
It was sort of weird the way we acquired the 
Palace Club. Several people were trying to 
get it, and I just kind of rode on everybody’s 
coattails; and when they put the deal together 
I wound up with three percent of it. As we 
worked in there, it went along good at a very 
even basis, nothing spectacular, but it was well 
thought of, and we had a lot of good people 
working there. 

The Palace Club, I suppose I spent from 
’36 to ’42, six years, and then eight years; 
fourteen years of my gambling experience was 
in the Palace Club, so it remains the great part 
of my education. I would have to say from the 
time I first went to work there and when I left, 
why my education was far from complete, but 
a good portion of it took place on that corner. 



_ 9 

Club Cal-Neva, 1962-PRESENT 


When I left there it was under sort of 
strange circumstances. I sold my three percent 
out, and as did Howard Farris. And we left 
together and came into Club Cal-Neva. That 
I believe was 1962. It was, I believe, forget 
exactly what time of the year it was, but when 
I left the Palace Club and knew I was goin’ 
to the Club Cal-Neva, it had been closed 
for two years and was really run-down. I 
put on a pair of over-alls and went to work 
cleaning it up with a crew, and supervised 
the cleaning it up and changing it around. 
I worked about a month and a half or two 
months doing this and getting it in shape to 
reopen it. When it reopened, it was in the 
first of April, and going into it the partners 
were Jack Douglass; Leon Nightingale; Doug 
Busey, an attorney; Howard Farris; Ad Tolen; 
and John Cavanaugh. It was distributed up, 
I started out with ten percent. It was two 
thousand dollars a point, so my end of it was 
twenty thousand dollars. Later we had some 
extra stock. Doug Busey sold out his stock, 
and I wound up with fourteen and twenty- 
nine hundredths percent of it. Later on I sold 


two and twenty-nine hundredths to my son, 
kept twelve for myself. 

The Cal-Neva was more or less a success 
from the start. All the partners were in 
working everyday and working hard. Howard 
Farris, myself, and Ad Tolen took care of the 
gambling end of it. And Leon Nightingale 
and Douglass were active in the business end 
of it, and the bar and the restaurant. I would 
probably have to say that that twenty thousand 
dollars was one of the greatest parlays that’s 
ever been made as far as I’m concerned 
from my own personal standpoint—my own 
personal viewpoint. I would hesitate to say 
how much it’s worth now, or how much I 
have taken out of it from the twenty thousand 
original dollars that was put in it. 

However, along with the money that was 
taken out, there was a lot of hard work and a 
lot of new ideas that were put into it to make it 
the success that it is. I believe now that it’s the 
best gambling house in the state of Nevada. I 
think it makes more money per square foot 
than anyplace in the state of Nevada. That’s 
a pretty big statement and a broad one, but 



54 


Warren Nelson 


I believe it to be true. And I believe it’s due 
to—the transition that has been made in the 
gambling business, and the fact that Cal-Neva 
was able to make that transition into the new 
deal as far as slot machines, Keno, and the 
new idea on the games. 

I think the greatest thing we’ve had is our 
help. I went in there and put a crew together— 
in the important parts. One of the first men 
to go to work for me was a man by the name 
of Clyde Bittner. Clyde was from Montana, 
came down to Reno with me in 1936. He had 
worked quite a few years at Harrah’s Club as 
a pit boss, came to work over there as a shift 
manager. Clyde was an energetic little guy, 
very sharp, very good to people. I think that 
he helped the place immeasurably—he was a 
very good man. Unfortunately, Clyde passed 
away I believe in 1969. It was just thirty years 
before that that he and I had come down from 
Montana, and I took him back to Montana on 
the same day we’d come, the twenty-ninth of 
April, and buried him in our hometown of 
Great Falls, Montana. Clyde I’m sure helped 
immeasurably to make the club a success. 

Hughie Connolly, who passed away last 
Christmas, came to work. Hugh was one of 
the great people in the business. I could write 
a whole book about Hughie Connolly. He’s 
one of my dearest friends and one of the best 
people in the business I’ve ever encountered. 
Hughie was not the brightest guy in the world 
as far as learning fast how to deal the games, 
but once he learned he knew them well. His 
greatest asset was his ability to get along with 
people that worked for him and to take care 
of the people that were players. 

The help liked him. He was pretty tough 
on ’em. He’d chew somebody out real good and 
then go back an hour later and tell ’em why, 
explain it to ’em. The people really liked that. 
His death left a great hole in the management 
of the club, an outstanding man. One of the 


great things that he did was to teach people 
how to treat people, and all the young bosses 
at work really —really know how to go out 
and say hello and what to do and how to 
handle people when they’re gambling, and 
this is not an easy thing to do. When people 
are gambling they’re not as easy to get along 
with as they are especially if they’re losing; but 
if you can handle those kind of people, then 
you’ve done a good job. 

I think he had a great deal to do with the 
success of Club Cal-Neva because he worked 
the graveyard shift, but we always had the 
best graveyard in town. And it was mainly 
because when the people came in, whether 
they were rock sober, no matter who they 
were, they were well treated as long as they 
behaved themselves. 

Hughie was a great asset to us, and is 
greatly missed. His background with me 
goes back a long ways. He went to work for 
me when he was nineteen years old before 
the war, I believe in ’38 or ’39. He was about 
nineteen; I know he wasn’t twenty-one yet. 
He was pretty young. He’s about five years 
younger than I am. I was probably twenty- 
three at the time or twenty-four, and he went 
to work for me as a shill. 

Hughie, to go on a little bit further about 
him, adopted three children, [he] and his wife. 
He’s married to a nice girl who survived him. 
And he was well-known all through the state 
of Montana. He was a fighter as a young man, 
and one of the best amateur fighters I have 
ever seen. All through the Marine Corps as 
much as I saw of him, which was little because 
we got split up after we first went in, but 
Hughie was an outstanding person. I probably 
think that he had as many medals and did 
as many things during the war in the South 
Pacific fighting the Japanese as anybody. He 
was an army by himself; he could clean out 
their caves; he was a fearless man. All the 



Club Cal-Neva, 1962-PRESENT 


55 


years I know him he never did tell me of those 
experiences in the Marine Corps, but I heard 
that from other people. So he was a very, very 
shy man. He wasn’t one to blow his own horn. 
Enough of Hughie Connolly. 

He and a young man by the name of 
Howard Keogh came to Reno together, and 
Howard was several years younger than 
Hughie. So between the two of them, one 
was seventeen and one was nineteen, maybe 
twenty, but they were both underage. In those 
days it didn’t make that much difference. They 
both went to work for me; they both remained 
my lifelong friends. Howard Keogh is now a 
graveyard manager in the Union Plaza Hotel 
in Las Vegas and doing very well. Howard, 
Hugh, and I joined the Marine Corps together 
in 1942. 

The Cal-Neva Club was a success from 
the start. It was a combination of things, I 
believe. The partners had something to do 
with it. I think the location was good, and 
it took off you might say almost at once. We 
opened the first of April, and the first year 
we were open the profit amounted to about 
two hundred and ten thousand which was 
more than actually I believe we expected at 
that time. The next year we went into a bus 
program real strong. It was something that I 
didn’t think too much of at the time. At the 
end of the year, we quit five hundred dollars 
winner by having buses. We were getting too 
many of them on Saturday, and it was a mess. 
It really didn’t amount to much, but I believe 
now after looking back on it that we treated 
the people that came in on those buses so well, 
that they’re still our customers. Now that’s 
sixteen years ago, so I—I figure it probably 
was a good thing. 

The next year the club took off, was very 
successful. We probably won about five 
hundred thousand which looked very good at 
that time. The club has gone on from there; it’s 


been in here sixteen years, and I believe has 
grown into probably as good a club as there 
is in the state of Nevada. I think it makes as 
much or more money per square foot than 
any casino in the state. I think this is due to 
management; I think it’s due to location, and 
most of all I think it’s due a lot of it to our 
help. The partners now have become not as 
involved as they were, but we’ve had some 
very good help. 

One of our top men when we first opened 
was Clyde Bittner. Another man that I 
attribute a lot of our success to was Johnny 
Howell. Johnny was in the Marine Corps 
with me. He was from Salt Lake City, and 
he said that he didn’t want to go back to Salt 
Lake and did I think I could get him a job. So 
when Harrah’s Club opened in 1946 I called 
Johnny in Salt Lake and he came down and 
went to work the day it opened. He worked 
there until he came over to go to work for 
me. John Howell’s still a shift manager, and he 
likewise is a very good man. He’s always here. 
And an amazing thing, he has two sons that 
are working for me now and both of them are 
pit bosses. One of them is only twenty-two, 
Scott, and the other one is twenty-five. This is 
an amazing thing to make young men bosses 
like this, but they’re both doing excellent. And 
something that I never realized you could 
do, but it’s a very good thing to do in this 
business to break these people in and make 
them bosses if they have the knowledge and 
have the ambition—these boys do. 

Another man that’s done a good job for 
us and been a good man through the years is 
Ernie Hastings. Ernie is a local boy, and been 
around Reno all his life and still works for us 
and is a top-notch man. 

I’ve got a lot of young men in the 
organization that have really made it go. 
Another one is now assistant manager, is 
a Basque boy that went to work for us as 



56 


Warren Nelson 


a cashier and learned the games and now 
is assistant manager out of Mountain City, 
graduated from the University, an ex-Marine 
pilot and very capable. His name is Dick 
Urriale. 

Our top man John Brevick is an amazing 
young man. John is now not quite forty. He 
has been workin’ for us for seventeen years. 
He started out as a Keno dealer. As a Keno 
dealer he was doin’ a good job. 

But he came to me one day and said, 
“Would it be all right with you Mr. Nelson if 
I learned how to tend bar?” 

I said, “Certainly, on your own time go 
ahead. 

So in about two or three months the head 
bartender come over and said that young 
man’s doing real good. He said, “I wonder if 
I could take him as a bartender?” 

I said, “If that’s what he wants to do, fine.” 

The next day Brevick come back and said, 
“No, I didn’t want to be a bartender.” He said, 
“What I’d really like to do is learn how to deal 
Craps.” 

So I said, “Go ahead.” 

Now in about three months he came back, 
and he said, “Well I’ve been dealin’ Craps. I 
would like to learn Roulette.” 

I said, “John, can you deal Craps?” 

And he said, “I think so.” 

There happened to be a pretty good game 
going; I said, “Well let’s get in and see.” 

So I got in and fancying myself as a pretty 
fair dealer I looked up and in about two 
minutes I could see he was doing better than 
I. So I said go ahead and learn Roulette. He 
went ahead, learned Roulette, learned “21,” all 
the other games, and before long I think in 
probably 1969 we bought a place up at Lake 
Tahoe called Cal-Neva Lodge. We bought it 
from Frank Sinatra and his people, and built 
a two hundred room hotel on it. And John 
went up there as a shift manager. 


To continue with John’s story, he came to 
me one day and said, “Just finished a course 
in horseshoeing up at the University.” He says, 
“You got some horses, could I come out and 
shoe some for you?” 

I thought that was an amazing thing that 
somebody that far along the business would 
learn how to shoe horses. Well within a month 
or two I found out he was goin’ to real estate 
school and passed real estate school and 
became a real estate salesman in his off time, 
and within three months he got his broker’s 
license. This is the kind of people that we’re 
finding in the business, the kind of people that 
make it go. Fantastic guy. 

Club Cal-Neva now has a thousand people 
working, and I could go on and on about the 
people that have helped make it a success. 
There are indeed many. Some of the younger 
people that have come into the business are 
helping. My son, now thirty-one years old, 
has taken hold and is doing real well. My 
head Keno man, Bob Ireland, has worked 
for me since he’s twenty-one years old, about 
twenty-five years, and is a top-notch young 
man, quiet, unassuming, know his business 
and does a good job. 

I have Pat Iacometti working who is 
probably the premier Keno man. He is very, 
very knowledgeable. Pat was born in Reno 
and sent to Italy as a boy to be educated; he 
has a little struggle with speech, but one of 
the brightest people I’ve ever known. It’s a 
pleasure to have him around. 

A young man by the name of Stan 
Tenerowicz is now the assistant slot machine 
manager. I knew him when he was probably 
a freshman or sophomore in high school, a 
friend of my son, came to work for us and 
has become a top-notch man in his field, 
real—real high-class man and really has 
learned the business and is learning everyday. 
Willie Stromer, our top slot machine man, 



Club Cal-Neva, 1962-PRESENT 


57 


is an expert, one of the best I think in the 
slot machine field. He’s a great electronics 
man and also a great figure man; that’s very 
important in our business, and he is excellent 
in what he does. 

Again to go back to some of the college 
boys. Joe Bliss was running one shift of the 
Keno for me, and he was an Indian boy, 
a Paiute Indian who graduated from the 
University and worked all the time he was 
going to school and elected to stay in the 
gambling business, and I’m very happy he did 
because he does a good job. There’s probably 
no end to personnel in a place like this. It goes 
on and on. 

Harry Hall who came to Reno with me 
in 1936, retired two years ago; a top-notch 
man in the Keno, we were together for over 
forty years. Hated to lose him, but nobody 
can work forever. 

Another top-notch man, Peck Holly, 
retired, and he worked for me for twenty-five 
or thirty years. He’s another Montana boy. 

A great friend and a great man, Harry 
Montague has retired. Harry and I worked 
together from 1937 off and on until his 
retirement about a year ago. He had a slight 
heart attack and thought he’d better quit. 
Harry was a very unique man, probably as 
honest a man as you could ever find to watch 
your money, but unfortunately he hated to 
lose. This probably, the fact that he hated to 
lose, held him back a lot because he just could 
not treat the players right that were winning. 
But everybody seemed to understand him, 
and he got away with it. I hated to lose him 
because he was such a watchdog and did take 
such good care of the business. However, 
with so many people working, a thousand 
in here, then it’s awful hard for all of them to 
understand that Harry meant no harm when 
he got mad because they lost. However, he’s 
one of the old-timers that really knew the 


business and an old-timer that you could 
really depend upon. 

I would suppose that off and on the people 
who have worked for me in different places, 
not one or two, but many in the dozens have 
worked with me and for me for from ten to 
forty—as high as forty-five years. This makes 
you pretty close to these people. One of the 
bad things about growing large—we now 
have a thousand people working—is that 
you don’t know the people like you used to. I 
used to pride myself on knowing everybody, 
their first name, their wife’s name, their kid’s 
name, what their dog’s name was, and what 
grade their kids were in. It’s impossible to do, 
and I’ve divorced myself from that because I 
found out I couldn’t do it; my memory not 
being as good as it used to be has something 
to do with it. 

Club Cal-Neva just got better and is 
getting better all the time. It’s an amazing 
business. My investment in here was twenty 
thousand dollars when it opened. This would 
probably go down as one of the great parlays 
of all time. I’m not going to try to estimate my 
net worth, but most of it has come from Club 
Cal-Neva. And to give an example I suppose 
my income in 1977 will be close to four 
hundred thousand; that’s for one year. Being 
in the seventy percent bracket for income tax 
doesn’t show too much profit, although I’m 
not kiddin’ that this is a fantastic business. 




10 

Civic Activities, Experiences with 
Internal Revenue Service, 
Gaming Industry Association 


About four or five years after I was in Club 
Cal-Neva, something happened in the town 
and the city that I didn’t approve of, and I 
made a statement. 

I said, “What’s the matter with those 
people?” I believe it was in the downtown 
association. 

Somebody says, “Well, if you think they’re 
doin’ wrong, why don’t you do something 
about it? Why don’t you join it?” 

I did. And since then the city government, 
the different associations in Reno have taken 
a lot of my time. I’ve never been sorry. I really 
went into it full bore. I went into the Chamber 
of Commerce, the Gaming Association, the 
Rodeo Association. I’ve been affiliated with 
just about everything that has anything to 
do with downtown Reno or particularly 
anything to do with the gambling business. 
That has been my main thrust is to try to do 
something to make the gambling business a 
little better thing. 

One of the things that I think we’re 
gradually doing is improving the image of the 
business. I believe that our business is going to 


get bigger, and I think it’s going to get better. 
I don’t condone gambling. I don’t say it’s the 
greatest thing in the world, but the way it’s 
conducted in the state of Nevada is the way it 
should be conducted. And I think that since 
the beginning of time that gambling has been 
here, since a soldier shot Craps for Christ’s 
clothes, so it’s here to stay. I believe now and I 
think that we’re all trying to do the same thing, 
that gambling is now to a point where we’re 
trying to make it a pure entertainment thing 
instead of something where somebody gets 
wide-eyed and rambunctious trying to win 
a lot of money or lose a lot of money. We’re 
changing that, we’re trying to make it a form 
of entertainment. About four or five—maybe 
ten years ago, I had—made a rough estimate 
that it cost the average person three dollars 
an hour to stay in a gambling house, whatever 
they did, if they played a dollar on the “21” 
or a nickel slot machine, whatever, because 
the percentage would keep them there long 
enough, so it would cost them about three 
dollars an hour. I think with inflation and 
everything it would be a little different now, 



60 


Warren nelson 


probably five dollars an hour, but I do believe 
that with—if you used good judgement and 
wanted to be entertained with a chance of 
making a winning of some kind, why that’s 
about what it would cost. I think that when 
you’re talkin’ about five dollars an hour the 
way entertainment is nowadays, I think that 
that is a very, not a very expensive thing. Let 
me stop a minute— I’ll answer this phone. 

I believe in 1964, I was appointed in a 
group of people that went back to Washington, 
D.C. to discuss the Keno game with the IRS. 
Keno bein’ my forte. We went back with the 
group, a large group of all the Keno people in 
the state because it was very important to us 
at that time. The governor, both senators and 
[in] the House of Representatives was Walter 
Baring at that time, and I believe Bible and 
Cannon; and the governor was Laxalt, head 
of the power company and the head of the 
telephone company from both the north and 
the south, presidents of half a dozen banks. A 
contingency of about probably thirty or forty 
people made a good showing and appeared 
back there. And at that time Mortimer 
Kaplan was the head of the IRS. What they 
were trying to do was put a ten percent tax 
on Keno which would have certainly ruined 
the game. We fought that off, but as always 
when you fight the IRS, you can never win 
the war. You lose battles, and they’re always 
pickin’ at you—you lose something every time 
you talk to them. However, we did keep the 
game on a pretty even keel and what went 
by we managed to survive. Since then I have 
met with Sheldon Cohen, I met with Johnny 
Walters and most recently Jerry Kurtz, one, 
two, three, four different IRS commissioners. 
I found all of them knowledgeable, people 
you could explain things to, much more than 
you could down on our level on the state. 
In the state they seem to understand us less 
than they did at the national level. However, 


we never did really win any battles. Sheldon 
Cohen, I believe, was one of the smartest 
people I’ve ever come in contact with. I 
appeared before the IRS commissioner and 
his lawyers and the people interested, and got 
up to talk about Keno, started at nine o’clock, 
by twelve o’clock I was still talking. I asked 
Mr. Cohen if I could stop. 

He said, “No, let’s finish this; I want to 
hear it.” 

I talked another hour ’til one o’clock, 
and when we got done he had a good basic 
understanding of Keno. And we did come 
out of it with a whole skin, although we did 
get scraped a little bit coming out, which 
we always do. Later on we appeared before 
Johnny Walters and before—the latest one— 
Jerry Kurtz. 

Our problems are large ones. They’re 
distinct; they’re hard to understand, some of 
the things that happen. We always believe we 
are right, but they always tell us we’re wrong. 
The problem is that they don’t understand, 
and we can’t get anybody out here to look at 
us and find out that we are good, legitimate 
people in doing things the way they should 
be done, in our opinion. 

The last man we talked to was Jerry 
Kurtz. The IRS is very intent upon taxing all 
gambling winnings. They at present are taxing 
any Keno ticket over fifteen hundred and any 
slot machine winning over twelve hundred. 
When you stop to think how fast the people 
can put money in the slot machine or how 
fast they can play Keno, this is very unfair. A 
man playin’ the dollar slot machine could put 
in twelve dollars a minute, seven hundred and 
twenty dollars an hour, win a twelve hundred 
dollar jackpot, be six hundred dollars loser 
and be expected to pay. However, we have 
been able to make out forms to show that the 
people have to the best of our knowledge, 
the probability as to how much money they 



Civic Activities, Experiences with Internal Revenue Service, Gaming Industry Association 61 


have lost, but in a big gambling house this 
is very hard to do. We are doing the best we 
can. We feel that they now have the idea that 
they should tax anybody that wins money at a 
Crap table or “21” table when somebody bets 
five hundred dollars and wins three hands, 
and then coming back three hours later and 
losing five hands, you can imagine what 
they’re gonna say if you try to collect on that 
first fifteen hundred they win. 

In fact not long ago, we had a man from 
Canada who hit a twenty-two hundred dollar 
Keno ticket, was eight thousand dollars loser 
playin’ the wheel, and tryin’ to explain to 
him that we had to take fifteen percent of 
that twenty-two hundred because he was 
from Canada, which is another rule of the 
IRS. Anybody from a foreign country, you 
have to take the money, collect for the United 
States government. We believe this is wrong; 
we’ve tried to fight it; we’ve tried to show ’em 
where they’re wrong and where collecting it 
is gonna cost them a lot more money than it 
would otherwise because the people that don’t 
play would cut our income down, that’s where 
the money to the government comes from 
is people like myself in the seventy percent 
bracket. The business generates so much 
business now; I believe last year ninety-four 
million went into the general fund on the 
gambling business. The gambling business 
gets tougher and tougher to make a living in 
all the time. Again, I’m not crying poor wolf 
because it is a good business, but we have so 
many rules, so many regulations. 

In conjunction with what I’ve been doing, 
about seven years ago, Governor O’Callaghan 
appointed me to the Gaming Policy Board. I 
have had a great rapport with our governor, 
and he has listened to me on many, many 
things concerned with gaming. We certainly 
don’t always agree and probably never will. 
He’s as strong willed as I am, and I believe that 


I know more about the business, what’s good 
for it than he does, but I don’t always get my 
way. But that’s neither here nor there. We still 
argue about it and see what happens. 

There have been many meetings that I 
have attended; and through the years one 
of the things that helped me I believe now, 
I believe that I have probably known more 
people in the business from all levels than 
probably anybody in the state of Nevada. I’m 
on speaking terms and am friendly with Baron 
Hilton, with my old friend Dick Graves from 
the Sparks Nugget, with Johnny Ascuaga, 
with Harvey Gross. Of course I worked for 
Bill Harrah, all the people down in Las Vegas, 
Jackie Gaughin one of the top people in our 
business, Sam Boyd who is a partner with me 
in the California Hotel down there, one of 
the premier people in our business who has 
been in it as long as I have. And he is also one 
of the old-timers that has made the change 
from the old days and to the computers and 
the young people that are now taking over. 
He has a son, Bill, who is a lawyer the same 
as my son, is very knowledgeable about the 
gambling business. Some day he’ll probably 
be running that business. I own a small piece 
of the California Hotel down there; I’m on the 
board of directors and feel that I’m able to help 
them in many ways at our monthly meetings. 

One of the great things that happens is 
the change of ideas and that goes on back 
and forth between them and myself. Jackie 
Gaughin, the first of every month calls me 
and says well what did you do on the slots? 
We go back and forth, and between us this 
also goes on with Sam Boyd and Frank Scott 
who’s now at the Union Plaza. These people 
by comparing our different places and what’s 
going on, I’m sure that it’s helped all of us. 
I think that the more communication that 
you get between people that the better off 
you are. This is a hard thing to do because 



62 


Warren nelson 


so many people want to hide what they’re 
making, what they’re doing. I have never felt 
that way; I always believe that in everything 
I’ve done I’m pretty proud of and usually I 
can say, “Well I’m doin’ better than you,” and 
that gives you a good feeling, although it does 
sound like you’re pretty braggadocio. And I 
guess if you’ve got something to brag about, 
that isn’t too bad. 

I’m back and forth from Las Vegas so 
much that these things always kind of work 
out and see what happens. To get back to Club 
Cal-Neva, I guess four years after we came in 
here, we got together and bought Club Cal- 
Neva up at the Lake, paid, as I remember, a 
million, two to Sinatra, spent four million 
dollars building a hotel, kept it for two years 
and sold it for a profit of two and a half 
million. It was quite a place, but it was just 
too much work. Two places to run were too 
much for us, and I for one, was driving back 
and forth so many times that I was really glad 
to get out of there. It was pretty nice to have 
that capital gain money for my twelve percent 
or fourteen percent that time of the two and 
a half million. I think we did a real good job 
at the Club Cal-Neva at the Lake. In fact the 
last three months we had it, the club made a 
million dollars. 

We turned it over to Ohio Investment 
Company who bought from us, and I 
understand they lost a million and a half or 
a million dollars in the first three months 
they had it. So this gives you a little insight of 
management in the gambling business. They 
figure it would be the same way as running a 
bank or anything else. I think that you have 
to have topnotch people to make a gambling 
house go. I think that management is one of 
the main things. However, location, many 
things have a lot to do with it. 

I would think the Club Cal-Neva because 
of its unique position is probably as well 


situated as most with parking and the other 
clubs around it. And we have remodeled 
three times, each time a major piece of 
business. The first time we took two stores 
next door to us and doubled the size of the 
downstairs Keno, and in doubling the size of 
the downstairs casino, I’m sure that we more 
than doubled our income. Three or four years 
later we took over the Western Union behind 
us and that made us a third again as big, and 
then we more than doubled our business 
again. Just a year ago in April, we added the 
upstairs, put a restaurant up there and moved 
it up. And I believe that that’s doubled our 
business. There doesn’t seem to be any end 
of it, and I certainly hope there isn’t. We are 
now contemplating going across the alley 
clear to Virginia Street and doubling the size 
of the club again. 

In the meantime we have also started to 
build a new hotel of two hundred rooms called 
the Comstock. It’s two blocks up Second 
Street. It will have a casino about the size of 
the downstairs Club Cal-Neva. This business 
is growing so fast, so big, it’s pretty hard to 
keep up with. 

To tell all the stories about Club Cal-Neva 
would certainly take a lot of time, but it has 
been very satisfying to be part of it. I believe 
that my end in running the gambling and 
taking care of the Keno and helping with 
the slots has contributed a great deal to it. I 
believe now that I’ve learned as much about 
slot machines as anybody, and I think that 
my ideas on big jackpots and thinking big 
and learning percentages is a great deal to 
do with the success of the club. But I had a 
lot of help from Ad Tolen, my partner. He’s 
an old-timer, been around a long time. He’s 
very conservative; that probably helps me 
because I’m inclined to go off onto a tangent 
at times. However, the rest of my partners see 
that I don’t. 



Civic Activities, Experiences with Internal Revenue Service, Gaming Industry Association 63 


One of my partners, Howard Farris, and I 
have been partners—I probably spoke of him 
before—but have been partners since 1937. 
We were in the Waldorf together, then the 
Palace together and in the Mapes together, and 
now in the Cal-Neva. Howard’s health is not 
good; and he doesn’t spend as much time as he 
used to. However, he’s very knowledgeable in 
our business and in the early days was a lot of 
help. Howard is an aggressive person, always 
lookin’ for a deal. He’s had some good ones, 
and he’s had some bad ones. A few times he 
scared me to death because usually I’m with 
him, and some of them have been good, some 
bad. However, right now I don’t think either 
one of us can kick about what’s happening in 
Club Cal-Neva. 

We’ll go back a little bit to my involvement 
in the community. I’ve had many honors 
placed upon me because of the work I’ve done, 
and it makes me feel good. I’ve been closely 
connected with the National Conference 
of Christians and Jews, the Denver Jewish 
Hospital, the United Way. These different 
things. They all take time; I have tried to cut 
down and not be as active in these things as 
I used to be, but it’s pretty hard to do. But I 
have cut down some. 

One of my greatest projects has been the 
Gaining Association. I was the president of it 
for five years, and I believe that that has been 
a real good thing for the business. We won’t 
get everybody in the gambling, in the area that 
belong to it, but most the people do. It’s been 
run very fairly. It’s as good for the little person 
as it is for the big clubs; and although we’ve 
had our problems and ups and downs with it, I 
believe that something like that’s very essential 
for the business. I think that getting together 
and talking your problems over, and getting 
together and putting the money together to 
fight the different things you have to fight, has 
a lot to do with the success of our business. 


Now we have more and more government 
people in it all the time, more state, more 
county, more restrictions, but I guess this 
is just the nature of the beast. I suppose 
everybody does. I’ve always been against new 
regulations in our business because I think 
that we know more about regulating than the 
state does or the federal government. We fight 
off some of it, but some of it comes in and 
then sticks; it’s not something you can’t live 
with, but we’re buried under tons of paper and 
it does make it difficult and costs a lot more 
money to operate. Of course everybody wants 
to see what’s going on, and I think basically 
the state does a very good job. But I think the 
state is really handicapped. The people they 
hire, they’ve had some topnotch, real good 
men, but then with the wages the state pays, 
they can’t attract real top-notch men. This is 
something I would like to see changed and 
will try whatever I can do to increase it. One of 
the things that’s been very gratifying is being 
able to know intimately and be close to the 
top people in the state of Nevada. I consider 
Howard Cannon a very dear friend. 

All the outside activities we were talkin’ 
about take a lot of time, but they certainly are 
important. Somebody has to do it. It’d be done 
more and more. Apparently in the industry 
you have to kind of move along the way other 
businesses do. And it’s pretty tough to fight 
when you have different rules and regulations 
all the time, but if you don’t participate then 
you can’t fight them. So participation is the 
word, and I believe truly that participation of 
some few people in the business have really 
helped. I think that it helps better with the 
government in all facets of the government. 
I think it’s important to know your Senator, 
your representative, your governor; and I have 
been able to become well acquainted with all 
of these people and able to converse with them 
and tell them my problems; and ninety-nine 



64 


Warren nelson 


percent of the time, they listen and try to help 
as much as they can. The business becomes 
more complex everyday, becomes bigger 
everyday, and harder to manage everyday. 
Where it used to take, one man could keep his 
finger on all of the whole operation, it’s got to 
the point now where it has to be kind of spread 
around and have a lot of people looking. 

I’m going back to the Club Cal-Neva. I 
think our participation in civic things that 
are going on has been good as far as charities, 
United Way and everything. I said everybody 
should participate. And the amazing thing is 
that the gambling industry, despite all you 
hear about it, does more in the way of charity 
and helping local entities of the different 
things that need help than any other form 
of business. We find that in trying to help 
these various entities and make them go 
that the people that don’t help are the people 
you think would, the doctors and lawyers, 
the architects, the engineers. A lot of these 
individual businessmen don’t participate. It 
seems like the big load is always carried by the 
gaining and certain other industries that come 
ahead and do a good job on it. The power 
company, the telephone company are always 
in the forefront of this thing; but without the 
gaming, it would sure change it a lot. 

Coming back to Club Cal-Neva and 
how it was made up at the inception, Leon 
Nightingale and Jack Douglass started to 
make the deal with the people that we bought 
it from; it was a dentist named Dr. Frank 
and some other people from Los Angeles. 
Jack Douglass and Leon negotiated with the 
lawyers and then brought in Howard Farris. 
At Howard Farris’ suggestion, they brought 
in me. At my suggestion we brought in Ad 
Tolen as a management team. Doug Busey 
was a partner to begin with, and Doug was 
the lawyer for the corporation which by the 
way is Sierra Development Company. 


Howard Farris, Ad Tolen and I worked 
together at the Palace Club for probably 
seven or eight years. But Howard Farris and 
I worked together for over twenty years, and 
we’re very closely acquainted, uh—Ad Tolen 
is a man from Los Angeles and worked on 
the border, dealt on the boats, but mainly 
around Los Angeles, very knowledgeable 
about the gambling business and a real good 
partner, uh— He—uh—knows the basis of the 
business as well as anybody, and keeps a close 
eye on it, has been very close to the action all 
the time the club has been open. 

Later on we started in to take our sons 
into the business and wound up with my son 
Greg [Nelson], Jack Douglass’ son, John, and 
Leon Nightingale’s son Steven. They’re all 
working in the club now with various degrees 
of interest. But I’m sure that this young blood 
has got to help even if it takes time for them 
to learn, but they’re learning fast. 

This has been sort of a weird partnership, 
certainly not one without problems. I suppose 
all partnerships have problems. I think the 
thing that really welds things together is 
whether you’re making money. We’ve always 
made money, and it gets better all the time, 
so this makes for a good partnership. We 
have many and varied ideas how things are 
supposed to be run, but I believe that after a 
lot of argument usually in my end of it—in the 
gambling end of it—I usually get my way. But 
it really is hard to show people why I’m doing 
some of the things I do because I suppose 
they do look a little bit weird from the outset. 
However, most of the things that I have done 
have become pretty successful. I started on 
the slot machines about two years after we 
came in and have become very interested in it, 
and more or less developed the machine that 
I copied after Keno, called it the “Spot Slot.” 
It had the same percentage approximately 
as Keno, and the same odds as an eight spot 



Civic Activities, Experiences with Internal Revenue Service, Gaming Industry Association 65 


ticket with a twelve thousand five hundred 
dollar jackpot for fifty cents which is the same 
as the eight spot ticket in Keno. 

With the help of Phil Waterman, who 
was then the slot manager and a very good 
mechanic, we were able to put these machines 
together, eight-reel machines, the first of its 
type. We got them together and working, and 
I had the idea of moving them into Vegas and 
into various outlets. Went down to Las Vegas 
and got a license to be an operator of slot 
machines and put one in the Mint which was 
being run by my friend Sam Boyd at the time, 
and also one in the Golden Nugget across 
the street in Las Vegas. The one in the Mint 
stayed there I think for six or seven years and 
on a twenty-five/seventy-five basis, twenty- 
five percent for the Club Cal-Neva for three 
years, and then they owned the machine. 
And I believe that our income out of that was 
between seventy and eighty thousand. I also 
put one in the Golden Nugget. It was in there 
for thirty-one days with twenty-two thousand 
winner; it got hit for twelve thousand five 
hundred, and the boss took it out; he couldn’t 
stand the hit. So it shows how it’s so hard 
for people to pay that kind of money out on 
the slot machines, but that’s more and more 
beginning to be the name of the game. 

I also had one in the Eldorado in 
Henderson and also I put one in the Sahara 
Tahoe at Lake Tahoe as well as two in Club 
Cal-Neva, one played two nickels, one that 
played two dimes, and one that played two 
quarters and paid jackpots accordingly, five 
thousand for a dime, twenty-five hundred for 
a nickel, and twelve thousand five hundred for 
the two quarters. I would believe that those 
machines made upwards of a couple hundred 
thousand, maybe more, in the three or four 
years they were in there. Later on at the time 
we bought Club Cal-Neva at Lake Tahoe from 
Frank Sinatra and once had the machine up 


there. At the time we bought the club, in order 
to get new slot machines we sold the rights 
to the Keno slot to the Bally Company and Si 
Redd for a hundred and eighty thousand, and 
this was enough money to pay for the new slot 
machines we put up at Lake Tahoe. 

Along the sane vein in the slot machine 
business, we became more aggressive and 
more competitive. In the last three or four 
years have spent a lot of time revising the 
percentages on slot machines, [have] come to 
the conclusion that the lower you make them, 
the more play you get, consequently the more 
money you make. The slot machines are a 
good part of the business now and very, very 
sensitive. I suppose that at least a third of my 
time is directed directly to the slot machine 
department; mostly I’m thinking up new ideas 
and new things that will go. About three years 
ago after observation in Las Vegas in one little 
club down there and Carl’s Club in Sparks, 
but this was originally an idea of mine and 
Si Redd, and probably this would be a good 
place to talk about Si Redd. 

Si Redd I suppose has been in Reno about 
eight years, maybe nine. When he came he 
bought the franchise for Bally slot machines 
and the franchise for all the “Big Bertha” 
machines that were then in operation. They 
were being operated by Dick Graves. Dick was 
a very bright guy in the business, especially 
the slot machines, and was the originator of 
the Sparks Nugget, also the Reno Nugget. 
Dick was a very innovative man, looking 
for new gimmicks and new things all the 
time. It was great to talk to him because 
he was a very smart man. We became well 
acquainted and spent a lot of time talkin’ 
about slot machines. He had this franchise 
and was tryin to slow down and get out of 
the business, so he wanted me to buy it. And 
I brought the proposition before the club and 
everybody thought well, maybe it’d take too 



66 


Warren nelson 


much time and wouldn’t be worth it, although 
I was really, really for it because I thought it 
would be a great thing. The board of directors 
turned it down. Then Dick Graves brought a 
man from Boston, Massachusetts, Si Redd, 
in and sold it to him for seventy thousand 
dollars. The price for me would have been 
forty thousand. I suppose that, conservatively, 
Si Redd for himself and Bally slot machines 
probably made ten or fifteen million with that 
franchise and with the participation machines 
that he has out and about in Reno. I don’t say 
that we could have done exactly the same, but 
I do believe that we would have been almost 
as successful as Si, had Sierra Development 
taken the proposition. 

However, it was great for us, and my 
connection with Dick Graves grew. And I 
went to London twice with him and with the 
people from Bally slot machine company to 
go to world-wide trade shows which showed 
all types of coin operated machines. Held 
in an old castle in London and just going 
through there and seeing the new gimmicks 
that they had out every year, gave me many 
ideas for new things to do and how to do 
them in the business back in Reno. It helped 
immeasurably. 

In connection with moving around with 
Dick Graves, the time I spent with him was 
always very fruitful mentally, because he’d 
been all over the world and really showed 
me a lot of different things. I suppose that 
he has as good a mind for gimmicks as 
anybody I’ve ever seen. We spent a lot of time 
together picking each other’s brains about slot 
machines, and I don’t know who came out 
ahead, but I’m sure that we both gamed a lot 
from our experiences. 

I went to Norway with him about seven or 
eight years ago I believe in ’72 to go polar bear 
hunting up towards the North Sea, up in the 
ice flow. It was a great trip, and just spending 


two weeks on a boat with Dick Graves was a 
great experience. It was a great experience, 
but we were so sick goin up—seasick that it 
took the edge off the experience. I also went 
to London with him twice, the slot machine 
showings there that they have every year 
in January, show all the new coin operated 
machines that come out that year, very 
interesting experiences. I also spent some 
time with him in Denmark, and he’s been all 
over the world, traveled all over the world 
in his own Greyhound bus that was fitted in 
like a home. And it was so interesting to be 
with him because no matter where you went 
he knew something about the area. I think 
he will go down as one of the old-time greats 
in gambling. 

At the same time the other hunter on the 
boat was a man named Nicholas Franco. In 
a short time we found out he was General 
Franco of Spain’s nephew, a very bright man 
that was chairman of the museum in Madrid, 
also had the franchise for all the Renault 
automobiles in Spain and the franchise for all 
Westinghouse products in Spain. And being 
Franco’s nephew, he was able to move around 
in politics in Spain very much. He was a very 
interesting man and very interested in slot 
machines and thought that maybe Dick and 
I and he should put them in Spain. This was 
discussed a lot, and Nicholas came over to 
Nevada twice to talk to us about it. However, 
it never jelled, but it was an interesting 
proposition and an interesting thing to talk 
about. A year or two later I was in Madrid 
and met with Nicholas Franco, and he took 
me and showed me the finest places to eat 
in Madrid, the small, little, fancy places that 
ordinary tourists didn’t see. Also had a new 
Renault for me to drive, a driver at my hotel 
room every morning. In the meantime, from 
his province in northern Spain right next 
to the Basque country, he ran for senator of 



Civic Activities, Experiences with Internal Revenue Service, Gaming Industry Association 67 


Spain from this province and made it. It was 
very interesting that he gave Dick Graves and 
myself all the credit for his being able to win 
the election because of the things that hed 
learned from us about politics and about how 
things worked in the United States. 

Dick Graves has pretty much bowed out 
of the picture now and is not a factor in the 
business anymore, but he did a great deal to 
develop and make things go. I think his start 
of the various places [such] as the Nugget in 
Sparks and everything have great impact on 
the business. 




11 


The Comstock Hotel, 
Plans for the Future 


About a month ago Club Cal-Neva 
opened a gambling school on Sierra Street in a 
building I own over there called Sierra Square 
School of Dealing. We have sixteen “21,” two 
Craps, two wheels, and mini-Baccarat. We’re 
gonna teach eventually Poker and Keno. It’s 
in a nice, big room, an old-fashioned room 
with chandeliers. Along with the school I 
would like to start a gambling museum. I’m 
already gathering some pictures of the old- 
timers, you know, from years ago, and we’re 
getting a pretty good collection along with 
the pictures and all, and we’re going to try 
to get as much different equipment and so 
forth that would be interesting to the public. 
This museum would be open to the public, 
and in conjunction with the museum any 
tourist that come in to look at the gambling 
museum could also learn how to play. Our 
student dealers over there will be able to deal 
to these people, and they will be people that 
don’t know how to shoot Craps, play “21,” play 
Baccarat or the wheel, and learn by playing. 
They will play with play money. There’ll be 
nothing involved in it, but I would suppose 


that in time if you won so much, we’d give 
you a free dinner or something like that to 
make people sort of interested in it. I think 
it’s a good idea. It’s never been done before 
to my knowledge, and so many people come 
to Reno and don’t understand the gambling, 
and so they naturally don’t play. All they ever 
play or get to do is the slot machines because 
anybody can do that. 

In conjunction with this is the museum 
and the school. I’m getting a bunch of old 
slot machines in there, the old-timers from 
1941 backward into the ’30s when slot 
machines first started to come out, and also 
I am contemplating having a Gamblers’ Hall 
of Fame. I would probably try to make the 
Hall of Fame include the famous and the 
infamous, however I don’t know if that would 
work because you might not be able to say 
something about the old-timers that weren’t 
lily white. But I would suppose that you’d have 
to start with somebody like “Pappy” Smith— 
the Smith brothers, Bill Harrah, Dick Graves, 
people of that caliber and then each year 
induct a few more and maybe we could get the 



70 


Warren Nelson 


Chamber of Commerce or somebody to help 
us along with it and make kind of a show out 
of it. I think people would be glad to do that. 
I think that this is something that would help 
the image of gambling that I’m always talking 
about, the one that I believe in and I’ve spent 
so much time trying to improve. 

In the museum I would have dice that 
were used in the early days that weren’t square, 
that had different numbers on them, that were 
loaded and shaved and the different things that 
they did in the old days to cheat the public. If 
I can get a hold of it I’ll put an old electric or 
juice wheel in and a magnet that had been used 
on Crap games, and just to show the public 
what happened in the past and try to show 
them that the future is nothing like that, and 
in Nevada now I’m sure there isn’t. 

And in conjunction with that, if I thought 
that somebody in Nevada was cheating and 
they were somebody I knew, I would go to 
them and say, hey, you’d better cut that out, 
you’re gonna be in trouble. If they didn’t pay 
any attention to me, I would certainly turn 
them into the Gaming Commission. I feel real 
strong on this. In the old days it wasn’t like 
that. You didn’t talk about anybody else, but 
again the image of gambling is foremost in 
my mind, and I would like to keep it that way. 

I’d like to talk a little bit now about the— 
about the image and some of the people in the 
gambling business that I think have helped 
the image. There are many, and I’m certain 
that I’m going to leave a lot out. I would like 
to get some of the old-timers in that [were] 
extra fine people and really have contributed 
a lot to the business. Some great characters, 
some great people in the business and all with 
different senses of values. I think that has 
changed now; I think the times have made 
it change, and I think that anybody in the 
gambling business has to have a very rigid set 
of values that can’t vary with different times 


and the way things are going. I think that 
honesty has become a very important part 
of the business. For the most part I believe 
that the business is ninety-nine and 99/100 
percent pure as far as anybody trying to cheat 
the people on the outside or for that matter 
the people on the inside. 

The commodity you handle is cash. This 
is very difficult, and there’s so many ways that 
things can happen that the whole business 
has changed to the point where money 
trails and how things happen are the very 
important part of the business. It has got to 
the point now where not only do you have 
to protect yourself, you have to protect the 
state, and of course the state is in the business 
whether anybody likes it or not. They’re in 
as much the gambling business as I am, and 
they are watching their part of it as closely 
as we are, and I must say are becoming very 
knowledgeable on how to do it. 

One of the foremost in my mind right 
now is a guy named Jack Duffy. His real name 
is Jack Cafferty. Jack broke in in Montana 
probably in the early ’30s as a young man and 
later worked on the boats and on the border 
and in fact all over the West in different 
places as it was hard to go to work during 
the Depression, and people in the gambling 
business moved from town to town as they 
opened. Jack wound up in Reno working 
with me years ago in the Palace Club as a pit 
boss. I was a pit boss, and he was a dealer. He 
was such a good dealer, when I first became 
a pit boss I asked the boss what my duties 
were, and he said well you just walk up and 
see everything you can—you’re not gonna see 
much, but look at everything you can. 

And he said, “Jack Duffy’s dealin’ ‘21’ 
there.” He said, “He’s got a bottle of beer 
siftin’ on the table; if it gets warm, get him 
another beer.”So that was my introduction 
to Jack. It was certainly pleasant to bring him 



The Comstock Hotel, Plans for the Future 


71 


the beer; he was a fantastic man. Incidentally 
he hasn’t drank for years, but he never was a 
real drinker, but he was just a party guy and 
got around a lot. He’s married to a real neat 
gal called Lucille, also a dealer in the early 
days, a very fine person and has a very good 
reputation. 

Jack owned two or three places in Reno, 
the old Picadilly and the old Town House. 
About the time—I guess it had to be about ’48 
or ’49, they called him to Vegas and he went 
to work in the Golden Nugget there, wound 
up casino manager; and he was a fair, good 
man and a very good manager. He had some 
problems. Jack was the kind of a guy that 
would never turn anybody down, especially 
the old-timers, and some of the old-timers 
would work in there when they couldn’t work 
anyplace else. But it was a very successful 
business, and I’m sure most of it was due to 
Jack Duffy. Jack has now retired and lives in 
Oroville. I still hunt and fish with him. We 
make many trips together, and he is one of 
the premier people. I think that he dealt “21” 
as fine as anybody I’ve ever seen. 

Again [there] are so many people of this 
time. One man that was associated with Duffy 
at one time by the name of Metrovich, Jimmy 
Metrovich. Jimmy was a top-notch golfer and 
a top-notch baseball player when I first met 
him. He and I were about the same age and 
broke in about the same time. Jimmy took off 
in the ’30s and went to Spain and fought for 
the Loyalists back there and came back, never 
spoke about it much, but became a pit boss 
and a manager and a real fine man. He died 
of a heart attack just a few years ago. 

Another man in about that same time 
and a partner with the last two mentioned, 
Metrovich and Duffy, was Johnny Acuff. 
Johnny broke in on the boats off Los Angeles, 
and he first came to Reno in the late ’30s and 
went to work as a wheel dealer. He was a man 


with a great personality and a nice guy. He 
married five or six times, always with good 
looking girls, one of his downfalls. Johnny 
Acuff was also a partner with Duffy and 
Metrovich, and Johnny later moved all over 
and worked at the Lake for awhile, finally 
went back to Las Vegas and got to drinkin 
quite a bit and died about two or three years 
ago. But he was a very good wheel dealer and 
a good pit boss and a very honest guy. He was 
probably his own worst enemy. 

Billy Panelli I’ve mentioned several times. 
I think that he was a premier of all people as 
far as I’m concerned, as far as dealing with the 
seekers and knowing the gambling business. 
He wasn’t a great personality, spoke very little, 
in fact spoke hardly at all. He and I worked 
together in the old Palace Club, and he taught 
me many, many things. And in turn I think 
that I taught him some things. 

An incident came up with him years ago, 
between he and I, a man had been playing at 
Harrah’s Club when I was workin there by 
the name of Homer White. Homer White was 
a Faro Bank dealer at the Bank Club, and I 
could never figure out how he could come in, 
play everyday, lose a hundred or a hundred 
and fifty playin’ the horses and playin’ Faro 
Bank. This went on for probably a year, year 
and a half. 

One day he come in to me and he said, 
“Warren, you’ve been awful good to me, 
and I’m leavin’ town. I want to show you 
something.” And I kind of fluffed him off. 

He said, “No, no, I want you to see this.” 
So we took him downstairs, and he said, “You 
got a deck of cards?” And I said yes. “Let me 
show you something.” 

Picked the deck up and picked out all the 
queens and the kings and put them on top of 
the deck, put the cards up and cut them and 
shuffled them three times, and put them back 
together, put them in a Faro Bank box. 



72 


Warren Nelson 


He said, “Now I’m gonna show you the 
winners of the kings and the queens.” And 
when the first king showed, he then made a 
bet that all the kings and queens do win, and 
it did. This was merely a matter of shuffling, 
and I couldn’t quite believe it until he did it 
two or three times. 

Finally, I said, “Homer, can I show this to 
Bill Panelli?” 

He said, “Well, I don’t want to show it 
to anybody else, but Bill’s a good guy, so I’ll 
show it to him.” 

So we brought him down, and Bill saw 
it and he also couldn’t believe it. So I said, 
“Homer, where do you get this?” 

He said, “Well, Warren, years ago when I 
was a young man and I was a Faro Bank dealer 
and I ran a game on my own and a guy accused 
me of cheating, and I shot him and killed him. 
I spent about twenty years in prison in Texas. 
I must have wore out a thousand decks of 
cards shuffling.” And he said, “I came up with 
this deal where an absolutely honest looking 
shuffle would go through and I could catch 
three or four winners with eight cards that 
could be memorized that were exposed in the 
previous deal in Faro Bank.” 

It was still hard for me to believe, but he 
did it four or five times. 

He said, “I’m showin’ you this because 
I’m leavin’ town, and I’m also showin’ you 
because I got fired for gettin drunk. I’m gonna 
leave and I’m an old man; I won’t last much 
longer; I wanted someone to see this. I want 
you to know that I did this in the Bank Club 
for twelve years and averaged a hundred fifty 
or two hundred dollars a day for all that time 
and nobody ever suspected me. Too bad that 
I had to get fired for getting drunk.” 

In my head I was tryin to figure out how 
much a hundred to a hundred and fifty dollars 
a day was. I suppose about forty thousand 
a year and twelve times four would be four 


hundred and eighty thousand, almost a half 
a million. This was done under the eyes of 
some of the smartest people in the gambling 
business. So this goes to show you that no 
matter how smart you are, there’s always 
somebody who might be a little bit smarter. 

Billy and I practiced this deal, for our 
own edification; and between the two of us, 
although we weren’t as good as the old man, 
why we both could and proved to ourselves 
it could be done. I also asked old man White 
if there was an antidote to this. 

He said, “Yes.” 

He said, “Just don’t let ’em split the deck 
exactly in the middle.” 

Ever since then, no matter who deals “21” 
for me, I try to have more cards on one side 
than the other in order to stop this. However, 
to my knowledge I’m almost positive nobody 
in the business ever has done this except this 
one man. So I guess you’d have to call him 
one of the famous ones or one of the [ones] 
that we’re talking about or the infamous I 
suppose. He never did work for me, and I’ve 
always thought, “Gee, I’m sure glad he didn’t.” 

One of the people that first taught me 
the business was Vinnie Merialdo. Vinnie is 
now eighty years old. He lives in Vegas. He 
was a pit boss for many, many years, sort of a 
politician. His brother was the state controller 
for a long time. They were out of Eureka, a real 
nice family of Italian and Irish people mixed 
together, but they were really great people. 
Vinnie was a playboy all his life, but he was a 
great family man, loved his family, although 
he played so much that he probably wasn’t 
the greatest provider in the world to begin 
with; but I don’t think anybody had a more 
loving father. His granddaughter, I think I 
mentioned before, now works for me, and I 
have great expectations of her because she’s 
a very bright girl; and she’s helping me run 
the school. 



The Comstock Hotel, Plans for the Future 


73 


I mentioned Warren Atcheson before who 
was the dean of all dealers in the old days, 
and he was sort of the book of Hoyle of the 
gamblers in the old days. 

I don’t know if I mentioned Jack Sullivan 
or not; I believe I did. His real name was 
Jack Scarlett. Although I never was real 
close to Jack Sullivan, he was—we had many 
arguments with him. He was a very fair man 
and certainly knew a lot about the business. 

John Petricciani, my first boss when I came 
to Reno, “Slot Machine Johnny” they called 
him, a very fair, good man. He died quite a 
few years ago. He was born in ’88, so he’s been 
dead about fifteen years I suppose. Although 
he had never been a dealer or anything like 
that, he ran a very good gambling house and 
was well respected. He and Jack Sullivan were 
always at swords point because they were 
the only two places in town, right across the 
alley from each other and there was a lot of 
competition. 

In the early ’30s young Harold Smith 
opened Harolds Club, and I suppose that I 
contributed quite a bit to his success because 
we used to stop him from playin’ all the time 
and not give him credit. If we had he’d a 
probably broke himself because he was always 
a player and still is. I was never real close to 
Harold, but he was a very flamboyant guy, and 
we were raised in the alley together. And he 
and his brother Raymond were all about the 
same age, started out about the same time. 

Another man that I met about that time 
was Bernie Einstoss. Bernie was a very bright 
man, I think as good an all around person in 
the gambling business that I’ve ever known. 
He was a bookmaker, was raised on the streets 
of Los Angeles and was down shootin Craps 
and crooked dice when he was in his teens 
in the alleys of L.A. He came up and died a 
wealthy man, had a part of Caesar’s Palace 
when he died. He fell dead at the telephone. 


He was also about my age and was always very 
good to me. I worked for him for five years 
at the Mapes, and he was a pleasure to work 
with. I learned a lot from him, and I think 
it works both ways—he learned something 
from me. 

He had a partner named Frank Grannis 
who worked for me at Harrah’s Club. Frank’s 
an old-timer, still alive, probably in his 
eighties, soft-spoken, sweet, nice man, knew 
the business very, very well, treated people 
good, a real fantastic guy. 

A man that had quite a bit of influence on 
me in the gambling business, a man named 
Harry Weitz. I think I probably spoke of him 
before. He’s the only man in the gambling 
business that doesn’t speak to me which I 
feel very bad about, but I learned a lot from 
him and was around him a lot. Some of the 
things that happened to me wouldn’t have 
happened if it hadn’t been for Harry helping 
me. However, I think that he was repaid 
many, many times. Harry is a compulsive 
gambler; he plays all the time, and I’m sure 
that although he’s made a lot of money and 
all, that he’s come to the point now where 
his gambling has about got him down. He’s 
gettin’ to be an old man. It’s a shame because 
he had a lot of talent; he was one of the real 
sharp people in the business, a very nice guy. 

“Pappy” Smith was never one of my 
favorites, but he had to be one of the great 
people in the gambling business. I think 
he was always very honest, and I also think 
he was very lucky. However, I had some 
experiences with him that were very strange. 
One time when I got out of Harrah’s Club and 
before I went into the Waldorf, I had an idea 
of dealing Faro Bank with a new kind of a 
layout that I had perfected with Billy Panelli. 
This Faro Bank layout would have been easy 
to deal and easy to play. I thought it was a very 
good idea, still do; however, I could never 



74 


Warren Nelson 


really make it work. But it was fixed so the 
bets were very easy to see whether you win or 
lost and much different than the regular game. 
Howard Farris and I got a hold of a bankroll 
of fifty thousand dollars and went in to see 
old man Smith to see if he would be interested 
in putting in a Faro Bank, and I showed it to 
him. And he was absolutely enthralled. He 
says that’s the greatest thing I’ve ever seen, 
I want you to put it in, but he said I don’t 
want to bankroll it because I’ve had some 
bad experiences with Faro Bank and if you’d 
bankroll it and run an honest game, I’d be glad 
to give you the space and our percentage. I 
was absolutely sure that the game would have 
gone in there because it would bring traffic 
and there wasn’t another game in town, and 
there were still a lot of players at that time. So 
he said come in and see me Tuesday, so the 
following Tuesday I went in. I had my certified 
check for my bankroll and had the table all set 
up, and I sat down outside of his office about 
thirty minutes and then forty minutes. Then 
all of a sudden about an hour and a half. 

I walked in and he looked up and he said, 
“I’ve changed my mind.” 

Well needless to say I wasn’t working, 
and I felt real bad about it. I later heard 
and certainly believe that he consulted his 
astrologist, and the astrologist said that the 
moon wasn’t right to put in a Faro Bank game 
and that was the end of the story. I don’t know 
for sure if that’s true, but that’s what was said. 

Somebody else that bears mentioning, an 
old-timer by the name of Eddie Sahati. Eddie 
Sahati was a known narcotic addict. He was 
on morphine and had to have a fix every four 
or five hours. In those days it wasn’t such a 
crime, but he was a very famous guy as far as 
gambling, wound up owning the Sahati Club 
on the south shore of Lake Tahoe. He had 
a brother Nick who was not a player on the 
inside, but a gambler, but not like his brother. 


Nick would bet every dollar he could get a 
hold of trying to live up to the image of his 
brother. Eddie died, although he went back 
to Kentucky and took the cure; I’m sure that 
he went back to heroin and died quite a few 
years ago. There’s a whole family of them, the 
Sahatis. His mother was a player, his sister 
was a player; they were around gambling all 
their lives. They were Armenians and Syrians, 
and there were the Nahas and—the Syufys 
and the Sahatis, one big intermingled family, 
all of them not kinky, but very sharp people, 
not hard to deal with, but you could win their 
money, but it was never easy. They were very 
interesting people to be around. 

One of the people about that time that 
I met, still my good friend, one of the old- 
timers, Sam Boyd. Sam was brought up on 
Bingo down on the beach in Long Beach and 
around Los Angeles, went to Hawaii, then 
came back to the states and learned the rest 
of the gambling, worked on the boats, and 
finally went to Vegas and worked down there. 
When I met him he came up to Reno to open 
up the club that I’m in now, Club Cal-Neva, 
for Sanford Adler. I became acquainted with 
them and the friendship has lasted and we are 
now partners in the California Hotel in Las 
Vegas. And it’s a real fantastic little joint. It’s 
makin money, and San’s one of the old-timers 
that I talk about that made the transition and 
now runs things about the way I do. 

Another Las Vegas man, Jackie Gaughin, 
has no peers as far as I’m concerned in the 
gambling business. He has a piece of about 
eight joints, he goes about eighty miles an 
hour, must wear out a pair of shoes each 
month, although he don’t buy a new pair 
just as soon as they’re wore out. He’s also a 
philanthropist, gives a lot of money away in 
Las Vegas and very well thought of. I suppose 
between he and Sam Boyd, the old-timers that 
really know the business, they’re probably a 



The Comstock Hotel, Plans for the Future 


75 


couple of the premier people that got on top 
and doing real good. Most of the corporations 
of the bigger places don’t have those kind of 
people, but there’s still a place for them. And 
I consider myself in that category, people 
that now own pieces of a joint and are up and 
making money. 

Another one of those, my present partner 
Ad Tolen started out as a wheel dealer down 
in Mexico and on the boats in Los Angeles. 

I think that the people I first cane to Reno 
with like Jim Brady who is now dead, bright 
young man; Clyde Bittner, a dear friend, 
wound up bein’ a boss for me and died of 
an ulcer operation about twelve or fourteen 
years ago. He and I came to Reno together; we 
were very close. Dick Trinastich, another boy 
I suppose I mentioned, but he also was one 
of the first people I knew, a top-notch Keno 
man, and he has also passed away. 

Talk about some of the young people 
who are not young any more but broke in 
and worked for me while they were going to 
college; this is one of the high points of my life. 
I talk about that all the time. I think another 
thing that has pleased me that I’ve been able 
to do is my relationship politically. I only 
started this a few years ago, and I consider 
most of the politicians I know, good friends. 
Mike O’Callaghan is one of the fine men I 
know who has been very good to me, and I 
think people like him certainly help the image 
of the gambling business because he’s always 
looked at it objectively and criticized where he 
thought it was due and praised where praise 
was due, so I think he’s helped it a lot. 

Senator Bible got to be a real dear friend. 
He’s helped the business so many ways; every 
time we went to Washington to fight with 
the IRS or the Justice Department, he was 
always right there behind us. The same way 
with Walter Baring, now dead, also Senator 
[Howard] Cannon who’s been a good friend; 


and now at the present time Santini, House 
of Representatives from Nevada has proven 
to be a real good man, helps the business, but 
only because he knows that it’s the main part 
of the state’s economy. 

All these things are gratifying. I’m very 
pleased that they’ve happened. These things 
that have happened that I’ve done, especially 
the last ten years, have given me a lot of 
satisfaction, although they were a lot of work. 
I’ve worked with the Chamber of Commerce, 
the Rodeo Association, Renovation — 
downtown association, Gaming Association, 
and I’ve tried to be a leader, especially for the 
gambling business to show what I thought it 
was and what it should be. I keep talking about 
what a great thing gambling is, and I really 
don’t condone it. I believe that gambling has 
got a place; I think it’ll always be here. And 
I think that the state of Nevada runs it very 
well, and I also think that my part of it I run 
very well. 




12 


Conclusions 


The gaming industry in my opinion is 
undergoing some great changes in northern 
Nevada, southern Nevada, also in the rest 
of the United States. The situation in New 
Jersey, I’ve been real close to that since it 
was first thought of. I think it was about four 
years ago, Governor O’Callaghan asked me to 
come to Las Vegas, and we met with Governor 
Brendan Byrne of New Jersey, four or five 
people from the legislature of New Jersey, 
and two or three of his assistants. We met 
with Pete Echeverria, myself, the governor, 
Phil Hannifin, and also Don Dugellio from 
the Review Journal of Las Vegas and Hank 
Greenspun from the Las Vegas Sun. 

The meeting was primarily for us to tell 
the governor of New Jersey what we thought 
his problems would be in New Jersey should 
they elect to go ahead and legalize gambling, 
which they have done. I think the information 
we gave them was very good. We told ’em it 
would be hard to control, would be a lot of 
people, it wouldn’t be easy, but it was possible. 
I think we indicated at that time that as far as 
Nevada was concerned, we weren’t for it or 


against it, that we didn’t believe that it would 
have a great effect on the state of Nevada. 

Hank Greenspun came in late and gave 
quite a dissertation on what he thought, and 
it was absolutely different than anybody else 
thought. I was very amazed when he read 
an editorial that was in the Sun the next 
day. It started out “Governor Byrne fiddles 
while New Jersey burns,” the fact that he said 
that gambling, they thought they would put 
it in Atlantic City. He said instead of New 
Jersey bein’ the Garden Spot of the United 
States, it would become the pest hole. I didn’t 
agree with that and got in an argument with 
Mr. Greenspun. But anyway, I think the 
information that we gave them was good. And 
naturally the governor was a little hesitant in 
giving them too much information because 
he thought it would be like if you were in 
one business to give your competitor all the 
information about it. 

However, it has gone forward, they are 
going to open; and I believe instead of being 
a detriment to Nevada that it’ll take them a 
long time to get where we are. And I think 



78 


Warren Nelson 


that all they’ll do is teach more people to play 
and probably in the long run maybe help the 
business in Nevada. 

Speaking of the changes that are taking 
place in northern Nevada, at this time within 
the next five or six months they’re going to be 
seven new hotels open, probably adding two 
thousand rooms to the present number in 
Reno. I have many, many different thoughts 
on what this is going to do to the industry, 
but my own opinion is that it can do nothing 
but help. We do have problems with putting 
the people to work, where they’re gonna 
work, we’re gonna have a terrific time getting 
enough help to do the jobs that have to be 
done, but I believe, as always, it will work out. 
I see such a bright future for the industry in 
northern Nevada. It seems to get better all the 
time, every weekend is better, every month 
is better than the previous month. Weather 
doesn’t seem to bother us any more. I think 
that Reno is really on the upswing, and I 
think possibly a lot of it is due to the gain in 
industry in the north itself. I think that we 
do a real good job in treating customers well. 
I believe we do better than Vegas, although 
Vegas is getting better. But I do believe that we 
have an atmosphere that people like. I think 
it’s getting to be more of a carnival all the 
time, not so much big gambling; the people 
just come like they’re going to a carnival or a 
circus, just come in and mill around and stay 
around where most of the action is and just 
seem to have a good time. 

For myself and my associates, we are 
in the process of going across the alley and 
doubling the size of our club. This will take 
about two years. Also we’re going up the street 
two blocks and opening up a new hotel that 
will open in May called the Comstock which 
will be in old fashioned decor depicting old 
Comstock mines and so on and so forth. I 
think there’s been a lot of good ideas in it. I 


have not spent as much time developing this 
as I have in the past, and some of the younger 
fellas in the organization are going with it and 
doing a good job. I think it’ll be something 
that myself and my associates will be proud 
of and I think Reno will be proud of. 

Everything seems to be getting bigger 
and better. We do have problems. One of our 
problems as I see it now, is the attitude that 
the Gaming Control Board and, I suppose, 
the Commission is taking at this time. They 
seem to be getting more and more into 
management itself than they ever did before. 
At the present time I’m in a hassle with them. 
They’re insisting that I put in a camera system 
of surveillance over my games which in my 
opinion, what I’ve seen in the past, isn’t the 
best way to protect yourself. I think that the 
surveillance that we get in our “peeks,” the eye 
itself—my eye in the place of that of the camera 
is much better. I don’t know if we’ll go to court, 
but I really am upset about it, and I do think 
that the state is really coming on too strong. I 
also believe that the state auditing department 
coming in and saying well you should have 
cash registers for your Keno, you should audit 
this way—I’m doing this from almost fifty 
years of experience, and I’m getting the young 
people that have never worked in the industry 
telling me how it should be run. I think that 
this big brotherhood goes to the IRS, to all 
bureaucrats that you find you wind up with, 
and some of the stuff isn’t feasible although 
I do believe they try hard in trying to do the 
right thing. I think that they think basically 
that they are right, but I also believe that I’m 
entitled to my opinion. 

Be as it may, this is not going to hurt the 
business, it’s just another irritation that I guess 
you do get in business. We have the same 
thing with unions. At the present time Club 
Cal-Neva doesn’t have one union member 
in any department, and it seems to work 



Conclusions 


79 


out well for us. When we did have unions it 
was nothin’ but a hassle, and people I don’t 
believe took as good a care of the people 
that work for me as I do. And I’m sure this 
is true. I think that the threat of the unions 
probably makes us come on a little bit faster, 
but I think we know how our people should 
be treated and how we handle them. And I 
think it’s working out good. This is true all 
over the industry in northern Nevada. I’m 
sorry to say it isn’t true in southern Nevada, 
but with one or two small exceptions, nobody 
in Reno is unionized, maybe the bartenders or 
the culinary, certainly not the gambling. Now 
one or two places do have some maintenance 
men that are under the operating engineers, 
but that’s certainly not a threat. I believe 
that the future of the business—it will keep 
growing, and our biggest problem at this 
time is the wage structure. The reason our 
wage structure is difficult is the nature of our 
business. The gaming business cannot raise 
its prices like the butcher shop does the meat, 
can’t be a dollar a pound today, and a dollar 
and a half tomorrow when that price of beef 
goes up. We cannot change the percentage 
on a Roulette Wheel that is 5 and 5/19 or a 
Crap game which is 1 and 42/100 or on a “21” 
game which is approximately three percent. 
These games have been that way for almost 
since their inception. People are used to it, and 
there’s actually no way that you could change 
that percentage. Our only hope is that people 
will bet more money, and the volume will take 
care of the percentage. However, one person 
dealing can only handle so many people, so 
it has become a problem. 

It’s been very difficult to have people that 
are used to playing the nickel slot machines 
and wean them and put ’em on the dollar slot 
machines, but that seems to be the salvation 
and we have been able to do that. It goes up all 
the time. We are also having more “21” games 


that are two dollar minimum and sometimes 
five dollar minimum. But the whole thing has 
gone up to such an extent that it does make a 
difference, and we can’t see the light at the end 
of the tunnel, but we have to keep working all 
the time to change the players over. Five years 
ago many of the players that are now playing 
dollar slot machines or even a year ago, you 
could have put a gun to their head, and they 
wouldn’t put a silver dollar in a slot machine. 
But now they see how loose they are and that 
has become the big thing in our business. 

I feel that I’ve had a lot to do with the 
changing and the come-on of dollar slot 
machines; results have been spectacular. I 
think that Club Cal-Neva leads them all, 
everybody in the state probably, in their 
handling of it and the amount of money 
that we make and the amount of money that 
goes through the slot machines, the dollar 
slot machines. It’s absolutely fantastic. The 
players are getting a good chance for their 
money because the percentages are so low 
on the machines; some of them are 98 1/2 
percent, only one and one half percent to the 
house. And from the way things used to be 
that is very, very minimal. However, if there 
is enough volume, that takes care of itself 
and just goes ahead and makes more money 
because the players seem to be happy because 
we do have a lot of winners. 

Another new thing that I believe is the 
coming thing, and very few people have 
done it, is the large-size jackpots. Harolds 
Club runs away with it having jackpots as 
high as a quarter of a million dollars on 
the floor. Now I’ve got three or four from 
a hundred and twenty thousand down to 
ninety thousand. I’ve got two machines with 
a jackpot, should you hit it, would pay fifty 
thousand dollars plus a thousand dollars a 
month the rest of your life. Naturally the odds 
hitting this are very, very high. Ninety million, 



80 


Warren Nelson 


seven hundred and some thousand to one, 
to be exact. However, if you play a machine 
twenty-four hours a day for a full year, a dollar 
machine a dollar a time, it averages about 
seven hundred and twenty dollars an hour. 
At the end of the year that would mean that 
you would put something like six million, two 
hundred thousand in it; and so at a year’s full 
play probably that machine wouldn’t be hit. 
However, it can be hit, and it will be hit. And I 
would say that probably one of these machines 
would hit every two years. Now this isn’t of 
course the only prize on the machine; it still 
has all the small prizes, and people could go 
ahead and win substantially without winning 
the fifty thousand dollars with a thousand 
dollars a month the rest of their life. I now 
have a machine in mind that I believe I’m 
going to get on—it’s going to take some time— 
but it’ll pay two hundred and fifty thousand 
dollar jackpot and thousand dollars a week 
the rest of your life. This is awfully hard to 
convince nine partners to do because there’s 
always the chance it would be hit. However, 
in my opinion it would finally come out so 
that it would make a tremendous amount 
of money, and some day some lucky person 
would get that prize. It naturally is hard, but 
again there would be many smaller prizes of 
fifty thousand, twenty-five thousand [that] 
the people would get with some regularity. 

One of the things that has made the 
gambling business, in my opinion, and has 
helped me tremendously is a knowledge 
of percentages and the possibilities and 
probabilities. 

I want to go back now to a local guy, 
a man from Los Angeles who is up here 
now working out the percentages for me. 
He’s undoubtedly the best mathematician 
in that field, possibilities and probabilities, 
I’ve ever seen in my life. He’s a man with no 
education, a hard-rock miner, but this is his 


hobby, figuring out percentages on Keno, 
slot machines, anything that goes up to great 
percentages. He’ll tell you how much you’ll 
spend in a lifetime smokin’ cigarettes, how 
much it affected your health, how much it’s 
shortened your lifetime, and also how much 
it cost you, and if you’d put the money into 
a bank account or a savings, compound 
interest, how much you would have made by 
not smoking. Naturally he smokes a couple 
packages a day. However, I do believe that 
this is the smartest guy I’ve ever seen in this 
particular line of business, and I’ve been able 
to shuffle him around and have other people 
in the gambling business use his ability, but 
very few of them realize how much he really 
knows and what the potential of the things he 
can do. He’s a sick man, he won’t live forever; 
he’s got emphysema, but he has really been 
a great boon for me, and I’m sure to the 
business. But not many people know this. His 
name is Ralph Shupe. 

Our target date for the Comstock opening 
is in May as I said before. I think it’s going to 
be a real good club. It’s gonna take a lot of 
energy and a lot of work to make it go, but all 
gambling houses take that. I see nothing but 
good for my business, and I hope that in the 
past I’ve been able to contribute somewhat to 
the stature of the business. I hope that I have 
been able to improve its image, and I hope that 
I will continue to improve the image of my 
business. I believe it’s been maligned. I’ve said 
this before, I’ll say it again: I don’t condone 
it; it’s not the greatest thing in the world, but 
certainly the way I run it, the way the state 
runs it, the way Nevada runs it, is the very 
best of probably not too good a thing. 

The “Black Book” that came out eight or 
nine years ago had ten or twelve people in 
it, probably half of ’em now are dead. They 
were dead bang Mafia people, gangsters, 
that nobody wanted their business anyway. 



Conclusions 


81 


It was just a sort of over-kill to put it in, say, 
to keep them out. Nobody would want them 
anyway I believe that the state could have a 
black book that would include all the people 
that have given us so many problems in the 
past in the gambling business, all the slot 
machine thieves and people that are trying to 
steal from the industry all the time and also 
the people that have been in the industry and 
have misused it and stolen. I think that a black 
book of that kind would be very useful, and 
I understand the state is now in the process 
of making a new one. Now to what extent 
it would come out I have no idea. However, 
anybody that does anything like that in this 
day and age, has got a problem because people 
will sue anybody on the drop of a hat, and it 
seems that so many of these things violate 
people’s rights. It is very difficult to do these 
kind of things. However, the state is working 
on it and it might be something—the one in 
existence now, I haven’t seen one for six or 
seven years. I forgot the name of the people 
that are in it, but most of them are people that 
never come to Nevada anyway and certainly 
never come to Reno, maybe Vegas once in 
awhile. 

[Would you consider maybe dealers that 
cheat? Could they go in that?] 

I don’t think you could ever get that on 
because I think that would be a violation of 
a person’s rights to make a living, and I don’t 
think it would ever happen. I have people 
working for me that I caught stealing years 
ago and because I felt that they had some 
good in them, I was able to bring them in and 
say what the hell’s the matter with you? And 
explain what was wrong, and these people 
I would almost swear they’ve never stolen 
since, and they’ve become very trusted and 
valued employees. So it doesn’t always follow 
that because somebody steals that you should 
put them down forever. I believe that you can 


rehabilitate many of these people if you show 
them the error of their ways and show them 
how to make a living without doing that. 
But you never know what another person is 
thinking or you’d never know what another 
man’s problems are. Somebody with a sick 
wife or a sick child that absolutely couldn’t 
see any other way out, I can understand 
that. But somebody who steals money in 
conjunction with somebody else and it 
becomes a conspiracy, of that kind I don’t 
forgive; and I would not condone. I would 
do anything I could to stop it if two people, 
one from the outside and one from the inside 
get in together and conspire, cheat or steal, 
then I have no compassion for ’em. But if it’s 
some person that does have a bad personal 
problem, and they’re on their own trying to 
steal money, that you can rehabilitate them. 
I truly believe in that, and in most cases I 
would—especially young people—try to 
rehabilitate them, and it has worked. In fact 
I have some bosses now that thirty years ago 
stole money from me and are now some of my 
top men. I know this doesn’t seem possible, 
but is; and I have the greatest faith in these 
very few people that this has happened to. 

The taxes in the state of Nevada now are 
five and a half percent of your gross win. This 
is a tremendous amount of money. However, 
it is a figure that we can live with. I think that 
if it went up another half or one and a half 
percent, that it would become very difficult to 
make money. But now I think it’s probably a 
fairly fair distribution. I believe that the state’s 
end of our business last year was something 
like close to a hundred million dollars out of a 
billion and a half dollars worth of—of action. 
And this is a fallacy that I see that comes out 
so often that it looks like the gamblers make 
all the money which isn’t quite true. This five 
and a half percent that the state takes out, they 
get theirs before we pay any expenses. I would 



82 


Warren Nelson 


say that the average gambling house, well run, 
if they could keep fifteen percent of all the 
money they win after payin’ all their expenses, 
they would have a tremendous operation and 
have a good income. 

But however, it must be realized that after 
that fifteen percent of the dollar won, not 
the dollar played, the dollar won, uh—then 
that goes through the hands of Uncle Sam. 
In my particular case I’m in the seventy 
percent bracket. This takes considerable 
amount of the money, so I would say when it 
comes right down to it that for every dollar 
that is won over the tables, if an owner or a 
corporation keeps five cents of it, he would be 
very, very lucky. I’m certainly not knocking 
the business. It’s still lucrative. It’s made me a 
comparatively wealthy man, not cash dollars, 
but I’ve been able to buy property and a home 
my wife’s found very, very good. And I feel 
that I worked hard for it. In my particular case 
starting out almost forty-six, forty-seven years 
ago, it’s only been the last fifteen years that 
I’ve really gotten a lot of money, but again it’s 
been due to the partners that I have, the hard 
work we’ve done. We’ve slowed down now, but 
I would say that my present status, the twenty 
thousand dollars that I invested in Club Cal- 
Neva is probably about as good a parlay as 
you’d ever see in the average lifetime. I’m not 
tryin’ to tell what my net worth, I really don’t 
know. But, I keep telling both of my children 
not to worry about it because I spend my 
money awfully fast, and I’m not trying to save 
or put anything by for posterity. I’m tryin to 
live a good life, be good to people, try to not 
give away a lot of money, but I try, to charity. 
And of course I look at it from the point that 
it is a write-off, but I think that I give much 
more than the average person and certainly 
much more than the average doctor, lawyer, or 
that class; and not to be a big-shot or a hero, 
but because there are many, many places and 


many things that I think do need help and 
that the money is well spent. I think that in 
my personal life with the people I know that 
are less fortunate, that I not only do I spend 
my money with them, I also spend my time. 
I’m not tryin’ to make myself a hero, but I 
do believe that the people that are sick, the 
funerals I go to, and the people that I try to 
help, I think that those things probably have 
helped me as much as anything. 



Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



84 


Warren Nelson 


A 


C 


Abelman, Nick, 78, 81-82 
Acuff, Johnny, 60, 152 
Alpers, Bernard J., 51-53 
Army General Classification 
Test (AGCT), 48 
Atcheson, Warren, 23-24, 

156 


California Hotel (Las 
Vegas), 132-133, 161 
Cal-Neva Lodge (Lake Tahoe) 
122, 134, 142 
Cannon, Howard, 129 
Carroll College (Helena, 
Montana), 4, 6 
Cascade County, Montana, 

14 


B 


Bally Manufacturing Com¬ 
pany (Reno, Nevada), 

142, 144 

Bank Club (Reno), 33, 37, 
38, 66, 70, 71, 74 
Baring, Walter, 129, 162 
Bernstein, Joe "Silver Fox 
of Powell Street", 29, 
65, 70-72 

Bible, Alan H., 129, 162 
"Big Bertha" slot machi 
143 

Bittner, Clyde, 

161-162 
"Black BookJ!; 
figures), 

Bliss, Joe, 112, 124 
Bonanza Club (Reno), 60 
Bonus Keno, 73-74 
Bootlegging, 10 
Boyd, Sam, 132, 160-161 
Brady, Jim, 16, 161 
Brevick, John, 121-123 
Busey, Douglas A. "Doug", 
115, 140 

Butte, Montana, 10, 19 
Byrne, Brendan, 164-165 


Cafferty, Jack "Jack Duffy", 
60, 150-151 


Cavanaugh, John, 115 
Cheaters. See Gaming 
cheaters 

"Chinese Lottery" 

"Chops" (gamblj 
66 

Chuck-a- 

Club Neva^^R-feno) , 93 , 

, 119-120, 

^ 134, 139, 142, 

68 

, Frank, 113 
ohen, Sheldon, 129-130 
Comstock Hotel (Reno), 135, 
166 

Connolly, Hugh, 43-46, 117- 
119 

Country Club Casino (Lake 
Tahoe), 18 
Craps, 22, 41, 98 
"Cribs" (Reno), 26 


Dandolos, Nicholas Andrea 
"Nick the Greek", 65, 70, 
93 

Darrow, "Curly", 19 
DeGiacomo, (Mr.), 94-96 
Dillinger, John Herbert, 26 
Douglass, Jack, 115-116, 139 
Douglass, John, 140 
Duffy, Jack. See Cafferty, 
Jack 




Original Index: For Reference Only 


85 


Einstoss, Bernie, 82-84, 
87-88, 99, 157 
Einstoss, Ron, 112 
El Cerrito, California, 54 


Faro Bank, 23, 24-25, 41, 
153-154, 158-159 
Farris, Howard, 60, 78-80, 
84, 105, 110, 115-116, 
136 

Ferguson, Roger, 112 
Fitzgerald, Lincoln, 72, 
74-75 

Floyd, Charles Arthur 
"Pretty Boy", 26 
Franco, Nicholas, 145-146 


Gambling games. 

Keno? Chines 

Chuck-a-luck; Craps; Faro 
Bank; Keno? Lowball 
Gaming cheaters, 28-30, 33, 
>6-57y**t>8<L4 9 , 153-154 , 
174-3 

Gaming Commission, Nevada 
state, 168 
Gaming Control Board, Nevada 
state, 23, 167 
Gaming Industry Association 
of Nevada, 127, 137 
Gaming Policy Board, Nevada, 
132 

Gaming regulations, Nevada, 
137-139 

Gaming taxation. See Taxa¬ 
tion, gaming 

Gaughin, Jackie, 132-133, 

161 

Giancana, Salvatore "Sam" 
"Moonie", 101-102 
Golden Nugget Casino (Las 
Vegas), 141-142, 151 


"Gold-tooth Camel" (colorful 
character in Reno), 27 
Graham, William D. "Bill", 
26, 38, 71 

Grannis, Frank, 87, 157-158 
Graves, Richard L. "Dick", 
132, 143-146 

Great Falls, Montana, 1, 14 
Greenberg, Dick, 106 
Greenspun, Herman "Hank", 
164-165 

Guffy, Jack, 111 


Hall, 

Hannifin, Phjjilip P. "Phil", 

lV>164 

rolds Club (Reno), 32, 33, 
, 74, 170 
:ah, John, 68 
larrah, William F. "Bill", 
58, 61-67, 69, 73, 74, 

77, 132 

Harrah's Club (Reno), 39, 

58, 60, 61, 63, 66, 72, 

76, 77, 82, 109 
Hastings, Ernie, 121 
Hawthorne, Nevada, 53-54 
Hazelwood, Larry, 24-25 
Hill, Virginia, 102 
Hobson, Joe, 54 
Hobson, Richard "Pick", 53- 
54 

Holiday Hotel (Reno) , 16 
Holly, Peck, 124 
Hornstein brothers, 113 
Howell, John "Johnny", 120- 
121 

Hysham, Montana, 1-2 


Iacometti, Louie, 107, 110, 
111 

Iacometti, Pat, 123 



86 


Warren Nelson 


M 


Internal Revenue Service, 
U.S. (IRS), 128-131 
Ireland, Bob, 123 


Jacobson, Nathan "Nate" 
93 

Jones, Bill, 6 


Kaplan, Mortimer, 129 
Keno, 10, 16, 18, 33-38, 
41, 72-73 

Keogh, Howard, 43-46, 119 
Kessel, Dave, 54, 103 
Kurtz, Jerry, 129 


Margolis, Eddie, 60 
Marine Corps, U.S., 38, 43- 
53, 58-59 
Martin, Wayne, 63 
Mathis, Dave, 112 
Merialdo, Vinnie, 17, 155- 
156 

Metrovich, Jimmy, 151-152 
Mint Casino (Las Vegas), 14: 
Montague, Harry, 124-125 
Mount St. Charles HiglvSchool 
(Helena, Montana) 



Laemmle 
Laxa 

s, CaJ 

;ard game) , 29 
_ ‘s, 1 

Lyden, Francis, 15, 17, 29- 
32, 33 

Lyden, Joe, 16-17, 19, 21 


60 

Meisenbach, 1 
Greg, 115, 140 
Lawrence, 1, 3, 4, 15 
Ison, Mrs. Lawrence (Louther- 
back), 2-3, 4 
Nelson, Pat Futter, 59-60 
Nevada Club (Lake Tahoe), 18 
Nevada Club (Reno), 72, 74 
Nick the Greek. See Dandolos, 
Nicholas Andrea 
Nightingale, Leon, 115-116, 
139-140 

Nightingale, Steven, 140 
Notten, Pete, 16-17, 19 


Me 

McCormack, Father, 7 
McKay, James "Jim", 26, 38, 
71 


O 

Oak Knoll Hospital (San Fran¬ 
cisco, California), 51 
O'Callaghan, Donal N. "Mike", 
132, 164 
Opium, 26, 31 


M 

Mafia, 173 

Manoukian, Noel, 112 
Mapes, Charles W., Jr., 84- 
85, 87, 94 

Mapes Hotel (Reno), 82, 94, 
99 


P 

Palace Club (Reno), 16, 22, 28, 
32, 33, 37, 38, 41, 65, 74, 
103-104, 105, 107, 109, 111, 
112, 113 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


87 


P 


S 


Panelli, Bill, 22-23, 32, 
41, 152-155, 158 

Parman, Walter, 71-72 

Pechart, Walter "Bill”, 54, 
103-104 

Personnel Classification, 
U.S. Marine Corps, 47-53, 
58 

Petricciani, Clorinda, 17, 
18, 21 

Petricciani, John "Slot 
Machine Johnny", 17, 18, 
22, 32, 33, 35-36, 43, 
156-157 

Presley, (Captain), 47-48 


Redd, Si, 142-144 
Redfield, LaVere, 86- 
94 

Remitter, Elmer " 
Rickard, G.L. "T 
Riley, Father, 7 
Ring 


Sierra Square School of Deal¬ 
ing (Reno), 147-148 
Silvers, Phil, 99-100 
Slot machines, 41, 98, 143, 
169-171 

Smith, Harold, 32-33, 157 
Smith, Raymond I. "Pappy", 
74-75, 158-160 
Smith, Sid, 5, 7-8 
"Spot Slot" (gambling device), 
141-142 

Stromer, Willie, 12< 

"Sub" (cheating 
Sullivan, 

See Seal 
Syufy 



oe Plaza (Lake Tahoe), 109 
Taxation, gaming, 175-176 
Tenerowicz, Stan, 124 
Thompson, "Titanic", 27, 29 
Tolen, Ad, 112-113, 115-116, 


iert A. 

"Bob", 

63 

136, 140 

arner, 

11-12, 

35 

Topel, Bishop, 9 

Louie, 

110 


Treasure County, 

Wheel, 

19-21, 

32, 

Trinastich, Dick 
Turillas, Felix, 


Ryals, Walt, 112 


U 


S 

Sahati, Edmund "Eddie", 160 
Sahati, Nicholas M. "Nick", 
160 

Sahati family, 160 
Scarlett, Jack "Jack Sulli¬ 
van", 38-41, 71, 74, 156 
Seaman, Pete, 20-21 
Shay, Emmett, 72, 74-75 
Shupe, Ralph, 171-172 
Sierra Development Company, 
Inc. (Reno), 140. See 
also Club Cal-Neva; Com¬ 
stock Hotel 


Unions, 168 
Urriale, Dick, 121 


W 

Waldorf Club (Reno), 39, 78- 
82 

Walters, Johnny, 129 
Waterman, Phil, 141 
Weitz, Harry, 105-107, 110, 158 
Wells, "Sundown", 60-61 
West, Elmer "Baldy", 74-75 
White, Homer, 153-155 



88 


Warren Nelson 


W 


Winters, A1, 63-65, 82 
"Wooden goose" (gambling 
device, 34 


Z 

Zibarth, Fritz, 65-69, 94 





